* /2 ·;- i

SERMONS,

BY

HUGH BLAIR, D.D.
Oneof the MINIsTIRS of the HIGH CHURCH,

AND
PROFrlsoR of RHETORIC and BELLES LETTRES

in the University, of Edinburgh.
VOLUME THE SECOND.

O
N D 0 N:
Pinted for W. ST»AMn; nd T. CADILL, in the Strand

nd W. CIlCH, Edinburgh.

U DCC LXXX.

se'

# THE CONTENTS.

THE
CO N T E N T S.

Page

SERMON I. e

On the Importance of Order in Condu&.

I CORINTH. xiv. 40. Let alltbings be
done-in order. \

SERMON II.

On the Government of the Heart.
PROVERBS iv. 23. Keep thy beart with

all diligence : for out of it are the
ifues of Ife. 29

SERMON III.

The fame Subjea continued.
PROV. iv. 23. Keep thy beart with all

diligence ; for out of it are the isuet of
If. . s 54

Page

S E R M ON IV.
On the Unchangeablenefs of the Di-

vine Nature.
JAMES i. 17. Every good and every

perfec gift is from above, and com-
eth down from the Father of Lightsr,
with whom is no variablenefi, nci-
tber hadow of turning. 85

SERMON V.

On the Compaflion of Chrilt.
HEBREWS iv. 15. We have not an

high prieJi which cannot be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities;
but was in all points tempted like as
we are, yet without fin. 117

SERMON VI.

On the Love of Praise.

JOHN xii. 43. For they loved the

praoF of men more than the prase
of od. 148

Pge

SERMON VII.
On the proper Eflimatc of Human

Life.
ECCLESIAST' - xii. 8. Vaity of va-

nities, fiit the preacher, all is va-
* nit1y. 78

S E R M 0 N VIII.

On Death.
PSALM xxiii. 4. lr,; though I walk

through the vall/,y f the Jhadow of
death, I will fear no evil; for thon
art with me; thy rod and tly jfff
they comfort me. 213

SER MON IX.

On the Happiness of a Future State.
REVELAT. vii. 9. After tis I beheld,

and lo! a great multitude, which no
man could number, of all nations, and
kindreds, and people, and tongues,

Page

Jlood before the throne, and before
the lamb, clothed with white robes,
and palms in their bands. 246

SERMON X.

On Candour.

CORINTII. xiii. 5. Charity-think-
etb no evil. 277

SERMO N XI.

On the Characer of Joseph.

GENESIS l. .
5. . w therefore be

not grieved nor angry with jourfelves
that ye fold me hither; for God did
fend me before you topreerve life.--
So now it was not you that sent me
hitbe,, butt (Gd. 309

S E R M O N XII.

On the Charadter of Hazael.

2 KINGS viii. 12, 13. And Hazael
said, Why weepetb my Lord? And

Page

be answered, BecaLfe I knrow the evil
that thou wilt do unto the children of
Israel. Their frong holds wilt thou
set on fire, and their young men wilt
thou Jlay with the sword, and wilt
daJh their children, and rip up their
women with child. And -Halzae
said, But what, is thf!lrvilnt a dor,
that he Jhould do this great thin ?
And ElihJa answered, The Lvrd
bath Jhewed me that thou Jhall be
king over Syria. 335

SERMON XIII.
On the Benefits to be derived from

the House of Mourning.
ECCLESIASTES vii. 2, 3, 4. It is bet-

ter to go to the house of mourning,
than to go to the bouse of feaJling;
for that is the end of all men, and the
living will lay it to bis heart. Sor-
row is better than laughter; for by
thefadnes of the countenance the heart
is made better. The heart of the wis
is in the bouse of mourning; but the
heart offools is in the house of mirth. 366

I

Page

SERMON XIV.
On the divine Government of the

Passions of Men.
PSALM Ixxvi. o1. Surely, the wrath

of man lhallpraifi thee; the remain-
der of wratbJbalt thou re.lrain. 396

SERMON XV.
On the Importance of Religious Know-

ledge to Mankind.
ISAIAH xi. 9. TheyJhallnot hurt nor

defroy in all my holy mountain; for
the earthJball befull of the knowledge
of the Lord, as the waters cover the
sea. 427

SE R-

# SERMON I. On the IMPORTANCE of ORDER in CONDUCT. 1 CORINTH. xiv. 40. Let all things be done — in order.

E R M O N .
On the IMPORTANCE OfORDER ia

CONDUCT.

t s--' - l

t CORINTH. X'I. 40.

Let all hings be d en-ib ordef.

g^I ELIGION liklcveryregular and SERM.
X r 2 wcll-conAtned Itemfe, is compo-

I. 1i ed of a vrirty of parts; each of

which poflires its separate ioportance, and
contribute* to the prfe6ioa of the whole.
Some graes are efrential to it; such as fitb
and repentance, the love of God, and the
lore of our ighbour; which,. ai that rit

VOL. II. B son,

SE R M. son, must be often inculcated on men.
a'-_- There are other dispositions and habits

which though they hold not so high a rank,
yet are necessary to the introducion and
support of the former; and therefore, in
religious exhortations these also justly claim
a place. Of this nature is that regard to
order, method and regularity, which the
apostle enjoins us in the text to carry
though the whole of life. Whether you
confider it as, in itself, a moral duty, or
not, vet I hope soon to convince you th!;a
it is cffential to the proper discharge of .-
most all duitics, and merits upon that ac-
count a greater degree of attention than is
commonly paid to it in a religious view.

If you look abroad into the world, you

may be satisfied, at the first glance, that a
vicious and libertine life is always a life of
confusion. Thence it is natural to infer
that order is friendly to religion. As the
neglect of it co-operates with vice, so the
preservation of it must aflift virtue. By the
appointment of providence, it is indifpen-
fablyrequifite to worldly prosperity. Thence

5 arises

arises a presumption that it is conneted SE R M.
also with spiritual improvement. When -
you behold a man's affairs, through ne-
gligence and mifconduC, involved in dif-
order, you naturally conclude that his ruin
approaches. You may at the fame time
justly fufped, that the caules which asset
his temporal welfare, operate also to the
prejudice of his moral interests. The apo-
ftle teaches us in this chapters that God is
not the author of confusion *. He is a lover
of order; and all his works are full of order,
But where confusion is, there is, its close
attendant, every evil work t. In the fe-
quel of this discourse I shall point out some
of those parts of conduc wherein it is most
material to virtue that order take place; and
then fiall conclude with fihow.ng the high
advantages which attend it. Allow me to
recommend to you, order in the condud of
your affairs; order in the difiribution of
your time; order in the management of
your fortune; order in the regulation of

Ver. 33. t James iiL 16.

B 2 your
wa

F.RM. your amusements; order in the arrangea
----- ment of your society. Thus let all thingJ

be done in order.

I. MAINTAIN order in the conduc of

your worldly affairs. Every man, in every
Ration of life, has some concerns, private,
domestic, or public, which require fuccef-
five attention ( he is placed tn some sphere
of ative duty. Iet the employments
*hieh belong to that sphere be so arranged,
that each may keep its place, without jufti-
ting another; and that what regards the
world'tnay not interfere with what is due
to God. In proportion to the multiplicity
of affairs, the observance of order becomes
moro indipenfable But fearcely is there
any train of life so simple and uniform but
what wil susser through the neglect of it.
I bpeak not now of suffering in point of
worldly interest. I call upon you to attend
to higher interests to remember that the
orderly conduc of your temnporal affairs
forms a great part of your duty as Chrifli-
ans.

Many,

Many, indeed, can hardly be persuaded S ER M.

of this truth. A firong propensity has, in a_-
every age, appeared among men to feque-
firate religion from the commerce of the
world. Seasons of retreat and devotion
they are willing to appropriate to God.
But the world they conlider as their own
province. They carry on a fort of fepa-
rate interest there. Nay, by the refpeft
which, on particular occalions, they pay to
religion, they too often imagine that they
have acquired the liberty of acting in
worldly matters according to what plan
they chute. How entirely do such persons
miflake the design of Christianity !-In this
world you were placed by Providence as on
a great field of trial. By the necessitics of
your nature you are called forth to differ,
ent employments. By many ties you are
connected with human society. From fu-
periours and inferiours, from neighboun
and equals, from friends and enemies, de.
mands arise, and obligations circulate
through all the ranks of life. This acive
I:cne was contrived by the wifdorm of hea-

P 3 ven,

68RRM. ven, on purmofe that it inight Ilin g inl,

- exrcife all the virtucs ol the chrillian th.i-.

ritter; your jullice, ca.indour aid vcracily
il (iealliig withi oie ailotller; your llitcly
to every tlrj, aind yiour oijicfi'iilioi dlin-
hlarge of c very ollie., which i; ('inniiiitied
t) y Iou your afftctlion tor yiour triCidJi;
your filrgivenrirs o(f eneiinich; yiir chl.tiily
lo the (lillreslld ; yoiu tillentlioiin t) Ihe ii-
terflts of your family. It is hy fulfilling all
tlhee olhligations, ill pr(olct liicceflioii, that
you (hlow your itoverfiilioin toit /efin h

, s Ic-

r',atb the grfpcl r'I:hrifl. It i thunl you
make yo,lu libbtfro toJhiie befire nren, that
tbry nmay f yourrr good worh., and glorJj, yor
lahlber whibc ii in beaven. It in tliui ynu
are renderedl mret fr the inherithlelr q' the
;il'iti i light.--ut how ran thole various
duties Ihe dilcliarged hy perfoi)n who are
ever in that hurry aid perplexity which
difibrder crcates? You wish, perha;ps, to
pertonn what your charafter and Itation
require. But from the confilfion in which
you have allowed yourlelves to he involved,
you find it to have become impoflille.

What

Whalllt V iw 'l.i

w ltcdl t o lt' tl ill il , pro- h I' I' M.

pICi ilte, hlliillitilft Illlow'ald a .1n1 in-li,- O _

eolliCrll Ict;llllo. A Iihlllillllc ,I :lllilrs
(inilWd liiinoJ yotl I.lclii. I)iill'lrcil oIli-
gatlini dillractd yin ,l; id til tli illivuJtioni
in ,eltiiniett tlle ciatilc, limtimnilcH the lrre-
tleml, i' eq|uilly neglecling, lhtli all, or,
ul IeClt, (if lacrilii Kig tlie glac;ilt i I(l lil
letci'r.

I lence arile I10 Imany iiittoijflielllt (hli;ar-

term, and lilch ti'cqucIIt inllintich of ip;rlial
alil divided goododil,, ;s *'e Ilnd in (lhe
world ; apllearallct'c of (igelrolily willilith
jullice, ionlloir withoutl trlll I, ll.olIity to
ineii without reverence of (;od. lle who
colundflt his aflairH with Incllhod ;nd1 regiu-
I.rity, liielct every duty ill il' prlp)ltr Ilace,
aind a.ilign, it its due rank. allt lirc thlere
in no order in conldud, there can l)e ito ninl-
fornity inl charader. Tlhe naturlal connex-
ion and arrangement of duties is lolt. If
virtue appear at all, it will be only in fits
and flarts. The authority of conscience
may occasionally operate, when our fitua-
tion affords it room for exertion. But in

B 4 other

E R M. other circumstances of equal importance,
__- ' every moral sentiment will be overpowered

by the tumultuous bustle of worldly affairs.
Fretfulness of temper too, will generally
charaterize those who are negligent of or-
der. The hurry in which they live, and
the embarrassments with which they are
surrounded, keep their spirits in perpetual
ferment. Confliting with difficulties which
they are unable to overcome, conscious of
their own milcondul, but aihamed to con-
fefi it, they are engaged in many a secret
struggle; and the uneasiness which they
susser within, recoils in bad humour on all
who are around them. Hence the wretch-
ed resources to which, at last, they are obliged
to fly, in order to quiet their cares. In de.
fpair of being able to unravel what they
have suffered to become so perplexed, they
sometimes fink into supine indolence, some-
times throw themselves into the arms of
intemperance and loose pleasure; by either
of which they aggravate their guilt, and ac-
celcrte their ruin. To the end that order
may be maintained in your affairs, it is ne-
ceffary,

II. T.AT

II. THAT you attend to order in the dif- SERM.

tribution of your time. Time you ought to --
confider as a sacred trust committed to you
by God; of which you are now the depo-
fitaries, and are to render account at the
last. That portion of it which he has al-
lotted you is intended partly for the con-
cerns of this world, partly for those of the
next. Let each of these occupy in the dif-
tribution of your time that space which
properly belongs to it. Let not the hours
of hospitality and pleasure interfere with
the discharge of your necessary affairs; and
let not what you call necessary affairs en-
croach upon the time which is due to de-
votion. To ever thing there is afeafon, and
a time for every purpose under the heaven *.
If you delay till to-morrow what ought to
be done to-day, you overcharge the mor-
row with a burden which belongs not to it.
You load the wheels of time, and prevent
it from carrying you along smoothly. He
who every morning plans the tranfadions

'Ecckf. iii. i,

of

S E R M. of the day, and follows out that plan, carries

on a thread which will guide him through
the labyrinth of the most busy life. The
orderly arrangement of his time is like a
ray of light which darts itself through all
his affairs. But where no plan is laid,
where the difpolal of time is surrendered
merely to the chance of incidents, all things
lie huddled together in one chaos, which
admits neither of distribution nor review.

The firlf requiite for introducing order

into the management of time, is io he im-
preled with a just sense of its value. Con-
li!cr well how much depends upon it, and
how fast it flies away. The bulk of men
are in nothing more capricious and incon-
fiflent than in their appretiation of time.
When they think of it as the measure of
their continuance on earth, they highly
prize it, and with the greatest anxiety seek
to lengthen it out. But when they view it
in separate parcels, they appear to hold it
in contempt, and sq(uander it with incon,
liderate profusion. While they complain
that life is short, they are often wifling its

d;fferent

different periods at an end. Covetous of SERM.
every other poifeffion, of time only they are -»
prodigal. They allow every idle man to be
master of this property, and make every
frivolous occupation welcome that can help
them to consume it. Among those who are
so careless of time, it is not to be expeced
that order should be observed in its diftri-
bution. But by this fatal neglect, how
many materials of severe and lafiing regret
are they laying up in store for themfelvcs!
The time which they susser to pass away in
the midst of confifion, bitter repentance
seeks afterwards in vain to recal. What
was omitted to be done at its proper mo-
ment, arises to be the torment of Ibme fu-
ture season. Manhood is disgraced by the
consequences of neglected youth. Old age,
oppressed by cares that belonged to a former
period, labours under a burden not its own.
At the close of life, the dying man be-
holds with anguifi that his days are finish-
ing, when his preparation for eternity is
hardly commenced. Such are the effects
of a disorderly waste of time, through not

attending

S E R M. attending to its value. Every thing in the
X--. life of such persons is misplaced. Nothing

is performed aright, from not being per-
formed in due season.

But he who is orderly in the difiribution

of his time, takes the proper method of
escaping those manifold evils. He is juitly
said to redeem the time. By proper manage-
ment, he prolongs it. He lives much in
little space; more in a few years than
others do in many. He can live to God
and his own foul, and at the fame time at-
tend to all the lawful interests of the present
world. He looks back on the past, and
provides for the future. He catches and
arrests the hours as they fly. They are
marked down for useful purposes, and their
memory remains. Whereas those hours fleet
by the man of confusion like a shadow.
His days and years are either blanks of
which he has no remembrance, or they are
filled up with such a confused and irregular
fucceflion of unfinifihed tranfadions, that
though he remembers he has been busy,
yet he can give no account of the bufnefs

which

which has employed him. Of him, more SE R M.
than of any other, it may with justice be .,-
pronounced, that he wtalketb in a vainshew;
he is drfquieted in vain.

III. INTRODUCE order into the manage-

ment of your fortune. Whatever it be, let
the administration of it proceed with me-
thod and oeconomy. From time to time
examine your situation; and proportion
your expence to your growing or diminilh-
ing revenue. Provide what is necessary,
before you indulge in what is superfluous.
Study to do justice to all with whom you
deal, before you assed the praise of lihera-
lity. In a word, fix iuch a plan of living
as you find that your circumstance will
fairly admit, and adhere to it invariably
againfi every temptation to improper ex-
cess.

No admonition rcfpe&ing morals is more

necessary than this to the age in which we
live; an age manifestly diftinguilhed by a
propensity to thoughtless profusion; wherein
all the different ranks of men are observed

to

s E R M. to press with forward vanity on those who
--_ are above them; to vie with their fupe-

riours in every mode of luxury and oftenta-
ticn; and to seek no farther argument for
jultifying extravagance, than the fashion of
the times, and the supposed necessity of
living like others around them. This turn
of mind begets contempt for fober and or-
derly plans of life. It overthrows all re-
gard to domestic concerns and duties. It
pushes men on to hazardous and visionary
ichemes of gain; and unfortunately unites
the two extremes, of grasping with rapaci-
oufnefs, and of squandering with profusion.
In the midit of such disorder no prosperity
can be of long continuance. While con-
fusion grows upon men's affairs, and pro-
digality at the fame time waftes their sub-
stance, poverty makes its advances like an
armed man. They tremble at the view of
the approaching evil; but have loft the
force of mind to make provision against it.
Accustomed to move in a round of society
and pleasures disproportioned to their con-
dition, they are unable to break through

the

the enchantments of habit; and with their SE R M.
eves open link into the gulph which is be- v-
fore them. I'ovcrty enforces dependance;
and dependance increases corruption. Ne-
ceffity first betrays them into mean com-
pliances; next, impels them to open crimes;
and beginning with ostentation and extra-
vagance, they end in infamy and guilt.
Such are the consequences of neglecing
order in our worldly circumstances. Such
is the circle in which the profuse and the
dissolute daily run.- To what cause, so
much as to the want of order, can we attri-
bute those scenes of distress which so fre-
quently excite our pity; families that once
were flourishing reduced to ruin; and the
melancholy widow and neglected orphan
thrown forth, friendless, upon the world?
What cause has been more fruitful in en-
gendering those atrocious crimes which fill
society with disquiet and terrour; in train-
ing the gamester to fraud, the robber to
violence, and even the affafin to blood ?

Be assured, theq, that order, fiugality,
and economy, are the necessary supports of

every

E R M. every personal and private virtue. How
A-J, humble soever these qualities may appear to

some, they are, nevertheless, the basis on
which liberty, independence, and true ho-
nour, must rile. He who has the fleadinefs
to arrange his affairs with method and re-
gularity, and to conduc his train of life
agreeably to his circumfiances, can be mailer
of himself in every situation into which he
may be thrown. He is under no neceflity
to flatter or to lie; to stoop to what is
mean, or to commit what is criminal. But
he who wants that firnnefi of mind which
the observance of order requires, is held in
bondage to the world; he can neither a&
his part with courage as a man, nor with
fidelity as a Christian. From the moment
you have allowed yourselves to pafi the line
of ceconomy, and to live beyond your for-
tune, you have entered on the path of
danger. Precipices surround you on all
fides. Every Rep which you take may
lead to mischiefs that, as yet, lie hidden;
and to crimes that will end in your ever-
lasting perdition.

IV. OBSERVE
4

IV. OBSERVE order in your amusements; SE R M.

that is, allow them no more than their pro-
per place; study to keep them within due
bounds; mingle them in a temperate fuc-
cession with serious duties, and the higher
bufincfs of life. Human life cannot pro-
ceed to advantage without some measure of
relaxation and entertainment. We require
relief from care. We are not formed for a
perpetual stretch of serious thought. By
too intense and continued application, our
feeble powers would soon be worn out. At
the fame time, from our propensity to ease
and pleasure, amusement proves, among all
ranks of men, the most dangerous foe to
order. For it tends incessantly to usurp and
encroach, to widen its territories, to thrust
itself into the place of more important con-
cerns, and thereby to disturb and counter-
act the natural course of things. One fri-
volous amusement indulged out of season,
will often carry perplexity and confusion
through a long succession of affairs.

Amusements, therefore, though they be
of an innocent kind, require steady go-

VOL. II. C vernmcnt,

S ER M. vernmcnt, to keep them within a due and
*- ; limited province. But such as are of an

irregular and vicious nature, require not to
be governed, but to be banished from every
orderly society. As soon as a man seeks his
happiness from the gaming-table, the mid-
night-revel, and the other haunts of licen-
tioufnefs, confusion seizes upon him as its
own. There will no longer be order in his
family, nor order in his affairs, nor order
in his time. The most important concerns
of life are abandoned. Even the order of
nature is by such persons inverted; night
is changed into day, and day into night.
Charader, honour, and interest itself, are
trampled under foot. You may with cer-
tainty prognosticate the ruin of these men
to be just at hand. Disorder, arisen to its
height, has nearly accomplished its work.
The spots of death are upon them. Let
every one who would escape the peftilen-
tial contagion fly with hafe from their
company.

V. PRESERVE

V. PRESERVE order in the arrangement SERM.

of your society; that is, entangle not your- *
selves in a perpetual and promiscuous crowd;
felet with prudence and propriety those with
whom you chute to associate; let company
and retreat succeed each other at measured
intervals. There can be no order in his life
who allots not a due share of his time to
retirement and reflecion. He can neither
prudently arrange his temporal affairs, nor
properly attend to his spiritual interests.
He lives not to himself, but to the world.
By continual dissipation, he is rendered
giddy and thoughtless. He contracts un-
avoidably from the world that spirit of dif-
order and confusion which is so prevalent
in it.

It is not a sufficient preservative againit

this evil, that the circles of society in which
you are engaged are not of a libertine and
vicious kind. If they withdraw you from
that attention to yourselves, and your do-
meftic concerns, which becomes a good man,
they are subversive of order, and incon-
fifent with your duty. What is innocent

C 2 in

SE R M. in itself, degenerates into crime from being
-v__ carried to excess; and idle, trifling society

is nearly a-kin to such as is corrupting. One
of the first principles of order is, to learn to
be happy at home. It is in domestic re-
treat that every wile and virtuous man finds
his chief fatisfadion. It is there he forms
the plans which regulate his public condut.
He who knows not how to enjoy himself
when alone, can never be long happy
abroad. To his vacant mind, company
may afford a temporary relief; but when
forced to return to himself, he will be so
much more oppressed and languid. Where-
as, by a due mixture of public and private
life, we keep free of the snares of both, and
enjoy each to greater advantage.

WHEN we review those different parts of

behaviour to which I have (hewn that order
is essential, it must naturally occur to you,
that they are all mutually conneced, and
hang upon each other. Throughout your
affairs, your time, your expence, your
amufemcnts, your society, the principle of

order

order mull be equally carried, if you ex- s ER M.
ped to reap any of its happy fruits. For
if into any one of those great departments
of life you susser disorder to cntcr, it will
spread through all the reft. In vain, for
inltance, you purpose to be orderly in the
conduc of your affairs, if you be irregular
in the distribution of your time. In vain
you attempt to regulate your expence, if
into your amufementc, or your society, dif-
order has crept. You have admitted a
principle of confusion which will defeat all
your plans; and perplex and entangle what
you fought to arrange. Uniformity is above
all things necessary to order. If you desire
that any thing should proceed according to
method and rule, let all things, as the text
exhorts, be done in order.

I must also admonish you, that in small,

as well as in great affairs, a due regard to
order is requisite. I mean not that you
ought to look on those minute attentions
which are apt to occupy frivolous minds,
as connected either with virtue or wisdom.
But I exhort you to remember, that disorder,

C 3 like

S E R M. like other immoralities, frequently takes rife

i- -i
. from inconsiderable beginnings. They who,

in the lesser tranfaaions of life, are totally
negligent of rule, will be in hazard of ex-
tending that negligence by degrees to such
affairs and duties as will render them cri-
minal. Remissness grows on all who fudy
not to guard againit it; and it is only by
frequent exercise that the habits of order
and pun&uality can be thoroughly con-
firmed.

FROM what has been said, the great im-

portance of this principle to moral and reli-
gious condua must already be evident.
Let us, however, conclude with taking a
summary view of the advantages which at-
tend it.

Firfi, the observance of order serves to

correc that negligence which makes you
omit some duties, and that hurry and pre-
cipitancy which makes you perform others
imperfetly. Your attention is thereby di-
rected to its proper objeas. You follow the
ftreight path which Providence has pointed

out

out to man; in the course of whch all the s E R M.
different business of life presents itself regu- J
larly to him on every fide. God and man,
time and eternity, possess their proper fta-
tions, arise in succession to his view, and
attract his care. Whereas he who runs on
in a disorderly course, speedily involves
himself in a labyrinth, where he is fur-
rounded with intricacy and darkness. The
crooked paths into which he strikes, turn
him aside from the proper line of human
pursuit; hide from his fight the objects
which he ought chiefly to regard, and
bring others under his view, which serve
no purpose but to diftrad and mislead him.

Next, by attending to order, you avoid

idleness, that most fruitful source of crimes
and evils. Ading upon a plan, meeting
every thing in its own place, you constantly
find innocent and useful employment for
time. You are never at a loss how to dif-
pose of your hours, or to fill up life agree-
ably. In the course of human acion, there
are two extremes equally dangerous to vir-
tue; the multiplicity of affairs, and the

C 4 total

S R M. total want of them. The man of order
,.-r^ stands in the middle between thcfe two ex-

tremes, and suffers from neither. He is
occupied, but not oppressed. Whereas the
disorderly, overloading one part of time,
and leaving another vacant, are at one pe-
riod overwhelmed with business, and at
another, either idle through want of em-
ployment, or indolent through perplexity.
Those seasons of indolence and idlenets,
which recur so often in their life, are their
molt dangerous moments. The mind, un-
happy in its situation, and clinging to every
object which can occupy or amuse it, is
then apteft to throw itself into the arms of
every vice and every folly.

Farther, by the preservation of order,

you check inconstancy and levity. Fickle
by nature is the human heart. It is fond
of change; and perpetually tends to start
aside from the treight line of condut.
Hence arises the propriety of bringing our-
selves under fulbjedion to method and rule;
which, though at first it may prove con-
straining, yet by degrees, and from the ex-

Fericnce

perience of its happy effeas, becomes na- s E R M.
tural and agreeable. It redifies those irre- A
gularities of temper and manners to which
we give the name of caprice; and which
are distinguishing charaderiftics of a difor-
derly mind. It is the parent of fleadinefs
of condut. It forms consistency of cha-
rader. It is the ground of all the confi-
dence we repose in one another. For, the
disorderly we know not where to find. In
him only can we place any trust who is
uniform and regular; who lives by prin-
ciple, not by humour; who ads upon a
plan, and not by desultory motions.

The advantages of order hitherto men-

tioned belong to rectitude of condud.
Confider also how important it is to your
felf-enjoyment and felicity. Order is the
source of peace; and peace is the highest
of all temporal blessings. Order is indeed
the only region in which tranquillity dwells.
The very mention of confusion imports
disturbance and vexation. Is it poflible
for that man to be happy who cannot look
into the state of his affairs, or the tenor of

his

SE R M. his condut, without discerning all to be

I.
i -- embroiled; who is either in the midst of

remorse for what he has negle&ed to do,
or in the midst of hurry to overtake what
he finds, too late, was necessary to have
been done ? Such as live according to or-
der may be compared to the celestial bodies
which move in regular courses, and by ftat-
ed laws; whose influence is beneficent;
whose operations are quiet and tranquil.
The disorderly resemble those tumultuous
elements on earth which, by sudden and
violent irruptions, disturb the course of
nature. By mismanagement of affairs, by
cxcefs in expence, by irregularity in .the
indulgence of company and amusement,
they are perpetually creating molestation
both to themselves and others. They de-
part from their road to seek pleasure; and
instead of it, they every where raise up
sorrows. Being'always found out of their
properplace, they of course interfere and
jar with others. The disorders which they
raise never fail to spread beyond their own
line, and to involve many in confusion

3 and

and distress; whence they necessarily be- 5 ERM.
come the authors of tumult and conten- As.
tion, of discord and enmity. Whereas or-
der is the foundation of union. It allows
every man to carry on his own affairs
without disturbing his neighbour. It is the
golden chain which holds together the so-
cieties of men in friendlhip and peace.

In fine, the man of order is conne&ed

with all the higher powers and principles
in the universe. He is the follower of God.
He walks with him, and ads upon his plan.
His characer is formed on the spirit which
religion breathes. For religion in general,
and the religion of Christ in particular, may
be called the great discipline of order. To
walk sinfully, and to walk dforderly, are
synonymous terms in Scripture. From
fucb as walk diorderly we are commanded,
in the name of the Lord Jesus Cbrj/, to
withdraw ourfelve *. The kingdom of
Satan is the reign of disorder and darkness.
To restore order among the works of God,

* Thef. iii. 6,

was

S ER M. was the end for which the Son of God de-
-.v-' scended to the earth. He requires order to

be observed in his church. His undertak-
ing is to be consummated in that perse&
order which he shall introduce at the last
day. In the new earth and the new beavens,
undisturbed order ihall for ever prevail
among the spirits of the jus made perfefl;
and whatever farther preparation may be
requisite for our being admitted to join their
society, it is certain that we shall never
share in it, unless we make it now our
Rtudy to do all things decently and in order.

SE R-

# SERMON II. On the GOVERNMENT of the HEART. PROVERBS iv. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence: for out of it are the issues of life.

[ 29 )

SERMON II.
On the GOVERNMENT of the HEART,

PROVERBS iv. 23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence: for out of

it are the jues of lfe.

M ONG the many wife counsels SE RM.
given by this inspired writer, there _

is none which deserves greater regard than
that contained in the text. Its importance,
however, is too seldom perceived by the
generality of men. They are apt to con-
fider the regulation of external condut as
the chief objc& of religion. If they can
adt their part with decency, and maintain a
fair charater, they conceive their duty to
be fulfilled. What pafies in the mean time
within their mind, they suppose to be of no

4 great

SE RM. great consequence either to themselves, or

i to the world. In opposition to this dan-

gerous plan of morality, the wife man ex-
horts us to keep the heart; that is, to attend
not only to our adiong, but to our thoughts
and desires; and to keep the heart with all
diligence, that is, with sedulous and unre-
mitting care; for which he afligns this
reason, that, out of the heart are the ifues
oflIfe.-In d&fcourfing of this fubje& I
purpose to confider, separately, the govern-
ment of the thoughts, of the passions, and
of the temper. But before entering on any
of these, let us begin with enquiring in
what sense the Juts of life are said to be out
of the heart; that we mny discern the force
of the argument which the text suggests, to
recommend this great duty of keeping the
beart.

The fie oflife are justly said to be out

of the heart, because the state of the heart
is what determines our moral character,
and what forms our chief happiness or mi-
fery.

FIRST,

FIRsT, it is the state of the heart which SERM.

determines our moral character. The te- .. '

.

nor of our acions will always correspond
to the dispositions that prevail within.
To dissemble or to suppress them, is a fruit-
less attempt. In spite of our efforts, they
will perpetually break forth in our beha-
viour. On whatever fide the weight of
inclination hangs, it will draw the pracice
after it. In vain therefore you study to
preserve your hands clean, unless you re-
solve at the fame time to keep your heart
pure. Make the tree good, as our Saviour
direds, and then it fruits will be good aso.
For out of the heart proceed not only evil
thoughts, but murders, adulteries, fornica-
tionm, theft, sale witness, blafpbemies *. If
that fountain be once poisoned, you can
never expect that salubrious streams will
flow from it. Throughout the whole of
their course, they will carry the taint of
the parent spring.

But it is not merely from its influence on
external action that the importance of the

' Matth. x'. I3.

heart

S E R M heart to our moral characer arises. Inde-

_-~ pendent of all acion, it is, in truth, the

fate of the heart itself which forms our
characer in the fight of God. With our
fellow-creatures, acions must ever hold the
chief rank; because, by these only we can
judge of one another; by these we asseA
each other's welfare; and therefore to these
alone the regulation of human law extends.
But in the eye of that Supreme Being, to
whom our whole internal frame is unco-
vered, dispositions hold the place of ations;
and it is not so much what we perform, as
the motive which moves us to perform-
ance, that conflitutes us good or evil in
his fight. Even among men, the mora-
lity of actions is eflimated by the principle
from which they are judged to proceed;
and such as the principle is, such is the
man accounted to be. One, for inltance,
may spend much of his fortune in chari-
table ations; and yet, if he is believed to be
influenced by mere oftcntation, he is deem-
ed not charitable, but vain. He may la-
bour unwcariedly to serve the public; but

if

if he is prompted by the desire of rising S E M.
:itu power, he is held not public spirited, _---i
but ambitious: And if he bestows a bene-
fit purely that he may receive a greater in
return, no man would reckon him gene-
rous, but selfish and interested. If reason
thus clearly teaches us to estimate the value
of acions by the dispositions which give
them birth, it is an obvious conclusion, that
according to those difpofitlons we are all
ranked and classed by him who feeth into
every heart. The rectification of our prin-
ciples of action is the primary object of
religious discipline: and in proportion as
this is more or less advanced, we are more
or less religious. Accordingly, the rege-
neration of the heart is every where repre-
sented in the Gospel as the most essential
requisite in the charater of a Christian.

SECONDLY, the fate of the heart not

only determines our moral charader, but
forms our principal happiness or misery.
External situations of fortune are no far-
ther of consequence than as they operate on

VOL. II. D the

SE R M. the heart; and their operation there is far
s__- from corresponding to the degree of worldly

prosperity or adversity. If, from any in-
ternal caufc a man's peace of mind be
disturbed, in vain you load him with all
the honours or riches which the world can
beflow. They remain without, like things
at a distance from him. They reach not
the source of enjoyment. Discomposed
thoughts, agitated paflions, and a ruffled
temper, poiton every ingredient of plea-
sure which the world holds out; and over-
cast every objec which presents itself, with
a melancholy glcom. In order to acquire
a capacity for happiness, it must be our firt
study to rectify such inward difordcrs.
Whatever difciplinc tends to accompliih
this purpose, is of greater importance to
man than the acquisition of the advantages
of fortunc. Tlilee are precarious and
doubtful in their effed; internal tranquil-
lity is a certain good. These are only
means; hut that is the end. These are no
more than infiruments of fatisfadion; that,
is fatisfadion itf,.i

Julftly

Justly is it said by the Wife Man, that be E R M.

who bath no rule over his pirit, is like a citO -
that is broken down and without walls L. All
is walte; all is in dilbrder and ruins within
him. He possesses no defence againit dan-
gers of any fort. He lies open to every
infurrejtion of ill-humour, and every inva-
sion of distress. Whereas he who is em-
ployed in regulating his mind is making
provision against all the accidents of life.
He is ereding a fortress into which, in the
day of danger, he can retreat with safety.
And hence, amidst those endeavours to fe-
cure happiness which inceflantly employ
the life of man, the careful regulation, or
the improvident neglec of the inward
frame, forms the chief diftindion between
wisdom and folly.

THUS it appears with how much pro-

priety the i/ues of lif are said to be out of
the heart. Here rife those great springs of
human conduct whence the main currents

' Prov. xxv. 28.

D 2 flow

s E R M. flow of our virtue, or our vice; of our hap-
_-_i piness, or our misery. Besides this power-

ful argument for keeping the heart with all
diligence, I must mention another import-
ant consideration taken from the present
state of human nature. Think what your
heart now is, and what must be the confe-
quence of remitting your vigilance in watch-
ing over it. With too much justice it is
said in Scripture, to be deceitful above all
tbings, and desperately wicked. Its bias of
innate corruption gives it a perpetual ten-
dency downwards into vice and disorder.
To direct and impel it upwards, requires a
constant effort. Experience may convince
you, that almost every desire has a propen-
fity to wander into an improper direction;
that every pafiron tends to excess; and that
around your imagination there perpetually
crowds a whole swarm of vain and cor-
rupting thoughts. After all the care that
can be bestowed by the best men on the
regulation of the heart, it frequently bas-
fles their efforts to keep it under proper
discipline. Into what universal tumult

S^ ~ ~then

then must it rife, if no vigilance le em- S ER M.
ployed, and no government be exercised '_
over it ? Inattention and remissness is all
that the great adversary of mankind de-
fires, in order to gain full advantage.
While you 7flep, he fws bis tares in the
feld. The house which he finds vacant
and unguarded, he presently garnlw.es with
evil pirits.

Add to this, that the human temper is

to be confidered as a fyflem, the parts of
which have a mutual dependance on each
other. Introduce disorder into any one
part, and you derange the whole. Suffer
but one passion to go out of its place, or
to acquire an unnatural force, and presently
the balance of the foul will be broken; its
powers will jar among themselves, and their
operations become difcordant.-Keep tiy
heart therefore with all diligence; for all
thy diligence is here required. And though
thine own keeping alone will not avail,
unless the affiflance of a higher power con-
cur, yet of this be well assured, that no
aid from heaven is to be expeQed, if thou

D 3 shalt

SERI M. flalt neglect to exert thy self in perform-
t_-r-i ing the part assigned thee.

IIAVING now shown the importance of

cxcrcifing government over the heart, I
proceed to c(cnrider more particularly in
what that govcrnment consists, as it re-
fpcds the thoughts, the pafrions, and the
temper.

I begin lvith the thoughts, which are the

prime movers of the whole human condut.
All that makes a figure on the great theatre
of the world, the employments of the busy,
the enterprizes of the ambitious, and the
exploits of the warlike, the virtues which
form thc halpincf;, and the crimes which
occalion the irifcry of mankind, originate
in tlat silent and secret rcccfs of thought
'v.hi.h is hidden from cvely human eye.
1'1:' fccrciv and /ilence hliich reign there
ftav itr thc prcjudice entertained hy too
many, t:.:t thlought is exempted from all
cn(itreul. Prafiilis, they T erhaps admit,
icti!'c govcrnment and rtefrailt, lIccaui
tlSiv aric xiClent emotions and dill'rih so-

c'.

ciety. But with their thoughts, they plead, s E R M
no one is concerned. By tliclh, as long as *,
they remain in their bosom, no offence can
be given, and no injury committed. To
enjoy unrcftrained the full range of imagi-
nation, appears to them the native right
and privilege of man.

Had they to do with none but their

fellow-creatures, such realoning might be
fpccious. But they ought to remember,
that in the light of the Supreme Being,
thoughts bear the charater of good or evil,
as much as acions; and that they are, in
especial manner, the fu'bjcds of divine ju-
rididion, because they are cognizable by
no other tribunal. The moral regulation
of our thoughts, is the particular tcft of our
reverence for God. If we restrain our pas-
sions from breaking forth into open difor-
ders, while we abandon our imagination
in secret to corruption, we flow that virtue
relts with us upon regard to men; and
that however we may act a part in public
with propriety, there is bclbre our eyes
no fear of that God who fir.'betb the

D 4 bear,

S E R M. eart, and requirb truthlb in the inward

II.
__- parts.r

But even abftrading fiom this awful

confidcration, tle government of our
thoughts mull appear to he of high con-
sequence, fiom their dircl influence on
condud. It is plain that thought gives the
firfl impulfc to every principle of adion.
Actions are, in truth, no other than thoughts
ripened into conlfilency and lilhRancc. So
certain is this, that to judge with prcciion
of the charadter of any mani, and to foretell
with confidence what part lie will adt, no
more were rcquilite, than to he rendered
capable of viewing the current of thought
which passes molt frequently within him.
Though by fucli a method we have no ac-
cess to judge of one another, yet thus it is
always in our power to judge of our selves.
Each of us, by impartially scrutinizing his
indulged and favourite thoughts, may dif-
cover the whole fccret of his real character.
This consideration alone, is sufficient to
(how of what importance the government
of thought is to the keeping of tl bheart.

BUT,

BUT, fuppofi;g us convinced of its 11m- SERM.

It.

portlane, a quctinlln miay arile, Ilow far it
is witlin our power, and in what degree
thoughts arc f'ujecd to thc command of the
will ? It i. plain that they are not always
the offspring of choice. Often they are in-
evitably imprcfed upon the mind by fur-
rounding objcts. Often they flart up, as
of themlilves, without any principle of in-
troduiion which we arc able to trace. As
the wind bllouwlob wbere it /flcth, and thou
cainfi nUo tell whence it comnclt, nor whither
it gocth, cqually rapid in its transitions,
and inlcrutable in its progress, is the course
of thought. Moving along a train of con-
neaions which arc too delicate for our oh-
servation, it defeats all endeavours either to
explore or to flop its path. Hence vain
and fantastic imaginations sometimes break
in upon the most fettled attention, and dif-
turb even the devout excrcifes of pious
minds. Inftanccs of this fort must be placed
to the account of human frailty. They are
misfortunes to be deplored, rather than
crimes to be condemned; and our gracious

Creator,

SERM. Creator, who knorws our frame, and retnm-

I.L
i__ Aihers we are djfl, will not be severe in mark-

ing every fuich error and wandering of the
mind. But, after these allowances are made,
fill there remains much scope for the proper
government of thought; and a multitude of
cafes occur, in which we are no lels ac-
countable for what we think, than for what
we do.

As, first, when the introduction of any

train of thought depends upon ourtflves,
and is our voluntary aCt; by turning our
attention towards such objects, awaken-
ing such passions, or engaging in fucli
employments as we know must give a pc-
culiar determination to our thoughts. Next,
when thoughts, by whatever accident they
may have been originally fuiggefted, are in-
dulged with deliberation and complacency.
Though the mind has been passive in their
reception, and, therefore, free of blame;
yet, if it be acive in their continuance, the
guilt becomes its own. They may have
intruded at first, like unbidden guests; but
if, when entered, they are made welcome,

8 and

and kindly entertained, the cafe is the fame SERM.

II.

as if they had been invited from the begin- _-
ning. If we he thus accountable to God
for thoughts either voluntarily introduced,
or deliberately indulged, we are no less so,
in the last place, for those which find ad-
mittance into our hearts from supine negli-
gence, from total relaxation of attention,
from allowing our imagination to rove with
entire licence, lMe tbe eyes of the soo/, to-
wards the c;:.J ofibe earth. Our minds are,
in this cafe, thrown open to folly and va-
nity. They are proftituted to every evil
thing which picafes to take poffeflion. The
confiquences mult all he charged to onr ac-
count; and in vain we plead excuse from
human infirmity. Hence it appears, that
the great object at which we are to aim in
governing our thoughts, is, to take the most
effeitual mcafures for preventing the intro-
duction of such as are linful, and for haflen-
ing their expullion, if they lhall have intro-
duced themselves without consent of the will.

But when we defecnd into our breaits,
and examine how far wc have fludied to

keep

S E R M. keep this objec in view, who can tell how
A_>^J oft be bath (ftnded? In no article of reli-

gion or morals are men more culpably rc-
mits than in the unrestrained indulgence
they give to fancy; and that too, for most
part, without remorse. Since the time that
Reason began to exert her powers, Thought,
during our waking hours, has been active
in every breast, without a moment's sus-
pension or pause. The current of ideas
has been always flowing. The wheels of
the spiritual engine have circulated with
perpetual motion. Let me ask, what has
been the fruit of this incessant activity with
the greatest part of mankind ? Of the in-
numcrable hours that have been cinml'kycd
in thought, how few arc marked with any
permanent or ufcfil effct ? How many
have either paired away in idle dreams; or
have been abandoned to anxious dilion-
tented inufings, to unsocial and malignant
paflions, or to irregular and criminal de-
fires? Had I power to lay open that flore-
house of iniquity which the hearts of too
many conceal; could I draw out and read

to

to them a lilt of all the imaginations they SERM.
have devised, and all the paiTions they have
indulged in secret; what a piture of men
would I present to themselves ? What crimes
would they appear to have perpetrated in
fancy, which to their molt intimate com-
panions they durst not reveal ?

Even when men imagine their thoughts

to be innocently employed, they too com-
monly susser them to run out into extrava-
gant imaginations, and chimerical plans of
what they would wiflh to attain, or chufe to
be, if they could frame the course of things
according to their desire. Though such
employments of fancy come not under the
fame description with those which are plainly
criminal, yet wholly unblameable they fel-
dom are. Besides the waste of time which
they occasion, and the misapplication which
they indicate of those intellecual powers
that were given to us for much nobler pur-
poses, such romantic speculations lead us
always into the neighbourhood of forbid-
den regions. They place us on dangerous
ground. They are for the most part con-

neaed

SE R M. need with some one l;adl palfion; and

' they always nourilh a giddy and frivolous

turn of thought. They unfit the minld for
applying with vigour to rational purfilits,
or for acquiescing in loher plans of condud.
From that ideal world in which it allows
iticlf to dwell. it returns to the commerce
of men, unbent and relaxed, lickly and
tainted, averse from discharging the duties,
and sometimes disqualified even for relilh-
ing the pleafurcs of ordinary life. 0 etru-
falem ! waJh tbine heart from wickednefi.
flow longJhall thy vain thougbts lodge within
thee? *- In order to guard againif all
such corruptions and abuses of thought as I
have mentioned, it may he profitable to at-
tend to the following rules.

IN the first place, fludy to acquire the

habit of attention to thought. No fludy is
more important; for in proportion to the
degree in which this habit is possessed, such
commonly is the degree of intellectual im-

* Jcrcm. iv. 14.

provcmcnt.

provement. It is the power of attention SERMA
which in a great mcalitre diilinguilhcs the *-
wile and the great fiom the vulgar and
trifling herd of men. The latter are ac-
cullomed to think, or rather to dream, with-
out knowing the subjed of their thoughts.
In their unconnected rovings, they purfime
no end; they follow no trad. Every thiin
floats loose and disjointed on the lurface of
their mind ; like leaves fcattcred and blown
about on the filce of tdie waters.

In order to lead your thoughts into any

ulrfiul dircieion, your firfl care must be, to
acquire tlhe power of fixing them, and of
refraiining their irregular motions. Inure
yourfelvcs to form a plan of proper medi-
tation; to purfuc it fleadilv; and with tc:
vere authority to keep the door ihut against
intrusions (if wandering fancy. Let your
mnhnd, for this puIl)oec, become a frq(lcnt
o!jed to it'l tl L tl your thoughts be malde
the ilbjeCt of thought and review.-". To
" what is my attention at present dirc.dl! ?
" (:(,ulidI il'l:i: c it \wihout a blulh to thc
" wulld? Vv;e:c Cod ilnfli:::l to call iie

L i,0t

SE IR M. into judgment, what account could I give

_ " of it to him ? Shall I be the wiser or the

" better for dwelling on such thoughts as
"now fill my mind ? Are they entirely
" confident with my innocence, and with
" my present and future peace? If they
"are not, to what purpose do I indulge
" such unprofitable or dangerous musings ?"
-By frequent exercise of this inward fcru-
tiny, we might gradually bring imagination
under discipline, and turn the powers of
thought to their proper use as means of im-
provement, instead of suffering them to be
only the infiruments of vanity and guilt.

IN the second place, in order to the go-

vernment of thought, it is necessary to guard
against idleness. Idleness is the great so-
menter of all corruptions in the human
heart. In particular, it is the parent of
loose imaginations and inordinate desires.
The ever adive and restless power of thought,
if not employed about what is good, will
naturally and unavoidably engender evil.
Imagine not that mere oceupation, of what-

ever

ever kind it be, will exempt you from the s E R M.
blame and danger of an idle life. Perhaps I _
the worst species of idleness is a dissipated,
though seemingly busy life, spent in the
haunts of loose society, and in the chace of
perpetual amusement. Hence a giddy mind,
alternately elated and dejeted with trifles,
occupied with no recolledion of the past
but what is fruitless, and with no plans for
the future but what are either frivolous or
guilty.

As, therefore, you would govern your

thoughts, or indeed as you would have any
thoughts that are worthy of being governed,
provide honourable employment for the
native acivity of your minds. Keep know-
ledge, virtue, and usefulness, ever in view.
Let your life proceed in a train of such pur-
suits as are worthy of a Christian, of a ra-
tional and a social being. While these are
regularly carried on as the main business of
life, let amusement possess no more than its
proper place in the difiribution of your time.
Take particular care that your amusements
be of an irreproachable kind, and that all

VOL. II. E your

SER M. your society be either improving or inno-
-,. cent. So Ihall the stream of your thoughts

be made to run in a pure channel. Manly
occupations and virtuous principles will ex-
pel the taint which idlencfs never fails to
communicate to the vacant mind.

IN the third place,when criminal thoughts

arise, attend to all the proper methods of
speedily filppreffing them. Take example
from the unhappy industry which finners
discover in hanifhing good ones, when a
natural sense of religion forces them on their
conscience. How anxiously do they fly
from themselves? how studiously do they
drown the voice which upbraids them in
the noise of company or diversion ? what
numerous artifices do they employ to evade
the uneasiness which returns of reflexion
would produce?-Were we to use equal
diligence in preventing the entrance of vi-
cious suggestions, or in repelling them when
entered, why should we not be equally fuc-
celsful in a much better cause ?-As soon as
you are sensible that any dangerous passion

begins

begins to ferment, instantly call in other SERM.
palfions, and other ideas, to your aid. .-..
Haftcn to turn your thoughts into a differ-
ent direction. Summon up whatever you
have found to be of power for compoling
and harmonizing your mind. Fly for as-
fiftancc to serious fludies, to prayer and
devotion ; or even fly to business or inno-
cent society, if solitude be in hazard of fa-
vouring the fedudion. By such means you
may stop the progress of the growing evil.
You may apply an antidote, before the
poison has had time to work its full effect.

IN the fourth place, it will be particularly

useful to imprcfs your minds with a habitual
sense of the presence of the Almighty. When
we reflect what a strong check the belief of
divine omniscience is calculated to give to
all criminal thoughts, we are tempted to
fufpeft, that even by Christians this article
of faith is not received with sincere convic-
tion. For who but muff confess, that if he
knew a parent, a friend, or a neighbour, to
have the power of looking into his heart,

E 2 he

S E R M. he durit not allow himself that unbounded
a _
n scope which he now gives to his imagination

and desire ? Whence, then, comes it to pas,
that men, without fear or concern, bring into
the presence of the awful majcfty of Heaven
that folly and licentiousness of thought
which would make them blush and tremble,
if one of their own fellow-creatures could
lefcry ? At the fame time, no principle is
supported by clearer evidence than the om-
nilcicnce of God. All religious fess have
admitted it. All societies of men, in their
oaths and covenants, appeal to it. The
fovercign of the universe cannot but know
what passes throughout his dominions. He
who supports all nature must needs pervade
and fill it. He who formed the heart is
certainly conscious to what passes within it.

Never let thi.s great article of faith escape

from your view. In thinking, as well as
in acting, accustom yourselves to look up
with reverence to that piercing eye of di-
vine observation which never lumbcrs nor
sleeps. Behold a pen always writing over
your head, and making up that great re-

cord

cord of your thoughts, words, and adions, S E R M.
from which at lat you are to be judged. I-,-
Think that you are never less alone than
when by youirelves; for then is He still
with you, whose infpeation is of greater
confcquence than that of all mankind.
Let these awful considerations not only
check the dissipation of corrupt fancy, but
infuse into your spirits that solemn com-
pofure which is the parent of meditation
and wisdom.' -Let them not only expel
what is evil, but introduce in its tfead what
is pure and holy; elevating your thoughts
to divine and eternal objeds, and aaing as
the counterpoise to those attradions of the
world, which would draw your whole at-
tention downwards to sense and vanity.

E 3 SELR-

# SERMON III. The same SUBJECT continued. PROV. iv. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life.

S E R M O N III.
The fame SUBJECT continued.

PROV. iv. 23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of

it are the ifues of life.
SER M. _AVING treated, in the foregoing

v---. H discourse, of the government of the

thoughts, I proceed to confider the govern-
ment of the passions, as the next great duty
included.in the keeping of te heart,

Pafflons are strong emotions of the mind,

occasioned by the view of apprehended
good or evil. They are original parts of
the constitution of our nature; and there-
fore, to extirpate them is a mistaken aim.
Religion requires no more of us than to

moderate

moderate and rule them. When our blef- SE R M.
fed Lord assumed the nature, without the ,w
corruption, of man, he was subjeA to like
passions with us. On some occalions he
felt the rilings of anger. He was often
touched with pity. He was grieved i fpi-
rit; he sorrowed and he wept.

Paifions, when properly direced, may

be fubtervient to very useful ends. They
rouze the dormant powers of the foul.
They are even found to exalt them. They
often raise a man above himself, and ren-
der him more penetrating, vigorous, and
malterly, than he is in his calmer hours.
Acuated by some high passion, he conkeirei
great designs, and surmounts all difficutltie
in the execution. He is inspired with more
lofty sentiments, and endowed with more
persuasive utterance, than he pofffeffc at
any other time. Passions are te aetive
forces of the foul They are its highet
powers brought into movement and exer-
tien. But, like all other great powers they
are either useful or deftruAive, according to
!heir direction and degree: as wind and

. 4 fir<

SU.AM. fire arte iftrumental in carrying on many
v~-»W of the beneficent operations of nature; but

when they rife to undue violence, or devi-
ate from their proper course, their path is
marked with 'ruin.
-. t is the present infelicity of human na-
ture, that those strong emotions of the mind
ar become too powerful for the principle
.hidi ought to regulate them. This is one
of the uthappy consequences of our apof-
tacy from God, that the influence of rea-
son i weakened, and that of passion
strengthened, within the heart, When man
revolted from his Maker, his passions re-
bel~ld againfi himself; and from being
originally the instruments of reason, have
becm*rthe.tyrants of ihe foul. Hence, in
treating f this fubjoc two things may be
afiualtd a principles: first, that through
thrprefnt weakness of the underfianding,
&blitflions are pfthti dite&ed towards im-
proper objofti ; and next, that even when
dtherire ction is just, and their objecs are
inn~di, they perpetually tend to run into
excel:. they always hurry us towards their

4 gratification

gratification with a blind and dangerous sEq-.
impetuofit. On these two points then ,
turns the whole government of our passions:
first, to afccrtain the proper objecs of their
pursuit; and next, to restrain them in that
pursuit when they would carry us beyond
the bounds of reason. If there be any pas-
sion which irtrudes itfelfunfeafonably into
our mind, which darkens and troubles our
judgment, or habitually discomposes our
temper; which unfits us for properly dif-
charging the duties, or disqualifies us for
cheerfuly enjoying the comforts of life,
we may certainly conclude it to have gained
a dangerous acfendant. The great object
which we ought to propose to ourselves is,
to acquire a firm and stedfast mind, which
the infatuation of paflion shall not seduce,
nor its violence (hake; which, reiting on
fixed principles, ihall, in the midst of con-
tending emotions, remain free, and maiter
of itself; able to liften calmly to the voice
of conscience, and prepared to obey its dic-
tates without hesitation.

To

F R .

M- To obtain, if possible, such command of
»-^ passion, is one of the highest attainments

of the rational nature. Arguments to show
its importance crowd upon us from every
quarter. If there be any fertile source of
miiclhief to human life, it is, beyond doubt,
the nilrule of pallion. It is this which
poilbns the enjoyment of individuals, over-
turns the order of society, and strews the
path of life with so many miseries, as to
render it indeed the valley of tears, All
those great scenes of public calamity, which
we behold with aftonilhment and horrour,
have originated from the source of violent
passions. These have overspread she earth
with bloodshed. These have pointed the
aflaffin's dagger, and filled the poisoned
bowl. These, in every age, have fur-
nifhed too copious materials for the orator's
pathetic declamation, and for the poet's tra,
gical feng.

When from public life we defeend to pri-

vate c( ndut, though pafion operate not
there in iuchi a wide and deftrutive sphere,
we (hall find its influence to be no less bane-

ful.

ful. I need not mention the black and SERM.
fierce passions, such as envy, jealousy, and ,
revenge, whose effects are obviously nox-
ious, and whose agitations are immediate
misery. But take any of the licentious and
sensual kind. Suppose it to have unlimited
scope; trace it throughout its course; and
you will find that gradually, as it rifes, it
taints the soundness, and troubles the peace
of his mind over whom it reigns; that in
its progress it engages him in pursuits which
are marked either with danger or with
shame; that in the end it waftes his for-
tune, destroys his health, or debases his
character; and aggravates all the miseries
in which it has invoved him with the con-
cduding pangs of bitter remorse. Through
all the stages of this fatal course, how many
have heretofore run? What multitudes do
we daily behold pursuing it, with blind and
headlong steps?

But, on the evils which flow from unre-

firained passions, it is needlcfs to enlarge.
Hardly are there any so ignorant or incon-
fiderate as not to admit, that where pallion

is

> Fl k . ib allowed to reign, both happiness and vira
A-·_ tue mult i;uffcr. I proceed therefore to

what is of morc confcquence, to suggest
sone direftions which may be useful in
aifffling us to preserve tle government of
our passions,

IN the first place, we must fludy to ac,

quire jufi views of the comparative import-
AXce of thoie objects that are most ready to

tttrad delire. The erroneous opinions
which we form concerning happiness and
misery, give rife to all the mistaken and
dangerous pafions which embroil our life.
We susser ourselves to be dazzled by unreal
appearances of pleasure. We follow, with
precipitancy, whitherfbever the crowd
leads. We admire, without examination,
what our predecessors have admired. We
fly from every ihadow at which we fee
others tremble. Thus, agitated by vain
fears and deceitful hopes, we are hurried
into eager contests about objecs which are
in themselves of no value. By rcdifying
Or opinions, we would strike at the root

of

of the evil. If our vain imaginations were s E R M.

All.

chaflened, the tumult of our paffilons would ,-
subside.

It is observed, that the young and the

ignorant are always the most violent in
pursuit. The knowledge which is forced
upon them by longer acquaintance with the
world, moderates their impetuosity. Study
then to anticipate, by reflexion, that know-
ledge which experience often purchases at
too dear a price. Inure yourselves to fre-
quent consideration of the emptiness of
those pleasures which excite so much strife
and commotion among mankind. Think
how much more of true enjoyment is loft
by the violence of pafion, than by the want
of those things which give occasion to that
paflion. Persuade yourselves that the fa-
vour of God and the possession of virtue
form the chief happiness of the rational
nature. Let a contented mind, and a
peaceful life, hold the next place in your
estimation. These are the conclusions
which the wife and thinking part of man-
kind have always formed. To these con-

clufions,

S E R M. clufions, after having run the race of pas-
,__ sion, you will probably come at the last.

By forming them betimes, you would make
a seasonable escape from that tempestuous
Tegion, through which none can pass with-
out suffering miferyi contracting guilt, and
undergoing severe remorse.

IN the second place, in order to attain

the command of pafion, it is requisite to
acquire the power of felf-denial. The lelf-
denial of a Christian consists not in perpe-
tual austerity of life, and universal renun-
ciation of the innocent comforts of the
world. Religion requires no such unne-
ceffary sacrifices, nor is any such foe to
present enjoyment. It confilts in our being
ready, on proper occasions, to abstain from
pleasure, or to submit to suffering, for the
fake of duty and confcicnce, or from a view
to some higher and more extensive good.
If we possess not this power, we {hall be
the prey of every loose inclination that
chances to arise. Pampered by continual
indulgence, all our pafions will become

mutinous

mutinous and headlfrong. Desire, not rea- SE RM.
son, will be dhe ruling principle of our I,
conduat.

As, therefore, you would keep your pas-

sions within due bounds, you must betimes
accustom them to know the reins. You
must not wait till some critical occasion for
the exercise of felf-denial occur. In vain
you will attempt to at with authority, if
your first essay be made when temptation
has inflamed the mind. In cooler hours,
you must sometimes abridge your enjoy-
ment even of what is innocent. In the
midst of lawful pleasure, you must main-
tain moderation, abftemioufnefs, and self-
command. The observance of this difci-
pline is the only method of fiipporting rea-
son in its proper ascendant. For if you
allow yourselves always to stretch to the
utmost point of innocence and safety, be-
yond that point you will infallibly be hur-
ried, when passion Ihall arise in its might
to shake the heart.

IN the third place, impress your minds
deeply with this persuasion, that nothing is

6 what

SE R NM. what it appears to be when you are under
,-.--. the power of passion. Be assured, that no

judgmient which you then form can be in
the least depended upon as found or true.
The fumes which ariie from a heart boiling
with violent passions, never fail to darken
and trouble the understanding. When the
gourd withered, under the slade of which
the prophet Jonah reposed, his mind, al-
ready ruffled by the disappointment of his
predictions, lot, on occalion of this flight
incident, all command of itself; and in the
midst of his impatience, he wij/ed to die
rather than to live. Inflead of being calmed
by that expofltlating voice, Dorf thou well,
(0 onah ! to be angry because of the gourd?
he replied with great emotion, I do well to
be angry even unto death. But did Jonah
think si) when his passion had abated ? Do
tliehf sentiments bear the least resemblance
to that humble and devout prayer which,
on another occasion, when in his calm mind,
lie put up to God * ? No two persons can
differ more from each other, than the fame

cee Jcnah ii.

person

person differs from himself, when agitated SE R M.
by patfon, and when mafler of his reason. ^
I do well to be angry, is the language of
every man when his mind is inflamed.
Every paflion justifies itself. It brings in a
thousand pretences to its aid. It borrows
many a false colour to hide its deformity.
It poffienes a fort of magic, by which it can
magnify or diminish objeds at plcafure,
and transform the appearance of every thing
within its sphere.

Let the knowledge of this imposture which

paflion praaifes, place you continually on
your guard. Let the remembrance of it
be ever at hand, to check the extravagant
judgments which you are apt to pass in
those moments of delusion. Liften to no
suggestion which then arises. Form no
conclusions on which you are to ad. As-
sure yourselves that every thing is beheld
through a false medium. Have patience
for a little, and the illusion will vanifli;
the atmosphere will clear up around vwn,
and ohjecd return to he viewed in their
native colours and just dimensions.

VOL. II. I: I:

SE R M. IN the fourth place, oppose early the be-

'- ginnings of passion. Avoid particularly all

luch obje&s as are apt to excite passions
which you know to predominate within
you. As ioon as you find the tempef riling,
have recourle to every proper method, ei-
ther of allaying its violence, or of escaping
to a calmer shore. Haften to call up emo-
tions of an ofpofite nature. Study to con-
quer one paflion by means of some other
which is of leis dangerous tendency. Never
account any thing tinall or trivial which is
in hazard of introducing disorder into your
heart. Never make light of any desire
which you feel gaining such progress as to
threaten entire dominion. Blandilhing it
will appear at the Iirf. As a gentle and
innocent emotion, it may Real into the
heart; but as it advances, is likely to pierce
you through with many firrows. What you
indulged as a favourite amulement, will
shortly become a serious business; and in
the end may prove the burden of your life.
Most of our passions flatter us in their rife.
But their beginnings are treacherous; their

I~~~ ~growth

growth is imperceptible; and the evils which S E R M.
they carry in their train lie concealed, until _-
their dominion is eftabliflhed. What Solo-
mon fays of one of them, holds true of them
all, that their beginning is as when one letteth
out water *. It issues from a small chink,
which once might have been easily stopped;
but being negleced, it is soon widened by
the stream; till the bank is at las totally
thrown down, and the flood is at liberty to
deluge the whole plain.

IN the fifth place, the excess of every

passion will be moderated by frequent me-
ditation on the vanity of the world, the
short continuance of life, the approach of
death, judgment, and eternity. The ima-
ginary degree of importance which the ne-
glec of such meditation suffers us to bestow
on temporal things, is one great cause of
our vehemence in desire, and our eagerness
in pursuit. We attach ourselves to the ob-
jets around us, as if we could enjoy them
for ever. Higher and more enlarged pro-

Prov. xvii. 14.

F 2 fpets

SE R M. speds of the destination of man would na-
*-v turally cool this misplaced ardour. For

what can appear so considerable in human
affairs, as to discompose or agitate the mind
of him to whole view eternity lies open, and
all the greatncfs of the universe of God?
How contemptible will seem to him this
hurry of spirits, this turmoil of passion,
about things which are so soon to end ?-
Where are they who once disturbed the
world with the violence of their contefis,
and filled it with the renown of their ex-
ploits ? What now remains of their designs
and enterprises, of their paflions and pur-
filits, of their triumphs and their glory?
'The flood of time has passed over them,
and fvcpt them away, as if they had never
been. The fyion ( f the world changes
contiiually around us. We filccecd one
another in the lllnan course, like troops
of pilgrims on their journcy. Absurdly we
spend our time in contending about the
trifles of a day, vhi!e v:e ought to he pre-
parin; tor a hiiher exiflnce. Eternity is
just :! 'lnd to close thi intrtducory fccne.

It

It is fast rolling towards us, like the tide SE R M.
of a vast ocean, ready to swallow up all -
human concerns, and to leave no trace be-
hind it, except the consequences of our good
or bad deeds, which ihall last for ever.-
Let such reflections allay the heat of passion.
Let them reduce all human things to their
proper standard. From frivolous pursuits
let them recal our attention to olbiels of
real importance; to the proper business of
man; to the improvement of our nature,
the discharge of our duty, the rational and
religious conduct of human life.

IN the last place, to our own endeavours

for regulating our passions, let us join ear-
nest prayer to God. Here, if any where,
divine afliftance is requilite. For such lis
the present blindness and impcrfccion of
human nature, that even to dilfovcr all the
disorders of our heart is become difficult;
much more, to retify them, is beyond cur
power. To that superior aid, then, whiJl
is promised to the pious and upright, let us
look up with humble minds; beseeching

:3 tilt:

S E R M. the Father of mercies, that, while we ftldy

..... to at our own part with resolution and

vigilance, he would forgive our returning
weakness; would strengthen our constancy
in refifling the assaults ofpaflion; and enable
us by his grace so to govern our minds, that
without considerable interruptions we may
proceed in a course of piety and virtue.

IT now remains to treat of the govern-

ment of temper, as included in the keeping
of the heart. Passions are quick and strong
emotions, which by degrees subside. Tem-
per' is the disposition which remains after
these emotions are past, and which forms
the habitual propensity of the foul. The
one are like the Itream when it is fwoln by
the torrent, and ruffled by the winds. The
other resembles it when running within its
bed, with its natural velocity and force.
The influence of temper is more silent and
imperceptible than that of paflion. It ope-
rates with less violence; but as its operation
is conflant, it produces effeas no less con-
fiderable. It is evident, therefore, that it

highly

highly deserves to be confidered in a reli- s E R M.
gious view. ____

Many, indeed, are averse to behold it in

this light. They place a good temper upon
the fame footing with a healthy conftitu-
tion of body. They conlider it as a natural
felicity which some enjoy; hut for the want
of which, others are not morally culpable,
nor accountable to God; and hence the
opinion has Sometimes prevailed, that a had
temper might be confiflent with a state of
grace. If this were true, it would overturn
that whole doctrine, of which the gospel is
so full, that regeneration, or change of na-
ture, is the essential charaderiftic of a Chril-
tian. It would suppose that grace might
dwell amidst malevolence and rancour, and
that heaven might he enjoyed by such as
are strangers to charity and love.-It will
readily he admitted, that iome, by the ori-
ginal frame of their mind, are more tavour-
ablv inclined than others towards certain
good dilpofitiols and habits. But this as-
fords no juftitication to those who neglect
to oppose the corruptions to which they are

F 4 prone.

SE R M. prone. Let no man imagine that the hui,

man heart is a foil altogether unfufceptible
of culture; or that the worif temper may
not, through the affiftancce of grace, be re-
formed by attention and discipline. Settled
depravity of temper is always owing to our
ow.i indulgence. If, in place of checking,
we nourish that malignity of difpolition to
which we are inclind, all the consequences
will be placed to our account, and every
exculc from natural constitution be rejeted
at the tribunal of Heaven.

The proper regulation of temper assets

the chinracer of man in every relation which
lie bears,; and includes the whole circle of
religious and moral duties. This, therefore,
is a filbjed of too great extent to he com-
prchended in one dilfourrf. But it may be
ulfefil to take a general view of it; and, be-
tore we conclude the doctrine of keeping the
heart, to shew what the habitual temper of
a good man ought to he, with rcfpete to
;od, to his neighbour, and to himlclf.

FIRST, with rcfpec to God, what he
cu'ight to cultivate is a levout trarcr. This

impiorts

imports more than the care of perform- S ERM.
ing the offices of religious worihip. It
denotes that sensibility of heart towards
the Supreme Being, which springs from
a deep imprefton of his perfections on
the foul. It flands opposed, not only
to that disregard of God which forms
tile defCrii;tion of the impious, but to
that ahfence of religious affeclions which
sometimes prevails among those who are
impcrfelyv good. They acknowleedge, per-
haps, the obhigations of duty. They fecl
fom. concern to work 6t tr.;r f/alvtion.
I]ut they apply to their duty through mere
constraint; an'l feive God without affection
or complacency. More liberal and gene-
rous fentimrents animate the man who is of
devout temper. God dwells upon his
thoughts as a hcilcfactor and a father, to
whose voice h lic rkcns with joy. Amidtl
the occurrences of life, his mind naturally
opens to the admiration of his wifdomn, the
reverence of liis po-wer, the love ns his
tranicendent goodncfs. All nattre appears
to his view as llamin;ed with the imprcis of

8 thetl

SE R M. these perfections. Habitual gratitude to
>_-_ his Maker for mercies pait, and cheerful

relignation to his will in all time to come,
are the native effusions of his heart.

Such a temper as this deserves to be cul-

tivated with the utmost attention; for it
contributes, in a high degree, both to our
improvement and our happiness. It refines,
and it exalts human nature. It softens that
hardness which our hearts are ready to con-
trad from frequent intercourle with this
rugged world. It facilitates the discharge
of every duty towards God and man. At
the iame time it is a temper peaceful and
serene, elevated and rejoicing. It forms
the current of our affedions to flow in a
placid tenour. It opens pleating profpets
to the mind. It banishes harlh and bitter
parfions; and places us above the reach of
many of the annoyances of worldly life.
When the temper is truly devout, the peace
of God which pa!tlbh niidcrftandiipg l ccpeth
the heart aniiItl. I proceed,

SECONDIY, to point out the proper slate
of our temper with refped to one another.

It

It is evident, in the general, that if we SERM.
consult either public welfare or private .
happiness, Christian charity ought to regu-
late our disposition in mutual intercourse.
But as this great principle admits of several
diversified appearances, let us confider some
of the chief forms under which it ought to
(how itfelfin the usual tenourof life. Uni-
verltl benevolence to mankind, when it
refts in the abftrad, is a loole indetermi-
nate idea, rather than a principle of real
effed; and too often floats as an useless
speculation in the head, instead of asseting
the temper and the heart.

What, first, presents itself to be recom-

mended is a peaceable temper; a difpofi-
tion averse to give offence, and desirous of
cultivating harmony, and amicable inter-
course in society. This supposes yielding
and condescending manners, unwillingness
to contend with others about trifles, and,
in contests that are unavoidable, proper
moderation of spirit. Such a temper is the
first principle of felf-enjoyment. It is the
bfis of all order and happiness among

mankind.

s F.R M. mankind. The politive and contcntious,

th e rude and (quarrcllonle, are tce bane (f
oIcietv. They fIcmn dcltined to hlaft the
small lliare of comnort which nature hai
licre allotted to ii;an. But they cannot di(-
turh the peace of others, more than they
break their own. The hurric;ane rages firl.
in their own bolom, Ibefore it is let forth
upon the world. In the tempests which
they raile, they are always tolt; and fre-
quently it is their lot to perish.

A peaceable temper mult be lupported by

a candid one, or a difpolftion to view the
condu&t of othlcrl with fairness and impar-
tiality. This flands opposed to a jealous
and fuifpicious tenmper, which alcribes every
aclion to the xorli motive, and throws a
black liade over every charadlcr. As you
would be happy in yourselves, or in your
cnnclin ios with (,lhcrs, guard againi this
malignant spirit. Study that charity ucl.ib
thinklkcl no revil; that temper which, with-
out (lcgcncratir, i:;.;n crc',!i'y, w ,ill difpofi
you to ibe jluit; a; d wl:ich can allow you
to obfcrvc a;n c;rr, /: ,a.:t ini uting it a-

a crii't .

a crime. Thus you will be kept free from s E R M.
that continual irritation which imaginary .
injuries rnile in a fifpicious brea;t; and will
walk among men as your brethren, not
your enemies.

But to be peaceable, and to be candid,

is not all that is required. of a good man.
He mutt cultivate a kind, generous, and
sympathizing temper, which feels for dif-
trcls, wherever it is beheld ; which enters
into the concerns of his fiiends with ar-
dour; and to all with whom he has inter-
tercourfe is gentle, obliging, and humane.
How amiable appears such a disposition,
when contrasted with a malicious or envi-
ous temper, which wraps itself up in its
own narrow intcrefls, looks with an evil
eye on the fuiccefs of others, and with an
unnatural fatisfadion feeds on their difap-
pointments or mileries ' lowv little dio)e
he know of the true halppninlfs of life, who
is a firanger to that intercourle of good
offices anid kind affectiont, which, by a
pleasing charm, attach mnci to one anothcr,
and circulate joy ftrom heart to ihe:rt

Yo'i1

S F. R M. You are not to imagine that a henevo-
L-.- lent temper finds no exercile, unlels when

opportunities offer of performing actions of
high gencrofity, or of cxtcnfive utilitv.
Thefc may fcldom occur. The condition
of the greater part of mankind, in a good
measure, precludes them. But in the or-
dinary round of human affairs, a thousand
occasions daily present themselves of miti-
gating the vexations which others susser, of
soothing their minds, of aiding their in-
terest, of promoting their cheerfulness, or
ease. Such occalions may relate to the
smaller incidents of life. But let us re-
member that of small incidents the system
of human life is chiefly composed. The
attentions which refpeA these, when fug-
gested by real benignity of temper, are
often more material to the happiness of
those around us, than acions which carry
the appearance of greater dignity and fplen-
dour. No wile or good man ought to ac-
count any rules of behaviour as below his
regard, which tend to cement the great
brotherhood of mankind in comfortable
union.

Particularly

Particularly in the course of that fami- S E R M.

liar intercolurfe which belongs to domestic
life, all the virtues of temper find an ample
range. It is very unfortunate, that within
that circle, men too often think themselves
at liberty to give unrestrained vent to the
caprice of passion and humour. Whereas
there, on the contrary, more than any
where, it concerns them to attend to the
government of their heart; to check what
is violent in their tempers, and to ioften
what is harsh in their manners. For there
the temper is formed. There, the real
character displays itself. The forms of the
world dilguife men when abroad. But
within his own family, every man is known
to be what he truly is.-In all our inter-
course, then, with others, particularly in
that which is closest and most intimate, let
us cultivate a peaceable, a candid, a gentle
and friendly temper. This is the temper
to which, by repeated injunctions, our holy
religion seeks to fonn us. This was the
temper of Christ. This is the temper of
Heaven.

WE

SE R M. WE are now to conlidcr, thirdly, thc

- proper state of temper, as it refpets the

individual himilclf. The hafis of all the
good dilpolitions which belong to this head,
is humility. By this I underfland, not that
meanness of tfirit which leads a man to
undervalue hilncif, and to fink below his
rank and character; but what the scripture
expresses with grcat propriety, .lhen it ex-
horts evcy man, not to tlink f hbmf'lf more
hi'hly than he oghwl to thinl, Obt to think
fobcrly '. I le w-ho adopts all the flattering
suggestions of fclf-lovc, and forms claims
upon the world proportioned to the ima-
ginary opinion whic hle lhas cc(nceived of
his merit, is preparing for hilmflf a thou-
sand mortilications. !\hcrca.s by checking
tile rilings of ill-founded v.liity, and re-
treating within thole bounds wvhich a mo-
derate estimation of our character pre-
Icribes, we escape tile miiferies which always
purfile an arrogant mind, and recommend
ourselves to the favour both of God and
man.

Rom. Aii. I.c

IIcnce

Hence will naturally arise a contented s E R M.

temper, which is one of the greatest blef- ._
sings that can be enjoyed by rnan, and one
of the most material requisites to the pro-
per dlfcharge of the duties of every station.
For a fretful and discontented temper ren-
ders one incapable of performing aright any
part in life. It is unthankful and impious
towards God; and towards men, provok-
ing and unjust. It is a gangrene which
preys on the vitals, and infecs the whole
constitution with disease and putrefacion.
Subdue pride and vanity, and you will
take the most effecual method of eradicat-
ing this distemper. You will no longer
behold the objecs around you with jaun-
diced eyes. You will take in good part
the blessings which Providence is pleated to
bestow, and the degree of favour which
your fellow-creatures are disposcd to grant
you. Viewing yourselves, with all your
imperfecions and failings, in a just light,
you will rather be surprised at your enjoy-
ing so many good things, than discontented
because there are any which you want.

VOL. II. G From

S FR M. From a humble and contented temper
t-vy- will spring a cheerful one. This, if not

in itl;if a virtue, is at least the garb in
which virtuc fihould be always arrayed.
Pictv and goodncfs ought never to be mark-
ed with that dejceion which sometimes
takcj ritl from fuperftiton, but which is
the proper portion only of guilt. At the
fame time, the chcerfulncfs belonging to
virtue is to be carefully distinguished from
that light and giddy temper which charac-
tcrizes folly, and is so often found among
the dissipated and vicious part of mankind.
Their gaiety is owing to a total want of
reflexion; and brings with it the uflal con-
fcqucnccs of an unthinking habit, fliamc-,
remorse, and hcavirefs of heart, in the end.
The cheerfulness of a well-regulated mind,
springs from a good confcicnce and the fa-
\our of heaven, and is Lounded by tem-
perance and reason. It makes a man
happy in hinsfelf, and promotes the hap-
pincis of all around him. It is the clear
and calm funflline of a mind illuminated by
piety and virtue. It crowns all other good

dispositions,

dispositions, and comprehends the general SE PfM
effea which they ought to produce on the
heart.

SUCH, on the whole, is the temper, or

habitual frame of mind, in a good man:
Devout towards God; towards men, peace-
able, candid, affcaionate and humane;
within himfclf, humble, contented and
cheerful. To the establishment of this hap-
py temper all the directions which I before
suggested for the due regulation of the
thoughts, and for the government of the
passions, naturally conduce; in this they
ought to issue; and when this temper is
thoroughly formed within us, then may
the heart be esteemed to have been kept
with all diligence. That we may be thus
enabled to keep it, for the fake both ofpre-
sent enjoyment and of preparation for
greater happiness, let us earnestly pray to
Heaven. A greater blessing we cannot
implore of the Almighty, than that he
who made the human heart, and who
knows its frailties, would aflift us to sub-

G 2 jc

SERM. jec it to that discipline which religion re-
,-^- quires, which reason approves, but which

his grace alone can enable us to main-
tain.

S E R-

# SERMON IV. On the UNCHANGEABLENESS of the DIVINE NATURE. JAMES i. 17. Every good and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither ...

[ 85 1

SERMON IV.
On the UNCIIANGEABLENESS of the

DIVINE NATURE.

JAMES i. 17.
Every good and every perfect gift is from

above, and cometh down from the Father
of Lghts, with whom is no variablenef,
neither/hadlow of turning.
T HE divine nature, in rome views, SERU.

attrats our love; in others, com- IV.

mands our reverence; in all, is entitled to
the highest attention from the human mind.
We never elevate our thoughts, in a pro-
per manner, towards the Supreme Being,
without returning to our own sphere with
sentiments more improved; and if, at any
time, his greatness oppresses our thoughts,

G 3 his

S R tM. his moral pcrfcdions always afford us rc-

IV.

licf. His almighty , powcr, his infinite
wiftlom and fiiprcmc goodness, arc founds
familiar to our cars. In his immutability
we are less accustomed to confider him;
and yet it is this pcrfedlon which, perhaps,
more than any other diftinguiflies the di-
vine nature from the human; gives com-
plcte energy to all its other attributes, and
entitles it to the highest adoration. For,
hence are derived the regular order of na-
ture and the ftedfaftnefs of the universe.
Hence flows the unchanging tenour ofthofe
laws which, from age to age, regulate the
conduct of mankind. Hence the uniform-
ity of that government, and the certainty
of those promiifs, which are the ground of
our trust and security. Goodness could
produce no more than feeble and wavering
hopes, and power would command very
imperfect reverence, if we were left to
ftfpoft that the plans which goodness had
framed might alter, or that the power of
cartying them into execution might de-
crease. The contemplation of God, there-

fore,

fore, as unchangeable in his nature n,,d in s r R M.
all his perfections, mufi undoubtedlyl Ie be
fruitful both of infirucion and of corfola-
tion to man. I fihall, fil1,, cndcavour to
illutfrate in some degree the nature of the
divine immutability ; and then make ap-
plication of it to our own condud.

EVER¥T grod anw, everjy p)s; ,7 gift

cmieth down J;rn, the Fi/her f' Lifbhts.
The title which in the text is g;ven to the
Deity, carries an elegant alluilon to the Sun,
the source of light, the most univeratl bc-
nefaEtor of nature, the molt regular and
conflant of all the great bodies with whlich
we are acquainted in the universe. Yet
even with the Sun there are certain degrees
of variablener. He apparently rifes and
sets; lie seems to approach nearer to us in
summer, and to retire farther off in win-
ter ; his influence is varied by the seasons,
and his lustre is affected by the clouds.
Whereas with him who is the Father of
Lights, of whole cverlafting brightness the
glory of the Sun is but a faint image,

G 4 there

S E R M. there is nofhadow of turning, not the most

diflant approach to change. In his being
or essence it is plain that alteration can ne-
vcr take place. For as his exiltence is de-
rived from no prior cause, nor dependent
on any thing without himself, his nature
can be influenced by no power, can be
affeaed by no accident, can be impaired
by no time. From everlasting to everlalt-
ing, he continues the fame. Hence it is
said, that he only hath immortality; that is,
he possesses it in a manner incommunicable
to all other beings. Eternity is described
as the high and holy place in which he
dwellcth; it is a habitation in which none
but the lFather of Lights can enter. The
name which he taketh to himself is, I am.
Of other things, some have been and others
shall be; but this is he which is, ubicb
was, and which is to come. All time is his;
it is measured out by him in limited por-
tions to the various orders of created beings;
but his own existence fills equally every
point of duration; the sirs and the last, the
beginning and the end, the fame yjierday, to-
day, andfor ever.

As

As in his essence, so in his attributes and s E R M.

perfedions, it is impossible therc can be any _,_
change. To imperfed natures only it be-
longs to improve and to decay. Every al-
teration which they undergo in their abili-
ties or difpolitions, flows either from inter-
nal defect, or from the influence of a superior
cause. But as no higher cause can bring
from without any accession to the divine
nature, so within itfclf it contains no prin-
ciple of decay. For the fame reason that
the felf-exiftent Being was from the begin-
ning powerful and wife, just and good, he
mult continue unalterably so for ever. Hence
with much propriety the divine perfcaions
are described in scripture by allusions to
those objeas to which we ascribe the most
permanent liability. His r.:gbtcoutnie is
like bte flrong mountains. His n;ercy is in
the heavens; anil bis fait,'filnefs reacbetb
intio the clouds. These perfetions of the
divine nature differ widely from the human
virtues, which are their faint flhadows. The
justice of men is at one time fevcre, at an-
other time relenting; their goodness is some-

times

s P R M. times confined to a partial fondness for a

(V.
L- ,-^ few, sometimes runs out into a blind in-

dulgence towards all. But goodness and
jultice are in the Supreme Being calm and
steady principles of acion, which, enlight-
ened by perfect wisdom, and never either
warped by partiality, or disturbed by passion,
perflvcre in one regular and conflant tenor.
Among men they may fcmetimes break forth
with transient Iplendour, like those wan-
dering fires which illuminate for a little the
darkness of the night. But in God they
shine with that uniform brightness, which
we can liken to nothing so much as to the
untroubled, eternal lustre of the highest
heavens.

From this follows, what is chiefly mate-

rial for us to attend to, that in the course
of his operations towards mankind, in his
cournfels and decrees, in his laws, his pro-
mises, and his thrcatenillns, there is no va-
rialenrfs nor jqadow f' turning with the
Almighty. K ,wn to himn from the begin-
I.;ing were all his works. In the divine idea.
the whole fyflem of nature exifled, long

before

before the foundations of the earth were laid. s E R M.

IV.

When he said, Let there be light, he only .
realized the great plan which from everlaft-
ing he had formed in his own mind. Fore-
seen by him was every revolution which
the course of ages was to produce. What-
ever the counsels of men can effect was
comprehended in his decree. No new cmer.
gency can arise to surprise him. No agita-
tions of anger or of sorrow, of fear or of
hope, can flake his mind or influence his
conduc. He refts in the eternal pofleffion
of that supreme beatitude, which neither
the virtues nor the crimes of men can it the
least affe. From a motive of overflowing
goodness, he reared up the universe. As
the eternal lover of righteousness, he rules it.
The whole system of his government is
fixed; his laws are irrevocable; and what
he once loveth, he lovetb to the end. In
scripture, indeed, he is sometimes said to
be grievcd, and to repent, But such expref-
sions, it is obvious, are employed from ac-
commodation to common conception; in
the fame manner as when bodily organs are

in

s . R M. in other pafTages ascribed to God. The
--j scripture, as a rule of life addressed to the

multitude, must make use of the language
of men. The divine nature, rcprefentcd in
its native sublimity, would have transcendcd
all human conception. When, upon the
reformation of finners, God is said to repent
of te evil which he had threatened against
them, this intimates no more, than that lie
suits his dispensations to the alterations which
take place in the characters of men. His
disposition towards good and evil continues
the fame, but varies in its application as its
objects vary; just as the laws themselves,
which are capable of no change of affection,
bring rewards or punishments at different
times to the fame person, according as his
behaviour alters. Immutability is indeed so
closely connected with the notion of supreme
perfection, that wherever any rational con-
ceptions of a Deity have taken place, this
attribute has been ascribed to him. Reason
taught the wife and reflecting in every age
to believe, that, as what is eternal cannot
die, so what is perfeCt can never vary, and

that

that the great Governor of the universe S R IM.

IV.

could be no other than an unchangeable ,-
Being.

FROM the contemplation of this obvious,

hut fundamental truth, let us proceed to
the practical improvement of it. Let us
confider what effe1 the serious consideration
of it ought to produce on our mind and be-
haviour.

It will be proper to begin this head of dif-

- course by removing an objetion which the

doctrine I have illustrated may appear to
form against religious services, and in par-
ticular againit the duty of prayer. To what
purpose, it may be urged, is homage ad-
dressed to a Being whose purpose is unal-
terably fixed; to whom our righteoujlnJs
cxtendeth not; whom by no arguments we
can persuade, and by no supplications we
can mollify? The objection would have
weight if our religious addresses were de-
signed to work any alteration on God; ei-
ther by giving him information of what he
did not know; or by exciting affetions

6 which

SE F R . which he did not possess; or by inducing

IV.
A, 8^ him to change measures which he had pre-

vioufly formed. But they are only crude
and imperfect notions of religion which can
suggest such ideas. The change which our
devotions are intended to make is upon our-
selves, not upon the Almighty. Their chief
efficacy is derived from the good dispositions
which they raise and cheriih in the human
foul. By pouring out pious sentiments and
desires before God, by adoring his perfec-
tion and confessing our own unworthiness,
by expressing our dependence on his aid,
our gratitude for his past favours, our sub-
million to his present will, our trust irq his
future mercy, we cultivate such affections
as suit our place and station in the universe,
and are thereby prepared for becoming ob-
jecs of the divine grace. Accordingly fre-
quent assurances are given us in Scripture,
that the prayers of sincere worshippers, pre-
ferred through the great Mediator, lhall be
productive of the happiest effefts, Wheo
they ak, they Jhall receive; when they fee,
theyJballfind; when they knock, itJball be

opened
4

opened to them. Prayer is appointed to be sE R M.
the channel for conveying the divine grace i_
to mankind, because the wisdom of Heaven
saw it to be one of the most powerful means
of improving the human heart.

When religious homage is confidered in

this light, as a great inftrumcnt of spiritual
and moral improvement, all the objecions
which scepticism can form from the divine
immutability, conclude with no more force
against prayer, than against every other
mean of improvement which reason has
suggested to man. If prayer be superfluous
because God is unchangeable, we might
upon similar grounds conclude, that it is
needless to labour the earth, to nourish our
bodies, or to cultivate our minds, because
the fertility of the ground, the continuance
of our life, and the degree of our under-
standing, depend upon an immutable So-
vereign, and were from all eternity fore-
seen by him. Such absurd conclusions rea-
son has ever repudiated. To every plain
and found underflanding it has clearly dic.
tated, that to explore the unknown purposes

of

S F RtM of Hcaven hclongs, not to us1; Iht thlat Ire
*.--- who decrees the end, certainly requires the

means; ;andi thit ill the dilrgent cmployment
of all tlhe meanis whitli, cal ad;vance ceither
our tcnlnpor.l or liriluail t'lirity, tle chief
cxertions of hl m.in willdoin ;tlld humrnan
duty conlill. Airlinling it tlirn t;fr an un-
doubted plinciplc, that rcli;inln i, a ica.fn-
able fervicc, and Iliat, thouInn witl Ithe il'-
bcer of J.gbts therrc hr , t,-*i,,Illn'rrft thc
homage of his crea:ltires is neverthelcls for
the wisest realons required by hIin, I pro-
ceed to shew what sentiments the contemn-
plation of divine immutability Ihould raise
in our minds, a;d what duties it Ihould
chiefly enforce.

1. LET it excite us to admire and adore.

Filled with profiound reverence, let us look
up to that Supreme 3cing who fits fiom
everlalting on the throne of tle universe;
moving all things, hut remaining inmmove-
able himself; direding every revolution of
the creation, but affcCted hy no revolutions
of events or of time. lie beholds the heavens

and

nnd the earth wax old as a garment, and SS RM.
decay like a veflure. At their appointed pe-
riods he raises up, or he dilfolves worlds.
But amidst all the convulsions of changing
and perilhing nature, his glory and felicity
remain unaltered.-The view of great and
flupendous objeaf in the natural world
firikes the mind with solemn awe. What
veneration, then, ought to be inspired by
the contemplation of an objea so sublime
as the eternal and unchangeable ruler of the
niiverfe! The composure and flillnefs of
thought introduced by such a meditation has
a powerful tendency both to purify and to
elevate the heart. It effaces, for a time,
those trivial ideas, and extinguifhcs those
low paflions, which arise from the circle of
vain and pairing obje&s around us. It opens
the mind to all the sentiments of devotion;
and accompanies devotion with that pro-
found reverence which guards it from every
improper excess. When we confider the
Supreme Being as employed in works of
love; when we think of his condescension
to the human race in fending his Son to

VOL. II. H dwell

s F R 1. dwell on the. earth; encouraged by favours

- and warmed by gratitude, we are sometimes

in danger of presuming too much on his
goodness, and of indulging a certain fond-
nets of affecion, which is unsuitable to our
humble and dependent slate. It is necef-
fary that He should frequently appear to
our minds in all that majesty with which
the immutability of his nature clothes him;
in order that reverence may be combined
with love, and that a mixture of sacred awe
may chasten the rapturous effusions of warm
devotion. Servile fear, indeed, would crush
the spirit of ingenuous and affectionate ho-
mage. But that reverence which springs
from elevated conceptions of the divine na-
ture, has a happy effect in checking the
forwardness of imagination, reitraining our
affections within due bounds, and compo-
sing our thoughts at the fame time that it
exalts them.

When, from the adoration of the un-

changeable perfection of the Almighty, we
return to the view of our own state, the first
sentiment which oilht naturally to arise, is

that

that of felf-abafement. We are too apt to SE R M.

IV.

be lifted up by any little diftinaions vhich _-
we possets; and to fancy ourselves great,
only because there are others whom we con-
lider as less. But what is man with all his
advantages and boasted powers before the
eternal Father of Lights ? With God there
is no variableness; with man there is no
flability. Virtue and vice divide the em-
pire of his mind; an(d wisdom and folly
alternately rule him. icr.ce he is change-
able in his designs, fickle in his friendships,
fluctuating in his whole charater. His
life is a series of contradictions. He is one
thing to-day, and another to-morrow;
sometimes obliged by experience to alter his
purpose, and often led to change it through
levity. Variable and unequal himself, he
is surrounded with fleeting objects. He is
placed as in the midst of a torrent, where all
things are rolling by, and nothing keeps its
place. He has hardly time to contemplate
this scene of vicissitude, before he too is
swept away.-Thus circumstanced in him-
self, and in all the objecs with which he is

H 2 connected,

S ER M. connected, let him be admonished to be

IV.
v_- h humble and modest. Let the contempla-

tion of the unchanging glory of his Creator
inspire him with sentiments of due filbinif-
sion. Let it teach him to know his proper
place; and check that vanity which is so
ready to betray him into guilt.

Let the fame meditation affect him with

a deep sense of what he owes to the good-
nces of the Deity. His goodness never ap-
pears in so firiking a light, as when viewed
in connexion with his greatness. The de-
scription which is given of him in the text
calls, in this view, for our particular atten-
tion. It presents to us the most amiable
union of condefccnfion with majesty, of the
moral with the natural perfections of God,
which can possibly be exhibited to the ima-
gination of man. From the Father of Lights,
with whom there is no variablenef, neither
Jbadow of turning, cometb down every good
andperfec gift. The most independent of
all Beings is represented as the most benefi-
cent. He who is eternal and immutable,
exalted above all, and incapable of receiving

3 rcturns

returns from any, is the liberal and un- S RM.
wearied Giver of every thing that is good. -V
-Let such views of the divine nature not
only call forth gratitude and praise, but
prompt us to imitate what we adore. Let
them thew us that benevolence is divine;
that to stoop from our fancied grandeur in
order to assist and relieve one another, is so
far from being any degradation of charaaer,
that it is our truest honour, and our nearest
resemblance to the Father of Lights.

II. LET the consideration of the divine

immutability convince us, that the method
of attaining the favour of Heaven is one
and invariable. Were the Almighty a ca-
pricious and inconltant Being, like man,
we should be at a loss what tenour of con-
dua to hold. In order to conciliate his
grace, we might think of applying some-
times to one supposed principle of his incli-
nation, sometimes to another; and bewil-
dered amidst various attempts, would be
overwhelmed with dismay. The guilty
would essay to flatter him. The timid,

H 3 sometimes

S R M. fomctimes by auiycrc mortifications, some-
IV.

times by coltly gifts, fomctimcs by obfe-
quious rites, wotld try to appease him.
Hence, in fad, have arisen all the corrup-
tions of religious worship among men;
from their for!min the divine characdcr
upon their own, and ascribing to the Sove-
reign of the Univerle the mutability of hu-
man pallions. Cod is represented by the
pfalmill David as sav!ing to the wicked, Tbuw
tho;gljtcJt that I wa alltorgcher finch an one
as thf'lfL . This continues to be the de-
scription of all the fuperifitious and enthu-
fiaftic fedts which, since the days of David,
have sprung up in the world.

It is our peculiar happiness under the go-

fpel to have God revealed to us in his ge-
nuine character, as without variableness or
Jladow of turning. We know that at no
time there is any change, either in his as-
sections, or in the plan of his adminiftra-
tion. One light always flines upon us
from above. One clear and direc path is
always pointed out to man. The Supreme

* rP.£:m 1. 21.

Being

Being is, and was, and ever will be, the S ER M.
lipporter of order and virtue ; the rigl t ous
Lrd loving righteouncfi. The external
forms of religion may vary; but under all
difienfltions which proceed fiom God, its
fuifitance is the fame. It tends continually
to one point, the purification of man's heart
and life. This was the olject of the origi-
nal law of nature. This was the scope of
the Mfltic infl:tuticn amidst all its sacrifices
and rites; and this is unqueflionably the
end of the gofpd. So invariablv conflant
is God to this purpose, that the diiienfation
of mercy in Christ Jcfus, which admits cf
the vicarious atonement and rightcoufinc's
of a Redeemer, makes no change in our
obligation to fulfil the duties of a good life.
The Redeemer himlflf hath taught us, that
to the end of time the moral law continues
in its full force; and that till bheacn and
earth pqaf away, wne jrt wr tittle Jhall in no
wis, ps,3fr.omn it ;. Thiis is the only illtitu-
tion known to meln, whose authority is un-
changing and cenfaint. Human laws rife

IMatth. v. IS.

H 4 and

s R M. and fall with the empires that gave them
1V. a_-_* birth. Systems of philosophy vary with the

progress of knowledge andlight. Manners,
lentinmnts, and npinions, alter with the
course of time. But throughout all ages,
and amidst all revolutions, the rule of mo-
ral and religious conduA is the iame. It
partakes of that immutability of the divine
nature, on which it is founded. Such as
it was delivered to the first worflippers of
God, it continues to be, at this day, to us;
and fucl it (hall remain to our posterity for
ever.

III. LET the contemplation of this per-

fetion of the divine nature teach us to
imitate, as far as our frailty will permit,
that constancy and ftedfaftnefs which we
adore. All the moral attributes of the Su-
preme Being, are standards of character
towards which we ought to aspire. But
as in all these perfections there are proper-
ties peculiar to the divine nature, our endea-
vours to resemble them are laid under great
restrictions by the diflimilarity between our

nature

nature and the divine. With refpcc to SERM.
that attribute which we now confider, the *
circumstances are evident which preclude
improper imitation. To man it is fre-
quently necessary to correct his errours, and
to change his condud. An attempt, there-
fore, to continue wholly invariable would,
in our situation, be no other than impru-
dent and criminal obflinacy. But withal,
the immutable rectitude of the Deity should
lead us to aspire after fixedness of principle
and uniformity in condudc, as the glory of
the rational nature. Impressed with the
sense of that supreme excellence which
results from unchanging goodness, faith-
fulness and truth, let us become ashamed
of that levity which degrades the human
character. Let us ponder our paths, ad
upon a well-regulated plan, and remain
confifent with ourselves. Contemplating
the glory of the Father of Lights, let us
aim at being transformed, in some degree,
into thefame image from glory to glory. Si-
nally,

IV. LET

S F R M. IV. LET the divinc immutability become

IV.
- the ground of confidence alid trust to good

men, amidst all the revolutions of this un-
certain world. This is one of the chief im-
provements to be made of the filljeat, and
therefore requires full illullration. There
are three lights in which we may view the
benefit redounding to us from that attribute
of God which we now conlider. It assures
us of the conliancy of nature ; of the regu-
lar administration of Providence; of the
certain accomplishment of all the divine
promilcs.

First, it gives us ground to depend on the

constant and uniform course of nature. On
the unchangeablenefs of God refis the fia-
bility of the universe. What we call the
laws of nature are no other than the decrees
of the Supreme Being. It is because He is
without variablenefi or Jhadow of turning
that those laws have continued the fame
since the beginning of the world; that the
Sun so confiantly observes his time of rising
and going down ; tli.t the fialons annually
return ; the tides periodically ebb and flow;

the

the earth yields its fruits at flited intervals; SER M.

1V.

and the human hody a nd mental ptwcrs ,_.
advance to maturity by a regular progress.
In all thole moiions and operations which
are inceflnntly going on throughout nature,
tiere is no flop nor interruption; no change
nor innovation ; no decedion from their
main scope. The fame powerful and fIeady
hand which gave the sirs. impulif to the
powecrs of nature, re'trains them from ever
exceeding their prci.ribed line. Hence
aries te chief cohif iort of our prefcnt life.
We find ourselves in a regular and orderly
world. We look forward to a known fuc-
cession of events. We are enal'l':d to form
plans of adion. From the caulc we calcu-
late the effed; and from the palt, we rca-
son with confidence concerning the future.

Accustomcd from our infancy to this con-

flancy in nature, we are hardly sensible of
the blessing. Familiaritv has the fame es-
fed here, as in many other cnjovirents, to
efface gratitude. But let us, for a moment,
take an oppofitc view of things. I.ct us
suppose, that we had any caule to dread

capricioulheis

SE R M. capriciousness or change in the power who

Iv.
A,_- rules the course of nature; any ground to

fufped that, but for one day, the Sun
might not rile, nor the current of the wa-
ters hold their usual course, nor the laws of
motion and vegetation proceed as we have
been accustomed to behold them. What
dismay would instantly fill all hearts!
what horror would fcem to overspread the
whole face of Nature! What part could we
as, or whithe. could we run, in the midfR
of convulsions which overturned all the
measures we had formed for happiness, or
for safety? The present abode of man
would then become, as Job describes the
region of the grave, a land of darknffs, as
darkness itsef,, and the Jhadow of death;
without any order; and where the light is as
darkness *. With what joy ought we then
to recognize an unvarying and stedfast ruler,
under whose dominion we have no such
difaflers to dread; but can depend on the
course of Nature continuing to proceed as

* Job x. 22.

it

it has ever gone on, until the period lliall SER M.

Iv.
arrive of its final dissolution!

BUT though the great laws of Nature be

conflant like their Author, yet in the
affairs of men there is much variety and
change. All that regards our present pof-
sessions and enjoyments was, for wife rea-
sons, left, in a great measure, uncertain;
and from this uncertainty arises the distress
of human life. Sensible of the changes to
which we lie open, we look round with
anxious eyes, and eagerly grafpr at every
objec which appears to promise us fecu-
rity. But in vain is the whole circle of
human things explored with this view.
There is nothing on earth so flable as to
assure us of undisturbed reft, Por so power-
ful as to afford us conflant protetion.
Time, death, and change, triumph over all
the labours of men. What we build up,
they incessantly destroy. The public con-
dition of nations, and the private fortunes of
individuals, are alike subjed to reverse.
Life never retains long the fame form. Its

whole

S ER M. whole fccnlcrv is continually shifting aronilr
*- -i us.- .\nitdll those endless viciflitudcs,

what c.ll '; aty firm conlblation, any
faitisfi'irl re!l to the heart, except the domi-
nion of a wile and rightcous iovercign,
withI wh om tere is no variablnl/ nor Jr/ha-
dow if turning? Though all things change,
and we ourselves he involved in the general
mutalilitv, yet as long as there is fixed and
permanent goodncfs at the head of the uni-
verse, we are afilnred that the great interests
of all good men shall be safe. That river
perpetually flows, the ftrceamt whereof make
glad the city Of C(l. We know that the
Supreme Being lovcd righteoufilefs from
the beginning of days, and that he will
continue to love it to the last. Under his
government none of those revolutions hap-
pen which have place among the kingdoms
of the earth; where princes die and new
sovereigns aCfend the throne; new minis-
ters and new counlfls succeed; the whole
face of affairs is changed; and former plans
fall into oblivion. But the throne of the Lord
is efJ l71lijedfjr ever; and the thoghts of lbi

S heart

heart endure to all generations. We serve s E R M.
the fame God whom our fathers worship- _
ped, and whom our poflerity shall adore.
His unchanging dominion comprehends all
events and all ages; establishes a connet-
ing principle which holds together the past,
the present, and the future; gives ftbility
to things which in themselves are fluctuat-
ing, and extrats order from those which
appear most confuifid. Well may the earth
rrjoio,, and the multitde of fles be glad,
because there reigneth over the universe such
an immutable Lord.

Were you to unhinge this great article

of faith; were you either to fay with the
fool, that there is no God, or to suppose with
the luperftitious, that the God who rules
is variable and capricious; you would in-
deed lay the axe to the root of the tree, and
cut down, with one blow, the hope and
fecuritv of mankind. For you would then
leave nothing in the whole compass of na-
ture, but a round of casual and transitory
being; no foundation of trust, no protec-
tion to the righteous, nD ftcdfaft principle

to

SE R . to uphold and to regulate the fuccefTion of
-.-a cxiftence. Instead of that magnificent spec-

tacle which the world now exhibits, when
beheld in connexion with the divine go-
vernment, it would then only present to
view, a multitude of thort-lived creatures
springing out of the dufft, wandering on
the face of the earth without guide or pro-
tetor, struggling for a few years against
the torrent of uncertainty and change;
and then finking into utter oblivion, and
vanishing like visions of the night. Myf-
terious obscurity would involve the begin-
ning of things; disorder would mark their
progress; and the blackness of darkness
would cover their final result. Whereas,
when Faith enable, us to discover an uni-
versal Sovereign, whose power never fails,
and whose wisdom and goodness never
change, the profped clears up on every
fide. A ray from the great source of light
seems to illuminate the whole creation.
Good men discover a parent and a friend.
They attain a fortress in every danger; a
refuge amidst all storms, a dwelling-place

in

in allgenerations. They are no longer afraid s ERM.
,f evil tidings. Their heart is fixed, trun- Y.
ing in the Lord.

THOUGH these reasonings from the un-

changing tenour of Divine government
cannot but afford much comfort to good
men, their fatisfation, however, becomes
still more complete, when they confider
the explicit promises which are given them
in the word of God. The immutability of
the divine purpose assures them most per-
fedly of those promises being fulfilled in
due time, how adverse foevcr circumfRances
may at present appear to their accomplish-
ment. The Jtrengthb f Israel is not a man
that hejhouid lie, nor the jon of man that he
Jbould repent. Hath he /aid it, andJhall be
not do it? Hath he joken, andJball be not
make it good? Men have the command
only of the present time. When that is
suffered to pass, changes may befal, either
in their own tfate, or in the situation of
things around them, which shall defeat their
best intentions in our behalf, and render all

VOL. II. I their

SE R M. their promises fruitleis. Hence, even set-
IV. jL-. ting aside the danger of human inconstancy,

the confidence which we can repose on any
earthly protedor is extremely imperfect.
Man, in his highest glory, is but a reed
floating on the stream of time, and forced
to follow every new diretion of the cur-
rent. But God is the rock of ages. All
time is equally in his hands. Intervening
accidents cannot embarrass him; nor any
unforeseen obstacle retard the performance
of his most distant promise. One day is with
the Lord as a thousand years; and a thou-
sand years are as one day. There is no
vicissitude of the human state in which good
men cannot take fanduary with him as a
sure and abiding friend; the safe conducor
of their pilgrimage here, as well as the eter-
nal reft of their fouls hereafter. All their
patrons may desert them; and all their
friends may die: but the Lord fill lives,
who is their rock; and the moJt high God,
who is their redeemer. He hath promised
that he will not leave them when they are
old, nor forsake them when their Jfrengtb

failetb;

failtb; and that even when their heart Jhall E R M.

IV.

faint, and their feh fail, he will be the .
Jirength of their heart and their portion for
ever. His immutability is not only the
ground of trust in him during their own
abode on earth, but gives them the fatisfac-
tion of looking forward to the fame wife
and good adminitration as continued to the
end of time. When departing hence, and
bidding adieu to life, with all its changeful
scenes, they can with comfort and peace
leave their family, their friends, and their
dearest concerns, in the hands of that God
who reigneth for ever; and whose counte-
nance Jhall always behold the upright with
the fame complacency. My days are like a
Jbadow that declineth, and I am withered
like the grass. But thou, 0 Ird, /halt en-
dure for ever; and thy remembrance to all
generations. The children of thy servants
/ball continue; and their feed Jball be efta-
blihed before thee *.

SucH are the benefits which good men
may derive from meditation on God as

Psalm ci. II, ia. 28

I 2 withoit

E R M. without variableness or Jhadow ns turning.
IV.
, It inspires them with fentinents of devout,

humble, and grateful adoration. It points
out to them the unvarying tenour of con-
dud which they ought to hold; checks their
fickleness and inconflancy; and amidst all
distresses and fears affords them comfort.
The immutability of God is the surest basis
on which their hopes can be built. It is
indeed the pillar on which the whole uni-
verse refts.-On such serious and solemn
meditations let our thoughts often dwell, in
order to correc that folly and levity which
are so apt to take possession of the human
heart. And if our minds be overawed, and
even depressed, with so high a view of the
divine nature, let them be relieved by the
reflecion, that to this unchangeable God
we are permitted to look up through a gra-
cious Mediator, who, though possessed of
divine perfeaion, is not unconscious of hu-
man difitrfs and frailty.

S £R-

# SERMON V. On the COMPASSION of CHRIST. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. HEBREWS iv. 15. We have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our ...

[ 17 ]

SERMON V.

On the COMPASSION of CHRIST.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.

HEBREWS iv. 15.

lWe have not an high prieJl which cannot be

touched with thefeeling of our infirmities;
but was in allpoints tempted like as we are,
yet without fin.
W HEN we compare the counsels of SERM.

Providence with the plans of men, V.

we find a like difference obtain as in the
works of nature compared with those of art.
The works of art may, at first view, appear
the most finished and beautiful; but when

I 3 the

S E R M. the eye is affifled to pry into their contexture,

V.
.-- --the nicest workmanship is discerned to be

rough and blemilhed. Whereas the works
of nature gain by the most accurate exami-
nation; and. those which on a superficial
survey appeared defctive or rude, the more
intimately they are infpeced, discover the
more cxad conlurudion and confumnmate
beauty. In the fame manner the fyflems
of worldly policy, though at firfl they fccm
plausible and profound, toon betray in their
progress the narrowness of the human un-
derflanding; wlhile those dispensations of
Providence which appeared to furnish ob-
jctions either againfl the goodness or the
wifdlom of Heaven, have, upon a more ex-
tensive view of their consequences, fre-
quently afforded the most striking proofs of
both.

God manifefed in the Ji/h was to the Jews

a lumbling-block, and to the Greeksfoolijh-
ness. It contradicted every prepossession
which their confined ideas of religion and
philosophy led them to entertain. If a fu-
periour Being was to interpole for the reftb-

ration

ration of a degenerate world, they concluded s E R M.

V.

that he would certainly appear in celestial
majesty. But the thoughts of God are not
as the thoughts of men. The divine wisdom
saw it to be fit that the Saviour of mankind
should in all things be made like unto tbofe
whom he came to save. By living as a man
among men, he dispensed inftrudtion in the
most winning manner. He added to in-
ftrution the grace and the force of his own
example. He accommodated that example
to the most trying and difficult situations of
human life; and by suffering a painful
death, he both taught men how to susser
and die, and in that nature which had of-
fended he offered a solemn expiation to God
for human guilt.

Besides these ends, so worthy of God,

which were accomplished by the incarna-
tion of Christ, another, of high importance,
is suggested in the text. Human life is to
good men, as well as to others, a state of
suffering and distress. To supply them
with proper consolation and encouragement
during such a state, was one great purpose

1 4 of

SE R M. of the undertaking of Christ. With this

V. v_,_ view he assumed the office of their high

priest, or mediator with God; and the en-
couragement which this office affords them,
will be proportioned to their assured belief,
first of his power, and next of his com-
paflion. His power is set forth in the verse
preceding the text, and the proper argu-
ment is founded upon it. Seeing that we
have a great high priejl who is padsed into
the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold
fafi our profeifon. But though it be en-
couraging to know that our high priest
is the Son of God, and that he is paied into
the heavens, yet these faas alone are not
sufficient to render him the full objed of
our confidence. For, as the Apoflle after-
wards obferveq, it belongs to the charader
of a high priest to be taken from among men,
that be may have compaqion on the ignorant,
and them that are out of the way, feeing that
be bimfeif is compafed with ifirmity. In
order then to satisfy us of our high priest's
possessing also the qualifications of mercy
and compassion, we are told that he is touch-

ed

ed uwith the feeling of our infirmities, and S E R M.

V.

was in all points tempted liie as we are. a
The force of this consideration I purpose
now to illustrate. I fiall first explain the
fads which are stated in the text, and then
show how from these our Saviour's com-
passion is to be inferred, and in what man-
ner it may be accommodated to the confo-
lation and hope of good men amidst various
exigencies of life.

THE affertion.in the text of Chrilt's be-

ing touched with tbefecling of our infirmities,
plainly implies that he - had full experience
both of the external distresses, and of the
internal sorrows of human nature. Affum-
iug a body such as ours, he fibjedCed him-
self to all the natural consequences of cor-
poreal frailty. 'He did not chufe for him-
self an easy and opulent condition, in order
to glide through the world with the least
molestation. He did not suit his mifion to
the upper ranks of mankind chiefly, by
assimilating his slate to theirs. But, born
in meanness, and bred up to labour, he

submitted

SERM. submitted to the inconveniencies of that

V.
L poor and toilsome life which falls to the

share of the most numerous part of the hu-
man race. Whatever is revere in the dif-
regard of relations or the ingratitude of
friends, in the scorn of the proud or the
insults of the mean, in the virulence of
reproach or the sharpness of pain, was un-
dergone by Christ. Though his life was
short, he f.uiliarized himself in it with a
wide compalfs of human woe; and there is
almost no difirefsful situation to which we
can be reduced, but what he has experi-
enced before us. There is not the least
reason to imagine that the eminence of his
nature raised him above the sensations of
trouble and grief. Had this been the cafe,
he would have been a sufferer in appear-
ance only, not in reality; there would have
been no merit in his patience, or in the re-
fignation which he expressed. On the con-
trary, it appears from many circumitances,
that the fenlibility of his nature was tender
and exquifitc. He affected none of that
hard indifference in which some ancient

philosophers

philosophers vainly gloried. He felt as a SERM.
man, and he sympathized with the feelings ,.- -'
of others. On different occasions we are
informed that he v as troubled in ,fiitt, that
hegroaned, and that be wept. The relation
of his agony in the garden of Gcthfemane
exhibits a iriking pidure of the sensations
of innocent nature oppressed with anguiih.
It discovers all the conflict between the
dread of Suffering on the one hand, and the
sense of duty on the other; the man ftrug-
gling for a while with human weakness,
and in the end recolleced in virtue, and
rising fuperiour to the objeds of dismay
which were then in his view. Father! if
it bepofible, let this cup pass from me. Ne-
vertbelefi, not as I will, but as thou wilt.
Thy will be done. Thus was our Saviour
touched with the feeling of our infirmities.
He was a man of orrows, and acquainted
with grief.

It is added in the text, that he was in all

points tempted like as we are. To be tempt-
ed is, in the language of Scripture, to un-
dergo such trials of virtue as are accompa-

3 nied

SE R I. nied with difficulty and conflict. Though

V.
s. our Lord was not liable to any temptations

from depravity of nature, yet he was per-
petually exposed to such as arise from fitua-
tions the most adverle to virtue. His whole
life was in this refped a course of tempta-
tion; that is, a severe trial of his constancy
by every discouragement. He suffered
repeated provocations both from friends
and foes. His endeavours to do good were
requited with the most obstinate and per-
verse opposition. Sometimes by the folici-
tations of ignorant multitudes he was tempt-
ed to accept the proffers of worldly greatness.
Oftener, by the insults of multitudes, more
blind and brutal, he was tempted to desert
an office which exposed him to so much
misery. Together with the world, the
powers of darkness also combined their
efforts against him. We are informed that
he was led into the vildernefs, and amidst
the horrours of a wild and dreary solitude,
was tempted of the devil. The great adver-
fary of mankind seems to have been per-
mitted to exert unusual proofs of his power

I and

and malice, on purpose that the trial of s E R M.

V.

our Saviour's constancy might he more v
complete, and his victory over him more
illustrious and distinguished.

From all these circumstances, the conclu-

sion is obvious, that our Lord knows from
personal experience, all the discouragements
and temptations which virtue can susser.
Though he participated not of the corrup-
tion, yet he felt the weakness of human
nature. He felt the strength of passion.
He is no franger to the disturbance and
commotion which either the attacks of the
world, or the powers of darkness, are able
to raise within the breast of man. One re-
markable difference, indeed, takes place
between our temptations and those of Christ.
Though he was tempted like as we are, yet
it was without in. Though the conflict
was the fame,' the iffuc was different.. Ve
are often foiled; He always overcame. But
his disconformity to us in this refpea is far
from weakening the strength of our present
argument. For fin contracs and hardcns
the heart. Every degree of guilt incurred

by

SE R M. by yielding to temptation tends to debase
»,--... the mind, and to weaken the generous and

benevolent principles in human nature. If
from our Lord's being tempted like as we are,
we have any ground to exped his fympa-
thy, from his being tempted, yet without
fin, we are entitled to hope that his sym-
pathy, unallayed and perfect, will operate
with more complete energy.

FROM this view of the fads which are

stated in the text, I proceed to show how
justly we may infer our Saviour's compaf-
sion, and in what manner it is to be ac-
commodated to the consolation of good men
amidA various exigences of life.

It has been the universal opinion of man-

kind, that personal experience of suffering
humanizes the heart. In the school of as-
fliction, compaflion is always supposed to
be most thoroughly learned: and hence in
the laws of Moses, when the Israelites are
commanded not to oppress the itranger, this
reason is given, for ye know the heart of a
flranger, secing ye were J/rangers yourselves

in

in the land of Egypt *. The distressed, ac- SE R M.

V.

cordingly, flie for consolation to those who e_.
have been their companions in woe. They
decline the prosperous, and look up to
them with a suspicious eye. They confi-
der them as ignorant of their feelings, and
therefore regardless of their complaints.
Amidst the manifold sorrows of life, then,
how soothing is the thought that our great
intercessor with. God was a fellow-fufferer
with ourselves, while he passed through
this valley of tears !

But was it necessary for Christ, it may

be said, to assume our nature in order to
acquire the knowledge of its infirmity and
distress? As a divine person, was he not
perfedly acquainted with our frame before
he descended to the earth ? Did he stand
in need of being prompted to compafnion
by the experience of our sorrows ? Could
his experimental knowledge of human weak-
ness increase the benevolence of a nature
which before was perfec?- No: he sub-

* Exod. xiii 9.

mitted

6 RM. mitted to be touched wit t the feling of our

V.
* --*infirmities, and to be tempted like as we are;

not in order to become acquainted with
our nature, but to satisfy us that he knew
it perfectly; not in order to acquire any
new degree of goodness, but to give us the
firmer confidence in the goodness which he
possessed, and to convey the sense of it to
our hearts with greater force and effect.

Difiruft is a wcaknefs peculiarly incident

to the miserable. They are apt to reject
hope, to indulge fear, and to tinge with the
dark colour of their own minds every ob-
jec which is offered for their encourage-
ment. The representations given us of the
Deity in Scripture afford undoubtedly much
ground for trust in his goodness. But the
perfection of an Almighty Being, who
dwelleth in the secret place of eternity,
whom no man bath seen or can fie, is over-
whelming to a timid apprehension. The
goodness which it promises is a new and
unknown form of goodness. Whatever
proceeds from a nature so far fuperiour to
our own, is beheld with a degree of awe

which

which is ready to overpower hope. Upon E R M.

V.

this account, under the Old Testament dif- ,-
penfation, the Supreme Being is often de-
fcribed with the attributes of a man, in order
to give a shade and softening to his great-
ness, and to accommodate his goodness
more to our capacity. The relentings of a
friend, the pity of a parent, and the sighs
of a mourner, are ascribed to the Almighty.
But we easily perceive such attributes to be
no more than figures and allusions. The
comfort which they afford is not definite
nor precise. They leave the mind under
an anxious uncertainty left it err in its in-
terpretation of those allegories of mercy.
In the person of Jesus Christ the obje& of
our trust is brought nearer to ourselves;
and of course adapted more effetually to
our encouragement. Those well-known
tender affecions, which are only figura-
tively ascribed to the Divinity, are in our
great Mediator thoroughly realized. His
goodness is the goodness of human nature
exalted and rendered perfet. It is that
species of goodness with which, of all others,

VOL. II. K we

ER M. we are bcft acquainted, compaiflon to the
V. -y--' unhappy; and compassion cultivated by

that difeipline which we know to be the
most powerful, the experience of sorrows.

For such reasons as these, becauf' the chil-

dren are partakers of fleh and blood, Cbrit
bimfelf likewfie took part of the fame. In all
tbingt it behoved him to be made like unto bis
brethren, that be might be a mercfifl, as well
as a faithful highpriefl. When we confider
*his assumption of our nature in this light,
what a mild aild amiable afpct does it give
to the governnrent of heaven ! What atten-
tive solicitude of goodness is shewn in car-
rying on the dispensation of our redemption
upon a plan so perfedly calculated to banish
all diftrufl, and to revive the most timid
and dejeced heart! How naturally does
that inference follow which the Apostle
makes in the verse immediately succeeding
the text; let as therefore come boldly to the
Ibrone of grace, that we may obtain mercy,
andfind grace to help in time of need! More
particularly, in consequence of the docrine
which I have illustrated, we are taught to
bopc,

I. TIJAT

I. THAT under all our infirmities and SERM.

errors, regard will be had to human im- 1_^
perfedion; that a merciful diftincion will
be made between what is weak and what is
wilfully criminal in our conduct; and that
such measures of obedience only will he ex-
aced as are proportioned to our circum-
flances and powers. What can more en-
courage our religious services, than to be
assured that the God whom we worflfip
knows our frame, and rcmemrers we are dl il;
and that the Mediator, through whom we
worihip him, if touched with the feeling of
our infirmities ? The most virtuous are the
most apt to be dejeted with the sense of
their frailty. While vain and fiperficial
men are easily flattered with favourable
views of themselves, and fond hopes of
divine acceptance, the slightest apprehen-
sion of guilt is ready to alarm the humble
and delicate mind; just as on coarse bodies
an impression is not easily made, while
those of finer contexture are soon hurt; and
as on an exquisite polish the leall speck is
visible. But though religion promotes great

K 2 fenlibility

s ERM. sensibility to all feelings of a moral nature,

V.
v_ yet it gives no countenance to excessive and

filpcrflitious fears. That humility which
checks prcfumption, and that jcaloufy which
infpircs vigilance, are favourable to piety;
while thole fulpicions which lead to de-
fpondency are injurious to God, hurtful to
ourfclves, and repugnant to that whole sys-
tem of mercy which I have been illustrating.

You complain, that when you engage in

the solemn exercises of devotion, your 'pi-
rits are depressed by a load of carcs and
sorrows; that in your thoughts there is no
compofurc, and in your affections no ele-
vation; that after your utmost efays you
are incapable of fixing your attention ftea-
dily on God, or of fending up your prayers
to him with becoming warmth and fulness
of heart. This debility and wandering of
mind you are apt to impute to some uncom-
mon degree of guilt. You confider it as
the symptom of incurable hardness of heart,
and as a melancholy proof of your being
abandoned by God.-Such fears as these in
a great measure refute themselves. If you

were

were really obdurate, you would be insen- SE R M.

V.

fible of guilt. Your complaints of hardncfs \
of heart are an evidence of your heart being
at that moment contrite and actually relent-
ing.-Are there any circumfiances of in-
ward discomposure and perplexity of which
He is unconicious lwho at a critical period
of his life was hearvy and/fre amnazed ; who
was obliged to complain that his foul was
troubled within him; and to acknowledge,
that though the spirit was willing, yet the
fJelI was weak? To a fuperiour nature,
untouched with human frailty, you might
in such situations look up with lmlne degree
of terrour. But He who remembers the
struggles of his own foul, will not, surely,
judge yours like a hard and unfeeling maf-
ter. Acquainted with the inmost recefes of
human nature, he perceives the sincerity of
your intentions; he fees the combat you
maintain; he knows how much of your
present confusion and disorder is to be im-
puted, not to your inclination and will, but
to an infirm, an aged or diseased body, or

* Mark xiv. 33,

K 3 to

S E R M. to a weak and wouinded spirit; and there-
e-__< fore will he far from rcjecing your attempts

to fcrve him, on account of the infirmities
which you lament. He hears the voice of
those fccrct afpliratioiis which you are unable
to express in wor(ls, or to form into prayer.
Every penitential tear which your contrition
fled', pleads your cause more powerfully
wii hiin, than all the arguments with which
you ctlu!d fill your mouth.

II. FROM our Saviour's experience of

human misery, we may justly hope that he
will so compaflionately regard our diltreffed
estate, as to prevent us from being loaded
with uninecefll.ry troubles. I-e will not
wantonly add afflition to the afflided; nor
willingly crufl what he fees to be already
broken. In the course of that high admi-
niflration which he now exercises, he may
indeccd judge certain intermixtures of ad-
vcrfity to be proper for our improvement.
Thete are trials of virtue through which all,
without exception, muR pass. Rugged was
the ruod !ly which our divine Mediator him-

self

self went before us to glory; and by be- SE R M.

h.

coining our companion in diltrefs, he meant ,-,
to reconcile us to our lot. He ennobled
adverfitv, by Sharing it with us. He railed
poverty from contempt, by afiuming it for
his own condition. The fevcrity of his
trials tends to lighten ours. When the ge-
neral of an army lies on the fame hard
ground, drinks of the fame cold fream,
carries the fIlme weight of armour with the
lowelt centincl, can any of his soldiers re-
pine at what they endure ?

Whatever afflictions our Lord may judge

to be nccefatry for us, of this we may refi
assured, that he will deal them forth, not
with harsh and imperious authority, but
with the tenderness of one who knows from
experience how deeply the human heart is
wounded by every llroke of advcrfitv. He
will not lay more upon us than he fees we
are able to hear. loucgb he canfi gri;s, yet
will be have cme pftiCn accorditg to thle mul-
titude of his lentler mn.r cs. te uwill /lay his
rorbh wii d in th& !,y of the c,/ wind *.

* Isaiah xxvii. 8.

K 4 For

s E R M. For it is his state, but not his nature, which
'-v-' is now changed. Notwithstanding his high

exaltation, he still retains the compaflionate
sentiments of the man of srrows. Still, we
are assured by an inspircd writer, he is not
aJhamed to call us his brethren *. And with
the heart of a brother he regards those few
and troubled days, such as his own once
were, which good men are doomed to pass
in this evil world.

From his compafnion, indeed, we are not

to expect that fond indulgence or unfeafon-
able relief by which the weak pity of men
frequently injures its objeds. It is to the
material interests, more than to the present
cafe, of good men, that he attends. When
under the impatience of sorrow we exclaim,
Hath he forgotten to be gracious ? hath he
in anger/Jhut up his tender mercies ? we re-
colleCt not in whose hands we are. His
compafnion is not diminished when its ope-
rations are most concealed. It continues
equally to flow, though the channels by
which it is conduced towards us lie too

Heb. ii. li.

deep

deep for our obfcrvation. Amidst our pre- SE R M.

V.

ient ignorance of what is good or ill for us a
in this life, it is sufficient for us to know,
that thc imnmediate adminillration of uni-
versal government is placed in the hands of
the most attentive and compassionate friend
of mankind. How greatly does this confi-
deration alleviate the burden of human woe!
How happily does it connea with the awful
difpcnlations of religion the mildest ideas of
tenderness and humanity!

III. TurE text leads us to hope that

amidit all the infirmities of our slate, both
under the temptations and under the dif-
tresses of life, our blessed Lord will afford
us a proper measure of assistance and sup-
port. In that be bath/ fffred being tempted,
he is able to fu(cour them who either susser,
or are temr alt *; that is, he is perfectly
qualified for discharging this beneficent
office; he knows exactly where the wound
bleeds, where the burden prefles, what re-
lief will prove most seasonable, and how it

* leb. ii. r1.

can

SE R M. can be most successfully applied. The

V.*J manner in which it is conveyed by him to

the heart we may be at a lots to explain;
but no argument can be thence drawn
against the credibility of the s.ac. The
operations which the power of God car-
ries on in the natural world are no less
myftcrioui than thnfe which we are taught
to believe that his spirit performs in the
moral world. If we can give no account
of what is every day before our eyes, how
a feed becomes a tree, or how the child
rites into a man, is it any wonder that we
should be unable to explain how virtue is
supported, and conflancy ftrengthcned, by
God within the heart? If men by their
counsels and figgeftions can influence the
minds of one another, must not divine fug-
geltion and counsel produce a much greater
effed ? Surely, the Father of Spirits must,
by a thousand ways, have access to the fpi-
rits which he has made, so as to give them
what determination, or impart to them
what afFiflance he thinks proper, without
injuring their frame, or disturbing their
rational powers,

Accordingly,

Accordingly, wherever any ncto;ls of sE R M.

religion have taken place amor.g mankind, _,_
this belief has in some mcafulr prevailed,
that to the virtuous under diArc!s aid was
communicated from above. This senti-
ment is so congruous to our natural impref-
sions of the divine benignity, that both
among poets and philosophers of antient
times it was a favourite idea, and often
occurs in their writings. But what among
them was no more than loose coniecQure cr
feeble hope has received full confirmation
from the gospel of Christ. Not only is the
promise of divine affifiance expressly given
to Christians, but their faith in that promise
is strengthened by an argument which mufl
carry conviction to every heart. If Christ
had full experience of the infufliciency of
human nature to overcome the difficulties
wherewith it is now surrounded, will he
withhold from his followers that grace
without which he fees they must pcrifh in
the evil day? If in the season of his tempt-
ation and distress, an angel was sent from

heaven

SE R I. heaven tofirengtbcn hilm , llhall no celeflial

V.

messenger be employed by him on the like
kind errand to tholc whom he stiles his
brethren Can we believe that he who once
bore our griefs and carried our frrows will,
from that height of glory to which he is
now exalted, look down upon us here con-
tending with thc fior:n of adversity, la-
bouring to follow his steps through the
steep and (' fficult paths of virtue, exposed
on every fide to arrows aimed against us by
the powers of darkness; and that, feeing our
distress, and hearing our supplications, he
will remain an unconcerned fpetator,
without vouchsafing us either assistance to
support our frailty, or protection to screen
us amidst surrounding dangers? Where
were then the benevolence of a divine Na-
ture? Where, the companion of that medi-
ator who was trained to mercy in the school
of sorrow? Far from us be such ungrateful
suspicions of the generous friend of human
kind!-Let us exert ourselves as we can,

* uke xxii. 43.

and

aul we shall be assisted. Let us pray, and SER M.

V.

we flall be heard; for there is one to pre- ...-
sent our prayers whom the father hearetb
always. These, will he fay, are my fol-
lowers on earth, pafling through that thorny
path of temptation and sorrow which I once
trode. Now I am no more in the world;
but the/ c are in the world. HIly Father!
tbine they were, and thou gaveq? them me.
Keep them through thine own name. Sanc-
tify them througb thy truth. Keep them
from the evil one; that they may be where I
am, and may behold the glory which thou
habt given me t.

Such is the comfort which arises to us

from our Saviour's participation of the in-
firmities of human nature; and thus it may
be applied to various fituatons of anxiety
and distress.

WHEN we review what has been said,

it is necessary that, in the firt place, I
guard you against a certain miiimprove-
ment which may be made of this doctrine.

t John xvii.

The

SERM. The amnillle view which it gives of our

V.

Lord's clemency may flatter some men
with unwarrautable hopes, and lead them to
imagine that in his experience of human
we.aknes an apology is to be found for
cvcrv crime. Persons of this character
mufl he taught that his companion differs
widely from that undifsinguilhing and ca-
pricious indulgence which is Iometimes
'found among men. It is the compafnion of
an impartial mind, enlightened by wis-
dom and guided by juftlce, extending to
the frailties of the sincere, but not to the
fins of the prefiumptuous, and least of all to
the crimes of those who encourage them-
selves in evil from the hope that they hall
meet with compaffon.

A course of deliberate guilt admits of no

apology from the weakness of human na-
ture. For notwithflanding all the infirmi-
ties incident to it, no man is under a ne-
ceffity of being wicked. So far is our Sa-
viour's experience of our nature from
afording any ground of hope to prefump-
tuous offenders, that it ought to fill them

S with

wihh tcrrour. For it fiows them how tho- S E R M.
roughly qualified he is to dilcriminate '
accurately the charaaers of men, and to
mark the boundaries between frailty and
perverseness. He who from his own feel-
ings well knows all the workings of the hu-
man heart, clearly discerns how different
their temper is from what was once his own.
He perceives that vice, not virtue, is
their choice; and that, inflea4 of refilling
temptation, they rcfiftconfiemiwe. Iiefeet
that infirmity affords them no cxcufe; and
that the real cafife of their ading a criminal
part, is not because they cannot do better,
but, in truth, because they will not. Hav-
ing forfeited every title to compaflion, they
are left in the hands of justice; and ac-
cording as they have fawn, they mnft ex-
ped to reap.

BUT, in the next place, to such as are

sincere and upright, the doArine which I
have illultrated affords high encouragement,
and powerfully recommends the Christian
Religion, It places that religion in its pro-

per

S ER M. per point of view, as a medicinal plan, in-
%--J tended both for the recovery of mankind

from guilt, and for their consolation under
trouble. The law was given Ty Mnfes; but
grace and truth came by Yefis Chris. The
law was a dispensation of mere authority.
The Gospel is a dispensation, not of autho-
rity only, but of relief. If it discovers new
duties, and imposes new obligations, it opens
also sources of comfort which were before
unknown to the world.

A Mediator between God and his crea-

tures was an objed after which men in all
nations, and under all forms of religion,
had long and anxiously fought. The follies
of superstition have served to disclose to us,
in this instance, the fentirments of nature.
The whole religion of Paganism was a fy:l-
tem of mediation and intercession. De-
pressed by a conscious sense of guilt, nature
ihrunk at the thought of adventuring on a
direct approach to the Sovereign of the uni-
verse; and laboured to find out some aufpi-
cious introduaor to that awful presence.
With blind and trembling eagerness, the

6 nations

nations fled to subordinate deities, to tutelar SERM.

V.

gods, and to departed spirits, as their pa- . ;
trons and advocates above. Them they
fludied to tooth with such costly gifts, such
pompous rites, or such humble fupplica.
tions, as they thought might incline them
to favour their cause, and to support their
interest with the Supreme Divinity. While
mankind were bewildered in this darkness,
the Gospel not only revealed the true Me-
diator, who in this view may be justly
called the desire f all nations, but placed his
character and office in a light most admirably
fitted, as has been ihewn in this Discourse,
to support the interest of virtue in the world;
and to encourage the humble, without flat-
tering the presumptuous. What plan of
religion could be more suited to the circum-
ttances of man, or more worthy of the
goodness of his Creator? What more ani-
mating to the pious worshipper in perform-
ing those solemn ads of devotion to which
we are called by the service of this day ?

I CANNOT conclude without taking no-
tice how remarkably this difpeii;tionl of

VOL. II. L religion

S ER M. religion is calculated to promote a spirit of

V.
v-_ humanity and compafnion among men, by

those very means which it employs for in-
spiring devotion towards God. We are
now drawing nigh to the Supreme Being
through a Mediator, for whose compassion
we pray on account of the experience which
he has had of our frailty. We trust, that
having been acquainted with distress, he
will not despise nor abhor the affliftion of the
aftfitsed. The argument by which we plead
for his compassion concludes till more
strongly for mutual charity, and sympathy
with one another. He who, in the midst
of the common sufferings of life, feels not
for the difireffed; he who relents not at his
neighbour's griefs, nor scans his failings
with the eye of a brother, must be sensible
that he excludes himself from the commi-
feration of Christ. He makes void the ar-
gument by which he pleads for his mercy;
nay he establishes a precedent against him-
self. Thus the Christian religion approves
itself as worthy of God, by connecting de-
votion in ftric union with charity. As in

its

its precepts the love of God and the love of SE R M.

V.

man are joined, so in its intfitutions the I
exercise of both is called forth; and to wor-
ship God through the mediation of a com-
passionate high priest, necessarily supposes
in the worshippers a spirit of compaflion
towards their own brethren.

L 2 SER-

# SERMON VI. On the LOVE of PRAISE. JOHN xii. 43. For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.

[ 148 ]
SERMON VI.

On the LOVE of PRAISE.

JO N ii. 43.
For they loved the prasi/ of men more than

the praie of God.

SER M. H

H E slate of man on earth is mani-
_-v- j fcftly designed for the trial of his

virtue. Temptations every where occur;
and perpetual vigilance and attention are
required. There is no passion, or principle
of adion ;:. his nature, which may not, if
left to itfeif, betray him into some criminal
excess. Corruption gains entrance, not only
by those passions which are apparently of
dangerous tendency, fulch as covetousness,
and love of pleasure; but by means of those

also

also which are seemingly the most fair and S E R M.
innocent, filch as the desire of esteem and i- -
praise. Of this the text fuggcfts a remark-
able initance. When our Lord appeared
in the land of Judra, the purity of his doc-
trine, and the evidence of his miracles, ac-
quired him a considerable number of fol-
lowers, chiefly among the lower classes of
men. But the Pharisees, who were the
leading and fashionable set, galled with
the freedom of his reproofs, decried him as
an impostor. 'Hence it came to pa£s, that
thoughajime of the rulers believed in him, yet,
becatfe of the Phanrfeer, the! did not confesi
him. Rulers, persons who, by their rank and
education, ought to have been liperiour to
any popular prejudice, were so far overawed
by the opinions of others, as to fifle their
conviction, to diffcmble their faith, and to
join with the prevailing party in condemn-
ing one whom in their hearts they revered:
for which, this reason is given, that they
Iloved the praiife of men more than the praise
of God. Since, tlicn, the love of praie can
mislead men into fnich culpable and dilho-

I. 3 rlft

SE R M. nest eondud, let us, with fume attention,

VI.
i l- ' examine the nature of this pallion. Let us

confider how tar it is an allowable principle
of acion; whcn it begins to he criminal;
and upon what accounts we ought to guard
against its acquiring the entire accendant.

WE are intended by Providence to he con-

neced with one another in society. Single
unaffilted individuals could make finall ad-
vances towards any valuable improvement.
By means of society our wants are filpplied,
and our lives rendered comfortable; our
capacities are enlarged, and our virtuous as-
feCions called forth into proper exercise.
In order to confirm our mutual connection,
it was necessary that some attrading power,
which had the effec of drawing men toge-
ther, and strengthening the social ties, should
pervade the human fyflem. Nothing could
more happily fulfil this purpose, than our
being so formed as to desire the efreem, and
to delight in the good opinion, of each other.
Had such a propensity been wanting, and
selfish principles left to occupy its place, so-

I xciety

ciety must have proved an unharmonious sS. R M.

VI.

and dilcordant Ilatc. Inflead of mutual at- I
trafion, a repulsive power would have pre-
vailed. Among men who had no regard
to the approbation of one another, all in-
tercourfe would have been jarring and of-
fenfive. For the wilcfl ends, therefore, the
delire of praiif was made an original and
powerful principle in the human breast.

To a variety of good purpofcs it is 11b-

servient, and on many occations co-operates
with the prinGiple of virtue. It awakens
us from sloth, invigorates acivity, and
simulates our efforts to excel. It has given
rife to mofl of the splendid, and to many of
the useful cnterprizes of men. It has ani-
mated the patriot, and fired the hero. Mag-
nanimity, generosity and fortitude are what
all mankind admire. Hence such as were
acuated by the desire of extensive fame,
have been prompted to deeds which either
participated of the spirit, or, at least, car-
ried the appearance of diflinguithed virtue.
The desire of praile is generally connected
with all the liner sensibilities of human na-

L 4 tur

SE R M. turc. It affords a ground on which exhort-
VI.

ation, counsel and reproof can work a pro-
per effe&. Whereas to be entirely destitute
of this passion betokens an ignoble mind,
on which no moral impression is ealily
made. Where there is no desire of praise,
there will be also no sense of reproach; and
if that be extinguished, one of the princi-
pal guards of virtue is removed, and the
mind thrown open to many opprobrious
pursuits. He whose countenance never
glowed with shame, and whose heart never
beat at the found of praise, is not destined
for any honourable diflintion; is likely to
grovel in the fordid quest of gain, or to
slumber life away in the indolence of felfifn
pleasures.

Abftrafing from the sentiments which

are connected with the love of praise as a
principle of adion, the efteetn of our fel-
low-creatures is an nbjea which, on ac-
count of the advantages it brings, may be
lawfully pursued. It is necessary to our
fucccfs in every fair and honest undertak-
ing. Not only our private interest, but our

publii

public usefulness, depends in a great measure s E R M.

VI.

Lpon it. The sphere of our influence is i ' e
contraced or enlarged in proportion to the
degree in which we enjoy the good opinion
of the public. Men liften with an unwil-
ling ear to one whom they do not honour;
while a refpeded character adds weight to
example, and authority to counsel. To
desire the esteem of others for the fake of
its effects is not only allowable, but in ma-
ny cafes is our duty: and to he totally in-
different to praise or censure, is so far from
being a virtue, that it is a real defect in
character.

BUT while the love of praise is admitted

to be in so many refpeds a natural and use-
ful principle of ation, we are at the fame
time to observe that it is entitled to no more
than our secondary regard. It has its
boundaries set; by tranfgrefling which, it is
at once transformed from an innocent into a
most dangerous passion. More sacred and
venerable principles claim the chief direc-
tion of human conduc. All the good es.

feds

SE R M. feds which we have ascribed to the desire

VI.
_-, of praise, are produced by it when remain-

ing in a subordinate flation. But when
passing its natural line, it becomes the ru-
ling spring of condud; when the regard
which we pay to the opinions of men, in-
croaches on that reverence which we owe
to the voice of conscience and the sense of
duty; the love of praise having then gone
out of its proper place, instead of improv-
ing, corrupts; and instead of elevating, de-
bases our nature. The proportion which this
passion holds to other principles of action is
what renders it either innocent or criminal.
The crime with which the Jewish rulers are
charged in the text, was not that they loved
the praise of men; but that they loved it
more than the praise of God.

Even in cafes where there is no direc

competition between our duty and our
fancied honour, between the praise of men
and the praise of God, the palfion for ap-
plause may become criminal by occupying
the place of a better principle. When vain-
glory usurps the throne of virtue; when

ofientation

ostentation produces acions which confci- sE R M.

VI.

ence ought to have ditated; such actions, _-,-
however specious, have no claim to moral
or religious praise. We know that good
deeds done merely to be seen of men lose
their reward with God. If, on occasion of
some trying conjuncture which makes us
hesitate concerning our line of conduc, the
first question which occurs to us be, not
whether an action is right in itself, and such
as a good man ought to perform, but whe-
ther it is such as will find acceptance with
the world, and be favourable to our fame,
the conclusion is too evident that the desire
ofapplaufe has obtained an undue ascendant.
What a wife and good man ought to study,
is to preserve his mind free from any such
solicitude concerning praise as may be in
hazard of overcoming his sense of duty.
The approbation of men he may wish to
obtain, as far as is confident with the ap-
probation of God. But when both cannot
be enjoyed together, there ought to be no
fufpence. He is to retire contented with
the testimony of a good conscience; and to

ihow

S ER M. show by the firmness of his behaviour, that,

J in the canfe of truth and virtue, he is fupe-

riour to all opinion.-Let us now proceed
to confider the arguments which should
support such a spirit, and guard us against
the improper influence of praise or censure
in the course of our duty.

i; the fir-t place, the praise of men is

not an object of any luch value in itself as
to be entitled to become the leading princi-
ple of conduc. We degrade our charac-
ter when we allow it more than fibordinate
regard. Like other worldly goods, it is
apt to dazzle us with a false lustre; but if
we would ascertain its true worth, let us
refle& both on whom it is beflowed, and
from whom it proceeds. Were the applause
of the world always the reward of merit;
were it appropriated to fu:h alone as by real
abilities, or by worthy actions, are entitled
to rife above the crowd, we might juflly
be flattered by poffeliing a rare and valuable
diftindion. But how iar is this from be-
ing the cafe in facd ? How often have the

decliicable

despicable and the vile, by dexterously SERM.
catching the favour of the multitude, soared u,..
upon the wings of popular applause, while
the virtuous and the deserving have been
either buried in obscurity, or obliged to
encounter the attacks of unjust reproach ?
The laurels which human praise confers are
withered and blasted by the unworthiness
of those who wear them. Let the man
who is vain of public favour be humbled by
the reflecion that, in the midst of his fuc-
cef, he is mingled with a crowd of impof-
tors and deceivers, of hypocrites and en-
thufiafts, of ignorant pretenders and fupcr-
ficial reasoners, who, by various arts, have
attained as high a rank as himfclf in tem-
porary fame.

We may easily be satisficd that applause

will be often flared by the undcfcreing, if
we allow ourselves to confider from whom
it proceeds. When it is the approbation of
the wife only and the good which is pur-
sued, the love of praise may then be ac-
counted to contain itself within just bounds,
and to nlu in its proper chlnnel. But the

8 t-llllllny

s E R M. testimony of the difcetning few, modest and
VI.

_ unafluming as they commonly are, forms

but a small part of the public voice. It fel-
dom amountb to more than a whisper, which
amidst the general clamour is drowned.
When the love of praise has taken possession
of the mind, it confines not itself to an ob-
jet so limited. It grows into an appetite
for indiscriminate praise. And who are
they that confer this praise ? A mixed mul-
titude of men, who in their whole conduc
are guided by humour and caprice, far more
than by rcafon; who admire false appear-
ances, and pursue false goods; who inquire
superficially, and judge rashly; whole senti-
mcnts are for the molf part erroneous, always
changeable, and often inconsistent. Nor
let any one imagine, that by looking above
the crowd, and courting the praise of the
falhionable and the great, he makes sure of
true honour. There are a great vulgar, as
well as a small. Rank often makes no dif-
ference in the understandings of men, or in
theirjudiciousdiftribution ofpraife. Luxury,
pride, and vanity, have frequently as much

influence

influence in corrupting the sentiments of SERM.
the great, as ignorance, bigotry, and pre- vl
judice, have in misleading the opinions of
the crowd.-And is it to such judges as
these that you submit the supreme direction
of your condut ? )o you stoop to court
their favour as your chief diffinction, when
an object of so much juster and higher am-
bition is presented to you in the praif of
God? God is the only unerring judge of
what is excellent. His approbation alone
is the substance, all other praise is but the
shadow, of honour. The characer which
you bear in his fight is your only real one.
How contemptible does it render you to be
indifferent with refpet to this, and to be
solicitous about a name alone, a fidit;ous,
imaginary character, which has no exist-
ence except in the opinions of a few weak
and credulous men around you? They fee
no farther than the outside of things. They
can judge of you by adions only; and not
by the comprehensive view of all your ac-
tions, but by such merely as you have had
opportunity of bringing forth to public no-

tice.

8E RM. tice. But the Sovereign of the world be-

VI.
*_" holds you in every light in which you can

be placed. The silent virtues of a generous
purpose and a pious heart attrat his notice
equally with the mos splendid deeds. From
him you may reap the ,raise of good acions
which you had no opportunity of perform-
ing. For he fees them in their principle;
he judges of you by your intentions; he
knows what you would have done. You
may be in his eyes a hero or a martyr,
without undergoing the labours of the one,
or the sufferings of the other. His infpec-
tion, therefore, opens a much wider field
for praise than what the world can afford
you; and for praise, too, certainly far more
illustrious in the eye of reason. Every real
artist studies to approve himself to such as
are knowing in his art. To their judgment
he appeals. On their approbation he refts
his characer, and not on the praise of the
unskilled and rude. In the highef art of
all, that of life and conduct, shall the opi-
nions of ignorant men come into the most
distant competition with his approbation

who

who is the searcher of all hearts, and the SERM.
llandard of all perfeaion ?-The testimony L_
of his praise is not indeed, as yet, openly
bestowed. But though the voice of the Al-
mighty found not in your ears, yet by con-
science, his sacred vicegerent, it is capable
of being conveyed to your heart. The
softest whisper of divine approbation is
sweeter to the foul of a virtuous man, than
the loudest shouts of that tlumultuary ap-
plause which proceeds from the world.

Confider, farther, how narrow and cir-

cumfcribed in its limits that fame is which
the vain-glorious man so eagerly pursues.
In order to shew him this, I shall not bid
him reflec that it is confined to a small
diftria of the earth; and that when he looks
a little beyond the region which he inhabits,
he will find himself as much unknown as
the most obscure person around him. I
(hall not desire him to confider, that in the
gulph of oblivion, where all human me-
morials are swallowed up, his name and
fame must soon be inevitably loft. He may
imagine that ample honours remain to gra-

VOL. II. M tify

s R M. tify ambition, though his reputation extend

not over the whole globe, nor last till the
end of time. But let him calmly reflet,
that within the narrow boundaries of that
country to which he belongs, and during
that small portion of time which his life fills
up, his reputation, great as he may fancy
it to be, occupies no more than an incon-
fiderable corner. Let him think what mul-
titudes of those among whom he dwells are
totally ignorant of his name and character;
how many imagine themselves too import-
ant to regard him; how many are too much
occupied with their own wants and pursuits
to pay him the least attention; and where
his reputation is in any degree spread, how
often it has been attacked, and how many
rivals arc daily rising to abate it: Having
attended to these circumstances, he will find
sufficient materials for humiliation in the
midst of the highest applause.- From all
these considerations it clearly appears, that
though the esteem of our fellow-creatures
be pleasing, and the purfiuit of it, in a mo-
derate degree, be fair and lawful, yet that

6 it

it affords no such object to desire as entitles S ER M.
it to be a ruling principle. VL.

IN the second place, an excessive love of

praise never fails to undermine the regard
due to conscience, and to corrupt the heart.
It turns off the eye of the mind from the
ends which it ought chiefly to keep in view;
and sets up a false light for its guide. Its
influence is the more dangerous, as the co-
lour which it assumes is often fair; and its
garb and appearance are nearly allied to
that of virtue. The love of glory, I before
admitted, may give birth to acions which
are both splendid and useful. At a distance
they strike the eye with uncommon bright-
ness; but on a nearer and ftrictr survey,
their luflre is often tarnished, They are
found to want that sacred and venerable dig-
nity which charaCterizes true virtue. Little
paflions and felfiih interefis entered into the
motives of thofewho performed them. They
were jealous ofa competitor. They fought
to humble a rival. They looked round for
spectators to admire them. All is magna-

NM nimity,

SE R M. nimity, generofitV, and courage, to public
VI.

view. But the ignoble source whence thcfe
seeming virtues take their rife is hidden.
Without, appears the hero; within, is found
the man of dull and clay. Consult filch as
have been intimately conneted with the
followers of renown ; and seldom or never
will you find that they held them in the
fame efieem with tholi who viewed them
from afar. There is nothing except fim-
plicity of intention, and purity of principle,
that can stand the test of near approach and
ftrit examination.

But supposing the virtue of vain-glorious

men not to be always false, it certainly can-
not be depended upon as firm or sure. Con-
ftancy and steadiness are to be looked for
from him only whose conduac is regulated
by a sense of what is right; wulofe praise is
not of men, but of Gol; whofc motive to dif-
charge his duty is always the fame. Change,
as much as you please, the situation of such
a rpan; let applause or let censure be his
lot; let the public voice, which this day has
extolled him, to-mlorrow as loudly decry

XI~~ ~~~him;

him; on the tenour of his behaviour these S E R M.

VI.

changes produce no effect. He moves in a
higher sphere. As the fun in his orbit is
not interrupted by the milns and forms of
the atmosphere below, so, regardlcfs of the
opinions of men, through honour and dif-
honour, through good report and bad report,
he pursues the path which conscience has
marked out. Whereas the apparent virtues
of that man whose eye is fixed on the world,
are precarious and temporary. Supported
only by circumstances, occasions, and par-
ticular regards, they flutuate and fall with
these. Excited by public admiration, they
disappear when it is withdrawn; like those
exhalations which, raised by heat from the
earth, glitter in the air with momentary
splendour, and then fall back to the ground
from whence they sprung.

The intemperate love of praise not only

weakens the true principles of probity, by
substituting inferior motives in their ftcad,
but frequently also impels men to actions
which are diredly criminal. It obliges them
to follow the current of popular opinion

M 3 whither-

S E R M. whithersoever it may carry them; and hence
AL_.- Jhiipwreck is often made both offaith and of

a good conscience. According as circum-
stances lead them to court the acclamation;
of the multitude, or to pursue the applause
of the great, vices of different kinds will
stain their chara&er. In one situation they
will make hypocritical professions of reli-
gion. In another, they will be a(hamed of
their Redeemer, and of his words. They
will be afraid to appear in their own form,
or to utter their genuine sentiments. Their
whole characer will become fictitious; opi-
nions will be assumed, speech and behaviour
modelled, and even the countenance formed,
as prevailing talte cxacts. From one who
has submitted to such prostitution for the
fake of praise, you can no longer expect
fidelity or attachment on any trying occa-
sion. In private life, he will be a timorous
and treacherous friend. In public conduct,
he will be supple and versatile; ready to dc-
fert the cause which he had espoused, and
to veer with every shifting wind of popular
favour. In fine, all becomes unsound an-

hollolv

hollow in that heart where, instead of re- SE R M.

VI.

gard to the divine approbation, there reigns v-.
the fovercign desire of pleasing men.

IN the third place, this passion, when it

becomes predominant, most commonly de-
feats its own end, and deprives men of the
honour which they are so eager to gain.
Without preserving liberty and independ-
ence, we can never command rcfpet.
That servility of spirit which fubjeas us to
the opinions of others, and renders us tri-
butaries to the world for the fake of ap.
plause, is what all mankind despise. They
look up with reverence to one who, un-
awed by their censures, aas according to
his own sense of things, and follows the free
impulse of an honourable mind. But him
who hangs totally on their judgment, they
confider as their vaflal. They even enjoy
a malignant pleasure in humbling his vanity,
and withholding that praise which he is seen
to court. By artifice and show he may
Shine for a time in the public eye; but it is
only as long as he can support the belief of

M 4 aAing

S FM. aMing from principle. When the incol-
k- - rfiftencics into which he falls detect his cha-

racer, his reputation passes away, like the
pageant of a day. No man ever obtained
lasting fame who did not, on several occa-
sions, contradict the prejudices of popular
opinion.

There is no course of behaviour which

will at all times please all men. That which
pleases most universally, and which only
commands durable praise, is religion and
virtue. Sincere piety towards God, kind
affecion to men, and fidelity in the dif-
charge of all the duties of life; a confcicnce
pure and undefiled; a heart firm to justice
and to truth, fuperiour to all terrours that
would lhake, and insensible to all pleafilres
that would betray it; unconquerable by the
opposition of the world, and resigned to
God alone; these are the qualities which
render a man truly refpedtable and great.
Such a character may, in evil times, incur
unjust reproach. But the clouds which envy
or prejudice has gathered around it will gra-
dually disperse; and its brightness will come

forth,

forth, in the end, as the noon day. As SE R M-
soon as it is thoroughly known, it finds a ^-v-
witness in every breast. It forces approba-
tion even from the most degenerate. The
human heart is so formed as to be attuned,
if we may use the expreflion, to its praise.
In fad, it is this firm and inflexible virtue,
this determined regard to principle bevond
all opinion, which has crowned the charac-
ters of such as now stand highest in the rolls
of laftig fame. The truly illustrious are
they who did not court the praise of the
world, but who performed the actions which
deserved it. They were perhaps traduced,
in their lifetime, by those whom they op-
posed. But poferity has done them ample
jufticc; and they are the men whom the
voice of ages now concurs in celebrating.
_he memorial of virtue i immortal; becarfe
it is approtved of God and of men. fl7 en it
is present, men take exanmle at it; and uwhcrt
;t i gone, they desire it. It weareth a crown,
and triumpheth fir ever; having gotten the
r,iflorjy; firiittgfr uindefled reward; *.

WifdomofSolomon, iv. 1, 2.

IN

SE R M, IN the fourth place, as an immoderate

VI.
'-v-^ passion for human praise is dangerous to vir-

tue, and unfavourable to true honour, so it
is dcfrudtive of felf-cnjoyment and in-
ward pcacc. Regard to the praifc of God
prcfcribes a simple and consistent tenour of
conduet, which in all situations is the fame;
which engages us in no perplexities, and
requires no artful refinement. Walking
uprigbtly, we walk surely, because we tread
an even and open path. But he who turns
aside from the straight road of duty in order
to gain applause, involves himself in an in-
tricate labyrinth. He will be often embar-
raffcd concerning the course which he ought
to hold. His mind will be always on the
stretch. He will be obliged to liften with
anxious attention to every whisper of the
popular voice. The demands of those ma-
fters whom he has submitted to serve, will
,prove frequently contradictory and incon-
fillent. He has prepared a yoke for his
neck which he must resolve to bear, how
much focvcr it may gall him.

The

The toils of virtue are honourable. The SE R M.

mind is supported under them by the con- V
fcioufnefs of asiing a right and becoming
part. But the labours to which he is doom-
ed who is enslaved to the desire of praise,
are aggravated by reflexion both on the un-
certainty of the recompence which he pur-
sues, and on the debasement to which he
submits. Conscience will from time to
time remind him of the improper sacrifices
which he has made, and of the forfeiture
which he has incurred of the praise of God
for the fake of praise from men. Suppose
him to receive all the rewards which the
miftalken opinion of the world can bestow,
its loudest applause will often be unable to
drown the upbraidings of an inward voice;
and if a man is reduced to be ashamed of
himself, what avails it him to be caressed by
others ?

But, in truth, the reward towards which

he looks who proposes human praise as his
ultimate obSect, will be always flying, like
a shadow, before him. So capricious and
uncertain, so fickle and mutable is the la-

vour

S R M. vour of the multitude, that it proves the
,__ most unlatisfadory of all purluits in whicl

men can be engaged. He who sets his
heart on it, is preparing for himself perpe-
tual mortifications. If the greatest and belt
can seldom retain it long, we may ealily
believe that from the vain and undeferving
it will suddenly escape. There is no cha-
rader but what on some fide is vulnerable
by censure. He who lifts himself up to the
observation and notice of the world is, of
all men, the least likely to avoid it. For
he draws upon himself a thousand eyes that
will narrowly infped him in every part.
Every opportunity will be watched of bring-
ing him down to the common level. His
crrours will be more divulged, and his in-
firmities more magnified, than those of
others. In proportion to his cagernefs for
praise will be his sensibility to repreach.
Nor is it reproach alone that will wound
him. He will be as much dejeded by si-
lence and neglect. He puts himself under
the power of every one to humble him,
by with-holding expected praise. Even

when

when praise is bestowed, he is mortified SERM.
by its being either faint or trite. He pines VIL
when his reputation stagnates. The degree
of applause to which he has been accustom-
ed grows insipid; and to be always praised
from the fame topics, becomes at lait much
the fame with not being praised at all.

All these chagrins and disquietudes are

happily avoided by him who keeps so trou-
bleoilne a passion within its due bounds;
who is more desirous of being truly worthy
than of being thought so; who pursues the
prai'e of the world with manly temperance,
and in subordination to the praise of God.
He is neither made giddy by the intoxicat-
ing vapour of applause, nor humbled and
cast down by the unmerited attacks of cen-
filre. Refting on a higher approbation he
enjoys himself in peace, whether human
praise flays with him, or flies away. With
me it is ainall thing to be judged of you, or of
man's judgment. He that judgeth me is the
Lord. My witnefi is in Heaven, and my
record is on high.

lv

SE vRM. IN the fifth and last place, the advari-

Vl.
yJ. tages which redound from the praise of men.

are not such as can bear to be put in com-
petition with those which flow from the
praise of God. The former are necessarily
confined within the verge of our present
existence. The latter follow us beyond
the grave, and extend through all eternity.
Not only is the praise of men limited in its
effe&s to this life, but also to particular fitua-
tions of it. In the days of health and ease
it may brighten the sunshine of prcfperity.
It may then sooth the ear with pleating ac-
cents, and gratify the imagination with fan-
cied triumphs. But when the distressful
seasons of life arrive, it will be found alto-
gether hollow and unlrubfantial: And furc-
ly, the value of any possession is to be chiefly
estimated by the relief which it can bring
us in the time of our greatest need. When
the mind is cafl down with sorrow and
grief, when sickness spreads its gloom
around us, or death rifes in awful profpeat
to our view, the opinions and the dif-
courses of the world will appear trifling and

infig-

insignificant. To one who is occupied SE RM-.
with nearer and more affecting interests, A
the praise or the censure of the world will
seem like the noise of diMtant voices, in
which he has small concern. But then is
the season when the praise of God supports
and upholds the labouring foul. Brought
home to the heart by the testimony of a
good conscience, and by the divine spirit
bearing witnefi with our spirits, it inspires
fortitude, and produces apcace whichlpaeth
nnderjifnding.
At present we behold an irregular and

disordered state of things. Virtue is often
deprived of its proper honours, and vice
usurps them in its flead. The charaders of
men are miftakcn; and ignorance and folly
difpQfe of human applause. But the day
hastens apace which shall close this scene of
errours, and vindicate the rights of ju'tr'e
and truth. Then iall be rendcred to every
man according to his works. Envy shall no
longer have the power of obscuring merit,
nor popular prejudices be able to support
the undeferving. Hidden worth shall be

brought

sER M. brought to light, and secret crimes revealed.

VI.
r-_ Many who passed through the world in the

silent obhcurity of humble, but steady good-
ncls, lhall be diltinguiflied as the favourites
of Heaven ; while the proud, the ambitious,
and the vain, are left to everlafling difho-
nour. The great Judge hath declared, that
wbhofever bar been aL7amed of him and of his
words, of that nan /iall h e

be aJamd when

be cometh in the glory of his Father, with all
the holy angels. Every departure from duty
shall at the period of final distribution ter-
minate in ignominy. True honour and true
virtue (hall be seen to coincide; and when
all human fame has passed away like finoke,
the only praifc which fliall he for ever re-
membered is that divine testimony, n'ell
done, thou good and faithful frvant: enter
thou into the joy of thy Lird.

TtIESE arguments clearly flow the im-

portance of preserving the love of praise
under proper subordination to the principle
of duty. In itself, it is an ufcful motive to
adion; but when allowed to extend itb

influence

influence too far, it corrupts the whole S ER M.
characer, and produces guilt, disgrace, and A
misery. To be entirely destitute of it, is
a defet. To be governed by it, is depra-
vity. The proper adjustment of the several
principles of acion in human nature is a
matter that deserves our highef attention.
For when any one of them becomes either
too weak or too strong, it endangers both
our virtue and our happiness. Keep thy
heart therefore with all diligence; pray that
GOs would enable thee to keep it with fuc-
cess; for out of the heart are the Jucs of

VOLfe. I. S
tOIL. II. N S E R-

# SERMON VII. On the proper ESTIMATE of HUMAN LIFE. ECCLESIASTES xii. 8. Vanity of vanities, faith the preacher, all is vanity.

[ 178 ]

S E R I O N VII.
Ontheproper ESTIMATE of IIuUAN LIfE.

PCCLESTASTrS Xii. 8.
Vanity of vanitics, Jfith the preacher, all is

vanity.
SE R M. N 0 serious maxim has been more gc-

tnerally adopted than that of the text.

In every age, the vanity of human life has
been the theme of declamation, and the fuh-
jet of complaint. It is a conclusion in which
men of all characers and ranks, the high
and the low, the young and the old, the
religious and the worldly, have more fre-
quently concurred than in any other. But
how just foev.-r the conclusion may be, the
premises from which it is drawn are often

fal 'c.
I

flfe. For it is prompted by various mo- SE R M.
tivcs, and derived from very different views A-
of things. Sometimes the language of the
text is assumed by a sceptic who cavils at
Providence, and censures the constitution of
the world. Sometimes it is the complaint
of a peevish man who is discontented with
his station, and ruffled by the disappoint-
ment of unreasonable hopes. Sometimes it
is the style of the licentious, when groan-
ing under miseries in which their vices have
involved them. Invedives againfi the va-
nity of the world which come from any of
these quarters deserve no regard; as they
ire the dictates of impiety, of spleen, or of
folly. The only cafe in which the senti-
ment of the text claims our attention, is
when uttered, not as an aspersion on Pro-
vidence, or a refledion on human affairs in
general; not as the language of private dif-
content, or the result of guilty fiufferings;
but as the fober conclusion of a wife and
good man concerning the imperfecion of
that happiness which refts solely on wofldly
pleafires. These, in their fairest form, are

N 2 not

SERM. not what they Icem to be. They never

-I bestow that complete satisfaction which they

promicr ; and therefore he who looks to
nothing beyond them shall have frequent
cause to deplore their vanity.

Nothing is of higher importance to us as

men and as Christians, than to form a proper
estimate of human life, without either load-
ing it with imaginary evils, or expeding
from it greater advantages than it is able to
yield. It fiall be my business, therefore,
in this Discourse, to distinguish a just and
religious fenle of the vanity of the world
from the unreasonable complaints of it which
we often hear. I flall endeavour, I. To
shew in what sense it is true that all earthly
pleasures are vanity. II. To inquire how
this vanity of the world can be reconciled
with the perfceions of its great Author.
III. To examine whether there are not
Ibme real and Iblid enjoyments in human
life which fall not under this general charge
of vanity. And, IV. To point out the
proper improvement to be made of such a
state as the life of man shall appear on the
whole to be.

I. I AM

I. I AM to shew in what sense it is true S F R M.

that all human pleasures arc vanity. This
is a topic which might be embellished with
the pomp of much description. But I shall
fludioufly avoid exaggeration, and only
point out a threefold vanity in human life
which every impartial obfcrvcr cannot but
admit; disappointment in pursuit, dilfftif-
fation in enjoyment, uncertainty in pofl
sesSion.

First,. disappointment in pursuit. When

we look around us on the world, we every
where behold a busy multitude, intent on
the prosecution of various designs which
their wants or defircs have fuggetled. We
behold them employing every method which
ingenuity can devifi, some the patience of
induPtry, tome the holdnefs of enterpri!e,
others the dexterity of firatagem, in order
to compass their ends. Of this incefant stir
and activity, what is the fruit ? In compra-
rifon of the crowd who have toiled in vain,
how finall is the number of the tucceflful ?
Or rather, where is the man who will de-
clare that in every point he has completed

N 3 his

s E PI M. hi, plan, and attained his utmost wilh ? No

VII.
_-Y-I extent of human abilities has been able to

discover a path which, in any line of life,
leads unerringly to success. The race is not
a/wa ys to the fwfi, nor the battle to the flrong,
nor r/ches t1 me:: fs runderJandilng. We may
form our plans with the most profound fa-
g.city, and with the most vigilant caution
imay g:uar!l agairft dangers on'every fide.
liut l i:ne unforcleen occurrence comes acrof;
which btfflcs our wisdom, and lays ou; l.a-
I)ours in the dust.

'Were such disappointments confined to

tholo'c who aspire at engrossing the higher
departmernts of life, the misfortune were
clse. The humliliation of the mighty, and
the fall (.f ambition from its towering height,
little colcclrn the bulk of mankind. Thfic
are olijects on which, as on distant meteors,
they .aze from afar, without drawing per-
oin'il iiitructill from events to much above
them. But, alas! lhen w e descend into
the regions of private life, we find diap-
pointment anl blarfed hope equally preva-
lent there. Neither the moderation of our

' ic S,

views, nor the juflice of our pretensions, can s E R M.
cnfure lhccefs. But tibne and chanice ha,.I, l --
to all, Against the stream of events both
the worthy and the undeferving arc obliged
to itruggle; and both are frequently over-
born alike by the current.

BESIDES disappointment in pursuit, dif-
iatisfation in enjoyment is a farther vanity
to which the human state is subjec. This
is the levereft of all mortifications, after
having been successful in the pursuit, to be
baffled in the enjoyment itself. Yet this is
found to be an evil still more general than
the former. Some may be so fortunate as
to attain what they have pursued; but none
are rendered completely happy by what they
have attained. Disappointed hope is mi-
fery; and yet successful hope is only im-
perfect bliss, Look through all the ranks
of mankind. Examine the condition of
thoie who appear most prosperous; and you
will find that they are never just what they
dcfire to be. If retired, they languish for
acion; if busy, they complain of fatigue,

N 4 If

S R M. If in middle life, tlihe' are impatient tfr dif-
VII. _-,- tintion; if in high flations, they ligh after

freedom and eafc. Something is still want-
ing to that plenitude of fatisfadion which
they expeted to acquire. Together with
every with that is gratified, a new demand
arises. One void opens in the heart, as
another is filled. On wilhes, wishes grow;
and to the end, it is rather'the expectation
of what they have not, than the enjoyment
of what they have, which occupies and in-
terests the most successful.

This diffatisfadion in the midst of hu-

man pleasure springs partly from the nature
of our enjoyments themselves, and partly
from circumstances which corrupt them.
No worldly enjoyments are adequate to the
high desires and powers of an immortal fpi-
rit. Fancy paints them at a distance with
splendid colours; but possession unveils the
fallacy. The eagerness of passion hefiows
upon them at first a hrifk and lively relifi.
But it is their fate always to pall by fami-
liarity, and sometimes to pass from satiety
into disgust. Happy would the poor man

think

think himself if he could enter on all the SERM.
treasures of the rich; and happy for a short v.
while he might be. But before he had long
contemplated and admired his slate, his pof-
sessions would fcem to lessen, and his cares
would grow.

Add to the unsatisfying nature of our

pleasures the attending circuniflances which
never fail to corrupt them. For, such as
they are, they are at no time possessed un-
mixed. To human lips it is not given to
taste the cup of pure joy. When external
circumstances show faircfi to the world, the
envied man groans in private under his own
burden. Some vexation disquiets, some pas-
sion corrodes hin; some ditlrefs, either felt
or feared, gnaws, like a wonn, the root of
his felicity. When there is nothing from
without to difhirh the prosperous, a iecret
poison operates within. For worldly hap-
piness ever tends to destroy itself, by cor-
rupting the heart. It follers the loose and the
violent passions. It engenders noxious habits;
and taints the mind with a false delicacy,
which makes it feel a thoufsnd unreal evils.

BUT

S ER N. B BUT put the cafe in the molt favourable
i-, light. Lay aside from human plealures

both disappointment in pursuit, and deceit-
fulness in enjoyment; fuppole them to be
fully attainable, and completely fatisfaftory;
ifill there remains to be confidered the va-
nity of uncertainl pollcfion and short dura-
tion. Were there in worldly things any
fixed point of security which we could gain,
the mind would then have some bals on
which to relt. But our condition is such,
that every thing wavers and totters around
us. Boa(I not thlfif of to-nmorrcw; for
thou inowy7 not what a day may bringforth.
It is much if, during its courfc, thou hearest
not of fomcwhat to disquiet or alarm thee.
For life never proceeds long in an uniform
train. It is continually varied by unex-
pected events. The feeds of alteration are
every where sown; and the i'nfhine of
profpenty commonly accelerates their
growth. If your enjoyments be numerous,
you lie more open on different fides to he
wounded. If you have poflfeled them long,
you have greater cause to dread an ap-

proaching

proaclling change. By flow degrees pro- F,R M.
fpcrity rifes; but rapid is the progress of *.
evil. It requires no preparation to bring
it forward. The edifice which it colt much
time and labour to eredt, one inauspicious
event, one sudden blow, can level with the
dust. Even supposing the accidents of life
to leave us untouched, human bliss muf
fiill be transitory; for man changes of lhim-
self. No course of enjoyment can delight
us long, What amnufed our youth Jofcs its
charm in maturer age. As years advance,
our powers are blunted, and our pleasurable
feelings decline. The silent lapse of time
is ever carrying somewhat from us, till at
length the period comes when all must be
swept away. The profped of this termina-
tion of our labours and pursuits is fuficient
to mark our slate with vanity. Our dais
arc a band-bre7adh, and our age is as inc-
thing. Within that little space is all our
entcrprife bounded. We crowd it with
toils and cares, with contention and firife.
We project great designs, entertain high
hopes, and then leave our plans unfinished,
and fink into oblivion. T

This
3

SE R M. This much let it suffice to have said con-

VII.
* J, cerning the vanity of the world. That

too much has not been said, mutt appear
to every one who confiders how generally
mankind lean to the oppolite fide; and how
often by undue attachment to the present
fiate, they both feed the most sinful pat-
sions, andpierce themselves through with mtnai
Jorrows. Let us proceed to enquire,

II. How this vanity of the world can be

reconciled with the perfections of its divine
Author. This enquiry involves that great
difficulty which has perplexed the thought-
ful and serious in every age; If God be
good, whence the evil that fills the earth ?
In answer to this interesting question, let us
observe,

In the first place, that the present condi-

tion of man was not his original or primary
state. We are informed by divine revela-
tion, that it is the consequence of his volun-
tary apoftacy from God and a state of inno-
cence. By this, his nature was corrupted;
his powers were enfeebled; and vanity and

vexation
I

vexation introduced into his life. All na- SERM.

VII.

ture became involved in the condemnation r.
of man. The earth was cursed upon his
account, and the whole creation made to
groan and travail in pain.

How mysterious soever the account of

this fall may appear to us, many circum-
stances concur to authenticate the fad, and
to show that human nature and the human
ftatc have undergone an unhappy change.
The belief of this has obtained in ahnoft all
nations and religions. It can be traced
through all the fables of antiquity. An ob-
fcure tradition appears to have pervaded
the whole earth, that man is not now what
he was at first; but that, in confequence.of
some transgression against his great Lord,
a Rate of degradation and exile succeeded
to a condition that was more flourishing and
happy. As our nature carries plain marks
of perversion and disorder, so the world
which we inhabit bears the fymptodis of
having been convulsed in all its frame.
Naturalists point out to us every where the
traces of some violent change which it hk

suffered.

S E R M. suffered. Illands torn from the continent,

VII.
* burning mountains, mhattered precipices, un-

inhabitable waftes, give it all the appearance
of a mighty ruin. The phylical and moral
state of man in this world mutually sym-
pathize and correspond. They indicate not
a regular and orderly ftrudure either of
matter or of mind, but the remains of fomc-
what that once was more fair and magnili-
cent. Let us observe,

IN the second place, that as this was not

the original, so it is not intended to be the
final state of man. Though in conle-
quence of the abuse of the human powers, fin
and vanity were introduced into this region
of the universe, it was not the purpose of
the Creator that they should be permitted
to reign for ever.. He hath made ample
provision for the recovery of the penitent
and faithful part of his fubjeds, by the
merciful undertaking of that great restorer
of the world, our Lord Jesus Christ. By
him lift and immortality were both purchal-
ed and brought to light. Tbe new heavens

and

and the new earth are discovered, whcrein S ER M.
dwelleth righteofnefi; where, through the -1
divine grace, human nature shall regain its
original honours, and man shall return to
be what once he was in Paradise. Through
those high discoveries of the Gospel, this
life appears to good men only in the light
of an intermediate and preparatory state.
Its vanity and misery, in a manner, difap-
pear. They have every reason to submit
without complaint to its laws, and to wait
in patience till the appointed time come for
the rcfjitution of all things. Let us take no-
tice

IN the third place, that, a future slate

being made known, we can account in a
satisfying manner for the present distress of
human life, without the smallest impeach-
ment of divine goodness. The sufferings
we here undergo are convened into difci-
pline and improvement. Through the
blessing of Heaven, good is extracted from
apparent evil; and the very misery which
originated from fin is rendered the means

of

SS R M. of correcting sinful paions, and preparing
,-.-. us for felicity. There is much reason to

believe that creatures as imperfed as we
are, require some such preliminary fRate of
experience before they can recover the per-
fetion of their nature. It is in the midst
of disappointments and trials that we learn
the insufficiency of temporal things to hap-
piness, and are taught to seek it from God
and Virtue. By these the violence of our
paflions is tamed, and our minds are form-
ed to sobriety and refledion. In the varie-
ties of life, occasioned by the vicissitude of
worldly fortune, we are inured to habits
both of the adive and the iuffering virtues.
How much soever we complain-of the va-
nity of the world, fads plainly show, that
if its vanity were less, it could not answer
the purpose of salutary discipline. Unfa-
tisfadory as it is, its pleasures are fill too
apt to corrupt our hearts. How fatal then
must the consequences have been, had it
yielded us more complete enjoyment? If,
with all its troubles, we are in danger of
being too much attached to it, how entirely

would

would it have reduced our affetions, if no S EVR M
troubles had been mingled with its plea- '*
fures ?

These observations serve in a great mea-

sure to obviate the difficulties which arise
from the apparent vanity of the human
state, by showing how, upon the Christian
fyflem, that vanity may be reconciled with
the infinite goodness of the Sovereign of the
Universe. The present condition of man
is not that for which he was originally de-
signed; it is not to be his final state; and
during his passage through the world, the
distresses which he undergoes are rendered
medicinal and improving. After having
taken this view of things, the cloud which,
in the preceding part of the discourse, ap-
peared to fit so thick upon human life be-
gins to be diflipated. We now perceive that
man is not abandoned by his Creator. We
discern great and good designs going on in
his behalf. We are allowed to entertain
better hopes; and are encouraged to en-
quire, as was proposed for the

VOL. II. 0 III

SS s 1.I Ill. 1. HEAD of dilcourfe, Whether there
-,- Ibe not in the prlcint condition of human

life fnime real and solid cnjoyments which
come not under the general charge of vanity
,f vanities. The dottrine of the text is to
be conlidered as chiefly addrcffed to worldly
men. Them Solomon means to teach that
all e.pecdations of hlils which reft solely on
earthly poffelions and pleasures, shall end
in difltppointment. But surely he did not
iltcnd to assert that there is no material
difference in the pursuits of men, or that
no real happiness of any kind could now be
attained by the virtuous. For besides the
uin twcverable objedion which this would
form against the divine administration, it
would direcly contradid what he elfewherc
nl.rts, that while God givethfore travail to
lheifincr, be giveth to the man that is good
in .isfight wifdo i, and knowledge, and joy .
It may, it must indeed be admitted, that
unmixed and complete happiness is un-
known on earth. No regulation of con-
duct can altogether prevent passions from

Ecclcf. ii, z6.

diflturbing

disturbing our peace, and misfortunes from S EM.

VIA.

wounding our heart. But after this con- .
cession is made, will it follow that there is
no objea on earth which deserves our
pursuit, or that all enjoyment becomes
contemptible which is not perfet? Let
us survey our state with an impartial
eye, and be just to the various gifts of
Heaven. How vain soever this life, con-
fidered in itself, may be, the comforts
and hopes of religion are sufficient to give
solidity to the enjoyments of the righ-
teous. In the exercise of good affetions,
and the testimony of an upright conscience;
in the sense of peace and reconciliation with
God through the great Redeemer of Man-
kind; in the firm confidence of being con-
duced through all the trials of life by infi-
nite wisdom and goodness; and in thejoyful
profpe& of arriving in the end at immortal
felicity, they possess a happiness which,
descending from a purer and more perse&
region than this world, partakes not of its
vanity.

Besides the enjoyments peculiar to reli-
gion, there are other pleasures of our pre-

0 2 sent

S R M. sent state which, though of ain inferiour
<I-%c, order, must not be overlooked in the efti-

mate of human life. It is neceflary to call
attention to these, in order to check that
repining and unthankful spirit to which
man is always too prone. Some degree of
importance must be allowed to the com-
forts of health, to the innocent gratifications
of sense, and to the entertainment afforded
us by all the beautiful scenes. of nature;
some to the pursuits and anufements of
social life; and more to the internal enjoy-
ments of thought and reflexion, and to the
pleasures of affedioilate intercourse with
those whom we love. These comforts are
often held in too low estimation, merely.
because they are ordinary and common;
although that be the circumstance which
ought, in reason, to enhance their value.
They lie open, in some degree, to all; ex-
tend through every rank of life, and. fill up
agreeably many of those spaces in our pre-
sent existence, which are not occupied with
higher objctis, or with fcrious cares.

We are in fcveral refpets unjust to Pro-
vidence in the computation of our pleasures

6 and

and our pains. We number the hours SERM.
which are spent in distress or sorrow; but .__
we forget those which have pafled away, if
not in high enjoyment, yet in the midst of
those gentle fatisfacions, and placid emo-
tions, which make life glide smoothly along.
We complain of the frequent disappoint-
ments which we susser in our pursuits. But
we recollect not that it is in pursuit, more
than in attainment, that our pleasure now
consists. In the present state of human na-
ture, man derives more enjoyment from the
exertion of his acive powers in the midst of
toils and efforts, than he could receive from
a fill and uniform pofceflion of the objea
which he strives to gain. The solace of the
mind under all its labours, is hope; and
there are few Situations which entirely ex-
clude it. Forms of expetcd bliss are often
gleaming upon us through a cloud, to re-
vive and exhilarate the most diltreffed. If
pains be scattered through all the conditions
of life, so also are pleasures. Happiness,
as far as life affords it, can be engrossed by no
rank of men to the exclusion of the reft; on

0 3 the

SE M. the contrary, it is often found where, at

VII.
b -" _first view, it would have been least cxpe&-

ed. When the human condition appears
most depressed, the feelings of men, through
the gracious appointment of Providence,
adjust thenfelves wonderfully to their state,
and enable them to extract fatisfaftion from
sources that are totally unknown to others.
Were the great body of men fairly to com-
pute the hours which they pass in ease, and
even with some degree of pleasure, they
would be found far to exceed the number
of those which are spent in absolute pain
either of body or mind.-But in order to
make a still more accurate estimation of
the degree of fatisfa&ion which, in the midst
of earthly vanity, man is permitted to enjoy,
the three following observations claim our
attention,

Ti E first is, that many of the evils which

occasion our complaints of the world arc
wholly imaginary. They derive their ex-
iftence from fancy and humour, and child-
ifh fubjedion to the opinions of others.

The

The di(refs which they produce, I admit, SS. R M.
is real; but its reality ariles not from the --
nature of things, but from that diliorlcr of
imagination which a finall measure of rc-
feflion might rectify. In proof of this we
may obfervc, that the persons who live moll
simply, and follow the ditates of plain un-
adulterated nature, are mist exempted frem
this class of evils. It is among the higher
ranks of mankind that they chiefly abound;
where fantastic refinements, lickly delicacy,
and eager emulation, open a thouland
sources of vexation peculiar to themlelves.
Life cannot but prove vain to them who
affect a difrclilh of every pleasure that is
not both exquisite and new; who meafurl
enjoyment, not by their own feelings, hut
by the standard of fashion; who think
themselves miserable if others do net ad-
mire their slate. It is not from wants or
sorrows that their complaints arile; but,
though it may appear a paradox, from too
much freedom from sorrow and want; from
the languor of vacant life, and the irritation
occasioned by those flagnating humours

0 4 which

SE R M. which ease and indulgence have bred within
VII. a,_ them. In their cafe, therefore, it is not the

vanity of the world, but the vanity of their
minds, which is to be accused. Fancy has
raised up the fpedres which haunt them.
Fancy has formed the cloud which hangs
over their life. Did they allow the light
of reason to break forth, the speCtres would
vaniih, and the cloud be dispelled.

THE second observation on this head is,

that of those evils which may be called real,
because they owe not their existence to
fancy, nor can be removed by rectifying
opinion, a great proportion is brought upon
us by our own mifcondut. Diseases, po-
verty, disappointment and shame are far
from being, in every instance, the unavoid-
able doom of men. They are much more
frequently the offspring of their own mif-
guided choice. Intemperance engenders
disease, sloth produces poverty, pride cre-
ates disappointments, and difhonefly exposea
to fname. The ungoverned pailions of men
betray them into a thousand follies; their

follies

follies into crimes; and their crimes into SE R M.

VII.

misfortunes. Yet nothing is more corn- -
mon than for such as have been the authors
of their own mir;r, to make loud com-
plaints of the hard fate of man, and to take
revenge upon the human condition by ar-
raigning its lippoicd vanity. T5he fJi/h-
ness of nmanfirflrvcrtcth ,i-s way, and then
bis heart fietilth aga;, the Lsr-d.

I do not, however, maintain that it is

within our power to be altogether free of
those felf-procured evils. For perfecion of
any kind is beyond the reach of man.
Where is the widiom that never errs?
Where the just man that offendeth not?
Nevertheless, much is here left to our-
selves; and, imperfec as we are, the con-
sequences of right or of wrong condu&t
make a wide difference in the happiness of
men. Experience every day ihows that a
found, a well-governed, and virtuous mind
contributes greatly to finooth the path of
life; and that widom excelleth folly as far
as light excelletb darkness. The way of the
,icked it as darknef ; they know not at what

they

SERM. theJy umble. litt the righteoiiefs rs the

^ perfert Jhall direc his way; and he that

walketh iprirhllt/v, wi/,lketh fuire'l. The
tendency of the one is towards a plain and
safe region. The course of the other leads
him amidst snares and precipices. The one
occasionally may, the other unavoidably
must, incur much trouble. Let us not
then confound, under one general charge,
those evils of the world which belong to the
lot of humanity, and those which, through
divine afliltance, a wife and good man may,
in a great meafiure, escape.

THE third observation which I make re-

fpefs those evils which are both real and
unavoidable; from which neither wisdom
nor goodr.cfs can procure our exemption.
Under these this comfort remains, that if
they cannot be prevented, there are means,
however, by which they may be much al-
leviated. Religion is the great principle
which aQs, under filch circumflances, as the
correcive of human vanity. It infpircs
fortitude, supports patience, and by its

profpcds

profprc&s and promises darts a checrlng ray SERM.
into tile darkcfl slade of human life. If it a
cannot secure the virtuous from disappoint-
nmcnt in their pursuits, it forms them to such
a temper as renders their d(ilappointments
more light and easy than tholes of other men.
If it docs not banih ditlltisfaftion from
their worldly pleasures, it confers fipiritual
pleasures in their fRead. If it enfares them
not the poffeflion of what they love, it fur-
nilhes comfort under the loss. As far as it
establishes a contented frame of mind, it
supplies the want of all that worldly men
covet to possess. Compare the behaviour
of the sensual and corrupted with that of the
upright and holy, when both are feeling the
effecs of human vanity, and the difference
of their situation will be manifest. Among
the former you are likely to find a querulous
and dejected, among the latter, a composed
and manly spirit. The lamentations of the
one excite a mixture of pity and contempt;
while the dignity which the other maintain
in distress commands refped. The susser-
ings of the former fettle into a peevish and

fretful

SE R M. fretful disposition; those of the latter soften
v1I. --, the temper and improve the heart. These

confequenccs extend so far as to give ground
for asserting, that a good man enjoys more
happiness in the courei of a seemingly un-
prosperous life, than a bad man does in the
midst of affluence and luxury. What a
conspicuous proof of this is afforded by the
Apofile Paul, who from the very depth of
afflition could fend forth such a triumphant
voice as proclaims the complete vicory
which he had gained over the evils of life ?
Troubled on every fide, yet not diflrjed;
perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but
not forsaken; cast down, but not deflroyed.
For though our outward man perJb, our in-
ward man is renewed, day by day *. Such,
though perhaps in an inferior degree, will
be the influence of a genuine religious prin-
ciple upon all true Chriltians. It begins to
perform that office to them here, which here-
after it will more completely discharge, of
wiping away the tearrfrom their eytr.

* z Corinth. iv. 8, 9. 16.

SUCIH,

Suci, upon the whole, is the estimate SERM.

VII.

which we are to form of human life. Much _
vanity will always belong to it; though the
degree of its vanity will depend, in a great
measure, on our own charater and con-
dud. To the vicious, it presents nothing
but a continued scene of disappointment and'
diffatisfa&ion. To the good, it is a mixed
state of things ; where many real comforts
may be enjoyed; where many resources
under trouble may be obtained; but where
trouble, in one form or other, is to be ex-
pedted as the 16t of man. From this view
of human life,

THI first practical conclusion which we

are to draw is, that it highly concerns us
not to be unreasonable in our expectations
of worldly felicity. Let us always remem-
ber where we are; from what causes the'
human state has become subjet to depref-
sion; and upon what accounts it must re-
main under its prefcnt law. Such is the
infatuation of felf-love, that though in the
general doctrine of the vanity of the world

all

SE R M. all men agree, yet almost every one flatters

VII.
.-, himself that his own cafe is to be an excep-

tion from the common rule. He refts on
expectations which he thinks cannot fail
him; and though the present bk not altoge-
ther according to his wish, yet with the
confidence of certain hope he anticipates
futurity. Hence the anguish of disappoint-
ment fills the world; and evils, which are
of themlelves sufficiently severe, oppress with
double force the unprepared and unfufpet-
ing mind. Nothing therefore is of greater
consequence to our peace, than to have al-
ways before our eyes such views of the
world as shall prevent our expecting more
from it than it is destined to afford. We
destroy our joys by devouring them before-
hand with too eager expectation. We ruin
the happiness of life when we attempt to
raise it too high. A tolerable and comfort-
able state is all that we can propose to our-
selves on earth. Peace and contentment,
not bliss nor transport, is the full portion of
man. Perfed joy is reserved for heaven.

BUT

BUT while we repress too sanguine hopes s E R M.

formed upon human life, let us, in the fe- _
cond place, guard against the other extreme
of repining and discontent. Enough has
been already said to shew, that notwith-
standing the vanity of the world, a confi-
derable degree of comfort is attainable in the
present fate. Let the recollecion of this
serve to reconcile us to our condition, and
to check the arrogance of complaints and
murmurs.-What art thou, 0 son of man !
who having sprung but yesterday out of the
duff, dareft to lift up thy voice against thy
Maker, and to arraign his providence, be-
cause all things are not ordered according
to thy wilh ? What title haft thou to find
fault with the order of the universe, whose
lot is so much beyond what thy virtue or
merit gave thee ground to claim ? Is it no-
thing to thee to have been introduced into
this magnificent world; to have been ad-
mitted as a fpe&ator of the divine wisdom
and works; and to have had access to all
the comforts which nature, with a bountiful
hand, has poured forth around thee ? Are

s all

sE R M. all the hours forgotten which thou haft pafled
A,_~ in ease, in complacency, or joy ? Is it a

small favour in thy eyes, that the hand of
divine mercy has been stretched forth to aid
thee, and, if thou rejec not its proffered
assistance, is ready to condu& thee into a
happier state of cxiftence ? When thou com-
pareft thy condition with thy desert, blush,
and be ashamed of thy complaints. Be silent,
be grateful, and adore. Receive with th;,nk-
fulness the blessings which are allowed thee.
Revere that government which at present
refuses thee more. Reft in this conclusion,
that though there be evils in the world, its
Creator is wife and good, and has been
bountiful to thee.

IN the third place, the view which we

have taken of human life should naturally
direQt us to such pursuits as may have most
influence for correting its vanity. There
are two great lines of conduct which offer
themselves to our choice. The one leads
towards the goods of the mind; the other
towards those of fortune. The former,

which

vhich is adopted only by the few, engages S E R M.
us chiefly in forming our principles, regu- '
lating our difpolitions, improving all our
Inward powers. The latter, which in every
age has been followed by the multitud,
points at no other end but attaining the
conveniencies and pleasures of external life.
It is obvious that, in this last pursuit, the
vanity of the world will encounter us at
every siep. For this is the region in which
it reigns,, and where it chiefly displays its
power. At the fame time, to lay the world
totally out of view is a vain attempt. The
numberlels ties by which we are conneced
with external things, put it out of our power
to behold them with indifference. But
though we cannot wrap ourselves up en-
tirely in the care of the mind, yet the more
we make its welfare our chief object, the
nearer shall we approach to that happy in-
dependence on the world which places us
beyond the reach of suffering from its
vanity.

That discipline, therefore, which corrects
the eagerness of worldly pafions, which

VOL. II. P fortifies

VII.

; lwich cnili}]?htcies the mind with uli:ul
knowledge, aid ftiiulhci t to it matter of
cnjoyment fromin vitliin itlelf, is of more
conle(quncc to real felicity, than all the pro-
vilion which we can make of the goods of
fortune. To this let us bend our chief at-
tention. Let us keep I/he heart with all di-
ligenec, sici;ng Cuat 'f it ,'ar the /ifneI of li'.
Let us account our mind the most important
province which is committed to our care;
and if we cannot rule fortune, study at least
to rule ourl:lvesc. Let us propole for our
objeI, not worldly flicccfs, which it de-
pends not on us to obtain; but that upright
and honourable ditcharge of our duty in
every conjuncture, which, through the di-
vine afliftance, is always within our power.
Let our happiness be fought where our pro-
per praile is found; and that be accounted
our only real evil, which is the evil of our
nature; not that, which is either the ap-
pointment of Providence, or which ariles
from the evil of others.

Bi'T

BuT in order to carry on with f;ucefs SER M.

VII.

this rationil and manly plan of condud, it
is neccffilry, in the last place, that to moral,
we join religious discipline. Under the
prefcnt imperfection of our minds, and
amidlt the frequent shocks which we receive
from humlan evils, much do we stand in
need of every assistance for supporting our
contancy. Of all affiftince to which we
can have rccoursc, none is so powerful as
what may be derived from the principles of
the Chrillian faith. He who builds on any
other foundation will find, in the day of
trial, that he had built his house on the sand.
Man is formed by his nature to look up to
a filpriour Being, and to lean upon a strength
that is greater than his own. All the con-
fiderations which we can offer for confirm-
ing his mind, preluppofc this resource, and
derive from it their principal efficacy.

Never then let us lose fight of those great

objects which religion brings under our
view, if we hope to stand firm and ere&
amidst the dangers and distresses of our pre-
fcnt slate. Let us cultivate all that con-

P 2 neion

SE R M. nelion with the great Father of Spirits

VII.
* -- which our condition admits; by piety and

prayer; by dependence on his aid, and trust
in his promises; by a devout sense of his
presence, and a continual endeavour to ac-
quire his grace and favour. Let us, with
humble faith and reverence, commit our-
selves to the blelfed Redeemer of the world;
encouraged by the discoveries which he has
made to us of the divine mercy, and by the
hopes which he has afforded us of being
raised to a nobler and happier Ration in the
kingdom of God. So shall virtue, grounded
upon piety, attain its full fircngth. Inspired
with a religious spirit, and guided by ra-
tional principles, we lhall be enabled to
hold a Iteady courle through this mixed
region of plealire and pain, of hopes and
fears; until the period arrive when that
cloud which the present vanity of the world
throws over human affairs shall entirely dif-
appear, and eternal light be diffuled over all
the works and ways of God.

JS . R-

# SERMON VIII. ON DEATH. PSALM xxiii. 4. Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

[ 213 ]
S E R M ON VIII.

ON DEATH.

PSALM xxiii. 4.

Yea thouigh I uwalk through the valle), of the

Jhadow of dcatb, I willfear no evil; for
thou art witb me; thy rod and thy Jlaf
they comfort me.

H IS Psalm exhibits the pleasing pic- s E R M.
ture of a pious man rejoicing in the v

goodness of Heaven. He looks around him
on his state, and his heart overflows with
gratitude. When he reviews the past part
of his life, he contemplates God as his
shepherd who bath made him lie down in
green paflures, and led him beside the fill
waters. When he confiders the present, he

P 3 beholds

SS. T' '. beholds his divine bencfaclor /rep,:ri/ a
i.y._. t,7l,' Jr' li. in in the p1trlsce rs hlis ere!mies,

anl/ ma'kin his cup run ov7er,. WIhen he
locl:s forward to tile future, he confides in
the ir nc goodness, as coniinuing to follow
him.: ,/!t,.I ,lays of bis life, awd [ri.ging him
t, dwell in the hnfce o' the I, 1 J, fr eyer'.
Amidfl these images of tranquiilitv and hap-
pincs, one oljcd prclcnts itlelf, which is
fuflicicnt to ox.:r-cail the minds and to damp
thc joy of the greatcti part of men ; that is,
the approach of death. But cn the Ilalmift
it produced no such effect. W\ith perfect
compolure ;nd flerenity he looks forward to
the time .hcen he is to pass through the val-
ly of tli Jlih adcw i death. The profiped,
instead of dcjeding him, appears to heighten
his triumph, by that security which the pre-
fencc of his almighty guardian afforded him.
1 will Jfar no evil, for ihou art with me:
and purliing the al:usioln with which he
had bcgun, exults in the hope that the shep-
herd who had hitherto condlued him would
ipluport hlIn ith llis faJft, whilc he passed
through that dark and perilous region, and

3 xv with.

with his rrod, or pastoral crook, would g:uard S E R M
himn from cvery danger.

Such is the happy (liflindion which

good men enjoy, in a situation the molt
formidable to human nature. That thrcat-
ening fpcre which appalls othcr-, carries
no terrour to them. While worldl- men
are juitly said throngh fear fs drath to be
all their life-tine fubjeti to boniage, to the
righteous only it belongs to look on death,
and finile. Since then it is in the power
of religion to confer upon us bo high a
privilege, let us adventure to contemplate
fleadilv this lafi foe whom we muff all en-
counter. Let us conlider what death is in
itself, and by what means good men are
enabled to meet it with fortitude. Though
the ilhbjec may be reckoned gloomy, it
must be admitted to be interesting. The
cole of life is a solemn and important
event, to which every wife man will have
regard in the general tenour of his condudt.
No one can ad his part with propriety,
who confiders not how it is to terminate;
and to exclude from our thoughts what we

P cannot

S . R M. cannot prevent from acually taking place,
VIII.

is the refuge of none but the timorous and
weak. We are more encouraged to enter
on this meditation by reflecing on the fu-
periour advantages which, as Christians,
we enjoy for overcoming the fear of death,
beyond that holy man whose sentiment is
now before us. Those great objects, which
he beheld through the medium, of types
and figures, are clearly revealed to us. That
dispensation of grace, which in his days
began to open, is now completed. That
life and immortality, which then only dawn-
ed on the world, have now shone forth
with full light and splendour.

DEATHI may be confidered in three

views; as the separation of the foul from
the body; as the conclusion of the present
life; as the entrance into a new state of
existence. In the firfi view, it is regarded
as painful and agonizing. In the second,
it is melancholy and dejeding. In the
third, it is awful and alarming. One of the
firfi enquiries which occurs concerning it is,

for

for what purposes it was clothed with all s ER M.
these terrours? Why, under the govern- ..
ment of a gracious Being, the termination
of life was loaded with so much sorrow and
distress ? We knov that, in consequence of
the fall, death was inflided as punifinment
upon the human race. But no unnecelffary
Ieverities are ever exercised by God; and
the wildom and goodness of the divine plan
will be much illustrated, by observing that
all the formidable circumstances which at-
tend death arc, in the present situation of
mankind, absolutely requisite to the pro-
per government of the world. The ter-
rours of death are, in fat, the great guar-
dians of life. They excite in every indivi-
dual that delire of felf-prefervation, which
is nature's first law. They reconcile him
to hearing the diftrelles of life with patience.
They prompt him to undergo its useful
and necessary labours with alacrity; and
they restrain him from many of those evil
courses by which his safety would be en-
dangered. While they are in so many re-
speds beneficial to the individual, they are

at

6ERM. at the fame time, the safeguard of locictv.
-_s-- If death were not dreaded and abhorred as

it is by men, no public order couldl e pre-
served in the world. The sword of autho-
rity were lifted up in vain. 'I'he fmintion
of law would lole their efcct. The feat-
fold and the executioner would be derided;
and Ihc violent left to trample unrestrained
on the rights cf ithe peacefil. If, notwith-
standing the restraints which felf-prefcrva-
tion ilnmolts, f!cicty is so often diflurled
by the crimes of the wicked, -what a scene
of confulion would it become, if capital
punitliment;, which are the last rt!iource
of goCernmlent, were of no influence to
deter oeTcnder, ?

For fuchl important end(s the conclusion

of life has, by the appointment of Provi-
dence, been made an awful olbjed. The
valley of death hai bccn planted with ter-
rours to the apprehenlion of men. Here,
as in many other instances, what seemed
at first to arraign the goodness of the Deity,
is upon enquiry found to confirm it.. But
though, for the moll salutary purposes, it

wVas

was requisite that the fear of death flould S E R M.
be a powerful principle in human nature, --
yet, like our other propensities, it is apt,
when left to itself, to run into exccls. Over
many it uiirps such n all aienl Ult as to de-
hafc their characicr, and to defeat the
chief cnds of living. To prelcrve it within
filch hounds that it flall not interrupt us in
performing the proper offices and duties
of life, is the diftintion of the brave man
above the coward; and to lurmount it in
such a degree that it shall not, even in nea.r
prospect, dejet our spirit, or trouble our
peace, is the great preference which virtue
enjoys above guilt. It has been the study
of tile wife and refieding, in every age, to
attain this steadiness of mind. Philosophy
purfied it as its chief object; and profelFed
that the great end of its discipline was, to
enable its votaries to conquer the fear of
death. Let us then, before we have re-
course to the more powerful aid of religion,
hearken for a little to what reason has lug-
gested on this fulbjct. Her assistance maiy,
perhaps, be not entirely despicable; and

though

ER M. though the armour which she offers be not
VIII. _,v_ completely of proof, it may serve, how-

ever, to turn aside, or to blunt some of
the lhafts which are aimed against us by
the last foe.

AFTER this manner she may be fuppofe(l

to address mankind, in order to reconcile
them to their fate.--Children of men!
it is well known to you that you are a
mortal race. Death is the law of your
nature, the tribute of your being, the debt
which all are bound to pay. On thefc
terms you received life, that you should be
ready to give it up when Providence calls
you to make room for others, who in like
manner, when their time is come, shall
follow you. He who is unwilling to filb-
mit to death when heaven decrees it, de-
serves not to have lived. You might as
reasonably complain that you did not live
before the time appointed for your coming
into the world, as lament that you are not
to live longer when the period of your
quitting it is arrived. What divine Provi-

dence

4cnce hath made necessary, human pru- S RM.
delce ought to comply with cheerfully. ._
Submit at any rate you mull; and is it not
much better to follow of your own accord,
than to be dragged reluctantly, and by
force ? What privilege have you to plead,
or what rcafon to urge, why you fhlould
pofeis ;an exemption from the common
doom ? All things around you are mortal
and perilhing. Cities, flates, and empires
have their period let. The proudest monlu-
ments of human art moulder into duff.
Even the works of nature wax old and
decay. In the midst of this univerlal ten-
dency to change, could you expedt that to
your fi.ame alone a permanent duration
Ihould he given ? All who have gone be-
fore you have hubmitted to the stroke of
death. All who are to come after you
shall undergo the amne fate. The great
and the good, the prince and the peasant,
the renowned and the obscure, travel alike
the road which leads to the grave. At the
moment when you expire, thousands
throughout the world shall, together with

you,

sS1 RM. you, he yil.ding up their breath. Can
.-- .-' that he held a great calamity which is com-

inion to YoUl with cvcer t ling that lives on
earth ; which is an cvcnt'as much accorl-
ing to the course of nature a'; it is that
leaves Ihould fall in autumn, or that fruit
fhnould drop from the tree when it is fully
ripe ?

The pain of dcath cannot he very long,

and is probably lIcf f ,erc than what you
have at other times experienced. The pomp
of death is more t rr 'rilng than death itfei:c
It is to the ewakncfs ; giination that it
owes its chief power of . ting your fpi-
rits; for when the force of the mind i;
rouzed, there is alnoft no passion in our
nature but what has showed itself able to
overcome the fear of death. Honour has
defied death; love has dcfpifcd it; fhamc
has rushed upon it; rcvenge has disregarded
it; grief a thousand times has wished for it.
Is it not firange that reason and virtue can-
not give you strength to surmount that fear,
which, even in feeble minds, so many pas-
sions have conquered ? What inconfiftcncy

is

is there in complailinii so much of the evils s E R M.
ot lite, anl being a thie aimne time lo asiaid I.
t ' what is to term inlate them all ? Who can
lill whether his future life might not teem
with dilhfters and mierics, as yet unknown,

-.sce it to be prolonged according to his
illh ? At any rate, is it defireable to draw

life out to the lafl dregs, and to wait till old
a; c pour upon you its whole fiore of diseases
.end sorrows ? You lament that you are to
die ; hut did you viewv your situation pro-
perly, you would have much greater caule
to lament if you were chained to this life
for two or three hundred years, without
pofilbility of relcafc. Expect therefore
calmly that which is natural in itself, and
which mullft e fit, because it is the ap-
pointment of heaxtn. Perform your duty
as a good ul)bjec of the Deity, during the
time allotted you; and rejoice that a
period is fixed for your dismission from the
present warfare. Remember that the fla-
vifh dread of death destroys all the comfort
of that life which you seek to preserve.
Better to undergo the firoke of death at

once,

S E R M. once, than to live in perpetual rilery fromi
.- ,_ the fear of dying.

Sucli discourses as thefc are specious at

least, and plausible. The arguments are not
without strength, and ought to produce some
effec on a considerate reflecting mind. But
it is to be fufpeaed that their effec will be
chiefly felt when the mind is calm and at
ease; rather when speculating upon death
at a distance, than when beholding it at
hand. When the critical moment arrives
which places the anxious, trembling foul on
the borders of an unknown world, reason-
ings drawn from neceflity and propriety
will be of small avail to quiet its alarms. In
order to afford relief, you mulf give it hope;
you must promise it protecion; you must
offer somewhat on which it can lay hold for
support, amidst the itruggles of labouring
nature. Hence the great importance of
those discoverics which revelation has made,
and of those principles with which it fortifies
the heart. To the consideration of these let
us next proceed, and observe their fuperiour

Xl~ ~efficacy

efficacy for surmounting the fear of death. SER M.

VIII.

In order to judge of their importance, it ,-
will be proper to take a view of death in
each of those lights in which it appears moR
formidable to mankind.

IT may be confidered, first, as the ter-

mination of our present exigence; the final
period of all its joys and hopes. The con-
cluding scene of any course of action in
which we have been engaged with pleasure,
even the last light of objets which we have
been long accuflomed to behold, seldom
fails of firiking the mind with painful re-
gret. How many circut-iflances will concur
to heighten that regret, when the time comes
of our bidding an eternal adieu to the light
of day; to every pursuit which had occu-
pied our attention as citizens of the world;
and to every friend and relation who had
attached our hearts ? How dejecing is the
thought to the greatest part of men, that
the fun hall rife, and the seasons shall re-
turn to others, but no more to them; and
that while their neighbours are engaged in

VOL. II. Q the

S F. R M. the usual affairs of life, they flhall he slut
.-... up in a dark and lonelome ininlion, for-

gotten, and cut off from among men, as
though they had never been ! If/id, in the
cutting sis f my days, IJfall go to the gates
of thegrave. lam deprived of tbc residue of
my years. Ifhall not fee the Lord again in
the land f the living. IJI1all behold man no
more with the inhabitants of the world*.

Let us now oblcrve, that the dejetioli

into which we are apt to fink at such a
juncture, will hear proportion to the degree
of our attachment to the olbjets which we
leave, and to the importance of those re-
sources which remain with us when they
are gone. He who is taking farewel of a
country through which he had travelled
with fatisfadion, and le who is driven from
his native land, with lwhich he had con-
neCted every idea of fettlecent and com-
fort, will have very different feelings at the
time of departure. Such is the difference
which, at the hour of death, takes place be-
tween the righteous and the ungodly. The

* llaiah xxxviii. 1o, 11,

latter

Litter knows nothing higher or better than SER M.
the prelent tate of existence. His interests, -
his pleafircs, his cxpectations, all centered
here. He lived solely for the enjoyments
of this world. Dreadful, therefore, and in-
supportable mufl be that event which fepa-
rates him from there for ever. Whereas the
culture of rcligion had previoully formed
the mind of a Chriflian for a calm and easy
transition from this life. It had inflrultcd
him in the proper eftimatc of tibhulnary
happiness. It had set higher profpecls be-
fore him. It had! formed him to a more
refined taste of cnjoyment than what the
common round of worldly amusements
could gratify. It give him connedions
and allinccq with ;il;itu;l oljects, which
are unknown t:n the men of the world.
Hence, thoui.!r he be attachcd to life yh the
natur.ll filings of humanitv, he is raised
above the wceak and unmanly regret of part-
ing with it. He knewt that it was intended
as preparatory only to a ficceding state.
As soon as the season of preparation should
be finillcd, lie cxpcted a removal; and

Q(._2 when

sE R M. when Providence gives the lignal, he bids

VIII.
Iv- adieu to the world with composed refolu-

tion, and undilturbed heart.-What though
death interrupt him in the middle of his
dcfigns, and break off the plans which he
had formed of being useful to his family
and the world? All thele he leaves with
tranquillity in the hands of that Providence
to which he has ever been accuflomed to
look up with resignation; which governed
the world wifely and gracioufy before he
existed; and which he knows will continue
to govern it with equal wisdom and benig-
nity, when lie shall be in it no more. The
time of his departure was not left to his
own choice; but he believes it to be the
molt proper, because it is the time chosen
by Him who cannot err. Honourable age
is not that wich Jflndcth in engltb of time,
nor that whichl is mncfured by number
of years. Btl woifitn is the grey bair to
man ; and an nilfp oltt(l Ife is old age *.
When lie beholds his friends and relations
mourning around him, his heart may melt,

* Vifd. of Solomon, iv. 8, 9.

but

but will not be overpowered; for It is re- S FR M.
lieved by the thought that he is bidding ._-
them only a temporary, not an eternal fare-
wel. He commends them, in the mean
time, to the blessing of that God whom he
has served; and while he is parting from
them, he hears a voice which sooths his
spirit with those comforting words, Leave
thy fatherlel children; I will prefCrve them
alive; and let thy widow tIrl/ in me *.

BUT death is more than the conclusion

of human life. It is the gate which, at the
fame time that it closes on this world, opens
into etcrnity. Under this view, it has often
been the filbject of terrour to the serious
and rcflcling. The transition they were
about to make was awful. Before them lay
a vast undifovered region, from whose
bounds no traveller ever returned to bring
information of the reception which he found,
or of the objeds which he met. with there.
The firll conception which figgefts itself is,
that the dilcembodied spirit is to appear be-

Jerem. l;x. ol.

(Q3 fore

S F R . fore its Creator, who is then to aCt as its
--,.j judge. The firic inquifltion which it mult

undergo, the inmpartial doom which it muff
hear pronounced, and the unaltcrable state
to which it shall be afligned, are awful
forms riling before the imagination. They
arc ideas which conciicnce forces upon all.
Alankind canl neither avoid conlidering
tlilit'felves is accountablle creatlures, nor
a\oidl vicwin:' deiath as the

l ;eaon w-hen

their account i. to, lc given. Such a ieinti-
eilt is withi nl(. ::lci tle oiurcse of drled;

;.

iti all 1iCi, (if ai'.ic)y. 'F ,a ccrt.:i; de-

grce a ' t! (' , ; i. 'ce \xx ill c(ivexv con 't ort.
Thie rclc-ii:! ( : ai v.- l-li.c it life n ,ikcs a
-wi dif i(rii cI, c I;': . cn the !.ifl In(oi: its of
the rightcouls a.d tl!e inic;. B.it whose
conlii(n .: i, o cleatr at, to likc him with
no rcnio.r ? \ lihol rcghr::'i cfs is o un-
hlciliflicd as tn lbidec tie lc'.it :v (t the
great l.i:rch r ,f '. it, \'ir, dares reft his
evcrlaf;lini, fAtc i;j'ii: hi;s T c.icd contoirmitv
to the rule of idty tli rcilg!::t thc wholc of
his life ?

We muil not inidg fe

of t i ontitents of
men at the ;il[ :'o:.ch of tic.;;h ! their or-

3j inary

dinary train of thought in the days of health s E R M.

VIII.

and cafe. Their views of moral conduet
are then, too generally, liperficial; flight ex-
cufes satisfy their minds, and the avocations
of life prevent their attention from dwelling
long on difagrecable fubjedts. But when
altogether withdrawn from the affairs of the
world, they are left to their own reflections
on past condud; with their spirits enfebiled
by disease, and their minds impreflcd with
the tcrrours of an invisible region; the moil
resolute are apt to deljfond, and even the
virtuous are in danger of linking under the
remembrance of their errours and frailties.
The trembling mind casts every where
around an anxious exploring eye after any
power that can uphold, any mercy that will
ifield and save it. And accordingly we sec
how eagerly every device has been embraced
which superstition could invent in various
countries, for quieting the alarms of the de-
parting Ipirit.

Here appears the great importance of

those dilcoverics which Chriftianitv has made
concerning the government of the univcrfi.

Q-4 It

S F R M. It displays the cnfigns of grace and cle-
h-I~ mency. It reveals the Almighty not as a

creator only and a judge, but as a compaf-
fionate parent, who knows our frame, Jwho
rimembers wc are didl, who pities uJ s aaf-
iher pitietlb ,is children; and with whom there
is Jfrgivenms, that he may be loved as well
as feared. Thlee general views, however,
of the divine administration, would not
have been fullicient to give full relief, if
they had not been confirmed by certain de-
cifive fadts, to which the mind can appeal
a;nidft all its doubts and fears. Two such
faEs the Goliel holds forth to us, particu-
larly adapted to the situation of human na-
ture in its greatest extremity; the atone-
ment, and the intercession of Christ. There
is no sentiment more natural to men than
this, that guilt mnuft be expiated by fiffer-
ing. All government is founded on the
principle, thl:t public juflice requires com-
pcnfition for crimes; and all religions pro-
cccd upon the belief, that, in order to the
pardon of the finler, atonement must he
bn.elc to the ji;itice of hcaven. Hence the

6 cndlet

endless variety of sacrifices, vifims, and SE R M.
expiations which have filled the earth. The .v
great sacrifice which our Redeemer offered
for guilt, coincides with these natural fen-
timents of mankind in giving ease to the
heart. It (hows us tle forfeit of guilt paid
by a divine personage in our behalf; and
allows us to look up to the Governour of
the world, as mcrciful to the guilty in con-
fiftency with juflice and order. But flill
some anxiety might remain concerning the
cxtenfion of that mercy to our own cafe in
particular. An invisible sovereign is an
awful idea; almighty, unknown power is
always formidable, and would be ready to
over helin the spirit of the feeble, were not
an intercessor with that sovereign revealed.
This interccflor is one who lived and aded
inour own nature; who not only knows
but who experienced our frailty; who has
all the feelings of a brother for human in-
firmity and difirelis; who himself passed
through that valley of the Jhadow cf death
whlich is now opening on us; to whose
n'crfit:l nlc!iation with his father we have

every

SS R M. every encouragement to commlit the cha'rge
V¥1I.I

of our ldeparting Jl)irit.-Sucli ii tile provi-
lion which Chriltianity has made for com-
forting the last hours of man. IThe atone-
ment, and the intercclfion of Chritl, are the
refuge of the penitent finner, and the con-
lolation of the !ilnt. By their means the
throne of the univerle is encircled with
mercy. The cloud which hung over the
invilible world begins to be diefierfcd; and
hope brightens through the gloom.

BITT what completes the triumph of good

men over dcath is, the prolpect of eternal
flicity. This was the great objlet after
which all nations have sighed, as the only
complete remedy both of the nileries of life
and the fears of death. On this, thi learned
and the ignorant, the civilized and thle ia-
vage triles of mankind bent their longing
eyes; eagerly grafiing at every argument,
and fondly indulging every hope, that could
promie them a propitious Deity, and the
prolongation of exillence in a happier fit;c.
But beyond willhes and feeble expectations,

thl

the light of nature could hardly rah. S E R M.
Even the most cultivated, hlilofolhlic;l mind i ,
was, at the hour of dilfolution, left in pain-
fil lilfenfe. Chriftianitv has put an end
to all helitation and doubt on this important
fubjeft. It has drawn alide the v.'l through
which reason eilTycd to pcnetrate ; and has
displayed to full view the future iwcililngs
of the 1pirits of the jull, the maniions of
everlasting reft, tle city of the livbin GAd.
Not only has it informed us that a1 ft tc of
perfect felicity is preparcd for the righteous,
but it has added to this information a variety
of circumstances which render that fiate
fcnilb!e to ourimagination, and e:couraging
to our hopes. It reprclcnts it as fully fe-
cured Iy tle gracious undertaking of the
Saviour of the world. It defcrihes it as an
inheritazcc, to which he has given his fol-
lowers a right and title. He is said to have
taken poffflfion of it in their name. He
ro!ci from the grave as the jtrf-firils olfthem
t,,lt /!fie; and under the character of their
fre-r;.:,'r., entered into the heavenly re-
gions. I am the refrrrrcio. and ihc 1/f'.

lie

E R M. He that bilieieth r.n me, thbbh he were dcad,
---- yyet/hall he live. I give unto myjheep eter-

nal lie. I ancend to ny Father andyour
Father, to my God tiaMlj yor God *.

Hence, to those who have lived a vir-

tuous life, and who die in the faith of
Christ, the whole aspect of death is changed.
Death is to them no longer the tyrant who
approaches with his iron rod, but the mef-
fenger who brings the tidings of life and
liberty. The profpeas which open to them
cheer their minds. Even in the valley of
death's shade, green paflures appear to rife.
They view themselves as going forth, not
to lie silent and solitary in the darkness of
the grave, not to wander forsaken in the
wide deserts of the universe, not even to
pass into a region where they are altogether
irangers and unknown; hut to enter on a
:uid, new indeed to fight, but by faith and
hope frequented long before; where they
shall continue to be under the charge of him
who hath hitherto been their guardian, be
re-united to many of their ancient and be-

John xi. 25. xx. 1".

loved

loved friends, and admitted to join the in- SE R M.
mm.'lerlble imultiude, gathere-d ot of all _
nations and longues am' people, who sand
btlire the throne of God. They leave be-
hind the dregs of their nature; and ex-
change this conlined and gloomy apartment
,f the univcric, for the glorious manlions
of tlcir Father's house. 3Blcfcd furelv are
the ldying in this hope, and blidJ t/'c ,.ciet
in this fruition, refiing Jrom 1b,ir lab/,irs
and followetd by their works. Good men
are detained at present in the outer court of
the temple: Death admits them into the
holy place. As yet thce sojourn in the
territories of pilgrimage and exile: Death
brings them home to tle native land of
Spirits. In this world they are divided
from one another, and mingled with the
worthless and the vile: Death unites in one
alnemblv all the pure and the jutl. Il the1
fight of the' Niiiv.fIj tOIy feI,'n.t idfie, a,'d
their dHl/ ,,. lo.,c wal s

t.iii 'r

. ier dii,':-

lion. ]lint th'ry are i, pihea. T.i/, r w-,rd
a/'j is with tle L'ed, and/ t/ c.? ,f t.'im
zwith, t, lb Higi h . - 0 De:t .'_ !h ;i'e

,, i'Jom of Solomon iii.:. ..-v. ;.

i;

SE R M. is nlw /lJ 'ii.i

? 0 Grave! wbcre is //'r

VIII.
_- vt'irf \WVhere are the tcrrolirs with

which thou halt so long affrigihtcd the na-
tions ? WVhrc are thy dreary and delolatc
domains, the haunts of fpecres and fliades,
the abhorred dwellings of darkncfs and
corruption? At the touch of the divine
rod, thy vilionary horrours have fled. The
spell is broken. The dawn of the celcftial
morning has dispelled thy dismal gloom;
and intecad of the habitlilioi f fdrarons, ap-
pears the paradise of God.

BUT supposing both the regret of quit-

ting life, and the dread of entering into a
future slate to be overcome, there is fiill
one circumstance which renders death form-
idable to many, that is, the shock which
nature is apprehended to fultain at the fe-
paration of the foul from the body.
Formidable, I admit, this may justly ren-
der it to them whote languilhing spirits
have no inward fund whence they can then
draw relief. Virmnces and ftrcngth of
mind is peculiarly rcquilite for the support
of nature in its last extremity; and that

Itrength

nrength is supplied by religion. The telli- s F. R M.
monv of a good conlIcience, and the re-
melnlrance of a virtuous life, a well-
grounlded trutt in the divine acceptance, and
a tirm hope of future felicity, are principles
fifficient to give composure and fortitude
to the heart, even in the midst of agony.
In what a high degree they can suspend or
alleviate the feelings of pain, has been fully
demonstrated by the magnanimous beha-
viour of such as have suffered death in the
cause of conscience and religion. How
often h:as the world beheld them advancing
to mect that fiippofed king of terrours, not
with callllnns only, but with joy; railed
by divine profi peIs and hopes into an en-
tire neglect and contempt of bodily susser-
ing ?

It is not without reason that a peculiar

assistance from heaven is looked for by good
men, at the hour of death. As they are
taught to believe, that in all the emergen-
cies of their life divine goodnlefs has watched
over them, they have ground to conclude,
that at the last it will not forf.ke them; but

that

SE R M. that at the season when its aid is most
--i needed, it lhall be mofl liberally commu-

nicated. Accordingly, a persuasion so con-
gruous to the benignity and compafnion of
the Father of mercies has been the comfort
of pious men in every, age. MyHfIeJ and
nmy heart faileth; but God is the Jtrengtb of
mny heart. In the valley of the fIadow of
death I willfear no evil, for thou art with
me. When the rod and jl f of this shepherd
of Israel are held forth to his expiring ser-
vants, declining nature needs no other sup-
port. The secret influence of his reviving
spirit is sufficient for their consolation and
fArength, while the painful struggle with
mortality lafis; till at length, when the
moment arrives that he silver cord mujs be
loosed, and the golden bowl be broken, their
Almighty Protetor carries off the immortal
spirit unhurt by the fall of its earthly taber-
nacle, and places it in a better mansion.-
How refpecable and happy is such a con-
clufion of human life, when one in this
manner quits the ltage of time, honoured
and supported with the presence of his

Creator,

Creator, and enjoying, till the last moment s ERM.
of refledion, the pleating thought, that he ,
has not lived in vain! I have fought a good
fight; Ihave fni/cd zny course ; I have kept
thefaith. Henceforth there is laid up for me
a crown of righteotfnefs, which the Lord the
righteousjudg cfJall give me at that day .

AFTER the view which we have taken

of the advantages possessed by good men for
overcoming the fears of death, the first fen-
timent which should arise in our minds is
gratitude to Heaven for the hopes which
we enjoy by means of the Chriflian reli-
gion. How depressed and calamitous was
the human condition, as long as the terrour
of death hung, like a dark cloud, over the
inhabitants of the earth; when, after all the
toils of life, the melancholy silence of the
grave appeared finally to close the fccne of
existence; or, if a future state opened be-
hind it, that state teemed with all those
forms of horrour which conscious guilt
could fuggef to a terrified imagination!

' : Tim. iv. , $.
VOL. II. R The

SE R M. The happiest change which ever took place

VIII.
* .- in the circuirftances of the humar. race, is

that produced by the discoveries with which
we are blessed concerning the government
of the universe, the redemption of the world,
and the future destination of man. How
much dignity is thereby added to the hu-
man character and state ? What light and
cheerfulness is introduced into our abode?
What eternal praise is due to Him who,
according to bis abundant mercy, hath begot-
ten us again into a lively hope, by the refur-
relion of Jefuis Chrifl from the dead, to an
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that
fadeth not away, reservcd in heaven ?

TIE next effect which the subjec we

have confidered Ihould produce, is an ear-
nest desire to acquire those advantages which
good men enjoy at their death. The road
which leads to them is plain and obvious,
A peaceful and happy death is, by the ap-
pointment of Ieaven, conneted with a
holy and virtuous life. Let us renounce
criminal pursuits and pleasures; let us fear

8 God

Cod and keep his commandments; let us SE R M.

VIII.

holdfaith and a good confiience, if we hope a_
for comfort at our last hour. To prepare
for this last hours every wife man should
confider as his most important concern.
Death may justly be held the test of life.
bet a man have supported his characer
with efteci and applause, as long as he
aced on the busy stage of the world, if at
the end he finks into dejeaion and terrour,
all his former honour is effaced; he departs
under the imputation of either a guilty con-
science, or a pusillanimous mind, In the
other parts of human conduc, disguise and
subtlety may impose on the world; but
seldom can artifice be supported in the hour
of death. The mark most commonly falls
off, and the genuine charader appears.
When we behold the scene of life closed
with proper composure and dignity, we na-
turally infer integrity and fortitude. We
are led to believe that divine assistance sup-
ports the foul, and we presage its tranlition
into a happier manlion. Mark the perfec

R 2 man

s E R M. man and beheld the upright; for the end ls

VIII.
_
- I /th/at man is peace '.

Tut last inftruttion which our fuljed

points out, refpets the manner in which a
wife and good man ought to stand affeded
towards life and death. He ought not to
be servilely attached to the one. He has
no reason abjedly to dread the other. Life
is the gift of God, which he may justly
cherish and hold dear. Nay, he is bound
by all fair means to guard and preserve it,
that he may continue to be useful in that
post of duty where Providence has placed
him. But there are higher principles to
which the love of life ihould remain sub-
ordinate. Wherever religion, virtue, or
true honour, call him forth to danger, life
ought to be hazarded without fear. There
is a generous contempt of death which
should diflinguifh those who live and walk
by the faith of immortality. This is the
source of courage in a Chriflian. His bc-

* Psalm xxxvii. 37.

1 -' .....

haviour ought to shew the elevation of his s F. R M.
foul above the present world; ought to dif- l
cover the liberty which he poffefics of fcl-
lowing the native sentiments of his mind,
without any of those restraints and fetters
which the fear of death imposes on vicious
men.

At the fame time, this rational contempt

of death must carefully be diffinguifhed
from that inconfiderat? and thoughtlcfs in-
difference-, with which foine have affected to
treat it. This is what cannot be jufilied
on any principle of rcafon. Human life is
no trifle, which men may play away at their
pleasure. Death, in every view, is an im-
portant event. It is the most solemn crisis
of the human exifiencc. A good man has
reason to meet it with a calm and firm mind.
But no man is entitled to treat it with oftcn-
tatious levity. It calls for manly serious-
ness of thought. It requires all the recol-
ledion of which we are capable; that with
the proper disposition of dependent beings,
when the duff is about to return to its dif,
we may deliver up the spirit to Him who
gave it.

R 3 SER-

# SERMON IX. On the HAPPINESS of a FUTURE STATE. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. REVELAT. vii. 9. After this I beheld, and, lo! a great multitude, which no man could ...

[ 246 ]

SERMON IX.

On the HAPPINESS of a FUTURE STATE.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.

REVELAT. vii. 9.
After tbis I beheld, and, lo ! a great multi-

tude, which no man could number, of all
nations, and kindreds, and people, and
tongues, flood before the throne, and before
the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and
palms in their hands.
s E R M. T N this mysterious book of Scripture many

I l revolutions are foretold which were to
take place in the church of God. They
are not indeed so foretold as to afford clear
and prcoife information concerning the time

of

of their coming to pass. It would have SERM.
been, on many accounts, improper to have
lifted up too far that awful veil which covers
futurity. The intention of the Spirit of
God was not to gratify the curiosity of the
learned, by disclosing to them the fate of
monarchies and nations, but to satisfy the
serious concerning the general plan, and final
issue, of the divine government. Amidst
those distresses which besel Christians during
the firft.ages, the discoveries made in this
book were peculiarly seasonable; as they
shewed that there was an Almighty Guar-
dian, who watched with particular attention
over the interests of the church which he
had formed; who foresaw all the commo-
tions which were to happen among the
kingdoms of the earth, and would so over-
rule them as to promote in the end the
cause of truth. This is the chief scope of
those mystic visions vith which the Apostle
John was favoured~ of feals opened in
heaven; of trumpej founding; and vials
poured forth. Th kingdom of darkness
was to maintain for while a violent struggle

I. 4 against

S : R r. against thc kingdom of light. But at the

_., conclusion, a voice was to be heard, as the

voice of many waters and (f mighty thuinder-
ings, , Illlcduiah, for the L.,rd God
omnipotcnt reigneth. The ling.ol1i: of this
world are bcome the kingdoms of our Lord,
and of his C/hrii, and hejhall reigNujr cvcr *.
Such is the profpcd with which the divine
Spirit at intervals enlightens, and with which
he finally terminates, the many dark and
direful fcencs that are exhibited in this hook.
In closing the canon of Scripture, he, with
great propriety, leaves upon our mind deep
impreflions of the triumphs of righteous-
ness, and of the blessedness of the redeemed.
After this I beheld, and, lo ! a great multi-
tude, which no man could number, of all na-
tions, and kindreds, andpeople, and tongues,
flood before the throne and before the Lamb,
clothed with white robes, and palins in their
bands.

These words present a beautiful defcrip-

tion of the happiness of laints in heaven;
a fubjedt on which it is, at all times, both

* Revel, xix. 6.-xi. 15.

comfortable

comfortable and improving to meditate. S E R M.
On this day, in particular, when we are to
commemorate the dying love of our Savi-
our, we cannot be better employed than in
contemplating what his love hath purchaf-
ed; in order both to awaken our gratitude,
and to confirm our attachment to him. The
sacrament of the supper is the oath of our
fidelity. Let us dispose ourselves for cele-
brating it, by taking a view of the rewards
which await the faithful. I shall, for this
end, in several ohfervations from the words
of the text, taken in connedion with the
context, endeavour to illustrate, in tome
imperfect degree, the prospect which is
here afforded us of a state of future felicity;
and then shall make pratical improvement
of the subjet.

I. WHAT the words of the text moif

obviously suggest is, that heaven is to be
confidered as a state of blessed society. A
multitude, a numerous assembly, are here
represented as sharing together the fame
felicity and honour. Without society, it is

impossible

SE RM. impossible for man to be happy. Place

Ix.
*,-,- hhim in a region where he was tfrrounded

with every pleafire; yet there, if he found
himself a folitarv individual, he would pine
and languish. They are not merely our
wants, and our mutual dependence, but
our native inllinls also, which impel us to
associate together. The intercourse which
we here maintain with our fellows, is a
source of our chief enjoyments. But, alas!
how mulch are these allayed by a variety of
dilagreeable circumfiances that enter into all
our connexions! Sometimes we fuffcr
from the diflreffes of those whom we love;
and sometimes from their vices or frailties.
Where friendihip is cordial, it is exposed to
the wounds of painful sympathy, and to
the anguilh of violent separation. Where
it is so cool as not to occalion sympathetic
pains, it is never productive of ntch plea-
sure. The ordinary commerce of the world
conlifts in a circulation of frivolous inter-
course, in which the heart has no concern.
It is generally inlipid, and often foured
by the llightot difference in humour, or op-

polition

yofifon of interest. We fly to company in S R M.

IX.

order to be relieved from wearisome corre- ,
fpondcnce with ourselves; and the vexations
which we meet with in society, drive us
back again into solitude. Even among the
virtuous, dissensions arise; and disagree-
ment in opinion too often produces aliena-
tion of heart. We form few connexions
where somewhat does not occur to difap-
point our hopes. The beginnings are often
pleasing. We flatter ourselves with having
found those who will never give us any
disgust. But weaknesses are too soon dif-
covered. Suspicions arise; and love waxes
cold. We are jealous of one another, and
accustomed to live in disguise. A studied
civility assumes the name without the plea-
sure offriendflip; and secret animosity and
envy are often concealed under the caresses
of dissembled affetion.

Hence the pleasure of earthly fccietv,

like all our other pleasures, is extremely im-
perfect; and can give us a very faint con-
ception of the joy that must arise from the
society of perfect spirits in a happier world.

Here,

SE R VM. Here, it is with difficulty that we can fe-

_ let from the corrupted crowd a few with

whom we wifl to alrociate in ftrid union.
There, are alfembled all the wife, the holy,
and the jult who ever exifed in the uni-
vcrfc of God; without any distress to trou-
ble their mutual bliss, or any source of dil-
agreement to interrupt their perpetual
harmony. Artifice and concealment are
unknown there. There, no competitors
fIruggle; no facions contend; no rivals
supplant each other. The voice of discord
never riles, the whisper of suspicion never
circulates, among thole innocent and be-
nevolent spirits. Each, happy in himself,
participates in the happiness of all the reft;
and by reciprocal communications of love
and friendship, at once receives from, and
adds to the fum of general felicity. Re-
new the memory of the most affedionate
friends with whom you were blest in any
period of your life. Divest them of all
those infirmities which adhere to the hu-
man character. Recal the most pleasing
and tender moments which you ever en-

joyed

joyed in their society; and the remcm- S E .R,.

Ix.

brance of those sensations may assist you .--.
in conceiving that felicity which is pol-
lelfed by the faints above. The happincls
of brethren dwelling together in unitl, is,
with great justice and beauty, compared by
the Psalmist to uich things as are mod re-
freihing to the heart of man; to the fra-
grancy of the richest odours, and to the
reviving influence of soft a'therial dews.
It is like the precious ointment poured on the
head of Aaron; amd like the iew of iL rmo;n,
even the dew that defcundetb on the 7111111-
tains of Zion, where the Lord commandcth
the bhefiing, even lifefor evermore *.

Belides the felicitywhich springs from per-

sect love, there are two circumstances which
particularly enhance the blessedness of that
multitude who fland b fore the throne; these
are, access to the most exalted society, and
renewal of the most tender connexions.
The former is pointed out in the Scripture
by joining the innumerable company ,f angcrs,
and the general afen;bl' and chrn5 Jh f the

* Ps. cxxxiii. I.

Aft-

S E R M. frfj-bolrn; by siing down with Abraham,

IX. _L, nand Ifiac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of

heaven t; a promise which opens the fu-
blimelt protpt'ts to the human mind. It
allows good men to entertain the hope, that,
separated from all the dregs of the human
mass, from that mixed and polluted crowd
in midtl of which they now dwell, they
shall be permitted to mingle with prophets,
patriarchs and apoltles, with legifators and
heroes, with all those great and illustrious
spirits, who have (hone in former ages as
the servants of God, or the benefacors of
men; whole deeds we are accustomed to
celebrate; whose Reps we now follow at a
diltance; and whole names we pronounce
with veneration.

United to this high aflTmbly, the bless-

ad at the fame time renew those ancient
connexions with virtuous friends which had
been dissolved by death. The profpec of
this awakens in the heart the most pleating
and tender Inltimeiit which perhaps can fill
it, in this mortal ilatc. l:or of all the for-

t leb. \ii. ::, v::
. M4 !'i . II.

rows

rows which we are here doomed to endure, s I R M.

ix.

none is lo bitter as that occasioned by the
fatal stroke which separates us, in appear-
ance, for ever, from those to whom either
nature or friendship had intimately joined
our hearts. Memory, from time to time,
renews the anguish; opens the wound
which seemed once to have been closed;
and by recalling joys that are past and gone,
touches every spring of painful ienfibility.
In these agonizing moments, how relieving
the thought, that the separation is only
temporary, not eternal; that there is a time
to come of re-union with those with whom
our happiefl days were spent; whose joys
and sorrows once were ours; and from
whom, after we (hall have landed on the
peaceful shore where they dwell, no revo-
lutions of nature shall ever be able to part
us more !-Such is the society of the biclfel
above. Of such are the multitude composed
who land before the throne. Let us now
observe,

II, THAT this is not only a blelTed but
a numerous society. It is called a mul-

titude,

S E R M. titude, a great multitude, a great multitude

Ix.
- -' which no man could number. These exprel-

lions convey the molt enlarged views of the
kingdom of glory. Dismay not yourselves
with the apprehension of heaven being a
confined and almost inacceflible region, into
which it is barely possible for a small hand-
ful to gain admission, after making their
escape from the general wreck of the human
race. In my Father's bouse, said our Sa-
viour, there are many manrions. That city
of the living God towards which you profess
to bend your course, is prepared for the
reception of citizens innumerable. It
already abounds with inhabitants; and
more and more shall be added to it, until
the end of time. Whatever difficulties
there are in the way which leads to it, they
have been often surmounted. The path,
though narrow, is neither impassable, nor
untrodden. Though the gate stands not
so wide as that which opens into hell, yet
through the narrow gate multitudes have
entered, and been crowned.

It is much to be lamented that among all
denominations of Christians, the unchari-

2 table

table spirit has prevailed of unwarrantably E R M,
circumscribing the terms of divine grace L
within a narrow circle of their own draw-
ing. The one half of the Christian world
has often doomed the other, without mercy
to eternal perdition. Without the pale of
that church to which each l`ed belongs, they
seem to hold it impossible for salvation to he
attained. But is this the genuine spirit of
the Gospel ? Can a Chriltian believe the
effets of the sufferings of Christ, to be no
greater than thefc ? For this did the Son
of God defeend from the highefl heavens,
and pour out his foul unto the death, that
only a few who adopt the fnmrc modes of
expreflion, and join in the fame forms of
worship with us, might be brought to the
kingdom of heaven ? Is this all the deli-
'erance he hns wrought upc.i the earth ? He
was with child; he was in pain; and fliall
he not sei of the travail of his f/l, and be
fatisfed? Surely, the Scripture has given
us full ground to conclude that the trophies
of our Redeemer's grace shall correspond to
the greatness of his power. bThecapain of
VL. II. S o|r

SE R M. our falvalion Jhall bring many fns with
Ix.

himself to glory. The pleasure of the Lord
Jlall proper in his band. He Jlail fee Lis
feed: He Jhll jjl fl many. Men a/hll be
blefed in bim, and all nations Jfall call him
bl6fed. For our farther encouragement,
let us obfcrve,

III. TIHAT the heavenly society is repre-

sented in the text, as gathered out of all the
varietics of tle human race. 'his is inti-
mated by th: remarkab;le exprefcions of a
.mulitude which in man c ,,u1, iulwlir, ,f all
nations and kindreds and peop/le and, tIogues;
as if designcd on purpole to corredt our
narrow notions of the extent, ad power of
divine grace. They whom distant seas and
regions now divide, whole languages and
manners arc at prcicnt fitrange to one an-
other, ihall then mingle in thle fame assem-
bly. No lituation is so remote, and no
fIation so unfavourable as to preclude access
to the heavenly felicity. A road is opened
by the divine spirit to those bliisful habita-
tions, from all corners of the earth, and

from

fronr all conditions of human life; from S E R M.

Ix.

the peopled city, and from the solitary de-
fert; from the cottages of the poor, and
from the palaces of kings; from the dwell-
ings of ignorance and simplicity, and from
the regions of science and improvement.
rThevJfall come, fays our blessed Lord him-
self, froiO the eat and from the weft, from
tile north and from the south, andfit down in
the kingdom of God *.

Such difioveries serve both to enlarge our

conceptions of the extent of divine good-
ness, and to remove those fears which are
ready to arise from particular situations in
life. Were you permitted to draw aside the
veil, and to view that diversified assembly
of the blessed who surround the throne, you
would behold among them numbers who
have overcome the fame difficulties which
encounter you, and which you dread as
insuperable. You would behold there, the
uninflructed, with whom an upright inten-
tion fiupplied the place of knowledge; the

Luke xiii. 29.

S 2 feeble,

SERM. feeble, whom divine grace had strength-

Ix. __v-i cned; and the miffed, whom it had brought

back into the right path. You would be-
hold the young who hadl ilrmounted the
allurements of youthfil pleafilrc, and the
old who had horn the difireffes of age with
undecayed conflancy ; many whom want
could not tempt to difhloncly ; many whom
riches did not feducc into pride or impiety;
many who in the Inotl difficult and cnfnar-
ing circumstances, in the midst of camps
and armies and corrupted courts, had pre-
served unfullied integrity. In a word,
froN all kindreds and people, that is, from
all ranks of life, and all tribes of men, even
from among publicans and finners, you
would behold those whom divine assistance
had conductcd to future glory.-And is
not the fame afliftance, in its full extent,
offered also to us? Encompassed, while
we run the Christian race with this coud of
witnees who have finished their course
with success; animated, while we fight the
good fight, with the flhouts of those who
have overcome and are crowned, shall de-

I fpair

fpair enervate or dejet our minds ? From S E R M.
the happy multitude above, there issues a
voice which ought to found perpetually in
the car of faith, ie ye fe ithfal unto the
death, and yejhall receive the frn f lfe;
BcJirong in the Lord and in the pwer of
his might; Be followers of us who throuih
faith and patience are niow inLriin te
promfies. Confider,

IV. TIIE dcfcription given in the ext

of the happiness and glory of the heav ly
society. They were beheld by the apostle
flanding betfre the throne, and iftre the
lamb, cloathed with white robes and palms
in their hands. All that these palms and
white robes import, it is not given us now to
understand. We know that among all na-
tions they have been used as ensigns of joy
and vidory; and are undoubtedly employed
here to reprelent that distinguished felicity
and honour, to which human nature shall he
then advanced. But we must he endowed
with the faculties of the blcicd, in order to
comprehend their employments and plea-

S 3 iire:;

SE R M. fures; and therefore on this part of the

J lubjed I thall not attempt to enlarge. The

lilence of humble and rcl)peaful hope, bet-
ter becomes us than the indulgence of those
excursions of fancy, which degrade the sub-
jed they endeavour to exalt.

One circumstance only cannot fail to at-

tract particular attention; that the blessed
are here described as Jlanding before the
throne and before the lamb; that is, enjoy-
ing the immediate presence of the great
Creator, and of the merciful Redeemer of
the world. The unhappy diflance at which
we are now removed fron God, is the
source of all our woes. Tho'e territories
which we inhabit, are not His abode. They
are regions of exile. They are the dwell-
ings of a fallen race; and are condemned
to be invcfled with clouds and darkness.
Here, God flandeth afar off. In vain we
often purlfe his prefcnce through his works,
his ways, and his religious inflitutions. lie
is laid to he a God that hidcth biinmdf He
Iwcildcth, as to us, in the ficret place of
tLwndcir. 11/ , ltlh back th fe f of bi

6 throne,

btronf, and fpreaieth a thick cloud upcn it. S E R M.

ix.

The inanifeltation of his prcfence shall be
the final for the renovation of all things.
When that Sun of righteoCifncf breaks forth
from the c!oud which now conceals him,
sorrow and fin, and every evil thing shall
fly away before the brightness of his face.
For neither guilt nor misery can remain
where God dwells. As the rising of the
fun transforms at once the face of nature,
and converts the whole extent of space
over which his beams are ljrcad, into a
region of light, lo ihall the divine presence,
as soon as it is revealed, diffuse universal
bliss over all who behold it. It imports
fullness of joy, and pleasure for evermore.
The inspired writer of this book thus de-
fcribcs its effets: There Jhall be no more
death, neither firrow, nor crying ncr pain;
for the former things are panied away. He
that fit upon the tbronefaid, Behold I make
all things new. They fJall hunger no mere,
neither thirfi any more. But the Lamb
which is in lthe midfl of the throne hallfeed
thjem, and J:all lead them unto living fotn-

S 4 ltair

SERM. tIaj; f water. God Jall 1:i/c ,:w,'y

,!
IX.

tears 'rom their eyes. But, defccnding frmin
this too sublime theme, let us

V. TURN our attention to a circunm-

stance in the state of future happinels, more
commensurate to our present conceptions,
which is suggested by the commentary upon
the words of the text given in the sequel of
the chapter. And one of the elders answered,
faying unto me, Whbat are these which are ar-
rayed in white robes; and whence came they ?
And Ifaid unto him, Sir, thou knowftl. And
be aid unto me, Tbefe are they which canm
out of great tribulation * This explanatory
circumstance may relate particularly to the
cafe of those primitive sufferers, who en-
dured severe persecution in the cause of the
goffil. But, in general, it presents this na-
tural and beautiful view of the future feli-
city of good men, that it is their reft from
the troubles and toils of life. For, to all,
even to the happief, human life is tribula-
tion and conflic. No man is thoroughly

Rev. viii. 13, 14.

at

at cafe in his condition. Pursuits succeed- SE R M.
ing to pursuits keep us in contfant agitation; IX .
while frequent returns of difappointnlent
break our plans, and opprcfs our spirits.
Fatigued by such a variety of toils, mankind
have ever looked forward to reft as their
favourite object. Throughout all their
ranks, from the highcfl to the lowes, they
are in perpetual chace of it; and it perpe-
tually flies before them. It is an objct
which here they are doomed always to leek,
and never to enjoy.

The nature and laws of our present slate

admit not the gratification of this favourite
with. For, hesides the ncccffity of trouble
in order to fulfil the purposes fr; difcipfine
and improvement, our very happiness, such
as it is in this world, requires a circulation
of labours. Our enjoyment consist in pur-
suit, not in attainment. Attainment is; with
us, for mofi part, the grave of pleasure.
Had we no object to excite fresh a'ivitv,
and to impel us to new toils, human life
would quickly flagnate in melancholy indo-
lence. At the fame time, the current of all

our

SERM. our wishes tends to repose. Imaginary

IX.

I forms float incessantly before our view, of

the happiness which is to be enjoyed in reft:
And from this conflit between our wifhcs
on the one hand, and our actual situation
on the other, arise much of the disquiet,
and much of the infelicity, of human life.
It is only in heaven that the tranquil re-
pose, which on earth is no more than a
pleasing phantom, shall be fully realized.
There, remaineth at last a reft for the people
of God; reft from the diflurbance of passion,
the vanity of pursuit, and the vexation of
disappointment; refit from all the fins and
the sorrows of this miserable world; reft,
which (hall not be merely an indolent cef-
fation from labour, but a full and satisfying
enjoyment. Good men shall ref from their
labours, and their works Jhall follow them.
They have come out of great tribulation.
They have fulfilled, with honour, their ap-
pointed course of trial. They have fat
down on the feat of the conqueror; and of
pas labours nothing remains but the pleasing

review,

review, and the happy fruits. There is flill S E R M.
to be confidered, ,x.

VI. ONE very material circumstance,

descriptive both of the charactcr, and of the
happiness, of those who enjoy the heavenly
bliss. Not only have they come out of great
tribulation, but, as the Spirit of God adds
in explaining the text, they have wajhed
their ro,bs, and made lthem white in the
blood of the laamb ". Two things are here
suggested; the fIanity of the blessed, and
the means by which it is attained.

First, their fandity or purity is emblema-

tically d" cribed, by their being clothed in
robes whi h arc washed and made white.
In order to qualify human nature for the
enjoyment of such happiness as I have en-
deavoured to describe, it muff undergo a
change so great as to receive in Scripture the
appellatinn of a new birth; a change to
x:hich all the inflitutions of religion, and
all the operations of grace, contribute in this
life, but which is not completed till the next.

Rev. viii. i4.

In

S E R MN. In this fantlity, or regeneration, conlifls not

_ only the necelliry preparation for future fe-

licity, but, which is not i) cormmlonly at-
tended to, contfils an essential part of that
felicity itl:lf. For, whence arises the mi-
fery of this present world ? It is not owing
to our cloudy atmosphere, our changing sea-
sons, and inclement ikies. It is not owing
to the debility of our bodies, or to the un-
equal diflribution of the goods of fortune.
Amildft all disadvantages of tlii. kind, a pure,
a fledfaft, and enlightened mind, poffcffcd
of exalted virtue, could enjoy iticlf in peace,
and finile at the impotent aflaults of fortune
and the elements. It is within ourlclvc,
that misery has fixed its feat. Our difr-
dcred hearts, our guilty palfions, our vio-
lent prejudices and misplaced ddtires, are
the infLtuments of the torment which we
endure. These iharpen the darts which
adversity would otherwile point in vain
against us. These are the viilrs r' wratl,
which pour forth plagues on the inhabitant,
(f the earth; and make the dwellings of
nations become the abodes of woe. Thence

discontent,

dilfcontent, and remorli, gnaw: the healrts of S ERM
individuals. Thence focicty is torn by open
violence, or undermined by Iccret trcachery;
:nd man is transformcd into a savage to
man.

Blut suppose fin to be b.iiil;cd from the

world ; tilppofl pcrfec piurity and charity
to dct'ilnd from heaven, and to animate
ctvcrv Ihulman breall; and you would bc-
'iold tihe Iprefet habitation rs men changed
into the paradise of Cod. The undisturbed
,nijonment of a }'o!v mind, and of a blissful
Inion with one another, would scarcely al-
low us to feel those external evils, of which
we now so loudly complain. All nature
would assume a different appearance around
us. That golden age which was so long
the subjet of the philofophtr's dream, and
of the poet's song, would i 1 fact take place.
According to the beautiful language of an-
cient prophecy, /prings would then rife ;i
the derfrt, and rivers be opened in the Ibhrfiy
land. Tbe wilde.rnef and the fjlitiay plac
would be glad. The wolf would dwell w.ib
the lamb, and the leopard lie down with the

'lki,

SERM. kid. Yudlgmcnt would dwell in the wilder-
-v. nefi, and righteoifiefs remain in the fruitidl

field. The dtf'rt wuld r.jic, and blf in
as the rofi.- If filch, even in this world,
would be the effects of innocence and virtui
completely restored, how much greater milli
they be in that new earth and tbi?/' ILaw
heavens, where rectitude of nature ihall be
combined with every circumltance of ex-
ternal felicity? It is the prefcnt inperfcid
state of human virtue that hinders us from
conceiving fully the influence of rightcouf-
ness upon happiness. The nrobs in which
the best men are now clothed, to uie the
language of the text, are fU!ilied with 1f)
many stains, as to convey no adequate idlc.
of the original beauty which belongs to the
garb of righteoufnels. But whcn tlhek
stains shall be washed away, wlcnl the::
robes shall be made perfecliy wlhie and
pure, a lustre will flow from the;c:, f which
we can, as yet, form no conception.

But how are the robes of the biellcd tlih

washed? Whence is derived that ipotlc!-
purity in which they arc arraycd? Thle

Spirit

Spirit of God hath answered us, from the SE R M.

lX.

Hwd of the Lamb; leading our thoughts to ....I
that high dispensation of mercy, to which
the faints above owe their eftabliflmcnt,
filft in grace, and then in glory. From
that blood which was J7cd for the remiffon
rffins, flow both the atonement of human
guilt, and the regeneration of human na-
ture. Human nature had fallen too low to
be capable of retrieving itself. It could not
regain its primitive innocence, and till less
was capable of raising itself so high in the
Icale of exifence as to mingle with angels.
We had neither sufficient knowledge to dif-
cover, nor virtue to merit, nor ability to
iualify ourselves for enjoying, celestial glory.
IHeaven mufl have been either covered from
our view by perpetual darkness, or only
beheld from afar as an inacceflible region,
if Christ had not interposed to openfor us a
tnw and living ,w ,y within the veil. The
obligations which his generous undertaking
has conferred upon the human race will tend
highly to increase the felicity of the bleflcd.
The sense of being diftinguiflhed by tb il-

luflirious

SER M. luftrious a benefactor, and the correspond-
lx.

ing returns of gratitude and love to him,
form some of the most pleating of those
emotions which (hall continue to delight
them through all eternity.

FROM those views of a slate of future

happiness which the text has filggefted, va-
rious inftrudions relating to life and prac-
tice naturally arise. We are taught to retify
our notions of felicity; to look for it, not
in what is external, but in what relates to
the mind and heart; in good dispositions
and a purified foul; in unity and friendship
with one another, and in the divine pre-
fence and favour. If such things form the
principal articles of future bliss, they cannot
but be essential to our happiness in the more
early periods of existence; and he who
seeks his chief enjoyments from an oppofitc
quarter, is erring widely from the path
which conducts to felicity.

We are farther taught whence to derive

conflancy and perseverance, amidst the pre-
sent discouragements of a virtuous life. In

this

this ;-orld, we often behold good men de- E R M.
pressed, and the wicked prospering around L
us. Our best deeds meet with unjust re-
turns from an ungrateful world. Sincerity
is over-reached by craft, and innocence falls
a viclim to power. But let us not on such
occasions fay within ourselves, that in vain
we have cleai cfd our hearts, and waJbed our
bands in innocency. Let us refl on the as-
lurance, that there disorders extend not far
in the kingdom of God. They assed only
the frffit age of cxiftence. They relate to
discipline and trial, which will soon be
finilhed. In that permanent slate which is
about to open, a new and better order of
things shall arise. When dejeCted with the
evils of life, let us look upward to that happy
multitude who have come out of great tribu-
.ltion, and now Jlad before t t throne.
Until the day arrive which ihall join us to
that bleifed aflembly, let us shew ourselves
worthy of the hope that is before us, by
supporting with a constant mind the trials of
our fidelity. Be patiet; jlallih your hearts.
TThe coming of the Lord draubt! nigh.
VoL.. I. T From

S F R M. From the profpeas which the text has

Ix.
v-J afforded, we may likewise learn what the

spirit is which flould regulate our life.
Sandity of condut, dignity of characer,
elevation of affetions, become thole who
expet to mingle with angels, andfpirits js
jtil men nadeperfect. I mean not that fucl
profpeds should carry away our whole at-
tention from the present world, where un-
doubtedly lies the chief scene of human ac-
tion, and human duty. But while we ad
as inhabitants of the earth, we ought at the
fame time so to remember our connection
with a better world, as not to debate our-
selves with what is mean, not to defile our-
selves with what is impure, not to entangle
ourselves among what is ensnaring, in the
present state. Let neither its advantages
elate, nor its disappointments deject us;
hut with an e(qual spirit, with a mind full
of immortality, let us pass through all the
changes of this mortal life.

Finally, let the discoveries of future hap-

pinels inIire us with suitable gratitude to
God and Chrit ; to the eternal Father, who

originally

originally decreed such rewards for the SE R M.
righteous; and to the Son, who ads in the ,_
high charader of the dispenser of the divine
mercies, and the great retlorer of the fallen
race of men. Particularly, when approach-
ing to God in solemn ads of devotion, such
as we are this day to perform, let gratitude
be alive and ardent in our heart. The com-
memoration of our Saviour's death is in a
high degree suited to awaken every emotion
of tenderness and love. It brings before us,
under one view, all the obligations which
we lie under to this great benefator of man-
kind. When jult ready to susser for our
fake, he instituted this holy sacrament, and
laid, Do tiis in remembrance of me.-Whom,
O blefled Jesus ! shall we ever remember, if
we are capable of forgetting Thee ? Thee,
to whom we owe the forgiveness of fin, and
the restoration of divine favour; our vidory
over death, and our hope of life eternal!
Thou haft enlarged our views beyond these
territories of disorder and darkness. Thou
haft dilcovered to us the city of the living
God. Thou fettclt open the gates of that

T 2 1(new

S E R M. new cerfalem; and leadef us into the path

IX.
J , of life. Thou from age to age gathereft out

of every nation, and kindred, and people, that
multtitude whirchJlan. d before the throne. Thou
hringet them olt of great tribulation. Thine
are the white robes with which they are in-
vested; thine, the palms which they bear;
and by Thee they are placed under the light
of the divine countenance for ever.

S ER-

# SERMON X. ON CANDOUR. 1 CORINTH. xiii. 5. Charity — thinketh no evil.

[ 277 ]
SERMON X.

ON CANDOUR.

I CORINTI. xiii. 5.

Chaprity-thinketh no evil.

ELIGION and Government are the S RM.
two great foundations of order and X.

comfort among mankind. Government re-
strains the outrages and crimes which would
be subversive of society, secures the pro-
perty, and defends the lives of its fubjcets.
But the defect of government is, that hu-
man laws can extend no farther than to the
aftions of men. Though they protect us
from external violence, they leave us open
on different fides to be wounded. By the
vices which prevail In society, our tran-

T quillity

S . R M. quillity may be disturbed, and our lives in
_ . various ways embittered, while government

can give us no redress. Religion supplies
the insufficiency of law, by striking at the
root of those disorders which occasion so
much misery in the world. Its professed
scope is to regulate, not acions alone, but
the temper and inclinations. By this means
it arcends to the sources of conduct; and
very ineffecual would the wisest system of
legislation prove for the happiness of manl-
kind, if it did not derive aid from religion,
in softening the dispositions of men, and
checking many of thocl evil passions towhich
the influence of law cannot possibly reach.

We are led to this refletion by the de-

scription given in the context of charity,
that great principle in the Christian system.
The Apoffle places it in a variety of lights,
and under each of them, explains its opera-
tion by its internal effecs; not by the acions
to which it gives rife, but by the dispositions
which it produces in the heart. He justly
supposes, that if the temper be duly regu-
lated, propriety of action will follow, and

6 good

good order take place in external beha iour. s E R M.

x.

Of those charadters of charity I have clhofn
one for the fibjec of this discourse, which
leads to the consideration of a virtue highly
important to us, both as Christians, and as
members of society. I (hall endeavour, first,
to explain the temper here pointed out, by
shewing what this description of charity im-
ports, that it tbinketh no evil; and then to
recommend fich a dilpofition, and to dif-
play the bad effeds of an opposite turn of
mind.

I. LET us confider what this description

of charity imports. You will easily perceive
that the expreflion in the text is not to be
understood in a sense altogether unlimited;
as if there were no occasion en which we
are to think unfavourably of others. To
view all the ations of men with the fame
degree of complacency, would be contrary
both to common understanding, and to
many express precepts of religion. In a
word, where ib much depravity abounds,
were we to think and speak equally well of

T 4 all,

E R M. all, we inuft either be insensible of the dif-
_cv - tindion between right and wrong, or be

indifferent to that dillintion when we per-
ceived it. Religion renders it our duty to
azbbr that wbich is evil; and, on many oc-
calions, to express our indignation openly
against it. But the Apostle, with great pro-
priety, describes the temper which he is re-
commending in filch ftroilg and general
terms, as might guard us against that ex-
treme to which we are naturally motl prone,
of rafll and unjult suspicion. 'I'he virtue
which he incans to inculcate is that which
is known by the name of Candour; a vir-
tue, which, as soon as it is mentioned,
every one will acknowledge to be essential
to the charater of a worthy man; a virtue
which we seldom fail of ascribing to any
person whom we seek to recommend to the
esteem of others; but which, I am afraid,
when we examine our own conduct in a
religious view, is feldorm the subjea of in-
qtiry.

It is necessary to observe, that true can-
dour is altogether different from that guard-

ed,

ed, inoffensive language, and that studied SERM.
openness of behaviour, which we so fre- --
quently meet with among men of the world.
Smiling, very often, is the aspel, and
smooth are the words of those who in-
wardly are the most ready to think evil of
others. That candour which is a Chriftiau
virtue confilts, not in fairness of fpecch,
hut in fairness of heart. It may want the
blandishment of external courtesy, but lup-
plies its place with humane and generous
liberality of sentiment. It3 malnners are
unaffecdd, and its profitfions cordial.
Exempt, on one hand, from the dark jea-
lousy of a suspicious mind; it is no leds
removed, on the other, from that easy cre-
dulity which is imposed on by every ipc-
cious pretence. It is perfectly consistent
with cxtenfive knowledge of the world,
and with due attention to our own fafcty.
In that various intercourse which we are
obliged to carry on with persons of every
different characer, suspicion, to a certain
degree, is a necefltry guard. It is only
when it exceeds the bounds of prudent cau-

3 tioh,

S E R M. tion, that it degenerates into vice. There is

x.
Ec,-, a proper mean between undiftinguifiinlg

credulity, and universal jealousy, which a
found uliderflanding discerns, and which
the man of candour studies to preserve.

He makes allowance for the mixture of

evil with good, which is to be found in every
human charater. He expeas none to be
faultless; and he is unwilling to believe that
there is any without some commendable
quality. In the midst of many defctcs, he
can discover a virtue. In the midst of per-
lonal rcfentment, he can be just to the me-
rit of an enemy. He ne\er lends an openl
ear to those defamatory reports and dark
suggestions, which, among the tribes of
the censorious, circulate with so much ra-
pidity, and meet with fuclh ready acceptance.
IIe is not hasty to judge; and he requires
full evidence before he will condemn. As
long as an action can be ascribed to different
motives, he holds it as no mark of sagacity
to impute it always to the worst. Where
there is just ground for doubt, he keeps his
judgment undecided; and during the pe-

riod

riod of fufpence, leans to the most chari- SERM.
table conftrudion which an ation can bear. X
When he must condemn, he condemns with
regret; and without those aggravations
which the severity of others adds to the
crime. He lillens calmly to the apology
of the offender, and readily admits every
extenuating circumtnance which cquity can
suggest. How much soever he may blame
the principles of any flee or party, he ne-
ver confounds under one general censure
all who belong to that party or fed. He
charges them not with such consequences
of their tenets, as they refuse and disavow.
From one wrong opinion, he docs not in-
ser the fuiverfion of all found principles;
nor from one bad adion, conclude that all
regard to conscience is overthrown. When
he beholds lhe mole in his brother's eye, he
renembers tie bea7 in his own. He com-
mifcratcs human frailty; and judges of
others according to the principles by which
he would think it reasonable that they
ihould judge of him. In a word, he views
men and acions in the clear sunshine of

charity

SE R M. charity and good-nature; and not in that

- dark and fullen ihade which jealousy and

party spirit throw over all characters.
Such being in general the spirit of that
charity which thinktdbh ;o evil, I proceed,

II. To recommend, by various argu-

ments, this important branch of Christian
virtue.

Let us begin with observing what a ne-

ceffary requilite it is to the proper discharge
of all the social duties. I need not spend
time in showing that these hold a very
high rank in the Chriflian system. The
encomium which the Apofile in this chap-
ter bestows upon charity, is alone fuflicient
to prove it. He places this grace at the
head of all the gifts, and endowments, which
can be pofelffed by man; and assures us
that thougb we had all faith Jo that we
could remove mountains, yet if we be defli-
flute of charity, it will prost us nothing.
Accordingly, love, gentlenefi, meeknefi and
long fJiffring, are enumerated as diftin-
guiihingfruits of the sprit of Chris *. But

Galat. v 2z, :3.

it

it is impolfible for such virtues as there to s E R M
find place in a breast, where the propensity ,
to think evil of others is predominant.
Charitable and candid thoughts of men are
the necessary introduction to all good-will
and kindness. They form, if we may
speak so, the only climate in which love
can grow up, and flourili. A suspicious
temper checks in the bud every kind assec-
tion. It hardens the heart, and estranges
man from man. What friendship or gra-
titude can you expect from him, who views
all your conduct with distrustful eyes, and
ascribes every benefit you confer to artifice
and stratagem ? The utmost which you
can hope from one of this character, is
juflice in his dealings; nor even that can
you be assured of; as the suspicions to
which he is a prey will afford him frequent
pretexts for departing from truth, and for
defending himself with the fame arms which
he conceives to be employed against him.
Unhappy will they be who are joined with
him by any close connexion; exposed to
every malignant suspicion which arises in

his

S E R M. his own mind, and to every unjust fugge-
.__-.-4 stion which the malice of others may infi-

nuate against them. That store of poison
which is colleted within him frequently
throws out its venom on all who are within
its reach. As a companion, he will be fe-
vere and Catirical; as a friend, captious and
dangerous; in his domestic sphere, harsh,
jealous and irafciblc; in his civil capacity,
seditious and turbulent, prone to impute
the conduct of his fuperiours to improper
motives, and upon loose information to
condemn their conduct.

The contrary of all this may be expeted

from a candid temper. Whatever is ami-
able in manners, or useful in society, na-
turally and easily ingrafts itself upon it.
Gentleness, humanity and compafflon flo"
from it, as their native spring. Open and
cheerful in itself, it diffuses cheerfulnels; and
good-humour over all who are under it;
influence. It is the chief ground of mu-
tual confidence and union among men.
It prevents those animofities from arising
which are the offspring of groundless pre-

judice ;

jidlice; or, by its benign interposition, al- SE R M.

x.

.lys them when arisen. In the magistrate, * -
it tempers justice with lenity. Among
lulhjces it promotes good order and sub-
mission. It conneas humanity with piety.
For he who is not given to think evil of
his fellow-creatures, will not be ready to
censure the dispensations of his Creator.
Whereas the fame turn of mind which ren-
ders one jealous and unjust towards men,
will incline him to be querulous and impi-
ous towards God.

IN the second place, as a suspicious, un-

charitable spirit is inconsistent with all
fccial virtue and happiness, so, in itself,
it is unreasonable and unjust. In order to
form found opinions concerning characters
and actions, two things are especially re-
quifite, information and impartiality. But
lich as are most forward to decide unfa-
vourably, are commonly destitute of both.
Inltead of possessing, or even requiring, fuh
'nformation, the grounds on which they
proceed are frequently the most flight and

frivolous.

SE R M. frivolous. A tale, perhaps, which the idle

X.
_-~- > have invented, the inquilitive have liflened

to, and the credulous have propagated; or
a real incident which rumour, in carrying
it along, has exaggerated and disguised,
supplies them with materials of confident
all'irtion, and decisive judgment. From an
aCtion they presently look into the heart,
and infer the motive. This supposed mo-
tive, they conclude to be the ruling prin-
ciple; and pronounce at once concerning
the whole character.

Nothing can be more contrary both to

equity and to found reason, than such pre-
cipitate judgments. Any man who attends
to what passes within himself, may easily
discern what a complicated syRem the hu-
man character is, and what a variety of
circumstances must be taken into the ac-
count, in order to eltimate it truly. No
single inflance of conduct whatever, is sus-
ficient to determine it. As from one wor-
thy aaion, it were credulity, not charity,
to conclude a person to be free from all
vice; so from one which is censurable, it

L>,

is pcri 'cfc unjt;fl t.l ;ificr itht ile anthir S ;ER M.I

X.

of it i,- without con.;i:nc., and w;tio"t me- -
rit. Dil vcui kniow!; ;ll the attendin , cir-
cumllanccs, it n:ilit ;i; pcar i: n ercu!ab!
light; nay, prl'h , tl under a comnder!dable
form. The lmotive. (' the ador may have
been entirely, dif.c:L't fro:l thole which
you atfrilec to liimn; a..! wv'ere you ltu;?o,5
him imp!eled hyl bad diil n, he m.my I:e
been prompted by conlciilcce and miiiakcn
principle. Admitting the adtion to have
beeni in every view criminal, he may have
been hurried into it througih i;.advcr!tncy
and fLrprilc. He may have finccrcly re-
pented ; and the virtuous principle may
have now regained its full vigour. Perhaps
this was the corner of frailty; the quarter
on which he lay open to the incursions of
temptation; while the other avenues of his
heart were firmly guarded by confcicnce.

No error is more palpable than to look

for uniformity from human nature; though
it is commonly on this supposition that our
general conclusions concerning characer are
formed. Mankind are conliflent neither in

VOL. II. U good

S E R N, go(od, nor in evil. In the prcfcnt fRate of

- fra.ilty, all is mixed and blended. The

tIrongcfl contrarieties of piety and hypo-
crify, of gcnerofity and avarice, of truth
and duplicity, often meet in one characer.
The purest human virtue is confitent with
some vice; and in the midst of much vice
and disorder, amiable, nay refpeaable, qua-
lities may be found. There are few cafes
in which we have ground to conclude that
all goodness is loft. At the bottom of the
charater there may lie some sparks of piety
and virtue, suppressed, but not extinguifl-
ed; which kept alive by the breath of hea-
yen, aind gathering strength in fccrct from
reflection, may, on the first favourable
opening which is afforded them, be ready
to break forth with splendour and force.-
Placed, then, in a situation of so much un-
certainty and darkness, where our know-
ledge of the hearts and characters of men is
so limited, and our judgments concerning
them are so apt to err, what a continual
call do we receive either to suspend our
judgment, or to give it on the favourable

fide?

fide ? cfpecially when we confider that, as E R M.
through imperfecA information we are un- X'
qualified for deciding soundly, so through
want of impartiality we are often tempted
to decide wrong. How much this enforces
the argument for candour, will appear by
confidering,

IN the third place, what the sources are

of those fevcre and uncharitable opinions
which we are so ready to form. Were the
mind altogether free from prepossession and
bias, it might avail itielf to more advan-
tage of the scanty knowledge which it pof-
fesses. But this is so far from being the
cafe, that on every fide we are encumbered
with prejudices, and warped by pallions,
which exert their influence in nothing more
than in leading us to think evil of others.
At all times we arejuftly said tofie through
a glaf, darkly; but passion and prejudice,
looking through a glass which distorts the
form of the objets, make us also fee falsely.

It is one of the misfortunes of our present
situation, that some of the good dispositions

U 2 of

I R M. of human nat nrc are apt to )btrav us into

X.
-_i tfrailtics an(l viicc. Thui. it often Ihappenc

that the laud:ab le attachment wlich we con:-
tract fir the couitrv, or the church, t,
whichl nwc bIloi, or for some political (tc-
noiniiiatioll un'ider which we clals ourfelvc,,
both cioniihcs our affcodions within too nar-
row a Iplicre, and iives rile to violni:
prejudices a!:nillt lltich as comie under an
oppolite delcrilption. Not contented with
being in the right ouri-ilves, we must lind
all others in the wrong. \e claim an ex-
clufive pofliclion of goodnets and wifldom;
and from approving warmly of thole who
join us, we proceed to condemn, with much
acrimony, not the principles only, but tlih
characers of tlhole fiom whom we difl;r.
Hence perolns of wcll-difpofed minds arc
too often, through the strength of partidl
good affcclion, involved in the crime ot
uncharitable judgmcnt. Tecy rafily extcnd
to every individual the Icvere opiuion
which they hase unwa.rrantal)ly conceived
of the whole hody.-This man is of a part!
whole pr.n',ilp's wn- rckon ilavilh; and

2 tlhcrefui:c

thlcrcre;-c lisW'io,'l icnt;inc t 'rcc rniuptc. S ER ?M.

X.

That man iclonlLs to a rcii:iouis !cl, which '
we are accuillmcd to (cr.: hii( ttd; and
thercf tc is iS nc.s all ci a.ll gencrouls
or lil)tr.il tlioult. Anotll is connelecd
with a sIec, which ie hl.ie !:c t.aught to
account rclaxled; and tlic'-c' lie can have
no fiincditv.-Are tliefe tilh ju'i('gmnts of
candour a (nd ( ha11ilv?

- i- tue pilety or

irtue lo very liniitcd in its ntilcr, as to )e
conlinied to ;ichi ;:'!c;e :; i'.c crcrv tlhn'rg
with' our eye-, .Ind ll elow cxatvl t tralin
of our ideas? Was thicre evr amv I reat

colnmunlirv i corril t s n0ot to include
within it indiv-itia!s i rea;l lworth

Bclides prcpoilVflions of this nature, which
lometmes millcad the holneft rnind, there
are other, and much more culpable cauits
of uncharitable judgment. Pride is hurt
and wounldd hv cvi'erv excecllencc in which
it can claim no ha;rce and from cern.ls
to dicovcr a blimilh, rclis upon the flight-
clt appearance of one, as a iattisfvi! proot.
When ri;va.'iv an( competition c oncul willi
pIride, our desire to cliv' d(lfed increa.f:,

[: ; and

S Rs M. and, by confequcnce, the grounds of censure

_ _
- multiply. Where no opposition ofinterefli

takes place, envy has too much influence
in warping the judgment of many. Even
when none of thele caules operate, the ii-
ward conlcioufiels of depravity is sufficient
to fill the mind with evil thoughts of others.
Whence lhould a man so readily draw his
opinions of men as from that character with
which he is belt acquainted, because it is
his own ? A person of low and base mind
naturally imputes to others the sentiments
which he finds congenial to himself; and is
incredulous of every excellency which to
him is totally unknown. He enjoys, be-
fides, consolation in the thought that others
are no better than himself; that his weak-
neffes and crimes are those of all men; and
that such as appear most distinguished for
virtue possess no real superiority, except
greater dexterity in concealing their vices.
Soothing themselves with this doctrine in
secret, too many softer and strengthen the
bad opinion which they entertain of all
mankind. Rarely, if ever, have you ground

to

to think well of that man's heart who is s FR M.

X.

on every occasion given to think the worst I-__
of others. Let us obfcrvc,

IN the fourth place, that fuitahle to the

sources whence a jealous and fulpicious tem-
per proceeds, are the efltcds which it pro-
duces in the world, the crimes and miflchiefs
with which it fills focietv. It possesses this
unhappy diftintion beyond the other fail-
ings of the human heart, that while it im-
pels men to violent deeds, itjutlilies to their
own apprehension the excesses which they
commit. Amidst the uproar of other bad
paflions, conscience ads as a restraining
power. As soon as the tumult fubfidcs, re-
morse exerts its influence, and renders the
finner sensible of the evil which he has done.
But the uncharitable man is unfortunately
set loose from any such check or controul.
Through the infatuation of prejudice, his
judgment is perverted; conscience is misled;
the light within him is turned into darknef:.
Viewing the objects of his displeasure as evil
men, he thinks himself entitled to give that

U 4 dilplcafilre

Si P d!. lleani'irc flUl ;,t; ;
;tnds ;in cllim itiin

_ h lie mnl} ihnriim ;i, lions, ma.yv lo hnLlims

illagin'. t.lt hc i, d(,ing go(di l.rxi ce c t)

'; 'eil f,'iits ,f an (cx !-tl'inking; !irt

.re cal!lmrv.v a1:d dr1(raCtion, 1)v which In-
ci: 't i ito rc' l embroilcd, an1d mel n arc lit
a! variance v.'th nc ;iii(ther. l'ut (lid it pr -
ceed no firt.hr tlI:n ccv CLi'ritin i|'cchl, the
mnilchief v.uild ibc Ilet'.

* li ch gr.altr and

morc tcrielis evil. frcil:cnntl cn!ic. \lIat
dircfil tefnit, ftO inliicc, hove often

i: ow-

ed fromi ralli and ill-foinulicd jcaloiinl in
privatc life ? No looner lh,;s onc allowed
that damion to take pofl-ffion of hlis mind,
than it perverts his underitanding, and taints
all his faculties. IlHaunting lhin b l nlri
and by day, bringing perpetutally before
!im the odious and difluieting forms which
it has railld lip, it blackens every appear-
dnce to hlis iicwv; gives to trifles whlich!
are in tlclinflves light as air, the weight (,f
full confirmation ; till what was at lirlt a
daiious furinilc, or a llight dilj)eafure, rilcs
dt length into full belief and implacalle

f,,,;.

i;,i''. IIenic, fuamilies torn with tlhe most SERM.
viol lot conlillions; the lhusband ainit d '-,
againil the wite, the ttlier :[a.in[ lBi,. tlul,
lic friend a:tinit tile friendm; tile )!,.n of
treacherv and aiElfflination contrived, :and
th!c (.i: :r plunged into the hoiom ol tfhe
i;'1. ,. !.-I[n public lite, how oLein i ave
kLi:(!(:-: ; liei lhi:lken with a!! the violence
o' v,i, and rebelelion, from the Iniil l'i..f-
pici'nI:s which fubljces had conceived of
their rilers; or the rall jealoui f which
prilices had entertained of their people ?-
But it is in religious diffcnfionschieflv, that
thle iilhllievous power of uncharitable pre-
judice has diijliycd its full atrocity. Re-
ligion is alwavs found to heighten every
paliionl on which it adns, and to render
cvc.y contcft into which it enters, uncom-
monly ardent; because the olbects which it
prCilnts are of such a nature as tlrongly to
li,:c (nd cngage the human mind. When
7eal for their own principles has prompted
menc to view thole of a different perluafion
i tlhe odious lights which bigotry suggests,
ticry fenimiicnt of humanity has too often

been

SER M. been extinguilhed. The mild influence of

x. '---. tthat religion which breathes nothing but

gentleness, has proved too feeble to reitrain
the violent and bloold hand of persecution;
and the uncharitable ipirit, raging among
contending partics, has tilled the world with
such calamities and crimes as have brought
diigrace on the Chriflian name.

Let us attend particularly to one awful

initance of the guilt which men may con-
trat, and of the rii which they may bring
upon thcmlelvcs, through the want of fair-
ness and candour. The nation of the Jews
were always cn(tcd ior a narrow and un-
charitable fiirit. \Vhcn John the Baptist,
and our blclid Lord, appeared among them,
because the former was auflcre in his tem-
per and retired in his life, they pronounced
of him that he had an evil spirit: And be-
cause the latter was open and sociable in his
manners, they held him to be deflitute of
that fandity which became a prophet. Their
prejudice againfl our Lord took its first rife
from a mos frivolous and contemptible caule.
Is not this the fn of the carpenter ? Can ant

3 ,go1l

good thing csme out of Naizareth ? When his S R M.

X.

miracles repelled this reproach, and filfii- ,-
ciently proved the eminence of his charadcr,
still they softered their prejudices by this
most futile reasoning, Hlav' any Jftih rulers
believed on him ? Obstinate in their attach-
ment to a temporal Mcffiah, and continuing
to view all our Saviour's conduct with an
evil eye, when lie converted with bad men
in order to reclaim them, they treated him
as a companion of publicans andfiiners. Be-
cauie he disallowed their groundlelf tradi-
tions, they held him to be a breaker of the
Sabbath, and a contemner of religion. Bc-
cause he prophesied the deflrudion of their
temple, they accused him of being an enemy
to his own nation. Till at l;fl, through
their perpetual mifconftrucrion of his ac-
tions, their paflions became so inflamed as
to make them cry out with one voice, Away
with this man to the death, and give us Bia-
rabbas the robber.- Viewing in this dread-
ful event the consequences of want of can-
dour, let every man tremble to think evil
rashly of his brother. No one can tell how

far

SIR M. fIr uI'',:i .'!) prcijll'ic,. mnl.i canllv hlin

_ .l tl.t, i}f 'c ;'!;,;.

, h;; 1

t o hlre ll,. )ur and

gvathl;-;Iruiq~t xvuhh

i il hi t)rclA. The

(];ud v .'1 .ic! .t

, ,,,, /; .. ir./ i'r, ,,r l'i rt'r i/bl.

a ,i.I ,'.7!,;'.,;', ;n.v slr';l i\vcll .l )'iL.:!ad, till
it cover tin' wv 1,'l. l(,riyoP, ;1ld (dil.llargc
w itli Ih(ql d.ltr' liJ\C \ioicncc tlih c.ithcircd
sorn.

V1, the i;:" !,'i.', .> c a ftl]i ciou; fpiirit

i, th11e toircc (los I 'la: lv cinc; and cal:l-
mitiei in the w:d!, f') it is thec Iliring of
ccrtain mi!crv to the pelrion liho indulges
it. Ilis fiiciind will he fcw ; and finall will
le 1:;C cm(lfort in tlic,; Vl10 lihe polclTecs.
1Bli'cvin rr oth -r, to hie h;s enemies, ih will
of cour:c ma;ke tlcem I;chi. Let his caution
he ever so .rcat, the alfpcrity of his thouglits
vri'! of:;n bl'cak out in his bhchaviour; and
in return for !i!; csli;ig and hating, he will
incur utliicic(on and hatred. 1Beidcs the ex-
tern:! cvils whkch lhie draws upon hilnfelf,
arilil;r from alienated friendlhip, broken
conflldcncc, and open cnmity; the ltfpiciotic
tem-ner itfilf is one of the worfi evils which

abiy

C, I/Sc SER M.

X.

/rn;, man': cm ' .T. s/ ,;!i' h,, /h .t ' Sho F..,..R.M.

by living in P'Cr';u'a cal''*"':'. livs iln per-
pctuali d:('eii? .1',:;:i: :i ; ).,)li:cniif to be
slrrounlLdcd ;'li bi", e.l:'l'iC,

c nn dign-

ing men, he is ;i !Ftra;:,r' r I!i.'nce and
trufi. IHe knows not to whomin to open
hlimtlf. lICe d(c'ii:ei i.: cotintenince in
forced fiini':s, v,'!:. his leA Ut i'!,;'.) within
from ap;lr:icii'ors of i'!it treacherv.
Hence tireitflines m (d l i-n no -', (dituft
at the w orldt, ;1a d ,11 ilie p;.ifii'i lcnf:t'i'ns
of an irritatcd and Lmbiit.crcl n l(d.

So numcrolls and grc:,t are the evils arifinl

from a Iufpicitus dilpofition, that of the two
extremes it is more eligible to expose our-
selves to occafiotial difadvantaige from think-
ing too wvcll of (.thers, than to susser con-
tinual misery by thinking always ill of them.
It is better to be ometiines imposed upon,
than never to trust. Safety ii puli'chfed at
too dear a rate, when, in order to fbcue-c it,
we are obliged to be always clad in armour,
and to live in perpetual hoffility with our
fellows. This is, for the fake of living, to

deprive

SE K M. deprive ourselves of the comfort of life.

The man of candour enjoys his situation,
,vhatever it is, with cheerfulness and peace.
l'udence direcs his intercourse with tle
world; but no black fifpicions haunt his
hours of rc!i. Accustomed to view the cha-
ractcrs of his neighbours in thle oft fa-
volrable light, he is like one who dwells
amidst those beautiful fccncs of nature, on
which the eye refis with plcafurc. Whereas
the suspicious man, having his imagination
filled with all the Ihocking forms of human
falsehood, deceit, and treachery, resembles
the traveller in the wilderness, who discerns
no objcets around him but what are either
dreary or terrible; caverns that open, ser-
pents that hils, and beasts of prey that howl.
Hence in him are verified those descriptions
which the Spirit of God has given us of
the misery of the wicked. They hall have
no peace. 7hey Jhall be like the troubled fa
when it cannot rJfl. The Lord Jhall give
them a trembling heart, andfailing of ecrs,
andforrow of mind: And they/hallfear day
and night, and have none afrance of heart.
I add,

IN

IN the sixth and last place, that there is S E M.

X.

nothing which exposes men in a more *_
marked and direct manner to the difplea-
sure of the Almighty, than a malignant and
censorious spirit. I insist not now on the
general denunciations of divine wrath against
malice and hatred. Let us only conlidcr
under what particular description the Spirit
of God brings this crime of uncharitable
judgment. It is declared to be an impious
invasion of the prerogative of God, to whom
alone it belongs to search all hearts, and to
determine concerning all charaEters. This
privilege He often appropriates expressly to
Iimfclf, on purpose to rcftrain the rafhnef.
of censure among men; requiring us to
leave the judging of others to Him, and to
attend, each of us, to our own business and
duty. Who art li, thatjudg¢jl anothcr hmn',
ervant ? 7o his own maJler, he fandictb or
falletl. Yitdge nothing before the lime; uIlil
the Lord come, who flJal rnake maljifif the
coinfels of the heart *.

It deserves our most frious attention, that,
in several passages of Scripture, the great

Rom, xiv. 4. 1 Corinth. i.
i .

Judge

sl R M. Judge of the world is rcpreientdl, ati !

X.
, _- c day of lilial retributioln, as procccin u; (:iru

this princile, cfl rendering to men :accordl;ii:,
to tlie im.nlcr in which they have aictl
towtrdl; tlchir brethren. lii thle -:,'ciI,
ti, i wilt Jhow ti.nfl'f merifl; and wi:.'
tbe /ficawrd, thou wilt Jhow th filfcftrwar,.
WVith whatZt jilgment ye jtdl, ye fJ7all '
judged; and with bwhat imcnaiir ye nmc, ;
fiall be imcfiircd to jyo again 'l. It i:; i.-
possible to form an argument of more for c
than tlis, to rcftrain all severity ofjudglmclt
amongr such as look forward to the tribin.il
of God. 'The argument extends not in-
deed so far, as to represent our acceptance
with the Deity as entirely suspended ulp''(
the candour which we fiow in forming olr
sentiments of others. We know that othl
graces besides this are requisite in order to
fit us for heaven; and that without pict.
towards God, and faith, in the Lord Jeltis
Christ, all our charity to men will be found
defecive and vain. But this we know
also, that in the heart which is destitute of

t Psalm xviii. z2, z6. Matth. vii. z.

fairncdi

fairness and candour, the Spirit of God S E R M.

X.

certainly dwells not; and that whatever _,
appearances of religion the uncharitable man
may afiulne, on him the Sovereign of the
universe looks with no favour. Thou
who art a man full of frailties, who ftandeft
in need, not merely of impartiality in thy
divine Judge, but of indulgence and mercy;
Thou who imploreft daily this mercy from
him, and prayeft that He would remenmber
:tou art duff, and not be 1tril to mark ini-
quity againJf thee; dareft thou, with those
very prayers in thy mouth, proceed to judge
without candour of thy brethren, and upon
the slightest grounds to reprobate and con-
demn them ? 0 thou hypocrite! (for by
what other name can we call thee?) vain
are all thy prctenlions to piety. Ineffecual
is every plea which thou canIt form for
mercy from heaven. The precedent which
thou haft eflablilhed against thyself is de-
cilive. Thou haft dicated the sentence of
thine own condemnation,

ON the whole, it clearly appears that no
part of the government of temper deserves

VOL. II. X attention

S if R M. attention more, than to keep our mninds pir-

X. --- from uncharitable prejudices, and open t,,

c.ldour and humanhity in judging of otherl,.
The wr!t collnf'c!citwces, Ibothl to ourlclvic
;'d to foiiety, follow froml the oppolitc
Iirit. Let us beware of cncouirginig a hallit
of lilpicion, by forming too levere and harlli
opinions concerning huIman nature in gene-
ral. A\ grcat proportion of infirmity and
corruption, doluhtlels, adheres to it; yet
tempered allOi it is with various mixturec ot
virtue and good affc.ion. Darkened as the
divine image now is among mankind, it is
not wholly effaced. Much piety and good-
nets may lic hidden in hearts that are un-
known to us. Vice is glaring and loud.
The crimes of the wicked make a noise in
the world, and alarm society. True worth
is retired and modelt, and requires parti-
cular situations to bring it forth to public
notice. The prophet llijah, in a time ot
prevailing corruption, imagined that all true
rciigion had forlfken the land. 1, even 1
only, said lie to the Lord, am left to rfivc
ihcc. iut the Almighty, who dlitcerncd

what

what was concealed from his imperfed x icw, s E R M.
replied, Yrt have I Ir

l me fiven Ithwo1, d 1

men in l/raci wbo have nt bwed the lta e to
Baal ?'.

The aged, and the unfortunate, who have

toiled through an uinficcdeflful life with long
experience of the falfchood and fraud of evil
men, are apt to be the nmoi severe in the
opinions which they entertain of o'licrs.
For such, their circumflanccs may he al-
lowod to form some degree of apology. But
if, in youth and prolfpcrity, the flme hard
lufpicious spirit prevail; if they who are
beginning the career of life set out with all
the scruples of difruft ; if, before they have
had realbn to complain of the world, they
betray the diffidence of a jealous, and the
malignity of a censorious mind, fad is the
presage which may thence be drawn of their
future dishonour. From such, you have
nothing to look for that shall be either en-
gaging in private life, or respectable in pub-
lic character. To youth it particularly be-
longs to be generous in sentiment, candid

* Kings xix. 14. IS.

X 2 in

S E R M. in opinion, undeligning in behaviour, open

X.
*-;-~ to the most favourable conftrudion of ac-

tions and condut. Throughout all the
flages of life, candour and fairness is one of
the moss honourable diftindions of the hu-
man charaacr. It is conneCed with mag-
nanimity; it is juflified by wisdom; it is
suitable to the relation in which we stand to
one another. But if reason and humanity
be insufficient to restrain us from rash and
uncharitable judgments, let that awful de-
nunciation frequently resound in our ears,
He Jball have judgment without mercy who
bathb owed no mercy.

SE R-

# SERMON XI. On the CHARACTER of JOSEPH. GENESIS xlv. 5. 8. Now therefore be not grieved nor angry with yourselves that ye sold me hither; for God did send me before you to preserve life. — So now it ...

[ 309 ]

SERMON XI.
On the CHARACTER of JOSEPH.

GENESIS xlv. 5. 8.

Jow therfore be not grieved nor angry with

yourfilves that yeiold me bither ; for God
didfend me before you to preserve lfe.
So now it was not you that ft me hither,
but God.

N this generous manner, Joseph frames s ER M.
an apology for the unnatural behaviour XI.

of his brethren. He extenuates the atro-
city of their crime, by representing the happy
effects which it had produced. He looks
beyond all second causes; and recognizes,
in the wonderful events of his life, the hand
of the Almighty.-- No human characer

X 3 exhibitcd

S I. R l. cxlil,iLcd in the recordls of Scripture is ni'.cc

c rem.irka.ile, or inflru'iivCe, tha tat of tlli
patriarch. lie i:. one whlom we behold
tricd in all tile ivii tudcs of fortune ; front
tile tonditiol of a favc, rising to be ruler (,t
the land of IEgpt ; and in every Ilaioni
acquiring, yv his \ irtue and wisdom, favour
with God and man. When overfecr (i
'niplliar's holfe, his fidelity was proved !:y
lirolng temptations, which he honouralhiy
reified. When thrown into prison by the
artifice of a false woman, his integrity and
prudence (oon rendered him conlpicutouo,
even in that dark mansion. When called
into the preflcnce of Pharaoh, the wife and
extensile plan wvhich he formed for savin;g
the kingdom fiom the mileries of impend-
ing famine, justly railed him to a high fta-
tion, wherein his abilities were eminently
dil)liyed in thle public service. But in his
whole hitory there is no circumstance In
striking and interefling, as his behaviour to
his brethren who had fold him into slavery.
The moment in which he made himlelf
known to them, that moment at which swe

are

are now to contemplate him, was the mot s E R M.
critical one of his lifc, and the moist decilive
of his character. It is iilch as rarely occurs
in the courle of human events; and is cal-
culated to draw the highelt attention of all
who are endowed with any degree of fen-
libility of heart. Let us conli(lr the lenti-
mnent which Jofcphl utters in the text under
two views, each of which is very infructivc
to all Chriflians. I. As a dilcovery of his
cordial forgivcncis of his brethren ; and, 11.
as an instance of his dutiful attention to the
Providence of God.

I. Tir. most cordial forgiveness is here

diiplaycd. I shall not recapitulate all the
preceding history refpecing Joseph and his
brethren; as it is well known by every one
who has the least acquaintance with the fa-
ered writings. From the whole tenour of
the narration it appears, that though Jo-
feph, upon the arrival of his brethren in
Egypt, made himself strange to them, yet
from the beginning he intended to difkover
himself; and studied lb to coaduCt the dif-

X 4 covery

SE R M. covery as might render the surprise of joy

XI.
-_-_' complete. For this end, by affeded feve-

rity, he took neafures for bringing down
into Egypt all his father's children. They
were now arrived there; and Benjamin
among the reft, who was his younger bro-
ther by the fame mother, and was particu-
larly beloved by Joseph. Him he threat-
ened to detain; and seemed willing to al-
low the reft to depart. This incident re-
newed their distress. They all knew their
father's extreme anxiety about the safety of
Benjamin, and with what difficulty he had
yielded to his undertaking this journey.
Should he be prevented from returning,
they dreaded that grief would overpower
the old man's fpjrits, and prove fatal to his
life. Judah, therefore, who had particu-
larly urged the necessity of Benjamin's ac-
companying his brothers, and had solemnly
pledged himself to their father for his safe
return, craved, upon this occasion, an au-
dience of the governour; and gave him a
full account of the circumstances of Jacob's
family.

Nothing

Nothing can be more interelting and pa- s ERM.

thetic than this discourse of Judah, as it is
recorded in the preceding chapter. Little
knowing to whom he spoke, he paints, in
all the colours of simple and natural elo-
quence, the difireffed lituation of the aged
patriarch, hastening to the close of life;
long afflited for the loss of a favourite son,
whom he supposed to have been torn in
pieces by a beast of prey; labouring now
under anxious concern about his youngest
son, the child of his old age, who alone
was left alive of his mother, and whom
nothing but the calamities of severe famine
could have moved a tender father to fend
from home, and expose to the dangers of a
foreign land. If we bring bim not back
with ui, we Jball bring down the grey hairs
of thyfervant ourfather, withfbrrow, to the
grave. pray thee therefore let thy frrvant
abide injead of Ibe young man, a bondman to
our lord. For bow Jball I go up to my f:-
ther, and Benjamin not with me ? les Ifee
the evil that Jall come on tm father.

Upon

FX. FR . Upon this relation, Jof'cph could no

longer rcftrain himnil ls The tender ideas
of his father and his father's house, of his
ancient home, his country and his kindred,
of the (lillrels of his family, and his own ex-
altation, all ruihed too firongly upon his
mind to bear any farther concealment. He
tried, cufr ever)' man to /ro out front me;
and he iept alrnd. The tears which he
shcd were not the tears of grief. They
were the burst of affection. They were the
effufinn., of a heart overflowing with all the
tender fenfihilities of nature. Formerly he
had been moved in the fame manner, when
he firit saw his brethren before him. H;i
bowels y'earnl,d nit/n themn; be fought for a
place where to wetp. He went into ,lis
chamber ; and then wIa/ed h.is /rce, and re-
turned to tleim. At that period his genc-
rous plan; were not completed. But ni)w,
when there was no fartllcr occasion for con-
firaining himself, he give free vent to the
llrong emotions of hi: heart. The firl!
ninliflcr to the king of Egypt was not

:ilhaincd

ash med to show, that le felt as man, and s E R .
a hrother. X.

wept aloud; aud Ihe gp.

liais, aud th/e bhofe of Pharnac heard him.

The first words which his swelling heart

allowed him to pronounce, are the moR
liitable to luch an affecling situation which
were cvcr uttered,.-- m oph; doth my
f/ther /t live ?l-What could he, what
ought he, in that impafiioned moment, to
havCe ,al Inore ? This is the voice of na-
ture heridtf, speaking her own language;
and it penetrates the heart: No pomp of
expression; no parade of kindness; hut
strong affcdion haflening to utter what it
firongly felt. ilis bnrthren cou, not an-
fwu'er hi"; Jfr they were Iroubled at his pre-
fence. Their silence is as expressive of those
emotions of repentance, and Ihame, which,
on this amazing difcovern, filled their
breasts, and flopped their utterance, ns the
few words which Joseph speaks are expref-
fie of the generous agitations which firug-
gled for vent witiiill him. No painter could
seize a more firiking moment for displaying
the charaderiftical features of the human

heart,

s IR M. heart, than what is here presented. Never
-_ i was there a Situation of more tender and

virtuous joy, on the one hand; nor, on
the other, of more overwhelming confulion
and conscious guilt. In the iinple narra-
tion of the sacred hiflorian, it is set before
us with greater energy and higher effed,
than if it had been wrought up with all the
colouring of the molt admired modern elo-
quence.

When Joseph had a little recovered him-

self from the lirft transports of emotion, he
proceeds to explain his situation to his
brethren, and to show them the beneficent
purpofcs for which he conceived himself to
be railed by Providence into power. The
apology which he makes in the text for their
former cruelty is uncommon and remark-
able. Now therefore be not grieved nor an-
gry with yourselves that ye fold me hither;
f/r Cod didfend me before you to preserve you
a poJterity in the earth, and tofave your lives
by a great deliverance. So now it was not
you that ent me hither but God; and be
l'ath made me a father to Pharaoh, and Lord

fj

Wf all bi hhoufe, and a ruler throughout all the S E R M.

Xl.

landofEgypt. This apology was, in truth, .a
no fatisfacory excuse for their crime. For
though the over-ruling providence of Hea-
ven had so direced the course of events, as
to render their bad intentions fubfenvient to
a happy issue; yet the badness of the inten-
tion originated entirely from themselves.
The envy and jealousy which they entcr-
tained against their brother, led them to
thecommifion of an atrocious deed. The
deed was voluntary; the crime was all their
own; and the interposition of Providence
in making unforeseen consequences follow
from that crime, did not, could not, excul-
pate them from guilt. It were an impious
conclusion, that because God extracts good
from our evil, we are not answerable for
the evil which we perpetrate. God cannot
be tempted with evil, neither temptethb e an;
man *. But the sentiment in the text is to
he confidered, as a colour which the gene-
rous humanity of Joseph prompted him to
throw on the conduct of his brethren. He

* James i. 13.

saw

SS R lM. fw tile confillon with which they we;':

XI.
--.' ovenvrwhlmed in his presence. He diverts

their attention from the remembrance of a
crime which was now wringing their heart3
with aigntifh, by representing to them the
happy effets which that crime had pro-
duced. He lets them free from all uncali-
ncfs on his account. He calls upon them
to rejoice in his prolpcrity; and iiletad of
dwelling on a painful recollecion of their
own conduct, to join with him in ac-
knowledging and adoring the hand of the
Almighty.

How different is this amiable spirit which

Joseph discovers, from that harlh and often-
tatious superiority which too often accom-
panies the pretended forgivencfs of injuries,
among those who call themselves Chrilnians!
They are ready to fay that, for their part,
they pardon the wrongs which have been
done them; they with that the persons who
have committed them may be able to for-
give themselves; they leave them to God
and to their own conscience. By the fevree
fuggeltions which they throw cut, they

dlilco-er

di;over the inward bitterness of their s)i- S E P Ml.

XI.

rit; and artfully gratify refentmcnt, at the -
time when they profels to exercile forgivc-
ness. 'Whereas the great and good man
whose characer we now confider, effaces
all memory of the crimes which he par-
dons. He fecks to alleviate the rcmorfe
of his brethren by an extenuation of their
guilt; and while he is preparing to make
their circumstances comfortable, fludics at
the lime time to render their minds easy
and tranquil.

This was not merely a transient emotion

with Joseph, owing to the firt burfI of as-
fetion on discovering himself to his bre-
thren. We have a clear proof, from a re-
markable tranlation which paifed many
years after this period, of his difpolition
continuing the aime to the end of life. It
is recorded in the last chapter of this book,
that when Jacob died, his ions began to be
seized with fear concerning the treatment
which they might receive from their bro-
ther. The guilty are always suspicious.
Conscious of their own bafenelis, they are

j incapable

S E R M. incapable of conceiving the magnanimity of

- others. They saw the bond which held

the family together, now broken by their
father's death. They dreaded that the re-
fentment of Jofepl against them had hi-
therto been only suppressed, or concealed.
Theyfaid among thenfilvcs, peradventure he
will now bate us, and requite all the evil which
we did unto him. Under this apprehension,
they first sent a humble meflage to depre-
cate his difpleafurc by the memory of their
common father; and then appearing in his
presence, they fell down before his face,
professing themiilves to be his servants, and
praying him to forgive the trcfpafs which
they had committed againlt him. But no
such hidden resentment as they dreaded had
ever lurked in the foul of Joseph. On the
contrary, when he beheld his brethren in
this affeding situation, bereaved of their
ancient protetor, and reduced, as they
imagined, to the necessity of holding up
their hands to him for mercy, he was over-
powered by a tide of tender emotions. Jo-
feph wept, while his brethrenliake unto bim,

i These

These affectionate tears alone were sufficient S E R M.

XI.

to have ensured their fbrgivenefs. But ha-
flening also by words to dispel their alarms,
he presently added, Fear not; for though ye
thought evil againJ? me, God meant it unto
good. Now therefore fear ye not; I will
nourijb you and your little ones. And be
comforted them; anrdfpake kindly unto thenm .

Such was the last incident that is record-

ed in the life of this eminent personage,
than whom you will find few more diftin-
guifled by an assemblage of illuflrious vir-
tues; in the lowet adversity, patient and
faithful; in the highest prosperity, benefi-
cent and generous; dutiful and affectionate,
as a son; kind and forgiving, as a brother;
accomplilhed, as a statesman; wife and pro-
vident, as a ruler of the land. In such a
character you behold human nature possess-
ing its highest honour. The sentiments
which it inspires, tend to ennoble our minds;
and to prevent their imbibing the spirit of
those hard, interested, and felf-feeking men
with whom the world abounds.

Genes . I. .
VOL. II. Y THz

SE R M. TiE itriking example of forgiveness,

,.' which the text displays, ought frequently

to occur to our thoughts, amidst the various
occasions of provocation and offence which
arise in our intercourse with the world. If
one so worthy and amiable, in the days too
of his youth and innocence, suffered such
cruel treatment from his brothers, ought
we to be surprised if, even from our nearest
relations, we meet with injustice or ingra-
titude ? Wrongs and injuries are, more or
lces, the portion of all. Like Death, they
are an evil unavoidable. No station is so
high, no power so great, no character so
unblemished, as to exempt us from them.
In the world, ungrateful men, false friends,
and violent enemies abound. Every wife
man ought to prepare himself for what he
is to encounter, in passing through this
thorny region. He is not to expect that
he can gather grapes from tbilles; nor to
lose the government of his mind, because,
in the midst of evil men, he is not allowed
to remain, like a sacred and inviolable per-
son, untouched and uninjured.

As

As this view of our situation ought to SS R M.

blunt the edge of passion and impatience, '-v
so the alleviating circumstances which rea-
son will suggest, ought to mollify resent-
ment. Think of the various conltruftions
which the a&ions of men will bear. Con-
fider how different the motives of him who
hath given us offence, may have been from
those which in the heat ofpafflon we afcribc
to him; how apt all men are to be seduced
by Iniftaken views of interest; and how
little ground we have to complain if, upon
a supposed interfering of interests, we susser
by others preferring their own to ours.
Remember that no opinions which you
form under the power of resentment can
be depended upon as just; and that every
one loads the intentions of his enemy with
imaginary degrees of malice.

But admitting the injury you have re-

ceived to he ever so atrocious in its nature,
and aggravated in its circumstances; sup-
posing it to be even parallel to that which
Joseph suffered; look up, like him, to that
divine government under which we are all

Y 2 placed.

F. M. placed. If forgiveness be a duty which
L-_j we know God to have required under the

most awful fandions, dare we draw upon
ourselves the merited vengeance of that iu-
periour, to whole clemency we are obliged
daily to fly ? When, with hard and unre-
lenting dilpofitions towards our brethren,
we fend up to Heaven prayers for mercy to
ourselves, those prayers return like impre-
cations upon our heads; and our very de-
votions feal our condemnation.

The most plain and natural sentiments of

equity concur with divine authority to
enforce the duty which I now recommend.
Let him who has never in his life done
wrong, be allowed the privilege of re-
maining inexorable. But let such as are
conscious of frailties and crimes, confider
forgiveness as a debt which they owe to
others. Common failings are the strongest
lelnon of mutual forbearance. Were this
virtue unknown among men, order and
comfort, peace and repose would he firan-
gers to human life. Injuries retaliated ac-
cording to the exorbitant measure which

pafilon

palfion prescribes, would juflify refentmcnt s E R M.

XI.

in return. The injured person would be- '-.-
come the injurer; and thus wrongs, reta-
liations, and freh injuries, would circulate
in endless succession, till the world was
rendered a field of blood. Of all the pas-
sions which invade the human breafi, re-
venge is the molf direful. When allowed
to reign with full dominion, it is more than
sufficient to poilfn the few pleasures which
rerrfain to man in his present state. How
much soever a person may ftlffer from in-
justice, he is always in hazard of suffering
more from the profccution of revenge.
The violence of an enemy cannot inflict
what is equal to the torment he creates to
himself, by means of the fierce and desperate
paflions which he allows to rage in his
foul.

Thole evil spirits who inhabit the regions

of misery, arc rcprcfented as delighting in
revenge and cruelty. But all that is great
and good in the universe, is on the fide of
clemency and mercy. The almighty Ruler
of the world, though for ages offended hy

Y . the

S E R . the unrighteousness, and insulted by the

XI.
-- impiety of men, is long sifting and flow

to anger. His Son, when he appeared in
our nature, exhibited both in his life and
his deati., the most illuifrious example of
forgivencf which the world ever beheld.
If you look into the hifftory of mankind,
you will find that in every age, those who
have been refpeded as worthy, or admired
as great, have been difiinguiihed for this
virtue. Revenge dwells in little minds.
A noble and magnanimous spirit is always
fuperiour to it. It fiuffers not from the inju-
ries of men those severe {hocks which others
feel. Colleced within itself, it fiands un-
moved by their impotent assaults; and with
generous pity, rather than with anger, looks
down on their unworthy conduct. It has
been truly said, that the greatest man on
earth can no sooner commit an injury, than
a good man can make himself greater, by
forgiving it. Joseph, at the moment when
we now contemplate him, had entirely un-
der his power all those unnatural brethren
who had been guilty towards him of the

molt

mofl cruel outrage which men could per- SE R M.

Xi.

petrate. He could have retained them for
ever in that Egyptian bondage to which
they had once consigned him; and have
gratified revenge by every accumulation of
disgrace which despotic power enabled him
to inflit. Had he aced this part, he
might for a while have been soothed by the
pleasures of his high Rtation. But remorse,
in the end, would have sung his loul.
Crtfety would have rendered him unhappy
within himself, as well as odious to others:
And his name would have perished among
the crowd of those contemptible fiatefmen,
whose ations stain the annals of history.
Whereas now, his charader stands among
the foremost in the ranks of spotless fame.
His memory is blessed to all generations.
His example continues to edify the world;
and he himself shines in the celestial re-
gions as the brigbtnef of the firmament, and
as tbheJars for ever and ever. Let us now,

II. CONSIDER the sentiment contained
in the text, not only as a discovery of cor-

Y 4 i

SE RM. dial forgiveness, but as an expression of

XI.
* _- devout attention to the condu& of Provi-

dence. So now it was not you that sent me
hither, bra God. Remark how beautifully
piety and humanity are, in this instance,
connected together. As we are told of
Cornelius, the good Centurion, that his
prayers and his alms, his devotion and his
good works, came up together in memorial
betfre God, so here we perceive fraternal
affection and religious reverence, mingling
in one emotion within the patriarch's heart.
In a person of low and vulgar mind, the
fcnfations on such an occasion would have
been extremely different. Looking back
on the past events of his life, he would
have ascribed all the adverlity which he had
suffered, to the pcrverfe treatment of his
brothers; and all the prosperity which he
afterwards attained, to his own goodconduce
and wisdom; and by confcquence would
have remained embittered against the inftru-
ments of the one, and filled with pride and
felf-fufficiency on account of the other.
But the elevated and noble mind of Jofeplh

rejeced

rejected such unworthy sentiments. Con- SE RM.

XI.

templating the hand of God in all that had ..

-

befallen him, he effaced the remembrance
of those evil deeds which had produced his
adversity; and for his prosperity he affe&-
ed no praise to himself, but ascribed it en-
tirely to the will of Heaven. Let us take
notice that this is not the reflection of a
private, retired man; wholf situation might
be supposed to favour such devout medita-
tions. It is the refletion of one, who was
leading a busy and a seducing life, in the
midst of a court; the favourite of the
greatest monarch who was then known in
the world. Yet him you behold, amidst
the submission and adulation which was
paid to him, preserving the moderation and
limplicity of a virtuous mind; and amidst
the idolatry and falle philosophy of the
Egyptians, maintaining the principlesof true
religion, and giving glory to the God of
lfrael.

From this union of piety with humanity,

which is io conspicuous in the sentiments of
Jol'ph, there arises one very important in-

sc.i RftruCtion;

S E R M. ftrudion; That a devout regard to the hand
1- , · of God in the various events of life tends

to promote good dispositions and affections
towards men. It will be found by those
who attend to the workings of human na-
ture, that a great proportion of those ma-
lignant palfions which break out in the in-
tcrcourfe of men, arises from confining their
attention wholly to second causes, and over-
looking the firt cause of all. Hence, they
are insolent in prosperity, because they dif-
eem nothing higher than their own abili-
ties; and in adverlity they are peevilh and
unforgiving, because they have no objed
on which to fix their view, but the condut
of men who have aded as their enemies.
They behold no plan of wifdor or goodness
carried on throughout nature, which can
allay the discomposure of their mind. As
soon as their temper is ruffled, the world
appears to them to be a continued scene of
difalters and injuries, of confused events
and of unreasonable men. Whereas to the
pious man, the contemplation of the uni-
wrfe exhibits a very different fpedacle. In

the

the midst of seeming confusion he traces a s R M.

XI.

principle of order; and by attention to that _
order, his mind is harmonized and calmed.
He beholds a wife and righteous Governour
presiding over all the commotions which
are raised by the tumult of conflicting pas-
sions and interests; guiding, with imper-
ceptible influence, the hand of the violent to
beneficent purposes; accomplilhing unex-
peted ends by the most improbable means;
obliging the wrath of man to praim bhim;
sometimes humbling the mighty, sometimes
exalting the low; often snaring the wicked
in the devices which their hands have wrought.
Refpetful acknowledgment of this divine
government, controuls the disorders of infto
riour paflions. Reverence for the decrees
of Heaven inspires patience and modera-
tion. Trust in that perfect wisdom and
goodness which directs all for the best, di-
minithes the ihock which worldly disasters
occasion. The irritation of paflion and re-
fentment, will always bear proportion to the
agitation which we susser from the changes
of fortune. One who connets himself

4 with

E R M. with nothing hut second causes, partakes ot
XI.
__.,.. the violence and irregularity of all the in-

fcriour movements belonging to this great
machine. He who refers all to God, dwells,
if we may speak so, in that higher fpherc
where motion begins; he is fulject to fewer
flocks and concuffnons, and is only carried
along by the motion of the universe.

How can mildness or forgiveness gain

place in the temper of that man who, on
occasion of every calamity which he suffers
from the ill usage of others, has no fantuary
within his own breast to which he can make
retreat from their vexations; who Is pof-
sessed of no principle which is of sufficient
power to bear down the rising tide of peevish
and angry passions? The violence of an
enemy, or the ingratitude of a friend, the
injuflice of one man, and the treachery of
another, perpetually dwell and rankle in
his thoughts. The part which they have
ated in bringing on his distress, is frequently
more grating to him than the diftrels itself.
Whereas he who in every event looks up to
God, has always in his view a great and cle-

vating

vating objet, which inspires him with mag- S E R M.

Xr.

nanimity. His mind lies open to every ,-.
relieving thought, and is inclined to every
suggestion of generosity. He is disposed to
fay with Joseph, it was not you thatfent me
hither, tht Cod; with David, it is the Lord;
let him do what f'emeth good in his eyes; and
with a greater personage than either of these,
the cup hbicb my Father bath given me to
drink, fiall I not drink it? Hence arises
fipetiority to many of the ordinary provo-
cations of the world. For he looks upon
the whole of his present life as part of a
great plan, which is carried on under the
direQion of Heaven. In this plan, he views
men as acting their several parts, and con-
tributing to his good or evil. But their
parts he confiders as subordinate ones;
which, though they may jufily merit his
affedion, and may occasionally call forth
his rcfentmcnt, yet afford no proper foun-
(.ition to violent or malignant paflion. He
looks upon bad men as only the rod with
which the Almighty chaftcns; like the
pcltilence, the earthquakc, or the storm.

In

S E R M. In the midR of their injustice and violence

X/.

he can pity their blindness; and imitate our
blefled Lord in praying, Father, forgive
then; for they know not wbat they do.

SE R-

# SERMON XII. On the CHARACTER of HAZAEL. 2 KINGS viii. 12, 13. And Hazael said, Why weepeth my Lord? And he answered, Because I know the evil that thou wilt do unto the children of Israel. Their strong ...

[ 3,- ]

SERMON XII.
On the CHARACTE.R of HAZAEI,.

2 KINGS viii. 12, 13.

.nd lazacl aid, Why weepetb iny Lord?

And he answered, Because I know the evd
that thou wilt do unto the children of rael.
Their firong holds wilt thouset on ire, and
their young men wilt thou Jlay with the
sword, and wilt daJh their childr-en, and
rip up their women with child. And
Hazaelfaid, But what, is thy servant a
dog, that he hould do this great thing?
And Eliha answered, The Lord bath
Jhewed me that thou Jhalt be king over
Syria.

N the days of Joram king bs Israel flou- s E R M.
rifhed the prophet Elisha. His character .

was so eminent, and his fame so widely
fprcad, that Benhadad the king of Syria,

though

SE R M. though an idolater, sent to conlult him con-
XII.

cerning the iflue of a distemper which
threatened his life. The incffcnger em-
ployed on this occalion was Hazael, who
appears to have been one of the princcs, or
chief men, of the Syrian court. Charged
with rich gifts from the king, he prelents
himself before the prophet; and accofis him
in terms of the highclt relipe. During tie
conference which they held together, Llifh
fixed his eye ftedfaftly on the countenance
of Hazael; and discerning, by a prophetic
spirit, his future tyranny and cruelty, 1>.
could not contain himself from burfling into
a flood of tears. When I azael, in firpritc,
inquired into the cause of this sudden emro-
tion, the prophet plainly informs him of tl'.
crimes and barbarities which lie furefa;:
that hereafter he should commit. The til!!
of Hazael abhorred, at this time, the thought'
of cruelty. Uncorrupted, as yet, by ain-
bition or grettnefs, his indignation arose at
being thought capable of fuclh avage adtions
as the prophet had mentioned; and, xitil
much warmth, he replies, But what ? ;

y'

tbv fervait a dor, that hcJbelo:d do this great s E M.
thing ? Elilha makes no return but to point
out a remarkable change which was to take
place in his condition; The Lord hath
Jhewed me thai t hJi.Zld be ling -over Syria.
In course of time, all that had been pre-
dited came to pass. Hazacl ascended the
throne; and ambition took pofleffion of his
heart. lie fmGe the cbild-cin f Ifraad in all
their conJls. He opprejcd thib during all
the dayr of King )choahaz *; and, from
what is left on record of his adions, plainly
appears to have proved what the prophet
foresaw him to be, a man of violence,
cruelty, and blood.

In this pafTagc of history, an objed is

presented which deserves our serious atten-
tion. We behold a man who, in one slate
of life, could not look upon certain crimes
without surprise and horrour; who knew
so little of himself as to believe it impoflible
for him ever to be concerned in commit-
ting them; that fame man, by a change of
condition, transformed in all his sentiments,

* 1 Kings xiii. 22.
VOL. II. Z and

SE R M. and as he rose in grcatnels, rising also ii
xII.

guilt; till at lalt he completed that whol,
character of iniquity which he once de-
tclted. Hence the following obicrvationt
naturally arice. I. That to a mind not
entirely corrupted, ;fetilnents of abhorrence
at guilt are natural. II. That notwith-
standing tlofe sentiments, the mind may
be brought under the dominion of the vice.;
which it had most abhorred. III. That
this unhappy revolution is frequently owing
to a change of men's external circumftanccs
and condition in the world. These obfer-
vations are to make the subjed of the pre-
sent dilcourfe; and will lead us to such ,
view of human nature as, it is hoped, ma:
be of general use.

I. SENTIMENTS of abhorrence, at guiii

are natural to the human mind. Ilazacl'f
reply to the prophet shews how strongly h'.
felt them. Is tby firvant a dog, that 'l
bould do this great thing ? Is he, or can he
ever be, so base and wretched as to perpc-
trate crimes, which would render him un-

worthy

worthy of bearing the name of a man? S RR M.
Tllis is the voice of human nature, while * -
it is not as yet hardened in iniquity. Some
vices are indeed more odious to the mind
than others. Providence has wilely pointed
the sharpest edge of this natural avcrfion
againlt the crinmes which are of most perni-
ious and deftrudivc nature; such as trea-
chery, oppression, and cruelty. But, in ge-
neral, the diftintion between moral good
and evil is so firongly marked, as to ac-
company almolt every vice with sensible
(lifapprobation. Present to any man, even
the molt ignorant and untutored, an ob-
vious instance of injustice, falsehood, or im-
piety; let him view it in a cool moment,
when no passion blinds, and no interest
warps him ; and voly will find that his mind
immediately revolts against it, as shameful
and base, nay as deserving punishment.
Hence, in reasoning on the characers of
others, however men may mistake as to
fa&s, yet they generally praise and blame
according to the principles of found mo-
rality.

Z 2 With

S E R M. With reileat to their own character, ?

XII.
-- notorious partiality too generally mifleals

their judgment. But it is remarkable, that
no finner ever avows directly to himself
that he has been guilty of gross and down-
right iniquity. Even when engaged by his
passions in the commiflion of the greatest
crimes, he always palliates them to his ownI
mind by some extenuation or apology, some
pretended necessity, or some borrowed co-
lour of innocence. Such power the unde-
niable dignity of virtue, and the acknow-
ledged turpitude of vice, possess over every
human heart. These sentiments are the re-
maining impreflfons of that law, which was
originally written on the mind of man.
They are gleams of that light which once
Ihone clear and frong within us; and which,
though it be now greatly obscured, yet con-
tinues to shoot a feeble ray athwart the
darkness of human nature.-But what-
ever sentiments of abhorrence at vice we
may at any time entertain, we have no
reatbn to build upon these a presumptuous
confidence of our continuance in virtue.

[or

For the next infiruftion which the text SE RM.

XII.
luggefts is, -

11. TnAT such is man's ignorance of his

own charader, such the frailty of his na-
ture, that he may one day become infa-
inous for those very crimes which at present
he holds in detestation. This obhcrvation
is too well verified by the history of Hazael;
and a thousand other inflances might be
brought to confirm it. Though there is
nothing which every person ought to know
so thoroughly as his own heart, yet from
the conduc of men it appears, that there is
nothing with which they are lets acquainted.
Always more prone to flatter themfclvcs
than desirous to dikcover the truth, they
tru[f to their being possescd of every virtue
which has not been put to the trial; and
reckon themselves secure against every vice
to which they have not hitherto been
tempted. As long as their duty hangs in
speculation, it appears so plain, and so cli-
gible, that they cannot doubt of performing
it. The fifliicion never enters thrir milr l,

Z 1 ti;nt

SE RM. that in the hour of speculation, and in :tl

XII.
,-..- hour of practice, their lentiinents may differ

widely. Their prcfent difliolition tleh ca-
fily persuade thcmfelvcs will ever continum
the fame; and yet that difpolition is chan-
ging with circumrtances every moment.

The man who glows with the warm feel-

ings of devotion, imagines it impossible for
him to lose that sense of the divine good-
nels which at present melts his heart. I-l
whom his friend has lately saved from ruin
is confident that, if some trying emergen y
shall put his gratitude to proof, he will r.l-
ther die than abandon his benefator. Ile
who lives happy and contented in frul.i!
industry, wonders how any man can give
himself up to difTolute pleasure. Were any
of thole persons informed by a fuperiolr
spirit, that the time was shortly to come
when the one should prove an example of
scandalous impiety, the other of treachery
to his friend, and the third of all that ex-
travagant luxury which disgraces a growing.
fortune; each of them would teflify as much
surprise and abhorrence as Hazael did, upo:(il

hcarini

learing the predidtions of the prophet. Sin- SERM.
cere they might very pofiiblsv be in their XII
expreflions of indliglatioll; for Ihypocriy
is not always to he charged on men whose
conduti is inconfiltent. Hazael ias in
earnest, whell he rcllnted with such ardour
the imputaticn of cruelty. The Apoltle
Peter was lincere, when he made the zealous
protelion, that though lie Illould go to
prison and to death with his mafler, he
woUld never deny him. They were fin-
cere; that is, they ipooke from the fulness
of their hearts, and from the w.armth of the
present moment; but they did not know
themlelves, as the events which followed
plainly showed. So falle to its principles,
too frequently, is the heart of man ; so
weak is the foundation of human virtue; Ib
much reason there is otr what the gofpcl
perpetually inculcates concerning the necef-
fity of diinifling ouriclics, and depending
on divine aid. Mortifying, I consef, is
this view of human nature; yet proper to
he attended to by all, in order to escape the
most fatal dangers. For, merely through

Z 4 untuarded

SERM. unguarded condut, and from the want of

XI r C
Li_--- this prudent suspicion of their own weak-

ness, how many, after the noft promising
beginnings, have gradually apostatized firom
every principle of virtue; until, at last, it
has become as difficult for one to believe
that they ever had any love of goodnels, as
it would have been once to have persuaded
themselves that they were to advance to
such a height in wickedness ?

IN such cafes as I have described, what

has become, it may be enquired, of those
sentiments of abhorrence at guilt which
were once felt lo strongly ? Are they to-
tally erased ? or, if in any degree they re-
main, how do such persons contrive to
satisfy themselves in acting a part which
their minds condemn?-Here, there is a
myfiery of iniquity which requires to be
unfolded. Latent and secret is the progress
of corruption within the foul; and the
more latent, the more dangerous is its
growth. No man becomes of a sudden
completely wicked, Guilt never shows its

whole

whole deformity at once; but by gradual SERM.

XU.

acquaintance reconciles us to its appearance, .
and imperceptibly diffuses its poison throu ,h
all the powers of the mind. Every man
has obme darling palfion which generally
affords the first introducion to vice. The
irregular gratifications into which it occa-
fionally reduces him, appear under the form
of venial weaknesses; and are indulged, in
the beginning, with scrupulousness and re-
fer:e. But by longer practice there re-
firaints weaken, and the power of habit
grows. One vice brings in another to its
aid. By a fort of natural affinity they con-
ned and entwine themselves together; till
their roots come to be spread wide and deep
over all the foul. When guilt rifes to be
glaring, conscience endeavours to remon-
ftrate. But conscience is a calm principle.
Passion is loud and impetuous; and creates
a tumult which drowns the voice of reason.
It joins, besides, artifice to violence; and
fJiuces at the fame time that it impels.
For it employs the understanding to impose
ipoln the conscience, It devises reasons

and

SE R M. and arguments to jullify the comuptions of

--- the heart. 'Ihe common practice of the

world is appealcd to. Nice dillinclions are
made. Men are found to be circumstanced
M tlb peculiar a manner, a.s to render cer-
tain actions excuial)le, if not blamelei,,
which, in another lituation, it is confefleed
would have becc criminal. By inclh a pro-
ccis as this, there is realon to believe that
a great part of mankind advance from siep
to flep in fin, partly hurried by passion,
and partly blinded by felf-deceit, without
any jult fencl of the degree of guilt twhich
they contract. By inveterate habits thein
judgment is, at length, perverted, and thei!
moral feeling aie dc.ldcned. '1hey sIc
now with other eyes; and can look with-
out pain on evil adiions which they for-
ncrly abhorred.

It is proper, however, to obllrvc, that

though our native lnctimicnts of abhorrcnce
at guilt may bc so born down, or io eluded
as to lose their influence on condue, vet
those sentiments belonging originally to our
frame, and being never totally eradicatci

fronr,

fiom the foul, will fill retain so much au- SER M.
thority, as if not to reform, at least on some v
occaiions, to chasten the finner. It is only
during a courfc of proliperity, that vice is
able to carry on its delusions without dif-
turbancc. But, amidit the dark and
thoughtful situations of life, conscience re-
gains its rights; and pours the whole bit-
tcrnefs of rcmorfe on his heart who lias
apostatized from his original principles.
We may well believe that, before the end
of his days, Hazaci's firif imprefiiGns would
be made to return. In the hour of advcr-
fity, the remembrance of his conference
with the venerable Prophet would fting hi;
heart. Comparing the sentiments which,
in those his better days, he felt, with the
atrocious cruelties which he had afterwards
committed, all the honours of royalty would
he unable to save him from the inward lfnfe
ofbafenefs and infamy.

FROM this view which has been exhi-

bited of the progress of corruption, and of
the danger to which we are exposed of

falling

F. R M. falling from principles which once appeared
.a __' firmly cftabliflied, let us receive ufiftil ad-

monition for cur own conduc. Let .art
him tbhat girdthbl on his harncfs, bafJi like hb,:i
that pilttctb it off. Let no man place a rath
and dangerous confidence in his virtue.
But clt him that thinketh he jland.lb, take
heed let befall. Never adventure on too
near an approach to what is evil. Fami-
liarize not yourselves with it, in the flight-
eft infLanres, without fear. Liften with
reverence to every reprehension of con-
fcie.cc; and preserve the most quick and
accurate fenf.iility to right and wrong. If
ever your moral impressions begin to de-
cay, and your natural abhorrence of guilt
to leffcn, you have ground to dread that
the ruin of virtue is fast approaching.
While you employ all the circumfpedion
and vigilance which reason can fuggefi, let
your prayers, at the fame time, continually
arcend to God for support and aid. Re-
member that from him dcfcendetb every good
and t'rfeat gift; and that to him only it
belongs to keep yo friom falling, and topre-

fnt

sant jye fimt/lf bfre t."e ,i;!r cf U i, s EER M.

XII.

glory with cxceedingjy. I procccd now to
the

III. OBSERVATION from the text, That

the power which corlliptioil acquires to
pervert the original principles of men, is
frequently owing to a change of their cir-
culmftances and condition in the world.
How different was Hazael the messenger
of Benhadad, from Hazael the king; he
who Itarted at the mention of cruelty, from
him who waded in blood! Of this fad
and surprising revolution, the Prophet em-
phatically afligns the caufc in these few
words; The Lord hathJlhwed me that thou
ihalt be king over Syria. That crown, that
fatal crown, which is to be set upon thy
head, shall shed a malignant influence over
thy nature; and shall produce that change
in thy character which now thou canst
not believe.- Whose experience of the
world is so narrow, as not to furnish him
with. instances similar to this, in much
humbler conditions of life? So great is

the

S F R M. the influence of a new situation of external

XIl.
- fortune; filch a different turn it gives to

our temper and affections, to our views
and desires, that no man can foretell what
his charaterwould prove, should Providence
either raile or deprels his circumtlances in
a remarkable degree, or throw him into
some sphere of action widely different from
that to which lie has bcen acculoiomed in
former life.

The feeds of various qualities, good and

bad, lie in all our hearts. But until pro-
per occasions ripen, and bring them for-
ward, they lie there inactive and dead.
They are covered up and concealed within
the recesses of our nature: or, if they spring
up at all, it is under such an appearance as
is frequently mistaken, even by ourselves.
Pride, for instance, in certain situations,
has no opportunity of displaying itself, but
as magnanimity, or sense of honour. Ava-
rice appears as necessary and laudable ceco-
nomy. What in one station of life would
discover itself to be cowardice and baseness
of mind, passes in another for prudent cir-

cumlpedion.

cumfpedion. What in the fiulrcl' of power s E R M.
would prove to be cruelty and oppression,
is reputed, in a flibordinate rank, no more
than the excrcilc of proper dilciline. For
a while, the man is known neither by the
world, nor by hiinielf, to be what he truly
is. But bring him into a new lituation of
life, which accords with his predominant
dilpofition; which strikes on certain latent
qualities of his foul, and awakens them into
acion ; and, as the leaves of a flower gra-
dually unfold to the fun, so shall all his
true character open full to ickw.

This may, in one light, he accounted

not so much an alteration of chul'.!clcr pro-
duced by a change of circumflanicc, as a
discovery brought forth of the real charader',
which formerly lay concealed. Yet, at the
fame time, it is true that the man hlinfelf
undergoes a change. For opportunity being
given for certain difpofitionll, which had
been dormant, to exert themfclvcs without
restraint, they of course gather strength.
By means of the afcendencv which they
gain, other parts of the temper are borne

I down;

SERM. down; and thus an alteration is made 'il
XII. ,_y-> the whole firuture and system of the foul.

He is a truly wife and good man who,
through divine affifiance, remains fuperi-
our to this influence of fortune on his cha-
rader; who having once imbibed worthy
sentiments, and eftabliflied proper principles
of adion, continues constant to these,
whatever his circumstances be; maintains,
throughout all the changes of his life, one
uniform and supported tenour of conduct;
and what he abhorred as evil and wicked in
the beginning of his days, continues to ab-
hor to the end. But how rare is it to meet
with this honourable consistency among
men, while they are passing through the
different stations and periods of life! When
they are setting out in the world, before
their minds have been greatly mifed or
debased, they glow with generous emotions,
and look with contempt on what is fordid
and guilty. But advancing farther in life,
and inured by degrees to the crooked ways
of men; pressing through the crowd, and
the bustle of the world; obliged to contend

3 with

with this man's craft, and that man's scorn; s E R M.
accustomed, sometimes, to conceal their XIL
sentiments, and often to stifle their feelings,
they became at last hardened in heart, and
familiar with corruption. Who would not
drop a tear over this fad, but frequent fall of
human probity and honour! Who is not
humbled, when he beholds the refined fen-
timents and high principles on which we
are so ready to value ourselves, brought to
fucl a flameful issue; and man, with all
his boasted attainments of reason, discover-
ed so often to be the creature of his exter-
nal fortune, moulded and formed by the
incidents of his life !

THE instance of Hazael's degeneracy

ceads us to reflect, in particular, on the dan-
gers which arise from stations of power and
greatnes ; especially, when the elevation of
men to these has been rapid and sudden.
Few have the firength of mind which is re-
quifite for bearing filch a change with tem-
perance, and felf-command. The refpe&
which is paid to the great, and the scope
VorL. 11. A a which

S E R M. which their condition affords for the indul-

_ gence of pleafilre, are perilous circumstances

to virtue. \hen men live among their
equals, and are accutfomed to encounter the
hardlhips of life, they are of courlf remind-
ed of their mitual dependence on each
other, and of the dependence of all upon
God. But when they are highly exalted
above their fellows, they meet with few
objects to awaken fcrious reflecion, but
with many to feed and inflame their pas-
sions. They are apt to separate their in-
terelt from that of all around them; to
wrap themselves up in theirvain grandeur;
and in the lap of indolence and felfilh plea-
sure, to acquire a cold indifference to the
concerns even of those whom they call their
friends. The fancied independence into which
they are '.fted up, is adverse to sentiment,
of piety, as well as of humanity, in their
heart. Taki ng the timbrel and the larp, and
rejoicing at the fJund of the organ, theyfigy
unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not
the knowledge of tl'I ways. Ilfhat is tbi
Almighty that we fJloltddfi'rvc h im ? or u hat

p.fit

arfft flJo/ld we have, .f uwr s1, zinto SE R M.
hin, P XII.

But we are not to imagine, that elevated

stations in the world furnilh the only formi-
dable trials to which our virtue is cxpofcd.
It will be found, that we are liable to no
fewer nor les dangerous temptations, from
the oppolite extreme of poverty and depref-
lion. When men who have known better
days are thrown down into abjed situations
of fortune, their spirits are broken and their
tempers foured. Envy rankles in their
breast at Inch as are more fuccefsfill. The
providence of Heaven is accused in secret
murmurs; and the sense of miferv is readv
to push them into atrocious crimes, in order
to better their ilate. Among the inferiour
claffcs of mankind, craft and dithonefly are
too often found to prevail, Low and pe-
nurious circumflances depress the human
powers. They deprive men of the proper
means of knowledge and improvement; and
where ignorance is gross, it is always in
hazard of engendering profligacy.

A a 2 Hence

SE R M. Hence it has been, generally, the opi-
XII.

nion of wife men in all ages, that there is
a certain middle condition of life, equally
remote from either of those extremes of
fortune, which, though it want not also its
own dangers, yet is, on the whole, the
state motl favourable both to virtue and to
happiness. For there, luxury and pride on
the one hand, have not opportunity to ener-
vate or intoxicate the mind, nor want and
dependence on the other, to' fink and de-
h.f'lit; there, all the native affetions of
the foul have the freelt and fairest exercise,
tlie equality of men is felt, friendships are
formed, and improvements of every fort are
pirfued with molt success; there, men are
prompted to induflry without being over-
come by toil, and their powers called forth
into exerticn, without being either super-
lided by too much abundance, or baffled
by insuperable difficulties; there, a mixture
ot comforts and of wants, at once awakens
their gratitude to God, and reminds them
of their dependence on his aid; and there-
fore, in this Ifate, men seem to er4oy life to

4 most

mofl advantage, and to be Icaft exposed to SER M.
the snares of vice. Such a condition it re- '-
corded, in the book of Proverbs, to have
been the wilh and choice of one who was
eminent for wisdom. Removefari, om me
va;,ty and ii: . Give me neither poverty nor
riches. Feed me with food convenient for
me. Left I be full and deny thee, and fal,
Who is the Lord? or leCf I be poor and fleal,
and take the name of my God in vain *.

FROM the whole view which we have

now taken of the subjed, we may, in the
first place, learn the reasons for which a
variety of conditions and ranks was efta-
blifhed by Providence among mankind.
This life is obviously intended to be a Rfate
of probation and trial. No trial of charac-
ters is requisite with refped to God, who
fees what is in every heart, and perfedly
knows what part each man would ad, in all
the poilible situations of fortune. But on
account of men themselves, and of the

Prov. xxx. 8, 9.

A a 3 world

s '.R M. world around them, it was neceflarv that

trial Ihould take place, and a discrimination
of charadctrs be made; in order that true
virtue might be fkparated from false appear-
ances of it, and the jultice of Heaven be
displayed in its final retributions; in order
that the failings of men might be so dif-
covered to themselves, as to afford them
proper inftrution, andpromote their amend-
ment; and in order that their characters
might be ihown to the world in every
point of view, which could furnish either
examples for imitation, or admonitions of
danger. The accomplishment of these im-
portant purpoles required, that human life
should not always proceed in one tenour;
but that it lhould both be chequered with
many revolutions, and diversified by a va-
riety of employments and ranks; in pass-
ing through which, the touchstone might
be applied to the characters of men, and
their hidden virtues or vices explored.
Hazael might have appeared in history with
a degree of reputation to which he was not
entitled, had he continued to at in a filh-

ordiiitc

ordinate station. At bottom, he was false S ER M.

XII.

and unsound. When railed higher in life, ..
the corruption of his heart dilcovered itself;
and he is now held forth with deserved in-
famy, as a warning to ficceeding ages.

IN the second place we learn, from what

has been said, the importance of attending
with the utmost care to the choice which we
make of our employment and condition in
life. It has been hown, that our external
situation frequently operates powerfully on
our moral character; and by consequence
that it is ftriftly connected, not only with
our temporal welfare, but with our ever-
lasting happiness or milery. He who might
have passed unblamed, and upright, through
certain walks of life, by unhappily chufing
a road where he meets with temptations too
firong for his virtue, precipitates himself
into shame here, and into endless ruin here-
after. Yet how often is the determination
of this most important article left to the
chance of accidental connedtions, or sub-
mitted to the option of youthful fancy and

A a 4 humour ?

SE R 1. humour ? When it is made the subjet of
I-y serious deliberation, how seldom have they,

on whom the decision of it depends, any
further view than so to dispose of one who
is coming out into life, as that he may the
fooncfl become rich, or, as it is expresscd,
make his way to most advantage in the
world ? Are there no other objeds than
this to be attended to, in fixing the plan of
life? Are there no more sacred and im-
portant interests which deserve to be con-
silted ?-You would not willingly place
one for whose welfare you was interefled, in
a situation for which you were convinced
that his abilities were unequal. These,
therefore, you examine with care; and on
them you reft the ground of your decision.
Be persuaded that not abilities merely, but
the turn of the temper and the heart, require
to be examined with equal attention, in
forming the plan of future cflablifhment.
Every one has some peculiar weakness,
some predominant passion, which exposes
him to temptations of one kind more than
of another. Early this may be discerned

to

to sloot; and from its firit risings its fu- SE R M.
ture growth may be inferred. Anticipate
its progrels. Confider how it is likely to
be affelted, by succeeding occurrences in
life. If you bring one whom you are rear-
ing up into a situation, where all the fur-
rounding circumstances flall cherilh and
mature this fatal principle in his nature,
you become, in a great measure, answerable
for the consequences that follow. In vain
you trust to his abilities and powers. Vice
and corruption, when they have tainted the
heart, are iffficient to overset the greatest
abilities. Nay, too frequently they turn
them against the possessor; and render
them the inftrumnnts of his more jlecdy
ruin.

IN the third place, we learn from the

history which has been illufirated, never to
judge of true happiness, merely from the
degree of men's advancement in the world.
Always betrayed by appearances, the mul-
titude are caught by nothing to much as by
the show and pomp of life. They think

every

s E R M. every one bleft,"vho is r'ifed far above otlhrcl
XII.

in rank. From their earliest years they arc
taught to fix their views upon worldly ele-
vation, as the ultimate objecd of their aims;
and of all the biiurces of error in conduct,
this is the most general.-Ha/ael on thl
throne of Syria would, doubtless, he morc
envied, and elteemed by the multitude .
far happier man than, when yet a lubjeit,
he was employed by Benhadad to carry his
meflage to Elihla. Yet, 0 Hazael! how
much better had it been for thee never to
have known the name or honour of a king,
than to have purchased it at the expence of
;in rImch guilt; forfeiting thy first and belt
charatcr; rulhi:l;g into crimes which were
once tlilne abhl),rrlciec; and becoming a
traitor to the native fiitiments and dicates
of thy heart! How fatal to thy repoic
proved that coveted purple, which wa'
drenched by thec in so much innocent bloodl
How much more cheerful were thy days,
and how much calmer thy nights, in the
former periods of thy life, than, when
placed on a tl'o.t. '.v car,, were invaded

~I lyby

b)v day with the cries of the miserable whom s E R M.

XII.

thou hadst ruined; and thy slumbers broken
bh night with the shocking remembrance of
thy cruelties and crimes ' Never let us
judge by the outside of things; nor con-
clude a man to be happy, solely becauie he
is encompassed with wealth or grandeur.
Much miiery often lurks where it is little
ftifpeted by the world. The material en-
quiries refpeding felicity are, not what a
man's external condition is, hut with what
difpnfition of mind he bears it; whether he
be corrupted or improved by it; whether
he conducts himself so as to be acceptable
to God, and approved of by good men.
For theie are the circumfances which make
the real and important diftincions among
the conditions of men. The effecds of these
a;re to last for ever, when all worldly di-
tfnCtions thall be forgotten.

IN the fourth place, from all that has

been laid, we should learn never to be im-
moderately anxious about our external situ-
ation, but to lilbmit our 1It with checrful-
pess to the dilp'ofal of Heaven. To make

the

SE R M. the befl and most prudent arrangcmcnts

X[.
-. --,_ which we can, refpecding our condition in

life, is matter of high duty. But let u,
remembcr, that ail the plans which we form
are precarious and uncertain. After the
utmost precautions taken by human wis-
dotn, no man can foresee the hidden dan-
gers which may await him in that path of
life on which he has pitched. Providence
chutes for us much more wifely than arc
can chufe for ourlelves; and, from circum-
stances that appeared at firif most unpro-
mifing and adverse, often brings forth in
the issue both temporal and spiritual felicity.
WIl'o knoweth what is good fr man in this
Ife, all the days of his vain lfr, which Jh
fpcndetb as a Jbadow ? When we confidcr
the darkness of our present slate, the im-
becility of human nature, and the doubtful
and ambiguous value of all that we call
prosperity, the exhortation of the Plalmift
comes home with great force on every re-
fleding mind, Commit thy way unto the
Lord*. Form thy measures with prudence:

Pfilm xxxvii. 5.

bat

but divelr tllyfelf of anxiety about the iflue. s E RM.
Inflcad of seeking to order thine own lot, J
.icquiefce in the appointment of Hcaven,
and follow without hesitation the call of
Providence, and of duty. In whatever situ-
ation of life God shall place thee, look up
devoutly to Him for grace and affifiance;
and study to as the part assigned thee with
a faithful and upright heart. Thus (halt
thou have peace within thyself, while thy
course is going on; and when it draws to-
wards a close, with fatisfacion thou shalt
review thy condudl. For, after all the toils
and labours of life, and all the vain struggles
which we maintain for pre-eminence rld
diflincion, we (hall find at the conclusion
of the whole scene, that to fear God and.
hifp ihis commandments is tbe wholc e of man.

SE R-

# SERMON XIII. On the BENEFITS to be derived from the HOUSE of MOURNING. ECCLESIASTES vii. 2, 3, 4. It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of feasting; for that is the end ...

[ 366 ]

S E R M ON XIIt.
On the BENEFITS to be derived from tih

HOUSE of MOURNING.

c c LEs J

8 r ES vii. 2, 3, 4.
It it better to go to the hotfe rs nmornlii,

than to go to the hotfr offeafting; Jir th,u
is te end of all men, and the living wiil
lay it to his heart. Sorrow is better than
laughter; fir by the sadness of the coun-
tenance the heart is made better. Tihe
heart of the ,ife if in the hotif of mourn-
ing; but the heart Jffools is in the bhosc
of mirth.

SERM. M ANY of the maxims contained in
Xi_ lvi this book of Ecclefiafes will appear

strange sayings to the men of the world.
But when they reflect on the charaser of

him

him who delivers them, they cannot Ibut SER M.
admit that his tenets de'lrve a fcrious and ,
attentive examination. For they are not
the doctrines of a pedant, who, from an
obfcurc retirement, declaims againflt plca-
fures which he never knewv. They are' not
the invectives of a dilppoiinted man, who
takes revenge upon the world, by satirizing
thole enjoyments, which he fought in vain to
obtain. They are the conclusions of a great
and prolperons prince, who had once given
full Icope to his desires; who was thoroughly
acquainted with life in its I.i.t flattering
scenes; and who now, reviewing all that
he had enjoyed, delivers to us the result of
long experience, and tried wisdom. None
of his principles seem, at first view, more
dubious and exceptionable than those which
the text presents. To aflert that sorrow is
preferable to mirth, and the bouse f mourn-
ing to the ho/se of feraling; to advise men
to chufe mortification and sadness when it
is in their power to indulge in joy, may
appear harsh and unreasonable doftrines.
They may, perhaps, be accounted enemies

to

S E R M. to the innocent enjoyment of life who give
XIII.

countenance to so severe a system, and
thereby incrcafe the gloom which already
fits sufficiently heavy on the condition of
man. But Ict this censure be suspended,
until we examine with care into the spirit
and meaning of the sentiments here de-
livered.

It is evident that the wife man does not

prefer sorrow, upon its own account, to
mirth; or represent sadness as a slate more
eligible than joy. He confiders it in the
light of discipline only. He views it with
reference to an end. He compares it with
certain improvements which he supposes it
to produce; when the heart is made better
by the sadness of the countenance, and the
living to lay to heart what is the end of all
men. Now, if great and lasting benefits
are found to result from occasional sadness,
thefc, filre, may be capable of giving it the
preference to some fleeting sensations of joy.
The means which he recommends in order
to our obtaining those benefits are to be ex-
plained according to the principles of found

reason;

reason; and to be undcrftood with those SERM.
limitations which the eastern flyle, in de- w.
livering moral precepts, frequently requires.
He bids us go to the hofi cf mourning; but
he does not command us to dwell there.
When he prefers sorrow to laughter, he is
not to be underflood as prohibiting all mirth;
as requiring us to wear a perpetual cloud on
our brow, and to fequeftratc ourselves from
every cheerful entertainment of social life.
Such an interpretation would be inconsistent
with many other exhortations in his own
writings, which recommend temperate and
innocent joy. It would not suit with the
proper discharge of the duties which be-
long to us as members of society; and
would be moit opposite to the goodness and
benignity of our Creator. The true scope
of his doctrine in this passage is, that there
is a certain temper and state of heart, which
is of far greater consequence to real happi-
ness, than the habitual indulgence of giddy
and thoughtless mirth; that for the attain-
ment and cultivation of this temper, fre-
quent returns of grave refletion are necef-

VoL. II. B 1 fary;

S E. R M. fLry; that, upon this account, it is profir-

alle to give admiflion to thole views of hu-
man diftrels which tend to awaken fiuli
reflction in the mind ; and that thus, from
the vicissitudes of sorrow, which we cithel
experience in our own lot, or fvmpathi/.
with in the lot of others, much wisdom and
improvement may be derived. These are
the sentiments which I.purpofe at present
to juflify and recommend, as most fiuitable
to the charadter of men and of Christians;
and not in the least inconsistent with plea-
lure, rightly underflood.

Among the variety of dispositions whilch

arc to he found in the world, some indeed
require less of this discipline than other;.
There are perlons whose tender and deli-
cate ICnlihility, either derived from nature,
or brought on by repeated afflictions, ren-
ders them too deeply ulfceptible of every
mournful impression; whose spirits stand
more in need of being supported and cheer-
ed, than of being auddened by the dark
views of human life. In such cafes, we are
commanded to /hi ulp lie hands whic.h bang

dowICn,

a4iwn, and to cnfirm l/c fatlic nrrs *. But S ER M.

XIII.

this is far from being the commuo! diiofi- -J-_
tion of men. Their minds are in general
inclined to Icvitv, much more than to
thoughtful mlilanchilv; and their hearts
more apt to be contrace(l and hardened,
than to relent with too much facility. I
ihall therefor endeavour to fllew them, what
bad inclinations their compliance with So-
lomon's advice would correct; what good
difpoliticns with refpict to God, their neigh-
bours, and thcmficlvcs, it would improve;
and how, upon the whole, his docirine is
verified, that hl e fi.cn.f f thsre couantcnainc
Ibe bcart is made Ic/llr.

I BnGIN by obfcnvnig, that the temper

recommended in the text suits the present
constitution of things in this world. Had
man been destined for a course of undif-
turbed enjoyment, perpctual gaiety would
then have corrcfponded to his state; and
pensive thought have been an unnatural
intrufigrl. But in a slate where all is che-

If;iah xxrV. 3. Heb. xii. lz.

B b 2 quered

SE R . q(1icrlcd anld imixcd, ' lhrie there is no pcro-
-_, lb Icrity without a rcvc:!, ,ld no jo)y ith-

out its attcnd(lilg ,ritl;; wShlre from thl
lhouil of feafling all mnuil, at one time or
other, pass into the hillfc of mourning, it
were equally unnatural if no admission wa,
given to grave reflcdtion. The mind of
man mullt be attempered to his condition.
Providence, whose wisdom is confpicuout,
in all its works, has adjusted with exadt
proportion the inward powers to the out-
ward state of every rational being. It hal
for this purpose implanted the serious and
sympathetic feelings in our nature, that they
might correspond with the vicissitudes of
Ibrrow in our lot. lie who endeavours to
repel their influence, or to flifle them in
unseasonable mirth, ;:s a violent and un-
natural part. He Ifrives with vain effort
against the current of things; contradicts
the intentions of his Mlaker, and counter-
acts the original impulles of his own heart.

It is proper also to observe, that as tlL

f/dnefs of the coitiinance has, in our present
lituation, a proper and natural place; so it

is requisite to the tru:e cijolinit of plea- S ER1.
lire. Worldly and fiJnfuill men often re-
mark not, till it be too late, that, 1bv the
fludied efforts ofconflant repetition, all their
pleasures fail. They draw them off 'o clole
to the dregs, that they become insipid and
nauseous. Hence even i/ l /aghlJr lbTir
hejrt isforrowfii, andti thc encd of tI,,ir mir;b
is bcavinefs t. It is only the intcrpoi;l of
serious and thoughtful hours, that can give
any- lively sensation to the returns of joy.
I speak not of those thoughtful hours, too
well known to finners, which proceed froln
guilty remorse; and which, instead of pre-
paring for future pleafiur, damp and licken
the moment of enjoyment; hut of those
which take ritl from the mind retreating
into itself, and opening to the sentiments of
religion and humanity. Such hours of
virtuous sadness brighten the gleams of sic-
ceeding joy. They give to the temperate
enjoyments of the pious and humane a re-
fined and delicate relish, to which the hard-
ened and insensible are entire fnranger.c

· Prov. xiv. 13.

3 b 3 I:or

SE R I. For it will be lf'und, li.it in proportion a;

XIII.
.-t_ i the tender naffcticni (Io th.e fl;ul arc kept

awake, how\. muih'i l:.xr the' may fomie-
timcS difirc.f the li.c:l1, i;i y priciere it olCp
likewilU to the m(ilt .,";recJl; fccnfltioii,.
He who never knew the fiorrows of frieid-
fliip, never allo knew its joys. He wholb
heart cannot relent in the hoiife of irourn-
ing, will, in the moll social hour of the
heule of feafling, partake of no more than
the lowelt part of animal pleaftlre.-
Having premised there olfervations, I pr-
ceed to point out the dired effects of a
proper attention to the diftreffcs of life upon
our moral and religioun character.

IN the first place, the house of mourn-

ing is calculated to give a proper check to
our natural thoughtleffnels and levity. The
indolence of mankind, and their love of'
pleasure, spread throagh all characters and
ranks some degree of aversion to what
is grave and serious. They grasp at any
objed, either of business or amusement,
vhich makes the present moment pass

fmocothlly

smoothly atwa; which carries their the'nlht s E R M.
abroad, and I;ves them from the trouble of --
refleding on themcilves. With too many,
this pailes into a habit of conltalt dillpaa -
tion. If their fortune and rank :llow them
to indilge their inclinations, they devote
themselves to the purliit of amnutilment
through all its different forms. The skilful
arrangement of its liuccllive Icenc:-, and the
preparatory ftudv ifr ihining in each, are
the only exertions in which their undlr-
ilanding is emplo) ed. Such a mode of life
may keep alive, for a while, a frivolous vi-
vacitv. It may improve men in some of
thoic exteriour accomplillments, which
i)arlkle in the eyes of the giddy and the
vain ; but it mnult fink them in the eftiem
of all the wile. It renders them firanic.rs
to themelve s; and tilclics, if not perni-
cious, to thc wlr!Md. 'Ihey lose eveln manly
principle. Thiir miniid become relaxed
and effeminate. All that is great or re-
ipet3ahlc in the hunman character is buried
plder a mn;l. cf trifles and flllics.

n , 4 if

S F. R T. If some mcafures ought to be taken foi
i_-_- i rescuing the mnind from this disgraceful lc-

vity; if lome principles mits be acquired
which may give more dignity and ficadi-
ness to conduct, where, I pray you, are
tlle'e to be looked for ? Not surely in the
houle of feafling, where every objed flt-
ters the fenfcs, and strengthens the feduc-
tions to which we are already prone; wherc
thle spirit of dissipation circulates from heart
to heart; and the children of folly mutually
admire, and are admired. It is in the loher
and serious house of mourning that the tidc
of vanity is made to turn, and a new di-
redion given to the current of thought.
When lome affeding incident prcfents a
flrong dilcovcry of the deceitfulncfs.of all
worldly joy, and roules our finfibility to
human woe; when we behold thofc with
whomll we had lately mingled in the houlc
of feafling, funk by foine of the fidden
viciflitudcs of lite into the vale of mifcry;
or when, in fad silence, we stand by the
friend whom we had loved as our own foul,
firetcled on the hed of dcath; then is the

season

season when the world begins to appear in a s E R M.

XIII.

new light; when the heart opens to virtu-
ous sentiments, and is led into that train of
reflection which ought to dired life. He
who before knew not what it was to com-
mune with his heart on any feriooui flubjed,
now puts the question to lhimiclf, for what
purpose he was sent forth into this mortal,
transitory state; what his fate is likely to
be when it concludes; and what juillgent
lie ought to form of those pleafurcs which
ainufe for a little, but which, he now fees,
cannot save the heart from anguiflh in the
evil day. Touched by the hand of thought-
ful melancholy, that airy editice (cf ili's
which fancy had raised up for him, vanifhle
away. He beholds in the place of it, the
lonely and barren desert, in which, fir-
rounded with many a disagreeable olject,
he is left muling upon himself. The tilfe
which he has mif-fpent, and the faculties
which he has misemploycd, his foolifl le-
vity and his criminal pursuits, all rife in
painful profpec before him. That un-
known state of existence into which, race

after

s E R h. after race, the children of men pass, ft;rikt

i_ his mind with lo!cln aiw.-Is there no

coOire hy whlich he c.nr ret:ieve his pall cr,
rours ? Is there no lupcriour power to
which he cani look up for aid ? Is there n(1
plan of condtui which, if it exempt him
not from sorrow, can at Jeaft procure him
conlolation amidst the dilrcfiul exigencies
of life ?-Such meditations as there, fug-
gested by the house of mourning, fre-
quently prod!'"c a change on the whole
charader. T'ly revive thole sparks of
gcodncfs whicl wecre nigh being quite ex-
tingiiiihcd in the (;ffipatcd mind; and give
rile to principles of conduc more rational
in themfelvcs, and more suitable to the hu-
man state.

IN the iecond place, impressions of thii

nature not only produce moral 'erioul'nel,
but awaken Icntiments of piety, and bring
men into the fanduary of religion. One
might, indeed, imagine that the blessings
of a prosperous condition would prove the
mos natural incitements to devotion; and

that

that when men were happy in themselves, S F R ,M.

XIII.

and saw nothing but happinels arnund them, *
they could not fail gratefully to acknow-
ledge that God who givclh them al/ tlings
riichir tlo rjoy. Yet such is their corruption,
that they are never more ready to forget
their benefactor, than when loaded with his
benefits. The giver is cuncealed from their
careless and inattentive view, by the cloud
of his own gifts. When their life conti-
nnes to flow in one finooth current, un-
ruffled by any griefs; when they neither
receive in their own circumstances, nor al-
low themselves ta receive from the ci,'cum-
flances of others, any admonitions of hu-
man initability, they not only become
regardless of Providence, but are in hazard
of contemnling it. Glorying in their ft!ength,
and lifted up by the pride of life into sup-
poled independence, that impious senti-
mlent, if not uttered by the mouth, vet too
often lurks in the hearts of many, during
their flourilling periods, W7hat is the Al-
mighty tbhat w e Jlolil, frire bim, aind cwhat
tribfl.j/ul t'C /
,' s lvef ' e praj ts lim ?

~~2 ~ If

S E R M. If such be the tendency of the house of
XIII.

_-- feasting, how neceffarv is it that, by sone

change in their lituation, men should be
obliged to enter into the house of mourn-
ing, in order to recover a proper sense of
their dependent state ? It is there, when
forsaken by the gaieties of the world, and
left alone with God, that we are made to
perceive how awful his government is; how
easily human greatness bends before him;
and how quickly all our designs and mea-
fire%, at his interpofal, vanish into no-
thing. There, when the countenance is
fad, and the affections are ',ftened by grief;
when we fit apart, involved in lerious
thought, looking down as from some cmi-
nence on those dark clouds that hang over
the life of man, the arrogance of prosperity
is humbled, and the heart melts under the
imprefflons of religion. Formerly we were
taught, but now we fee, we feel, how
much we stand in need of an Almighty
protector, amidst the changes of this vain
world. Our foul cleaves to him who de-
fi.es not, nsr abhor; the ,fiitli n If tlr

affliiflc.

afflicd. Prayer flows forth of its own ac- s E R M.

XIII. 4

cord from the relenting heart, that he may _
be our God, and the God of our friends in
diftre's; that he may never forsake us while
we are sojourning in this land of pilgrim-
age; may strengthen us under its cala-
mities, and bring us hereafter to those ha-
bitations of reft, where we, and they whom
we love, may be delivered from the trials
which all are now doomed to endure. The
discoveries of his mercy which he has made
in the gofpcl of Chrifl, are viewed with
joy, as so many rays of light sent down
from above to dispel, in some degree, the
firrounding gloom. A mediator and in-
terceffbr with the S6vereign of the Uni-
verse, appear comfortable names; and the
refurretion of the just becomes the power-
ful cordial of grief. In filch moments as
there, which we may juflly call happy mo-
ments, the foul participates of all the plea-
fircs of devotion. It feels the power of
religion to support and rcliev. It is soft-
cned, without being broken. It is full,
and it pours itself forth ; pours itfclf forth,

3 if

S E R M. if we may be allowed to uli the cx.,rcficn,

- J into the boloin of it. micrciful Creator.

IN thc third place, fulch serious fcnti-

incnts produce the happiest effecct upon our
disposition towards our fellow-creaturcs, as
well as towards God. It is a common and
jult oblervation, that cley. who have lived
always in affluence and. eafc, ifrangers to
the miserics of life, are liable to contract
hardnef. of heart with refpec to all the
concerns of others. Wrapped up in them-
selves, and their own pleasures, they be-
hold with indifference the molt affe&inm
scenes of diftrcf;. Habituated to indulge
all their delires without controul, they be-
come impatient of the lealt provocation or
offence; and are ready to trample on their
inicriours, as if they were creatures of a
different ijecies from themfelvcs. Is this
an amiable temper, or fich as becomes a
man ? When appearing in others, do we
not view it with much displeasure? When
imputed to ouirfcves, can we avoid account-
ing it a severe reproach ?

By

By the experience of difilcli, this a;.ro- S FR M.

gant infeinfliility of temper is most ct7c-
tlally correded; as the rcmcml)r.incc of
our own filffcrings naturally prompts us to
feel for others when they fi:ffcr. But if
Providence has hccn lb kind as not to sub-
ject us to nmucl of this dil;iplinc in our own
lut, let us draw improvement from the
harder lot of ethers. Lct us sometimes flep
aside from the smooth and flowery paths
in which we are permitted to walk, in
order to view the toilibme march of our
fellows through the thorny desert. By vo-
luntarily going into the house es mourning;
by yielding to the fentimcnts which it ex-
cites, and mingling our tears with these of
the afflided, we shall acquire that humane
sensibility, which is one of the highest orna-
ments of the nature of man. Perceiving
how much the common distresses cf life
place us all on a level, and render the high
and the low, the rich and the poor, com-
panions in misfortune and mortality, we
shall learn to set no man at nought, and,
least of any, our afflited brother. Preju-

dices

S E1R M. di.cei x\ill )c extinguilhed, and hrn'n -
XIII.

l*- Icei op;cned and enlarged, when looki:;,
ar>lund on the multitude of men, we coln-
fider them as a band of fellow-travellers
in the valley of woe, where it ought to he
the office of every one to alleviate, as much
as possible, the common )url(lc.-WVhilc
the vain and the licentious are revelling in
the midlt of extravagance and riot, how
little do thcv think of those scenes of fore
dillrefs which are going on at that moment
throughout the world; multitudes ftrug-
gling for a poor fubfiltence to support the
wife and the children whom they love, and
who look up to them with eager eyes for
that bread which they can hardly procure;
multitudes groaning under ficknels in de-
lolate cottages, untended and unmourned;
many, apparently in a better situation ot
life, pining away in secret with concealed
griefs; families weeping over the beloved
friends whom they have loft, or, in all the
bitterness of anguih, bidding those who
are jult expiring the last adieu!

May we not appeal to the heart of every s ER M.

good man, nay almost to the heart of every '-
man who has not divested himself of his
natural feelings, whether the admiflIon of
such views of human life might not, some-
times at leaPt, fumilh a more worthy employ-
ment to the mind, than that mirth offools,
which Solomon compares to the cracdling
Js thormn under a pot *; the transient burif
of unmeaning joy; the empty explosion
of giddinels and levity? Those allies of
jollity in the house ol fealting are often
forced from a troubled mind; like flashes
from the black cloud, which, after a mo-
mentary effulgence, are Succeeded by thicker
darkness. Whereas compaiflonate assec-
tions, even at the time when they draw
tears from our eyes for human misery,
convey fatisfa&ion to the heart. The gra-
cious appointment of Heaven has ordained
that Sympathetic pains should always be
accompanied with a certain degree of plea-
sure; on purpose that we might be more

' Ecrlef. vii. 6.
VOL. II. C c interefied

F. R M. interefled in the cafe of the distresscd, and
XIIr.
»-i- that by this mysterious bond, man might

be linked closer to man. The inward fa-
tisfadion which belongs to the compaffi-
onate affections is, at the fame time, height-
ened by the approbation which they receive
fron our reason; and by the confcioufnefi
which they afford us of feeling what men
and Chriftiaps ought to feel.

IN the fourth place, the disposition rc-

commended in the text, not only improves
us in piety and humanity, but likewiic
assists us in felf-government, and the due
moderation of our desires. The houfc of
mourning is the school of temperance and
sobriety. Every wife man will find it for
his interest to enter into it sometimes of his
own accord, left otherwise he be compelled
to take up his dwelling there. Seasonable in-
terruptions of our pleasures are necessary to
their prolongation. For, continued fcence
of luxury and indulgence haften to a me-
lancholy issue. The house of feasting too
often becomes an avenue to the house of

3 mourning.

mourning. Short, to the licentious, is the S ERM.
interval between them; and speedy the -j
transition from the one to the other.

But supposing that, by prudent manage-

ment, the men of pleasure could avoid the
pernicious effects which intemperance and
dissoluteness are likely to produce on their
health, or their fortune, can they also pre-
vent those disorders which such habits will
introduce into their minds? Can they
escape that wrath of the Almighty, which
will infallibly pursue them for their fins
both here and hereafter ? For whence, so
much as from the unchecked pursuit of
pleasure, do all those crimes arise which
slain the characters of men with the deepest
guilt, and expose them to the severest judg-
ments of Heaven ? Whence, then, is the
corretive of those mischiefs to be fought,
but from such a discipline as shall moderate
that intemperate admiration of the world
which gave rife to the evil ? By repairing
sometimes to the house of mourning, you
would chasten the looseness of fancy, abate
the eagcrnefs of pafion, and afford scope to

Cc 2 reafoa

S E R M. reason for exerting her restraining powers,

XIII.
L ,_ You would behold this world stripped of

its falfi colours, and reduced to its proper
level. Many an important inftrudion you
would receive from the humiliation of the
proud, the mortification of the vain, and
the sufferings of the voluptuous, which you
would fee exemplified before you, in the
chambers of Ibrrow, of icknels, and of
death. You would then be taught to re-
joice as thougb you rejiced not, and to weep
as tbough you wcepedl not; that is, neither
in joy, nor in grief, to run to excess; but
to t ib is world Jo as not to abife it; con-
templating the ff/ion thereof as paJing
away.

Moreover, you would there learn the

important leflon of suiting your mind, be-
fore-hand, to what you had reason to ex-
pe'I from the world ; a lesson too seldom
studied by mankind, and to the neglec of
which, much of their misery, and much of
their guilt, is to be charged. By turning
away their eyes from the dark frde of life;
by looking at the world only in one light,

and

and that a flattering one, thec form their SS R M.
measures on a false plan, and are ncceffa- Jll
rily deceived and betrayed. Hence, the
vexation of lucceeding diiappointllment and
blasted hope. Hence, their criminal impa-
tience of life, and their hitter accusations of
God and man; when, in truth, they have
reason to accule only their own folly.-
Thou who wonldft at like a wile man, and
build thy houie on the rock, and not on the
sand, contemplate human life not only in
the funthine, but in the shade. Frequent
the house of mourning, as well as the house
of mirth. Study the nature of that Rtate in
which thou art placed; and balance its joys
with its fiorrows. Thou feeft that the cup
which is held forth to the whole human
race, is mixed. Of its hitter ingredients,
exped that thou art to drink thy portion.
Thou feeft the sorn hovering every where
in the clouds around thee. Be not surprised
if on thy head it Ihall break. Lower, there-
fore, thy fails. Difinils thy florid hopes;
and come forth prepared either to ad or to
iuffer, according as Heaven ilall decree.

Cc 3 Thus

S E R M. Thus flialt thou he c:c-te(l to take the pro-
__--- pereft mcaltires for defence, by endcavour-

ing to secure an interest in Hi; favour, who,
iln thIe time r trlrrblc, can l:T.ie thee inl his
pavilion. Thy mind shall adjust itself to
follow the order of his providence. Thou
1halt he enabled, with equanimity and ftea-
dincfs, to hold thy course through life. Si-
pally,

.IN the fifth place, by accustoming our-

selves to such serious views of life, our ex-
ceffive fondness for life itself will be mo-
deratcd, and our minds gradually formed
to with and to long for a betc:- world. If
we know tha:t our continuance here is to be
flort, and that we are intended by our
Maker for a more lasting state, and for em-
ployments of a nature altogether different
from those which now occupy the bufv, or
amnule the vain, we mufl furcly be con-
vinced, that it is of the highest consequence
to prepare ourselves for so important a
change. This view of our duty is fre-
quently held up to us in the sacred writings;

and

and hence religion becomes, though not a S ERM.

XIII.

morose, yet a grave and solemn principle, _
calling off the attention of men from light
pursuits, to those which are of cternal mo-
ment. What is a man profitcd if ie Jhall
gain the whole world, and lfe his own foul;
if he Ihall lead a life of thoughtlefis miilt
on earth, and exclude himself from eterna
felicity in heaven ? Worldly affeaion, and
sensual pleasure, depress all our higher powers.
They form an unnatural union between the
human foul and this earth, which was only
designed for its temporary abode. They
attach it too strongly to objects from which
it must shortly part. They alienate its de-
fires from God and heaven, and dejed it
with flavilh and unmanly fears of death.
Whereas, by the discipline of religious fe-
rioufnefs, it is gradually loosened from the
fetters of sense. Assisted to discover the
vanity of this world, it rifes above it; and
in the hours of fobcr thought, cultivates con-
necion with those divine and immortal oh-
jeds, among which it is designed to dwell.

C c 4 EIOUGc

S .RM. ENouctI lias now been said to convince

XIII.
,_ -.-any thinking person of the juttice, and rea-

fonableneis, of the maxims in the text; and
to (how, that, on various occasions, fJrrow
may be better than laughter. Wouldst thou
acquire the habit of recollection, and fix the
inciples of thy conduct; wouldst thou be
1U up to thy Creator and Redeemer, and
be formed to fcntiments of piety and devo-
tion ; wouldll thou be acquainted with thole
mild and teinlcr affedions which delight the
compafilonate and humane; wouldst thou
have the power of sensual appetites tamed
and correced, and thy foul railed above the
ignoble love of life, and fear of death ? Go,
my brother, go-not to scenes of pleasure
and riot, not to the house of feafling and
mirth-but to the silent house of mourn-
ing; and adventure to dwell for a while
among objedts that will soften thy heart.
Contemplate the lifeless remains of what
once was fair and flourilhing. Bring home
to thyself the vicissitudes of life. Recal the
remembrance of the friend, the parent, ar
the child, whom thou tenderly lovcdfl. Iook

back

back on the days of formler cars; and think s E R M.

XIII.

on the companions of thy youth, who now ,
lleep in the dust. Let the vanity, the mu-
tability, and the sorrows of the human estate,
rife in full profpet before thee; and though
thy countenance may be made fld, t'y heart
/hall be made better. This iadnefs, though
for the present it dejects, yet fiall in the
end fortify thy spirit; inlpiring thee with
such sentiments, and prompting such relo-
lutions, as shall enable thee to enjoy, with
mbre real advantage, the reft of life. Dif-
positions of this nature form one part of
the character of those mourners whom our
Saviour hath pronounced blefd; and of
those to whom it Is promied, that si wing
in tears they Jball reap in joy 1-. A great
difference there is between being serious
and melancholy; and a melancholy too
there is of that kind which defervcs to be
sometimes indulged.

Religion hath, on the whole, provided

for every good man abundant materials of
consolation and relief. How dark soever

t M.rth 4
. 4. Pflim cxni. 5.

the

S . R M. the present face of nature may appear, it

XIII.
__- difpcls the darkness, when it brings into

view the entire fyfiem of things, and ex-
tends our survey to the whole kingdom of
God. It represents what we now behold
as onlv a part, and a small part, of the ge-
neral order. It aflures us, that though here,
for wile ends, nifery and sorrow are per-
mitted to have place, these temporary evils
{hall, in the end, advance the happiness of
all who love God, and are faithful to their
duty. It shows them this mixed and con-
fused scene vanishing by degrees away, and
preparing the introduction ofthat state, where
the house of mourning shall be shut up for
ever ; where no tears are seen, and no
groans heard; where no hopes are fruf-
trated, and no virtuous connections dif-
solved; but where, under the light of the
divine countenance, goodness shall flourifli
in perpetual felicity. Thus, though reli-
gion may occasionally chasten our mirth
with sadness of countenance, yet under that
sadness it allows not the hearts of good men
to fink. It calls upon them to rejoice, le-

,a. t:l

,au-tc the Lor-d rcigneth whbo is tIhcir roc,, and S E R M.
the moil high God bo is their R,/c,:cr. ,
Reason likewise joins her voice with that of
religion; forbidding us to make peevilh and
unrcafonable complaints of human life, or
injuriously to ascribe to it more evil than it
contains. Mixed as the present state is,
ihe pronounces, that generally, if not al-
ways, there is more happiness than misery,
more pleafwre than pain, in the condition
of man.

S }. R-

# SERMON XIV. On the divine GOVERNMENT of the PASSIONS of MEN. PSALM lxxvi. 10. Surely, the wrath of man shall praise thee; the remainder of wrath shall thou restrain.

[ 396 ]

SERMON XIV,
On the divine GOVERNMENT of thle

PASSIONS of MEN.

PSALM lXXvi. 10.
Surely, the wrath of man Jhall praise thee;

the remainder of wrath fl alt thou refirain.
SERM. T HIS Pfalin appears to have been

composed on occalion of some re-

markable deliverance obtained by the Jewifl
nation. It is generally understood to have
been written in the reign of Hezekiah, and
to refer to the formidable invasion of Judxa
by Sennacherib; when the angel of the
Lord, in one night, discomfitcd the whole
Afryrian hofl, and finote them with sudden
deftrudion. To this interposition of the

divine

divine arm, thole exprefioons in the context s E R M.

XIV.

may naturally be applied; Then brake he . .
the arrows of the bow, theJ hih'ld, tbefword,
and the battle. 7hbe Jlot-hearted are poiled;
they have slept their Jlcep; and none of the
men of might have found their bands. At
tby rebuke, 0 God of Jacob, both the chariot
and the hotfe are caf into a dead Jleep. In
the text, we have the wife and religious
reflection of the Pfalmifl upon the violent
deligns which had been carried on by the
enemies of his country, and upon the issue
to which Providence had brought them.
Surely, the wratb of man hall praie thee.
By the wrath of man, we are to undertand
all that the impetuosity of human pafions
can devise or execute; the projecs of am-
bition and resentment, the rage of perfecu-
tion, the fury of war; the dilbrders which
violence produces in private life, and the
public commotions which it excites in the
world. All these shall praif God, not with
their intention and design, nor by their na-
tive tendency; but by those wife and good
purposes, which his providence makes them

accomplilh;

S F R M. accomplish; from their poison extra&ing
,._.._ health, and converting things which in

theminelves are pernicious, into infiruments
of his glory, and of public benefit: So that,
though the wrath of man worketh not the
rigbhteoiifefi of God, it is nevertheless forced
and compelled to minister to his praise.
The Psalmist adds, the remainder of wrath
Jfialt thou restrain; that is, God will allow
scope to the wrath of man as far as it an-
fwers his good purposes, and is subservient
to his praise; the reft of it {hall be curbed
and bound up. When it would attempt to
go beyond its prescribed limit, he fays to it,
as to the waters of the ocean, HitbertoJhalh
tbou come, but no further; and here tlall thy
proud waves be flayed.

All this shall be fully verified and de-

clared by the last issue of things; when we
ihall be able mote clearly to trace the di-
vine administration through its several steps,
by feeing the consummation of the whole.
In some cafes, it may be reserved for this
period, to unfold the mysterious wisdom
of Heaven. But in general, as much of

t.

the divine conduac is at present manifest, s i R M.
as gives just ground for the assertion in the iV
text. In the sequel of this discourse, I shall
endeavour to illustrate and confirm it. I
Ihall show in what manner the wrath of
man is made to praise the power, the wis-
dom, the justice, and the goodness of God.

I BEGIN with this observation, That in

order to accomplish the great purposes car-
ried on by the Government of the Univcrfe,
it is necessary that the divine perfecions be
displayed before mankind, in a sensible and
flriking manner. We are not to conceive
the Supreme Being as hereby seeking praise
to himself, from a principle of ostentation or
vain glory. Independent and felf-fufficient,
he reft8 in the enjoyment of his own beati-
tude. His praise consists in the general
order and welfare of his creation. This
end cannot be attained, unless mankind be
made to feel the fubjetion under which
they are placed. They must be taught to
admire and adore their sovereign. They
mutf he overawed by the view of a high

hand,

S ER M. hand, which can at plealsre controul thei?

XIV.
.- -I ations, and render them subservient to

purpofcs which they neither foresaw nor
intended. Hence the propriety of God's
making the wtrath of man to prafc hbim.
We easily conceive in what manner the
heavens and the earth are said to praifc
God, as they are standing monuments of
that supreme perfecion which is displayed
in their creation. The virtues of good
men obviously praise him, by exhibiting
his image, and refledinlg back his glory.
But when even the vices and inordinate
paflions of bad men arc made to praise him,
in consequence of the uleful purposes which
they are compelled to accomplih, this, in
particular manner, diftinguilhes and fig-
nalizes a divine hand; this opens a more
wonderful prolped of the administration of
Heaven, than if all its fubjeds had been
loval and willingly obedient, and the course
of human affairs had proceeded in a quiet
and regular tenour.

X 1. THE

I. THlE wrath of man redounds to the SERM.

praile of divine power. It brings it forth I
with fitll and awful lustre, to the view of
mankind. To reign with sovereign com-
mand amidst the most turbulent and difor-
dered fate of things, both in the natural
and moral world, is the peculiar glory of
omnipotence. Hence God is described in
Scripture asfitting Sn the food, riding on the
wings of the wind, dwelling in the darkness
and the tcmpllj; thit is, making the mos
violent powers in the universe minister to
his will, giving thelm Ifope, or reltraining
them, according as ilits the purposes of his
dominion. As heJfill, at his pleasure, tbe
raging f the fias, and the ne oe of their
waves, in like manner, be fills the tumults
of the people. When the paflions of men
are molt inflamed, and their designs just
ripe for burfling into execution, often, by
'oln utnexpcted interpolition, he calls
upon the world to obfcrve that there is one
higher than the highest on earth, who can
frtsltrate their devices in a moment, ana
command the earth to be fill !,/ore n hm.

\VO. II. D d Proud

s :R M. Proud fleets, destincd to carry deiruclirnl
XIV.

J to neighbouring kingdoms, may cover the

ocean. He blows with his wind, and they
are scattered. Mighty armies may go forti
to the field in all the glory of humn:a
Itrcltgail; but the issues of battle are with
hiin. He suspends on hiigh the invifbhle
balance which weighs the fatc of nationc.
According as the scale inclines, he gives to
Ionic flight event the power of deciding the
contcfl. He clouds the sky with darknils,
or opens the windows of heaven to Ict
forth their flood. He dejeds the hearts of
the brave with sudden terrour, and render,
the hands of the firong weak and unpler-
forming, at the critical moment. A thou-
land unseen ministers tland ready to be the
infltrments of his power, in humbling the
pride, and checking the efforts of the wrath
of man. Thus, in the inflance of haughty
Sennacherib, and that boasted tempest of
wrath which he threatened to pour upon
all the Jewilh nation; / will pult Ny lo'k,
fays the Almighty, in t/9' no,

no amt

: br'idlk
ithy t lipsr, and I will turn t/,.e back I,) tie

woly

was by 'which thob carmeJi J. In that night S ER M.
the destroying angel smote the hofl, and IV
he departed with fiame 'f face to his own
land. W1hen the heathen rage, and the peo-
ple imagine a vain kting; when the kings of
the earth iet themselves, and its rulers take
counsel tggelher; He that fiteth in the Ilca-
iensf hall laugh; the Lord

l ,all bld thbm in

derf/on t.

*II. THI wrath of man is made to praise

the wisdom as well as the power of God.
Nothing difllays moic remarkably the ad-
mirable counsel of heaven, than its arrang-
ing the train of events in such a manner,
that the unruly palfions of the wicked Ihall
contribute to overthrow their own designs.
History abounds with examples of their
being rendered the unconscious ministers of
Providence, to accomplilh purposes diredly
opposite to those which they had in view.
Thus the cruelty of the sons of Jacob, in
pursuing the. defirulion of their brother

2 Kings xix. 23. t Psalm ii. ,, 2, 3.

D d 2 Joseph,

S v.M Joseph, became the means of cffecing his
C--. high advancement. Thus the wrath of

Pharaoh against the lfraelites, and his un-
jus attempts to detain them in bondage,
proved the occasion of bringing them forth
from the land of slavery, with signal mark,
of the favour rs Heaven. Thus the inhu-
man plan which Haman had formed for
rnining Mordecai, and extirpating the
whole Jewilh nation, paved the way for
M\ordecci's high promotion, and for the
triumph of the Jews over all their ene-
mics.

After this manner the Almighty fnarelb

the wicked in the worts of their hands; and
creds his own counsel upon the ruin of
theirs. Thofc events which, viewed apart,
appear as ipots in the divine administration,
when conlidered in conneEion with all
their consequences, are often found to give
it additional lustre. The beauty and mag-
nificence of the universe are much height-
ened, by its being an extenfivc and compli-
:ated fyltem; in which a variety offprings
are made to play, and a multitude of dif-

ferent

fcrent movements are, with molt admirable S F R M.
art, regulated and kept in order. Inter- . .
fering intcrefts, and jarring paflions, arc in
filch manner balanced against one another;
such proper checks are placed on the vio-
lence of human pursuits; and the wratb of
nian is made to to hold its course, that how
opposite soever the several motions seem to
be, yet they concur and meet at last in
one direcion. \While, among the multi-
tudes that dwell on the face of the earth,
some are iubmiffive to the divine authority;
tome rife up in rebellion against it; others,
absorbed in their pleasures and pursuits, are
totally inattentive to it; they arc all so
moved by an imperceptible influence from
above, that the zeal of the dutiful, the
wrath of the rebellious, and the indiffrence,
of the careless, contribute finally to the
glory of God. All are governed in such a
way as suits their powers, and is confident
with rational freedom, yet all are fubjeded
to the neceflity of fulfilling the eternal
purposes of Heaven. This depth of di-
vine wisdom in the adminiltration of the-

D d 3 universe,

SERM. universe, cxceed:; ail hIuman comprehen-

XIV.
,_- sion, and affords everlasting subject of ado-

ration and pra.ise.

III. Tl E wrait rs manl praises the justice

of God, by being employed as the intnru-
ment of inflicing punifiment upon finners.
Did bad men trace the course of events in
their life with attentive eye, they might
easily difcovcr the greatclt part of the dil-
afers which they fuffcr to be brought upon
them by their own ungoverned pafions.
The fuceefiton of caules and cffcCts is lo
contrived by Providence, that the wrath
which they meant to pour forth on others,
frequently recoils, by its effeds, upon them-
selves. But supposing them to escape thole
external mischiefs which violent paflions na-
turally occasion, they cannot evade the in-
ternal misery which they produce. The
constitution of things is framed with such
profound wisdom, that the divine laws, in
every event, execute themselves against
the finner, and carry their fandion in their
own bosom. The Supreme Being has no

occasion

nccal!on to unlock the prilons of the dce!e, s F R M.
or to call down the thunder fiom heavcn, * ,'
in order to punifil the wrath ors nmn. He
carries on the ad(minitiration of juflice with
more fimplicitv, and dignii). It is fuflicient
that he allow tho!e fierce pafjions which
render bad men the disturbers of others, to
operate on their own hearts. I'e (drivers
them up to t!henielves, and they become
their own torminetors. B)efre the world
they may ditfuilc their lifucrings; hut it is
well known, that to be inwardly torn with
de(pite, revenge and wrathful passions, is
the mol intcnec of all mierv. In thus con-
neiling the punilhnent with the crime,
making their uon uwiccdncfs to replrov,
Ihem, na, t//,!." lar Jcli jidiis to corr,? Irn;,
tlhe avenging hand of a righteous Gover-
nour i. ConTip)icuous ; and thus the obtirva-
tion of the Pialmifl is fully vcrified ; /tc
wcic"d biZv,' d/raw' oit ther f,.ior4I and
brit t1heir bou, ti c./, //, l-n tic por and
ncedi; l!t ttheir fwJrd f1./ail cr. 1 inlo sLir

' I'.;!'m ^v^ii. n, i;.

I) d 4 Tlhe

s i. 1t The wralth rs oa allfb prailes the jnltic.

of God in the punifhnent of other crimi-
nals, as well as of the wrathful themfelve<.
Ambitious and lawlels men are let loosc
upon eacl other, that without any super-
natural interposition, they may fulfil the
just vengeance of heaven in their mutulal
dcftruction. They may occalionally he
cemented together by conspiracy againlt
the just; but as no firm nor lasting bond
can unite themn, they become at lalt the
prey of mutual jcaloufy, firife and fraud.
For a time they may go on, and seem to
prosper. The justice of Heaven may ap-
pear to slumber; but it is awake; and only
waits till the meafuire of their iniquity he
full. God reprclcnts himlelf in Scripture
a; fomctimes permitting wickedness to arile
to an overgrown height, on purpose that
its ruin may he greater, and more exem-
plary. He fivs to the tyrant of Egypt,
thatfor this canst hE bad r.aif,i in :./, th it
ic, had allowed him to prosper and he ex-
alted, that he ;mightfJeIC i hbini hi.r power .
.and!hat hi.: name mig7t be decrlrcd tlroiil,-

oa;t

rlt all the earth *. The divine adminifira- S r R M.
tion is glorified in the punilhment contrived ,__
for the workers of iniquity, as well as in
the reward prepared for the righteous. This
is the prrpofi which the Lird hath purpofJd
r/on all the earth; and lhis is the hand that
is flretcbedforth over all the naticsr t.

IV. TIIE wrath .f man is made to praise

the goodncfs of God. This is the inoft
unexpeCted of its effects; and therefore
requires to be the most full) illuftrlted.
All the operations of the government of the
Deity may be ultimately resolved into good-
ness. His power, and wisdom, and justice,
all conduce to general happiness and order.
Among the means which he uses for ac-
complilhing this end, it will be found that
the wrath of man, through his over-ruling
direction, possesses a considerable place.

First, it is employed by God as an useful

inftrment of discipline and correction to
the virtuous. The storms which ambition
and pride raise among mankind, he permits

Eyod. ix. 16. f If:iah yiv. 26.

with

S ERM. with the lfme intention that he fends forth
XIV.

tcmpcfts among thc elements; to clear the
atmolphere of noxious vapours, and to l:u-
rify it from that corruption which all tlins
contrad by too much reft. When wicked
men prevail in their designs, and exercie
the power wlhich they have gained with a
heavy and oppressive hand, the virtuous arc
apt to exclaim, in bitterneft of foul, Where
is the Lord? and where the sceptre of
righteouficfs and truth ? Hatb Godforgottcn
to be gracious ? or doth he indeed fee, and
is there knrwlcdge in the mofi high --
Their opprcffors are, in truth, no more
than the miniftcrs of God to them for good.
He fees that they stand in need of correction,
and therefore raises up enemies against them,
in order to cure the intemperance of pro-
fperity; and to produce, in the fcrious
hours of affliction, proper reflections upon
their duty, and their past errours.

In this light the disturbers of the earth

are often represented in Scripture; as
scourges in the hand of God, employed to
infliCt chafliflment upon a degenerating

people.

rcople. They are commiflioned for the SF.RM.
cxccution of righteous and wife purposes, -
concealed from themselves; and when their
coinniilic(; is fulfilled, they arc recalled, and
ieftroyed. Of this we have a remarkable
example in the use which God mnde of the
king of Assyria, with respect to the people
of Israel. I willfend him againfl an hyo-
critical natlion, and agcinl? the p'plec of smy
wrath will I give him a charge, to take the
Jpoil, and to take the pr1ey. iwbiit, he
medneth not so; neither doth his bcarr thiik
fJ ; but it is in his heart to delroy,-1 and cut
J nations not a few. Yib'ercfrc it Jh,7ll
come to pffi, that when the Lord ha:b per-
f.rmcd his whole work tupon mount Zion and
cn Jcritrilein, I will punithb the fruit of the
Jlout heart of the king ofA jfria, and thbeglry
'f his high looks *. In vain, then, doth the
wrath of mn lift itself up against God. He
fiitb, by the Jrcength of my hand I have dcne
it, aid by my wisdom, for I am prudent.
Shall the ax bifl itef efagaiyfl him that hew-
clb therewith ? or Jhall the saw magnfy it-

Isaiah x. 6, 7. 1z.

fJe

,* ! ti. f4£s a,,i//7 im th,,at Jaketh ;t .' All thing,

_- swhether they will it or not, nmuft ,wrK, t,-

3etberj;, r ,'d to themr that love Gd. The'
wrabt rs I lm, among the reft, fills ip the
place assigned to it by the ordination of
Heaven. The violent enemy, the promu
conque:-or, and the oppressive tyrant, possel
only the fame flation with the famine, the
peflilence, and the flood. Their triumphs
are no more than the accomplifliment (t
God's corredion ; anid tc remlaiN'ier oftbeir
wcrabth Jbll be rtilrain.

SECONDLY, God makes the wrcrath cf

man contribut. to the benefit of the vir-
tuous, by rendering it the means of im-
proving and signalizing their graces; and of
railinl thelm, thereby, to higher honour and
glory. Had humian affairs proceeded in :;a
orderly train, and no opposition been made
to religion and virtue by the violence of the
wicked, what room would have been left
for some of the highest and mofl generou.
exertions of the loul of man ? How many
llilinin cxamplrcs of fortitude, conftanc,

a'Ti

and patience, would have been lss to the sr.l
world ? What a field of virtues pcculiar to -.-.-
a slate of discipline had lain uncultivated?
Spirits of a higher order possess a slate of
cftablilhcd virtue, that ilands in need of no
lich trials and improvements. Iut to u,,
who are only under education for such a
slate, it belongq to pats through the furnace,
that our fouls may be tried, refined, a:ld
brightened. We mult fland the conflic,
that we may be graced and crowned as con-
querors. The wrath tf man opens the field
to glory ; calls us forth to the most ditill-
guifihed cxercife of acive virtue, and forms
us to all thole suffering graces which arc
among the highest ornaments of the human
foul. It is thus, that the illufirious hand of
true patriots and heroes, of confcffors and
martyrs, have been set forth to the admira-
tion of all ages, as lights of the wor-l';
while the rage and fur)' of enemies, instead
of bearing them down, have only served 1i
exalt and dignify them more.

TIIIRDLY, the wrath of li7n is often
made to advance the temporal propcrity of

4 the

S . R M. righteous. The occasional diftrc!ls which
XIV..

i it brings upon them frequently lay the foun-

dation of their future luccels. The vic,-
lence with which wicked men pursue their
refentnent, defeats its own purpolc; and
engages the world on the fide of the vir-
tuous, whom they persecute. The attempti
of malice to blacken and defame them,
bring forth their characlers with more ad-
vantage, to the view of impartial beholder..
The extremities to which they are reduced
by injultice and oppression, rouze their cou-
rage and aCtivity; and often give occasion
to such vigorous efforts in their jus defence,
as overcome all oppolition, and terminate
in prosperity and luccefs. Even in cafcl
where the wrath of man appears to prcvail
over the peaceable and the jus, it is fre-
quently, in its issue, converted into a blef-
sing. How many have had reason to be
thankful, for being disappointed by their
enemies in dcfigns which they carnefily
pursued, but which, if fuccefsfullv accom-
plifhed, they have afterwards fccn, would
have occasioned their ruin? Ibrh/ is wife

2 and

,:/nd wcil observe, t!,f ll hiings, even he fJa! S E R M.
,,derJfiand the I6vin-ndnefis f !c ,rd *.
s h '

\hilc the w r.;th!b f man thu. praises God

by the advantages which it is made to bring
to good men, as individuals, the divine hand
i lequally apparent in the limilar effects
wh.ic it is appointed to produce to nations
;>:ld ficleties. When wars and commo-
tions Ihake the earth, when faLaions rage,
and intestine divilions embroil kingdoms
rliat before were fiourifling, Providence
ieems, at first view, to have abandoned
public affairs to the mifiule of human pas-
lions. Yet from the midst of this confusion
order is often made to spring; and from
these mischiefs lasting advantages to arise.
By such convulsions, nations are rouzed
from that dangerous lethargy into which
flowing wealth, long peace, and growing
effeminacy of manners had funk them.
They are awakened to discern their true
interests; and taught to take proper mea-
lures for security and defence against all
their foes. Inveterate prejudices are cor-

* P lam crii. 34.

recaJl;

S E (1 M. reded; and latent sources of danger arc
«--JX discovercd. Public spirit is called forth;

and larger views of national happiness arc
formed. The corruptions to which every
government is liable, are often recified by
a ferment in the political body, as noxious
humours in the animal frame are carried off
by the shock of a disease. Attempts made
against a wife and well established civil con-
flitution, tend in the issue to strengthen it;
and the dilordcrs of licentiousness and sac-
tion, teach men more highly to prize the
blefllngs of tranquillity and legal protetion.

l1O11RI ' i.Y, the wrath 'f man, when it

breaks forth in the pcrfecution of religion,
praises the divine goodness, by being ren-
dered conducive to the advancement of truth
and propagation of religion in the world.
The church of God, since the days of its
infancy, hath never been entirely exempted
from the wrath of the workl ; and in thole
ages, during which it was molt exposed t(
that wrath, it hath always flourithed the
most. In vain the policy and the rage of

mIen

men united their efforts to extinguish this S ERM.
divine light. Though all the four winds .
blew againfi it, it only (hone brighter,
and flamed higher. 'Many waters xcould
not quench it, nor all the floods drown it.
The constancy and fortitude of those who
suffered for the truth, had a much greater
effea in increasing the number of converts,
than all the terror and cruelty of perfecu-
tors, in diminifhing'it. By this means, the
wrath of man was made to turn against it-
self, to the deftrudion of its own purpose;
like waves, which assaulting a rock with
impotent fury, discover its immoveable fta-
bility, while they dash themselves in pieces
at its feet.

I SHALL only add one other instance of

the wrath of man prailing God, by accom-
plifhing ends of most extensive benefit to
mankind. Never did the rage and malice
of the wicked imagine that they had ob-
tained a more complete triumph, than in
the death of Jesus Christ. When they had
executed their purpose of making him susser

VoL. II. 1. e cs

s E R l. as a malefador, they were confident that
cc__ they had extinguiihed his name, and dif-

comfited his followers for ever. Behold
how feeble are the efforts of the wrath of
man against the decree of Heaven! All
that they intended to overthrow, they mos
effectually established. The death of Christ
was, in the counsels of Heaven, the spring
of evcrlalfing life to the.faithful. The croft
on which he suffered with apparent igno-
miny, became the flandard of eternal honour
to him; the enlign under which his fol-
lowers assembled, and triumphed. He who,
at his plealurc, rejfralns the remainder of
wrath, suffered the rage of our Saviour's
enemies to suggest no other things to them
than what, long before, He had determined,
and his prophets had foretold. They all
conspired to render the whole scene of
Christ's sufferings exactly conformable to
the original, predicted plan of divine mercy
and goodness; and each of them contri-
buted his share to accomplish that great un-
dertaking, which none of them in the least
underflood, nor meant to promote. - S,

rcmalrkable

remarkable an instance as this, fully afcer- s F RM.
tained in Scripture, of the wrath of mar,
miniitcring to the designs of Heaven, ought
to be frequently in our eye; as an exem-
plification of the conduct of Providence in
many other cafes, where we have not so
much light afforded us for tracing its ways.

BY this induction of particulars, the doc-

trine contained in the text is plainly and
fully verified. We have seen, that the dif-
orders which the pride and pailions of men
occasion in the world, though they take rife
from the corruption of human nature in
this fallen state, yet are so overruled by Pro-
vidence, as to redound to His honour and
glory who governs all. They illufirate be-
fore the world the divine perfetions in the
adminfltration of the universe. They serve
the purposes of moral and religious im-
provement to the fouls of men. By a secret
tendency, they advance the welfare of those
whom they appear to threaten with evil.
Surely, 0 God!. the wrath of man jal praif
thee; the remaind'r of wrath Jialt thou re-

F e 2 jraui

S F RM. jfraln.-In thy hand it is; and thou never
XIV. ,---.. lettelf it forth but in weight and measure.

It is wild and intractable in its nature; but
Thou tames it. It is blind and headlong
in its impulse; but Thou directef it. It
firuggles continually to break its chain; hut
Thou confineft it; Thou retrencheft all the
fupcrfluity of its fury.--Let us now con-
fider, what improvement is to be made of this
meditation on the ways of Providence.

IN the first place, let it lead us to a reli-

gious contemplation of the hand of God
in all the tranfafions of the world. In the
ordinary course of human affairs, we be-
hold a very mixed and busy scene; the
passions of men variously agitated, and new
changes daily taking place upon this Rage
of time. We behold peace and war alter-
nately returning; the fortunes of private
men riling and falling; and Rates and na-
tions partaking of the fame vicissitude. In
all this, if we attend only to the operation
of external causes, and to the mere rotation
'of events, we view no more than the ina-

nimate

ninate part of nature; we flop at the fur- s ER M.
face of things; we contemplate the great x-
fpedacle which is presented to us, not with
the eyes of rational and intelligent beings.
The life and beauty of the universe arises
from the view of that wisdom and goodncfs
which animates and conduts the whole,
and unites all the parts in one great de-
sign. There is an eternal mind who puts
all those wheels in motion; himself remain-
ing for ever at reit. Nothing is void of
God. Even in the paflions and ragings of
men, He is to be found; and where they
imagine they guide themselves, they are
guided and controuled by his hand. What
iblemn thoughts and devout affecdions ought
this meditation to inspire; when in view-
ing the affairs of the world, we attend not
merely to the adings of men, but to the
ways of God; and conlider ourselves, and
all our concerns, as includcd in his high
administration !

IN the second place, the dotrine which
has been illustrated (hould prevent us from

E e 3 ccnfuring

SE RM, . censuring Providence, on account of any
L_-_i seeming disorders and evils which at prefcnt

take place in the world. The various in-
stances which have been pointed out in thia
discourse, of human passion and wickedness
rendered subservient to wife and useful ends,
give us the highest reason to conclude that,
in all other cafes of seeming evil, the like
ends are carried on. This ought to satisfy
our mind, even when the profpet is most
dark and discouraging. The plans of di-
vine wisdom arc too large and comprehen-
five to be discerned by us in all their extent;
and where we fee only by parts, we must
frequently be at a loss in judging of the
whole. The way of God is in the sea and
bis path in the great waters; hisfootJfeps arc
not known *. But although thou fayc/J tbho
canfl notfee him, yet judgment is before him;
therefore trftl thou in him t. As in the
natural world, no real deformity is found,
nothing but what has either some orna-
ment, or some use; so in the moral world,

Pfa!m lxxvii. 19. t Job, xxxv, 14.

(he

the most irregular and deformed appear- SER. M.

XI'.

ances contribute in one way or other to the G--1
order of the whole. The Supreme Being,
from the molt opposite and difigreeing
principles, forms universal concord; and
adapts even the most harfli and diflonant
notes to the harmony of his praise. As lie
hath reared the goodly frame of n.ture
from various and jarring elements, and
hath fettled it in peace; lo he hath formed
such an union by his providence of the
more various interests, and more jarring
paifions of men, that they all conspire to
his glory, and co-operate for general good.
-How amazing is that wisdom, which
comprehends such infinite diversities, and
contrarieties, within its fcheine! How pow-
erful that hand, which bends to its own
purpose the good and the had, the busy
and the idle, the friends and the foes of
truth; which obliges them all to hold on
their courle to his glory, though divided
from one another by a multiplicity of pur-
suits, and differing often from themselves;
and while they all move at their own frec-

E e 4 dnm,

S . R M. dom, yet by a fecrct inflluencC, winds and

turns them at his will! 0 the dtpth ffit l.
riches, both ls the w'i/fi, , and knZwulc('Lgc r
God! How Ilulf lr'cl/T a ,re his judglments,
and his ways pjlfujiliniig oult .'

IN the third place, we fee, from what

has hccn slid, how much realon there is
for submission to the decrees of Heaven.
Whatever distresses we susser from the
wrath of nman, we have ground to believe
that they befall not in vain. In the midll
of human violence, or opprellion, we are
not left to be the sport of fo:tune. Higher
counl;ls arc concerned. Wilf and good
designs are going on. God is always car-
rying forward his own purposes; and if
these terminate in his glory, which is ever
the fime with the felicity of the righteous,
is not this a fuflicient reason for our calm
and chearful acquiescence ?

Hence also, to conclude, arises the moil

powerful argument for studying, with zeal-
ous alfiduity, to gain the favour and pro-

Rom. xi. 33.

tedion

tection of the Almighty. If his displeasure SERM.

XIV.

hang over our heads, all things around us
may be just ohjecs ofterrour. For against
him, there is no defence. The moi violent
powers in nature are miniflers to him.
Iormidable, indeed, may prove the wrath

ms man, if he be plealed to let it forth

against us. To him, but not to ui, it be-
longs to restrain it at pleasure. Whereas,
when we are placed under his protecion,
all human wrath is div.fted of it, terrours.

h be bcfor us, who or what can be agailiJ

us ? Let us purfle the meafiur;e which he
hath appointed for ohtatilingi his grace hv
faith, repentance and a holy life, and we
shall have no reason to he afr,,id 'f cvil
tidings; our hearts will be fxir. tris';: in
the Lord. When the religious fear of God
pofleffes the heart, it expels the ignolle
fear of man ; and becomes the principle of
courage and magnanimity. The Lord is
a buckler and a jtidd to them that serve
him. 11When be arifith, his enem:is jlall be
Jfattered, asfinoke ir Ir'ivcn awar, Iand as
cbff brffore the wiz,. He givcth JltrcNtb

and

S E R M. and viclory to his people; he cloatheth them

XIV.
L.V withb salvation. The wrath of man la!!l

praie him; and the remainder of rath Jhall
be restrain.

S E R-

# SERMON XV. On the IMPORTANCE of RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE to MANKIND. Preached before the Society in Scotland for propagating Christian Knowledge. ISAIAH xi. 9. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my ...

[ 427 3

SERMON XV.
On the IMPORTANCE of RELIGIOUS

KNOWLEDGE to MANKIND.
Preached before the Society in Scotland for propagating

Chriltian Knowledge.

ISAIAHl xi. 9.
tbeyjhall not burt nor destroy in all nm holy

mountain; for the earthJball e full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters co-
ver the fia.

HIS passage of Scripture is under- SERM.
stood, by all Chriflian interpreters, to xV.

refer to the days of the Gospel. The Pro-
phet describes, in the context, the aufpi-
cious influence of the Mefliah's reign, as

extending

Sl R ii. extending over all nature, and produtcinr

XV.
> - Ui'uive1rfil felicity. The filll accomplitl-

mcnt of this iredidion is yet future, and
rcfliects rome more advanced period of tilh
kingdom of C;od, when true religion Ihall
univerlially prevail, and the native tendency
of the (;ofpel attain its entire effect. In
the 1)rol'pcd of this event, the Prophet
feerns to rife above himielf, and celebrates
that happy age in the most flillimle firain
of eaflern poetry. He opens a beautiful
view of the ltate of the world, as a slate of
returning innocence. He reprelents all
nature fiourilhing iln leace; discord and
guile alolilhed; the most hostile natures
reconciled, and the moRt lavage, reformed
and tamed. The wolfyhall dwell with the
lamb, and the leopard lie doewn witb tlt
kid; and tI, c C(-f, and the young lion, and the
fitlilg trgitbhr,nd at a little cbild Jhall leam
tlnm. The lion Jhall eat Jlraw like te o;:
and the sicking childJball play on the bole of
tbe asp, and the wr'ened cbild f/all put bis
band on the cockatrice de. They Jhall not
hurt nor destroy in all my boly mountain;

fir

fir the carthJh l be fill of the I ;;.wIdg of s . R M.
thb Lord, as the wata'rs coer th ca. v

Upon reading thcie words, we must im-

mediately perceive the great encouragement
which they give to all good dceigns for pro-
moting religion in the world. When we
tngage in these, we have the comfort of
being engaged, not only in a good cauie,
hut also in one that shall undoubtedlv be
firccelsfill. For we are here afli.red by the
divine promile, that truth and righteoufi)cns
shall at length prevail, and that the in-
creasing influence of religion shall introduce
general happinels. It is a plcafing and ani-
mating refledion, that in carring on such
designs, we ad upon the divine plan ; and
co-operate with God for advancing the
kingdom of the Mefliah. W\ have no rca-
son to be discouraged by any unfavourable
circunftances which at preernt oppose c(ur
pious endeavours. Though the ignorance,
fuperitition, and corruption, which now ill1
so great a part of the world, have a dark
and mysterious asped, it is not bcvond the
power of that Supreme Being who brings

light

SE R M. light out of darkness, to clear up those per-
XV.

plcxing appearances, and gradually to ex-
tricate mankind from the labyrinth of ig-
norance and errour. Let us confider how
improbable it seemed, when the gospel was
firlt published, that it ihould extend so far,
and overthrow so much efRabliihed fuperfli-
tion, as it has already done. There is no-
thing, in the present Ilate of the world, to
render it more unlikely that it Shall one day
be universally received, and prevail in its
full influence. At the rife of Chriltianity,
the disproportion was, at least, as great,
between the apparent human causes, and
the effect which has actually been produced,
as there is, in our age, between the circum-
stances of religion in the world, and the
effec which we farther expea. hbe Sun
of righteoufnefi having already exerted its
influence in breaking through the thicken
darkness, we may justly hope, that it is
powerful enough to dispel all remaining
obscurity; and that it will ascend by de-
grees to that perfec day, when healingJball
be under its wings to all the nations. A

i3 lilt.c

little one /hall become a thou/and; and a/mall S E R M.
cne, aJlrong nation. I the Lord will haJten i_
it in its time *.

BESIDES the prediction w !'ch the text

contains of the future fucce'.; f religion,
it points out also a precise connexion be-
tween the increase of religious knowledge,
and the happiness of mankird. hbeknow-
ledge of the Lord filling the earth, is assigned
as the cause why they Jhall not hurt nor de-
Jiroy in all the holy mountain of God. To
this I am now to lead your thoughts; as
a lul)jed both suited to the occasion of the
present meeting, and proper to be illustrated
in times, wherein total indifference to reli-
gious principles appears to gain ground.
Whether Christianity thall be propagated
farther or not, is treated as a matter of no
great concern to mankind. The opinion
prevails among many, that moral virtue
may subsist, with equal advantage, in-
dependent of religion. For moral princi-
ples, great regard is professed; but articles

Irfiah Ix. 21.

of

SF.RM. of religious belief are held to be abftradc

XV.
,_ tenets, remote from life; points of mern

speculation and debate, the influence of
which is very inconliderable on the acion,
of men. Their gencral conduct, it is coi-
tended, will always proceed upon views
and principles which have more relation to
the present state of things; and religious
knowledge can therefore stand in no necef-
fary connection with their happincfs and
profperity.-How adverse filch opinions
are both to the profefiion and pracice of
religion, is abundantly evident. How ad-
verfc they are to the general welfare and
real interests of mankind, I hope to make
appear to candid minds.

By the knowlcege of the l.ord in the text,

is not to be underfood the natural know-
ledge of God only. It is plain, that the
Prophet speaks of the age of the Meffall,
when more cnlarged dikcoveries should be
made to mankind of the divine perfedions
and government, than unaflifted reason
could attain. The knowledge of the lord,
therefore, comprehends the principles of

Christianity,

Chriflianity, as well as of natural religion SE R M.

Xv.

In order to discern the iinportance of such _*
knowledge to general happiness, we fliall
confider man, I. as an individual; II. as a
member of society.

I. CONSIDERING manl as an individual,

let us inquire, how far the knowledge of
true religion is important, first, to his im-
provement; next, to his consolation.

FIRST, with rcfpct to the improvement

of man; the advancement of his nature in
what is valuable and useful, the acquisition
of such dispositions and habits as fit him for
acting his part with propriety on this stage,
and prepare him for a higher Hate of adion
hereafter; what benefit does he receive, in
these refpeds, from religious knowledge and
belief? It is obvious, that all increase of
knowledge is improvement to the under-
standing. The more that its sphere is en-
larged, the greater number of objects that
are Submitted to its view, especially when
these objecds are of intrinsic excellence, the

VOL. II. F f more

s E R M. more must thole rational powers, which are

xv.
i-v- the glory of man, be in the course of attain.

ing their proper ftrcngth and maturity.
But were the knowledlge of religion merely
speculative, though the peclllation must he
admitted to be noble, yet Ids could be said
of its importance. We recommend it t;
mankind, as forming the heart, and direct-
ing the life. Those pure and exalted con-
ceptions which the Christian religion han
taught us to entertain of the Deity, as the
universal Father and righteous Governour
of the universe, the standard of unfpottcl
perfection, and the author of evcl3 good ani
perse gift; conducting his whole admini-
ftration with an eternal regard to order,
virtue, and truth; ever favouring the caulc
and supporting the interests of righteous
men; and applying, in this direction, the
whole might of omnipotence, and the whole
counsel of unerring wisdom, from the be-
ginning to the end of things; such con-
ceptions both kindle devotion,and strengthen
virtue. They give fortitude to the mind in
the pradtice of righteousness, and eftab!ilh

the

the perfallion of its being our highest in- S F.RM.

XV.
tercft.

All the doctrines peculiar to the Gospel

are great improvements on what the light
of nature had imperfedly fuggefled. A
high dispensation of Providence is made
known, particularly tuited to the exigencies
of man; calculated for recovering him from
that corrupted state into which experience
hears witness that he is fallen, and for re-
.floring him to integrity, and favour with his
Creator. The method of carrying on this
great plan is such as gives us the molf
ftrikingvicws of the importance of righteous-
ness or virtue, and of the high account in
which it stands with God. The Son of
God appeared on the earth, and suffered as
a propitiation for the fins of the world,
with this express intention, that he might
bring in everlaJling rightcoufnefs; that he
might purge our cOnicnces from dead works
to serve te livitn God; that he might re-
deemn s fron all iniquity, and purfj, unto
hiinfr/f a peculiar ptople, zealous of good
wrl.r. ISuch a merciful interposition of

F f 2 the

S F R M. the Creator of the world, while it illil-

xV.
>-^v trioufly dili'lays hlis goodness, and fignalizc.

his concern for the moral interests of man-
kind, affords us, at the fame time, the most
satisfying ground of confidence and truflt.
It offers an object to the mind, on which it
can lay hold for the lecurity of its future
hopes; when, with a certainty far beyond
what any abltrad argument could yield, it
appeals to a diftinguithed fad; and is
enabled to fay, He that spared not his r wn
Son, but delivered him upi fir us all, how
Jball he not with him al o freely give us all
things ~ ?

While the divine Government is thus

placed in a light the most amiable, and most
encouraging to every virtuous mind, there
is, at the fame time, something extremely
awful and solemn in the whole doctrine of
redemption. It is calculated"to Itrike the
mind with reverence for the divine admi-
nifiration. It points at some deep malignity
in fin, at some dreadful consequences flow-
ing from guilt, unknown in their caufce

Rom. viii. 32.

and

and in tl:cr whole effects to us, which SE R M.

XV.

moved the Sovereign of the World to de-
part from the ordinary course of Providence,
and to bring about the restoration of his
fallen creatures by a method so astonishing.
Mankind are hereby awakened to the molt
serious rcflecions. Such views are opened
of the fandity of the divine laws, of the
ftridnets of the divine justice, of the im-
portance of the part which is afligned theln
to act, as serve to prevent their trifling with
human life, and add dignity and iblemnity
to virtue. lTheib great purposes are farther
carried on, by the dilcovery which is made
of the fixed connection in which this life
flands with a future eternal state. \We are
rcprcfentcd as. swing now, 7what wic re to
reap hereafter; undergoing a course of pro-
bation and trial, which, according as it ter-
minates in our improvement, or leaves us
unreformed and corrupted, will difinilss us
to lafling abodes, either of puniihmcnt or
reward. Such a discovery rifes far above
the dubious conjetures, and uncertain rea-
fonings, which mere natural light filggefts

F f 3 concerning

S E R M. concerning the future condition of man-
xv.

kind. Here we find, what alone can pro-
duce any considerable influence on pracice,
explicit promise and threatening; an autho-
ritative fandion given to a law; the Gover-
nour and Judge revealed; and all the mo-
tives which can operate on hope and fear,
brought home to the heart, with Thus fzith
the Lord of HoJts. In a word, a great and
magnificent plan of divine administration is
opened to us, in the Gospel of Christ; and
nothing is omitted that can impress man-
kind with the persuasion of their being all,
in the firideft sense, fubjeds of the moral
government of God.

'THOUGH the hounds of this Diicoulirf

allow us to take only an imperfed view of
the principles of Christian ldodrine, yet the
hints which have been given lay a lhfli-
cient foundation for appealing to every in-
partial mind, whether the knowledge and
belief of such principles he not intimately
connedctd with the improvement, and, by
conlequcnce, witl the happincfs of man.

I reifon

I reason now with such as admit, that virtue s E R M.

xV.

is the great source both of improvement *_
and happiness. Let them lay lwhat ftrcls
they pleafc upon the authority of conscience,
and upon the force and evidence of its dic-
tates; can they refuse to allow, that the
natural tendency of the principles which I
have mentioned, is to support those ditates,
and to confirm that authority; to excite,
on various occasions, the most useful senti-
ments; to provide additional restraints from
vice, and additional motives to every virtue?
Who dares pronounce, that there is no cafe
in which confcicnce fiands in need of flicl
assistance, to direc, where there is so much
uncertainty and darkness; and to prompt,
where there is so much feebleness and irre-
solution, and llch a fatal proneness to vice
and folly ?

But how good foevcr the tendency of

religious principles may be, some will still
call in question their actual significancy,
and influence on life. This tendency is
by various causes defeated. Between the
belief of religious principles and a corre-

F f 4 fpondent

SE R M. fponlcnt pracice, it will be alleged that

xv.
a- _ frequent experience shews there is no ne-

ceflary connection; and that therefore the
propagation of the one, cannot give us any
assurance of proportionable improvements
following in the other.-This, in part, is
granted to be true; as we admit that reli-
gious knowledge and belief are filfceptible
of various degrees, before they arrive at that
real Christian Faith which the Scripture re-
prefcnts as prrifing the heart. But though
the connection between principle and prac-
tice be not neceflary and invariable, it will
not, I suppose, he denied that there is some
connection. Here then one avenue to the
heart is opened. If the tendency of reli-
gious knowledge be good, wisdom must
direct, and duty oblige us to cultivate it.
For tendency will, at least in some cafes,
rife into effect; and, prohably, in more
calis than are known and observed by the
world. Belides the distinguished examples
of true religion and virtue which have, more
or lets, adorned every age of the Christian
ra1, what numbers may there be, in the

more

more lilent and private sc

ncs of life, over- S FR M.

looked by' fipl)erlicial ohfirvers of m;mkind,
on whole hearts and lives religious princi-
Flcs have tile Inoft happy influence? Even
on looie and giddy minds, where thev are
tafr froin operating their full cfflec, their
influence i,, fre(ienltly, not altogetler lofl.
Imnpreflions of religion often check vice in
its career. They prevent it from proceed-
ing its utmost length ; and thoughl thev do
not entirely reform the offender, thcv serve
to imaintain order in focicty. l'erlons wvho
are now had, might probably have heen
worle without them, and the world have
fuffired more from unrestraincd licentious-
nIcl. 1They often folw latent feeds of good-
ness in the heart, which proper circum-
stances and occalions aftenvards ripen;
though the reformation of the offender may
not be so conspicuous, as his former enor-
mities have been. From the native ten-
dency of religious belief, there is reason to
conclude, that those good cfleds of it are
not so rare as some would represent them.
By its nature and tendency, we can better

judge

p -4
SER M. judge (f its effects, than by obir'vatioins

drawn from a luppoled experience, which
often is narrow in its comnpals, and falla-
cious in its concluiions.

The actual influence of principle and be-

lief on mankind, admits of clear illustration
from uncontested matter of fad. They
who hold the good effeds of Chritlian prin-
ciples to be so inconsiderable, as to render
the propagation of them of finall import-
ance, will be at no loss to give us instances
of corrupt principles of belief having had
the mol powerful influence on the world.
Loud complaints we hear from this quarter,
of the direful effects which superstition and
enthufialti have produced; of their having
poisoned the tempers, and transformed the
manners of men; of their having over-
come the ftrongcft retraints of law, of rea-
son, and humanitv. Is this then the cafe
that all principles, except good ones, are of
fluch mighty cne rgy ?-Strange ! that false
religion should be able to do so much, and
true religion so little; that belief, so pow-
trfdl in the one cafe, fhculd be so impo-

tent

tent in the other.-No impartial enquirer, SER M.

XV.

litrelv, can entertain this opinion. The v*
whole hiflory of mankind shows that their
rcligious tenets and principles, of whatever
nature they he, arc of great influence in
forming their charaltcr, ai:d directing their
conduct. Tlie milchicf which falie prin-
ciples have done, affords a good argument
to guard carefully againit errour; but as it
is a proof of what belief can do, it gives
ground to hope the more from it, when
rightly directed. The fame torrent which,
when it is put out of its natural course,
overflows and lays waste a country, adorns
and enriches it, when running in its pro-
per channel. If it he alleged that lilper-
ftition is likely to be more powerful in its
cffetds than trut!l, becatic it agrees better
willh tie follies and corruptions of the
world, we may oppose to this on the other
hand, that truth has the divilne blessing and
thc countcnance of Heven on its fide.
Let us alvavs hope well of a cause that is
,cood in itl'(f, anl beneficial to mankind.
Truth ii mighliv, and will prevail. Let us

fprcad

S F R M. fprcad the incorrlptibcl sied as widely as
- rV-' wv'e can, and trufl in God that he will give

the incral'c. IIaving thus shown the imn-
portance of religious knowledge to man-
kind in the way of improvement, let us,

IN the second place, confider it in the

light of consolation; as bringing aid and
relief to us amilft the difircfies of life.
Hecre religion inconteflably triumphs; and
its happy effects in this rcfpe.ft, furniflh a
firong argument to every benevolent mind
for withing them to be farther diffused
throughout the world. For without the
belief and hope afboided by divine Reve-
lation, the circiumftaices of man are ex-
tremely forlorn. He finds himself placed
here as a stranger in a vast universe, where
the powers and operations of nature are
vcry implrfdcctl known; where both the
egiinnings and the iffucs of things are in-
volvcd in mvfteriou; darknecs; where he
is unable to dificover, with any crtailty,
whence lie lprung, or for what piirpofe he
vas hbrllght into this fate of txiflencc;

hlc-lher

xV.

of a mild, or of a wrathful ruler; 'n hat con- _
firuclion he is to put on many of the dif-
penlhtions of his providence; and what his
fate is to be when le departs hence. \hat
a diliconiolate fitxatiton, to a 1erious enquir-
ing mind! The greater degree of virtue it
polleffes, its leniibilitv is likely to be the
more opprelFed by this burden of labouring
thought. Even though it were in one's
.power to banilh all uneasy thought, and to
till up the hours of life with perpetual
amusement, life so filled up would, upon
reflection, appear poor and trivial. But
these are far from being the terms upon
which man is brought into this world. He
is conscious that his being is frail and fee-
ble; he fees himself beset with various
dangers; and is exposed to many a me-
lancholy apprehension, from the evils
which he may have to encounter, before he
arrives at the close of life. In this distressed
condition, to reveal to him such discoveries
of the Supreme Being as the Christian reli-
gion affords, is to reveal to him a Father

and

SE RM. and a Friend; is to let in a ray of the nmoi

xv.
-i cheering light upon the darkncfs of the hu-

man estate. He who was before a dcfli-
tute orphan, wandering in the inhofi)itablc
desert, has now gained a licltcr from the
bitter and inclement blast. I e now knows
to whom to pray, and in whom to trust;
where to unbosom his sorrows; and from
what hand to look for relief.

It is certain, that when the h.eirt bleeds

from some wound of recent misfortune,
nothing is of equal efficacy with religious
comfort. It is of power to enlighten the
darkefl hour, and to aflwage the fevereli
woe, by the belief of divine favour, and
the profped of a bleflcd immortality. In
such hopes, the mind expatiates with joy;
and when bereaved of its earthly friends,
solaces itself with the thoughts of one friend
who will never forli;ke it. Relined rea-
fonings concerning the nature of the hu-
man condition, and the improvement which
philosophy teaches us to make of every
event, may entertain the mind when it is
at ease; may perhaps contribute to tooth

it,

it, when slightly touched with sorrow. S E R M.

XV.

But when it is torn with any fore distress, , _
they are cold and feeble, compared with a
diret promile from the word of God.
This is an anchor to the foul both sure and
fledfaf. This has given consolation and
refuge to many a virtuous heart, at a time
when the most cogent reasonings would
have proved utterly unavailing.

Upon the approach of death, especially,

when if a man thinks at all, his anxiety
about his future interests must naturally in-
creaie, the power of religious consolation is
sensibly felt. Then appears, in the most
firiking light, the high value of the disco-
verics made by the Gospel; not only life
and immortality revealed, but a mediator
with God discovered; mercy proclaimed,
through him, to the frailties of the penitent
and the humble; and his presence pro-
mifed to be with them when they are pass-
ing through the valley of the Jhadow of
death, in order to bring them safe into un-
ieen habitations of reft and joy. Here is
ground for their leaving the world with

comfort

SS R M, coiniflt and peace. But in this 'evere and
--- trying period, this labouring hour of na-

ture, how ihall the unhappy man lipport
himic':, who knows not, or believes not,
the hope of religion ? Secretly confcioLs
to hiniiilf tait hc has not acded his part as
he ought to hive done, the lin. of his past
life aritl before him in fad remembrance.
He wifles to exitl after death, and vet
dreads that existence. The Governour of
the world is unknown. He cannot tell
whether every cndeavour to obtain his
mercy may not be in vain. All is awful
obscurity around him ; and in the midst of
endless doubts and perplexities, the trem-
bling, reluctant foul, is forced away from
the body. As the misfortunes of life must,
to such a man, have been most oppreflive,
so its end is bitter. His fun sets in a dark
cloud; and the night of death closes over
his head, full of mifery.-Having now
(hewn how important the knowledge of the
Lord is, both to the improvement and the
consolation of man, confidercd as an indi-
vidual, I am next to shew,

II. How
IS

II. How important this knowledge is to s E R M.

xv.

him as a member of society. This branch v__
of the subjed is in part anticipated by what
has been said. For all the improvement
which man receives as an individual, re-
dounds to the benefit of the public. Society
reaps the fruit of the virtues of all the
members who compose it; and in propor-
tion as each, apart, is made better, the
whole must flouriflh.

But besides this effec, religious know-

ledge has a diret tendency to improve the
social intercourse of men, and to assist them
in co-operating for common good. It is
the great initrument of civilizing the mul-
titude, and forming them to union. It
tames the fierceness of their passions, and
softens the rudeness of their manners.
There is much reason to doubt whether
any regular society ever subsisted, or could
fubfill, in the world, destitute of all reli-
gious ideas and principles. They who, in
early times, attempted to bring the wander-
ing and scattered tribes of men from the
woods, and to unite them in cities and

VOL. II. G g com-

S . R M. communities, always found it neceffitv to

,I begin with some institution of religion.

The wisest legifators of old, through the
whole progress of their fyflems of govern-
ment, confidered religion as essential to civil
polity. If even those imperfet forms of
it, loaded with so much superstition and
errour, were important to the welfare of
society, how much more that reasonable
worship of the true God, which is taught
by the Gospel ? True religion introduces
the idea of regular fubjedion, by accu!-
toming mankind to the awe of fuperiour
power in the Deity, joined with the vene-
ration of fuperiour wisdom and goodness.
It is by its nature an associating principle;
and creates new and sacred bonds of union
among men. Common assemblies for reli-
gious worship, and joint homage offered
up to one God; the sense of being all de-
pendent on the fame protecion, and bound
to duty by the fame ties, sharers in the
fame benefits of heaven, and expeaants of
the fame reward, tend to awaken the fen-
timents of friendly relation, and to con-

firm

film and strengthen our mutual connexion. S ER M.

XV.

The doctrine of Christianity is most adverse
to all tyranny and oppreflion, hut highly
favourable to the interests of good govern-
ment among men. It represses the spirit
of licentiousness and sedition. It inculcates
the duty of subordination to lawful fuipe-
riours. It requires us to fear God, to ho-
nour the il

: a, and not to meddle with them
that are given to change.

Religious knowledge forwards all useful

and ornamental improvements in society.
Experience shows, that in proportion as it
diffules its light, learning flourifhcs, and
liberal arts are cultivated and advanced.
Just conceptions of religion promote a free
and manly spirit. They lead men to think
for themicives; to form their principles
upon fair inquiry, and not to rclign their
conlcience to the dictates of men. Hence
they naturally inspire aversion to slavery of
every kind; and promote a taste for liberty
and laws. Despotic governments have ge-
nerally taken the firmest root among nations
that were blinded by Mahometan or Pagan

G g 2 darkness;

I. n M. (iarknrfs; where the throne of violence has
Xv. _---,- been flpportcd by ignorance andl f.lfc rcli-

g;o!l. In the Chriflian world, (luring tholf
centuries in which gross superstition held its
reign undifurbed, oppreflion and Ilavcry
t-cre in its train. The cloud of ignorance
f;t thick and deep over the nations; and
the world was threatened with a relapfc into
ancient harbaritv. As soon as the true

n ,,wlk,lge of tbc Lor, revivcd, at the aulpi-
cious mra of the Reformation, learning, li-
berty, and arts, began to fline forth with it,
and to rcfumne their lustre.

But the happy influence which religion

exerts on society, extends much farther than
to effects of this kind. It is not only sub-
fidiary to the improvement, but necessary to
the prelfrvation of society. It is the very
basis on which it refts. Religious prin-
ciple is what gives men the surest hold of
one another. That last and greatcft pledge
of veracity, an oath, without which no so-
ciety could subsist, derives its whole autho-
rity from an established reverence of God,
to whom it is a solemn appeal. Banish re-

4 ligious

iigious principle, and )you loofi'c all the S I M.
bonds which connecd mankind together;. .
you lhake the fundamental pillar of mutual
confidence and trust; you rcndcr the fecu-
rity ariling from laws, in a geat measure,
void and ineffetual. :or human laws, and
human fandions, cannot cxtend to number-
less cafes, in which the 1af:ty of mankind
is deeply concerned. They would prove
very feeble innfilmcnts of order ald peace,
if there were no checks upon the conduct of
men from the sense of divine legillation ; if
no belief of future rewards and ptuiihments
were to overawe conscience, and to iupply
the defects of human government.

Indeed, the belief of religion is of such

importance to public welfare, that the molt
expressive description we could give of a
society of men in the utmost diiordcr, would
he to fly, that there was no fear of God
left among them. Imagination would im-
mediately co;c;ivc of them as abandoned to
rapine and violence, to perfidy and treachery;
as deceiving and deceived, opprffing and
oppressed; consumcd by intestine broils,

G g land

s r, R M. and ripe for becoming a prey to the first
Xv.

invader. On the other hand, in order to
form the idea of a society flourishing in its
highcft glory, we need only conceive the
belief of Chriflian principles exerting its full
influence on the hearts and lives of all the
members. Inftantlv, the most amiable scene
would open to our view. We should fee
the caufcs of public difinion removed, when
men werc animated with that noble spirit of
love and charity which our religion breathes;
and formed to the pursuit of those higher
intcrefts, which give no occasion to compe-
tition and jcaloulf. We should fee families,
neighbourhoods, and communities, living in
unbroken amity, and purfiuing, with one
heart and mind, the common interest; so-
briety of manners, and simplicity of life,
reflored; virtuous industry carrying on its
ufefill labours, and cheerful contentment
every where reigning. Politicians may lay
down what plans they please for advancing
public prosperity; but, in truth, it is the
prevalency of such principles of religion and
virtue, which forms the trength and glory

3 of

of a nation. Whcn tlife arc totally want- S E R M.
ing, no measures contrived hy hulman wis- .--
dom can supply the defcc. In plroportion
as they prevail, they raise the slate of lociety
fiom that fad degeneracy into which it is at
prelent funk; and carry it forward, under
the blefling of Heaven, towards that happy
period, when nation Jsall not /!i lip their
sword agai;/l nation, nor learn war any
more.

In order to prove the importance of reli-

gious knowledge to the interest of society,
one consideration more, dcferving particu-
lar attention, remains to be mentioned. It
is, that ifgoodfeed be not sown in the field,
tares will infallibly spring up. The pro-
pcnfion towards religion is strong in the
human heart. There is a natural prepa-
ration in our minds, for receiving some im-
pressions of supernatural belief. Upon
thele, among ignorant and uncultivated
men, superstition or cn:huiiafin never fail
to graft themselves. Into what monstrous
forms tlefe have shot forth, and what va-
rious mischiefs they have produced to so-

G g 4 ciety,

SF.R M. cicty, is too well known. Nor is this the

XV.
A_- whole of the danger. Deligning men arc

always ready to take advantage of this po-
pular weaknerf, and to direct the luperfti-
tious bias of the multitude to their own am-
bitious and interested ends. Superstition,
in itself a formidable evil, threatens confe-
quences still more formidable, when it is
rendered the tool of design and craft. Hence
aritfs one of the most powerful arguments
for propagating with zeal, as far as our in-
fluence can extend, the pure and undefiled
doatrines of the Gospel of Christ; in order
that juit and rational principles of religion
may fill up that room in the minds of men,
which dangerous fanaticism will otherwise
usurp.

This consideration alone is sufficient to

ihow the high utility of the design under-
taken by the Society for propagating Chris-
tian Knowledge. With great propriety,
thycv have bcflovrd their chief attention on
a remote quarter of our own country, where,
from a variety of cauies, ignorance and fu-
perftition had gained more ground, than in

any

any other corner of the land; where the E R M.
inhabitants, by their local situation, were _v_
more imperfelyv supplied with the means
of proper education and inftrudtion ; and at
the fame time exposed to the seductions of
such as fought to pervert them from the
truth. The laudable endeavours of the
Society in diffusing religious and useful
knowledge through this part of the country,
have already been crowned with much fuc-
ccs; and more is still to be expeCoed from
the continuance of their pious and well-
direflcd attention.

With such good dcfigns, it becomes all

to co-operate, who are lovers of mankind.
Thus (hall they (how their just ifnfe of the
value of that blefing which they enjoy, in
the knowledge of the Gospel of Christ;
and their gratitude to Heavep for ccnfcr-
ring it upon them. Thus shall they make
the bleflings of those who are new ready
to pcrij/ through lack of knowledge, descend
upon their heads. Thus shall they contri-
bute their endeavours for bringing forward
that happy period foretold by ancient pro-

phecv;

SE R M. phccy; when there fJall be wne Lord over

- all the earth, and his name one; when that

nameJball be great from the riring to the fe-
ting fun; when thereJhall be nothing to hurt
nor dejroy in all the holy mountain of God;
but judgment Jlall dwell in the wildernfs,
and rigbteoiufrcfi remain in thefruitfldfield;
the defertJhall rejoice, and blofom as the refc;
and the earth Jball be full of the knwsledge
of the Lsrd as the waters cover thefea +.

' Zechar. xiv. 9. Malachi i. 1l. Isaiah xxii. i,'.
xXyv. I.

(u\SEV\
BRITA \
F I N I S.
