SE R MON S,

Y

HUGH BLAIR, D.D.
One of the MINISTERS of the HIGH CHURCH,

AND
PROFEssaR of RHETORIC and BELLES LETTRES

in the University, of Edinburgh.

VOLUME THE SECOND.
THE THIRD EDITION.

L O N D O N
Printed for W. STRAHAN; and T. CADELL, in the Strand;

and W. CREECH, Edinburgh.

M DCC LXXx,

# THE CONTENTS.

THE
CO N E N T S.

Page

SERMON L

On the Importance of Order in Condud.
C CORINTH. xiv. 4o. Let all bings be

done-in order. I

SE R MO N II.

On the Government of the Heart.
PROVERBS iv. 23. Keep thy heart with

all diligence: for out of it are the
cesr of sle. 29

S E R M O N III.

The fame Subjeat continued.
PROV. iv. 23. Keep thy heart with all

diligence; for out of it are the ij ues of
life. $4

A A

Page

SERMON IV.
On the Unchangeablenefs of the Di-

vine Nature.
JAMES i. 17. Every good and every

perfet gift is from above, and com-
eth down from the Father of Lights,
with whom is no variableness, nei-
therJhbadow of turning. 85

SERMON V.

On the Compassion of Christ.
HEBrtEWS iv. 15. We have not an

high priefj which cannot be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities;
but was in all points tempted like as
we are, yet without fin. I 17

SERMON VI.

On the Love of Praise.
JoHS xii. 43. For they loved the

praise of men more than the praie
of God' 148

Page

S E R M ON VII.
On the proper Estimate of Human

Life.
ECCLESIASTES xii. 8. Vanity of va-

nities, faith the preacher, all is va-
nity. 178

S E R M ON VIII.

On Death.

PSALM xxii. .
4 ea though I walk

through the valley of the Jhadowe of
death, I will fear no evil; for thou
art with me; thy rod and thy Jlaff
they comfort me. 213

SER M ON IX.

On the Happiness of a Future State.
REVELAT. vii. 9. After this I beheld,

and lo! a great multitude, which no
man could number, of all nations, and
kindreds, and people, and tongues,

Page

flood before the throne, and before
the Lamb, clothed with white robes,
and palms in their hands. 246

SERMON X.

On Candour.
I CORINTI. xiii. 5. Charity--think-

eth no evil. 277

S ER M O XI.

On the Charaster of Joseph.
GENtSIS xlv. 5. 8. Nrow therefore be

not grieved nor angry with yourif elves
that ye fold me hither; for God did
fend me before you to preserve l fe.-.-.
So now it was not you that jent me
hither, but God. 309

S E R M O N XII.

On tle Charader of Hazael.
2 KINGS viii. 12, 13. And Hazael

said, Why weepeth m y Lord? An.'

Page

he anfvered, Because I know the evil
that thou wvilt do unto the children of
Jfrael. TheirJfrong holds wilt thou
set on fre, and their young men2 wilt
thou flaj, with the sword, and .wilt
daJs their children, and rip zip their
vwomeln zwith child. And Hazael
said, But what, is thyferva nt a dog,
that he .Jouhld do this great thing ?
And Eli/Jan answered, The Lord
hath /hewed me that thou Jhialt 'b
king over Syria. 335

SERMON XIII.
On the Benefits to be derived from

the House of Mourning.
ECCLESIASTES vii. 2, 3, 4. It is bet-

ter to go to the hofie of mourning,
than to go to the ho/se of feaJfing;
Jbr that is the end of all men, and the
living will lay it to his heart. Sor-
row is better than laughter; for by
the fJdnefs of the countenance the heart
is made better. The heart of the wife
is il the hozfe of mourning; but the
heart of fools is in the house of mirth. 366

Page

SERMON XIV.
On the divine Government of t:-;e

Passions of Men.
PSALM lxxvi. Io. Surely, the wrath

of man /hall praie thee; the remain-
der of wrath tJalt thozu restrain. 396

SER M O N XV.
On the Importance of Religious Know-

ledge to Mankind.
ISAIAH xi. 9. T'heyJ7hall not hurt nor

deJfroy in all my holy mountain; for
the earthjIhall be fll of the knowledge
of the Lord, as the water-s cover the
sea. 427

S ER-

# SERMON I. On the IMPORTANCE of ORDER in CONDUCT. 1 CORINTH. xiv. 40. Let all things be done — in order.

S E R M ON I.
On the IMPORTANCE of ORDER ill

CONDUCT.

i CORINTH. xiv. 40.

Let all things be done-in order.
l^^rS^ E L I G 0 N, like every regular and s E R M.

R well-connedced system, is compos- 1 .

kk.IJsi ed of a variety of parts; each of
which possesses its separate importance, and'
contributes to the perfection of the whole.
Some graces are essential to it; such as faith
and repentance, the love of God, and them
love of our neighbour; which, for that rea-

VOL. II, B son,

S E R M. son, must be often inculcated on men,

- There are other dispositions and habits

which though they hold not so high a rank,
yet are neceifary to the introdution and
support of the former; and therefore, in
religious exhortations these also justly claim
a place. Of this nature is that regard to
order, method and regularity, which the
apostle enjoins us in the text to carry
through the whole of life. Whether you
confider it as, in itself, a moral duty, or
not, yet I hope soon to convince you that
it is essential to the proper discharge of al-
most all duties, and merits upon that ac-
count a greater degree of attention than is
commonly paid to it in a religious view.

If you look abroad into the world, you

may be satisfied, at the first glance, that a
vicious and libertine life is always a life of
confusion. Thence it. is natural to infer
that order is friendly to religiori As the
neglect of it co-operates with vice, so the
preservation of it must assist virtue. By the
appointment of providence, it is indifpen-
fablyrequifite to worldly prosperity. Thence

arises

arises a presumption that it is conneied S E RM.

I.

also with spiritual improvement. When -
you behold a man's affairs, through ne-
gligence and mifcondud, involved in dif-
oi-der, you naturally conclude that his ruin
approaches. You may at the fame time
justly fufpea, that the causes which affect
his temporal welfare, operate also to the
prejudice of his moral interests. The apo-
file teaches us in this chapter, that God is
not the author of cotlfion *. He is a lover
of order; and all his works are full of order.
But where confzfion is, there is, its close
attendant, every evil work t. In the fe-
quel of this discourse I ihall point out some
of those parts of condud wherein it is most
material to virtue that order take place; and
then shall conclude with ihowing the high.
advantages which attend it. Allow me to
recommend to you, order in the conduct of
your affairs; order in the difiribution of
your time; order in the management of
your fortune; order in the regulation of

* Ver. 33.. - James iii. x6.

B 2 your

S EiR. your amusements; order in the arrange-

_' . rment of your, society. Thus let all things

be done in order.

I. MAINTAIN order in the conduc of

your worldly affairs. Every man, in every
station of life, has some concerns, private,
domestic, or public, which require fuccef-
five attention; he is placed in some sphere
of active duty. Let the employments
which belong to that sphere be so arranged,
that each may keep its place, without just-
ling another; and that what regards the
world may not interfere with what is due
to God. In proportion to the multiplicity
of affairs, the observance of order becomes
more indispensable. But scarcely is there
any train of life so simple and uniform but
what will susser through the neglect of it.
I speak not now of suffering in point of
worldly interest. I call upon you to attend
to higher interests; to remember that the
orderly conduc of your temporal affairs
forms a great part of your duty as Chrifli-
ans.

Many,

Many, indeed, can hardly be persuaded SERM.

'of this truth. A strong propensity has, in --
every age, appeared among men to feque-
firate religion from the commerce of the
'world. Seasons of retreat and devotion
they are willing to appropriate to God.
But the world they confider as their own
province. They carry on a fort of fepa-
Tate interest there. Nay, by the refpet
which, on particular occasions, they pay to
religion, they too often imagine that they
have acquired the liberty of acting in
worldly matters according to what plan
they chute. How entirely do such persons
mistake the design of Christianity !-In this
world you were placcd by Providence as on
a great field of trial. By the necessities of
your nature you are called forth to differ-
ent employments. By many ties you are
connected with human society. From fu-
periours and inferiours, from neighbours
and equals, from friends and enemies, de-
mands arie, and obligations circulate
through all the ranks of life. This aaive
scene was contrived by the wisdom of hea-

B 3 ven,

S E M. yen, on purpose that it might bring into
L -- exercise all the virtues of the christian cha-

raaer; your justice, candour and veracity
in dealing with one another; your fidelity
to every trust, and your conscientious dif-
charge of every office, which is committed
to you; your affeation for your friends;
your forgiveness of enemies; your charity
to the diitreffed; your attention to the in-
terests of your family. It is by fulfilling all
there obligations, in proper succession, that
you fiow your conversation to be such as be-
cometh the gospel of Chris. It is thus you
make your light Jo to /hJine before men, that
they maysee your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in heaven. It is thus you
are rendered meet for the inheritance of the
faints in light.-But how can those various
duties be discharged by persons who are
ever in that hurry and perplexity which
disorder creates? You wish, perhaps, to
perform what your character and station
require. But from the confusion in which
you have allowed yourselves to be involved,
you find it to have become impossible.

What

What was neglected to be done in its pro- S E R M.
per place, thrusts itself forward at an incon- -. -
venient season. A multitude of affairs
crowd upon you together. Different obli-
gations diftra& you; and this diftraaion
is sometimes the cause, sometimes the pre-
tence, of equally negleaing them all, or,
at least, of sacrificing the greater to the
lesser.

Hence arise so many inconsistent charac-

ters, and such frequent instances of partial
and divided goodness, as we find in the
world; appearances of generosity without
justice, honour without truth, probity to
men without reverence of God. He who
conducts his affairs with method and regu-
larity, meets every duty in its proper place,
and assigns it its due rank. But where there
is no order in conduc, there can be no uni-
formity in character. The natural connex-
ion and arrangement of duties is loft. If
virtue appear at all, it will be only in fits
and starts. The authority of conscience
may occasionally operate, when our fitua-
tion affords it room for exertion. But in

B 4 other

S E M. other circumstances of equal importance,
--.-', every moral sentiment will be overpowered

by the tumultuous bustle of worldly affairs.
Fretfulness of temper too, will generally
characerize those who are negligent of or-
der. T le hurry in which they live, and
the embarrassments with which they are
surrounded, keep their spirits in perpetual
ferment. Conflicing with difficulties which
they are unable to overcome, conscious of
their own mifcondua, but ashamed to con-
fess it, they are engaged in many a secret
struggle; and the uneasiness which they
susser within, recoils in bad humour on all
who are around them. Hence the wretch-
ed resources to which, at last, they are obliged
to fly, in order to quiet their cares. In de-
fpair of being able to unravel what they
have suffered to become so perplexed, they
sometimes fink into supine indolence, some-
times throw themselves into the arms of
intemperance and loose pleasure; by either
of which they aggravate their guilt, and ac-
celerate their ruin. To the end that order
may be maintained in your affairs, it is ne-
ceffary,

II. THAT

II. THAT you attend to order in the di-f- s E R M.

tribution of your time. Time you ought to
confider as a sacred trust committed to you
by God; of which you are now the depo-
fitaries, and are to render account at the
last. That portion of it which he has al-
lotted you is intended partly for the con-
cerns of this world, partly for those of the
next. Let each of these occupy in the dif-
tribution of your time that space which
properly belongs to it. Let not the hours
of h6fpitality and pleasure interfere with
the discharge of your necessary affairs; and
let not what you call necessary affairs en-
croach upon the time which is due to de-
votion. To every thing there is a season, and
a time for every purpoJf under the heaven *.
If you delay till to-morrow what ought to
be done to-day, you overcharge the mor-
row with a burden which belongs not to it.
You load the wheels of time, and prevent
it from Carrying you along smoothly. He
who every morning plans the tranfacions

* Eccles. iii. i.

of

s E R M. of the day, and follows out that plan, carries
.--v_-- on a threa.d which will guide him through

the labyrinth of the noft bnfy life. The
orderly arrangement of his time is like a
ray of light which darts itself through all
his affairs. But where no plan is laid,
where the disposal of time is surrendered
merely to the chance of incidents, all things
lie huddled together in one chaos, which
admits neither of distribution nor review.

The first requisite for introducing order

into the management of time, is to be im-
pressed with a just sense of its value. Con-
fider well how much depends upon it, and
how fast it flies away. The bulk of men
are in nothing more capricious and incon-
fift-nt than in their appretiation of time.
When they think of it as the measure of
their continuance on earth, they highly
prize it, and with the greatest anxiety seek
to lengthen it out. But when they view it
in separate parcels, they.appear to hold it
in contempt, and squander it with incon-
fiderate profusion. While they complain
biiat life is ihort, they are often wifling its

different

different periods at an end. Covetous of E R M.
every other possession, of time only they are ,
prodigal. They allow every idle man to be
master of this property, and make every
frivolous occupation welcome that can help
them to consume it. Among those who are
so careless of time, it is not to be expeced
that order should be observed in its difiri-
bution. But by this fatal neglect, how
many materials of revere and lasting regret
are they laying up in store for themselves
The time which they susser to pass away in
the midst of confusion, bitter repentance
seeks afterwards in vain to recal. What
was omitted to be done at its proper mo-
ment, arises to be the torment of forne fa-
ture season. Manhood is disgraced by the
consequences of negleaed youth. Old age,
oppressed by cares that belonged to a former
period, labours under a burden not its own.
At the close of life, the dying man be-
holds with anguish that his days are finish-
ing, when his preparation for eternity is
hardly commenced. Such are the effets
of a disorderly waste of tlle, through not

attending

S E P. M. attending to its value. Every thing in the
;_.-/- life of such persons is misplaced. Nothing

is performed aright, from not being per-
formed in due season.

But he who is orderly in the difribution

of his time, takes the proper method of
escaping those, manifold evils. -Ie is justly
said to redeem the time. By proper manage-
ment, he prolongs it. 1-Ie lives much in
little space; more in a few years than
others do in many. He can live to God
and his own foul, and at the lfme time at-
tend to all the lawful interests of the present
world. He looks back on the past, and
provides for the future. He catches and
arrests the hours as they fly. They arc
marked down for useful purpofcs, and their
memory remains. Whereas those hours fleet
by the man of confusion like a shadow.
His days and years are either blanks of
which he has no remembrance, or they are
filled up with such a confused and irregular
succession of unfinished tranfadions, that
though he remembers he has been busy,
yet he can give no account of the business

I which

which has employed him. Of him, more S E R M.
than of any.other, it may with ju-tice be . .
pronounced, that he walketh in a vainJhJew;
he is dijquieted in vailn

III. INTRODTDUC order into the manage-

ment of your fortune. Whatever it be, let
the administration of it proceed with me-
thod and economy. From time to time
examine your situation; and proportion
your cxpence to your growing or diminifih-
ing revenue. Provide what is neceflary,
before you indulge in what is superfluous.
Study to do justice to all with whom you
deal, before you asset the praifc of libera-
lity. In a word, fix such a plan of living
as you find that your circumfiances will
fairly admit, and adhere to it invariably
against every temptation to improper ex-
cess.

No admonition .elpedting morals is-more

necessary than this to the age in which we
live; an age manifestly diftinguiflied by a
propensity to thoughtless profusion; wherein
all the different ranks of men are observed

to

SER M. to press with forward vanity on those who

-- __ are above them; to vie with their fupe-

riours in every mode of luxury and oftenta-
tion; and to seek no farther argument for
justifying extravagance, than the fashion of
the times, and the ifppofed necessity of
living like others around them. This turn
of mind begets contempt for fober and or-
derly plans of life. It overthrows all re-
gard to domcftic concerns and duties. It
pushes men on to hazardous ard visionary
schemes of gain; and unfortunately unites
the two extremes, of grasping with rapaci-
oufnefs, and of squandering with profusion.
In the midst of such disorder no prosperity
can be of long continuance. While con-
fusion grows upon men's affairs, and pro-
digality at the fame time wafles their sub-
fiance, poverty makes its advances like an
armed man. They tremble at the view of
the approaching evil; but have loft the
force of mind to make provision against it.
Accustomed to move in a round of society
and pleasures disproportioned to their con-
dition, they are unable to break through

6 the

the enchantments of habit; and with their S E M.
eyes open fink into the gulph which is be-
fore them. Poverty enforces dependance;
and dependance increases corruption. Ne-
ceffity first betrays them into mean com-
pliances; next, impels them to open crimes;
and beginning with ostentation and extra-
vtagance, they end in infamy and guilt.
Such are the consequences of neglecing
order in our worldly circulnftances. Such
is the circle in which the proftilf and the
dissolute daily run.-To what cause, to
much as to the want of order, can we attri-
bute those scenes of distress which to fre-
quently excite our pity; families that once
were flourishing reduced to ruin; and the
melancholy widow and neglected orphan
thrown forth, friendless, upon the world ?
What cause has been more fruitful in en-
gendering those atrocious crimes which fill
society with disquiet and terrour; in train-
ilg the gamester to fraud, the robber to
violence, and even the assassin to blood ?

Be assured, then, that order, frugality,
and oeconomy, are the necefary supports of

every

-E R M. every personal and private virtue. Hovi

_-w. humble soever there qualities may appear to

some, they are, nevertheless, the basis on
which liberty, independence, and true ho-
nour, must rife. He who has the steadiness
to arrange his affairs with method and re-
gularity, and to condut his train of life
agreeably to his circumstances, can be makier
of himself in every situation into which he
may be thrown. He is under no necessity
to flatter or to lie; to stoop to what is
mean, or to commit what is criminal. But
he who wants that firmness of mind which-
the observance of order requires, is held irt
bondage to the world; he can neither adt
his part with courage as a man, nor with
fidelity as a Christian. From the moment
you have allowed yourselves to pass the line
of oeconomy, and to live beyond your for-
tune, you have entered on the path of
danger. Precipices furrbund you on all
fides. Every ftep which you take may
lead to mischiefs that, as yet, lie hidden;
and to crimes that will end -in your ever-
lasting perdition.

IV. OBSERVE

IV. OBSERVE order in your amufenents; s E R M.

that is, allow them no more than their pro- _
per place; fludy to keep them within due
bounds; mingle them in a temperate fuc-
cefison with serious duties, and the higher
business of life. Human life cannot pro-
ceed to advantage without some measure of
relaxation and entertainment. We require
relief from care. *We are not formed for a
perpetual firetch of serious thought. By
too intense and continued application, our
feeble powers would soon be worn cut. At
the fame time, from our propensity to ease
and pleasure, amusement proves, among all
ranks of men, the most dangerous foe to
order. For it tends inceflantly to usurp and
encroach, to widen its territories, to thrust
itielf into the place of more important con-
cerns, and thereby to disturb and counter-
aa the natural course of things. One fri-
volous amusement indulged out of season,
will often carry perplexity and confusion
through a long succession of affairs.

Amusements, therefore, though they be
of an innocent kind, require steady go-

VOL. II. C vernment,

SE R M. vernment, to keep them within a due and

limited province. But such as are of an
irregular and vicious nature, require not to
be governed, but to be banished from every
orderly society. As soon as a man seeks his
happiness from the gaming-table, the mid-
night-revel, and the other haunts of licen-
tioufnefs, confusion seizes upon him as its
own. There will no longer be order in his
family, nor order in his affairs, nor order
in his time. The most important corncerns
of life are abandoned. Even the order of
nature is by such persons inverted; night
is changed into day, and day into night.
Charater, honour, and interest itself, are
trampled under foot. You may with cer-
tainty prognosticate the ruin of there men
to be just at hand. Disorder, arisen to its
height, has nearly accomplished its work.
The spots of death are upon them. Let
every one who would escape the peftilen-
tial contagion fly with haste from their
company.

.... . V. PRESERVE

V. PRESERVE order in the arrangement SE RM.

of your society; that is, entangle not your- _
selves in a perpetual and promiscuous crowd;
felet with prudence and propriety those with
whom you chufe to associate; let company
and retreat succeed each other at measured
intervals. There can be no order in his life
who allots not a due share of his time to
retirement and reflecion. He can neither
prudently arrange his temporal affairs, nor
properly attend to his spiritual interests.
He lives not to himself, but to tile world.
By continual dissipation, he is rendered
giddy and thoughtless. He contracs un-
avoidably from the world that Spirit of dif-
order and confusion which is so prevalent
in it.

It is not a sufficient preservative against

this evil, that the circles of focicty in which
you are engaged are not of a libertine and
vicious kind. If they withdraw you from
that attention to yourselves, and your do-
meftic concerns, which becomes a good man,
they are subversive of order, and incon-
fiftent with your duty. What is innocent

C 2 in

S E R M. in itself, degenerates into crime from beilg

- ~,carried to excess; and idle, trifling society

is nearly a-kin to such as is corrupting. One
of the first principles of order is, to learn to
be happy at home. It is in domestic re-
treat that every wife and virtuous man finds
his chief fatisfaaion. It is there he forms
the plans which regulate his public condut.
He who knows not how to enjoy himself
when alone, can never be long happy
abroad. To his vacant mind, company
may afford a temporary relief; but when
forced to return to himself, he will be so
much more oppressed and languid. Where-
as, by a due mixture of public and private
life, we keep free of the snares of both, and
enjoy each to greater advantage.

WHIEN we review those different parts of

behaviour to which I have shewn that order
is essential, it must naturally occur to you,
that they are all mutually connected, and
hang upon each other. Throughout your
affairs, your time, your expence, your
amusements, your society, the principle of

2 order

order must be equally carried, if you cx- E R pM.
pec to reap any of its happy fruits. For
if into any one of those great departments
of life you susser disorder to enter, it will
1pread through all the reft. In vain, for
instance, you purpose to be orderly in the
conduct of your affairs, if you be irregular
in the distribution of your time. In vain
you attempt to regulate your expence, if
into ycur amnufements, or your society, dil-
order has crept. You have adm-t1cd a
principle of confusion which will defeat ail
your plans ; and perplex and entangle vwhat
you fought to arrange. Uniformity is above
all things necessary to order. If you delire
that any thing should proceed according to
method and rule, let all tbi^rs, as the text
exhorts, be done in oirder.

I miull also adnlonith yon., that in finall,

as well as in great affairs, a due regard to
order is requiite. I mean not that you
ought to look on those minute attentions
which are apt to occupy frivolous minds,
as connected either vith virtue or wisdom.
But I exhort you to remember, thai d:io.rd t. ,

C 3 1;k,-

S E R M. like other immoralities, frequently takes rife

I.
x_<_ from inconsiderable beginnings. They who,

in the lesser transaCtions of life, are totally
negligent of rule, will be in hazard of ex-
tending that negligence by degrees to such
affairs and duties as will render them cri-
minal. Remissness grows on all who study
not to guard against it; and it is only by
frequent exercise that the habits of order
and punctuality can be thoroughly con-
firmed.

FROM what has been said, the great im-

portance of this principle to moral and reli-
gious conduct must already be evident.
Let us, however, conclude with taking a
summary view of the advantages which at-
tend it.

FirfR, the observance of order serves to

correc that negligence which makes you
omit rome duties, and that hurry and pre-
cipitancy which makes you perform others
imperfeEdly. Your attention is thereby di-
reLced to its proper objecOs. You follow the
ftreight path which Providence has pointed

out
i

out to man; in the course of which all the S E R M.
different business of life presents itself regu- _
larly to him on every fide. God and man,
time and eternity, pofcefs their proper Ra-
tions, arise in fuccefioon to his view, and
attraAc his care. Whereas he who runs on
in a disorderly course, speedily involves
himself in a labyrinth, where he is fur-
rounded with intricacy and darkness. The
crooked paths into which he strikes, turn
him aside from the proper line of human
pursuit; hide from his fight the objects
which he ought chiefly to regard, and
bring others under his view, which serve
no purpose but to diftraat and mislead him.

Next, by attending to order, you avoid

idlencfs, that most fruitful source of crimes
and evils. Ating upon a plan, meeting
every thing in its own place, you constantly
find innocent and useful employment for
time. You are never at a loss how to dif-
pose of your hours, or to fill up life agree-
ably. In the course of human acion, .there
are two extremes equally dangerous to vir-
tue; the multiplicity of affairs, and the

C 4 total

S E R M. total want of them. The man of order

I.
*- ifands in the middle between these two ex-

tremes, and suffers from neither. He is
occupied, but not oppressed. Whereas the
disorderly, overloading one part of time,
and leaving another vacant, are at one pe-
riod overwhelmed with bufmefs, and at
another, either idle through want of em-
ployment, or indolent through perplexity.
Those seasons of indolence and idleness,
which recur so often in their life, are their
most dangerous moments. The mind, un-
happy in its situation, and clinging to every
object which can occupy or amuse it, is
then apteft to throw itself into the arms of
every vice and every folly.

Farther, by the preservation of order,

you check inconitancy and levity. Fickle
by nature is the human heart. It is fond
of change; and perpetually tends to start
aside from the fireight line of conduCt.
Hence arises the propriety of bringing our-
selves under fubje&ion to method and rule;
which, though at firit it may prove con-
straining, yet by degrees, and from the ex-

perience

perience of its happy effects, becomes na- s E R M.
tural and agreeable. It reCtifies those irre-
gularities of temper and manners to which
we give the name of caprice; and which
are distinguishing charateriflics of a difor-
derly mind. It is the parent of steadiness
of conduCt. It forms consistency of cha-
raCter. It is the ground of all the confi-
dence we repose in one another. For, the
disorderly we know not where to find. In
him only can we place any trust who is
uniform and regular; who lives by prin-
ciple, not by humour; who aCts upon a
plan, and not by desultory motions.

The advantages of order hitherto men-

tioned belong to retitude of conduct.
Confider also how important it is to your
felf-enjoyment and felicity. Order is the
source of peace; and peace is the highest
of all temporal blessings. Order is indeed
the only region in which tranquillity dwells.
The very mention of confusion imports
disturbance and vexation. Is it possible
for that man to be happy who cannot look
into the state of his affairs, or the tenor of

his

SERM. his conduct, without discerning all to be
*- embroiled; who is either in the midst of

remorse for what he has neglected to do,
or in the midst of hurry to overtake what
he finds, too late, was necessary to have
been done ? Such as live according to or-
der may be compared to the celestial bodies
which niove in regular courses, and by ftat-
ed laws; whose influence is beneficent;
whose operations are quiet and tranquil.
The disorderly resemble those tumultuous
elements on earth which, by sudden and
violent irruptions, disturb the course of
nature. By mismanagement of affairs, by
excess in expence, by irregularity in the
indulgence of company and amusement,
they are perpetually creating molestation
both to themselves and others. They de-
part from their road to seek pleasure; and
instead of it, they every where raise, up
sorrows. Being always found out of their
proper place, they of course interfere and
jar with others. The disorders which they
raise never fail to spread beyond their own
line, and to involve many in confusion

6 and

and distress; whence they necessarily be- SER M.
come the authors of tumult and conten- _
tion, of discord and enmity. Whereas or-
der is the foundation of union. It allows
every man to carry on his own affairs
without disturbing his neighbour. It is the
golden chain which holds together the so-
cieties of men in friendship and peace.

In fine, the man of order is conneced

with all the higher powers and principles
in the universe. He is the follower of God.
He walks with him, and ads upon his plan.
His characer is formed on the spirit which
religion breathes. For religion in general,
and the religion of Christ in particular, may
be called the great discipline of order. To
walk Jflfidly, and to walk diorderly, are
synonymous terms in Scripture. From
filch as walk diofrderly we are commanded,
in the na o

e of e Lord 7yef/a C3hr/l, to

-withdraw ourf/lves . The kingdom of
Satan is the reign of disorder and darkness.
To restore order among the works of God,

* 2 Theft. iii. 6.

was

SE RM. as the end for which the Son of God de-
'--_-- scended to the earth. He requires order to

be observed in his church. His undertak-
ing is to be consummated in that perfec
order which he shall introduce at the last
day. In the newc earth and the new heaoLvens,
undisturbed order shall for ever prevail
among the spirits of the jijt made perfCl ;
and whatever farther preparation may be
requisite for bur being admitted to join their
society, it is certain that we shall. never
share in it, unless we make it now our
study to do all things decently and in orldr.

SER-

# SERMON II. On the GOVERNMENT of the HEART. PROVERBS iv. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence: for out of it are the issues of life.

[ 29 1

S E R M O N I.
On the GOVERNMENT of the HEART.

PROVERBS iv. 23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence: for out of

it are the ities of lifc.
AM ONG the many wife counsels s E R M.

given by this inspired writer, there

is none which deserves greater regard than
that contained in the text. Its importance,
however, is too seldom perceived by the
generality of men. They are apt to con-
fider the regulation of external conduCt as
the chief obje& of religion. If they can
ac their part with decency, and maintain a
fair character, they conceive their duty to
be fulfilled. What passes in the mean time
vithin their mind, they suppose to be of no

great

SER M. great consequence either to themselves, or
*-' _ to the world. In opposition to this dan-

gerous plan of morality, the wife man ex-
horts us to keep the heart; that is, to attend
not only to our actions, but to our thoughts
and desires; and to keep the heart with all
diligence, that is, with sedulous and unre-
mitting care; for which he assigns this
reason, that, out of the heart are the izjues
of lfe.-In 'discoursing of this subjea I
purpose to confider, separately, the govern-
ment of the thoughts, of the passions, and
of the temper. But before entering on any
of these, let us begin with enquiring in
what sense the Jifies of lie are said to be out
of the heart; that we may discern the force
of the argument which the text fuggeffs, to
recommend this great duty of keeping the
heart.

The ifjues of life are justly said to be out

of the heart, because the state of the heart
is what determines our moral characer,
and what forms our chief happiness or mi-
fery.

FIRST,

FIRST, it is the state of the heart which SE RM.

II.

determines our moral charater. The te- --
nor of our actions will always correspond
to the dispositions that prevail within.
To dissemble or to suppress them, is a fruit-
less attempt. In spite of our efforts, they
will perpetually break forth in our beha-
viour. On whatever fide the weight of
inclination hangs, it will draw the pracice
after it. In vain. therefore you study to
preserve your hands clean, unless you re-
solve at the fame time to keep your heart
pure. Make the tree good, as our Saviour
directs, and then its fruits will be good aso.
For out of the heart proceed not only evil
thoughts, but murders, adulteries, fornica-
tions, theft, false witness, blaf/hemies *. If
that fountain be once poisoned, you can
never expec that salubrious streams will
flow from it. Throughout the whole of
their course, they will carry the taint of
the parent spring.

But it is not merely from its influence on
external acion that the importance of the

* Matth. xv. i8.

heart

E R M. heart to our moral characer arises. Inde-
.-.. pendent of all acion, it is, in truth, the

state of the heart itself which forms our
characer in the fight of God. With our
fellow-creatures, acions must ever hold the
chief rank; because, by these only we can
judge of one another; by these we affe&
each other's welfare; and therefore to these
alone the regulation of human law extends,
But in the eye of that Supreme Being, to
whom our whole internal frame is unco-
vered, dispositions hold the place of actions;
and it is not so much what we perform, as
the motive which moves us to perform-
ance, that constitutes us good or evil in
his fight. Even among men, the mora-
lity of actions is estimated by the principle
from which they are judged to proceed;
and such as the principle is, such is the
man accounted to be. One, for instance,
may spend much of his fortune in chari-
table actions; and yet, if he is believed to be
influenced by mere ostentation, he is deem-
ed not charitable, but vain. He may la-
bour unweariedly to serve the public; but

if

Ss he is prompted by the desire of rising S ER M.
into power, he is held not public spirited,
but ambitious: And if he beflows a bene-
fit purely that he may receive a greater in
return, no man would reckon him gene-
ious, but felfifli and interested. If reason
thus clearly teaches us to estimate the value
of ations by the dispositions which give
them birth, it is an obvious conclusion, that
according to those dispositions we are all
ranked and classed by him who feeth into
every heart. The reCtification of our prin-
ciples of acion is the primary object of
religious discipline: and in proportion as
this is more or less advanced, we are more
or less religious. Accordingly, the rege-
neration of the heart is every where repre-
sented in the Gospel as the most essential
requisite in the character of a Christian.

SECONDLY, the state of the heart not

only determines our moral character, but
forms our principal happiness or misery.
External situations of fortune are no far-
ther of consequence than as they operate on

VoL.. II, D the

s El M. the heart; and their operation there is far
v__-- from corresponding to the degree of worldly

prosperity or adversity. If, from any in-
ternal cause a man's peace of mind be
disturbed, in vain you load him with all
the honours or riches which the world can
bestow. They remain without, like things
at a distance from him. They reach not
the source of enjoyment. Discomposed
thoughts, agitated passions, and a ruffled
temper, poison every ingredient of plea-
sure which the world holds out; and over-
cast every object which presents itself, with
a melancholy gloom. In order to acquire
a capacity for happiness, it must be our first
fludy. to rectify such inward disorders.
Whatever discipline tends to accomplish
this purpose, is of greater importance to
man than the acquisition of the advantages
of fortune. These are precarious and
doubtful in their effeC; internal tranquil-
lity is a certain good. These are only
nmeans; but that is the end. These are no
more than instruments of fatisfaaion: that,
is fatisfadion itself.

5 Jutly

jufl1y is it said by the \Vise Man, that he s E R M.

¢0h0o hath no riule over his pirit, is like a ciy _
/hat is broken down and without walls *. All
is waste; all is in disorder and ruins within
him. He possesses no defence against dan-
gers of any fort. He lies open to every
infurredion of ill-humour, and every inva--
sion of distress. Whereas he who is em-
ployed in regulating his mind is making
provision against all the accidents of life.
He is erecting a fortress into which, in the
day of danger, he can retreat with safety.
And hence, amidst those endeavours to fe-
cure happiness which incessantly employ
the life of man, the careful regulation, or
the improvident neglec of the inward
frame, forms the chief diftinaion between
wisdom and folly.

THUS it appears with how much pro-

priety the iJ:es of life are said to be out of
the heart. Here rife those great springs of
human conduc whence the main currents

Prov. xxv. 28.

D 2B flow

S E R M. flow of our virtue, or our vice; of our hap-

I. _ piness, or our misery. Betides this power-

ful argument for keeping the heart with all
diligence, I must mention another import-
ant consideration taken from the present
state of human nature. Think what your
heart now is, and what must be the confe-
quence of remitting your vigilance in watch-
ing over it. With too much justice it is
said in Scripture, to be deceitifl above all
things, and defperatlev -wicked. Its bias of
innate corruption gives it a perpetual ten-
dency downwards into vice and disorder.
To direCc and impel it upwards, requires a
confiant effort. Experience may convince
you, that almost every desire has a propen-
fity to wander into an improper direcion;
that every passion tends to excess; and that
around your imagination there perpetually
crowds a whole swarm of vain and cor-
rupting thoughts. After all the care that
can be bestowed by the best men on the
regulation of the heart, it frequently bas-
fles their efforts to keep it under proper
discipline. Into what universal tumult

thein
8

then must it rife, if no vigilance be em- SE R M.
ployed, and no government be exercised _,
over it? Inattention and remissness is all
that the great adversary of mankind de-
fires, in order to gain full advantage.
While you Jiecp, he Jows his tares in the
field. The house which he finds vacant
and unguarded, he presently garnjijes with
evilfpirits.

Add to this, that the human temper is

to be confidered as a system, the parts of
which have a mutual dependance on each
other. Introduce disorder into any one
part, and you derange the whole. Suffer
but one passion to go out of its place, or
to acquire an unnatural force, and presently
the balance of the foul will be broken; its
powers will jar among themselves, and their
operations become difcordant.-Keep thy
heart therefore witb all diligence; for all
thy diligence is here required. And though
thine own keeping alone will not avail,
unless the assistance of a higher power con-
cur, yet of this be well assured, that no
aid from heaven is to be expeaed, if thou

D 3 lhalt

S E R M. halt neglec to exert thy self in perform-
~* < *ing the part assigned thee.

HAVING now shown the importance of

exercising government over the heart, I
proceed to confider more particularly in
what that government consists, as it re-
speCts the thoughts, the passions, and the
temper.

I begin with the thoughts, which are the

prime movers of the whole human conduct.
All that makes a figure on the great theatre
of the world, the employments of the busy,
the enterprizes of the ambitious, and the
exploits of the warlike, the virtues which
form the happiness, and the crimes which
occasion the misery of mankind, originate
in that silent and secret recess of thought
which is hidden from every human eye.
The fecrefy and silence which reign there
favour the prejudice entertained by too
many, that thought is exempted from all
controul. Passions, they perhaps admit,
require government and restraint, because
they are violent emotions and disturb so-

ciety.

ciety. But with their thoughts, they plead, S E R M.
no one is concerned. By these, as long as _
they remain in their bosom, no offence can
be given, and no injury committed. To
enjoy unrefirained the full range of imagi-
nation, appears to them the native right
and privilege of man.

Had they to do with none but their

fellow-creatures, such reasoning might be
specious. But they ought to remember,
that in the fight of the Supreme Being,
thoughts bear the character of good or evil,
as much as actions; and that they are, in
especial manner, the fubjets of divine ju-
rifdi&ion, because they are cognizable by
no other tribunal. The moral regulation
of our thoughts, is the particular test of our
reverence for God. If we restrain our pas-
sions from breaking forth into open difor-
ders, while we abandon our imagination
in secret to corruption, we show that virtue
refts with us upon regard to men; and
that however we may ac a part in public
with propriety, there is before our eyes
no fear of that God who fearcheth the

D 4 heart,

S E M. heart, and requireth truth in the inward

I_ parts.

But even abftrading from this awful

consideration, the government of our
thoughts must appear to be of high con-
sequence, from their direct influence on
condult. It is plain that thought gives the
first impulse to every principle of action.
Adions are, in truth, no other than thoughts
ripened into consistency and substance. So
certain is this, that to judge with precision
of the character of any man, and to foretell
with confidence what part he will ad, no
more were requisite, than to be rendered
capable of viewing the current of thought
which pases most frequently within him.
Though by such a method we have no ac-
cess to judge of one another, yet thus it is
always in our power to judge of our selves.
Each of us, by impartially scrutinizing his
indulged and favourite thoughts, may dif-
covcr the whole secret of his real character.
This consideration alone, is sufficient to.
show of what importance the government
of thought is to the keeping of te heart.

BUTs

BUT, supposing us convinced of its im- S F R M.

portance, a queflion may arise, How far it
is within our power, and in what degree
thoughts are subjea to the command of the
will ? It is plain that they are not always
the offspring of choice. Often they are in-
evitably impressed upon the mind by fur-
rounding objets. Often they start up, as
of themselves, without any principle of in-
troducion which we are able to trace. As
the wind blowelh where it iicbth, and thou
canyf not tell whence it cometh, nor whither
it goeth, equally rapid in its transitions,
and inscrutable in its progress, is the course
of thought. Moving along a train of con-
nedions which are too delicate for our ob-
servation, it defeats all endeavours either to
explore or to stop its path. Hence vain
and fantastic imaginations sometimes break
in upon the molt fettled attention, and dif-
turb even the devout exerciies of pious
minds. Instances of this fort must be placed
to the account of human frailty. They are
misfortunes to be deplored, rather than
crimes to be condemned; and our gracious

Creator,

S E R M. Creator, who knows ozrf-rame, and remem-
*,' * bers we are dust, will not be severe in mark-

ing every such error and wandering of the
mind. But, after these allowances are made,
fiill there remains much scope for the proper
government of thought; and a multitude of
cafes occur, in which we are no less ac-
countable for what we think, than for what
we do.

As, first, when the introduction of any

train of thought depends upon ourselves,
and is our voluntary at; by turning our
attention towards such objecs, awaken-
ing such passions, or engaging in such
employments as we know must give a pe-
culiar determination to our thoughts. Next,
when thoughts, by whatever accident they
may have been originally suggested, are in-
dulged with deliberation and complacency.
Though the mind has been passive in their
reception, and, therefore, free of blame;
yet, if it be ative in their continuance, the
guilt becomes its own. They may have
intruded at first, like unbidden guests; but
if, when entered, they are made welcome,

and

and kindly entertained, the cafe is the fame. s ER M.
as if they had been invited from the begin- I
ning. If we be thus accountable to God
for thoughts either voluntarily introduced,
or deliberately indulged, we are no less so,
in the last place, for those which find ad-
mittance into our hearts from supine negli-
gence, from total relaxation of attention,
from allowing our imagination to rove with
entire licence, like the eyes of the fool, to-
wards the ends of the earth. Our minds are,
in this cafe, thrown open to folly and va-
nityo They are proftituted to every evil
thing which pleases to take possession. The
consequences muff all be charged to our ac-
count; and in vain we plead excuse from
human infirmity. Hence it appears, that
the great object at which we are to aim in
governing our thoughts, is, to take the most
effectual measures for preventing the intro-
duCtion of ifch as are sinful, and for haftcn-
ing their expulsion, if they lhall have intro-
duced themselves without content of the will.

But when we descend into our breasts,
and examine how far we have studied to

keep

s E R M. keep this objea in view, who can tell how
v__-- oft he hath offiended? In no article of reli-

gion or morals are men more culpably re-
miss than in the unrestrained indulgence
they give to fancy; and that too, for most
part, without remorse. Since the time that
Reason began to exert her powers, Thought,
during our waking hours, has been a&cive
in every breast, without a moment's sus-
pension or pause. The current of ideas
has been always flowing. The wheels of
the spiritual engine have circulated with
perpetual motion. Let me aft, what has
been the fruit of this incessant acivity with
the greatest part of mankind ? Of the in-
numerable hours that have been employed
in thought, how few are marked with any
permanent or useful effe ? How many
have either passed away in idle dreams; or
have been abandoned to anxious difcon,
tented musings, to unsocial and malignant
passions, or to irregular and criminal de-
fires? Had I power to lay open that store-
house of iniquity which the hearts of too
many conceal; could I draw out and read

to

to them a lift of all the imaginations they s E R M.
have devised, and all the palfions they have v_
indulged in secret; what a piture of men
would I present to themselves ? What crimes
would they appear to have perpetrated in
fancy, which to their mot intimate com-
panions they durst not reveal ?

Even when men imagine their thoughts

to be innocently employed, they too com-
monly susser them to run out into extrava-
gant imaginations, and chimerical plans of
what they would wifll to attain, or chufe to
be, if they could frame the course of things
according to their desire. Though such
employments of fancy come not under the
fame description with those which are plainly
criminal, yet wholly unblameable they fel-
dom are. Besides the wafie of time which
they occasion, and the misapplication which
they indicate of those intellectual powers
that were given to us for much nobler pur-
poses, such romantic speculations lead us
always into the neighbourhood of forbid-
den regions. They place us on dangerous
ground. They are for the most part con-

neced

S ER M. neaed with some one bad parfion; and

.-' they always nourish a giddy and frivolous

turn of thought. They unfit the mind for
applying with vigour to rational pursuits,
or for acquiescing in fober plans of conduc.
Froml that ideal world in which it allows
itself to dwell, it returns to the commerce
of men, unbent and relaxed, sickly and
tainted, averse from discharging the duties,
and sometimes disqualified even for relish-
ing the pleasures of ordinary life. 0 7eriu-
Jalemz ! irvaJjh thize heart fromn wickednzefs.
HCAw lo. zgJhnall tah vain thoughs lodge within
thee' ?-- In order to guard against all
such corruptions and abuses of thought as I
have mentioned, it may be profitable to at-
tend to the following rules.

IN the first place, ftudv to acquire the

habit of attention to thought. No study is
more important; for in proportion to the
degree in which this habit is possessed, such
commonly is the degree of intellectual im-

* Jerem. iv. 14.

provement.

provement. It is the power of attention s R M.
which in a great measure diftinguilles the e
wife and the great from the vulgar and
trifling herd of men. The latter are ac-
customed to think, or rather to dream, with-
out knowing the flbjeL of their thoughts.
In their unconnected rovings, they pursue
no end; they follow no traCd. Every thing
floats loose and disjointed on the surface of
their mind; like leaves scattered and blown
about on the face of the waters.

In order to lead your thoughts into any

useful direction, your first care must be, to
acquire the power of fixing them, and of
restraining their irregular motions. Inure
yourselves to form a plan of proper medi-
tation; to pursue it steadily; and with fe-
vere authority to keep the door shut against
intrusions of wandering fancy. Let your
mind, for this purpose, become a frequent
objec to itself. Let your thoughts be made
the subjed of thought and review.-" To
i wlat is my attention at present directed ?
" Could I disclose it without a blush to the
" world? Were God instantly to call me

" into

S E R M. "( into judgment, what account could I give

" of it to him ? Shall I be the wiser or the
'L better for dwelling on such thoughts as
' now fill my mind ? Are they entirely
" confiltent with my innocence, and with
"mly present and future peace ? If they
"are not, to what purpose do I indulge
" such unprofitable or dangerous musings ?"
-By frequent exercise of this inward fcru-
tiny, we might gradually bring imagination
under discipline, and turn the powers of
thought to their proper use as means of im-
provement, instead of suffering them to be
only the instruments of vanity and guilt.

IN the second place, in order to the go-

vernment of thought, it is necessary to guard
against idleness. Idleness is the great so-
menter of all corruptions in the human
heart. In particular, it is the parent of
loose imaginations and inordinate desires.
The ever active and restless power of thought,
if not employed about what is good, will
naturally and unavoidably engender evil.
Imagine not that mere occupation, of what-

ever

ever kind it be, will exempt you from the SE RM.
blame and danger of an idle life. Perhap.s _
the worfi species of idleness is a dissipated,
though seemingly buiy life, spent in the
haunts of loose society, and in the chace of
perpetual amu-ement. Hence a giddy mind,
alternately elated and dejected with trifles,
occupied with no recoilection of the pas
but what is fruitleis, and with no plans for
the future but what are either frivoio is or
guilty.

As, therefore, you would govern your

thoughts, or indeed as you would have any
thoughts that are worthy of being gloverned,
provide honourable employment for the
native activity of your minds. Keep know-
ledge, virtue, and uliefulne's, ever in view.
Let your life proceed in a tr-in of such pur-
suits as- are worthy of a Christian, of a ra-
tional and a social being. While these are
regularly carried on as the main business of
life, let amusement possess no more than its
proper place in the distribution of your time.
Take particular care that your amusements
be of an irreproachable .kind, and that all

VOL. II. E your

S R M. your society be either improving or inno-
- v-- Jcent. So ihall the stream of your thoughts

be made to run in a pure channel. Manly
occupations and virtuous principles will ex-
pel the taint which idleness never fails to
communicate to the vacant mind.

IN the third place,when criminal thoughts

arise, attend to all the proper methods of
speedily suppressing them. Take example
from the unhappy industry which finners
discover in banishing good ones, when a
natural sense of religion forces them on their
conscience. How anxiously do they fly
from themselves ? how studiously do they
drown the voice which upbraids them in
the noise of company or diversion? what
numerous artifices do they employ to evade
the uneasiness which returns of reflexion
would produce ?-Were we to use equal
diligence in preventing the entrance of vi-
cious fuggeflions, or in repelling them when
entered, why should we not be equally fuc-
ceisful in a much better cause ?-As soon as
you: are sensible that any dangerous paflion

begins

begins to ferment, instantly call in other S ER M.
passions, and other ideas, to your aid. A
Haften to turn your thoughts into a differ-
ent direction. Summon up whatever you
have found to be of power for composing
and harmonizing your mind. Fly for as-
fiftance to serious studies5 to prayer and
devotion; or even fly to business or inno-.
cent society, if solitude be in hazard of fa-
vouring the seduction. By such means you
may stop the progress of the growing evil.
You may apply an antidote, before the
poison has had time to work its full effect.

IN the fourth place, it will be particularly

useful to impress your minds with a habitual
sense of the presence of the Almighty. When
we refleC what a strong check the belief of
divine omniscience is calculated to give to
all criminal thoughts, we are tempted to
fufpet, that even by Christians this article
of faith is not received with sincere convic-
tion. For who but must confers, that if he
knew a parent, a friend, or a neighbour, to
have the power of looking into his heart,

E 2 he

S E R M. he durst not allow himself that unboundect
-_feo scope which he now gives to his imagination

and desire ? Whence, then, comes it to pass,
that men, without fear or concern, bring into
the presence of the awful majesty of Heaven
that folly and licentiousness of thought
which would make them blush and tremble,
if one of their own fellow-creatures -could
descry ? At the fame time, no principle is
supported by clearer evidence than the om-
nifcience of God. All religious feEs have
admitted it. All societies of men, in their
oaths and covenants, appeal to it. The
sovereign of the universe cannot but know
what passes throughout his dominions. He
who fiipports all nature muff needs pervade
and fill it. He who formed the heart is
certainly conscious to what paifes within it.

'Never let this great article of faith efcapc

'from your view. In thinking, as well as
in adting, accustom yourselves to look up
with reverence to that piercing eye of di-
vine observation which never Jiunzbers nor
Jleeps. Behold a pen always writing over
your head, and making up that great re-

2 cord

cord of your thoughts, words, and ations, s E R M.
from which at last you are to be judged. J
Think that you are never less alone than
when by yourselves; for then is He still
with you, whose infpeaion is of greater
consequence than that of all mankind.
Let these awful considerations not only
check the dissipation of corrupt fancy, but
infuse into your spirits that solemn com-
pofure which is the parent of meditation
and wifdorn. Let them not only expel
what is evil, but introduce in its stead what
is pure and holy; elevating your thoughts
to divine and eternal objecs, and acing as
the counterpoise to those attraicions of the
world, whlic would draw your whole at-
tention downwards to sense and vanity.

E 3 S ER-

# SERMON III. The same SUBJECT continued. PROV. iv. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life.

S E R M O N III

The fame SUBJECT continued,

P R o ,. iv, 23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of

it are the iues of life.
SERM. It AVING treated, in the foregoing

. discourse, of the government of the

thoughts, I proceed to confider the govern-
ment of the passions, as the next great duty
included in the keeping of the heart.

Passions are firong emotions of the mind,

occasioned by the view of apprehended
good or evil. They are original parts of
the conffitution of our nature; and there-
fore, to extirpate them is a mistaken aim.
Religion requires no more of us than to

moderate

moderate and rule them. When our blef- S E R M.

III.

fed Lord assumed the nature, without the L_
corruption, of man, hewas subjeCt to like
passions with us. On some occasions he
felt the risings of anger. He was often
touched with pity. He was grieved in Jpi-
rit; he sorrowed and he wept.

Passions, when properly direced, may

be subservient to very useful ends. They
rouze the dormant powers of the foul.
They are even found to exalt them. They
often raise a man above himself, and ren-
der him more penetrating, vigorous, and
masterly, than he is in his calmer hours.
Acuated by some high passion, he conceives
great designs, and surmounts all difficulties
in the execution. He is inspired with more
lofty sentiments, and endowed with more
persuasive utterance, than he possesses at
any other time. Passions are the active
forces of the foul. They are its highest
powers brought into movement and exer-
tion. But, like all other great powers, they
are either useful or deftrutive, according to
their directin and degree: as wind and

E 4 fire

S E R M O N III,

The fame SUBJECT continued,

PRO V,. iv. 23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of

it are the ji.es of lfe.

SERM. R _A.AVING treated, in the foregoing

_ .
_._. - discourse, of the government of the

thoughts, I proceed to confider the govern-
ment of the passions, as the next great duty
included in the keeping of the heart.

Passions are strong emotions of the mind,

occasioned by the view of apprehended
good or evil. They are original parts of
the conflitution of our nature; and there-
fore, to extirpate them is a mistaken aim.
Religion requires no more of us than to

moderate

moderate and rule them. When our blef- s E R M.
fed Lord assumed the nature, without the L--
corruption, of man, he was subjeC to like
passions with us. On some occasions he
felt the risings of anger. He was often
touched with pity. He was grieved in fpi-
rit; he sorrowed and he wept.

Passions, when properly directed, may

be subservient to very useful ends. They
rouze the dormant powers of the foul.
They are even found to exalt them. They
often raise a man above himself, and ren-
der him more penetrating, vigorous, and
masterly, than he is in his calmer hours.
Aauated by some high pafflon, he conceives
great designs, and iurmounts all difficulties
in the execution. He is inspired with more
lofty sentiments, and endowed with more
persuasive utterance, than he poffefles at
any other time. Passions are the aCtive
forces of the foul. They are its highest
powers brought into movement and exer-
tion. But, like all other great powers, they
are either useful or deftrucive, according to
their direction and degree: as wind and

E 4 fire

S E R M. fire are initrumental in carrying on many

'II.
.-,-. i of the beneficent operations of nature; but

when they rife to undue violence, or devi-
ate from their proper course, their path is
marked with ruin.

It is the present infelicity of human na-

ture, that those strong emotions of the mind
are become too powerful for the principle
which ought to regulate them. This is one
of the unhappy consequences of our apof-
tacy from God, that the influence of rea-
son is weakened, and that of passion
strengthened, within the heart. When man
revolted from his Maker, his passions re-
belled against himself; and from being
originally the initruments of reason, have
become the tyrants of the foul. Hence, in
treating of this fubje&, two things may be
assumed as principles: first, that through
the present weakness of the underflanding,
our passions are often direted towards im-
proper objets; and next, that even when
their direction is just, and their objects are
innocent, they perpetually tend to run into
excess: they always hurry -us towards their

gratification

gratification with a blind and dangerous S E R M.
impetuosity. On these two points then _..
turns the whole government of our passions:
first, to ascertain the proper objects of their
pursuit; and next, to restrain them in that
pursuit when they would carry us beyond
the bounds of reason. If there be any pas-
sion which intrudes itself unseasonably into
our mind, which darkens and troubles our
judgment, or habitually difcompoies our
temper; which unfits us for properly dif-
charging the duties, or disqualifies us for
cheerfully enjoying the comforts of life,
we may certainly conclude it to have gained
a dangerous ascendant. The great object
which we ought to propose to ourselves is,
to acquire a firm and stedfast mind, which
the infatuation of passion shall not reduce,
nor its violence shake; which, refling on
fixed principles, shall, in the midst of con-
tending emotions, remain free, and master
.of itself; able to liften calmly to the voice
of conscience, and prepared to obey its dic-
tates without hesitation.

To

S E R M . To obtain, if possible, such command of

_ , passion, is one of the highest attainments

of the rational nature. Arguments to show
its importance crowd upon us from every
quarter. If there be any fertile source of
mischief to human life, it is, beyond doubt,
the misrule of passion. It is this which
poisons the enjoyment of individuals, over-
turns the order of fdciety, and fti-ews the
path of life with so many miseries, as to
render it indeed the valley of tears. All
tliofe great scenes of public calamity, which
we behold with astonishment and horrour,
have originated from the source of violent
passions, These have overspread the earth
with bloodshed. These have pointed the
assassin's dagger, and filled the poisoned
bowl. These, in every age, have fur-
nifhed too copious materials for the orator's
pathetic declamation, and for the poet's tra-
gical song.

When from public life we descend to pri-

vate conduct, though paflion operate not
there in such a wide and deftrudtive sphere,
we shall find its influence to be no less bane-

ful.

ful. I need not mention the black and S E RM.

III.

fierce passions, such as envy, jealousy, and -
revenge, whose effects are obviously nox-
ious, and whose agitations are immediate
misery. But take any of the licentious and
sensual kind. Suppose it to have unlimited
scope; trace it throughout its course; and
you will find that gradually, as it rites, it
taints the soundness, and troubles the peace
of his mind over whom it reigns; that in
its progress it engages him in pursuits which
are marked either with danger or with
shame; that in the end it waftes his for-
tune, destroys his health, or debases his
character; and aggravates all the miseries
in which it has involved him with the con-
cluding pangs of bitter remorse. Through
all the stages of this fatal course, how many
have heretofore run? What multitudes do
we daily behold pursuing it, with blind and
headlong steps?

But, on the evils which flow from unre-

strained passions, it is needless to enlarge..
Hardly are there any so ignorant or incon-
fiderate as not to admit,. that where passion

S E R M. is allowed to reign, both happiness and vir-

IjJ.
I. --. tue must susser. I proceed therefore to

what is of more consequence, to suggest
some directions which may be useful in
a!ififing us to preserve the government of
our passions.

IN the first place, we must study to ac-

quire just views of the comparative import-
ance of those objects that are most ready to
attract desire. The erroneous opinions
which we form concerning happiness and
milery, give rife to all the mistaken and
dangerous passions which embroil our life.
We susser ourselves to be dazzled by unreal
appearances of pleasure. We follow, with
precipitancy, whithersoever the crowd
leads. We admire, without examination,
what our predecessors have admired. We
fly from every shadow at which we fee
others tremble. Thus, agitated by vain
fears and deceitful hopes, we are hurried
into eager contests about objeCts which are
in themselves of no value. By rectifying
our opinions, we would firike at the root

of

of the evil. If our vain imaginations were S E R M.

III.

chastened, the tumult of our pailions would _
iubfide.

It is observed, that the young and the

ignorant are always the moil violent in
pursuit. The knowledge which is forced
upon them by longer acquaintance with the
world, moderates their impetuosity. Study
then to anticipate, by reflexion, that know-
ledge which experience often purchases at
too dear a price. Inure - yourfeives to fre-
quent consideration of the emptiness of
those pleasures which excite so much strife
and commotion among mankind. Think
'how much more of true enjoyment is loft
by the violence of passion, than by the want
of those things which give occasion to that
passion. Persuade yourselves that the fa-
vour of God and the pofieffion of virtue
form the chief happiness of the rational
nature. Let a contented mind, and a
'peaceful life, hold the next place in your
estimation. These are the conclusions
which the wife and thinking part of man-
kind have always formed. To these con-

clufions,

S E 1 M. clufions, after having run the race of pas-

ia nfion, you will probably come at the las,

By forming them betimes, you would make
a seasonable escape from that tempestuous
region, through which none can pass with-
out suffering misery, contracting guilt, and
undergoing severe remorse.

IN the second place, in order to attain

the command of passion, it is requisite to
acquire the power of felf-denial. The self-
denial of a Christian consists not in perpe-
tual austerity of life, and universal renun-
ciation of the innocent comforts of the
world. Religion requires no such unne-
ceffary sacrifices, nor is any such foe to
present enjoyment. It consists in our being
ready, on proper occasions, to abstain from
pleasure, or to submit to suffering, for the
fake of duty and conscience, or from a view
to some higher and more extensive good.
If we possess not this power, we ihall be
the prey of every loose inclination that
chances to arise. Pam Jered by continual
indulgence, all our paisions will become

mutinouS

mutinous and headstrong. Desire, not rea- S E R M,

II.

ion, will be the ruling principle of our
conduct.

As, therefore, you would keep your pas-

sions within due bounds, you muit betimes
accustom them to know the reins. You
must not wait till some critical occasion for
the exercise of felf-denial occur. In vain
you will attempt to at with authority, if
your firit effay-be made when temptation
has inflamed the mind. In cooler hours,
you must fometines abridge your enjoy-
ment even of what is innocent. In the
midit of lawful pleasure, you muff main-
tain moderation, abftemioufnefs, and self-
command. The observance of this difci-
pline is the only method of supporting rea-
son in its proper ascendant. For if you
allow yourselves always to firetch to the
utmost point of innocence and safety, be-
yond that point you will infallibly be hur-
ried, when patlion ihall arise in its might
to flliake the heart.

IN the third place, impress your minds
deeply with this persuasion, that nothing is

vwhlat

SE R M. what it appears to be when you are under

III,
,_ „ the power of passion. Be assured, that no

judgment which you then form can be in
the least depended upon as found or true.
The fumes which arise from a heart boiling
with violent passions, never fail to darken
and trouble the understanding. When the
gourd withered, under the shade of which
the prophet Jonah reposed, his mind, al-
ready ruffled by the disappointment of his
predictions, loft, on occasion of this flight
incident, all command of itself; and in the
midst of his impatience, he wijFed to die
rather than to live. Instead of being calmed
by that expoftulating voice, DoJI thou well,
O Jonah ! to be angry becrae of the gourd ?
he replied with great emotion, I do well to
be angry even unto death. But did Jonah
think so when his passion had abated ? Do
these sentiments bear the least resemblance
to that humble and devout prayer which,
on another occasion, when in his calm mind,
he put up to God * ? No two persons can
differ more from each other, than the fame

-See Jonah ii.

person

person differs from himself, when agitated S ER M.

IlI.

by passion, and when master of his reason. -
I do well to be angry, is the language of
every man when his mind is inflamed.
Every passion justifies itself. It brings in a
thousand pretences to its aid. It borrows
many a false colour to hide its deformity.
It poflefles a fort of magic, by which it can
magnify or diminish objects at pleasure,
and transform the appearance of every thing
within its sphere.

Let the knowledge of this imposture which

passion pradifes, place you continually on
your guard. Let the remembrance of it
be ever at hand, to check the extravagant
judgments which you are apt to pass in
those moments of delusion. Lifen to no
suggestion which then arises. Form no
conclusions on which you are to at. As-
sure yourselves that every thing is beheld
through a false medium. Have patience
for a little, and the illusion will vanish ;
the atmosphere will clear up around you,
and objects return to be viewed in their
native colours and just dimeinfons.

VOL. II. F I;

S E R M. IN the fourth place, oppose early the bee

III.
---- , ginnings of paflion. Avoid particularly all

such objects as are apt to excite passions
which you know to predominate within
you. As soon as you find the tempest rising,
have recourse to every proper method, ei-
ther of allaying its violence, or of escaping
to a calmer shore. Haften to call up emo-
tions of an opposite nature. Study to con-
quer one passion by means of some other
which is of less dangerous tendency. Never
account any thing small or trivial which is
in hazard of introducing disorder into your
heart. Never make light of any desire
which you feel gaining such progress as to
threaten entire dominion. Blandilhing it
will appear at the first. As a gentle and
innocent emotion, it may tfeal into the
heart; but as it advances, is likely to pierce
you throtugh with many sorrows. What you
indulged as a favourite amusement, will
lhortly become a serious business; and in
the end may prove the burden of ydur life.
Most of our paflions flatter us in their rife.
But their beginnings are treacherous; their

growth
0

growth is imperceptible; and the cvils which s E R M.
they carry in their train lie concealedc until x_
their dominion is eftabiifhed. What Solo-
mon fays of one of them, holds true of them
all, that their begimiung is as aswhe one letteth
oul water t. It issues from a small chink,
which once might have been easily flopped;
but being negleded, it is soon widened by
the fiream; till the bank is at last totally
throwrn down, and the flood is at liberty to
dcluge the whole plain.

IN the fifth place, the excess of every

passion will be moderated by frequent me-
ditation on the vanity of the world, the
ihort continuance of life, the approach of
death, judgment, and eternity. The ima-
ginary degree of importance which the ne-
gled of such meditation suffers us to bestow
on temporal things, is one great cause of
our vehemence in desire, and our eagerness
in pursuit. We attach ourselves to the ob-
jeds around us, as if we could enjoy them
for ever. Higher and more enlarged pro-

* Prov. xvii. 14.

F 2 fpcras

S E R M. spects of the destination of man would na-

-- turally cool this misplaced ardour. For

what can appear so considerable in human
affairs, as to discompose or agitate the mind
of him to whose view eternity lies open, and
all the greatness of the universe of God?
How contemptible will seem to him this
hurry of spirits, this turmoil of passion,
about things which are so soon to end ?-
Where are they who once disturbed the
world eith the violence of their contests,
and filled it with the renown of their ex-
ploits ? What now remains of their designs
and enterprises, of their passions and pur-
suits, of their triumphs and their glory?
The flood of time has passed over them,
and swept them away, as if they had never
been. The fJfi/Jion of the world changes
continually around us. We succeed one
another in the human course, like troops
of pilgrims on their journey. Absurdly we
spend our time in contending about the
trifles of a day, while we ought to be pre-
paring for a higher existence. Eternity is
just at hand to close this introductory scene.

It

It is fat rolling towards us, like the tide S ER M.
of a vast ocean, ready to swallow up all _-
human concerns, and to leave no trace be-
hind it, except the consequences of our good
or bad deeds, which fhiall last for ever.-
Let such reflections allay the heat of passion.
Let them reduce all human things to their
proper standard. From frivolous pursuits
let them recal our attention to objects of
real importance; to the proper bufinetf of
man; to the improvement of our nature,
the discharge of our duty, the rational and
religious conduct of human life.

IN the last place, to our own endeavours

for regulating our passions, let us join ear-
neff prayer to God. Here, if any where,
divine assistance is requisite. For such is
the present blindness and imperfection of
human nature, that even to discover all the
disorders of our heart is become difficult;
much more, to rectify them, is beyond our
power. To that superior aid, then, which
is promised to the pious and upright, let us
look up with humble minds; beseeching

F 3 the
/C

S E R M. thes Father of mercies, that, while we study

----- to ad our own part with resolution and

vigilance, he would forgive our returning
weakness; would strengthen our constancy
in refiring the aflaults ofpaffion ; and enable
us by his grace so to govern our minds, that
without considerable interruptions we may
proceed in a course of piety and virtue.

IT now remains to treat of the govern-

ment of temper, as included in the 'kciping
of the heart. Paflions are quick and strong
emotions, which by degrees fibfide. Tem-
per is the disposition which remains after
these emotions are parl, and which forms
the habitual propensity of the foul. The
one are like the stream when it is fwoln by
the torrent, and ruffled by the winds. The
other resembles it when running within its
bed, with its natural velocity and force.
The influence of temper is more silent and
imnerceptible than that of passion. It ope-
rates withe less violence; but as its operation
is constant, it produces effecs no less con-
fiderable. It is evident, therefore, that it

highly

highly deserves to be confidered in a roll- s E IR.v

ili.
gious view.

Many, indeed, are averse to behold it in

this light. They place a good temper upon
the fame footing with a healthy conftitu-
tion of body. They confider it as a natural
felicity which some enjoy; but for the want
of which, others are not morally culpable,
nor accountable to God; and hence the
opinion has sometimes prevailed, that a bad
temper might be consistent with a state of
grace. If this were true, it would overturn
that whole doctrine, of which the gospel is
so full, that regeneration, or change of na-
ture, is the essential charaateriftic of a Chrii-
tian. It would suppose that grace might
dwell amidst malevolence and rancour, and
that heaven might be enjoyed by such as
are strangers to charity and love.-It will
readily be admitted, that some, by the ori-
ginal frame of their mind, are more favour-
ably inclined than others towards certain
good dispositions and habits. But this as-
fords no juftifcation to those who neglecd
to cppofe the corruptions to which they are

F 4 prone.

S tRM. prone. Let no man imagine that the lti_
(----' man heart is a foil altogether unfuifeptible

of culture; or that the worst temper may
not. through the assistance cf grace, be re-
~;ormead by attention and discipline. Settled
depravity of temper is always owing to our
ow-n indulgence. If, in place of checking,
we nourish that malignity of disposition to
which we are inclined, all the consequences
will be placed to our account, and every
excuse from natural concitution D rejecied
at the tribunal of Heaven.

The proper regulation of temper asse.'s

the character of man in every relation which
he bears; and includes the whole circle of
religious and moral duties. This, therefore,
is a subjed of too great extent to be com-
prehended in one discourse. But it may be
useful to take a general view of it; and, be-
fore we conclude the doCrilrn of keyping the
heartt, to shew what the habitual temper of
a good man ought to be,' with respect to
God, to his neighbour, and to himself.

- FIRST, with refpeA to God, what he
ought to cultivate is a devout temper. This

imports

imports more than the care of perform- s ER.M.
ing the offices of religious worship. It - I
denotes that sensibility of heart towards
the Supreme Being, which springs from
a deep impression of his perfections on
the foul. It fiands opposed, not only
to that disregard of God which forms
the description of the impious, but to
that absence of religious affetions whichl
forncrimes prevails among those who are
imperfeEtly good. They acknowledge, per-
haps, the obligations of duty. They feel
some concern to work out their salvation.
But they apply to their duty through mere
constraint; and serve God without affetion
or complacency. More liberal and gene-
rous sentiments animate the man who is of
devout temper. God dwells upon his
thoughts as a benefa&or and a father, to
whose voice he hearkens with joy. Amidst
the occurrences of life, his mind naturally
opens to the admiration of his wifdfom, the
reverence of his power, the love of his
transcendent goodness. All nature appears
to his view as fRamped with the impress of

3 thefc

S E R M. these perfections. Habitual gratitude to

/2I. _>,_ his Maker for mercies past, and cheerful

resignation to his will in all time to come,
are the native effuficns of his heart.

Such a temper as .!his deserves to be cul-

tivated with the utmrnTi attention; for it
contributes, in a high degree, both to our
improvement and our iappinefs. It refines,
and it exalts human nature. It softens that
hardness which our hearts are ready to con-
trat from frequent intercourse with this
rugged world. It facilitates the discharge
of every duty towards God and man. At
the fame time it is a temper peaceful and
serene, elevated and rejoicing. It forms
the current of our affections to flow in a
placid tenour. It opens pleating profpe&s
to the mind. It banishes harsh and bitter
passions; and places us above the reach of
many of the annoyances of worldly life.
When the temper is truly devout, the peace
of God which pafleth underianzding keepetb
the heart andJozl. I proceed,

SECONDLY, to point out the proper state
of our temper with refpec to one another.

It

It is evident, in the general, that if we S ER M,
consult either public welfare or private --
happiness, Chriflian charity ought to regu-
late our disposition in mutual intercourse.
But as this great principle admits of several
diversified appearances, let us confider some
of the chief forms under which it ought to
show itfelfin the usual tenour of life. Uni-
versal benevolence to mankind, when it
refts in the abftrad, is a loose indetermi-
nate idea, rather than a principle of real
effed; and too often floats as an useless
fpeculation'in the head, instead of asseting
the temper and the heart.

What, firrt, presents itself to be recom-

mended is a peaceable temper; a difpofi-
tion averse to give offence, and desirous of
cultivating harmony, and amicable inter-
course in society. This supposes yielding
and condescending manners, unwillingness
to contend with others about trifles, and,
in contests that are unavoidable, proper
moderation of spirit. Such a temper is the
first principle of felf-enjoyment. It is the
basis of all order and happiness among

mankind.

S ERM. these perferions. Habitual gratitude to

- - his Maker for mercies past, and cheerful

resignation to his will in all time to come,
are the native effuficns of his heart.

Such a temper as this deserves to be cul-

tivated with the utmost attention; for it
contributes, in a high degree, both to our
improvement and our liappinefs. It refines,
and it exalts human nature. It softens that
hardness which our hearts are ready to con-
traa from frequent intercourse with this
rugged world. It facilitates the discharge
of every duty towards God and man. At
the fame time it is a temper peaceful and
serene, elevated and rejoicing. It forms
the current of our affections to flow in a
placid tenour. It opens pleasing profpe&cs
to the mind. It banishes harsh and bitter
passions; and places us above the reach of
many of the annoyances of worldly life.
When the temper is truly devout, the peace
of God which pqafeth underjlanding kcepetb
the heart andfoul. I proceed,

SECONDLY, to point out the proper tfate
of our temper with refpea to one another.

It

It is evident, in the general, that if we S E R Ml

Ill.

consult either public welfare or private c.-,
happiness, Christian charity ought to regu-
late our disposition in mutual intercourse.
But as this great principle admits of several
diversified appearances, let us confider some
of the chief forms under which it ought to
show itfelfin the usual tenour of life. Uni-
versal benevolence to mankind, when it
refts in the abitract, is a loose indetermi-
nate idea, rather than a principle of real
effect; and too often floats as an useless
fpeculation'in the head, instead of affeicting
the temper and the heart.

What, firit, presents itself to be recom-

mended is a peaceable temper; a difpofi-
tion averse to give offence, and desirous of
cultivating harmony, and amicable inter-
course in society. This supposes yielding
and condescending manners, unwillingness
to contend with others about trifles, and,
in contests that are unavoidable, proper
moderation of spirit. Such a temper is the
first principle of felf-enjoyment. It is the
basis of all order and happiness among

mankind.

SERM. mankind. The positive and contentious,

III'.
t_ '- * the rude and quarrelsome, are the bane of

society. They seem destined to blast the
finall share of comfort which nature has
here allotted to man. But they cannot dif-
turb the peace of others, more than they
break their own. The hurricane rages sirs
in their own bosom, before it is let forth
upon the world. In the tempests which
they raise, they are always -toft; and fre-
quently it is their lot to periffi.

A peaceable temper must be supported by

a candid one, or a disposition to view the
conduCt of others with fairness and impar-
tiality. This fRands opposed to a jealous
and Lfufpicious temper, which ascribes every
a&ion to the w-orst motive, and throws a
black shade over every character. As you
would be happy in ycurfelves, or in your
connections with others, guard againit this
malignant spirit. Study that charity which
thinketh no evil; that temper which, with-
out degenerating into credulity, will dispose
you to be just; and which can allow you
to obfcrve an error, without imputing it as

a crimes

2 crime. Thus you will be kept free from s E R M.
that continual irritation which imaginary
injuries raise in a suspicious breast; and will
walk among men as your brethren, not
your enemies.

But to be peaceable, and to be candid,

is not all that is required of a good man.
He must cultivate a kind, generous, and
sympathizing temper, which feels for dif-
trefs, wherever it is beheld; which enters
into the concerns of his friends with ar-
dour; and to all with whom he has inter-.
tercourfe is gentle, obliging, and humane.
How amiable appears such a disposition,
when contrasted with a malicious or envi-
ous temper, which wraps itself up in its
own narrow interests, looks with an evil
eye on the success of others, and with an
unnatural fatisfadtion feeds on their difap-
Dointments or miseries How little does
he know of the true happiness of life, who
is a stranger to that intercourse of good
offices and kind affedions, which, by a
pleasing charm, attach men to one another,
and circulate joy from heart to heart

You

SERM. You are not to imagine that a benevo-a

IlL. AI_.-IS lent temper finds no exercise, unless when

opportunities offer of performing acions of
high generosity, or of extensive utility.
These may seldom occur. The condition
of the greater part of mankind, in a good
measure, precludes them. But in the or-
dinary round of human affairs, a thousand
occasions daily present themselves of miti-
gating the vexations which others susser, of
toothing their minds, of aiding their in-
terest, of promoting their cheerfulness, or
cafe. Such occasions may relate to the
smaller incidents of life. But let us re-
member that of finail incidents the system
of human life is chiefly composed. The
attentions which refpe& these, when fug-
gested by real benignity of temper, are
often more material to the happineis of
those around us, than a&ions which carry
the appearance of greater dignity and iplen-
dour. No wife or good man ought to ac-
count any rules of behaviour as below his
regard, which tend to cement the great
brotherhood of mankind in comfortable
union.

Particularly

Particularly in the course of that fami- S E R M.

liar intercourse which belongs to domestic
life, all the virtues of temper find an ample
range. It is very unfortunate, that within
that circle, men too often think themselves
at liberty to give unrestrained vent to the
caprice of passion and humour. Whereas
there, on the contrary, more than any
where, it concerns them to attend to the
government of their heart; to check what
is violent in their tempers, and to soften.
what is harsh in their manners. For there
the temper is formed. There, the real
charaEter displays itself. The forms of the
world disguise men when abroad. But
within his own family, every man is known
to be what he truly is.-In all our inter-
course, then, with others, particularly in
that which is closest and most intimate, let
us cultivate a peaceable, a candid, a gentle
and friendly temper. This is the temper
to which, by repeated injuntions, our holy
religion seeks to form us. This was the
temper of Christ. This is the temper of
Heaven,

WE
4

S ER M. WE arc now to confider, thirdly, the

L--- proper state of temper, as it refpets the

individual himself. The balls of all the
good dispositions which belong to this head,
is humility. By this I understand, not that
meanness of spirit which leads a man to
undervalue himself, and to fink below his
rank and charaacer; but what the scripture
expresses with great propriety, when it ex-
horts every man, not to think of himeZlf more
highly than he ought to think, but to tbinkk
soberly %. He who adopts all the flattering
suggestions of felf-love, and forms claims
upon the world proportioned to the ima-
ginary.opinion which he has conceived of
his merit, is preparing for himself a thou-
sand mortifications. Whereas by checking
the rilings of ill-founded vanity, and re-
treating within those bounds which a mo-
derate estimation of our character pre-
scribes, we escape the miseries which always
pursue an arrogant mind, and recommend
ourselves to the favour both of God and
man.

Rom. xii. 3.

HIence

Hence will naturally arise a conteitcd S R R M.

temper, which is one of the greatest blel- -,-
sings that can be enjoyed by man, and one
of the most material requisite to the pro-
per discharge of the duties of every station.
For a fretful and discontented temper ren-
ders one incapable of performing aright any
part in life. It is unthankfiul and impious
towards God; and towards men, provok-
ing and unjust. It is a ganigrene which
preys on the vitals, and inse-e: the ,wtole
constitution with disease and putr-cfaLion.
Subdue pride and vanity, and you will
take the most cffidual method of cradicat-
ing this distemper. You will no longer
behold the objeas around you with jaun-
diced eyes. You will take in good part
the blessings which Providence is pleaied to
belfow, and the degree of favour which
your fellow-creatures are difpofid to grant.
you. Viewing yourselves, wvith all your
imperfections and failings, in a just light,
you will rather be furpriied at your enjoy-
ing so many good things, than diicontented
because there are any which you want.

VOL. II. G From

S ER M. From a humble and contented tempcr

,- will spring a cheerful one. This, if not

in itfeif a virtue, is at least the garb in
whlich virtue inould be always arrayed.
Piety and goodness ought never to be mark-
ed with that dejecion which sometimes
takes rife from superstition, but which is
the proper porticn only of guilt. At the
fame time, the cheerfulness belonging to
virtue is to be carefully distinguished from
that light and giddy temper which charac-
terizes folly, and is so often found among
the difiipated and vicious part of mankind.
Their gaiety is owing to a total want of
reflexion; and brings with it the usual con-
sequences of an unthinking habit, ihame,
renorfe, and heaviness of heart, in the end.
The cheerfulnef3 of a. well-regulated mind,
springs from a good confcier-cc and the fa-
vour of heaven, and is bounded by tem-
perance and reacin. It makes a man
happy in himfeif, and promotes the hap-
pinels of ail around him. It is the clear
and calm furihine of a mind illuminated by
piety and virtue. It crowns all other good

difpcfitions,

dispositions, and comprehends the general SERM.
effet which they ought to produce on the .--
heart.

SUCH, on the whole, is tlh: temper, or

habitual frame of mind, in a goc;ld n:ian,
Devout towards Cod; towards lmn, peace-
able, candid, afFc.-ionate and humane;-
within himself, humble, contenf ed and
cheerful. To the establishment of thi, ha.p-
py temper all the dirc&ion.s which i before
suggested for the due regulation of the
thoughts, and for the government of the
paifons, naturally conduce; in this they
ought to iflue; and when this temper is
thoroughly formed within us, then may
the heart be esteemed to have been kept
with all diligencle. That we may be thus
enabled to keep it, for the fake both of pre-
sent enjoyment and of preparation for
greater happinef., let us earnestly pray to
Heaven. A grearer blessing we cannot
implore of the Almighty, than that he
who made the human heart, and whoi
knows its frailties, would assist us to sub-

GZ 2 jec^-.

S E R M. jeCt it to that discipline which religion re-'
i , __ quires, which reason approves, but which

his grace alone can enable us to main-
tain.

SE R-

# SERMON IV. On the UNCHANGEABLENESS of the DIVINE NATURE. JAMES i. 17. Every good and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither ...

[ 85 ]

S E R M O N IV.
On the UNCHANGEABLENESS of the

DIVINE NATURE.

JAMES i. 17.
Every good and every perfeb' gift is fr.orm

above, and cometb down fromel the Father
of Lights, with whom is no variable/irf,
neither Jhadowi of turning.

HE divine nature, in some views, SE R M

IV.

attrads our love; in others, cor- I. _

mands our reverence; in all, is entitled to
the highest attention from the human mind.
We never elevate our thoughts, in a pro-
per manner, towards the Supreme Being,
without returning to our own sphere with
sentiments more improved; and if, at any
time, his greatness oppresses our thoughts,

G 3 his

S E R M. his moral perfecions always afford us re-

IV.

^ lief. His almighty power, his infinite

wisdom and supreme goodness, are founds
familiar to our ears. In his immutability
we are less accustomed to confider him;
and yet it is this perfection which, perhaps,
more than any other distinguishes the di-
vine nature from the human; gives com-
plete energy to all its other attributes, and
entitles it to the highest adoration. For,
hence are derived the regular order of na-
ture and the ftedfaftnefs of the universe.
Hence flows the unchanging tenourof those
laws which, from age to age, regulate the
conduct of mankind. Hence the uniform-
ity of that government, and the certainty
of those promises, which are the ground of
our truf -and security. Goodness could
produce no more than feeble and wavering
hopes, and power would command very
imperfedc reverence, if we were left to
suspeCt that the plans which goodness had
framed might alter, or that the power of
carrying them into execution might de-
ereafe. The contemplation of God, there-

fore,

fore, as unchangeable in his nature and in S ER M.
all his perfeQions, must undoubtedly be -.--.
-fruitful both of inftrudion and of consola-
tion to man. I shall, first, endeavour to
illustrate in some degree the nature of the
divine immutability; and then make ap-
plication of it to our own conduct.

EVE R good and eve)y, pe;yfec gift

cometh down from the Father of Lis-r'l.
The title which in the text is given to thc
Deityj carries an elegant alluilon to the Sun,
the source of light, the moit universal be-
nefaaor of nature, the most regular and
constant of all the great bodies with which
we are acquainted in the universe. Yet
even with the Sun there are certain degrees
of variableness. He apparently rites and
sets; he seems to approach nearer to us in
summer, and to retire farther off in win-
ter; his influence is varied by the seasons,
and his lustre is affeced by the clouds.
Whereas with him who is the Father of
Lights, of whose everlasting brightness the
glory of the Sun is but a faint image,

(G 4 there

S E P.M. there is no nadrowe of ftii/rnitg, not the motl

iv.
.-, distant approach to change. In his being

or essence it is plain that alteration can ne-
ver take place. For as his existence is de-
rived from no prior cause, nor dependent
on any thing without himself, his nature
can be influenced by no power, can be
aifecteed by no accidient, can be impaired
bv no time. Frem everlafiinc to everlaft-
ins, he cc:tintnes the I:ame. .-ence it is
ilid. tihat he oG;,/ ;t: ? '?; ;7i;i&Fs ; ; that is,

eI Fciei'es it in a manner incomnmunicable
to all other bc'o.
i tcrni. e t dfciribed,

' t l' 7 ?

r4-. / _ l

-L

! L '.;;
b ,:.:Lc!' - : c' :'i' 'wi:ch he

-·-~~~~~~~~~~~r

but t -; 7 Io l; n

eo ' :e. "i
r

.twolZ --.x'..1i' '.-t 1to ''sl l ' 1...1.

· . , ? · . ·

but his oiawn ci, e

- s ecut;-Iy every

point of ·uran ; :: ' -

bt iS '') LZsló, i')c cJii.', i'_J1

_ - ?:' i~_lJ / QYt , /7-

but ahi o, n

,7 : c
_

8 AS
'

.;,-

d~,

,
~ ,

As in his essence, so in his attributes and s ER M.

IV.

perfections, it is impollible there can be any
change. To imperfec natures only it be-
longs to improve and to decay. Every al-
teration which they undergo in their abili-
ties or dispositions, flows either from inter-
nal defect, or from the influence of a superior
cause. But as no higher cause can bring
from without any accession to the divine
nature, so within itielf it contains no prin-
ciple of decay. For the iame reason that
the felf-exiftent Being was from the begin-
ning powerful and vise, just and good, he
must continue unralterably f so r ever. I-Ience
with much propriety the divine perfe&tions
are described in flCripture by allusions to
those objecs to which we ascribe the mol,
perman-ent f'cabiii;y. his r-i'eou/ift f. is
like thI Jfi'oln mollnl'ains. His ;ZR';-ci, is in
the heavenis; tInd his hfait/.hf:-,:f reachetb
unto the cloids. These perfections of the
divine nature diLer widely from the human
virtues, which are their faint fladows. The
justice of men is at one time severe, at an-
other time relenting; their goodners is son-e-

tims'>I

S R M. times confined to a partial fondness for a

v -- few, sometimes runs out into a blind in-

dulgence towards all. But goodness and
justice are in the Supreme Being calm and
steady principles of ation, which, enlight-
ened by perfed wisdom, and never either
warped by partiality, or disturbed by passion,
persevere in one regular and constant tenor.
Among men they may sometimes break forth
with transient splendour, like those wan-
dering fires which illuminate for a little the
darkness of the night. But in God they
£hine with that uniform brightness, -which
we can liken to nothing so much as to the
untroubled, eternal lustre of the highest
heavens.

From this follows, what is chiefly mate-

rial for us to attend to, that in the course
of his operations towards mankind, in his
counsels and decrees, in his laws, his pro-
mises, and his threatenings, there is no va-
riablenefs nor Jhadow of turning with the
Almighty. Known to him from the begin-
ning were all his warks. In the divine idea
the whole system of nature exiftd, long

before

before the foundations of the earth were laid. s E R M.

1V.

When he said, Let there be light, he only a
realized the great plan which from everlaft-
ing he had formed in his own mind. Fcre-
seen by him was every revolution which
the course of ages was to produce. What-
ever the counsels of men can effec was
comprehended in his decree. No new emer-
gency can arise to surprise him. No agita-
tions of anger or of sorrow, of fear or of
hope, can shake his mind or influcnce his
conduct. I-e refts in the eternal possession
of that supreme beatitude, which neither
the virtues nor the crimes of men can in the
least asset. From a motive of overflowing
gocinefs, he reared up the universe. As
the eternal lover ofrighteoufnefs, he rules it.
The whole system of his government is
fixed; his laws are irrevocable; and what
he once loveth, he loveth to the end. In.
scripture, indeed, he is obmetimes .aid to
begrieved, and to repent. But fich expref-
sions, it is obvious, are employed from ac-
commodation to common conception; in
the fame manner as when bodily organs are

I i;.

E R M. in other paflages ascribed to God. The
i_-^ fScripture, as a rule of life addressed to the

multitude, must make use of the language
of men. The divine nature, represented in
its native sublimity, would have transcended
all human conception. When, upon the
reformation of finners, God is said to repent
of the evil which he had threatened against
them, this intimates no more, than that he
suits his dispensations to the alterations which
take place in the charaters of men. His
disposition towards good and evil continues
the fame, but varies in its application as its
objeds vary; just as the law's themselves,
which are capable of no change of affecion,
bring rewards or punishments at different
times to the fame person, according as his
behaviour alters. Immutability is indeed so
closely conneced with the notion of supreme
perfection, that wherever any rational con-
ceptions of a Deity have taken place, this
attribute has been ascribed to him. Reason
taught the w-ife and reflecning in every age
to beiieve, that, as what is eternal cannot
die, so what is perfect can never vary, and

that

that the great Governor of the un;verfe SE RM.

IV.

could be no other than an unchangeable ,__
Being.

FROM the contemplation of this obvious,

but fundamental truth, let us proceed to
the pracical improvement of it. Let us
confider what effe the serious consideration
of it ought to produce on our mind and be-
haviour.

It will be proper to begin this head of dif-

course by removing an objection which the
docrine I have illustrated may appear to
form against religious services, and in par-
ticular against the duty of prayer. To what
purpose, it may be urged, is homage ad-
dressed to a Being whose purpose is unal-
terably fixed; to whom our righteoziicfs
extendetb not; whom by no arguments we
can persuade, and by no supplications we
can mollify? The objecion would have
weight if our religious addrefles were de-
signed to work any alteration on God; ei-
ther by giving him information of what he
did not know; or by exciting affestions

which

S E R M- which he did not poflefs; or by inducing

,V . him to change measures which he had pre-

vioufly formed. - But they are only crude
and imperfect" notions of religion which can
suggest such ideas. -The change which our
devotions are intended to make is upon our-
selves. not upon ;ihe Altmighty. Their chief
effc-acy is derived from the good dispositions
which they raise and cherish in the human
foul. By pouring out pious sentiments and
desires before God, by adoring his perfec-
tion and confessing our own unworthiness,
by exprefing our dependence on his aid,
our gratitude for his past favours, our sub-
miflion to his present will, our trust in his
future mercy, we cultivate such affections
as suit our place and itation in the universe,
and are thereby prepared for becoming ob-
jects of the divine grace. Accordingly fre-
quent aflurances are given us in Scripture,
that the prayers of sincere worihippers, pre-
ferred through the great Mediator, shall be
productive of the happiest effects. When
they aJk, they Jall receive; when they seek,
they shall find; when they knock, it Jhall be

opened

opened to them. Prayer is appointed to be S ER M.
the channel for conveying the divine grace ,
to mankind, because the wisdom of Heaven
saw it to be one of the mos powerful means
of improving the human heart.

When religious homage is confidered in

this light, as a great instrument of spiritual
and moral improvement, all the objetions
which scepticism can form from the divine,
immutability, conclude with no more force
against prayer, than against every other
mean of improvement which reason has
suggested to man. If prayer be superfluous
because God is unchangeable, we might
upon similar grounds conclude, that it is
needless to labour the earth, to nourifi our
bodies, or to cultivate our minds, because
the fertility of the ground, the continuance
of our life, and the degree of our under-
flanding, depend upon an immutable So-
vereign, and were from all eternity fore-
seen by him. Such absurd conclusions rea-
son has ever repudiated. To every plain
and found understanding it has clearly'dic-
tated, that to explore the unknown purposes

of

SE R M. of Heaven belongs not to us; but that He

IV.

,- -- ,
, who decrees the end, certainly requires the

means; and that in the diligent employment
of all the means which can advance either
our temporal or spiritual felicity, the chief
exertiGon of human wisdom and human
duty confifl. Assuming it then for an un-
doubted principle, that religion is a reason-
able service, and that, though with the Fa-
ter of L;£,5ts there be n70 variablcncfs, the
homage of his cleatures is nevertheless for
the vifeft reasons required by him, I pro-
ceed to ihcew what sentiments the contem-
plation of divine immutability flould raise
in our minds, and what duties it should
chie-ly enforce.

I. LET it excite us to admire and adore.

Filled with profound reverence, let us look
up to that Supreme Being who fits from
everla.ting on the throne of the universe;
moving all things, but remaining immove-
a:.le himself; direeting every revolution of
the creation, but affscced by no revolutions
o events or of time. He beholds the heavens

and

and the earth wax old as a goarment, .and s ES R M.

IV.

decay like a vefmurc. At their appointed pc- ----
riods he raises up, or he dissolves worlds.
But amidst all the convulsions of changing
and perishing nature, his glory and felicity
remain unaltered.-The view of great and
stupendous objecs in the natural world
strikes the mind with solemn awe. VWhat
veneration, then, ought to be inspired by
the contemplation of an objec so sublime
as the eternal and unchangeable ruler of the
universe! The compofuire and stillness of
thought introduced by such a meditation has
a powerful tendency both to purify and to
elevate the heart. It effaces, for a time,
those trivial ideas, and extinguishes those
low passions, which arise from the circle of
vain and pafling objeOes around us. It opens
the mind to all the sentiments of devotion;
and accompanies cevotlon with that pro-
found reverence which guards it from every
improper excess. When we confider tlhe
Supreme Being as employed in works of
love; when we think of his condescension
to the human race in fending his Son to

VOL. IT. UI dwell

S E RM. dwell on the earth; encouraged by favours
a_ and warmed by gratitude, we are sometimes

in danger of presuming too much on his
goodness, and of indulging a certain fond-
ness of affection, which is unsuitable to our
humble and dependent state. It is necef-
fary that He ihould frequently appear to
our minds in all that majesty with which
the immutability of his nature clothes him;
in order that reverence may be combined
with love, and that a mixture of sacred awe
may chasten the rapturous effusions of warm
devotion. Servile fear, indeed, would crush
the spirit of ingenuous and affeEtionate ho-
mage. But that reverence which springs
from elevated conceptions of the divine na-
ture, has a happy effea in checking the
:orwardnefs of imagination, restraining our
-affections within due bounds, and compo-
ling our thoughts at the fame time that it
exalts them.
'- When, from the adoration of the un-
:changeable perfection of the Almighty, we
return to the view of our own slate, the first
sentiment which ought naturally to arise, is

that

that of felf-abafement. Wve are too apt to S E R M.

IV.

be lifted up by any little diftindions which
we possess; and to fancy ourselves great,
only because there are others whom we con-
fider as lets. But what is man with all his
advantages and boasted powers before the
eternal Father of Lights ? With God there
is no variableness; with man there is no
liability. Virtue and vice divide the em-
pire of his mind; and wildom and folly
alternately rule him. Hence he is change-
able in his designs, fickle in his friendships,
fluctuating in his whole character. His
life is a series of contradictions. He is one
thing to-day, and another to-morrow;
sometimes obliged by experience to alter his
purpose, and often led to change it through
levity. Variable and unequal himself, he
is surrounded with fleeting objecs. He is
placed as in the midst of a torrent, where all
things are rolling by, and nothing keeps its
place. He has hardly time to contemplate
this scene of vicissitude, before he too is
swept away.-Thus circumitanced in him-
self, and in all the objects with which he is

H 2 connected,

S E R M. connecaed, let hi-m; lbe admonished to be

IV. ---- humble and modess. Let the contempla-

tion of the unchanging glory of his Creator
inlpire him with sentiments of due fubmif-
sion. Let it teach him to know his proper
place; and check that vanity which is so
ready to betray him into guilt.

Let the fame meditation assed him with

a deep sense of what he owes to the good-
ness of the Deity. His goodness never ap-
pears in so striking a light, as when viewed
in connexion with his greatness. The de-
icription which is given of him in the text
calls, in this view, for our particular atten-
tion. It presents to us the most amiable
union of condetcenlion with majesty, of the
moral with the natural perfections of God,
which can polibly be exhibited to the ima-
gination of man. From the Father of Lighits
vwith whom there is no variablenief, neither
Jfadow of turning, cometh down every good
and fperfe7 gift. The most independent of
all Beings is represented as the most benefi-
cent. He who is eternal and immutable,
exalted above all, and incapable of receiving

returns

returns from any, is the liberal and un- s rS. M.
wearied Giver of every thing thait is goc;d. I
-Let such views of the divine nature not
only call forth gratitude and praile, but
prompt us to imitate what we adore. Lct
them shew us that benevoclnce is div ine;
that to stoop from our fancied grandeur in
order to aflift and relieve one another, is so
far from being any degradation of chi-aracr,
that it is our truect honour, and our nearest
resemblance to the Father of Lights.

II. LET the consideration of the divine

immutability convince us, that the method
of attaining the favour of Heaven is one
and invariable. Were the Almighty a ca-
pricious and inconstant Being, like man,
we should be at a loss what tenour of con-
duct to hold. In order to conciliate his
grace, we might think of applying some-
times to one supposed principle of his incli-
nation, sometimes to another; and bevil-
dered amidst various attempts, would be
overwhelmed with difinay. The guilty
would essay to flatter him. The timid,

H3 sometimes

SE M. sometimes by austere mortifications, some-

IV.
* s
- times by costly gifts, sometimes by obfe-

quious rites, would try to appease him.
Hence, in fat, have arisen all the corrup-
tions of religious worship among men;
from their forming the divine character
upon their own, and ascribing to the Sove-
reign of the Universe the mutability of hu-
man passions. God is represented by the
psalmist David as faying to the wicked, Thout
thoughteJ/ that I was altogether fitch an one
as thyself*. This continues to be the de-
scription of all the superstitious and enthu-
fiaftic feCes which, since the days of David,
have sprung up in the world.

It is our peculiar happiness under the go-

fpel to have God revealed to us in his ge-
nuine character, as without variablene/s or
Jhadow of turning. We know that at no
time there is any change, either in his as-
sections, or in the plan of his adminiftra-
tion. One light always ihines upon us
from above. One clear and direa path is
always pointed out to man. The Supreme

* Psalm 1. 21.

Being

Being is, and was, and ever will be, the s E R M.
supporter of order and virtue; the righteous -
Lord loving righteozfneSs. The external
forms of religion may vary; but under all
dispensations which proceed from God, its
substance is the fame. It tends continually
to one point, the purification of man's heart
and life. This was the object of the origi-
nal law of nature. This was the scope of
the Mosaic institution amidst all its sacrifices
and rites; and this is unquestionably the
end of the gospel.- So invariably constant
is God to this purpose, that the difpenfatioin
of mercy in Christ Jesus, which admits of
the vicarious atonement and righteousness
of a Redeemer, makes no change in our
obligation to fulfil the duties of a good life.
The Redeemer himself hath taught us, that
to the end of time the moral law continues
in its full force; and that till heaven and
earth pass away, one jot or tittle Jhall in no
wife pasfromn it ". This is the only inftitu-
tion known to men, whose authority is un.-
changing and constant.: Human laws rife

*Matth. v. i8.:

H 4 and

S E R M. and fall with the empires that gave them

IV.
--- birth. Systems of philosophy vary with the

progress of knowledge and light. Manners,
ientiments, and opinions, alter with the
course of time. But throughout :sl *'i .S
and amidfl all revolutions, the rule of mo-
ral and religious conduct is the fame. It
partakes of that immutability of the divine
nature, on which it is founded. Such as
it was delivered to the first worshippers of
God, it continues to be, at this day, to us;
and such it hall remain to our posterity for
ever.

III. LET the contemplation of this per-

fetiop of the divine nature teach us to
imitate, as far as our frailty will permit,
that constancy and ftedfaftnefs which we
adore. All the moral attributes of the Su-
preme Being, are standards of characer
towards which we ought to aspire. But
as in all these perfecions there are proper-
ties peculiar to the divine nature, our endea-
vours to resemble them are laid under great
reftriaiobns by the dissimilarity between our

-3 nature

nature and the divine. With respect to s ER M.
that attribute which we now confider, the _-,
circumstances are evident which preclude
improper imitation. To man it is fre-
quently necessary to correE his errours, and
to change his conduct. An attempt, there-
fore, to continue wholly invariable would,
in our situation, be no other than impru-
dent and criminal obstinacy. But withal,
the immutable recitude of the Deity ihould
lead us to aspire after fixedness of principle
and uniformity in conduct, as the glory of
the rational nature. Imprefled with the
sense of that supreme excellence which
results from unchanging goodness, faith-
fulness and truth, let us become ahfamed
of that levity which degrades the human
character. Let us ponder our paths, ac
upon a well-regulated plan, and remain
consistent with ourselves. Contemplating
the glory of the Father of Lights, let us
aim at being transformed, in some degree,
into thefame image from glory to glory. Fi-r
nally,

IV. LET

S ER M. IV. LET the divine immutability become

'V.
v the ground of confidence and trust to good

men, amidst all the revolutions of this un-
certain world. This is one of the chief im-
provements to be made of the subjea, and
therefore requires full illustration. There
are three lights in which we may view the
benefit redounding to us from that attribute
of God which we now confider. It assures
us of the constancy of nature; of the regu-
lar administration of Providence; of the
certain accomplishment of all the divine
promises.

First, it gives us ground to depend on the

constant and uniform course of nature. On
the unchangeablenefs of God refts the fla-
bility of the universe. What we call the
laws of nature are no other than the decrees
of the Supreme Being. It is because He is
without variablenef or J7adow of tuzrning
that those laws have continued the fame
since the beginning of the world; that the
Sun so constantly observes his time of rising
and going down; that the seasons annually
return; the tides periodically ebb and flow;

the

the-earth yields its fruits at stated intervals; E R M.

IV.

and the human body and mental powers _ _
advance to maturity by a regular progress.
In all those motions and operations which
are incessantly going on throughout nature,
there is no stop nor interruption; no change
nor innovation; no deflection from their
main scope. The fame powerful and steady
hand which gave the first impulse to the
powers of nature, refrains them from ever
exceeding their prescribed line. HIence
arises the chief comfort of our present life.
We find ourselves in a regular and orderly
world. We look forward to a known fuc-
cefflon of events. We are enabled to form
plans of action. From the cause we calcu-
late the effeEt; and from the paRt, we rea-
son with confidence concerning the future.

Accustomed from our infancy to this con-

ftancy in nature, we are hardly sensible of
the blessing. Familiarity has the fame es-
sect here, as in many other enjoyments, to
efface gratitude. But let us, for a moment,
take an opposite view of things. Let us
suppose, that we had any cause to dread

capriciouinefs

-EIRM. capriciousness or change in the power who
i-_r- rules the course of nature; any ground to

fufped that, but for one day, the Sun
might not rife, nor the current of the wa-
ters hold their usual course, nor the laws of
motion and vegetation proceed as we have
been accustomed to behold them. What
dismay would instantly fill all hearts!
what horror would seem to overspread the
whole face of Nature! What part could we
aat, or whither could we run, in the midst
of convulsions which overturned all the
measures we had formed for happiness, or
for safety? The present abode of man
would then become, as Job describes the
region of the grave, a land of darkness, as
darkness it/sef, and the Jhadow of death;
without any order; and where the light is as
darknejs *. With what joy ought we then
to recognize an unvarying and fledfaft ruler,
under whose dominion we have no such
disasters to dread; but can depend on the
course of Nature continuing to proceed as

Job x. zz.

it

it has ever gone on, until the period fliall s E R M.

IV.
arrive of its final dissolution! -

BUT though the great laws of Nature be

constant like their Author, yet in the
affairs of men there is much variety and
change. All that regards our present pof-
sessions and enjoyments was, for wife rea-
sons, left, in a great measure, uncertain;
and from this uncertainty arises the distress
of human life. Sensible of the changes to
which we lie open, we look round with
anxious eyes, and eagerly grasp at every
objec which appears to promise us fecu-
rity. But in vain is the whole circle of
human things explored with this view.
There is nothing on earth so stable as to
assure us of undisturbed reft, nor to power-
ful as to afford us constant protecion.
Time, death, and change, triumph over all
the labours of men. What we build up,
they inceifantly destroy. The public con-
dition of nations, and the private fortunes of
individuals, are alike fuhjed to reverse.
Life never retains long the fame form. Its

wMhole

S E R M. whole scenery is continually flifting around

IV.
i-_ us.-- Amidst those endless vicissitudes,

what can give any firm consolation, any
satisfying reft to the heart, except the domi-
nion of a wife and righteous sovereign,
cwvit bwhomn there is no variableness nor fJ7a-
idow of turning Y Though all things change,
and we ourselves be involved in the general
mutability, yet as long as there is fixed and
permanent goodness at the head of the uni-
verse, we are assured that the great interests
of all good men shall be safe. That river
perpetually flows, the Jireams whereof nzake
glad the city of God. We know that the
Supreme Being loved righteousness from
the beginning of days, and that he will
continue to love it to the last. Under his
government none of those revolutions hap-
pen which have place among the kingdoms
of the earth; where princes die and new
sovereigns ascend the throne; new minis-
ters and new counsels succeed; the whole
face of affairs is changed; and former plans
fall into oblivion. But the throne of the Lord
is eJfabliThedfor ever; and the thoughts of his

heart

heart endure to all generations. We serve S E R M.

IV.

the fame God whom our fathers worship-
ped, and whom our posterity Ihall adore.
His unchanging dominion comprehends all
events and all ages; eflablifhes a connect-
ing principle which holds together the pafl,
the present, and the future; gives stability
to things which in themselves are fluctuat-
ing, and extrats order from those which
appear most confused. Well may the earlh
rejoice, and the mniltitznde of iJes be glad,
because there reigneth over the universe such
an immutable Lord.

Were you to unhinge this great article

of faith; were you either to Jay with the
fool, that there is no God, or to suppose with
the superstitious, that the God who rules
is variable and capricious; you would in-
deed lay the axe to the root of the tree, and
cut down, with one blow, the hope and
security of mankind. For you would then
leave nothing in the whole compass of na-
ture, but a round of casual and transitory
being; no foundation of trust, no protec-
tion to the righteous, no stedfast principle

5 to

S E R M. to uphold and to regulate the fuccefflon or

Iv.
L ,'- exiflence. Instead of that magnificent spec-

tacle which the world now exhibits, when
beheld in connexion with the divine go-
vernment, it would then only present to
view, a multitude of ihort-lived creatures
springing out of the dufl, wandering on
the face of the earth without guide or pro-
tedor, struggling for a few years against
the torrent of uncertainty and change;
and then finking into utter oblivion, and
vanishing like visions of the night. Myf-
terious obscurity would involve the begin-
ning of things; disorder would mark their
progress; and the blackness of darkness
would cover their final result. Whereas,
when Faith enables us to discover an uni-
versal Sovereign, whose power never fails,
and whose wisdom and goodness never
change, the profped clears up on every
fide. A ray from the great source of light
seems to illuminate the whole creation.
Good men discover a parent and a friend.
They attain a fortress in every danger; a
refuge amidst all storms, a dwelling-place

in

si all generations. They are no longer afraid S E R M.
of evil tidings. Their heart is fixed, trily-
ing in the Lord.

THOUGH these ieafonings from the un-

changing tenour of Divine government
cannot but afford much comfort to good
men, their fatisfadion, however, becomes
Itill more complete, when they confider
the explicit promises which are given them
in the word of God. The immutability of
the divine purpose assures them most per-
fe&ly of those promises being fulfilled in
due time, how adverse soever circumstances
may at present appear to their accomplifll-
ment. The Jrength of Israel is not a man
that heJ hould lie, nor the son of man that he
Jhould repent. Hath hefaid it, and/hall he
not do it? iYath he fpokcn, and J/hall he not
7mak/e it good? Men have the command
only of the present time. When that is
suffered to pass, changes may befal, either
in their own state, or in the situation of
things around them, which fliall defeat their
best intentions in our behalf, and render all

VOL. II; I their

S E.R M. their promises fruitless. Hence, even set-

Iv.
L-_ ting aside the danger of human inconstancy,

the confidence which we can repose on any
earthly prote&or is extremely imperfect.
Man, in his higherf glory, is but a reed
floating on the stream of time, and forced
to follow every new direcion of the cur-
rent. But God is the rock of ages. All
time is equally in his hands. Intervening
accidents cannot embarrass him; nor any
inforefecn obstacle retard the performance
of his most distant promise. One tday is wiih
the Lord as a thofiand years; and a thou-
.sand years are as one day. There is no
vicissitude of the human slate in which good
men cannot take fandSuary with him as a
sure and abiding friend; the safe conductor
of their pilgrimage here, as well as the eter-
nal reft of their fouls hereafter. All their
patrons may desert them; and all their
friends may die: but the Lord fill lives,
who is their rock; and the moj? high God,
who is their redeemer. He hath promised
that he will not leave thenm wzen they are
old, nor forfike them when their J-rength

faileth ;

fiileth; and that even when their heart fJal s E R M-
Jfint, and their Jfieh fail, he cwill be the -- -
slrength of their heart and their portion for
ever. His immutability is not only the
ground of trust in him during their own
abode on earth, but gives them the fatisfac-
tion of looking forward to the fame wife
and good administration as continued to the
end of time. When departing hence, and
bidding adieu to life, with all its changeful
scenes, they can with comfort and peace
leave their family, their friends, and their
dearest concerns, in the hands of that God.
who reigneth for ever; and whose countc-
nance Jhall always behold the uright with
the fame complacency. My days are like a
Jhadow that declinctb, and I am withered
like the grass. But thou, 0 Lord, /halt en-
dnre for ever; and thy remembrance to all
generations. the children of thy servants
Jhall continue; and their feed Jhall be efta-
blihed before thee *.

Suchi are the benefits which good men
may derive from meditation on God as

* Psalm cii. ii. 12, z8.

I 2 without

SE R M. without variableness or Jhadow of turning.

Iv.
.-y._ It inspires them with sentiments of devout,

humble, and grateful adoration. It points
out to them the unvarying tenour of con-
dudt which they ought to hold; checks their
fickleness and inconstancy; and amidst all
distresses and fears affords them comfort.
The immutability of God is the surest basis
on which their hopes can be built. It is
indeed the pillar on which the whole uni-
verse refts.-On such serious and solemn
meditations let our thoughts often dwell, in
order to correct that folly and levity which
are so apt to take possession of the human
heart. And if our minds be overawed, and
even depressed, with so high a view of the
divine nature, let them be relieved by the
reflecion, that to this unchangeable God
we are permitted to look up through a gra-
cious Mediator, who, though possessed of
divine perfeEtion, is not unconscious of hu-
man distress and frailty.

SE R-

# SERMON V. On the COMPASSION of CHRIST. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. HEBREWS iv. 15. We have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our ...

[ I7 ]

SERMON V.

On the COMPASSION of CHRIST.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.

HEBREWS iv. 15.
We have not an hzigh prie? which cannot be

touched with thefeeling of our infirmities;
but was in allpoints tenmpted like as we are,
yet without Jin.
W HEN we compare the counsels of s E RM.

Providence with the plans of men, .

we find a like difference obtain as in the
works of nature compared with those of art.
The works of art may, at first view, appear
the most finiihed and beautiful; but when

I 3 the

S EVR M. the eye is aflifted to pry into their contexture,

V.
v'-_-J *the nicest workmanship is discerned to be

rough and blemished. Whereas the works
of nature gain by the most accurate exami-
nation; and those which on a superficial
survey appeared defective or rude, the more
intimately they are infpeced, discover the
more exa& conftruCaion and consummate
beauty. In the fame manner the systems
of worldly policy, though at first they 'eem
plausible and profound, soon betray in their
progress the narrowness of the human un-
derftanding; while those dispensations of
Providence which appeared to furnifl ob-
jeations either against the goodness or the
wifdorm of Heaven, have, upon a more ex-
tensive view of their consequences, fre-
quently afforded the most striking proofs of
both.

Cod manjfeijed in the flteJ was to the Vewcs

a Jiinbibling-block, and to Ite Greeks foolyh-
nJfs. It contradiaed every prepossession
which their confined ideas of religion. and
philosophy led th m to entertain. If a iu-
periour Being was to interpofL for the refto-

ratio:a

ration of a degenerate world, they concluded s E R M
that he would certainly appear in celestial -,
majesty. But the thoughts of God are not
as the thoughts of inme. The divine wifdiorn
saw it to be fit that the Saviour of mankind
should in all things be made like nlnto those
whom he came to save. By living as a man
among men, he dispensed inftrution in the
most winning manner. He added to in-
firudion the grace and the force of his own
example. Hle accommodated that example
to the most trying and difficult situations of
human life; and by ffiSering a painful
death, he both taught men how to susser
and die, and in that nature which had of-
fended he offered a solemn expiation to God
for human guilt.

Besides these ends, so worthy of God,

which were accomplifled by the incarna-
tion of Christ, another, of high importance,
is suggested in the text. Human life is to
good men, as well as to others, a state of
suffering and distress. To supply them
with proper consolation and encouragement
during such a state, was one great purpose

I 4 of

S E R M. of the undertaking of Christ. With this

V.
~'- Jview he assumed the office of their high

priest, or mediator with God; and the en-
couragement which this office affords them,
will be proportioned to their affired belief,
first of his power, and next of his com-
passion. His power is set forth in the verse
preceding the text, and the proper argu-
ment is founded upon it. Seeing that we
have a great high priesd who is pajed into
the heavens, yefius the Son of God, let us hold
fafJ our profejion. But though it be en-
couraging to know that our high priest
is the Son of God, and that he is pased into
the heavens, yet these fads alone are not
sufficient to render him the full object of
our confidence. For, as the Apolfle after-
wards observes, it belongs to the characer
of a high priest to be taken from among men,
ihat he may have conmpajion on the ignorant,
a;d themn that are out of the way, feeing that
he hinfief is compafed with irfirmity. In
order then to satisfy us of our high prier's
possessing also the qualifications of mercy
and compassion, we are- told that he is

touched

touched with the feeling of our infirmities, and s F R M.
was in all points tempted like as we are. _,_
The force of this consideration I purpose
now to illufirate. I shall first explain the
fads which are stated in the text, and then
show how from these our Saviour's com-
paflion is to be inferred, and in what man-
ner it may be accommodated to the confo-
lation and hope of good men amidst various
exigencies of life.

THE aflertion in the text of Christ's be-

ing touched with the feeling of our ifirmities,
plainly implies that he had full experience
both of the external difireffes, and of the
internal sorrows of human nature. Affum-
ing a body such as ours, he fubjeaed him-
self to all the natural consequences of cor-
poreal frailty. He did not chufe for him-
self an easy and opulent condition, in order
to glide through the world with the leani
molestation. He did not suit his miiflon to
the upper ranks of mankind chiefly, by
assimilating his fRate to theirs. But, born
in meanness, and bred up to labour, he

submitted

S E R M. submitted to the inconveniencies of that

V.
o__^ poor and toilsome life which falls to the

share of the most numerous part of the hu-
man race. Whatever is severe in the dif-
regard of relations or the ingratitude of
friends, in the scorn of the proud or the
insults of the mean, in the virulence of
reproach or the sharpness of pain, was un-
dergone by Christ. Though his life was
short, he familiarized himself in it with a
wide compass of human woe; and there is
almost no distressful situation to which we
can be reduced, but what he has experi-
enced before us. There is not the least
reason to imagine that the eminence of his
nature raised him above the sensations of
trouble and grief. Had this been the cafe,
he would have been a sufferer in appear-
ance only, not in reality; there would have
been no merit in his patience, or in the re-
fignation which he expressed. On the con-
trary, it appears from many circumstances,
that the sensibility of his nature was tender
and exquisite. He asseted none of that
hard indifference in which some ancient

philosophers

philosophers vainly gloried. He felt as a S ER M.

V.

man, and he sympathized with the feelings
of others. On different occasions we are
informed that he was troubled in spirit, that
he groaned, and that he wept. The relation
of his agony in the garden of Getlifemane
exhibits a striking picure of the sensations
of innocent nature opprcffed with anguish.
It discovers all the confliQt between the
dread of suffering on the one hand, and the
sense of duty on the other; the man ftrug-
giing for a while with human weakneis,
and in the end recolleced in virtue, and
rising fuperiour to the objecQs of difinay
which were then in his view. Father! if
it be pofible, let this cup pass from me. Ne-
verthelefs, not as I will, biut as thou wilt.
Why will be done. Thus was our Saviour
touched -with the feeling of our infirmities.
He was a man of sorrows, and acquainted
with grief

It is added in the text, that he was in all

points tenmpted like as we are. To be tempt-
ed is, in the language of Scripture, to un-
dergo such trials of virtue as are accompa-

nied

S E R M. nied with difficulty and conflit. Though

V.

our Lord was not liable to any temptations
from depravity of nature, yet he was per-
petually exposed to such as arise from fitua-
tions the most adverse to virtue. His whole
life was in this refpet a course of tempta-
tion; that is, a revere trial of his constancy
by every discouragement. He suffered
repeated provocations both from friends
and foes. His endeavours to do good were
requited with the most obstinate and per-
verse opposition. Sometimes by the folici-
tations of ignorant multitudes he was tempt-
ed to accept the proffers of worldly greatness.
Oftener, by the insults of multitudes, more
blind and brutal, he was tempted to desert
an office which exposed him to so much
misery. Together with the world, the
powers of darkness also combined their
efforts against him. We are informed that
he was led into the wildernefi, and amidst
the horrours of a wild and dreary solitude,
was tempted of the devil. The great adver-
fary of mankind seems to have been per-
mitted to exert unusual proofs of his power

and

and malice, on purpose that the trial of s ER M.
our Saviour's constancy might be more
complete, and his victory over him more
illustrious and distinguished.

From all these circumstances, the conclu-

sion is obvious, that our Lord knows from
personal experience, all the discouragements
and temptations which virtue can susser.
Though he participated not of the corrup-
tion, yet he felt the weakness of human
nature. He felt the strength of paflion.
He is no stranger to the disturbance and
commotion which either the attacks of the
world, or the powers of darkness, are able
to raise within the breast of man. One re-
markable difference, indeed, takes place
between our temptations and those of Christ.
Though he was tempted like as we are, yet
it was without fin. Though the confli&c
was the fame, the issue was different. We
are often foiled; He always overcame. But
his disconformity to us in this refpeC is far
from weakening the strength of our present
argument. For fin contracts and hardens
the heart. Every degree of guilt incurred

by

SERM. by yielding to temptation tends to debase

V.

1-
; the mind, and to weaken the generous and

benevolent principles in human nature. If
from our Lord's being tempted like as we are,
we have any ground to expet his fympa-
thy, from his being tempted, yet without
fit, we are entitled to hope that his sym-
pathy, unallayed and perfec, will operate
with more complete energy.

FROM this view of the fatls which are

flated in the text, I proceed to show how
justly we may infer our Saviour's compaf-
sion, and in what manner it is to be ac-
commodated to the consolation of good men
amidst various exigences of life.

It has been the universal opinion of man-

kind, that personal experience of suffering
humanizes the heart. In the school of as-
fliCtion, compassion is always supposed to
be most thoroughly learned: and hence in
the laws of Moses, when the Ifiaelites are
commanded not to oppress the firanger, this
reason is given, for ye know the heart of a
Jiranger, Jeeing ye were Jfrangers yourSelves

8 in

in the land of Egpt '. The diffrcfed, ac- S E R M.
cordingly, flie for consolation to those who i _
have been their companions in woe. They
decline the prosperous, and look up to
them with a suspicious eye. They conli-
der them as ignorant of their feelings, and
therefore regardless of their complaints.
Amidit the manifold sorrows of life, then,
how soothing is the thought that our great
intercessor with God was a fellow-fufferer
with ourselves, while he passed through
this valley of tears !

But was it necessary for Christ, it may

be said, to assume our nature in order to
acquire the knowledge of its infirmity and
diflrefs? As a divine person, was he not
perfedly acquainted with our frame before
he descended to the earth ? Did he stand
in need of being prompted to compaiflon
by the experience of our sorrows? Could
his experimental knowledge of human weak-
ness increase the benevolence of a nature
which before was perfet ?--- No: he sub-

*Exod. xxiii. 9.

mitted

S E R M. mitted to be touched wvith the feeling of our

V. ;-i- einfirmities, and to be tempted like as we are;

not in order to become acquainted with
our nature, but to satisfy us that he knew
it perfecly; not in order to acquire any
new degree of goodness, but to give us the
firmer confidence in the goodness which he
possessed, and to convey the sense of it to
our hearts with greater force and effect.

Distrust is a weakness peculiarly incident

to the miserable. They are apt to reject
hope, to indulge fear, and to tinge with the
dark colour of their own minds every ob-
jet which is offered for their encourage-
ment. The representations given us of the
Deity in Scripture afford undoubtedly much
ground for trust in his goodness. But the
perfecion of an Almighty Being, who
dwelleth in the secret place of eternity,
whom no man hath seen or can fee, is over-
whelming to a timid apprehension. The
goodness which it promises is a new and
unknown form of goodness. Whatever
proceeds from a nature so far fuperiour to
our own, is beheld with a degree of awe

6 which

which is ready to overpower hope. Upon s ER M.
this account, under the Old Testament dif- --
penfation, the Supreme Being is often de-
fcribed with the attributes of a man, in order
to give a shade and softening to his great-
ness, and to accommodate his goodness
more to our capacity. The relentings of a
friend, the pity of a parent, and the sighs
of a mourner, are ascribed to the Almighty.
But we easily perceive such attributes to be
no more than figures and allusions. The
comfort which they afford is not definite
nor precise. They leave the mind under
an anxious uncertainty left it err in its in-
terpretation of those allegories of mercy.
In the person of Jesus Christ the objeea of
our trust is brought nearer to ourselves;
and of course adapted more effedually to
our encouragement. Those well-known
tender affecEions, which are only figura-
tively ascribed to the Divinity, are in our
great Mediator thoroughly realized. His
goodness is the goodness of human nature
exalted and rendered perseEt. It is that
species of goodness with which, of all others,

VOL. II. K we

S E R M. we are best acquainted, compassion to the

V.

_ unhappy; and compassion cultivated by

that discipline which we know to be the
most powerful, the experience of oirrows.

For luch reasons as these, beciazf the chil-

dren care partakers of feJj and blood, Chrifl
hiin1ef 'ikerwife took part ?f the fame. IA all
tbinigs it behoved him to be made like znto his
breibren, tbhat he might be a n:ercf'l, as well
as fa fitlffil Mhigh. piif. 'Vlhen we confider
his aimnption of our nature in this light,
what a mild and amiable arpc& does it give
to the government of heaven ! What atten-
tive solicitude of goodness is shewn in car-
rying on the dispensation of our reielption
*upon a plaln lto IperSLy calculated to laniifl
all diltruf-, alnd to revive the nmo!l timid
and .dej cced heart! I-cw natu.rallv does
that inerence follow xvricih tile Apotile
makes in the verse immlcdiatey ficceeding
tle text ; let s.r tbheief'ore cone bold#y to the
*throne of grace., Dhat wie may obtLC:!. merci',
,and fmid grace to i).e in time of need I! More
particularly, in coi'Lequencc of the dodzrine
wrhich I have illustrated7 we arc taught to
hope,

8 I. TIIAT

I. THAT under all our infirmities and S E R M.

V.

errors, regard will be had to human im- --
perfeclion ; that a merciful diftintion will
be made between what is weak and what is
wilfully criminal in our conduLc; and that
such meafurcs of obedience only will be ex-
aced as are proportioned to our circum-
flances and powers. WVhat can more en-
courage our religious fcrviccs, than to be
alfured tha:t the God whlm we worfiip
knowzs o/r .frame, acnd rc'nzembcers ',ve ar-tc de//;
and that the Mediator, through whom we
worthip him, is touched with te jZ'eli /'ig of'
ouir il.irmities? The most virtuous are tie
most apt to be dejeLed with the tufcn of
their frailty. While vain and fuperlicial
men are easily flattered with favourable
views of themselves, and fond hopes of
divine acceptance, the slightest apprllen-
sion of guilt is ready to alarm tle humble
and delicate mind; just as on coarse bodies
an impression is not easily made, while
those of finer contexture are Ibon hurt; and
as on an exquisite polish the leat fpcckl is
visible. But though religion promotes great

K 2 I.:fiLli'iy

S E R M. sensibility to all feelings of a moral nature,

v.
-v_ yet it gives no countenance to excessive and

superstitious fears. That humility which
checks presumption, and that j ealoufy which
inspires vigilance, are favourable to piety;
while those lufpicions which lead to de-
fpondency are injurious to God, hurtful to
ourselves, and repugnant to that whole sys-
tem of mercy which I have been illustrating.

You complain, that when you engage in

the solemn exercises of devotion, your fpi-
rits are depressed by a load of cares and
sorrows; that in your thoughts there is no
composure, and in your affections no ele-
vation; that after your utmost essays you
are incapable of fixing your attention Rea-
dily on God, or of fending up your prayers
to him with becoming warmth and fulness
of heart. This debility and wandering of
mind you are apt to impute to some uncom-
mon degree of guilt. You confider it as
the symptom of incurable hardness of heart,
and as a melancholy proof of your being
abandoned by God.-Such fears as these in
a great measure refute themselves. If you

6 were

were really obdurate, you would be insen- s L R M.

V

fible of guilt. Your complaints of hardness -
of heart are an evidence of your heart being
at that moment contrite and aatually relent-
ing.-Are there any circumilances of in-
ward discomposure and perplexity of which
He is unconscious who at a critical period
of his life was heavy and foJe iaiazed': ; who
was obliged to complain that his foul was
troubled zu'it/Ji. him; and to acknowledge,
that though the spirit was willing, yet the
AisJ zcvas weak ? To a fuperiour nature,
untouched with hulman frailiy, you might
in such situations look up with some degree
of terrour. But He who remembers the
struggles of hiis own foul, will not, surely,
judge yours like a hard and unfeeling maf-
ter. Acquainted with the inmost recefies of
human nature, he perceives the sincerity of
your intentions; he fees the combat you
maintain ; he knows how much of your
present confusion and disorder is to be im-
puted, not to your inclination and will, but
to an infirm, an aged or diseased body, or

* Mark xiv. 33.

K 3 to

S E R M. to a weak and wounded spirit; and there-
--- --, fore will be far from rejecing your attempts

to serve him, on account of the infirmities
which you lament. He hears the voice of
those secret aspirations which you are unable
to express in words, or to form into prayer.
Every penitential tear which your contrition
sheds, pleads your cause more powerfully
with him, than all the arguments with which
you could fill your mouth.

II. FROM our Saviour' s experience of

human misery, we may julfly hope that he
will so compaflionately regard our dilfreffed
el{ate, as to prevent us from being loaded
with unneceiTary troubles. I-e will not
wantonly add afflicion to the afflided; nor
willingly cr-uh what he fees to be already
broken. In the course of that high admi-
niftration which hle now exercises, he may
indeed judge certain intermixtures of ad-
verfity to be proper for our improvement.
These are trials of virtue through which all,
without exception, must pass. Rugged was
the road by which our divine Mediator him-

self

self went before us to glory ; and by b)e- S E RM.
coming our companion in diflrels, he meant ,_
to reconcile us to our lot. I-Ie cnnobled
adversity, by sharing it with us. He raiscd
poverty from contempt, by auming it for
his own condition. The severity of his
trials tends to lighten ours. WVhen the ge-
neral of an army lies on the ifame hard
ground, drinks of the fame cold stream,
carries the liame weight of armour with the
lowest centinel, can any of his loldiers re-
pine at what they eldu-e ?

Whatever affltiions our Lord may judge

to be neceflary for us, of this we may reft
assured, that he will deal them fortl, not
with hai-fl and imperious authority, Ibut
with the tenderness of one who knows from
experience how deeply the human hcart is
wounded by every sIroke of adversity. He
will not lay more upon us than he fees we
are able to bear. ThozCugh, he ca /re grief, yet
wVi/l he have comi7prjos z accordinig to the nmul-
titude of his tender mlercies. He wdilJ/jy his
rosugh winld i/ the day of the eanl wind '

* Isaiah xxvii. 8.

K 4 For

S E R M. For it is his ifate, but not his nature, which

V.
i_ X is now changed. Notwithstanding his high

exaltation, he fill retains the compassionate
sentiments of the man offorrows. Still, we
are assured by an inspired writer, he is not
aJhamed to call us his brethren *. And with
the heart of a brother he regards those few
and troubled days, such as his own once
were, which good men are doomed to pass
in this evil world.

From his compassion, indeed, we are not

to exped that fond indulgence or unfeafon-
able relief by which the weak pity of men
frequently injures its objecs. It is to the
material interests, more than to the present
cafe, of good men, that he attends. When
under the impatience of sorrow we exclaim,
Hat/b he forgotten to be gracious ? hath he
in anger Jhsut up his tender mercies ? we re-
colled not in whose hands we are. His
compaflion is not diminiihed when its ope-
rations are most concealed. It continues
equally to flow, though the channels by
which it-is conduted towards us lie too

* Heb. ii. ii.

deep

deep for our observation. Amidst our pre- s E R M.
sent ignorance of what is good or ill for us __
in this life, it is fifficient for us to know,
that the immediate administration of uni-
versal government is placed in the hands of
the most attentive and compaiflonate friend
of mankind. How greatly does this confi-
deration alleviate the burden of human woe!
How happily does it conned vith the awful
dispensations of religion he mildest ideas of
tenderness and humanity !

III. THE text leads us to hope that

amidPl all the infirmities of our state, both
under the temptations and under the dif-
tresses of life, our blessed Lord will afford
us a proper meafltre of affilance and sup-
port. In that he hath fjct'red being tempted,
be is able to ficcour thezm who either susser,
or are tempted 'c; that is, he is perfealy
qualified for discharging this beneficent
office; he knows exadly where the wound
bleeds, where the burden presses, what re-
lief will prove most seasonable, and how it

* Heb. ii. 18.

can

S E R M. For it is his state, but not his nature, which

V.

is now changed. Notwithfianding his high
exaltation, he still retains the compassionate
Sentiments of the man ofSorrows. Still, we
are assured by an inspired writer, he is not
ajhamed to call us his brethren *. And with
the heart of a brother he regards those few
and troubled days, such as his own once
were, which good men are doomed to pass
in this evil world.

From his compassion, indeed, we are not

to expeCt that fond indulgence or unfeafon-
able relief by which the weak pity of men
frequently injures its objects. It is to the
material interests, more than to the present
ease, of good men, that he attends. When
under the impatience of sorrow we exclaim,
Hath he forgotten to be gracious ? hath he
in anger JJht up his tender mercies ? we re-
colled not in whose hands we are. His
compassion is not diminished when its ope-
rations are most concealed. It continues
equally to flow, though the channels by
which it is conducted towards us lie too

Heb. ii. Il.

deep

deep for our observation. Amidst our pre- s E R M.
sent ignorance of what is good or ill for us --
in this life, it is sufficient for us to know,
that the immediate administration of uni-
versal government is placed in the hands of
the most attentive and compafionate friend
of mankind. How greatly does this confi-
deration alleviate the burden of human woe!
How happily does it conned with the awful
dispensations of religion the mideeft ideas of
tenderness and humanity!

III. THE text leads us to hope that

amidIt all the infirmities of our state, both
under the temptations and under the dif-
tresses of life, our blessed Lord will afford
us a proper measure of assistance and sup-
port. In that he hath fiered being tempted,
he is able to iuccour them who either susser,
or are tempted *; that is, he is perfecly
qualified for discharging this beneficent
office; he knows exactly where the wound
bleeds, where the burden presses, what re-
lief will prove most seasonable, and how it

* Heb. ii. 18,

can

SE R M. can be most successfully applied. The

-,-J manner in which it is conveyed by him to

the heart we may be at a loss to. explain;
.but no argument can be thence drawn
'against the credibility of the fad. The
operations which the power of God car-
ries on in the natural world are no less
mysterious than those which we are taught
to believe that his spirit performs in the
moral world. If we can give no account
of what is every day before our eyes, how
a feed becomes a tree, or how the child
rifes into a man, is it any wonder that we
should be unable to explain how virtue is
supported, and constancy firengthened, by
God within the heart? If men by their
counsels and suggestions can influence the
minds of one another, must not divine fug-
geftion and counsel produce a much greater
effed ? Surely, the Father of Spirits must,
by a thousand ways, have access to the fpi-
rits which he has made, so as to give them
what determination, or impart to them
what assistance he thinks proper, without
injuring their frame, or disturbing their
rational powers.

Accordingly,

Accordingly, wherever any notions of S E R M.

V.

religion have taken place among mankind,
this belief has in some measure prevailed,
that to the virtuous under distress aid was
communicated from above. This senti-
ment is so congruous to our natural impref-
sions of the divine benignity, that both
among poets and philosophers of antient
times it was a favourite idea, and often
occurs in their writings. But what among
them was no more than loose conjeaure or
feeble hope has received full confirmation
from the gofpcl of Christ. Not only is the
promise of divine assistance expressly given
to Christians, but their faith in that promise
is strengthened by an argument which must
carry conviclion to every heart. If Christ
had full experience of the insufficiency of
human nature to overcome the difficulties
wherewith it is now surrounded, will he
withhold from his followers that grace
without which he fees they must perish in
the evil day? If in the season of his tempt-
ation and distress, an angel was sent from.

heaven

S E R M. heaven to jrengthen him , shall no celestial

--- messenger be employed by him on the like

kind errand to those whom he stiles his
brethren ? Can we believe that he who once
bore our griefs and carried our sorrows will,
from that height of glory to which he is
now exalted, look down upon us here con-
tending with the storm of adversity, la-
bouring to follow his steps through the
steep and difficult paths of virtue, exposed
on every tide to arrows aimed against us by
the powers of darkness; and that, feeing our
distress, and hearing our supplications, he
will remain an unconcerned fpeCator,
without vouchsafing us either assistance to
support our frailty, or protecion to screen
us amidst surrounding dangers? Where
were then the benevolence of a divine Na-
ture? Where, the compassion of that medi-
ator who was trained to mercy in the school
of sorrow? Far from us be such ungrateful
suspicions of the generous friend of human
kind!-Let us exert ourselves as we can,

* Luke xxii. 43.

and

and we ihall be affiPted. Let us pray, and SER M.
we shall be heard; for there is one to pre-
lent our prayers whom the father heareth
always. These, will he fay, are my fol-
lowers on earth, passing through that thorny
path of temptation and sorrow which I once
trode. Now I am no more in the world;
but these are in the world. Holy Father !
thine they were, and thou gavect them me.
Keep them through thine own name. Sanc-
tify them through thy truth. Keep them
from the evil one; that they nmay be where I
am, and may behold the glory which thou
haft given me '.

Such is the comfort which arises to us

from our Saviour's participation of the in-
firmities of human nature; and thus it may
be applied to various situations of anxiety
and distress.

WHEN we review what has been said,

it is necessary that, in the first place, I
guard you against a certain misimprove-
nent which may be made of this doctrine.

t John xvii.

The

S E M. The amiable view which it gives of our2

V.
A_--- Lord's clemency may flatter some men

with unwarrantable hopes, and lead them to
imagine that in his experience of human
weakness an apology is to be found for
every crime. Persons of this charaCter
must be taught that his compassion differs
widely from that undiftinguifling and ca-
pricious indulgence which is sometimes
found among men. It is the compafnion of
an impartial mind, enlightened by wis-
dom and guided by justice, extending to
the frailties of the sincere, but not to the
fins of the presumptuous, and least of all to
the crimes of those who encourage them-
selves in evil from the hope that they flall
meet with compassion.

A course of deliberate guilt admits of no

apology from the weakness of human na-
ture. For notwithstanding all the infirmi-
ties incident to it, no man is under a ne-
ceffity of being wicked. So far is our Sa-
viour's experience of our nature from
affording any ground of hope to prefump-
tuous offenders, that it ought to fill them

with

with terrour. For it shows them how tho- s E R M.
roughly qualified he is to discriminate v_
accurately the characters of men, and to
mark the boundaries between frailty and:
perverseness. He who from his own feel-
ings well knows all the workings of the hu-
man heart, clearly discerns how different
their temper is from what was once his own.
He perceives that vice, not virtue, is
their choice; and that, instead of reliiling
temptation, they refifl conscience. He fees
that infirmity affords them no excuse; and
that the real cause of their acting a criminal
part, is not becautl they cannot do better,
but, in truth, becaufc they will not. Hav-
ing forfeited every title to compassion, they
are left in the hanls of justice; and ac-
corcling as t//)y haveJ'wzJI, they mufll ex-
pect to reCa,5.

BUT, in the next place, to such as are

sincere and upright, the doctrine which I
have illu tratcd affords high encouragement,
and powerfully recomlmends the Chrilfian
Religion. it places that religion in its pro-

per

S E R M. per point of view, as a medicinal plan, in-

V.
*_, tended both for the recovery of mankind

from guilt, and for their consolation under
trouble. 'he law was given by Moses; but
grace and truth came by yefus ChriJ. The
law was a dispensation of mere authority.
The Gospel is a dispensation, not of autho-
rity only, but of relief. If it discovers new
duties, and imposes new obligations, it opens
also sources of comfort which were before
unknown to the world.

A Mediator between God and his crea-

tures was an obje& after which men in all
nations, and under all forms of religion,
had long and anxiously fought. The follies
of superstition have served to disclose to us,
in this inflance, the sentiments of nature.
The whole religion of Paganism was a sys-
temr of mediation and intercession. De-
pressed by a conscious sense of guilt, nature
shrunk at the thought of adventuring on a
dire& approach to the Sovereign of the uni-
verse; and laboured to find out some aufpi-
cious introduaor to that awful presence.
With blind and trembling eagerness, the

nations

nations fled to Subordinate deities, to tutelar S E R M.

V.

gods, and to departed spirits, as their pa- v
trons and advocates above. Them they
studied to sooth with such costly gifts, such
pompous rites, or such humble fupplica-
tions, as they thought might incline them
to favour their cause, and to support their
interest with the Supreme Divinity. While
mankind were bewildered in this darkness,
the Gospel not only revealed the true Me-
diator, who in this view may be justly
called the dfire of all nations, but placed his
character and office in a light most admirably
fitted, as has been ihewn in this Discourse,
to support the interest of virtue in the world;
and to encourage the humble, without flat-
tering the presumptuous. What plan of
religion could be more Iuited to the circum-
stances of man, or more worthy of the
goodness of his Creator ? What more ani-
mating to the pious worshipper in perform-
ing those solemn ads of devotion to which
we are called by the service of this day?

I CANNOT conclude without taking no-
tice how remarkably this diSpensation of

Vor . II. I religion

S E R M. religion is calculated to promote a spirit of

V.
a-_--. humanity and compassion among men, by

those very means which it employs for in-
spiring devotion towards God. We are
now drawing nigh to the Supreme Being
through a Mediator, for whose compafion
we pray on account of the experience which
he has had of our frailty. We trust, that
having been acquainted with difirefs, he
will not defpie nor abhor the affltliion of the
affliEed. The argument by which we plead
for his compassion concludes still more
strongly for mutual charity, and sympathy
with one another. He who, in the midst
of the common fuffeiings of life, feels not
for the distressed; he who relents not at his
neighbour's griefs, nor scans his failings
,with the eye of a brother, mufl be sensible
that he excludes himself from the commi-
feration of Christ. He makes void the ar-
gument by which he pleads for his mercy;
nay he eftablithes a precedent against him-
self. Thus the Christian religion approves
itself as worthy of God, by connecting de-
votion in ftri~t union with charity. As in

its

its precepts the love of God and the love of s E R M
man are joined, so in its institutions the '--,-
exercise of both is called forth; and to wor-
ship God through the mediation of a com-
passionate high priest, necessarily supposes
in the worshippers a spirit of compaffiorn
towards their own brethren.

L 2a SER-

# SERMON VI. On the LOVE of PRAISE. JOHN xii. 43. For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.

[ 148 ]
SERMON VI,

On the LOVE of PRAISE.

JOHN xii. 43.
For they loved the praie of men more than

the praise of God.
SERM. T SHE fRate of man on earth is mani-

*_ 1 feftly designed for the trial of his
virtue. Temptations every where occur;
and perpetual vigilance and attention are
required. There is no passion, or principle
of ation in his nature, which may not, if
left to itself, betray him into some criminal
excess. Corruption gains entrance, not only
by those passions which are apparently of
dangerous tendency, such as covetousness,
and love of pleasure; but by means of those

also

also which are seemingly the most fair and S ER M.

VI.

innocent, such as the desire of esteem and ---
praise. Of this the text suggests a remark-
able instance. When our Lord appeared
in the land of Judaa, the purity of his doc-
trine, and the evidence of his miracles, ac-
quired him a considerable number of fol-
lowers, chiefly among the lower clafies of
men. But the Pharisees, who were the
leading and fashionable fee, galled with
the freedom of his reproofs, decried him as
an impostor. Hence it came to pass, that
though ome of the rulers believed in him, yet,
becatse of the Pharisees, they did not confeJf
him. Rulers, persons who, by their rank and
education, ought to have been fuperiour to
any popular prejudice, were so far overawed
by the opinions of others, as to stifle their
convition, to dissemble their faith, and to
join with the prevailing party in condemn-
ing one whom in their hearts they revered:
for which this reason is given, that they
loved the praise of men more than the praise
of God. Since, then, the love of praise can
mislead men into such culpable and dilho-

L 3 nefl

S E R M. nest condua, let us, with some attention,

VI. ,_-- examine the nature of this passion. Let us

confider how far it is an allowable principle
of acion; when it begins to be criminal;
and upon what accounts we ought to guard
against its acquiring the entire ascendant.

WE are intended by Providence to be con-

neated with one another in obciety. Single
unaflifted individuals could make small ad-
vances towards any valuable improvement.
By means of society our wants are supplied,
and our lives rendered comfortable; our
capacities are enlarged, and our virtuous as-
sections called forth into proper exercise.
In order to confirm our mutual connetion,
it was necessary that some attracing power,
which had the effea of drawing men toge-
ther, and strengthening the social ties, flould
pervade the human system. Nothing could
more happily fulfil this purpose, than our
being so formed as to desire the esteem, and
to delight in the good opinion, of each other.
Had such a propensity been wanting, and
selfish principles left to occupy its place, so-

ciety

ciety mufl have proved an unharmonious S ER M.

VI.

and discordant itate. Instead of mutual at- ',-
tration, a repulsive power would have pre-
vailed. Among men who had no regard
to the approbation of one another, all in-
tercourfe would have been jarring and of-
fenfive. For the wisest ends, therefore, the
desire of praise was made an original and
powerful principle in the human breast.

To a variety of good purposes it is sub-

servient, and on many occasions co-operates
with the principle of virtue. It awakens
us from sloth, invigorates activity, and
stimulates our efforts to excel. It has given
rife to moif of the splendid, and to many of
the useful enterprizes of men. It has ani-
mated the patriot, and fired the hero. Mag-
nanimity, generosity and fortitude are what
all mankind admire. Hence such as were
actuated by the desire of extensive fame,
have been prompted to deeds which either
participated of the spirit, or, at least, car-
ried the appearance of distinguished virtue.
The desire of praise is generally connected
with all the finer sensibilities of human na-

, 4 ture,

S E R M. ture. It affords a ground on which exhort-

V1I.

..- . ation, couniel and reproof can work a pro-

per effeCt. Whereas to be entirely deltitute
of this passion betokens an ignoble mind,
on which no moral impression is easily
made. Where there is no desire of praise,
there will be alIb no sense of reproach; and
if that be extinguished, one of the princi-
pal guards of virtue is removed, and the
mind thrown open to many opprobrious
pursuits. Hle whose countenance never
glowed with shame, and whose heart never
beat at the found of praise, is not defiined
for any honourable diftinaion; is likely to
grovel in the fordid quest of gain, or to
slumber life away in the indolence of felfith
pleasures.

Abitrading from the sentiments which

are conneced with the love of praise as a
principle of ation, the esteem of our fel-
low-creatures is an objec which, on ac-
count of the advantages it brings, may be
lawfully pursued. It is necessary to our
success in every fair and honest undertak-
ing. Not only our private interest, but our

public

public usefulness, depends in a great mcafrre S E, R M.

VL.

upon it. The sphere of our influence is _
contraCted or enlarged in proportion to the
degree in which we enjoy the good opinion
of the public. Men liften with an unwil-
ling ear to one whom they do not honour;
while a refpedced character adds weight to
example, and authority to counsel. To
desire the esteem of others for the fake of
its effedcs is not only allowable, but in ma-
ny cafes is our duty: and to be totally in-
different to praise or censure, is ob far from
being a virtue, that it is a real defect in
character.

BUT while the love of praise is admitted

to be in so many respects a natural and use-
ful principle of action, we are at the fame
time to observe that it is entitled to no more
than our secondary regard. It has its
boundaries set; by transgressing which, it is
at once transformed from an innocent into a
most dangerous passion. More sacred and
venerable principles claim the chief direc-
tion of human conduc. All the good es-

seas

S E . M. fe&s which we have ascribed to the desire

VL.

*
_ of praise, are produced by it when remain-

ing in a Subordinate fiation. But when
pafling its natural line, it becomes the ru-
ling spring of conduct; when the regard
which we pay to the opinions of men, in-
croaches on that reverence which we owe
to the voice of conscience and the sense of
duty; the love of praise having then gone
out of its proper place, instead of improv-
ing, corrupts; and instead of elevating, de-
bases our nature. The proportion which this
passion holds to other principles of acion is
what renders it either innocent or criminal.
The crime with which the Jewish rulers are
charged in the text, was not that they loved
the praise of men ; but that they loved it
more than the praif of God.

Even in cafes where there is no dired

competition between our duty and our
fancied honour, between the praise of men
and the praise of God, the passion for ap-
plause may become crim:inal by occupying
the place of a better principle. When vain-
glory usurps the throne of virtue; when

ostentation

ostentation produces actions which confci- SERM.
ence ought to have dictated; such actions, I
however specious, have no claim to moral
or religious praise. We know that good
deeds done merely to be seen of men lose
their reward with God. If, on occasion of
some trying conjuncture which makes us
hesitate concerning our line of conduct, the
first question which occurs to us be, not
whether an ation is right in itself, and such
as a good man ought to perform, but whe-
ther it is such as will find acceptance with
the world, and be favourable to our fame,
the conclusion is too evident that the desire
ofapplaufe has obtained an undue ascendant.
What a wife and good man ought to study,
is to preserve his mind free from any such
solicitude concerning praise as may be in
hazard of overcoming his sense of duty.
The approbation of men he may wish to
obtain, as far as is consistent with the ap-
probation of God. But when both cannot
be enjoyed together, there ought to be no
fi-fpence. He is to retire contented with
the tefti-nony of a good conscience; and to

show

S F R M. show by the firmness of his behaviour, that,

.- , in-the cause of truth and virtue, he is fupe-

riour to all opinion.-Let us now proceed
to- ebnfider the arguments which should
support such a spirit, and guard us against
the improper influence of praise or censure
in the course of our duty.

IN the first place, the praise of men is

not an objec of any such value in itself as
to be entitled to become the leading princi-
ple of conduct. We degrade our charac-
ter when we allow it more than Subordinate
regard. Like other worldly goods, it is
apt to dazzle us with a false lustre; but if
we would ascertain its true worth, let us
reflect both on whom it is bestowed, and
from whom it proceeds. Were the applause
of the world always the reward of merit;
were it appropriated to such alone as by real
abilities, or by worldly acions, are entitled
to rife above the crowd, we might juftlX
be flattered by possessing a rare and valuable
diftindion. But how far is this from be-
ing the cafe in faa ? How often have the

despicable

despicable and the vile, by dexterously SER M.

VI.

catching the favour of the multitude, soared v_
upon the wings of popular applause, while
the virtuous and the deserving have been
either buried in obscurity, or obliged to
encounter the attacks of unjust reproach?
The laurels which human praise confers are
withered and blasted by the unworthiness
of those who wear them. Let the man
who is vain of public favour be humbled by
the reflection that, in the midst of his fuc-
cess, he is mingled with a crowd of impof-
tors and deceivers, of hypocrites and en-
thufiafts, of ignorant pretenders and super-
ficial reasoners, who, by various arts, have
attained as high a rank as himself in tem-
porary 'fame.

We may easily be satisfied that applause

will be often shared by the undeserving, if
we allow ourselves to confider from whom
it proceeds. When it is the approbation of
the wife only and the good which is pur-
sued, the love of praise may then be ac-
counted to contain itfelfwithin just bounds,
and to run in its proper channel. But the

testimony

S E R M. testimony of the discerning few, modest and
m-V--. unafluming as they commonly are, forms

but a small part of the public voice. It fel-
dom amounts to more than a whisper, which
amidst the general clamour is drowned,
When the love of praise has taken possession
of the mind, it confines not itself to an ob-
jed so limited. It grows into an appetite
for indiscriminate praise. And who arc
they that confer this praise ? A mixed mul-
titude of men, who in their whole condua
are guided by humour and caprice, far more
than by reason; who admire false appear-
ances, and pursue false goods; who inquire
ifperficially, and judge raffily; whose senti-
ments are for the moit part erroneous, always
changeable, and often inconsistent. Nor
let any one imagine, that by looking above
the crowd, and courting the praise of the
faihionable and the great, he makes sure of
true honour. There are a great vulgar, as
well as a finall. Rank often makes no dif-
ference in the understandings of men, or in
theirjudicious distribution ofpraife. Luxury,
pride, and vanity, have frequently as much

influence

influence in corrupting the sentiments of S E R M.
the great, as ignorance, bigotry, and pre-
judice, have in misleading the opinions of
the crowd.-And is it to ifch judges as
these that you iubmit the iupreme direction
of your conduct ? Do you sLoop to court
their favour as your chief diftindion, when
an objet of so much juiter and higher am-
bition is presented to you in the pra'i of
God ? God is the only unerring judge of
what is excellent. His approbation alone
is the substance, all other praiic is but the
shadow, of honour. The characer wlich
you bear in his fight is your only real one.
How contemptible does it render you to be
indifferent with refpe& to this, and to be
Solicitous about a name alone, a ficitious,
imaginary character, which has no exist-
ence except in the opinions of a fwv weak
and credulous men around you ? They fee
no farther than the outside of things. They
can judge of you by acions only; and not
by the comprehensive view of all your ac-
tions, but by such merely as you have had
opportunity of bringing forth to public no-

6 tice.

S E R M. ticc. But the Sovereign of the world le-

vI.

I_ holds you in every light in which you can

be placed. The silent virtues of a generous
purpose and a pious heart attraa his notice
equally with the most Ipliendid deeds. From
him you may reap the praise of good aaions
which you had no opportunity of peiform-
ing. For he fees them in their principle;
he judges of you by your intentions; he
knows what you would have done. You
may be in his eyes a hero or a martyr,
without undergoing the labours of the one,
or the sufferings of the other. His infpec-
tion, therefore, opens a much wider field
for praise than what the world can afford
you; and for praise, too, certainly far more
illustrious in the eye of reason. Every real
artist studies to approve himself to such as
are knowing in his art. To their judgment
he appeals. On their approbation he refts
his charater, and not on the praise of the
unikilled and rude. In the highest art of
all, that of life and conduc, shall the opi-
nions of ignorant men come into the most
distant competition with his approbation

3 .. who

tvho is the searcher of all hearts, and the S ER M.

Vs.

standard of all perfetion ?-The testimony v_
of his praise is not indeed, as yet, openly
bestowed. But though the voice of the Al-
inighty found not in your ears, yet by con-
science, his sacred vicegerent, it is capable
of being conveyed to your heart. The
softest whisper of divine approbation is
fweeeter to the foul of a virtuous man, than
the loudest shouts of that tumultuary ap-
plause which proceeds from the world.

Confider, farther, how narrow and cir-

cumfcribed in its limits that fame is which
the vain-glorious man so eagerly pursues.
In order to shew him this, I shall not bid
him reflet that it is confined to a small
dilfriac of the earth; and that when he looks
a little beyond the region which he inhabits,
he will find himself as much unknown as
the molf obscure person around him. I
shall not desire him to confider, that in the
gulph of oblivion, where all human me-
morials are swallowed up, his name and
fame muff soon be inevitably loft. He may
imagine that ample honours remain to gra-

VOL. II. M tify

S E R M. tify ambition, though his reputation extend

,I not over the whole globe, nor last till the

end of time. But let him calmly refleCt,
that within the narrow boundaries of that
country to which he belongs, and during
that finall portion of time which his life fills
up, his reputation, great as he may fancy
it to be, occupies no more than an incon-
fiderable corner. Let him think what mul-
titudes of those among whom he dwells are
totally ignorant of his name and characer
how many imagine themselves too import-
ant to regard him; how many are too much
occupied with their own wants and pursuits
to pay him the least attention; and where
his reputation is in any degree spread, how
often it has been attacked, and how many
rivals are daily rising to abate it: Having
attended to these circumftances,'lie will find
sufficient materials for humiliation in the
midst of the higheRf applause. -- From all
tliefe considerations it clearly appears, that
tihough the esteem of our fellow-creatures
'be pleating, and the pursuit of it, in a mo-
dierate degree, 'be fair and lawful, yet that

6 . -it

it affords no such objeCt to desire as entitles SER M.

Vi.
it to be a ruling principle. -v-

IN the second place, an excessive love of

praise never fails to undermine the regard
due to conscience, and to corrupt the heart.
It turns off the eye of the mind from the
ends which it ought chiefly to keep in view;
and sets up a false light for its guide. Its
influence is the more dangerous, as the co-
lour which it assumes is often fair; and its
garb and appearance are nearly allied to
that of virtue. The love of glory, I before
admitted, may give birth to acions which
are both splendid and useful. At a distance
they strike the eye with uncommon bright-
ness; but on a nearer and striCter survey,
their lustre is often tarnished. They are
found to want that sacred and venerable dig-
nity which charaterizes true virtue. Little
passions and selfish interests entered into the
motives ofthofe who performed them. They
were jealous of a competitor. They fought
to humble a rival. They looked round for
speCtators to admire them. All is magna-

M 2 nimity,

S E RM. nimity, generosity, and courage, to public

VI.
'-*__ view. But the ignoble source whence these

seeming virtues take their rife is hidden.
Without, appears the hero; within, is found
the man of dufl and clay. Consult such as
have been intimately connected with the
followers of renown; and seldom or never
will you find that they held them in the
fame esteem with those who viewed them
from afar. There is nothing except fim-
plicity of intention, and purity of principle,
that can stand the test of near approach and
ftriQt examination.

But supposing the virtue of vain-glorious

men not to be always false, it certainly can-
not be depended upon as firm or sure. Con-
ftancy and steadiness are to be looked for
from him only whose conduct is regulated
by a sense of what is right; whose prase is
not of men, but of God; whose motive to dif-
charge his duty is always the fame. Change,
as much as you please, the situation of such
a man; let applause or let censure be his
lot; let the public voice, which this day has
extolled him, to-morrow as loudly decry

him;

liim; on the tenour of his behaviour these s E R M.

VL.

changes produce no effect. He moves in a I
higher sphere. As the fun in his orbit is
not interrupted by the mists and storms of
the atmosphere below, so, regardless of the
opinions of men, through honour and dif-
honour, through good report and bad report,
he pursues the path which conscience has
marked out. Whereas the apparent virtues
of that man whose eye is fixed on the world,
are precarious and temporary. Supported
only by circumstances, occasions, and par-
ticular regards, they flucuate and fall with
these. Excited by public admiration, they
disappear when it is withdrawn; like those
exhalations which, raised by heat from the
earth, glitter in the air with momentary
splendour, and then fall back to the ground
from whence they sprung.

The intemperate love of praise not only

weakens the true principles of probity, by
substituting inferior motives in their stead,
but frequently also impels men to actions
which are directly criminal. It obliges them
to follow the current of popular opinion

M 3 whither-

S E R M. whithersoever it may carry them; and hence
<__. Jhipwreck is often made both offaith and of

a good colffcience. According as circum-
flances lead them to court the acclamations
of the multitude, or to pursue the applause
of the great, vices of different kinds will
Rain their character. In one situation they
will make hypocritical professions of reli-
gion. In another, they will be ashamed of
their Redeemer, and of his words. They
will be afraid to appear in their own form,
or to utter their genuine sentiments. Their
whole characer will become ficitious; opi-
nions will be afumed, speech and behaviour
modelled, and even the countenance formed,
as prevailing taste exaas. From .one who
has submitted to such prostitution for the
fake of praise, you can no longer expec
fidelity or attachment on any trying occa-
sion. In private life, he will be a timorous
and treacherous friend. In public condut,
he will be supple and versatile; ready to d&-
fert the cause which he had espoused, and
to veer with every shifting wind of popular
favour. In fine, all becomes, unsound and

hollow

hollowv in that heart where, instead of re- SE RM.

VI.

gard to the divine approbation, there reigns I
the sovereign desire of pleasing men.

IN the third place, thispaffilon, when it

becomes predominant, most commonly de-
feats its own end, and deprives men of the
honour which they are so eager to gain.
Without preserving liberty and independ-
ence, we can never command refpec.
That servility of spirit which fubjedts us to
the opinions of others, and renders us tri-
butaries to the world for the fake of ap-
plause, is what all mankind despise. They
look up with reverence to one who, un-
awed by their censures, ats according to
his own sense of things, and follows the free
impulie of an honourable mind. But him
who hangs totally on their judgment, they
confider as their vassal. They even enjoy
a malignant pleasure in humbling his vanity,
and withholding that praise which he is seen
to court. By artifice and show he may
ihine for a time in the public eye; but it is
only as long as he can support the belief of

M 4 ating

S E R M. ating from principle. When the incon-

Vi.

f iftencies into which he falls detect his cha-
raaer, his reputation passes away, like the
pageant of a day. No man ever obtained
laiting fame who did not, on several occa-
sions, contradict the prejudices of popular
ppinion,

There is no course of behaviour which

will at all times please all men. That which
pleases most universally, and which only
commands durable praise, is religion and
virtue. Sincere piety towards God, kind
affection to men, and fidelity in the dif-
charge of all the duties of life; a conscience
pure and undefiled; a heart firm to justice
and to truth, fuperiour to all terrours that
would shake, and insensible to all pleasures
that would betray it; unconquerable by the
opposition of the world, and resigned to
God alone; these are the qualities which
render a man truly refpecaable and great.
Such a character may, in evil times, incur
unjuUt reproach. But the clouds which envy
or prejudice has gathered around it will gra-
dually disperse; and its brightness will come

7 forth,

forth, in the end, as the noon day. As S E R M.

·~ VI.

soon as it is thoroughly known, it finds a v
witness in every breast. It forces appxoba-
tion even from the most degenerate. The
human heart is so formed as to be attuned,
if we may use the exprefiion, to its praise.
In faCL, it is this firm and inflexible virtue,
this determined regard to principle beyond
all opinion, which has crowned the charac-
ters of such as now fiand highest in the rolls
of lasting fame. The truly illustrious are
they who did not court the praise of the
world, but who performed the actions which
deserved it. They were perhaps traduced,
in their lifetime, by those whom they op-
posed. But posterity has done them ample
justice; and they are the men whom the
voice of ages now concurs in celebrating.
'he memorial of virtue is immortal; becamfe
it is approved of God and of men. Wh7en it
is present, men take example at it; and when
it is gone, they deJire it. It wceareth a crow7,-
and triumpheth for ever; having gotten the
vicJory; Jlrivingfor undefiled rewards *.

* Wisdom of Solomon, iv. 1, 2.

IN

SE R M. IN the fourth place, as an immoderate

VI.

--passion for human praise is dangerous to vir-

tue, and unfavourable to true honour, so it
is deftrutive of felf-enjoyment and in-
ward peace. Regard to the praise of God
prescribes a simple and consistent tenour of
conduc, which in all situations is the fame;
which engages us in no perplexities, and
requires no artful refinement. Walking
zuprightlj, we walk Jfrely, because we tread
an even and open path. But he who turns
aside from the straight road of duty in order
to gain applause, involves himself in an in-
tricate labyrinth. He will be often embar-
raffed concerning the course which he ought
to hold. His mind will be always on the
stretch. He will be obliged to liften with
anxious attention to every whisper of the
popular voice. The demands of those ma-
fters whom he has submitted to serve, will
prove frequently contradictory and incon-
fiftent. He has prepared a yoke for his
neck which he must resolve to bear, how
much soever it may gall him.

The

The toils of virtue are honourable. The sERM.

VI.

mind is supported under them by the con- -
fcioufnefs of ading a right and becoming
part. But the labours to which he is doom-
ed who is enslaved to the desire of praise,
are aggravated by reflexion both on the un-
certainty of the recompence which he pur-
sues, and on the debasement to which he
submits. Conscience will from time to
time remind him of the improper sacrifices
which he has made, and of the forfeiture
which he has incurred of the praise of God
for the fake of praise from men. Suppose
him to receive all the rewards which the
mistaken opinion of the world can bestow,
its loudest applause will often be unable to
drown the upbraidings of an inward voice;
and if a man is reduced to be alhamed of
himself, what avails it him to be carefled by
others ?

But, in truth, the reward towards which

he looks who propo`es human praise as his
ultimate object, will be always flying, like
a shadow, before him. So capricious and
uncertain, so fickle and mutable is the fa-

your

S E R M. vour of the multitude, that it proves the

V.
, - _ nmoft unfatisfadtory of all pursuits in which

men can be engaged. He who sets his
heart on it, is preparing for himself perpe-
tual mortifications. If the greatest and best
can feldlom retain it long, we may easily
believe that from the vain and undeferving
it will suddenly escape. There is no cha-
raCk'er but what on some fide is vulnerable
by cen-ure. He who lifts himself up to the
observation and notice of the world is, of
all men, the least likely to avoid it. For
he draws upon himself a thousand eyes that
will narrowly infped him in every part.
Every opportunity will be watched of bring-
ing him down to the common level. His
errours will be more divulged, and his in-
firmities more magnified, than those of
others. In proportion to his eagerness for
praise will be his sensibility to reproach.
Nor is it reproach alone that will wound
him. He will be as much dejeCted by si-
lence and neglec. He puts himself under
the power of every one to humble him,
by witlh-holding expected praise. Even

when

when praise is beflowed, he is mortified S E R M.

VI.

by its being either faint or trite. He pines _
when his reputation stagnates. The degree
of applause to which he has been accustom-
ed grows insipid; and to be always praised
from the fame topics, becomes at last much
the fame with not being praised at all.

All these chagrins and disquietudes are

happily avoided by him who keeps so trou-
blefome a passion within its due bounds;
who is more desirous of being truly worthy
than of being thought so; who pursues the
praise of the world with manly temperance,
and in Subordination to the praise of God.
He is neither made giddy by the intoxicat-
ing vapour of applause, nor humbled and
cast down by the unmerited attacks of cen-
sure. Refting on a higher approbation he
enjoys himself in peace, whether human
praise stays with him, or flies away. With
me it is afinallthing to be judged ofyou, or of
man 'sjudgment. He that judgeth me is the
Lord. My witness is in Heaven, and my
record is on high.

IN

S ER M. IN the fifth and last place, the advan-

VI.

*- _ tages which redound from the praise of men,

are not such as can bear to be put in com-
petition with those which flow from the
praise of God. The former are necessarily
confined within the verge of our present
existence. The latter follow us beyond
the grave, and extend through all eternity.
Not only is the praise of men limited in its
effects to this life, but also to particular fitua-
tions of it. In the days of health and ease
it may brighten the sunshine of prosperity.
It may then sooth the ear with pleasing ac-
cents, and gratify the imagination with fan-
cied triumphs. But when the distressful
seasons of life arrive, it will be found alto-
gether hollow and unsubstantial: And sure-
ly, the value of any possession is to be chiefly
estimated by the relief which it can bring
us in the time of our greatest need. When
the mind is cast down with sorrow and
grief, when sickness spreads its gloom
around us, or death rites in awful profpec
to our view, the opinions and the dif-
courIes of the world will appear trifling and

infig-

insignificant. To one who is occupied S ERM.
with nearer and more affeding interests, V
the praise or the ccnfure of the world will
feeim like the noise of distant voices, in
which he has small concern. But then is
the season when the praise of God supports
and upholds the labouring foul. Brought
home to. the heart by the testimony of a
good conscience, and by the divine spirit
bearing wvitnefs with our spirits, it inspires
fortitude, and produces apeace which pajngth
underJfanding.

At present we behold an irregular and

disordered state of things. Virtue is often
deprived of its proper honours, and vice
usurps them in its stead. The characers of
men are mistaken; and ignorance and folly
dispose of human applause. But the day
hafiens apace which ihall close this scene of
errours, and vindicate the rights of justice
and truth. Then Jiall be rendered to every
man according to his works. Envy shall no
longer have the power of obscuring merit,
nor popular prejudices be able to support
the undeferving. Hidden worth Ihall be

brought

E R M. brought to lightd and secret crimes revealed.
<-o_- Many who passed through the world in the

silent obscurity of humble; but fleady good-
ness, shall be distinguished as the favourites
of Heaven; while the proud, the ambitious,
and the vain, are left to everlafling difho-
nour. The great Judge hath declared, that
whosoever has been aJJzamed of him and of his
words, of that manjhall he be ajnamzed when
he cometh in the glory of his Father, with all
the holy angels. Every departure from duty
shall at the period of final distribution ter-
minate in ignominy. True honour and true
virtue ihall be seen to coincide; and when
all human fame has pafled away like smoke,
the only praise which shall be for ever re-
membered is that divine testimony, TVeIll
done, thou good and faithfzid servant: enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord.

THESE arguments clearly ihow the im-

portance of preserving the love of praise
under proper Subordination to the principle
of duty. In itself, it is an useful motive to
acaion; but when allowed to extend its

influence

influence too far, it corrupts the whole S ER T.
character, and produces guilt, disgrace, and -
misery. To be entirely destitute of it, is
a defect0 To be governed by it, is depra-
vity. The proper adjustment of the several
principles of acion in human nature is a
matter that deserves our highest attention.
For when any one of them becomes either
too weak or too strong, it endangers both
our virtue and our happiness. Keep thy
heart therefore with all diligence; pray that
God would enable thee to keep it with fiuc-
cess; for out of the heart are the ilj'es f

L. fe. S E R-
VOL. II. N S E R-

# SERMON VII. On the proper ESTIMATE of HUMAN LIFE. ECCLESIASTES xii. 8. Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher, all is vanity.

[ I78 ]

S E R M O N VII.
On the proper ESTIMATE of HuMAN LIFE.

ECCLESIASTES xii. 8.
Vanity of vanities, faith the preacher, all is

vanity.
S E RM. 0 ferrious maxim has been more ge-

VIL. N.L nerally adopted than that of the text.

In every age, the vanity of human life has
been the theme of declamation, and the sub-
jec of complaint. It is a conclusion in which
men of all charaCters and ranks, the high
and the low, the young and the old, the
religious and the worldly, have more fre-
quently concurred than in any other. But
how just soever the conclusion may be, the
premises from which it is drawn are often

a~~~~~~~ ~~~false.

false. For it is prompted by various mo- s ER M.
tives, and derived from very different views A
of things. Sometimes the language of the
text is assumed by a sceptic who cavils at
Providence, and ccnfures the constitution of
the world. Sometimes it is the complaint
of a peevish man who is discontented with
his tfation, and ruffled by the disappoint-
ment of unreasonable hopes. Sometimes it
is the style of the licentious, when groan-
ing under miseries in which their vices have
involved them. Invetives against the va-
nity of the world which come from any of
these quarters deserve no regard; as they
are the dictates of impiety, of spleen, or of
folly. The only cafe in which the senti-
ment of the text claims our attention, is
when uttered, not as an aspersion on Pro-
vidence, or a reiection on human affairs in
general; not as the language of private dif-
content, or the result of guilty sufferings;
but as the fober conclusion of a wife and
good man concerning the imperfection of
that happiness which refts solely on worldly
pleasures. These, in their fairef form, are

N 2 not

SE R M. not what they seem to be. They neve¢

V1i.
»--- bestow that complete satisfaction which they

promise; and therefore he -who looks to
nothing beyond them fllall have frequent
cause to deplore their vanity.

Nothing is of higher importance to us as

men and as Chrifians, than to form a proper
estimate of human life, without either load-
ing it with imaginary evils, or expeting
from it greater advantages than it is able to
yield. It shall be my business, therefore,
in this Discourse, to distinguish a just and
religious sense of the vanity of the world
from the unreasonable complaints of it which
we often hear. I shall endeavour, I. To
(hew in what sense it is true that all earthly
pleasures are vanity. II. To inquire how
this vanity of the world can be reconciled
with the perfetions of its great Author.
III. To examine whether there are not
some real and solid enjoyments in human
life which fall not under this general charge
of vanity. And, IV. To point out the
proper improvement to be made of such a
state as the life of man shall appear on the
whole to be.

I. I AM

I. I AM to shew in what sense it is true s E R M.

VII.

that all human pleasures are vanity. This
is a topic which might be embellished with
the pomp of much description. But I flall
studiously avoid exaggeration, and only
point out a threefold vanity in human life
which every impartial observer cannot but
admit; disappointment in pursuit, diffatif-
fadion in enjoyment, uncertainty in pof-
feflion.

First, disappointment in pursuit. When

we look around us on the world, we every
where behold a busy multitude, intent on
the prosecution of various designs which
their wants or desires have suggested. We
behold them employing every method which
ingenuity can devise, some the patience of
industry, some the boldness of enterprise,
others the dexterity of firatagem, in order
to compass their ends. Of this incessant stir
and acivity, what is the fruit? In compa-
rifon of the crowd who have toiled in vain,
how small is the number of the successful ?
Or rather, where is the man who will de-
clare that in every point he has completed

N 3 his

S ER M. his plan, and attained his utmost wifl ? No
v-.-' extent of human abilities has been able to

discover a path which, in any line of liie,
leads unerringly to success. Tch race is not
always to t7hefOlft, nor the battle to the Jro;;K,
nor riches to men of tunderlandi,,ig. V/c may
form our plans with the moit profound fa-
gacity, and with the most vigilant caution
may gu.rd against dangers on every fide.
But some unforeseen occurrence comes across
which baffles our wisdom, and lays our la-
bours in the dust.

Were such disappointments confined to

those who aspire at engrofiing the higher
departments of life, the misfortune were
less. The humiliation of the mighty, and
the fall of ambition from its towering height,
little concern the bulk of mankind. Thefc
are objects on which, as on distant meteors,
they gaze from afar, without drawing per-
fonal inftrucion from events so much above
them. But, alas! when we descend into
the regions of private life, we find difap-
pointment and blafied hope equally preva-
lent there. Neither the moderation of our

views,

views, nor the justice of our pretensions, can s , R M.
enlure success. But time anid chanice hbr,7lfn -
to all. Against the fl-ream of events both
the worthy and the undeferving arc obliged
to struggle ; and both are fi-equently over-
born alike by the current.

BESIDES dilippointment in pursuit, dif-

fatisfattion in enjoyment is a farther vanity
to which the human fllate is fuljeSi. This.
is the ievcreft of all mortifications, after
having been fucccfsful in the purftlit, to be
baffled in the enjoyment itlelf. Yet this is
found to be an evil still more general than
the former. Some may be so fortunate as
to attain what they have pursued ; but none
are rendered completely happy by what they
have attained. Disappointed hope is mi-
!ery; and yet successful hope is only im-
perfect bliss. Look through all the ranks
of mankind. Examine the condition of
those who appear most prosperous; and you
will find that they are never just what they
desire to be. If retired, they languish for
ation; if busy, they complain of fatigue.

N4 If

S E R M. If in middle life, they are impatient for dif-

VIi.

tinction; if in high ifations, they sigh after
freedom and ease. Something is still want-
ing to that plenitude of fatisfadion which
they expected to acquire. Together with
every wifl that is gratified, a new demand
arises. One void opens in the heart, as
another is filled. On wiihes, wishes grow;
and to the end, it is rather the expetation
of what they have not, than the enjoyment
of what they have, which occupies and in-
terests the moit fucceisful.

This diflatisfadion in the midst of hu-

man pleasure springs partly from the nature
of our enjoyments theill'eves, and partly
from circumitances which corrupt them.
No worldly enjoyments are adequate to the
high desires and powers of an immortal fpi-
rit. Fancy paints them at a distance with
splendid colours; but poffelion unveils the
fallacy. The eagerness of passion bestows
upon them at first a brisk and lively relish.
But it is their fate always to pall by fami-
liarity, and sometimes to pass from satiety
into disgust. Happy would the poor man

think

think himself if he could enter on all the S ER M.

ViI.

treasures of the rich; and happy for a fiort
while he might be. Bur before he had long
contemplated and admired his slate, his pof-
feflions would seem to leffcn, and his cares
would grow.

Add to the unsatisfying nature of our

pleasures the attending circumwfances which
never fail to corrupt them. For, such as
they are, they are at no time poflercd un-
mixed. To human lips it is not given to
tafRe the cup of pure joy. Wvhen external
circumstances flow fairef to the world, the
envied man groans in private under his own
burden. Some vexation disquiets, some pas-
sion corrodes him; some distress, either felt
or feared, gnaws, like a worm, the root of
his felicity. When there is nothing from
without to disturb the profilerous, a fccret
poison operates within. For worldly hap-
piness ever tends to destroy itself, by cor-
rupting the heart. It softers the loose and the
violent paflions. It engenders noxious habits;
and taints the mind with a false delicacy,
which makes it feel a thousand unreal evils.

BUT

S E R r BUT put the cafe in the most favourcble
--- light. Lay aside from human pleafurc3

both disappointment in pursuit, and dcceit-
fulness in enjoyment; suppose them to be
fully attainable, and completely fatisfaaCory;
till there remains to be confidered the va-
nity of uncertain possession and ihort dura-
tion. Were there in worldly things any
fixed point of Lecurity which we could gain,
the mind would then have some basis on
which to reft. But our condition is such,
that every thing wavers and totters around
us. Boa]! not th7jfef of to-morrow; for
thou knoweftJ not what a day may bring forth.
It is much if, during its course, thou hearcft
not of somewhat to disquiet or alarm thee.
For life never proceeds long in an uniform
train. It is continually varied by unex-
peced events. The feeds of alteration are
every where sown; and the funihine of
prosperity commonly accelerates their
growth. If your enjoyments be numerous,
you lie more open on different fides to be
wounded. If you have possessed them long,
you have greater cause to dread an ap-

proaching

proaching changc. By flow degrees pro- s E R M.
iperity rifes; but rapid is the progre's of -.
evil. It requires no preparation to bring
it forward. The edifice which it cost much
time and labour to cree', one iIiaufpjicious
event, one sudden blow, can level with the
dull. Even fuGppofing the accidents of life
to leave us untouched, lhumat n blils must
still be transitory; for man changes of him-
self. No cour'e of enjoyment can deliglt
us long. WVhat amulfed our youth loCes its
charm in maturer age. As ye:ais advance,
our powers are blunted, and our pleasurable
feelings decline. The silent lapse of time
is ever carrying foinewhat from us, till at
length the period comes when all must be
swept away. The prospect of this termina-
tion of our labours and purfiiis is fuficient
to mark our state with vanity. Our days
are a hand-brceaLh, oand ouzr rae is as no-
thing. Within that little space is all our
enterprise bounded. We crowd it with
toils and cares, with contention and strife.
We project great designs, entertain high
hopes, and' then leave our plans unfinished,
and fink into oblivion. This

S E R M. This much let it suffice to have said con-

VII.

cerning the vanity of the world. That
too much has not been said, must appear
to every one who confiders how generally
mankind lean to the opposite fide; and how
often by undue attachment to the present
tRate, they both feed the most sinful pal-
sions, and pierce thenfelves through zwith many
sorrows. Let us proceed to enquire,

II. How this vanity of the world can be

reconciled with the perfetions of its divine
Author. This enquiry involves that great
difficulty which has perplexed the thought-
ful and serious in every age; If God be
good, whence the evil that fills the earth ?
In answer to this interesting question, let us
observe,

In the fitrl place, that the present condi-

tion of man was not his original or primary
state. We are informed by divine revela-
tion, that it is the consequence of his volun-
tary apoftacy from God and a state of inno-
cence. By this, his nature was corrupted;
his powers were enfeebled; and vanity and

vexation

vexation introduced into his life. All na- SE M.
ture became involved in the condemnation
of man. The earth was cursed upon his
account, and the whole creation made to
gtroan anid travail in pain.

How myftcrious soever the account of'

this fall may appear to us, many circum-
fiances concur to authenticate the faCt, and
to show that human nature and the human
fiate have undergone an unhappy change..
The belief of this has obtained in aln:oft all
nations and religions. It can be traced
through all the fables of antiquity. An ob-
fcure tradition appears to have pervaded
the whole earth, that man is not now what
he was at first; but that, in consequence of
some transgression against his great Lord,
a state of degradation and exile succeeded
to a condition that was more flourifiing and
happy. As our nature carries plain marks
of perversion and diifrder, so the world
which we inhabit bears the symptoms of
having been convulsed in all its frame.
Naturalists point out to us every where the
traces of some violent change which it has

x~~~~I i~fuffered.

S ER M. suffered. Islands torn from the continent,

VII.
,v burning mountains, shattered precipices, un-

inhabitable wares, give it all the appearance
of a mighty ruin. The physical and moral
itate of man in this world mutually sym-
pathize and correspond. They indicate not
a regular and orderly ftrudcure either of
matter or of mind, but the remains of some-
what that once was more fair and magnifi-
cent. Let us observe,

IN the second place, that as this was not

the original, so it is not intended to be the
final state of man. Though in confe-
quence of the abuse of the human powers, fin
and vanity were introduced into this region
of the universe, it was not the purpose of
the Creator that they should be permitted
to reign for ever. He hath made ample
provision for the recovery of the penitent
and faithful part of his fulbjeds, by the
merciful undertaking of that great restorer
of the world, our Lord Jesus Christ. By
him life and imimortality wtere both purchaf-
ed and brotughtto light. The zew heavens

and

and the new earth are discovered, wZhercin s ` R M.
dwelleth righteoincfjs; where, through the
divine grace, human nature fllall regain its
original honours, and man shall return to
be what once he was in Paradise. Through
those high discoveries of the Gospel, this
life appears to good men only in the light
of an intermediate and preparatory state.
Its vanity and misery, in a manner, difap-
pear. They have every reason to fubmiit
without complaint to its laws, and to wait
in patience till the appointed time come for
the rcjtitztion of all things. Let us take no-
tice,

IN the third place, that, a future Rfate

being made known, we can account in a
satisfying manner for the present distress of
human life, without the finalleft impeach-
ment of divine goodness. The sufferings
we here undergo are converted into difci-
pline and improvement. Through the
blessing of Heaven, good is extraced from
apparent evil; and the very misery which
originated from fin is rendered the means

of

s E R M. of correting sinful passions, and preparing
~t- ,,us for felicity. There is much reason to

believe that creatures as imperfec as we
are, require some such preliminary Rtate of
experience before they can recover the per-
fetion of their nature. It is in the midst
of disappointments and trials that we learn
the insufficiency of temporal things to hap-
piness, and are taught to seek it from God
and Virtue. By these the violence of our
paflions is tamed, and our minds are form-
ed to sobriety and reflection. In the varie-
ties of life, occasioned by the vicissitude of
worldly fortune, we are inured to habits
both of the active and the suffering virtues.
How much soever we complain of the va-
nity of the world, faCts plainly show, that
if its vanity were less, it could not answer
the purpose of salutary discipline. Unfa-
tisfadtory as it is, its pleasures are still too
apt to corrupt our hearts. How fatal then
must the consequences have been, had it
yielded us more complete enjoyment ? If,
with all its troubles, we are in danger of
being too much attached to it, how entirely

would

would it have seduced our affecions, if no SE R M

VII.

troubles had been mingled with its plea- .--
Lures ?

These observations serve in a g-eat mea-

sure to obviate the difficulties which arise
from the apparent vanity of the human
state, by showing how, upon the Christian
system, that vanity may be reconciled with
the infinite goodness of the Sovereign of the
Univerl. The present condition of man
is not that for which he was originally de-
signed; it is not to be his final tRate; and
during his pasSage through the world, the
distresses which he undergoes are rendered
medicinal and improving. After having
taken this view of things, the cloud which,
in the preceding part of the discourse, ap-
peared to fit so thick upon human life, be-
gins to be dissipated. We now perceive that
man is not abandoned by his Creator. We
discern great and good designs going on in
his behalf. We are allowed to entertain.
better hopes; and are encouraged to en-
quire, as was proposed for the

VOL. II. 0 I1i

SER M. III. HEAD of discourse, XWhether there

VII. «y-d be not in the present condition of human

life some real and solid enjoyments which
come not under the general charge of vanity
of vanities. The dotrine of the text is to
be confidered as chiefly addressed to worldly
msen. Them Solomon means to teach that
all expectations of bliss which reft solely on
earthly possessions and pleasures, ihall end
in disappointment. But surely he did not
intend to assert that there is no material
difference in the pursuits of men, or that
no real happiness of any kind could now be
attained by the virtuous. For besides the
unanswerable objetion which this would
form against the divine administration, it
would directly contradit what he elsewhere
asserts, that while God giveth fore travail ta
thefinner, he giveth to the man that is good
in his fight wisdom, and knowledge, andjoy *.
It may, it must indeed be admitted, that
unmixed and complete happiness is un-
known on earth. No regulation of con-
duct can altogether prevent passions from

* Eccl<f, ii. 26.

disturbing

diftur',ing our peace, and misfortunes from s E R M-
wounding our heart. But after this con-
ceflion is made3 will it follow that there is
no objec ohn earth which deserves -ur
pursuit, or that all enjoyment becomes
contemptible which is iiot perfea ? Let
us survey our iaftte with an impartial
eye, and be just to the various gifts of
Heaven. How vain soever this life, con-
fider'ed in itself, may be% the comforts
and hopes of religion are sufficient to-give
solidity to tie enjoyments of the righ-
teous. In the. exercise of good affecions,
and the teftimorny of an upright conscience;
in the sense of peace and reconciliation with
God through the great Redeemer of Man-~
kind; in the firm confidence of being con-
ducted through all the trials of life by ini-
nite wisdom and goodness; and in thejoyful
profped of arriving in the end at immortal
felicity, they polfefs a happiness which,
descending from a purer and more perfedc
region thani this world, partakes not of its
¥vanity. '

-Befides-the enijoyments peculiar to reli-
gion, there are other pleasures of our pre-

'' . 0 l. tent

SEr FM. sent state whlich, though of an inferiour
A_
- order, mult not be overlooked in the e'i-

mate of human life. It is necessary to call
attention to these, in order to check that
repining and unthankful spirit to which
man is always too prone. Some degree of
importance must be allowed to the com-
forts of health, to the innocent gratifications
of sense, and to the entertainment afforded
us by all the beautiful scenes of nature;
Iome to the pursuits and amusements of
social life; and more to the internal enjoy-
ments of thought and reflexion, and to the
pleasures of affedionate intercourse with
those whom we love. These comforts are
often held in too low estimation, merely
because they are ordinary and common;
although that be the circumstance which
ought, in reason, to enhance their value.
They lie open, in some degree, to all; ex-
tend through every rank of life, and fill up
agreeably many of those spaces in our pre-
sent existence, which are not occupied with
higher objecs, or with serious cares.

We are in several refpeds unjust to Pro-
vidence in the computation of our pleasures

and

and our pains. We number the hours s ER M.
which are spent in diftreis or sorrow; but t
we forget those which have passed away, if
not in high enjoyment, yet in the midif of
those gentle fatisfations, and placid emo-
tions, which make life glide finoothly along.
We complain of the frequent dilFappoint-
ments which we susser in our pursuits. But
we recollea not that it is in purluit, more
than in attainment, that our pleasure now
consists. In the present state of human na-
ture, man derives more enjoyment fiom the
exertion of his active powers in the midst of
toils and efforts, than he could receive fi-om
a still and uniform possession of the object
which he strives to gain. The solace of the
mind under all its labours, is hope; and
there are few situations which entirely ex-
clude it. Forms of expected bliis are often
gleaming upon us through a cloud, to re-
vive and exhilarate the most distressed. If
pains be scattered through all the conditions
of life, so also are pleasures. Happiness,
as far as life affords it, can be engrossed by no
rank of men to the exclusion of the reft; on

0 3 the

S E R M. the contrary, it is often found where, at

VII.
' -..-.' first view, it wbuld.'have been least expet-

ed. - When the:huiman condition appears
most depressed, the,-eelings of men, through
the gracious appointment of Providence,
adjust themfelves'wonderfully to their Rate,
and enable thenrto extrat fatisfaCion from
sources that are'totally unknown to others.
Were the great body of men fairly to com-
pute the hours which they pass in ease, and
even with tome degree of pleasure, they
would be found'fat to exceed the number
of those which aire spent in absolute pain
either of body or mind.-3But in order to
make a flill more accurate eflitnation of
the degree of fatisfadion which, in the midst
of earthly vanity, man is permitted to enjoy,
the three following observations claim our
attention.

TH E first is, that many of the evils which

occasion our compiaints of the world are
wholly imaginary. They derive their ex-
iftence from fancy arid humour, and child-
ifh fuibjeaion to the opinions of others.

' I~ - X~ ~The

The distress which they produce, I admit, s E R M.
is real; but its reality arises not from the .--..-a
nature of things, but from that disorder of
imagination which a small measure of re-
flection might recify. In proof of this we
may observe, that the persons who live most
limply, and follow the dicates of plain un-
adulterated nature, are most exempted from
this class of evils. It is among the higher
ranks of mankind that they chiefly abound;
where fantaffic refinements, sickly delicacy,
and eager emulation, open a thousand
sources of vexation peculiar co themselves.
Life cannot but prove vain to them who
affect a disrelish of every pleasure that is
not both exquisite and new; who measure
enjoyment, not by their own feelings, but
by the standard of fashion; who think
themselves miserable if others do not ad-
mire their state. It is not from wants or
sorrows that their complaints arise; but,
though it may appear a paradox, from too
much freedom from sorrow and want; from
the languor of vacant life, and the irritation
occasioned by those stagnating humours

0- 4 vwlich

S E RM. which ease and indulgence have bred v'iihit,
_-.-' them. In their cafe, therefore, it is not the

vanity of the vworld, but the vanity of their
minds, which is to be accused. Fancy -Ias
raised up the .pedres which haunt them.
Fancy has formed the cloud which hangs
over their life. Did they allow the light
of reason to break forth, the IpcCrcs would
vanifl, and the cloud be dispelled.

THE second observation on this head io.

that of those evils which may be called real,
because they owe not their existence to
fancy, nor can be removed by reedifying
opinion, a great proportion is brought upon
us by our own mifcondut. Diseases, po-
verty, disappointment and shame are far
from being, in every instance, the unavoid-
able doom of men. They are much more
frequently the offspring of their own mif-
guided choice. Intemperance engenders
disease, sloth produces poverty, pride cre-
ates disappointments, and difhonefly exposes
to shame. The ungoverned passions of men
betray them into a thousand follies; their

follies

follies into crimes; and their crimes into S ER M.

VII.

misfortunes. Yet nothing is more com- -
mon than for such as have been the authors
of their own misery, to make loud com-
plaints of the hard fate of man, and to take
revenge upon the human condition by ar-
raigning its supposed vanity. The fooloh-
znfs of mnanfirJf perverteth his way, and then
his heart fretteth againfl the Lord.

I do not, however, maintain that it is

within our power to be altogether free of
those felf-procured evils. For perfe&ion of
any kind is beyond the reach of man.
Where is the wisdom that never errs?
Where the just man that offendeth not ?
Nevertheless, much is here left to our-
selves; and, imperfec as we are, the con-
sequences of right or of wrong conduct
make a wide difference in the happiness of
men. Experience every day shows that a
found, a well-governed, and virtuous mind
contributes greatly to smooth the path of
life; and that wisdom excelleth folly as far
as light excelleth darkness. T'he way of the
wvicked is as darkness; they know not at 'wheat

3 shey

SE, R M. the j flumble. B. A the. :righteovfuefs of tie

_, per feE-Jhall direW.' his way; and he that

valkcth uprightly, ..walketh surely. The
tendency .of the one is towards a plain and
safe region. The course of the other leads
him amidst snare and.precipices. The one'
occasionally may, the other unavoidably
must, incur much trouble. Let us not
then confound, under one general charge,
those evils of the world which belong to the
lot of humanity, and those which, through
divine affifiance, a wife and good man may,
in a great measure, escape.

THE third observation which I make re-

fpets those evils which are both real and
unavoidable; from which neither wisdom
nor goodness can procure our exemption.
Under there this comfort remains, that if
they cannot be prevented, there are means,
however, by which they may be much al-
leviated. Religion is the great principle
which ads, under such circumstances, as the
correcive of human vanity. It inspires
fortitude, supports patience, and by its

profpees

profpes: and promises darts a cheering ray E R M.
into the darket flhade of human life. If it a J
cannot secure the virtuous from disappoint-
ment in their pursuits, it forms them to such
a temper as renders their disappointments
more light and easy than.thofe of other men.
If it does not banish diffatisfadion from
their worldly pleasures, it confers spiritual
pleasures in their stead. If it ensures them
not the possession of what they love, it fur-
nifhes comfort under the loss. As far as it
establishes a contented frame of mind, it
supplies the want of all that worldly men
covet to possess. Compare the behaviour
of the sensual and corrupted with that of the
upright and holy, when both are feeling the
effects of human vanity, and the difference
of their situation will be manifest. Among
the former you are likely to find a querulous
and dejeded, among the latter, a composed
and manly spirit. The lamentations of the
one excite a mixture of pity and contempt;
while the dignity which the other maintain
in distress commands refpet. The susser-
ings of the former fettle into a peevish and

s .}~ ' ...- 5s ifretful

S . R M. fretful difpofltion; those of the latter soften

the temper and improve the heart. These
consequences extend so far as to give ground
for asserting, that a good man enjoys more
happiness in the courie of a seemingly un-
prosperous life, than a bad man does in the
midst of affluence and luxury. What a
conspicuous proof of this is afforded by the
Apostle Paul, who from the very depth of
affliacion could fend forth such a triumphant
voice as proclaims the complete vidory
which he had gained over the evils of life ?
7troubled on every fide, yet not dJireq'e.d;
perplexed, but not in deSpair; persecuted, bGt
not forsaken; carq down, but not defiroyed.
For though our outward man perijs, our in-
ward man is renewed, day by day

d . Such,

though perhaps in an inferior degree, will
be the influence of a genuine religious prin-
ciple upon all true Christians. It begins to
perform that office to them here, which here-
after it will more completely discharge, of
wviping away the tears fJrom their eyes,

z 2 Corinth. iv, 8, 9. i6.

SUCH,

SUCH, upon the whole, is the estimate SERM.

VII.

which we are to form of human life. Much _-,
vanity will always belong to it; though the
degree of its vanity will depend, in a great
measure, on our own characer and con-
duCt. To the vicious, it presents nothing
but a continued scene of disappointment and
diffatisfaCion. To the good, it is a mixed
state of things; where many real comforts
may be enjoyed; where many resources
under trouble may be obtained; but where
trouble, in one form or other, is to bc ex-
pected as the lot of man. From this view
of human life,

THE first pracical conclusion which we

are to draw is, that it highly concerns us
not to be unreasonable in our expedations
of worldly felicity. Let us always remem-
ber where we are; from what causes the
human state has become fubjeEt to depref-
sion; and upon what accounts it must re-
main under its present law. Such is the
infatuation of felf-love, that though in the
general doclrine of the vanity of the world

all

S E R M. all men agree, yet almost every one flatters

VII.

L * _s himself that his own cafe is to be an excep-

tion from the common rule. He refts on
expecations which he thinks cannot fail
him; and though the present be not altoge-
ther according to his wish, yet with the
confidence of certain hope he anticipates
futurity. Hence the anguish of disappoint-
ment fills the world; and evils, which are
of themselves sufficiently severe, oppress with
double force the unprepared and unfufpee-
ing mind. Nothing therefore is of greater
consequence to our peace, than to have al-
ways before our. eyes such views of the
world as ihall prevent our expecting more
from it than it is destined to afford.. We
destroy our joys by devouring them before-
hand with too eager expectation. We ruin
the happiness of life when we attempt to
raise it too high. A tolerable ind comfort-
able state is all that we can propose to our-
selves, on earth. Peace and contentment,
hot bliss nor transport, is the full, portion of
man, Perfet joy is reserved for heaven.

BUT

Bu T while we repress too sanguine hopes s E R M.

VII.

formed upon human life, let .us, in the fe- .-
cond place, guard against the other extreme
of repining and. discontent. Enough has
been already said to shew, that notwith-
standing the vanity of the world, a confi-
derable degreeof comfort is attainable in the-
present state.' Let the recolletion of this
serve to reconcile us to. bhr condition, and
to check' the arrogance of complaints and'
murmus.--What art thou, 0 son of man !
who having-fprung but yesterday out of the
duff, dareft to lift up-thy voice against thy
Maker, and to arraign his providence, be-
cause all things are not ordered according
to thy wiih'? What title haft thou to find'
fault with the order of the universe, whose
lot is s6o much beyond what thy virtue or
merit gave thee ground-to claim ? Is.it no-d
thing to thee to have been introduced into
this magnificent world; 'to have been ad-
mitted as a fpedator of the divine wisdom
and; works;: . and to have had access to all
the comforts which nature, with a bountiful
hand, has poured forth around thee ? Arc

all

S E R M. all the hours forgotten which thou halt passed

VII. _ - '_ in ease, in complacency, or joy ? Is it a

finall favour in thy eyes, that the hand of
divine mercy has been firetched forth to aid
thee, and, if thou reject not its proffered
assistance, is ready to condua thee into a
happier state of existence ? When thou com-
pareft thy condition with thy desert, blush,
and be ashamed of thy complaints. Be silent,
be grateful, and adore. Receive with thank-
fulness the blessings which are allowed thee.
Revere that government which at present
refuses thee more. Reft in this conclusion,
that though there be evils in the world, its
Creator is wife and good, and has been
bountiful to thee.

IN the third place, the view which we

have taken of human life should naturally
direc us to such pursuits as may have moRt
influence for correcting its vanity. There
are two great lines of condua which offer
themselves to our choice. The one leads
towards the goods of the mind; the other
towards those of fortune. The former,

which

which is adopted only by the few, engages SE R M.
us chiefly in forming our principles, regu- _
lating our dispositions, improving all our
inward powers. The latter, which in every
age has been followed by the multitude,
points at no other end but attaining the
conveniencies and pleasures of external life.
It is obvious that, in this last pursuit, the
vanity of the world will encounter us at
every ftep. For this is the region in which
it reigns, and where it chiefly displays its
power. At the fame time, to lay the world
totally out of view is a vain attempt. The
numberless ties by which we are connected
with external things, put it out of our power
to behold them with indifference. But
though we cannot wrap ourselves up en-
tirely in the care of the mind, yet the more
we make its welfare our chief object, the
nearer fiall we approach to that happy in-
dependence on the world which places us
beyond the reach of suffering from its
vanity.

That discipline, therefore, which correts
the eagerness of worldly passions, which

VOL. II. P fortifies

S E R M. fortifies the heart with virtuous principles,

VII.
A_.>Y which enlightens the mind with useful

knowledge, and furnishes to it matter of
enjoyment from within itself, is of more
coniequence to real felicity, than all the pro-
vision which we can make of the goods of
fortune. To this let us bend our chief at-
tention. Let us keep the heart with all di-
ligence, feeing out of it are the /ites of lifc.
Let us account our mind the most important
province which is- committed to our care;
and if we cannot rule fortune, study at leait
to rule ourselves. Let us propose for our
objec, not worldly success, which it de-
pends not on us to obtain; but that upright
and honourable discharge of our duty in
every conjuncure, which, through the di-
vine afliftance, is always within our power.
Let our happiness be fought where our pro-
per praise is found; and that be accounted
our only real evil, which is the evil of our
nature ; not that, which is either the ap-
pointment of Providence, or which arises
from the evil of others.

BUT

BUtrT in order to carry on with success SERM.

this rational and manly plan of condud, it '-
is necessary, in the last place, that to moral,
we join religious discipline. Under the
present imperfecion of our minds, and
amidst the frequent shocks which we receive
from human evils, much do we Ptand in
need of every afliftance for supporting our
constancy. Of all afiftance to which We
can have recourse, none is so powerful as
what may be derived from the principles of
the Christian faith. He who builds on any
other foundation will find, in the day of
trial, that he had built his lioufe on the sand.
Man is formed by his nature to look up to
a fuperiour Being, and to lean upon a strength
that is greater than his own. All the con-
fiderations which we can offer for confirm-
ing his mind, presuppose this resource, and
derive from it their principal efficacy.

Never then let us Icfc fight of those great

objets which religion brings under our
view, if we hope to fland firm and ere2
amidst the dangers and difireffes.of our pre-
sent ltate. Let us cultivate all that con-

P a necion

S E R M. nedion with the great Father of Spirits

VII.

- which our condition admits; by piety and

prayer; by dependence on his aid, and trust
in his promises; by a devout sense of his
presence, and a continual endeavour to ac-
quire his grace and favour. Let us, with
humble faith and reverence, commit our-
selves to the blessed Redeemer of the world;
encouraged by the discoveries which he has
made to us of the divine mercy, and by the
hopes which he has afforded us of being
raised to a nobler and happier station in the
kingdom of God. So shall virtue, grounded
upon piety, attain its full strength. Inspired
with a religious spirit, and guided by ra-
tional principles, we shall be enabled to
hold a feady course through this mixed
region of pleasure and pain, of hopes and
fears; until the period arrive when that
cloud which the present vanity of the world
throws over human affairs shall entirely dif-
appear, and eternal light be diffused over all
the works and ways of God,

SE R-

# SERMON VIII. ON DEATH. PSALM xxiii. 4. Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

[ 213- ]
SE R M ON VIII.

ON DEATH.

PSALM xxiii. 4.
Tea though I walk through the valley of the

Jhadow of death, I zillfear no evil; for
thou art with nme; thy rod and thy Jaff
they consort me.
T H IS Psalm exhibits the pleasing pic- s E R M.

ture of a pious man rejoicing in the V

goodness of Heaven. He looks around him
on his state, and his heart overflows with
gratitude. When he reviews the pall part
of his life, he contemplates God as his
Jhepherd who hath made him lie down in
green pafiures, and led him berfide the Jill
waters. When he confiders the present, he

P 3 beholds

S E R M. beholds his divine benefadcor prepari, g ,;
t-Xy- ktable for him n
in the prefnce of his enemies,

and making his cup run over. When he
looks forward to the future, he confides in
the fame goodness, as continuing to follow
him all the days of his Ife, and bringing him
to dwell in the hourfe of the Lord for ever.
AmidPt these images of tranquillity and hap-
piness, one objed presents itself, which is
sufficient to overcast the minds and to damp
the joy of the greatest part of men; that is,
the approach of death. But on the Psalmist
it produced no such effect. With perfed
cornlpofure and serenity he looks forward to
the time when he is to pass through the val-
ley of the Jhadow of death. The profpe&,
instead of dejecting him, appears to heighten
his triumph, by that security which the pre-
fence of his almighty guardian afforded him.
I will fear no evil, for thou art with we:
znd pursuing the allusion with which he
hlad begun, exults in the hope that the shep-
herd who had hitherto conducted him would
support him with hisaff, while he passed
through that dark and perilous region, and

with

withl his roda, or paRtoral crook, would guard S ER M.
himn from every danger.

Such is the happy diftindion which.

good men enjoy, in a situation the modft
formidable to human nature. That threat-
ening fpedre which appalls others, carries
no terrour to them. While worldly men'
are justly said through fear of death to be',
all t/eir ife-time fibjcd to bondage, to the:
righteous only it belongs to look on death,-
and finile. Since then it is in the power
of religion to confer upon us so high a
privilege, let us adventure to contemplate
steadily this last foe whom we mult all en-
counter. Let us confider what death is in
itself, and by what means good men are
enabled to meet it with fortitude. Though
the fulbject may be reckoned gloomy, it
must be admitted to be interesting. The
close of life is a solemn and important
event, to which every wife man will have
regard in the general tenour of his conduc.
No one can ad his part with propriety,
who confiders not how it is to termina.te;
and to exclude frdin our thoughts what we

P 4 cannot

S E R M. cannot prevent from atually taking place,

VIII.
.--e. is the refuge of none but the timorous and

weak. We are -more encouraged to enter
on this meditation by reflecting on the fu-
.periour advantages which, as Clriftians,
we enjoy for overcoming the fear of death,
beyond that holy man whose sentiment is
now before us. Those great objects, which
he beheld through the medium of types
and figures, are clearly revealed to us. lThat
dispensation of grace, which in his days
began to open, is now completed. That
life and immortality, which then only dav:n-
ed on the world, have now shone forth
with full light and fplendcur.

DEATHI may be confidered in three

views; as the reparation of the foul from
the body; as the conclusion of the prelent
life; as the entrance into a new irate of
existence. In the first view, it is regarded
as painful and agonizing. In the second,
it is melancholy and dejecaing. In the
third, it is awful and alarming. One of the
first enquiries which occurs concerning it is,

for

fbr what purposes it was clothed with all S E R M.

VIII.

these terrours? WVhy, under the govern- V.
ment of a gracious Being, the termination
of life was loaded with c'_ much bfrrow and
distress ? We krnow that, in consequence of
the fall, death was inflicted as punishment
upon the human race. But no unnecessary
severities are ever exercised by God; and
the wisdom and goodness of the divine plan
will be much illustrated, by observing that
all the formidable circumstances which at-
tend death are, in the pre'ent situation of
mankind, abbolutely requilite to the pro-
per government of the world. The ter-
rours of death are, in sac, the great guar-
dians of life. They excite in every indivi-
dual that desire of felf-prefervation, which
is nature's first law. They reconcile him
to bearing the distresses of life with patience.
They prompt him to undergo its useful
and necessary labours with alacrity; and
they restrain him from many of those evil
courses by which his safety would be en-
dangered. While they are in so many re-
spects beneficial to the individual, they are

3 at

S E R M. at the fame time, the safeguard of society.

,-- _ If death were not dreaded and abhorred as

it is by men, no public order could be pre-
served in the world. The sword of autho-
rity were lifted up in vain. The fantions
of law would lose their effect. The fcaf-
fold and the executioner would be derided;
and the violent left to trample unrestrained
on the rights of the peaceful. If, notwith-
standing the restraints which felf-preferva-
tion imposes, society is so often disturbed
by the crimes of the wicked, what a scene
of confiifion would it become, if capital
punishments, which are the last resource
of government, were of no influence to
deter offenders ?

For such important ends the conclusion

of life has, by the appointment of Provi-
dence, been made an awful object. The
valley of death has been planted with ter-
rours to the apprehension of men. Here,
as in many other instances, what seemed
at firlI to arraign the goodness of the Deity,
is upon enquiry found to confirm it. But
thlough, for the most salutary purposes, it

WgS

was requisite that the fear of death should s E R M

V1II.

be a powerful principle in human nature,
yet, like our other propensities, it is apt,
when left to itself, to run into excess. Over
many it ufilrps such an ascendant as to de-
base their charader, and to defeat the
chief ends of living. To preserve it within
such bounds that it shall not interrupt us in
performing the proper offices and duties
of life, is the diflindtion of the brave man
above the coward; and to surmount it in
such a degree that it shall not, even in near
profpecd, dejed our spirit, or trouble our
peace, is the great preference which virtue
enjoys above guilt. It has been the fiudy
of the wife and reflecing, in every age, to
attain this steadiness of mind. Philolophy
pursued it as its chief object; and profcfeI d
that the great end of its discipline was, to
enable its votaries to conquer the fear of
death. Let us then, before we have re-
course to the more powerful aid of religion,
hearken for a little to what reason has fug-
gested on this subjed. Her affifiance may,
perhaps, be not entirely despicable; and

though

SE RM. though the armour which she offers be not

VIII.
- Ccompletely of proof, it may serve, how-

ever, to turn aside, or to blunt some of
the shafts which are aimed against us by
the last foe.

AFTER this manner she may be supposed

to address mankind, in order to reconcile
them to their fate.- Children of men!
it is well known to you that you are a
mortal race. Death is the law of your
nature, the tribute of your being, the debt
which all are bound to pay. On these
terms you received life, that you should be
ready to give it up when Providence calls
you to make room for others, who in like
manner, when their time is come, fliall
follow you. He who is unwilling to sub-
mit to death when heaven decrees it, de-
lerves not to have lived. You might as
reafbnably complain that you did not live
before the time appointed for your coming
into the world, as lament that you are not
to live longer when the period of your
quitting it is arrived. What divine Provi-

dence

dence hath made necessary, human pru- SERM.
dence ought to comply with cheerfully. _
Submit at any rate you must; and is it not
much better to follow of your own accord,
than to be dragged relu&antly, and by
force ? What privilege have you to plead,
or what reason to urge, why you fiould
possess an exemption from the common
doom? All things around you are mortal
and perishing. Cities, states, and empires
have their period let. The proudest monu-
ments of human art moulder into dust.
Even the works of nature wax old and
decay. In the midst of this universal ten-
dency to change, could you expet that to
your frame alone a permanent duration
ihould be given ? All who have gone be-
fore you have submitted to the stroke of
death. All who are to come after you
fiall undergo the fame fate. The great
and the good, the prince and the peasant,
the renowned and the obscure, travel alike
the road which leads to the grave. At the
moment when you expire, thousands
throughout the world shall, together with

you.

SERM. you, be yielding up their breath. Can

VIII.
_ - that be held a great calamity which is com-

mon to you with every thing that- lives on
earth;. which is an event as much accord-
ing to the course of nature as it is that
leaves should fall in autumn, or that fruit
fhouild drop from the tree when it is fully
ripe ?

The pain of death cannot be very long,

and is probably less severe than what you
have at othcr times experienced. The pomp
of death is more terrifying than death itself.
It is to the weakness of imagination that it
owes its chief power of dejecting your fpi-
rits; for when the force of the mind is
rouzed, there is almost no passion in our
nature but what has showed itself able to
overcome the fear of death. Honour has
defied death; love has despised it; shame
has ruffed upon it; revenge has disregarded
it; grief a thousand times has wished for it.
Is it not fitrange that reason and virtue can-
not give you strength to surmount that fear,
which, even in feeble minds, so many pas-
sions have conquered ? What inconsistency

5 is

is there in complaining so much of the evils S E R M.

VIII.

of life, and being at the faee time so afraid _

--

of what is to terminate iSi

- - all ? Who can

tell whether his fut. . life might not teeln
with difiafters and miieries, as yet unknown,
were it to be prolonged according to his
wilh ? At any rate, is it desirable to draw
life out to the last dregs, and to wait till old
age pour upon you its whole store of difeaies
and sorrows ? You lament that you are to
die; but did you vicw your situation pro-
perly, you would have much greater cause
to lament if you were chained to this life
for two or three hundred years, without
possibility of release. Expeft therefore
calmly that which is natural in itself, and
which must be fit, because it is the ap-
pointment of heaven. Perform your duty
as a good fubjeEt of the Deity, during the
time allotted you; and rejoice that a
period is fixed for your dismission from the
present warfare. Remember that the fla-
vifh dread of death destroys all the comfort
of that life which you seek to preserve.
Better to undergo the stroke of death at,

once,

SE R M. once, than to live in perpetual misery from

VIII.
«> - the fear of dying.

SUCH discourses as these are specious at

least, and plaufillc. The arguments are not
without strength, and ought to produce tome
effe: on a considerate rcflcating mind. But
it is to be fufpeded that their effect will be
chiefly felt when the mind is calm and at
ease; rather when speculating upon death
at a diftancc, than whvlin beholding it at
hand. WVhen the critical moment arrives
which places the anxious, trembling foul on
the borders of an unknown world, reason-
ings drawn from necessity and propriety
will be of small avail to quiet its alarms. In
order to afford relief, you must give it hope;
you must promiie it protection; you must
offer somewhat on which it can lay hold for
support, amidit the firuggles of labouring
nature. Hence the great importance of
those discoveries which revelation has made,
and of those principles with which it fortifies
the heart. To the consideration of these let
us next proceed, and observe their fuperiour

efficacy

efficacy for surmounting the fear of death. s E R M.

VIII.

In order to judge of their importance, it
will be proper to take a view of death in
each of those lights in which it appears most
formidable to mankind.

IT may be confidered, first, as the ter-

mination of our present existence; the final
period of all its joys and hopes. The con-
cluding scene of any' course of acion in
which we have been engaged with pleasure,
even the last fight of objecs which we have
been long accustomed to behold, seldom.
fails of striking the mind with painful re-
gret. How many circumstances will concur
to heighten that regret, when the time comes
of our bidding an eternal adieu to the light
of day; to every pursuit which had occu-
pied our attention as citizens of the world;
and to every friend and relation who had
attached our hearts ? How dejeting is the
thought to the greatest part of men, that
the fun shall rife, and the seasons shall re-
turn to others, but no more to them; and
that while their neighbours are engaged in

VOL. II. Q_ the

SE R M. the usual affairs of life, they {hall be ihut

VIII. *--».. up in a dark and lonesome mansion, for-

gotten, and cut off from among men, as
though they had never been! Ifaid, in the
cutting off of my days, Iahall go to the gates
of the grave. Iam deprived of the residue of
my years. IiJhall not fee the Lord again i
the land of the liviig. IJhall behold man no
more with the inhabitants of .the world '.

Let us now observe, that the dejedion

into which we are apt to fink at such a
junture, will bear proportion to the degree
of our attachment to the obje&s which we
leave, and to the importance of those re-
sources which remain with us when they
are gone. He who is taking farewel of a
country through which he had travelled
with fatisfa&ion, and he who is driven from
his native land, with which he had con-
neced every idea of settlement and com-
fort, will have very different feelings at the
time of departure. Such is the difference
which, at the hour of death, takes place be-
tween the righteous and the ungodly. The

* Ifiaiah xxxviii. !o, i.la

latter

latter knows nothing higher-or better than S E R M
the present slate of exiftencei; His interests, ~
his pleasures,- his e'xpectations, all centered
here. He lived solely for the enjoyments
of this world.' Dreadful,' therefore, and in-
supportable mull be that event which fepa-
rates him from these for ever. Whereas the
culture of religion had previously formed
the mind of a Christian for a calm and easy
transition from this life. It had inftruded
him in the proper estimate of sublunary
happiness. It htad set higher prospects be-
fore him. It had formed 'him to a more
refined taste of enjoyment than what the
common round of worldly amusements
could gratify. It gave him connerions
and alliances with spiritual objeas, which
are unknown to the men of the world.
Hence, though he be attached to life by the
natural feelirigs of humanity, he is raised
above the weak and unmanly regret of part-
ing with it. He knew that it was intended
as preparatory only to a succeeding tate.
As soon as the season of preparation ihould
be finilhed, he expected a.removal; and

Q 2 when

s ERMM. when Providence gives the signal, he bids
CL - adieu to the world with composed refolu-

tion and undisturbed heart.-What though
death interrupt him in the middle of his
designs, and break off the plans which he
had formed of being useful to his family
and the world? All these he leaves with
tranquillity in the hands of that Providence
to which he has ever been accustomed to
look up with resignation; which governed
the world wifely and graciously before he
existed; and which he knows will continue
to govern it with equal wisdom and benig-
nity, when he shall be in it no more. The
time of his departure was not left to his
own choice; but he believes it to be the
most proper,. because it is the time chosen
by Him who cannot err. slonourable age
is not that -which Jandeth in length of time,
nor that which is measured by number
of years. But wisdom is the grey hair to
man; and an unlpotted life is old age"
When he beholds his friends and relations
mourning around him, his heart may melt,

4 Wifd. of Solomon, iv. 8, 9.

but
*»»C* -

btit will not be overpowered; for it is re- SE R M.

VIII.

lieved by the thought that he is bidding A
them only a temporary, not an eternal fare-
wel. He commends them, in the mean
time, to the blessing of that God whom he
has served; and while he is parting from
them, he hears a voice which sooths his
spirit with those comforting words, Leave
thy fathcrlef children ; I will preserve them
alive; anid let thy widow tritA in me '.

BUT death is more than the conclusion

of human life. It is the gate which, at the
fame time that it closes on this world, opens
into eternity. Under this view, it has often
been the subjed: of terrour to the serious
and reflecting. The transition they were
about to make was awful. Before them lay
a vast undiscovered region, from whose
bounds no traveller ever returned to bring
information of the reception which he found,
or of the objects which he met with there.
The first conception which suggests itself is,
that the disembodied spirit is to appear be-

* Jerem. xlix. II.

Q, ~3 ~ fore

SER M. fore its Creator, who is then to ad as its

VIII. -.t--' judge. The ftrid inquisition which it must

undergo, the impartial doom which it muff
hear pronounced, and the unalterable state
to which it shall be assigned, are awful
forms rising before the imagination. They
are ideas which conscience forces upon all.
Mankind can neither avoid- confidering
themselves as accountable. .creatures, nor
avoid viewing death as the season when
their account is to be given. - Such a senti-

nent is with most men the source of dread;
with all men, of anxiety. To a certain de-
gree a good conscience will convey comfort.
The reflecion on a well-fpent life makes a
wide difference between the last moments, of
the righteous. and the finner. But whose
conscience is so clear as to strike him with
no remorse? Whose righteousness is so un-
blemished as to abide the scrutiny of the
great searcher of hearts ? Who dares reft his
everlasting fate upon his perfec conformity
to the rule of duty throughout the whole of
his life?.

We must not judge of the sentiments of
men at the approach of 'death by their or-

dinary

dinary train of thought in the days of health s E R M.
and ease. Their views of moral condud
are then, too generally, superficial; flight ex-
cufes satisfy their minds, and the avocations
of life prevent their attention from dwelling
long on disagreeable subjects. But when
altogether withdrawn from the affairs of the
world, they are left to their own reflections
on past conduct; with their spirits enfeebled
by disease, and their minds impressed with
the terrours of an invisible region; the most
resolute are apt to despond, and even the
virtuous are in danger of finking under the
remembrance of their errours and frailties.
The trembling mind carts every where
around an anxious exploring eye after any
power that can uphold, any mercy that will
ihield and save it. And accordingly we fee
how eagerly every device has been embraced
which superstition could invent in various
countries, for quieting the alarms of the de-
parting spirit.

Here appears the great importance of

those discoveries which Christianity has made
concerning the government of the universe.

0,4 - It

S E R M. It displays the ensigns of grace and cle-

-- nmency. It reveals the Almighty not as a

creator only and a judge, but as a compaf-
fionate parent, ,who knows our frame, who
remembers we are dut, who pities us as afa-
iherpitieth bis children; -and with whom there
isfbrgiveinesi, that he may be loved as well
as feared. These general views, however,
of the divine administration, would not
have been sufficient to. give full relief, if
they had not been confirmed by certain de-
cifive fa&s, to which the mind can appeal
amidst all its doubts and fears. Two such
faCts the Gospel holds forth to us, particu-
larly adapted to the situation of human na-
ture in its greatest extremity; the atone-
ment, and the intercefison of Christ. There
is no sentiment more natural to men than
this, that guilt must be expiated by susser-
ing. All government is founded on the
principle, that public justice requires com-
penfation for crimes; and all religions pro-
ceed upon the belief, that, in order to the
pardon of the finner, atonement mufl he
made to the justice of heaven.. Hence the

6 endless

endless variety of sacrifices, vidims, and S E R M.
expiations which have filled the earth. The
great sacrifice which our Redeemer offered
for guilt, coincides with these natural fen-
timents of mankind in giving ease to the
heart. It shows us the forfeit of guilt paid
by a divine personage in our behalf; and
allows us to look up to the Governor of
the world, as merciful to the guilty in con-
fiftency with juflice and order. But still
some anxiety might remain concerning the
extension of that mercy to our own cafe in
particular. An invisible Sovereign is an
awful idea; almighty, unknown power is
always formidable, and would be ready to
overwhelm the spirit of the feeble, were not
an intercessor with that sovereign revealed.
This intercessor is one who lived and aged
in our own nature; who not only knows
but who experienced our frailty; who has
all the feelings of a brother for human in-
firmity and distress; who himself passed
through that valley of thejhadow of death
which is now opening on us; to whose
powerful mediation with his father we have

every

s E R M. every encouragement to commit the charge
.VnL. . of our departing fpirit.-Such is the provi-

lion which Christianity has made for com-
forting the last hours of man. The atone-
ment, and the intercession of Christ, are the
refuge of the penitent finner, and the con-
folation of the faint. By their means the
throne of the universe- is encircled with
mercy. The cloud which hung over the
invisible world begins to be dispersed; and
hope brightens through the gloom.

BUT what completes the triumph of good

men over death is, the profpea of eternal
felicity. This was the great objec after
which all nations have sighed, as the only
complete remedy both of the riniferies of life
and the fears of death. On this, the learned
and the ignorant, the civilized and the fa-
vage tribes of mankind bent their longing
eyes; eagerly grasping at every argument,
and fondly indulging every hope, that could
promise them a propitious Deity, and the
prolongation of existence in a happier state.
But beyond wishes and feeble expectations,

the

the light of nature could hardly reach. E RM-
Even the most cultivated, philosophical mind
was, at the hour of dissolution, left in pain-
ful suspense. Christianity has put an end
to all hesitation and doubt on this important
subjed. It has drawn aside the veil through
which reason essayed to penetrate; and has
displayed to full view the future dwellings
of the spirits of the just, the manflons of
everlasting reft, the city of the living God.
Not only has it informed us that a state of
perfect felicity is prepared for the righteous,
but it has added to this information a variety
of circumstances which render that slate
sensible to our imagination, and encouraging
to our hopes. It represents it as fully fe-
cured by the gracious undertaking of the
Saviour of the world. It describes it as an
inheritance, to which he has given his fol-
lowers a right and title. He is said to have
taken possession of it in their name. He
rose from the grave as thefirJf-fruits of them
thatJleep; and under the character of their
fore-runner, entered into the heavenly re-
gions. I nm the refurretion and the lfe.

He

S E R M. He that believeth on mne, though he were derad,

VIIi.
v '_ yet Jhall he live. Igive itnto myJhJeep eter-

nal life. I ascend to my Father and your
Father, to my God and your God '*.

Hence, to those who have lived a vir-

tuous life, and who die in the faith of
Christ, the whole aspeQ of death is changed.
Death is to them no longer the tyrant who
approaches with his iron rod, but the mcf-
fenger who brings the tidings of life and
liberty. The profpetas which open to them
cheer their minds. Even in the valley of
death's shade, green pafiures appear to rife.
They view themselves as going forth, not
to lie silent and solitary in the darkness of
the grave, not to wander forsaken in the
wide deserts of the universe, not even to
pass into a region where they are altogether
strangers and unknown; but to enter on a
land, new indeed to fight, but by faith and
hope frequented long before; where they
shall continue to be under the charge of him
who hath hitherto been their guardian, be
re-united to many of their ancient and be-

* John xi. 25. xx. 17.

loved

loved friends, and admitted to join the in- S E R M.

VIII.

numerable multitude, gathered out of all --.
nations and tongues and people, 'who Jland
before the throne of God. They leave be-
hind the dregs of their nature; and ex-
change this confined and gloomy apartment
of the universe, for the glorious mansions
of their Father's house. Blessed surely are
the dying in this hope, and blejed the dead
in this fruition, refting fronz their labours
and followed by their works. Good men
are detained at present in the outer court of
the temple: Death admits them into the
holy place. As yet they sojourn in the
territories of pilgrimage and exile: Death
brings them home to the native land of
Spirits. In this world they are divided
from one another, and mingled with the
worthless and the vile: Death unites in one
assembly all the pure and the just. In the
fight of the univeife they seemed to die, and
their departure was taken for utter deflruc-
tion. But they are in peace. Their reward
alo is with the Lord, and the care of them
with the mops High -.-- 0 Death ! where

+ Wisdom of Solomon iii. z, 3.-v. 15.

iS

SE R M. is now thy fling? 0 Grave! where is thy

VIII.
i-- 'vitIory? Where are the terrours with

which thou hapt so long affrighted the na-
tions? Where are thy dreary and desolate
domains, the haunts of speares and ihades,
the abhorred dwellings of darkness and
corruption? At, the touch of the divine
rod, thy visionary horrours have fled. The
spell is broken. The dawn of the celestial
morning has dispelled thy dismal gloom;
and instead of the habitation of dragons, ap-
pears the paradise of God.

BUT supposing both the regret of quit-

ting life, and the dread of entering into a
future state to be overcome, there is fill
one circumstance which renders death form-
idable to many, that is, the ihock which
nature is apprehended to sustain at the fe-
paration of the foul from the body.
Formidable, I admit, this may justly ren-
der it to them whose languishing spirits
have no inward fund whence they can then
draw relief. Firirinefs and strength of
mind is peculiarly requisite for the support
of nature in its last extremity; and that

strength

Strength is supplied by religion. The tefti- s ER RM.
mony of a good conscience, and the re- _
membrance of a virtuous life, a well-
grounded trust in the divine acceptance, and
a firm hope of future felicity, are principles
sufficient to give composure and fortitude
to the heart, even in the midst of agony.
In what a high degree they can suspend or
alleviate the feelings of pain, has been fully
demonstrated by the magnanimous beha-
viour of such as have suffered death in the
cause of conscience and religion. How
often has the world beheld them advancing
to meet that supposed king of terrours, not
with calmness only, but with joy; raised
by divine profpeas and hopes into an en-
tire neglect and contempt of bodily susser-
ing ?

It is not without reason that a peculiar

assistance from heaven is looked for by good
men, at the hour of death. As they are
taught to believe, that in all the emergen-
cies of their life divine goodness has watched
over them, they have ground to conclude,
that at the last it will not forsake them; but

4 that

SERM. that at the season when its aid is most

_- needed, it shall be most liberally commu-

nicated. Accordingly, a persuasion so con-
gruous to the benignity and compassion of
the Father of mercies has been the comfort
of pious men in every age. MyfeJleJ and
my heart faileth; but God-is '-the 'trength of
my heart. In the valley of the Jhadow of
death I will fear no evil,. for thou art with
me. When the rod andiaff of this shepherd
of Israel are held forth to his expiring ser-
vants; declining nature needs no other sup-
port. The -secret- influenCe of -his reviving
spirit is sufficient for their consolation and
strength, while the painful- fitruggle with
mortality lasts ; till at length, when' the
moment arrives that the flver cord mroti -be
loosed, and the golden bowl be broken, their
Almighty Protedtor carries off the immortal
spirit unhurt by the fall of its earthly taber-
nacle, and places-it in -a better 'mansion.-
How refpetabte andi'happy is such a con-
clufion of human life, when one in this
manner quits the stage of time, honoured
and supported with the pretence of his

Creator,

Creator, and enjoying, till the last momenlt SE R M.

VIII.

of refletioln, the pleasing thought, that he
has not lived in vain ! I have fought a good
jfght; Ihave ftiJ.7ed nmy course ; I have kept
the faith. Henceforth there is laid p for zme
a crowns of right eozfejSf, which the Lord the
rigbhteozus jiudgefi altlgive nme at that day ,.

AFTER the view which we have taken

of the advantages poirefsed by good men for
overcoming the fears of death, the iirit fen-
timent which should arise in our minds is
gratitude to Heaven for the hopes which
we enjoy by means of the Christian reli-
gion. How depressed and calamitous was
the human condition, as long as the terrour
of death hung, like a dark cloud, over the
inhabitants of the earth ; when, after all the
toils of life, the melancholy silence of the
grave appeared finally to close the scene of
existence; or, if a future state opened be-
hind it, that state teemed with -all those
forms of horrour which conscious guilt
could suggest to a terrified imaginatiqn!

* 2 Tim. iv. 7, 8.
VOL. II. R The

SE R M. The happiest change which ever took place

VIII.
. --_ in the circumitances of the human race, is

that produced by the discoveries with which
we are blessed concerning the government
of the universe, the redemption of the world,
and the future destination of man. How
much dignity is thereby added to the hu-
man charadcer and slate? What light and
cheerfulness is introduced into our abode?
What eternal praise is due to Him whn,
according to his abundant mercy, hath begot-
ten us again into a lively hopc, by the rJir.r-
reHtion ofeJsis C0Jrjil from ihe dead, to an.
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and thai
fadeth not away, reserved in heaven ?

THE next effec& which the subjed we

have confidered should produce, is an ear-
nest desire to acquire those advantages which
good men enjoy at their death. The road
which leads to them is plain and obvious,
A peaceful and happy death is, by the ap-
pointment of Heaven, conneced with s
holy and virtuous life. Let us renounc-:
criminal pursuits and pleafil-cs; let us fca;

*'

. '
~~~~~~~~~~~.Co;·d

God and keep his commandments; let us S E R M.

VIII.

holdfaith and a good confience, if we hope -
for comfort at our last hour. To prepare
for this last hour; every wife man should
confider as his most important concern.
Death may justly be held the tefn of life.
Let a man have supported his character
with esteem and applause, as long as he
adEed on the busy stage of the world, if at
the end he finks into dejecion and terrour,
all his former honour is effaced; he departs
under the imputation of either a guilty con-
science, or a pusillanimous mind. In the
other parts of human condud, disguise and
subtlety may impose on the world; but
seldom can artifice be supported in the hour
of death. The mask most commonly falls
off, and the genuine character appears.
When we behold the scene of life closed
with proper composure and dignity, we na-
turally infer integrity and fortitude. We
are led to believe that divine assistance sup-
ports the foul, and we presage its transition
into a happier mansion. Mark the perse[5

R 2 ? mat

s E M. iman and behold the lupright; for the end bs
~L---.- that man is peace *.

THE last inftruaion which our fubje&

points out, refpeas the manner.in which a
wife and good man :oughtto stand affected
towards life and death. He ought not to
be servilely attached to the one. He has
.no reason abjectly to dread the other. Life
is the gift of God, which he may justly
cherilh and hold dear. Nay, he. is bound
by all fair means to guard and preserve it,
that he may continue to be useful in that
post of duty where Providence has placed
him. But there are higher principles to
which the love of. life should remain sub-
ordinate. Wherever religion, virtue, or
.true honour, call him forth to danger, life
ought to, be hazarded without fear, There
is a generous contempt of death which
ihould distinguish those who live and walk
by the. faith of immortality. This is tthe
iource of courage in a Chriftlan. His be-

* Pfaim xxxvii. 37.

'@ -*~
- lan~haviour

havlour ought to shew the elevation of his s E R N.
foul above the present world; ought to dif- ,---,
cover the liberty which he possesses of fol-
lowing the native sentiments of his mind,
without any of those restraints and fetters
which the fear of death imposes on vicious
men.

At the fame time, this rational contempt

of death muif carefully be diftinguilhed
from that inconsiderate and thoughtless in-
difference, with which some have affected to
treat it. This is what cannot be justified
on any principle of reason. Human life is
no trifle, which men may play away at their
pleasure. Death, in every view, is an im-
portant event. It is the most solemn crisis
of the'human existence. A good man has
reason to meet it with a calm and firm mind.
But no man is entitled to treat it with often-
tatious levity. It calls for manly serious-
ness of thought. It requires all the recol-
leaion of which we are capable; that with
the proper disposition of dependent beings,
when the dust is about to return 'to its dust,
we may deliver up the spirit to Him who
gave it,

R 3 SER~

# SERMON IX. On the HAPPINESS of a FUTURE STATE. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. REVELAT. vii. 9. After this I beheld, and lo! a great multitude, which no man could ...

F 246 T

S E R M 0 N IX.
On the HAPPINESS of a FUTURE STATI,

Preached at the Celebration of the. Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.

REVELAT. vii. 9.
.After this I beheld, and, lo ! a great multi-

tude, which no man could number, of.all
nations, and kindreds, and people, and
tongues, flood before the throne, and before
the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and
palms in their hands.
S E R M. N this mysterious book of Scripture many

'. JL revolutions are foretold which were to

take place in the church of God. They
are not indeed so foretold as to afford clear
and precise information concerning the time

I~ 0,of

of their coming to pass. It would have S ERM.

IX.

been, on many accounts, improper to have -
lifted up too far that awful veil which covers
futurity. The intention of the Spirit of
God was not to gratify the curiosity of the
learned, by difclofng to them the fate of
monarchies and nations, but to satisfy the
serious concerning the general plan, and final
issue, of the divine government. Amidfl
thoi'e distresses which besel Chriflians during
the first ages, the diicoveries made in this
book were peculiarly seasonable; as they
mlewed that there was an Almighty Guar-
dian, who watched with particular attention
over the interests of the church which he
had formed; who foresaw all- the commo-
tions which were to happen among the
kingdoms of the earth, and would so over-
rule them as to promote in the end the
cause of truth. This is the chief scope, of
those mystic visions with which the Apostle
John was favoured; of feals opened in
heaven; of trumpets founding; and vials
poured forth. The kingdom of. darkness
was to maintain for a while a violent struggle

R 4 ,gainft

SE R M. against the kingdom of light. But at tne

Ix.
-. conclution, a'voice was to be heard., as the

voice of many ,waters. and of mighty thunder-
ings, faying, Alleluiah, for the Lord God
omnipotent reigneth, $The, kinigd7ioms of this
world are become the kingdomzs of Qur Lord,
and of his Cbhrt, and he shall reign for ever .
Such is the profpeE with which the divine
Spirit at intervals enlightens, and with which
he finally terminates, the many dark and
direful scenes that are exhibited in this book.
In closing the canon of Scripture, he, with
great propriety, leaves upon our mind deep
impressions of the triumphs of righteous-
ness, and of-the blessedness of the redeemed.
iftecr this I beheld, qnd, Io ! a great mzi/ti-
tizdZc which no man could otnu7ber of all na-
tions, and kindreds, and people, and tongucs,
flood before the throne and beJbre the liami',
clothed with wchite robes, and panls iii thcir

These words present a beautiful defcrip-

tion of thle happincfs of faints in hcaven;
* iLubje¢ct on which it is, at all tincs, botl

Revcl. xix. 6 -xi. 15.

.. oso table1

comfortable and improving to meditate. S ERM.

Ix.

On this day, in particular, when we are to --
commemorate the dying love of our Savi-
our, we cannot be better employed than in
contemplating what his love hath purchaf-
ed; in order both to awaken our gratitude,
and to confirm our attachment to him. The
sacrament of the supper is the oath of our
fidelity. Let us ciifpofe ourselves for cele-
brating it, by taking a view of the rewards
which await the faithful. I shall, for this
end, in several obfcrvations firom the words
of the text, taken in connection with the
context, endeavour to illustrate, in some
imperfe&t degree, the profped which is
here afforded us of a state of future felicity;
and then ihall make practical improvement
of the fubjetd

I. WHAT the words of the text most

obviously fuggelt is, that heaven is to be
confidered as a state of blessed society. A
multitude, a numerous assembly, are here
represented as sharing together the fame
felicity and honour, Without society, it is

impoflible

S.E RM. impossible for man to be happyr. Place

v-' him in a region where he was surrounded

with every pleasure; yet there, if he found
himself a solitary individual, he would pine
and languish. They are. not merely our
wants,. and our mutual dependence, but
our native inftindcs alfo,-:which impel us to
afrociate together. The: intercourse which
we here maintain with our fellows, is a
source of our chief enjoyments. But, alas!
how much are these allayed by a variety-of
disagreeable circumstances that enter into
all our connexions ! Sometimes we susser
from the difireffes of those whom we love;
and sometimes from their vices or-frailties.
Where friendship is cordial, it is exposed to
the wounds of painful. fyimpathy, and to
the a guifli of violent ieparation. Where
it is so cool as not to occasion- sympathetic
pains, it is never producive'of much plea-
sure. The ordinary commerce of the world
consists in a circulation of frivolous inter-
course, in which the heart has no concern.
It is. generally insipid, and often toured
by.the flightet difference in humour, or op-

poiition

position of interest. We fly to company in S E R M.
order to be relieved from wearisome corre- -
fpondence with ourfeives; and the vexations
which we meet with in society, drive us
back again into solitude. Even among the
virtuous, dissensions arise; and difagrec-
ment in opinion too often produces aliena-
tion of heart. We form few connexions
where somewhat does not occur to difap-
point our hopes. The beginnings are often
pleasing. We flatter ourselves with having
found those who will never give us any
disgust. But weaknefles are too soon dif-
covered. Suspicions arise; and love waxes
cold. We are jealous of one another, and
acciftomed to live in disguise. A studied
civility assumes the name without the plea-
sure offriendfhip; and secret animosity and
envy are often concealed under the caresses
of dissembled affection.

Hence the pleasure of earthly society,

like all our other pleasures, is extremely im-
perfedc; and can give us a very faint con-
ception of the joy that must arise from the
society of perfect spirits in a happier world.

Here,

SE R M. Here, it is with difficulty that we can fe-

IX.
-y- rledt from the corrupted crowd a few with

whom we wish to afTociate in ftri&t union.
There, are assembled all the..wife, the holy,
and the just who ever existed in the uni-
verse of God; without any distress to trou-
ble their mutual bliss, or any: source of dif-
agreement' to interrupt their- perpetual
harmony. Artifice and concealment are
unknown there. There, no competitors
struggle; no facions contend; no rivals
supplant each other. The voice of discord
never rifes, the whisper of suspicion, never
circulates, among those innocent and.be-
nevolent spirits. Each, happy in himself,
participates in the happiness of all the reft;
anid by reciprocal communications of love
and friendship, at once receives from, -and
·-adds to the fum of general felicity.. Re-
new the memory of the most affectionate
friends with whom you were blest in any
period of your life. Divest them of all
thife infirmities which adhere to. the hu-
man charater. Recal' the most pleating
and tender moments which you ever en-

joyed
4

joyed in their society; and the remem- S ER M.
brance of thole sensations may assisi you --
in conceiving that felicity which is pof-
sessed by the faints above. The happiness
of brethren dwelling together in unity, is,
with great justice and beauty, compared by
the Psalmist to such things as are most re-
freshing to the heart of man; to the fra-
grancy of the richest odours, and to the
reviving influence of soft atherial dews.
It is like the precious ointment poured on the
head of Aaron ; and like the dew of Hermon,
even the dew that defcendeth on the moun-
tains of Zion, where the Lord co7mmandetb
the blejing, even life for evermore *.

Besides the felicity which springs from per-

fed love, there are two circumstances which
particularly enhance the blessedness of that
rmultitude wwho Jfand before the throne; these
are, access to the most exalted society, and
renewal of the most tender connexions.
The former is pointed out in the Scripture
byjoining the innumerable compcany of angels,
and the general aftem.bly and cb'iurch of the

Psalm cxxxii. i.

'f r/-

SER M. firJf-born; by Jtting down with Abrajhatm

Ix. .--. and Isaac, and Vacob, in the kingdcom of

heaven * ; a promise which opens the il-
blimeft prospects to the human mind. It
allows good men to entertain the hope, that
separated from all the dregs of the human
'mass, from that 'mixed and pollited croTwd
-in 'iidlt of which they now 'dwell, they
shall be permitted to mingle with prophets,
patriarchs and apostles, with legislators and
heroes, with all those great and illustrious
spirits, who have ihone in former ages as
the servants of God, or the benefaaors of
men; whose deeds we are accustomed to
celebrate; whose steps we now follow at a
distance; and whose names we pronounce
with veneration.

United to this high assembly, the blefl-

ed at' the fame time renew those ancient
connexions with virtuous friends which had
been diifolved by death. The profped of
this awakens in the heart the most pleasing
and tender sentiment which perhaps can fill
it, in this mortal slate. For of all the for-

Heb. xii. 22, 23. Matth. viii. 1 1

rows

xows which we are here doomed to endure, S E R M.

IX.

none is so bitter as that occasioned by the X_
fatal stroke which separates us, in appear-
ance, for ever, from those to whom either
nature or friendship had intimately joined
our hearts. Memory, from time to time,
renews the anguish ; opens the wound
which seemed once to have been clofedl
and by recall>'igjoys that are past and gone,
touches every .iring of painful sensibility.
In these agen.':ing moments, how relieving
the thought, that the separation is only
temporary, not eternal; that there is a time
to come of re-union with those with whom
our happieRf days were spent; whose joys
and sorrows once were ours; and from
whom, after we shall have landed on the
peaceful ihore where they dwell, no revc-
lutions of nature shall ever be able to part
us more !-Such is the society of the blessed
above. Of such are the multitude composed
who Jfand before the throne. Let us now
observe,

II. THAT this is not only a blessed but
a numerous society. It is called a mul-

titude,

S E R M. tittde, a great multitude, a great multitudF

Ix. , which no nzan could number. These expref-

lions convey the molt enlarged views of the
kingdom of glory. Dismay not yourselves
with the apprehension of heaven being a
confined and almost inaccessible region, into
which it is barely pbffible for a small hand-
ful to gain admission, after making their
escape from the general wreck of the human
race. In nIy Father's haiJuf, said our Sa-
viour, there are many maifzion. That city
of the living God towards which you profels
to bend your course, is prepared for the
reception of citizens innumerable. It
already abounds with .inhabitants; and
more and more {hall be. added to it, until
the end of time. Whatever difficulties,
there are in the way which leads to it, they
have been often surmounted. The path,
though narrow, is neither impassable, nor
untrodden. Though the gate ltands not
so wide as that which. opens into hell, yet
through the narrow gate multitudes have
entered, and been crowned.

It is much to be lamented that ahnong all
denominations of Christians, the unchari-

table

table spirit has prevailed of unwarrantably S ERM.
circumscribing the terms of divine grace -
within a narrow circle of their own diraw-
ing. The one half of the Christian world
has often doomed the other, without mercy,
to eternal perdition. Without the pale of
that church to which each fe& belongs, they
seem to hold it impoflible for salvation to be
attained. But is this the genuine spirit of
the Gospel ? Can a Christian believe the
effects of the sufferings of Christ, to be no
greater than these ? For this did the Son
of God descend from the highest heavens,
and pour out his foul unto the death, that
only a few who adopt the fame modes of
expression, and join in the fame forms of
worship with us, might be brought to the
kingdom of heaven ? Is this all the deli-
verance he has zrolught upon the earth ? He
was with child; he was in pain; and shall
he not Jfe of the travail of his ozul, and be
satisfied? Surely, the Scripture has given
us full ground to conclude that the trophies
of our Redeemer's grace shall correspond to
the greatness of his power. The captain of

VOL. II. S our

SER M. our jalvatiozn Jhall; bring mnany sons tciz6i

' · himnbfef to glory. Tshe plerfire of the Lord

Jhall priofper in his h'and. He J/lall Jee his
feed: He Jhall jnJtiffy many. Men Jhall be
blessed in him, and all nations Jhall call himn
blefqed. For our farther encouragement,
let us observe,

III. THAT the heavenly fociety'is reprc-

sented in the text, as gathered out of all the
varieties of the human race. This is inti-
mated by the remarkable expressions of o
mullitnde which no' man could number, of all
nations and kindreds and people and tongues;
as if designed on purpose to eorrect our
narrow notions 6f the extentr and power of
divine grace. They whom difanta seas and
-regions now divide, whose languages and
manners are at present firange to one an-
other, shall then mingle in the fame assem-
-.:bly. No situation -is so :remote,, and no

station bs unfavourable as to preclude access
At0o the'heavenly felicity. A road is opened
by the divine spirit to those blissful habita-
tions, from all corners of the earth, and

6 -- from

from all conditions of human life; fiom S E R .

IX.

the peopled city, and from the solitary de- *-
.fert:; from the cottages of the poor, and
from, the palaces of kings; from the dwell-
ings of ignorance and fiim.plicity, and from
the regions of science and improvement,
7TheyJ/all come, fays our blessed Lord him-
ielf, fron the eaJf and from1 the weft, from
the ilorth andafrom the outh, andjit down inz
the kinigdom of God %

Such discoveries serve both to enlarge our

conceptions: of the extent of divine good-
ness, andto remove those fears which are
ready to arise from particular situations in
life. Were you permitted to draw afde the
veil, and to view that diversified aflembly
of the bleired who surround the throne, you
iwould behold among them numbers who
have overcome the fame difficulties which
encounter you, and which you dread as
iifuperable. You would behold there, the
uninftruted, with whom an upright inten-
tion supplied the place of.knowledge; the

* Luke xiii. 29.

S 2 feeble,

S E R M. feeble, whom 'divine grace had firengti-

Ix. -/_e nened-; 'and the mined, whom it had brought

back into the' right path. You would be-
hold the ~young who had surmounted the
allurements of youthful pleasure, and the
old who-had lborni he d'istresses" of agge with
undecayed conrftancy; many whom want
could not tempt to dishonesty; ma'ny whom
riches did not seduce into pri'de or impiety;
many who in the most difficult and enfnar-
ing circtimftances, in the mid'st of camps
and armies and corrupted courts, had pre-
'served unfullied integrity. 'In a word,
fromr all kindreds and people, that is, from
a·ll ranks of life, and all tribes of men, even
from among publicans and Jlfiners, 'you
would behold those whom divine assistance
had conduted to future glory.-And is
n-ot the fame assistance, in its full extent,
_offered also to us ? Encompassed, while
,we run the Christian race with this cloud of
-wit-nefes who have finished their. curti
-with- success ; animated, while we fight tbe
-good fight, with the ihouts of. those who
have overcome and are crowned, thall de-

fpair

fpair enervate or dejec our minds ? From ERM M
tle' happy multitude above, there issues a .-~
voice which ought to found perpetually in
the ear of faith, Be ye faithful unto the
death, anZd ye jt7all recei.e the crown of lfe;
Be.Jfrong in the Lord and in the power of
his minght; BeJfollowers of us vwho through
faiti? ad patience are now inheriting the
pro.o ws., Confider,

IV. TIHE description given in the text

of the happiness and glory of the heavenly
society. They were beheld by the apostle
flanding before te throne, and before the
lamb, c/loated twi.th vhit robes and palhms
in their hand.r. All that these palms and
zwhite robes import, it is not given us now to
underhand. We know that among all na-
tions they have been uied as ensigns of joy
and vi&ory; and are undoubtedly employed
hei'e to represent that ditinguifhed felicity
and honour, to which human nature shall be
then advanced. But we must be endowed
';ith the faculties of the blessed, in order to
,c.mprehend their employments and plea-

- : :"S 3 fures;
7?:, . '. '

SER M. fures; and therefore on this part of the

Ix.
a__-,~ subjed I ihall not'attempt to enlarge. The

silence ofhliumhble and refpetful hope, bet-
ter becomes us than the indulgence of those
excursions of fancy, which degrade the sub-
je& they endeavour to exalt.

One circumstance only cannot fail'to at-

tra& particular attention; that the blessed
are here described as Jlandizng before' the
throne and before the lamb; that is, enjoy-
ing the immediate pretence of the great
Creator, and of the merciful Redeemer of
the world. The unhappy distance at which
we are now removed from God, is the
source of all our woes. Those territories
whiich we inhabit, are not His abode. They
are- regions of exile. They are the dwell-
ings of a fallen race; and are condemned
to be :invested with clouds and darkness.
FIere, God standeth afar off. In vain we
often putrfue his presence through his works,
his ways, aid his religious institutions. He'
is ''fid'- to be a God that hideth himss. /le
{deelwletR,' as to us, in the ficret place of
/hdbidir.- ' II hjoldeth back the farce'! of'1i

'' *' ,h - ;. <..

hrocne, and fpireadeth a thickc clold upon it. SER x.
The manifeitation of his pretence shall be
the signal for the renovation, of all things.
When that Sun of righteoifefjs breaks forth
from the cloud which now conceals him,
sorrow and fin, and every evil thing shall
fly away before the brightness of his face.
For neither guilt nor misery can remain
where God dwells. As the rising of the
fun transforms. at once the face of nature,
and converts the whole extent of space
over which. his beams are. spread, into a
region of light, so shall the divine pretence,
as soon as it is revealed, diffuse universal
bliss. over all. who behold it. It imports
fizln'fr ofi joy, and plearre for ever.more.
The ipfpir.d writex of this book thus de-
scribes its effets: There J7hall be no more
death, neither sorrow, nor cryzng nor pain;
for the former things are pared away. He
that fit upon the throne said, Behold I make
all things Inew. 'heyJhJall hznger no more,
neither thirst any more. But the Lamb
vwhich i n the mzidl of the throne fJhalljfed
them, and'JJhjall lead them unto living foun-

S 4 tains

S E R M. tains of water.- God Jtall- wipe away all

Ix.

I tears from their ejes. But, defceniding from

this too sublime theme,. let us

V. TURN our attention-to a circum-

stance in the state of:future happiness, more
commensurate to :our- present conceptions,
which is fuggefied by the commentary upon
the words of the text given in'the sequel of
the chapter. And one of the elders answered,
faying unto me, What are these w'hich are ar-
rayed in wh1ite robes; and whence came they?
And Ifaid ?uto him, Sir, thou knowefr. And
he said unto mew These are they which came
out of great tribulation' *. This explanatory
circumstance may relate particularly to the
cafe of those.. primitive sufferers, who en-
dured severe persecution in the cause of the
gospel. But,'in general, it presents this na-
tural and beautiful view of the future feli-
city of good men,: that it is their reft from
the troubles and toils of life. For, to all,
even to the happiest, human life is tribula-
tion and conflit. No man is thoroughly

* Rev.' viii. 13, 14,
. * at

iateafe in his condition. Purflits succeed- s E R M.

Ix.

ing to pursuits keep us in constant agitation; ,
while frequent returns of disappointment
break our plans, and oppress our spirits.
Fatigued by such a variety of toils, mankind
have ever looked forward to reft as their
favourite *objea. t Throughout all their
ranks, from the highest to the lowest, they
are in perpetual chace of it; and it perpe-
tually flies before them. It is an obje&
which here they are doomed always to seek,
and never to enjoy.

The nature and laws of our present slate

admit not the gratification of this favourite
wish. For, besides the necessity of trouble
in order to fulfil the purposes of discipline
and improvement, our very happiness, such
as. it is in this world, requires a circulation
of labours. Our enjoyment conrifts in pur-
suit, not in attainment. Attainment is with
us, for mol part, the grave of pleasure.
Had we no objct to excite fresh tadivitv,
and to impel us to new toils, human life
would quickly stagnate in melancholy indo-
lence. At the fame time, the current of all

our

S i .R . otir wishes tends to repose. [maginary
·~ .-,aforms float incefiantly before our view, of

the happiness which is to be enjoyed in reft:
And from this conflic between our wifles
cn the one hand, and our actual situation
on the other, arise much of the disquiet,
and much of the infelicity, of human life.
It is only in heaven that the tranquil re-
pose, which on earth is no more than a
pleating phantom, ihall be fully realized.
There, remanieth at last a re for the people
of God; relf from the disturbance of passion,
the vanity of pursuit, and the vexation of
disappointment; reft from all the fins and
the sorrows of this miserable world; reft,
which shall not be merely an indolent cef-
fation from labour, but a full and satisfying
enjoyment. Good men fiall reJAfrom their
labours, and their works Jhall follow them.
They have come, out of great tribulation.
T'ihey have fulfilled, with honour, their ap-
pointed course of trial. They have fat
down on the feat of the conqueror; and of
past labours nothing remains but the pleasing

review,

review, and the happy fruits. There is still s E R M.

Ix.
to. be confidered, .

VI. ONE very material circumstance,

descriptive both of the characer, and of the
happiness, of those who enjoy the heavenly
bliss. Not only have they come out of great
tribulation, but, as the Spirit of God adds
in explaining the text, theyt have waq/ced
their robe.r, and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb , Two things are here
fuggeefted; the fantcity of the blcffed, and
the means by which it is attained.

First, their fanssity or purity is emblema-

tically described, by their being clothed in
robes which are wvaljed d an adne white.
In prder to qualify human nature for the
enjoyment of iuch happiness as I haeve en-
deavoured to describe, it mufl undergo a
change so great as to receive in Scripture the
appellation of a newo birtb; a change to
w.hich all the infitutions of religion, and
all the operations of grace, contribute in this
life, but which is not completed till the next.

* Rev. viii. 14.

In

S , R M. In this fantity, or regeneration, consists not

~_._ only the necessary preparation for future fe-

licity, but, which is not so commonly at-
tended to, consists an. essential part of that
felicity itlelf. For, whence arises the mi-
fcly of this present world ? It is not owing
to our cloudy atmofphcre, our changing .sea-
sons, and inclement skies. It is not owing
to the debility of our bpdies, or to the un-
e.qual distribution of the goods of fortune.
'Amnidli all disadvantages of this kind, a pure,
a stedfast, and enlightened mind, poflefsed
of exalted virtue, could enjoy'itfelf in peace,
and finile at the impotent assaults of fortune
and the elements. It is within ourselves,
that misery has fixed its feat. Our difor-
dered hearts, our guilty paflions, our vio-
lent prejudices and misplaced desires, are
the inftrumeits of the torment which we
endure. These sharpen the darts which
adversity would otherwise point in vain
against us. These are 'the vials of zwrath
which pour forth plagues on the inhabitants
0f"the earth; and make the' dwellings of
pations become the abodes of woe. Thence

discontent,

lifcontent, and rembrfe, gnaw the hearts of S ERM.

IX.

individuals. Thence society is torn by open _ _
violence, or undermined by secret treachery;
and man is transformed into a savage to
man.

But suppose fin to be banifled from the

world; Ifippofe perfect purity and charity
to dcfkend from heaven, and to anirare
every humanl breift; and you would be-
bold the present habitation of men changed
into the paradise of God. The undisturbed
enjoyment of a holy mind, and of a blissful
union with one another, would scarcely al-
low us to feel those external evils, of which
we now so loudly complain. All nature
would assume a different appearance around
us. That golden age which was so long
the subjed of the philosopher's dream, and
of the poet's song, would in fasl take place.
According to the beautiful language of an-
cient prophecy, springs would then rife in
the.defert, and rivers be opened in the th rfJy
land. The wilderness and the solitary place
woulzd be glad. 7he wolf would dwell with
the lamb, and the leopard lie down with the

kid.

SE R M. fid, fudgrnent would dwell in the wilder-

ties, and righteoitfief remain iii thefruitful
field, The desert would rejoice, and blofom
as the ro/e.-If such, even in this world,
would be the effets of innocence and virtue
completely restored, how much greater mufl
they be in that new earth tind those new
hJcavens, where redtitude of nature shall be
combined with every circumstance of ex-
ternal felicity? It is the present imperfed
iate of human virtue that hinders us from
conceiving fully the influence of righteous-
ness upon happineis. The robes in which
the best men are now clothed, to use the
language of the text, are sullied with .so
inany stains, as to convey no adequate idea
of the original beauty which belongs to the
garb of righteoufihels. l3ut when these
Rfains flall be vwahed away, when thefc
robes shall be made perfectly white and
pure, a lulRre will flow fr-om them of which
we can, as yet, form no conception.

But how are the robes of the blefled thus

waflled ? Whence is derived that spotless
purity in which they are. arrayed The

Spirit

Spirit of God hath answered us, from the sERM.

Ix.

,blood'of the Lamb; leading our thoughts to -
that high difpenfatioti of miercy, to which
the faints above owe their eftabliihment,
first in grace, and then in glory. !From
that blood which was /7Jed for the rem jjon
offins, flow both the atonement of human
guilt, and the regeneration of human na-
ture. Human nature had fallen too low to
be capable of retrieving itself. It could not
regain its primitive innocence, and lill les
was capable of raising itself so high in the
scale of existence as to mingle with angels,
We had neither sufficient knowledge to dil-
cover, nor virtue to merit, nor ability to
qualify ourselves for enjoying, ceietiPal glory.
Heaven mull have been either covered from
our view by perpetual darkneirs, or only
beheld from afar as an inaccefiible region;
if Christ had not interposed to opi., /vr

/ :s a

new and living wLwy zvithbis t, c'.:'.. The
obligations which his generous undertaking
has conferred upon the hunmal race will tend
highly to increase the felicity of the blessed.
The sense of being diftinguilhed by so il-

...r ,~. !s luRriou

S E R M. luftrious a benefactor, and the correspond-

Ix. x -. ing returns of gratitude and love to him,

form some of the most pleasing of those
emotions which shall continue to delight
them through all eternity.

FROM those views of a state of future

happiriefs which the text has suggested, va-
rious instruCtions relating to life and prac-
tice naturally arise, We are taught to recify
our notions of felicity; to look for it, not
in what is external, but in what relates to
the mind and heart; in good dispositions
and a purified foul; in unity and friendship
with one another, and in the divine pre-
fence and favour. If such things form the
principal articles of future bliss, they cannot
but be essential to our happiness in the more
early periods of existence; and he who
seeks his chief enjoyments from an opposite
quarter, is erring widely from the path
which conducs to felicity.

We are farther taught whence to derive

constancy and perseverance, amidst the pre-
sent discouragements of a virtuous life. In

this

this world, we often behold good men de- s E R M.
pressed, and the wicked prospering around a
us. Our best deeds meet with unjust re-
turns from an ungrateful world. Sincerity
is over-reached by crafts and innocence falls
a victim to power. But let us not on such
occasions fay within ourselves, that in vain
we have cleansed our hearts, and wasJed our
hands in innocenc. Let us reft on the as-
furance, that these disorders extend not far
in the kingdom of God. They affe& only
the first stage of existence. They relate to
discipline and trial, which will soon be
finished. In that permanent state which is
about to open, a new and better order of
things shall arise. When dejeded with the
evils of life, let us look upward to that happy
multitzude who have come out of great tribu-
lation, and now A.and before the throne.
Until the day arrive which flall join us to
that blessed assembly, let us shew ourselves
worthy of the hope that is before us, by
supporting with a constant mind the trials cf
our fidelity. Be patieznt; Jabli b yout hearts.

'he coming5 f tib. Lord d7razcvth nigh.
VOL. II. ' From

S E R M. From the profpeds which the tcxt has
oL--.. afforded, we may likewise learn ,what the

spirit is which flould regulate our life.
Sanacity of conduc, dignity of charaler,
elevation of affedions, become those who
expec to mingle with angels, and. /iri/s of
j/t 7m7en nmadepcrfc1f. I mean not that lIch
proflpecs fllould carry away our whole at-
tention from the prcfcnt world, where un-
doubtedly lies the chief scene of human ac-
tion, and human duty. But while we at
as; inhabitants of the earth, we ought at the
Ilame time b to remcmber our connection
with a bctter world, as not to debase our-
fclves with vwhat is nean, not to defile our-
Ielves witlh what is imlure, not to entangle
ourlelves among what is cnfariing, in the
present sta-te. Let neither its advantages
elate, nor its difappointmcnts deject us;
but with an equal tjirit, with a mind full
of immortality, let us pars through all the
changes of this mortal life.

Finally, let the discoveries of future hap-

pinels illnfire us with suitable gratitude to
God and Christ ; to the eternal Father, who

originally

eriginally decreed such rewardas for the S E R M.

IX.

righteous; and to the Son, vwho acs in the
high charactaer of the ditcnfer of the divine
mercies, and the great reftorcr of the fallen
race of men. Particularly, when approach-
ing to God in folern acs of devotion, such
as we are this day to performn, let gratitude
be alive and ardent in our heart. The com-
memoration of our Saviour's death is in a
high degree suited to awaken every emotion
of tenderness and love. It brings before us,
under one view, all the obligations which
we lie under to this great benefaclor of man-
kind. When just ready to fiffer for our
fake, he infPituted this holy sacrament, and
laid, Do /his in reCmembrZ ce of mc.-WVhom,
0 blefced Jesus ! lhall we ever remember, if
we are capable of forgetting Thee ? Thee,
to whom we owe the forgiveness of fin, and
the restoration of divine favour; our victory
over death, and our hope of life eternal!
Thou haft enlarged our views beyond these
territories of disorder and darkness. Thou
haft discovered to us the cify of the living
God. Thou fetteft open tbe gates of that

T 2 . ew

S E R M. znew yer ffalem; and leadeft us into the paat

IX.
L - -* of lfe. Thou from age to age gathereft out

of every nation, and kindred, andpeople, that
multitude which Jland before the throne. Thou
bringeft them out of great tribulation. Thine
a;re the white robes with which they are in-
vested; thine, the palhns which they bear
and by Thee they are placed under the light
of the divine countenance for ever,

S E R-

# SERMON X. ON CANDOUR. 1 CORINTH. xiii. 5. Charity — thinketh no evil.

[ 277 ]
S E R M ON X

ON CANDOUR.

I CORINTH. xiii. 5.

Charity-thinkct/t no evil.
R ELIGION and Government are the SER rM.

two great foundations of order and '.

comfort among mankind. Government re-
firains the outrages and crimes which would
be subversive of society, secures the pro-
perty, and defends the lives of its fubjeds.
But the defec of government is, that hu-
man laws can extend no farther than to the
acions of men. Though they protect us
from external violence, they leave us open
on different fides to be wounded. By the
vices which prevail in society, our tran-

T 3 quillity

SE PR M. quillity may be dilturbed, and our lives in

X. 1
---. various ways embittered, while government

can give us no redress. Religion supplies
the infuflicicncy of law, by striking at tile
root of thlhc disorders wiich occasion so
much misery in the world. Its profelled
feope is to regulate, not adions alone, but
the temper and inclinations. By this means
it ascends to the sources of conducQt; and
very ineifetual would the wvifeft lyfieml of
legillation prove for the happincfs of man-
kind, if it did not derive aid from religion,
in softening the dispositions of men, and
checking many of thole evil passions to which
the influence of law cannot pofiibly reach.

\Ve are led to this refiecoion by the de-

scription given in the context of charity,
that great principle in the Christian system.
The Apostle places it in a variety of lights,
and under each of them, explains its opera-
tion by its intrnal effeEts; not by the a&tions
to which it gives rife, but by the diiifofition6
which it produces in the heart. He justly
filppofes, that if the temper be duly regu-
lated, propriety of action will fojlow, and

4 good

good order take place in external behaviour]. s . IM

, -

Of those characers of charity I have cholen
one for the lubjelt of this difcourie, which
leads to the consideration of a virtue highly
important to us, both as Chriltians, and as
members of society. I lhall endeavour, iirt,
to explain the temper here pointdc out, by
fliewing Vwhat this de.icrip'ion of charity im-
ports, that it /bilncth no evil; and then to
recommend hich a di[pjofitiou, and to di-
play the bad eflc-ts of an oppolc te turn of
mi nd,

I. LET us confider what this dceiription

of charity imports. You vill ealily perceive
that the exprefiion in the text is not to be
understood in a fenIf altogether unlimited;
as if there were no occasion on whiclh we
are to think unft.vourably of others. To
view all the ations of men witl the fame
degree of complacency, would be contrary
both to common understanding, al.d to
many express precepts of religion. In a
word, where Io much depravity abounds,
were we to think and 1speak equally well of

T 4 all,

sE r* M. quillity may be disturbed, and our lives in

various ways embittered, while government
can give us no redress. Religion supplies
the infufficicncy of law, by striking at the
root of these disorders which occasion so
much misery in the world. Its profeflcd
scope is to regulate, not actions alone, but
the temper and inclinations. By this means
it ascends to the sources of conduct; and
very ineffectual would the wisest fyrlem of
legislation prove for the happiness of man-
kind, if it did not derive aid from religion,
in softening the dispositions of men, and
checking many of those evil passions to which
the influence of law cannot pofiibly reach.

'We are led to this reflection by the de-

scription given in the context of charity,
that great principle in the Christian system.
The Apostle places it in a variety of lights,
and under each of them, explains its opera-
tion by its internal effeEs; not by the actions
to which it gives rife, but by the dispositions
which it produces in the heart. He justly
filppoles, that if the temper be duly regu-
lated, propriety of action will foilow, and

4 0good

good order take place in external belhaviour. s E R M-
Of thoie charaaers of charity I have cholfen
one for the fibjec of this discourse, which
leads to the consideration of a virtue highly
important to us, both as Chritlians, and as
members of society. I ihall endeavour, lirit,
to explain the temper here pointed out, by
fiewing whiat this description of charity im-
ports, that it tbinkcithJ :o evil; and then to
recommend iuch a difipofition, ald to dii-
play the bad efltis of an oppolite turn of
mind.

I. LET us confider what this deftription

of charity imports. You will ealily perceive
that the expreflion in the text is not to be
understood in a sense altogether unlimited;
as if there were no occasion on which we
are to think unfavourably of others. To
view all the actions of men with the fime
degree of complacency, would be contrary
both to common understanding, and to
many express precepts of religion. In a
word, where ib much depravity abounds,
were ve to think and jipeak equally well of

T 4 al,

S E R M. all, we must either be insensible of the dif-

x. I-y-- tinaion between right and wrong, or be

indifferent to that diftintion when we per-
ceived it. Religion renders it our duty to
abhor that which is evil; and, on many oc-
cafions, to express our indignation openly
againit it. But the Apostle, with great pro-
priety, describes the temper which he is re-
commending in such itrong and general
terms, as might guard us against that ex-
treme to which we are naturally most prone,
of rash and unjust suspicion. The virtue
which he means to inculcate is that which
is known by the name of Candour; a vir-
tue, which, as soon as it is mentioned,
every one will acknowledge to be essential
to the characer of a worthy man; a virtue
which we seldom fail of ascribing to any
person whom we seek to recommend to the
esteem of others; but which, I am afraid,
when we examine our own conduct in a
religious view, is seldom the subjeA of in-
quiry.

It is necessary to observe, that true can-
dour is altogether different from that guard-

ed,

edj, inoffensive language, and that studied s E R M.
openness of behaviour, which we so fre- --
quently meet with among men of the world.
Smiling, very often, is the aspect, and
smooth are the words of those who in-
wardly are the most ready to think evil of
others. That candour which is a Christian
virtue consists, not in fairness of speech,
but in fairness of heart. It may want the
blandishment of external courtesy, but sup-
plies its place with humane and generous
liberality of sentiment. Its manners are
unaffeced, and its professions cordial.
Exempt, on one hand, from the dark jea-
lousy of a suspicious mind; it is no less
removed, on the other, from that easy cre-
dulity which is imposed on by every Ipe-
Pious pretence. It is perfectly consistent
with extensive knowledge of the world,
and with due attention to our own safety.
In that various intercourse which we are
obliged to carry on with persons of every
different chara&er, suspicion, to a certain
degree, is a necessary guard. It is only
when it exceeds the bounds of prudent cau-

tion,

S E R M. tion, that it degenerates into vice. There is

a proper mean between undiflinguifhing
credulity, and universal jealouiy, which a
found understanding discerns, and which
the man of candour fludies to preserve.

He makes allowance for the mixture of

evil with good, which is to be found in every
human character. He expecs none to be
faultless; and he is unwilling to believe tlat
there is any without iome commendable
quality. In the midst of many defcts, he
can discover a virtue. In the midst of per-
fonal resentment, he can be just to the me--
rit of an enemy. He never lends an open
ear to those defamatory reports and dark
suggestions, which, among the tribes of
the censorious, circulate with so much ra-
pidity, and meet with such ready acceptance.
He is not hasty to judge; and he requires
full evidence before he will condemn. As
long as an action can be ascribed to different
motives, he holds it as no mark of sagacity
to impute it always to the worst. Where
there is just ground for doubt, he keeps his
judgment undecided; and during the pe-

riod

riod of fufpence, leans to the most chari- SE MR
table conftrutlion which an action can bear. ,_
When he must condemn, he condemns with
regret; and without tholf aggravations
which the severity of others adds to the
crime. He liftcns calmly to the apology
of the offender, and readily admits every
extenuating circumifance which equity can
iiggelt. How, much soever he may blame
the principles of any sect or party, he ne-
ver confounds under one general censure
all who belong to that party or fed. iHe
charges them not with fich consequences
of their tenets, as they refuse and dilavow.
From one wrong opinion, he does not in-
ser the subversion of all found principles;
nor from one bad aaion, conclude that all
regard to conscience is overthrown. When
lhe beholds the 7mote in his brother's eyc, he
remembers the beam in his own. 1e com-
miifrates human frailty; and judges of
others according to the principles by which
he would think it reasonable that they
should judge of him. In a word, he views
mnen and aCtions in the clear funihine of

charity

SE R M. charity and good-nature; and not in that

X. -, dark and fullen Ihade which jealousy andt

party spirit throw over all charaters.---
Such being in general the spirit of that
charity which thinketh no evil, I proceed,

II. To recommend, by various argu-

ments, this important branch of Christian
virtue.

Let us begin with observing what a ne-

ceffary requisite it is to the proper discharge
of all the ofcial duties. I need not spend
time in showing that these hold a very
high rank in the Christian system. The
encomium which the Apostle in this chap-
ter bestows upon charity, is alone sufficient
to prove it. He places this grace at the
head of all the gifts, and endowments, which
can be possessed by man; and assures us
that though we had all faith so that we
could remove mountains, -yet if we be defti-
ftute of charity, it will profit zus nothing.
Accordingly, love, gentleneis, meekness and-
long fiufring, are enumerated as diftin-
guifhingfruits of thefpirit of Christ *. But

* Galat. v. zz, 23;

it

it is impossible for such virtues as these to S E R M.

X.

find place in a breast, where the propensity a-_
to think evil of others is predominant.
Charitable and candid thoughts of men are
the neceflary introdutlion to all good-will
and kindness. They form, if we may
speak so, the only climate in which love
can grow up, and flouri1h. A suspicious
temper checks in the bud every kind afiec-
tion. It hardens the heart, and cflrange.
man from man. What friendship or gra-
titude can you exped from him, who views
all your condut with distrustful eyes, and
ascribes every benefit you confer to artifice
and stratagem ? The utmost which you
can hope from one of this character, is
justice in his dealings; nor even that can
you be assured of; as the fufiicions to
which he is a prey will afford him frequent
pretexts for departing from truth, and for
defending himself with the fame arms which
he conceives to be employed against him.
Unhappy will they be who are joined with
him by any close connexion; exposed to
every malignant suspicion which arises in

hi.s

S E R M. his own mind, and to every unjust fugge-

X.
'. - stion which the malice of others may infi-

nuate against them. That store of poison
which is colleted within him frequently
throws out its venom on all who are within
its reach. As a companion, he will be fe-
vere and satirical; as a friend, captious and
dangerous; in his domestic sphere, harsh,
jealous and irascible; in his civil capacity,
seditious and turbulent, prone to impute
the conduCt of his fuperiours to improper
motivcs, and upon loose information to
condemni their colndut.

The contrary of all this may be expeced

from a candid temper. Whatever is ani-
able in manners, or useful in society, na-
turally and cafily ingrafts itself upon it.
Gentleness, humanity and compaflion flow
from it, as their native spring. Open and
cheerful in itself, it diffuses cheerfulness and
good-humour over all who are under its
influence. It is the chief ground of mu-
tiual confidence and union among men.
It prevents those animoiities from arising
which are the oflspring of groundless pre-

judice;

judice; or, by its benign interpoftlioil, al- S ER .
lays them when arilen. In the magilrate,
it tempers justice with lenity. Among
filbjeas it promotes good order and sub-
mission. It connets humanity with piety.
For he who is not given to think evil of
his fellow-creatures, will not be ready to
censure the dii'peniations of his Creator.
Whereas the fame turn of mincd which ren-
ders one jealous and unjust towards men,
will incline him to be querulous and impi-
ous towards God.

IN the second place, as a suspicious, un-

charitable spirit is inconsistent with all
social virtue and happiness, so, in itelf,
it is unreasonable and unjust. In order to
form found opinions concerning charaters
and actions, two things are elpecially re-
quifite, information and impartiality. But
such as are most forward to decide unfa-
vourably, are commonly destitute of both.
Inflead of possessing, or even requiring, full
information, the grounds on which they
proceed are frequently the molf flight and

frivolous.

S E R M. frivolous. A tale, perhaps, which the idle

X.

-- have invented, the inquisitive have listened

to, and the credulous have propagated; or
a real incident which rumour, in carrying
it along, has exaggerated and disguised,
iipplies them with materials of confident
assertion, and decilive judgment. From an
acion they presently look into the heart,
and infer the motive. This supposed mo-
tive, they conclude to be the ruling prin-
ciple; and pronounce at once concerning
the whole character.

Nothing can be more contrary both to

equity and to found reason, than such pre-
cipitate judgments. Any man who attends
to what paifes within himself, may easily
discern what a complicated system the hu-
man charaQer is, and what a variety of
circumntances must be taken into the ac-
count, in order to estimate it truly. No
single inflance of conduct whatever, is sus-
ficient to determine it. As from one wor-
thy action, it were credulity, not charity,
to conclude a person to be free from all
vice; so from one which is censurable, it

is

of it is without conicicnce, aind without mle-
rit. Did you know .11 the attending cir-
cumftances, it might aLpptear in an excusable
light; nay, perhaps, liiader a comnmeldable
Iorm.n. Thi]e lmtives of the acor -may have
been entirely dilerlent friom tlotfl which
you ascribe to hinm ; and whcre you suppose
limn impelled by bad dcilgn, he may have
been prompted by coniience and rmiftaken
princitpe. Admitting the aaion to have
been in every view criminal, he may have
been hurried into it through inad\·ertencyv
and surprise. He may have sincerely re-
pented; and the virtuous principle may
have now regained its full vigour. Perhaps
this was the corner of frailty; the quarter
on which he lay open to the incursions of
temptation; while the other avenues of his
heart were lirmly guarded by conicience.

No error is more palpable than to look

for uniformity from human nature; though
it is commonly on this supposition that our
general conclusions concerning charader are
formed. Mankind are consistent neither in

VOL. II. U good,

S E R M, good, nor in evil. In the present state of

X.
'a - frailty, all is mixed and blended. The

strongest contrarieties of piety and hypo-
crify, of generosity and avarice, of truth
and duplicity, often meet in one characer.
The purest human virtue is confitent with
olome vice; and in the midst of much vice
and disorder, amiable, nay refpe&able, qua-
lities may be found. There are few cafes
in which we have ground to conclude that
all goodness is loft. At the bottom of the
chara&ter there may lie some sparks of piety
and virtue, il-prene'd, but not extinguish-
ed; which kept alive by the breath of hea-
ven, and gathering ftrrength in fecrct from
reflction, may, on the firfl: fsvouriable
opening which is afforded them, be ready
to break forth with iplendour and f6rce.-
Placed, then, in a situation of Ib much un-
certainty and darkness, where our know-
ledge of the hearts and cliaracters of men is
*so limited, and our judgments concerning
them are so apt to err, what a continual
call do we receive either to llfpend our
judgment, or to give it on the favourable

fide?

fide? cfpccially when we confider that, as S ER M.

X.

through imperfeLC information we are un- -
qualified for deciding roundly, to through
want of impartiality we are often tempted
to decide wrong. How much this enforces
the argument for candour, will appear by
confidcring,

IN the third place, what the sources are

of those severe and uncharitable opinions
which we are so ready to form. Were the
Inind altogether free froin prepodffelion and
lias, it might avail itself to more advan-
tage of the scanty knowledge which it pof-
fesses. But this is so far from being the
cafe, that on every fide we are encumbered
with prejudices, and warped by passions,
which exert their influence in nothing more
than in leading us to think evil of others.
At all times we are justly said tofee throitgh
a glass, darkly't; but passion and prejudice,
looking through a glass which distorts the
form of the objeas, make us also iee falsely.

It is one of the misfortunes of our present
situation, that some of the good dipiolitions

U 3 of

S E R M. of human nature are apt to betray us Into

X.
ai-v- frailties and vices. Thus, it often happens

that the laudable attachment which we con-
trac for the country, or the church, to
which we belong, or for some political de-
nomination under which we clals ourselves,
both confines our affeaions within too nar-
row a sphere, and gives rife to violent
prejudices against such as come under an
opposite description. Not contented with
being in the right ourselves, we must find
all others in the wrong. NTe claim an ex-
clufive polfeffion of goodness and wiifdom;
and from approving warmly of those who
join us, we proceed to condemn,, with much
acrimony, not the principles only, but the
characters of those from whom we differ.
H[ence persons of well-difpofed minds are
too often, through the strength of partial
good affetion, involved in the crime of
uncharitable judgment. They rashly extend
to every individual the severe opinion
which they have unwarrantably conceived
of the whole body.-This man is of a party
wVhofe principles we reckon slavish; and

therefore

therefore his wvhole sentiments are corrupted. s ER M.
That man belongs to a religious fct, yvhich --
we are accustomed to deem bigotted ; and
therefore he is incapable of any generous
or liberal thought. Another is connected
with a fe&, which we have been taught to
account relaxed; and therefore he can have
no fandity.-Are these the judgments of
candour and charity? Is true piety or
virtue so very limited in its nature, as to be
confined to flich alone as fee every thing
with our eyes, and follow exacly the train
of our ideas? Was there ever any great
community so corrupt as not to include
within it individuals of real worth ?

Besides prepoffeflions of this nature, which

sometimes mislead the honest mind, there
are other, and much more culpable causes
of uncharitable judgment. Pride is hurt
and wounded by every excellence in which
it can claim no share; and from eagerness
to discover a blemish, refts upon the flight-
eft appearance of one, as a satisfying proof.
When rivalry and competition concur with
pride, our desire to espy defeats increases,

U 3 and,

S E R M. and, by consequence, the grounds of ceniire

x.

multiply. Where no oppbfition ofinterefts
takes place, envy has too much influence
in warping the judgment of many. Even
when none of these causes operate, the in-
ward consciousness of depravity is sufficient
to fill the-mind with evil thoughts of others.
Whence fmould a man so readily draw his
opinions of men as from that character with
which he is best acquainted, because it is
his own ? A person of low and base mind
naturally imputes to others the sentiments
which he finds congenial to himself; and is
incredulous of every excellency which to
him is totally unknown. He enjoys, be-
fides, consolation in the thought that others
are no better than himself; that his weak-
neffes and crimes are those of all men; and
that such as appear most distinguished for
virtue possess no real superiority, except
greater dexterity in concealing their vices,
Soothing themselves with this doctrine in
secret, too many softer and firengthen the
bad opinion which they entertain of all
mankind. Rarely, if ever, have you ground

.. .. ~~~~~~~to

to think well of that man's heart who is s E R M.
on every occalion given to think the worst -
of others. Let ts obterve,

IN the fourth place, that suitable to the

sources whence a jealous and suspicious tem-
per proceeds, are the effets which it pro-
*duces in the world, the crimes and mischiefs
with which it fills society. It poffefles this
.unhappy diftinaion.beyond the other fail-
'ings of.the human heart, that while it im-
pels men to violent deeds, it justifies to their
own apprehension the excefles which they
commit. Amidst the uproar of other bad
passions, conscience ads as a restraining
power. As soon as the tumult subsides, re-
.morse exerts its influence, and renders the
:inner sensible of the evil which he has done.
But the uncharitable man is unfortunately
*set loose from any such check or controul.
Through the infatuation of prejudice, his
judgment is perverted; conscience is misled;
the light wtithin himn is turned into darkness.
Viewing the objets of his displeasure as evil
mJen, he thinks himself entitled to give that

U 4 displeasure

S E R M. displeasure full vent; and in committing

X. c-_* the noft inhuman adcions, may sometimes

imagine that he is doing good service to
God.

The first fruits of an evil-thinking spirit

are calumny and detraction, by which fb-
ciety is so often embroiled, and men are set
at variance with one another. But did it pro-
ceed no farther than censorious speech, the
miichief would be less. Much greater and
more Jfrious evils frequently ensue. \What
direful effects, for instance, have often flow-
ed from rafli and ill-founded jealousy in
private life ? No sooner has one allowed
that daemon to take poffeflion of his mind,
than it perverts his understanding, and taints
all his faculties. Haunting him by night
and by day, bringing perpetually before
him the odious and diifuieting forms which
it has raised up, it blackens every appear-
ance to his view; gives to trifles whiclh
are in themselves light as air, the weight of
fulil confirmation ; till what was at first a
dUbious fiurmife, or a flight displeasure, rifes
at length into fill belief and implacable

fury.

fuiry. Hence, fanmilies torn rith the molt S 1s R M.

x.

violent con.vulsio-ns; the hu band armed

_

against the wife, the father against the son,
the friend against the friend; the plan of
treachery and affaflination contrived, and
the dagger plunged into the bofbm of the
innocent.-In public life, how often have
kingdnoms been ihaken with all the violence
of war and rebellion, from the unjuit sus-
picions which fubiea-s had conceived of
their rulers; or the :aflh jealoltfy which
princes hid entertained of their peple ?-
But it is in religious diiicenFions chiefly, that
the mischievous power of unchlaritable pre-
judice has dli;played its full atrocity. Re-
ligion is always found to heighten every
paflion on which it ads, and to render
every contest into whlich it enters, uncom-
monly ardent; becault the objecs -whicli it
prcfents are of such a nature as strongly to
seize and engage the human mind. W/hen
zeal for their own principles has prompted
mIen to view thofi of a different perfualioni
in the odious lights which bigotry fuggefis,
every sentiment of humanity has too often

been

S E R M. been extinguished. The mild influence of

X. A,_ that religion which breathes nothing but

gentlenets, has proved too feeble to restrain
the violent and bloody hand of persecution;
and the uncharitable spirit, raging among
contending parties, has filled the world with
fiuch calamities and crimes as have brought
disgrace on the Chriffian name.

Let us attend particularly to one awful

instance of the guilt which men may con-
traa, and of the ruin which they may bring
upon themselves, through the want of fair-
nels and candour. The nation of the Jews
were always noted for a narrow and un-
charitable spirit. When John the Baptist,
and our blessed Lord, appeared among them,
because the former was austere in his tem-
per and retired in his life, they pronounced
of him that he had an evil spirit: And be-
cause the latter was open and sociable in his
manners, they held him to be destitute of
that fanEtity which became a prophet. Their
prejudice against our Lord took its first rife
from a molt frivolous and contemptible cause.
].r not this thefon of the carjpenter ? Can ayr

8 goad

good thing' come out of Arazareth ? VTWhen his S E R M.
miracles repelled this reproach, and fufli- v
ciently proved the eminence of his character,
still they softered their prejudices by this
most futile reasoning, Have any of the rlers
believed on him ? Obstinate in their attach-
ment to a temporal Mefiah, and continuing
to view all our Saviour's conduct wiit an
evil eye, when he converscd with bad men
in order to reclaim them, they treated him
as a companion of pb/licans andfniencrs. Be-
caule he diiallowed their grounllcefs tradi-
tions, they held him to be a breaker of the
Sabbath, and a contemner of religion. Be-
cause he prophesied the deftruCion of their
temple, they accused him of being an enemy
to his own nation. Till at last, through
their perpetual mifconftrultion of his ac-
tions, their paflions became so inflamed as
to make them cry out with one voice, ,Away
with this man to the death, and give us Ba-
rabbas the robber.---Viewing in this dread-
ful event the consequences of want of can-
dour, let every man tremble to think evil
sa4flly of his brother. No one can tell how

far

S ER M. far uncharitable prejudices may carry him

X.
-v in guilt, if he allows them to harbour and

gather strength within his breast. The
cloud which rofj from the ea, no bigger than
a nzan's hand, may soon swell and spread, till
it cover the whole horizon, and discharge
with mofl dcfrrudive violence the gathered
florm.

IN the fifth place, as a suspicious spirit

is the source of so many crimes and cala-
mities in the world, so it is the spring of
certain misery to the person who indulges
it. His friends will be few; and finall will
be his comfort in those whom he poflcflf:s.
Believing others to be his enemies, he will
of course make them such. Let his caution
be ever tb great, the asperity of his thoughts
will often break out in his behaviour; and
in return for fufLpeling and hating, he will
incur fispicion and hatred. Besides the ex-
ternal evils which he draws upon him elf,
arising from alienated friendship, broken
confidence, and open enmity; the suspicious
temper itsics is one of the worst evils which

any

atny man can fiuffr. If iJi all /;i2r tbcre be S E R M.

x.

toriSzent, how miferabic mnuf be his itate whlo, --
by liviging i perpetual jealousy, lives in per-
petual dread ? Looking upon himfilf to be
flrroundcd with tp;es, enemies, :.l-d deiign-
ing men, he is a itranirer to reliance and
trttl. I--i knows not to whom to olpen
hilie'lk. IIe drefles his countenance in
forced finiles, while his heart throbs within
from apprehensions of secret treachery.
Hence fretfulnets and ill-humiour, ditiguili
at the world, and all the painful sensations
of an irritated and embittered mind.

So numerous and great are the evils arifiix

from a suspicious diflofitionr that of the two
extremes it is more eligible to expose our-
selves to occasional dicadvantage firol think-
ing too well of others, than to susser con-
tinual nifery by thinking always ill of them,
It is better to be sometimes imposed upon,
than never to trust. Safety is purchased at
too dear a rate, when, in.order to secure it,
we are obliged to be always clad in armour,
and to live in perpetual hostility with our
fellows. This is,. for the fake of living, to

5 deprive

S E RM. deprive ourselves of the comfort of life;

X.
_L i The man of candour enjoys his situation,

whatever it is, with cheerfulness and peace.
Prudence directs his intercourse with the
world; but no black iufpicions haunt his
hours of reft. Accustomed to view the cha-
raaers of his neighbours in the most fa-
vourable light, he is like one who dwells
amidst those beautiful scenes of nature, on
which the eye reffs with pleasure. Whereas
the suspicious man, having his imagination
filled with all the shocking forms of human
falsehood, deceit, and treachery, resembles
the traveller in the wilderness, who discerns
no objects around him but what are either
dreary or terrible; caverns that open, ser-
pents that hiss, and beasts of prey that howl.
Hence in him are verified those descriptions
which the Spirit of God has given us of
the misery of the wicked. They Jj all have
nopeace. They JhJall be like the troubled sea
when it cannot re/f. The Lord Js all give
them a trembling heart, andfailing of eye;,
andforrow of mind: And theyfjall fear day
and night, and have none ajfi-urace of heart.
I add,

I1

IN the sixth and last place, that there is s E R M.

nothing which expoks men in a more -_v---
marked and direa manner to the dilplea-
litre of tlhe Almighty, than a malignant and
censorious ifirit. I insist not now on tie
general denunciations of divine wrath againlt
malice and hatred. Let us only conlider
under what particular dclcription the Spirit
of God brings this crime of uncharitable
judgment. It is declared to be an impious
invasion of the prerogative of God, to whom
alone it belongs to search all hearts, and to
determine concerning all characers. This
privilege He often appropriates expressly to
himself, on purpose to restrain the rafhncl s
of censure among men; requiring us to
leave the judging of others to Him, and to
attend, each of us, to our own business and
duty. Il4ho art thou thatjitdg-e another zman's
fervantt ? To his own mnzfer, he Jiandeth or
falleth. r/dge nothing before the time; nz til
the Lord comne, whco J7hJll make 1mazif f the
coulfels of the heart '.

It deserves our most serious attention, that,
in several paifages of Scripture, the great,

Rom. xiv. 4. l Corinth. iv. j.

Judge

SE RM. Judge of tie world is represented, at tile

-- ~day of final retribution, as proceeding upon

this principle, of rendering to men according
to the manner in which they have adedl
towards their bretlhrn. Ti the rierci

1Tith w/J7t jl(/t e jr eudg, ye J'aZll be
jucdgcd; and with what mncafire yc mrete, if
/.nll be meo'fzredJ to your again -. It is im-
pofible to form an arlgument of more force
than this, to restrain all severity ofjudgment
among such as look forward to the tribunal
of God. The argument extends not in-
deed so far, as to represent our acceptance
with the Deity as entirely suspended upon
the candour which we ffiow in forming our
fentimcnts of others. We know that other
graces bfcides this are requiiite in order to
fit us for heaven; and that without piety
towards God, and faith in the Lord Jefius
Christ, all our charity to men will be found
defective and vain. But this we know
alob, that in the heart which is destitute of

t Psalm xviii. 25, 26. Matth. vii. z.

fairness

fairness and candour, the Spirit of God S E R M.

X.

certainly dwells not; and that whatever ~
appearances of religion the uncharitable man
may aIume, on him the Sovereign of the
univerie looks with no favour.---Thou
who art a man full offrailties, wvho flancidc
in need, not merely of impartiality in thy
divine Judge, but of indulgence and mercy
Thou who impIorerf daily this mercy from
him, and prayeft that He would rcmmzber
thou art digs, and not be Rrid to mark ii-
quity againit thee; darei' thou, with those
very prayers in thy mouth, proceed tojudge
without candour of thy brethren, and upon
the slightest grounds to reprobate and con-
demn then ? 0 thou hypocrite ! (for by
what other name can we call thee?) vain
are all thy pretensions to piety. Ineffedtual
is every plea which thou canst form for
mercy from heaven. The precedent whvich
thou haft eftablified against thyself is deci-
five. Thou haft dicLated the ientence of
thine own condemnation,

ON the whole, it clearly appears that no
part of the government of temper deserves

VOL. II, X attention

S E R M. attention more, than to keep our minds pure

X.
- *-' from uncharitable prejudices, and open to

candour and humanity in judging of others.
The worst consequences, both to ourselves
and to society, follow from the opposite
spirit. Let us beware of encouraging a habit
of suspicion, by forming too revere and harfl
opinions concerning human nature in gene-
ral. A great proportion of infirmity and
corruption, doubtless, adheres to it; yet
tempered also it is with various mixtures of
virtue and good affetion. Darkened as the
divine image now is among mankind, it is
not wholly effaced. Much piety and good-
ness may lie hidden in hearts that are un-
known to us. Vice is glaring and loud.
The crimes of the wicked make a noise in
the world, and alarm society. True worth
is retired and modest, and requires parti-
cular situations to bring it forth to public
notice. The prophet Elijah, in a time of
prevailing corruption, imagined that all true
religion had forsaken the land. I, even I
onlj, said he to the Lord, am left to serve
thee. But the Almighty, who discerned

what

what was concealed from his imperfec view, s E R M.

X.

replied, Yet have I left me seven thousand iz
men in Israel who have not bowed the knee to
Baal *.

The aged, and the unfortunate, who have

toiled through an unsuccessful life with long
experience of the falsehood and fraud of evil
men, are apt to be the most severe in the
opinions which they entertain of others.
,For such, their circumstances may be al-
lowed to form some degree of apology. But
if, in youth and profpcrity, the fame hard
suspicious spirit prevail; if they who are
beginning the career of life set out with all
the scruples of distrust; if, before they have
had reafdn to complain of the world, they
betray the diffidence of a jealous, and the
malignity of a censorious mind, fad is the
presage which may thence be drawn of their
future diihonour. From such, you have
nothing to look for that shall be either en-
gaging in private life, or refpedable in pub-
lic character. To youth it particularly be-
longs to be generous in sentiment, candid

IX Kings xix. 14. 18.

X 2 in

S E R M. in opinion, undesigning in behaviour, open

X. , - to the most favourable conftrution of ac-

tions and conduc. Throughout all the
stages of life, candour and fairness is one of
the most honourable diftinaions of the hu-
man character. It is conneted with mag-
nanimity; it is justified by wisdom; it is
suitable to the relation in which we stand to
one another. But if reason and humanity
be insufficient to restrain us from rash and
uncharitable judgments, let that awful de-
nunciation frequently resound in our eais,
He Jhall have judgment without mercy wBh
bath /howed no mercy.

SE R-

# SERMON XI. On the CHARACTER of JOSEPH. GENESIS xlv. 5. 8. Now therefore be not grieved nor angry with yourselves that ye sold me hither; for God did send me before you to preserve life. — So now it ...

[ 309 ]

SERMON XI.
On the CHARACTER of JOSEPH.

GENESIS xlv. 5. 8.
Now therefore be not grieved nor angry with

yourselves that ye fold me hither; for God
didfend me before ou to preserve life.
So now it was not you thatfent me hither,
but God.
IN this generous manner, Joseph frames s E R M.

an apology for the unnatural behaviour, x

.

of his brethren. He extenuates the atro-
city of their crime, byreprefenting the happy
effeCts which it had produced. He looks
beyond all second causes; and recognizes,
in the wonderful events of his life, the hand
of the Almighty.- No human character

X 3 exhibited

S E R M. exhibited in the records of Scripture is more

XI.
X-I.- remarkable, or inftrutive, than that of this

patriarch. He is one whom we behold
tried in all the vicissitudes of fortune; from
the condition of a slave, rising to be ruler of
the land of Egypt; and in every station
acquiring, by his virtue and wisdom, favour
with God and man. When overseer of
Potiphar's house, his fidelity was proved by
firong temptations, which he honourably
refited. When thrown into prison by the
artifice of a false woman, his integrity and
prudence soon rendered him conspicuous,
even in that dark mansion. When called
into the presence of Pharaoh, the wife and
extensive plan which he formed for saving
the kingdom from the miseries of impend-
ing famine, justly raised him to a high fta-
tion, wherein his abilities were eminently
displayed in the public service. But in his
whole history there is no circumstance so
striking and interesting, as his behaviour to
his brethren who had fold him into slavery.
The moment in which he made himself
known to them, that moment at which we

are

are now to contemplate him, was the most S E R M.
critical one of his life, and the most decisive 1A-
of his character. It is such as rarely occurs
in the course of human events; and is cal-
culated to draw the highest attention of all
who are endowed with any degree of fen-
fibility of heart. Let us confider the senti-
ment which Joseph utters in the text under
two views, each of which is very inftrucive
to all Christians. 1. As a discovery of his
cordial forgiveness of his brethren; and, II.
as an instance of his dutiful attention to the
Providence of God.

I. THE most cordial forgiveness is here

displayed. I shall not recapitulate all the
preceding history respecting Joseph and his
brethren; as it is well known by every one
who has the least acquaintance with the fa-
cred writings. From the whole tenour of
the narration it appears, that though Jo-
feph, upon the arrival of his brethren in
Egypt, made himself strange to them, yet
from the beginning he intended to discover
himself; and studied so to condua the dif-

X 4 covery

S E R M. covery as might render the surprise of joy
<,-__- complete. For this end, by asse&ted feve-

rity, he took meafires for bringing down
into Egypt all his father's children. They
were now arrived there; and Benjamin
among the reft, who was his younger bro-
ther by the fame mother, and was particu-
larly beloved by Joseph. HIim he threat-
ened to detain; and seemed willing to al-
low the reft to depart. This incident re-
newed their distress. They all knew their
father's extreme anxiety about the safety of
Benjamin, and with what difficulty he had
yielded to his undertaking this journey.
Should he be prevented from returning,
they dreaded that grief would overpower
the old man's spirits, and prove fatal to his
life. Judah, therefore, who had particu-
larly urged the necessity of Benjamin's ac-
companying his brothers, and had solemnly
pledged himself to their father for his safe
return, craved, upon this occasion, an au-
dience of the governour; and gave him a
full account of the circumstances of Jacob's
family,

Nothing

Nothing can be more interefring and pa- s E R M.

OXI.

thetic than this discourse of Judah, as it is --
recorded in the preceding chapter. Little
knowing to whom he spoke, he paints, in
all the colours of simple and natural elo-
quence, the distressed situation of the aged
patriarch, hastening to the close of life;
long affliced for the loss of a favourite son,
whom he supposed to have been torn in
pieces by a beast of prey; labouring now
under anxious concern about his youngest
son, the child of his old age, who alone
was left alive of his mother, and whom
nothing but the calamities of revere famine
could have moved a tender father to fend
from home, and expose to the dangers of a
foreign land. If we bring him not back
.with us, we JJall bring dozven the grey heirs
of thyj frvant our father, with sorrow, to the
grave. pray thee therefore let thy servant
abide ijlead of the young man, a bondman to
our lord. For how fh all Igo up to my fa-
ther, and Benjamin not with me ? les I fee
the evil thatJhall come on myfather.

Jpon

S E R M. Upon this relation, Joseph could no

XI.
a, _ longer refirain himself. The tender ideas

of his father and his father's house, of his
ancient home, his country and his kindred,
of the distress of his family, and his own ex-
altation, all rushed too strongly upon his
mind to bear any farther concealment. He
cried, cazfe every, man to go out from me;
and he wept aloud. The tears which he
Ihed were not the tears of grief. They
were the burit of affection. They were the
effusions of a heart overflowing with all the
tender sensibilities of nature. Formerly he
had been moved in the fame manner, when
he firpt saw his brethren before him. His
bowels yearned upon them; he fought for a
place where to weep. He went into his
chamber; and then wafsed his face, and re-
turned to them. At that period his gene-
rous plans were not completed. But now,
when there was no farther occasion for con-
firaining himself, he gave free vent to the
firong emotions of his heart. The first
minister to the king of Egypt was not

ashamed

ashamed to show, that he felt as a man, and s E R M.

XI.

a brother. He wept aloud; and the Eg8p-
tians, and the hozfe of Pharaoh heard him.

The first words which his swelling heart

allowed him to pronounce, are the most
suitable to such an affecting situation which
were ever uttered.-I am 7yofeph; doth my
father yet live ?-What could he, what
ought he, in that impassioned moment, to
have said more ? This is the voice of na-
ture herself, speaking her own language;
and it penetrates the heart: No pomp of
expression; no parade of kindness; but
strong affection hastening to utter what it
strongly felt. His brethren could not an-
fwer him; for they were troubled at his prc-
fence. Their silence is as expressive of those
emotions of repentance, and shame, which,
on this amazing discovery, filled their
breasts, and flopped their utterance, as the
few words which Joseph speaks are expref-
five of the generous agitations which ftrug-
gled for vent within him. No painter could
seize a more itriking moment for displaying
the charaderiftical features of the human

3 heart,

SER M. heart, than what is here presented. Never

XI.
.---' was there a situation of more tender and

virtuous joy, on the one hand ; nor, on
the other, of more overwhelming confusion
and conscious guilt. In the simple narra-
tion of the sacred historian, it is set before
us with greater energy and higher effect,
than if it had been wrought up with all the
colouring of the most admired modern elo-
quence.

When Joseph had a little recovered him-

seLf from the first tranliorts of emotion, he
proceeds to explain his situation to his
brethren, and to show them the beneficent
purposes for which he conceived himself to
be raised by Providence into power. The
apology which he makes in the text for their
former cruelty is uncommon and remark-
able. Now therefore be not grieved nor an-
ry -w~ith yourselves that ye fold me hither;

for God didfend me before you to preferveyou
a poJtIerity in the earth, and to ave your lives
by a great deliverance. So now it was not
tyou that Jont me hither but God; and he
bath made me a father to Pharaoh, -and Lord

of

of all his hozi', and a ruler throtughozt all the S E R M.
land of EgRpt. This apology was, in truth, --,
no fatisfat&ory excuse for their crime. For
though the over-ruling providence of 1-ea-
ven had so direaed the course of events, as
to render their bad intentions subservient to
a happy issue; yet the badness of the inten-
tion originated entirely from themfelvesd
The envy and jealousy which they enter-
tained against their brother, led them to
the commission of an atrocious deed. The
deed was voluntary; the crime was all their
own; and the interposition of Providence
in making unforeseen consequences follow
from that crime, did not, could not, excul-
pate them from guilt. It were an impious
conclusion, that because God extracts good
from our evil, we are not answerable for
the evil which we perpetrate. God cannot
be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any
man *. But the sentiment in the text is to
be confidered, as a colour which the gene-
rous humanity of Joseph prompted him to
throw on the conduCt of his brethren. He

* James i. 13.

saw

S ER M. saw the confusion with which they were

XI.
- overwhelmed in his presence. He diverts

their attention from the remembrance of a
crime which was now wringing their hearts
with anguish, by representing to them the
happy effects which that crime had pro-
duced. He sets them free from all uneafi-
ness on his account. He calls upon them
to rejoice in his prosperity; and instead of
dwelling on a painful recollecion of their
own condua, to join with him in ac-
knowledging and adoring the hand of the
Almighty.

How different is this amiable spirit which

Joseph discovers, from that harsh and often-
tatious fi.periority which too often accom-
panies the pretended forgiveness of injuries,
among those who call themselves Christians!
They are ready to fay that, for their part,
they pardon the wrongs which have been
done them; they wish that the persons who
have committed them may be able to for-
give themselves; they leave them to God
and to their own conscience. By the severe
suggestions which they throw out, they

discover

discover the inward bitterness of their fpi- S E R M.

XI.

rit; and artfully gratify resentment, at the t.
time when they profess to exercise forgive-
ness. Whereas the great and good man
whose character we now confider, effaces
all memory of the crimes which he par-
dons. He seeks to alleviate the remorse
of his brethren by an extenuation of their
guilt; and while he is preparing to make
their circumstances comfortable, studies at
the fame time to render their minds easy
and tranquil.

This was not merely a transient emotion

with Joseph, owing to the first burit of as-
feeion on discovering himself to his bre-
thren. We have a clear proof, from a re-
markable tranfadion which passed many
years after this period, of his disposition
continuing the fame to the end of life. It
is recorded in the last chapter of this book,
that when Jacob died, his sons began to be
seized with fear concerning the treatment
which they might receive from their bro-
ther. The guilty are always suspicious.
Conscious of their own baseness, they are

incapable

S E R M. incapable of conceiving the magnaniinty of

XI
,--- bOthers. They saw the bond which held

the family together, now broken by their
father's deathi They dreaded that the re-
fentment of joseph against them had hi-A
therto been only suppressed, or concealed.
'beyJaid among thenmelves, peradventure be
'will now hate us, and requite all the evil which
wve did unto him. Under this apprehension,
they first sent a humble message to depre-
cate his displeasure by the memory of their
common father; and then appearing in his
pretence, they fell down before his faces
professing themselves to be his servants, -and
praying him to forgive the trespass which
they had committed against him. But no
such hidden resentment as they dreaded had
ever lurked in the.foul of Joseph. On the
contrary, when he beheld his brethren in
this affecting ituation, bereaved of their
ancient protetor, and reduced, as they
imagined, to the necessity of holding up
their hands to him for mercy, he was over-
powered by a tide of tender emotions. Y0-
feph wept, while his brethren spake unto him.

These

These aftfedionate tears alone were fufmcient s E R M.

vr.

to have ensured their forgiveness. But ha- A
flening also by words to dispel their alarms,
he presently added, Fear inot; for thozgJ yc
thought evil agani/l me, God meant it unto
good. Nw1V therefore fear ye not; I will
nourfih you Cad jyour litl/e ones. And he
consorted them; al;d ,spake kindljc unto them ~.

Such was the last incident that is record-

ed in the life of this eminent personage,
than whom you will find few more diftin-
guifhed by an aflemblage of illustrious vir-
tues; in the lovwe adversity, patient and
faithful ; in the highest prosperity, benefi-
cent and generous; dutiful and affectionate,
as a son; kind and forgiving, as a brother;
accomplished, as a statesman; wife and pro-
vident, as a ruler of the land. In such a
characer you behold human nature possess-
ing its highest honours. The sentiments
which it inspires, tend to ennoble our minds;
and to prevent their imbibing the spirit of
those hard, interested, and felf-feeking men
with whom the world abounds.

* Genes . 1. 2
VOL. II. Y TrEI

S ER M. THIE iriking example of forgiveness,
--~^- which the text displays, ought frequently

to occur to our thoughts, amidst the various
occasions of provocation and offence which
arise in our intercourse with the world. If
one so worthy and amiable, in the days too
of his youth and innocence, suffered such
cruel treatment from his brothers, ought
we to be surprised if, even from our nearest
relations, we meet with injustice or ingra-
titude ? Wrongs and injuries are, more or
lets, the portion of all. Like Death, they
are an evil unavoidable. No fiation is so
high, no power so great, no characer so
unblemished, as to exempt us from them.
In the world, ungrateful men, false friends,
and violent enemies abound. Every wife
man ought to prepare himself for what he
is to encounter, in passing through this
thorny region. He is not to expet that
he can gather grapes from thistles; nor to
lose the government of his mind, because,
in the midst of evil men, he is not allowed
to remain, like a sacred and inviolable per-
son, untouched and uninjured.

3 As

As this view of our situation ought to s E R M.

XI.

blunt the edge of passion and impatience, _-
so the alleviating circumstances which rea-
son will suggest, ought to mollify resent-
ment. Think of the various conftrudions
which the actions of men will bear. Con-
fider how different the motives of him who
hath given us offence, may have been from
those which in the heat of passion we ascribe
to him; how apt all men are to be seduced
by mistaken views of interest; and how
little ground we have to complain if, upon
a supposed interfering of interests, we susser
by others preferring their own to ours.
Remember that no opinions which you
form under the power of resentment can
be depended upon as just; and that every
one loads the intentions of his enemy with
imaginary degrees of malice.

But admitting the injury you have re-

ceived to be ever to atrocious in its nature,
and aggravated in its circumstances; sup-
posing it to be even parallel to that which
Joseph suffered; look up, like him, to that
divine -government under which we are all

Y 2 placed.

SE RM. placed. If forgiveness be a duty which
L-__ we know God to have required under the

most awful fandions, dare we draw upon
ourselves the merited vengeance of that fu-
periour, to whose clemency we are obliged
daily to fly? When, with hard and unre-
lenting dispositions towards our brethren,
we fend up to Heaven prayers for mercy to
ourselves, those prayers return like impre-
cations upon our heads ; and our very de-
votions feal our condemnation.

The most plain and natural sentiments of

equity concur with divine authority to
enforce the duty which I now recommend.
Let him who has never in his life done
wrong, be allowed the privilege of re-
maining inexorable. But let such as are
conscious of frailties and crimes, confider
forgiveness as a debt which they owe to
others. Common failings are the strongest
leflon of mutual forbearance. Were this
virtue unknown among men, order and
comfort, peace and repose would be ftran-
gers to human life. Injuries retaliated ac-
cording to the exorbitant measure which

passion

passion prescribes, would justify resentment s E R M,
in return. The injured person would be- '---
come the injurer; and thus wrongs, reta-
liations, and fresh injuries, would circulate
in endless succession, till the world was
rendered a field of blood. Of all the pas-
sions which invade the human breast, re-
venge is the most direful. When allowed
to reign with full dominion, it is more than
sufficient to poifoh the few pleasures which
remain to man in his present state. How
much soever a person may susser from in-
justice, he is always in hazard of suffering
more from the prosecution of revenge.
The violence of an enemy cannot inflic
what is equal to the torment he creates to
himself, by means of the fierce and desperate
passions which he allows to rage in his
foul.

Those evil spirits who inhabit the regions

of misery, are represented as delighting in
revenge and cruelty. But all that is great
and good in the universe, is on the fide of
clemency and mercy. The almighty Ruler
of the world, though for ages offended by

Y 3 the

S E R M. the unrighteousness, and insulted by the

XI.

.---, imnpiety of men, is long Jfff'riig arnd Jlo'w

to a;zer. His Son, when he appeared in
our nature, exhibited both in his life and
his death, the most illunrious example of
forgiveness which the world ever beheld.
If you look into the history of mankind,
you will find that in every age, those who
have been refpecded as worthy, or admired
as great, have been diftinguifned for this
virtue. Revenge dwells in little minds.
A noble and magnanimous spirit is always
fuperiour to it. It suffers not from the inju-
ries of men those revere shocks which others
feel. Colleced within itself, it stands un-
moved by their impotent aflaults; and with
generous pity, rather than with anger, looks
down on their unworthy conduat. It has
been truly said, that the greatelf man on
earth can no sooner commit an injury, than
a good man can make himself greater, by
forgiving it. Joseph, at the moment when
we now contemplate him, had entirely un-
der his power all those unnatural brethren
who had been guilty towards him of the

moil

most cruel outrage which men could per- s ER M.
petrate. He could have retained them for
ever in that Egyptian bondage to which
they had once consigned him; and have
gratified revenge by every accumulation of
disgrace which despotic power enabled him
to inflict. Had he aaced this part, he
might for a while have been soothed by the
pleasures of his high Rtation. But remorse,
in the end, would have flung his foul.
Cruelty would have rendered him unhappy
within himself, as well as odious to others:
And his name would have perifled among
the crowd of those contemptible flatefinen,
whose acions tain the annals of history.
Whereas now, his character fRands among
the foremost in the ranks of spotless fame.
His memory is blessed to all generations.
His example continues to edify the world;
and he himself ihines in the celestial re-
gions as the brightness of the firmament, and
(is theJiarsfor ever aind ever. Let us now,

II. CONSIDER the sentiment contained
In the text, not only as a discovery of cor-

Y 4 dial

ER M. dial forgiveness, but as an exprefflon of

devout attention to the condut of Provi-
dence. So now it was not you that sent me
hither, but God. Remark how beautifully
piety and humanity are, in this instance,
conneced together. As we are told ,of
Cornelius, the good Centurion, that his
prayers and his alms, his devotion and his
good works, came up together in memorial
before God, so here we perceive fraternal
affetion and religious reverence, mingling
in one emotion within the patriarch's heart.
In a person of low and vulgar mind, the
sensations on such an occasion would have
been extremely different. Looking back
on the past events of his life, he would
have ascribed all the adversity which he had
suffered, to the perverse treatment of his
brothers; and all the prosperity which he
afterwards attained, to his own good condud
and wisdom; and by consequence would
have remained embittered against the infiru-
ments of the one, and filled with pride and
felf-fufficiency on. account of the other.
But the elevated and noble mind of Joseph

rejeCted

rejected such unworthy sentiments. Con- SER M.
templating the hand of God in all that had -
befallen him, he effaced the remembrance
of those evil deeds which had produced his
adversity; and for his prosperity he assed-
ed no praise to himself, but ascribed it en-
tirely to the will of Heaven. Let us take
notice that this is not the reflection of a
private, retired man; whose situation might
be supposed to favour such devout medita-
tions. It is the reflecion of one, who was
leading a busy and a seducing life, in the
midst of a court; the favourite of the
greatest monarch who was then known in
the world. Yet him you behold, amidst
the fubmiflion and adulation which was
paid to him, preserving the moderation and
simplicity of a virtuous mind; and amidst
the idolatry and false philosophy of the
Egyptians, maintaining the principles of true
religion, and giving glory to the God of
Israel.

From this union of piety with humanity,

which is so conspicuous in the sentiments of
Joseph, there arises one very important in-

ftrudion;

S E R M. ftruion; That a devout regard to the hand

XI.
I -- I of God in the various events of life tends

to promote good dispositions and affe}tions
towards men. It will be found by those
who attend to the workings of human na-
ture, that a great proportion of those ma-
lignant passions which break out in the in-
tcrcourfe of men, arises from confining their
attention wholly to second causes, and over-
looking the firit cause of all. Hence, they
are insolent in proiferity, because they dif-
corn nothing higher than their own abili-
ties; and in adversity they are peevish and
unforgiving, bccaifc they have no objeQ
on which to fix their view, but the conduct
of men who have aded as their enemies.
They behold no plan of mwifdom or goodness
carried on throughout nature, which can
allay the discomposure of their mind. As
soon as their temper is ruffled, the world
appears to them to be a continued scene of
diirfters and injuries, of confused events
and of unreasonable men. Whereas to the
pious man, the contemplation of the uni-
verse exhibits a very different fpeetacle. In

the

the midlf of fceming confusion he traces a E R M.

XI,

principle of order; and by attention to that _-
order, his mind is harmonized and calmed.
He beholds a wife and righteous Governour
presiding over all the commotions which
are raised by the tumult of confliCting pas-
sions and interests; guiding, with imper-
ceptible influence, the hand of the violent to
beneficent purposes; accomplishing unex-
pected ends by the most improbable means;
obligilng the -watlh of man to praise him;
fomeinmes humbling the mighty, fomctimes
exalting the low; often sitaring bhe wicked
in the devices which their bands have wrought.
RespeCtful acknowledgment of this divine
government, controuls the disorders of infe-
riour passions. Reverence for the decrees
of Heaven inspires patience and modera-
tion. Trust in that perfc&t wisdom and
goodness which directs all for the best, di-
minithes the fiock which worldly disasters
occasion. The irritation of passion and re-
fentment, will always bear proportion to the
agitation which we susser from the changes
of fortune. One who connects himself

with

S E R M. with nothing but second causes, partakes of

XI.
AI-_- the violence and irregularity of all the in-

feriour movements belonging to this great
machine. He who refers all to God, dwells,
if we may speak so, in that higher sphere
where motion begins; he is subjea to fewer
mocks and concufions, and is only carried
along by the motion of the universe.

How can mildness or forgiveness gain

place in the temper of that man who, on
occasion of every calamity which he suffers
from the ill usage of others, has no fanduary
within his own breast to which he can make
retreat from their vexations; who is pof-
fefed of no principle which is of sufficient
power to bear down the rising tide ofpeevifh
and angry passions ? The violence of an
enemy, or the ingratitude of a friend, the
injustice of one man, and the treachery of
another, perpetually dwell and rankle in
his thoughts. The part which they have
aded in bringing on his distress, is frequently
more grating to him than the distress itself.
Whereas he who in every event looks up to
God, has always in his view a great and ele-

vating

vating objcQt, which inll ires im with mag- S E R M.
nanimity. His mind lies open to every
relieving thought, and is inclined to every
fuggeition of generosity. He is disposed to
fay with Joseph, it -,z s not yogi zlhatZ' fIt Zme
h7ither, buit God; with David, it is t.he Lord;
let him do whlat feiemeth good iin his eyes; and
with a greater pcrbfnage than eithcr of these,
the clip WVh,:cb my Father 7ha/h given me lo
drink, JJall I not drink it? Hence arises
superiority to many of the ordinary provo-
cations of the world. For he looks upon
the whole of his present life as part of a
great plan, which is carried on under the
diretion of Heaven. In this plan, he views
men as acting their several parts, and con-
tributing to his good or evil. But their
parts he conliders as subordinate ones;
which, though they may juRly merit his
affe&ion, and may occasionally call forth
his resentment, yet afford no proper fbun-
dation to violent or malignant passion. I-e
looks upon bad men as only the rod with.
which the Almighty chastens; like the
pestilence, the earthquake, - or the sorn.

8 In

S E R M. In the midst of their injustice and violence
_--w--- he can pity their blindness; and imitate our

blessed Lord in praying, Fatheri-, forgive
them; for they know not what they do.

SE R-

# SERMON XII. On the CHARACTER of HAZAEL. 2 KINGS viii. 12, 13. And Hazael said, Why weepeth my Lord? And he answered, Because I know the evil that thou wilt do unto the children of Israel. Their strong ...

E 3,35 ]

SE R M N XII.
On the CHARACTER of HAZAEL.

2 KINGS viii. 12, 13.
And Hazaelf fid, Why iweepeth m7y Lord?

sAnd he answered, Becaife I know the evil
that thou wilt do uito the children of frael.
Their frong holds wilt thot fit on fire, and
their youn2g mCen wilt thozu Jlay with the
s-word, and wilt danJ their children, and
rip p u their women wiith child. And
l2a.zaelfaid, ]3,t *what, is thy servant a
dog, that he J7ozild do this great thing ?
And EliJha anfTwcred, Jhe Lord hath
J7jewed me that thou JJhalt be king over
Syria.
IN the days of Joram king of Israel flou- s E R M..

rifhed the prophet Elisha. His chara&ter

was so eminent, and his fame so widely
ipread, that Benhadad the king of Syria,

though

S E R M. though an idolater, sent to consult him cond

-XII.
- cerning the issue of a distemper which

threatened his life. The messenger em-
ployed on this occasion was Hazael, who
appears to have been one, of the princes, or
chief men, of the Syrian court. Charged
with rich gifts from the king, he presents
himself before -the prophet ,. and accosts him
in terms of the highest refpet. During the
conference which they held together,. Eliha
fixed his eye ftedfaftly on the countenance
of Hazael; and discerning, by a prophetic
spirit, his future tyranny and cruelty, he
could not contain himself from bursting into
a flood of tears. When Hazael, in surprise,
inquired into the cause of this sudden emo-
tion, the prophet plainly informs him of the
crimes and barbarities which he foresaw
that hereafter he should commit. The foul
of Hazael abhorred, at this time, the thoughts
of cruelty. Uncorrupted, as yet, by am-
bition or greatness, his indignation arose at
being thought capable of such savage actions
as the prophet had mentioned; and, with
much warmth, he replies, But what? is

thy

hy frvant a o t

eJa

doo, hate d do this great S E R M.

thing ? Elisha makes no return but to point
out a remarkable change which was to take
place in his condition; The Lord hath
Jhewed me that thoujZJalt 1e king over Syria.
In course of time, all that had been pre-
dicted came to pass. Hazael ascended the
throne; and ambition took possession of his
heart. He fjiote the children of Israel in all
their coajfs. He opprc/fd them dzaring all
the days of King yehoahaz *'; and, from
what is left on record of his actions, plainly
appears to have proved what the prophet
foresaw him to be, a man of violence,
cruelty, and blood.

In this pafage of history, an object is

ptefented which deserves our serious atten-
tion. We behold a man who, in one state
of life, could not look upon certain crimes
without fuiprife and horrour; who knew
so little of himself as to believe it impossible
for him ever to be concerned in commit-
ting them; that fame man, by a change of
condition, transformed in all his sentiments,

* 2 Kings xiii. zz.
VOL. II. Z and

S.ERM. and as he rose in greatness, rising also in

XI. iA-_' guilt; till at last he completed that whole

character of iniquity which he once de-
tested. Hence the following observations
naturally arise. I. That to a mind not
entirely corrupted, sentiments of abhorrence
at guilt are natural. II. That notwith-
standing those sentiments, the mind may
be brought under the dominion of the vices
which it had most abhorred. III. That
this unhappy revolution is frequently owing
to a change of men's external circumltanccs
and condition in the world. These obier-
vations are to make the fubjedt of the pre-
sent discourse; and will lead us to such a
view of human nature as, it is hoped, may
be of general use.

1. SENTIMENTS of abhorrence at guilt

are natural to the human mind. Hazael's
reply to the prophet shews how strongly he
felt them. Is thy servant a dog, that he
JhJould do this great thing ? Is he, or can he
ever be, so base and wretched as to perpe-
trate crimes, which would render him un-

6 - worthy

-wvorthy of bearing the name of a man P SE R M.

XII.

This is the voice of human nature, while --'
it is not as yet hardened in iniquity. Some
vices are indeed more odious to the mind
than others. Providence has wifely pointed
the sharpest edge of this natural aversion
against the crimes which are of most perni-
cious and deftrudive nature; such as trea-
chery, oppression, and cruelty. But, in ge-
neral, the distinCtion between moral good
and evil is so strongly marked, as to ac-
company almost every vice with sensible
disapprobation. Present to any man, even
the most ignorant and untutored, an ob-
vious instance of injustice, falsehood, or im-
piety; let him view it in a cool moment,
when no passion blinds, and no interest
warps him; and you will find that his mind
immediately revolts against it, as shameful
and base, nay as deserving punishment.
Hence, in reasoning on the charadcers of
others, however men may mistake as to
fats, yet they generally praise and blame
according to the principles of found mo-
rality.

Z 2 \Tith

S E R M. With refpea to their own characer, a

XIIl

' notorious partiality too generally misleads

their judgment. But it is remarkable, that
no finner ever avows direcly to himself
that he has been guilty of gross and down-
right iniquity. Even when engaged by his
passions in the commission of the greaterf
crimes, he always palliates them to his own
mind by some extenuation or apology, some
pretended necessity, or some borrowed co-
lour of innocence. Such power the unde-
niable dignity of virtue, and the acknow-
ledged turpitude of vice, possess over every
human heart. These sentiments are the re-
maining impressions of that law, which was
originally written on the mind of man.
They are gleams of that light which once
shone clear and strong within us; and which,
though it be now greatly obscured, yet con-
tinues to shoot a feeble ray athwart the
darkness of human nature.- But what-
ever sentiments of abhorrence at vice we
may at any time entertain, we have no
reason to build upon there a presumptuous
confidence of our continuance in virtue.

For

For the next inftrudion which the text s FERM.

XIIL
suggests is, I--_

II. THAT such is man's ignorance of his

own character, such the frailty of his na-
ture, that he may one day become infa-
:mous for those very crimes which at preient
he holds in detestation. This observation
is too well verified by the history of Hazael;
and a thousand other instances might be
brought to confirm it. Though there is
nothing which every person ought to know
so thoroughly as his own heart, yet from
the conduct of men it appears, that there is
nothing with which they are less acquainted.
Always more prone to flatter themselves
than desirous to discover the truth, they
trust to their being possessed of every virtue
which has not been put to the trial; and
reckon themselves secure against every vice
to which they have not hitherto been
tempted. As long as their duty hangs in
speculation, it appears so plain, and so eli-
gible, that they cannot doubt of performing
it. The suspicion never enters their mind,

Z 3 that

S ER M. that in the hour of speculation, and-in the

XII.
. ,_^ hour of practice, their sentiments may differ

widely. Their present disposition they ea-
fily persuade themselves will ever continue
the fame; and yet that disposition is chan-
ging with circumstances every moment.

The man who glows with the warm feel-

ings of devotion, imagines it impossible for
him to lose that sense of the divine good-
ness which at present melts his heart. He
whom his friend has lately saved from ruin
is confident that, if some trying emergency
shall put his gratitude to proof, he will ra-
ther die than abandon his benefaaor. He
who lives happy and contented in frugal
industry, wonders how any man can give
himself up to dissolute pleasure. Were any
of those persons informed by a fuperiour
spirit, that the time was shortly to come
when the one should prove an example of
scandalous impiety, the other of treachery
to his friend, and the third of all that ex-
travagant luxury which disgraces a growing
fortune; each of them would testify as much
surprise and abhorrence as Hazael did, upon

hearing

hearing the predictions of the prophet. Sin- S E R M.

XII.

cere they might very pofiibly be in their ,---
expressions of indignation; for hypocrisy
is not always to be charged on men whose
conduct is inconsistent. Hazael was in
earnest, when he resented with such ardour
the imputation of cruelty. The Apostle
Peter was sincere, when he made the zealous
profession, that though he should go to
prison and to death with his master, he
would never deny him. They were fin-
cere; that is, they spoke from the fulness
of their hearts, and from the warmth of the
present moment; but they did not know
themselves, as the events which followed
plainly showed. So false to its principles,
too frequently, is the heart of man; so
weak is the foundation of human virtue; so
much reason there is for what the gospel
perpetually inculcates concerning the necef-
fity of distrusting ourlelves, and depending
on divine aid. Mortifying, I confess, is
this view of human nature; yet proper to
be attended to by all, in order to escape the
most fatal dangers. For, merely through

Z 4 unguarded

SER M. unguarded condut, -and from the want of

- this prudent suspicion of their own weak-

ness, how many, after the most promising
beginnings, have gradually apostatized fiom
every principle of virtue; until, at last, it
has become as difficult fbr one to believe
that they ever had any love of goodness, as
it would have been once to have persuaded
themselves that they were to advance to
such a height in wickedness ?

IN such cafes as I have described, wh'at

has become, it may be enquired, of those
sentiments of abhorrence at guilt which
were once felt so firongly ? Are they to-
tally erased ? or, if in any degree they re-
main, how do such persons contrive to
satisfy themselves in ading a part which
their minds condemn'?-Here, there is a
mystery of iniquity which requires to be
unfolded. Latent and secret is the progress
of corruption within the foul; and the
more latent, the more dangerous is its
growth. No man becomes of. a sudden
completely wicked. Guilt never.fhows its

whole

whole deformity at once; but by gradual s 7R M.

XII.

acquaintance reconciles us to its appearance, ----
and imperceptibly diffuses its poison through
all the powers of the mind. E.very man
has tome darling passion which generally
affords the first introduction to vice. The
irregular gratifications into which it occa-
fionally seduces him, appear under the form
of venial weaknesses; and are indulged, in
the beginning, with scrupulousness and re-
serve. But. by longer pratice thlce re-
firaints weaken, and the power of habit
grows. One vice brings in another to its
aid. By a fort of natural affinity they con-
net and entwine themselves together; till
their roots come to be spread wide and deep
over all the foul. When guilt rites to he
glaring, conscience endeavours to remon-
itrate. But conscience is a calm principle.
Paflion is loud and impetuous; and creates
a tumult which drowns the voice of realln.
It joins, besides, artifice to violence; and
seduces at the fame time that it impels.
For it employs the understanding to impose
Upon the conscience. It devises reasons

3 nand

SERIM. and arguments to justify the corruptions of

the heart. The common practice of the
world is appealed to. Nice diftin&tions are
made. Men are found to be circumstanced
in so peculiar a manner, as to render cer-
tain ations excusable, if not biamelefs,
which, in another situation, it is confessed
would have been criminal. By such a pro-
cess as this, there is reason to believe that
a great part of mankind advance from ftep
to ftep in fin, partly hurried by passion,
and partly blinded by felf-deceit, without
any just sense of the degree of guilt which
they contra-. By inveterate habits their
judgment is, at length, perverted, and their
moral feelings are deadened. They fee
now with other eyes; and car look with-
out pain on evil acions which they for-
merly abhorred.

It is proper, however, to obser.ve, that

though our native sentiments of abhorrence
at guilt may be so borne down, or so eluded
as to lore their influence on condu&, yet
those sentiments belonging originally to our
frame, and being never totally eradicated

from

from the foul, will ffill retain so much au- s E R M.

XII.

thority, as if not to reform, at lcaft on some -v
occasions, to chasten the finner. It is only
during a course of profpcrity, that vice is
able to carry on its delusions without dif-
turbance. But, amidst the dark and
thoughtful situations of life, conscience re-
gains its rights; and pours the whole bit-
ternefs of remorse on his heart who has
apostatized from his original principles.
We may well believe that, before the end
of his days, HIazael's first impreflions would
be made to return. In the hour .of adver-
fity, the remembrance of his conference
with the venerable Prophet would fting his
heart. Comparing the ientiments which,
in those his better days, he felt, with the
atrocious cruelties which he had afterwards
committed, all the honours of royalty would
be unable to iave him from the inward sense
of ba'enefs and infamy.

FROM this view which has been exhi-

bited of the progress of corruption, and of
the danger to which we are exposed of

falling

s E R M. falling from principles which once appeared
-.-.. firmly established, let us receive useful ad-

monition for our own conduc. Let not
him that girdeth on his barnes, boajt like him
that pzltteth it off. Let no man place a rash
and dangerous confidence in his virtue.
But let him that tghinksih he iandeth7, take
heed let he fall. Never adventure on too
near an approach to what is evil. Fami-
liarize not yourselves with it, in the flight-
eft instances, without fear. Liften with
reverence to every reprehension of con-
science; and preserve the most quick and
accurate sensibility to right and wrong. If
ever your moral impressions begin to de-
cay, and your natural abhorrence of guilt
to lessen, you have ground to dread that
the ruin of virtue is fast approaching.
While you employ all the circumspeCtion
and vigilance which reason can suggest, let
your prayers, at the fame time, continually
ascend to God for support and aid. Re-
member that from him defcendeth everygood
and perfeE gift; and that to him only it
belongs to keep you from falling, and to pre-

fient

sent you fautlefs before the presence of his S E R M.
glory wcith exceeding joy. I proceed now to _
the

III. OBSERVATION from the text, That

the power which corruption acquires to
pervert the original principles of men, is
frequently owing to a change of their cir-
cumftances and condition in the world.
How different was Hazael the mefienger
of Benhadad, from Hazael the king; he
who started at the mention of cruelty, from
him who waded in blood! Of this fad
and surprising revolution, the Prophet em-
phatically assigns the cause in there few
words; The Lord hath jhewved me that thou
/halt be king over Syria. That crown, that
fatal crown, which is to be set upon thy
head, dhall shed a malignant influence over
thy nature; and ihall produce that change
in thy character which now thou canIt
not believe.-Whofe experience of the
world is so narrow, as not to furnish him
with initances similar to this, in much
humbler conditions of life ? So great is

the

S E R M. the influence of a new situation of external
, _y · fortune; such a different- turn it gives to

our temper and affections, to our views
and desires, that no man can foretell what
hischaracterwould prove, should Providence
either raise or depress his circumfiances in-
a remarkable degree, or throw him into
some sphere of ation widely different from
that to which he has been accustomed in
former life. -

The feeds of various qualities, good and

bad, lie in all our hearts. But until pro-
per occasions ripen, and bring them for-
ward, they lie there inactive and dead.
They are covered up and concealed within
the recesses of our nature: or, if they spring
up at ill, it is under such an appearance as
is frequently mift,iken, even by ourfelvcs.
Pride, for instance, in certain situations,
has no opportunity of displaying itself, but
as magnanimity, or sense of honour. Ava-
rice appears as necessary and laudable oeco-
nomy. What in one flation of life would
discover itself to be cowardice and baseness
of mind, passes in another for prudent cir-

cumfpeaion.

cumrpeaion. What in the fulness of power s E R M.
would prove to be cruelty and oppression,
is reputed, in a subordinate rank, no more
than the exercise of proper discipline. For
a while, the man is known neither by the
world, nor by himself, to be what he truly
is. But bring him into a new situation of
life, which accords with his predominant
disposition; which strikes on certain latent
qualities of his foul, and awakens them into
adion; and, as the leaves of a flower gra-
dually unfold to the fun, so small all his true
charaaer open full to view.

This may, in one light, be accounted

not so much an alteration of characer pro-
duced by a change of circumstances, as a
discovery brought forth of the real characer,
which formerly lay concealed. Yet, at the
fame time, it is true that the man himself
undergoes a change. For opportunity being
given for certain dispositions, which had
been dormant, to exert themselves without
restraint, they of courle gather tfrength.
By means of the afeendency which they
gain, other parts of the temper are borne

down;

S E R M. down; and thus an alteration is made in

XII.
A the whole ftruCure and fyfcem of the foul.

He is a truly wife and good man who,
through divine assistance, remains fuperi-
our to this influence of fortune on his cha-
raaer; who having once imbibed worthy
Ientiments, and established proper principles
of aCion, continues constant to these,
whatever his circumstances be; maintains,
throughout all the changes of his life, one
uniform and iupported tenour of conduSt;
and what he abhorred as evil and wicked in
the beginning of his days, continues to ab-
hor to the end. But how rare is it to meet
with this honourable consistency among
men, while they are pafling through the
.different stations and periods of life ! When
they are setting out in the world, before
their minds have been greatly mnifled or
debated, they glow with generous emotions.
and look with contempt on what is fordid
and guilty. But advancing farther in life.
and inured by degrees to the crooked ways
of-men;. pressing through the crowd, and
the bustle of the world; obliged to contend

:'.... . . - -l-w it}

With this man's craft, and that man's scorn; S E R M.
accuftomedj sometimes, to conceal their
fnltimentisand often to stifle 'their feelings,
they became at last hardened in heart, and
familiar with corruption. Wh ro would not
drop a tear over this fad, but frequent fall of
human probity and honour! Who is not
humbled, when he beholds the refined fen-
timents and high principles en which we
are to ready to value ourselves, brought to
such a shameful issue; and man, with all
his boasted attainments of reason, dilcover-
ed so often to be the creature of his exter-
nal fortune, moulded and formed by the
incidents of his life !

TIE instance of Hazael's degeneracy

leads us to refle&t, in particular, on the dan-
gers which arise from stations of power and
greatness; .epecially, when the elevation of
men to these has been rapid and sudden.
Few have the strength of mind which is re>
quifite for bearing such a change with tem-
perance, and felf-command. The refpec2
which is paid to the great, and the scope

VOL. II. A a which

S E R M. which their condition affords for the indul-

xII.
L-V-- gence of pleasure, are perilous circumstances

to virtue. When men live among their
equals, and are accustomed to encounter the
hardships of life, they are of course remind-
ed of their mutual dependence on each
other, and of the dependence of all upon
God. But when they are highly exalted
above their fellows, they meet with few
objects to awaken serious reflection, but
with many to feed and inflame their pas-
sions. They are apt to separate their in-
terest from that of all around them; to
wrap themselves up in theirvain grandeur;
and in the lap of indolence and selfish plea-
sure, to acquire a cold indifference to the
concerns even of those whom they call their
friends. The fancied independence into which
they are lifted up, is adverse to sentiments
of piety, as well as of humanity, in their
heart. 7Taking the timbrel and the harp, and
rejoicing at the found of the organ, theyJfay
unto God, Depart from us, for we deJire not
the knowlzedge of thy ways. What is the
Almighty that we Jhould serve him ? or what

profit

prost Jhould we have, if tee fray unlo S E R M.
him ? .,.

But we are not to imagine, that elevated

stations in the world furnish the only formi-
dable trials to Which our virtue is expoied.
It will be found, that we are liable to no
fewer nor less dangerous temptations, from
the opposite extreme of poverty and depref-
lion. When men who have known better
days are thrown down into abject situations
of fortune, their spirits are broken and their
tempers foured. Envy rankles in their
breast at such as are more successful. The
providence of Heaveii is accused in secret
murmurs; and the sense of inifery is ready
to push them into atrocious crimes, in order
to better their state. Among the inferiour
classes of mankind, craft and diflionefty are
too often found to prevail. Low and pe-
nurious circumstances depress the human
powers. They deprive men of the proper
means of knowledge and improvement; and
where ignorance is gross, it is always in
hazard of engendering profligacy.

A a 2 Hence

S E R M. Hence it has been, generally, the opi-
- -. nion of wife men in all ages, that there is

a certain middle condition of life, equally
remote from either of those extremes of
fortune, which, though it want not also its
own dangers,. yet is, on the whole,. the
state most favourable both to virtue and to
happiness. For there, luxury and pride on
the one hand, have not opportunity to ener-
vate or intoxicate tile mind, nor want and
dependence on the other,. to fink and de-
base it; there, all the native affections of
the foul have the freest and fairest exercise,
the equality of men is felt, friendships are
formed,- and improvements of every fort are
pursued with mofl success; there,, men are
prompted to industry without being over-
come by toil, and their powers called forth
into exertion, without being either super-
feded by too much abundance, or baffled'
by infoiperable difficulties ; there,, a mixture
of comforts and of wants, at once awakens
their gratitude to God', and reminds them
-of their dependence on his aid; and' there-
fore, in this state, men seem to enjoy life to

It~~~r namoft

rnoft advantage, and to be least exposed to s E R M.
the snares of vice. Such a condition is re- ,
corded, in the book of Proverbs, to have
been the wifi and choice of one who was
eminent for wisdom. Remove far from ne
vanity al,?d iL's. Give me neither poverty nor
riches. Feed me with food convenient for
mze. Lc/t I be fiull and deny thee, and fay,
iWho is the Lord? or left I be poor and fJeal,
and take the name of ny God in vain I.

FROM the whole xiew which we have

now taken of the fubjeet, we may, in the
first place, learn the reasons for which a
variety of conditions and ranks was efta-
blifhed by Providence among mankind.
This life is obviously intended to be a state
of probation and trial. No trial of charac-
ters is requisite with refped to God, who
fees what is in every heart, and perfealy
knows what part each man would aQ, in all
the possible Iituations of fortune. But on
account of men themselves, and of the

*Prov. xxx. 8, 9.

A a 3 world

S E R M. world around them, it was necessary that

XII.
,-.-' trial should take place, and a discrimination

of characers be made; in order that true
virtue might be separated from false appear-
ances of it, and the justice of Heaven be
displayed in its final retributions; in order
that the failings of men might be so dif-
covered to themselves, as to afford them
proper infirudtion, and promote their amend-
ment; and in order that their characers
might be shown to the world in every
point of view, which could furnish either
examples for imitation, or admonitions of
danger. The accomplishment of there im-
portant purposes required, that human life
should not always proceed in one tenour;
but that it should both be chequered with
many revolutions, and diversified by a va-
riety of employments and ranks; in paif-
ing through which, the touchitone might
be applied to the characers of men, and
their hidden virtues or vices explored.
Hazael might have appeared in history with
a degree of reputation to which he was not
entitled, had he continued to at in a sub-

ordinate

olrdinate station. At bottom, he was false s EX M.
and unsound. When raiied higher in life, t-.
the corruption of his heart discovered itself;
and he is now held forth with deserved in-
famy, as a warning to succeeding ages.

IN the second place we learn, from what

has been said, the importance of attending
with the utmost care to the choice which we
make of our employment and condition in
life. It has been shown, that our external
situation frequently operates powerfully on
our moral character; and by consequence
that it is ftriQly connected, not only with
our temporal welfare, but with our ever-
lassing happiness or misery. He who might
have passed unblamed, and upright, through
certain walks of life, by unhappily chufing
a road where he meets with temptations too
strong for his virtue, precipitates himself
into shame here, and into endless ruin here-
after. Yet how often is the determination
of this most important article left to the
chance of accidental connections, or sub-
mitted to the option of youthful fancy and

A a 4 humour ?

S E RM humour? When it is made the fubje& of

_-y-- serious deliberation, how seldom have they,

on whom the decision of it depends, any
further view than so to dispose of one who
is coming out into life, as that he may the
soonest become rich, or, as it is exprefled,
make his way to most advantage in the
world ? Are there no other objecs than
this to be attended to, in fixing the plan of
life? Are there no more sacred and im-
portant interefis which deserve to be con-
fulted ?-You would not willingly place
one for whose welfare you was interested, in
a situation for which you were convinced
that his abilities were unequal. These,
therefore, you examine with care; and on
them you reft the ground of your decision.
Be persuaded that not abilities merely, but
the turn of the temper and the heart, require
to be examined with equal attention,, in
forming the plan of future .establishment.
Every one has some peculiar weakness,
some predominant passion, which exposes
him to temptations of one kind more than
of another. Early this may be difqernnl
... ... . A.tP

to nfoot; and from its firit risings its fu- EXR M.
ture growth may be inferred. Anticipate -
its progress. Conlider how it is likely to
be affeced, by succeeding occurrences in
life. If you bring one whom yGu are rear-
ing up into a situation, where all the fur-
rounding circumrftances shall cherish and
mature this fatal principle in his nature,
you become, in a great measure, answerable
for the coniequences that follow, In vain
you trust to his abilities and powers. Vice
and corruption, when they have tainted the
heart, are sufficient to overset the greatest
abilities. Nay, too frequently they turn
them against the poffeflor; and render
them the instruments of his more speedy
ruin.

IN the third place, we learn fi.om the

history which has been illufirated, never to
judge of true happiness, merely from the
degree of men's advancement in the world.
Always betrayed by appearances, the mul-
titude are caught by nothing so much as by
the show and pomp of life. They think

every

S E R M. every one blest, who is raited far above others

XII.
v[-_, in rank. From their earliest years they are

taught to fix their views upon worldly ele-
vation, as the ultimate object of their aims;
and of all the Iburces of error in conduct,
this is the molt general.-Hazael on the
throne of Syria would, doubtless, be more
envied, and esteemed by the multitude a
far happier man than, when yet a fubje&,
he was employed by Benhadad to carry his
mefrage to Elilha. Yet, 0 Hazael! how
much better had it been for thee never to
have known the name or honour of a king,
than to have purchased it at the expence of
so much guilt; forfeiting thy firfl and belt
character; rufling into crimes which were
once thine abhorrence; and becoming a
traitor to the native sentiments and dictates
of thy heart! How fatal to thy repose
proved that coveted purple, which was
drenched by thee in so much innocent blood!
How much more cheerful were thy days,
and how much calmer thy nights, in the
former periods of thy life, than, when
placed on a throne, thy ears were invaded

by

by day with the cries of the miserable whom s E R M.

XII.

thou hadst ruined; and thy slumbers broken __
by night with the shocking remembrance of
thy cruelties and crimes !- Never let us
judge by the outside of things; nor con-
clude a man to be happy, solely because he
is encompassed with wealth or grandeur.
Much misery often lurks where it is little
fufpeaed by the world. The material en-
quiries refpeding felicity are, not what a
man's external condition is, but with what
disposition of mind he bears it; whether he
be corrupted or improved by it; whether
he conducts himself so as to be acceptable
to God, and approved of by good men.
For there are the circumstances which make
the real and important diffintions among
the conditions of men. The effects of these
are to last for ever, when all worldly dif-
tintions shall be forgotten.

IN the fourth place, from all that has

been said, we flould learn never to be im-
moderately anxious about our external situ-
ation, but to submit our lot with cheerful-
ness to the disposal of Heaven. To make

the

S E R M. the .best and most prudent arrangements

_ which we can, refpeding our condition in

life, is. matter of high duty. But let us
remember, that all the plans which we form
are precarious and uncertain. After the
utmost precautions taken by human wis-
dom, no man can foresee the hidden dan-
gers which may await him in that path of
life on which he has pitched. Providence
chutes for us much more wifely than we
can chufe for ourselves; and, from circum-
tlances that appeared at first most unpro-
mifing and adverse, often brings forth in
the issue both temporal and spiritual felicity.
W4ho knowetb what is good for man in this
Itfe, all the days of his vain life, which he
Jfendeth as a Jhadowe ? When we confider
the darkness of our present slate, the im-
becility of human nature, and the doubtful
and ambiguous value of all that we call
prosperity, the exhortation of the Pfalmrift
comes home with great force on every re-
flecting mind, Commit thy way unto the
Lord *. Form thy measures with prudence;

,.,,.- :* Psalm xxxvii. 5-

bur

but divest thyself of anxiety about the issue. s E RM.
Instead of seeking to order thine own lot, v--,
acquiesce in the appointment of Heaven,
and follow without helitation the call of
Providence, and of duty. In whatever situ-
ation of life God shall place thee, look up
devoutly to Him for grace and assistance;
and study to act the part assigned thee with
a faithful and upright heart. Thus shalt
thou have peace within thyself, while thy
course is going on; and when it draws to-
wards a close, with fatisfadion thou shalt
review thy conduCt. For, after all the toils
and labours of life, and all the vain struggles
which we maintain for. pre-eminence a'nd
diftinAion, we fiall find at the conclusion
of the whole scene, that to fear God and
keep his commandmeints is the whole of man.

S£ :R-~

# SERMON XIII. On the BENEFITS to be derived from the HOUSE of MOURNING. ECCLESIASTES vii. 2, 3, 4. It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of feasting; for that is the end ...

[ 366 ]

SERMON XIII.
On the BENEFITS to be derived from the

HOUSE of MOURNING;

ECCLESIASTES vii. , 3, 4.
It is better to go to the hoife of mourning,

than to go to the house of fe/ating ; for that
is the end of all men, and the living will
lay it to his heart. Sorrow is better than
laughter; for by the sadness of the coun-
tenance the heart is made better. The
heart of the wife is in the house of mourn-
ing; but the heart offools is in the house
of mirth.
SER M. Mt ANY of the maxims contained in

*Xl XV. I this book of Ecclesiastes will appear

strange sayings to the men of the world.
But when they reflec on the character of

him

him who delivers them, they cannot but s E R M.
admit that his tenets defirve a serious and '-
attentive examination. For they are not
the dotrines of a pedant, who, from an
obscure retirement, declaims against plea-
fures which he never knew. They are not
the invectives of a disappointed man, who
takes revenge upon the world, by satirizing
those enjoyments, which he lbught in vain to
obtain. They are the conclusions of a great
and prosperous prince, who had once given
full scope to his desires; who was thoroughly
acquainted with life in its most flattering
scenes; and who now, reviewing all that
he had enjoyed, delivers to us the result of
long experience, and tried wisdom. None
of his principles seem, at first view, more
dubious and exceptionable than those which
the text presents. To aftert that sorrow is
preferable to mirth, and the hoife of mourn-
ing to the holfe of fecialing; to advise men
to chufe mortification and sadness when it
is in their power to indulge in joy, may
appear harsh and unreasonable dotrines.
They may, perhaps, be accounted enemies

to

SERM. to the innocent enjoymentof life who give
XIII. -a-,,-_, countenance -to -- 'fe severe a- fyftenm, : and

thereby increase .the gloom' which already
fits sufficiently h-eavy on -the condition of
man. But let -this. ceniMure;:be suspended;
until we -examine with care intio the fpilrit
and- meaning of the fentimednts -here de-
livered. ' . ' :' .
:a d: -

it is evident that fl'e-wife nian does not

prefer sorrow., upon, its own 'account;., to
mirth ; or represent sadness as a state moire
eligible than joy.;: He-'confiders it in the
light of discipline only. .-He views it with
reference to- an end.. -He compares it with
certain improvements which'he.fuppofes it
to' produce;' when the heart is :made better
by', the sadness of-the cotuntenance,- and the
living to ay to- heart-that is the end of all
men. 'Now, if great and lasting benefits
are found to result from' occasional- adnefs,
these, sure, may .be capable of giving it the
preference to some fleeting sensations of joy.
The means which -he recommends in order
to our obtaining.thofe benefits are to be ex-
plained :aceording to the principles of found

reason;

reason; and to be understood with those SEIRM.

XIII.

limitations which the eastern style, in de- ,-----
livering moral precepts, frequently requires.
He bids us go to the house of mourning ; but
he does not command us to dwell there.
When he: prefers sorrow to laughter, he is
not to be understood as prohibiting all mirth;
as requiring us to wear a perpetual cloud on
our brow$ and to sequestrate ourselves from
every cheerful entertainment of obcial life.
Such an interpretation would be inconsistent
with many other exhortations in his own
writings, which recommend temperate and
innocent joy. It would not suit with the
proper discharge of the duties which be-
long to us as members of society; and
would be most opposite to the goodness and
benignity of our Creator. The true scope
of his doCtrine in this passage is, that there
is a certain temper and state of heart, which
is of far greater consequence to real happi-
ness, than the habitual indulgence of giddy
and thoughtless mirth; that for the attain-
ment and cultivation of this temper, fre-
quent returns of grave reflecion are necef-

VOL. II. B b fxrv;

S E R M. fary ; that, upon this account, it is profit-

- able to give admiflion to thole views of hu-

man distress which tend to awaken iuch
reflection in the mind ; and that thus, from
the vicifiitudes of sorrow, which we either
experience in our own lot, or sympathize
wvith in the lot of others, much wisdom and
improvement may be derived. These are
the sentiments which I purpose at present
to justify and recommend, as most suitable
to the character of men and of Christians;
and not, in the least inconsistent with plea-
sure, rightly understood.

Amorng the variety of dispositions whiclh

are to be found in the world, some indeed
require less of this difciline than others.
'Ihere are perfols whose tender and deli-
cate -enhibiityT, either derived from nature,
or brought on by repeated afflicions, ren-
ders them too deeply fulceptible of every
mournfuil impression; wlofe spirits stand
ilmore in n-eed. of being. supported and cheer-
ed,- th'an of being- iaddened by the dark
views of. human life. In such cafes .we .are
colmmanmded to (lift .up the hands which hang

docwn,

doWn, and to confrrm tfhe feeble knecs , But s E R M.

· ' XIII.

this is far from being the common di.fpofi-
tion of men. Their minds are in general
inclined to levity, much more than to
thoughtful melancholy; and their hearts
more apt to be contracted and hardened,.
than to relent with too much facility. I
shall therefore endeavour to shew them, what
bad inclinations their compliance with So-
lomon's advice would corre&c; what good
dispositions with respect to God, their neigh-
bours, and thermfelves, it would improve;
and how, upon the whole, his docrine is
verified, that by the fzidnefs of the counztenance
the heart is made beter-.

I BEGIN by observing, that the temper

recommended in the text suits the pre:ent
constitution of things in this world. Hlad
man been defined for a course of undif-
turbed enjoyment, perpetual gaiety would
then have corresponded to his state; and
pensive thought have been an, unnatural
intrusion. But in a fate where all is che-

* Isaiah xxxv. 3. Hleb. xii. ,2.

B b 2 quered

SE R M. quered and mixed, where there is 'no pro-n
A_
-. j fperity without a reverse, and no joy with-

out its attending griefs; where from the
house of feasting all must, at one time or
other, pass into the house of mourniig, it
were equally unnatural if no admission 'was
given to grave refleXioin. The mind of
man must be attempered to his condition.
Providence, whose wisdom is; conspicuous
in all its works, has adjusted with exact
proportion the inward powers to the out-
ward state of every rational being. It has
for this purpose implanted the ferioius and
sympathetic feelings in our nature, that they
might correspond with the -vicissitudes of
sorrow in our lot. He who endeavours to
repel their influence, or to Rfifle them in
unseasonable mirth, as' a violent and uin-'
natural part. He firives vwith vain effort
against the current of things; 'coitradits
the intentions of his Maker, and counter-
ads the original impulses of his own heart.

It is proper also to observe, that as the

sadness of the countenance has, in our present
situation, a proper and natural place; so it

is

is requisite to the true enjoyment of plea- SERM.
sure. Worldly and feniual men often re- A--
mark not, till it be too late, that, by the
studied efforts of constant repetition, all their
pleasures fail. They draw them off so close
to the dregs, that they become insipid and
nauseous. Hence even in laughter their
heart isborrowful, and the end of their mirth
is heaviness t. It is only the interpofal of
serious and thoughtful hours, that can give
any lively sensation to the returns of joy.

ifpeak not of those thoughtful hours, too
well known to finners, which proceed from
guilty remorse; and which, instead of pre-
paring for future pleasure, damp and sicken
the moment of enjoyment; but of those
which take rife from the mind retreating
into itself, and opening to the sentiments of
religion and humanity. Such hours of
virtuous sadness brighten the gleams of fuc-
ceeding joy. They give to the temperate·
enjoyments of the pious and humane a re-
fined and delicate relish, to which the hard-
ened and insensible are entire firangerst

t Prov. xiv. 13.

Bb 3 For

s E Pr.M. For i will cc found, that in proportion as
--y- t-the tender affec.ions of the foul are kept

awake, how muchl soever they may lome-
times distress the heart, they preserve it open
likewise to the most a?,-ceable fcnfatiosns.
He who never knew the sorrows of fricnd-
tilip, niever also knew its joys. Hie whofi
heart cannot relent in the house of mourn-
ing, will, in the most social hour of the
houfc of tfeling, partake of no more than
:the lowcft part of animal picaf ure.-
-Having p)rcmitc(l thclc obfervaations, I pro-
ced to point out the dire efi cfles of a
pirdper attention to the distresses of life upon
our moral and religious character.

IN the first place, the house of mourn-

ing is calculated to give a proper check to
our natural thoughtltlefilhCe and levity. The
indolence of mankind, and their love of
pleasure, ifpread through all charaders and
ranks orme degree of aversion to what
iS grave and serious. They grasp at any
ob j2c, either of bufineis or amusement,

V ic ma-es tlio pr.eiCet moment pals

imoothly

smoothly away; vwhich carries their thougihts S R pi' .r
abroad, and ilaves them from the trouble of ·
rcflectine on themlillves. Vith too many,
this paliCs into a habit of conlilant iiiha-
tion. If their fortune and rank allowv them
to indulge their inclinations, thyc dev-ote
thcimfelvcs to the purfi'uit of amnu ieur'e
ihrough all its differcnt forims. I'llu iifu
nr:lcin-geclent of its icicefilve i CeIcs, and the
preparatorv fti.udy for fli ning in aclh, art
the only cxertion; in wvhich their under-
ilua'ni(,in i; clnployed. Such a mode of li
may keep alive, for a v.'hilc, a tfivolous vi-
va ci':.y. It nav inmprove me in il iome of
thole exteriour accomplithinents, which
ii.arkle ini the cyes of the giddy and (-he
vain ; but it inuft fink them in the eriecer
of all the Wiife. It renders them itrangers
to themnielvcs; arnd uleletls, if not Fprni-
cious, to the world. They lofi eCvery manly
principle. Their minds become relaxed
and effeminate. All that is great or rc--
ipetlable in the human characer is buried
under a mass of trifles and follies.

B b 4 If

S E R M. If some measures ought to be taken for
-L-, rescuing the mind from this disgraceful le-

vity; if some principles must be acquired
which may give more dignity and fteadi-
ness to conduc, where; I pray you,.. are
these to be looked for ? Not surely in.the
house of feasting, where every objea flat-r
ters the seifes, and strengthens the feduc-
tiors to which we are already prone; where
the spirit of dissipation circulates from heart
to heart; and the children of folly mutually
admire, and are admired. It is in the fober
and serious house of mourning that the tide
of vanity is made to turn, and a new di-
rection given to the current of thought.
When fome.affeting incident presents a
strong discovery of the deceitfulness of all
worldly joy, and rouses our sensibility to
human woe; when we behold those with
whom we had lately mingled in the house
of feasting, funk by some of the sudden
vicissitudes of life into the vale of misery;
or when, in fad silence, we sand by the
friend whom we had loved as our own foul,
stretched on the bed of death; then is the

season

season when the world begins to appear in a sE R M.

XIII.

new light., when the heart opens to virtu- v_
ous sentiments, and is led into that train of
refleXion which ought to dire& life. He
who before knew not. what it was to com-
mune with his heart on any serious subje6t,
now puts the.queftion to hinfelf, for what
purpose he was sent forth into this mortal,
transitory state.; what his fate is likely to
be when ,it concludes; and what judgment
he ought to form of those pleasures which
amuse for a little, but which, lie now fees,
cannot save the heart from anguish in the
evil day. Touched by the hand of thought-
ful melancholy, that airy edifice of blifi
which fancy had raised up for him, vanishes
away. He beholds in the place of it, the
lonely and barren desert, in which, fur-,
rounded with many a diiatgreeable, object,
he is.left musing upon himsel-f. The time
which he has mif-fpent,: and. the faculties
which he has mi.femployed,i his foolish le-
*ity and his criminal pursuits,- all rife in
painfull prpfpe :-before him. :_That un-
known state ps exiftence.,int: which; race

'.:,,,-...~. ~after

S ER MI after race, the children of men pass, firikes

XIII.

h his mind with solemn awe.-- s there no
cotufe by which he can retrieve his palt er-
rours ? Is there no luperiour power to
which he can look up for aid ? Is there no
plan of conduc which, if it exempt him
not f-om sorrow, can at leait procure him
Conifblation amidst the diftrefsfui exigencies
of life ?-- uch meditations as thcfe, fug-
gefiedl by the house of mourning, fre-
quently produce a change on the whole
characcer. Tehey revive thlioe sparks of
goodness whLich were nigh being (Luite ex-
tinguihed in the difiipatcd mind; and give
Tife to principles of conduct more rational
in thenmfeves, and more suitable to the hu-
man Afate.

Ix the second place, i:nprefIions of this

nature not only produce moral ferioufnes,,
but awaken 'entinents cf piety, and bring
men into the fGn iuaryr of religion. One
night, indeed, imagine that the bleisngs
of a protperous condition would prove the
moi') natural incitements to devotion; and

that

that when. fienm were happy in themfclves, s F, R M.

XIll.

and fliw nothl-ig but happines aroulnd them,
they could not fail gratefully to acknow-
ledge that God who givecf then all thizhgj
richl, to etjoy. Yet flch is their corruption,
that they are never more ready to lor-get
their benefactor, than when loaded with his
benefits. The giver is concealed from their
careless and inattentive view, by the cloud
of his own, gifts. When their life cohti-
nues t. flow in one smooth current, un-
iltlcd by any griefs; when they neither
receive in their own circumstances, nor al-
1,ow tlhelifelves to receive from. the circum-
stances of others, any admonitions of hu-
man instability, they- hot only become
regardless of Providence, buthtre in hazard
of contemning it. Glorying in theitrftrength,
and lifted, up by the pride of life into sup-
posed independence, that impious senti-
ment, if not uttered by the mouth, yet too
often lutiks in the hearts of many, during
their flourishing periods, What is the Al-
mi'ghty that we JlJouzldfirve him, and what
profit Jhould we have if we pray lnto hit ?

4 If

S E RM. If such be- the- tendency of the house .of
A_ , feasting, how necessary is it that, by some

change in their situation, men should be
obliged to enter into the house of mourn-
ing, in order to recover a proper sense of
their dependent state ? It is.:there, when
forsaken by the. gaieties of. the world, and
left alone with God, that- we. are made to
perceive how awful his government is ; how
easily human greatness bends-. before him;
and how quickly all our designs and mea-
fures, at his interpofal, vaniih into no-
thing. There, when the countenance is
fad, and the affedions are softened by grief;i
when we fit apart, involved in serious
thought, looking, down as from some emi-
nence on thofe-dark clouds that hang over
the life of man, the arrogance of prosperity
is humbled, and the heart melts under the
impreflions of religion. Formerly we were-
taught, but now- we fee, we feel, how
much we- tand in need of'an Almighty
protetor, amidif the changes of this vain
world. Our foul cleaves to him who de-
spifes. not, nor abhors the..affit7ion of the

aqided.

efflia7ed. Prayer flows forth of its own ac- S E R M.
cord from the relenting heart, that he may v_-
be our God, and the God of our friends in
distress; that he may never forsake us while
we are sojourning in this land of pilgrim-
age; may strengthen us under its cala-
mities, and bring us hereafter to those ha-
bitations of reft, where we, and they whom
we love, may be delivered from the trials
which all are now doomed to endure. The
discoveries of his mercy which he has made
in the gospel of Christ, are viewed with
joy, as so many rays of light sent down
from above to dispel, in some degree, the
surrounding gloom. A mediator and in-
terceffor with the Sovereign of the Uni-
verse, appear comfortable names; and the
refurredtion of the just becomes the power-
ful cordial of grief. In such moments as
there, which we may justly call. happy mo-
ments, the foul participates of all the plea-
fures of devotion. It feels the power- of
religion to support and relieve.- It is soft-
ened, without being brokein. It is fulls
and it pours itself forth; pours itself: forth,

6 if

S E R M. if we may be allowed to use the expreflnon,

XIII.
_-^, intio the bolbm of its merciful Creator.

IN the third place, ifch serious senti-

ments produce the happielt effea upon our
disposition towards our fellow-creatures, as
well as towards God. It is a common and
juit observation, that they who have lived
always in affluence and eafc, firangers to
the iifer-ies of life, are liable to contract
hardncfs of heart with refpeEt to all the
concerns of others. Wrapped up in them-
Ielvcs, and their ownv pleaiures, they be-
hold with indifference the moif affecting
scenes of ditrefs. Habituated to indulge
all their desires without controul, they be-
come impatient of the least provocation or
offence; and are ready to trample on their
inferiours, as if they were creatures of a
different species from themifeves. Is this
an amiable temper, or such as becomes a
man ? When appearing in otllers, do we
not view it with much displeasure? When
imputed to curfelves, can wve avoid account-
ing it a severe reproach ?

By

By the experience of difirefs, this arro- S ERM

gant ini;nfibility cf temper i iminof effec- --
tually correeed; as the remnembrance of
our own sufferings naturally prompts us to
feel for others when they ulfier. But if
Providcuce Ilas tbeen ib kind as not to i'lb-
jeC us to much of this discipline in our ownl
lot, let us draw improvermn nt from the
harder lot of others. Let us fbmetlmes r-ep
aside from the smooth and flowery paths
in which w e are peritted to walk, in.
ordcr to view the toiliblne march of our
fellows through the thorny dlfert. By yo-
luntarily going into the houte of mourning;
by yielding to the sentiments which it ex-
cites, and mingling our tears with those of
the afsited, we shall acquire that humane
sensibility, which is one of the highest orna-
ments of the nature of man. Perceiving
how much the common diftrcfes of life
place us all on a level, and render the high
and the low, the rich and the poor, ccm-
panions in misfortune and mortality, we
shall learn to set no man at nought, and,
least of any, our affl'.ed brothler. Preju-

dices

S E R M. dices will be extinguished, and benevo-

*, lence opened and enlarged, when looking

around on the multitude of men, we con-
iider them as a band of fellow-travellers
in the valley of woe, where it ought to be
the office of every one to alleviate, as much
as possible, the common burden.-While
the vain and the licentious are revelling in
the midst of extravagance and riot, how
little do they think of those scenes of fore
distress which are going on at that moment
throughout the world; multitudes ftrug-
gling for a poor subsistence to support the
wife and the children whom they love, and
who look up to them with eager eyes for
that bread which they can hardly procure;
multitudes groaning under sickness in de-
solate cottages, untended and unmourned;
many, apparently in a better situation of
life, pining away in secret with concealed
griefs; families weeping over the beloved
friends whom they have loft, or, in all the
bitterness of anguish,. bidding those who
are just expiring the last adieu !

.May

May we not appeal to the heart of every. s E R M.

XIII.

good man, nay almost to the heart of every -
man who has not divested himself of his
natural feelings, whether the admission of
such views of human life might not, some-
times at least, furnish a more worthy employ-
ment to the mind, than that mirth of fool,
which Solomon compares, to the crackling
of thorins under a pot t; the transient burst
of unmeaning joy; the empty explosion
of giddiness and levity? Those sallies of
jollity in the house of feasting are often
forced from a troubled mind; like flashes
from the black cloud, which, after a mo-
mentary effulgence, are succeeded by thicker
darkness. Whereas compassionate assec-
tions, even at the time when they draw
tears from our eyes for human misery,
convey iatisfaQion to the heart. The gra-
cious appointment of Heaven has ordained
that sympathetic pains should always be
accompanied with a certain degree of plea-
sure; on purpose that we might be more

*Eccles. vii. 6.
VOL. II. C c interested

s E R M. interested in the cafe of the distressed, and
XIII. v-.-- that by this mysterious bond, man might

be linked closer to man. The inward fa-
tisfadion which belongs to the compaffi-
onate affeaions is, at the fame time, height-
ened by the approbation which they receive
from our reason; and by the consciousness
which they afford us of feeling what men
and Christians ought to feel.

IN the fourth place, the disposition re-

commended in the text, not only improves
us in piety and humanity, but likewise
assists us in felf-government, and the due
moderation of our desires. The house of
mourning is the school of temperance and
sobriety. Every wife man will find it for
his interest to enter into it sometimes of his
own accord, left otherwise he be compelled
to take up his dwelling there. Seasonable in-
terruptions of our pleasures are necessary to
their prolongation. For, continued scenes
of luxury arid indulgence haften to a me-
lancholy issue. T he house of feafling too
often becomes an avenue to the house of

-c -. 5. - mourning.

mourning. Short, to the licentious, is the s ERx'M,
interval between them; and speedy the --
transition fron the one to the other.

But supposing that, by prudent manage-

ment, the men of pleasure could avoid the
pernicious effects which intemperance and
difTolutenefs are likely to produce on their
health, or their fortune, can they also pre-
vent those disorders which such habits will
introduce into their minds ? Can they
escape that wrath of the Almighty, which
will infallibly pursue them for their fins
both here and hereafter ? For whence, so
much as from the unchecked pursuit of
pleasure, do all those crimes arise which
slain the charaters of men with the deepest
guilt, and expose them to the severest judg-
ments of Heaven ? Whence, then, is the
corrective of those mischiefs to be fought,
but from such a discipline as shall moderate
that intemperate admiration of the world
which gave rife to the evil ? By repairing
sometimes to the house of mourning, you
would chasten the looseness of fancy, abate
the eagerness of passion, and afford scope to

., C c 2 reason

S ER M. reason for exerting her reif:raining powers.

XIII.

X You would behold this world stripped of

its false colours, and reduced to its proper
level. Many an important inftruotion you
would receive from the humiliation of the
proud, the mortification of the vain, and
the sufferings of the voluptuous, which you
would fee exemplified before you, in the
chambers of sorrow, of sickness, and of
death. You would then be taught to re-
joice as though you rejoiced not, and to weep
as though you weeped not; that is, neither
in joy, nor in grief, to run to excess ; but
to ffe this world so as not to ab'fe it; con-
templating the fyiJiot thereof as pajing
awa'y.

Moreover, you would there learn the

important lesson of suiting your mind, bc-
fore-hand, to what you had reason to ex-
pec from the world; a lesson too seldom
studied by mankind, and to the neglect of
which, much of their misery, and much of
their guilt, is to be charged. By turning
away their eyes from the dark fide of life;
by looking at the world only in one light,

and

and that a flattering one, they form1 their s F, R M.
measures on a false plan, and are ncceilla-
rily deceived and betrayed. I-Ience, the
vexation of succeeding diltaplpolntment and
blasted hope. Hence, their crimninal impa-
tience of life, and their bitter accuiltions of
God and man; when, in truth, they have
reason to accuse only their own folly.--
Thou who wouldst aQt like a wite hman, and
build thy house on the rock, and not on the
land, contemplate human life not only in
the sunshine, but in the shade. I;requent
the house of mourning, as well as the house
of mirth. Study the nature of that ftatc in
which thou art placed; and balance its joys
with its sorrows. Thou feert that the cup
which is held forth to the whole human
race, is mixed. Of its bitter ingredients,
expec that thou art to drink thy portion.
Thou feeft the storm hovering every where
in the clouds around thee. Be not surprised
if on thy head it shall break. Lower, there-
fore, thy fails. Dimnifs thy florid hopes;
and come forth prepared either to act or to
susser, according as Heaven shall decree.

Cc 3 Thus

S E R M. Thus flhalt thou be excited to take the pro,
XL-y- pereft measures for defence, by endeavour-

ing to secure an interest in His favour, who,
in the time of trouble, can hide thee in his
pavilion. Thy mind fliall adjust itself to
follow the order of his providence. Thou
shalt be enabled, with equanimity and flea-
diness, to hold thy course through life. Si-
nally,

IN the fifth place, by accufloming our-

felvcs to such fIrious views of life, our ex-
ceflive fondness for life itself will be mo-
derated, and our minds gradually formed
to wilh and to long for a better world. If
we know that our continuance here is to be
Short, and that we are intended by our
Makcr for a more lasting slate, and for em-
ployments of a nature altogether different
from those which now occupy the busy, or
amuse the vain, we must surely be con-
vinced, that it is of the highest consequence
to prepare ourselves for so important a
change. This view of our duty is fre-
quently held up to us in the sacred writings;

and

and hence religion becomes, though not a s E R M.

XIII.

inorofe, yet a grave and folermn principle, a,
calling off the attention of men from light
pursuits, to those which are of eternal mo-
ment. What is a man proftced if he jhall
gSain the whole world, and lose his ow;n JfIl;
if he shall lead a life of thoughtless mirth
on earth, and exclude himself from eternal
felicity in heaven ? Worldly affection, and
sensual pleasure, depress all our highcr powers.
They form an unnatural union between the
human foul and this earth, which was only
deligned for its temporary abode. They
attach it too frongly to obje&ts from which
it must shortly part. They alienate its de-
fires from God and heaven, and deject it
with flavifli and unmanly fears of death.
Whereas, by the discipline of religious fe-
rioufnefs, it is gradually loosened from the
fetters of sense. Affifled to discover the
vanity of this world, it rites above it; and
in the hours of fober thought, cultivates con-
neaion with those divine and immortal ob-
jeats, among which it is designed to dwell.

,! C c 4 ENOUGIH

ER M. ENOUGH has now been laid to convince
XIII.

any thinking.perfon of the justice, and rea-
fonablenefs, of the maxims in the text; and
to ihow, that, on various occasions, sorrow
may be better thanr lArmghter. Wouldst thou
acquire the habit of recollection, and fix the
principles of thy condut ; woulldft thou be
led up to thy Creator and Redeemer, and
be formed to sentiments of piety and devo-
tion; wouldst thou be acquainted with those
mild and tender affeaions which delight the
compaflionate and humane; wouldst thou
have the power of fenuial appetites tamed
and corrected, and thy foul raised above the
ignoble love of life, and fear of death ? Go,
my brother, go-not to scenes of pleasure
and riot, not to the house of feasting and
mirth-but to the silent house of mourn-
ing; and adventure to dwell for a while
among objects that will soften thy heart.
Contemplate the lifeless remains of what
once was fair and flouriflling. Bring home
to thylfelf the vicissitudes of life, Recal the
remembrance of the friend, the parent, or
the child, whom thou tenderly lovedft. Look

back

back on the days of former years; and think s E RM.

XIIL

on the companions of thy youth, who now
sleep in the dust. Let the vanity, the mu-
tability, and the sorrows of the human estate,
rife in full proipcEt before thee ; and though
thy countenance may be madef Jd, thy, heart
Jnall be made better. This facdnefs, though
for the present it dejebts, yet shall in the
end fortify thy spirit; inspiring thee with
such sentiments, and prompting such refb-
lutions, as shall enable thee to enjoy, with
more real advantage, the reft of life. l)if-
positions of this nature form one part of
the charaCter of those mourners whom our
Saviour hath pronounced ble'd; and of
those to whom it is promised, that sowing
in tears they yfall reap in joy -]-. A great
difference there is between being lerious
and melancholy; and a melancholy too
there is of that kind which deserves to be
sometimes indulged.

Religion hath, on the whole, provided

for every good man abundant materials of
consolation and relief. How dark soever

t Matth... 4. Psalm cxxvi. 5.

the
0

SE R M. the present face of nature may appear, it
t.-.J dispels the darkness, when it brings into

view the entire system of things, and ex-
tends our survey to the whole kingdom of
God. It represents what we now behold
as only a part, and a small part, of the ge-
neral order. It assures us, that though here,
for wife ends, misery and sorrow are per-
mitted to have place, these temporary evils
shall, in the end, advance the happiness of
all who love God, and are faithful to their
duty. It shows them this mixed and con-
fused scene vanishing by degrees away, and
preparing the introduction of that state, where
the house of mourning shall be shut up for
ever; where no tears are seen, and no
groans heard; where no hopes are fruf-
trated, and no virtuous connecions dif-
solved; but where, under the light of the
divine countenance, goodness shall flourish
in perpetual felicity. Thus, though reli-
gion may occasionally chasten our mirth
with sadness of countenance, yet under that
sadness it allows not the hearts of good men
to fink. It calls upon them to rejoice, be-

camt/

cafe the Lord reigneth who is their rock, and S E R M.
the nmoqb high God who is their Redeemer. -
Reason likewise joins her voice with that of
religion; forbidding us to make peevish and
unreasonable complaints of human life, or
injuriously to ascribe to it more evil than it
contains. Mixed as the present state is,
she pronounces, that generally, if not al-
ways, there is more happiness than misery,
more pleasure than pain, in the condition
of man.

SER-

# SERMON XIV. On the divine GOVERNMENT of the PASSIONS of MEN. PSALM lxxvi. 10. Surely, the wrath of man shall praise thee; the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain.

.[ 396 ]

S E RMO N XIV.
On the divine GOVERNMENT of the

PASSIONS of MEN.

PSALM lxxvi. Io.
Surely, the wrath of matn Jhall pra'ise thee;

the remainder of wrath J7halt thou rejirain.

S F R M. HIS Psalm appears to have been
xIv. ,__,_ composed on occasion of some re-

markable deliverance obtained by the Jewish
nation. It is generally understood to have
been written in the reign of Hezekiah, and
to refer to the formidable invasion of Judea
by Sennacherib; when the angel of the
Lord, in one night, discomfited the whole
Assyrian host, and smote them with sudden
deftruaion. To this interposition of the

divine

divine arm, thole expreflions in the context s E R M.
may naturally be applied ; T'heJz b;-ake he .
the arrows of the bow, the /rield, the fizord,
and the battle. 'hejiont-hearted airefpoiled;
they have Jlept their Jleep ; and none of the
men of might have found their hands. At
thy rebuke, 0 God of Jacob, both the chariot
and the horse are caji into a dead Jeep. In
the text, we have the wife and religious
reflecion of the Psalmist upon the violent
designs which had been carried on by the
enemies of his country, and upon the iffuc
to which Providence had brought them.
Surely, the wrath of zman? JJall praifi thee.
By the wrath of man, we are to understand
all that the impetuosity of human passions
can devise or execute; the projets of am-
bition and resentment, the rage of perfecu-
tion, the fury of war; the disorders which
violence produces in private life, and the
public commotions which it excites in the
world. All these shall p-rase God, not with
their intention and design, nor by their na-
tive tendency; but by those wife and good
purposes, which his providence makes them

accomplish;

sE R M. accomplish; from their poison extrating

-. ~*' health, and converting things which in

themselves are pernicious, into instruments
of his glory, and of public benefit: So that,
though the wrath of man iworketh not the
righteouftnef of God, it is nevertheless forced
and compelled -to minister to his praise.
The Psalmist adds, the remainder of wrath
Jhalt thou restrain; that is, God will allow
scope to the wrath of man as far as it an-
fwers his good purposes, and is subservient
to his praise; the reft of it {hall be curbed
and bound up. When it would attempt to
go beyond its prescribed limit, he fays to it,
as to the.waters of the ocean, HithertoJflalt
thou come, but no further ; and here Jhall thy
proud waves bejiayed.

All this ihall be fully verified and de-

clared by the last issue of things ' when we
fiall be able more clearly to trace the di-
vine administration through its several stepss
by feeing the consummation of the whole.
In fbme cafes, it may be reserved for this
period, ta unfold the mysterious wisdom
of Heaven. But in general, as much, of

the

the divine conduc is at present manifests SERM.
as gives just ground for the assertion in the _.
text. In the sequel of this discourse, I shall
endeavour to illustrate and confirm it. I
shall flhow in what manner the wrath of
man is made to praise the power, the wii-
dom, the justice, and the goodness of God.

I BEGIN with this observation, That in

order to accomplish the great purposes car-
ried on by the Government of the Universe,
it is necessary that the divine perfetions be
displayed before mankind, in a sensible and
striking marner. We are not to conceive
the Supreme Being as hereby seeking praise
to himself, from a principle of ostentation or
vain-glory. Independent and felf-fufficient,
he refts in the enjoyment of his own beati-
tude. His praise consists in the general
order and welfare of his creation. -This
end cannot be attained, unless mankind be
made -to feel the fubjetion under which
they are placed. They 'muft-be taught to
admire and adore their sovereign. They
i-lift be overawed by the view of a high

hand,

S ER M. hand, which can at pleasure controul their

XIV.
.,, actions, and render them subservient to

purposes which they neither foresaw nor
intended. Hence the propriety of God's
making the wrath of man to praise him.
We easily conceive in what manner the
heavens and the earth are said to praise
God, as they are Handing monuments of
that supreme perfection which is displayed
in their creation. The virtues of good
men obviously praise him, by exhibiting
his image, and refleEing back his glory.
But when even the vices and inordinate
passions of bad men are made to praise him,
in consequence of the useful purposes which
they are compelled to accomplish, this, in
particular manner, distinguishes and fig-
nalizes a divine hand; this opens a more
wonderful profpea of the administration of
Heaven, than if all its fubjeas had been
loyal and willingly obedient, and the course
of human affairs had proceeded in a quiet
and regular tenour.

~3~~· ·· I. THE

t. THE 'wrath of man redounds to the SERM.

'r *c r * T i * * T Xi V.

praise of divine power. It brings it forth ,
with full and awful lustre, to the view of
mankind. To reign with sovereign com-
mand amidst the moif turbulent and difor-
dered state of things, both in the natural
and moral world, is the peculiar glory of
omnipotence. Hence God is describcd in
Scripture asJfttihig on thej ood, ridiing on the
wings of the wind, dwelling in the darkncfs
and the tempeJf; that is, making the nmol:
violent powers in the universe minifier to
his will, giving them scope, or retraining
them, according as suits the purposes of his
dominion. As heJtillr, at his pleasure, the
raging of the fear, and the nose of their
waves, in like manner, heJiills the tumults
of the people. When the paflions of men
are most inflamed, and their designs just
ripe for bursting into execution, often, by
some unexpected interposition, he calls
upon the world to observe that there is one
higher than the higheRt on earth, who can
fruitrate their devices in a moment, and
command the earth to be Jill before him.

VOL. II. D d Proud

SERM. Proud fleets, destined to carry deftruAion
XIV. _-^ to neighbouring kingdoms, may cover the

ocean. He blows with his wind, and they
are scattered. Mighty armies may go forth
to the field in all the glory of human
strength; but the issues of battle are with
him. He fuipends on high the invisible
balance which weighs the fate of nations.
According as the scale inclines, he gives to
iome flight event the power of deciding the
contest. He clouds the sky with darkness,
or opens the windowvs of heaven to let
forth their flood. I-e ldjecOs the hearts of
the brave with fuidden tcrrour, and renders
the hands of the ltrong weak and unper-
torning, at the critical moment. A thou-
sand unseen ilinliiters stand ready to be the
inftrumcnts of his power, in hlumblisng the
pride, and checking the efforts of the. wrath
of man. Thus, in the inflance of haughty
Sennacherib, and that boasted tempest of
wratl which he threatened to pour upon
all the Jewish nation ; [I illl put nm hook,
lays the Almighty, in thy nof', and nzy bridle
in thy lips, aztd I will tzirn thee back hy' the

o8 way

wajy by ,w hich thou cameJf i In that night s IR M.

xIv.

the destroying angel smote the holt, and .
he dcparted with JfJame of face to his own
land. WTF-hen the heathen rage, and the peo-
ple imagine a vain thijg ; when the kings of
the earth fct thenfclves, and its rulers take
counfil together ; he that fitteth in the Hea-
vensjhall lanugh; the Lord Jhall hold them in
der-fion ~1-

II. TIHE wrathl f 7na.n is made to praise

the wisdom as well as the power of God.
Nothing displays more remarkably the ad-
mirable counsel of heaven, than its arrang-
ing the train of events in such a manner,
that the unruly passions of the wicked shall
contribute to overthrow their own designs.
History abounds with examples of their
being rendered the unconscious ministers of
Providence, to accomplish purposes direaly
opposite to those which they had in view.
Thus the cruelty of the sons of Jacob, in
purluing the cde]tru llion of tlheir brother

" z .Kings xi:<. 28. t Psalm ii. , ,

D d 2 Joseph,

SE RVM. Joseph, became the means of cffleing his

. - high advancement. Thus the wrath of

Pharaoh againll the ii'aelitcs, and his un-
just attempts to detain. tlhem in bolndage,
proved the occaion ofl brigingg them forth
fiom the land of slavery, with signal marks
of the favour of H:eaven. Thus the inhu-
man plan which -Haman had formed for
truning Mordecai, and extirpating the
vwhole Jcwith nation, paved the way for
Mordeca:i's highl promlotion, and. sori the
triumph of the Jews over nll thcir cine-
I ies.

After this manner the Amihity fi./areflh

It c.'ic',ke i th/ i.' 'coriks iJ' their a.7;;ii and
ereds his own counlcl u]pon tih ruin of
theirs. Thosi events which, v\iewed\ apart,
appear as spots in the divinc administration,
when contidered in cotnedtion with all
their contcquences, are often fiound to give
it additional lutllre. The beauty and mag-
nificence of the universe are much height-
cned, by its being an extentive and compli-
cated fyttei ; in which a variety of iprings
are made to play, and a multitude of dif-

fcrent

i;lcrnt imovemenlcts are, witjh lmoil admirable S F. R Mo

XIV.

art, regulated and kept in ordcer. iter-
fering; intcrefts, and jarring paflions, arc ill
luch manner bala(nced .aaini one another ;
stich lropcr clhecks arc placed on the vio-
lence of human pi-rilits; a;nd the l. 'rtith of
man is mlade l tO) hold its colriC, that Ihow
opploiitc (ccvcr thic veral motions 1'ccnm to
be, yet tihey concur and lmeet at la1t ill
ne diretion. While, among the mu1ti-
tidcs that dwell on the flce. of the earth,
1mlle are i-tllillt've to thce divine authority;
imc riic up1) in rebellion againt it ; others,
ahfl-1rbed in their plea lires and puri.lits, are
totally- inaitcntiv to it; they are all io
mloved by ;n imlperceltible inf-lulcc si-on
abocv, that the zeal of the dutiful, the
xV-,ralh of the rebellious, and the indillfferece
of the carelels, contributc finally to the
glory of GodL. All are governedl in such a
way as iflts their powers, and is conliflent
with rational freiedom, yet all are ulbjcded
to the necelity of fulfilling the eternal
lpurpols of Heaven. This depth of di-
vin ll viflo in the adminiitration of the

D d 3 universe,

E R M. unlverfe, exceeds all human comprehen-
XIV.
_- - l sion, and affords everlasting subjed of ado-,

ration and praise.

III. THE wrath of 'man praises thejuftice

of God, by being employed as the inftru-
ment of inflicing punishment upon finners.
Did bad men trace the course of events ia
their life with attentive eye, they might
easily discover the greatest part of the dif-
afters which they susser to be brought upon
them by their own ungoverned paflions.
The fucceflion of causes and effets is so
contrived by Providence, that the wrath
which they meant to pour forth on others,
frequently recoils, by its effets, upon them-
selves. But supposing them to escape thofc
external mischiefs which violent passions na-
t'arally occasion, they cannot evade the in-
ternal miicry which tlhey produce, The
constitution of things is framed with such
profound witiom, that the divine laws, in
every event, execute themilelves against
the imncer, and carry their ilincion in their
nwn bosom. The Supreme Being has no

occafiol

occasion to unlock the prisons of the deep, s ER M.

XIV.

or to call down the thunder from heaven, --
in order to punifl the zcwrlath of man. He
carries on the administration ofjuftice with
more simplicity, and dignity. It is sufficient
that he allow those fierce paflions which
render bad men the difiurbers of others, to
operate on theil own heai-ts. He delivers
them up to themselves, and they become
their own tormentors. Before the world
they may disguise their sufferings ; but it is
well known, that to be inwardly torn with
delpite, revenge and wrathful passions, is
the most intense of all misery. In thus con-
neaing the puniilhment with the crime,
making their own -,icked. ncf to reprove
t.hem, and their backJ/idings to correct them,
the avenging hand of a righteous Gover-
nour is conspicuous ; and thus the obferva-
tion of the Psalmist is fully verified; the
*zcicked have drawn out their fzweord and
bent their bow, to cqfI down the poor and
needy, ; but their sword J1all enter into their
co''n heart **

- Psalm xxxvii. 14, 15.

D d 4 The

S E R M. The wrath of man also praises the justice

XIV. Ccc, of God in the punishment of other crimi-

nals, as well as of the wrathful themselves.
Ambitious and lawless men are let loose
upon each other, that without any super-
natural interposition, they may fulfil the
jufl vengeance of heaven in their mutual
defirudion. They may occasionally be
cemented together .by conspiracy against
the julft; but as no firm nor lasting bond
can unite them, they become at last the
prey of mutual jealousy, strife and fraud.
For a time they may go on, and seem to
prosper. The justice of Heaven may ap-
pear to slumber; but it is awake; and only
waits till the measure of their iniquity be
full. God represents himself in Scripture
as sometimes permitting wickedness to arise
to an overgroswn height, on purpose that;
its ruin may be greater, and more exem-
plary, He fays to the tyrant of Egypt,
thatfor this cane he had raied him tp, that
is, had allowed him to prosper and be ex-
alted, that he mnightJhew in him his power;
iand that his name might be decla-ed through-

6 out

out all the earth :. The divine adminitra- s E R M.

XIV.

tion is glorified in the punlifhment contrived --.
for the workers of iniquity, as well as in
the reward prepared for the righteous. TIhis
;s the ppZ)ofe wiLhc, the Lord hath pulrpofLd
.1upon all the earth ; and this is the hand that
i .jl-retchca'jr/h over all the nations 1-.

IV. THE zCwrath of man is made to praise

the goodncfs of God. This is the molt
unexpecled of its effc¢ts; and therefore
requires to be the molt fully illustrated.
All the opcrations of the government of the
Deity may be ultimately resolved into good-
ness. His power, and wisdom, and justice,
all conduce to general happiness and order.
Among the means which he uses for ac-
complilhing this end, it will be found that
the wrath of man, throtugh his over-ruling
direcion, poffeilTs a considerable place.

First, it is employed by God as an useful

inltrument of discipline and correction to
the virtuous. The storms which ambition
,.nd pride raise among mankind, he permits

' Exod. ix . 1. t Isaiah xiv. z6.

with

SE R M. with the fame intention that he fends forth
XIV.
. -. tempeits among the elements; to clear the

atmoifhere of noxious vapours, and to pu-
rify it from that corruption which all things
contract by too much reft. When wicked
men prevail in their designs, and exercise
the power which they have gained with a
heavy and oppressive hand, the virtuous are
apt to exclaim, in bitterness of foul, Where
is the Lord ? and where the sceptre. of
righteoullnefs and truth ? Hat/ God forgo/ten
to be gracio/s ? or doth he indeed fee, and
is there knzowledge in the 1o0Ji hii ?---
Their oppressors are, in truth, no more
than the ministers of God to them for good.
-Ie fees that they R-and in need of corretion,
and therefore raises up enemies against them,
in order to cure the intemperance of pro-
iperity; and to produce, in the serious
hours of afflicion, proper reflections upon
their duty, and their past errours.

In this light the disturbers of the earth

are often represented in Scripture; as
scourges in the hand of God, employed to
infli- chatfifement upon a degenerating

people,

people. They are commissioned for the s E R M.

XIV.

execution of righteous and wife purposes, _
concealed from themselves; and when their
commifion is fulfilled, they are recalled, and
destroyed. Of this wTe have a remarkable
example in the use vwhich God made of the
king of Assyria, with respeCt to the people
of Israel. I will fend him agailij an hLpo-
critical nation, and again/l the people of zmy
'wrath w'ill I give him a charge, to take the
spoil, and to take the prey. Howbeit, he
meaneth not Jo; neither doth his heart think
:so; but it is in his heart to dfjiroy, and cut
of nations not a few. 'Whreyfore it jhall
come to pass, that when the Lord hath per-
formezd his iwhole work up0on nmont!i Zion and
on 3tcferalem, I will pi uni the f-ruit of the
Jfout heart of the king of fj7jria, and the glorl
of his higha looks ". In vain, then, doth the
wrath of ?nan lift itself up against God. 1He
fiith, by the irength of myj hand I have done
it, and by my -wisdom, for I anz prudcil/.
S7all the ax boafi itself again/l him that herw-
ifth therewith ? or Jhall the fJ-zw mnagnify it-

* Isaiah x. 6, 7. 12.

s

SE RM fclf agaiz/ him thatJhaketh it ? All things,

I. ,- whether they will it or not, must work to-

gether for good to them that love God. The
werath of man, among the reft, fills up the
place aifigned to it by the ordination of
-Ieaven. The violent enemy, the proud
.conqueror, and the oppreiiivc tyrant, poflels
only the fame fiation with the famine, the
peltilence, and the flood. Their triumplhs
are no more than the accomplilhment of
God's corretion; and the remainder of 'thir
wvrath Jhall bh re/Iranii,

SECONDLY, God makes the wrath of

nman contribute to the benefit of the vir-
tuous, b1y rendering it the means of im-
proving and signalizing their graces; and of
railing them, thereby, to higher honour and
glory. I-ad human affiairs proceeded in an
orderly train, and no oppolition been nmade
to religion and virtue by the violence of the
wicked, what room would have been left
for some of the highest and most generous
exertions of the foul of man ? How many
Ihining, examples of fortitude, constancy,

and

and patience, would have been loft to thle S 1 R M_
world ? What a tield of virtues peculiar to ,---
a tiate of dilciplinc had lailn uncutltivated ?
Spirits of a hilgher order pofllefs a slate of
ellabliihed virtule, that tlands in need of no
such trials and improvements. But to us,
who are only under education for ft.ch ;
llatc, it belongs to pats through the furnace,
that our If)uls may be tried, refined, and
brilghtened. erV mulllt fland the coniliti ,
that we may be graced and crowned as coni-
q(tirors. 'The Tcr l7jlh n/' mIll opens the sicld
to glory ; calls us forth to tlhe inloft diflii,-
guified exercile of acLive virtue, and foiIms
us to all thole lgfilcring graces which are
amono tlic highell ornaiielnts of thc luiinan.
lnol. It is thus, that the illuifrious Iband of
true patriots land heroes, of confceflors and
martyrs, have been Ict forth to tlh admira-
tion of all ages, as li)htsJ /' i/hc wcorld;
while the rage and fury of cncinics, infea.d
of lbearing them down, have only flcrved to
exalt an.d dignify thenm more.

THIRDLY, the wralh/ of man is often
made to advance the temporal proifperity of

the

SE R M. righteous. The occasional distresses which
XIV. XIV. it brings upon them frequently lay the foun-

dation of their future success. The vio-
lence with which wicked men pursue their
resentment, defeats its own purpose; and
engages the world on the fide of the vir-
tuous, whom they persecute. The attempts
of malice to blacken and defame them,
bring forth their characers with more ad-
vantage, to the view of impartial beholders.
The extremities to. which they are reduced
by injustice and oppreflion, rou'ze their cou-
rage and ascivity; and often give occasion
to iuch vigorous efforts inr thcir just defence,
as overcome all oppolltion, and terminate
in prosperity and success. Even in cafes
wihere the wrath of nma7t appears to prevail
over the peaceable and the just, it is fre-
quently, in its issue, converted into a blef-
sing. How many have had realon to be
thankful, for being diilppointcd by their
enemies in designs which they earnestly
purilued, but which, if iucceisfully accom-
plifhed; they have afterwards seen, would
have occalioned their ruin ? IT455or' is wfe

(/t?2/

and zvill obfjrve thec thiiigs, ezve. he e J7a.l E R A:..

X1V.
zundertiand the loving-k/id.iefsi cf tbe Lord .

While the wrath of man thus prafies God

by the advantages which it is made to bring
to good men, as individuals, the divine hand
is equally apparent in the similar effecs
which it is appointed to produce to nations
and societies. When wars and commo-
tions ilake the earth, when fa(ions rage,
and inteffine divisions embroil kingdoms
that before were flourishing, Providence
seems, at first view, to have abandoned
public affairs to the mifriule of human pai-
iions. Yet from the midst of this confufioi
order is often made to spring; and from
these miifchiefs lasting advantages to ai-i'.
By such convuflions, nations arc rouzed
fromn that dangerous lethargy into which
flowing wealth, long peace, and groving
effeminacy of manners had Ifnk then
They are awakened to discern their true
interests; and taught to take proper ne.a-
fitres for security and defence against all
their foes. Inveterate prejudices are cor-

* Psalm cvii. 34.

reeled;

SER M. re&ed; and latent sources of danger are

xlV.
,_,
sl discovered. Public spirit is called forth;

and larger views of national happiness are
formed. The corruptions to which every
government is liable, are often reaified by
a ferment in the political body, as noxious
humours in the animal frame are carried off
by the shock of a disease. Attempts made
against a wife and well established civil con-
ftitution, tend in the issue to ftrengtllen it;
aid the diobrders of licentioulleis and fatc-
tion, teach men more highly to prize tlhe
bleflings of tranquillity and legal protecion.

FOURTHLY, the wrath of mai, whTle. i

breaks forth in the persecution of religion,
praises the divine goodness, by being ren-
dered conducive to the advancement of truth
and propagation of religion in the world.
The church of God, since the d(t)s of its
infancy, hath never been entirely exempted
from the wrath of the world; and in thole
ages, during which it was most exposed to
that wrath, it hath always flourifled the
most. In vain the policy and the rage of

Ilc1

men united their efforts to extinguiih this SE R IM.
divine light. Though all the four winds --
blew against it, it only flone brighter,
and flamed higher. Many ,zwaters cmii
not quzench it, nor all the jfoordr drocn it.
The conftlancy and fortitude of tho'e who
suffered for the truth, had a much greater
elfet in increasing the number of converts,
than all the terror and cruelty of perfecu-
tors, in diminishing it. By this means, the
wrath of m'an was made to turn againlt it-
self, to the defirudion of its own purpose;
like waves, which alsaulting a rock with
impotent fury, discover its immoveable fta-
bility, while they dall themselves in pieces
at its feet.

I SHALL only add one other infiance of

the wrath of tan praising God, by accom-
plithing ends of most extensive benefit to
mankind. Never did the rage and malice
of the wicked imagine that they had ob-
tained a more complete triumph, than in
the death of Jesus Christ. When they had
executed their purpose of making him filffer

VOL. II. E e as

SE R M. as a malefactor, they were confident that

i, - they had extinguished his name, and dif-

comfited his followers for ever. Behold
how feeble are the efforts of the wrath of
man against the decree of Heaven! All
that they intended to overthrow, they most
effeaually efiablifhed, The death of Chriss
was, in the counsels of Heavens the spring
of everlaffing life to the faithful. The cross
on which he suffered with apparent igno-
nliny, became the standard of eternal honour
to him ; the ensign under which his fol-
lowers aflembled, and triumphed. He who,
at his pleasure, refJrains the remainder of
wrath, suffered the rage of our Saviour's
enemies to suggest no other things to them
than what, long before, He had determined,
and his prophets had foretold. They all
conspired to render the whole scene of
Christ's -sufferings exactly conformable to
the original, predicted plan of divine mercy
and goodness; and each of them contri-
buted his share to accomplifli that great un-
dertaking, which none of them in the least
understood, nor meant to promote.-So

remarkable

'remarkable an instance as this, fully afcer- s r. RM.
tained in Scripture, of the wrath of man L-v-i
miniflering to the designs of Heaven, ought
to be frequently in our eye; as an exem-
plification of the condud of Providence in
many other cafes, where we have not bo
much light afforded us for tracing its ways.

BY this indution of particulars, the doc-

trine contained in the text is plainly and
fully verified. We have seen, that the dii-
orders which the pride and paflions of men
occasion in the world, though they take rife
from the corruption of human nature in
this fallen state, yet are so overruled by Pro-
vidence, as to redound to His honour and
glory who governs all. They illuftratc be-
fore the world the divine perfecions in the
administration of the universe. They serve
the purposes of moral and religious im-
provement to the fouls of men. By a secret
tendency, they advance the welfare of those
whom they appear to threaten with evil.
Surely, 0 God! the wrath of man Jhall praise
thee; thle remainder of wrath Jhalt thou re-

Ee 2 Jlrain.

SEIRM. si raln.-In thy hand it is; and thou never

_-- letteft it forth but in weight and meaiire.

It is wild and intradable in its nature; but
Thou tamest it. It is blind and headlong
in its iipulfic; but Thou diredelf it. It
firuggles continually to break its chain; but
Thou conlinett it; Thou retrenchclft all the
fupcrfluity of its fury.--- t us now con-
fider, what improvement is to l)e made of tllis
meditation on t) he ways of Providence.

IN the lirfl place, let it lead us to a reli-

gious contemplation of tle hand of God
in all thc tranfalldions of the world. In the
ordinary courle of human aflairs, we be-
hold a very mixed and Ibuy fcIene; the
pallions of men varioully agitated, and new
changes daily taking place upon this stage
of time. We behold peace and war alter-
nately returning ; the fortunes of private
men riling and falling; and states and na-
tions partaking of the fame vicissitude. In
all this, if we attend only to the operation
of external causes, and to the mere rotation
of events, we view no more than the, ina-

I nimate

ninate part of nature ; we Rfop at the fur- s l R M.

XIV.

siee of things ; we contemplate thile grte t

-g

1iped:acle which is presentcd to us, not with
the eyes of rational and intelligent beings.
The litf an11d bealuty of the utiverfi aritis
fiom the view of that witlolll and goodnetls
wIillch animates and conduids the whole,

(nd uniltes all the parts ill one great de-
,lign. There is an cternal mind who puts
all tliofe wheels in motion ; lliil' fs rcmain-
ing for ever ait re1l-. Nothilgr is void of
(god. Even in the paflions and ragilgs of
menll, 1-l is to be Ifu)tnd ; 11and where they
imagline they guide themtIifelvs, they are
guided andl controtied ly lis hand. What
iolci1n thoughts and devout a;lle'tions ought
11is meditation to inipire ; whcn in view-
ing the aftlrs of the world, we attend not
mIlrely to the adcings of mcll, bult to the
ways of God; and confidclr ourtilves, and
a1ll our concerns, as included in his high
4dmliniislration !

1N the second place, the do trine which
has been illustrated floulcl prevent us from

E e 3 censuring

SE R M. censuring Providence, on account of any

XIV.
- - seeming disorders and evils which at present

take place in the world. The various in-
stances which have been pointed out in this
discourse, of human passion and wickedness
rendered ihbfervient to wife and useful ends,
give us the highest reason to conclude that,
in all other cafes of seeming evil, the like
ends are carried on. This ought to satisfy
our mind, even when the profiipe is inoft
dark and discouraging. The plans of di-
vine wisdom are too large and comprehen-
five to be difeerned by us in all their extent;
and where we fee only by parts, we must
frequently be at a loss in judging of the
whole. The way of God is in the sea and
his path in the great waters; bis.foottoeps are
not knozen W. But althhough fe

thou faef th

can/I notfee him, yet judgmenit is before him ;
therefore trzft thou in him '. As in the
natural world, no real deformity is found,
nothing but what has either Ibme orna-
ment, or some use; so in the moral world,

Psalm lxxvii. g1. + Job, xxxv. 14.

the

the most irregular and deformed appear- SE R M.

XIV.

ances contribute in one way or other to the
order of the whole. The Supreme Being,
from the most opposite and disagreeing
principles, forms univcrfal concord; and
adapts even the mollt harll andi diflbnant
notes to the harmony of his praile. As he
bath reared the goodly frame of nature
fiom various and jarring elements, and
lath fettled it in peace; so he hath formed
Ifch an union by his providence of the
more various interclls, and more jarring
paflions of men, that they all con(pire to
his glory, and co-operate for general good.
,-How amazing is that wiilom, which
comprehends ifchl infinite diversities, and
contrarieties, within its scheme! Hlow pow-
erful that hand, wlhich bends to its own
purpiole the good and the bad, the busy
and the idle, the friends and the foes of
truth ; which obliges them all to hold on
their course to his glory, though divided
from one another by a multiplicity of pur-
.suits, and differing often from themselves;
and while they all move at their own free-

E e 4 dom,

S E R M dom, yet by a secret influence, winds and

XI.V.
L-v-- turns them at his will! 0 the depti of the

riches, both of the wifdorn and knowledge of
God! How uztfearcihable are his judgments,
and his ways pajqifinding out *!

IN the third place, we fee, from what

has been said, how much reason there is
for fubminfion to the decrees of Heaven.
Whatever difireffes we susser from the
wrath of man, we have ground to believe
that they befall not in vain. In the midst
of human violence, or oppreflion, we are
not left to be the sport of fortune. Higher
counsels are concerned. Wife and good
designs are going on. God is always car-
rying forward his own purposes; and if
these terminate in his glory, which is ever
the fame with the felicity of the righteous,
is not this a sufficient reason for our calm
and chearful acquiescence?

Hence also, to conclude, arises the most

powerful argument for studying, with zeal-
ous afiduity, to gain the favour and pro-

* Rom. xi. 33.

tedtion

tefion of the Almighty. If his difpleaifre s E R M.

XIV.

hang over our heads, all things around us -.
may be just objects ofterrour. For againit
him, there is no defence. The moit violent
powers in nature arc ministers to him.
Formidable, indeed, may prove the wrath
of man, if he be pleased to let it forth
againit us. To him, but not to us, it be-
longs to restrain it at pleasure. WJlereas,
when we are placed under his protection,
all human wrath is divested of its terrours.
If he befor ns, who or what can be agaifl
us? Let us purfie the measures which he
hath appointed for obtaining his grace by
faith, repentance and a holy life, and we
ihall have no reason to be afraid of evil
tidings ; our hearts will be fixed trftinzg in
the Lord. When the religious fear of God
pofleffes the heart, it expels the ignoble
fear of man; and becomes the principle of
courage and magnanimity. The Lord is
a buckler and a jshield to them that fervc
him. When he arifeth, his enemies Jhjall be
scattered, asfinoke is driven away, and as
haffj before the wind. He giveth Jlrenigth

and

SE RM. and viEtory to his people; he cloathetb then

V_* e with salvation, The 7wrath of man Jhail

praise him; and the remainder of wrath JhJall
be redJrain.

E R-

# SERMON XV. On the IMPORTANCE of RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE to MANKIND. Preached before the Society in Scotland for propagating Christian Knowledge. ISAIAH xi. 9. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my ...

[ 427 1

SERMON XV,
On the IMPORTANCE of RELTGIOUS

KNOWLEDGE to MANKIND.
Preachcd before the Society in Scotland for propagating

Clriflian Knowledge.

I s A I i l. 9.

7ahe',Jh all not hurz nzor dJ in mro
i y holy

mocntain; for the earth Jhalll be fill of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the watcrs co-
ver thecja.
T HI S passage of Scripture is under- E R M.

stood, by all Chri-fian interpreters, to .

refer to the days of the Gospel. The Pro-
phet describes, in the context, the aufpi-
cious influence of the Messiah's reign, as

extending

S ER M. extending over all nature, and producing

xv. a-_ universal felicity. The full accomplish-

ment of this prediction is yet future, and
refpeds some more advanced period of the
kingdom of God, when true religion fllall
universally prevail, and the native tendency
of the Gospel attain its entire effet. In
the profpee of this event, the Prophet
seems to rife above himself, and celebrates
that happy age in the most sublime strain
of eastern poetry. He opens a beautiful
view of the state of the world, as a state of
returning innocence. He represents all
nature flourishing in peace; discord and
guile abolifined; the most hostile natures
reconciled, and the most savage, reformed
and tamed. 'he wolfihall dwell with the
lamb, and the leopard lie down with the
kid; and the calf, and the young lion, and the
fatling together, and a little child Jhall lead
them. - he lion Jall eat fJlraw like the ox ;
and the Jicking childJh ll play on the hole of
the asp, and the w.eaned child Jaall put his
hand on the cockatrice' den. They Jhall not
hurt nor de/lroy -i'n -'all my holy mountain-;

for the earthJhall be full of the kinowledge of s E R M,

xv.
the Lord, as the waters cover the fa.

Upon reading these words, we must im-

mediately perceive the great encouragement
which they give to all good designs for pro-
moting religion in the world. When we
engage in these, we have the comfort of
being engaged, not only in a good cause,
but also in one that shall undoubtedly be
successful. For we are here assured by the
divine promise, that truth and righteousness
lhall at length prevail, and that the in-
creasing influence of religion shall introduce
general happineis. It is a pleasing and ani-
mating refleeion, that in carrying on such
designs, we ad upon the divine plan; and
co-operate with God for advancing the
kingdom of the Messiah. We have no rea-
son to be discouraged by any unfavourable
circumstances which at present oppose our
pious endeavours. Though the ignorance,
superstition, and corruption, which now fill
so great a part of the world, have a dark
and mysterious afpeft, it is not beyond the
power of that Supreme Being who brings

light

S E R M. light out of darkness, to clear up those per-,

- -_ plexing appearances, and gradually to ex-

tricate mankind from the labyrinth of ig-
norance and errour. Let us confider how
improbable it feemred, when the gospel was
first published, that it ihould extend to far,
and overthrow lb much established iiperfti-
tion, as it has already done. There is no-
thing, in the present state of the world, to
render it more unlikely that it shall one day
be universally received, and prevail in its
full influence. At the rife of Chritiianity,
the disproportion was, at leafn, as great,
between the apparent human causes, and
the effec which has adually been producedi
as there is, in our age, between the circuin-
stances of religion in the world, and the
effect which we farther expect. T7e Sun
of righteoifiieJs having already exerted its
influence in breaking through the thickest
darkness, we may jnfily hope, that it is
powerful enough to dispel all remaining
obscurity; and that it will afiend by de-
grees to that perfect day, when healing7 a/ll
be under its wings to all the nations. A

6 little

little oncJhall become a tlhoflnd; and a f7all s F, R M.

xv.

o07n, a dJqovig nation. I the Lord -vill h/f7ti -e -
it il its time .

BESIDES the predi&ion wlichl the text

contains of the tfuture luccefs of relegion,
it points out also a precifit connexion be-
tween the increase of religious knowledge,
and the happinels of mankind. 7The know-ca-
leeAc of 'the Lord fillicg the earth, is afligned
as tlh cau fe vwly hrey JJhall not burt nor dc-
f/iroy in all the holy monnti lln o God ','d. To
this T am now to lead your t}houghts ; ac
a ftiijec both suitcd to the occalion of the
present mceting, and proper to be illtlftratcd
in times, wherein total indiflerence to reli-
gious principles appears to gain ground.
Whether Chri fllanity flhall bc propagated
farther or not, is treated as a natter of no
great conccrni to mankind. The opinion
prevails among miany, that moral virtue
may fitbift, with equal advantage, in-
dependent of religion. For moral princi-
ples, great regard is professed; but articles

* Isaiah Ix. 22.

of

SE R M. of religious belief are held to be abftra&

XV.
_.-^- tenets, remote fromn life;- points of mere

ipeculation and debate, the influence of
which is very inconsiderable on the actions
of men. Their general conduct, it is con-
tended, will always proceed Uipon views
and principles which have more relation to
the present state of things; and religious
knowledge can therefore stand in no necel-
fary connection with their happiness and
proiperity. H-- ow adverl' Ifich opinions
are both to the profeflion and pradice of
religion, is abundantly evident. How ad-
verse they are to the general welfare and
real interests of mankind, 1 hope to make
appear to candid minds.

By the knowledge of the Lord in the text,

is not to be underflood the natural know-
ledge of God oply. It is plain, that the
Prophet speaks of the age of the Messiah,
when more enlarged discoveries should be
made to mankind of the divine perfetions
and government, than unaffilted reabon
could attain. The knowledge of the Lord,
therefore, comprehends the principles of

Christianity,

Cllriftianity, as well as of natural reiigion, s R M
In order to discern the importance of such I. -
ktowledgc to gcneral happiness, we llhall
confider man, I. as an individual II. as a
member of Iociety.

I. CONSIDERING man as an individual,

let us inquire, how far the knowledge of
true religion is important, iirft, to his im-
provement; next, to his consolation.

FIRST, with refpea to the improvement

of man; the advancement of his nature in
what is valuable and ufefill, the acquisition
of such dispositions and habits as fit him for
ating his part with propriety on this fitge,
and prepare him for a higher state of acion
hereafter; what benefit does he receive, in
theef refpeas, from religious knowledge and
belief? It is obvious, that all increase of
knowledge is improvement to the under-
standing. The more that its sphere is en-
larged, the greater number of objedts that
ate fubnitted to its view, especially when
these objeas are of intrinsic excellence, the

VOL. TI. F f more

E R M. more must those rational powers, which are
»-a__ the glory of man, be in the course of attain-

ing- their proper strength and maturity.
But-were the knowledge of religion merely
speculative, though the £peculation mufft be
admitted to be noble, yet less could be said
of its importance. WVe recommend it to
mankind, as forming the heart, and diret-
ing the life. Those pure and exalted con-
ceptions which the Christian religion has
taught us to entertain of the Deity, as the
univer:al Father and righteous Governour
of the universe, the standard of unspotted
perfection, and the author of every good and
perfet gift; conducting his whole admini-
ftration with an eternal regard to order,
virtue, and truth; ever favouring the cause
and supporting the interests of righteous
men; and applying, in this direcion, the
whole might of omnipotence, and the whole
counsel of unerring wisdom, from the be-
ginning to the end of things; such con-
ceptions both kindle devotion, and strengthen
virtue. They give fortitude to the mind in.
the praatic.of righteousness, and establish

the

the persuasion of its being our highest in- s E R M.

XV.
terert. .-,-

All the doctrines peculiar to the Gospel

are great improvements on what the light
of nature had imperfectly fuggcfted. A
high dispensation of Providence is made
known, particularly suited to the exigencies
of man; calculated for recovering him front
that corrupted Ilate into which experience
be:ars witness that he is fallen, and for re-
floring him to integrity, and favour with his
Creator. The method of carrying on this
great plan is such as gives us the most
striking views of the importance of iighteouf-
ness or virtue, and of the high account in
which it stands with God. The Son of
God appeared on the earth, and suffered as
a propitiation for the fins of the world,
with this express intention, that he might
bring in everlafJing righlteozi/ines; that he
might purge our co7nsciences from dead works
to serve the living God; that he might re-
deem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
hifelf a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. Such a merciful interposition of

F f 2 the

SE R M. the Creator of the world, while it illus-

xv.
'-_ - trioufly displays his goodness, and signalizes

his concern for the moral. interests of man-
kind, affords us, at the fame time, the most
satisfying ground of confidence and trust.
It offers an objet to the mind, on which it
can lay hold for the security of its future
hopes; when, with a certainty far beyond
what any abftrad argument could yield, it
appeals to a distinguished faad; and is
enabled to fay, He thatfpared not his ozwn
Son, but delivered him utp for us all, how
Jl7all he not with him alo freely give us all
things ?

While the divine Government is thus

placed in a light the most amiable, and most
encouraging to every virtuous mind, there
is, at the fame time, something extremely
awful and solemn in the whole dotrine of
redemption. It is calculated to strike the
mind with reverence for the divine admi-
nftration. It points at some deep malignity
in fin, at some dreadful consequences flow-
ing from guilt, unknown in their causes

Rom. viii. 32.

and

and in their whole effecs to us, which SER M.
moved the Sovereign of the World to de- --,
part from the ordinary course of Providence,
and to bring about the restoration of his
fallen creatures by a method so astonishing.
Mankind are hereby awakened to the molt
serious reflections. Such views are opened
of the fanatity of the divine laws, of the
ftridnefs of the divine justice, of the im-
portance of the part which is assigned them
to ad, as serve to prevent their trifling with
human life, and add dignity and folemnitv
to virtue. These great purposes are farther
carried on, by the discovery which is made
of the fixed connection in which this life
stands with a future eternal itate. We are
represented as sowing now, what we are to
reap hereafter; undergoing a course of pro-
bation and trial, which, according as it ter-
minates in our improvement, or leaves us
unreformed and corrupted, will difinifs us
to lasting abodes, either of puni.fiment or
reward. Such a discovery rites far above
the dubious conjecures, and uncertain rea-
oinings, which mere natural light fuggefis

F f 3 concerning

S E R M. concerning the future condition of man-

xv.
_L-- *kind. Here we find, what alone can pro-

duce any considerable influence on pracice,
explicit promise and threatening; an autho-
ritative fandion given to a law; the Gover-
nour and Judge revealed; and all the mo-
tives which can operate on hope and fear,
brought home to the heart, with Tbus faith
the Lord of HoJrs. In a word, a great and
magnificent plan of divine administration is
opened to us, in the Gospel of Christ; and
nothing is omitted that can impress man-
kind with the persuasion of their being all,
in the ftriaeft sense, fubjeds of the moral
government of God,

THOUGH the bounds of this Discourse

allow us to take only an imperfect view of
the principles of Christian dotrine, yet the
hints which have been given lay a fuffi-
cient foundation for appealing to every im-
partial mind, whether the knowledge and
belief of such principles be not intimately
connected with.the improvement, and, by
¢onfequence, with the happiness of man.

I realbn

I reason now with such as admit, that virtue S F R M.

XV.

is the great source both of improvement ---
and happiness. Let them lay what stress
they please upon the authority of conscience,
and upon the force and evidence of its dic-
tates; can they refu-i to allow, that the
natural tendency of the principles which I
have mentioned, is to support those diCtates,
and to confirm that authority; to excite,
on various occasions, the most useful senti-
mnents ; to provide additional restraints from
vice, and additional motives to every virtue ?
Who dares pronounce, that there is no cafe
in which conicience stands in need of such
assistance, to dired, where there is so much
uncertainty and darkness;. and to prompt,
where there is so much feebleness and irre-
solution, and such a fatal proneness to vice
and folly ?

But how good soever the tendency of

religious principles may be, some will still
call in question their actual significancy,
and influence on life. This tendency is
by various causes defeated. Between the
belief of religious principles and a corre-

F f + fpondent

SE R M. fpondent practice, it, will be alleged that

XV.
L..V.; frequent experience thews there is. no ne-p

ceffary connection; and that therefore the
propagation of the one, cannot give us any
aflurance of proportionable improvements
following in the other.-This, in part, is
granted to be true; as we admit that reli-
gious knowledge and belief hre susceptible
of various degrees, before they arrive at that
real Christian Faith which the Scripture re-
presents as ptrifyhzg the heart. But though
the connection between principle and prac-
tice be not necessary and invariable, it will
not, I suppose, be denied that there is riome
connection. Here then one avenue to the
heart is opened.. -If the tendency of reli-
gious knowledge be good, wisdom' must
direa, and duty oblige us to cultivate it.
For tendency -will, at least in some :cafes,'
rife. into effe.t; and, probably, in more
cafes than are known and- observed' by the
world,: -- Beides the distinguished examples'
of true. religion and virtue. which have, morel
or less, adorned every age of the Chriftiani
.sra, what numbers may there be, in the

more

more-filent and private scenes of life, over- s E M.

X¥.

looked by superficial observers of mankind, '
on whose hearts and lives religious princi-
ples have the most happy influence? Even
on loose and giddy minds, where they are
far from operating their full effect, their
influence is, frequently, not altogether loft.
Impressions of religion often check vice in
its career. They prevent it from proceed-
ing its utmost lenigth; and though they do
not entirely reform the offender, they serve
to maintain order in society. Persons who
are now bad, might probably have been
worse without them, and the world have
suffered more from unrestrained licentious-
ness. They often sow latent feeds of good-
ness in the heart, which proper circum-
stances and occasions afterwards ripen;
though the reformation of the offender may
not be so conspicuous, as his former enor-
mities have -been. From the native ten-
dency of religious belief, there is reason to
conclude, that those good effects of it are
not so rare as some would represent them.
By -its nature and tendency, we can better

judge

E R M. judge of its effeEts, than by observations

drawn from a supposed experience, which
often is narrow in its compass, and falla-
cious in its conclusions.

The actual influence of principle and be-

lief on mankind, admits of clear illustration
from uncontested matter of fact. They
who hold the good effects of Christian prin-
ciples to be to inconiiderable, as to render
the propagation of thenm 'f finall import-
ance, will be at no lois to give us illtanlces
of corrupt principles of belief having had
the most powerful influence on the world.
Loud complaints we hear from this quarter,
of the direful effets which superstition and
enthusiasm have produced; of their having
poisoned the tempers, and transformed the
manners of men; of their having over-
come the strongest restraints of law, of rea-
son, and humanity. Is this then the cafe
that all principles, except good ones, are of
such mighty energy ?-Strange ! that falle
religion should be able to do so much, and
true religion so little; that belief, so pow-
:erful in the one .cafe, should be so impo-

tent

tent in the other.--No impartial enquirer, S E R M.

XV.

surely, can entertain this opinion. The -
whole hiltory of mankind shows that their
religious tenets and principles, of whatever
nature they be, are of great influence in
forming their character, and direeling their
condud. The mifchicf which false prin-
ciples have done, affords a good argument
to guard carefully against errour; but as it
is a proof of what belief can do, it gives
ground to hope the ,more from it, when
rightly directed. The fame torrent which,
when it is put out of its natural course,
overflows and lays waste a country, adorns
and. enriches it, when running in its pro-
per channel. If it be alleged that fupcr-
Itition is likely to be more powerful in its
effects than truth, because it agrees better
with the follies and corruptions of the
world, we may oppose to this on the other
hand, that truth has the divine blefling and
the countenance of Heaven on its fide.
Let us always hope well of a cause that is
good in itself, and beneficial to mankind.
Truth is mighty, and will prevail. Let us

spread

S E RM. spread the incorrztptible feed as widely as
I-- we can, and truit in God that he will give

the increase. Having thus shown the im-
portance of religious knowledge to man-
kind in the way of improvement, let us,

IN the second place, confider it in the

light of consolation; as bringing aid and
relief to us amidst the diitrelfes of life.
Here religion incontestably triumphs ; and
its happy effets in this refpe&, furnish a
firong argument to every benevolent mind
for wishing them to be farther diffused
throughout the world. For without the
belief and hope afforded by' divine Reve-
lation, the circumrftances of man are ex-
tremely forlorn. He finds himself placed
here as a stranger in a vast universe, where
the powers and operations of nature are
very imperfecly known; where both the
beginnings and the issues of things are in-
volved in mysterious darkness; where he
is unable to discover, with any certainty,
whence he sprung, or for what purpose .he
was brought into this state of existence;

whether

whether he be fubjeded to the government S E R M.

xv.

of a mild, or of a wrathful ruler; what con-
ftrudion he is to put on many of the dif-
penfations of his providence; and what his
fate is to be when he departs hence. What
a disconsolate situation, to a serious enquir-
ing mind! The greater degree of virtue it
possesses, its sensibility is likely to be the
more opprefed by this burden of labouring
thought. Even though it were in one's
power to banish all uneasy thought, and to
fill up the hours of life with perpetual
amusement, life so filled up would, upon
reflection, appear poor and trivial. But
there are far from being the terms upon
which man is brought into this world. He
is conscious that his being is frail and fee-
ble; he fees himself beset with various,
dangers; and is exposed to many a me-
lancholy apprehension, from the evils
which he may have to encounter, before'he
arrives at the close of life. In this difrefled
condition, to reveal to him such difoveries
of the Supreme Being as the Christian reli-
gion affords, is to reveal to him a Father

and

S E R M. and a Friend; is to let in a ray of the mos:

xv.
^ _- e cheering light upon the darkness of the hu-

man estate. He'who was before a defti-
tute orphan, Wandering in the inhospitable
desert, has now gained a shelter from the
bitter and inclement blast. H' e now knows
to whom to pray, and in 'whom to trunt;
where to unbosom liis sorrows; and from
what hand to look' for relief

It is certain, that when the heart bleeds

from some wound of recent misfortune,
nothing is of equal efficacy with religious
comfort. It is of power to enlighten the
darkell hour, and to aftwage the severest
woe, by the belief of divine favour, and
the profped of a blessed immortality. In
such hopes, the mind expatiates with joy;
and when bereaved of its earthly friends,
Iblaces itself with the thoughts of one friend
who will never forsake it. Refined rea-
fonings concerning the nature of the hu-
man condition, and the improvement which
philosophy teaches us to make of every
event, may entertain the mind when it is
at ease; may perhaps contribute to Looth

-- T it,

It, when slightly touched with sorrow. S E R M

XV.

But when it is torn with any fore distress,
they are cold and feeble, compared with a
direC promise from the word of God.
This is an anchor to the foul both fire anda
JfedfafJ. This has given consolation and
refuge to many a virtuous heart, at a time
when the most cogent reasonings would.
have proved utterly unavailing.

Upon the approach of death, efpectllyv,

when if a man thinks at all, his anxicty
about his future intereits nuft naturally in-
create, the power of religious consolation is
sensibly felt. Then appears, in the most
firiking light, the high value of the ditco-,
veries made by the Gospel; not only life
and immortality revealed, but a mediator
with God discovered; mercy proclaimed,
through him, to the frailties of the penitent
and the humble; and his pretence pro-
mifed to be with them when they are pass-
ing through the valley of the Jhadow of
death, in order to bring them safe into un-
seen habitations of reft and joy. Here is
ground for their leaving the world with

comfort

s E R M. comfort and peace. But in this severe and
-*_,- trying period, this labouring hour of na-

ture, how ihall the unhappy man support
himself, who knows not, or believes not,
the hope of religion? Secretly conscious
to himself that he has not a&ed his part as
he ought to have done, the fins of his past
life arise before him in fad remembrance.
He wishes to exist after death, and yet
dreads that existence. The Governour of
the world is unknown. He cannot tell
whether every endeavour to obtain his
mercy may not be in vain. All is awful
obscurity around him; and in the midst of
endless doubts and perplexities, the trem-
bling, relutant foul, is forced away from
the body. As the misfortunes of life must,
to such a man, have been most oppressive,
so its end is bitter. His fun sets in a dark
cloud; and the night of death closes over
his head, full of mifery.-Having now
ihewn how important the knowledge of the
Lord is, both to the improvement and the
consolation. of man, coniidered as an indi-
vidual, I am next to shew,

- 4 II. Howl

I. 'How important this 'knowlevdge is to s ER M.

him as a 'member of society. This branch _..
of the fubje& is'in part anticipated'by what
has been said. For all the improvement
which man receives as an individual, re-
dounds to the benefit.of the publcl. Society
reaps the 'fruit .of the virtues of all the
members who compose it ; and in propor-
tion as each, apart, is made better, the
whole must 'flourith.

But besides this effet, religious know-

ledge has a dired tendency to improve the
social intercourse of men, and to assist them
in co-operating for common good. It is
the great infirument of civilizing the mul-
titude, and forming them to union. It
tames the fierceness of their passions, and
softens the rudeness of ,their manners.
There is much reason to doubt whether
any regular society ever subsisted, or could
subsist, in the world, destitute of all reli-
gious ideas and principles. They who, in
:early times, attempted to bring -She wander-
ing and scattered tribes of :men from the
woods, and to unite them .in cities and

VoL. 1I. G g com-

S E R M. communities, always found it necessary to

xv. ..-' . begin with.. some infitution of religion.

The wisest legislators of old- through the
whole progress of their systems of govern-
ment, confidered religion as essential to civil
polity. If even those imperfea forms of
it, loaded with so much. superstition and
errour, were important to, the welfare. of
society, how much more that reasonable
worship of the true God, which is taught
by the Gospel ? True religion introduces
the idea of regular subjeCtion, by accuf-
toming mankind to the awe of fuperiour
.power in the Deity,. joined with the vene-
ration of fuperiour wisdom and goodness.
It is by its nature an associating principle;
and creates new and-facred bonds of union
. among men. Common assemblies for reli-
glous. worship, and joint homage offered
.p.to one God; the sense of being all de-
pendent on the fame protection, and bound
.to duty by. the fame ties, sharers in the
-fame benefits of heaven, and expeaants of
the fame reward, tend to awaken the fen-
..tilents of friendly relation, and to con-

;: ....firm
.:i,:..:..5.

firm and strengthen our mutual connexion. E R M.

xv.

The dotrine of Christianity is most adverse _,
to all tyranny and oppression, but highly
favourable to the interests of good govern-
ment among men. It reprefles the spirit
of licentiousness and sedition. It inculcates
the duty of subordination to lawful fupe-
riours. It requires us to fear God, to ho-
nour the king, and not to meddle with thenz
that are given to change.

Religious knowledge forwards all useful

and ornamental improvements in society.
E.:perience shows, that in proportion as it
diffuses its light, learning flourishes, and
liberal arts are cultivated and advanced.
Just conceptions of religion promote a free
and manly spirit. They lead men to think
for themselves; to form their principles
upon fair inquiry, and not to resign their
conscience to the ditates of men. Hence
they naturally inspire aversion to slavery of
every kirid; and promote a taste for liberty
and laws. Despotic governments have ge-
ierally taken the firmest root among nations
that were blinded by Mahometan or Pagan

G g 2 darkness;

S ER M. darkness; where the throne of violence has

xv.

- been supported by ignorance and false reli-

gion. In the Christian world, during those
centuries in which gross superstition held its
reign undisturbed, oppreflion and slavery
were in its train. The cloud of ignorance
fat thick and deep over the nations; and
the world was threatened with a relapse into
ancient barbarity. As soon as the true
knowledge of the Lord revived, at the aufpi-
cious ara of the Reformation, learning, li-
berty, and arts, began to Shine forth with it,
and- to resume their ltufre.

But the happy influence which religion

exerts on- society, extends much farther than
to effeats of this kind. It is not only sub-
fidiary to the improvement, but necessary to
the -preservation of society. It is the very
basis -on which it refts. Religious prin-
iple 'is what gives men the surest hold of
one another. That last and greateR pledge
of- vracity,--an oath, -without which no so-
-ciety could subsist, derives its whole aufho-
rity- from an- eftabliihe-d reverence of God,
to whom it is a -folen appeal. Banilfh rc-

Ii gioua

.
*

ligious principle, and you loosen all the S E R M.

XV.

bonds which connect mankind together; ·
you fhaake the fundamental pillar of mutual
confidence and trust; you render the fecu-
rity arising from laws, in a great measure,
void and ineffecual. Forhuman laws, and
human fanCions, cannot extend to number-
less cafes, in which the safety of mankind
is deeply concerned. They would prove
very feeble instruments of order and peace,
if there were no checks upon the condut of
men from the sense of divine legislation; if
no belief of future rewards and punishments
were to overawe conscience, and to lipply
the defeccs of human government.

Indeed, the belief of religion is of fucl

importance to public welfare, that the most
expressive deifription we could give of a
society of men in the utmost disorder, would
be to fay, that there was no fear of God
left among them. Imagination would im-
mediately conceive of them as abandoned to
rapine and violence, to perfidy and treachery;
as deceiving and deceived, oppressing and
oppressed; consumed by intestine broils,

g 3 and

SE R M. and ripe for becoming a prey to the first

Xv.
s__-. invader.: On the other hand, in order to

form the idea of a society flourishing in its
highest glory, we need only conceive the
belief of Christian principles exerting its full
influence on the hearts and lives of all the
members. Instantly, the most amiable scene
would open to our view. We should fee
the causes of public disunion removed, when
men were animated with that noble spirit of
love and charity which our religion breathes;
and formed to the pursuit of those higher
interests, which give no occasion to compe-
tition and jealousy. We should fee families,
neighbourhoods, and communities, living in
unbroken amity, and pursuing, with one
heart and mind, the common interest; so-
briety of manners, and simplicity of life,
restored; virtuous industry carrying on its
useful labours, and cheerful contentment
every where reigning. Politicians may lay
down what plans they please for advancing
public prosperity; but, in truth, it is the
prevalency of such principles of religion and
virtue, which forms the strength and glory

of

of a nation. When these are totally want- s E R M.

XV.

ing, no measures contrived by human wis-
dom can supply the defc£. In proportion
as they prevail, they raise the state of society
from that fad degeneracy into which it is at
preient funk; and carry it forward, under
the blessing of Heaven, towards that happy
period, when nation Jlaall not lift up their
Jword againfl nation, nor learn s'ar any
more.

In order to prove the importance of reli

gious knowledge to the interest of society,
one consideration more, deserving particu-
lar attention, remains to be mentioned. It
is, that if goodfeed be not sown in the field,
tares will infallibly spring up. The pro-
pension towards religion is strong in the
human heart. There is a natural prepay
ration in our minds, for receiving some im-
pressions of supernatural belief. Upon
these, among ignorant and uncultivated
men, superstition or enthufiafin never fail
to graft themselves. Into what monstrous
*forms these have ihot forth, and what va-
rious mischiefs they have produced to so-

G g 4 ciety,

S.E R M. ciety, is too well known. Nor is this the

XV.
v-_ whole of the danger. Designing men are

always ready to take advantage of this po-
pular weakriefs,! and tb direct the fuperfti-
tious bias of the multitude to their own am-
bitious and intereifed ends. Superfiition,
in itself a- formidable evil, threatens confe-
quences still more formidable, when it is
rendered the tool of design and craft. Hence
arises one of the most powerful arguments.
for propagating with zeal, as far as our in-
fluence can extend, the pure and undefiled
docrines of the Gospel of Christ; in order
that juit and rational. principles of religion
may fill, up that. room in the minds of men,
which dangerous fanaticism will otherwise
usurp.

This consideration alone is sufficient to

show the high utility of the design under-
taken by the ;Society for propagating Chris-
tian Knowledge. With great. propriety,.
they.have beflowed their chief attention on.
a remote quarter, of our own country, where,
from a variety of causes, ignorance and fi-!u
perdition had gained more ground, than in

any

any other corner of the land; where the S E R M.

XV.

inhabitants, by their local situation, were .v_.,.
more imperfectly supplied with the means.
of proper education and inftrucion; and at,
the fame time exposed to the seductions of
such as fought to pervert them from the
truth. The laudable endeavours of the
Society in diffusing religious and ufefuI
knowledge through this part of the country,
have already been crowned with much fuc-
cess; and more is still to be expected from
the continuance of their pious and well-
directed attention.

With such good designs, it becomes all

to co-operate, who are lovers of mankind.
Thus ihall they fiow their just sense of the
value of that blefling which they enjoy, in
the knowledge of the Gospel of Christ;
and their gratitude to Heaven for confer-
ring it upon them. Thus shall they make
the blessings of those who are now ready
to peryz/h through lack of knowledge, defccnd
upon their heads. Thus flhall they contri-
bute their endeavours for bringing forward
that happy period foretold by ancient pro-

phecy;

S E R M. phecy; when there Jhall be one Lord over

xv.

all the earth, and his name one; when that
nameJhall be great from the rising to thefit-
tingfn f ; when there IJall be nothing to hurt
nor defroy in all the holy ?mountain of God;
but judgment Jhall dwell in the wiicLr ncfs,
and righteoufiefs remain it the friuit flfield;
the deofrtJhall rejoice, and blo/omn as the rofc;
and the earth Jhall be fill of the knovledge
of the Lord as the waters cover the fia k,

Zcchar. xiv. 9. Malachi i. Ii. Ifiiiah xxxii. 16.
xxxv. I.

F I N I S.

# Just Published,

-tjl Pltbiij7~edi,
The E I C- HT HE D IT ION of tihe l 'c, i Voiu' of

S E R M 0 N S,

3Y

HUGH BLAIR, D. D.
One of teIC MINISTERS Of tlie IIIcGi CHURcI,

A ND
Pitoi"ss. a es Rrr(rTOR IC and B1GrTI',s IE'rTRLS illn the

University of Thin hnn~]i

# The following BOOKS were lately published by T. CADELL in the STRAND.

The following BOOKS were lately pub-

liihed by T. CADELL ill the STRAND .

' U ' R T 0.
'T HE History of Eglanid, from th Invaifion of

7'/lius C.rser to the Revolution. A new Ed*i-

tion, printed on ilne Paper, with nni! Correaliuns
and Additions ; and a complete index, 8 Vols. Roy1il
Paper. 71. 7s.

*** Another E'.dition on finill Paipcr. .41. Ies.

A*no Another Edlition in h Vols, Svo. 1a. Ss.

1The lii ll o s

,t Grr ,',/.;;i, f(otm the l.Rcilixtion

to the Accclitn cl1 tlhe loule of Jl.;:;':,. ly '?,:-;:;'.,'
.Lt'pl,'fij:, '.lk-iq; the d '.Edition; :2 Vol.. with .t
lle.ad ot thle A llulr. 21. 5s.

()liiinal IP.plis: C'. t.ii:ing tlhe Scclet Iliflory of
;rft ]a'it.: .i, f ion the Rcltlotiitioi to the Ac;\Celionl
tO tlhe I ttifc of T].:.:':I;'': ''u wliich aire pI'clixexl,

lxti.uis trni the life oi 'f/amrs II. :is wittclln y hin-
silt'; publifilcd trom the O)riiiials; 2 Vols. 21. :

IThe iliilory of &',t. ;.,:,/, dt il the. Reignls ofl

Qicc-n ./11, andl otf Kiili ; ':;'s \ 1. till his A,''celioni
to the Crown of i.'::!.,:i/; witlh a Review of thi S,, -'
iijh Ililloryt previous to tlhait lPiod i and ;an A\pplCn-
dix, contailning ('riin.al lPapeIs: 2 Vols. By //i'; .,;.
Ri.'rt{/v::, D). 1). tilt'e 5l1 Edition. 11. los.

<'"'' Another Elition, 2 Vols. Svo. I2s.
The Iliftory of the Reign of the Emnperor C2ar.'rs

V. with a View of the P'rogrcfs of Society in Europt,
from the Subvetion of the .Roman Empirec to the Be-
ginning ot the Sixtcelnt Clttly)'. )y J' 7li'ilan Ro-

bi,, Ji:,

bert~ySns, D. D). Embellishfd with .t lal.ites, cicg.mtly
cl 2,rzlvedk 3 Vols. 3l. 3s.

~ * Aiiother Edition, in 4 Vols. So. II. *l"*

T'he Fslory. of .Ae:c.ru:a, Voli. 1. nnd II. fly the

imlir Author. l lir'flrtis i ith Mp.
t1. ct.

'the flit ory of), til c' Reiill . P1:/ tolc

?Ic: o

CChe

r~i rug or cipaAn.-. I). I' okt(i
oft l)iIs~ y Irn i. hIetor ic, .ii (lI c U'ir (Iv i It y o St.

lioll ii.

JVI iC~C! Ii lc~ltIS S tItC PdJI)CrS, IIO.sl 1501 to I 72ó, iil

otheor E'a1ounih
c Col lci tVoio. 91. 2.S.

teuioirs oft (,esat Ih~iztain ;butl I,'/a,,d~, from~n tlrc

IT)hle lution of the mlid

I'a1irmczrt oFr11 oN til e. until

the Sca Battle o~f La J.IoSu. BJy Sir 7a/mr D/)~ympkc,
IAl-t. 21 l ditVo n ; 2 Vols. 2!. óso.

' Thac Scinotid Volumeo, conftflin chic1y of

LWc1tcr, from the Frnch Anabasnhdors in .tr/and
to N tehir Ce ourrt, Brid sarom C/jar/'s 11. somes t
Kingil ( oiiloams and Qaierrianicin, &c. &sc. ntr-

Tpcrsed wite hiSlorical Relationl s neFliiry tocon-

neó& the Papers together., may be hald separate.
Pi-ce A.. 2s. Boards.

'Anii Inquiry into' the Nature 'and Caues 'of the
'Wealth of NaNions. ByAldain 31nzth, LL. D. F. 'R. S.

formerly

formerly Profcfbor of Moral Philofphby in the Univer.
fity of Glasgow; 2 Vols. 21. 2s. 2d Edition.

An Account of the Voyages undertaken by Order

of h;s Present Majety, for nmaking Difcovcrics in the
Southern Hemilphere, and fucccflivcly performed by
Commodore Byro;i, Capt. ft'aill, tild Capt'. Cartcret,
in the Dolphin, Swallow, and the ,Elcdeavour 'Erawn up
from the Journals which were kept by' the fevral
Commanders, and from the Papers of 7ofeph Banks,
Efq; and Dr. Solhinder. By '/cob Harwufisvorth, 1,I,. D.
Illuflratcd with Cuts, and a great Variety of Charts
and Maps (in all 52 Plates) relative to the Countries
now first difcovcred, or hitherto but impetfeEtly known.
Price 31. 12s. bound.

An Account of a Voyage towards the South Pole,

and round the World: performed in his Majesty's
Ships the Rejblutiro and Jdvecnture, in the Years 1772,
1773, 1774, and 1775. Written by James Cook,
Commander of the Resolution. In which is included,
Captain Frncaux's Narrative of his Proceedings in the
Adventure, during the Separation of the Ships. Ele-
gantly printed in two Vols. Royal. Illufirated with
Maps and Charts, and a Variety of Portraits of Per-
sons and Views of Places, drawn during the Voyage
by Mr. Hodges, and engraved by the most eminent
Mailers. 21. 12S.

OCTAVO and TrWELVES.

A Biographical Hiflory of England, from Egbert the
Great to the Revolution: Confiting of Charaaers

disposed

disposed in difltrent Clafles, and adapted to a IMctho-
dical Catalogue of engraved Brittl/ Heai,;, interifcilcd
with Variety of Anecdotes and Mcimoirs of ;i grcat
Number of Persons not to be found in any other Bio-
graphical Work. 4 Vols. xl. 4s.

A Pbilofophical and Political Hiflory of the Settlc-

ments and Trade of the Europ,'ans in the Ea/ adll Is/s
lndies, translated from the French of the Abb6 Rcynall.
By 7. 7ilzamaiond, M. . A new Edition, :ciiciu-lly
reviled, in 5 Vols. 8vo. and illuflratcd with RMaps.
i1. los.

Sketches of the -liflory of Min, by the Author of
the Elements of Criticiln, 4 Vols. 11. 4s. 2d Edit.

Elemcnts of General I-iflory, translated froml the

Irench of the Abb6 Milot, Ancient and Modern Hi-
Itory; 5 Vols. 8vo. i. 15s.

An EJcclefiafiic;l Hiflory, Aiicicnt and Modern,

from the Birth of Chrifi to the Beginning of the prc-
sent Century. In which the Rife, Progress, and
Variations of Chiirch Power are conlidercd, in their
Connetion with the State of Learning and Philofo-
phy, arnd the political Hiflory of Etlrope, during that
Period. By the late learned y7ohn Lawrence Mojheizim,
D. D. Translated, and accompanied with Notes and
Chronological Tables, by ATchibald Maclainc, D. D.
To the whole is added an accurate Index. 'hp 2d
Edition, correeed and improved by additional Notcs,
and fcvcral Appendixes. 5 Vols. ii. ios.

Observations on Mount Yefuivius, Mount iEtna, and
other Volcanos, in a Series of Letters addrefled to

the

the Royal Society, from Sir Wlilliam Hamilton, Knight
of the Bath, F. R. S. To which are added Explana-
tory Notes, by the Author, hitherto unpublished.
Illustrated with Plates. 3d Edition. 4s. 6d.

A Tour through Sicily a~wff e ta I a Series of

Letters to William Beckfort, Efqi of Somerly, in -Sus-
folk, from P. Brydone, F. R. S. 2 Vols fillufirated
with a Map. 3d Edition. i2s.

A Tour through rome of the Northern Parts of Eu-

rope, particularly Copcnhagen, Stockholn, and Pctcf-
iurgh, in a Series of Letters, by N. Jr1-axall, Jun.
3d IEdition. 6s.

A Journey to theVeftlern Isles of Scotland. By the
Author of the Rambler. 6s.

A View of Society and Manners in Franc7 , Siit-

zerland, and Germany, with Anecdotes relating to
:some eminent Characters. By eyoh:, Moore, AI. D.
2 Vols. 3d Edition. i2s.

A Journey from Gibraltar to MIalaga, with a View

of the Garrison and its Environs, 'c. &c . Illustrated
with a View of each Municipal Town, and a Chart,
Sc. By.Francis Carter, Efq; 2 Vols. 14s.

Sermons on various SulbjeAs, by the late'yobn Far-

quhar, M. A. Minister at Nigg, carefully correced
*from the Author's MSS. by George Campbell, D. D.
Principal of Marifchal College; and Alexander Ger-
rard, D. D. IProfeffor of Divinity in King's College,
.ABrdeen. 2 Vols. 3d Edition. 7s.

*!Abho
