,W- ;
,: '   j
111 I,,, 9

s
1 9

1

SERMONS,

BY
HUGH BLAIR, D.D. F.R.S. Ed.

One of the MINISTERS of the HIGH CHURCH,

AND
PROFESSOR of RHETORIC and BELLLES TTRES

in the UNIVERSITY, of EDINBURGH.

IN FOUR VOLUMES.

VOL. I.
THE NINETEENTH EDITION.

LONDO N;
PRINTED FOR A. STRAHAN, AND T. CADELL;

AND W. CREECH, EDINBURGH:
And Sold by T. CADELL Jun'. and W. DAVIES.

(Succelfors to Mr. CADELL,) in the Strand.

M DCC XCIV.

# TO THE QUEEN.

TO THE

Q U E E N.

MADAM,
W HEN the Firfi Volume of these

Sermons was published, I did

not presume to request the liberty
of prefixing to them a Name so
illustrious. Encouraged by the
favourable manner in which the
Public has received Two Volumes,

A I now

I now humbly beg leave, on the
publication of a Thild, to lay them
all before your MAJESTY.

Had I been in doubt to whom

they could be presented with the
greatert propriety, the public voice
would irftantly have directed me
to the Person to whom I have now
the honour of addressing myself.
Discourses intended to promote re-
ligion and virtue can be inscribed
to none more suitably than to One
who, in the higheRt station of life,
has ever supported the cause of re-
ligion by her conspicuous regard
for it; who has advanced the in-
terets of virtue, by her distinguish-
ed example; and who, by a'happy
union of the amiable with the efti-
mable qualities, has commanded

4' ' the

the love and the refped of a great
nation.

It is a signal blefing to a king-

dom, when a Person whose charac-
ter would have reflected honour
upon any condition of fortune, is
placed by Providence in that ele-
vated rank, which allows her virtues
to shine with extensive lustre, and
to diffuse their auspicious influence
over a whole land.

That this influence of your MA-

JESTY'S virtues may long continue
to be felt; that while they alleviate
the cares, and increase the comfort
of our gracious Sovereign; while
they improve the minds, and con-
tribute to the felicity of your illus-
trious offspring; they may, at the
fame time, successfully exert their

power

power in forming the public man-
ners on a pattern so worthy of imi-
tation, shall be my sincere wish
and earnest prayer.

I have the honour to be, with
profound refpe&t,

MADAM,
Your MAJESTY'S most humble,

And molt devoted servant,

HUGH BLAIR.

# THE CONTENTS.

THE
CONT E NTS.

SERMON I.

On the Union of Piety and Morality.
AcTS, x. 4. Thy prayers and thine alns

are come up for a memorial before
God. - - Page

SERMON II.
On the Influence of Religion upon

Adversity.
PSALM xxvii. 5. In the time of trou-

ble, he Jfall hide me in his pavilion;
in the secret of his tabernacle Jfall
be hide me; he f all set me up upon
p rock. - 25

SERMON III.
On the Influence of Religion upon

Prosperity.
PSALM i. 3. He Pall be like a tree

planted by the rivers of water, that
briigeth forth his fruit in hisfeafon;
his leaf also Jhall not wither, and
whatsoever he doth Jhallprofper. Page 58

SERMON IV.
On our Imperfet Knowledge of a

Future State.

I CORINTH. xiii. 12. For now we
fee through a glafi, darkly. 85

SERMON V.

On the Death of Christ,
JOHN, xvii. I. yefus lift up his eyes

to Heaven, and said, Father! the
hour is come !-- I 15

SERMON VI.

On Gentleness.

JAMES, iii. 17. The wifdomn that is
from above, is-gentle- Page I45

S E R MIO N VII.

On the Disorders of the Passions.
ESTHER, v. 13. Yet all this ava'ileth

me ,othing,Jfo long as I f:e Morn/ecai
the Yew silting at the King's gate. 1 73

S E R M O N VIII.
On our Ignorance of Good and Evil

in this Life.
ECCLESIAST. Vi. 12. 11ho klno:eth

what is good for man in this lifi, ill
the dys of hhs vain .lif, which hJe
fpendeth as a fiaowr ? - 04

VOL. I. a

SERMON IX.

On Religious Retirement.
PSALM iv. 4. Commrnune wziih yrur own

heart, upon your bed, and befJill. Page 234

SER MON X.

On Devotion.
ACTS, x. 2. Cornelius-A devout man. 264

SERMON XI.

On the Duties of the Young;
TITUS, ii. 6. Young men likewtfe ex-

hort, to be fober-minded. - 396

SER MIO N XIT.
On the Duties and Consolations of

the Aged,
PROV. xvi. 31. The hoary head is a

crown of glory, if it b fobund in the
way of righteoulefs. - 341

SERMON XIII.

On the Power of Conscience.
GENESIS, xlii. 21, 22. And theyfaid

one to another, We are verily guilty
concerning our bro '!cr, in that we
saw the anguijh.of his fJul, when
he besought us; and we would not
hear: Therefore is this dftrefs come
upon us. And Ruben atfwered them,
faying, Spake 1 not unto you, faying,
Do not fin againjl the child; and ye
iwould not hear ? Therefore, behold
also his blood is required. Page 375

SERMON XIV.
On the Mixture of Joy and Fear in

Religion.
PSALM ii. I . Rejoice with trembling. 413

I~~~~~1

SERMON XV.
On the Motives to Conflancy in

Virtue.
GAL. vi.. And let us not be weary

in well-doing; for in due season we
Jkall reap, f we faint not. Page 439

# SERMON I. On the Union of PIETY and MORALITY. ACTS, X. 4. Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God.

J iX*XX+- rX+-?X9X-rX X-?;X+tX

S E R M ON I.
On the Union of PIETY and MORALITY.

ACTS, X. 4.
Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for

a memorial before God.
KSY'i HE High and Lofty One who E R M.

kg inhabitebt eternity, dwelleth ayo ,__

kjr I with him that is of humble
and contrite heart. In the midlt of
his glory, the Almighty is not inatten-
tive to the meanest of his subje&s. Nei-
ther obscurity of station, nor imperfec-
tion of knowledge, finks those below his

VOL. I, B regard,

S E R M. regard, who worship and obey him. Every
Iy~~ prayer which they fend up from their fe-

cret retirements, is listened to by him;
and every work of charity which they per-
form, how unknown soever to the world,
attracs his notice. The text presents a
signal infiance of this comfortable truth.
In the city of Cefarea, there dwelt a
Roman centurion, a military officer of
infeiiour rank, a Gentile, neither by
birth nor religion entitled to the privi-
leges of the Jewith nation. But he was a
devout and a benevolent man; who, ac-
cording to his measure of religious know-
ledge, studied to perform his duty, prayed
to God always, and gave muich alms to the
people. Such a character passed not un-
observed by God. So highly was it ho-
noured, that to this good centurion an
Angel was lent from heaven, in order to
diret him to the means of full inftrudion
in the truth. The Angel accosts him
with this salutation, Cornelius, Thyr prayers
and thine alms are come tupfor a memorial
before God.

It

It is to the conjuntion of prayers and S ER .

alms, that I purpose now to diret your ,-aI
thoughts, as describing the refpetable
and amiable charater of a man, as form-
ing the honour and the blessedness of a
true Christian; piety.joined with charity,
faith with good works, devotion with mo-
rality. These are things which God hath
connectedi and which it is impious in'
man to separate. It is only when they
remain united, that they can come up as
a grateful memorial before God. I flhall first
endeavour to shew you, That alms with-
out prayers, or prayers without alms, mo-
rality without devotion, or devotion with-
out morality, are extremely defetive; .and
then shall point out the happy effeds of:
their mutual union.

LIT us begin with confidering the cafe

of alms without prayers; that is, of good
works without piety, or a proper sense
of God and religion. Examples bs this
are not uncommon in the world. With
many, Virtue is, or at least is preterided

1B2 to

SE R M. to be, a refpetable and an honoured
.-y-- name, while Piety founds meanly in their

ears. They are men of the world, and
they claim to be men of honour. They
reft upon their humanity, their public
spirit, their probity, and their truth.
They arrogate to themselves all the manly
and the acive virtues. But devout assec-
tions, and religious duties, they treat with
contempt, as founded on shadowy fpe.
culations, and fit to employ the attention
only of weak and superstitious minds.
Now, in opposition to such persons, I
contend, That this neglea of piety ar-
gues depravity of heart; and that it in-
sers an irregular discharge of the duties of
morality.

FIRST, it argues internal depravity;

for it discovers a cold and a hard heart.
If there be any impression which man is
formed by nature to receive, it is a sense
of religion. As soon as his mind opens
to observation and refletion, he discerns
innumerable marks of his dependent state.

He

He finds himself placed, by some fuperiour s E R M.

I.

power, in a vast world, where the wisdom --
and goodness of the Creator are conlpicu-
ous on every fide. The magnificence, the
beauty and order of nature, excite him to
admire and adore. When he looks up
to that omnipotent hand which operates
throughout the universe, he is impressed
with reverence. When he receives bless-
ings which he cannot avoid ascribing to
divine goodness, he is prompted to grati-
tude. The expreflions of those affecions,
under the various forms of religious wor-
ship, are no other than native effusions of
the human heart. Ignorance may mislead,
and superstition may corrupt them; but
their origin is derived from sentiments that
are essential to man.

Cast your eyes over the whole earth.

Explore the molf remote quarters of the
east or the weft. You may discover tribes
of men without policy, or laws, or cities,
or any of the arts of life: But no where
will you find them without some form of
religion. In every region you behold the

B 3 profirate

SER M. proitrate worshipper, the temple, the altar,

I.
1-v- and the offering. Wherever men have

existed, they have been sensible that some
acknowledgment was due, on their part,
to the Sovereign of the world. If, in their
rudest and most ignorant state, this obli-
gation has been felt, what additional force
muff it acquire by the improvements of
human knowledge, but especially by the
great discoveries of the Christian revela-
tion? Whatever, either from reverence or
from gratitude, can excite men to the
worthip of God, is by this revelation
placed in fiich a light, as one ihould
think were sufficient to overawe the most
thoughtless, and to melt the most obdurate
mind.

Canst thou, then, pretend to be a man

of reason, nay, a man of virtue, and yet
continue regardless of one of the first and
chief dicates of human nature? Where
is thy sensibility to what is right and fit,
if that loud voice which calls all nations
throughout the earth to religious homage,
hias never been heard by thee? Or, if it

ITr ~ has

has been heard, by what strange and false SE R M.
refinements haft thou stifled those natural ,-,-
sentiments which it tends to awaken?
Calling thyself a son, a citizen, a friend;
claiming to be faithful and affectionate
in these relations; haft thou no sense of
what thou oweft to thy first Parent, thy
highest Sovereign, thy greatest Benefac-
tor? Can it be consistent with true virtue
or honour, to value thyself upon thy re-
gard to inferiour obligations, and yet to
violate that which is the most sacrcd and
the most ancient of all ? When simple in-
ftind teaches the Tartar and the Indian,
together with his alms and good works, to
join his prayers to that Power whom he
confiders as the source of good, shall it be
no reproach, in the most enlightened state
of human nature, and under the purest
difpeniation of religion, to have extin-
guifhed the sense of gratitude to Heaven,
and to flight all acknowledgment of the
great and the true God ? What does such
conduct imply, but either an entire want,
or a wilful fuppreflion, of some of the best

B4 and

S E R M. and mofft generous affeaions belonging to
L - u human nature ?-Surely, there must be an

eflential defet in that heart which remains
cold and insensible, where it ought to be
affeaed most warmly. Surely, such a de-
gree of depravity mufft be lodged there, as
is sufficient to taint all the other springs
of pretended virtue.

BUT besides this, I muff contend, in

the second place, That where religion is
negleced, there can be no regular nor
fleady pracice of the duties of morality.
The characer will be often inconsistent;
and Virtue, placed on a basis too narrow
to support it, will be always loose and
tottering. For such is the propensity of
our nature to vice, so numerous are the
temptations to a relaxed and immoral
conduc, that stronger restraints than
those of mere reason, are necessary to be
imposed on man. The sense of right and
wrong, the principle of honour, or the
inftina of benevolence, are barriers too
feeble to withstand the strength of passion.

In

In the tranquil seasons of life, these natural SE M.
principles may, perhaps, carry on the ordi- -
nary course of social duties with some regu-
larity. But wait until some trying emer-
gence come. Let the conflict of pafiions
arise. Let the heart be either wounded by
fore distress, or agitated by violent emo-
tions; and you shall presently fee, that vir-
tue without religion is inadequate to the go-
vernment of life. It is destitute of its pro-
per guard, of its firmest support, of its chief
encouragement. It will fink under the
weight of misfortune; or will yield to the
solicitation of guilt.

The great motives that produce con-

ftancy and firmness of adion, muf be of
a palpable and striking kind. A divine Le-
giflator, uttering his voice from heaven;
an omniscient Witness, beholding us in
all our retreats; an Almighty Governour,
stretching forth his arm to punish or re-
ward, disclosing the secrets of the invisible
world, informing us of perpetual reft pre-
pared hereafter for the righteous, and of
indignation and wrath awaiting the wicked:

14 These

S ERM. These are the considerations which over-
- ; awe the world, which support integrity,

and check guilt. They add to virtue that
solemnity which should ever characerize
it. To the admonitions of conscience they
give the authority of a law. Co-operating
with all the good dispositions of a pious
man, they strengthen and insure their in-
fluence. On his alms you can have no
certain dependence, who thinks not of
God, nor has joined prayer to his chari-
table deeds. But when humanity is fe-
conded by piety, the spring from which
it flows is rendered, of course, more re-'
gular and corftant.-In short, withdraw
religion, and you shake all the pillars of
morality. In every heart you weaken the
influence of virtue: And among the mul-
titude, the bulk of mankind, you over-
throw its power.

HAVING thus shewn that morality with-

out devotion is both defective and unstable,
I proceed to confider the other extreme,
of prayers without alms, devotion without
morality.

In

In every age the practice has prevailed, s E R M.

of substituting certain appearances of piety ,--
in the place of the great duties of huma-
nity and mercy. Too many there have
always been, who flatter themselves with
the hope of obtaining the friendthip of
their Creator, though they negledc to do
justice to their fellow-creatures. But such
persons may be assured, that their supposed
piety is altogether of a spurious kind. It
is an invention of their own, unknown to
reason, unknown in the word of God. In
scripture we are ever direced to try our
faith by our works, our love of God by our
love of men. We are directed to confider
piety as a principle which regenerates the
heart, and forms it to goodness. We are
taught, that in vain we address any ads of
homage to Christ, unless we do the things
which he faith; and that love, peace, gen-
tlenes, goodness, meceknes, and temperance,
are not only the injunctions of his law, but
the native fruits of his spirit *. If there-

Luke, vi. 46. Gal. v. zz.

fore,

S E RM. fore, while piety seems ardent, morality

I.
--_ shall decline, you have full reason to be-

lieve, that into that piety some corrupting
ingredients have entered. And if ever
your regard to morality shall totally fail;
if, while you make many prayers, you
give no alms; if, while you appear to be
zealous for God, you are false or unjust to
men; if you are hard or contraded in
heart, severe in your censures, and oppref-
five in your conduc; then conclude with
certainty, that what you had termed piety
was no more than an empty name. For
as soon, according to the scripture fimili-
tude, will bitter waters flow from a sweet
fountain, as such effeds be produced by ge-
nuine piety.

What you have called by that name,

resolves itself into one or other of three
things. Either it is a hypocritical form
of godliness, assumed in order to impose
on the world; or, which is the mot fa-
vourable supposition, it is a transient im-
preflion of seriousness, an accidental melt-
ing of the heart, which pajes away like

the

the morning cloud and the early dew; or, SERM.
which I am afraid is too often the cafe,
it is the deliberate refuge of a deluded
and superstitious, but, at the fame time,
a corrupted mind. For all men, even the
most depraved, are fubje&, more or less,
to compuntions of conscience. It has
never been in their power to withdraw
totally beyond the reach of that warning
voice, which tells them that something is
necessary to be done, in order to make
their peace with the Ruler of the world.
But, backward at the fame time to resign
the gains of dishonesty, or the pleasures
of vice; averse from submission to that
sacred law which enjoins righteousness
in its whole extent, they have often at-
tempted to make a fort of composition
with Heaven; a composition, which,
though they dare not avow it in words,
lurks in secret at the bottom of many a
heart. If God will only dispense with
some articles of obedience, they will re-
pay him with abundant homage. If they
fail in good pracice, they will study to

be

(i

SE RM. be found in belief; and, by the number of

Iy~J their prayers, will atone, in some measure,

for their deficiency in charitable deeds.

But the attempt is as vain as it is im-

pious. From the simplest and plainest
principles of reason it must appear, that
religious worihip, disjoined from justice
and virtue, can upon no account what-
ever find acceptance with the Supreme
Being. To what pin'pofe is the multitude
of your facrfices unto me? f ith the Lord.
Bring no more vain oblations. Incense is air
abomination unto me. The new moons and
sabbaths, the calling of qjemlblies, I cannot
away with; it is iniquity, even the Jolenmn
meetings".- Cease, foolish and impious
man! Cease to confider the Almighty as a
weak or vain-glorious being, who is to
be appeased by thy devout prostrations,
and thy humble words; or to be gratified
_y the parade and ostentation of external
wor(hip. What is all thy worship to him ?
Will he eat the fiefJ of thy facrficcs, or
drink the blood of offered goats ? Was wor-

* Ifa. i. ii. 1,4.

ship

ship required of thee, dost thou think, SER M.

I.

upon his account, that thou mighteft :
bring an increase to his glory and feli-
city by thy weak and insignificant praises ?
Sooner mighteft thou increase the fplen-
dour of the fun by a lighted taper, or add
to the thunder by thy voice. No: It is
for the fake of man, not of God, that
worihip and prayers are required; not that
God may be rendered more glorious, but
that man may be made better; that he may
be confirmed in a proper sense of his de-
pendent state, and acquire those pious and
virtuous dispositions in which his highest
improvement consists.

Of all the principles in religion, one

should take this to be the most evident;
and yet frequent admonitions are needed,
to renew the impression of it upon man-
kind. For what purpose did thy Creator
place thee in this world, in the midfr of
human society, but that as a man among
men thou mighteft cultivate humanity;
that each in his place might contribute
to the general welfare; that as a spouse, a

brother,

SEIRM. brother, a son, or a friend, thou mighteft

I.
-~; aa thy part with an upright and a tender

heart; and thus aspire to resemble Him
who ever consults the good of his crea-
tures, and whose tender mercies are over
all his works ? And dares thou, who haft
been sacrificing unfufpicious innocence to
thy loose pleasures; thou, who haft been
disturbing the repose of society by thine
ambition or craft; thou, who, to increase
thy treasures, haft been making the wi-
dow and the orphan weep; dareft thou
approach God with thy worlhip and thy
prayers, and entertain the hope that he
will look down upon thee in peace? Will
the God of order and justice accept such
poor compensation for his violated laws?
Will the God of love regard the services
of one who is an enemy to his creatures?
Shall a corrupter of the society of men
aspire to the habitations of pure and bleT-
ed spirits ?-Believe it, He that faith he
loveth God, mufi love his brother aso. Cease
to do evil: learn to do well. Seek judg-
ment, relieve the opprefed, judge the fa-

thcrle/s,

fterlef;, plead for the widow: And then, s E R M.
Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh .
to thee; call upon him in the day of trouble,
and he will answer thee. Thy prayers and
thine alms shall then ascend in joint memo-
rial before the Most High.

I HAVE now shewn the evil of maiming

and splitting religion; of dividing asunder
two things, which though in theory they
may be separated, yet in pratice must al-
ways co-exist, if either of them be real, De-
votion to God, and Charity to men. Let
us confider next the happy effeCts of their
union.

Their union forms the confifent, the

graceful, the refpedable character of the
real Christian, the man of true worth.
If you leave either of them out of your
system, even though you excel in the
other, you can stand trial only in one
point of view. It is only on one fide
your character is fair; on the other, it
will always be open to much reproach.
And as you dishonour yourselves, ib you

VOL. I, C do

S E RM. do great injustice to religion. For, by
E_, dividing its parts from one another, you

never fail to expose it to the censure of
the world: And perhaps, by this fort of
partial and divided goodness, religion has
fuflered more in the esteem of mankind,
than by open profligacy. The unbeliever
will scoff at your piety, when he fees you
negligent of moral duties. The bigot will
decry all morality, when he fees you pre-
tending to be a follower of virtue, though
you be a despiser of God. Whereas he
who fears God, and is at the fame time
just and beneficent to men, exhibits reli-
gion to the world with full propriety. It
thines in his conduct with its native fplen-
dour; and its rays throw a glory round
him. His charadcer is above reproach. It
is at once amiable and venerable. Malice
itl2'f is afraid to attack him; and even
the wcrft men refpccd and honour him in
their hearts.

This too is the man whose life will be

most peaceful and happy. I-e who fails
materially either in piety or in virtue, is

2 always

always obnoxious to the anguish of re- E R M.
morse. His partial goodness may flatter --
him in the day of filperficial observation;
but when solitude or diflrcfs awakens the
powers of rcfleCiion, he ihall be made to
feel, that one part of duty performed, atones
not for another which is negledcd. In the
inidft of his prayers, the remembrance of
injustice will upbraid shim with hypocrisy;
and in the (liftribution of his alms, the
prayers which the poor put up for him,
vill make him blush for his neglect of God.
Conicience will supply the place of the
hand coming forth to write over against
him on the wall, Thou art weighed in the
balance, and art found wanting %. Where-
as he who holds both faith and a good con-
science, who attends equally to the dilcharge
of his duty towards God and towards man,
enjoys, as far as human imperfection al-
lows, the sense of fairness and consistency in
condut, of integrity and soundness of heart.

The man of mere morality is a franger
to all the delicate and refined pleasures of

* Dan. v. 27.

C 2 devo.

SE RM. devotion. In works of beneficence and
a__ mercy, he may enjoy fatisfadion. But

his fatisfaaion is destitute of that glow of
affecton, which enlivens the feelings of
one who lifts his heart at the fame time to
the Father of the Universe, and confi-
ders himself as imitating God. The man
again who refts solely in devotion, if that
devotion open not his heart to humanity,
not only remains a stranger to the plea-
fures of beneficence, but muff often un-
dergo the pain ariling from bad passions.
But when beneficence and devotion are
united, they pour upon the man in whom
they meet, the full pleasures of a good
and pure heart. His alms conneced him
with men; his prayers with God. He
looks without dismay on both worlds.
All nature has to him a benign asped.
If engaged in ative life, he is the
friend of men; and he is happy in the
exertions of that friendship. If left in
retirement, he walks among the works of
nature, as with God. Every objea is en-
livened to him by the sense of the Divine

presence.

presence. Every where he traces the be- s E R M.
neficent hand of the Author of nature; .-
and every where, with glowing heart, he
hears and answers his secret voice. When
he looks up to heaven, he rejoices in the
thought that there dwells that God whom
he serves and honours; that Saviour in
whom he trusts; that Spirit of grace from
whose inspiration his piety and his charity
flow. When he looks around him on the
world, he is soothed with the pleasing re-
membrance of good offices which he has
done, or at least has fludied to do, to many
who dwell there. How comfortable the
reflecion, that him no poor man can
upbraid for having with-held his due; him
no unfortunate man can reproach for having
seen and despised his sorrows; but that
on his head are descending the prayers of
the needy and the aged; and that the hands
of those whom his protection has supported,
or his bounty has fed, are lifted up in secret
to bless him !

Life, passed under the influence of filch
dispositions, naturally leads to a ha1ry

C3 e'.

SER M. end. It is not enough to fay, that faith
,_-- and piety, joined with acive virtue, con-

flitute the requisite preparation for hea-
ven. They in truth begin the enjoyment
of heaven. In every slate of our exitlence,
they form the chief ingredients of felicity.
Hence they are the great marks of Christ-
ian regeneration. They are the figna-
ture of that Holy Spirit, by which good
men are laid to be .flld lito the day of
redemipion. The text affords a firiking
proof of the eliimation in which they are
held by God. Amidfl that infinite va-
riety of human events which pals tnder
his eye, the prayers and the alms of Cor-
nelius attracaed his particular notice. He
remarked the amiable dif)olitions which
rose in the heart of this good man. But
he saw that they were yet imperfet, while
he remained unenlightened by the prin-
ciples of the Christian religion. In order
to remove this obl'rudion to his riling
graces, and to bring him to the full know-
ledge cf that God whom he bfught to
honotur, he wvas favoured with a super.

natural

natural meflage from heaven. While the SERM.
princes of the earth were left to aa by the
counsels of their own wisdom; while with-
out interposition from above, generals con-
quered or fell, according to the viciflitude
of human things; to this good Centurion
an angel was commissioned from the throne
of God.

What can I fay more or higher in praise

of this blessed character, than that it is
what God delights to honour ? Men single
out as the objects of distinCtion, the great,
the brave, or the renowned. But he zwho
feeth not as man fecth, pafling by those
qualities which often shine with false fplen-
dour to human observation, looks to the
inward principles of acion; to those prin-
ciples which form the effcnce of a worthy
charader, and which, if called forth, would
give birth to whatever is laudable or excel-
lent in conduct. Is there one, though in
humble station, or obscure life, whoJ ar-
eth Cod, anld vwo-ret,5 ,riltoo!lfi, fs; whose
prayers and alms, proceeding in regular
unafficted tenour, belpeak the upright, the

C 4 tender,

S ER M. tender, the devout heart ? Those alms and

- prayers come up in memorial before that

God who is no refpeter of persons. The
Almighty beholds him from his throne with
complacency. Divine illumination is ready
to infirua him. Angels minister to him.
They now mark him out on earth as their
future associate; and for him they make
ready in paradise, the white robes, thepalms,
and thefceptres of the just.

To this honour, to this blessedness, let

our hearts continually aspire; and through-
out the whole of life, let those solemn and
sacred words with which I conclude, found
in your ears, and be the great directory of
our conduct: ` lie hath Jhewed thee, 0 man,
what is good; and what doth the Lord thy
God require of thee, but-to do jeifly andlove
mercy-and to walk humbly with thy God?

Micah, vi. 8.

# SERMON II. On the Influence of RELIGION upon ADVERSITY. PSALM xxvii. 5. In the time of trouble, he shall hide me in his pavilion; in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me upon...

[ 2 ]

SERMON II.
On the Influence of RELIGION upon

ADVERSITY.

-------- aner

PSALM XXvii. 5.
hI the time of troukle, he f/.all hide me

in his pavilion; in the fccret of his ta-
bernacle fl.iall he hide me; he fJallfet me
upon a rock.

H E life of man has always been a S ERM.
very mixed slate, full of uncer- _

tainty and vicissitude, of anxieties and fears.
In every religious audience, there are many
who fall under the denomination of the
unfortunate; and the reft are ignorant how
soon they may be called to join them. 1 r
the prolperity of no man on earth is fible
and allured. Dark clouds may soon gather

over

SE R M. over the heads of those whose fly is now

most bright. In the midst of the deceitful
calm which they enjoy, the florm that is
to overwhelm them has perhaps already
begun to ferment. If a man live many
years, and rejoice in themn all; yet let him
remember the days of darkneJf, for theyJall
be many .

Hence, to a thoughtful mind, no study

can appear more important, than how to
be suitably prepared for the misfortunes of
life; so as to contemplate them in pro-
fpea without dismay, and, if they must
befal, to bear them without dejection.
Throughout every age, the wisdom of the
wife, the treasures of the rich, and the
power of the mighty, have been employ-
ed, either in guarding their fla:e against
the approach of distress, or in rendering
themselves less vulnerable by its attacks.
Power has endeavoured to remove adver-
fity to a distance. Philosophy has studied,
when it drew nigh, to conquer it by pa-
tience; and Wealth has fought out every

* Ecclf. xi. 8.

pleafnurc

pleasure that can compensate or alleviate SER M.
pain.

While the wisdom of the world is thus

occupied, religion has been no less atten-
tive to the fame important objet. It in-
forms us in the text, of a pavilion, which
God erets to shelter his servants in the
time of trouble, of afiecrct place in his taber-
nacle, into which he brings them; of a
rock on whbich he Jets them up; and else-
where he tells us, of afJJiclI and a buckler,
which he spreads before them, to cover
them frm othe terrour by night, and the ar-
row that fiieth by3 day. Now, of what
nature are those instruments of defence,
which God is representcd as providing
with such solicitous care for thole who
fear him? Has he reared up any bul-
warks, impregnable by misfortune, in
order to separate the pious and virtuous
from the reft of mankind, and to screen
them fiom the common difalters of life?
No: To those dilafters we behold them
liable no less than others. The defence
which religion provides, is altogether of

an

S E RM. an internal kind. It is the heart, not the

outward state, which it professes to guard.
When the time of trouble comes, as come it
must to all, it places good men under the
pavilion of the Almighty, by affording
them that security and peace which arise
from the belief of divine protetion. It
brings them into thefJcret of bis tabernacle,
by opening to them sources of consolation
which are hidden from others. By that
strength of mind with which it endows
them, it efts them up upon a rock, againfa
which the temper may violently beat, but
which it cannot (hake.

How far the comforts proceeding from

religion merit those high titles under
which they are here figuratively described,
I fiall in this discourse endeavour to
,how. I shall for this end compare toge-
ther the situation of bad men, and that
of the good, when both are suffering the
misfortunes of life; and then make such
improvement as the subjea will naturally
suggest.

I. RELI-

I. RELIGION prepares the mind for en- SERM.

countering, with fortitude, the most severe
shocks of adversity; whereas vice, by its
natural influence on the temper, tends to
produce dejeaion under the flightell trials.
While worldly men enlarge their posses-
sions, and extend their connceions, they
imagine that they are firengthening them-
selves againrf all the pofible vicilitudcs of
life. They fay in their hearts, My moun-
tarin Jands Jfrong, and I J7Jnll never be
moved. But lb fatal is their delusion, that,
instead of strengthening, they are weaken-
ing that which can oily support them when
those vicissitudes come. It is their mind
which must then iiploirt themn; and their
mind, by their sensual attachments, is cor-
rupted and enfeebled. Addidled with in-
temperate fondneis to the picafures of the
world, they incur twvo great and certain
evils; they both exclude themselves from
every resource exccpt the world; and they
increase their sensibility to every blow which
comes upon them from that quarter.

l They

SE R M. They have neither principles nor tem-
t ,-_ per which can fland the assault of trouble.

They have no principles which lead them
to ook beyond the ordinary rotation of
events; and therefore, when misfortunes
involve them, the profped must be com-
fortlefs on every lide. Their crimes have
disqualified them from lo. king up to the
assistance of any higher power than their
own ability, or for relying on any better
guide than their own wifilom. And as
from principle they cal derive no sup-
port, so in a temper corrupted by pro-
fperity they find no relief. They have
loft that moderation of mind which en-
ables a wife man to accommodate himself
to his situation. Long fed with false
hopes, they are exasperated and flung by
every disappointment. Iuxurious and es-
feminate, they can bear no uneasiness.
Proud and presumptuous, they can brook
no opposition. By nourishing dispositions
which so little suit this uncertain slate,
they have infused a double portion of bit-
ternefs into the cup of woe; they have

fihnrpened

lharpened the edge of that sword which is SE R M.
lifted up to finite them. Strangers to all ,,_
the temperate fatisfations of a good and a
pure mind; strangers to every pleasure ex-
cept what was seasoned by vice or vanity,
their adversity is to the last degree difcon-
solate. Health and opulence were the two
pillars on which they reftcd. Shake either
of them; and their whole edifice of hope
and comfort falls. Profirate and forlorn,
they are left on the ground; obliged to join
with the man of Ephraim in his abjec
lamentation, They have takcn awcay my
gods which I have made, and what have I
more ?--Such are the caures to which we
muff ascribe the broken spirits, the peevish
temper, and impatient paflions, that so
often attend the declining age, or falling
fortunes, of vicious men.

But how diifercnt is the condition of a

truly good man in those trying situations
of life! Religion had gradually prepared
his mind for all the events of this incon-
ftant state. It had inftruaed him in the

Judges, xviii. z4.

nature

SERM. nature of true happiness. It had early

weaned him from the undue love of the
world, by discovering to him its vanity,
and by setting higher prorpeas in his
view. Affliceions do not attack him by
surprise, and therefore do not overwhelm
him. He was equipped for the storm, as
well as the calm, in this dubious naviga-
tion of life. Under those conditions he
knew himself to be brought hither, that
he was not to retain always the enjoy-
ment of what he loved : And therefore he
is not overcome by disappointment, when
that which is mortal, dies; when that
which is mutable, begins to change; and
when that which he knew to be transient,
passes away.

All the principles which religion teaches,

and all the habits which it forms, are fa-
vourable to ftlength of mind. It will be
found, that whatever purifies, fortifies
also the heart. In the course of living
righteotfly, fobcril,, and godlt, a good man
acquires a fReady and well-governed fpi-
rit. Trained, by Divine grace, to enjoy

with

with moderation the advantages of the s E RM.
world, neither lifted up by success, nor ._
enervated with sensuality, he meets the
changes in his lot without unmanly de-
jeftion. He is inured to temperance and
restraint. He has learned firmness and
felf-command. He is accufsomed to
look up to that Supreme Providence,
which disposes of human affairs, not
with reverence only, but with trust and
hope.

The time of prosperity was to him

not merely a season of barren joy, but
producive of much useful improvement.
He had cultivated his mind. He had
frored it with useful knowledge, with
good principles and virtuous difpofi-
tions. These resources remain entire,
when the days of trouble come. They
remain with him in sickness, as in
health; in poverty, as in the midst of
riches; in his dark and solitary hours,
no less than when surrounded with
friends and gay society. From the glare
of prosperity he can, without dejetion,

VOL. I. D withdraw

s E R M. withdraw into the ifade. Excluded from

. several advantages of the world, he may

be obliged to retreat into a narrower
circle; but within that circle he will find
many comforts left. His chief pleasures
were always of the calm, innocent, and
temperate kind; and over these, the
changes of the world have the least power.
His mind is a kingdom to him; and he
can still enjoy it. The world did not
bestow upon him all his enjoyments; and
therefore it is not in the power of the
world, by its most cruel attacks, to carry
them all away.

II. THE distresses of life are alleviated

to good men, by reflections on their past
conduct; while, by such reflections, they
are highly aggravated to the bad. During
the gay and acive periods of life, finners
elude, in some measure, the force of con-
science. Carried round in the whirl of
affairs and pleasures; intent on contriv-
ance, or eager in pursuit; amused by hope,
or elated by enjoyment; they are fieltered,

by

by that crowd of trifles which surrounds SER M.
them, from serious thought. But con-
science is too great a power to remain
always suppressed. There is in every
man's life, a period when he shall be
made to stand forth as a real object to
his own view: And when that period
comes, woe to him who is galled by the
fight! In the dark and solitary hour of
distress, with a mind hurt and fore from
some recent wound of fortune, how shall
he bear to have his character for the first
time disclosed to him, in that humiliating
light under which guilt will necessarily
present it ? Then the recollection of the
past becomes dreadful. It exhibits to him
a life thrown away on vanities and follies,
or consumed in flagitiousness and fin; no
station properly supported ; no material
duties fulfilled. Crimes which once had
been easily palliated, rife before him in
their native deformity. The sense of guilt
mixes itself with all that has befallen him.
He beholds, or thinks that he beholds,
the hand of the God whom he hath of-

D 2 fended,

SERM. fended, openly firetched out against him.

-At a season when a man stands moif in
need of support, how intolerable is the
weight of this additional load, aggra-
vating the depression of disease, difap-
pointment, or old age! How miserable
his Rtate, who is condemned to endure at
once the pangs of guilt, and the vexations
of calamity! Thbe pirit of a man mayJfiain
his itfirmities; but a woundedfpirit who can
bear ?

Whereas, he who is blessed with a clear

conscience, enjoys, in the worfl conjunc-
tures of human life, a peace, a dignity,
an elevation of mind peculiar to virtue.
The tefimony of a good conscience is
indeed to be always difiinguilhed from
that presumptuous boast of innocence,
which every good Christian totally dif-
claims. The better he is, he will be the
more humble, and sensible of his failings.
But though he acknowledge that he can
claim nothing from God upon the foot-
ing of desert, yet he.can trust in his. mer-
ciful acceptance through Jesus Christ, ac-

11 cording

cording to the terms of the gofpcl. He s ERM.
can hope that his prayers and his alms j
have come up in memorial before God. The
piety and virtue of his former life were
as feeds sown in his prosperous state, of
which he reaps the fruits in the season
of adversity. The riches, the pleasures, and
the friends of the world, may have made
wings to tbemfelves and Jfown away. But
the improvement which he made of those
advantages while they lasted, the tempe-
rate spirit with which he enjoyed them,
the beneficent acions which he perform-
ed, and the good example which he set to
others, remain behind. By the memory
of there, he enjoys his prosperity a fe-
cond time in reflection; and perhaps this
second and reflected enjoyment is not in-
ferior to the first. It arrives at a more
critical and needful time. It affords him
the high fatisfation of having extracted
lafling pleasure from that which is short;
and of having fixed that which by its
nature was changing.-" If my race be
"now about to end, I have this com-

D .3 ( fort,

SERM. " fort, that it has not been run in vain.

I" " Ihave fought the good fight; I have kept

"the faith. My mind has no load. Fu-
" turity has no terrours. I have endea-
" voured to do my duty, and to make
"my peace with God. I leave the reft
" to Heaven." These are the reflecions
which to the upright make light arie in
darkness; reflecions which cheer the
lonely house of virtuous poverty, and at-
tend the conscientious sufferer into prison
or exile; which sooth the complaints of
grief, lighten the prefliire of old age, and
furnish to the bed of sickness, a cordial
of more grateful relish, and more fove-
reign virtue, than any which the world
can afford.

Look abroad into life, and you will

find the general sense of mankind bearing
witness to this important truth, that mind
is superior to fortune; that what one
feels within, is of much greater importance
.than all that befalls him without. Let a
man be brought into some such revere
and trying situation, as fixes the attention

X~~2 ~of

of the public on his behaviour. The first s E R M.
queflion which we put concerning him, ,
is not, What does he susser? but, How
does he bear it? Has he a quiet mind ?
or, Does he appear to be unhappy within
If we judge him to be compored and
firm, resigned to Providence, and sup-
ported by conscious integrity, his charac-
ter rifes, and his misery lessens in our
view. We esteem and admire, rather than
pity him. Recolled what holy men have
endured for the fake of conscience, and
with what cheerfulness they have suffered.
On the other hand, when conscience has
concurred with outward misfortunes in dif-
tressing the guilty, think of the dreadful
consequences which have ensued. How
often, upon a reverse of fortune, after
abused prosperity, have they madly hur-
ried themselves over that precipice from
which there is no return; and, in what
nature most abhors, the voluntary extinc-
tion of life, have fought relief from that
torment of reflection, which was become
too great for them to bear?

D 4 Never

s E R M. Never then allow yourselves to imagine,

,. that misfortunes alone form the chief

misery of man. None but the guilty are
completely miserable. The misgiving and
distrust, the accusations and reproaches of
their minds, the sense of having drawn
down upon their heads the evils which
they susser, and the terrifying expecation
of more and worse evils to come; these
are the eflential ingredients of human
misery. They not only whet the edge,
but they envenom the darts of afflition,
and add poison to the wound. Whereas,
when misfortunes assail a good man, they
carry no such fatal auxiliaries in their train.
They may ruffle the surface of his foul;
but there is a strength within, which resists
their farther impreflion. The constitution
of his mind is found. The world can
inflit upon it no wounds, but what admit
of cure.

III. ILL men, in the time of trouble,

can look up to no protector; while good
men commit themselves, with trust and

hope,

hope, to the care of Heaven. The hu-sERM.
man mind, naturally feeble, is made to _
feel all its weakness by the pressure of
adversity. Dejeted with evils which
overpower its strength, it relies no longer
on itself. It casts every where around, a
wishing, exploring eye, for some ihelter to
screen, some power to uphold it; and if,
when abandoned by the world, it can
find nothing to which it may fly in the
room of the world, its slate is truly for-
lorn. Now, whither ihould the ungodly,
in this situation, turn for aid? After hav-
ing contended with the storms of adverse
fortune till their spirits are exhautfed,
gladly would they ,retreat at last to the
fancuary of religion. But that fanduary
is shut against them; nay, it is environed
with terrours. They behold there, not a
Protecor to whom they can fly, but a
Judge whom they dread; and in those
moments when they need his friendship
the most, they are reduced to deprecate
his wrath. If he once called when they
refifed, and liretched out his hands when

they

SE R M. they would not regard, how much reason

i'. __, have they to fear that he will leave them

now to eat the fruit of their own ways,
and to be filled with their own devices;
that he will laugh at their calamity, and
mock when their fear cometh ?

But of all the thoughts which can enter

into the mind, in the season of distress,
the belief of an interest in his favour
who rules the world is the most soothing.
Every form of religion has afforded to
virtuous men some degree of this confola-
tion. But it was reserved for the Ctrift-
ian revelation, to carry it to its highest
point. For it is the dicet scope of that
revelation, to accommnodate itself to the
circumstances of man, under two main
views; as guilty in the fight of God,
and as struggling with the evils of the
world. 'Under the former, it discovers
to him a Mediator and an atonement;
under the latter, it promises him the
Spirit of grace and consolation. It is a
system of complete relief, .extended from
cur spiritual to our temporal distresses.

The

The fame hand which holds out forgive- SERM.
ness to the penitent, and assistance to the.
frail, dispenses comfort and hope to the
affliced.

It deserves your particular notice, in

this view, that there is no characer
which God more frequently assumes to
himself in the sacred writings, than that
of the Patron of the distressed. Compaf-
sion is that attribute of his nature which
he has chosen to place in the greatest va-
riety of lights, on purpose that he might
accommodate his majesty to our weak-
ness, and provide a cordial for human
griefs. He is the hearer of all prayers;
but with particular attention he is repre-
sented as listening to the cry of the poor,
and regarding the prayer of the destitute.
All his creatures he governs with justice
and wisdom; but he takes to himself, in
a special manner, the charge of executing
judgment for the opprefed, of proteing the
firanger, of delivering him who bath no
helperfrom the hand of thefpoiler. For the
opprcfion of Abhe poor, andfor the fighlin of

the

s E R M. the needt , will I arise, faith the Lord, to

1 .~et him in Safety from him that pifcth at

him. He is the Father of thefftherlefs, and
the outage of the widow, in his holy habi-
tation. ie raieth them tip that are bowed
down. He dzwclleth with the contrite. lie
bealeth the broken in heart. For he know-
eth our frame; be remembereth that we
are dzfJt.-If the wisdom of his provi-
dence saw it necessary to place so many
of his creatures in an affliEted state, that
slate, however, he commiserates. He
disdains not to point out himself as the
refuge of the virtuous and pious; and to
invite them, amidst all their troubles, to
pour out their hearts before him. Those
circumstances which estrange others from
them, interest him the more in their fitna-
tion. The neglect or scorn of the world
exposes them not to any contempt in his
fight. No obscurity conceals them from
his notice; and though they should be
forgotten by every friend on earth, they

* Pfal. ix. 8.-cii. 1 i.7xlvi. 7.--Ixviii. 5.-cxlvii. 3.
-ciii. 14, &c.

are

are remembered by the God of heaven. SE RM.
That sigh, heaved from the afflicted bo- ...
son, which is heard by no human ear, is
listened to by him; and that tear is re-
marked, which falls unnoticed or despised
by the world.

Such views of the Supreme Being im-

part the- most sensible consolation to every
pious heart. They present his admini-
firation under an aspect so mild and be-
nign, as in a great measure to disperse
the gloom which hangs over human life.
A good man acts with a vigour, and sus-
sers with a patience more than human,
when he believes himself countenanced
by the Almighty. Injured or opprefled
by the world, he looks up to a Judge
who will vindicate his cause; he appeals
to a Witness who knows his integrity;
he commits himself to a Friend who will
never forsake him. When tired with the
vexations of life, devotion opens to him
its quiet retreat, where the tumults of the
world are hushed, and its cares are loft ii
happy oblivion; where the wnicked cefe

from

SER M. fj'om troubling, and the weary are at reft.

There his mind regains its serenity; the
agitation of paflion is calmed; and a
softening balm is infused into the wounds
of the spirit. Disclosing to an invisible
Friend those secret griefs which he has
no encouragement to make known to the
world, his heart is lightened. He does
not feel himself solitary or forsaken. He
believes God to be present with him, and
the Holy Ghost to be the inspirer of his
consolations. From that secret place of
the divine tabernacle, into which the Text
represents him as admitted, he hears this
voice issue, Call upon me in the day of
trouble, and I will afiwer thee. Fear not;
for I am with thee. Be niot ditfayed; for
I am thy God. And as he hears a voice
which speaks to none but the pure in
heart, so he beholds a hand which finners
cannot fee. He beholds the hand of
Providence conducting all the hidden
springs and movements of the universe;
and with a secret, but unerring operation,
direcing every event towards the happi-

ness

ness of the righteous. Those afflicions s E R M.
which appear to others the messengers of ,
the wrath of Heaven, appear to him the
ministers of fantification and wisdom.
Where they discern nothing but the hor-
rours of the tempest which surrounds
them, his more enlightened eye beholds
the angel who rides in the whirlwind,
and directs the storm. Hence a peace
keeping the mind and heart, which is no
where to be found but under thepavilion
of the Almighty.

IV. GOOD men are comforted under

their troubles by the hope of Heaven;
while bad men are not only deprived of
this hope, but distressed with fears arising
from a future fate. The foul of man
can never divest itself wholly of anxiety
about its fate hereafter. There are hours
when even to the prosperous, in the midit
of their pleasures, eternity is an awful
thought. But much more when those
pleasures, one after another, begin to
withdraw; when life alters its forms, and

becomes

SE R M. becomes dark and cheerless; when its

,. changes warn the most inconsiderate, that

what is so mutable will soon pass entirely
away; then with pungent earnestness
comes home that queflion to the heart,
Into what world are we next to go ?-
How miserable the man, who, under the
diftraaions of calamity, hangs doubtful
about an event which so nearly concerns
him; who, in the midst of doubts and
anxieties, approaching to that awful
boundary which separates this world from
the next, shudders at the dark profpct
before him; wishing to exist after death,
and yet afraid of that existence; catching
at every feeble hope which superstition
can afford him, and trembling, in the
Same moment, from refleaion upon his
crimes!

Btir blessed be God who hath brought
life and immortality to light; who hath not
only brought them to light, but secured
them to good men; and by the death and
retilrreation of Jesus Chrilt, hath begotten
them unto Ie lively hope of an inheritance

incol-

tncorruptible, undefled, and that fadeth ot S E R M.
away. Justly is this hope styled in scrip-
ture, the anchor of the foul, both fire and
Jfedfa/l. For what an anchor is to a ihip
in a dark night, on an unknown coast,
and amidst a boisterous ocean, that is
this hope to the foul when distracted by
the confusions of the world. In danger,
it gives security; amidst general fluaua-
tion, it affords one fixed point of reit. It
is indeed the most eminent of all the ad-
vantages which religion now confers. For,
confider the mighty power of hope over
the human mind. It is the universal com-
forter. It is the spring of all human ac.
tivity. Upon futurity, men are constantly
suspended. Animated by the profpea of
some distant good, they toil and susser
through the whole course of life; and it is
not so much what they are at present, as
what they hope to be in some after-time,
that enlivens their motions, fixes attention,
and stimulates industry. Now, if, in the
common affairs of life, such is the energy
of hope, even when its object is neither

VOL. 1. E very

S E R M. very considerable, nor very certain; what

effects may it not be expeEted to produce,
when it refts upon an objet so splendid as
a life of immortal felicity ? Were this hope
entertained with that full perfuafon which
Christian faith demands, it would, in truth,
not merely alleviate, but totally annihilate,
all human miseries. It would banish dif-
content, extinguith grief, and suspend the
very feeling of pain.

But allowing for the mixture of human

frailty; admitting those abatements which
our imperfecion makes upon the effect of
every religious principle, still you will find,
that, in proportion to the degree in which
the hope of heaven operates upon good
men, they will be tranquil under susser-
ings; nay, they will be happy, in com-
parison of those who enjoy no such relief.
What indeed, in the course of human
afifirs, is sufficient to distress, far less to
overwhelm, the mind of that man who
can look down on all human things from
an elevation so much above them ? He is
only a passenger through this world. He

I ' is

is travelling to a happier country. How SE R M.
disagreeable soever the occurrences of his _fl
journey may be, yet at every flage of that
journey he receives the aflurance that he
is drawing nearer and nearer to the period
of reft and felicity.-Endure, and thou
lhalt overcome. Persevere, and thou shalt
be successful. ', The time of trial hastens to
a close. Thy mansion is prepared above;
thy reft remaineth among the people of
God. The disorders which vice has intro-
duced into the works of God, are ?bout to
terminate; and all tears are soon to be
wiped away from the eyes of the just.-
The firm assurance of this happy conclusion
to the vexations and the vanities of life,
works a greater effet on the sincere illi-
terate Christian, than all the refinements of
philosophy can work on the most learned
Infidel. These may gratify the mind that
is at ease; may sooth the heart when flight-
ly discomposed; but when it is fore and
deeply torn; when bereaved of its best
and most beloved comforts, the only con-
folations that can then find access, arire

E 2 from

SER M. from the hope of a better world; where
A,_v~ those comforts shall be again restored; and

all the virtuous ihall be assembled, in the
presence of him who made them. Such
hopes banish that despair which over-
whelms, and leave only that tender melan-
choly which softens the heart, and often
renders the whole character more gentle
and amiable.

OF this nature are the resources which

religion provides for good men. By its
previous discipline, it trains them to forti-
tude; by the reflections of a good con-
science it sooths, by the sense of Divine
favour it supports them; and when every
comfort fails them on earth, it cheers
them with the hope of heaven. Diftin-
guifhing his servants with such advantages,
God is justly said to erec his pavilion over
them in the evil time. He not onlyfpreads
a tent for them in the wilderness, but he
transforms in some measure the state of
nature around them. To use the beautiful
language of ancient prophecy; In the de-

fart,

fart, the thirJty land, where no water is, SE RM.
he openeth springs. InJlead of the thorn,
he maketh the fir-tree to come up; inlead of
the briar, the myrtle to spring. In midjf of
the habitation of dragons, he maketh green
paJlures rie, and Jill waters flow around
his people.

.,-

THE improvement to be made of these

truths is as obvious as it is important.
Let us study so to conduc our lives, that
we may be qualified for deriving such con-
folations from religion. To their reality,
and their importance, all mankind bear
witness. For no sooner are they overtaken
by distress, than to religion they fly.
This, throughout every age, has been the
universal ihelter which the young and the
old, the high and the low, the giddy and
the serious, have fought to gain, as soon
as they found that reft could be no where
else procured for the weary head, or the
aching heart. But amidf those multitudes
that crowd to religion for relief, how few
are entitled to approach that sacrcd source

E3 of

s F R M. of comfort ? On what feeble props do their
Ab hopes and pretensions reft? How much

superstition mingles with that religion to
which men are driven by distress and fear?
-You must first apply to it as the guide
of life, before you can have recourse to it
as the refuge of sorrow. You must submit
to its legislative authority, and experience
its renewing influence, before you can look
for its consolatory effec. You must secure
the testimony of a good conscience, and
peace with God through Jesus Christ;
otherwise, when the floods Jhall come, and
the rains descend, and the winds blow, the
house which you had proposed for your
retreat, shall prove the ho fe founded on the
sand, not on the rock.

There are two plans, and there are but

two on which any man can propose to
condua himself through the dangers and
distresses of human life. The one is the
plan of worldly wisdom; the other, that
of determined adherence to conscience.
He who ads upon the former, lays prin-
ciple aside, and trufis his defence to his art

and

and ability. He avails himself of every ad- s E R M.
vantage which his knowledge of the world '
suggests. He attends to nothing but what
he confiders as his interest; and uncon-
fined by conscience, purlues it by every
course which promises him success. This
plan, though too often adopted, will be
found, on trial, ineffeaual and deceitful.
For human ability is an unequal match for
the violent and unforeseen vicissitudes of the
world. When these torrents rife in their
might, they sweep away in a moment the
banks which worldly wisdom had reared
for defence, and overwhelm alike the crafty
and the artless. In the mean time, persons
of this charaCter condemn themselves to live
a most unquiet life. They pals their days
in perpetual anxiety, listening to every mo-
tion; startled by every alarm; changing
their measures on every new occurrence;
and when diftrels breaks in over all their
defences, they are left under it, hopeless
and disconsolate.

The plan, which, in opposition to this,
religion recommends, as both more honour-

E 4 able

S E R M. able in itself, and more effetual for fecu.

II.
,L-, rity, is, at all hazards, to do your duty, and

to leave the consequences to God. Let
him who would as upon this plan, adopt
for the rule of his conduct that maxim of
the Pfalmilt's, Trufl in the Lord, and do
good*. To firm integrity, let him join a
humble reliance on God. Let his adherence
to duty encourage his religious trust. Let
his religious trust inspire him with forti-
tude in the performance of his duty. Let
him know no path but the firaight and
direct one. In the most critical moments
of aCtion, let him afl no further questions,
than, What is the right, the fit, the worthy
part? How as a man, and as a Christian,
it becomes him to aCt ? Having received the
decilion of conscience, let him commit his
way unto the Lord. Let him, without
trepidation or wavering, proceed in dif-
charging his duty; resolved, that though
the world may make him unfortunate, it
shall never make him base; and confiding,
that in what God and his conscience re-

* Psalm xxxvii. 3.

quire

quire him to adl or susser, God and a good S E R M.
conscience will support him.- Such prin-
ciples as these, are the best preparation for
the vicissitudes of the human lot. They
are the Ihield of inward peace. He who
thinks and aas thus, shall be exposed to
no wounds but what religion can cure.
He may feel the blows of adversity; but
he shall not know the wounds of the
heart,

# SERMON III. On the Influence of RELIGION upon PROSPERITY. PSALM i. 3. He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not ...

E ss }

S E R M 0 N.-, II.
On the Influence of RELIG-ION upon

PROSPERITY.

PSALM i. 3
He /hall be like a free planted by the rivers

of water, that bringetb forth his fruit in
his season; his leaf alo Jfall not wither,
and whatsoever he doth Jiall prosper.
SE R M T H E happy influence of religion

1.m. T E
e-- -upon human life, in the time of

adversity, has been confidered in the pre-
ceding discourse. Concerning this the fen-
timents of men are more generally agreed,
than with refpee to some other preroga-
tives which religion claims. They very
readily aflign to it the office of a Comforter.
But as long as their Rate is prosperous,
they are apt to account it an unneceflary

guefi,

guest, perhaps an unwelcome intruder. SERM.
Let us not be thus unjust to religion, nor
confine its importance to one period only
in the life of man. It was never intended
to be merely the nurse of sickness, and the.
flaff of old age. I purpose now to show
you, That it is no less essential to the en-
joyment of prosperity, than to the comfort
of adversity: That prosperity is prosperous,
if we may be allowed the expression, to a
good man only; and that to every other
person, it will prove, notwithstanding its
fair appearance, a barren and joyless state.

The Psalmist, in the Text, by an image

taken from one of the most beautiful ob-
jects in nature, describes a man who
flourilhes in full prosperity. But to whom
is the description limited ? To him, as the
preceding verses inform us, that walkcth
not in the council of the ungodly, nor Jfand-
eth in the way of Jiners, norfitteth in the
feat of the scornful, but hath his delight in
the law of God. He only is like the tree
planted by the rivers of iwater; whillt ;/!
ungodly, as he adds, are not o; but lv.:.

pI.;' G

SE R M. prosperous soever they may appear to the
CI_, world, are in truth but like the chaff which

the wind driveth away. In confirmation
of this doctrine, I thall lay before you some
of those circumstances which diffinguifh the
prosperity of the good man beyond that of
the finner; and shall conclude, with point-
ing out the dangers and miseries into which
the latter is apt to be betrayed by his fa-
vourable situation in the world.

I. PIETY, and gratitude to God, con-

tribute in a high degree to enliven pro-
fperity. Gratitude is a pleasing emotion.
The sense of being distinguished by the
kindness of another, gladdens the heart,
warms it with reciprocal affeCtion, and
gives to any possession, which is agreeable
in itself, a double relish, from its being
the gift of a friend. Favours conferred
by men, I acknowledge, may prove bur-
denfome. For human virtue is never per-
sect; and Sometimes unreasonable expecta-
tions on the one fide, sometimes a mor-
tifying sense of dependence on the other,

corrode

corrode in secret the pleasure of benefits, SE RM.
and convert the obligations of friendship i_
into grounds of jealousy. But nothing of
this kind can affeCt the intercourse of gra-
titude with Heaven. Its favours are wholly
disinterested; and with a gratitude the
moif cordial and unfufpicious, a good man
looks up to that Almighty Benefactor, who
aims at no end but the happiness of those
whom he blesses, and who desires no re-
turn from them but a devout and thankful
heart. While others can trace their pro-
fperity to no higher source than a concur-
rence of worldly causes, and, often, of
mean or trifling incidents, which occasion-
ally favoured their designs; with what
superior fatisfation does the servant of
God remark the hand of that gracious
Power which hath raised him up; which
hath happily conducted him through the
various steps of life, and crowned him with
the most favourable ditindion beyond his
equals?

Let us farther confider, that not only
gratitude for the past, but a cheering sense

of

SE R M. of God's favour at the present, enter into

the pious emotion. They are only the
virtuous, who in their prosperous days
hear this voice addrefled to them, Go thy
way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy
uzinte with a nmeryj heart; for God now
acceptcth thy works I. He who is the
Author of their prosperity, gives them a
title to enjoy, with complacency, his own
gift. While bad men inatch the pleasures
of the world as by ftea'th, without counte-
nance from God the proprietor of the
world; the righteous fit openly down to
the feast of life, under the smile of ap-
proving Heaven. No guilty fears damp
their joys. The blessing of God refts upon
all that they possess; his protection fur-
rounds them; and hence, in the habita-
tions of the righteous, is found the voice of
rejoicing and salvation. A lufre unknown
to others, invests, in their fight, the whole
face of nature. Their piety reflecs a fun-
shine from heaven upon the prosperity of
the world; unites, in one point of view,

* Eclcef. ix. 7.

the

the friling asped, both of the powers SERM.
above, and of the objeds below. Not
only have they as full a relish as others, of
the innocent pleasures of life, but, more-
over, in there they hold communion with
God. In all that is good or fair, they trace
his hand. From the beauties of nature,
from the improvements of art, fiom the
enjoyments of social life, they raise their
affection to the source of all the happiness
which surrounds them; and thus widen
the sphere of their pleasures, by adding in-
telleEtual, and spiritual, to earthly joys.

For illufcration of what I have said on

this head, remark that cheerful enjoyment
of a prosperous fiatc which King David
had, when he wrote the twenty-third
Psalm; and compare the highest pleasures
of the riotous finner, with the happy and
satisfied spirit which breathes throughout
that Pfalm.-In the midRP of the splendour
of royalty, with what amiable simplicity
of gratitude does he look up to the Lord as
his Jfephcrd; happier in ascribing all his
success to divine favour, than to the policy

of

SER M. of his councils, or to the foree of hi
,/_, arms! How many instances of divine

goodness arose before him in pleating re.
membrance, when with such relish he speaks
of the green pa/ures and Jtill waters be.
fide which God had led him; of his cup
'which he hath made to overflow; and of
the table which he hath prepared for him
in pretence of his enemies! With what
perfec tranquillity does he look forward to
the time of his passing through the valley
of the hadow of death; unappalled by that
Spetre, whose most distant appearance
blasts the prosperity of finners! He fears
no evil, as long as the rod and the Jlaff
of his Divine Shepherd are with him;
and, through all the unknown periods of
this and of future existence, commits
himself to his guidance with secure and
triumphant hope. Surely goodness and
mercy IJall follow me all the days of my
lifr; and I will dwell in the hotfe of the
Lord for ever.-What a purified, senti-
mental enjoyment of prosperity is here
exhibited ! How different from that gross

x o relish

ielifh of worldly pleasures, which belongs S E R M.
to those who behold only the terrestrial i-
fide of things; who raise their views to
no higher objeas than the succession of
human contingencies, and the weak efforts
of human ability; who have no protetor
or patron in the heavens, to enliven their
prosperity, or to warm their hearts with
gratitude and trust.

II. RELIGION affords to good men pe-

tuliar security in the enjoyment of their
prosperity. One of the first reflecions
which muff strike every thinking man, as-
ter his situation in the world has become
agreeable, is, That the continuance of such
a fitilation is most uncertain. From a va-
riety of causes, he lies open to change. On
many fides he fees that he may be pierced;
and the wider his comforts extend, the
broader is the mark which he spreads to
the arrows of misfortune. Hence many a
secret alarm to the reflecting mind; and to
those who rejec all such alarms, the real
danger increases, in proportion to their im-
provident security.

VOL. I. F By

SE R M. By worldly assistance it is vain to think
L-,-- of providing any effetual defence, feeing

the world's mutability is the very cause of
our terrour. It is from a higher principle,
from a power iuperiour to the world, that
relief muff be fought, amidst such difquie-
tudes of the heart. He who in his pro-
fperity can look up to One who is witness
to his moderation, humanity, and charity;
he who can appeal to Heaven, that he has
not been elated by pride, nor overcome
by pleasure, but has studicd to employ its
gifts to the honour of the Giver; this
man, if there be any truth in religion, if
there be any benignity or goodness in the
administration of the universe, has just
cause for encouragement and hope. Not
that an interest in the Divine grace will
perpetuate to a good man, more than to
others, a life of unruffled profpcrity.
Change and alteration form the very es-
fence of the world. But let the world
change around him at pleasure, he has
ground to hope that it filall not be able to
make him unhappy. Whatever may vary,

God's

God's providence is still the fame; and his s E R M.
love to the righteous remains unaltered.
If it shall be the Divine will to remove one
comfort, he trusts that some other shall be
given. Whatever is given, whatever is
taken away, he confides that in the last re-
fult all fiall wo for fr his good.

Hence he is not dillurbed, like bad

men, by the infiability of the world.
Dangers, which overcome others, fliake
not his more steady mind. le enjoys the
pleasures of life pure and unallaycd, bc-
cause he enjoys them, as long as they laif,
without anxious terrours. They are not
his all, his only good. He welcomes
them when they arrive; and when they
pass away, he can eye them, as they de-
part, without agony or delpair. His pro-
fperity strikes a deeper and firmer root
than that of the ungodly. And for this
reason he is compared, in the Text, to a
tree planted by the rivers ofJ swaer; a tree
vhofe branches the tempest may indeed
bend, but whose roots it cannot touch;
a tree, which may occasionally be firipped

F 2 cf

S E R M. of its leaves and blossoms, but which fill

maintains its place, and in due season flou-
rifhes anew. Whereas the fidner in his
prosperity, according to the allusion in the
book of Job, resembles the rzjh that grow-
eth up in the mire *; a slender reed, that
may flourish green for a while by the fide
of the brook, as long as it is cherished by
the fun, and fanned by the breeze; till the
first bitter blast breaks its feeble ftem,
roots it out from its bed, and lays it in the
dust. Lo! such is the prosperity of them
that forget God; and thus their hope Jfiall
perijh.

III. RELIGION forms good men to the

most proper temper for the enjoyment of
prosperity. A little reflecion may satisfy
us, that mere possession, even granting it
to be secure, does not constitute enjoyment.
Give a man all that is in the power of the
world to bestow; surround him with riches;
crown him with honours; invest him, if
you will, with absolute dominion; but

e Job, viii, i.,

leave

leave him at the fame time under some fe- s E R M.
cret oppression or heaviness of heart; you
bellow indeed the materials of enjoyment,
but you deprive him of ability to extraCt
it. You set a feait before him, but he wants
the power of tatting it. Hence prosperity
is so often an equivocal word, denoting
merely affluence of possession, but unjuitly
applied to the miserable possessor.

We all know the effeds which any in-

disposition of the body, even though flight,
produces on external prosperity. Visit the
gayest and most fortunate man on earth,
only with sleepless nights; disorder any
single organ of the senses; corrode but one
of his smallest nerves; and you lhall pre-
fently fee all his gaiety vanish; and you
shall hear him complain that he is a mi-
ferable creature, and express his envy of
the peasant and the cottager.-And can
you believe, that a disease in the foul is
less fatal to enjoyment than a disease in
the animal frame; or that a found mind
is not as essential as a found body, to the
prosperity of man ?-Let us rate sensual

F 3 gratifi-

SE r M. gratifications as high as we plcafc, we Ihall
A-.-. be made to feel that the feat of enjoyment

is in the foul. The corrupted temper, and
the guilty passions of the bad, frustrate the
eftfel of every advantage which the world
confers on thcm. The world may call
them men of pleasure; but of all men they
are the greatest foes to plcafire. From
their eagerness to grasp, they firangle and
destroy it. None but the temperate, the
regular, and the virtuous, know how to
enjoy prosperity. They bring to its com-
forts the manly relilh of a found uncorrupt-
ed mind. They flop at the proper point,
before enjoyment degenerates into disgust,
and pleafire is converted into pain. They
are irangers to those complaints which flow
from flileen, caprice, and all the fantastical
diftrefics of a vitiated mind. While riot-
ous indulgence enervates both the body and
the mind, purity and virtue heighten all the
powers of human fruition. Moderate and
simple pleafires relilh high with the tem-
perate; in the midst of his studied refine-
ments, the voluptuary languishes.

Wherever

Wherever guilt mingles with prosperity, s R M.

a certain gloom and heaviness enter along i
with it. Vicious intrigues never fail to
entangle and embarrass those who engage
in them. But innocence confers ease and
freedom on the mind; leaves it open to
every pleasing sensation; gives a lightness
to the spirits, similar to the native gaiety of
youth and health; ill imitated, and ill sup-
plied, by that forced levity of the \ vicious,
which arises not from the health, but from
the drunkenness of the mind.

Feeble are all pleasures in which the

heart has no part. The felfifl gratifica-
tions of the bad, are both narrow in their
circle, and short in their duration. But
prosperity is redoubled to a good man, by
his generous use of it. It is reflecded back
upon him from every one whom he makes
happy. In the intercourse of domcefic
affecion, in the attachment of friends,
the gratitude of dependants, the efceen
and good-will of all who know him, he
fees bleflings multiplied round him, on
every fide. ItWhenI the ear heard me, then

44 it

S E R M. it bleed me; and when the eye Jaw mle, it
t..v..i gave woitnefs to me: Becaufc I delivered the

poor that cried, the fatherless, and him that
had none to help him. The blefing of hinm
that was ready to perJih came upon me, and
I caefed the widow's heart to sien with joy.
I was eyes to the blind, and feet was Ito
the lame: I was a father to the poor; and
the cafie which I knew not, Ifearched out*.
-Thus while the righteous flouriiJeth like
a tree planted by the rivers of water, he
bringeth forth also his fruit in his Jeafon:
And that fruit, to pursue the allusion of
the Text, he brings forth, not for himself
alone. He flourishes, not like a tree in
some solitary defart, which scatters its blof-
foms to the wind, and communicates nei-
ther fruit nor shade to any living thing;
but like a tree in the midst of an inhabited
country, which to some affords friendly
shelter, to others, fruit; which is not only
admired by all for its beauty, but blessed
by the traveller for the shade, and by the
hungry for the sustenance it hath given.

Job, xxix. 11-17.

IV, Rr-

IV. RELIGION heightens the profpe- SERM.

rity of good men, by the profped which
it affords them of greater happiness to
come in another world. I showed, in the
foregoing discourse, the mighty effect of
the hope of Heaven, in relieving the mind
under the troubles of life. And sure, if
this hope be able to support the falling, it
cannot but improve the flourifhipg fiate
of man; if it can dispel the thickest gloom
of adversity, it must needs enliven profpe-
rity, by the additional lustre which it
throws upon it. What is present, is never
sufficient to give us full fatisfafion. To
the present we must always join some
agreeable anticipations of futurity, in or-
der to complete our pleasure. What an
accession then must the prosperity of the
righteous man receive, when, borne with a
smooth and gentle gale along the current
of life, and looking round on all the
blessings of his state, he can confider these
as no more than an introduction to higher
scenes which are hereafter to open; he
can view his present life, as only the

porch

S E R M. porch through which he is to pass into the

MIl.
IL - palace of bliss; and his present joys, as

but a feeble fiream, dispensed for his occa-
fional refreshment, until he arrive at that
river of life, which flows at God's right
hand !-Such profpeas purify the mind,
at the fame time that they gladden it.
They prevent the good man from setting
too high a value on his present poffeflions;
and thereby assist him in maintaining,
amidst the temptations of worldly pleasure,
that command of himself which is so cifen-
tial to the wife and temperate enjoyment of
prosperity.

It is the fate of all human pleasures, by

continuance, to fade; of most of them,
to cloy. Hence, in the most prosperous
state, there are frequent intervals of lan-
guor, and even of dejeaion. There are
vacuities in the happiest life, which it is
not in the power of the world to fill up.
What relief so adapted to these vacant or
dejeced periods, as the pleasing hopes
which arise from immortality? How bar-
ren and impcrfec2 that prosperity, which

can

can have recourse to no such subsidiary SER M.
comfort, in order to animate the stagnation Y
of vulgar life, and to supply the infuffi-
ciency of worldly pleasures!

Worldly prosperity declines with de-

clining life. In youth its relish was
brifl and poignant. It becomes more
fober as life advances; and flattens as
life descends. He who lately overflowed
with cheerful spirits and high hopes, be-
gins to look back with heaviness on the
days of former years. He thinks of his
old companions who are gone; and re-
views past scenes, more agreeable than any
which are likely to return. The acivity
of pursuit is weakened. The gliety of
amusement is fled. The gratilications
of sense languifll. When his accustomed
pleasures, one after another, thus steal
treacherously away, what can he, who is
an utter itranger to religion, and to the
hope of Heaven, fuilftitute in their place ?
-But even in that drooping period, the
promises and hopes of religion support
the spirits of a good man till the lareit

hour.

s E R M. hour. Hisi leaf, it is said in the Text, Jhall
a not witber. It ihall not be in the power

of time to blafi his prosperity: But old age
ihall receive him into a quiet retreat, where,
if lively fentltions fail, gentle pleasures
remain to sooth him. That hope of im-
mortality, which formerly improved his
other enjoyments, now in a great measure
supplies their absence. Its importance rifes,
in proportion as its objec draws near. He
is not forsaken by the world, but retires
from it with dignity; reviewing with a
calm mind the part which he has afted,
and trufling to the promire of God for an
approaching reward. Such sentiments and
expecations shed a pleating tranquillity
over the old age of the righteous man.
They make the evening of his days go
down unclouded; and allow the stream of
life, though fallen low, to run clear to the
last drop.

THUS I have shewn, I hope, with full

evidence, what material ingredients reli-
gion and a good conscience are in the pro-

fperity

fperity of life. Separated from them, pro- S E R M.

Ill

fperity, how fair soever it may seem to the --- j
world, is insipid, nay frequently noxious
to the possessor: United with them, it rites
into a real blessing bellowed by God upon
man. God givetb to a man that is good in
his fight, widonm, and knowledge, and joy;
but to the finner he givetbfoire travail, to ga-
ther, and to heap up, that he may give to him
that is good before God`.

ALLOW me now to conclude the sub-

jea, with representing to the prosperous
men of the world, those crimes and mise-
ries into which the abuse of their condition
is likely to betray them, and calling upon
them to beware of the dangers with which
they are threatened.

It is unfortunate for mankind, that

those situations which favour pleasure, ard
too generally adverse to virtue. Virtue re-
quires internal government and discipline;
prosperity relaxes the mind, and inflames
the pafions. Virtue is supported by a

* Eclef. i. 16.

regard

SE R M. regard to what is future; prosperity at-

Ill. Ho_ taches us wholly to what is present. The

characeriftics of virtue, are modefly and
humility; the most common attendants of
profperiry, are pride and presumption.
One should think, that prosperity would
prove the strongest incitement to remember
and to honour that God who bestows it.
Yet such is the perverseness of human
nature, that it proves much oftener the
motive to impiety. The changes of the
world call the attention of men to an in-
visible Power. But a train of events pro-
ceeding according to their wish, leads
them to nothing beyond what they fee.
The Supreme Giver is concealed from view
by his own gifts. This instance of success
they ascribe to a fortunate concurrence of
worldly causes; that acquisition, to their
own skill and indufiry; unmindful of
-lim, who from the beginning arranged
that series of causes, and who placed them
in circumstances where their industry could
operate witl success. From forgetting God,
they too often proceed to delpife him.

All

All that is light or giddy in their minds SERM.
is set in motion by the gale of prosperity. y-
Arrogance and felf-fufficiency are lifted
up; and their state is confidered, as fe-
cured by their own firength. Hence that
pride of countenance, through which the
wicked, in their prosperity, as David ob-
serves, refiie to siek after God. They arc
described as fpca/kiig loft ilj, and felting
their mouth agaiii the lHavell s. 7Tey
take the timbrel and bhayp, and rejoice at
the found of the orgni; and thty fiyJ unto
God, depart from us, for we defirc not the
llowledge of thy ways. What is the Al-
nmighty that we f'olll Jfive hilm? Or,
wihat prot ofit J wld 'e havl', If wi'e pray
unto him ?

ThJcy fJy unto God dLpart from t. s.-

What an impious voice! Could we have
believed it possible, that worldly plea-
fures should so far intoxicate any human
heart ? Wretched and infatuated men!
Have you ever examined on what your
confidence refts ?-You have said in your
hearts, Yon fJiall never be mirvcd; you

7 fancy

S ER M. fancy yourselves placed on a mountain

which Jfandeth Jtrong. Awake from those
flattering dreams, and behold how every
thing totters around you! You ltand on
the edge of a precipice; and the ground
is sliding away below your feet. In your
health, life, possessions, conneaions, plea-
fures, principles of deltruaion work. The
mine advances in secret, which saps the
foundations, while you revel on the fur-
face. No mighty effort, no long prepara-
tion of events, is needed to overturn your
prosperity. By flow degrees it rose. Long
time, much labour, and the concurrence
of many afifting causes, were necessary to
rear it up; but one flight incident can
entirely overthrow it. Suspicions are in-
fused into the patron or the prince on
whom you depend; and your disgrace
ensues. Exercise, or amusement, kindles
a fever in the veins of those whom you
loved; and you are robbed of your com-
forts and hopes. A few grains of sand
lodge themselves within you; and the
reft of your life is disease and misery.

14 Ten

Ten thousand contingencies ever float on S E R M.
the current of life, the smallest of which,
if it meet your frail bark in the passing, is
sufficient to dash it in pieces.-Is this a
place, is this a time, to swell with fancied
security, to riot in unlawful pleasure, andc
by your disregard of moral and religious
duties, to brave the government of the
Almighty? He hath stamped every pof-
feflion of man with this inscription, Re-
joice c'with trembling. Throughout every
age, he hath pointed his peculiar difplea-
sure against the confidence of presumption,
and the arrogance of prolperity. I-Ie hath
pronounced, that whbooever exalteth him-
fejlfJ all be abased. And {hall neither the
admonitions which you receive from the
visible inconstancy of the world, nor the
declarations of the Divine displeasure, be
sufficient to check your thoughtless ca-
reer? Know that, by your impiety, you
multiply the dangers which already threat-
cn you on every fide; you accelerate tMe
speed with which the changes of the world
advance to your deltruaion. The Al-

VoLr 1. G mighty

sE R M. mighty touches with his rod that edifice of

, dufl, on which you Rtand, and boast of your
strength; and, at that instant, it crumbles
to nothing.

As men, then, bethink yourselves of

human instability. As Christians, reve-
rence the awful government of God. In-
sure your prosperity, by consecrating it to
religion and virtue. Be humble in your
elevation; be moderate in your views; be
submissive to Him who hath raised and
diflinguifled you. Forget not, that on his
providence you are as dependent, and to
the obedience of his laws as much bound,
as the mcaneft of your fellow-creatures.
Disgrace not your Ration, by that grossness
of sensuality, that levity of dissipation, or
that insolence of rank, which bespeak a lit-
tle mind. Let the affability of your be-
haviour flow that you remember the natural
equality of men. Let your moderation in
plea'ure, your command of pafiion, and
your Ready regard to the great duties of
life, show that you possess a mind worthy
of your fortune, Establish your character

01I

bo the basis of esteem; not on the flattery s E R M.
of dependents, or the praise of sycophants, n
but on the refpe& of the wife and the
good. Let innocence preside over your
enjoyments. Let ufefiilnefs and benefi-
cence, not ofrentation and vanity, direct
the train of your pursuits. Let your alms,
together with your prayers, come vp in me-
morial before God. So ihall your profpe-
rity, under the blessing of Heaven, be as
the Jfininig light, which Jlineth more and
more unto the pet/sei day. So ihall it refem-
ble those celeffial fires which glow above,
with beneficent, with regular and perma-
nent lufre; and not prove that mirth of
fools, which by Solomon is compared to the
crackling of thorns under a pot, a glittering
and fervent blaze, but speedily extind.

On the whole, let this be our conclusion,

that both in prosperity and in adversity,
religion is the lafeft guide of human life.
Conduaed by its light, we reap the plea-
fures, and at the fame time escape the dan-
gers, of a prosperous fate. Sheltered under
its protection, we stand the shock of adver-

G 2 iity

s E R M. fity with most intrepidity, and susser leat

I from the violence of the storm. He that

defireth life, and lovcth many days that he
may fee good, let him keep his tongue from
evil, and his lips from gnile. Let him de-
part from evil, and do good. Let him seek
peace with God, and pursue it. Then, in
his adversity, God flJall hide him in his pa-
vilion. In his prosperity, he JJall fourjl7
like a tree planted by the rivers of water.
The ungodly are not so; but are like the
chnf, light and vile, which the wind drivetl
taway.

# SERMON IV. On our Imperfect KNOWLEDGE of a FUTURE STATE. I COR. xiii. 12. For now we see through a glass, darkly. 

[rS5 ]

SERMON IV.
On our Imperfea KNOWLEDGE of a

FUTURE STATE.

I COR. xiii. 12.

For now we fee through a glf, darkly,.-
THHE Apotle here describes the im-SERM.

perfection of our knowledge with iv.

relation to spiritual and eternal objets.
He employs two metaphors to represent
more strongly the disadvantages under
which we lie ; One, that we fee those ob-
jecs through a glafi, that is, through the
intervention of a medium which obscures
their glory; the other, that we fee them
in a riddle or enigma, which our tranfla-
tors have rendered by feeing them darkly;
that is, the truth in part discovered, in

G 3 part

SER M. part concealed, and placed beyond ouy
am-_ comprehension.

This description, however just and true,

cannot fail to occasion some perplexity
to an inquiring mind. For it may feern
firange, that so much darkness should be
left upon those celestial objecs, towards
which we are at the fame time commanded
to aspire. We are firangers in the uni-
verse of God. Confined to that spot on
which we dwell, we are permitted to
know nothing of what is tranfaaing ia
the regions above us and around us. By
much labour, we acquire a superficial
acquaintance with a few sensible objects
which we find in our present habitation;
but we enter, and we depart, under a
total ignorance of the nature and laws of
the spiritual world. One subjeC in par-
ticular, when our thoughts proceed in this
train, mufl often recur upon the mind
with peculiar anxiety; that is, the im-
mortality of the foul, and the future ftatc
of man. Exposed as we are at present to
such variety of afflidions, and subjeCted

to

to so much disappointment in all our pur- s E R M.
suits of happiness, Why, it may be said, _V.
has our gracious Creator denied us the
consolation of a full discovery of our fu-
ture existence, if indeed ihch an existence
be prepared for us ?-Reason, it is true,
suggests many arguments in behalf of
immortality: Revelation gives full affu-
rance of it. Yet even that Gospel, which
is said to have brought life and immortality
to light, allows us to fee only through a
glafi, darkly. It doth not yet appear what
we Jhall be. cOur knowledge of a future
world is very imperfec; our ideas of it
are faint and confused. It is not displayed
in such a manner, as to make an impref-
sion suited to the importance of the object.
The faith even of the best men is much
inferior, both in clearness and in force,
to the evidence of sense; and proves on
many occasions insufficient to counterba-
lance the temptations of the present world.
Happy moments indeed there Sometimes
are in the lives of pious men, when, fe-
questered from worldly cares, and borne up

G 4 on

s E RM. on the wings of divine contemplation, they

V. rife to a near and transporting view of

immortal glory. But such efforts of the
mind are rare, and cannot be long sup-
ported. When the spirit of meditation
subsides, this lively sense of a future fiate
decays; and though the general belief of
it remain, yet even good men, when they
return to the ordinary business and cares of
life, seem to rejoin the multitude, and to
re-affume the fame hopes, and fears, and
interests, which influence the reft of the
world.

From such refletions, a considerable

difficulty refpeding this important sub-
jea, either arises, or seems to arise. Was
such an obscure and imperfect discovery of
another life worthy to proceed from God ?
Does it not afford some ground, either to
tax his goodness, or to fuofpe the evi-
dence of its coming from him? This is
the point which we are now to confider;
and let us confider it with that close atten-
tion which the subjef merits. Let us in-
quire, whether we have any reason, ei-

ther

ther to complain of Providence, or to ob-S E R M.
Ject to the evidence of a future slate, be- I
canul that evidence is not of a more fenfi-
ble and firiking nature. Let us attempt
humbly to trace the reasons, why, though
permitted to know and to fee somewhat of
the etcrnal world, we are nevertheless per-
mitted only to know in part, and to Jfe
through a glass, darkly.

IT plainly appears to be the plan of the

Deity, in all his difpenfatiol-s, to mix
light with darkncfs, evidence with uncer-
tainty. Whatever the reasons of this pro-
cedure be, the facd is undeniable. He is
described in the Old Testament as a God
that hidehl hlinf'lfA. Clouds and darkness
are said to fiirroniiid bhi. His way is in the
/ca, and his path in the great waters; his
Jfot/le)s are not known. Both the works
and the ways of God are full of mystery.
In the ordinary course of his government,
innumerable events occur which perplex
us to the utmost. There is a certain li:;i

* Ifa. xto. 15.

t.o

SE R M. to all our inquiries of religion, beyond

.__V which if we attempt to proceed, we are

loft in a maze of inextricable difficulties.
Even that revelation which affords such
material inftrudion to man, concerning his
duty and his happiness, leaves many doubts
unresolved. Wlhyit was not given sooner;
why not to all men; why there ihould be
so many things in it hard to be underJiood;
are difficulties not inconsiderable, in the
midst of that inconteftible evidence by
which it is supported. If, then, the future
tfate of man be not placed in so full and
clear a light as we desire, this is no more
than what the analogy of all religion,
both natural and revealed, gave us reason
to exped.

But such a solution of the difficulty will

be thought imperfect. It may, perhaps,
not give much fatisfaaion to flow, that
all religion abounds with difficulties of a
like nature. Our situation, it will be said,
is so much the more to be lamented, that
not on one fide only we are confined in our
inquiries, but on all hands environed with

Ago mysterious

rnyfterious obfcurity.-Let us then, if so SE RM.
much dissatisfied with our condition, give IV.
scope for once to Fancy, and confider how
the plan of Providence might be rectified
to our wish. Let us call upon the Scep-
tic, and desire him to fay, what measure
of information would afford him entire fa-
tisfaction.

This, he will tell us, requires not any

long or deep deliberation. He (efires only
to have his view enlarged beyond the li-
mits of this corporeal state. Instead of
refting upon evidence which requires dif-
cuffion, which muff be supported by much
reasoning, and which, after all, he alleges
yields very imperfet information, he de-
mands the everlasting mansions to be so
displayed, if in truth such mansions there
be, as to place faith on a level with the
evidence of sense. What noble and happy
effects, he exclaims, would instantly fol-
low, if man thus beheld his present and
his future e.xiflence at once before him!
He would then become worthy of his rank
in the creation. Instead of being the sport,

as

E R M. as now, of degrading passions and childilh
IV. attachments, he would at solely on the

principles of immortality. His pursuit of
virtue would be steady; his life would be
undisturbed and happy, Superiour to the
attacks of distress, and to the Solicitations
of pleasure, he would advance, by a re-
gular process, towards those divine rewards
and honours which were continually prc-
.cnt to his view. - Tius Fancy, with
as much ease and confidence as if it were
a perseEt judge of creation, erects a new
world to itself, and exults with admira-
tion of its own work. But let us pause,
and suspend this admiration, till we coolly
examine the consequences that would fol-
low from this supposed reformation of the
universe.

CONSIDER the nature and circumstances

of man. Introduced into the world in
an indigent condition, he is supported at
first by the care of others; and, as soon
as he begins to act for himself, finds la-
bour and induflry to be necefalry for sus-

13 tainilg

tainmng his life, and supplying his wants. SERM.
Mutual defence and interest give rife to lv.
society; and society, when formed, re-
quires diftindions of property, diversity
of conditions, subordinations of ranks,
and a multiplicity of occupations, in or-
der to advance the general good. The
services of the poor, and the protection
of the rich, become reciprocally necessary.
The governours, and the governed, must
co-operate for general safety. Various
arts mufft be studied; some refpecing the
cultivation of the mind, others the care
of the body; tome to ward off the evils,
and some to provide the conveniences of
life. In a word, by the destination of
his Creator, and the neceflities of his
nature, man commences, at once, an
ative, not merely a contemplative being.
Religion affiumes him as such. It sup-
poses him employed in this world, as on
a bury stage. It regulates, but does not
abolish, the enterprises and cares of or-
dinary life. It addrefscs itself to the va-
rious ranks in society; to the rich and

the

S E R M. the poor, to the magifirate and the subjed,

V It rebukes the slothful; directs the diligent

how to labour; and requires every man to
do his own bltfi fs,

Suppose, now, that veil to be with-

drawn which conceals another world from
our view. Let all ol)fcurity vanish; let
us no longer ee darkly, as through a glfs;
but let every man enjoy that intuitive
perception of divine and eternal objects
which the Sceptic was supposed to desire.
The immediate effect of.fuch a discovery
would be, to annihilate in our eye all
human objects, and to produce a total
flagnation in the affairs of the world.
Were the ceefltial glory exposed to our
admiring view; did the angelic harmony
found in our enraptured ears; what
earthly concerns would have the power
of engaging our attention for a tingle mo-
ment? All the fludies and pursuits, the
arts and labours, which now employ the
activity of man, which support the or-
der, or promote the happiness of focietyi
would lie neglected and abandoned. Those

desires

desires and fears, those hopes and interests, s E R M.
by which we are at present stimulated, ,_.
would cease to operate. Human life would
present no objeas sufficient to route the
mind; to kindle the spirit of cnterprife,
or to urge the hand of industry. If the
mere sense of duty engaged a good man to
take some part in the business of the world,
the talk, when Submitted to, would prove
distasteful. Even the preservation of life
would be flighted, if he were not bound
to it by the authority of God. Impatient
of his confinement within this tabernacle
of dust, languishing for the happy day of
his translation to those glorious regions
which were displayed to his fight, he
would sojourn on earth as a melancholy
exile. v Whatever Providence has prepared
for the entertainment of man, would be
viewed with contempt. Whatever is now
attraaive in society, would appear insipid.
In a word, he would be no longer a fit
inhabitant of this world, nor be qualified
for those exertions which are allotted to

him

SE R M. him in his present sphere of being. B1ui.

f'. all his faculties being sublimated above the

measure of humanity, he would be in the
condition of a being of fuperiour order, who)
obliged to reside among men, would regard
their pursuits with scorn, as dreams, trifles,
and puerile amusements of a day.

But to this reasoning it may perhaps

be replied, That such consequences as I
have now stated, fuippofing them to fol.
low, deserve not much regard.-For what
though the present arrangement of human
affairs were entirely changed, by a clearer
view, and a stronger imprefTion of our fu-
ture state ? Would not such a change prove
the highest blessing to man ? Is not his
attachment to worldly objects the great
source both of his mifcry and his guilt?
Employed in perpetual contemplation of
heavenly objects, and in preparation for
the enjoyment of them, would he not be-
come more virtuous, and of course more
happy, than the nature of his present em-
pioyments and attachments permits him

to

to be-Allowing for a moment, the con- SER M.
sequence to be such, this much is yielded, V
that, upon the supposition which was made,
man would not be the creature which he
now is, nor human life the state which we
now behold. How far the change would
contribute to his welfare, comes to be
confidered.

If there be any principle fully afcer-

tained by religion, it is, That this life was
intended for a state of trial and improve-
ment to man. His preparation for a bet-
ter world required a gradual purification
carried on by steps of progressive dilci-
pline. The situation, therefore, here as-
signed him, was such as to answer this
design, by calling forth all his active
powers, by giving full scope to his moral
dispositions, and bringing to light his
whole character. Hence it became pro-
per, that difficulty and temptation should
arise in the course of his duty. Ample re-
wards were promised to virtue; but there
rewards were left, as yet, in obscurity
and distant profpea. The impressions of

VOL. I. H fenle

S ER M. sense were so balanced against the disco-

IV.

- verics of immortality, as to allow a con-

slid between faith and sense, between con-
science and desire, between present plea-
sure and future good. In this conflit, the
fouls of good men are tried, improved, and
strengthened. In this field, their honours
are reaped. Here are formed the capital
virtues of fortitude, temperance, and self-
denial; moderation in prosperity, patience
in adversity, submission to the will of God,
and charity and forgiveness to men, amidst
the various competitions of worldly in-
terest.

Such is the plan of Divine wisdom for

man's improvement. But put the cafe
that the plan devised by human wisdom
were to take place, and that the rewards
of the just were to be more fully displayed
to view; the exercise of all those graces
which I have mentioned, would be en-
tirely superseded. Their very names would
be unknown. Every temptation being
withdrawn, every worldly attachment
being subdued by the overpowering dif-

coveries

coveries of eternity, no trial of sincerity, S ERM.
no discrimination of charaEters, would re- L
main; no opportunity would be afforded
for those adive exertions, which are the
means of purifying and perfeding the
good. On the competition between time
and eternity, depends the chief exercise
of human virtue. The obscurity which
at present hangs over eternal objecs, pre-
serves the competition. Remove that ob-
fcurity, and you remove human virtue from
its place. You overthrow that whole sys-
tem of discipline, by which imperfect crea-
tures are, in this life, gradually trained up
for a more perfec state.

This, then, is the conclusion to which

at last we arrive: That the full display
which was demanded, of the heavenly
glory, would be so far from improving
the human foul, that it would abolish
those virtues and duties which are the
great instruments of its improvement. It
would be unsuitable to the characer of
man in every view, either as an ative
being, or a moral agent. It would dif-

H 2 qualify

SE R M. qualify him for taking part in the affairs

IV.
- of the world; for relifing the pleasures,

or for discharging the duties of life: In a
word, it would entirely defeat the pur-
pose of his being placed on this earth.
And the queflion, Why the Almighty has
been pleased to leave a spiritual world,
and the future cxiftence of man, under so
much obscurity, resolves in the end into
this, Why there should be fueh a creature
as man in the universe of God ?-Such is
the issue of the improvements proposed to
be made on the plans of Providence. They
add to the discoveries of the superior wis-
dom of God, and of the prcfumption and
folly of man.

FROM what has been said it now ap-

pears, That no reasonable objection to the
belief of a future Rate arises, from the
imperfe& difcovcries of it which we en-
joy; from the difficulties that are mingled
with its evidence; from our feeing as
thlrough a glns, darkly, and being left to
c'alk ,yi failh andm n: by f.b/t. It cannot

be

be otherwise, it ought not to be other- SERM.

IV.

wife in our present state. The evidence A_
which is afforded, is fuflicient for the
convidion of a candid mind, sufficient
for a rational ground of conduct; though
not so firiking as to withdraw our atten-
tion fiom the present world, or altoge-
ther to overcome the impreflion of fen-
fible objecs. In such evidence, it becomes
us to acquiesce, without indulging either
doubts or complaints, on account of our
not receiving all the fatisfation which
we fondly desire, but which our present
immaturity of being excludes. For, upon
the supposition of immortality, this life is
no other than the childhood of existence;
and the measures of our knowledge must
be proportioned to fiuch a Rfate. To the
fuccefflve stages of human life, from in-
fancy to old age, belong certain peculiar
attachments, certain cares, defircs, and
interests; which open not abruptly, but
by gradual advances on the mind, as it
becomes fit to receive them, and is pre-
pared for afting the part to which, in

H 3 their

SER M. their order they pertain. Hence, in the

,I. education of a child, no one thinks of in-

spiring him all at once with the knowledge,
the sentiments, and views of a man, and
with contempt for the exercises and amuse-
ments of childhood. On the contrary,
employments suited to his age are allowed
to occupy him. By these his powers are
gradually unfolded; and advantage is taken
of his youthful pursuits, to improve and
ftrengthcn his mind; till, ftep by ftep,
he is led on to higher profpeas, and pre-
pared for a larger and more important scene
of action.

This analogy, which so happily illus-

trates the present conduct of the Deity
towards man, deserves attention the more,
as it is the very illustration used by the
Apostle, when treating of this subject in
the context. Now, fays he, we know in
part -bi when that which is peyjecf is
come, that which is in part fJall be done
away. kWhen I was a childI spoke as a
child, I underfJood as a child, I thought as
a child; but when I became a man, I put

away

awn' childi/hl things. For now we fee S RM.

IV.

through a glass, darkly; but then, face to
fiJce: Now I knoo in part; bult then, I
fall know even as I am known. Under
the care of the Almighty, our education
is now going on, from a mortal to an
immortal state. As much light is let in
upon us, as we can bear without injury.
When the objecs become too splendid
and dazzling for our fight, the curtain
is drawn. Exercised in such a field of
action, as suits the firength of our un-
ripened powers, we are, at the fame time,
by proper prospeCts and hopes, prompted
to aspire towards the manhood of our
nature, the time when childij things/Jhall
be put away. But still, betwixt those
future profpeds, and the impreifion of
present objects, such an accurate propor-
tion is efrablifhed, as on the one hand
flall not produce a total contempt of
earthly things, while we aspire to those
that are heavenly; and on the other,
shall not encourage such a degree of at-
tachment to our present slate, as would

H 4i render

S E R M. render us unworthy of future advancement.

IV.

In a word, the whole course of things is
so ordered, that we neither, by an ir-
regular and precipitate education, become
men too loon; nor, by a fond and trifling
indulge:ice, be suffered to continue children
for ever.

LET these reflections not only remove

the doubts which may arise from our
obscure knowledge of immortality, but
likewise produce the highest admiration
of the wisdom of our Creator. The firuc-
ture of the natural world affords innume-
rable instances of profound design, which
no attentive fpeeator can survey without
wonder. In the moral world, where the
workmanship is of much finer and more
delicate contexture, fubjeacs of flill greater
admiration open to view. But admi-
ration muff rife to its highest point,
when those parts of the moral conflitu-
tion, which at first were reputed ble-
mifhes, which carried the appearance of
objections, either to the wisdom or the

goodness

goodness of Providence, arc discovered, on S ER M.
more accurate inspection, to be adjusted ,_
with the most exquisite propriety. We
have now seen that the darkness of man's
condition is no less essential to his well-
being, than the light which he enjoys.
His internal powers, and his external fitua-
tion, appear to be exactly fitted to each
other. Those complaints which we are
apt to make, of our limited capacity and
narrow views, of our inability to penetrate
farther into the future destination of man,
are found, from the foregoing observations,
to be just as unreasonable, as the childish
complaints of our not being formed with a
microscopic eye, nor furnished with an
eagle's wing; that is, of not being endowed
with powers which would subvert the na-
ture, and counteract the laws, of our pre-
sent state.

In order to do justice to the fubje&,

I must observe, that the fame reasoning
which has been now employed with reflpet
to our knowledge of immortality, is
equally applicable to many other branches

of

S E R M. of intellectual knowledge. Thus, why we

IV.
,V- are permitted to know so little of the na-

ture of that Eternal Being who rules the
universe; why the manner in which he
operates on the natural and moral world, is
wholly concealed; why we are kept in such
ignorance, with refpedt to the extent of his
works, to the nature and agency of fpiri-
tual beings, and even with refped- to the
union between our own foul and body:
To all these, and several other enquiries
of the fame kind, which often employ the
solicitous researches of speculative men, the
answer is the fame that was given to the
interesting question which makes the subjec
of our discourse. The degree of know-
ledge desired, would prove incompatible
with the design, and with the proper bufi-
ness of this life. It would raise us to a
sphere too exalted; would reveal objects
too great and striking for our present facul-
ties; would excite feelings too strong for
us to bear; in a word, would unfit us for
thinking or acting like human creatures.
It is therefore reservcd for a more ad-

vanced

ivanced period of our nature; and the hand s ERM-
of Infinite wisdom hath in mercy drawn a -
veil over fccnes which would overpower the
fight of mortals.

One instance, in particula', of Divine

wisdom, is io illustrious, and corresponds
so remarkably with our present subjed,
that I cannot pass it over without notice;
that is, the concealment under which Pro-
vidence has placed the fiture events of
our life on earth. The desire of penetrat-
ing into this unknown region, has ever
been one of the most anxious passions of
men. It has often seized the wile as well
as the credulous, and given rife to many
vain and impious fuperflitions throughout
the whole earth. Burning with curiosity
at the approach of some critical event, and
impatient under the perplexity of conjec-
ture and doubt, How cruel is Providence
we are apt to exclaim, in denying to man
the power of foresight, and in limiting
him to the knowledge of the present mo-
ment ? Were he permitted to look forward
i-to the course of dcftiny, how much more

suitably

S E R M. suitably would he be prepared for the various

, -'s turns and changes in his life ? \ith what

moderation would he enjoy his prosperity
under the fore-knowledge of an approach-
ing reverse? And with what eagerness be
prompted to improve the flying hours, by
feeing the inevitable term draw nigh which
was to finish his course ?

But while fancy indulges such vain de-

fires, and criminal complaints, this coveted
fore-knowledge muff clearly appear to the
eye of Reason, to be the most fatal gift
which the Almighty could bestow. If, in
this present mixed state, all the fucceifive
scenes of distress through which we are
to pass, were laid before us in one view,
perpetual sadness would overcast our life.
Hardly would any tranlicnt gleams of in-
tervening joy be able to force their way
through the cloud. Faint would be the
reliih of pleasures of which we foresaw
the close: Insupportable the burden of as-
flictions, under which we were oppressed
by a load not only of prefcnt, but of an
anticipated sorrow. Friends would begin

their

their union, with lamenting the day which s E R M.
was to dilfolve it; and, with weeping eye,
the parent would every moment behold
the child whom he knew that he was to
lose. In flort, as soon as that mysterious
veil, which now covers futurity, was
lifted up, all the gaiety of life would dif-
appear, its flattering hopes, its pleating
illusions would vanish; and nothing but
its vanity and sadness remain. The fore-
fight of the hour of death would conti-
nually interrupt the course of human as-
fairs, and the overwhelming profipet of
the future, instead of exciting men to pro-
per acivity, would render them immove-
able with conftcrnation and difinay.-
How much more friendly to man is that
mixture of knowledge and ignorance which
is allotted to him in this state! Ignorant of
the events which are to befall us, and of
the precise term which is to conclude our
life, by this ignorance our enjoyment of
present objets is favoured ; and knowing
that death is certain, and that human as-
fIlirs arc full of change, by itis know-

lcd ge

S E R M. ledge our attachment to those objeas is no-

IV.

derated. Precisely in the fame manner, as
by the mixture of evidence and obscurity
which remains on the profped of a future
slate, a proper balance is preserved betwixt
our love of this life, and our desire of a
better.

The longer that our thoughts dwell on

this subjed-, the more we muff be con-
vinced, that in nothing the Divine wisdom
is more admirable, than in proportioning
knowledge to the necessities of man. In-
stead of lamenting our condition, that we
are permitted only toffee as throughi a gln/s,
darkly, we have reason to bless our Crea-
tor, no less for what he hath concealed, than
for what he hath allowed us to know. He
is wondefiul in couifi/l, as he is excellenlt
in working. He is wife in heart, and his
thoughts are deep. How uniearchable are
the riches of the wi/0lom so the k/lowlede of
God !

FROM the whole view which we have
taken of the subjet, this important in-

ftruCion

itrusilon arises, that the great design of all SE RM.

IV.

the knowledge, and in particular of the
religious knowledge which God hath as-
forded us, is, to lit us for discharging the
duties of life. No ufele's discoverics are
made to us in religion: No dilcoverics
even of useful truths, beyond the preciss
degree of information, which is subservient
to right conduct. To this great end all our
information points. In this centre all the
lines of knowledge meet. Life anin iilmmor-
tality are brought to liglt in the gopell; yet
not so displayed as to gratify the curiosity
of the world with an altonifhing fpecacle;
but only so far made known, as to aflift and
support us in the practice of our duty. If
the discovery were more imperfect, it would
excite no desire of immortality; if it were
more full and firiking, it would render us
careless of life. On the first supposition,
no sufficient motive to virtue would ap-
pear; on the fccond, no proper trial of it
would remain. In the one cafe, we should
think and aCt like men who have their por-
tion onlu in this world; in the other cafe,

2 like

SERM. like men who have no concern with this

IV. 1_, world at all. Whereas now, by the wife

contfitution of Heaven, we are placed in the
most favourable situation for aaing, with
propriety, our allotted part here; and for
rising, in due course, to higher honour and
happiness hereafter.

Let us then second the kind intentions of

Providence, and aa upon the plan which
it hath pointed out. Checking our inqui-
fitive solicitude about what the Almighty
hath concealed, let us diligently improve
what he hath made known. Inhabitants of
the earth, we are at the fame time candi-
dates for Heaven. Looking upon these as
only different views of one confiftcnt cha-
raEer, let us carry on our preparation sos
Heaven, not by abftrating ourselves from
the concerns of this world, but by ful-
filling the duties and offices of every fla-
tion in life. Living Joberl, righteolly,
and godly in the prcJint world, let us look
for that blcfid hope, and the glorious appear-
ing of the great God, and our Saviour 7fiJs
Chri/ef

Ji~~ ~ Before

Before I conclude, it may be proper to s E R >I.

observe, That the rcafonings in this dif-.- ---
course give no ground to apprelend any
danger of our being too much influenced
by the belief of a future state. I have
flowin the hurtful effccs vhii:h would fol-
low from too bright and full a difovery of
the glory of that state; and in shewing this,
I have julfified the decree of Providence,
which permits no such dilcovery. Put as
our nature is at prefint conflitiited, at-
tached by so many firong connetions to
the world of sense, and enjoying a co:;-
niulncation so feeble and dillant with the
world of ipirits, we need fear no danger
from cultivating intercourit with the latter
as much as possible. On the contrary,
fiom that intercourse the chief security of
our virtue is to be fought. The bias of
our nature leans lo much towlardis cfnfe,
that from this fide the peril is to be dread-
ed, and on this fide the defence is to be
provided.

Let us then wcall bl fJ;ilt. Let us
ftcingthen this principle cf aIioun to the

TOL, I. I ut...'A

S E R M. utmorf of our power. Let us implore the

IV. 1-c-.' Divine grace, to strengthen it within us

more and more: That we may thence de-
rive an antidote against that subtile poison,
which incessant commerce with the objets
of sense diffuses through our fouls; that we
may hence acquire purity and dignity of
manners filited to our divine hopes; and,
undefiled by the pleasures of the world, un-
shaken by its terrours, may preserve to the
end one conitant tenour of integrity. Till
at last, having, under the conduct of
Chritlian faith, happily finished the period
of discipline, we enter on that slate, where
a far nobler scene shall open; where eter-
nal objecs shall shine in their native fplen-
dour; where, this twilight of mortal life
being pait, the Sun of righleoif2efs ihall
rife; and that which is perfecS being come,
that which is in part Jhall be done away.

# SERMON V. On the DEATH of CHRIST. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. JOHN, xvii. 1. Jesus lift up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father! The hour is come.

[ I15 ]

S E R M ON V.

On the DEATH of CHRIST.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.

JOHN, Xvii. I.
7eftis I ft up his eyes to lheaven, and said,

Father ! The hour is come.

THESE were the words of our bless- SERM.
T V.

ed Lord on a memorable occasion.

The feast of the passover drew nigh, at
which he knew he was to susser. The
night was arrived wherein he was to be
delivered into the hands of his enemies.
He had spent the evening in conference
with his disciples; like a dying father in
the midst of his family, mingling confola-
tions with his last inftrutions. When he

I 2 had

S ER M. had ended his discourse to them, he lifted

V.
-.-.. utp his eyes to heaven, and, with the words

which I have now read, began that so-
lemn prayer of intercession for the church,
which closed his ministry. Immediately
after, he went forth with his disciples into
the garden of Gethsemane, and furren-
dered himself to tllofe who came to appre-
hend him.

Such was the situation of our Lord at

the time of his pronouncing these words.
He saw his mission on the point of being
accompliflled. He had the profped full
before him, of all that he was about to
fuffer.-Father ! the hotr is come.-What
hour? An hour the most critical, the
most pregnant with great events, since
hours had begun to be numbered, since
time had begun to run. It was the hour
in which the Son of God was to termi-
nate the labours of his important life, by
a death still more important and illuftri-
ous; the hour of atoning, by his susser-
ings, for the guilt of mankind; the hour
of accomplifiing prophecies, types, and

symbols,

symbols, which had been carried on SE RM.
through a series of ages; the hour of con-
eluding the old, and of introducing to the
world the new dispensation of religion;
the hour of his triumphing over the
world, and death and hell; the hour of
his erefting that spiritual kingdom which
is to last for ever. Such is the hour, such
are the events, which you are to comme-
morate in the sacrament of our Lord's
Supper. I shall attempt to set them before
you as proper fubjeds, at this time, of
your devout meditation. To display them
in their genuine majesty, is beyond the
ability of man.

I. THIS was the hour in' which Christ

was glorified by his sufferings. The
whole of his life had discovered much
real greatness, under a mean appearance.
Through the cloud of his humiliation,
his native lustre often broke forth ; but
never did it shine so bright, as in this last,
this trying lour. It was indeed the hour
of distress; and'of blood. He knew it to

I3 be

S E R M. be such; and when he uttered the words
- O-, of the Text, he had before his eyes, the

executioner and the cross, the scourge, the
nails, and the spear. But by profpets of
this nature his bful was not to be over-
come. It is distress which enobles every
great characer; and distress was to glo-
rify the Son of God. He was now to
teach all mankind, by his example, how
to susser and to die. He was to stand forth
before his enemies, as the faithful witness
of the truth; justifying by his behaviour
the character which he assumed, and feal-
ing with his blood the dotrine which he
taught.

What magnanimity in all his words

and actions on this great occasion! The
court of Herod, the judgment-hall of
Pilate, the hill of Calvary, were so many
theatres prepared for his displaying all the
virtues of a constant and patient mind.
When led forth to susser, the first voice
which we hear from him, is a generous
lamentation over the fate of his unfortu-
nate, though guilty, country; and, to the

last

last moment of his life, we behold him in s E R M.

V.

possession of the fame gentle and benevolent
spirit. No upbraiding, no complaining
expression escaped from his lips, during the
long and painful approaches of a cruel
death. He betrayed no fylmptom of a
weak or a vulgar, of a dilcompofed or im-
patient mind. With the utmost attention
of filial tenderness, he committed his aged
mother to the care of his beloved disciple*.
With all the dignity of a sovereign, he
conferred pardon on a penitent fellow-
sufferer. With a greatness of mind beyond
example, he spent his last moments in apo-
logies and prayers for those who were
fliedding his blood.

By wonders in heaven, and wonders on

earth, was this hour diftingui.hed. All
nature seemed to feel it; and the dead and
the living bore witness to its importance.
The veil of the temple was rent in twain.
The earth shook. There was darkness
over all the land. The graves were open-
e(d, and many) whoJ fipt, arcS and went into

* See John, xix. 26, 27.

I 4 the

S E RM.. the Hcly Citr. Nor were these the only

V.
p-Y- iprodigies of this awful hour. The most

hardened hearts were subdued and changed.
The judge who, in order to gratify the
multitude, pafled sentence against him,
publicly attested his innocence. The
Roman centurion who presided at the
execution, glorifcd God, and acknow-
ledged the uffrer to be more than man.
..ftcr he fs: te te hings which had pafrcd,
he filJ, Cclrtinly this was a righteous per-
f/in; trIlp t/his was the Son of God. The
jewif(l mailefactor who was crucified with
him, addrefced him as a King, and im-
plored his favour. Even the crowd of in-
felfible lfpectors, who had come forth as
to a common fpctacle, and who began
x'ith clamours and inlllts, returned home,
Jfluitinlg their brfics.-Look back on the
heroes, the philosophers, the legislators of
old. View them in their last moments.
Recal every circumstance which diftln-
gunihed their departure from the world.
Where can you !ind ilch an aTl'mblage of
high virtues, and of great events, as con-

curred

curred at the death of Chrilt? Where SERM.

V.

bo many testimonies given to the dig- ..
nity of the dying person, by earth and
by heaven ?

IT. Tins was the hour in which Christ

atoned for the fins of mankind, and ac-
complified our eternal redemption. It was
the hour when that great sacrifice was of-
sered up, the efficacy of which reaches back
to the firfl tranflreffion of man, and extends
forward to the end of time; the hour when,
from the cross, as from an high altar, the
blood was flowing, which wafled away the
guilt of the nations.

This awful dispensation of the Al-

mighty contains mnyfteries which are be-
yond the discovery of man. It is one of
tliofe thilngs into which /,;e Ca';;/s d(tjr t/
lock,. 'What has been revcled to us is,
That the death of Clrift was the intcrpo-
litioo of IHaven fur pievclltiig the ruin
of huinian kind. W\e know, that, under
the government of Cod, mifecr is the na-
*ura! confcqucucc of guilt. After a:>nil

iTi' e;$il

SE R M. creatures had, by their criminal condut,

V. -.;_ introduced disorder into the Divine king-

dom, there was no ground to believe, that
by their penitence and prayers alone
they could prevent the destruction which
threatened them. The prevalence of pro-
pitiatory sacrifices throughout the earth,
proclaims it to be the general fcnfe of
mankind, that mere repentance was not
of sufficient avail to expiate fin, or to
stop its penal effecs. By the constant
allusions which are carried on in the
New Testament to the sacrifices under
the Law, as pre-signifying a great atone.
ment made by Christ; and by the firong
expressions which are used in describing
the effects of his death, the sacred writers
show, as plainly as language allows, that
there was an efficacy in his sufferings, far
beyond that of mere example and in-
ftruaion. The nature and extent of that
efficacy we are unable, as yet, fully to
trace. Part we are capable of behold-
ing; and the wisdom of what we behold,
we have reason to adore. We difeern in

this

this plan of redemption, the evil of fin SE t M.
strongly exhibited; and the jufiice of the .-.,.
Divine government awfully exemplified, in
Christ suffering for finners. But let us not
imagine, that our present difcovcries un-
fold the whole influence of the death of
Christ. It is connected with causes into
which we cannot penetrate. It produces
consequences too extensive for us to ex-
plore. God's thoughts are not as our thoughts.
In all things we fee only in part; and here,
if any where, we fee alob as through a
glass, darkly.

This, however, is fully manifefl, that

redemption is one of the moR glorious
works of the Almighty. If the hour of
the creation of the world was great and
illustrious; that hour, when, from the
dark and formless mais, this fair system
of nature arose at the Divine command;
when the morning Jfars fang together, and
all the sons of God Jfoutcd far joy'; no lets
illustrious is the hour of the refRoration
of the world; the hour when, fiom con-
demnation and misery, it emerged into

happincfs

SERM. happiness and peace. With less external

V.

.^..J majefly it was attended, but is, on that

account, the more wonderful, that under
an appearance so simple, such great events
were covered.

III. IN this hour the long series of

prophecies, visions, types, and figures,
was accomplished. This was the centre
in which they all met: This the point
towards which they had tended and
verged, throughout the course of so many
generations. You behold the Law and
the Prophets tfanding, if we may speak
so, at the foot of the cross, and doing
homage. You behold Moses and Aaron
bearing the ark of the covenant; David
and Elijah presenting the oracle of tefti-
mony. You behold all the priests and
sacrifices, all the rites and ordinances,
all the types and symbols assembled
together to receive their consummation.
Without the death of Christ, the worfnip
and ceremonies of the Law would have
remained a pompous, but unmeaning in-

ftitution,

flitution. In the hour when he was SERM.
crucified, the book with the fiven feals \-
was opened. Every rite assumed its fig-
nificancy; every prediion met its event;
every symbol displayed its correspond-
ence.

The dark and seemingly ambiguous

method of conveying important difcove-
ries under figures and emblems, was not
peculiar to the sacred books. The ipirit
of God, in pre-signifying the death of
Christ, adopted that plan, according to
which the whole knowledge of thofc
carly ages was propagated through the
world. Under the veil of myllerious al-
lusion, all wisdom was then concealed.
From the sensible world, images were
every-wlhere borrowed, t6 describe things
unlfeci. More was understood to be
meant, than was openly c.prefled. By
cnigmatical rites, the Plricft communi-
cated his docrines; by parables and al-
legories, the Philosopher infiiueId his
dilciples; even the I.cgillator, by figu-
rative Ialyings, commanded the reverence

of

S E R M. of the people. Agreeably to this prevail.

V. -_,.. ing mode of inftruftion, the whole dif-

penfation of the Old Testament was to
conduced, as to be the shadow and the
figure of a spiritual system. Every re-
markable event, every distinguished person.
age, under the Law, is interpreted in the
New Testament, as bearing some reference
to the hour of which we treat. If Isaac
was laid upon the altar as an innocent
vitlim; if David was driven from his throne
by the wicked, and restored by the hand
of God; if the brazen serpent was lifted up
to heal the people; if the rock was smitten
by Moses, to furnifli drink in the wilder-
ness; all were types of Christ, and alluded
to his death.

In predicing the fame event the lan.

guage of ancient prophecy was magnifi-
cent, but Seemingly contradiCtory: For it
foretold a Messiah, who was to be at once
a sufferer and a conqueror. The Star was
to come out of Jacob, and the Branch to
spring fromt the Jiem of e~e. The Angel of
the Covenant, the Desire of all Nations, was

20 to

to come fiddenljy to his temple; and to him s E R M.

V.

was to be the gathering of the people. Yet As
at the fame time, he was to be defpfied and
rejesed of men; he was to be taken from
prfon and from jzudgment. and to be led as
a lamb to the Jlaughter. Though he was a
man of .orrows and acquainted with grief,
yet the Gentiles were to come to his light,
and Kings to the brtightnefs of his riing. In
the hour when Christ died, those prophe-
tical riddles were solved; those seeming
contradictions were reconciled. The ob-
fcurity of oracles, and the ambiguity of
types, vanilhed. The Jin of righteolfzefis
rose; and, together with the dawn of re-
ligion, those shadows passed away.

IV. Tins was the hour of the abolition
of the Law, and the introducion of the
Gospel; the hour of terminating the old,
and of beginning the new dispensation of
religious knowledge and worship through-
out the earth. Viewed in this light, it
forms the most august xra which is to be
found in the history of mankind. When

Christ

SER M. Christ was suffering on the cross, we are
_ _-.y informed by one of the Evangelists, that he

said, ItbirJi; and that they filled a fpunge
with vinegar, and put it to his mouth. After
he had taficd the vine ar, knowig that all
things were now accomfplficd, and the fciip-
turcs fifilled, be said, It is finiied ; that is,
This offered draught of vinegar was the last
circumstance predicted by an ancient Pro-
phet t, that remaincd to be fulfilled. The
vision and the prophecy are now fealed:
The Mosaic dilpjen'ation is cloled. Anld he
bowed his hcad, and galve lp the Ghj/J.

It is finij.cd.-\When he uttered these

wnords, he changed the state of the uni-
verse. At that moment the Law ccafed,
and the Goipel commenced. This was the
ever-memorable point of time which litpa-
rated the old and the new world from
each other. On one fide of the point of
ftparation, you behold the Law, with its
priests, its facrificcs, and its rites, retiring
from fight. On the other fide, you be-

* John, xI. 2, 29,9 30. 1 Pfa!mn; iv. :r.

24 rhold

hold the Gospel, with its simple and vene- s E R M.

V.

rable infitutions, coming forward into _
view. Significantly was the veil of the
temple rent in this hour; for the glory
then departed from between the cheru-
bims. The legal High Priest delivered up
his Urim and Thummim, his breast-plate,
his robes, and his incense: And CHRIST
flood forth as the great High Priest of all
succeeding generations. By that one fa-
crifice, which he now offered, he abolished
sacrifices for ever. Altars on which the fire
had blazed for ages, were now to smoke
no more. VTidims were no more to bleed.
Arot with the blood of balls and goats, but
with his own blood, he now entered into the
Holy Place, there to appear in the presence of
Godfor us.

This was the hour of association and

union to all the worshippers of God.
When Christ said, It isfiii/jed, he threw
down the wall of partition which had so
long divided the Gentile from the Jew. He
gathered into one, all the faithful, out of
every kindred and people. He proclaimed
VOL. I. K the

S E R M. the hour to be come, when the knowledge

V.

of the true God should be no longer con-
fined to one nation, nor his worship to one
temple; but over all the earth, the wor-
ihippers of the Father fhouldferve him in'
spirit and in truth. From that hour they
who dwelt in the iltermofi ends of the earth,
jlrangers to the covenant of promiJE, began
to be brought nigh. In that hour, the light
of the Gospel dawned from afar on the
Britifi islands.

During a long course of ages, Provi-

dence seemed to be occupied in preparing
the world for this revolution. The whole
Jewish (economy was intended to ufier it
in. The knowledge of God was preserved
unextinguifhed in one corner of the world,
that thence, in due time, might issue forth
the light which was to overspread the
earth. Successive revelations gradually en-
larged the views of men beyond the nar-
row bounds of Judxa, to a more extensive
kingdom of God. Signs and miracles
awakened their expectation, and directed
their eyes towards this great event. Whe-

i1 ther

ther God descended on the flaming moun- SERM.
tain, or spoke by the Prophet's voice; whe- '-
ther he Scattered his chosen people into
captivity, or re-affeinbled them in their own
land; he was still carrying on a progressive
plan, which was accompliihed at the death
of Christ.

Not only in the territories of Israel, but

over all the earth, the great difplcfations
of Providence refpeted the approach of
this important hour. If empires rose or
fell; if war divided, or peace united the
nations; if learning civilized their man-
ners, or philosophy enlarged their views;
all was, by the secret decree of Heaven,
made to ripen the world for that fillnfis
of time, when Christ was to publifll the
whole counsel of God. The Persian, the
Macedonian, the Roman conqueror, en-
tered upon the ltage each at his prediEted
period; and though he meant not Jo, neither
did his heart think So, minitered to this
hour. The revolutions of power, and
the fucceflion of monarchies, were so ar-
ranged by Providence, as to facilitate the

K 2 progress

S E RM. progress of the Gospel through the habit"

V. v-_ able world, after the day had arrived, when

the j lone which was cut out of the noun-
tain without hands, Jhotdd become a great
mountain, and fill the carth '. This was
the day which ibralham saw afar off, and
was glad. This was the day which many
Propbets and Kings, and righteous men, dc-
fired to fee, but coitld not ; the day for which
the earnest expeslation of tbe creature, long
oppressed with ignorance, and bewilder-
ed in superstition, might be justly said to
wait.

V. Tiils was the hour of Christ's tri-

umph over all the lowers of darkness; the
hour in which he ovcrthrew dominions and
thrones, led captivity captive, and gave gifis
unto men. The contest which the kingdom
of darkness had long maintained against the
kingdom of light, was now brought to its
crisis. The period was come, when the feed
of the woman Jhould bruise the head of the
serpent. For many ages, the most gross fu-

* Dan. ii3 35. Prfiti

pcrftition

perbtition had filled the earth. 'he glory of SE RM.
the uncorruptible God was every-where, V.
except in the land of Judea, clanged into
images made like to corruptible wan, and to
birds, and bests, and creeping things. The
world, which the Almighty created for him-
self, seemed to have become a temple of
idols. Even to vices and passions altars
were raied; and what was entitled Reli-
gion, was in cflecq a discipline of impurity.
In the midst of this universal darkness, Sa-
tan had erecaed his throne; and the learned
and polished, as well as the savage nations,
bowed down before him. But at the hour
when Christ appeared on the cross, the fig-
nal of his defeat was given. His kingdom
suddenly departed from him; the reign of
idolatry passed away: He was beheld to fall
like lightning from Heaven. In that hour,
the foundation of every Pagan temple
shook. The flatue of every false God tot-
tered on its base. The Priest fled from his
falling shrine; and the Heathen oracles be-
came dumb for ever.

K 3 As

SERM. As on the cross Christ triumphed ver

V. _ Satan, so he overcame his auxiliary the

world. Long had it aflailed him with its
temptations and discouragements. In this
hour of revere trial, he surmounted them
all. Formerly he had despised the pleafiues
of the world. He now baffled its terrours.
Hence he is justly said to have crucifedl
the world. By his sufferings he ennobled
distress; and he darkened the lustre of the
pomp and vanities of life. He discovered
to his followers the path which leads
through affliction, to glory and to vitory;
and he imparted to them the fame spirit
which enabled him to overcome. My king-
dom is not of this world. In this world ye
Jfall have tribulation; but be of good cheer;
I have overcome the worldh .

Death also, the last foe of man, was

the viaim of this hour. The formidable
appearance of the fpetre remained; but
his dart was taken away. For, in the
hour when Christ expiated guilt, he dif-

* John, xvi. 33.

armed

armed death, by securing the refurre&ion SERM.
of the just. When he laid to his penitent V
fellow-fufferer, To-day thou shalt be with
me iu paradise, he announced to all his fol-
lowers the certainty of heavenly bliss. He
declared the cherubims to be difmifled, and
the flaming fJuord to be sheathed, which
had been appointed at the fall, to keep from
man the 'way of the tree of life :. Faint,
before this period, had been the hope, in-
ditinct the profpe&t, which even good men
enjoyed of the heavenly kingdom. Life
and immortality were now brought to light.
From the hill of Calvary, the firit clear and
certain view was given to the world of
the everlasting mansions. Since that hour,
they have been the perpetual consolation of
believers in Chrifl. Under trouble, they
sooth their minds; amidst temptation, they
support their virtue; and, in their dying
moments, enable them to lay, 0 death !
where is thy sing ? 0 grave ! where is thy
victory ?

* Gen. iii. zs,

K 4 VI. THIS

SERM. VI. THIS was the hour when our Lord

V.
,,v-_ ereCIed that spiritual kingdom which is

never to end. How vain are the coun-
fels and designs of men! How shallow is
the policy of the wicked ! How short their
triumphing! The enemies of Christ ima-
gined, that in this hour they had success-
fully accomplifled their plan for his de-
firudion. They believed, that they h d
entirely scattered the fmnall party of his
followers, and had extinguiihled( his name
and his honour for ever. In derilion, they
addressed him as a King. They clothed
him with purple robes; they crowned him
with a crown of thorns; they put a reed
into his haild; and, with insulting mock-
ery, bowed the knee before him. Blind
and impious men! How little did they
know, that the Almighty was at that mo-
ment fctting him as a King on the hill of
Sion; giving him the Ileathen for his in-
heritance, and the uttermnifl parts of the
earth for his poeffon ! How little did they
know that their badges of mock royalty
were at that moment converted into the

signals

signals of absolute dominion, and the in- S ER M.
ftruments of irresistible power! The reed v._ _
which they put into his hands became a
rod of iron, with which he was to break in
pieces his enemies; a sceptre, with which
he was to rule the universe in righteous-
ness. The cross, which they thought was
to stigmatize him with infamy, became the
ensign of his renown. Instead of' being
the reproach of his followers, it was to be
their boast and their glory. The cross was
to shine on palaces and churches, through-
out the earth. It was to be assumed as
the diftindion of the most powerful mo-
narchs, and to wave in the banner of
vicorious armies, when the memory of
Herod and Pilate fliuld be accursed;
when Jerusalem flould be reduced to afies,
and the Jews be vagabonds over all the
world.

These were the triumphs which com-

menced at this hour. Our Lord saw them
already in their birth; he Jfw of the

t tra-
vail of his foul, and was fatisfid. iHe

beheld

SERM. beheld the word of God going forth, con-

V. quering, and to conquer; subduing to the

obedience of his laws, the subduers of the
world; carrying light into the regions of
darkness, and mildness into the habitations
of cruelty. He beheld the Gentiles wait-
ing below the cross, to receive the Gospel.
He beheld Ethiopia and the IJles flrelchiing
out their bands to God; the desert begin-
ning to rejoice, and to blofom as the rof/;
and the knowledge of the Lord filling the
earth, as thewaters cover the sea. Well
pleased, he said, It is sinuSed. As a con-
queror, he retired from the field, reviewing
his triumphs: He bowed his head, and gave
up the ghost.- From that hour, Christ
was no longer a mortal man, but Head
over all things to the Church; the glorious
King of men and angels, of whose domi-
nion there shall be no end. His triumphs
shall perpetually increase. His name Jiall
endure for ever; it fianll lZft as long as the
iun; men fiJall be blefd in him, and all na-
tions Jf'all call him blefld.

Such

Sucii were the tranfafions, such the es- SERM.

sects of this ever memorable hour. With V.
all ttiofe great events was the mind of our
Lord filled, when he lifted up his eyes to
heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come.

From this view which we have taken

of this subjed, permit me to suggest, what
ground it affords to confide in the mercy
of God, for the pardon of fin; to trust to
his faithfiilnefs, for the accompliflment of
all his prolmies; and to approach to him,
with gratitude and devotion in adts of
worship.

IN the first place, The death of Christ

affords us ground to confide in the Divine
mercy for the pardon of fin. All the steps
of that high dispensation of Providence,
which we have confidered, lead direcly to
this conclusion, Ile that Jjarcd not his
own Son, but delivered him up for us all,
bow flSall he not writ/h him also freely give
us all things '? This is the final result
of the discoveries of the Gospel. On this

Rom. viii, 32.

l'eis

S E R M. refts that great system of consolation, which

- it hath reared up for men. We are not

left to dubious and intricate reasonings,
concerning the conduct which God may
be expected to hold towards his offending
creatures. But we are led to the view of
important and illuflrious fads, which strike
the mind with evidence irreliftible. For,
is it possible to belicve, that iuch great
operations, as 1 have endeavoured to de-
scribe, were carried on by the Almighty in
Vain? Did he excite in the hearts of his
creatures, luch encouraging hopes with-
out any intention to fu!iil them ? After so
long a preparation of goodnels, could he
mean to deny for),iveceis to the penitent
and the humble ? '\hen, overcome by the
itcnfe of guiit, man looks up with an afto-
niflled eye to the justice of his Creator, let
him recolled that hour of which the Text
speaks, and be comfortcd. The flgnals of
Divine mercy, ercced in his view, are
too conspicuous to be cither distrusted or
mifiaken.

IN

rAr
IN the next place, The discoveries of S ERM.

V.

this hour afford the highest reason to trust -
in the Divine faithfulness, for the accom-
pliihment of every promise which remains
yet unfulfilled. For this was the hour of
the completion of God's ancient covenant.
It was the pefori.manlce of the mercj pro-

sised to the fathers. We belold the con-
summation of a great plan, which, through-
out a course of ages, had been uniformly
pursued; and which, against every human
appearance, was, at the appointed moment,
exacly fulfilled. No word that is gone out
of the mouth of the Lord fl.all fail. No
length of time alters his purpose. No ob-
ftacles can retard it. Towards the ends
accomplished in this hour, the most repug-
nant infiruments were made to operate.
We discern God bending to his purpose,
the jarring passions, the opposite interests,
and even the vices of men; uniting seem-
ing contrarieties in his scheme ; making the
wirth of man to praif him ; obliging the
ambition of Princes, the prejudices of the
Jews, the malice of Satan, all to concur,

14 either

GERM. either in bringing forward this hour, or

V.

' in completing its diftined efftes. With

what entire confidence ought we to wait
for the fulfilment of all his other promiles
in their due time; even when events are
most embroiled, and the profpeat is mofR
discouraging ? A/lthosgh thou jfyefl, Thou
cailt not fee hin ; j'djiidgment is befbre him ;
therefore trijl thou il him. Be attentive
only to perform thy duty; leave the event
to God; and be aiured, that under the
direction of his Providence, all thiibgs f.,all
work together for a happy issue.

LASTLY, The consideration of this whole

fubjjca tends to excite gratitude an: devo-
tion, when we approach to God in acds of
worship. The hour of which I have dif-
coursed, prefentt him to us in the amiable
light of the Deliverer of mankind, the Re-
fiorer of our forfeited hopes. WVe behold
the greatnces of the Almighty, oiftened by
the mild radiance of condelcenlion and
mercy. We behold him diminishing the
awful diflance at which we stand from his

pretence,

presence, by appointing for us a Mediator s E R M.
and Intercessor, through whom the humble v.
may, without dismay, approach to Him
who made them. By such views of the
Divine nature, Christian faith lays the
foundation for a worfllip which flall be at
once rational and affectionate; a worflip, in
which the light of the undertfanding shall
concur with the devotion of the heart, and
the most profound reverence be united with
the most cordial love. Chriflian faith is
not a system of fpcculative truths. It is
not a leflbn of moral inftrucion only. By
a train of high difcovcries which it reveals,
by a succession of intcrefting obj-es which
it places in our view, it is calculated to ele-
vate the mind, to purify the aftilions, and,
by the assistance of devotion, to confirm
and encourage virtue. Such, in particular,
is the scope of that divine institution, the
Sacrament of our Lord's Supper. To this
happy purpose, let it conduce, by concenter-
ing, in one firiking point of light, all that
the Gospel has displayed of what is most im-
pcrtant to man. Touched with just contri-

tion

SER M. tion for past offences, and filled with a

V.
,_, _grateful sense of Divine goodness, let us

come to the altar of God; and with a
humble faith in his infinite mercies devote
ourselves to his service for ever.

# SERMON VI. On GENTLENESS. JAMES, iii. 17. The wisdom that is from above, is  gentle 

I45 ]
SERMON VI.

On GENTLENESS.

JAMES, iii. 17.

'I'e wyidorm that is from above, is-gentle--
' O be wife in our own eyes, to be S E R M.

wife in the opinion of the world, '

and to be wife in the fight of God, are
three things so very different, as rarely to
coincide. One may often be wife in his
own eyes, who is far from being so in
the judgment of the world; and to be re-
puted a prudent man by the world, is no
security for being accounted wife by God,
As there is a worldly happiness, which
God perceives to be no other than dif-
guised misery; asthere are worldly ho-
nours, which in his eflimation are re-

VOL. I. L proach;

ER MI. proach; so there is a worldly wisdom,
Vm. which in bis Jight is foolihnefi. Of this

worldly wisdom the charaters are given
in the context, and placed in contrast with
those of the wyidom which is from above.
The one is the wisdom of the crafty;
the other, that of the upright. The one
terminates in felfiihnefs; the other, in
charity. The one is full of lrife and bit-
ter envyings; the other, of mercy and of
good fruits. One of the chief chara&ers
by which the wisdom from above is dif-
tinguifhed, is gentlenefi, of which I am
now to discourse. Of this there is the
greater occasion to discourse, because it is
too seldom viewed in a religious light;
and is more readily confidered by the
bulk of men, as a mere felicity of nature,
or an exterior accomplishment of man-
ners, than as a christian virtue, which they
are bound to cultivate. I shall first explain
the nature of this virtue; and shall then
offer tome arguments to recommend, and
some directions to facilitate, the practice
of it.

I BEGIs

I BEGIN with diftinguilhing true gen- S ERM.

tlenefs from paflive tameness of spirit, V1
and from unlimited compliance with the
manners of others. That passive tame-
ness, which submits, without firuggle, to
every encroachment of the violent and as-
fuming, forms no part of Christian duty;
but, on the contrary, is deftrudive of
general happiness and order. That unli-
mited complaisance, which, on every oc-
cafion, falls in with the opinions and
manners, of others, is so far from being a
virtue, that it is itself a vice, and the pa-
rent of many vices. It overthrows all
steadiness of principle; and produces that
sinful conformity with the world which
taints the whole charafter. In the pre-
sent corrupted fate of human manners,
always to assent and to comply, is the
very worfl maxim we can adopt. It is
impossible to support the purity and dig-
nity of Christian morals, without oppo-
sing the world on various occasions, even
though we should stand alone. That
gentleness, therefore, which belongs to vir-

L 2 tue,

SE R M. tue, is to be carefully distinguished from
X- r' the mean spirit of cowards, and the fawn-

ing assent of sycophants. It renounces no
just right from fear. It gives up no im-
portant truth from flattery. It is indeed
not only consistent with a firm mind, but
it necessarily requires a manly spirit, and a
fixed principle, in order to give it any real
value. Upon this solid ground only, the
polish of gentleness can with advantage be
fuperinduced.

It stands opposed, not to the most de-

termined regard for virtue and truth, but
to harshness and severity, to pride and
arrogance, to violence and oppression.
It is, properly, that part of the great
virtue of charity, which makes us un-
willing to give pain to any of our bre-
thren. Compassion prompts us to relievetheir
wants. Forbearance prevents us from
retaliating their injuries. Meekness re-
firains our angry paflions; candour, our
fevre judgments. Gentleness correas
whatever is offensive in our manners; and,
by a constant train of humane attentions,

13 studies

studies to alleviate the burden of common s E R M.
misery. Its office, therefore, is extensive. VI.
It is not, like some other virtues, called
forth cnly on peculiar emergencies; but
it is continually in action, when we are en-
gaged in intercourse with men. It ought
to form our address, to regulate our speech,
and to diffuse itself over our whole beha-
viour.

I muf warn you, however, not to

confound this gentle w'fidom which is from
above, with that artificial courtesy, that
fludied fmoothneis of manners, which is
learned in the fchocl of the world. Such
accomplifllnents, the most frivolous and
empty may poffels. Too often they are
employed by the artful, as a snare; too
often affected by the hard and unfeel-
ing, as a cover to the baseness of their
minds. We cannot, at the fame time,
avoid observing the homage which,
even in such instances, the world is con-
strained to pay to virtue. In order to
xender society agreeable, it is found ne-
ccflary to assume somewhat, that may at

L 3 least

SERM. least carry its appearance. Virtue is the

VI.
I_,~ universal charm. Even its ihadow is

courted, when the substance is wanting.
The imitation of its form has been re-
duced into an art; and, in the commerce
of life, the first study of all who would
either gain the esteem, or win the hearts
of others, is to learn the speech, and to
adopt the manners, of candour, gentle-
ness, and humanity. But that gentleness
which is the characeriftic of a good
man, has, like every other virtue, its
feat in the heart: And, let me add, no-
thing, except what flows from the heart,
can render even external manners truly
pleasing, For no assumed behaviour can
at all times hide the real character. In
that unaffecaed civility which springs
from a gentle mind, there is a charm
infinitely more powerful than in all
the studied manners of the most finished
courtier.

True gentleness is founded on a sense

of what we owe to him who made us,
and to the common nature of which we

4 all

all share. It arises from reflecion on our E R M.
own failings and wants; and from just vI.
views of the condition, and the duty of
man. It is native feeling, heightened and
improved by principle. It is the heart
which easily relents; which feels for every
thing that is human; and is backward
and flow to infliCt the least wound. It is
affable in its address, and mild in its de-
meanor; ever ready to oblige, and will-
ing to be obliged by others; breathing
habitual kindness towards friends, cour-
tefy to firangers, long-fuffering to ene-
mies. It exercises authority with modera-
tion; administers reproof with tender-
ness; confers favours with ease and mo-
defty. It is unassuming in opinion, and
temperate in zeal. It contends not ea-
gerly about trifles; flow to contradic, and
fill flower to blame; but prompt to
allay difLenfion, and to restore peace. It
neither intermeddles unnecessarily. with
the affairs, nor pries inquisitively into the
secrets of others. It delights above all
things to alleviate distress, and if it can-

L 4 not

SERM; not dry up the falling tear, to sooth at
., least the grieving heart. Where it has

not the power of being useful, it is never
burdensome. It ieeks to please, rather
than to shine and dazzle; and conceals
with care that superiority, either of talents
or of rank, which is oppressive to thole
who are beneath it. In a word, it is that
spirit and that tenour of manners, which
the gospel of Christ enjoins, when it conm-
inands us to bear one another's burdens; to
rejoice with those who rejoice, and to i eep
with those who weep; to plerfe every one his
neighbour for his good; to be kind and ten-
der-hearted; to be pitiful and courteous; to
fipport the weak, and to be patient towards
all men.

Having now sufficiently explained the

nature of this amiable virtue, I proceed to
recommend it to your pradice. Let me,
for this end, desire you to confider the duty
which you owe to God; to confider the
relation which you bear one to another; to
confider your own interest.

I, CONSIDER

I. CONSIDER the duty which you owe SERM.

to God. When you survey his works, VI.
nothing is so conspicuous as his greatness
and majefly. When you consult his word,
nothing is more remarkable, than his atten-
tion to fnt':n that greatnels, and to place
it in the mildest and least oppressive light.
He not only charaderiles himself as the
God cfcolfolation, but, with condefccnding
gentlencls, he particularly accommodates
himielf to the situation of the unfortunate.
He dIlleth with the hlunmble and contrite.
He hidcth not his face whben the afficted cy.
He healeth the broken in heart, and bindetb
up their wounds.-When his Son came to
be the Saviour of the world, he was emi-
nent for the fame attribute of mild and
gentle goodness. Long before his birth, it
was prophesied of him that he should not
Jirive, nor cry, nor carfte his voice to be
heard in the Jiefets; that the bruijcd reed
he fJolld not break, nor quench the fJzok-
iSng flax ' And after his death, this

* Math. xii. 19, z0.

difin-

E R M. dillinguilhing feature in his charater wva
_vL so universally remembered, that the Apostle

Paul, on occasion of a request which he
makes to the Corinthians, uses those re-
markable expressions *, Ibefeech you by the
Vccek;cfis and gentleness of CGrifl. During
all his intercourse with men, no harffinefs,
or pride, or stately distance, appeared in
his demeanour. In his access, he was easy;
in his manners, simple; in his answers,
mild; in his whole behaviour, humble and
obliging. Learn of me, said he, for Iam
meek and lowly in heart.-As the Son of
God is the pattern, so the Holy Ghost is
the inspirer of gentleness. His name is
the comforter, the Spirit of Grace and peace.
His fruits, or operations on the human
mind, are love, meesnefs, gentleness, andlong-
jfiseri.:g t.-Thus, by every discovery of
the Godhead, honour is conferred upon
gentleness. It is held up to our view, as
peculiarly conneCted with Celestial Nature.
And ftiitable to such discoveries, is the whole
!irain of the gospel. It were unnecessary to

* z Cor, :, .. !' Gal. v. 2z.

appeal

appeal to any single precept. You need s E R M.
only open the New Testament, to find this _V.L
virtue perpetually inculcated. Charity, or
love, is the capital figure ever presented
to our view; and gentleness, forbearance,
and forgiveness, are the founds ever recur-
ing on our ear.

So predominant, indeed, is this spirit

throughout the Christian dispensation,
that even the vices and corruptions of
men have not been able altogether to
defeat its tendency. Though that dif-
penfation is far from having hitherto
produced its full effect upon the world,
yet we can clearly trace its influence, in
humanizing the manners of men. Re-
markable, in this refpea, is the victory
which it has gained over those powers of
violence and cruelty which belong to the
infernal kingdom. Wherever Chrifliani-
ty prevails, it has discouraged, and, in
ibme degree, abolished slavery. It has
rescued human nature from that ignomi-
nious yoke, under which, in former ages,
the one half of mankind groaned. It has

introduced

C ER M. introduced more equality between the two

VI,
L-,-' sexes, and rendered the conjugal union

more rational and happy. It has abated
the ferocioufilefs of war. It has mitigated
the rigour of despotism, mitigated the
cruelty of punishment; in a word, has
reduced mankind from their ancient bar-
barity, into a more humane and gentle
state.- Do we pretend respect and zeal
for this religion, and at the fame time
allow ourselves in that harshness and feve-
rity, which are so contradidory to its ge-
nius ? Too plainly we flow, that it has no
power over our hearts. We may retain
the Christian name; but we have aban-
doned the Christian spirit,

I[. CONSIDER the relation which you

bear to one another. Man, as a solitary
individual, is a very wretched being.
As long as he frands detached from his
kind, he is possessed, neither of happiness,
nor of strength. We are formed by na-
ture to unite ; we are impelled towards
each other, by the compassionate inftinats

in

in our frame; we are linked by a thou- SER M.

VI.

sand connections, founded on common , _
wants. Gentlencfs, therefore, or, as it is
very properly termed, humanity, is what
man, as such, in every station, owes to
man. To be inaccessible, contemptuous,
and hard of heart, is to revolt against
our own nature; is, in the language of
scripture, to hide ozufelves from our own
fefiJ. Accordingly, as all feel the claim
which they have to mildness and huma-
nity, so all are feniibly hurt by the want
of it in others. On no fide are we more
vulnerable. No complaint is more feel-
ingly made, than that of the harsh and
rugged manners of persons with whom we
have intercourse. But how feldo;n do we
transfer the cause to ourielves, or cxamine
how far we are guilty of infiiding on
others, whose sensibility is the fame with
ours, thoce very wounds of which we so
loudly complain ?

But, perhaps, it will be pleaded by
iome, That this gentleness on which we
now insist, regards only those smaller

offices

S E R M. offices of life, which in their eye are

,V. not essential to religion and goodness.

Negligent, they confess, on flight occa-
sions, of the government of their temper,
or the regulation of their behaviour, they
are attentive, as they pretend, to the
great duties of beneficence; and ready,
whenever the opportunity presents, to
perform important ferviccs to their fel-
low-creatures. But let such persons re-
flee, that the occasions of performing
those important good deeds, very rarely
occur. Perhaps their situation in life, or
the nature of their connections, may in
a great measure exclude them from such
opportunities. Great events give scope
for great virtues; but the main tenour of
human life is composed of small occur-
rences. Within the round of these, lie
the materials of the happiness of most
men; the subje&s of their duty, and
the trials of their virtue. Virtue must
be formed and supported, not by unfre-
quent aas, but by daily and repeated
exertions. In order to its becoming either

vigorous

vigorous or useful, it must be habitually SERM.

VI.

aaive; not breaking forth occasionally with '.
a transient lustre, like the blaze of the
comet; but regular in its returns, like the
light of day: Not like the aromatic gale,
which sometimes feasts the sense; but like
the ordinary breeze, which purifies the air,
and renders it healthful.

Years may pass over our heads, with-

out affording any opportunity for ads
of high beneficence or extensive utility.
Whereas not a day pases, but in the
common tranfaaions of life, and efpe-
cially in the intercourse of domeffic
society, gentleness finds place for pro-
moting the happiness of others, and for
strengthening in ourselves the habit of
virtue. Nay, by seasonable discoveries of
a humane spirit, we sometimes contri-
bute more materially to the advancement
of happiness, than byacdions which are
seemingly more important. There are
situations, not a few, in human life,
where the encouraging reception, the
condescending behaviour, and t}!c look

of

SERM. of sympathy, bring greater relief to the

VI.
V._ . heart than the most bountiful gift. \While,

on the other fide, when the hand of libe-
rality is extended to bestow, the want of
gentleness is sufficient to frustrate the in-
tention of the benefit. We four those
whom we mean to oblige; and, by con-
ferring favours with ostentation and harfli-
ness, we convert them into injuries. Can
any disposition then be held to pofiFfs a
low place in the scale of virtue, whose in-
fluence is so considerable on the happiness
of the world?

Gentleness is, in truth the great ave-

nue to mutual enjoyment. Amidst the
firife of interfering interests, it tempers
the violence of contention, and keeps
alive the feeds of harmony. It softens
animofities; renews endearments; and
renders the countenance of man a re.
freihment to man. Banish gentleness
from the earth; suppose the world to be
filled with none but harsh and contentious
fpiiits; and w:at fort of society would
remnain the solitude of the desert were

preferable

preferable to it. The confli& of jarring sE R M.
elements in chaos; the cave, where sub- VI.
terranecus winds contend and roar; the
den, where serpents hiss, and beasts of the
forest howl; would be the only proper
representations of such assemblies of men.
-0 that I had wings like a dove ! for then
I wolld fly away, and be at reJl. Lo ! then
I would wander Jar of, and rcmain in the
wilderlecfi; I would hafien my c/capefron
the windy florin and tempet : For I have
Jsec violence and strife in the city. Mif-
chief andJfrrow are in the inilfs of it: De-
ceit and guile depart not from the Jlreet :.
-Strange ! that where men have all one
common interest, that they should so often
absurdly concur in defeating it! Has not
Nature already provided a sufficient quan-
tity of unavoidable evils for the slate of
man? As if we did not susser enough from
the storm which beats upon us without,
mufft we conspire also, in those societies
where we assemble, in order to find a re-
treat from that storm, to harass one another?

* Pfal. Iv. 6, 7, 8,
VOL. I. M -But

S E R M. -But if the sense of duty, and of common

VI.

happiness, be insufficient to recommend
the virtue of which we treat, then let me
desire you,

III. To confider your own interest,

Whatever ends a good man can be supposed
to pursue, gentleness will be found to fa-
vour them. It prepossesses and wins every
heart. It persuades, when every other ar-
gument fails; often disarms the fierce, and
melts the stubborn. Whereas harfhlef3
confirms the opposition it would subdue;
and, of an indifferent person, creates an
enemy. He who could overlook an injury
committed in the collision of interefs, will
long and severely resent the flights of a con-
temptuous behaviour.-To the man ofgen-
tlenefs, the world is generally disposed to
ascribe every other good quality. The
higher endowments of the mind, we admire
at a distance, and when any impropriety cf
behaviour accompanies them, we admire
without love. They are like some of the
distant stars, whose beneficial influence

reaches

reaches not to us. Whereas of the in- SERM.

VI.

fluence of gentleness, all in some degree -
partake, and therefore all love it. The man
of this charader riles in the world without
struggle, and flourishes without envy. His
misfortunes are universally lamented; and
his failings are easily forgiven.

But whatever. may be the effct of this

virtue on our external condition, its influ-
ence on our internal enjoyment is certain
and powerful. That inward tranquillity
which it promotes, is the fiLft requisite to
every pleasurable feeling. It is the calm
and clear atmofpherc, the serenity and fun-
Ihine of the mind. When benignity and
gentleness reign within, we are always least
in hazard of being ruffled from without;
every person, and every occurrence, are
beheld in the most favourable light. But
let some clouds of ditg,uft and ill-humcur
gather on the mind; and immediately the
scene changes. Nature seems transformed;
and the appearance of all things is blackened
to our view. The gentle mind is like the
smooth fiream, which rcflests every obtl;c

M 2 in

SE RM. ia its jul proportion, and in its fairest co-

-,-i lours. The violent spirit, like troubled wa-

ters, renders back the images of things
distorted and broken; and communicates
to them all that disordered motion which
arises solely from its own agitation.

Ol)lnces mijif come. As soon may the

waves of the sea cease to roll, as provoca-
tions to arise from human corruption and
frailty. Attacked by great injuries, the man
of mild and gentle spirit will feel what hu-
n!an nature feels; and will defend and re-
sent, as his duty allows him. But to those
flight provocations, and fiivolous offences,
which are the most frequent causes of dif-
quiet, he is happily fuperiour. Hence his
days flow in a far more placid tenour than
those of others; exempted from the num-
berlefs discomposures which agitate vulgar
minds. Inspired with higher sentiments;
taught to regard with indulgent eye, the
frailties of men, the omissions of the care-
leTs, the follies of the imprudent, and the
levity of the fickle, he retreats into the calm-
nels of his spirit, as into an undisturbcd

fanduary;

fancuary; and quietly allows the usual S ERM.

VI,
current of life to hold its course.

This virtue has another, and fill more

important connetion with our interest, by
means of that relation which our present
behaviour bears to our eternal state. Hea-
ven is the region of gentleness and friend-
fhiip: Hell, of fierceness and animosity. If
then, as the scripture inftruets us, according
to what we now Jow, we mll hereafter
reap; it follows, that the cultivation of a
gentle temper, is necessary to prepare us for
heavenly felicity, and that the indulgence
of harsh difpolitions, is the introducion to
future misery. Men, I am afraid, too often
separate those articles of their belief which
relate to eternity, from the ordinary affairs
of the world. They connect them with the
seasons of seriousness and gravity. They
leave them with much refpeft, as in a high
region, to which, only on great occasions,
they retort; and, when they descend into
common life, confider themselves as at li-
berty to give free scope to their humours
and paflions. Whereas, in fad, it is their

M 3 beha-

S E R M. behaviour in the daily train of social inter-

VI.

j course, which, more than any other cause,
fixes and determines their spiritual charac-
ter; gradually instilling those dispositions,
and forming those habits, which assec their
everlasting condition. With regard to trifles,
perhaps their malignant dispositions may
chiefly be indulged. But let them remem-
ber well, that those trises, by increasing the
growth of peevishness and passion, become
pregnant with the most serious mischiefs;
and may fit them, before they are aware,
for being the future companions of none but
infernal spirits.

I mean not to fay, that, in order to our

preparation for Heaven, it is enough to be
mild and gentle ; or that this virtue alone
will cover all our fins. Through the feli-
city of natural confitution, a.certain degree
of this benignity may be poffefled by some,
whose hearts are in other refpeats corrupt,
and their lives irregular. But what I mean
to assert, is, That where no attention is
given to the government of temper, meet-
nels for Heaven is not yet acquired, and the

regene-

regenerating power of religion is as yet un- E R M.
known. One of the first works of the spirit ,
of God is, to infuse into every heart which
it inhabits, that gentle wilfdom which is from
above. Trhey w/o are C/jrif's have crucified
the fle/fl with its nfel'cions and ljis: but let
it not be forgotten, that among the works
of the feflJ, hatred, variance, emulations,
wrath, Jlrife, and envyings, are as expressly
enumerated, as uncleanness, murders, drunk-
ennefs, and revelling .. They who continue
either in the one, or the other,Jfhall not in-
hlerit, indeed cannot inherit, the kingdom of
God.

Having thus ihown the importance of

gentleness, both as a moral virtue, and as
a Christian grace, I shall conclude the sub-
jeCt, with briefly suggesting some confidera-
tions which may be of use to facilitate the
pracice of k.

FOR this end, let me advise you to view

your character with an impartial eye; and
to learn from your own failings, to give

9 Gal. v. 19, o2, 2z.

M 4 that

SER M. that indulgence which in your turn you

V1I. .--- claim. It is pride which fills the world

with so much harshness ahd severity. In the
fulness of felf-eftimation, we forget what
we are. We claim attentions to which we
are not entitled. We are rigorous to of-
fences, as if we had never offended; un-
feeling to diltrefs, as if we knew not what
it was t) susser. From those airy regions
of pride and folly, let us descend to our
proper level. Let us survey the natural
equality on which Providence has placed
man with man, and reflet on the intirmi-
ties common to all If the reflection on
natural equality and mutual offences be in-
sufficient to prompt humanity, let us at
lealt remember what we are in the fight of
God. Have we none of that forbearance
to give to one another, which we all io ear-
neftly intreat from Heaven ? Can we look
for clemency or gentleness from our Judge,
when we are so backward to theW it to bur
own brethren ? t

Accustom yourselves also to reflec on
the fmnall moment of those things which are

the

the usual incentives to violence and conten- s E R M.

VI.

tion. In the ruffled and angry hour, we
view every appearance through a false me-
dium. The most inconficerable point of
interest, or honour, swells into a momentous
objed; and the slightest attack seems to
threaten immediate ruin. But after pafilon
or pride has subsided, we look round in
vain for the mighty miicliefs we dreaded.
The fabric, which our ditiurbed imagination
had reared, totally disappears. But,.though
the cause of contention has dwindled away,
its consequences remain. We have alienated
a friend, we have embittered an enemy;
we have sown the feeds of future suspicion,
malevolence, or difguf.--Sufpend your vio-
lence, I beseech you, for a moment, when
causes of discord occur. Anticipate that
period of coolness, which, of itself, will
soon arrive. Allow yourselves to think,
how little you have any profpec of gaining
by fierce contention; but how much of the
.the happiness of life you are certain of
throwing away. Easily, and from the
fimalleft chink, the bitter waters of strife are

let

SERM. let forth; but their course cannot be fore-

VI.
^Lo J seen; and he seldom fails of suffering most

from their poisonous effect, who firfl al-
lowed them to flow.

But gentleness will, most of all, be pro-

moted by frequent views of those great
objects which our holy religion presents.
Let the profpecs of immortality fill your
minds. Look upon this world as a state of
passage. Confider yourselves as engaged
in the pursuit of higher interests; as acting
now, under the eye of God, an introduc-
tory part to a more important fccne. Ele-
vated by such sentiments, your minds will
become calm and sedate. You will look
down, as fromn a fuperiour fation, on the
petty disturbances of the world. They are
the felfilh, the sensual, and the vain, who
are most fuiljea to the impotence of pas-
sion. They are linked so closely to the
world; by so many fides they touch every
object, and every person around them, that
they are perpetually hurt, and perpetually
hurting others. But the spirit of true re-
ligion removes us to a proper distance from

l tche

the grating objects of worldly contention. S R M.
It leaves us fufliciently conneted with the -
world, for afting our part in it with pro-
priety; but disengages us from it so far, as
to weaken its power of disturbing our tran-
quillity. It inspires magnanimity; and
magnanimity always breathes gentleness.
It leads us to view the follies of men with
pity, not with rancour; and to treat, with
the mildness of a fuperiour nature, what in
little minds would call forth all the bitter-
ness of passion.

Aided by such considerations, let us cul-

tivate that gentle wisdom which is, in so
many refpeds, important both to our duty
and our happiness. Let us assume it as the
ornament of every age, and of every flation.
Let it temper the petulance of youth, and
soften the moroseness of old age. Let it
mitigate authority in those who rule, and
promote deference among those who obey.
I conclude with repeating the caution, not
to mistake for true gentleness, that flimsy
imitation of it called polished manners,
which often, among men of the world,

under

SER M. under a smooth appearance, conceals much

VI.
-_---j asperity. Let yours be native gentleness of

heart, flowing from the love of God, and
the love of man. Unite this amiable spirit
with a proper zeal for all that is right, and
just, and true. Let piety be combined in
your characer with humanity. Let deter-
mined integrity dwell in a mild and gentle
breast. A characer thus supported will
command more real refpef, than can be
procured by the most shining accomplish-
ments, when separated from virtue.

# SERMON VII. On the DISORDERS of the PASSIONS. ESTHER, v. 13. Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the King's gate.

[ 173 i

S E R M ON VII.
On the DISORDERS of the PASSIONS.

ESTHER, V. 13.

ret all this availeth me nothing, so long
as Ifee Mordecai the Yew fitting at
the King'.r gate.
THESE are the'words of one, who,SERM.

though high in station and power,

confessed himself to be miserable. They
relate to a memorable occurrence in the
Persian history, under the reign of Aha-
fuerus, who is supposed to be the Prince
known among the Greek hiflorians by the
name of Artaxerxes. Ahafiuerus had ad-
vanced to the chief dignity in his king-
dom, Haman, an Amalekite, who inhe-
rited all the ancient enmity of his race to

2 the

SE RM. the Jewish nation. He appears, from
VII.

what is recorded of him, to have been a
very wicked minister. Raised to greatness
without merit, he employed his power
solely for the gratification of his passions.
As the honours vhich he pdffefled were
next to royal, his pride was every day fed
with that servile homage which is pecu-
liar to Asiatic courts; and all the ser-
vants of the King prostrated themselves
before him. In the midst of this general
adulation, one person only slooped not to
Haman. This was Mordecai the Jew;
who, knowing this Amalekite to be an
enemy to the people of God, and, with
virtuous indignation, despising that in-
folence of prosperity with which he fitw
him lifted up, bowcd not, nor did him re-
verence. On this appearance of difre-
fpea from Mordecai, Haman was fill of
wrath: But be thonght fJorn) to lay hands
on Mordecai alone. Pcrlbnal revenge was
not fifficient to satisfy him. So violent
and black were his paflions, that he re-
solved to exterminate the whole nation to

which

which Mordecai belonged. 'AbuGng, for sERM.
this cruel purpose, the favour of his cre- .-
dulous Sovereign, he obtained a decree to
be sent forth, that, against a certain day,
all the Jews throughout the Persian do-
minions should be put to the sword.
Mean while, confident of success, and
blind to approaching ruin, he continued
exulting in his prosperity. Invited by
Ahasuerus to a royal banquet, which
Either the Queen had prepared, he went
forth that dayjojfld, and with a glad heart.
But belold how flight an incident was
sufficient to poison his joy! As he went
forth, he saw Mordecai in the King's
gate; and observed, that frill he refused
to do him homage. Hcfood not up, nor
ewas moved fur him; allhough lie well
knew the formidable dcfigns which I-a-
man was preparing to execute. One pri-
vate man, who decfpifed his grc.nlc.s,
and dildained fil)miflion, wvhil a v;icle
kingdom trembled before hiim; one fprirt,
which the utmost firetch of his power
could neither iubdue nor humble, blast-

cd

SERM. etl his triumphs. His whole foul was

..-j lfhaken with a florn of passion. Wrath,

pride, and desire of revenge, rose into
fury. \ith difficulty he reitrained him-
self in public; but as soon as he cane
to his own house, he was forced to dif-
clole the agony of his mind. He gather-
cd together his friends and family, with
Zerifh his wife. He told thbem of the gl(ry
of his riches, and the muzihtitulde of his chil-
dren, an all the things wherein the King
had promoted him, and how he had ad-
vanced him above the princes andfervants
of tle King. He a rl, moreover, e'n, ,EJhcr
the 2cIeCcn did let no man come in with the
King, urto the banqlzt t tat /e had pre-
pared, but yjelf; and to-moirrow also azn I
invited unfo her lith the King. After all
this preamble, what is the conclusion?--
Yret all this availlth me nOtlhig, so lo In as
Ifee Mordecai the Js e: fitting at the King's
gate.

The sequel of Haman's hiflory I shall

not now pursue. It might afford matter
for much inarudion, by the confpicu-

Ous

ous justice of God in his fall and punish- SER M.
ment. But, contemplating only the fin-
gular situation in which the Text presents
him, and the violent agitation of his
mind which it displays, the following
reflections naturally arise, which, together
with some pracical improvements, shall
make the subjet of this discourse. I. H-ow
miserable is vice, when one guilty passion
creates so much torment ! II. How un-
availing is prosperity, when, in the height
of it, a single disappointment can defirny
the relili of all its pleasures ! I1I. How
weak is human nature, which, in the ab-
fence of real, is thus prone to form to itself
imaginary woes!

I. How miserable is vice, when one

guilty passion is capable of creating so
much torment ! When we discourse to
you of the internal misery of finners;
when we represent the pangs which they
susser, from violent passions, and a cor-
rupted heart; we are sometimes fufpeded
of chufing a theme for declamation, and

VOL. I. N of

S ER M. of heightening the picture which we

VII. ,_, draw, by colours borrowed from fancy.

They whose minds are, by nature, hap-
pily tranquil, or whose situation in life
removes them from the disturbance and
tumult of passion, can hardly conceive,
that as long as the body is at ease, and
the external condition prosperous, any
thing which passes within the mind
should cause such exquisite woe. But,
for the truth of our assertions, we appeal
to the history of mankind. We might
reason from the constitution of the ra-
tional frame; where the understanding is
appointed to be supreme, and the passions
to be Subordinate; and where, if this due
arrangement of its parts be overthrown,
misery as necessarily ensues, as pain is
consequent in the animal frame, upon
the distortion of its members. But lay-
ing speculations of this kind aside, it is
sufficient to lead you to the view of fads,
the import of which can neither be con-
troverted, nor mistaken. This is, indeed,
the great advantage of history, that it is

a mir-

a mirror which holds up mankind to their s E R T.
own view. For, in all ages, human na- \
ture has been the fame. In the circ!c of
worldly affairs, the fame charadlers and
situations are perpetually returning; and
in the follies and patfions, tle vices and
crimes, of the generations that are past, we
read those of the present.

Attend, then, to the inflance now be-

fore us; and conceive, if you can, a per-
son more thoroughly wretched, than one
reduced to make this humiliating consef-
iion, that though surrounded with power,
opulence, and pleasure, he was loft to all
liappineis, through the fierceness of his
resentment; and was at that moment
filng by disappointment, and torn by
rage, beyond what he could bear. A/ll
this availeih me nothing, si lon1g as I fee
lJIrdecai the Yew fJitting at the King's gate.
Had this been a soliloquy of Haman's
Within himself, it would have been a iuffi-
cient dilcovery of his misery. But when
we confider it as a confeflion which he
makes to others, it is a proof that his

N 2 misery

S . RM. misery was become insupportable. For

such agitations of the mind every man
firives to conceal, because he knows they
dishonour him. Other griefs and for-
rows, he can, with freedom, pour out to
a confident. What he suffers from the
injustice or malice of the world, he is not
ashamed to acknowledge. But when his
suffering arlfes from the bad dispositions
of his own heart; when, in the height
of prosperity, he is rendered miserable,
solely by disappointed pride, every ordi-
nary motive for communication ceases.
Nothing but the violence of anguish can
drive him to confess a passion which ren-
ders him odious, and a weakness which
renders him despicable. To what ex-
tremity, in particular, mufft he be re-
duced, before he can disclose to his own
family the infamous secret of his misery?
In the eye of his family every man wishes
to appear refpefable, and to cover from
their knowledge whatever may vilify or
degrade him. Attacked or reproached
abroad, he consoles himself with his im-

portance

portance at home; and in domestic at- SE R M.
tachment and respect, seeks for some com- VII.
penfation for the injustice of the world.
Judge then of the degree of torment
which Haman endured, by its breaking
through all there restraints, and forcing
him to publish his shame before those
from whom all men seek most to hide it.
How severe muff have been the conflict
which he underwent within himself, be-
fore he called together his wife and all
his friends for this purpose ! How dread-
ful the agony he suffered at the moment
of his confession, when, to the astonished
company, he laid open the cause of his
distress !

Assemble all the evils which poverty,

disease, or violence can inflict, and their
flings will be found by far less pungent,
than those which such guilty passions dart
into the heart. Amidst the ordinary cala-
mities of the world, the mind can exert
its powers, and suggest relief: And the
mind is properly the man; the sufferer,
and his sufferings, can be diftinguifled.

N3 JBut

SERM. But those disorders of passion, by feiz~

VII. c*.
- ing directly on the mind, attack hu-

man nature in its strong hold, and cut
off its lafl relource. They penetrate to the
very feat of sensation; and convert all the
powers of thought into instruments of
torture.

Let us remark, in the event that is now

before us, the awful hand of God ; and
admire his justice, in thus making tlh
finner's owin .ickcncIs to reprove him, and
his backljidintgs to correct him. Sceptics
reason in vain against the reality of di-
vine government. It is not a subjea of
dispute. It is a fad which carries the
evidence of sense, and displays itself be-
fore our eyes. We fee the Almighty ma-
nifeftly pu;irfig thefnller with evil. We
fee him connecting with every single de-
viation fiom duty, those wounds of the
spirit which occasion the most exquisite
torments. He hath not merely promul-
gated his laws now, and delayed the dil-
tribution of rewards and puniflhmcnts
until a future period of being. But the

fandions

fanlions of his laws already take place; SERM.

VII.

their effects appear; and with such infi-
nite wisdom are they contrived, as to
require no other executioners of juflice
against the finner, than his own guilty
pallions. God needs not come forth from
his fecrct place, in order to bring him to
punifliment. He need not call thunder
down from the heavens, nor raise any mi-
nifter of wrath from the abyss below. He
needs only fay, Ephraim is joined to bis
idols; let him alone: And, at that infiant,
the finner becomes his own tormentor.
The infernal fire begins, of itself, to kindle
within him. The worm that never dies,
seizes on his heart.

Let us remark also, friom this example,

how imperfectly we can judge, from ex-
ternal appearances, concerning real hap-
piness or misery. All Persia, it is pro-
bable, envied Haman as the happiest
person in the empire; while yet, at the
moment of which we now treat, there
was not within its bounds one more
thoroughly wretched. We are seduced

N4 and

SERM. and deceived by that false glare which

VII.
u-.v prosperity sometimes throws around bad

men. We are tempted to im tite their
crimes, in order to partake of their ima-
gined felicity. But remember Haman,
and beware of the snare. Think not,
when you behold a pageant of grandeur
displayed to public view, that you dif-.
cern the ensign of certain happiness. In
order to form any just conclusion, you
must follow the great man into the re-
tired apartment, where he lays aside his
disguise; you must not only be able to
penetrate into the interiour of families,
but you must have a faculty by which
you can look into the inside of hearts.
Were you endowed with such a power,
you would most commonly behold good
men, in proportion to their goodness,
satisfied and easy; you would behold
atrocious finners always restless and un-
happy.

Unjust are our complaints, of the

promiscuous distribution made by Provi-
dence, of its favours among men. From

superficial

superficial views fiuch complaints arise. S E R M.

VII.

The dittribution of the goods of fortune, ,-.
indeed, may often be promiscuous; that
is, diliroportioned to the moral charac-
ters of men; but the allotment of real
happiness is never so. For to the wicked
there is no peace. 2Jhei arc like the troubled
sea when it cannot reft. The travel v.cith
pain all their days. Trouble and anguihf
prevail against them. Terrours make them
afraid on every fide. A dreadful found is
in their ears; and tlhey are in great fear
where no fear is.- Hitherto we have
confidered Haman under the character of
a very wicked man, tormented by crimi-
nal passions. Let us now confider him
merely as a child of fortune, a prosper.
ous man of the world; and proceed to ob-
serve,

II. How unavailing worldly prosperity

is, since, in the midIt of it, a single dif-
ap :,intment is sufficient to embitter all
its pleasures. We might at first imagine,
that the natural effect of prosperity would

be,

SERsM. be, to disuse over the mind a prevailing
ViI.

f atisfacion, which tlh lesser evils of life
could not ruffle or disturb. We might
cxpet, that as one in the full glow of
health, despises the inclemency of wea-
ther; so one in poflefion of all the ad-
vantages of high power and flation,
ihould disregard flight injuries; and, at
perseec ease with himself, should vicw,
in the most favourable light, the beha-
viour of others around hlim. Such effeLts
would indeed follow, if worldly prosperity
contained in itfclf the true principles of
human felicity. But as it pofifles them
not, the very reverse of those confc-
quenccs generally obtains. Prosperity de-
bilitates, instead of fircngthening the mind.
Its most common cffcc is, to create an
extreme sensibility to the slightest wound.
It foments impatient defircs; and raises
exptcaations which no success can satisfy.
It softers a false delicacy, which fickcns
in the midit of indulgence. By repeat-
ed gratification, it blunts the feelings of
men to what is pleasing; and leaves them

8 unhappily

unhappily acute to whatever is uncafy. SERM.

VII.

Hence, the gale which another would *.
scarcely feel, is, to the prosperous, a rude
tempest. Hence, the rofe-leaf doubled be-
low them on the couch, as it is told of
the effeminate Sybarite, breaks their reft.
Hence, the difrefped shown by Mordecai,
preyed with such violence on the heart of
Haman. Upon no principle of reason can
we assign a sufficient cause for all the dif-
trefs which this incident occasioned to him.
The cause lay not in the external incident.
It lay within himself; it arose from a mind
distempered by prosperity.

Let this example correc that blind

eagerness, with which we rush to the
chafe of worldly greatness and honours.
I fay not, that it should altogether divert
us from pursuing them; since, rwhen en-
joyed with temperance and wisdom, they
may doubtless both enlarge our ui'lIty,
and contribute to our comfort. But let it
teach us not to over-rate them. Let it
convince us, that unless we add to them
the neceflary correcaives of piety and vir-

tue,

SE R M. tue, they are, by themselves, more likely

, to render us wretched, than to make us

happy.

Let the memorable fate of Haman

suggest to us also, how often, besides cor-
rupting the mind, and engendering inter-
nal misery, they lead us among precipices,
and betray us into ruin. At the moment
when fortune seemed to smile upon him
with the most serene and fettled asped,
the was digging in secret the pit for his
fall. Prosperity was weaving around his
head the web of deftruaion. Success in-
flamed his pride; pride increased his thirst
of revenge; the revenge which, for the
fake of one man, he fought to execute on
a whole nation, incensed the Queen; and
he is doomed to susser the fame death
which he had prepared for Mordecai.-
Had Haman remained in a private Rfation,
he might have arrived at a peaceable
old age. He might have been, I flall not
fay, a good or a happy man, yet pro-
bably far less guilty, and less wretched,
than when placed at the head of the

14 greatest

greatest empire in the East. WJho knowetb S E R M.
what is good for man in this lfe ? all the . V.
day's of his vain lie, which he fpendeth as
aflJadow.

An extensive contemplation of human

affairs will lead us to this conclusion,
That, among the different conditions and
ranks of men, the balance of happiness
is preserved in a great measure equal;
and that the high and the low, the rich
and the poor, approach, in point of real
enjoyment, much nearer to each other
than is commonly imagined. In the lot
of man mutual compensations, both of
pleasure and of pain, universally take
place. Providence never intended, that
any tate here ihould be either completely
happy or entirely miserable. If the feel-
ings of pleasure are more numerous, and
more lively, in the higher departments
of life, such also are those of pain. If
greatness flatters our vanity, it multiplies
our dangers. If opulence increases our
gratifications, it increases, in the fame
proportion, our desires and demands. If

the

SER M. the poor are confined to a more narrow
VII.

z circle, yet within that circle lie most of

those natural fatisfaftions, which, after
all the refinements of art, are found to
be the most genuine and true.-In a state,
therefore, where there is neither so much
to be coveted on the one hand, nor to be
dreaded on the other, as at first afpears,
how fubmiifllve ought we to be to the dif-
pofal of Providence ! How temperate in
our desires and puiluits ! How much more
attentive to preserve our virtue, and to im-
prove our minds, than to gain the doubt-
ful and equivocal advantages of worldly
prosperity !- But now, laying aside the
consideration of Hainan's great crimes;
laying aside his high prosperity; viewing
him simply as a man, let us oblerve, from
his history,

III. How weak human nature is, which,

in the absence of real, is thus prone to
create to itself imaginary woes. All this
availeth me nothilng, so long as I fee lMor-
decai the yew fitting at the King's gate.

-\Vhat

--What was it, 0 Haman! to thee, SE R T.

VII.

though Mordecai had continued to fit ,
there and neglected to do thee homlge ?
Would the banquet have been on that
account the le's magnificent, thy palace
less splendid, or thy retinuc l's nume-
rous? Could the dilielpedt of an obscure
firanger dishonour the favourite of a
mighty King? In the midst of a thou-
sand fubmiilive courtiers, was one fillen
countenance an object worthy of drawing
thy notice, or of troubling thy repole?-
Alas! in Haman we behold too just a
piture of vhat often paliLs within our-
telves. We never know what it is to be
long at ease. Let the world ceal from
changing around us. Let extcrnial things
keep that situation in which we molt
wilh them to remain; yet folmcwhat
from within fliall loon arise, to diflurb
our happiness. A Mordecai appears, or
leems to appear, filltin at ibi gate. Some
vexation, which our fancy has either
entirely created, or at least has unrealbn-
ably aggravated, corrocles us in fccre;

11 nd

SE RM. and until that be removed, all that we
,II, enjoy availceb us nothing. Thus, while

we are incessantly complaining of the
vanity and the evils of human life, we
make that vanity, and we increase those
evils. Unskilled in the art of extracting
happinels from the objects around us, our
ingenuity solely appears in converting them
into mnilery.

Let it not be thought, that troubles of

this kind are incident only to the great
and the mighty. Though they, perhaps,
from the intemperance of their passions,
are peculiarly exposed to them; yet the
disease itself belongs to human nature,
and spreads through all ranks. In the
humble and seemingly quiet shade of
private life, discontent broods over its
imaginary ibrrows; preys upon the citi-
zen, no ltfs than upon the courtier; and
often nouriflies passions equally malig-
nant in the cottage and in the palace.
Having once seized the mind, it spreads
its. own gloom over every surrounding
obje ,; it every where searches out ma-

terials

terials for itself; and in no directicn more s ER M.
frequently employs its unhappy activi- v-i
ty, than in creating divisions among',
mankind, and in magnifying flight pro-
vocations into mortal injuries. Theofe
felf-creatud miseries, imaginary in the
cause, hut real in the fufiering, will be
found to form a proportion of human
evils, not inferiour, eht!hr in fcvcritv or
in number, to all that we endure from
the unavoidable calamiities of life. In
situations where much comfort might be
enjoyed, this man's man periority, and that
man's negle&, our jealousy of a fricnd,
our hatred of a rival, an imagined as-
front, or a mistaken point of honour,
allow us no repose. Hencc, discords in
families, animositics among friends, and
wars among nations. Hence, H-aman
mifcrable in the midfld of all that great-
ness could bestow. Hence, multitudes
in the moRL obfcurc ifations, for whom
Providence fccmed to have prepared a
quiet life, no less eager in their petty
broils, nor less tormented by tlihir pai-

Vol, I. (0 fios,

SE R M. sions, than if princely honours were the

VII.
,_ _prize for which they contended.

FROM this train of observation, which

the Text has fugges.ed, can we avoid re-
fleding upon the diiorder in which hu-
man nature plainly appears at prelent to
lie? We have beheld, in H-aman, the
pidcure of that misery which arises from
evil passions; of that unhappine's, which
is incident to the highect prosperity; of
that discontent, which is common to
every state. Whether we confider him
as a bad man, a prosperous man, or fim-
ply as a man, in every light we behold
reabon too weak for passion. This is the
source of the reigning evil; this is the
root of the universal disease. The flory
of Haman only ihews us, what human
nature has too generally appeared to
be in every age. Hence, when we read
the history of nations, what do we retl!
but the history of the follies and crimes
of men? We may dignify those recordedc
tranfaaions, by calling them the intrigues

18 of

of statesmen, and the exploits of conquer- SERM.

VII.

ours; but they are in truth, no other than --.
the efforts of discontent to escape from its
misery, and the lruggles of contending pas-
lions among unhappy men. The history
of mankind has ever been a continued tra-
gedy; the world a great theatre exhibiting
the fame repeated scene, of the follies of
men shooting forth into guilt, and of their
pafions fermenting, by a quick proce's, into
misery.

But can we believe, that the nature of

man came forth in this slate from the
hands of its gracious Creator? Did he
frame this world, and store it with inha-
bitants, solely that it might be replenished
with crimes and misfortunes ?-In the
moral, as well as in the natural world, we
may plainly discern the signs of fume
violent convulsion, which has shattered the
original workmanship of the Almighty.
Amidst this wreck of human nature,
traces still remain which indicate its Au-
thor. Thole high powers of conscience
and reafoni that capacity for happiness,

0 2, that

S R IM. that ardour of enterprise, that glow of

- afedl&on, which often break through the

gloom of human vanity and guilt, are
like the scattered columns, the broken
arches, and defaced sculptures of some
fallen temple, whose ancient splendour
appears amidil its ruins. So conspicuous
in human n2ture are those characters,
both of a high origin, and of'a degrad-
ed Ilatc, that, by many religious secs
throughout the earth, they have been
seen and confeflrcd. A tradition seems to
have pervaded ahlnoil all nations, that
the human race had either through some
oflcnc forfeited, or through some mif-
fortune lolt, that fLation of prim cval
honour which they once pofeffed. But
while, from this d'odrine, ill-underftood,
and involvcd in nmany fabulous tales, tlhe
nations wancdering in Pagan darkness
could draw no confcquences that were
juil; wi:iic totally ignorant of the na-
ture oi the di!eafe, they fought in vain
for the remedy ; the fame divine revela-
tion, x;hicri has informed us in what

manner

manner our apoftacy arose, from the abuse s E R M.
of our rational powers, has inftruted us k-
also how we may be reRored to virtue and
to happiness.

LET us, therefore, study to improve

the assistance which this revelation afiords
for the restoration of our nature, and the
recovery of our felicity. With humble
and grateful minds, let us apply to thole
medicinal springs which it hath opened,
for curing the dilbrders of our heart and
paflons. In this view, let us, with reve-
rence, look up to that Divine Personage,
wlo descended into this world, on pur-
pose to be the light and the life of men;
who came in the fulncfs of grace and
truth, to rcpair the Cdefolaltion of many ge-
nerations, to restore order among the
works of God, and to raise up a nvec earth
and new heavens, whicrin rightcolflCfi
.IJould dwell for ever. Under his tuition
let us put ourselves; and, amidst the
florms of paflion to which we are here
exposcd, and the slippery paths which we

03 are

SERM. are left to tread, never trust prefumptu.
VII.

oufly to our own understanding. Thank-
ful that a Heavenly Conduaor vouchsafes
his aid, let us earnestly pray, that from
him may descend divine light to guide our
fReps, and divine strength to fortify our
minds. Let us pray, that his grace may
keep us from all intemperate pafions, and
mistaken pursuits of pleasure; that whether
it shall be his will to give or to deny us
earthly prosperity, he may bless us with a
calm, a found, and well-regulated mind;
may give us moderation in success, and for-
titude under disappointment; and may en-
able us so to take warning from the crimes
and miseries of others, as to escape the snares
of guilt.

WHILE we thus maintain a due de.

pendence on God, let us also exert our-
selves with care in acfing our own part.
From the whole of what has been said,
this important initruaion arises, that the
happiness of every man depends more
upon the state of his own mind, than

upon

upon any one external circumstance; nay, S E R M.

VII.

more than upon all external things put a,
together. We have seen, that inordinate
passions are the great disturbers of life;
and that, unless we possess a good con-
science, and a well-governed mind, difcon-
tent will blast every enjoyment, and the
highest prosperity will prove only dif-
guised misery. Fix then this conclufiori in
your minds, that the deflru:ion of your
virtue is the deflrudion of your peace.
Keep thy heart 'with all diligence; govern
it with the greatef care ; for out of it are
the Ifies of lfe. In no station, in no pe-
riod, think yourselves fccure from the dan-
gers which spring from your passions.
Every age, and every station they beset;
from youth to grey hairs, and from the
peasant to the prince.

At your first setting out in life, efpe-

cially when yet unacquainted with the
world and its fnlres, when every plea-
sure enchants with its finile, and every
objeQ shines with the gloss of novelty;
beware of the fcducing appearances which

0 4 surround

S E R . surround you, and recollec what othera

_; have fi:ffercd from the power of head-

firong desire. If you allow any passion,
even though it be esteemed innocent,
to acquire an absolute ascendant, your
inward peace will be impaired. But if
any which has the taint of guilt, take
early pofiefilon of your mind, you may
date from that moment the ruin of your
tranquillity. Nor with the season of
youth does the peril end. To the im-
petuofity of youthful desire, succeed
the more fober, but no lcfs dangerous,
attachments of advancing years; when
the paflions which are connected witl
interest and ambition begin their rcign,
and too frequently cxtend their malig-
nant influence, even over those periods
of life which ought to be most tranquil.
From the firif to the last of man's abode
on earth, the difeipline murf never be
relaxed, of guarding the heart from the
dominion of passion. Eager passions, and
violent desires, were not made for man.
They exceed his sphere. They find no

adequate

adequate objects on earth; and of course SERM.
can be productive of nothing but misery. ,
The certain consequence of indulging them
is, that there shall come an evil day, when
the anguifli of disappointment shall drive us
to acknowledge, that all which we enjoy
availeth us iothiing.

You are not to imagine, that the warn-

ings which I have given in this discourse,
are applicable only to the cafe of fucl
signal offenders as he was, of whom the
Text treats. Think not, as I am afraid
too many do, that because your passions
have not hurried you into atrocious deeds,
they have therefore wrought no mischief,
and have left no fting behind them. By a
continued fcries of looSe, though appa-
rent trivial, gratifications, the heart is
often as thoroughly corrupted, as by the
commilfion of any one of those enormous
crimes which spring from great ambition,
or great revenge. Habit gives the paflions
flrength, while the absence of glaring
guilt seemingly justifics them; and, un-
awakLened by remorfc, the finner proceeds

a24; in

S E R M. in his course, till he wax bold in guilt, and
VII.

, become 'ripe for ruin. For by gradual

and latent fleps, the deftruaion of our
virtue advances. Did the evil unveil itself
at the beginning; did the storm which
is to overthrow our peace, difeover as it
rose, all its horrours, precautions would
more frequently be taken against it. But
we are imperceptibly betrayed; and from
one licentious attachment, one criminal
paflion, are, by a train of consequences,
drawn on to another, till the government
of our minds is irrecoverably loft. The
enticing and the odious paflions are, in this
refpet, similar in their process; and,
though by different roads, conduEt at last
to the fame issue. David, when he first
beheld Bathsheba, did not plan the death
of Uriah. Haman was not delivered up
all at once to the madness of revenge. His
pafions rose with the rising tide of pro-
fperity; and pride completed what profpe.
rity began. What was originally no more
than difpleafurc at Miordecai's difrefpedt,
increased with every invitation-he receivcd

to

to the banquet of the Queen; till it im. S ERM.

VII.

pelled him to devise the faughter of a
whole nation, and ended in a degree of rage
which confounded his reason, and hurried
him to ruin. In this manner, every cri-
minal passion, in its progress, swells and
blackens; and what was at first a small
cloud, such as the prophet's servant saw, no
bigger than a man's hand riring from the
sea*, is soon found to carry the tempest in
js womb.

* Kings, xviii. 44,

# SERMON VIII. On our IGNORANCE of GOOD and EVIL in this Life. ECCLES. vi. 12. Who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all the days of his vain life, which he spendeth as a shadow?

[ 204 ]

SE R M ON VIII.
On our IGNORANCE of GOOD and EVIL

in this Life.

ECCLES.. vi. 2.

tWho knoceth what is good for man in this

life, all the days of his vain i'fe, which
be fpendeth as a Jhado' 9
ERM. T HE measure according to which

ViL knowledge is dispenscd to man,

affords conspicuous proofs of divine wis-
dom. In many instances we clearly per-
ceive, that either more or less would have
proved detrimental to his state; that en-
tire ignorance would have deprived him
of proper motives to ation; and that
complete discovery would have raised
hirm to a sphere too high for his prc-

ien;

sent powers. He is, therefore, permitted SERM.

VIII.

to know only in part; and to fe through a
glafi, darkly. He is left in that state of
conjecture, and partial information, which
though it may occasionally subjeCt him to
distress, yet, on the whole, conduces molt
to his improvement; which affords him
knowledge sufficient for the pulpofes of
virtue, and of active life, without disturb-
ing the operations of his mind, by a light
too bright and dazzling. This evidently
holds with refpeat to that degree of ob-
fcurity which now covers the great laws of
Nature, the decrees of the Supreme Being,
the Rate of the invisible world, the future
events of our own life, and the thoughts
and designs which pass within the breatds
of others ~.

But there is an ignorance of another

kind, with rc!ine&t to which the applica-
tion of this remark may appear more du-
bious; the ignorance under which men
labour concerning their happincis in the
present life, and the means of obtiining it.

Vid. Serni. iv.

if

S E R . If there be foundation for Solomon'g
VIII. iL. complaint in the Text, who knoweth what

is good for man in this life ? this confe-
quence may be thought inevitably to fol-
low, that the days of his life mufft be vain
in every sense; not only because they are
fleeting, but because they are empty too,
like the Jhadow. For, to what purpose
are all his labours in the pursuit of an
object, which it is not in his power to
diicover or ascertain ?-Let us then feri-
oufly enquire, what account can be given
of our present ignorance, respeCting what
is good for us in this life; whether no-
thing be left, but only to wander in
uncertainty amidst this darkness, and to
lament it as the fad confequence.of our
fallen state; or whether such inftruc-
tions may not be derived from it, as give
ground for acknowledging, that by this,
as by all its other appointments, the wis-
dom of Providence brings real good out
of teeming evil. I fall, in order to de-
termine this point, firif, endeavour to il-
lufirate the dodrine of the Text, That we

know

know not, or at most know imperfetly, S r. M.

\ iII

vhat is good for us in this lifE: I fliall 1
next explain the causes to which this de-
sea in our knowledge is owing: And
then thall ihow the purposes which it
was intended to serve, and the effets
which it ought to produce on our con-
dut.

THE whole history of mankind seems
a comment on the docrine of the Text.
When we review the course of human
affairs, one of the firit objets which every
where attracts our notice, is, the mif
taken judgment of men concerning their
own interest. The fore evil which Solo-
mon long ago remarked with refpet to
riches, of their being kept by the oazvers
thereof to their hart, takes place equally
with respeCt to dominion and power, and
all the splendid objects and high fiations
of life. We every day behold men climb-
ing, by painful fleps, to that dangerous
height, which, in the end, renders their
fall more revere, and their ruin more con-

fpicuous.

E R M. fpicuous. But it is not to high flations
Hol that the dofaine of the Text is limited.

In the crimes by which too often these are
gained, and in the misfortunes which they
afterwards bring forth, the greater part of
every audience may think themselves little
concerned. Leaving such themes, there-
fore, to the poet, and the historian, let us
come nearer to ourfelvcs, and survey the
ordinary walk of life.

Around us, we every where behold a

busy multitude. Refllefs and uneasy in
their present situation, they are incessantly
employed in' accomplilfing a change of
it; and as soon as their wish is fulfil-
led, we dilfern, by their behaviour, that
they are as difiatisfied as they were be-
fore. Where they ex;peced to have found
a paradifi, they find a defdrt. The man
of bufincfs pines for leisure. Tie leisure
for which he had longed, proves an irk-
some gloom; and, through want of em-
ployment, he languishes, tickens, and dies.
Thei man of retirmc;ent isancies no state to
be so happy as thilt of adive life. But

he

he has not engagcd long in the tumults SERM.
and contests of tle world, until he finds -
cause to look back with regret on the caln
hours of his formcr privacy and retreat.
Beauty, wit, eloquencc, and fame, are
eagerly desired by persons in every rank
of life. They are the parent's fondest
wifli for his child; the ambition of the
youngs and the admiration of the old.
And yet, in what numberless instances
have they proved, to those who pofleffed
them, no other than shining inares; fe-
dudions to vice, instigations to folly,
and, in the end, sources of misery ? Con-
fortably might their days have pafled,
had they been less conspicuous. But the
diftinaions which brought tliem forth
to notice, conferred splendour, and with-
drew happiness. Long life is, of all
others, the most general, and !seemingly
the molt innocent objet of delire. With
refpea to this too, we so fiequently err,
that it would have been a bleifing to
many to have had their wish denied.
There was a period, when tiey might

VOL. 1. P have

SE VR' have quitted the stage with honour, and
_-_- in peace. But by living too long, they

outlived their reputation; outlived their
family, their friends, and comforts; and
reaped nothing from the continuance of
days, except to feel the pressure of age, to
tafle the dregs of life, and to behold a wider
compass of human misery.

Man walketh in a vain Jow. His fears

are often as vain as his wishes. As what
flattered him in expectation, frequently
wounds him in possesSion; so the event
to which he looked forward with an
anxious and fearful eye, has often, when
it arrived, laid its terrours aside; nay,
has brought in its train unexpected bless-
ings. Both good and evil are beheld at a
distance, through a perfpeftive which de-
ceives. The colours of objects When
nigh, are entirely different from what
they appeared, when they were viewed in
futurity.

THE faat then being undoubtedly cer-
tain, that it is common for men to be

deceived

deceived in their profpeds of happiness, S FR M.
let us next inquire into the causes of that _-
deception. Let us attend to those peculiar
circumstances in our fate, which render us
luch incompetent judges of future good or
evil in this life.

First, We are not sufficiently acquaint-

ed with ourselves, to foresee our future
feelings. We judge by the sensations of
the present moment; and, in the fervour
of desire, pronounce confidently concern-
ing the desired objec. But we refie&
not, that our minds, like our bodies, un-
dergo great alteration from the situations
into which they are thrown, and the pro-
greflive stages of life through which they
pass. IHence, concerning any condition
which is yet untried, we conjecture with
much uncertainty. In imagination, we
carry our present wants, inclinations, and
sentiments, into the state of life to which
we aspire. But no sooner have we en-
tered on it, than our sentiments and incli-
nations change. New wants and defircs
arise; new objects are required to gratify

P 2 them;

s IRM. them; and by consequence our old difatif-
A-_-y faction returns, and the void, which was

to have been filled, remains as great as it
was before.

But, next, supposing our knowledge of

ourselves sufficient to direa us in the
choice of happiness, yet frill we are liable
to err, from our ignorance of the con-
nedions which subsist between our own
condition and that of others. No indi-
vidual can be happy, unless the circum-
fiances of thofc around him be so ad-
justed as to conspire with his interest. For,
in human society, no happiness or mi-
fery stands unconneted and independent.
Our fortunes are interwoven by threads
innumerable. We touch one another on
all fides. One man's misfortune or fuc-
cess, his wisdom or his folly, often, by
its consequences, reaches through multi-
tudes. Such a system is far too compli-
cated for our arrangement. It requires
adjustments beyond our skill and power.
It is a chaos of events, into which our
eye cannot pierce; and is capable of re-

i gulation,

gulation, only by him who perceives at SERM.
one glance the relation of each to all. _

Farther, as we are ignorant of the

events which will arise from the combi-
nation of our circumstances with those of
others, so we are equally ignorant of the
influence which the present tranfaaions of
our life may have upon those which are
future. The important question is not,
What is good for a man one day; but
What is good for him all the days of his
life? Not, what will yield him a few
scattered pleasures; but what will render
his life happy on the whole amount ?
And is he able to answer that question,
who knoweth not what one day may brin-g
forth who cannot tell, whether the events
of it may not branch out into conte-
quences, which will assume a directioa
quite opposite to that in which they set
forth, and spread themselves over all his
life to come? There is not any present
moment that is unconnedced with some
future one. The life of every man is a
oontinued chain of incidents, each link

P 3 of

S E RM. of which hangs upon the former. The

VIII.
---i transition from cause to effet, from event

to event, is often carried on by secret
iteps, which our foresight cannot divine,
and our sagacity is unable to trace. Evil
may, at some future period, bring forth
good; and good may bring forth evil,
both equally unexpeded. Had the Pa-
triarch, Joseph, continued to loiter under
his father's fond indulgence, he might
have lived an obscure and insignificant
life. From the pit and the prison, arose
the incidents whicil made him the ruler
of Egypt, and the saviour of his father's
house.

Laitly, Supposing every other incapa-

city to be removed, our ignorance of the
dangers to which our ipiritual state is
exposed, would disqualify us for judging
soundly concerning our true happiness.
Higher interests than those of the present
world, are now depending. All that is
done or suffered by us here, ultimately
refers to that immortal world, for which
good men are trained up, under the care

of

of an Almighty Parent. We are as in- SERM.
competent judges of the mcafures necef- VlrI.
fary to be pursued for this end, as children
are, of the proper conduct to be held in
their education. We foresee the dangers
of our spiritual, fiill less than we do those
of our natural state; because we are less
attentive to trace them. We are still more
exposed to vice than to misery; becaufi
the confidence which we place in our vir-
tue, is yet worse founded than that which
we place in our wisdom. Can you esteem
him prosperous who is raised to a fitua-
tion which flatters his passions, but which
corrupts his principles, disorders his tem-
per, and, finally, oversets his virtue? In
the ardour of pursuit, how little are these
effects foreseen? And yet, how often are
they accomplished by a change of condi-
tion ? Latent corruptions are called forth;
feeds of guilt are quickened into life; a
growth of crimes arises, which, had it not
been for the fatal culture of prolperity,
would never have seen the light. How
often is man, boaRful as he is of reason,

P 4 merely

SE R M. merely the creature of his fortune; form-
--i ed and moulded by the incidents of his

life?-Hazael, when yet a private man,
detested the thoughts of cruelty. Thou
j:alt flay the young men with the sword,
said the Prophet: t'hou Jhalt dan/h the chil-
dren, and rip up the weomen with child. Is
thy servant a dog, replied Hazael, that he
JIould do thfeC thins ? But no sooner was
he clothed with the coveted purple, than
it seemed to taint his nature. He com-
mitted the crimes of which at a distance,
he believed himself incapable; and became
the bloody tyrant, whose character his foul
once abhorred F.

SucH then at present is man; thus

incapable of pronouncing with certainty
concerning his own good or evil. Of
futurity, he difcernslittle; and even that
little he fees through a cloud. Ignorant
of the alteration which his sentiments and
desires will undergo, from new fitua-
lions in life; ignorant of the consequences

* Iings, viii. 12, 13.

which

which will follow from the combination SERM.

VIII.

of his circumrfances with those of others J
around him; ignorant of the influence
which the present may have on the future
events of his life; ignorant of the effect
which a change of condition may produce
on his moral character, and his eternal in-
terests; How can he know what isgood
for him all the days of his vain life, which
hefpendcth as a Jhadow ?

Instead of only lamenting this ignorance,

let us, in the last place, .confider how it
ought to be improved; what duties it fug-
gefis, and what wife ends it was intended
by Providence to promote.

I. LET this doctrine teach us to pro-

ceed with caution and circumfpetion,
through a world where evil lb frequently
lurks under the form of good. To be
humble and modest in opinion, to be vigi-
lant and attentive in conduct, to difiruft
fair appearances, and to restrain rash de-
fires, are infruaions which the darkness
of our present state flould firongly in-

culcate.

s VRM. cultate. God hath appointed our fitua-

tion to be so ambiguous, in order both to
call forth the exertion of those intelligent
powers which he hath given us, and to
enforce our dependence on his gracious
aid. It is not in man that walketh to dired
his Jleps. Surrounded with so many be-
wildering paths, among which the wisest
are ready to stray, how earnestly should
we implore, and how thankfully should
we receive, that divine illumination which
is promised in scripture to the pious and
the humble ! Thefecret of the Lord is with
them that fear him. He will guide them
with his coufiel. He will teach them the
way that they fiouldl chife. But what
must be the fate of him, who, amidst all
the dangers attending human conduct,
neither looks up to Heaven for direction,
nor properly exerts that reason which
God hath given him? If to the most
diligent inquirer, it proves so difficult a
task to distinguish true good, from those
fallacious appearances with which it is
ever blended, how should he discover it

4 who

who brings neither patience nor attention s ER M.

VIII.

to the search; who applies to no other coun- i
fellor than present pleasure, and, with a
rash and credulous mind, delivers himself
up to every figgeflion of desire ?

This admonition I particularly diret to

those, who are in a period of life too
often charaaterifed by forward prefump-
tion and headlong pursuit. The self-
conceit of the young, is the great source
of those dangers to which they are ex-
posed, and it is peculiarly unfortunate,
that the age which tands moit in need of
the counsel of the wife, should be the
most prone to contemn it. Confident in
the opinions which they adopt, and in
the measures which they purlie, they
teem as if they underfood Solomon to
fay, not, Who knoweth, but, Who is ig-
norant of what is goodfor nan all the days
of his life The bliss to be aimed at, is,
in their opinion, fully apparent. It is
not the danger of mistake, but the failure
of success, which they dread. Aaivity
to seize, not iagacity to discern, is the

only

E R M. only requisite which they value.- How

-- long shall it be, ere the fate of your pre-

deceftors in the fame course teach you
wisdom? How long shall the experience
of all ages continue to lift its voice to
you in vain? Beholding the ocean on
which you are embarked covered with
wrecks, are not those fatal signals fuffi-
cient to admonith you of the hidden
rock? If, in Paradise itself, there was a
tree which bare fruit fair to the eye, but
mortal in its effeats, how much more, in
this fallen Rate, may such deceiving ap-
pearances be expected to abound! The
whole state of Nature is now become a
scene of delusion to the sensual mind.
Hardly any thing is what it appears to
be. And what flatters most, is always
farthest from reality. There are voices
which sing around you; but whose firains
allure to ruin. There is a banquet spread,
where poison is in every diih. There is
a couch which invites you to repose; but
to slumber upon it, is death. In such a
situation, be not high- mind7'cd, but fear. Lct

sobriety

sobriety tempcr your unwary ardour. Let SERM.
modesty check your rash presumption. Let
wisdom be the offspring of refletion now,
rather than the fruit of bitter experience
hereafter.

II. LET our ignorance of what is good

or evil, correct anxiety about worldly fuc-
cess. As rashness is the vice of youth,
the opposite extreme of immoderate care is
the vice of advancing years. The dotrine
which I have illuitrated, is equally adapted
for checking both. Since we are ib often
betrayed into evil by the miitaken pursuit
of good, care and attention are requisite,
both in forming our choice, and in conduct-
ing our pursuit; but since our attention and
care are liable to be lb often fiuftratcd, they
flould never be allowed to deprive us of
tranquillity.

The ignorance in wliich we are left con-

cerning good and evil, is not such as to
supersede prudence in condutd: For wvif-
dom is flill found to xcel fJlly asJ fir as
light excellcth dirkiija. But it is that de-

gree '

SER M. g;ee of uncertainty, which ought to ren-

der us temperate in pursuit; which ought
to calm the perturbation of hope and
fear, and to cure the pain of anxiety.
Anxiety is the poison of human life. It
is the parent of many fins, and of more
miseries. In a world where every thing
is so doubtful, where you may succeed
in your wifl, and be miserable; where
you may be disappointed, and be blest in
the disappointment; what means this
restless stir and commotion of mind ? Can
your solicitude alter the course, or un-
ravel the intricacy of human events? Can
your curiosity pierce through the cloud
which the Supreme Being hath made im-
penetrable to' mortal eye ?-To provide
against every apparent danger, by the em-
ployment of the most promising means,
is the office of wisdom. But at this point
wifdoin flops. It commands you to re-
tire, after you have done all that was
incumbent on you, and to possess your
mind in peace. By going beyond this
point; by giving yourselves up to immo-

derate

derate concern about unknown events, SERM.
you can do nothing to advance your fuc- -v
cess, and you do much to ruin your
peace. You plant within your breast the
thorn which is long to gall you. To the
vanity of life, you add a vexation of
spirit, which is wholly of your own crea-
tion, not of Divine appointment. For
the dubious goods of this world were
never designed by God to raise such eager
attachment. They were given to man for
his occasional refreshment, not for his
chief felicity. By setting an excessive
value upon objects which were intended
only for your secondary regard, you change
their nature. Seeking more fatisfadion
from them than they are able to afford,
you receive less than they might give.
From a mistaken care to secure your hap-
piness, you bring upon yourselves certain
mifcry.

III. LET our ignorance of good and

evil determine us to follow Providence,
and to resign ourselves to God. One of

the

SER M, the most important lelfons which can be
a_,J given to man, is resignation to his Maker 5

and nothing inculcates it more than the
experience of his own inability to guide
himfelf.-You know not what is good for
you, in the future periods of life. But
God perfectly knows it; and if you faith-
fully serve him, you have reason to believe
that he will always consult it. Before him
lies the whole fuccefflion of events which
are to fill up your existence. It is in his
power to arrange and model them at his
pleasure, and so to adapt one thing to
another, as to fulfil his promise of making
them all work togetherfJr good to those v,5bo
love hin. Here then, amidif the agitations
of desire, and the perplexities of doubt, is
one fixed point of reft. By this let us
abide; and dismiss our anxiety about things
uncertain and unknown. Acquaint your-
fclves with God, and be at peace. Secure the
one thing ne(dfnl. Study to acquire an in-
terest in the Divine favour; and you may
safely surrender yourselves to the Divine
adminitration.

When

When tempted to repine at your condi- S ER M.

tion, renfie how uncertain it is, whether
you should have been happier in any
other. Rememiberiig the vanity of many
of your former wifles, and the fallacy
which you have so often experienced il
your fclc.mes of happincfs, be thankful
that you are placed under a wiser direc-
tion than yonir own. Be not too partict,
lar in your petitions to IIeaven, cci,-
cerning your temporal intel-rc. Suiler
God to govern the world according to his
own plan; and only pray, that lie woul'
bcftow what his unerring wisdom fies tc
he best for you on the whole. In a word
CoGmlit jyour way untO tbe LorI. Trly il.
,imn, ad do good. Follow wherever his
providence leads; comply with whatever
his will requires; and leave all the ref. to

1V. LET our ignorance of wh:at is good

for us in this life, prevent our taking any
unlawful flep, in order to compass cur
most favourite designs. Were the finner

VOL. 1. Q , bribed

SERM. bribed with any certain and unqueftion-
VIII.

I_ , able advantage; could the means which

he employs ensure his success, and could
that success ensure his comfort; he might
have some apology to offer for deviating
from the path of virtue. But the doc-
trine which I have illustrated, deprives
him of all excuse, and places his folly in
the mol firiking light. He climbs the
seep rock, and treads on the edge of a
precipice, in order to catch a shadow.
He has cause to dread, not only the un-
certainty of the event which he wishes to
accomplish, but the nature also of that
event when accomplished. He is not only
liable to that disappointment of success,
which so often frustrates all the designs of
men; but liable to a disappointment frill
more cruel, that of being successful and
miserable at once. Riches and pleasures
are the chief temptations to criminal
deeds. Yet those riches, when obtained,
may very possibly overwhelm him with
unforeseen miseries. Those pleasures may
cut short his health and life. And is it

for

for fich doubtful and fallacious rewards, SERM.
that the deceiver fills his mouth with lies, kVi
the friend betrays his benefactor, the apof-
tate renounces his faith, and the affal:in
covers himself with blood ?

Whoever commits a crime, incurs a

certain evil for a molt uncertain good.
What will turn to his advantage in the
course of this life, he cannot with any
affirance know. But this he may know,
with full certainty, that by breaking the
Divine commandments, he will draw
upon his head that displeasure of the' Al-
mighty, which ihall crush him for ever.
The advantages of this world, even when
innocently gained, are uncertain bless-
ings; when obtained by criminal means,
they carry a curse in their bosom. To the
virtuous, they are often no more than
chaff. To the guilty, they are always
poison.

V. LET our imperfect knowledge of

what is good or evil, attach us the more
ro these few things, concerning which

Q.2 there

S E R M. there can be no doubt of their beinj,

truly good. Of temporal things whicl
belong to this class, the catalogue, it mufl:
be confessed, is small. Perhaps the chief
worldly good we flhould wifi to enjoy, is
a found mind in a found body. Health
and peace, a moderate fortune, and a few
friends, fuin up all the undoubted articles
of temporal felicity. Wife wvas the man
who addrefled this prayer to God; RJ-
mov.' far from m2,e v a2, I/''

:ii lies. Giwve :'.

neither poverty nor riches. icc]l me iith
food convenient for mle. LcJt be fJill ,ind
deny lthcc, and fJiy, w/Lo is tic LorLd or ls
I be poor ,mdJlacl, aand aie a

the name oJf z.V

God in vainl. He whose withes, rclpeict-
ing the poffeflions of this world, are thc
most reasonable and bounded, is likely
to lead the safest, and, for that reafonl
the mot desirable life. By aspiring tor
high, we frequently miss the happiness
which, by a lels ambitious aim, we might
have gained. High happiness on earth, is
rather a pilture which the imaginatio.

* Prov, xx., 8, g9.

forms;

g.orms, than a reality which man is allowed S E R M.

VIII.
to possess. v.

But with regard to spiritual felicity, we

are not confined to such humble views.
Clear and determinate objects are pro-
posed to our pursuit; and full scope is
given to the mofl ardent delre. The for-
givenefs of our fins, and the aflfilance of
God's holy grace to guide our life; the
improvement of our mnids in l nowledge
and wisdom, in piety and virtue; the
protetion and favour of the g.'cat Father
of all, of the blefled Redeemer of man-
kind, and of the Spirit of fanuification
and comfort; thcfe are objects, in the
pursuit of which there is no room for
hesitation and distrust, nor any ground for
the question in my Text, W,,Jo .korc'b
cwat is good for man ? Had Providence
spread an equal obscurity over happiness
of every kind, we might have had some
reason to complain of the vanity of our
condition. But we are not left to so
hard a fate. The Son of God hath de-
fccnded from heaven to be the Light of

Q3 Ih!

S ER M. the world. He that removed that veil

VIII.
u ,,, which covered true bliss from the search of

wandering mortals, and hath taught them
the way which leads to life. Worldly enr
joyments are shown to be hollow and de-
ceitful, with an express intention to dire&
their affetions towards those which are
fplritual. The fame discoveries which di-
minifh the value of the one, serve to in-
creaSe that of the other. Finally,

VI. LET our ignorance of what is good

or evil here below, lead our thoughts and
desires to a better world, I have endea.
vcured to vindicate the wifdorm of Provi-
dence, by shewing the many ufefuil ptr-
pofcs which this ignorance at present pro-
motes. It serves to check presumption
and rashness, and to enforce a diligent
exertion of our rational powers, joined
with a humble dependence on Divine aid.
It moderates eager passions refpeEting
worldly success. It inculcates refigna-
tion to the disposal of a Providence which
is much wiser than man. It restrains us

from

from employing unlawful means in order SER M.
to compass our most favourite designs. It _
tends to attach us more closely to those
things which are unquestionably good. It
is therefore such a degree of ignorance as
suits the present circumfiances of man better
than more complete information concerning
good and evil.

At the fame time the causes which

render this obscurity necessary, too plainly
indicate a broken and corrupted state of
human nature. Thley flow this life to be
a tate of trial. They suggest the ideas of
a land of pilgrimage, not of the house of
reft. Low-minded and base is he, who
aspires to no higher portion; who could be
satisfied to ipend his whcle exiitence, in
chafing thole treacherous appearances of
good, whichl o often mock his purful,
What fladow can be more vain then the life
of the greatest part of mankind? Of all tb:at
eager and bustling crowd which we beh( .d
on the earth, how few discover the path of
true happiness ? How few can we find whose
ativity has not been misemploydd, and

Q,4 whole

s R RM. whose course terminates not in confessions
?I... of disappointments? Is this the state, are

there the habitations, to which a rational
spirit, with all its high hopes and great
capacities, is to be limited for ever ?-Let
us bless that God who hath set nobler pro-
fpets before us; who, by the death and
refurrecion of his Son Jesus Christ, hath
begottcn us to the lively hope of an inheritance
ncorrutptible, ulndfiled, and that fadcth ,not
away, reservcd in the heavens. Let us show
ourselves worthy of such a hope, by ltting
our a7e'cizolls upon th tthings above, not upon
things on the earth. Let us walk by faith,
and not by fghtt; and, amidst the obscurity
of this faint and dubious twilight, console
ourselves with the expecation of a brighter
day which is soon to open. This earth is
the land of thadows. But we hope to pass
into the world of realities; where the pro-
per objeCls of human desire nhall be dil:
played; where the substance of that bliss
shall be found, whose image only we novw
pursue; where no fallacious hopes shall any
longer allure, no fmi!ing appearances shall

betray

betray, no insidious joys shall fling; but SE RM.
where truth shall be inseparably united with -
pleasure, and the mists which hang over
this preliminary state being dissipated, the
perfeat knowledge of good ihall lead to the
full enjoyment of it for ever.

# SERMON IX. On RELIGIOUS RETIREMENT. PSALM iv. 4. Commune with your own heart, upon your bed, and be still.

t 234 ]

SERMON IX.
On RELIGIOUS RETIREMENT.

PSALM iv. 4.
Commune with yotor own heart, rpon your

bed, and be flill.
ERM. M UCH communing with themselves

there has always been among man-

kind; though frequently, God knows, to
no purpose, or to a purpose worse than
none. Could we discover the employ-
ments of men in retirement, how often
ihould we find their thoughts occupied
with fubjeds which they would be
afhanmed to own ? What a large share
have/ambition and avarice, at some times
the grossest pafions, and at other times the
meanest trifles, in their solitary musings?

r4?S2 ~ They

They carry the world, with all its vices, E R M.
into their retreat; and may be said to dwell
in the midfl of the world, even when they
teem to be alone.

This, surely, is not that fort of com-

muning which the Psalmist recommends.
For this is not properly communing with
our heart, but rather holding secret in-
tercourfe with the world. What the
Plfalnif means to recommend, is religi-
ous recollection; that exercise of thought
which is conneLted with the precept given
in the preceding words, to sand in awe,
and fin ot. It is to commune with our-
selves, under the character of spiritual
and immortal beings; and to ponder those
pathl of our fiot, which are leading us to
eternity. I shall, in the first place, show
the advantages of such ferions retirement
and meditation; and flhall, in the second
place, point out some of the principal
Iubjets which ought to employ us in our
retreat.

The advantages of retiring from the
world, to conmune with our heart, will be

found

SE R M. found to be great, whether we regard ou.
,^"- hhappinefs in this world, or our preparation

for the world to come.

LET us confider them, first, v 'th re-

fpeEt to our happiness in this world. It
will readily occur to you, that an entire
retreat from worldly affairs, is not what
religion requires; nor does it even enjoin a
great retreat from them. Some flations of
life would not permit this; and there are
few irations which render it ncceflairy. The
chief field, both of the duty and of the im-
provement of man, lies in acsive life. By
the graces and virtues which he exercises
amidst his fellow-creatures, he is trained up
for heaven. A total retreat from the world
is so far from being, as the Roman Catholic
Church holds, the perfetion of religion,
that, some particular cafes excepted, it is no
other than the abulf of it.

But, though entire retreat would lay

us aside sion the part for which Provi-
dence chiefly intended us, it is certain,

that'

slhat, vwthout occasional rctrcat, ec muff SER M.
as that part very ill. There will be ,_
neither consistency in the condutld, nor
dignity in the charader, of one who sets
apart no share of his time for meditp.tiori
and reflection. In the heat and bustle of
life, while pafl;on is every moment throw-
ing falls colours on the objects around us,
nothing can be viewed in a.juft light. If
you wish that reafion fihold exert her
native power, you nuft ftep afidc frolm
the crowd, into the cool and silent fiade.
It is there that, with lober and .cady eye,
:he examines what is good or ill, what is
wife or foolish in human ccn(lduct; she
looks back on the past, flie looks forward
to the future; and forms plans, not for
the prcfent moment only, but for the
whole of life. How ihould that man dif-
charge any part of his duty aright, who
never fufinrs his paflions to cool? And
how flould his paflions cool, who is en-
gaged without interruption, in the tu-
mult of the world? This incenfant stir
may be called the perpetual drunken-

ness

SERM. ness of life. It raises that eager ferment-

_ ation of spirit, which will be ever fend-

ing forth the dangerous fumes of rashness
and folly. Whereas he who mingles reli-
gious fetreat with worldly affairs, remains
calm, and mafler of himself. He is nor
whirled round and rendered giddy, by
the agitation of the world; but, from that
sacred retirement, in which he has been
conversant among higher obje&s, comes
forth into the world with manly tranquil-
lity, fortified by the principles which he
has formed, and prepared for whatever
may befal.

As he who is unacquainted with re.

treat, cannot sustain any character with
propriety, so neither can he enjoy the
world with any advantage. Of the two
classes of men who are most apt to be
negligent of this duty, the men of plea-
sure, and the men of business, it is hard to
fay which susser most in point of enjoy-
ment from that neglet. To the former,
every moment appears to be loft, which
partakes not of the vivacity of amusement.

To

To conned: one plan of gaiety with ano. s E R M.

lx.

ther, is their whole study; till, in a very ,
short time, nothing remains but to tread
the fame beaten round; to enjoy what
they have already enjoyed, and to fee
what they have often seen. Pleasures
thus drawn to the dregs, become vapid
and tasteless. What might have pleased
long, if enjoyed with temperance and
mingled with retirement, being devoured
with such eager haste, speedily surfeits
and disgusts. Hence, these are the per-
sons, who, after having run through a
rapid course of pleasure, after having
glittered for a few years in the foremost
line of public amusements, are the mofi
apt to fly at last to a melancholy retreat;
not led by religion or reason, but driven by
disappointed hopes, and exhausted fp'-
rits, to the pensive conclusion that all is
vanity.

If uninterrupted intercourse with the

the world wears out the man of pleasure, it
no less oppresses the man of business and
ambition. The itrongeft spirits must at

length

SERM. length fink under it. The happiet tccln

l__ .per must be toured by incessant return3

of the opposition, the inconstancy, and
treachery of men. For he who lives al-
ways in the bustle of the world, lives in ,
perpetual warfare. Here an enemy en-
counters; there a rival supplants him.
The ingratitude of a friend flings him tlil
hour; and the pride of a superior wounds
him the next. In vain he flies for relief te
trifling amusements. These may afford a
temporary opiate to care; but they com-
municate no strength to the mind. On the
contrary, they leave it more soft and de.
fenceless, when molestations and injuries
renew their attack.

Let him slho wishes for an effecual

cure to all the wounds which the world
can inflict, retire from intercourse with
men to intercourse with God. When
he enters into his closet, and shuts the
door, let'him shut out; at the fame time,
all intrusion of worldly care; and dwell
among objects divine and immortal.-
Those fair profects of order and peace

2 I {hall

lhall there open to his view, which form s E R M.
the most perfect contrast to the confulion Ix_
and misery of this earth. The celeflial
inhabitants quarrel not; among them
there is neither ingratitude, nor envy,
nor tumult. Men may harass one ano-
ther; but in the kingdom of God con-
cord and tranquillity reign for ever.-
From such objecs there beams upon the
mind of the pious man, a pure and en-
livening light; there is diffused over his
heart a holy calm. Ilis agitated spirit
reaffumes its firmness, and regains its
peace. The world finks in its import-
ance; and the load of mortality and
misery loses almost all its weight. The
grecn pafJiires open, and the Iill weatirs
flow around him, betide which the Shep-
herd of Ifael guides his flock. The dif-
turbances and alarms, so formidable to
those who are engaged in the tumults of
the world, seem to him only like thunder
rolling afar off; like the noile of distant
waters, whose found he hears, whose
course he traces, but whose waves touch

Vo.. I, R him

S ER M. him not.-As religious retirement is thus

IX.

evidently conducive to our happiness in this
life, so,

IN the second place, it is absolutely

iccefFary in order to prepare us for the
life to come. He who lives always in
public, cannot live to his own foul.
The world lieth in zvickednefs; and with
good rcafon the Chriflian is exhorted, not
to be cofo-rmed to it, but transformed by the
reneiillg of his mind. Our conversation
and intercourse with the world is, in
leveral refpels, an education for vice.
From our earliest youth, we are accustomed
to hear riches and honours extolled as
the chief possessions of man; and pro-
posed to us, as the principal aim of our
future pursuits. W\e are trained up, to
look with admiration on the flattering
marks of diftinCion which they bcltow.
In quest of thole fancied blefTings, we fee
the multitude around us eager and ser-
vent. Principles of duty, we may, per-
haps, hear sometimes inculcated; but

we

we seldom behold them brought into SERM.

IX.

competition with worldly profit. The _-,_
soft names, and plausible colours, under
which deceit, sensuality, and revenge,
are presented to us in common difcourbe,
weaken, by degrees, our natural sense of
the diltinlion between good and evil.
We often meet with crimes authorised
by high examples, and rewarded with
the caresses and smiles of the world. We
discover, perhaps, at last, that those
whom we are taught to reverence, and
to regard as our patterns of conduct,
act upon principles no purer than thole
of others. Thus breathing habitually a
contagious air, how certain is our ruin
unless we sometimes retreat from this
pestilential region, an(l feck for proper
correctives of the dioirders vhich ale
contracted there ? Religious retirement
both abates the disease, and firnifhcs the
remedy. It leIcins the corrupting influ-
ence of the world; and it gives oppor-
tunity for better principles to c:ert ti:'
po'wcr. lTe who is at'oiuc:o;ncd to tu:ni

R 2 a- .

SERM. aside, and commune with himself, will,

IX.
-v -ifometimes at least, hear the truths which

the multitude do not tell him. A more
found inftrutor will lift his voice, and
awaken within the heart those latent fug-
geftions, which the world had overpowered
and suppressed.

The ads of prayer and devotion, the

exercises of faith and repentance, all the
great and peculiar duties of the religion
of Christ, necessarily suppose retirement
from the world. This was one chief end
of their institution, that they might be
the means of occasionally sequestering us
from that great scene of vice and folly,
the continued presence of which is so
hurtful. Solitude is the hallowed ground
which Religion hath, in every age, chosen
for her own. There, her inspiration is
felt, and her secret mysteries elevate the
foul. There, falls the tear of contrition;
there, rifes towards heaven the sigh of the
heart; there, melts the foul with all the
tenderness of devotion, and pours itself
forth before him who made, and him

who

who redeemed it. How can any one who S E R M.
is unacquainted with such employments of -_
mind, be fit for heaven ? If heaven be the
habitation of pure affecdions, and of intel-
ledual joy, can such a itate be relished by
him who is always immersed among fen-
fible objects, and has never acquired any
taste for the pleasures of the underfianding,
and the heart ?

The great and the worthy, the pious

and the virtuous, have ever been addid-
ed to serious retirement. It is the cha-
raceriftic of little and frivolous minds,
to be wholly occupied with the vulgar
objects of life. These fill up their de-
fires, and supply all the entertainment
which their coarse apprehensions can re-
lifh. But a more refined and enlarged
mind leaves the world behind it, feels a
call for higher pleasures, and seeks them
in retreat. The man of public spirit
has recourse to it, in order to form plans
for general good; the man of genius, in
order to dwell on his favourite themes;
the philosopher, to pursue his difcovcries;

R 3 the

s E R I. the faint, to improve himself in grace.
_-. .1fi7ac went out to meditate in the felds, at

the evening tide. David, amidst all the
splendour of royalty, often bears witness
both to the pleasure which he received,
and to the benefit which he reaped, from
devout meditation. I communed witilh my'
:vC'i heart, 7ad my spirit 1made diligcnt
j'arcbh. I tJho,,ght on iy' wayns, and turned
imy feet unto God's icfiimonies. In the
nmultitude of thoughts within me, his conm-
forts delight mLy fJul. Our blefied Saviour
himfllf, though of all who ever lived on
earth he needed least the afliftance of reli-
gious retreat, yet by his frequent practice,
has done it signal honour. Often were the
garden, the mountain, and the filcnce of
the night, fought by him, for intercourse
with heaven. Whecn he hadSent the multi-
tude away, he went up into a mountain, apar't
to pray.

The advantages of religious retirement

will still more clearly appear, by confider-
ing, as was proposed, in the next place,
some of those great objecs which should

there

there employ our thoughts. I flall men- s E R M.

ix.

tion only three, which are of the most plain --j
and acknowledged importance; God, the
world, and our own characier.

I. WHEN you retire from the world,

coinmue wcith your hearts concerning God.
Impressions of Deity, besides their being
the principle of what is ftridly termed
religion, are the great support of all mo:al
sentiment, and virtuous conidul, amoni
men. But with what difficulty are they
preserved in any due degree of force,
amidst the affairs and avocations of the
world ? While the crowd of surrounding
objets is ever ruffing on the imagina-
tion, and occupying the fcillfs and the
heart, what is not only absent fiom view,
but, by its nature, invisible, is apt to
vanifih like a flhadow. Hence it is given
as the charater of wicked men, in scrip-
ture, that they are witbhont God in the
worl/. They deny not, perhaps, that he
does c;iPt; but it is the fame to them as
though he did not: For having lolt him

R 4 from

s E R M. from their view, his existence has no es-

Ix.
L--J fed on their conduct. If, at any time,

the idea of God rife in their mind, it
rifes like a terrifying phantom which they
haflen to cxpcl, and which they gladly
fancy to be unreal, bccaufe they le' it
make so little impreflion on others around
them.

Let him who retires to serious medita-

tion, begin with imprefling deeply on his
mind this important truth, that there is
undoubtedly a Supreme Governour, who
prcfides over the univcrfe. But let him
not imagine, that to commune with his
heart concerning God is to search into
the mysteries of the Divine nature, or to
attempt a difcpvery of the whole plan of
Providence. Long enough he may be-
wilder himself in this maze, without
making any proficiency in the pracical
knowledge of God. Shall he who knows
so little of his own nature, or of the na-
ture of the objeCs with which he is fur-
rounded, expect to comprehend the Being
who made him ? To commune with our-

selves, to any useful purpose, on this sub- s E R M.

IX.

jeCt, is to bring home to our fouls the in- I
ternal, authoritative fenle of God, as of a
Sovereign and a Father. It is not to fpecu..
late about what is mysterious in his eflence,
but to contemplate what is displayed of his
perfedions. It is to realize the presence
of the Supreme Being, so as to produce the
most profound veneration; and to awaken
the earnef desire of as near an approach as
our nature will permit, to that great Foun-
tain of happiness and life.

After this manner was that holy man

asseted, who uttered this ardent'i: wifl,
O that I knew iwhC'c I inig'htfiZ d him, that
J might come ceven to hs feat !-If with
such a frame of mind you feck after God,
be assured that he is not far fiom you;
and that, though you are not permitted
as yet to come to h.s feat, you may, at
leait, reach the footstool of his throne, and
touch the robe that covers him. In the
midif of your solitary musings lift your
v-'es, and behold all nature full of God.

* Job, xxiii. '.

L'ook

SERM. Look up to the firmament, and admire
.,_, his glory. Look round on the earth, and

observe his prcftnce every wherc displaycd.
If the gay landlcapc, or the fiuitful field,
present themselves to your eye, behold
him fmriling upon his works. If the
mountain raifl its lofty head, or the ex-
panfe of waters roll its tide before you,
contemplate, in thole great and solemn
objects, his power and majesty. Nature,
in all its dierfitics, is a varied manifefta-
tion of the Deity. If you were to taLc the
wvings of t: mo;' o i an, and davell in tlhe td-
termonf piarts of the fJa, even there you
would find him. For iin limn yout live and
move. He fills and animates all space. In
the barren wilderness, as in the peopled
region, you can trace his footsteps; and
in the deepest solitude, you may hear a
voice which teflifies of him.

Him, indeed, you are never to con-

found with the workmanflhip of his
hands. Nature, in its most awful or most
pleasing scenes, exhibits no more than
diiffrent forms of inanimate matter. But

on

on these dead forms is imprefled the glory S E R M.
of a living spirit. The beauty, or the
greatness, which appears in them, flows
from the Fountain of all greatncfs and
beauty; in him it centers; of his perfec-
tion it reflecs an image; and towards
him fnould lead your view.-In converf-
ing with a fellow-creature on earth, it is
not with his body we converse, though it
is his body only which we fee. From his
words and actions we conceive his mind;
with his mind, though invisible, we hold
correspondence, and direct towards this
Spiritual Essence our affection and regard.
In like manner, though here we behold no
more of God than what his works display,
yet in those displays, we are capable of
perceiving the universal Spirit, and of hold-
ing correspondence with this unseen Being,
in veneration, gratitude, and love.

It is thus that a pious man, in his re-

tired meditations, viewing natural objects
with a spiritual eye, communes with his
heart concerning God. He walks among
the various scenes of nature, as within

the

SE R M. the precinacs of a great temple, in tle

Ix.
i habitual exercise of devotion. To those

discoveries of the Supreme Being in his
works, let him apply the comment of
his word. From the world of Nature, let
him follow God into the world of Grace.
When conducted fiom the outer courts,
into this inmost fanCllary of the temple,
he shall feel himself brought still more
nigh to the sacred Presence. In the great
plan of Divine WVifdon, for extirpating
the evils produced by fin, he shall receive
the interpretation of many of the hidden
mysteries of Nature. He shall discover in
Christ, the Deity made, in some degree,
viilble to sense. In the beneficent works
which he performed, and the gracious
undertaking which he accomplilhed, he
ihall behold the brighlnl of the ]zthLe's
glori,, and shall discern it to be J':/l (f
grace and truth.-From the sacred retreat
wherein his thoughts have been thus
employed, lhe rcturns to the world like a
fuperiour being. He carries into acdivc
life those pure and elevating sentiments

10

to which the giddy crowd are firangers. SE RM.
A certain odour of ifndity remains upon -
his mind, which, for a while at least, will
repel the contagion of the world.

II. COMIIUNE with your heart, in the
season of retirement, concerning the world,
The world is the great deceiver, whofl
fallacious arts it highly imports us to de-
te&t. But in the midfl of its pleasures and
purluits, the detection is impofible. We
tread, as within an enchanted circle, where
nothing appears as it truly is, It is only
in retreat that the charm can be broken.
Did men employ that retreat, not in car-
rying on the delusion which the world has
begun, not in forming plans of imaginary
bliss, but in fubjedicng the happiness which
the world affords to a Prrit dlicuffion, the
'pell would diiblve; and in the room
of the unreal profipefts which had long
amuscd them, the nakedness of the world
would appear.

Prepare yourselves, then, to encounter
th!e light of truth. Ribolve rather to bear

io athe

SER M. the disappointment of some flattering

*r hopes, than to wander for ever in the

paradise of fools. While others meditate
in secret on the means of attaining worldly
success, let it be your employment to
scrutinize that success itself. Calculate
fairly to what it amounts; and whether
you are not losers on the whole, by your
apparent gain. Look back for this pur-
pose on your past life. Trace it from
your earliest youth; and put the queffion
to yourselves, What have been its hap-
piefl periods? Were they those of quiet
and innocence, or those of ambition and
intrigue? Has your real enjoyment uni-
formly kept pace with what the world
calls prosperity? As you are advanced in
wealth or station, did you proportionably
advance in happiness? Has success, al-
moit in any one instance, fulfilled your
expectation ? Where you reckoned upon
most enjoyment, have you not often found
least? *W\herever guilt entered into your
pleafircs, did not its fling long remain,
after the gratification was 1pafr?- Such

quefticnq

questions as these, candidly answered, SERM.
would, in a great meafuire, unmaflk the
world. They would c;xpofe the vanity of
its pretensions; and convince you, that
there are other springs than t!hoe whlicl the
world affords, to which you miuft apply for
happiness.

Whilc you commune with your heart

concerning what the world now is, con-
fider also what it will one day appear to
be. Anticipate the awful moment of your
bidding it an eternal farewell. Think,
what reflections fllall most probably arise
when you are quitting the field, and look-
ing back on the scene of a&ion. In what
light will your closing eyes contemplate
those vanities which lno fline so bright,
and those irterefts which now fwxell into
such high importance ? W,;hat part will
you then wil to have adIed ? 'What flall
then appear momentous, what trising,
in human condu& ?-Let the fober senti-
ments which such anticipations fiu.g.cf,
temper now your misplaccd ardour. Let
the last conclusions which you iliall form,

7 enter

SE R M. enter into the present estimate which you

ix.
t.-,,.. make of the world, and of life.

Moreover, in communing with your.

selves concerning the world, contemplate
it as fibjed to the Divine dominion. The
greater part of men behold nothing more
than the rotation of human affairs. They
fee a great crowd ever in motion; the
fortunes of men alternately rising and
falling; virtue often difircefed, and pro-
fperity appearing to be the purchase of
worldly wisdom. But this is only the
outside of things. Behind the curtain
there is a far greater scene, which is be-
held by none but the retired, religious
fpetator. Lift up that curtain, when
you are alone with God. View the world
with the eye of a Chrifltian; and you
ihall fee, that while man's heart devifcith
his way, it is the Lord who diireEeth his
fleps. You shall fee, that however men
appear to move and adt after their own
pleasure, they ares neverthelesl, retained
in secret bonds by the Almighty, and all
their operations rendered fubfcrvient to

thd

the ends of his moral government. You S ERM.

lx.

ihall behold him obliging the wrath of vi_
man to praifc him; punishing the finner
by means of his own iniquities; from
the trials of the righteous, bringing forth
their reward; and to a state of seeming
universal confusion, preparing the wisest
and most equitable issue. While the
fafnion of this world is passing fast away,
you mhall discern the glory of another
rising to succeed it. You shall behold all
human events, our griefs and ourjoys, our
love and our hatred, our character and our
memory, absorbed in the ocean of eternity;
and no trace of our present exifence left,
except its being for ever well with the
righteous, and ill with the wicked.-
Such a view of the world, frequently pre-
sented to our minds, could not fail to en-
force those solemn conclusions; There is no
wvdom, nor coutfel, againl the Lord. Fear
God, and keep his conmandments; for this is
the whole of man. Jhat is a man profitcd,
if heJhall gain the whole world, and loft his
own foul?

VOL. I, S III. COM-

SERM. II. COMMUNE with your heart, con-

Ix.

cerniig yourselves, and your real charac-
ter. To acquire a thorough knowledge
of ourselves, is an attainment no less dif-
ficult than important. For men are ge-
nerally unwilling to fee their own imper-
fecions; and when they are willing to
enquire into them, their felf-love impoles
on their judgment. Their intercourse
with one another assists the delusion to
which, of themselves, they are pro'-e.
:or the ordinary commerce of the world
is a commerce of flattery and falsehood;
where reciprocally they deceive and are
deceived, where every one appears undcr
an assumed form, professes esteem which he
does not feel, and bestows praise in order
to receive it. It is only in retreat where
those false semblances disappear, and thole
flattering voices are silent, that a man can
learn to think fobcl',, f 'hiz/Ij; 7ls an s e
oiubt to think.

It has been said, that there arc three

characters which every man filftains;
and these often extremely different from

onei

one another: One, which he pofl'fTes in s E R .
his own opinion; another, which he car- X.
ries in the estimation of the world; and a
third, which he bears in the judgment of
God. It is only the last which ascertains
what he really is.-Whether the character
which the world forms of you be above or
below the truth, it imports you not much
to know. But it is of eternal consequence,
that the character which you poflefs in
your own eyes, be formed upon that which
you bear in the fight of God. In order
to try it by this great flandard, you muff
lay aside, as much as possible, all partiality
to yourselves; and in the season of retire-
ment, explore your heart with fich accu-
rate scrutiny, as may bring your hidden
dcfects to light.

Enquire, for this purpose, whether you

be not conscious, that the fair epinion
which the world entertains of you, is
founded on their partial knowledge both
of your abilities and your virtues ? Would
you be willing that all your ations should
be publicly canvased ? Could you bear

S 2 to

SERM. to have your thoughts laid open? Are
..,-. there no parts of your life which you

would be uneasy if an enemy could dif-
cover? In what light, then, must these
appear to God? When you have kept
free of vice, has your innocence proceed-
ed from purity of principle, or from
worldly motives? Rife there no envy or
malignity within you when you compare
your own condition with that of others ?
Have you been as solicitous to regulate
your heart, as to preserve your manners
from reproach? Professing yourselves to
be Christians, has the Spirit of Christ ap-
peared in your conduct ? Declaring that
you hope for immortality, has that hope
surmounted undue attachments to the pre-
sent life ?

Such investigation as this, seriously pur-

sued, might produce to every man many
discoveries of himself; discoveries not pleas-
ing perhaps to vanity, but salutary and
useful. For he can be only a flatterer, but
no true friend to himself, who aims not at
knowing his own defets as well as virtues.

24 By

By imposing on the world, he may carry S E R M.
on some plan of fancied profit; but by j
imposing on his heart, what can he pro-
pose to gain? He feedeth on aJfes: A de-
ceivedheart hath turned him aside, that he
cannot deliver his foul, norfay, Is there not a
lie in my right hand*?

THUS I have set before you some of

those great objects which ought to em-
ploy your meditation in religious retire-
ment. I have endeavoured to introduce
you into a proper intercourse with your
heart, concerning God, the world, and
your own character. Let this intercourse
terminate in fixing the principles of your
future condut. Let it serve to introduce
consistency into your life. Nothing can
be more wavering and disjointed, than
the behaviour of those who are wholly
men of the world, and have never been
inured to commune with themselves.
Diffipaiion is a more frequent cause of
their ruin, than determined impiety. It

Ia, xliv. 20o

S3 is

S E R M. is not so much because they have adopted

- bad principles, as because they have never

attended to principles of any kind, that their
lives are ib full of incoherence and difor-
der.-You hover on the borders of fin and
duty. One day, you read the Scriptures,
you hear religious discourses, and form
good resolutions. Next day, you plunge
into the world, and forget the ierious irm-
prefion, as if it had never been made.
The imprcilon is again renewed, and again
effaced ; and in this circle your life revolves.
Is such conduct worthy of creatures en-
dowed with intelligent powers? Shall the
c!ofe of life overtake you, before you have
determined how to live ? Shall the day ne-
ver come, that is to ind you steady in your
views, decided in your plans, and engaged
in a course of acion which your mind ap-
proves ?-If you wifli that day ever to ar-
rive, retirement and meditation mufft firfl
bring you home to yourselves, from the
dissipation in which you are now scattered;
muff teach you to fix flbch aims, and to lay
down such rules of conduct, as are suitable

to

to rational and immortal beings. Then will I R M.

IX.

your charater become uniform and refpeEt- ,
able. Then you may hope that your life
will proceed in such a train as shall prepare
you, when it is finished, for joining the
society of more exalted spirits.

84

# SERMON X. On DEVOTION. ACTS, x. 2. Cornelius  A devout man 

[ 264 ]
SERMON X,

On DEVOTION.

ACTS, X. 2.

Cornelius--A devout man-
SER M. T HAT religion is essential to the wel.

fare of man, can be proved by the

most convincing arguments. But these,
how demonstrative soever, are insufficient
to support its authority over human con-
dut. For arguments may convince the
understanding, when they cannot con-
quer the passions. Irresistible they seem
in the calm hours of retreat; but in the
season of ation, they often vanish into
smoke. There are other and more power-
ful springs, which influence the great

movements

movements of the human frame. In or- SERM.
der to operate with success on the active
powers, the heart must be gained. Sen-
timent and affection mutt be brought to
the aid of reason. It is not enough that
men believe religion to be a wife and ra-
tional rule of conduct, unless they relilh
it as agreeable, and find it to carry its
own reward. Happy is the man, who,
in the conflict of desire between God and
the world, can oppose, not only argu-
ment to argument, but pleasure to plea-
sure; who, to the external allurements of
sense, can oppose the internal joys of de-
votion; and to the uncertain promises of
a flattering world, the certain experience
of that peace of God which pafcth under-
sanding, keeping his mind and heart.-Such
is the temper and spirit of a devout man,
Such was the character of Cornelius, that
good Centurion, whose prayers and alms
are said to have come up in memorial before
God. Of this character I intend, through
Divine assistance, to discourse; and shall
Rndeavour, I. To explain the nature of

devotion;

SE R M. devotion; II. To justify, and recommend
ivJ_ it; and, III. To rectify some miflakes

concerning it.

I. DEVOTION is the lively exercise of

those affections, which we owe to the
Supreme Being. It comprehends several
emotions of the heart, which all terminate
on the fame great object. The chief of
them are, veneration, gratitude, desire, and
resignation.

It implies, first, profound veneration

of God. By veneration, I understand an
affection compounded of awe and love;
the affection which, of all others, it best
becomes creatures to bear towards their
infinitely perfelt Creator. Awe is the
first sentiment that rifes in the foul, at
the view of his greatness. But, in the
heart of a devout man, it is a solemn and
elevating, not a dejecing, emotion; for
he glows, rather than trembles, in the
Divine pretence. It is not the fuperfti-
tious dread of unknown power, but the
homage yielded by the heart to him who

is,

is, at once, the greatefl, and the best of S ER M.

X.

Beings, Omnipotence, viewed alone, would
be a formidable objet. But, confidered
in conjunction with the moral perfections
of the Divine nature, it serves to heighten
devotion. Goodness aflieds the heart with
double energy, when residing in one so
exalted. The goodncfs which we adore
in him, is not like that which is common
among men, a weak, mutable, undifcern-
ing fondncfl, ill qualified to be the ground
of assured trust. It is the goodneis of a
perseEt Governor, acting upon a regular
extensive plan; a steady principle of be-
nevolence, conduded by wisdom; which,
fuibjea to no variablcncfs or JhloAw of
tli.rling, free from all partiality and caprice,
incapable of being either soothed by flattery
or ruffled by resentment, resembles, in its
calm and equal lustre, the eternal serenity
of the highest heavens. Thy mercy, 0 Lord!
is i the heavens, and thbyJfitfillnefs reacb-
etl unto the clouds. Thy righteozefitfJ is like
tbe great mountains, and thyjudgments are a
great depth.

Such

SE R M. Such are the conceptions of the great

X.
"'.* God, which fill with veneration the heart

of a devout man. His veneration is not
confined to acts of immediate worship.
It is the habitual temper of his foul.
Not only when engaged in prayer or
pralfe, but in the silence of retirement,
and even amidst the occupations of the
world, the Divine Being dwells upon his
thoughts. No place, and no object, ap-
pear to him void of God. On the works
of Nature he views the impression of his
hand; and in the aCtions of men, he
traces the operation of his Providence.
Whatever he beholds on earth, that is
beautiful or fair, that is great or good,
he refers to God, as to the Supreme
origin of all the excellence which is skat.
tered throughout his works. From those
effects he rites to the first cause, From
those streams he ascends to the fountain
whence they flow. By those rays he is
led to that eternal source of light in which
they centre,

DEVOTIO':

DEVOTION implies, secondly, sincere SERM.

gratitude to God, for all his benefits.
This is a warmer emotion than simple
veneration. Veneration looks up to the
Deity, as he is in himself: Gratitude
regards what he is towards us. When a
devout man surveys this vast universe,
where beauty and goodness are every
where predominant; when he reflects on
those numberless multitudes of creatures
who, in their different stations, enjoy the
blessings of existence; and when at the
fame time he looks up to an Universal Fa-
ther, who hath thus filled creation with life
and happiness, his heart glows within him.
He adores that disinterested goodness
which prompted the Almighty to raise up
so many orders of intelligent beings, not
that he might receive, but that he might
give and impart; that he might pour forth
himself, and communicate to the spirits
which he formed, some emanations of his
felicity.

The goodners of this Supreme Bcnefac-
tor he gratefully contemplates, as di!flay-

eel

SER M. ed in his own slate. He reviews the

X.
-.,-i events of his life; and in every com-

fort which has sweetened it, he discerns
the Divine hand. Does he remember
with affection, the parents under whose
care he grew up, and the companions
with whom he pafled his youthful life!
Is he now happy, in his family riling
around him; in the spouse who loves
him, or in the children who give him
comfort and joy? Into every tender re-
membrance of the past, and every pleas-
ing enjoyment of the prefcnt, devotion
enters; for in all tlofe beloved objecs,
it recognizes God. The communication
of love from heart to heart, is an es-
fusion of his goodness. From his in-
fpiration descends all the friendship which
ever glowed on earth; and therefore, to
him it justly returns in gratitude, and ter-

,inates on him.
But this life, with all its interests, is

but a finall part of human existence. A
devout man looks forward to immorta-
lity, and discovers till higher fubjecs of

20 gratitude.

gratitude, He views himself as a guilty SER M.
creature, whom Divine benignity has re- -._
ceived into grace; whose forfeited hopes
it has restored; and to whom it has opened
the most glorious prospeCts of future felicity.
Such generosity shewn to the fallen and
miserable, is yet more affelting to the
heart, than favours conferred on the inno-
cent. He contemplates, with aftoniflment,
the labours of the Son of God, in accom-
plifhing redemption for men; and his foul
overflows with thankfulness to him, who
loved ts, and wtyq.ed us Ji-om ourJfis in bis
own blood.-'lrhat /hall I render to the Lord,
for all his bcuefits ? Bless the Lord, 0 mn;
fold! and all that is within me, bleJs his
holy name; who forgivect all thine ini-
quiliCs, and healeth all thy dif'afes; v/who re-
deemeth thy life fom de/ir-u/ion, alnd crowc;-
eth thee with loving kindnsf, and liitb len-
der mercies.

DEVOTION implies, thirdly, the de-

fire of the foul after the favour of the Su-
preme Being, as its chief good, and final

rc~.

SE R M. reft. To inferiour enjoyments, the devout

X.

man allots inferiour and secondary attach-
ment. He disclaims not every earthly
affection. He pretends not to renounce
all pleasure in the comforts of his pre-
sent state. Such an unnatural renuncia-
tion humanity forbids, and religion can-
not require. But from these he expeds
not his supreme bliss. He discerns the
vanity which belongs to them all; and
beyond the circle of mutable objects
which surround him, he aspires after
some principles of more perfect felicity,
which ihall not be subject to change or
decay. But where is this complete and
permanent good to be found? Ambition
pursues it in courts and palaces; and re-
turns from the pursuit, loaded with for-
rows. Pleasure seeks it among sensual
joys; and retires with the confession of
disappointment. T7he deep faith, it is not in
me; and the feafaith, it is not with me. It
cannot be gottlc, forgold; neither Jhallilvcr
be weighedt for the price thereof Its place
is not in the Lan.! of the living. True hap-

pinelf

piness dwells with God; and from thSe SERM.
lihIJt of his countenance, it beams upon the
devout man. His voice is, 7hJm have I
in heaven but thee ? and there is none upon
earth that I desire beside thee. After ex-
ploring heaven and earth for happiness,
they teem to him a mighty void, a vil-
dernefs of shadows, where all would be
empty and insubstantial without God.
But in his favour and love, he finds wlat
supplies every defect of temporal objets;
and assures tranquillity to his heart, amidst
all the changes of his exiftcnce. ThouJljali
guide me with thy cotinfel; and thou JJhali
receive me to thyJ glory. My fjlej/ and my
heart failcth; but God is the Jircngth o'f il
h'lart, and my portionfor ever.

FROM these sentiments and affetions,

devotion advances, fourthly, to an entire
resignation of the foul to God. It is the
consummation of trust and hope. It ba-
nifhes anxious cares and murmuring
thoughts. It reconciles us to every ap-
pointment of Divine Providence; and re-

VOL. I. T solves

SE RM. solves every wish into the desire of pleas-

,L. ing him, whom our hearts adore. Its

genuine breathings are to this effet:
" ConduEt me, 0 God! in what path

soever feemeth good to thee. In no-

" thing fliall I ever arraign thy sacred
" will. Doff thou require me to part

with any worldly advantages, for the

" fake of virtue and a good conscience? I
"give them up. Doff thou command me
"to relinquiih my friends, or my coun-
"try? At thy call I cheerfully leave
"them. Dost thou summon me away
"ifrom this world ? Lo ! I am ready to
"depart. Thou haft made, thou haft re-
" deemed me, and I am thine. Myself,
" and all that belongs to me, I surrender
( to thy disposal. Let the men of the
" world have their portion in this life. Be
"it mine, to bch ldt yfaice in righteotfiefs;
" and wcsn' I awakc, to befatisfed with thy
" l;iZccfs."

This, furcly, is one of the noblest ads

of which the human mind is capable,
'whecn thus, if we may be allowed the ex-

pression,

preflion, it unites itself with God. Nor SER l.
can any devotion be genuine, which in- . J
spires not sentiments of this nature. For
devotion is not to be confidered as a tran-
fient glow of affection, occasioned by some
casual impreflions of Divine goodncls,
which are suffered to remain unconneded
with the conduct of life. It is a power-
ful principle, which penetrates the foul;
which purifies the affecions from debaf-
ing attachments; and, by a fixed and
steady regard to God, subdues every sinful
passion, and forms the inclinations to piety
and virtue.

Sucil in general arc the dispositions

that constitute devotion. It is the union
of veneration, gratitude, desire, and rc-
fignation. It exprcffcs, not so much the
performance of any particular duty, as
the spirit which must animate all reli-
gious duties. It flands opposed, not mere-
ly to downright vice; but to a heart
which is cold, and infenlible to Iacred
things; which, from conpulfion, pcriha;s,

T 2 and

S E M. and a sense of interest, preserves some re.

X.
i gard to the divine commands, but obeys

them without ardour, love, or joy. I
proceed,

II. To recommend this devout spirit

to your imitation. I begin with obferv.
ing, That it is of the utmost consequence
to guard against extremes of every kind
in religion. We must beware, left, by
seeking to avoid one rock, we split upon
another. It has been long the subjec of
remark, that superstition and enthusiasm
are two capital sources of delusion; fu-
perftition, on the one hand, attaching
men with immoderate zeal, to the ritual
and external part of religion; and enthu-
fiafm, on the other, direting their whole
attention to internal emotions, and myf-
tical communications with the spiritual
world; while neither the one, nor the
other, has paid sufficient regard to the
great moral duties of the Christian life.
But, running with intemperate eagerness
from these two great abuses of religion,

men

men have neglected to observe, that there s E R M.
are extremes opposite to each of them, _ ,_
into which they are in hazard of preci-
pitating themselves. Thus the horrour of
superstition has Sometimes reached so far
as to produce contempt for all external
institutions; as if it were poflible for
religion to subsist in the world, without
forms of worihip, or public acknow-
ledgment of God. It has also happened
that some, who in the main are well as-
fe&ed to the cause of goodness, observing
that persons cf a devout turn have at
times been carried, by warm affetions,
into unjustifiable excesses, have thence
iaftily concluded that all devotion was
a-kin to enthufafin; and separating reli-
gion totally from the heart and affecaions,
have reduced it to a frigid oblcrvance of
what they call the rules of virtue. This
is the extreme which I purpose at present
to combat, by shewing you, iirsi, That
true devotion is rational, and well-found-
ed; next, That it is of the highest inm-
portance to every other part of religion

T 3 and

SE R M. and virtue; and, lastly, That it is most

piX. conducive to our happiness.

IN the first place, True devotion is ra-

tional, and well-founded. It takes its rife
from affetions, which are essential to the
human frame. We are formed by Na-
ture to admire what is great, and to love
what is amiable. Even inanimate objects
have power to excite thole emotions.
The magnificent profpeds of the natural
world, fill the mind with reverential awe.
Its beautiful scenes create delight. When
we survey the ations and behaviour of our
fellow-creatures, the affeCions glow with
greater ardour; and, if to be unmoved,
in the former cafe, argues a defect of fen-
fibility in our powers, it discovers, in the
latter, an odious hardness and depravity
in the heart. The tenderness of an assec-
tionate parent, the generosity of a for-
giving enemy, the public spirit of a patriot
or a hero, often fill the eyes with tears,
and swell the breast with emotions too big
for utterance. The object of those assec-

tions

tions is frequently raised above us, in con- E R M.
dition and rank. Let us suppose him raised a J
also above us, in nature. Let us imagine,
that an angel, or any being of fuperiour
order, had condescended to be our friend,
our guide, and patron; no person, sure,
would hold the exaltation of his benefac-
tor's character, to be an argument why he
ihould love and revere him lefs.-Strange!
that the attachment and veneration, the
warmth and overflowing of heart, which
excellence and goodness on every other oc-
cafion command, Should begin to be ac-
counted irrational, as soon as the Supreme
Being becomes their object. For what rea-
son mufft human sensibility be extinc to-
wards him alone ? Are all benefits entitled
to gratitude, except the highest and the best?
Shall goodness cease to be amiable, only be-
cause it is perfect ?

It will, perhaps, be said, that an un-

known and invisible being is not quali-
sied to raise affection in the human heart.
Wrapt up in the mysterious obscurity of
his nature, he escapes our search, and

T4 affords

SERM. affords no determinate objec to our love

X.
A*_- or desire. WTe go forward, but he is not

there ; and backward, but iwe cannot per-
ceive him; on the left hand, where he
worketh, but we cannot behold him.: 'i'
bideth hiifelf on the right hand, that we
cannot fee him .-- Notwithstanding this
obscurity, is there any being in the uni-
verse more real and certain, than the Cre-
ator of the world, and the Supporter of
all exifience? Is he in whom we live and
move, too distant from us to excite de-
votion? His form and essence, indeed,
we cannot fee; but to be unseen, and
imperfectly known, in many other in-
stances, precludes neither gratitude nor
love. It is not the fight, io much as the
firong conception, or deep impreflion, of
an object, which affecs the passions. \Ve
glow with admiration of pertonages, who
have lived in a distant age. Whole na-
tions have been transported with zeal and
affection, for the generous hero, or pub-
lic deliverer, whom they knew only by

Job, xxxiii. 8, 9.

fame.

fame. Nay, properly speaking, the direc SERM.

X.

objet of our love is, in every cafe, in- k-..
visible. For that on which affection is
placed, is the mind, the foul, the internal
character of our fellow-creatures; which,
surely, is no less concealed, than the Di-
vine Nature itself is, from the view of
lenic. From actions, we can only infer
the dispositions of men; from what we
lee of their behaviour, we collect what is
iivifible; but the conjecture which we
form is, at best, imperfect; and when
their acions excite our love, much of
their heart remains flill unknown. I ask,
then, in what respect God is lcs qualified
than any other being to be an object of as-
fecion ? Convinced that he exilts; behold-
ing his goodness ipread abroad in his works,
exerted in the government of the world,
displayed in some measure to sense, in the
actions of his son Jelus Christ ! are we not
firnifhed with every essential rcquifite which
the heart demands, in order to indulge the
most warm, and at the fame time the moit
rational emotions ?

If

S ER M. If there considerations justify the rea-

X.
_-y-e- fonablenefs of devotion, as expressed in

veneration, love, and gratitude, the fame
train of thought will equally justify it
when appearing in the forms of desire,
delight, or resignation. The latter are,
indeed, the consequence of the former.
For we cannot but desire some communi-
cation with what we love; and will na-
turally resign ourselves to one, on whom
we have placed the full confidence of
affecion. The alpirations of a devout
man after the favour of God, are the
effets of that earneR with for happiness
which glows in every breat. All men
have somewhat that may be called the
objeca of their devotion; reputation,
pleasure, learning, riches, or whatever
apparent good has itrongly attached their
heart. This becomes the centre of at-
traction, which draws them towards it;
which quickens and regulates all their
motions. While the men of the world
are thus influenced by the objets which
they severally worship, fiall he only who

directs

directs all his devotion towards the Supreme s E R M.
Being, be excluded from a place in the v
system of rational conduc ? or be censured
for having paflions, whose sensibility cor-
responds to the great cause which moves
them ?-Having vindicated the reasonable-
ness of devotion, I come,

IN the fccond place, to show its im-

portance, and the high place which it
possesses in the system of religion. I ad-
dress myself now to those, who, though
they reject not devotion as irrational, yet
confider it as an unnecessary refinement;
an attainment which may be safely left to
recluse and sequestered persons, who aim
at uncommon fanCity. The solid and
material duties of a good life, they hold
to be in a great measure independent of
devout affeCion; and think them fuffi-
ciently supported, by their necessary con-
nedion with our interest, both in this
and in a future world. They insist much
upon religion being a calm, a fober, and
rational principle of conduct.- I admit

tha.

S ER M. that it is very laudable to have a rational

X.
!--,- religion. But I must admonish you, that

it is both reproachful and criminal, to have
an insensible heart. If we reduce religion
into so cool a state, as not to admit love,
affeCion, and desire, we shall leave it in
poffefion of small influence over human
life. Look abroad into the world, and ob-
serve hovl few aft upon deliberate and ra-
tional views of their true interest. The bulk
of mankind are impelled by their feelings.
They are attracted by appearances of good.
Taste and inclination rule their conduct.
To direEt their inclination and taste to-
wards the highest objets; to form a relish
within them, for virtuous and spiritual en-
joyment; to introduce religion into tie
heart, is the province of devotion; and
hence arises its importance to the interests
of goodness.

Agreeably to this doctrine, the great

Author of our religion, who well kncw
what was in man, laid the foundation of
his whole lyftem in the regeneration of
the heart. The change which was to be

13 accom-

accomplished on his followers, he did not SEXR M
purpose to effec, merely by regulating '
their external condut; but by forming
within them a new nature; by taking
away the heart of Jlone, and giving thnm
a heart of flJh, that is, a heart relenting
and tender, yielding to the Divine im-
pulse, and readily susceptible of devout im-
pressions. Thou JfTalt love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and mind, and fol,
and Jlrength: This is the fJfl and great
commandmtnent. lMIy so, give ime thy heart,
is the call of God to each of us: And,
indeed, if the heart be with-held, it is
not easy to conceive what other offering
we can present, that will be acceptable
to him.

Of what nature mult that man's reli-

gion be, who professes to worlhip God,
and to believe in Christ; and yet raises
his thoughts towards God, and his Sa-
viour, without any warmth of gratitude or
love ? I speak not of those occasional de-
cays of pious afEcL'ion, to which the best
are fibjec, but of a total insensibility to

this

SER M. this part of religion. Surely let the outs

X.
s-,-; ward behaviour be ever so irreproachable,

there must be Tome essential defect in a
heart which remains always unmoved at
the view of infinite goodness. The as-
fecions cannot, in this cafe, be deemed
to flow in their natural channel. Some
concealed malignity must have tainted
the inward frame. This is not the man
whom you would chute for your bosom-
friend; or whose hcart you could expecd
to answer, with reciprocal warmth, to
yours. His virtue, if it deserves that
name, is not of the moss amiable fort;
and may, with reason, receive the appel-
lation (often injudiciously bestowed) of
cold and dry morality. Such a person
muff, as yet, be fair fom the ckingdom of
Heaven.

As devotion is thus essential to religion

in its principle, so it enters into the pro-
per discharge of all its duties. It diffuses
an auspicious influence over the whole
of virtue. The prevailing temper of the
mind is formed by its most frequent em-

10 ployments.

ployments. Intercourse with Supreme SE R M.

X.

perfecion cannot, therefore, but ennoble
and improve it. The pure love of God
naturally connefc itself with the love of
man. Hence, devotion has been often
found a powerful infiru-mcnt in huma-
nizing the manners of men, and taming
their unruly passions. It finooths what
is rough, and softens what is fierce, in
our nature. It is the great purifier of the
affedions. It iifpires contempt of the
low gratifications belongin, to animal
life. It promotes a humble and cheerful
contentment with our lot; and subdues
that eager desire of riches and of power,
which has filled this unhappy world with
crimes and misery. Finally, it befiowa
that enlargement of heart in the Ic;rvice
of God, which is the great principle,
both of perfeveralnc, and of p!.C1S i.
virtue. HIe who, unacquainted with de-
vout affetions, sets himil f'to kecp the
Divine commandments, will advance in
obedience with a liow ind la;nil pLa.;
like one who, carrying a heiav burden,

toil

SE R M. toils to mount the hill. But he whofc

X.
L- heart devotion has warmed, will proceed

on his way, cheerful and rejoicing. The
one performs his duty, only because it is
commanded; the other because he loves
it. The one is inclined to do no more
than necessity requires; the other seeks
to excel. The one looks for his reward
in somewhat betides religion; the other
finds it in religion itself: It is his meat
and drink to do the will of that heavenly
Father, whom he loves and adores. Which
of these two are likely to make the greatelf
improvement in goodness, is easily dif-
cerned. Let us now confider,

IN the third place, the influence of de-

votion on the happiness of life. Whatever
promotes and strengthens virtue, vwht-
ever calms and regulates the temper, is a
source of happiness. Devotion, as I have
just now fliown, produces those effecs in
a remarkable degree. It inspires compo-
furc of spirit, mildness, and benignity;
weakens the painfil, and cherifies the

pleasing

pleating emotions; and, by there means, SER M.
carries on the life of a pious man, in a X.
fioohl and placid tenour.

Besides exerting this habitual influence

on the mind, devotion opens a field of
enjoyments, to which the vicious are en-
tire strangers; enjoyments the more valu-
able, as they peculiarly belong to retire-
ment when the world leaves us, and to
adversity when it becomes our foe. These
are the two seasons, for which every wife
man would most with to provide some
hidden store of comfort. For let him be
placed in the most favourable situation
which the human state admits, the world
can neither always amuse him, nor al-
ways shield him from distress. There
will be many hours of vacuity, and
many of dejecion, in his life. If he be
a stranger to God, and to devotion, how
dreary will the gloom of solitude often
prove ? With what oppreflive weight will
licknefs, disappointment, or old age, fall
upon his spirits? But, for those pensive
periods, the pious man has a relief pre-

VoL. T. U pared.

S E R M. pared. From the tiresome repetition of

X.
,_,L tthe common vanities of life, or from the

painful corrosion of its cares and sorrows,
devotion transports him into a new region;
and surrounds him there with such objects,
as are the most fitted to cheer the dejetion,
to calm the tumults, and to heal the wounds
of his heart. If the world has been empty
and delusive, it gladdens him with the pro.
speC of a higher and better order of things,
about to arise. If men have been ungrate-
ful and bare, it displays before him the
faithfulnels of that Supreme Being, who,
though every other friend fail, will never
forsake him. Consult your experience
and you will find, that the two greatef
sources of inward joy are, the exercise of
love directed towards a deserving object,
and the exercise of hope terminating on
tome high and assured happiness. Both
these are supplied by devotion; and there-
fore we have no reason to be surprised,
if, on some occasions, it fill the hearts of
good men with a satisfaction not* to be
expressed.

4 The

The refined pleasures of a pious mind SERM.

are, in many refpeas, fuperiour to the ^
coarse gratifications of sense. They are
pleasures which belong to the highest
powers, and best affeaions of the foul;
whereas the gratifications of sense reside
in the lowel region of our nature. To
the one, the foul sloops below its native
dignity. The other, raise it above itself.
The one, leave always a comfortless, often
a mortifying remembrance behind them.
The other are reviewed with applause
and delight. The pleasures of sense rc-
femble a foaming torrent, which, after a
disorderly course, speedily runs out, and
leaves an empty and offensive channel.
But the pleasures of devotion resemble
the equable current of a pure river,
which enlivens the fields through which
it passes, and diffuses verdure and ferti-
lity along its banks. To thee, 0 Devo-
tion! we owe the highest improvement of
our nature, and much of the enjoyment
of our life. Thou art the support of our
virtue, and the reft of our fouls, in this

U 2 turbu-

S E R M. turbulent world. Thou compofePr the

x.

thoughts. Thou calmest the pafions.
Thou exalteft the heart. Thy communi-
cations, and thine only, are imparted to
the low, no less than to the high; to
the poor, as well as to the rich. In thy
presence, worldly diftinaions cease; and
under thy influence, worldly sorrows are
forgotten. Thou art' the balm of the
wounded mind. Thy fanauary is ever
open to the miserable; inaccessible only
to the unrighteous and impure. Thou
beginnefi on earth, the temper of heaven.
In thee, the hofts.of angels and blessed fpi-
rits eternally rejoice. It now remains,

III. To endeavour to corre& some

errors, into which men are apt to fall
concernlni; devotion. For it is but too
obvious, that errors are often committed
in this part of religion. These frequently
disfigure its appearance before the world,
and fubjeic it to unjust reproach. Let us
therefore attend deliberately to its nature,
fb as to difiinguifli pure and rational de-

votion,

votion, of which I have hitherto treated, SE R M.
fron that which is, in any degree, spurious x
and adulterated.

In the first place, It is an error to

place devotion in the mere performance
of any external at of worship. Prayer
and praise, together with the ordinances
peculiar to the Christian religion, are the
appointed means of railing the heart to-
wards the Supreme Being. They are the
instituted signs of devotion; the language
in which it naturally exprefles itself. But
let us remember, that they are signs and
expressions only; and we all know, that
in various cafes, these may not correspond
to the thing signified. It is in the difpo-
fition of the heart, not in the motion of
the lips, or in the posture of the body,
that devotion consists. The heart may
pray, or praise, when no words are ut-
tered. But if the heart be unconcerned or
ill affeCted, all the words we can utter, how
properly framed soever, are no other than
empty and unacceptable founds in the ear
of the Almighty.

U3 IN

S ER M. IN the second place, It is an error to

X.

conceive the pleasures and advantages of
devotion, to be indiscriminately open to
all. Devotion, like many parts of religion,
may in fonme lights be confidered as a pri-
vilege, and in others as a duty. It is the
duty of all, to love God, and to resign
themselves to his will. But it is the privi.
lege of good men only, to rejoice in God,
and to confide in his friendnhip. Hence a
certain preparation is requisite, for the en-
joyment of devotion in its whole extent.
Not only must the life be reformed from

,-.s normities, but the heart muff have
: i.r;ouLe that clange which the Go.el
.-,:..iut. A competent klnowlcdge of God
lmuff be rcquired. A proper foundation
rust be laid ii faith and repentance, for
inircojrle with Heaven.

They wvho would ruifl all at once from

tie a;ils o the world, into the sacred
retreat of de, otion; they who imagine
that retreat to fiand always ready for the
reception of such as betake themselves to

it,

it, for no reason, but because every other s E R M.
refuge excludes them, betray gross igno- X
rance of this part of religion. They bring
to it, faculties unqualified to taste its plea-
fures; and they grasp at hopes, to which
they are not entitled. By incorporating
with devotion the unnatural mixture of
their unfandified pafions, they defile and
corrupt it. Hence that gloom which has
often spread over it. Hence those super-
flitious mortifications and aufterities, by
which the falsely devout hope to purchase
favour from God; haunted by the ter-
rours of a guilty conscience, and vainly
firuggling to fubfitute a servile and
cringing homage, in the room of the pure
affedions of a renewed heart. On such
altars the hallowed fire of true devotion
cannot burn; nor can any incense ascend
from them, that shall be grateful to Hea-
ven. Bring no more vain oblations. TlrafJ
ye, make you clean, put away the evil of
olr doings from before mine eyes, Jhitl the
Lord. Cease to do evil; learn to do well.
Then draw nigh to God, and he will draw

U 4 nigh

SE R M. nigh to you.-- But though devotion re.

X.
,__ , quires a pure heart, and a virtuous life, and

necessarily fiuppofes the exercise of frequent
retirement, I mufl observe,

IN the third place, That it is an error

to conceive it as requiring an entire re-
treat from the world. Devotion, like
every other branch of religion, was in-
tended to fit us for discharging the duties
of life. We serve God, by being useful
to one another. It is evident from the
frame of our nature, and from our com-
mon necessities and wants, that we were
designed by Providence for an active part
on this earth. The Gospel of Chrit, ac-
cordingly, confiders us as engaged in the
concerns of the world; and direcs its
exhortations to men, in all the various
relations, characters, and employments of
civil life. Abftradion from society, there-
fore, and total dedication of our time to
devout exerciles, cannot be the molt pro-
per method of acquiring the favour of
God.

I mean

I mean not, however, to throw any SE R M.

blame on those, who having loft: all relish X.
for the ordinary pursuits of life, in con-
sequence of revere wounds which they
have received from affmidion; who, be-
ing left to stand alone, and discerning
their connections with the world to be
in some measure broken off, choose to
seek tranquillity in a religious retirement,
and to consecrate their days entirely to
God. Situations sometimes occur, which
both justify a great degree of retreat from
the world, and entitle it to refped. But
with regard to the bulk of mankind,
Christian devotion neither requires nor
implies any such fequeltration from the
affairs of men. Nay, for the most part,
it will be cultivated with greater success,
by those who mingle it with the acive
employments of life. For the mind,
when entirely occupied by any one ob-
jet, is in hazard of viewing it at last
through a false medium. Objets efpe-
cially, so great and iublime as those of
idevotion, when we attempt to fix upon

3 them

SERM. them unremitting attention, overftretch

X.
_,- and disorder our feeble powers. The

mind, by being relaxed, returns to them
with more advantage. As none of our
organs can bear intense sensations without
injury; as the eye, when dazzled with
overpowering light, beholds imaginary
colours, and loses the real diftincfion of
objecs; so the mind, when overheated by
perpetual contemplation of celestial things,
has been sometimes found to mistake the
firong impressions of fancy, for fupernatu-
ral communications from above. To the
employments of devotion, as to all other
things, there are due limits. There is a
certain temperate sphere, within which it
preserves longest its proper exertion, and
moit successfully promotes the purposes for
W hich it was designed.

IN the fourth place, It is an error to

imagine, that devotion enjoins a total
contempt of all the pleasures and amuse-
mcnts of human society. It checks, in-
deed, that spirit of dissipation which, is

too

too prevalent. It not only prohibits plea- SE R M.
fures which are unlawful, but likewise X.
that unlawful degree of attachment to
pleasures in themselves innocent, which
withdraws the attention of man from
what is serious and important. But it
brings amusement under due limitation,
without extirpating it. It forbids it as
the business, but permits it as the re-
laxation, of life. For there is nothing in
the spirit of true religion, which is hostile
to a cheerful enjoyment of our situation in
the world.

THEY who look with a severe and

indignant eye upon all the recreations by
which the cares of men are relieved, and
thc union of society is cemented, arc,
in two reflpeas, injurious to religion. Firit,
thcy exhibit it to others under a forbid-
ding form, by clothing it with the garb
of Ib much unnecessary austerity. And
ncxt, they deprive the world of the be-
nefit which their example might afford,
in drawing the line between innocent and

dangerous

SEr PM. dangerous pleasures. By a temperate

participation of thofc which are innocent,
they might successfully exert that autho-
rity, which a virtuous and refpecEable
charaEter always poffefles, in restraining
undue excess. They would ihew the
young and unwary, at what point they
ought to flop. They would have it in
their power to regulate, in some degree,
the public manners; to check extrava-
gance, to humble presumption, and put
vice to the blush. But, through inju-
dicious severity, they fall thort of the
good they might perform. By an in-
discriminate censure of all amusement,
they detraQ from the weight of their re-
proof, when amusement becomes undoubt-
edly sinful. By totally withdrawing them-
selves from the circle of cheerful life, they
deliver up the entertainments of society,
into the hands of the loose and the cor-
rupted; and permit the blind power of
fashion, uncontrolled, to eftablill its own
standards, and to exercise its dangerous
ivway over the world.

1'

IN the fifth place, It is an error to s E RM.

believe, that devotion nouriflies a spirit X.
of severity, in judging of the manners
and characters of others. Under this
reproach, indeed, it has so long suffercd
in the world, that, with too many, the
appellation of devout, fuggcits no other
characer, but that of a, four and recluse
bigot, who delights in censure. But the
reproach is unjust; for iilch a spirit is
entirely opposite to the nature of true
devotion. The very first traces which it
imprints on the mind, are candour and
humility. Its principles are liberal. Its
genius is unassuming and mild. Severe
only to itself, it makes every allowance
for others which humanity can iuggeft.
It claims no privilege of looking into
their'hearts, or of deciding with rellec&
to their eternal flate.-If your supposed
devotion produce contrary effei s; if it
infuse harlhnefs into your ientiments,
and acrimony into your iBeech; you may
conclude, that, under a serious appear-
ance, carnal paflions lurk. And, if ever

it

SE R M. it Shall so far lift you up With self-

X.-_, conceit, as to make you establish your own

opinions as an infallible standard for the
whole Chritfian world, and lead you to
consign to perdition all who differ from
you, either in some doctrinal tenets, or
in the mode of exprefling them; you may
reft assured, that to much pride you have
joined much ignorance, both of the nature
of devotion, and of the Gospel of Chrit.
Finally,

IN the sixth place, It is an error to

think, that perpetual rapture and fpiri.
tual joy belong to devotion. Devout
feelings admit very different degrees of
warmth and exaltation. Some perlons,
by the frame of their minds, are much
more susceptible than others of the tender
emotions. They more readily relent at
the view of Divine goodness, glow with
a warmer ardour of love, and, by confe-
quence, rife to a higher elevation of joy
and hope. But, in the midst of still and
calm affictions, devotion often dwells;

and,

and, though it produce no transports in SERM.

x.

the mind, diffuses over it a steady fere- ,
nity. Devout sensations not only vary
in their degree according to the frame of
different tempers; but, even among the
best disposed, susser much interruption
and decay. It were too much to expet,
that, in the present state of human frailty,
those happy feelings should he uniform
and constant. Oppression of worldly
cares, languor of spirits, and infirmities
of health, frequently indispose us for the
enjoyment of devout affections. Pious
men, on these occasions, are in hazard of
paling judgment on their own state with
too much severity; as if, for some great
iniquity, they were condemned by God
to final hardness of heart. Hence arises
that melancholy, which has been seen to
overcloud them; and which has given
occasion to many contemptuous scoffs of
ungodly men. But it is a melancholy
which deserves to be treated with tender-
ness, not with contempt. It is the excess
of virtuous and pious sensibility. It is

the

SERM. the overflowing of a heart affected, in an

X. -_iL extreme degree, with the humble sense

of its own failings, and with ardent
concern to attain the favour of God. A
weakness, however, we admit it to be,
though not a crime; and hold it to be
perfectly separable from the essence of de-
votion. For contrition, though it may
melt, ought not to fink or overpower the
heart of a Christian. The tear of repent-
ance brings its own relief. Religion is
a spring of consolation, not of terrour, to
every well-informed mind, which, in a
proper manner, rells its hope on the infi-
nite goodness of God, and the all-fufficient
merit of Christ.

To conclude, Let us remove from

devotion all those miltakes, to which the
corruptions of men, or their ignorance
and prejudices, have given rife. WVith
us, let it be the worilip of God, in; fSiril
and in trutth; the elevation of the foul
towards him in simplicity and love. Let
us purlfe it as the principle of virtuous

conduct,

conduc, and of inward peace, by frequent sE R M.

X.

and fcrious meditation on the great objecs
of religion, let us lay ourselves open to its
influence. By means of the inflitutions of
the Gospel, let us cherish its imprefiions.
And, above all, let us pray to God, that lie
may efablifll its power in our heart. For
here, if any where, his aflifance is ircqii te.
The spirit of devotion is his gifr. Fro ilhis
inspiration it proceeds. Towards him it
tends; and in his presence, hereafter, it
l(all attain its full perfelion.

VOL. I. X

# SERMON XI. On the DUTIES of the YOUNG. TITUS, ii. 6. Young men likewise exhort, to be sober - minded.

L 306 ]

SER iMON XI.
On the DUTIES of the YOURo.

TITUS, ii. 6.

olung imen liiewife exhort, to befober-m',indcd.
SERM. SOBRIETY of mind is one of those

Xi virtues which the present condition

of human life strongly inculcates. The
uncertainty of its enjoyments checks
presumption; the multiplicity of its
dangers demands perpetual caution. Mo-
deration, vigilance, and felf-government,
are duties incumbent on all; but especially
on such as are beginning the journey
of life. To them, therefore, the adimo-
nition in the Text is, with great propr;ety,
directed; though there is reason to ftn:,
that by them it is in hazard of bingl

]east regarded. Experience enforces the S E R M.
admonition on the moit gid,',- after they ,j
have advanced in years. But the whole
htate of youthful views and paflions, is
adverle to sobriety of mind. The fcencs
which present themselves, at our entering
upon the world, are commonly flatterin.
Whatever they be in thlmf h'ies, the lively
spirits of the young gildi every opening
profpec. The field of hope appears to
iretch wide before them. Pleasure fce;s
to put forth its blofioms on every fide.
Impclled by desire, forward they r;i!i1
with inconliderate ardour: Promnpt to
decide, and to chute; averse to Ic!ltate,
or to enquire; credulou-, beca;lf un-
taught by experience; ralli, becaufl un-
acquainted with danger; heacillronr,
bccaufe unfubdued by di.rippoi!ltmenz.
iHence arlie the perils, of which it is n:1
design at present to warn them. I fiall
take sobriety of mili/, in its most compre-
henfive sense, as including the whole of
that dicfipline which religion and virtue
prcrcribe to youth. Though the words

X2 o

SE R M. of the Text are directly addrefled to joo:un

XJ.
- men, yet, as the fame admonition is given

in a preceding verse to the other sex, the
inftrutions which arise from the Text are
to be confidered as common to both. I
intend, si-ft, to fhcw them the importance
of beginning early to give serious attention
to their condu& ; and, next, to point out
those virtues which they ought chiefly to
cultivate.

As soon as you are capable of reflec-

tion, you mutt perceive that there is a
right and a wrong in human aaions.
You fee, that those who are born with
the fame advantages of fortune, arc not
all equally prosperous in the course of life.
While some of them, by wife and steady
conduct, attain diftinflion in the world,
and pass their days with comfort and
honour; others of the fame rank, by mean
and vicious behaviour, forfeit the advan-
tages of their birth, involve themselves in
much misery, and end in being a dil-
grace to their friends, and a burden on

society.

society. Early, then, you may learn, that s 1 R M.

X'.

it is not on the external condition in ,
which you find yourfclves placed, but on
the part which you are to act, that your
welfare or ulllappinels, your honour or
infamy, depend. Now, when lbeinniiog
to aft that part, what can be of 'reatcr
moment, than to regcuate your plan of
condulc with the molt lfrious attentibn,
before you have yet committed any fatal
or irretricvable errors ? If, inc.,d of
exerting relledioi for this val'rihle pur-
pose, you deliver ycir!lvcs up at so cri-
tical a time, to sloth and p'ealurc; if you
refuse to lilten tn any co(nl:!!or but hu-
mour, or to attend to any pullui; except
that of amusement; if you allow your-
selves to float loose and carelc's on the
tide of life, ready to receive any direc-
tion which the current of fafi.oun mnay
chance to give you, what can yon cx;'ei.:
to follow from such beginnings? VWhile
so many around you are undergoilg the
fad confeqti!unces of a like indifcr.iocn,
for what realon fliall not those conie-

X 3 quences

S E R M. quenccs e:teid to you ? Shall you

XI.
_ attain fucceis without that preparation,

and escape dangers without that precau-
titn, whichi is required of others? Shall
happiniefs [;row up to you, of its own
accord, and felicit your acceptance, when,
to the reft cf mankind, it is the fruit of
on, cultivation, and the acquisition of
labr' r :.rc care?- Decceive not your-
fclvers with vic'i ; ari.c:ant hopes. What-
ever be your rank, Providence will not,
for your fake, reverfc its cflablifhed or-
dcr. The Author of your being hath
crn:iined you to

an '.'/s ed to 'o nr w7ys; to

p,!.:r /,'" .

/ a,I. cf r'SI feet.!; to re.l'clmbcr

'O;i' 'O

:;.S i': the dic.s of 'oour 'ouzhl. lie

1h.th '..i led, thbt they only who feck
cft/r a ,':,'Jo Ji'.'l. /d it; that fools /fal

7.-/r:j his owcn foul. By liafening to these
admonitions, and tempering the vivacity
of youth with a proper mixture of serious
thtiught, you may ensure cheerfulness for
the reft of life; but by delivering your-

selves

selves up at present to giddincfs and levity, S E R M.
you lay the foundation of lasting heaviness s
of heart.

When you look forward to those plans

of life, which either your circumstances
have suggested, or your friends have
proposed, you will not hesitate to acknow-
ledge that, in order to pursue them with
advantage, some previous difiipline is
requisite. Be allured, that whatever is to
be your profellion, no education is more
necessary to your success, than the ac-
quirement of virtuous dif!ofitions and
habits. This is the univerlal preparation
for every character, and every fta;ion in
life. Bad as the world is, refiedt is
always paid to virtue. In the usual course
of human affairs, it will be found, that
a plain understanding joined with ac-
knowledged worth, contributes more to
prosperity, than the brightest parts with-
out probity or honour. Whether fcicnce,
or bufnefs, or public life, be your aim,
virtue still enters, for a principal flare,
into all those great departments of flciety.

X.4 'It

sERM-. It is connecaed with eminence, in every

X[.

l liberal art; wvith rcputation, in every branch

of fair and uf:fi bunincfs; wvith diftinc-
tion, in every public flation. The vigour
which it gives the mind, and the weight
which it adds to character; the generous
fcntimcnts which it breathes, the undauc.ted
spirit which it inlpircs, the ardour of dili-
gence which it quickens, the freedom which
it procures fiomn pernicious and dilhonour-
ablce avocations, are the foundations of all
that is high in fame, or great in success,
among men.

Whatever ornamental or engaging

endowments you now1 pcffefs, virtue is a
necef{ary requisite, in order to their
ihining with proper luflrc. Feeble are
the attrations of the fiircil form, if it
be fiifpeated that nothing within corre-
fponds to the pleasing appearance without.
Short are the triumphs of wit, when it is
i.lp)ofcd to be the vehicle of malice. By
whatever arts you may at first attract the
attention, you can hold the esteem, and
secure the hearts of others, only by ami-

2 o able

able dispositions, and the accomplifiments SE R M.
of the mind. These are the qualities whole - .
influence will last, when the lustre of all
that once sparkled and dazzled has passed
away.

Let not then the season of youth be

barren of improvements so el'cntial to
your fiture felicity and honour. Now is
the seed-time of life; and according to
wha7t you sow, you Ji',.ll re:p. Your cha-
rater is now, under Divine afliftancc, of
your own forming; your fate is, in olme
measure, put into your own hands, Your
nature is as yet pliant and loft. I-Iabits
have not established their dominion. Pre-
judices have not pre-occupied your un-
dc;ftanding. The world has not had time
to contract and debase your affecions.
All your powers are more vigorous, dif-
embarrassed, and siee, than they will be
at any future period. Whatever impulse
you now give to your defircs and passions,
the direaion is likely to continue. It
will form the channel in which your life
is to run; nay, it may determine its ever-

lasting

s t', -. laling issue. Confider then the emplv-
'--v.-- ment of this important period, as the

highest trust which ihall ever be com-
mitted to you; as, in a great meafilec,
decisive of your happiness, in time, and
in eternity. As in the fuccer'jn of ihe
fealons, each, by the invariab!c laws of
Nature, asses the produEtiois of what is
next in course; so, in human life, every
period of our age, according as it is well
or ill spent, influences the happiness of
that which is to follow. Virtuous youth
gradually brings forward accompliflci
and flouriihing manhood; and such man-
hood passes of itself, without uneasiness,
into refpetable and tranquil old age.
But when nature is turned out of its re-
gular course, disorder takes place in the
moral, just as in the vegetable world. If
the Spring put forth no blossoms, in
Summer there will be no beauty, and
in Autumn no fruit. So if youth be
trifled away without improvement, man-
hood will be contemptible, and old age
miserable. If the beinnings of life have

been

becen vaznity, its latter end can be no other S E R M.

Xi.
than vexation of spirit.

Having thus thown the importance of

beginning early to give fcrious attention to
condut, I come, next, to point out the
virtues which are most necetffry to be cul-
tivated in youth. What I llall,

I. RECOMIMEND, is piety to God. With

this I bcin, both as a foundation of
good morals, and as a disposition particu-
larly graceful and becoming in youth.
To be void of it, argues a cold heart, defti-
tute of some of the best affelions which
belong to that age. Youth is the feafotn
of warm and generous emotions. The
heart fliould then, fpontaneoully, rife
into the admiration of what is great,
glow with the love of what is fair and
excellent, and melt at the discovery of
tenderness and goodncfs. Where can
any object be found, so proper to kindle
those affecions, as the Father of the uni-
verse, and the Author of all felicity ?
Unmoved by veneration, can you con-

template

SERM. template that grandeur and majcRv,
L. -y which his -works every where dili1la!?

Untouched by gratitude, can you vicw
that profusion of good, which, in this
pleasing season of life, his beneficent hand
pours around you? Happy in the love
and affecion of those with whom )ye
are conneceed, look up to the Supreinm
Beir.g, as the inspirer of all the iriend-
ship which has ever been shewn you by
others; himfclf, your best and your sirs
friend; formerly, the fupportcr of your
infancy, and the guide of your child-
hood; now, the guardian of your youth,
and the hope of your coming years.
View religious homage, as a natural ex-
prefiion of gratitude to him for all his
goodnef;. Confider it as the service of the
God of G'oirfJ7:h.rs; of him, to whom your
parents devoted ycu; of him, who in for-
mer ages your anceltors honoured; and by
wlhom they are now rewarded, and blcildc
in heaven. Connected with so many tem-
der sensibilities of foul, let religion be with
you, not the cold and barren offspring of

ipccu-C

speculation, but the warm and vigorous S E R M.
dictate of the heart. L--

But though piety clliy belong to the

heart, yet the aid ..' the undcrflanding is
requisite, to give a proper diretion to the
devout affedions. You mult cndcavour,
therefore, to acquire just views, both of
the great principles of natural religion, and
of the peculiar doctrines of the Gofpcl. For
this end, study the sacred I'criptures. Con-
fult the word of God, more than the systems
of men, if you would know the truth in its
native purity. \Vhen, upon rational and
fober enquiry, you have established your
principles, susser them not to Le Lhaken by
the scoffs of the licentious, or the cavils of
the sceptical. Remember, that in the ex-
amination of every great :nd comprclen-
five plan, such as that of C;riiianiiy, dif-
ficulties may be expeQcid to occur; and
that reasonable evidence is not to be rejed-
ed, because the nature of our present state
allows us only to knowzc i: pa;', and to fee
throzlgh a glass, darkl y.

ImprAfs

S ER M. Impress your minds with reverence for all

XI.
-- _that is sacred. Let no wantonness of youth.

ful spirits, no compliance with the intem-
perate mirth of others, ever betray you
into prophane sallies. Betides the guilt
which is thereby incurred, nothing gives a
more odious appearance of petulance and
presumption to youth, than the affetation
of treating religion with levity. Instead of
being an evidence of fuperiour underfland-
ing, it discovers a pert and (hallow mind;
which, vain of the first fmattcrings of know-
ledge presumes to make light of what the
reft of mankind revere.

At the fame time you are not to ima-

gine, that when exhorted to be religious,
you are called upon to become more for-
mal and solemn in your manners than
others of the fame years, or to erec your-
selves into supercilious reprovers of those
around you. The spirit of true religion
breathes gentleness and affability. It
gives a native, unafrfced eaie to the be-
haviour. It is social, kind, and cheer-

ful

ful; far removed from that gloomy and s R R M.

XI.

illiberal superstition which clouds the -J
brow, sharpens the temper, dejcs the
spirit, and teaches men to fit themselves
for another worl,!, 1)y neglecting the con-
cerns of this. Let your religion, on the
contrary, conneC preparation for heaven,
with an honourable discharge of the du-
ties of aftive life. Let it be aflociated in
your imagination, with all that is manly
and useful; with wbatjoevcr thilngs are
true, are jusi, are pure, are lovely, are of
good report, wherever there is any viirta',
and wherever there is a;y prai. Of such
religion discover, on every proper occasion,
that you are not ashamed; but avoid mak-
in, any unneceflary orientation of it before
the world.

II. To piety, join modesty and doci-

litv, reverence of your parents, and lub-
mission to those who are your fuperiou:;
in knowledge, in station, and in years.
Dependence and obedience belong to
youth. Modesty is one of its chief orna-

ments;

SER M. ments; and has ever been esteemed a pre.

XI.
*Ac sage of rising merit. When entering on

the career of life, it is your part, not to
assume the reins as yet into your hands;
but to commit yourselves to the guidance of
the more experienced, and to become wife by
the wisdom of those who have gone before
you.

Of all the follies incident to youth,

there are none which either deform its
present appearance, or blast the profpeC:
of its future prosperity, more than self-
conceit, presumption, and obstinacy. By
checking its natural progress in improve-
ment, they fix it in long immaturity;
and frequently produce mischiefs, which
can never be repaired. Yet these are vices
too commonly found among the young.
Big with enterprise, and elated by hope,
they resolve to trust for success to none
but themselves. Full of their own abili-
ties, they deride the admonitions which
are given them by their friends, as the
timorous suggestions of age. Too wife
to learn, too impatient to deliberate, too

forward

forward to be restrained, they plunge, sER M.

XI.

vith precipitant indiscretion, into the
midst of all the dangers with which life
abounds. SeeJf thou a young man wife in
his own conceit ? There is mnore hope of a
fool, than of him.-Pofitive as you now are
in your opinions, and confident in your
af'ertions, be assured, that the time ap-
proaches when both men and things will
appear to you in a different light. Many
charaaers which you now admire, will,
by and by, fink in your esteem; and
many opinions, of which you are at pre-
sent most tenacious, will alter as you ad-
vance in years. Distrust, therefore, that
glare of youthful presumption, which
dazzles your eyes. Abound not in your
own sense. Put not yourfelvcs forward
with too much eagerness; nor imagine,
that by the impetuosity of juvenile ar-
dour, you can overturn systems which
have been long established, and change
the face of the world. Learn not to think
more highly of youfeives than you outght to
thiilk, but to think soberly. By patient and
. VOL. I. Y gradual

SE R M. gradual progression in improvement, you
Ho_, may, in due time, command lasting esteem.

But by assuming, at present, a tone of fu-
periority, to which you have no title, you
will disgust those whose approbation it is
most important to gain. Forward vivacity
may fit you to be the companions of an idle
hour. More solid qualities must recom-
mend you to the wife, and mark you out
for importance and consideration in fubfe-
quent life.

III. IT is necessary to recommend to

you, Sincerity and truth. This is the
basis of every virtue. That darkness of
characer, where we can fee no heart;
thocl foldings of art, through which
no native affection is allowed to penetrate,
present an object, unamiable in every
season of life, but particularly odious in
youth. If, at an age when the heart is
warm, when the emotions are firong,
and when nature is expeted to shew it-
self free and open, you can alrcady smile
and deceive, what are we to look for

when

when you fliall be longer hackneyed in the sE R M.

XI.

ways of men; when interest shall have .e
completed the obduration of your heart, and
experience thall have improved you in all
the arts of guile ? Dissimulation in youth,
is the fore-runner of perfidy in old age. Its
first appearance is the fatal omen of grow-
ing depravity, and future shame. It de-
grades parts and learning; obscures the
lufre of every accomplishment; and finks
you into contempt with God and man.

As you value, therefore, the approba-
tion of Heaven, or the esteem of the
world, cultivate the love of truth. In all
your proceedings, be direEt and consistent.
Ingenuity and candour possess the most
powerful charm; they bespeak universal
favour, and carry an apology for almost
every failing. The lip of truth flall be
eJlablifJcd for ever; but a lying tongue is
but for a mnoment ". The path of truth, is
a plain and a safe path; that of falsehood,
is a perplexihg maze. After the first de-
parture from sincerity, it is not in your

Prcv. xii. 19.

Y2 power

S ER M. power to stop. One artifice unavoidably

XI. leads on to another; till, as the intricacy

of the labyrinth increases, you are left
entangled in your own snare. Deceit dif-
covers a little mind, which flops at tem-
porary expedients, without rising to com-
prehenfive views of conduct. It betrays,
at the fame time, a dastardly spirit. It
is the resource of one who wants courage
to avow his designs, or to reft upon him-
self. Whereas, openness of character dil-
plays that generous boldness which ought
to distinguish youth. To set out in the
world with no other principle than a
crafty attention to interest, betokens one
who is destined for creeping through the
inferior walks of life. But to give
an early preference to honour above gain,
when they stand in competition; to dcfpife
every advantage, which cannot be attained
without dishonest arts; to brook no mean-
ness, and to stoop to no difirnulation; are
the indications of a great mind, the pre-
fages of future eminence and diftinsion in
life.

At

At the fame time, this virtuous sincerity s ER M.

is perfectly consistent with the most pru- ,
dent vigilance and caution. It is oppoied
to cunning, not to true wisdom. It is not
the finplicity of a weak and improvident,
but the candour of an enlarged and noble
mind ; of one who scorns deceit, because
he accounts it both base and unprofitable;
and who seeks no disguise, because he needs
none to hide him. Lord ! who JJall abid
in t /hy tabernacle ? IThWo f:all fclend into ihy
holy hill? Ie that walhctih priiht!/, and
wcrketh righteoficfis, and f:cakc:; the the truth
in his heart.

IV. YOUTH is the proper fcafon of

cultivating the benevolent and humane
affections. As a great part of your hap-
pineifs is to depend on the connexions
which you form with others, it is of high
importance that you acquire, betimes, the
temper and the manners which will ren-
der iuch connexions comfortable. Let a
fenle of justice be the foundation of all
your social qualities. In your most early

Y 3 intercourse

SE R M. intercourse with the world, and even in

XI XI, your youthful amusements, let no unfair-

ness be found. Engrave on your mind
that sacred rule, of doing all things to
others, according as you wiJfh that they
Jhould do unto you. For this end, impress
yourselves with a deep sense of the origi-
nal and natural equality of men. What-
ever advantages of birth or fortune you
possess, never display them with an often-
tatious superiority. Leave the fubordina-
tions of rank, to regulate the intercourse of
more advanced years. At present, it be-
comes you to aa among your companions,
as man with man. Remember how un-
known to you are the vicissitudes of the
world; and how often they, on whom ig-
norant and contemptuous young men once
looked down with scorn, have risen to be
their superiors in future years.

Compafion is an emotion of which

you ought never to be alhamed. Grace-
ful in youth is the tear of sympathy, and
the heart that melts at the tale of woe.
Let not ease and indulgence contrac your

affections,

alffetions, and wrap you up in felfinf en- S ER M.
joyment. But go sometimes to the house ai}_
of mourning, as well as to the hoitfe of feait-
ing. Accustom yourselves to think of the
diftrefles of human life; of the solitary
cottage, the dying parent, and the weeping
orphan. Thou Jialt not harden thy heart,
Inr sl'ut thy hand from thy poor brother;
but thou fi:alt surely give unto him in the
day of his need: Aind thine heart Jfall not
be grieved whcn thou givefI unto him; be-
caljfe that for this thing, the Lord thy God
flall bleJi thee in all thy works *. Never
sport with pain and distress, in any of your
amusements; nor treat even the meanest
infca with wanton cruelty.

In young minds, there is commonly a

strong propensity to particular intimacies
and friendflips. Youth, indeed, is the
season when friendflips are sometimes
formed, which not only continue through
succeeding life, but which glow to the
last, with a tenderness unknown to the
connexions begun in cooler years. The
propensity therefore is not to be difcou-

Deut. xv. 7. Io.
Y 4 raged;

SE R M. raged; though at the fame time it must
,;.. be regulated with much circumspection

and care. Too many of the pretended
friendships of youth, are mere combina-
tions in pleasure. They are often found-
ed on capricious likings; suddenly con,
tracled, and as suddenly dissolved. Some.
times they are the effect of interested com-
plaifance and flattery on the one iide, and
of credulous fondihefs on the other. Be-
ware of such rash and dangerous connex-
ions, which may afterwards load you
with diahonour. Remember, that by the
character of those whom you choose for
your friends, your own is likely to be
formed, and will certainly be judged of
by the world. Be flow, therefore, and
cautious in contrasting intimacy; but
when a virtuous friendfliip is once efta-
blifhed, confider it as a sacrcd engagement.
Expose not yourselves to the reproach of
lightness and inconstancy, which always
bespeak, either a trifling, or a bate mind.
Reveal none of the secrets of your friend.
Be faithful to his interests. Forsake him
not in danger. Abhor the thought of ac-

quiring

quiring any advantage by his prejudice or SE R M.
hurt. There is a friend that loveth at all . i
times, and a brother that is born for ad-
vecfity. Thine own friend, and thy flther's
friend, fofake not *.

Finally, on this head; in order to ren-

der yourselves amiable in society, correct
every appearance of harflnefs in beha-
viour. Let that courtesy ditlinguilh your
demeanour, which springs, not so much
from Ptudied politeness, as from a mild
and gentle heart. Follow the cuRtoms of
the world in matters indifferent; but flop
when they become sinful. Let your man-
ners be simple and natural; and of course
they will be engaging. Affecation is cer-
tain deformity. By forming themielves on
fantaflic models, and vying with one ano-
ther in every reigning folly, the young be-
gin with being ridiculous, and end ia being
vicious and immoral,

V. LET me particularly exhort youth to
temperance in pleasure: Let me admonifl

'Prov. xvii. 17.-xxvii. 1o.

them,

ESERM. them, to beware of that rock on which

Xl. thousands, from race to rce, continue to

split. The love of pleasure, natural to man
in every period of his life, glows at this age
with exeeflive ardour. Novelty adds freih
charms, as yet, to every gratification. The
world appears to spread a continual fcaft;
and health, vigour, and high spirits,
invite them to partake of it without
restraint. In vain we warn them of latent
dangers. Religion is accused of infuiTer-
able severity, in prohibiting enjoyment;
and the old, when they offer their admo-
nitions, are upbraided with having forgot
that they once were young.-And yet,
my friends, to what do the restraints of
religion, and the counsels of age, with
refpet to pleasure, amount? They may
all be comprised in few words, not to
hurt yourselves, and not to hurt others,
by your pursuit of pleasure. Within there
bounds, pleasure is lawful; beyond them,
it becomes criminal, because it is ruinous.
Are these rcftraints any other, than what
a wife man would choose to impose on

himself?

himself? We call you not to renounce SERM.

XL.

pleasure, but to enjoy it in safety. Instead _
of abridging it, we exhort you to pursue it
on an extensive plan. We propose measures
for securing its poffenion, and for prolong-
ing its duration.

Consult your whole nature. Confider

yourselves not only as 'enfitive, but as
rational beings; not only as rational, but
social; not only as social, but immortal.
Whatever violates your nature in any of
these refpeds, cannot afford true pleasure;
any more than that which undermines an
essential part of the vital system can pro-
mote health. For the truth of this conclu-
sion, we appeal, not merely to the autho-
rity of religion, nor to the testimony of the
aged, but to yourselves and your own ex-
perience. We ask, Whether you have not
found, that in a course of criminal excess,
your pleasure was more than compensated
by succeeding pain ? Whether, if not from
every particular inflance, yet from every
habit, at least of unlawful gratification,

there

SE R M. there did not spring so!ne thorn to wound
s. -v-. you, there did not arile some con!equcence

to make you repent of it in the iflue?
_low lolng then, y e finpe ones ! will je love
rtnlipcity , How long repeat the fame
round of pernicious folly, and tamecl? ex-
pose yourselves to be caught in the faime
snare? If you have any conlideration, or
any firmness left, avoid temptations, fo;r
which you have found yourlelves une-
qual, with as much care, as you would
shun peflilential infeaion. Break off all
conneaions with the loose and profligate.
WIrhen filers entice thee, cofent thou not.
Look not on the wine when it is red, iwheli
it givclh its colour in the cup; for at the
laJ1, it bileth like a serpent, and fiinctll
like an adder. Remove thy1 c,'a' Ifom the
Jlrange womani, and comne not near the door
of her hoifc. Let not thine heart incliie
to her ways; for her hoife is the iwa
to hell. 'rhon gool after her as a bird
haflelh to the jilare, and knowcth not thit
it is for his Ife.

13 By

By these unhappy excesses of irregular s E R M.

pleasure in youth, how many amiable _.^
dispositions are corrupted or destroyed!
How many rising capacities and powers
are fuppreffedl! How many flattering
hopes of parents and friends are totally
extinguiflled! Who but muff drop a tear
over human nature, when he beholds that
morning which arose so bright, overcast
with filch untimely darkness; that good
humour which once captivated all hearts,
that vivacity which sparkled in every
company, those abilities which were fitted
fcr adorning the highefR itation, all fa-
crificed at the flrine of low sensuality;
and one who was formed for running the
fair career of life in the midlt of public
eftcem, cut off by his vices at the begin-
ning of his courfc, or funk, for the whole
of it, into infigni'icancy and contempt!-
These, 0 iinful Pleasure ! are thy trophies.
It is thus that, co-operating with the foe
of God and man, thou degradeft human
honour, and blaflcft the opening profpeats
of human felicity.

VI. DILI-

SE RM. VI. DILIGENCE, industry, and proper
_I^ improvement of time, are material duties

of the young. To no purpose are they
endowed with the best abilities, if they
want activity for exerting them. Un-
availing, in this cafe, will be every di-
rection that can be given them, cither for
thtir temporal or spiritual welfare. In
youth the habits of industry are most
easily acquired. In youth, the incen-
tives to it are strongest, fiom ambition
and from duty, from emulation and hope,
from all the profpeds which the begin-
ning of life affords. If, dead to these
calls, you already languifli in slothful
inaacion, what will be able to quicken
the more sluggish current of advancing
years?

Industry is not only the instrument of

improvement, but the foundation of plea-
sure. Nothing is so opposite to the true
enjoyment of life, as the relaxed and
feeble slate of an indolent mind. He
who is a stranger to industry, may pof-
fess, but he cannot enjoy. For it is la-

bour

bour only which gives the relish to plea- SERM.
sure. It is the appointed velicle of every _
good to man. It is the indispensable
condition of our poffefuing a found mind
in a found body. Sloth is ol incon-
fiftent with both, that it is hard to de-
termine whether it be a greater foe to
virtue, or to health and happiness. In-
adive as it is in itself, its effects are
fatally powerful. Though it appear a
slowly flowing stream, yet it undermines
all that is stable and flourishing. It not
only saps the foundation of every virtue,
but pours upon you a deluge of crimes
and evils. It is like water which first
putrifies by stagnation, and then fends up
noxious vapours, and fills the atmosphere
with death.

Fly, therefore, from idleness, as the

certain parent both of guilt and of ruin.
And under idleness I include, not mere
inaction only, but all that circle of
trifling occupations, in which too, many
saunter away their youth; perpetually
engaged in frivolous society, or public

7 amuse-

SERM. amufemerits, in the labours of dress, or

XI.
xl
- the ostentation of their perfons.-Is this

the foundation which you lay for fiture
usefulness and esteem? By such accom-
plifhments, do you hope to recommend
yourselves to the thinking part of the
world, and to answer the expetations of
your friends, and your country ?-Amuse-
ments, youth requires. It were vain, it
were cruel to prohibit them. But though
allowable as the relaxation, they are most
culpable as the business, of the young.
For they then become the gulph of time,
and the poison of the mind. They so-
ment bad passions. They weaken the
manly powers. They fink the native
vigour of youth, into contemptible effemi-
nacy.

Redeeming your time from such dan-

gerous waste, seek to fill it with employ-
ments which you may review with satis.
faction. The acquisition of knowledge
is one of the most honourable occupa-
tions of youth. The desire of it disco-
vers a liberal mind, and is conncted with

many

many accompliflments, and many virtus. S E R i.
But though your train of life fihould not ,_ .
lead you to study, the course of education
always furniflhes proper employments to a
well-difpofed mind. Whatever you pursue,
be emulous to excel. Generous ambition,
and sensibility to praise, arc, cpcchilly at
your age, among the marks of virtue. Think
not, that any affluence of fortune, or any
elevation of rank, exempts you from the
duties of applidation and indultrr. Induflry
is the law of our being; it is the demand
of Nature, of Reason, and of God. Re-
member always, that the years which nowV
pals over your heads, leave permanent me-
morials behind them. From your thought-
!ess minds they may escape ; but they re-
main in the remembrance of God. They
form an important part of the re;iP.cr of
your life. They will hereafter bea: tefti-
inony, either for or against you, at that
day, when, all your acions, but parti-
cularly for the employments of.youth, you
muff give an account to God.

VOL. I. Z TIIus

S R p.M. THius I have let before you some of the
--__y clhief lqualifications which belong to that

Jobcr nlind, that virtuous and religious cha-
rdeler, which the Apostle in my Text
recommends to youth; piety, modesty,
truth, benevolence, temperance, and in-
duflry. Whether your future course is
deffined to be long or flort, after this man-
ner it lhould commence ; and, if it continue
to be thus conducted, its conclulion, at what
time soever it arrives, will not be inglo.
rious or unhappy. For honourable age If
not that which J landeth in length of time, or
that which is meafinred by number of years.
But wfloiom is the grey hair to man, and at
nij/potted life is ol age.

LET me finish the subject, with recalling

your attention to that dependence on the
blelTing of Heaven, which, amidst all your
endeavours after improvement, you ought
coc;aiiLual'y to prcicrve. It is too common
with the young, even when they resolve to
tread the path of virtue and honour, to set

out

out with presumptuous confidence in them- s E R M.
selves. Trusting to their own abilities for ,_
carrying them successfully through life,
they are careless of applying to God, or of
deriving any afiftance from what they arc
apt to reckon the gloomy discipline of re-
ligion. Alas! how little do they know the
dangers which await them? Neither hu-
man wisdom, nor human virtue, unfup-
ported by religion, are equal to the trying
situations which often occur in life. By
the flock of temptation, how frequently
have the most virtuous intentions been
overthrown ? Under the pressure of dilfaf-
ter, how often has the greatest constancy
funk? Every good, and every pJfc';f gift,
isfrom above. Wisdom and virtue, as well
as riches and honour, come fronm God. Defti-
tute of his favour, you are in no better
situation, with all your boasted abilities,
than orphans left to wander in a tracklels
desert, without any guide to conduct them,
or any fleltcr to cover them fiom the ga-
thering storm. Corrcd-, then, this ill-
founded arrogance. ExpeCt not, that your

Z 2 happi-

SE R M. happiness can be independent of him who

XL.
_ made you. By faith and repentance, ap-

ply to the Redeemer of the world. By
piety and prayer, seek the proteCtion of the
God of heaven. I conclude with the solemn
words, in which a great Prince delivered
his dying charge to his son; words which
every young person ought to confider as
addressed to himself, and to engrave deeply
on his heart: Thou, Solomon, imy foi, know
thou the God of thy fathers; and firve hiim
with a perfet heart, and with a willing
mind. For the Lordfearcheth all hearts, and
underflandeth all the imaginations of the
thoughts. If thonfeek him, he will be found
of thee; but if thou forsake him, be will cajl
thee offor evecr *.

* X Chron. xxviii. 9.

# SERMON XII. On the DUTIES and CONSOLATIONS of the AGED. PROV. xvi. 31. The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.

[ 341 1

SERMON XII.
On the DUTIES and CONSOLATIONS

of the AGED.

PROV. xvi. 31.
The boary head is a crown of glo', if it

befolund in the way rs right/coficLs
tO fear God, and to keep his comm'and- S E RM.

ments, is the rule of our duty, in ll

every period of life. But, as tie light
which guides our steps, varies with the
progress of the day, ib the rule of reli-
gious conduct is divcrCified in its appli-
cation by the different stages of our prc-
sent exilence. To every age, there be-
longs a diftina propriety of ehlavioul.
There arises from it, a fcries of duties pe-
culiar to itself.

; 3 Of

S E R M. Of those which are incumbent on

, youth, I have treated in the preceding

discourse. As we advance from youth to
middle age, a new field of aaion opens,
and a different character is required. The
flow of gay and impetuous spirits be-
gins to subside. Life gradually aflumes a
graver cast; the mind a more sedate and
thoughtful turn. The attention is now
transferred from pleasure to interest; that
is, to pleafiure diffuled over a wider extent,
and imcariied by a larger scale. Former-
ly, the enjoyment cf the present moment
occupied the whole attention. Now, no
.;&ion terminates ultimately in itself, but
refers to imne more dillant aim. Wealth
and p'ower, the inftrunmcnts of lasting
gratiiication, are now coveted more than
any single pleasure. Prudence and fore-
fight lay their plans. Industry carries on
its patient efforts. Aclivity pufhles for-
ward; addrcfs winds around. Here, an
enemy is to be overcome; there, a rival
to be displaced. Competitions warm; and
t:e cirite of the world thickens on every

4 fide,

fide. To guide men through this busy pe- s E R M.
riod, without loss of integrity; to guard -.^-.
them agaiift the temptations which arile
from mistaken or interfering interests; to
call them from worldly pursuits to fierious
thoughts of their spiritual concerns, is the
great office of religion.

But as this includes, in a great mea-

sure, the whole compass of moral duty,
as the general strain of religious exhorta-
tion is addressed to those who are in this
season of life; a delineation of the vir-
tues properly belonging to middle age,
may appear unneceflary, and would lead
us into too wide a field. Let us therefore
turn our view to a bounded profpeat;
and contemplate a period of life, the du-
ties of which are circumscribed within
narrower limits. Old age is a stage of
the human course, which every one hopes
to reach ; and therefore the confideratior,
of it interests us all. It is a period juily
entitled to general refped. Even its fail-
ings ought to be touched with a gentle
hand; and though the petulant, and the

Z 4 vain,

S ER M. vain, may dcfpife the boa2'y read; yet the

XII.
,_ ,j wvifeft of men has aflertcd in the Text, tlia:

when found in thJe rinay of'ri'htieo//it/s, it ij
a crown of glory. I ihall firift offer Ibmin
counsels, concerning the errors which arc
most incident to the aged. Secondly, J
shall firggcft the peculiar duties they ought
to prastile ; and, thirdly, poilnt out the con-
folations they may enjoy.

I. As the follies and vices of youth

are chiefly derived from inexperience aind
presumption; so almost all the eriors oc
age may be traced up to the 'ee'lccis
and ditreffes peculiar to that time of lil.,
Though in every part of life, vcxatio:s
occur, yet, in former years, either bl)!i-
ness, or pleasure, served to obliterate their
impreflion, by supplying occupation to
the mind. Old age begins its advances,
wvih dililualifyin-g men for relishing the
one, and for taking an an ive part in the
ethcr. While it withdraws their accuf-
tomed fiuports, it impnres, at tie fanme
time, the additicnal burden of grxowing

13 iniirlitics.

ilfirmities. In the former fiages of their S ERM.
journey, hope continued to flatter them ,_
vith many a fair and enticing profped.
But in proportion as old age increases, those
pleaiing illusions vanifi. Life is contracted
within a narrow and barren circle. Year
after ycar ftcals fomcwhat away from their
ltore of comfort, deprives them of some of
their ancient friends, blunts fomie of their
powers of lenfation, or incapacitates them
for obme fundlion of life.

'Though, in the plan of Providence, it

is x'ilely ordered, that berore we are
called away from the world, our attach-
inent to it should be gradually loosened;
though it be lit in itfclf, that as in the day
of human life, there is a morning and
a neon, so there should be an even-
ing alib, when the lengthening fliadows
fllall admnonifh us of approaching night;
y)ct we have no reason to be surprised,
if they who are arrived at this deje&ing
i;afon, feel and lament the change which
thlcy suser. The complaints, therefore,

of

SERM. of the aged, should meet with tenderness,
XI. rather than censure. The burden under

which they labour, ought to be viewed
with sympathy, by those who must bear it
in their turn, and who, perhaps, hereafter,
may complain of it as bitterly. At the fame
time, the old flhould confider, that all the
seasons of life have their several trials allot-
ted to them ; and that to bear the infirmities
of age with becoming patience, is as much
their duty, as it is that of the young to resist
the temptations of youthful pleasure. By
calmly enduring, for the short time that re-
mains, what Providence is pleased to inflit,
they both express a resignation most accept-
able to God, and recommend themselves to
the esteem and afliftance of all who are
around them.

But though the querulous temper im-

puted to old age, is to be confidercd as a
natural infirmity, rather than as a vice;
the fame apology cannot be made for that
peevish disgust at the manners, and that
malignant censure of tha enjoyments, of

the

the young, which is sometimes found to SERM.
accompany declining years. Nothing can _,
be more unjust, than to take offence at
others, on account of their partaking of
pleasures, which it is pai your time to
enjoy. By indulging this fretful temper,
you both aggravate the uneasiness of age,
and you alienate those on whose affection
much of your comfort depends. In order
to make the two extremes of life unite in
amicable society, it is greatly to be wiflied,
that the young would look forward, and
confider that they shall one day be old ; and
that the old would look back, and remem-
bering that they once were young, make
proper allowances for the temper and the
manners of youth.

But instead of this, it is too common to

find the aged at declared enmity with the
whole system of present customs and man-
ners; perpetually complaining of the grow-
ing depravity of the world, and of the afto-
nilhing vices and follies of the rising gene-
ration. All things, according to them, are
ruffing fast into ruin. Decency and good

order

SE R .I. crder have become extint, ever since thati

-J_ llhappy discipline, under which the)y ii'et

their youth, has paited away.--. Palt, at
leafl, of this diyileafure, you m)y {ltirl]
impute to the infirmity of age, v;:icil
throws its own gloom on every lhrround-
ing objct. Similar lamentations were, ii
the days of your youth, poured foril by
your fathers; and they who are now youlng,
thall, when it comes to their turn, inveiIh,
in the like strain, againfr thole who s!ic-
cced them. Great has been the corruption
of the world in every age. Suiilicint
ground there is for the complaints m:de by
serious observers, at all times, of abound.
ing iniquity and folly. But though parti-
cular modes of vice prevail in one agc,
more than in others, it docs not follow,
that on that age all iniquity is accumul::.c
It is the form, perhaps, more than the quan-
tity of corruption, which makes the diilinc-
tion. In the worfl of times, God l1:s
affired us, that there flall be always ,;
feed who JlJall fIcrve him . Si' Ito t
,/':

Pfal. xi i, ;o.

11 'k!i

JThat is the canfe that the former days were S E RM.

XII.

bettert the thef ? for thou dt 1not enquire
'felj concerning this. Be not r.ihteous
ov'!rmuch ; neither m7ake thlfl/ f ovcer;.'fe i'
Former follies pass avay, and are forgot-
ten. Thoic which are prefcnt, strike ob-
servation, and flarpen ccnfurc. Had the
depravation of the world continued to in-
crease in proportion to those gloomy calcu-
lations wlich, for ib many centuries past,
have ellimated each race as worse than the
preceding; by this time, not one ray of
good fenle, nor one spark of piety and vir-
tue, muffl have remained unextinguifhed
among mankind.

One of the vices of old age, which ap-

pears the most unaccountable, is that co-
vetous attachment to worldly interest, with
which it is often charged. But this too,
can naturally be deduced friom the sense of
its feebleness and decay. In proportion as
the vigour both of body and mind declines,
timidity may be expteicd to increase. With

' E;cle, vii. o1. 15.

anxious

SER M. anxious and fearful eye, the aged look

*-- forward to the evils which threaten them,

and to the changes which may befal.
Hencc, they are fometimcs apt to over-
value riches, as the inflrument of their
defence against these dangers, and as the
most certain means of securing them against
solitude and difrefpea. But though their
apprehensions may justify a cautious fru-
gality, they can by no means excuse a
fordid avarice. It is no leTs abfilrl,
than it is culpable, in the old, from the
dread of uncertain futurity, to deny
themselves the enjoyment of the prefeint;
and to increase in anxiety about their
journey, in proportion as it draws nearer
to its cole. There are more effetual me-
thods of commanding refpeQ from the
world, than the mere possession of wealth.
Let them be charitable, and do good. Let
them mix beneficence to their friends, with
a cheerful enjoyment of the comforts which
befit their slate. They will then receive
the returns of real refpcel and love.
~Whe:eas, by their riches, they procure no

more

more than pretended demonstrations of SERTM.

XII.

regard; while their ill-judged parsimony
occasions many secret wishes for their
death.

As increasing years debilitate the body,

so they weaken the force, and diminish
the warmth, of the affections. Chilled by
the hand of time, the heart loses that ten-
der sensibility, with which it once entered
into the concerns and sorrows of others.
It is, in truth, a merciful appointment of
Providence, that as they who fee many
days, must behold many a fad scene,. the
impressions of grief upon their heart should
be blunted by being often repeated; and
that, in proportion as their power of ad-
vancing the prosperity of others decreases,
their participation of the misfortunes of
others should also lessen. However, as in
every period of life, humanity and friend-
ihip contribute to happiness, it is both the
duty and the interest of the aged, to
cherish the remains of the kind assec-
tions; and from the days of former
years, to recal fiuch imprcflions as may

tend

SE R M. tend to soften their hearts. Let thecn

i_ . not, from having suffered much in the

course of their long pilgrimage, become
callous to the sufferings of others. But,
remembering that they still are men, let
them frudy to keep their heart open to
the sense of human woc. Pratifed in
the ways of men, they are apt to be
suspicious of design and fraud; for the
knowledge and the distrust of mankind
too often go together. Let not, how.
ever, that wary caution, which is the
fruit of their experience, degenerate into
craft. E:-perience ought also to have
taught them, that amidlt all the falfchood
of men, integrity is the best defence; and
that he who continueth to the end to wtalk
upriHtl', shall continue to walk fiJ'ud.
Having thus offered foime admonitions
concerning the errors mofL incident to age,
I proceed,

II. To point out the duties which pccu-
liarly belong to it,

Thr

The first which I shall mention, is a SE RM.

timely retreat from the world. In every --
pailr of iife, we are in hazard of being too
deeply in -nerfid in its cares. But during
its vigorous periods, the impulse of aaive
spirit, the neceflry business of our flation,
and the allowable endeavours to advance
our fortune by fair industry, render it
difficult to obfcrvc due moderation. In
old age,, all the motives of eager pursuit
diminifll. The voice of Nature then calls
you to leave to others the bustle and contest
of the world; and gradually to disengage
yourselves from a burden, which begins to
exceed your strength. Having borne your
share of the heat and labour of the day, let
the evening of life be pafled in the cool and
quiet shade. It is only in the shade, that
the virtues of old age can flourish. There,
its duties are discharged with more success;
and there, its comforts are enjoyed with
greatest fatisfadion.

By the retreat of old age, however, I
do not mean a total cessation from every

VOL. I. A a worldly

S ER M. worldly employment. There is an error
XIL

- in this, as well as in the opposite extreme.

Persons who have been long haralfed with
business and care, sometimes imagine, that,
when life declines, they cannot make their
retirement from the world too complete.
But where they expeCed a delicious en-
joyment of leisure and ease, they have
often found a melancholy solitude. Few
are able, in any period of their days, to
bear a total abftraaion from the world.
There remains a vacancy which they can-
not fill up. Incapable of being always
employed in the exercises of religion, and
often little qualified for the entertainments
of the understanding, they are in hazard of
becoming a burden to themcflves, and to
all with whom they are conncted. It is,
therefore, the duty of the aged, not so
much to w!,ithdraw entirely fiom worldly
bulincfs, as to contract its circle; not so
much to break off, as to loosen their
communication with adivec life. Conti.
inuing that train of occupation to which

they

they have been most accustomed, let them s E R M.
pursue it with less intnen ess; relaxing X .
their efforts, as their powers decline ; retir-
ing more and more from public observation,
to domestic scenes, and serious thoughts;
till, as the decays of life advance, the world
ihall of itself withdraw to a greater distance
from their view; its objecs fliall gradually
yield their place to others of more import-
ance; and its tumults shall found in their
ears, only like a'noife which is heard from
afar.

If it be the duty of the old, to retreat
betines from the fatigue of worldly care,
it is still more incumbent on them to
quit the pursuit of fich pleasures as are
unsuitable to their years. Cheerfulness,
in old age, is graceful. It is the natural
concomitant of virtue. But the cheer-
fillnes of age is widely different from the
levity of youth. Many things are allow-
able in that early period, which, in ma-
turer years, would de`erve cenfirc; but
which, in old age, become both ridiculous

A a 2 and

st RM. and criminal. By awkwardly affeCting to
X"1. imitate the manners, and to mingle in the

vanities of the young, as the aged depart
from the dignity, so they forfeit the privi-
leges of grey hairs. But if, by follies of
this kind, they are degraded, they are ex-
posed to much deeper blame, by descending
to vicious pleasure, and continuing to hover
round those sinful gratifications to which
they were once addicted. Amusement and
relaxation the aged require, and may en-
joy. But let them confider well, that by
every intemperate indulgence, they accele-
rate decay; instead of enlivening, they
oppress, and precipitate their declining state.
Ease, safety, and respeCt, are the proper en-
joyments of age. Within these bounds let
it remain, and not vainly attempt to break
through that barrier, by which nature
has separated the pleasures of youth from
the comforts left to the concluding years of
life.

A material part of the duty of the
aged, consists, in studying to be useful

to

to the race who are to succeed them. Here s E R M.

XII

opens to them an extensive field, in which _-
they may so employ themselves, as confi-
derably to advance the interest of religion,
and the happiness of mankind. To them
it belongs, to impart to the young the fruit
of their long experience; to inftrua them
in the proper conduct, and to warn them of
the various dangers, of life; by wife coun-
fel, to temper their precipitate ardour; and,
both by precept and example, to form them
to piety and virtue.

It is not by rigorous discipline, and

unrelaxing austerity, that they can main-
tain an ascendant over youthful minds.
The constraint which their presence will
impose, and the aversion which their
manners will create, if the one be con-
fiantly awful, and the other severe, tend
to frustrate the effec of all their wisdom.
They mufft assume the spirit of the com-
panion, and the friend; and mix, with
the authority of age, a proper degree of
indulgence to the manners of the young.

A a 3 Instead

SE R M. Instead of lessening the refped due to their

I_. years by such condescension, they take the

surest method to increase it. Old age never
appears with greater dignity, than, when
tempered with mildness, and enlivened with
good humour, it ads as the guide and the
patron of youth. Religion, displayed in
such a character, ftrikcs the beholders, as at
once amiable and venerable. They revere
its power, when they fee it adding so much
grace to the decays of nature, and shedding
tb pleasing a lustre over the evening of life.
The young with to tread in the fame steps,
and to arrive at the close of their days
with equal honour. They liften with
attention to counsels which are mingled
with tenderness, and rendered refpestable
by grey hairs. For, notwithstanding all
its presumption, youth naturally bends
before fuperiour knowledge and years,
Aged wisdom, when joined with acknow-
ledged virtue, exerts an authority over
the human mind, greater even than that
which arises from power and station. It

can

can check the most forward, abafhl the most s E R M.
profligate, and firike with awe the most :..
giddy and unthinking.

In the midst of their endeavours to be

useful to others, let not the aged forget
those religious employments which their
own itate particularly requires. The first
of these, is, reflecion on their past beha-
viour, with a view to discover the errors
which they have committed; and, as far
as remaining life allows, to apply them-
selves to repentance and amendment.-
Long has the world bewildered you in its
maze, and imposed upon you by its arts.
The time is now come, when this great
seducer ihould mislead vou no more.
From the calm station at which you are
arrived, fequeftcred from the crowd of
the deceiving and the deceived, review
your conduct with the eye of Christians
and immortal beings. After all the tumult
of life is over, what now remains to
afford you solid fatisiation? Have you
served God with fidelity, and dilcharged
your part to your fellow-creatures with

A a 4 integrity

ER M. integrity and a good conscience? Can
.XI_ you look forward without terrour to

that day which is to dissolve your con-
nexion with this world, and to bring
you into the pretence of him who made
you, in order to give account of your
ations ?-The retrofpeat of life is seldom
wholly unattended by uneasiness and
shame. Though, to the good and the
bad, it presents a very different scene;
yet, to all men, it recals much guilt
incurred, and much time mif-fpent. It
too much resembles the review which a
traveller takes from some eminence, of a
barren country, through which he has
pafied, where the heath and the defart
form the chief prospeCt; diversified only
by a few scattered spots of imperfect culti-
vation.

Turn then your thoughts to the proper

methods of making your peace with God
through Jesus Christ; and implore, from
Divine grace, that new heart and right
spirit, which will fit you for a better
world. Let devotion fill up many of

those

those hours which are now vacant from S ER M.

XII.

worldly business and care. Let your as-
fecions dwell among divine and immortal
objects. In silent and thoughtful me-
ditation, walk as on the shore of that vast
ocean, upon which you are soon to em-
bark. Summon up all the confidera-
tions, which fliould reconcile you to your
departure from life; and which may
prepare you for going through its last
scene, with firmness and decency. Often
let your thanksgivings ascend to God,
for that watchful care with which he
hath hitherto conducted you, through
the long journey of life. Often let your
prayers be heard, that in what remains
of your pilgrimage, he may not forsake
you; and that, when you enter into the
valley of the fladow of death, he may there
support you with his lass, and defend you
with his rod.-Amidft such thoughts and
cares, let old age find you employed; be-
taking yourselves to a prudent and timely
retreat; disengaged both from the op-
preffive load of business, and from the

unfeafon-

S E R M. unseasonable pursuit of pleasure; apply-

Xi'
_ ing yourselves to form the succeeding

race, by your counsels, to virtue and wis-
dom; reviewing seriously your past life;
by repentance and devotion, preparing
yourselves for a better; and, with humble
and manly composure, expeaing that hour,
which Nature cannot now long delay. It
remains,

III. To suggest the consolations which

belong to old age, when thus found in thu
wna of rigbteoflcfies.

I must introduce them with observing,

That nothing is more reasonable in itself,
than to submit patiently to those infirmi-
ties of Nature which are brought on by
the increase of years. You knew before-
hand what you had to expect, when you
numbered the fuccefive summers and
winters which were passing over your
heads. Old age did not attack you by
surprise, nor was it forced upon you
against your choice. Often, and earnestly,
did you with to fee long lfe and maly

da's.

days. When arrived at the desired period, s ERM.
have you any just cause to complain, on X11.
account of enduring what the constitution
of our being imposes on all? Did you ex-
pect, that, for your fake, Providence was
to alter its eftablifled order? Throughout
the whole vegetable, sensible, and rational
world, whatever makes progress towards
maturity, as soon as it has passed that
point, begins to verge towards decay. It
is as natural for old age to be frail, as for
the stalk to bend under the ripened ear,
or for the autumnal leaf to change its
hue. To this law all who went before
you, have submitted; and all who shall
come after you, must yield. After they
have flourished for a season, they shall
fade, like you, when the period of decline
arrives, and bow under the preflure of
years.

During the whole progress of the hu-

man course, the principal materials of
our comfort, or uneasiness, lie within our-
selves. Every age will prove burdensome
to those who have no fund of happiness

in

S E R M. in their own breast. Preserve them, if you

X1. could, fiom infirmity of fiame; bestow

upon them, if it wcre possible, perpetual
youth; fill they would be restless and
miserable, through the influence of ill-
governed p.,fIns. It is not surprising, that
such persons are peevish, and querulous,
,when old. Unjustly they impute to their
time of life, that misery with which their
vices and follies embitter every age.
Whereas, to good men, no period of life
is unsupportable, because they draw their
chief happiness from sources which are in-
dependent of age or time. Wisdom, piety,
and virtue, grow not old with our bodies.
They fuffcr no decay from length of days.
To them only belongs unalterable and un-
fading youth. Thofi that be planted in thl
hoife of the Lord, JflallfourifJ in the courts
of our God. They Jhall Jfill bring forth
fruit in old age; they fJall be fat and
flour5Jhilg ".

You can now, it is true, no longer
relish many of those pleasures which once

* Pfal. xcii. 23, 14.

amused

amused you. Your sensations are less' E R M.
quick than formerly; your days more xnI.
languishing. But if you have quitted the
region of pleasure, in return you posiess
that of tranquillity and repose. If you are
itrangers to the vivacity of enjoyment,
you are free, at the fame time, from the
pain of violent and often disappointcd
desire. Much fatiguc, much vexation, as
well as vanity, attend that turbulence of
life, in which the younger part of man-
kind are engaged. Anidft those keen
pursuits, and seeming pleafurcs, for which
you envy them, often they feel their own
misery, and look forward with a wishful
eye to the season of calmness and retreat.
For on all fides of human life, the ba-
lance of happiness is adjusted with more
equality than at first appears; and if old
age throws some new distresses into the
scale, it lightens also the weight of others.
Many passions, which formerly disturb-
ed your tranquillity, have now subsided.
Many competitions, which long filled your
days with disquiet and strife, are now at

2aa

S E R M.an end. Many afflicions, which once

_ rent your hearts with violent anguish, are

now softened into a tender emotion, on
the remembrance of past woe. In the be-
ginnings of life, there was room for much
apprehension concerning what might be-
fal in its progress. Your security was
never untroubled. Your hopes were inter-
rupted by many anxieties and fears. Hav-
ing finishcd the career of labour and dan-
ger, your anxiety ought of course to lessen.
Ready to enter into the harbour, you can
look back, as from a secure flation, upon
the perils you have escaped, upon the tem-
pest by which you was tolfed, and upon the
multitudes who arc fiill engaged in conflict-
ing with the storm.

If you have aSced your part with in-

tegrity and honour, you are justly entitled
to refpe&, and you will generally receive
it. For rarely, or never, is old age con-
temned, unless when, by vice or folly,
it renders itself contemptible. Though
length of time may have worn off super-
ficial ornaments, yet what old age loses

in

in grace, it often gains in dignity. The sERM.
veneration, as was before observed, which Xl.
grey hairs command, puts it in the power
of the aged, to maintain a very important
place in human society. They are so far
from being insignificant in the world, that
families long held together by their autho-
rity, and societies accuftcmed to be guided
by their couniels, have frequently had caule
to regret. their lols, more than that of the
most vigorous and young. To fucccls of
every kind, the head which dircEts, is no
lees essential than the hand which executes.
Vain, nay often dangerous, were youth-
ful enterprise, if not conducled by aged
prudence. Ifaid, Days Jfiould fp'al, and
imultitude of years JIhuhi teach wijlo'on4.
7'hrefore, thou Jhalt rif/ up bcfore the hoary
head, and honour the face of the old man, and
fear thy God t.

Though, in old age, the circle of your

pleasures is more contraeled than it has
formerly been; yet, within its limits,
many of those enjoyments remain, which

Job, xxiii. 7. t L-v. x:x. -3z.

7 are

S E R M. are most grateful to human nature. Tem-

XII.
-vI perate mirth is not extinguished by ad-

vanced years. The mild pleasures of do-
meftic life still cheer the heart. The en-
tertainments of conversation, and social in-
tercourfe, continue unimpaired. The delfre
of knowledge is not abated by the fiailty
of the body; and the lcifire of old :'ge
affords many opportunities for gratifying
that desire. The fphcre of your obfcrva-
tion and refleEtion is so much cnlarged by
long acquaintance with the world, as to
supply, within itself, a wide range of im-
proving thought. To rccal the various re-
volutions which have occurred since you
began to aft your part in life; to compare
the charaters of past and present times; to
trace the hand of Providence, in all the in-
cidents of your own lot; to contemplate
with thoughtful eye, the successive new ap-
pearances which the world has assumed
around you, in government, education,
opinions, customs, and modes of living;
these are employments, no less entertaining
than inftlutive to the mind.

14 While

While you are engaged in such em- SERM.

ployments, you are, perhaps, surrounded ,
with your families, who treat you with
attention and refpea; you are honoured
by your friends; your character is efta-
blifhed; you are placed beyond the reach
of clamour, and thefinfc of tongues; and,
free from diftraling cares, you can at-
tend calmly to your eternal interests. For
such comforts as there, have you not
cause most thankfully to acknowledge
the goodness of Heaven? Do they not
afford you ground to pass the remainder
of,your days in resignation and peace;
disposing yourselves to rife in due time,
like satisfied guests, from the banquet
that has been set before you; and to
praise and bless, when you depart, the
great Master of the feast ? To a man that
is good in his fight, whether he be young
or old, God giveth wisdom, and knowledge,
and joy. For every season of life, the be-
nignity of his providence hath prepared
its own fatisfaCions, while his wisdom
hath appointed its peculiar trials. No

VOL. [, B b age

s E R M. age is doomed to total infelicity; provided

XI[.
,__j that we attempt not to do violence to Na-

ture, by seeking to extort from one age the
pleasures of another; and to gather, in
the Winter of life, those flowers which were
destined to bloffol only in its Summer,
or its Spring.

BUT perhaps it will be said, That I

have ccnfidercd old age only in its iirft
flages, and in its most favourable point
of light; before the faculties are as yet
much impaired, and when disease or as-
flition has laid no additional load on
the burden of years. Let us then view
it with all its aggravations of distress.
Let us suppose it arrived at its utmolt
verge, worn out with infirmities, and
bowed down by sickness and sorrow.
Still there remains this consolation, that
it is not long ere the weary fJlall be at
reft. Having passed through so many of
the toils of life, you may now surely,
when your pilgrimage touches on its
close, bear, without extreme impatience,

8 the

the hardships of its concluding flage. S ER M.
From the inestimable promises of the ,
Golijel, and fiom the gracious presence
of God, the afflicions of old age cannot
seclude you. Though your heart J73old
begin to faint, and youir feJe7 to fail, there
is One, who can be the Jlrength of your
hbart, and your portion for ever. Even to
,olr; old age, faith the Lord, 1 amn Ire; and
even to hoary hairs will I carr' oul. I
have mlade, and I will bear; even I will
carry, and will deliver you *. Leave thy
;iltherlcf' children; I will preserve themn
dlive; and let thy ,widosws trjil iin me -1-.

There is undoubtedly a period, whea

there ought to be a faticty of life, as
there is of all other things; and when
death shall be viewed, as your merci-
ful difmiflion from a long warfare. To
come to the grave in a full age, like as a
Jlock of corn coe inth i ii its fafon , is
the natural termination of the human
course. Amidst multiplying infirmities,
to prolong life beyond its usual bounds,

- Ifa. xlvi. 4. - Jer. xlix, I . j Job, v. 26.

Bb 2 and

SR, lM. and to draw out your exifience lere to
Ni-i- the last and foulcet dregs, ought not to

be the wifi of any wife man. Is it de-
firable, to continue lingering on the bor-
ders of the grave, after every tie which
connecs you with life is broken ; and to
be left a solitary individual, in the midlt
of a new generation, whose faces youa
hardly know ? The lhades of your de-
parted friends fife up before you, and
warn you, that it is time to depart.
Nature and Providence summon you, to
be gathered to your fathers. Reason ad-
monfines you, that, as your predecessors
made way for you, it is jult that you
should yield your place to those who
have arisen to succeed you on this busy
flage; who, for a while, ihall fill it with
their ations and their sufferings, their vir-
tues and their crimes; and then shall, in
their turn, withdraw, and be joined to the
forgotten multitudes of former ages.

Could death, indeed, be confidered iii

no other view than as the close of life, it
would afford only a melancholy retreat.

The;

The total exi:;'u Son of !;ein, is a thouSh t, s E R M.
which huiian na.u, in its im1';n ditreflcd _
circumifanccs, cannict bear v!itlho't dejec-
tion. But, hl.i'd I1 C:c!! i'ir ottier
prolpcfies revive iCe ip)i;'its (i' the ..';d, w.'ho
hlive tlpent tihir life in })ety ;nd virtue. To
them, death is not the cxtilu.'iol, hut the
renovation of the living principle ; its re-
moval from tbc e:,i':.,ir bhni' o/ /is f:btbr-
nacle, to the Jhoife 1it mald with !dlls , eter-
nal il the hvL'tl s.'/ Hvli,'Jil'tg J.a i the' grod
fight; hzavninfie,.;.Ju h'i heir cr;?c, and /epit
the faith; there is laidl li for tbhei the crc :cn
of rijhterofne/is. The Saviour of the .rorld
hath not only lb;ozight iminorta:liy to ligt.,
but placed it within the reach of their hope
and trust. By making atonement for their
guilt, he hath prepared their v:wiy witlini
the veil; and secured to them the Fofiefi-
sion of an inheritance, inlcorruptible and n-
defiled, reserved in the heavens.- SucIh
are the hopes and profpeds which cheer
the sorrows of old age, and surmount the
fear of death. Faith and piety are the only

13 b 3 adequate

S E RM. adequate supports of human nature in all
a__ its great emergencies. After they have

guided us through the various trials of life,
they uphold us, at last, amidst the ruins of
this falling frame ; and when thefilver cord
isj/fl ready to Ie loofid, and the golden bowl
to be broken ; when the pitcher is broken at
the Jfontain, and the whcel broken at the
cyiern; they enable us to fay, 0 Death!
where is i. fling ? 0 Grave ! where is
thy victory ?

# SERMON XIII. On the POWER of CONSCIENCE. GENESIS, xlii. 21, 22. And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us; ...

[ 375 1

SERMON XIII.
On the POWER of CONSCIENCE.

GENESIS, xlii. 21, 22.

ild tlhey fid O c to anotherl, WIre alrc lvre l

glilty concerniing our brother, in that we
saw tbe ilwiiji} of his fiol, wihen he bc-
foJght ius; and ice would ncot 1car: There-
fore is this dhi-rcfs come upon us. Aind
Recben answered theml, faying, Spake I
not unlto 'oul,f:.'ilng, Do not fin aganilf the
child; and ye woultd ot bear ? 'fericfore
behold aPio his blood is requ'ied.
T HIS book of Gencfs displays a rore SR E M.

singular and intercfting fccnc, than

was ever prcfcntcd to the world by any
other historical record. It carries us back

3 b4 to

SER M. to the beginning of time, and exhibits
._ _mankind in their infant and rising state.

It shows us human manners in their pri.
mitive simplicity, before the arts of refine-
ment had poiifhed the behaviour, or dif-
guised the charaders of men; when they
gave vent to their passions without diffimu-
lation, and spoke their sentiments without
reserve. Few great societies were, as yet,
formed on the earth. Men lived in scat-
tered tribes. The tranfadions of families
made the chief materials of history; and
they are related in this book, with that
beautiful simplicity, which, in the higheR
degree, both delights the imagination, and
affecs the heart.

Of all the patriarchal histories, that of

Joseph and his brethren is the most re.
markable, for the characers of the aRors,
the inftruaive nature of the events, and
the surprising revolutions of worldly for-
tune. As far as relates to the Text, and
is necessary for explaining it, the itory is
to the following purpose:- Joseph, the
youngest, except one, of the sons of

Jacob,

Jacob, was distinguished by his father S E M.
with such marks of peculiar affeEtion, as .
excited the envy of his brethren. Having
related to them, in the openness of his
heart, certain dreams which portended
his future advancement above them, their
jealousy rose to such a height, that they
unnaturally conspired his defiruaion.
Seizing the opportunity of his being at
a distance from home, they first threw
him into a pit, and afterwards 'old him
for a slave; imposing on their father by a
false relation of his death. When they had
thus gratified their resentment, they loft all
remembrance of their crime. The family
of Jacob was rich and powerful; and
several years passed away, during which
they lived in prosperity; without being
touched, as far as appears, with the least
remorse for the cruel deed which they had
committed.

Meanwhile, Joseph was safely con-

duaed, by the hand of Providence,
through a variety of dangers, until,
from the lowest condition, he rose at

last

SERM. last to be chief favourite of the King of

XIII.
XL,- Egypt, the most powerful monarch at

that time in the world. While he pof-
sessed this high dignity, a general famine
diftrefied all the neigbouring countries.
In Egypt alone, by means of his fore-
fight and prudent administration, plenty
still reigned. Compelled to have rccourfe
to that kingdom for supply of food, the
brethren of Joseph, upon this occasion,
appeared in his presence, and made their
humble application to him, for liberty to
purchase corn; little fufpeaing the Go-
vernour of the land, before whom they
bowed downz their faces to the earth, to
be him, whom long ago, they had fold as
a slave to the Ifhmaelitcs. But Joseph no
sooner saw, than he knew his brethren;
and, at this unexpeced meeting, his
heart melted within him. Fraternal ten-
dernefs arose in all its warmth, and
totally effaced from his generous breast
the impreflion of their ancient cruelty.
Though, from that moment, he began to
prepare for them a surprise of joy; yet

he

he so far conitrained himself, as to afilume SER M.

XIII.

an appearance of great severity. By this -. .
he intended, both to oblige them to bring
into Egypt his youngest and most beloved
brother, whose presence he instantly re-
quired; and also, to awaken within them
a due sense of the crime which they had
formerly perpetrated. Accordingly, his
behaviour produced tie designed effect.
For while they were in this situation,
itrangers in a foreign land where they
had fallen, as they conceived, into ex-
treme distress; where they were thrown
into prison by the Governour, and treated
with rigour, for which they could aflign
no cause; the refletion mentioned in
the Text arose in their minds. Con-
science brought to remembrance their
former fins. It recalled, in particular,
their long forgotten cruelty to Joseph;
and, without hesitation, they interpreted
their present diftie(s to be a judgmnct,
for this c:i:., insii:;Ld by Heaven. Tihcy
siid olle to a10 tbcr, I'e are vcrily guilty
COncerning ou/i brothcr, in ltJal cefitcw 1,e

anlguity

S R M. anguiJl of his foul when he be/ought u,
__, a and we would not hear: ther fore is this

diflreJs come ulpon l.-B-jeold also his blood
is required.

From this inftrui've passage of his-

tory, the following obfcrvations naturally
arise. I. That a sense of right and wrong
in conduct, or of moral good and evil,
belongs to human nature. tI. That it
produces an apprchenfion of merited pu-
nilhment, when we have committed evil.
III. That although this inward fentlmeni
be flifled during the season of prosperity,
yet in advcrfity it will revive. And,
IV. That, when it revives, it determines
us to confider every distress which we sus-
ser, from what cause soever it has arilen,
as an acual infliction of punishment by
Heaven. The consideration of there par-
ticulars will lead us to a very serious view
of the nature of man, and of the govern-
ment of God.

I. THERE belongs to human nature a
sense of moral good and evil, or a fa-

culty

culty which diflinguifhes right from wrong, SE RM.

XI".

in aaion and conduct. T/hey jid one to
*nother, AWe are veri/y giiilty.- n an
age, when the law was not yet given,
when no external revelation of the Divine
will fubfifed, except what had been
handed down among the patriarchs, from
one generation to another; the brethren
of Jofcph reasoned concerning their con-
du&, upon the fame moral principles,
and were asseted by the fame feelings,
of which we are conscious at this day.
Such sentiments are cceval with human
nature; for they are the remains of a
law which was originally wrilln in i our
heart. In the darkest regions of the
earth, and among the rudest tribes of
men, a diltinCtion has ever been made
between just and unjufi, between a duty
and a crime. Throughout all the inter-
course of human beings thele tdiflintions
are fuppoied. They are the foundation
of the mutual trust which the tranfac-
tions of life require; nay, the very enter-
tainments of society constantly appeal to

2 x them,

S ER M. them. The Historian, who studies to
_, ' magnify his hero, by representing him as

just and generous; the Poet, who seeks to
interest the world in his fiaions, by en-
gaging the heart in behalf of distressed vir-
tue; are fufflcient to confute the Sceptic,
who denies any natural perception of a dif-
tinction in actions.

But though a sense of moral good and

evil be deeply imprefled on the heart of
man, yet it is not of sufficient power to
regulate his life. In his prcfent corrupted
itate, it is both too general to afford him
full dircaion in condut, and too feeble to
withstand the opposition of contrary prin-
ciples in his natare. It is often perverted
by ignorance and superstition; it is too cafily
overcome by paflion and desire. Hence3
the importance of that Divine revelation,
which communicates both light and flrength;
,which, by the inflruCdive difcoveriesit makes,
and by the powerful aflifance it supplies,
raises man to a station infinitely fuperiour
to that which he. possesses under the mere
light of Nature.

It

It is of consequence, however, to remark, s E RM

That this revelation neceflarily supposes an .--a
antecedent fcnfe of right and wrong to take
place in the human mind. It addresses it-
self to men, as possessed of ilch a faculty;
and, when it commands them, in general
terms, to pursue whatsoever thint.s arle true,
whatsoever things are honel, wihart/oever
things are jlll, pure, lovely, or of good
report, if there be any virte, land if there be
any praise, it plainly appeals to the native
diCtates of their heart. Nay, unlels men
were endowed by Nature with Iome sense
of duty or of moral obligation, they could
reap no benefit from revelation ; they would
remain incapable of all religion whatever.
For, in vain were a system of duty pre-
fcribed to them by the word of God;
allegiance were in vain required towards
their Creator, or love and gratitude en-
joined towards their Redeemer; if, pre-
vioufly, there was no principle in their
nature, which made them feel the obli-
gations of daty, of allegiance, and of

gratitude.

SERM. gratitude. They could have no ideas cor.
^^-i responding to such terms; nor any con-

viction, that, independently of fear or
interest, they were bound to regard, either
him who made, or him who redeemed
them.-This, therefore, is to be held as a
principle fundamental to all religion, That
there is in human nature, an approving or
condemning sense of conduct; by means of
which, they who have not the law, are d
law unto thenfelves . They who, from
a mistaken zeal for the honour of Divine
revelation, either deny the exifience, or
vilify the authority of natural religion, are
not aware, that by disallowing the sense of
obligation, they undermine the foundation
on which revelation builds its power of
commanding the heart.

The Text leads us to observe, That

one of the cafes in which the natural sense
of good and evil operates most forcibly, is
when men have been guilty of injustice
or inhumanity. We saw the anguijf of
iur brother's foul when he besought us, and

* Rom. ii. 14.

we

we could not hear. An inward principle SERM.
prompts us to do good to others; but with
much greater authority, it checks and con-
demns us, when we have done them in-
juries. This part of the human confti-
tution deserves to be remarked as a signal
proof of the wisdom of its Author, and of
the gracious provision which he has made
for the welfare of mankind. We are all
committed, in some measure, to the care
and assistance of one another. But our
mutual influence reaches much farther
with refpet to the evils, than with re-
fpea to the enjoyments, of thole around
us. To advance their prosperity, is often
beyond our ability; but to inflia inju-
ries, is almost always within our power:
And, at -the fame time, felf-interedt very
frequently tempts us to commit them.
With the utmost propriety, therefore, we
are so framed, that the influence of the
moral principle ihould be most authori-
tative, in cafes where its aid is most
needed; that to promote the happiness
of others, should appear to us as praise-

VOL. I. C c worthy,

S E R M. worthy, indeed, and generous; but that,
XIII. okj to abstain from injuring them, should be

felt as matter of the ftrideft duty.-
Amidst the distress which the patriarchs
suffered in Egypt, had only this suggestion
occurred, " We saw our brother begin-
" ning to prosper, and we contributed
"not to his advancement," their minds
would have been more easily quieted.
But, when their reflection was, 74e /iaw
his anguihj, wehen he befoght us, and we
'would not hear, then compunction turned
upon them its sharpest edge. I proceed to
pbferve,

II. THAT our natural sense of right

and wrong, produces an apprehension of
merited punishment when we have com-
mitted a crime. When it is employed in
surveying the behaviour of others, it dif-
tinguifles some actions, as laudable and
excellent; and disapproves of others, as
evil and base. But when it is direCted
upon our own conduc, it assumes a
higher office, and exercises the authority

of

of a judge. It is then properly termed SERlM.
Conscience; and the sentiments which it ,_
awakens, upon the perpetration of a crime,
are styled, Remorse. There/lor, laid tle
brethren of Joseph, is this dJfrefs come upon
us; behold also his blood is required. Thcy
acknowledged, not only that they had com-
mitted a wrong, but a wrong for which they
werejuftly doomed to susser.

Did not conscience suggest this natural

relation between guilt and punishment,
the mere principle of approbation, or dii-
approbation, with refpee to moral con-
du&, would prove of finall efficacy. For
disapprobation attends, in some degree,
every conviction of impropriety, or folly.
When one has acqed unsuitably to his in-
terest, or has trespassed againit the rules of
prudence or decorum, he reflects upon his
condua with pain, and acknowledges that
he deserves blame. But the difliFrence be-
tween the fcnfe of mifcondunt, and the
sense of guilt, consists in this, that the
latter penetrates much deeper into the

C c 2 heart,

SE R M. heart. It makes the criminal feel, that he

is not only blameable, but justly punilh-
able, for the part which he has aaed.
With reference to this office of conscience,
the inspired writers frequently speak of it,
in terms borrowed from the awful folemni-
ties of judicial procedure; as, bearing wit-
ncfs for or agaji us ; accfing or cxcufing,
jzLudging and condemnilg. It will be found,
that in the language of most nations, terms
of the fame import are applied to the ope-
rations of conscience; expressing the sense,
which all mankind have, of its pasing fen-
tence upon them, and pronouncing rewards
or punishments to be due to their aCtions.

The sense of puniflment merited, you

are further to observe, can never be fepa-
ratcd from the dread, that, at some time or
other, punishment flall be actually infliced.
This dread is not confined to the venge-
ance of man. For let the finner's evil
deeds be ever so thoroughly concealed
from the knowledge of the world, his
inward alarms are not quieted by that

confidera-

consideration. Now, punishment is the SER M.

XIII.

fantiaon of a law. Every law supposes a
rightful superior: And therefore, when
conscience threatens punishment to secret
crimes, it manifestly recognises a fu-
preme Governour, from whom nothing is
hidden. The belief of our being account-
able to him, is what the most hardened
wickedness has never been able to eradi-
cate. It is a belief which arises, not
merely from reasoning, but from internal
sentiment. Conscience is felt to aCt as the
delegate of an invisible ruler; both anti-
cipating his sentence, and foreboding its
execution.

Hence arise the terrours, which so of-

ten haunt guilt, and rife in proportion to
its atrocity. In the history of all na-
tions, the tyrant and the oppressor, the
bloody and the flagitious, have been ever
pointed out, as fearfil, unquiet, and reft-
less; subjed to alarms and apprehensions
of an unaccountable kind. And surely,
to live under such disquietude, from the
dread of merited puniflment, is already

Cc3 to

s E RP . to undergo one of the most revere punilh-
D1. Mments which human nature can susser.

When the world threatens us with any
of its evils, we know the extent, and dif-
cern the limits of the danger. We fee the
quarter, on which we are exposed to its
attack. We measure our own strength
with that of our adversary; and can take
precautions, either for making refintance,
or for contriving escape. But when an
awakened conscience places before the fin-
ncr the just vengeance of the Almighty,
the profpet is confounding, because the
danger is boundless. It is a dark unknown
which threatens him. The arm that is
stretched over him, he can neither fee nor
resist. On every fide he dreads it; and
on every object which surrounds him, he
looks with terrour, because he is con-
fcious that every object can be employed
against him as an infirument of wrath.
No wonder that the lonesome solitude, or
the midnight hour, should strike him
with horror. His troubled mind beholds
forms, which other men fee not; and

hears

hears voices, which found only in the ear s E R M.
of guilt. A hand appears to come forth, Xt_.
and to write upon the wall over against
him, as it did of old, in the fight of an
impious monarch, He fiall find no cafe,
nor reft. For the Lord /hall give him a
trembling heart, andfailing of eyes, and for-
row of mind: Alnd his life iJ7al hang in doubt
before him; and he flall fear t7ay and night,
and have none qJurance of his lifc. In the
morning heJallalfay, 'Wctuld to God it wecre
even ; and at even he fJ all fay, lIuld to God
it were morning, for the fear of his heart
wherewith he Jfall fear, and for the fight
which his eyes Jhall fee. His life Jall be
grievous unto him ".-Adverlity ! how blunt
are all the arrows of thy quiver, in com-
parison with those of guilt!-But if such
be the power of conscience, whence, it may
be asked, comes it to pass, that its influence
is not more general, either in restraining
men from the commission of fin,'or in lead-
ing them to a timely repentance? This
brings me to oblerve,

* Deut. xxviii. 65, 66, 67. Ifa, xv. 4.

C c 4 III. THAT

SER M. III. THA', during a course of profpe-

XIII.
_ rity, the operations of conscience are of-

ten suspended; and that adversity is the
season which restores them to their proper
force. At the time when crimes are com-
mitted, the mind is too much heated
by paflon, and engrossed by the object of
its pursuit, to be capable of proper reflec-
tion. After this tumult of spirits has sub-
fided, if a train of new passions be at
hand to employ its activity, or a fuccef-
sion of pleasurable objeas occur to en-
gage its attention, it may for a while re-
main, though not entirely free fiom in-
ward misgivings, yet unconscious of the
degree of its guilt. Dissipated among the
amusements of life, the finner escapes, in
some measure, from his own view. If he
reflets upon himself at all, the continu-
ance of prosperity seems to him a strong
juflification of his condut. For it will
be found, that in the hearts of all men,
there is a natural propensity to judge of
the favour of the Supreme Being, from
the course of external events. When they

are

are borne with a smooth gale along the SERM.
stream of life, and behold every thing X11.
proceeding according to their wish, hardly
can they be brought to believe, that
Providence is their enemy. Basking in
the sun-shine of prosperity, they suppose
themselves to enjoy the finile of indulgent
Heaven; and fondly conclude, that they
are on terms of friendship, with all above,
and with all below. Easy they find it,
then, to spread over the grossest crimes
a covering, thin, indeed, and flight, yet
sufficient to conceal them from a fupcrficial
view.

Of this we have a very remarkable in-

fiance, in those brethren of Jofcph, whose
history we now confider. Not only from
the silence of the inspired writer, we have
ground to believe that their remorse was
flifled, while their prosperity remained;
but we are able to trace some of the pre-
tences, by which, during that period, they
quieted their minds. For when they
were contriving the deftruaion of Joseph,
we find Judah faying to his brethren,

What

SE R l. What profit is it, f ,e Jflay our brothrct

-_, 2and conceal his blood? Let us fell him to the

Iinmaelites; and let not our hand be upon
him; for he is our brother, and our flejl:
and his brethren were content ". Here
you behold them junifying their crime,
by a fort of pretended humanity; and
making light of felling their brother for
a slave, because they did not take away
his life. How firangely are the opinions
of men altered, by a change in their con-
dition ! How different is this sentiment of
the Patriarchs, from that which they after-
wards entertained of the fame action, when,
as you fee in the Text, the remembrance of
it wrung their hearts with anguifl ?

But men, in truth, differ as much from

themselves, in prosperity, and in adver-
fity, as if they were different creatures.
In prosperity, every thing tends to flatter
and deceive. In adversity, the illusions of
life vanish. Its avocations, and its plea-
fures, no longer afford the finner that
shelter he was wont to find from con-

* Gen. xxx.vii. -6, 27.

*'i^ i~fcience,

science. Formerly he made a part of the S E RM.
crowd. He now feels himself a solitary 4-'
individual, left alone with God, and with
his own mind. His fiirits arc not lfupport-
cd, as before, by ifallacious views of the fa-
vour of Heaven. The candle cf the Lord
fhlines not on his head; his pride is humbled;
and his affcdions are softened for receiving
every serious imprefion. In this situation,
a man's iniquity is fire to find himn oft.
Whatever has been notoriously criminal in
his former conducl, rifes as a f -care, and
places itself before him. The incrcafed
sensibility of his mind renders him alive
to feelings which lately were faint; and
wounds which had been ill healed bleed
afrefli. When mei take the ttimb el and the
harp, and rejoice at the found of theJ organ,
they ls, WIhat is the hi'hty1, that wcJhJouild
serve him ? But when the) are bol:,en in the
cords of) afficion, then heflcwetht tem their
work, and their trafgrefOioi, that th9e have
exceeded. He openeth also their ears to dJ
cipline; and conmnandelh, that the, return
from iniquity.

Hence,

SE R M. Hence, we may perceive the great
XIiI. usefulness and propriety of that inter-

change of conditions, which takes place
in human life. By prosperity, God gives
scope to our passions, and makes trial of
our dispositions. By adversity, he revives
the serious principle within. Neither the
one, nor the other, could be borne entire
and unmixed. Man, always prosperous,
would be giddy and insolent; always as-
flited, would be fullen and despondent.
Hopes and fears, joy and sorrow, are,
therefore, so blended in his life, as both
to give room for worldly pursuits, and
to recall, from time to time, the admoni-
tions of conCcience. Of the proportion
in which they should be mixed for this
purpose, we are very incompetent judges.
From our ignorance of the degree of dif-
cipline, which the spiritual state of others
requires, we often censure Providence
unjustly, for its severity towards them:
And, from the vanity and raflnefs of
our withes, we complain without rea-
son, of its rigour to ourselves. While

4 we

we consult nothing but our ease, God at- SERM.
tends to our spiritual improvement. When XII.
we seek what is pleasing, he fends what
is ufefil. When, by drinking too deep
of worldly prosperity, we draw in a fe-
cret poison, he mercifully infuses a medi-
cine, at the time that he troubles and em-
bitters the waters. It remains nowv to ob-
serve,

IV. THAT when conscience is tho-

roughly awakened, it determines the
finner to confider every calamity which
he suffers, as a positive inflidion of pu-
niliment by Heaven. As it had before
alarmed him with threatenings of Di-
vine displeasure, it tells him, when he
falls under diitrefs, that the threatened
day of account is come. Afilidions, on
some occasions, rife directly out of our
fins. Thus diseases are brought on by
intemperance; poverty springs from idle-
ness; and disgrace from presumption.
In such cafes, the punishment is so
closely connected with the crime, that

it

SERM. it is impossible to avoid discerning the
XIII. -,s e relation which the one bears to the

other. But the appointment of Provi-
dence, which we now confider, reaches
farther than this. God has framed us
so, that distresses, which have no per-
ceivable connection with our former
crimes, are nevertheless interpreted by
conscience, to be inflited on their ac-
count. They force themselves upon our
apprehension, under this view. They are
made to carry, not only that degree of pain
which properly belongs to themselves, but
that additional torment allb, which arises
from the belief of their being the vengeance
of the Almighty.

Let a man fall unexpectedly into some

deep calamity. Let that calamity be
brought upon him, either by means
which the world calls fortuitous; or by
a train of incidents, in which his own
mifconduat, or guilt, has apparently had
no part; yet one of the first questions,
which, in such a situation, he puts to
himself, is, VWhat have I done to de-

serve

serve this? His reflection is, anmoft in- s ER M.
ftiiaively, drawn hack upon his former xmI.
life; and if, in the course of that re-
trofped, any flagrant guilty deed occur
to smite his conscience, on this he can-
not avoid refting with anxiety and ter-
rour, and connecting it in his imagina-
tion with what he now fulTers. He fees,
or thinks that he fees, a Divine arm lifted
up; and what, in other circumstances,
he would have called a reverse of for-
tune, he now views as a judgment of
Heaven.

When the brethren of Joseph, confined

in the Egyptian prison, were bewailing
the diflrefs into which they had fallen,
there was no circumfiance which pointed
out any relation between their present
misfortune, and their former cruelty to
their brother. A long course of years had
intervened, during which they flourilhed
in wealth and cafe. They were now
far from the scene of their crime; in a
foreign land, where they believed them-
selves utterly unknown, and where they

had

SERM. had done nothing to offend. But con-

XI[I.
, '_ Sfcience formed a connetion between

events, which, according to the ordi-
nary apprehension of men, were entirely
independent of each other. It made
them rccolled, that they, who once had
been deaf to the supplications of a bro-
ther, were now left friendless and for-
lorn, imploring pity in vain from an un-
relenting Governour; and that they who
had first conspired to kill their brother,
and afterwards fold him for a slave,
were themselves deprived of liberty, and
threatened with an ignominious death.
How undefervedly soever there evils be-
fell them on the part of men, they con-
sessed them to be just on the part of Provi-
dence. They concluded the hour of retri-
bution to be arrived; and, in the person of
the Governour of Egypt, they beheld the
Ruler of the world calling them to account
for guilt. Therefore is this distress cone
upon us. Behold alo his blood is re-
quired.

Similar

Similar sentiments on like occasions s E R P.

will be found not uncommon among _
mankind. Pious men, there is no doubt,
are at all times disposed to look up to
God, and to acknowledge his hand in
every event of life. But what I now
observe is, That where no habitual ac-
knowledgment of God takes place; nay,
where a daring contem'pt of his autho-
rity has prevailed, conscience, neverthe-
less, conftiains men, in the day of their
diltrefs, to recognize God, under the most
awful of all charate:rs, The avenger of past
guilt.

Herein the ;widorm of God appears

in fich a light, as jufily to claim our
highest admiration. The ordinary course
of his Providence is carried on by hu-
man means. HIe has fettled a train of
events, which proceed in a regular fuc-
ccfion of causes and effe&s, without his
appearing to interpose, or to ad. But
thlfe, on proper occasions, are made to
affedQ the human mind in the fame
manner as if he were beheld descending

VOL. 1. D d from

S E R M. from his throne, to punish the finner

XIII.
A_,J with his own hand. Were God to

suspend the laws of Nature, on occasion
of every great crime that was committed
on earth, and to govern the world by
frequent interpositions of a miraculous
kind, the whole order of human affairs
would be unhinged; no plans of acion
could be formed; and no scope would
be given for the probation and trial of
men. On the other hand, were the
operation of second causes allowed to
conceal a Divine hand totally from view,
all sense of fuperiour government would
be loft; the world would seem to be
void of God; the finncr would perceive
nothing but chance and fortune in the
difreffes which he fiffered. Whereas,
by its being so ordered, that several in-
cidents of life fiall carry the fame force,
and strike the mind with the fame
impreflion, as if they were supernatural
interpositions, the fear of God is kept
alive among men, and the order of hu-
man affairs is, at the fame time, pre-

served

served unbroken. The finncr fees his SER M.

XIII.

diflrefs to be the immediate cffct of -
human violence cr oppression; and is
obliged, at the fane moment, to con-
fider it as a Divine judgment. His con-
science gives to an ordinary misfortune,
all the edge and the fling of a vifitatiol
from Heaven.

FROM the train of thought which tle

Text has suggested, several inferences
naturally follow. But I shall confine
Inyfelf to two, which claim your particular
attention.

The first is, the clear evidence which

the preceding oblcrvations afford, of a
)ivine government now exercield over
mankind. This most important and
awful of all truths, cannot be too often
prelcnted to our view, or too strongly
imprefled on our mind. To the imperfed
conviction of it, which obtains in the
world, mufl be ascribed, in a great mea-
sure, the prevalence of fin. Did men
rirmlv believe that the Alnihi-htv Being,

D d 2 who

3 E RM. who formied them, is carrying on a

.-.-,- system of administration which will not

leave guilt unpunished, it is impolfible
that they could remain so inattentive, as
we often behold them, to their moral
conduct. But the bulk of mankind are
giddy and thoughtless. Struck by the
ilperficial appearances of pleasure, which
accompany licentiousness, they inquire
no farther; and deliver themselves up to
their senses and their passions. Where-
as, were they to rcflect, but for a mo-
ment, upon that view which has now
been given of human nature, they might
soon be satisfied, that the moral govern-
ment of God is no matter of doubtful
discussion. It is a sac, no less obvious
and incontestable, than the government
exercised by those earthly rulers, whom
we behold with the cnfigns of their office
before our eyes.

To govern, is to require a certain

course of action, or to prescribe a law;
and to enforce that law by a suitable
distribution of rewards and punifliments.

Now,

Now, God has not only invefled con- SERM.
science, as we have seen, with authority J
to promulgate, but endowed it also with
power to enforce, his law. By placing
inward approbation and peace on the
fide of virtue, he gave it the fanaion of
reward. But this was not enough. Pain
is a more powerful principle than plea-
sure. To escape misery is a fironger
motive for ation, than to obtain good.
God, therefore, so framed human nature,
that the painful sense of ill-dcfert should
attend the commission of crimes; that
this sense ol ill-defert fiould necessarily
produce the dread of punifiment; and
that this dread should so operate on the
mind, in the time of distress, as to make
the finner conceive Providence to be en-
gaged against him, and to be concerned
in infliaing the punishment which he
suffers. All there impreflions he hath
tfamped upon the heart with his own
hand. He hath made them constituent
parts of our frame; on purpose, that by
the union of so many strong and pungent

D d 3 senti-

S E R M. sentiments, he might enforce repentance

XIII.
 - ^land reformation, and publish to the hu-

man race his detestation of fin. Were he
to speak to us from the clouds, his voice
could not be more decisive. What we
discern to be interwoven with the con-
texture of human nature, and to pervade
the whole course of human affairs, carries
an evidence not to be resifted. We might,
with as much reaobn, doubt whether the
fun was intended to enlighten the earth,
or the rain to fertilize it; as whether he
who has framed the human mind, intended
to announce righteousness to mankind, as
his law.

Ti-ir second inference which I make

from the foregoing discourse, refpeas the
intimate connection, which those operations
of conscience have, with the peculiar and
diftinguiflhing dotrines of the Gospel of
Chrifl. They will be found to accord
with them so remarkably, as to furnish
anl answer to some of those objeaions,
which superficial rcafoncrs are apt to raise

againf;

againlft the Christian revelation. In par- S E R M.
ticular, they coincide with that awful - .
view which the Gospel gives us, of the
future consequences of guilt. If the fin-
ner is now confirained by confcienee, to
view the Almighty as pursuing him
with evil for long-forgotten crimes, how
naturally must he conclude that, in a
subsequent period of exiftcncc, the Di-
vine administration will proceed upon
the fame plan, and complete what has
been left imperfect here? If, during this
life, which is only the time of trial, the
displeasure of Providence at fin is diflayed
by tokens so manifest, what may be ap-
prehended to follow, when justice, which
at present only begins to be executed,
fiall be carried to its copfummation ?
What conscience forebodes, revelation
verifies; assuring us that a day is ap-
pointed vwhen God will render to every mant
according to his works; to them, who by pa-
tient continuance in well-doing, seek forglory,
honour, and immortalilt, eternal Ife B:ut

D d 4 unto

S E R M. unto them that are contentious, and obey not

XIII.
'-_-. tbhe ttuth, but obey unrighteolfneos; indig-

nation and wrath, tribulation and anguljil,
-upon every foul of man that dotb evil, of the
Jcw firJI, and also of the Gentile. For
there is no rejfpe of persons with God. For
as many as have finned without the law,
Jhall a/so peri/s without the law; and as
many as have finned i't the law, Ihall be
judged by the law .

While the threatenings of conscience

thus strengthen the evidence of the scrip-
ture doerine concerning future punish-
ments, they likewise pave the way for
the belief of what is revealed concerning
the method of our deliverance by Chrilt.
They suggest to the finner, some deep
and dark malignity contained in guilt,
-vhich has drawn upon his head tich
high difplcafure from Heaven. They
call forth his most anxious efforts, to
avert the effeds of that displeasure; and
to propitiate his offended Judge. Some

e Iaum. ii. 7-13.

atone-

atonement, he is conscious, must be SERM.
made; and the voice of Nature has, in v-
every age, loudly demanded fuflering, as
the proper atonement for guilt. Hence
mankind have constantly fled for refuge
to such substitutions as they could de-
vise to place in the room of the offender;
and, as by general consent, victims have
every where been slain, and expiatory fa-
crifices have been offered up on innu-
merable altars. Irhcireiith f:al1 I comne be-
fore the Lord, rand bowv 1nyf;cf bcfIre the mfnJi
high God? Shalll I coi. ci' bif're hiim with
burnt cril :s%, and calves of o year old ?
[;isll the Lord be p;cfd with thoiftimds of
rams, or with ten tho:/i'slids of rivers of oil?
Or, Jfall I give n:, jffl-bor for 1nmy tris-
grej'ion ; theJil.'t of ml body, for Ihc fn of
ly fodul'" These perplexities and agita-
tions of a guilty conscience, may be
termed preludes, in some measure, to the,
Gospel of Christ. They are the pointings
of unenlightend Nature, towards that

Micah, vi. 6, 7.

method

SE RM. metiod of relief, which the grace of
'---j God has provided. Nature felt its inabi-

lity to extricate itself from the consequences
of guilt: The Gospel reveals the plan of
Divine interposition and aid. Nature con-
fefled some atonement to be necessary: The
Gefpcl di1covers, that the neceflary atone-
mcnt is made. The remedy is no sooner
prelented, than its suitableness to the disease
appears; and the great myfrery of redemp-
tion, though it reaches, in its full extent,
Leyond our comprchenfion, yet, as far as
it is revealed, holds a visible congruity with
the sentiments of Confciencc, and of Na-
ture.

Natural and revealed religion proceed

from the flame Author; and of course, are
analogous and consistent. They are part
of the fame plan of Providence. They are
connected mcafures of the fame system of
government. The serious belief of the one,
is the best preparation for the reception of
the othcr. Both concur in impressing our
mind with a deep fenie of one most im-

portant

portant truth, which is the result of this s ER M.

XIII.

whole discourse, That as we sow now we
musA reap; that under the government of
God, no one shall be permitted, with im-
punity, to gratify his criminal passions, and
to make light of the great duties of life.

# SERMON XIV. On the Mixture of JOY and FEAR in RELIGION. PSALM ii. 11. Rejoice with trembling.

t 412 ]

E R MO N XIV.
On the Mixture of JOY and FEAR in

RELIGION.

PSALM ii. I1.

'Rejoice with tremblig.

SE.R M. JOY and Fear, are two great springs of
xv. J human acion. The mixed condition

of this world gives scope for both; and,
according as the one or the other predo-
minates, it influences the general tenour
of our conduct. Each of them possesses
a proper place in religion. To serve the
Lord with gladznefs, is the exhortation of
the Psalmist David %. To Jerve him with
reverence andgodly far, is the admonition
of the Apostle Paul-1. But, under the present

* Psalm c, z., t Heb, xii 28.

/ 2' imper-

imperfetion of human nature, each of these s E R M.

XIV.

principles may be carried to a dangerous
extreme. When the whole of religion is
placed in joy, it is in hazard of rising into
unwarrantable rapture. When it refts al-
together on fear, it degenerates into super-
flitious servility. The text enjoins a due
mixture of both ; and inculcates this im-
portant maxim, That, joy tempered with
fear, is the proper disposition of a good
man. In difccur'ing of this fubjct, I
shall endeavour to ihew, first, That joy
is eflential to religion; and next, That,
for variov s rcabn,., tis joy ought to be
mixed with ;ear; whence we f1all be able
to ascertain the nature of that fleady and
composed spirit, which is most luitable to
our present condition, and most acceptable
to God.

I. JoY is cfiential to religion, in two

refpe&s; as religion inlpires joy, and as
it requires it. In other words: To rejoice
is both the privilege, and the duty, of
good men.

IN

3E R M. IN the firfl place, Religion inspires joy.
A_- It a'Iords just ground of gladness, to all

who firmly believe its doctrines, and fin-
cerely study to obey its laws. For it con-
sers on them the two most material re-
quifites of joy; a favourable situation of
things without, and a proper disposition
of mind within, to relifi that favourable
situation.

When they examine their situation

without, they behold themselves placed
in a world which is full of the influ-
ence of a gracious Providence; where
beauty and good are every where predo-
minant; where various comforts are be-
ltowed; and where, if any be with-held,
they h1v.e erafon to believe that they are
with-held by parental wisdom. Among
the crowd that encompass thenm, they
may be at a loss to discern, who are
their friends, and who their enemies.
But it is sufficient to know, that they
are under the protetIion of an invisible
Guardian, whose power can keep them
from every evil. All the fleps of his

 8 condudt,

condut, they may be unable to trace. SERM4.
Events may befal them, of which they ,_
can give no account. But, as long as
they are satisfied that the fvfiem of Di-
vine government is founded on mercy,
no prefcnt occurrences are able to delroy
their peace. For hl ico ,sared ,t his
ilwn Son, blut deCivcrd ,il.' i/ ! f/;r them,
bow fJ:all he not C'/L' I/.i:, fJ'Cely' ,i'ive
thbin1 all thilngs? If their nature is fir;:l,
Divine atfltiance is promiled to frenlgthcn
it. If their virtue is impnerfct, a dilpen-
fation is opened, wxhich gives them the
hope of pardon. If their extcrnl cir-
cumftances be in any reieft: unfavc.!r-
able, it is because a higher intcrcet is
consulted. All t.bins, they are assured,
.hall work togrthcr for their good. On
their prosperity refis the bleflng; on
their adverlity, the fandtifying Spirit of
the Almighty. 01d age may advance,
and life decay; but beyond those boun-
daries of Nature, faith opens the pro-
fpe&t of their lasing felicity. W\ithout
anxicty, they pass through the diffirent

periods

SER .J. period; of their present exiflence, becau*f
XiV. they know it to be no more than an intlc-

dufion to immortality.

As such a situation of things without,

lays a solid foundation for joy; so the
disposition which religion forms within,
promotes the relish of it. It is indeed
from within, that the chief sources of
enjoyment or trouble rife. Tle minds
of bad men are always disorderly; and
hence their lives are so generally uneasy.
In vain they take the tiimbrel and the ha;p.,
and endeavour to r;joice at the fouid if tbi
organ. Spleen and dilguft purlue them
through all the haunts of amusement.
Pride and ill humour torment them.
Oppressed with discontent, their spirits
flag; and their worn-out pleasures afford
them entertainment no more. But reli-
gion fubducs those malignant palions,
which are the troubles of human repose;
which either overcast the mind with the
gloom of peevifhnies, or disquiet it by
the violence of agitation. It infuses, in
thleir rcom, those mild and gentle difpo-

iitions

fiiions, whose natural effcct is to fmoot sE R M.
hie tenour of the foul. Benevolence and XIV.
candour, moderation and temperance,
ivherever they reign, produce cheerful-
ness and serenity. The consciousness of
integrity gives ease and freedom to the
mind. It enables good men to extract from
every olbje L, the whole fatisfaQion which
it is capable of yielding; and adds the fla-
vour of innocence, to all their external
icafiurcs.

IN the ficond place, As religion natu-

rally inliires joy; io, what it inf)ires, it
commands us to cherish. As a necessary
proof of our sincerity, it requires checrful-
ness in the performance of our duty; be-
cause, if this be wanting, our religion dif-
covers itself not to be genuine in principle,
and in practice it cannot be stable.

Religious obedience, destitute of joy, is

not genuine in its principle. For, did
either faith or hope, the love of God cr
the love of goodness, rule the heart,
they could not fail to produce fatisfation

VOL. I. E e in

SEP.M. in piety and virtue. All thofc causes of
XIV.

_, joy which I have mcntioned vwould then

operate; and their native cffect on the
mind, would 'ollow. The profpets
which relieion cpcns, would gladden,
and the a ic:ions which it inspires,
would sooth the he:.rt, We fcrve, with
pleafurc, the lenclcfaor whom we love.
We rejoice in cvery t1udy and pursuit,
to which we are fccricly attached. If
we serve not God l ith plcaflue, it is
because we kncv, hiLn not, or love him
not. If we rejoice not in virtue, it is
because our afriLeon is alienated from it,
and our inclin.tions arc depraved. We
give too evident proof, that either wc
believe not the principies cf religion, or
that we feel not their power. Exclude
joy frol religion; and you leave no
ether motives to it, except compulsion
and interel. But are there suitable
grounds, on lwhich to raft the whole of
our obcdience to the Supreme Being?
My foan, g' 1ivm tl y

l c'art, is the call of
Godr Surcly if there be no pleasure it

fulfilling

fulfilling his commanns, the heart is not S R M.
given himi; and, in that cafe, fl;c m:'ii!i':zd. c .
Js /!,i fies i.'toi ri brlt b

i':: ,s is brought
to l.is a'tar in vain.

As religion, dcftitute of joy, is imperfcct

in its principle; io, in pradice, it must be
unitable. In vain you endeavour to fix any
man to the regular performance of that in
which he finds no pleafiure. Bind him ever
ib faRf by intcrel' or fear, he will contrive
some method of eluding the obligation.
Ingenuity is never so fertile of cvafions, as
vwhere pleafilre is all on the one iide, and
mere nrccept on the other. I[e may fludv
to favc appearances. He may diTelcmbl e
and conitrain himself. But his heart re-
volts in fecrct; and the weight of incli-
nation, will, in the end, draw the praCtice
after it. If perseverance is not to be ex-
peced, still less can zeal be looked for
from him, who, in his religious duties,
trembles without rejoicing. Every at-
tempt towards virtue which he forms will
be feeble and awkwark. I-He applies to it
as a talk; he dreads the tarz-maftcr; but

Ee a he

SE R M. he will labour no more than necessity
xiv.

enjoins. To escape from puniiment i?
his sole aim. He bargains for immunity,
by every duty which he performs; and
all beyond, he esteems fuperfiuous toil.
-Such religion as this, can neither pu-
rify the heart, nor prepare for heavenly
bliss. It is the refuge of an abject mind.
It may form the ritual of the monk, or
prescribe the penance of the idolater;
but has no concern with the homage ot
him, who worJjips the Fathjcr in spirit anY
in trith. His charaaer is, that the joy 0j'
the Lord is his Jf-rngth `. It attaches his
heart to religion. It inspires his zeal. It
supports his constancy; and accelerates his
progress.

There is no man but has some object

to which he cleaves for enjoyment; some-
what that flatters him with distant hope.
or affords him present pleasure. Joy is
the end towards which all rational beings
tend. For the fake of it, they live; it
resembles the air they breathe, which is

* Nch. viii. io.

necessary

A.ece{.lry for the motion of the heart, SERIM.
arid all the vital fundions. But as the
breathing of infected air proves fatal to
life; in the fame manner joy, drawn
from a corrupted source, is deflru&ive,
both of virtue and of true happiness.
When you have no plealire in good-
ness, you may with certainty conclude the
reason to be, that your pleasure is all de-
rived from an oppolite quarter. You have
exhausted your affeiiion upon the world.
You have drunk too much of its poi-
ibned waters: to have any rclifli for a pure
ipring.

Eflimate, therefore, tlh genuineness of

your religious principles; eftimatc tle tde-
gree of your stability in religious prac-
tice, by the degrce of -your fa'isfaCtion in
piety and virtue. Be assured that where
your treasure is, there will your delight
be also. The worldly man rejoices in his
possessions; the voluptuous in his plea-
fures; the social in his friends and com-
panions. The truly good man rejoices
ai doing jlly', loving wercy, and walking

E e 3 hzmbl

E R M. humzliy with the Lord his God. lHe is
tiv happy, when employed in the regular dif..

charge of the great duties of life. Spon-
taneous they flow from the affeiions of a
pure heart. Not only from the keeping
of the divine commandments he expecls,
but in the ketping of them, he enjoys a
great reward.-Accordingly, in the senti-
ments of holy men recorded in scripture,
we find this tiirit every-;where prevalent.
T;eir language was; TJ', flatltes lhave I
ta-e': as ,mine hcritare for ever; f(ir thc' are
t. joieii g o ./' ,c. rb:'}' a;e

i,;, fo/eCs

i t/bs honkl cf .' yi'r-ri:;/a:e. he;' arei
j'erc.ir b.ha: hC!el:, and the hoe;I -c1Nomb.
Ifhoml have I i, heaven but thee ? l2:nd there
is iloe upoiC earh th, tt I Ide,' bc,2es thee.
They did not receive the /.ii-it if boInae,
but the lrpiit of sadoptiOn. T/Lj' wore filled
w-it, peace and joy ii believing. Thy, re-
osiced i12 hope of the gl.,j of Goid. As soon
as the gThiopian eunuch received fiom
Philip the light of the Gospel, that light
revivete and cheered his heart. A new fun
seemed to arise; a new glory to shine

around

around hiim. Every objcE& brightened; and S E R M.
he went on his cway rijc'iiig ': . After the
lame manner fiould every gcod man pro-
ceed in his journey through life, with a fe-
rene and cheerful spirit. ConRernation anid
dejedion let him leave to the flavcs of guilt;
who have every thing to dread, both firom
this world and the next. If he appear be-
fore others with a dilpirited alipct, he dif-
hIonours religion; and affords ground for
uflpicion, that he is either ignorant oi its
nature, or a llrangcr to its powe:'.

Thus I have flewn joy to be essential

to religion. It is the spirit which it in-
spires, and which it requires in good men.
But in our present state, the best principles
may be carried to a dangerous excess; and
Ujoy, like other things, has its due limits.
To serve God with unmixed delight, be-
longs to more advanced spirits in a happier
world. In this region of imperfection, rome
infusions from a different cup, mufl of ne-
ceflity tincqure our joy. Let us then,

Als, viii. 39.
Ee 4 II, TURv

?
,

SERM. II. TURN to the other fide of the argii-
XIv. ,-r-j ment, and confider the realbOs which ren-

der it proper, that when we rejoice, we
hlould rejoice withi trembling.

In the firfl place, Because all the ob-

jects of religion, which afford ground for
joy, tend to inspire, at the fain timle, re-
verence and fear. We serve 4 Benefador,
it is true, in whom we have reaion to de-
light; whose purposes are gracious; whose
law is the plan of our happinels. But this
Benefador, is the Kiig cternal, inmmortal,
and invfible; at whose prefepce the moun-
tains shake, and Nature trembles. Evcy)
good, and every perfc7 gift, comle down fronz
him. But the hand which confers them,
we cannot fee. Mysterious obscurity refts
upon his essence. He dwclleth isn tIeefcrct
place of thinder; and clouds and darkness
surround him. He is the Hearer of prajer;
but we lift our voice to him from afar.
Into his immediate presence no access is
permitted. Our warmest devotion admits
rp familiarity with him. God is in heaven,
id thoiu upon earth; therefore, let thy

words

words be few. If his omniicience admi- ERM.

XIV.

nifters comfort in our secret distress, it like-
wife fills with awe the heart that is conscious
of guilt. For, if he knows our frame, and
remc1ebers we are diuf; our iniquities, also,
are ever before him; our secret Jins, in the
light of his countenance.

Throughout all his dispensations, great-

pess, in conjuncion with goodness, firikes
our view; and wherever we behold the
Parent, we behold tle Legislator also. The
death of Christ, in behalf of a guilty
world, is the chief ground of religious
hope and joy. But it is no lets the ground
of reverence; when, in this high tranf-
acion, we contemplate God, as at once
stria in justice, and great in mercy. I
the Lord keep mercy for thotuzias of them
;bIat sTar me. Iforgive their iniquit'y, traf-
greffon, and fin; but I will by no means
clear the guilty. When we open the book
of the law, we find promibfs and threaten-
ings mingled in the fame page. On the
one fide, we fee Heaven displayed in
all its glory: On the other, Hell opening

S E R M. its terrours. In short, in whatever li-Ti:
_,IV we view religion, it appears folemrn rn

venerable. It is a temple full of niajeft)y
to which the vorfhippers may approach
with comfort, in the hope of obhni!i:ig
grace, and lfinding mercy ; but where they
cannot enter, without being impresscd
with awe. If we may be permitted to
compare spiritual with natural thirns,
religion resembles not thole scenes of
natural beauty, wliere every objecdt iiles.
It cannot be likened to the gay landscape,
or the flowery field. It resembles more
the augult and fublirne appearances of
Nature; the lofty mountain, the expanded
.ocean, and the Sfarry firmament; at the
fight of which, the mind is at once over-
awed and delighted; and, from the union
of grandeur with beauty, derives a pleasing,
but a serious, emotion.

IN the second place, As jny, tempered

by fear, suits the nature of religion, lb
it is requisite for the proper regulation of
the conduct of man. Let his joy flov

from

from the best and purest source; yet, if it SERM.

XIV.

remain long unmixed, it is apt to become
dangerous to virtue. As waters which
are never stirred, nor troubled, gather a
Iedinent, which putrifies them; so the
undisturbed continuance of placid sensa-
tions engenders disorders in the human
foul. It is wifely ordered in our present
slate, that joy and fear, hope and grief,
flould act alternately, as checks and ba-
lances upon each other, in order to pre-
vent an excess in any of them, which
our nature could not bear. If we were
fubjecd to no alarms of danger, the
wisest would soon become improvident;
and the most humble prciumptuous.
Man is a pilgrim on earth. Were his
path to be always smooth and flowery,
he would be tempted to relinquish his
guide, and to forget the purpose of his
journey. Caution and fear are the
{hields of happiness. Unguarded joy
begets indolence; indolence produces fe-
curity; security leads to rashness; and
rashness ends in ruin. In order to re-

joice

S E R M. joice long, it is neceTlEry that wve ri,,-

XI V,
,i-. wi'h .tremblingo. Had our first parents

oblerved this rule, man might have beer'
ftil in paradise. He who faith in hi,;
hieart, Mvy 7mozotii Jfaids flrog ; I jsj, /
never be moved; may be afllured, that his
slate already begins to totter. Religion,
therefore, performs a kind oflice, in giv-
ing us the admonition of the Text. I1
inspires cheerfulnels in the service of
God. It proposes joy, as our chief ijring
of aation. But it fiuppoits jos, by guard-
ing it wil'i fear; not suppressing, but re-
gulating its indulgence; requiring us to
rejoice, like persons who have obtained
a treasure, which, through want of vigi-
lance, they are exposed to lose. De-
pendent beings are formed for fubmif-
sion; and to submit, is to fland in awe.
Becaqfe the Lord reignleth, kt the earth be
glad. We are the fubjets of God; and
:therefore may justly rejoice. But still we
-are fllbjeas; and, therefore, trembling
;nuft mix itself with our joy.

IN

IN the third place, The unstable condi- S RRM.

tion of all humanl things, naturally in-.vJ
spires fear in the midst of joy. The
spirit to which religion forms us, must
undoubtedly correspond to the itate in
which we are placed, and to the part
which is afl;ned us to at. Now, the
firll view under which our prcfent itate
appears, is that of fallen creatures, who
are undergoing in this worid, probation
and tri:.l for their irccov

"

, nnd are

co(!manded to zt:,r*/' o0t! i/Ji' Jalvation
ii'/b fi,'r ad trmbli2ng. This view of
our condition infers not habitual dejedion
of mind. It requires not melancholy
abLra&ion from the affairs, or total con-
tempt of the amuiements ci life. But it
inspires humility. It enforces dependence
on divine aid; and calls forth the voice
0f supplication to Heaven. In a situation
so critical, and where interests so important
are at stake, every reasonable person mult
confess, that 'erioufnefs ought to temper
rejoicing.

Were

S E R M. Were there in human life any fixec

XIV.
x,.- point of liability and reft, attainable by

man; could we, at any one moment, al-
sure ourselves, that there remained no
latent source of danger, either to our tem-
poral, or our spiritual fiate; then I admit
we might lay trembling aside, and re-
joice in full security. But, alas! no
fich safe station, no fucll moment of
confidence, is allowed to man during his
warfare on earth. Vicissitudes of good
and evil, of trials and consolations, fill
up his life. The belc intentioned arc
Sometimes betrayed into crimes; the most
prudent overwhelmed with misfortunes.
The world is like a wheel inceflantly re-
volving, on which human things alter-
nately rife and fall. What is past of our
life has been a chequered scene. On its
remaining periods, uncertainty and dark-
ness reft. Futurity is an unknown re-
gion, into which no man can look for-
ward without awe, because he cannot tell
what forms of danger or trial may meet
him there. This we know well, that in

23 every

every period of our life, the path of hap- s F R M.
niness fiall be found ftcp and arduous; Xv.
but swift and easy the deiccrnt to ruin.
WVhat, with much exertion of care and
vigilance, we had built up, one unwary
acion may, in an evil hour, overthrow.
The props of human coniidence are, in
general, insecure. Tile sphere of human
pleasures is narrow. \hile we form
ichcmes for frengthening tlih one, and for
enlarging the other, dcath, mrcan-whie,
advances. Life, with a swift, though in-
sensible courfc, glides awav; and, like a
river which undermines its banks, gra-
dually impairs our state. Year after year
fcals something from us; till the decaying
ftbric.totter of itself, and crumble at length
into dust. So that, whether we confi-
der life or death, time or eternity, all
things appear to concur in giving to man
the admonition of the Text, REjoice with
trembling.

I HAVE now shown, in whiat refpeds
religion both promotes joy, and inspires

serious-

S E R M. seriousness. It places us in the mos fl-
xiv.

_ vourable situation, which human life as:

fords, for joy; and it gives us every assist-
ance, for reliffing that joy. It renders
it our duty to cultivate the fitisfaaion
which it yields. It demands a cheerful
spirit, in order to ascertain the sincerity
of our principles, and to confirm us in
good practice. At the fame time the
joy which it inspires, is tempered with
fear by the genius of religion itself;
by the danger to which unguarded joy
would expose us; and by the impropriety
of indulging it, in a situation so mixed as
the present. The tre!izbling which is here
enjoined, is not to be underitood as fig-
nifying a pusillanimous dejedion. It im-
ports no more than that caution and so-
briety, which prudence dictates, as be-
longing to our itate. By connecting such
trembling with our joy, religion means
to recommend to us, a cheerful, but a
comnpofed spirit, equally remote from
the humiliating depression of fear, and
the exulting levity of joy. Always to re-

23 joice,

joice is to be a fool. Always to tremble, E R M.

XIV.

is to be a slave. It is a modest cheerful-
ness, a chastened joy, a manly seriousness,
which becomes the servant of God.

BUT is this, it may perhaps be said, the

whole amount of that boasted fatisfation
which religion betows ? Is this all the
compensation which it makes, for those
sacrifices it exacts? Are not the terms
which vice holds out far more enticing,
when it permits us to gratify every desire;
and, in return for our surmounting the
timorous scruples ofconfcience, promises us
a life of gaiety, festivity, and unrestrained
joy ?- Such promises vice may indeed
make; but, how far it fulfils them, we
may safely refer to the determination of
the greatest fenfulalift, when he has finiflhed
his career, and looks back on what he has
enjoyed. Ask him, Whether he would re-
commend to his children, and his friends,
to hold the fame course; and whether, with
his dying breath, he dare aflure them, that
the gratifications of licentiousness afford the
greatest enjoyment of life ? Whetever hopes

VOL. I. Fs vice

SERM. vice may at the beginning inspire, yet,

XIV.
H-o, after the trial is made, it has been always

found that criminal pleasures are the bane
of happiness, the poison, not the cordial,
of our present tate. They are pleasures
compensated by an infinite overbalance of
pain; moments of delight, succeeded by
years of regret; purchased at the expence
of injured reputation, broken health, and
ruined peace. Even abftrating from their
pernicious consequences, they are, formoft
part, in themselves treacherous pleasures;
unsound and disturbed in the moments of
enjoyment. In the minds of fichb laughter,
the heart is forrowfil. Often is the smile
of gaiety assumed, while the heart akes
within: And though folly may laugh, guilt
will fling. Correating this pernicious
phrenzy of pleasure, and reducing it to a
more fober and regulated state, religion is,
in truth, no other than wisdom, introducing
peace and order into the life of man.

While religion condemns such pleasures

as are immoral, it is chargeable with no
improper austerity, in respect of those

which

which are of an innocent kind. Think SE R M.

XIV.

not, that by the cautious discipline ,-
which it prescribes, it excludes you from
all gay enjoyment of life. Within the com-
pass of that sedate spirit, to which it forms
you, all that is innocently pleasing will be
found to lie. It is a mistake to imagine,
that in constant effusions of giddy mirth,
or in that flutter of spirits which is excited
by a round of diversions, the chief enjoy-
ment of our state consists. Were this the
cafe, the vain and the frivolous would be
on better terms for happiness, than the
wife, the great, and the good. To arrange
the plans of amusement, or to preside in
the haunts of jollity, would be more de-
firable, than to exert the highest effort of
mental powers for the benefit of nations.
A consequence so absurd, is fuficient to
explode the principle from which it flows.
To the amusements and lesser joys of the
world, religion assigns their proper place.
It admits of them, as relaxations from
care, as instruments of promoting the union
of men, and of enlivening their social in-

F f 2 tercourfe,

SER M. tercourfe. But though, as long as they
XIV.

are kept within due bounds, it does not
censure nor condemn them; neither does
it propose them as rewards to the virtuous,
or as the principal objects of their pursuit.
To such, it points out nobler ends of action.
Their felicity it engages them to seek, in
the discharge of an useful, an upright, and
honourable part in life; and, as the habi-
tual tenour of their mind, it promotes cheer-
fulness, and discourages levity.

Between these two there is a wide

diftintion; and the mind which is most
open to levity, is frequently a stranger to
cheerfulness. It has been remarked, that
transports of intemperate mirth, are often
no more than flaihes from the dark cloud;
and that in proportion to the violence of
the effulgence, is the succeeding gloom.
Levity may be the forced prodution of
folly or vice; cheerfulness is the natural
offspring of wisdom and virtue only. The
one is an occasional agitation; the other a
permanent habit. The one degrades the
character; the other is perfealy confident

with

with the dignity of reason, and the steady S E R M.

XIV.

and manly spirit of religion. To aim at a
conrfant succession of high and vivid fen-
fations of pleasure, is an idea of happineAi
altogether chimerical. Calm and tempe-
rate enjoyment, is the utmost that is al-
lotted to man. Beyond this, we firuggle
in vain to raise our state; and, in fad, de-
press our joys, by endeavouring to heighten
them. Instead of those fallacious hopes of
perpetual festivity, with which the world
would allure us, religion confers upon us
a cheerful tranquillity. Instead of dazzling
us with meteors of joy, which sparkle and
expire, it iheds around us a calm and
steady light. By mixing trembling with
our joy, it renders that joy more solid,
more equal, and more lassing.

In this spirit, then, let us serve God,

and hold our course through life. Let us
approach to the Divine Being, as to a
sovereign of whom we stand in awe, and
to a father in whom we trust. In our
condut, let us be cautious and humble,
as those who have ground to fear; well

F f 3 pleated

SE R M. pleased and cheerful, as those who have
X[V. -,_[. cause to rejoice. Let us show the world,

that a religious temper, is a temper sedate,
not fad; that a religious behaviour, is a
behaviour regulated, not stiff and formal.
Thus we shall use the world, as not abusing
it; we ihall pass through its various changes,
with the least discomposure; and we ihall
vindicate religion from the reproaches of
those who would attribute to it either en-
thufiaftic joys or slavish terrours. We ihall
show, that it is a rational rule of life, wor-
thy of the perfection of God, and suitcd
to the nature and state of man.

# SERMON XV. On the Motives to CONSTANCY in VIRTUE. GALAT. vi. 9. And let us not be weary in well - doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

[ 439 ]

SERMON XV.
On the Motives to CONSTANCY in

VIRTUE.

GALAT. vi. 9.
And let us not be weary in well-doing; for

in due season we flJall reap, if 'we faint
lot.
D ISCONTENT is the most general SERM.

of all the evils which trouble the life .,-

of man. It is a disease, which every
where finds materials to feed itself; for
if real diitreffes be wanting, it substitutes
such as are imaginary in their place. It
converts even the good things of the
world, when they have been long enjoy-
ed, into occasions of disgust. In the
midst of prosperity, it disposes us to
complain; and renders tranquillity tire-

F f 4 some,

SERM. some, only because it is uniform. There

xv.
xv. is no wonder that this spirit of restlessness

and diffatisfaacion, which corrupts every
terrestrial enjoyment, should have some-
times penetrated into the region of virtue.
Good men are not without their frailties;
and the perverseness incident to human
nature, too readily leads us, who become
weary of all other things, to be weary, also,
in well-doing.

Let me put a cafe, which, perhaps,

will be found not unfrequent in ordinary
life. Suppose a person, after much com-
merce with the world, to be convinced
of its vanity. He has seen its most
flattering hopes to be fallacious. He has
felt its most boasted pleasures to be un-
fatisfaCory. He resolves, therefore, to
place his happiness in virtue; and, dif-
regarding all temptations from interest,
to adhere to what is right and honour-
able in conduC. He cultivates acquaint-
ance with religion. He performs, with
seriousness, the offices of devotion. He
lays down to himself, a rational and use-

ful

ful plan of life; and, with fatisfaion, S E R M.

XY.

holds on for a while in this reformed
course. But, by degrees, discouragements
arise. The peace which he hoped to en-
joy, is interrupted, either by his own frail-
ties, or by the vices of others. Passions
which had not been thoroughly subdued,
struggle for their accustomed gratification.
The pleasure which he expeded to find in
devotion, sometimes fails him; and the in-
justice of the world often fours and frets
him. Friends prove ungrateful; enemies
mifreprelent, rivals supplant him: And part,
at least, of the mortifications which he sus-
sers, he begins to ascribe to virtue.- Is
this all the reward of my serving God, and
renouncing the pleasures of fin? Verily, in
vain I have cleafcd my heart, and wafned
my hands in innocency. Behold, the ungodly
proJper in the world, and have more than
heart can wiJs ; while, all the day long, I
am plagued and chaflened every morning.-
To such persons as these, and to all who
are in hazard of being infected with their

spirit,

S E R M. spirit, I now address myself. In reply to
xv. -_ ) their complaints, I purpose to shew, That

in no slate they can chute on earth, by no
plan of conduct they can form, it is poffi-
ble for them to escape uneasiness and difap-
pointment; that in a life of virtue, they
will susser less uncafinefs, and fewer difap-
pointments, than in a course of vice; they
will poflefs much higher resources and ad-
vantages; and they will be assured of com-
plete reward at the end. From these con-
fiderations, I hope to make it appear, that
there is no sufficient reason for our being
weanr in well-doing; and that, taking hu-
man life upon the whole, Virtue is far the
moif eligible portion of man.

I. UNEASINESS and disappointment are

inseparable, in some degree, from every
slate on earth. Were it in the power of
the world, to render those who attach
themselves to it, satisfied and happy, you
might then, I admit, have some title to
complain, if you found yourselves placed

upon

upon worse terms in the service of God. SE RM.
But this is so far from being the cafe, that x v
among the multitudes who devote them-
selves to earthly pleasure, you will not find
a tingle person who has completely attained
his aim. Enquire into the condition of
the high and the low, of the gay and the
serious, of the men of business and the men
of pleasure, and you shall behold them all
occupied in lupplying some want, or in
removing some distress, No man is pleated
with being precisely what he is. Every-
where there is a void; generally, even in
the most prosperous life, there is some cor-
ner poffelfed by sorrow. He who is en-
gaged in business, pines for leisure. He
who enjoys leisure, languishes for want of
employment. In a single state, we envy
the comforts of a family. In conjugal
life, we are chagrined with domestic
cares. In a safe ination, we regret the
want of objets for enterprize. In an
enterprizing life, we lament the want of
}afety. It is the doom of man, that his

O0 s{ky

SERM. sky should never be free from all clouds.
^..j IHe is, at present, in an exiled and fallen

slate. The objecs which surround him, are
beneath his native dignity. God has
tinged them all with vanity, on purpose to
make him feel, that this is not his reft; that
here he is not in his proper place, nor ar-
rived at his true home.

If, therefore, you aim at a condition

which mall be exempted from every dif-
quiet, you pursue a phantom; you increase
the vanity and vexation of life, by enga-
ging in a chafe so fruitless. If you complain
of virtue, because there is incident to it a
portion of that uneasiness which is found
in every other state, your complaint is mofl
unreasonable. You claim an immunity
from evil, which belongs not to the lot of
man. Reconcile yourselves, then, to your
.condition; and, instead of looking for
perfect happiness any where on earth, glad.
ly embrace that state which contains the
fcweft sorrows.

II. TuouGi

II. THOUGII no condition of human SERM.

life is free from uneasiness, I contend, .
That the uneasiness belonging to a sinful
course, is far greater than what attends
a course of well-doing. If you be weary
of the labours of virtue, be assured, that
the world, whenever you try the ex-
change, will lay upon you a much heavier
load. It is the outside, only, of a licentious
life, which is gay and fmniling. Within,
it conceals toil, and trouble, and deadly
sorrow. For vice poisons human happiness
in the spring, by introducing diolrder into
the heart. Those pafions which it seems
to indulge, it only feeds with imperfect
gratifications; and thereby strengthens
them for preying, in the end, on their
unhappy victims.

It is a great mifcake to imagine, that the

pain of felf-denial is confined to virtue.
He who follows the world, as much
as he who follows Christ, must take zp
his croft; and to him, assuredly, it will
prove a more oppressive burden. Vice
allows all our paiflons to range uncon-

trolled;
8x

.SE R M. trolled; and where each claims td be

XV.
Am fuperiour, it is impossible to gratify all.

The predominant desire can only be in-
dulged at the expence of its rival. No
mortifications which virtue exacts% are
more severe than those, which ambition
imposes upon the love of ease, pride upon
interest, and covetousness upon vanity,
Self-denial, therefore, belongs, in com-
mon, to vice and virtue; but with this
remarkable difference, that the passions
which virtue requires us to mortify, it
tends to weaken; whereas those which
vice obliges us to deny, it, at the fame
time, strengthens. The one diminishes
the pain of self denial, by moderating
the demand of passion; the other in-
creases it, by rendering those demands
imperious and violent. What distresses,
that occur in the calm life of virtue, can
be compared to those tortures, which re-
morse of conscience inflicts on the wicked;
to those severe humiliations, arising from
guilt combined with misfortunes, which
fink them to the duff; to those violent

agitations

agitatious of shame and disappointment, SE R M.

XV.

which sometimes drive them to the molt :
fatal extremities, and make them abhor
their existence ? How often, in the midst
of those disastrous situations, into which
their crimes have brought them, have
they cursed the fedutions of vice; and,
with bitter regret, looked back to the day
on which they first forsook the path of in-
nocence?

But, perhaps, you imagine, that to such

miseries as these, great criminals only are
exposed; and that, by a wary and cautious
management, it is possible to avoid them.
Take vice and virtue, then, in the most
general point of view. Compare God and
the world as two masters, the one or other
of whom you must obey; and confider
fairly, in whose service there will be reason
for your being weary soonest, and repenting
most frequently. The world is both a hard
and a capricious master. To submit to a
long servitude, in the view of a recompcnce
from which they are excluded in the end,

is

S E R M. is known to be often the fate of those, who
XV. .-.., are devoted to the world. They sacrifice

their present ease to their future profpees.
They court the great, and flatter the mul-
titude. They prostitute their conscience,
and dishonour their charaser: And, after
all their efforts, how uncertain is their fuc-
ces ! Competitors jutile, and outstrip them,
The more artful deceive, the more violent
overthrow them. Fair profpeas once
smiled; but clouds soon gather; the sky is
darkened; the scene changes; and that
fickle world, which$ a moment before, had
flattered, the next moment forgets them.

God is never mistaken in the character

of his servants; for he feeth their hearts,
and judgeth according to the truth. But
the world is often deceived in those who
court its favour; and, of course, is un-
just in the distribution of ifs rewards.
Flattery gains the ear of power. Fraud
supplants innocence; and the pretending
and assuming occupy the place of the
worthy and the modest, In vain you

claim

claim any merit with the world, on ac- SERM.

XV.

count of your good intentions. The _ --
world knows them not; regards them
not. It judges of you folcly by your
actions; and, what is worle, by the fluc-
cess of your aiions, which often depends
not on yo'irfelves. But, in the fight of
the Supreme Being, good intentions sup-
ply the place of good deeds, which you
had not the opportunity of performing.
The well-meant endeavours of the poor
find the fame acceptance with him, as
the generous actions of the rich. The
widow's mite is, in his eye, a coflly
offering; and even he who givcth to a
djciple a cup of cold water, when he can
give him no more, goeth not cithout his
reward.

As the world is unjust in its judgments,

so it is ungrateful in its requitals. Time
speedily effaces the memory of the greatest
services; and when we can repeat them no
more, we are neglected and thrown aside.
It was the faying of a noted great man of
the world, on the fall of his fortunes,

VOL. I. G g "Had

SER . " Had I served God as faithfully as f
_XV, " have done my King, he would not

" have cast me off in my old age." Un-
faithfulness, and ingratitude, are unknown
to God. With him no new favourites
arise, to usurp the place, or to bear off the
rewards, of his ancient servants. Even to
your old age, I am He; and even to hoary
hairs, 1 will carry ,ou. I have made, and
I uwill bear; even I will cary,, and will
deliver you, faith the Lord Alnighy *
Since, then, in our several departments, we
must labour, What comparison is there, be-
tween labouring for God, and for the world ?
How unjust are they, who become weary
so much sooner in the service of God, than
they do in that of the most severe and im-
perious of all masters.

II. TIHE resources of virtue are much

greater than thole of the world; the com-
penfations which it makes for our distresses,
far more valuable. Perpetual success be-
longs neither to the one, nor the other.

e :I.aih, xlvi. 4.

But

45 I
But under disappointments, when they S E R M.

XV.

occur, virtue bears us up; the world ,
allows us to fink. When the mind of
a good man is hurt by misfortunes, re-
ligion administers the cordial, and infuses
the balm. Whereas the world inflits
wounds, and then leaves them to seter.
It brings sorrows, but it provides no
consolation. Consolation is entirely the
province of religion. Supposing religion
to be infcriour to vice in external advan-
tages, it must be allowed to possess internal
peace in a much higher degree. This
is so certain, that almost all men, at some
period or other of their life, look forward
to it, as to a desirable retreat. When the
ends of their present pursuit fliall be
accomplifled, they propole to themlelves
much fatisfation in an honourable
discharge of the duties of their station,
amidlt thole moderate paflions, and tem-
perate pleasures, which innocence allows.
That which all men agree in holding to
be second in importance to the pursuit
which the,: fbolo,.v, may be sifely esteemed

Gg to

SE R M. to be the first in real worth; and it may be

x V.
XV- concluded, that if they were not blinded

by tome prevailing passion, they would
discern and adopt it as such.

It is the peculiar efece of virtue, to

make a man's chief happiness arise from
himself and his own condu&. A bad
man is wholly the creature of the world.
IHe hangs upon its favour, lives by its
smiles, and is happy or miserable, in pro-
portion to his fucccfs. But to a virtuous
man, success in worldly undertakings is
but a secondary objet. To discharge his
own part with integrity and honour, is
his chief aim. If he has done properly
what was incumbent on him to do, his
mind is at refl; to Providence he leaves
the event. His witness is in heaven, and
his record is on high. Satisfied with the
approbation of God, and the testimony
of a good confcicnce, he enjoys himself,
and dei'iies the triumphs of guilt. In
proportion as such manly principles rule
your heart, you will become independent
of the world; and will forbear complain-

4 ing

ing of its difcouragmcnts. It is the im- SER M.
perfecion of your virtue, which occasions r
you to be wear , in -well-drig. It is becaunf
your hearts remain divided bctweci God
and the world, that you are lo often dif-
contented; partly wishing to dilcharge your
duty, and partly fceking your happiness
from somewhat that is repugnant to your
duty. Study to be more confiltent in prin-
ciple, and more uniform in practice, and
your peace will be more unbroken.

Though virtue may appear at first fight

to contract the bounds of enjoyment, you
will find, upon reflection, that, in truth,
it enlarges them. If it restrains the excess
of tome pleaures, it favours and increases
others. It precludes you fiom none, but
such as are either fantaitic and imaginary,
or pernicious and deftruCive. Whatever
is truly valuable in human enjoyment, it
allows to a good man, no less than to
others. It not only allows him such plea-
fures, but heightens them, by that grateful
relish which a good conscience gives to
every pleasure. It not only heightens

Gg 3 them,

s E RM. them, but adds to them, also, the pccu-
XV. liar fatisfaaions which flow from virtuous

sentiments, from devout affections, and
religious hopes. On how much worse
terms is the finner placed, in the midst of
his boasted gratifications? His portion is
confined to this world, His good things
are all of one fort only; he has neithcr
knowledge, nor relish, of any thing be-
yond them. His enjoyment, thcrcfore,
refis on a much narrower basis, than that
of the servants of God. Enlarge, as much
as you please, the circle of worldly grati-
fications; yet, if nothing of the mind and
the heart, nothing of a refined and moral
nature, enter into that circle, and vary the
enjoyment, languor and wearinels soon
succeed. Among whom do you hear more
peevish exprefflons of discontent, or more
frequent complaints of low spirits, than
among the professed votaries of worldly
pleasure ?

Vice and virtue, in their progress, as

in every other respect, hold an opposite
cpurfe. The beginnings of vice are en-

ticing,

ticing. The first steps of worldly advance- s E R M.
ment, are flattering and pleasing. But the
continuance of success blunts enjoyment,
and flattens desire. Whereas the begin-
nings of virtue are laborious. But, by
perseverance, its labours diminifl, and
its pleasures increase. As it ripens into
confirmed habit, it becomes both finoother
in practice, and more complete in its re-
ward. In a worldly life, the termination
of our hopes always meets our view. We
fee a boundary before us, beyond which
we cannot reach. But the profpecs of
virtue are growing and endless. The righ-
teous /lall hold on in his way ; and he
that bath clean hands, Jfall lwax Jironger
and flronger. The path of the jif is as the
Jhining light, that Jf.ineth imore and more
unto the pesec'7 day. This brings me to
confider,

IV. THE assured hope, which good

men enjoy, of a full reward at last. I
have endeavoured by several confidera-
tions, to correct your impatience under

G g 4 the

SE R M. the present discouragements of virtue. I

XV.

_, have ihown many high advantages, which

it already poflFetes. But now, laying
all these alide; supposing virtue to have
brought you no advantage, but to have
only engaged you in perpetual ftrugglcs
with an evil world; the Text suggests
what is sufficient to answer every ob-
jedion, and to silence every complaint;
Li due season yoi J:all reap, if jcit faint
not. It is not a loose encouragement, or
a dubious hope, which is held forth to
us. A direct and explicit declaration is
made by the Spirit of God, that piety
and virtue, how discouraged soever, or
oppressed, they may be for a while, shall
not be fruifrated of their reward; but
that in due felafon, when the period which
is fixed by the Divine decree fliall come,
all who have not been uweary in well-
doing, though they may have sown in
tears, fJall reap in joy. As this great prin-
ciple of faith is so essential to our present
argument, and is indeed the foundation
of all religion, it will be proper that we

now

now take a view of the grounds on which s E R M.

XV.

it refts. By fixing our attention both on _V
the proofs which realbn iuggells, and on
the difcovcrics which revelation has made,
of a lhate ii' il'ture retribution, we shall
take an ceQ u il method of confirming our
adherence to religion, and of baffling those
temptations which might lead us to be weaOy
inl cwell-doin:g.

TIIE firif, and most obvious prefump-

tion, which reason affibrds in behalf of
future rewards to the righteous, arifcs
from the imperfet distribution of good
and evil in our present state. Notwith-
standing what I have advanced concern-
ing the pleasures and advantages of vir-
tue, it cannot be denied, that tile happi-
ness of good men is often left incomplete.
The vicious pofiTis advantages, to which
they have no right; while the confcicn-
tious susser for the fake of virtue, and
groan under distresses which they have
not merited from the world. Indeed,
were the distribution of good and evil, in

this

SER M. this life, altogether promifcilous; could

Xv.

it be laid, with truth, that the moral
condition of men had no influence what-
ever upon their happiness or misery; I
admit, that from such a state of things,
no presumption would arise of any fu-
ture retribution being intended. They
who delight to aggravate the mifcries of
life, and the diflreffes of virtue, do no
service to the argument in behalf of Pro-
vidence. For, if total disorder be found
to prevail now, suspicions may, too just-
ly, arise, of its prevailing for ever. if
he who rules the univerie, entirely ne-
gleas virtue here, the probability must
be finall, of his rewarding it hereafter.
But this is far from being the true slate
of the faF. What human life presents to
the view of an impartial observer, is by
no means a scene of entire confusion;
but a state of order, b gun and carried
on a certain length. Virtue is so far
from being negleced by the Governour
of the world, that from many evident
marks it appears to be a chief objetl of

his

his care. In the confitution of human SERM.
nature, a foundation is laid, for comfort -,
to the righteous, and for internal puniih-
ment to the wicked. Throughout the
course of Divine government, tendencies
towards the happiness of the one, and the
misery of the other, conltantly appear.
They are so conspicuous, as not to have
escaped the notice of the rudest nations.
Over the whole earth, they have diffused
the belief, that Providence is propitious to
virtue, and averse to guilt. Yet these
tendencies are, fomctimes, dilappointed of
their effect, and that which Providence
visibly favours, is left, at present, without an
adequate reward.

From filch an impecrfecC difribution of

happiness, what are we to conclude, but
that this systel is the beginning, not the
whole, of things; the opening only of a
more extenlive plan, whole conlumnmation
reaches into a future world? If God has
alreadyfi't his thronefbr juglimelnt; if he has
visibly begun to reward and to punish, in

some

S E R M. some degree, on earth, he cannot mean to

xv.

leave the exercise of government incom-
plete. Having laid a foundation of a
great and noble itruaure, he will in due
time rear it up to perfe.ion. The unfi-
nifled parts of the fabric evidently flow,
that a future buiiding is intended. All his
other works are constru&ed according to
the most full and ex:ict proportion. In the
natural world, nothing is dcicicnt, nothing
redundant. It is in the mor.l world, only,
that we difcovcr irregularity and defete.
It falls short of that order and pcrfection
which appear 'n the reil of the cre:ation. It
exhibits not, in its present ftatc, the fame
ieatures of complete wisdom, julficc, or
goodncfs. But can we believe, that, under
the government of the Supreme Being, those
a. parent disorders fllall not be relified at
the last ? Or, that from his condua towards
his rational creatures, the chief of his works,
the sole objetion against his perfeCtion shall
be allowed to rife, and shall continue unre-
moved for ever?

On

On the supposition of future rewards SER M.

XV.

and puniflments, a satisfying account .
can be given, of all the diobrders which
at present take place on earth. Chriftia-
nity explains their origin, and traces
them to their iffuc. Man, fallen from
his primieval felicity, is now undergoing
probation and discipline for his final
state. Divine juflice remains, for a sea-
son, concealed; and allows men to a2t
their parts with freedom on this theatre,
that their characers may be formed and
ascertained. Amidst discouragements and
afflitions, the righteous give proof of
their fidelity, and acquire the habits of
virtue. But, if you suppose the events
of this life to have no reference to an-
other, the whole state of man becomes
not only inexplicable, but contradictory
and inconfilrent. The powers of the in-
feriour animals are perfe&ly suited to
their station. They know nothing higher
than their present condition. In gratify-
ing their appetites, they fulfil their defti-
ny, and pass away. Man, alone, comes

forth

S E R M. forth to aa a part, which carries no
xv.

_,| meaning, and tends to no end. Endowed

with capacities, which extend far beyond
his preient sphere; fitted by his rational
nature for running the race of immorta-
lity, he is flopped short in the very en-
trance of his course. He squanders his
acivity on pursuits, which he discerns to
be vain. He languishes for knowledge,
which is placed beyond his reach. He
thirsts after a happiness, which he is
doomed never to enjoy. He fees and
laments the dilafters of his state; and
yet, upon this supposition, can find no-
thing to remedy them.-IHas the eter-
nal God any pleasure in fiorting himielf
with such a fcenc of misery and folly, as
this life, if it had no connexion with an-
other, mull exhibit to his eye? Did he
call into exilience this magnificent uni-
verse, adorn it with so much beauty and
splendour, and fllrround it with those
glorious luminaries which we behold in
the heavens, only that boine generations
of mort:.l men might arile to behold these

wonders,

wonders, and then disappear for ever? S E R M.

XV.

How unsuitable, in this cafe, were the .
habitation to the wretched inhabitant!
How inconsistent the commencement of
his being, and the mighty preparation of
his powers and faculties, with his delii-
cable end! I-How contradikory, in finc,
were every thing which concerns the itate
of man, to the wifdoi and perfedlion of his
Maker !

Throughout all ages, and among all

nations, the perfiiafion of a future life
has prevailed. It sprung not from the
refinements of science, or the fipeculations
of philosophy; but from a deeper and
stronger root, the natural sentiments of
the human heart. Hence it is common
to the philosopher and the savage; and
is found in the most barbarous, as well
as in the most civilized regions. Even
the belief of the being of a God, is not
more general on the earth, than the be-
lief of immortality. Dark, indeed, and
confuted, were the notions which men
entertained concerning a future state.

13 Ye,

SERrM. Yet fill, in that slate, they looked for
_,_ retribution, both to the good and the

bad; and in the perfciion of such plea-
fures, as they knew best and valued molf
highly, they.placed the rewards of the vir-
tuous. So universal a content seems plain-
ly to indicate an original determination
given to the foul by its Creator. It shows
this great truth to be native and congenial
to man.

When we look into our own breafds,

we find various anticipations and pre-
fages of future existence. Most of our
great and high pafiqons extend beyond
the limits of this life. The ambitious
and the felf-denied, the great, the good,
and the wicked, all take interest in what
is to happen after they ihall have left the
earth. That passion for fame, which in-
spires so much of the acdivity of man-
kind, plainly is animated by the perfua-
sion, that confcioufniefs is to survive the
difiblution of the body. The virtuous
are supportcd by the hope, the guilty
tormented with the dread, of what is to

take

take place after death. As death approaches, S E R M.

xv.

the hopes of the one, and the fears of the
other, are found to redouble. The foul,
when issuing hence, seems more clearly to
discern its future abode. All the operations
of conscience proceed upon the belief of
immortality. The whole moral conduc
of men refers to it.. All legislators have
supposed it. All religions are built upon it.
It is so essential to the order of society, that
were it erased, human laws would prove
ineffeaual restraints from evil, and a deluge
of crimes and miseries would overflow the
earth. To suppose this universal and power-
ful belief to be without foundation in truth,
is to suppose, that a principle of delusion
was interwoven with the nature of man;
is to suppose, that his Creator' was reduced
to the necessity of impressing his heart with
a falsehood, in order to make him answer
the purposes of his being.

BUT though there arguments be strong,

yet all arguments are liable to objection.
Perhaps this general belief, of which I have

VOL. I. H h spoken,

SE M. spoken, has been owing to inclination and
'-.v-' desire, more than to evidence. Perhaps,

in our reasonings on this subjea from the
divine perfeaions, we flatter ourselves with
being of more consequence, than we truly
are, in the system of the universe. Hence
the great importance of a discovery pro-
ceeding from God hirmfelf, which gives full
authority to all that reason had fuggefred,
and places this capital truth beyond the
reach of suspicion or distrust.

The method which Christianity has taken

to convey to us the evidence of a future
state, highly deserves our attention. Had
the Gospel been addressed, like a system of
philosophy, solely to the understanding of
men; had it aimed only at enlightening
the studious and reflecting, it would have
confined itself to abftrad truth; it would
have simply informed us, that the righteous
are hereafter to be rewarded, and finners to
be puniflied. Such a declaration as that
contained in the Text, would have been
sufficient: Be not weary in wecll-doing, fJr
in dieefefon.you JJall reap, if you faint not.

But

But the Gospel has not flopped, at barely SE RM.
announcing life and immortality to man-
kind. It was calculated for popular edifi-
cation. It was intended to be the religion
not merely of the few, whose underfianding
was to be informed ; but of the many, also,
whose imagination was to be impressed, and
whose passions were to be awakened, in or-
der to give the truth its due influence over
them. Upon this account it not only re-
veals the certainty of a future slate, but, in
the peribn of the great Founder of our
religion, exhibits a leries of facts relating
to it; by means of which, our senses, our
imagination, and paflions, all become in-
terested in this great objec.

The refurreaion of Christ from the grave

was designed to be a sensible evidence, that
death infers not a final extincion of the
living principle. He rose, in order to shew,
thc't, in our name, he had conquered death,
and was become the j'l//f-frits of themi that
Jleep. Nor did he only rile from the grave,
but, by ascending to heaven in a vilible
form, before many xitnetles, gave an ocular

H h 2 specimen

SE R M. specimen of the transition from this world

xv.
I-,_ into the region of the blessed. The employ-

ments which now occupy him there, are
fully declared. As our fore-runner he hath
entered within the veil. He appears in the
presence of God for us. He maketh perpetual
interceJion for his people. Igo, faith he, to
my Father and your Father, to 19, God and
your God. In my Father's Ihout are many
mansions. I go to prepare a place for you.
I will come again, and receive you to mfelf/
that where I am, there yon may be aso. The
circuinftances of his coming again, are dif-
tindly foretold. The founding of the last
trumpet, the refurredion of the dead, the
appearance of the Judge, and the solemnity
with which he shall discriminate the good
from the bad, are all described. The very
words in which he flall pronounce the final
sentence, are recited in our hearing: Come,
ye blefed of my Father ! inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the Joundation of the
world. Then shall the holy and the just be
caught up in the clouds, to meet the Lord in
the air. They shall enter with him into

the

the city of the living God. They shall possess s EXR M.

XV.

the new earth and new heavens, wherein -
dwelleth righteoufinef. God f/all wipe away
all tears from their eyes. They faJll behold
his ace in righteoutnefs, and befatisfied with
his likeness for ever.-By recording such a
train of striking circumifances and fads, the
Gospel familiarizes us in some measure with
a future state. By accommodating this great
discovery, in so useful a manner, to the
conceptions of men, it furnishes a strong
intrinsic evidence of its divine origin.

THUS, upon the whole, whether you

consult your reason, or liften to the dif-
coveries of revelation, you behold our ar-
gument confirmed; you behold a life of
piety and virtue issuing in immortal felicity.
Of what worldly pursuit can it be pro-
nounced, that its reward is certain ? Look
every where around you, and you shall fee,
that the race is far from being always to the
swift, or the battle to the frong. The most
diligent, the most wife, the most accom-
plifhed, may, after all their labours, be dif-

appointed

S ER M. appointed in the end; and be left to susser
_-_- i the regret, of having pelct their flrengthfor

inought. But for the righteous is laid up the
crown of lifc. Their final happiness is pre-
pared in the eternal plan of Providence, and
secured by the labours and sufferings of the
Saviour of the world.

Cease then, from your unjust complaints

againf, virtue and religion. Leave difcon-
tent, and peeviflnefs, to worldly men. In
no period of diRrels, in no moment of dif-
appointment, allow yourselves to fufpedt
that piety and integrity are fruitless. In
every state of being, they lead to happiness.
If you enjoy not at prefcnt their full re-
wards, it is because the season of recom-
pence is not yet come. For, in. duetfeafon
jyou fall rcap. There is a lime which is
proper for reward; and there is a period
which belongs to trial. -low long the one
should laPt, and when the other flould ar-
rive, belongs not to you to determine. It
is fixed by the wife, though unknown de-
cree of the Al;ighty. But, be aflured, that
ie that comnc!bh,Jj,/coli Cc, an; wi' not tarry.

8 HIe

He shall come in dtefeafon, to restore per- S E R M.
fecd order among his works; to bring reft :-
to the weary, comfort to the affliaed, and
just retribution to all men. Behold, faith
the faithful and true Witness, I come quick-
ly, and my reward is with me. To him that
overcometh, will I give to eat of the tree of
life, which is in the midji of the paradie of
God. I willgive him the morning flar. I
will make him a pillar in my temple. He
Jhall be clothed in white raiment; andfiall
fit down with me on my throne*.

*Rev. xxii. 12-ii. 7. 28.-iii. 12. 5. 21.
END OF TIIE FIRS~T VOLUME.
