a1i

SENTIMENTAL BEAUTIES

FROM THE WRITINGS OF
DR. B L A I R.

SEL.CTED WITH A VIEW

TO REFINE THE TASTE,
RECTIFY THE JUDGMENT,

AND
MOULD THE HEART TO VIRTUE.

THE FOURTH EDITION.

---The men whom moral duty guides
And pure religion charms, with God himfcif
Hold converse; grow familiar, day by day,
With his conceptions, act upon his plan
And form to his, the rclifh of their fouls.

LONDON:
PRINTED FOR JOIIH WALLIS, NO. i6, LVDGATE-

STREET; AND LEE AND HURST, PATEl-

NOSTER-ROW.
1 DCC XCVIII,

# PREFACE.

PREFACE.

T HE celebrity of Dr. BLAIR has been long
established as a claflical writer, a critic, a mo-
ralift, and a divine. His works recommend
themselves, as well by the weight and import-
ance of his observations, as by the ftreiigth and
beauty of his language.

The passages here fele&ed are not frittered

down to mere apothegms, and single maxims;
but contain fine illuRtrations, and, in some in-
stances, complete essays on the rcfpeive sub-
jects. They are adorned with all the charms
which language will admit, without injury to its
strength.

It may not be unnecessary to point out the

advantages of such a companion for the pocket.
Could we estimate the time wafted in the inter-
vals of business and amusement, it would be
found to bear a considerable proportion to the

A 2 length

lergth of human life. But he that carries a
book of this nature in his pocket, will be able
to redeem many valuable hours: not to Iav how
ufcful it muff be to have such a Monitor at hand;
from how many scenes of dissipation it may guard,
or how many aLts of folly it may prevent.

Those who compare this Edition with the

former, will immediately perceive it to be more
than doubled in its size. The enlargements have
been chiefly from the two last volumes of the
Autho's Sermons, which were not published
when the former appeared.

The EDnTOR has only to add, that, if the

Reader receives as much pleasure and inftruc-
tion from the perusal, as he did in the compila.
tion, he will be more than fatisfied-he will be
highly gratified.

T. W.

CON.

# CONTENTS.

CONTENTS.

Page

AFFABILITY -.-
feSl7cd Gaiety - - 6
Advantages of Labour - - - 136

mbition - - 1 55
Anxiety - - 233
-- the V;ice of Age - 2
Avarice - - - 3
Awe - - 5
Anger and Envy contrajfed - - 23
Appearances of Piety- - 62
Athefin (praslical) - - - 196
Corpafjion - - 7
Confiience - - S
Content - - 10
C-l/ancy and Firmness - -
Cheerfrilnefs of Age, &c. - 51
Chrjslian Forttude - - - 13
Choice of Friends - - 127
Comnmunon zwith God - 144
Chrflianity Rational - - 167

eation - - - 174

Charity - 185
Consolation _- - 192
Co7fuort to the Penitent - 93
----in Afflicion - - 94

A3

Comp;7on - 243

,- of God - - - 242

Deceit - -- I12
Devotion - - - 14
Difiontent - 16
Diffpation - - 8
Duty of Old Ae - - - 20
Danger of bad Exampes - - 237
Devout MIan - 55
Dfapps.ited Pride - - - 69
Delay - - - -11
Death - - - -
Divine Support - - 132
--- Omniscience - 139
- Prefince - - 137
Death of Chris - - - 63
Diffj/lion of the Forl. - - 178
Dark Providences illhtrated - -214
Effes of Religion - - - 2
·-- ofloofe Gratificatins - - 35
- of lice - - 95
- of Indolence - - 4
Events Uncertain - - 25
Envy - --133
Ends of Religious Worship - 220
Employment - I 17
Faith, Piety, and Pirtue - 26
Felicity equally dfltributed - 27
-- Temporal - - - 28

Spiritual - - 29

Fafye Sensibility - - - I I
-- Courage -- 131
Funeral - -- -119
Forgiveness -- - 23
Fortitude - -130
Faith - - - 86
Futurity - - g19o
Fountain of Happiness - 201
Friendjhip -. - 230
Fidelity - - - -231
God is Light -- 202
-- is Love - - 204
-- with refpe,7 to Man - 31
Good Matn 34
- Temper o - 92
_- Nature -- i61
Gratitude - 36
Grief - - - - 122
Goodnefi cfthe Creator - 176
God of Nature - - 98
Happinfs - - - I60
-- how judged of - 37
- - not Independent - - 38
Hifiory - - 39
Rope - . - 40
·Humanity - 41
Human 'icijftudes - - - 222
Ignorance of Good and Evil - 33
Indulry .- - 45
Intent of Religion - - 46

Idlen ess- - 18
Inijrudtisn -- -1 25
intremperance - 1- 8
Inac7tivity - .- 84
Idle Curiafity - - 2C6
Jfl ice and Mercy - - 166
Kingdsm of Gd - - 1I82
Lflufil Pleafsre - - 200
Lbve of YJtice - 47
Long Life - . 191gr
Limits of Human Knowledge - - 238
Man of the lrorld 53
-- of Bui- . 6
·-, of Pleafire - - 6
---'s Danger ard Security - l T
,--'s real Dependewce 54
Men of true Plealure- 63
Middle.dge 57
Adeditation -- - 226
Moderation - 59
Morality and Devotin - 16
MJfieries of Providence - 211
Mourner - - 12I
ANew Heavens and Earth - 180
--ear -- - 87
N-gler, of Relgion 59
Necerff.:y of Prudence - - 72
Old Age - 60
Obscurity of Proviltee - 213

3

Plcn re - - ~ - :164

·--- Sl.,? al, c. - 65
-- - of (Old 4ge - -66
Public Lre -- - 52
tPr',fimptin - - 67
Principle and Sentiment 70
Prosperity - 7 I
Pnfive lamencfs of Spirit - - 90
Progres of lice - - - 126
ProJperily and Adversity - -1
Patience - 148

--- under .ffitilon - 153
PajoMate an - - - I46
Pafton and Patience - - -152
Piety - - I62
Providence - - - 188
Propriety of Public 7Yotjhip - 218
Procrajination - -234
Redemption - 74
Rejfo-ratin -- - 75
Resignation - - 78
Religion - 7 5

Ridicule of . - I73

Religious R/efletion- 77
.- --- [fof7)ip - - -102
Recolleaion i - -112
Regularity - -116
Restraint -15
Religious tvorjhip - - 170
Self-Knowledge - - 48

Supf/ition and Enthusiasm - - 22
Sef- Comunion - - - 79
Settled Principles - - - 128
Sincrity - - 8I
Slth - -- - 82
Sobri.'e of J ind - 83
Solitude -- - 86
Study of Man -- - 8
SEnfbility -- - c8
Senfi of the Divine Pre fence - I)7
Scoffir, the -- - 17
Study of Nature -- - 76
Sin the Source of Sorrow -- - 227
Source of Evil - - 229
Slavery of Pice - 2I1
True Hofitutr - - -104
-- Religion - - -I08
- i tlue, &c. - - - 40
Temperance - 91
Time - - III
fiime Paol Imprcved - - 113
The Tomb - - -120
Temporizer, the - - -172
TraNitoriinefs of Life - 223
Tranquillity - -226
Unchangeablenefs of God - 221
Union of Piety and Morality - 58
Utility of Public $lor/hip - 219
Villain - 96
Virtue - - 98

# EXTRACTS FROM DR. BLAIR's LECTURES ON RHETORIC, &c.

Zoluptualy - 100

ir tue and Prcfperity - - 97
Zanity of the World - i66
IJ';nt of Foresight -- 30
lJorld -

1- - 0

IYay of the 7,orld - - - 236
Fifdom of God - - - 240
IWorldly Greatness - 36
23'h - -
- 03

EXTRACTS FROM

Dn. BLAIR's LECTUIiES ON RHETORIC, &c.

On Speech - - 245

Of Tale 2- - 246

Improvement of our Faculties - - 247
Of Critic/ii - - 249
Tajfle and Genius di/fintigujcd - - 251
Of Genius - - 252
Of Graneur - - 253
Of the Sublime I -

- 255

Sublimity of Scripture - 256
Of Homer - - 257
Of Ossian - 258
Us/ of Figurative Language - - 260
EnSgltJI Style - 26I

Dir.ó7ions /forforinig a Good Style . 262
Rif of Oratory - - 267
Grecian Eloq'ence - 2b8
Roman Eloquence - -- 271
Cicero and Demo/fhenes compared - 273
Eloquence of the 6hrifian Fatbers - 275
Englij/ and French Eloquence - 276
Means of Improving in Eloquence - 282
The 4ntients adl Mioderns Compared 288
Of Dialogues - - 293
Epijolary Vriting - 296
Of Fi'tSitiouis Hilory -- 300
Of Poetry - 305
Origin of Poety - 306
UnIon of Poetry and Afic - - 310
Paloral Poetry 3- 13
MIilton's Paradie Los - 314
On Tragedy -- 320
Origin of ragedy 322
Cl;aracter of Shakefpcare 323
On Dramatic Poetry --32

SENTI-

# AFFABILITY.

SENTIMENTAL BEAUTIES

oF
DR. BLAIR.

AFFABILITY.'

N order to render ourielves amiable in focicty,
we should correa every appearance of harsh-

ness in our behaviour. That courtesy ihould
distinguish our demeanour, which springs, not
so much from fludied politeness, as from a mild
and gentle heart. We flould follow the cufloms
of the world in matters indifferent; but flop
when they become finfiul. Our manners ought
to be simple and natural, and of courle they will
be engaging. Affictation is certain deformity-
By forming themselves on fantastic models, and
vying with one another in every reigning folly,
the young begin with being ridiculous, and end
in being vicious and immoral,

B ANXI-

# ANXIETY, THE VICE OF AGE.

ANXIETY, THE VICE OF AGE.
IGNORANCE of what is good or evil, fllould

correct anxiety about worldly fucccfs. As

raihnefs is the vice of youth, the opposite cx-
tremes of immoderate care is the vice of advanc-
ing years; but since attention is to often fruflrat-
ed, it thould never be allowed to deprive us of
tranquillity; that degree of uncertainty therefore
ought to render us temperate in pursuit, calm the
perturbation of hope and fear, and cure the pain
of anxiety.

Anxiety is the poison of human life. It is the

parent of many fins, and of more miseries. In a
world where every thing is so doubtful-where
we may succeed in our with, and be miserable,
-where we may be disappointed, and be blcifed
in the disappointment; what means a reftlcfs fiir
and commotion of the mind? Solicitude cannot
alter the course, or unravel the intricacy of hu-
man events-Curiofity cannot pierce through the
cloud which the Supreme Being hath made im-
penetrable to the human eye-Wifdom commands
man to retire after he has done all that was in-
cumbenton him, and to possess his mind in peace.
By going beyond this point) by giving himself
up to immoderate concern about unknown events,

he

# AVARICE.

he can do nothing to advance this success, and
does much to ruin his peace ;-lhe plants within
his breat the thorn which is long to gall him
-To the vanity of life he adds vexation of fpi-
rit, which is wholly of his own creation, not of
divine appointment.

For the dubious goods of this world were never

designed by God to raise such eager attachment.
They were given to man for his occasional rc-
frcfhmcnt, not for his chief felicity: by setting
an excelfive value upon obje&s which were in-
tended only for his secondary regard, he changes
their nature. Seeking more fatisfacion from
them than they are able to afford, he receives lets
than they might give; from a mistaken care to
secure his happiness, he brings upon himself cer-
tain misery.

AVARICE,
O NE of the vices of old age, which appears

the most unaccountable, is that covetous

attachment to worldly intercft with which it is
often charged. But this too can naturally be
deduced from the sense of its fecblenefs and
decay.

B 2 In

Li proportion as the vigour both of body and

mrid declines, timidity may be expedted to en-
crease. With anxious and fearful eye, the aged
look forward to the evils which threaten them,
and to the changes which may betfl. Hence,
are they apt to overvalue riches, as the inftru-
ments of their defence againlt these dangers, and
as the most certain means of scuring them again(t
solitude and difrefpe&.

But though this cautious frugality may be jus-

tified; foidid avarice can by no means be excused.
They should be charitable and do good. They
should mix benefcence to their friends, with a
cheerful enjoyment of the comforts which befit
their state. They will then receive the returns
of real refpet and love. Otherways, by their
riches, they procure no more than pretended de-
monftrations of regard; while their ill-judged
parsimony occasions many secret wilhes for their
death.

Chilled by the hand of time the heart loses that

tender fenfihility, with which it once entered in-
to the concerns and sorrows of others. How-
ever, as in every period of life, humanity and
friendship contribute to happiness, it is both our
duty and interest to cherish the remains of the
kind affections, nor susser them to be blunted or

dcftroyed

# AWE.

dcetroyed by fordid avarice. We fllould not,
fiom having luffered much in the course of our
long pilgrimage, become callous to the fuffcrings
of others. But, remembering we still are men,
ifudy to keep our heart open to the sense of hu-
man woe.

Praaified in the ways of men, we are apt to

be lilfpicious of design and fraud; for the know-
ledge and distrust of mankind too often go toge-
ther. Vc fliould not however susser that wary
caution, which is the fiuit of experience, to
dwindle into craft; for amidst the falsehoods of
men, integrity is the best defence: he who con-
tinueth to the end to walk uprightly, shall con-
tinue to walk surely.

AWE.
A WE is the firt sentiment which arises in the

foul at the view of greatness. But in the

heart of a devout man, it is a solemn and elevat-
ing, not a dejeLed emotion; for he glows, ra-
ther than trembles, in the divine pretence. It
is not the fuperifitious dread of unknown
power, but the homage yiddcd by the heart to

B 3 him,

# MAN OF BUSINESS.

him, who is at once the greatest and best of
beings.

Omnipotence, viewed alone, would be a for-

midable object. But, confidered in conjuncion
with the moral perfections of the divine nature,
it ierves to heighten devotion.

MAN OF BUSINESS.

N uninterrupted intercourse with the world
oppresses the man of business and ambition.

The itrongeft spirit must at length fail and fink
under it. The happiet temper must be toured
by incelfant returns of the opposition, the incon-
fancy and treachery of men. For he who lives
always in the bustle of the world, lives in a per-
petual warfare: here, an enemy encounters; there,
a rival supplants him. The ingratitude of a
friend flings him this hour, and the pride of a
superior wounds him the next. In vain he flies
for relief to trifling amusements. These may
afford a temporary opiate to care; but they com-
municate no flrength to the mind. On the con-
trary, they leave it more soft and defencelels,
when molefations and injuries renew the attack.

COM-

# COMPASSION.

COMPASSION.
COMPASSION is an emotion of which we

ought never to be aflhamed. Graceful, par-

ticularly in youth, is the fear of sympathy, and
the heart that melts at the tale of woe. We
fliould not permit eafc and indulgence to contract
our affections, and wrap us up in selfish enjoy-
ment. But we flould accustom ourselves to
think of the distresses of human life, of the soli-
tary cottage, the dying parent, and the weeping
orphan. Nor ought we ever to sport with pain
and distress in any of our amusements; nor treat
even the meanest insed with wanton cruelty.

It has been objeEted, and it is to be feared with

some reason, that female conversation is too fre-
quently tincured with a censorious spirit, and
that ladies are seldom apt to discover much ten-
dernefs for the errors of a fallen fifler. No ar-
guments can justify, no pleas extenuate it.

To insult over the miseries of an unhappy

creature is inhuman, not to compaflionate them
is unchristian. The worthy part of the sex al-
ways express themselves humanely on the failings
of others, in proportion to their own undeviating
goodness, and by that gentle virtue are prompted

lI~~
to to

$

# CONSCIENCE.

to alleviate the difircefis of the unfortunate and
wretched; it prevents us from retaliating inju-
ries X and restrains our revere judgments and an-
gry paflions.

CONSCIENCE.
DURING the gay and active periods of life,

finners elude, in sone measure, its force.

Carried round in the whirl of affairs and plea-
fures; intent on contrivance, eager in pursuit,
amused by hope, or elated by enjoyment, they
are sheltered by that croud of trifles which fur-
rounds them from serious thought. But con-
science is too great a power to remain always
suppressed.

In the dark and solitary hour of distress, the

recollesion of the past becomes dreadful. It
exhibits a life thrown away in vanities and follies,
or consumed in flagitiousness and fin: crimes rife
in their native deformity. How miserable the
state of that man condemned to endure at once
the pangs of guilt, and the vexations of cala-
mity !

But

# CONSTANCY AND FIRMNESS OF ACTION.

But a clear conficicnce enjoys, in the worst

conjunction of human life, a peace, a dignity,
an elevation of mind peculiar to virtue, not a
presumptuous boast of innocence. The better a
man is, he will be more humble and sensible in
his failings. Of his piety and virtue, he reaps
the fruits in the season of adversity: the im-
provement he makes; the temperate spirit with
which he enjoys those advantages; the beneficent
aations which he performed, and the good exam-
ple which he set to others, remain behind.

By the memory of these, he enjoys his profpe-

rity a second time in reflection. His mind has
no load; futurity no terrors. For refle&ion
cheers the lonely house of poverty, and attends
the conscientious sufferer into prison and exile.
CONSTANCY AND FIRMNESS OF ACTION.

HE great motives which produce these must
be of a palpable and striking kind. A di-

vine legifiator uttering his voice from heaven ;-
an omniscient witness beholding us in all our re-
treats;-an Almighty governor firetching forth
his arm to punifl or reward, disclosing the fe-
crets of the invifib!e world, informing us of per-

petual

# CONTENT.

petual rclf prepared hereafter for the righteous,
and of indignation and wrath awaiting the
wicked..

Thelc considerations overawe the world, fizp-

port integrity, and check guilt; they a:dd to v ir-
tue that fblennity which should ever charaFcri!:
it-to the admonitions of conlience they give
the authority cf law.

CONTENT.

U RING' the whole progress of human

events, the principal materials of our

comforts, or uneasiness, lie within ourselves.
Every age will prove burdensome to those
who have no fund of happiness in their own
breatls. Could they be preserved from all
infirmities of frame; could they have beflowed
upon them, if it were pofliblc, perpetual youth;
fill they would be reftlcfs and miferablc, through
the influence of ill-governed paflions-It is not
furprizing that such people are peevish, and que-
rulous when old. Unjultly they impute to their
time of life that misery, with which their vices
and follies embitter every age.

Whereas,

# MAN'S DANGER AND SECURITY IN YOUTH.

:Vhercas, to good men, no perio'd of life is
iniupportable, becaulfe they draw their chief hap-
pineefs from lilurccs which are independent of age
or time; Wifdiom, Piety, and Virtue, grow not
old with our bodies; they fulffr no decay from
length of days; to them belongs only unalterable
and unfading youth.
MAN'S D-ANGER AND SECURITY IN

'YOUTH.
IN that period of life too often characterized by

forward presumption and headlong pursuit)

fel-conceit is the great source of those dangers to
which men are cxpofed; and it is peculiarly un-
fortunate, that the age which sands mofl in need
of the -counsel of the wife, should be the mopt
prone to contemn it. Confident in the opinions
which they adopt, and in the measures which
they pursue, the bliss which youth aim at is, in
their opinion, fully apparent. It is not the dan-
ger of mifiake, but the failure of success, which
they dread. AAtivity to seize, not sagacity to
difccrn, is the only requisite which they value.

The whole tate of nature is now become a
scene of delusion to the sensual mind. Hardly

any

# DECEIT.

any thing is what it appears to be: and what
flatters most is always farthest from reality.-
There are voices which sing around us, but
whose firains allure to ruin. There is a banquet
spread where poison is in every dish. There is a
couch which invites us to repose, but to slumber
upon it is death. Sobriety lhould temper unwary
ardour; Modelty check rash presumption; Wil-
dom be the offspring of refleXion now, rather
than the bitter fruit of experience hereafter.

DECEIT.
T HAT darkness of charater, where we can

fee no heart-thofe foldings of art, through

which no native affeAion is allowed to penetrate,
present an objed unamiable in every season of
life, but particularly odious in youth. If at an
age when the heart is warm, when the emotions
are firong, and when nature is expeAed to ihew
itself free and open, we can already smile and
deceive, what is to be expeted, when we Ihall
be longer hackneyed in the ways of men, when
interest shall have compleated the obduration of
our hearts, and experience hall have improved
us in all the arts of guile ?

Difi-

Diflimulation in youth is the forerunner of

perfidy in old age: its first appearance is the fa-
tal omen of growing depravity and future shame.
It degrades parts and learning, obscures the lufire
of every accomplishment, and finks us into con-
tempt with God and man. The path of falhood
is a perplexing maze. After the firfl departure
from sincerity, it is not in our power to flop.
One artifice unavoidably leads on to another; till,
as the intricacy of the labyrinth increases, we are
left entangled in our own filare.

Deceit discovers a little mind, which flops at

temporary expedients, without rising to com-
prehenfive views of conduct. It betrays a das.
tardly spirit. It is the resource of one who wants
courage to avow his designs, or to reft upon him-
self. To set out in the world with no other
principle than a crafty attention to interest, be-
tokens one who is destined for creeping through
the inferior walks of life. He may be fortunate,
he cannot be happy; the eye of a good man
will weep at his error: he cannot taste the
sweets of confidential friendship, and his even-
ing of life will be embittered by universal cone
tempt.

C DEVO,

# DEVOTION.

DEVOTION.
IS the lively exercifc of those affctions, which

we owe to the Supreme Being. It compre-

hends several emotions of the heart which ter-
minate in the fame object. The chief of them
are veneration, gratitude, desire, and refigna-
tion.

It implies firit, profound veneration for God,

that is, an affetion compounded of awe and love;
-fccondly, incere gratitude for all his benefits:
this is a warmer emotion than veneration; vene-
ration looks up to the Deityas he is himself;
gratitude regards what he is towards us ;-third-
ly, the desire of the foul after the favour of the
Supreme Being, as its chief good and final ref ;--
and, fourthly, it advances to an entire resignation
of the foul to God. It is the consummation of
tiuft and hope. It banishes anxious cares and
murmuring thoughts. It reconciles us to every
appointment of Divine Providence; and resolves
every wish into the desire of pleasing him, whom
our hearts adore.

It is one of the noblest acs of which the hu-

man mind is capable. It is a powerfill principle
which penetrates the foul, which purifies the as-

sections

fe6}ions fiom debating attachments; and, by a
'fixed and iteady regard to God, subdues every
sinful passion, and forms the'inclinations to piely
and virtue.

It expresses the spirit which must animate all

religious duties. It stands opposed not merely
to downright vice; but to a heart which is cold
and insensible to sacred things, and obeys the di-
vine commands without ardour, love, and joy.
It is rational and 'well-founded. It is of the
highest importance to every other part of religion
and virtue; and, in fine, is the most conducive
to our happiness. It diffuses an auspicious influ-
ence over the whole of virtue. It is often found
a powerful inftrumert in humanizing the man-
ners of men, and taming their unruly passions.
It fnooths what is rough, and fofrens what is
fierce in our naturc. It is the great purifier of
the affections. It inspires contempt of the. low
gratifications belonging to animal life. It pro-
motes a humble and checrful contentment with
our lot, and subdues the eager desire of riches
and of power, which has filled this unhappy world
with crimes and misery. The spirit of devotion
is the gift of God. From his ilfpiration it pro-
ceeds; towards him it tends; and in his presence
hereafter, it Ihall attain its full perfedio1n.

C 2 MORA.

# MORALITY AND DEVOTION SEPARATELY INSUFFICIENT.

# DISCONTENT.

MIORALITY AND DEVOTION SEPARATELY

INSUFFICIENT.
T HE man of mere morality is a firanger to all

the delicate and refined pleafurles of devo-

tion. In works of beneficence and mercy he
may enjoy fatisfa&ion; but it will be destitute of
that glow of affection, which enlivens the feel-
ings of one, who lifts his heart at the ifme time to
the Father of the universe, and confiders himself
as imitating God.

The man again who refis solely on devotion,

if that devotion opens not his heart to humanity,
not only remains a stranger to the pleasures of
beneficence, but mull often undergo the pain
arising from bad palfions.

DISCONTENT.

N the humble and seemingly quiet shade of
private life, as well as am3ng the great and

mighty, discontent broods over its imaginary for-
rows; preys upon the citizen no less than the
courtier, and often nourishes passions equally
maglignant in the cottage and in the palace. Hav-

ing

ing once seized the mind, it fprcads its own
gloom over every surrounding object; it every
where searches out materials for itself; and in no
direction more frequently employs its unhappy
activity, than in creating divisions among man-
kind, and in magnifying flight provocations into
mortal injuries.

In situations where much comfort might be

erijoyed, this man's superiority and that man's
neglect, our jealousy of a friend, our hatred of
a rival, an imagined affront, or a miltaken point
of honour, allow us no repose. Hence discord
in families, animositics among friends, and wars
among nations! Look around us ! every where
we find a busy multitude. Restless and uneasy
in their present situation, they are incessantly
employed in accomplifiing a change of it; and
as soon as their wish is fulfilled, we discern by
their behaviour, that they are as difiatisfied as
they were before. Where they expected to have
found a paradise, they find a desert.

The man of business pines for leisure; the lei-

sure for which he had longed proves an irksome
gloom, and through want of employment, he
languishes, sickens, and dies.

C3 The

# DISSIPATION.

The man of retirement fancies no slate so

happy as that of aaive life; but he has not en-
gaged long in the tumults and contests of the
world, until he finds cause to look back with
regret on the calm hours of his former privacy
and retreat.

Beauty, wit, eloquence, and fame, are ea-

gerly desired by persons in every rank of life.
They are the parent's fondest wish for his child;
the ambition of the young, and the admiration
of the old; and yet in what numberless instances
have they proved, to those who pofleffed them,
no other than shining shares, feduftions to vice,
instigations to folly, and, in the end, sources of
misery.

DISSIPATION.
THE love of difllpation is allowed to be the

reigning evil of the present day. It is an

evil which many content themselves with regret-
ting, without feking to redress.

It is too often cultivated as the readiest relief

to domestic infelicity; it draws the mind awhile
from the subjea of its distress, and suffers it to

enjoy

enjoy an interval of ease; but this resource is as
treacherous as it is momentary, and plunges the
mind into more real difirefs than that from which
it promised to relieve it.

Every one teems convinced that the evil so

much complained of does really exist somewhere,
though all are inwardly persuaded that it is not
with themselves. All desire a general reforma-
tion, but few will liften to proposals of particu-
lar amendment.

Diflipation not only indisposes its votaries, by

relaxing the tone of mind, and rendering it in-
capable of application, study or virtue, to every
thing useful and excellent, but disqualifies them
for the enjoyment of pleasure itself. It softens
the foul so much, that the most superficial employ-
ment becomes a labour, and the slightest incon-
venience an agony. The roses of pleasure fel-
dom last long enough to adorn the brow of him
who plucks them; for they are the only roses
which do not retain their sweetness after they
have loft their beauty.

DUTY

# DUTY OF OLD AGE.

DUTY OF OLD AGE.
A MATERIAL part of the duty of the aged

confifis in studying to be useful to the race

who are to succeed them. Here opens to them
an extensive field, in which they may so employ
themselves as considerably to advance the hap-
piness of mankind. To them it belongs to im-
part to the young the fruit of their long experi-
ence to infrrua them in the proper condut,
and to warn them of the various dangers of life ;
by wife counsel to temper their precipitate ardour,
and both by precept and example to form them
to piety arid virtue.

It never appears with greater dignity, than,

when tempered with mildness and enlivened
with good-humour, it aas as a guide and a pa-
tron of youth.

Religion, displayed in such a character, strikes

the beholders, as at once amiable and venerable.
They revere its power, when they fee it adding
so much grace to the decays of nature, and shcd-
ding so pleating a lustre over the evening of life.
The young wish to tread in the fame steps, and
to arrive at the close of their days with equal
honour.

They

# EFFECTS OF RELIGION.

They liften with attention to counsels which

are mingled with tenderness, and rendered re-
fpcAable by grey hairs.

Aged wisdom, when joined with acknowledged

virtue, exerts an authority over the human mind,
greater even than that which arises from power
and station. It can check the most forward;
abash the most profligate, and irike with awe
the most giddy and unthinking.

EFFECTS OF RELIGION.
R EIIGION prepares the mind of man for all

the events of this inconstant fiate, inftruts

him in the nature of true happiness; early weans
him from an undue love of the world: afflicions
do not attack him by surprise, and therefore do
not overwhelm him; he is equipped for the
torm, as well as the calm, in this dubious na-
vigation of life. He is not overcome by difap-
pointment, when that which is mortal dies;
when that which is mutable begins to change;
and when that which he knew to be transient
passes away.

Religion

# SUPERSTITION AND ENTHUSIASM.

Religion not only purifies, but also fortifies

the heart, so that the devout man is neither lift-
ed up by succeSs, nor enervated by fcnfiu.lity; he
meets the changes in his lot without unmanly
dejealion.-He is inured co temperance and re-
ftraint.-He has learned firmness, and felf-com-
mand.-He is accustomed to look up to Supreme
Providence, not with reverance only, but with
trust and hope.

In prosperity he cultivates his mind; itorcs

it with useful knowledge, with good principles,
and virtuous dispositions. The resources remain
entire when the day of trouble comes. His chief
pleasures are always. of the calm, innocent and
temperate kind, and over those, the changes of
the world have the least power. His mind is a
kingdom to him, and he can ever enjoy it.

SUPERSTITION AND ENTHUSIASM.
SUPERSTITION and enthusiasm are two

capital sources of dclufion. Superstition, on

the one hand, attaching men with immoderate
zeal to the ritual and external part of religion.
Enthusiasm, on the other, direcing their whole
attention to internal emotions, and myflical

COIn-

# ANGER AND ENVY CONTRASTED.

communications with the spiritual world; while
neither the one, nor the other, has paid fuffi-
cient regard to the great moral duties of the
Christian life. Indeed the horror of fuperilition
has sometimes reached so far, as to produce con-
tempt for all external institutions; whilst persons
of a devout turn being carried by warm affections
at times into unjuftifiabie excefles, have thence
made many conclude that all devotion was akin
to enthusiasm.

ANGER AND ENVY CONTRASTED.
A NGER is less reasonable and more sincere

than envy. Anger breaks out abruptly;

envy is a great prefacer: anger wishes to be un-
derftood at once: envy is fond of remote hints
and ambiguities; but obscure as its oracles are,
it never ceases to deliver them till they are per-
seAly comprehended: anger repeats the fame cir-
cumftances over again; envy invents new ones
at every freih recital: anger gives a broken, ve-
hemcnt, and interrupted narrative; envy tells a
more confifient, and more probable, though a
falser tale: anger is exceively imprudent, for
it is impatient to disclose every thing it knows;
envy is discreet, for it has a great deal to hide:

3 anger

anger never consults times or seasons; envy waits
for the lucky moment when the wound it medi-
tates may be made the most exquisitely painful,
and the molt incurably deep: anger uses more in-
vedive; envy does more mischief.

Simple anger soon runs itself out of breath, and

is exhausted at the end of it's tale, but it is for
that chosen period that envy has treasured up the
inoft barbed arrow in its whole quiver: anger
puts a man out of himself; but the truly malici-
ous generally preserve the appearance of felf-pof-
fefion, or they could not so effe'tually injure:
anger talks loudly of its own wrongs; envy of
its adversary's injustice: anger is a violent a&t;
envy a constant habit: no one can be always an-
gry, but he may be always envious.

An angry man's enmity (if he be generous)

will subside when the objec of his resentment
becomes unfortunate; but the envious man can
extrat food for his malice out of calamity it-
self, if he finds his adversary bears it with dig-
rity, or is pitied or affilied in it. The rage of
the paflonate man is totally extinguished by the
death of his enemy; but the hatred of the mali-
cious is not buried even in the grave of his rival;
he will envy the good name he has left behind
him; he will envy him the tears of his widow,

the

# EVENTS UNCERTAIN.

the profpcrity of his children, the cfteem of his
friends, the prailis of his epitaph; nay, the very
magnificcnce of his funeral.

EVENTS UNCERTAIN.

AN walketh in a vain show. His fears are
often as vain as his wiihes. As what flat-

tered him in expeaation, frequently wounds him
in poffeflion; so that the event to which he looked
forward with an anxious and fearful eye, has of-
ten, when it arrived, laid its terrors aside; nay,
has brought in its train unexpected bleflings.

Both good and evil are beheld at a diflance,

through a perfpecive which deceives. The co-
lours of objecs when nigh, are entirely different
from what they appeared, when they appeared in
futurity. It is common for men to be deceived
in their profpeas of happiness. They judge by
the sensations of the present moment, and in the
fervour of desire pronounce confidently concern-
ing the desired object. But refect not that their
minds, like their bodies) undergo great alteration
from the situation into which they are thrown,

D and

# FAITH, PIETY, AND ACTIVE VIRTUE.

and the progressive fiagcs of life through which
they pass.

Hence, concerning any condition which is

yet untried, they conjecaure with much uncer-
tainty. In imagination they carry their prefcnt
wants, inclinations, and sentiments, into the state
of life to which they aspire. But no sooner have
they entered into it than their fcntincents and in-
clinations change. New wants and desires arile,
new objctss.are required to gratify them; and by
consequence their old diflitisfation returns, and
the void which was to have been filled, remains
as great as it was before,

FAITH, PIETY, AND ACTIVE VIRTUE.
L IFE passed under the influence of such difpo-

fitions naturally leads to an happy end.

Itis not enough to fay, faith and piety joined
with aefive virtue constitute the rcquifite prepa-
ration for heaven. They in truth begin the en-
joyment of heaven. In every state of our exiit-
,ence they form the chief ingredients of felicity.

FELI-

# FELICITY EQUALLY DISTRIBUTED.

FELICITY EQUALLY DISTRIBUTED.
A MONG the different conditions and ranks

of men, the balance of happiness is pre-

served in a great measure equal; and the high
and low, the rich and the poor, approach in point
of real enjoyment much nearer to each other
than is commonly imagined. Providence never
intended that any itate here should either be com-
pletely happy, or entirely miserable.

If the feelings of pleasure are more numerous

and more lively, in the higher departments of
life, such also are thoie of pain.-If greatness
flatters our vanity, it multiplies our dangers.-
If opulence encreafes our gratifications, it en-
creases in the fame proportion our desires and de-
mands.-If the poor are confined to a more nar-
row circle, yet within that circle lie most of those
natural fatisfaAions, which, after all the refine-
ments of art, are found to be the moif genuine
and true. For the happiness of every man de-
pends more upon the state of his own mind than
upon any.one external circumstance; nay, more
than upon all external things put together.

Inordinate passions are the great disturbers of
life; and unless we possess a good conscience,

D 2 and

# FELICITY TEMPORAL.

and a well-governed mind, discontent ;'ill I;s!i:
every cnjo!yment, and the highecf prof)crity nill
only prove dif^guftd milery. This concltiioii
then should be fixed in the mind; The dcflrucic(!i
of virtue is the dcftruction of peace. In no it.-
tion-in no period are we fccurc fiom the dangers
which spring fiom our pafloons. Every age, and
every ftItion they beiet, from yout'h to grey
hairs, and fiomi the Cpeaf(nt to tl;hc riaie.

FELICITY TEMPORAL.
O UR imperfeal knowledge of what is good

or evil ihould attach us the more to those

few things, concerning which, there can be no
doubt of their being truly good.

Of temporal things which belong to this class,

the catalogue, it must be confessed, is small.
Perhaps the chief worldly good we should wifll
to enjoy, is a found mind in a found body.
Health and peace, a moderate fortune, and a few
friends, fum up all the undoubted articles of tem-
poral felicity.

He whose wishes, refpeóting this world, are
the molt rcafonablc and bounded, is likely to

lead

# SPIRITUAL FELICITY.

lead. the safest, and, for that reason, the most de-
firable life. By aspiring too high we frequently
miss the happiness, which, by a less ambitious
aim, we might have gained. High happiness
on earth is rather a pitiure which the imagina-
tion forms, than reality which man is allowed to
possess.

SPIRITUAL FELICITY.

ITH regard to spiritual felicity, we are
not confined to humble views. Clear

and determinate objecs are proposed to our pur-
suits, and full scope is given to our most ardent
desires. The forgiveness of our fins, and God's
holy grace to guide our life; the protection and
favour of the great Father of all,, of the blessed
Redeemer of mankind, and of the spirit of fanc-
tification and comfort; these are objeAs, in the
pursuit of which there is no room for hefita-
tion and diflruft.

Had Providence spread an equal obscurity over

happiness of every kind, we might have had
some reason to complain of the vanity of our
condition. But we are not left to so hard a fate.
The Son of God hath removed that veil which

D 3 covered

# WANT OF FORESIGHT RESPECTING OUR SPIRITUAL STATE.

covered true bli's from the search of wanderinl
mortals, and hath taught them the way which
leads to eternal life.
WANT OF FOBRESIGHT RESPECTING OUR

SPIRITUAL STiATE.

E foresee the dangers of our firiitual, till
less than we do those of our natural lhate;

hecaufe we are less attentive to trace them. We
are still more exposed to vice than mirfry. We
cannot efreem him prosperous who is raised to a
situation which flatters his pafions, but which
corrupts his principles, disorders his temper, and,
finally, oversets his virtue.

In the ardour of pursuit there effcts are not

foreseen; and yet how often are they accom-
pliShed by the change of condition. Latent cor-
ruptions are called forth;-feeds of guilt are
quickened into life;-a growth of crimes arises,
which, had it not been for the fatal culture of
prosperity, would never have seen the light.

Man, boastful as he is of reason, is merely

the creature of his fortune, formed and moulded
by the incidents of his life; incapable of pro-

nouncing

# GOD WITH RESPECT TO MAN.

nouncing with certainty concerning his own cood
or evil; of futurity he discerns little, and even
that little he fees through a cloud. Ignorant of
the alteration which his sentiments and desires
will undergo from new situations in life ;-igno-
iant of the cofeqluences which will follow from
the combination of his circumflanees with those
of others around him ;-ignorant of the influence
which the prelent may have on the future events
of life;-ignorant of the effect which a change
of condition may produce on his moral charaaer
and his eternal interefis; how can he know what
is gs2d for him all thes d(ays of his vain lifc, whichl
fpet'?deth as a /latw,. Instead therefore of la-
menting this ignorance only, he should confider
how it ought to be improved; what duties it fuig-
gests; and what wifi ends it was intended by
Providence to promote.

GOD WITH RESPECT TO MAN.

N the midit of his glory, the Almighty is not

inattentive to the meanest of his fubjeas.

Neither ohfcurity of flation, nor imperfcdtion
of knowledge, finks those below his regard who
worship and obey him. Every prayer which
they fend up from their secret retirement is lif-

tcned

tened to by him; and every work of charity
which they perform, how unknown soever to
the world, attracts his notice.

He is the patron of the difirefled. Compaflion

is that attribute of his nature which he has chosen
to place in the-greateil variety of lights, on pur-
pose that he might'accommodate his majesty to
our weakness, and provide a cordial for human
griefs.

All his creatures he governs with jultice and

wifdom-an affliced state he commiferates-he
is the refuge of the virtuous and pious, and in-
vites them, amidst all their troubles, to pour out
their hearts before him. The negled, or scorn
of the world, exposes them not to any contempt
in his fight. No obscurity conceals them from
his notice, and though they should be forgotten
by every friend on earth, they are remembered
by the God of heaven.

That sigh heaved from the affliced bosom,

which is heard by no human ear, is listened to
by him; and that tear is remarked which falls
unnoticed, or despised by the world. There pre-
sent his adminifiration under an aspea so mild
and benign as in a great measure to disperse the
gloom which hangs over human life.

IGNO-

# IGNORANCE OF GOOD AND EVIL, ITS UTILITY.

IGNORANCE OF GOOD AND EVIL,

ITS UTILITY.

'r fervcs to check presumption and rafilncfs,
and to enforce a diligent exertion of our ra-

tional powers, joined with an humble dependence
on diviie aid. It moderates eager paflions re-
fpeilng worldly success. It inculcates refigna-
tion to the disposal of a providence which is much
wiser than man. It restrains us from employing
unlawful means, in order to compass our most
favourite designs. It tends to attach us more
closely to those things which are unquestionably
good. It is therefore such a degree of ignorance
as suits the present circumstances of man better
.than more complete information concerning good
and evil. At the fame time- the causes which
render this obscurity neceflary, too plainly indi-
cate a broken and corrupted state of human na-
ture. They shew this life to be a short trial.
They suggest the ideas of a land of pilgrimage,
not of a house of reft.

GOOD

# GOOD MAN.

GOOD MAN.
H E is devout and benevolent, and according

to his mcafure of religious knowledge, flu-

dies to perform his duty, prays to God always,
and gives much alms to the people; joining piety
with charity; faith with good works; devotion
with morality, confitent with the connecion or-
dained by God between them: for alms without
prayers, or prayers without alms; morality with-
out devotion, or devotion without morality, are
extremely defe&ive.

A good man a&s with. vigour, and suffers with

a patience more than human, when he believes
himself countenanced by the Almighty. Injured
or oppressed by the world, he looks up to a judge
who will vindicate his cause; he appeals to a
witness who knows his integrity; he commits
himself to a friend who will never forsake him.
When tired with the vexations of life, devotion
opens to him its quiet retreat, where the tumults
of the world are hushed, and its cares are loft in
happy oblivion.

There his mind regains its serenity: the agi-

tation of paflion is calmied; and a softening balm
is infused into the wounds of the spirit; his heart

is

# EFFECT OF LOOSE GRATIFICATIONS.

is lightened; he does not feel himself solitary or
forsaken; he believes God to be present with
him, and as he hears a voice which speaks to none
but the pure in heart, so he beholds a hand which
finners cannot fee.

Those afflitions which appear to others the

meiTengers of the wrath of heaven, appear to
him the ministers of sanctification and justice.
Where they discern nothing but the horrors of
the tempest which surrounds them, his more en-
lightened eye beholds the angel who rides in the
whirlwind .and direas the storm.

EFFECT OF LOOSE GRATIFICATIONS.
BY a continued series of loose, though appa-

rently trivial gratifications, the heart is of-

ten as thoroughly corrupted, as by the commis-
sion of any one of those enormous crimes which
spring from great ambition, or great revenge.
Habit gives the passions strength, while the ab-
fence of glaring guilt seemingly justifies them;
and unawakened by remorse, the finner proceeds
in his course, till he waxes bold in guilt, and
becomes ripe for ruin; for by gradual and latent
Aeps the destruction of our virtue advances. We

are

# GRATITUDE.

# WORLDLY GREATNESS AND HONOURS,

are imperceptibly betrayed ; and from one licenl
tious attachment, are, by a train of consequences,
drawn on to another, till the government of our
minds is irrecoverably loft.

GRATITUDE.
GRATITUDE is a pleating emotion. The

sense of being diffinguifhed by the kindnecs

of another gladdens the heart, warms it with
reciprocal affetion, and gives to any profeflion,
which is agreeable in itfclf, a double rclifi, from
its being the gift of a friend. Favours, though
confrrcd by men, may become burdcnolme; but
nothing of this kind can assea the intcrccurle of
gratitude with heaven. Its favours are wholly
disinterested. The Almighty aims at no end
but the happiness of those whom he blcfes, and
who desires no return from them but a devout and
thankful heart.

WORLDLY GREATNESS AND HONOURS,
IWA HEN enjoyed with temperance and wis-

dom, both enlarge our utility, and con-
tribute to our comfort. But we {hould not over-

rate

# HAPPINESS - HOW JUDGED OF.

rate themn; for unless we add to them the necef-
fary correaives of piety and virtue, besides cor-
xupting the.mind, and ingendering internal mi-
fery, they lead us among precipices, and betray
us into ruin.

HAPPINESS-HOW JUDGED OF.
TMPERFECTLY can we judge of real hap-

piness or misery from external appearance.-

We are seduced and deceived by that false glare
which prosperity throws around bad men ;-we
are tempted to imitate their crimes, in order to
partake of their imagined felicity.

The pageant of grandeur displayed to public

view, is not the ensign of certain happiness. We
must follow the great man into the retired apart-
ment, where he lays aside his disguise, in order
to form any just conclusion. We must have a
faculty by which we can look into the inside of
hearts; then should we behold good men in pro-
portion to their goodnels, iatisfied and easy; atro.
cious finners always restless and unhappy.

E HAHAP.

# HAPPINESS NOT INDEPENDENT.

HAPPINESS NOT INDEPENDENT.
N O individual can be happy, unless the cir-

cumftances of those around him be so ad-

justed as to conspire with his interest. For in
human society, no happiness or misery rands
unconneted and independent. Our fortunes
are interwov.n by threads innumerable: one
man's success or misfortune, his wisdom or folly
-ften, by its confequcnces, reaches through mul-
titudcs.

Such a system is to. fir complicated for our

arrangement.-It requires adjutiments beyond
our skill and power.-It is a chaos of events into
which our eye cannot pierce'; and is capable of
regulation only by him who perceives at one
glance the relation of each to all. We are. igno-
rant of the influence which the present tranfac-
tions of our life may have upon those which are
future.

The important question is, not what will yield

to man a few scattered pleasures, but what will
render his life happy on the whole amount.
There is not any present moment that is uncon-
neted with some future one.-The life of every
man is a continued chain of incidents, each link

of

# HISTORY.

Of which hangs upon the former. The tranfi-
tion from cause to effedt, from event to event, is
often carried on by secret steps, which our fore-
fight cannot divine, and our sagacity is unable to
trace. Evil may at tome future period bring forth
good; and good nmay bring forth evil, both
equally unexpected.

HISTORY.

ISTORY is a mirror which holds up man-
kind to their own view: in the circle of-

worldly affairs the fame charasters and situations
are perpetually returning, and in the follies and
pafions, the vices and crimes of the generations
that are palt, we read those of the present.

The history of mankind has ever been a con-

tinued tragedy-the world a great theatre, ex-
hibiting the fame repeated scene of the follies
of men shooting forth into guilt, and of their
paflions fermenting by a quick process into
mnifery.

E 2 TRUE

# TRUE VIRTUE AND HONOUR.

# HOPE.

TRUE VIRTUE AND HONOUR.

EN pofeffed of these, value not themfelvec
upon any regard to inferior obligations,.

and yet violate that which is the mo t sacred and
ancient of all-religion.

They ihould confider such violation as a fe-

verereproach in the most enlightened slate of
human nature; and under the purest dispensation
of religion, it appears to have extinguiflied the
sense of gratitude to heaven, and to flight all ac-
knowledgment of the great and true God. Such
condua implies either an entire want, or a wil-
ful fupprelfion of some of the belt and niotl gene-
rous affeelions belonging to human nature.

HOPE.
H OPE to the foul, when diflracaed by the con-

fusions of the world, is as an anchor to a

ihip in a dark night, on an unknown coast, and
amidf a boiflerous ocean. In danger it gives
security -amidst general fluctuation it aftobds
one fixed point of reft.-It is the most eminent
of all the advantages which religion now con-

sers~

# HUMANITY.

fers.-It is the universal comforter;-it is the
spring of all human activity.

Upon futurity, men are conflantly suspended;

animated by the proipeEr of tome difiant good,
they toil and susser through the whole course of
life and it is not so much what they are at pre-
sent, as what they hope to be in rome after time,
that enlivens their motions, fixes their attention,
and stimulates induitry.

Was this hope entertained with that full per-

fualion which Christian faith demands, it would
in truth totally annihilate all human miseries'; it
would banish discontent, extinguish grief, and
suspend the very feeling of pain.

HUMANITY.
G ENTLENESS, which belongs to virtue, is

to be carefully diflinguified from the mean

spirit of cowards, and the fawning assent of fyco-
phants.-It renounces no just right from fear:
it gives up no important truth from flattery:-it
is indeed not only consistent with a firm mind,

E 3 but

but it necessarily requires a manly spirit and a
fixed principle in order to give it any real value.

It flands opposed to harhnefs and severity,-

to pride and arrogance,-to violence and oppref-
sion :-it is, properly, that part of the real virtue
charity, which makes us unwilling to give pailn
to any of our brethrea.-It correts whatever is
Qffenfive in our manners, and by a conltant train
of humane attentions, ifudies to alleviate the bur-
den of common mifcry.-Its office is therefore
extenfive;-it is continually in aaion, when we
are 'engaged in intercourse with men.-It ought
to form our address, to regulate our fpecch, and
to diffuse itself over our whole behaviour.

That gentleness which is charaerifiic of a

good man, has, like every other virtue, its feat
in the heart.-In that unaffeled civility which
springs from a gentle mind, there is a charm in-
finitely more powerful than in all the studied
manners bs the most finished courtier.

It is founded on a sense of what we owe to

him who made us, and to the common nature of
which we all share. It arises from reflection on
our own failings and wants; and from just views
of the condition and duty of man. It is native
feeling heightened and ihaproved by principle. It

is

i, the heart which easily relents; which feels for
every thing that is human; and is backward and
flow to inflit the least wound. It is affable in,
its address, and mild in its demeanour; ever ready
to oblige, and be obliged by others; breathing
habitual kindness towards. friends, courtesy to
irangers, long-fuffering to enemies.

It exercises authority with moderation ;-admi-

nifters reproof with tendernefs;-confers favours
with care and modesty. It is unafuming in opi-
nion, and temperate in zeal. It contends not
eagerly about trifles; flow to contradict, and still
flower to blame; but prompt to allay dissention -
and restore peace. It neither intermeddles unne-
ccfarily with the affairs, nor pries inquisitively
into the secrets of others. It delights above all
things to alleviate distress; and, if it cannot dry
up the falling tear, to soothe at least the grieving
heart.

Where it has not the power of being useful, it

is never burdensome. It seeks to please rather
than shine and dazzle, and conceals with care
that superiority, either of talents or of rank,
which are oppressive to those who are beneath it.
It is the great avenue to mutual enjoyment:
amidst the strife of interfering interests, it tem-
pers the violence of contention, and keeps alive

the

the feeds of harmonv.-It softens animofities,
renews endearments, and renders the countenance
of man a refreshment to man. It prepoflefes
and wins every heart. It persuades when every
other argument fails; often disarms the fierce,
and melts the ifubborn.

To the man of humanity the world is gene-

rally disposed to ascribe every other good quality;
of its influence all in some degree partake, there-
fore all love it..

The man of this character riles in the world

without firuggle, and flourishes without envy;
his misfortunes are univerfaily lamented, and
his failings are easily forgiven. The inward
tranquillity which it promotes is the first requi-
site of every pleasurable feeling. It is the calm
and clear atmosphere, the serenity and sunshine
of the mind.

Attacked by great injuries, the man of mild

and gentle spirit will feel what human nature
feels and will defend and resent as his duty al-
lows him: but to -ight provocations he is happily
superior. Inspired with noble sentiments, taught
to regard, with indulgent eye, the frailties of
men, the omiflions of the careless, the follies of
the imprudent, aud the levity of the fickle; he

retreats

# INDUSTRY.

retreats into the calmness of his spirit, as into an
undisturbed fantuary, and quietly allows the
usual current of life to hold its course

INDUSTRY.
D IIIGENCE, and proper improvement of

time, are material duties of the young.

To no purpose are they endued with the best abi-
lities,. if they want aceivity for exerting them.-
In youth the habits of induflry are most easily
acquired.-In youth the incentives to it are the
strongest; from ambition and from duty, from
emulation and hope, all the profpeds which the
beginning of life affords.

Induifry is not only the instrument of improve-

ment, but tie foundation of pleasure. He who.
is a stranger to it may possess, but cannot enjoy.,
For it is labour only which gives relish to plea-
fure.-It is the appointed vehicle of every good
man.-It is the indifpenfible condition of our p.of-
fefling a found mind in a found-body.

We fllould reek to fill our time with employ-

ments. which may be reviewed with fatisfadion.
The acquisition of knowledge is one of the most

honour-

# INTENT OF RELIGION.

honourable occupations of youth. The desire of
it discovers a liberal mind, and is connected with
many accomplifhmcnts, and many virtues. Bur.
though our train of life fihould not lead us to

I)ud), the course of education always furnitihes

proper employments to a well-difpofed mind.
Whatever we pursue, we should be emulous to
excel.

Genereus ambitien and sensibility to praise,

are, especially at the youthful period, among the
marks of virtue. We never ought to think that
any affluence of fortune,-or any elevation of rank,
exempts us from the duties of application and in-
duftry; induitry. is the law of our being; it is
the demand of nature, of reason, and of God.

INTENT OF RELIGION.
IF there be' any principle fully ascertained by

religion; it is, that this life was intended for

a tate of trial and improvement to man. His
preparation for a better world required a gradual
purification,, carried on by fleps of progreflive
discipline. The situation here afligned him was
such as to answer this design, by calling forth all
his activepowers, by. giving full feope to his mo-

ral

# LOVE OF JUSTICE.

,ral dispositions, and bringing to light his whole
character. Hence it became proper, that difi-
culty and temptation Ihould arise in the course of -
his duty; ample rewards were prorifed to vir-
tuei but these rewards were left, as yet, in ob-
fcurity and distant profpct.

The impressions of sense were so balanced

:against immortality, as to allow a confliA be-
-twecn faith and fenfe,-between conscience and
.lefire,-between prefentpleafure and future good.
In this colfliA the fouls of good men are tried,
improved and ftren!thened:-in this field their
honours are reaped ;-here are formed the capital
virtues of fortitude, temperance, and feif-denial
-moderation in prosperity, patience in adversity,
,ful;miffion to the will of God, charity, and for-
givenefs to men amidst the various compeititons
.of worldly interest.

LOVE OF JUSTICE.
A SENSE ofjuftice should be the foundation

of all our social qualities. In our most
.early intercourse with the world, and even' inour

omoft youthful amusements, no unfairness should
.be found. That sacred rule of doing all things

I to

# SELF-KNOWLEDGE.

to others, according as we wish they would de
unto us, thould be engraved on our minds. For
this end, we should impress ourselves with a
deep sense of the original, and natural equality
of men.

Whatever advantage of birth or fortune we

.pofles, we ought never to display them with an
ofientatious superiority. We should leave the
.subordinations of rank, to regulate the inter-
course of more advanced years. In youth it
becomes us to aC among our companions, as
man with man. We should remember how un-
known to us are the vicissitudes of the world;
.and how often they, on.whom ignorant.and con-
.temptuous young men once looked down with
scorn, have arisen to be their superiors in future
years.

SELF- KNOWLEDGE.

O acquire a thorough knowledge of our-
selves, is an attainment no lets difficult

than important. For men are generally unwil-
ling to fee their own imperfeacions; and when
they are willing to enquire into them, their self-
love imposes upon their judgment. Their inter-

course

t.

course with one another assists their delusion, to
which, of themselves, they are prone.

For the ordinary commerce of the world, is a

commerce of flattery and falsehood; where reci-
procally they deceive and are deceived, where
every one appears under an affuned form, pro-
felies efteemi which he does not feel, and bestows
praise in order to receive it.

There are three characters which every man

fuflains; and these often extremely different fioml
one another. One which he pofl'efcs is his own
opinion ;--another, which he carries in eltimation
of the world ;-and a third, which he bears in the
judgment of God :-it is only the last which as-
certains what he really is. Whether the charac-
ter which the world forms of him be above or
below truth, it imports not much to know. But
it is of eternal consequence, that the characer
which a man pofieffes in his own eyes be formed
upon that which he bears in the fight of God.

He should enquire, after laying aside all partia-

lity for himself and exploring the heart with
lfch accurate scrutiny, as may bring all hidden
defeds to light, whether he be not conscious,
that the fair opinion which the world entertains
of him, is founded on their partial knowledge,

F both

both of his abilities and virtues. He should be
willing that all his actions should be publicly can-
vas'ed. He should bear to have his thoughts laid
open.

When he has kept from vice, it should be

known whether his innocence proceeded from
purity of principle, or from worldly motives ;-
whether any malignity or envy rifes within him,
when he compares his own condition with that
of others. He fliould enquire whether he has
been as solicitous to regulate his heart, as to pre-
serve his manners from reproach;-profefiing
himself a Chriitian, whether the spirit of Christ
has appeared in his condu ;--declaring that he
hopes for immortality, whether that hope fur-
mounted undue attachment to the present life.

Such investigation, seriously pursucd, may

produce to every man many difcovcries of him-
self; discoverics, not pleasing, perhaps, to va-
nity, but salutary and useful. For he can only
be a flatterer, but no true friend to himself, who
aims not at knowing his own defeas, as well
as virtues.

CHEER-

# CHEERFULNESS OF OLD AGE, AND LEVITY OF YOUTH, CONTRASTED.

CHEERFULNESS OF OLD AGE, AND LE-

VITY OF YOUTH, CONTRASTED.
CHEERFULNESS, in old age, is graceful.

It is the natural concomitant of virtue. But

this is widely diffirent from the levity of youth.
Many things are allowable in that early period,
which in maturer years, would delfere censure;
but which, in old age, become both ridiculous and
criminal.-By awkwardly affecting to imitate the
manners, and to mingle in the vanities of the
young; as the aged depart from the dignity, so
they forfeit the privileges of grey hairs. But if
by follies of this kiind they arc degraded, they are
exposed to much a.:.'er it)lme, by defdending to
vicious p!cri.';, : '.: I ,' '..uiiig to hover round
thofc t.r ul .u -;.:!.i;i; i s i ',,-ich they were
once ::alii.'.ti l.

Amusement and relaxation the aged require,

and may enjoy ; but they Ihculd conlider well, by
every intcmperate i;nulgcncc they accelerate de-
cay; instead of enli vnllg, they opprel' and pre-
cipitate their declining itate.

F 2 PUB-

# PUBLIC LIFE  ITS INCONVENIENCIES.

PUBLIC LIFE-ITS INCONVENIENCIES.
TE who lives always in public cannot live to

his owu; kbul. Convcriition and intercourse

with the wvorld is, in several ref)peds, an educa-
tion for vice. Frcm eariielt youth we are accuf-
tomned Co healr iiclles and honour extolled as the
chief pofie.fions of man, and propofied to us as the
principle aim of our future pursuits. We are
trained up to look with admiration on the flattcr-
ing marks of diflinlc:ion which they bestow. In
quefC of those fancied bleflings, we fee the multi-
tude around us eager and fervent. Principles of
duty we may, perhaps, hear Sometimes inculcated;
but we seldom behold them brought in competi-
tion with worldly profit.

The soft names and plausible colours under

which deceit, sensuality, and revenge, are pre-
sented to us in common discourse, weaken, by de-
grees, our natural sense of the diftinftion between
good and evil. We often meet with crimes au-
thorized by high examples, and rewarded with
the caresses and smiles of the world. We disco-
ver, perhaps, at last, that those whom we are
taught to reverence and to regard as our patterns
of conduc, acd upon principles no purer than
those of others.

MAN

# MAN OF THE WORLD.

MAN OF THE WORLD.
H E pretends that virtue is, at least, a rcfpecl-

able and honoured name, while piety founds

meanly in his ears-and claims to be a man of ho-
nour. He reits upon humanity-public spirit-
probity-and truth. He arrogates to himself all
the manly and acive virtues:--but devout assec-
tions and religious duties he treats with contempt,
as founded on shadowy speculation, and fit to
employ the attention only of weak and fuperfli-
tious minds. Hence this negle& of piety argues
depravity of foul-infers an irregular dilcharge
of the duties of morality, and difcovcrs a cold
and hard heart.

He who ats from worldly wisdom lays princi-

ple aside, and trusts his defence to his art and abi-
lity. He avails himself of every advantage which
his knowledge of the world fuggefis-he attends
to nothing but what he confiders as his interest;
and unconfined by conscience, pursues it by every
course which promises him success.

Persons of this charaster condemn themselves

to live a most unquiet life;-they pals their days
in perpetual anxiety-liftening to every motion
-startled by every alarm-changing their mea-

F 3 fures

# MAN'S REAL DEPENDENCE.

fures on every new occurrence,-and when dif-
trefs breaks in over all their defences, they are
left under it hopeless and disconsolate.

MAN'S REAL DEPENDENCE.
MiAN fliould proceed with caution and cir-

cumfpeion through a world, where evil

so frequently lurks under the form of good. To
be humble and modest in opinion,-to be vigilant
and attentive in condu&t,-to diftrult fair appear-
ances,-and to restrain rash defires-are inftruc-
tions which the darkness of his present itate
should strongly inculcate.

God hath appointed his situation to be so am-

biguous in order both to call forth the exertion
of those intelligent powers which he hath given
him, and to enforce his dependence on his gra-
cious aid. Surrounded by so many bewildering
paths, among which the wifefl- are ready to firay,
he should earnestly implore, and thankfully re-
ceive that divi:e illumination which is promiled
to the pious and humble.

What mull be the fate of him who looks not
up to heaven for direction, nor properly exerts

the

# DEVOUT MAN.

the reason which God hath given him?-who
brings neither patience nor attention to the search
of true happiness ?-who applies to no other
counsellor than present pleasure, and with a rafl
and credulous mind delivers himself up to every
fuggeition of desire?

DEVOUT MAN.
H IS veneration is not confined to aas of im-

mediate worship. It is the habitual temper

of his foul. No place and no object appear to
him void of God. When he surveys this vast
univerfc, where beauty and goodness are every
where predominant ;-when he reflets on the
numberless multitudes of creatures, who, in their
different flations, enjoy the blessings of existence;
-and when, at the fame time, he looks up to an
universal Father, who hath thus filled creation
with life and h'.ppinefs; his heart glows within
him. He looks forward to immortality, and dif-
covers the highest fuibjeds of gratitude. He
views himself as a guilty creature, whom divine
benignity has received into grace, whose forfeited
hopes it has restored, and to whom it has opened
the molt glorious profped of future felicity.-
He contemplates with aftoniihmenc the labours of

the

the Son of God, in accomplishing redemption
for men, and his foul overflows with thankfulness
to hlim.

To inferior enjoyments, he allots inferior and

secondary attachments.-He disclaims not every
earthly affetion.-He pretends not to renounce
all pleasure in the comforts of this prcfcnt state.
Such an unnatural renunciation humanity forbids,
and religion cannot require. But from there he
expeEts not supreme bliss. He discerns the va-
nity which belongs to them all; and beyond the
circle of mutable objects, which surround him,
he aspires after some principles of more perfect
felicity, which shall not be fubje& to change or
decay.

But where is this complete and permanent

good to be found ? Ambition pursues it in courts
and palaces, and returns from the pursuit loaded
with forrows-Pleafure seeks it among sensual
joys, and retires with the confession of disappoint-
ment.

After exploring heaven and earth for happi-

ness, to the devout man they seem a mighty void,
a wilderness of shadows, where all would be
empty and unsubstantial without God.-True
bappinefs dwells only with God.

MIDDLE

# MIDDLE AGE.

MlIDDLE AGE.

S we advance from youth to middle age, ,a
new field of aation opens, and a different

charater is required. The flow of gay and im-
petuous spirits begins to subside. Life gradually
aftilnes a graver cast; the mind a more sedate
and thoughtful turn. The attention is now
transferred fiom pleasure to interell; that is, to
plealure, difluled over a wider extent, and mea-
fured by a larger scale.

Formerly, the enjoymert of the present mo.

ment occupied the whole attention. Now, no
action terminates alternately in itself, but refers
to fbme more dillmat aim. Wealth and power,
the infiruments of lasting gratification, are now
coveted more than any single pleasure ;-prudence
and foresight lay their plan;-indutiry carries on
its patient efforts;-aciivity pushes forward;--
address winds around ;-here, an enemy is to be
overcome ;-there, a rival to be displaced ;-com-
petitions warm ;-and the strife of the world
thickens on every fide.

THE

# THE UNION OF PIETY AND MORALITY.

THE UNION OF PIETY AND MORALITY.
THIS forms the consistent, the graceful, the

refpceable charatecr of the real Christian,

the man of true worth. Either of them left out,
one fide of the characer is only fair; the other
fide will be always open to much reproach. Hence
we dishonour ourselves, and do great injustice to
religion: as by division it is exposed to the cen-
sure of the world.

The unbeliever will scoff at such piety, where

he fees neglect of moral duties. The bigot will
decry all morality, where he fees a pretence of
virtue, though a contempt of God. Whereas he
who fears God, and is at the fame time just and
beneficent to men, exhibits religion to the world
with full propriety. His characer is above re-
proach. It is at once amiable and venerable.-
Malice itself is afraid to attack him; and even
the worlt men refpet and honour him in their
hearts. He who fails materially either in piety,
or virtue, is always obnoxious to the anguiih of
remorse.

NEGLECT

# NEGLECT OF RELIGION.

NEGLECT OF RELIGION.

HERE Religion is negleaed there can be
no regular or steady practice of the duties

of morality. The chara&er will be often incon-
fifient; and virtue, placed on a basis too narrow
to support it, will be always loose and tottering.
For such is the propensity of our nature to vice,
so numerous are the temptations to a relaxed and
immoral conduct, that stronger restraints than
those of mere reason are necefiary to be ilnpofed
on man.

The sense of right and wrong, the principle of

honour, or the inftina of benevolence, are bar-
riers too feeble to withfland the strength of par-
sion. For the heart wounded by fore diltrcef, or
agitated by violent emotions, soon discovers, that
virtue without religion is inadequate to the govern-
ment of life. It is destitute of its proper guard
-of its firmest fupport-of its chief encourage-
ment. It will fink under the weight of misfor-
tune-or will yield to the solicitations of guilt.

Humanity, seconded by piety, renders the

spring from whence it flows of course more re-
gular and conitant. In ihort, withdraw religion
and you fliake all the pillars of morality. In

3 every

# OLD AGE.

every heart you weaken the influence of virtue;
and among the multitude, the bulk of mankind,
you overthrow its power.

OLD AGE.
O LD Age is a ltage of the human courre,

which every one hopes to reach; it is a pc-

riod justly entitled to general refpe&t. Even its
failings ought to be touched with a gentle hand.
For though in every part of life vexations occur;
yet, in former years, either business, or plcafure,
served to obliterate their impression, by supplying
occupation to the mind.

Old age begins its advances by disqualifying

men either from relishing the one, or for taking
an active part in the other; while it withdraws
their accustomed supports, it imposes, at the
fame time, the additional burden of growing in-
firmities.

In the former flages of their journey, hope

continued to flatter them with many a fair and
enticing p,'ofpect; but as old age increases these
illusions vaniih. Life is contracted within a nar-
row and barrca circle. Year after year steals

fume-

somewhat away from their store of comfort-de-
prives them of some of their ancient friends-
blunts some of their powers of fenfation-and in-
capacitates them for some funcion of life.

The querulous temper, to them imputed, is to

be confidered as a natural infirmity, rather than a
vice: the fame apology cannot be made for that
peevish disgust at the manners, and that malig-
nant censure of the enjoyment, of the young,
which is fometines found to accompany declin-
ing years.

It is too common to find the aged at declared

enmity with the whole system of present customs
and manners; perpetually complaining of the
growing depravity of the world, and of the afto-
niifing vices and follies of the rising generation.
All things, according to them, are rushing fast
into ruin. Decency and good order have become
extint; ever since that happy discipline, under
which they spent their youth, has paiTed away.

Former follies vanilh, and are forgotten.-

Those which arc present, strike observation and
sharpen censure. tIad the depravation of the
world continued to increase in proportion to those
gloomy calculations, which, so many centurihs
past, have ecnimated each race as worse than thte

G preced-

# APPEARANCES OF PIETY.

preceding; by this time, not one ray of good
lense, nor one spark of piety and and virtue, mutt
have remained unextinguiflied among mainkind.

APPEARANCES OF PIETY.
THESE are often substituted in the place of

the great duties of humanity and mercy. -

Too many flatter themselves with the hope of
.obtaining the friendship of their Creator, though
they negle& to do justice to their fellow-cre--
tures.

But supposed piety is an invention of their

own, unknown to reafon-unknown in the word
of God. For piety is a principle which regene-
rates the heart, and forms it to goodness. If,
therefore, while piety seems ardent, morality shall
decline; or if ever the regard to it should totally
fail-if, whiif making prayers, no alms are
given-- if, whilf we appear zealous for God, we
are false or unjust to men-if we are hard or
contracted in heart, severe in our censures, and
oppreflive in our conduct, then conclude what
we have termed piety, was no more than an
empty name, refolviing itself either into an hypo-
critical form ofgodlinefs-atranfient imprefflon of

serious-

# MEN OF TRUE PLEASURE.

ferioufilefs-an accidental melting of the heart-,-
or the deliberate refuge óf a deluded and fuperfti-
tious, but, at the fame time, a corrupted mind.
For all men, even the mos. depraved, are sub-
jed, more or lecs, to compuncions of confci--
ence.

MEN OF TRUE PLEASURE.
T HE feat of enjoyment is the foul. None

but the temperate, the regular, and the

virtuous know how to enjoy prosperity. They
bring to its comforts the manly relish of a found
uncorrupted mind. They stop at the proper
point before enjoyment degenerates into disgust,
and pleasure is converted into pain. They are
firangers to those complaints which flow from
spleen, caprice, and all the fantastical diitreffes of
a vitiated mind. Purity and virtue heighten all
the powers of human fruition. Moderate and
simple pleasures relish high with the temperate.

Innocence confers ease and freedom on the

mind; leaves it open to every pleasing sensation';
give a lightness to the spirits, similar to the native
gaiety of youth and health ;-for prosperity is re-
doubled to a good man by his generous use of it.;

G 2 it

# MAN OF PLEASURE.

it is refleced back upon him from every one
whom he makes happy*

In the intercourse of domeitic affection-in

the attachment of friends-the gratitude of de-
pendeats-the esteem and good will of all who
know hirn-he fees blefiings multiplied around
him on every fide; like a tree in the midit of an
inhabited country, affording to some friendly
shelter, to others fruit, which is not only ad-
mired by all for its beauty, but blessed by the
traveller for the shade, and by the hungry for the
{uftenance it has given.

MAN OF PLEASURE.
T O a man of plealure every moment appears

to be loft, which partakes not of the viva-

city of amusement. To connea one plan of
gaiety with another is his sole tfudy, till in a
very ihort time nothing remains but to tread the
fame beaten round-to enjoy what they have al-
ready enjoyed-and to fee what they have often
seen.

Pleasures thus drawn to the dregs become va-
pid and tasteless. What might have pleated

long,

# PLEASURE, SENSUAL AND SPIRITUAL.

long, if enjoyed with temperance and mingled
with retirement, being devoured with such eager
haste, speedily surfeits and digufts. Hence,
having run through a rapid course of pleasure,
after having glittered for a few years in the fore-
most line of public amufemnents, such men are
the most apt to fly at last to a melancholy retreat;
not led by religion or reason, but driven by dif-
appointed hopes and exhaufktld spirits to the pen-
five conclusion, that a.'l is v;anit.

PLEASURE, SENSUAL AND SPIRITUAL.
'T HE refined pleasures of a pious mind are,

in many refpecs, superior to the coarse gra-

tifications of sense ;-they are pleasures which be-
long.to the highefi powers and beit affections of
the foul; whereas the gratifications of sense re-
fide in the lowest region of our nature. To the
one the foul stoops below its native dignity; the
other raises it above itself. The one leaves al-
ways a comfortless, often a mortifying remem-
brance behind it; the other is reviewed with ap-
plause and delight. The pleasures of some rc-
femble a foaming torrent; which, after a difor-
derly course, speedily runs out, and leaves an
empty and offensive channel: but the pleaflres of

G 3 devo.

# PLEASURES OF OLD AGE.

devotion resemble the equable current of a pure
river, which enlivens the fields through which
it passes, and diffuses verdure and fertility along
its banks.

PLEASURES OF OLD AGE.
THOUGH, in old age, the circle of pleasure

is contraced, yet within its limits, many

of those enjoyments remain which are most grate-
ful to human nature.

Temperate mirth is not extinguished by ad-

vanced years;-the mild pleasures of odmeftic
life still cheer the heart. The entertainments of
conversation and social intercourse continue un-
impaired. The desire of knowledge is not abated
by the frailty of the body, and the leisure of old
age affords many opportunities for gratifying that
desire. The sphere of observation and reflection
is not so much enlarged by long acquaintance
with the world, as to supply, within itself, a wide
range of improving thought: whilst the aged are
engaged in such employments as best fait the in-
firmities of their nature, they are surrounded,
perhaps, with families, who treat them with at-
tention and refpec; they are honoured by their

friends;

# PRESUMPTION.

friends; their charaters are established, and are
placed beyond the reach of clamour and the itrife
of tongues; and, free from diflra&ing cares, can
calmly attend to their eternal interests.

No age is doomed to total infelicity, provided

that we attempt not to do violence to nature, by
seeking to extort from one age the pleasures of
another, and to gather in the winter of life those
flowers which were destined to blofiom only in
its fummner or its spring.

PRESUMPTION.
THE constant concomitant of Presumption is

felf-conceit and obstinacy; and of all the

follies incident to youth particularly, there are
none which either deform its present appear-
ance, or blalf the profpe& of its future profpe-
rity more than there. By checking its natural
progress in improvement, they fix it in long
immaturity, and frequently produce mischiefs,
which can never be repaired.

These are the vices too commonly found

among the young.-Big with enterprize, and
elated by hope, they resolve to trust for success

to

to none but themfelves.-Full of their own ab?-
lities, they deride the admonitions which are
given them by their friends, as the timorous fug-
geftions of age.-Too wife to learn,-too im-
patient to deliberate,-too forward to be reltrain-
ed, they plunge with precipitate indiscretion into
the midst of all the dangers with which life
abounds.-Pofitive in opinion, and confident in
their assertions, as they are at this period, the
time will arrive when both men and things will
appear in a different light. Many characers
now admired will fink, by and by, in esteem;-
and many opinions, of which they are at present
most tenacious, will alter as they advance in
years.

The glare of youthful Presumption which daz-
zles our eyes liould always be distrusted; we
should not abound in our own sense, nor put our-
selves forward with too much eagerness; nor ima-
gine that by the impetuosity of juvenile ardour,
systems can be overturned which have been long
established, or that the face of the world can be
changed; but by patient and gradual progrefllon
in improvement, we may in due time command
lasting esteem. But by assuming, at present, a
tone offuperiority to which we have no title, we
shall disgust those whose approbation it is most
important to gain. Forward vivacity may fit us,

to

# DISSAPPOINTED PRIDE.

to be the companions of an idle hour. More so-
lid qualities must recommend us to the wife, and
mark us out for importance and consideration in
subsequent life.

- --~~~~~~~

DISSAPPOINTED PRIDE.
Wi HEN a man's sufferings arire from the bad

dispositions of his own heart; when in the

height of prosperity he is rendered miserable sole-
ly by disappointed pride, every ordinary motive
for communication ceases. The violence of an-
guifi drives him to confers a passion which ren-
ders him odious,. and a weakness which renders
him despicable.

In the eye of his family, every man withes to:

appear relpedable, and to cover from their know-
ledge whatever may vilify or degrade him. At-
tacked or reproached abroad, he consoles himself
with his importance at home; and in domestic at-
tachment and refpeEt, seeks for some compenfa-
tion for the injustice of the world. But. the
torments this folly occasions force him to break
through all restraints, and publish his shame be-
fore those from whom all men seek most to hide
it.

PRIN-

# PRINCIPLE AND SENTIMENT CONTRASTED.

PRINCIPLE .ND SENTIMENT CONTRASTEd.

ENTIMENT and Principle are often mif-
taken for each other though in fad they wide

ly differ.-Sentiment is the virtue of ideas, and
Principle the virtue of adion.-Sentiment has its
feat in the head, Principle in the heart.-Sentiment
suggests fil.e harangues, and subtle diftintions;
Principle conceives just notions, and performs
good ations in consequence of them. -Sentiment
refines away the simplicity of truth, and the
plainness of piety; and, as Voltaire, that cele.
brated wit, has remarked of his no less celebrated
contemporary Rousseau, " gives us virtue in'
words and vice in deeds."-Sentiment may be
called the Athenian, who knew what was right ;:
and Principle the. Lacedemonian,. who prac-
tfsd it>.

These qualities may be exemplified from corn

fidering two characders beautifully drawn by the
admirable pen of Milton.-Belial, who may be
called, and not improperly, the Demon of senti-
ment . and Abdiel, the Angel of principle.

BELIt',

# PROSPERITY.

BELIAL.

A fairer person loft not he ,vcn; he feem'd
For dignity composed, and high exploit,
But all was false and hollow, tho' his tongue
Dropt manna, and could make the worse appear
The better reason, to perplex and dafli
Matureft counsels; for his thoughts were low,
To *ice industrious, but to nobler deeds
Tim'rous and flotllful; )et he pleated the ear.

ABDIEL.

-* --- _Faithful found
Among the faitllcfs, faithful only he
Among innumerable fa.ll, unmoved,
Unflllken, unfeduecd, -unterrified
His loyalty he kept, his love, his zeal.
Nor number, nor example with him wrought
To fwvrve from truth, or change his coiitant mind,
Tho' single.-

-PROSPERITY.

SINGLE disappointment is sufficient to
embitter all the pleasures of worldly pro-
fperity. Though it might be expeted, one in

posses-

# NECESSITY OF PRUDENCE IN EVERY STAGE OF LIFE.

pofeifflon of high power and flation should difre.
gard flight injuries. But prosperity debilitates,
instead of strengthening the mind. Its common
effc is, to create an extreme sensibility to the
slightest wound, It foments impatient desires;
and raises expeaations which no success can fa-
tisfy. It softers a false delicacy, which sickens
in the nidft of indulgence;-by repeated gratifi-
cation, it blunts the feelings of men to what is
pleasing; and leaves them unhappily acute to
whatever is uneasy.
NECESSITY OF PRUDENCE IN EVERY

STAGE OF LIFE.
A T the firfi setting out in life, especially

when yet unacquainted with the world and

its snares, when every pleasure enchants with its
smile, and every objec shines with the gloss of
novelty, youth should beware of the reducing
appearances which surround them; and recolleA
what others have suffered from the power of head-
firong desire. If any passion be allowed, even
though it should be esteemed innocent, to acquire
an absolute ascendant, their inward peace will be
impaired. But if any, which has the taint of

guilt,
I

guilt, they may uatc fro:n that momcnt the ruin
of their tranquillity.

Nor with the season of youth doe.s the peril

end. To the impetuosity of youthful desire, fuc-
ceed the more fober, but no less dangerous at-
tachments of advancing years; when the passions
which are connelted with interest and ambition
begin their reign, and too frequently extend their
influence, even over those periods of life which
ought to be the most tranquil.

Friom the firit to the last of man's abode on

earth, the discipline must never be relaxed of
guarding the heart from the dominion of paflion.
Eager passions and violent desires were not made
for man.-They exceed his fphere.-They find
no adequate objet on earth; and, of course, can
be productive of nothing but milery.

The certain consequence of indulging them.

is, that there shall conle an evil day, whenii the
angulifl of difappointmcnt flall ackntowledge that
all which we enljov :!\leth us nothing.

SI REDEMP-

# REDEMPTION.

REDEMPTION.
THIS is one of the most glorious works of

the Almighty-illuitrious is the hour of the

restoration of the world-the hour when from
condemnation and misery, it emerged into happi-
ness and peace.

In this hour, the long series of prophecies, vi-

sions, types, and figures, was accompliffied. This
was the center in which they all met;-this the
point to which they tended and verged, through-
out the course of so many generations. We be-
hold the law and the prophets flanding at the foot
of the cross, and doing homage. We behold
Moses and Aaron bearing the ark of the covenant;
-David and Elijah presenting the oracle of tef-
timony ;-we behold all the priests and sacrifices,
-all the rights and ordinances,-all the types and
symbols, assembled together to receive their con-
summation. In this hour every rite assumed its
significancy ;-every prediction met its event --
every fymboldifplayed its corrcfpondencc.

REFOR

# REFORMATION.

# RELIGION.

REFORMATION.
T HE rage for reformation commonly shews

itself in a violent zeal for fupprefling what

is wrong, rather than in a prudent attention to
establish what is right; but we shall never obtain
a fair garden merely by rooting up weeds; we
must also plant flowers; for the natural richness
of the foil we have been clearing will not susser
it to lie barren, but whether it si all be vainly or
beneficially prolific, depends on the culture.

RELIGION.
T HE spirit of true religion breathes gentle-

ness and affability. It gives a native unaf-

seaed ease to the behaviour. It is social, kind,
and cheerful ;-far removed from that gloomy
and illiberal superstition which clouds the brow,
iharpens the temper, deje&s the spirit, and teaches
men to fit themselves for another world, by neg-
leWjng the concerns of this.

On the contrary, religion conneas our prepa-

ration for Heaven, with an honourable discharge
of the duties of active life. It is associated in

H 2 the

t:e i:;ag;;lation with all that is lovely and use-
fii;,-\vil.h wnhatlbever things are true, are julf,
:-"2 pure, are lovely, are of good report,-where-
c;'cr there is any virtue,-and wherever there is
any pS:-'-.i:.

Religion is rather a matter of fentime:t than

reasoning. The important and intereiting ar-
ticles of faith are fufficicntly plain. Our atten-
tion should be fixed on these, and not fu.sered to
rneddle with controversy. For there we are
plunged into a chaos, from which we never shall
be able to extricate ourselves. It spoils the tem-
per, and ha3 no good cffei on the heart.

All books, and all conversation, that tend to

fl:ke our faith on those great points of religion
_which should serve to regulate our condut, and
on which our hopes of future and eternal happi-
ness depend, fliould be avoided.

We fhculd never indulge ourselves in ridicule

on religious fubjets, nor give countenance to it
in others, by seeming diverted with what they
fay. This, to people of good breeding, will be
a sufficient check. It is not necessary to go fur-
ther than scripture for our religious opinions.

We

# RELIGIOUS REFLECTION.

We should embrace those we find clearly re-

vealed, and never perplex ourselves about such
as we do not underfland, but treat them with si-
lence and becoming reverence.

RELIGIOUS REFLECTION.
IF there be any impreflion which man is form-

ed by nature to receive, it is religion. As

soon as his mind opens to observation he discerns
innumerable marks of his dependent ftate;-he
finds himself placed, by some superior power, in
a vast world, where the wisdom and goodness of
the Creator are conspicuous on every fide.

The magnificence, the beauty,, the order of

nature, excite him to admire and adore. When
he looks up to the omnipotent hand which ope-.
rates throughout the universe, he is impreflied
with reverence !- when he receives blerfings
which he cannot avoid ascribing to divine good..
ness, hle is prompted to. gratitude..

Tribes of men, without policy or laws, or.

cities, or any of the arts of life, are discovered;.
but no where withou.t fQme form of religion. In.

H 3 every

# RESIGNATION.

every region we behold the profirate worshipper,
the temple, the altar, and the offering.

RESIGN ATION.
IGNORANCE of good or evil should deter-

mine man to follow providence, and resign

himself to God. Resignation to his Maker is
one of the moR important Icleons which can be
given to man. He knows not what is good for
himself in the future periods of life; but God
perfecly knows it; and if he faithfully serves
him, he has reason to believe that God will al-
-ways consult it.' Before him lies the whole fuc-
ceflion of events, which are to fill up man's ex-
iftence. It is in his power to arrange, and mo-
del them at his plealfre.

Amidst the agitations of desire, and the per-

plexities of doubt, there is one fixed point of ret.
By this let man abide; and difinifs his anxiety
about things uncertain and unknown. He should
acquire an interest in divine favour; and he may
safely surrender himself to the divine adminiftra-
tion. When tempted to repine at his condition,
he should reflec whether he would have been
happier in any other tfation.

He

# SELF COMMUNION,

He fllould not be too particular in his petitions

to heaven concerning his temporal interest, but
susser God to govern the world according to his
own plan; and only pray, that he would bestow
what his unerring wisdom fees to be best for him.
On the whole he should follow wherever his pro-
vidence leads; comply with whatever he requires,
and leave all the relt to him.

SELF COMMUNION,
A S recommended by men of virtue and true

piety, is religious recollection. It is to

commune with ourselves, under the charaaer of
spiritual and immortal beings; and to ponder
those paths of our feet which are leading us to
eternity.- It is to bring home to our fouls the in-
ternal, authoritative sense of God, as of a fove-
reign and a father; to contemplate what is dil-
played of his perfeaions.-It is to realize the
presence of the Supreme Being, so as to produce
the most profound veneration, and to awaken the
earnest desire of as near an approach, as our na-
ture will permit, to that great fountain of hap-
piness and life.

By

By this the pious man walks among the vari-

ous scenes of nature as within the precin&s of a
great temple, in the habitual exercise of devotion.
And from hence, when his thoughts have been
thus employed, he returns to the world like a
superior being. He carries into aLcive life those
pure and elevating sentiments, to which the giddy
crowd are itrangers. A certain odour of san&ity
remains upon his mind, which, for a while at
least, will repel the contagion of the world.

As he views the world with the eye of a Chris-

tian, he will fee, that however men appear to
move and ad after their own pleasure, they are
nevertheless retained in secret bonds by the Al.
mighty; and all their operations rendered subser-
vient to the ends of his moral government. He
will behold him punishing the finner by means of
his own iniquities; from the trials of the righte-
ous bringing forth their reward; and to a state
of seeming universal confusion preparing the wisest
and most equitable iffue.-While the fashion of
this world is passing faf away, he will discern
the glory of another arising fast to succeed it.-
He will behold all human events; our grief and
our joys-our love and hatred-our character and
our memory, absorbed in the ocean of eternity;
and no traces of our present exiglence left, except

its

# SINCERITY.

its being for ever well with the righteous, and
ill with the wicked.

SINCERITY.
SINCERITY is the basis of every virtue.

The love of truth, as we value the appro-

bation of heaven, or the ceteem of the world,
should be cultivated. In all our proceedings it will
make us direct and confident. Ingenuity and
candour posiess the most powerful charm; they
bcfpeak universal favour, and carry an apology
for almost every failing.

The path of truth is a plain and safe path.-

It supplies us with an openness of charadcer which
displays a generous boldness, necessary to ditlin-
guifh youth. To give an early preference to
honour above gain when they fland in competi-
tion;-to defpiic every advantage, which cannot
be attained without dishonest arts ;-to brook no
meannels, and sloop to no diflimulation, are the
indications of a great mind, the presages of fu-
ture eminence and diftin&ion in life.

At the fame time, this virtuous sincerity is
perectly confident with the most prudent vigi-

lance

# SLOTH.

lance and caution. It is opposed to cunning,
not to truc wisdom. It is not the simplicity of
the weak and improvident, but the candour of
an enlarged and noble mind; of one who scorns
deceit, because he accounts it both base and un-
profitable; and who seeks no difguicf, because he
needs none to hide him.

SLOTH.

OTHING is so opposite to the true enjoy-
ment of life, as the relaxed and feeble Rtate

of an indolent mind. Sloth is so inconfitent
with both soundness of mind and body, that it is
harder to determine whether it be a greater foe
to virtue, or to health and happiness. Inactive
as it is in itself, its effects are fatally powerful.
Though it appear a slowly flowing fiream, yet it
undermines all that is liable and flourishing. It
not only saps the foundation of every virtue, but
pours upon us a deluge of crimes and evils.-
It is like water, which first putrifies by ftagna-
tion; and then fends up noxious vapours, and fills
the atmosphere with death.

Idleness is the certain parent both of guilt and
ruin, which Thould be avoided. Under this are

included,

# SOBRIETY OF MIND  ITS NECESSITY.

included, not mere inaEtion only, but all that cir-
cle of trifling occupations, in which too many faun-
ter away their youth; perpetually engaged in fri-
volous society or public amusements ;-in the la-
bour of dress, or theofientation of their persons.

Amusements, youth requires. It were vain-

it were cruel, to prohibit them. But though al-
lowable as the relaxation, they are most culpable
as the business of the young. For they then be-
come the gulph of time, and the poison of the
mind.-They foment bad paflions-they weaken
the manly powers-they fink the native vigour
of youth into contemptible effeminacy.

SOBRIETY OF MIIND-ITS NECESSITY.
SOBRIETY of mind is one of those virtues,

which the present condition of human life

strongly inculcates. The uncertainty of its en-
joyments checks presumption; the multiplicity
of its dangers demands perpetual caution.

Moderation-vigilance-and felf-government,

are duties incumbent on all; but especially on
such as are beginning the journey of life. For the
whole slate of youthful views and passions is ad-

2 verse

verse to sobriety of mind.-The scenes which
present themselves at our entering upon the
world, are commonly flattering.-WVhatever they
be in themfelhes,' the lively spirits of the young
gild every openingprofpe&.--Thc field of hope
appears to stretch wide before them. Pleasure
seems to put foith its bloflbms on every fide.-
Impelled by desire, forward they rush with incon-
fiderate ardour:-prompt to decide and to chute-
averse to hesitate or to enquire;-credulous, bc-
cause untaught by experiencc;-rafl, because
unacquainted with danger;-headftrong, because
unfubdued by dihappointment.

In human actions there is a right and wrong.

-Those who are born with the fame advantages
of fortune, are not all equally prosperous in the
course of life.-Some of them, by wife and steady
conduct, attain diffin.tion in the world, and pan's
their days vith comfort and honour ;-others of
the fame rank, by mean and vicious behaviour,
forfeit the advantages of their birth,-involve
themselves in much mifery,-and end in being a
disgrace to their friends, and a burden on focicty.
Early, then, we may learn, that it is not on the
external condition in which we find ourselves
placed;-but on that part on which we are to a&,
that our welfare or unhappinefs,-our honour or
,infamy depend.

WVhen

When beginning to a& that part, it is of the

grcateft moment to regulate our plan of condu.t
with the most serious attention, before we have
yet committed any fatal or irretrievable errors.-
If, instead of exerting refleEtion for this valuable
purpose, we deliver ourselves up, at so critical a
tinle, to sloth and pleafure;-if v:e refuie to
iiften to any counsellor but humour, or to attend
to any purluit except that of amufement;-if we
allow ourfilves to float loose and careless on the
tide of life, ready to receive any dire&tion which
the current of faiion may chance to give us-the
fad conliequecnces of such indilcretion will extend
to us:-we cannot attain success without prepara-
tion, and escape dangers without precaution.-
Happiness will not grow up to us of its own ac-
cord, and solicit our acceptance, when to the relt
of mankind, it is the fruit of long cultivation,
and the acquilition of labour and carc.-We
should not deceive ourselves with such arrogant
hopes.

Whatever be our rank, Providence will not, for
our lfake, rev.crfc its eftablilhcd order. But, by
t.talpcring the vivacity of youth with a proper
mixture of fcrious thought, we may ensure cheer-
fulness for the reft of life; whilst by delivering
ourselves up at present to giddiness and levity,
we lay the foundation of lalting heaviness of
heart. I .SOLI-

# SOLITUDE.

SOLITUDE.
.SOLITUDE is the hallowed ground which

religion hath, in every age, chosen for her

own. There her inspiration is felt, and her fe-
cret myiteries elevate the foul. There falls the
tear of contrition ;-there, rifes towards heaven
the sigh of the heart;-there, melts the foul with
all the tenderness of devotion, and pours itself
forth before him who made, and redeemed it.

The great and worthy, the pious and the vir-

tuous, have ever been addicted to serious retire-
ment. Refined and enlarged minds leave the
world behind them,--feel a call for higher plea-
fures,--and seek them in retreat.

But a total seclusion from the world, is so far

from being the perfecion of religion, that it is
no other than the abufc of it. Yet there will be'
neither confiffency in the condut, nor dignity
in the character, of one who sets apart no share
of time for meditation and refiecion.

If we wish that reason mhould exert her native

power, we mulff sip aside from the crowd into
the cool and silent shade. It is there that, with
fober and steady eye, she examines what is good

and

and evil, what is wife or foolish, in human con-
du& ;-she looks back on the past, and forms
plans, not for the present moment only, but for
the whole of life.

Man cannot discharge any part of his duty

aright, who never fulffrs his pallions to cool-
and his paflions cannot cool, who is engaged
without interruption in the tumult of the world.
This incefiant stir may be called the perpetual
drunkenness of life. It raiies that eager fermen-
tation of spirit, which will ever be fending forth
the dangerous fumes of rafniefs and folly.

Whereas, he who mingles religious retreat

with worldly affairs, remains calm and master
of himfelf-he is not whirled round, and render-
ed giddy by the agitation of the world, but comes
forth with manly tranquillity, fortified by prin-
ciples which he has formed, and prepared for
whatever may befal. For he who wihnes for an
effetual cure of the wounds which the world
can inflict, should retire from intercourse with
men, to intercourse with God. When he enters
into his closet, and ihuts the door, let him shut
out at the fame time all intrusion of worldly
care, and dwell among objects divine and immor-
tal: for ccleftial inhabitants quarrel not. Amongfi
them there is neither ingratitude, nor envy, nor

I 2 tumult;

# THE STUDY OF MAN.

tumult; concord and tranquillity reign for ever.
From such objects, upon the mind of the pious
man, there beams a pure and enlivening light;
there is dift;fcd over his heart a holy calm.-His
agitated spirit reafnlumes its firnnefs, and regains
its peace.-The world finks in its importance,
and the load of mortality and misery loses almost
all its weight. The ditfurbances and alarms> io
formidable to thole who are engaged in the tu-
mults of the world, seem to him like thunder
only roiling atar off.

Besides, it is also necefiary to prepare- us for 1

life to cone. F'or breathing habitually a conta-
gious air, how certain is our ruin, unlcfs we
fcenetimes retreat from this pletilential region,
and lfeek for proper correcives of the disorders
which are contradted there ?-Religious retire-
ment both abates the disease, and furnifleA the
remedy. It lessens the corrupting influence of
the world; and it gives opportunity for better
principles to cxert their power.

THEI STUDY OF MAN.
T HE life of man is a mixed slate, full of un-

certainty and vici.fitude, of anxieties and
fears. For no man's prosperity on earth is liable

Ind

and affured-hence no fludy, to a thoughtful
mind, can appear more important than how to be
suitably prepared for the misfortunes of life, so as
to contemplate them in profpcc without dismay;
and, if they must befal, to bear them without de-
jeaion.

Throughout every age, power has endeavour-

ed to remove adversity to a distance. Philosophy
has studied when it drew nigh, to conquer it by
patience-and wealth h:s fought out every plea-
sure that can compensate or alleviate pain.

But religion has been no less attentive to the

fame important object. The defence which it
provides is altogether of an internal kind. It is
the heart, not the outward slate, which it pro-
fesses to guard, by affording the diftrefled that
security and peace, which arile frotn a belief of
divine protecion. It opens to them sources of
consolation which are hidden from others. By
that strength of mind with which it endows them,
it sets them upon a rock, againfi which the tem-
pelt may violently beat, but cannot thake; for it
prepares the mind for encountering with fortitude
the most revere shocks of adversity.

13 PAS-

# PASSIVE TAMENESS OF SPIRIT, AND UNLIMITED COMPLIANCE.

PASSIVE TAMENESS OF SPIRIT, AND

UNLIMITED COMPLIANCE.
PASSIVE tameness, which submits without

firuggle to every encroachment of the vio-

lent and assuming, forms no part of Chriitian
duty, but is deftrudive of general happiness and
order.

Unlimited complaisance which, on every occa-

sion, falls in with the opinions and manners of
others, is so far from being a virtue, that it is it-
self a vice, and the parent of many vices.-It
overthrows all steadiness of principle, and pro-
duces that sinful conformity with the world,
which taints the whole characer.

In the present corrupted state of human man-

ners, always.to assent and to comply, is the very
work maxim which can be adopted. It is im-
poflible to support the purity and dignity of
Chrifftian morals, without opposing the world on
various occasions, even though we ihould itand
alone,

. *

, tTE1M
.-sv x, »

# TEMPERANCE.

TEMPERANCE.
T EMPERANCE in pleasure is eflentially

necessary to be observed, particularly by

youth, that they may beware of that rock on
which thousands, from race to race, continue to
split. The love of pleasure, natural to man in
.every period of his life, glows at this age with
excellive ardour.-Novelty adds fresh charms, as
yet, to every gratification.-The world appears
to fpead a continual feaft;-and health, vigour,
and high spirits invite them to partake of it with-
out reitraint. In vain are they warned of the
latent danger. The old, when they offer their
admonitions, are upbraided with having forgot
that they once were young. And yet, to what
do the counsels of age, with refped to pleasure,
amount ? They may all be corprifed in a few
words, not to hurt ourselves, and not to hurt
others by our pursuit of pleasure, and those will
be fully effeded by temperance. Within there
bounds, pleasure is lawful, beyond them it be-
comes criminal, because it is ruinous,

Hence by this virtue we are not called to re-

nounce pleasure, but to enjoy it in fafety.-In-
stead of abridging it, we are exhorted to pursue

it

# GOOD TEMPER  ITS EFFECTS AND UTILITY.

it on an extensive plan; we have measures prc
posed for iecuring its polfeTion, and for prolong-
ing its duration.-As we confider ourselves not
only as sensitive, but as rational beings ;-not only
as rational but focial:-not only as social but im-
mortal; whatever violates our nature in any of
these refpes cannot afford true pleasure.

Have we not found that in the course of crimi-

nal excess, pleasure was more than compensated by
Succeeding pain ? Have we not from every habit,
at least of unlawful gratification, found Tome
thorn spring to wound us; some consequence to
make us repent of it in the issue ? We should there-
fore avoid temptations, for which we have found
ourselves unequal, with as much care as we
would shun pestilential infecion.

GOOD TEMPER-ITS EFFECTS AND UTILITY.
AGood-natured man, whatever faults he may

have, they will for the mos part be treated

with lenity ;-he will generally find an advocate
in every human heart;-his errors will be lament-
ed, rather than abhorred;-and his virtues will be
viewed in the fairest point of light:-His good hu-
mour, without the help of great talents or ac-

quirements,

quirements, will make his company preferable to
that of the moit brilliant genius, in whom this
quality is wanting-but with it such a brightness
will be added to their luitre, that all the world
will envy and admire, whilf his associates will all
most adore, and labour to imitate him.--In short,
it is almost impossible that we can be sincerely be-
loved by any body, without this engaging pro-
perty, whatever other excellencies we may pof-
fiefi--but with it, we flhall fcarccly fall of find-
ing some friends and favours, even though we
should be dellitute. of alinoft every other advan-
tage..

It is true we are not all equally happy in our

dispositions; but human virtue consists in cherish-
ing and cultivating every good inclination, and in
checking and subduing every propensity to evil.-
If a man had been born with a bad-temper, it
might have been made a good one, at least with
regard. to its outward effecs, by education,. reason
and principle: and though he is so happy as to
have a good one while young, he mufft not sup.
pose it will always continue so, if he neglets to
maintain a proper command over. it.- Power-
ficknefs-difappointments-or worldly cares may
corrupt, or embitter the finefi disposition,. if they
are not counteraAed by reason aund religion.-
Hence thefc should be ever exerted in the exigen-

cics

cies of life-they will teach us a becoming sub-
miflion under all the accidents of our mortal slate,
with which it is so variouflv chequered:-divert
calamity of its severest fling-make our enemies
aihamed of their persecuting tpirit-and cause us
to finile even in the midst of misfortune.

By good temper is not meant an insensible in-

difference to injuries-and a total forbearance
from manly rcfentment.-There is a noble and
generous kind of anger, a proper and neccffary
part of our nature which has nothing in it sinful
or degrading-We are not to be dead to this-
for the person, who feels not an injury, must be
incapable of being properly affected by benefits.
With those, who treat us ill without provocation,
we ought to maintain our own dignity-but
whilst we shew a sense of their improper behavi-
our, we must preserve calmness, and even good
breeding-and thereby convince them of the im-
potence, as well as injustice of their malice.

Generous anger does not preclude elieem for

whatever is really eflimable, nor does it deflroy
good-will to the person of its object, or autho-
rize any impeachment to reft on the goodness of
our difpofition:-It even inspires the desire of
overcoming our enemy by benefits-and wishes
to inflic no other punishment than the regret of

having

# EFFECTS OF VICE.

having injured one who deserved his kindness :
It is always placable, and ready to be reconciled,
as soon as the offender is convinced of his error;
nor can any subsequent injury provoke it to re-
cur to pail difobligations, which had been once
forgiven. The confcioufiefs of injured innocence
naturally produces dignity, and usually prevents
anger ;-but if tempered with the calmness of a
quiet spirit, it ever rifes superior to the oppref-
five hand of insolence and cruelty.

EFFECTS OF VICE.
V ICE by its natural influence on the temper

tends to produce dejecion under the slightest

trials, and weakens that which only can support
mankind when those vicissitudes come-For it is
their mind which must then support them; and
their mind, by their sensual attachments, is cor-
rupted and enfeebled-fo that they have neither
principles, nor temper, which can ftlad the assault
of trouble.

TJhey have no principles which lead them to

look beyond the ordinary rotation of events-
and therefore, when misfortunes involve them,
the profpeA mufl be comfortless on every fide.

Strangers

# VILLAIN.

-Strangers to all the temperate fatisfa6tions of
a good and pure mind-Strangers to every plea-
sure, except what was seasoned by vice or vanity,
their adversity is to the lait degree disconsolate--
From hence we may deduce the causes to which
we must ascribe the broken fpirits-the peevifl
temper-and impatient passions that so often at-
tend the declining age, or falling fortunes of vi-
cious men.

1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

VILLAIN.
H E climbs the steep rock, and treads on the

edge of a precipice, in order to catch a

ihadow-He has cause to dread not only the un-
certainty of the event which he wishes to accom-
plifh, but the nature also of that event when ac-
complhhed-He is not only liable to that difap-
pointment of success, which so often fruitrates all
designs of men; but liable to a disappointment
till more cruel, that of being successful and mi-
ferable at once.

Riches and pleasure are the chief temptations

to criminal deeds. Yet those riches, when ob-
tained, may very possibly overwhelm him with
unforeseen miseries. Those pleafurcs may cut

I ihurt

# VIRTUE AND PROSPERITY CONTRASTED.

ihort his health and life-And is it for such
doubtful and fallacious rewards, that the deceiver
fills his mouth with lies, the friend betrays his
benefacor, the apostate renounces his faith, and
the affaflin covers himself with blood!

Whoever commits a crime, incurs a certain

evil for a most uncertain good-What will turn
to his advantage in the course of this life, he
cannot with any aflilrance know;-but this he
may know, with full certainty, that he will
draw upon his head that displeasure of tie Al-
mighty, which shall crush him for ever.

The advantages of this world when obtained

by criminal means carry a curse in their bosom,
nay even lwhen innocently gained, are uncertain
bleflings. To the virtuous, they are often no
more than chai-f-to the guilty they are always
poison.

VIRTUE AND PROSPERITY CONTRASTED.
r HOSE situations which favour pleafire are

.too generally adverse to virtue. Virtue

requires internal government and discipline; pro-
iperity relaxes the mind, and inflames the pals

K Lions:

# VIRTUE

lions:-virtue is supported by a regard to wrha
is future-profperity attaches us wholly to what
is prefent:-virtue checks our purfiits, which are
the result of intemperance-refrains our desires,
.and makes them flow in the calm tide of modera-
tion:-profperity encreafes oui evil propensities,
inflames our passions, and plunges us deep in the
siream of riot and excess :-virtue is the fovereiga
.pilot which seers us into the harbour of true
lailing pleafure-profperity is too apt to turn the
helm to the port.of sensual enjoyment-unites us
too closely to the things of this world-and makes
us eye the moment of our dissolution writh regret
and horror. The chara&teriftics of virtue are
.modesty and humility-the most common.attend-
ants upon prosperity are pride and presumption;
and often prove the motive. of.impiety.

VIRTUE
JS the universal charm: even its shadow is

courted, when the substance is wanting.-It

*must be formed.and supported, not by unfrequent
aas, but by daily and repeated exertions, in order
to its'becoming vigorous and useful. Great events
give scope for great virtues; but the main tenor
.of human life.is composed of small occurrences-

Within

VWithin the round of these, lie the materials of
the happiness of most men; the fubjeas of thei?
duty, and the trials of their virtue.

Whatever is to be our profeflion, no educationi

is more neceflary to success, than the acquirement
of virtuous dispositions and habits. This is the
universal preparation for every characer, and
every station in life-Bad as the worrd is, refpec
is always paid to virtue. In the ufiual course of
human affairs, it. will be found that a plain un-
derftanding, joined witht acknowledged worth,
contributes more to prosperity than the brightefi
parts without probity or honour,-

Whether science, or business, or public life,

be our aim, virtue still enters, for a principal
share, into all those great departments of so-
cietv.

It is conneted with eminence in every liberal

art;-with reputation in every branch of fair and
ufefll business ?-with difiinLion, in every public
flation. The vigour which it gives to the mind,
and the weight which it adds to the character;--
the generous sentiment which it breathes;-the.
undaunted fpirit'which it inspires ;-the ardour of
diligence which it quickens ;-the freedom which
it procures from pernicious and diflonourable

K 2 avoca-

# VOLUPTUARY.

avocations, are the foundation of all that is high
in fame, or great in fuccels among men.

Whatever ornamental or engaging endow-

ments we poffers, virtue is a necefliry requisite
in order to their lhining with proper lulre-By
vhatever arts we may at first attract the atten-
tion, we can hold the eftccm, and secure the hearts-
of others, on!y by amiable dirpofitions, and the
accomplishments of the mind-Thefe are the qua-
lities vhofe influence will lass, when the lusire
of all that once sparkled and dazzled has paied
away.

VOLUPTUARY.
T HE corrupted temper, and the guilty pas.

sions of the bad, frustrate the effec of every

advantage which the world confers on them-
The world may call them men of pleasure; but
of all men they are the greatest foes to pleasure:
from their eagerness to grasp, they firangle and
destroy it-riotous indulgence enervates both the
body and the mind: so that in the midst of his
studied refinement the voluptuary languishes.

Where-

# WORLD.

Wherever guilt mingles with prosperity, a

certain gloom and heaviness enter along with
it. Vicious intrigues never fail to entangle and
embarrass those who engage in them;-befides,
the selfish gratifications of the bad are both nar-
row in their circle, and Ihort in their duration.

WORLD.

HE world is the great deceiver, whose fal-
lacious arts it highly imports us to detec..

But in the midlf of its pleasures and pursuits, the
dete&tion is impoflible. We tread as within an
enchanted circle, where nothing appears as it
truly is. We live in delusion, forming plans of
imaginary bliss. We wander for ever in the pa-
radife of fools-meditating in secret on the means
of attaining worldly fuccefs;-which acquired,
has seldom in one instance fulfilled our cxpeta-
tion ;-but where we have reckoned moll upon
enjoyment ,there have we generally found the
least.

It is too often confidered as the only field of

pleasure; and beat over and over in quest of joys
unfubflantial and tranfitory:-Pleafed-- with the
visionary trifles which it affords, we forget the

K 3 proba.

# RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.

probationary tate of our exiftence,-madly pursue
what at best we cannot retain-barter our eternal
welfare for vain shadows and empty shew ;-and,
as if careless of the justice of God, seem to regard
not his threatened vengeance, but depend solely
on the extent of his mercy; and dives ourselves of
the smallest right to demand our promised felicity.

RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.
THE expressions of those affecions under its

various forms, are no other than native

effusions of the human heart. Ignorance may
minlead, and fuperflition may corrupt them, but
their origin are derived from sentiments that are
essential to man.

Wherever men have exifled, they have been

sensible that some acknowledgment was due, on
their part, to the Sovereign of the world; which
Christian revelation has placed in such a light, as
one should think were sufficient to over-awe the
mofi thoughtless, and to melt the most obdurate
mind.

/But religious worlhip, disjoined from justice
and virtue, can on no account whatever find

accept-

# YOUTH.

acceptance with the Supreme Being.-Becaufe it
is for the fake of man that worship and prayers
are required, that he may be rendered better, and
acquire those pious and virtuous dispositions, in
which his highefi improvement consists.

YOUTH.
Y7OUTH is the season of warm and generous

emotions ;-the heart should then fpontane-

oufly rife into the admiration of what is great,
glow with the love of what is fair and excellent,
and melt at the discovery of tenderness and good-
nefs.-In this season we lhould endeavour, upon
rational and fober enquiry, to have our princi-
ples established, nor susser them to be flaken by
the scoffs of the licentious, or the cavils of the
fceptical.-No wantonness of youthful spirits, no
compliance with the intemperate mirth of others,
flould ever betray us into profane sallies.

It should not be barren of improvements, so es-
fential to future felicity and honour.

This is the seed-time of life.-The character

is now under divine afliftance, of our own form-
ing; our fate is, in some measure, put into our

own

# TRUE HONOUR.

own hands.-Nature is as yet pliant and soft-
habits have not eftablihed their dominion-pre-
judices have not pre-occupied our underfianding
-the world has not had time to contrad and de-
base our affe&ions-All our powers are more
vigorous, disembarrassed and free, than they will
be ar any future period. Whatever impulse we-
now give to our desires and pailions, the direction
is likely to continue.-It will form the channel in
which our life is to run; nay, it may determine
its everlasting issue.

Virtuous youth gradually brings forward ac--

complilhed and flourishing manhood; and such
manhood pafges of itself, without uneasiness, into
refpeAable and tranquil old age.-But if youth
e trifled away without improvement, manhood
will be-cortemptible, and old age miserable.-
I the beginning of life has been vanity, its latter
end can be no other than vexation of.fpirit.

TRUE HONOUR.

[HE proper honour of man arises not from
-Lthofe splendid ations and abilities which ex-
cite high admiration. Courageand prowess, mili-
tary renown, signal vi&ories and conquests, may

render

render the name of a man famous, without ren-
dering his character truly honourable. To
many brave men, to many heroes renowned in
flory, we look up with wonder. Their exploits
are recorded. Their praises are sung. They sand
as on an eminence, above the reft of mankind.
Their eminence, nevertheless, may not be of that
bort before which we bow with inward esteem
and refpet. Something more is wanted for that
purpose, than the conquering arm, and the intre-
pidmind. The laurels of the warrior must at all
times be dyed in blood, and bedewed with the tears
of the widow and the orphan. But if they have
been Itained by rapine and inhumanity; if fordid
avarice has marked his character; or low and
gross sensuality has degraded his life; the great
hero finks into a little man. What at a distance,
or on a superficial view, we admire, becomes
mean, perhaps odious, when we examine it more
closely. It is like the Colossal statue, whose im-
mense size struck the fpcelator afar off with aito-
niflment; but, when nearly viewed, it appears
disproportioned, unfhapely, and rude.

Observations of the fame kind may-be applied

to all the reputation derived from civil accomplish-
ments; from the refined politics of the statesman,
or the literary efforts of genius and erudition.
These bellow, and, within certain bounds, ought

to

to bestow, eminence and diftinaion on men.
They discover talents which in themselves are
shining; and which become highly valuable,
when employed in advancing the good of man-
kind. Hence, they frequently give rife to fame.
But a diftination is to be made between fame and
true honour. The former is a loud and noisy ap-
plause; the latter,. a more silent and internal ho-
mage. Fame floats on the breath of the multi-
tude; Honour refts on the judgment of the think-
ing. Fame may give praise while it with-holds
esteem: True honour implies efieem mingled'
with refpe&. The one regards particular diftin-
guifhed talents; the other looks up to the whole
charater. Hence the statesman, the' orator, or
the poet, may be famous, while yet the man him-
self is far from being honoured. We envy his
abilities. We wish to rival them. But we
would not chufe to be clafied with him who pof-
sessed them..

From all this it follows, that in order to discern

where man's true honour lies, we must look, nor
to any tingle adventitious circumstance of fortune;
not to any sparkling quality; but to the whole of
what forms a man; what entitles him, as such, to
rank high among the class of beings to which he
belongs; in a word, we must look to the mind
and the foul. A inid. fiuperior to fear, to selfish

interest

:interet and corruption; a mind governed by the
principles of uniform retitude and integrity; the
fame in prosperity and adversity; which no bribe
can seduce, nor terror overawe; neither by plea.
sure melted into efteminacy, nor by distress funk
into dejetion; such is the mind which forms the
diftintion and eminence of men.-One, who in
no situation of life is either ashamed or afraid of
discharging his duty, and acting his proper part
with firmness and conflancy; true to. the God
whom he worships, and true to the faith in which
he professes to believe; full of affetion to his
brethren of mankind ; faithful.to his friends, ge-
nerous to his enemies, warm with compaflion to
the unfortunate; felf-denying to little private
intereits and pleasures, but zealous for public in-
terelt and happiness; magnanimous, without be-
ing proud; humble, without being mean; just,
without being harlh; fnnple in his manners, but
manly in his feelings; on whose word .you can
,enttrely rely; whose countenance never deceives
you; whose profeflions of kindness are the effu.
sions of his heart; one, in fine, whom, ind-
pendent of any views of advantage, you would
choose for a superior, could trust in as a friend,
.and could love as a brother:-This is the man,
whom in your heart, above all .others, you do,
you must, honour.

xa TRUE

# TRUE RELIGION.

# SENSIBILITY.

TRUE RELIGION.

ALSE ideas may be entertained of religion;
as false and imperfea conceptions of virtue

have often prevailed in the world. But to true
religion there belongs no fullen gloom; no mc-
lancholy auiterity, tending to withdraw men
from human society, or to diminifl the exertions
of ative virtue. On the contrary, the religious
principle, rightly understood, not only unites
with all such virtues, but supports, fortifies, and
confirms them. It is so far from obscuring the
lustre of a charater, that it heightens and enno-
bles it. It adds to all the moral virtues a vene-
rable and authoritative dignity. It renders the
virtuous character more august. To the deco-
rations of . palace, it joins the majesty of a
temple.

SENSIBILITY.
T O him who is prompted by virtuous fenfibi-

lity, every office of beneficence and huma-

manity is a pleasure. He gives, assists, and re-
lieves, not merely because he is bound to do so,

but

but because it would be painful for him to refrain.
Hence, the smallest benefit he confers rifes in its
value, on account of its carrying the affection of
the giver impressed upon the gift. It speaks his
heart; and the discovery of the heart is very fre-
quently of greater consequence than all that libe-
rality can beitow. How often will the assec-
tionate smile of approbation gladden the humble,
and raise the dejected ! How often will the look
of tender sympathy, or the tear that iqvolunta-
rily falls, impart consolation to the unhappy! By
means of this correspondence of hearts, all the
great duties which we owe to one another are
both performed to more advantage, and endeared
in the performance. From true sensibility flow a
thousand good offices, apparently small in them-
selves, but of high importance to the felicity of
others; offices which altogether escape the obfer-
vation of the cold and unfeeling, who, by the
hardness of their manner, render themselves un-
amiable, even when they mean to do good.-
How happy then would it be for mankind, if this
affeetionate difpofttion prevailed more generally
in the world! How much would the Tum of pub-
lic virtue and public felicity be increased, if men
were always inclined to rejoice with them that re.
joice, and to wcep with them that weep

L But,

But, besides the effect of such a temper on ge-

neral virtue and happiness, let us confider its es-
sec on the happiness of him who poffeltes it, and
the various pleasures to which it gives him access.
If he be master of riches or influence, it affords
him the means of increasing his own enjoyment,
by relieving the wants, or increasing the com-
forts of others. If he command not thefe-advan-
tages, yet all the comforts which he fees in the
poffeflion of the deserving, become in some fort his,
by his rejoicing in the good which they enjoy.
Even the face of nature yields a fatisfadion to
him which the insensible can never know. The
profusion of goodncfs which he beholds poured
forth on the univcrfe, dilates his heart with the
thought that innumerable multitudes.around him
are blest and happy. When he fees the labours
of men appearing to.prosper, and views a country
flourishing in wealth and indeftry; when he beholds
the spring coming forth in its beauty,and reviving
the decayed fa:e of nature; or in autumn beholds
the fields loaded with plenty, and the year crown.
ed with all its fruits; he lifts his affections with
gratitude to the great Father of all, and rejoices
in the general felicity and joy.

FALSE

# FALSE SENSIBILITY.

# TIME.

FALSE SENSIBILITY.
SOFTNESS of manners muff not be miflakrn-

for true sensibility. Sensibility indeed tends

to produce gentleness in behaviour; and when
such behaviour flows from native affection, it is
valuable and' amiable. But the exterior manner
alone may be learned in the school of the world;
and often, too often, is found to cover much un-
feeling hardness of heart. Professions of fenfibi-
lity on every trifling occasion, joined with the
appearance of excessive foftnels, and a profusion
of sentimental language, aflord always much
ground for distrust. They create the suspicion
of a studied charater. Frequently, under a neg-
ligent and seemingly rough manner, there lies a
tender and feeling heart. Manliness and fenfibi-
lity are so far from being incompatible, that the
truly brave are for the mofl part generous and
humane; while the soft and effeminate are hardly
capable of any vigorous exertion of affetion.

TIME.
T IME is of so great importance to mankind

that it cannot too often employ religious
meditation. There is nothing in the manage-

L 2 ment

# RECOLLECTION.

ment of which wisdom is more req'uisite, or where
mankind display their inconsistency more. In its
particular parcels, they appear entirely careless of
it; and throw it away with thoughtlcfs profusion.
But, when collcEted into rome of its great por-
tions, and viewed as the measure of their conti-
nuance in life, they become fcnfible of its value,
and begin to regard it with a serious eye. While
day after day is wafted in a course of idleness or
vicious pleasures, if some incident shall occur
which leads the '" ' ---i i i'.i . - iil:

. at. all

, itn l. ucle.1LC t a

ii- Ui

L; M~: r

of his age, or time of life; how much of it is
gone ;at what period of it he is now arrived;
and to what proportion of it he can with any pro-
bability look forward, as yet to come; he can
hardly avoid feeling some secret compuncAion,
and reflecting seriously upon his Itate. Happy,
if that virtuous impression were not of momen-
tary continuance, but retained its influence amnidft
the succeeding cares and pleasures of the world!

RECOLLECTION.
W HEN we recollea the several stages of

life through which we have palled; the

successive occupations in which we have been
engaged, the designs we have formed, and the

hopes

# TIME PAST IMPROVED.

hopes and fears which alternately have filled our
breast; how barren for the motl part is the remem-
brance; and how few traces of any thing valua-
ble or important remain ! Like characters drawn
on the sand, which the next wave waflies totally
away, so one trivial succession of events has es-
faced the memory of the preceding; and though
we have seemed all along to be busy, yet for
much of what we have.ated, we are neither wiser
nor better than if such aCtions had never been.
Hence let the retrofpeA of what is past produce,
as its first effect, humiliation in our own eyes,
and abasement before God. Much do human
pride and felf-complacency require some correc-
tion; and that correction is never more effetually
administered, than by an impartial and serious re-
view of former life.

TIME PAST IMPROVED.
T HOUGH pafled time be gone, we are not

to confider it as irredeemably loll. To a

very profitable purpose it may yet be applied, if
we lay hold of it while it remains in remem-
brance, and oblige it to contribute to future im-
provement. If you have gained nothing more
by the years that are pait, you have at least

L 3 gained

gained experience; and experience is the mother
of wisdom. You have seen the weak parts of
your charater; and may have difcovcred the
chief sources of your mifcondu&. To there let
your attention be directed; oin these, let the pro-
per guards be set. If you have trifled long, re-
solve to trifle no more. If your paflions have
often betrayed and degraded you, study how they
may be kept, in future, under better discipline.
Learn, at the fame time, never to trust prefump-
tuoufly in your own wisdom. Humbly apply to
the Author of your being, and beseech his grace
to guide you safely through those slippery and
dangerous paths, in which experience has shewn
that you are so ready to err, and to fall.

In reviewing pals life, it cannot but occur,

that many things now appear of inconsiderable
importance, which once occupied and attached
us in the highest degree. Where are those keen
competitions, those mortifying disappointments,
those violent enmities, those eager pursuits, which
we once thought were to last for ever, and on
which we confidered our whole happiness or mi-
fery as suspended? We look back upon them
now, as upon a dream which has passed away.
None of those mighty consequences have follow-
ed which we had predicted. The airy fabric has
vanished, and left no trace behind it. We smile

at

# DELAY.

at our former violence; and wonder how such
things could have ever appeared so significant
and great. We may reft assured, that what hath
been fiall again be. When Time shall once
have laid his lenient hand on the paflions and pur-
suits of the present moment, they too shall lose
that imaginary value which heated fancy now
bellows upon them. Hence, let them already
begin to subside to their proper level. Let wis-
dom infuse a tinAure of moderation into the
eagerness of contest, by anticipating that period
of coolness, which the lapse of time will, of it-
self, certainly bring.

DELAY.
NEVER delay till to-morrow, what reason

and conscience tell you ought to be perform-

ed to-day. To-morrow is not yours; and though
you should live to enjoy it, you muff not overload
it with a burden not its own. Sufficitnt for t
day will prove the duty thereof,

REGU:

# REGULARITY.

# AFFECTED GAIETY.

REGULARITY.
T HE observance of order and method, is of

high consequence for the improvement of

present time. He who performs every employ-
ment in its due place and season, suffers no part
of time to escape without profit. He multiplies
his days; for he lives much in little space.
Whereas he who neglecs order in the arrange-
ment of his occupations, is always losing the pre-
sent in returning upon the past, and trying, in
vain, to recover it when gone.

AFFECTED GAIETY.
T HE affectation of youthful vanities degrades

the dignity of manhood; even renders its

manners less agreeable; and by awkward at-
tempts to please, produces contempt. Cheerful-
ness is becoming in every age. But the proper
eheerfulnefs of a man is as different from the le-
vity of the boy, as the flight of the eagle is from
thefluttering of a sparrow.
,.. 1 EMPLOY.

# EMPLOYMENT.

EMPLOYMENT.
T IHE wants of society call for every man's

labour, and require various departments

to be filled up. They require that some be ap-
pointed to rule, and others to obey; some to de-
fend the society from danger, others to maintain
its internal order and peace; some to provide the
conve.iiencies of life, others to promote the im-
provement of the mind; many to work others
to contrive and direct. In short, within the
sphere of society there is employment for'
every one; and in the course of thee-enmploy-
ments, many a moral duty is to be performed;
many a religious grace to be exercised. No one
is permitted to be a mere blank in the world,
No rank, nor flation, no dignity of birth, nor
extent of possessions, exempt any man from con-
tributing his share to public utility and good.
This is the precept of God.-This is the voice
of nature.-This is the just demand of the hu-
man race upon one another.

IDLE.

# IDLENESS.

# DEATH.

IDLENESS.
IDLENESS is the great corrupter of youthy

and the bane and dishonour of middle age.

He who, in the prime of life, finds time hang
heavy on his hands, may with much reason sus-
pct, that he has not consulted the duties which
the consideration of his age imposcd upon him;
assuredly he has not consulted his own happiness.

.timvoiqn, DEATH.
W TERE death a rare and uncommon objec;

were it only once-in- the course of a man's

life, that he beheld one of his fellow-creatures
carried to the grave, a solemn awe would fill
him; he would {top short in the midst of his plea-
fures; he would even be chilled with secret hor-
ror. Such impressions, however, would prove
unsuitable to the nature of our present slate.
When they became so frong as to render men
unft for the ordinary business of life, they would
in a great measure defeat the intention of our
being placed in this world. It is better ordered
by the wisdom of Providence, that they should
be weakened by the frequency of their recurrence;
and so tempered by the mixtuse of other paflons,

as

# THE FUNERAL.

as to allow us to go on freely in acting our parts
on earth.

Yet, familiar as death is now become, it ought

not to pass over, as one of those common inci-
dents which are beheld without concern, and
awaken no reflection. There are many things
which the funerals of our fellow-creatures are
calculated to teach; and happy it were for the
gay and diflipated, if they would lifien more
frequently to the initructions of so awful a mo-
nitor,

~- 7--t , I, , ~m -

THE FUNERAL.
j W HEN we observe the funerals that pass

along the streets, or when we walk

among the monuments of death, the firil thing
that naturally itrikes us, is the undiffinguifliing
blow, with which that common enemy levels all.
We behold a great promiscuous multitude all
carried to the fame abode; all lodged in the fame
dark and silent mansions. There, mingle persons
of every age and characer, of every rank and
condition in life; the young and the old, the
poor and the rich, the-gay and the grave, the re-
nowned and the ignoble. A few weeks ago,

I most

# THE TOMB.

most of those whom we have seen carried to the
grave, walked about as we do now on the earth;
enjoyed their friends, beheld the light of the fun,
and were forming designs for future days. Per-
haps, it is not long since they were engaged in
scenes of high festivity. For them, perhaps, the
cheerful company assembled; and in the nidft of
the circle they shone with gay and pleasing viva-
city. But now-to them, all is finally closed.
To them no more shall the seasons return, or the
fun rife. No more shall they hear the voice of
mirth, or behold the face of man. They are
swept from the universe, as though they had
never been. They are carried away as with a
jood: the wind has pajled over them, and thfy are
gone.

THE TOMB.

A TOMB, it has been justly said, is a monu-
·lA ment situated on the confines of both worlds.
It, at once, presents to us the termination of the
inquietudes of life, and sets before us the image
of eternal reft.-Thlre, in the elegant expressions
of Job, the wicked cease from troubling; and there
the weary be at reft. There the prisoners reft toge-
ther ; they hear not the voice of the opprfor. Tha

Sfiall

# THE MOURNER.

finall and the great are there; and the servant is frce
from his m fflr. It is very remarkable, that in
all languages, and among all nations, death has
been described in a style of this kind; expressed
by figures of speech, which convey every where
the fame idea of reft, or sleep, or retreat from the
evils of life. Such a fiyle perfectly agrees with
the general belief of the foul's immortality; but
afluredly conveys no high idea of the boasted
pleifures of the world. It shews how much all
mankind have felt this life to be a scene of trou-
ble and care; and have agreed in opinion, that
pcrfece relt is to be expected only in the grave.

THE MOUINER.

HILE the funeral is attended by a nume-
rous, unconcerned company, who are dif-

coursing to one another about the news of the day,
or the ordinary affairs of life, let our thoughts
rather follow to the house of mourning, and re-
present to themnfelves what is going on there.
There, we should fee a disconsolate family, fitting
in silent grief, thinking of the fad breach that is
made in their little society; and with tears in
their eyes, looking to the chamber that is now
left vacant, and to every memorial that presents

M itself

# GRIEF.

itself of their departed friend. By such attention
to the woes,of others, the felfifli hardness of our
hearts will be gradually softened, and melted
down into humanity.

GRI E F.
L ET moderation temper the grief of a good

man and a Christian. He muff notforrcw

like thofi who have no hope. As high elevation of
spirits befits not the joys, so continued and over-
whelming dejction suits not the griefs of this
tranftory world. Grief, when it goes beyond
certain'bounds, becomes unmanly; when it lass
beyond a certain time, becomes unseasonable.-
Let him not reject the alleviation which time
brings to all the wounds of the heart, but susser
excessive grief to fubfije, by degrees, into a ten-
der and affectionate remembrance. Let him con-
fider, that it is in the power of Providence to
raise him up other comforts in the place of those
he has loft. Or, if his mind, at present, reject
the thoughts of such consolation, let it turn for
relief, to the profpe& of a future meeting in a
happier world. This is indeed the chief soother
of affliAion--the most powerful balm of the
bJeeding heart. It affiits us to view death, as no

more

# FORGIVENESS.

more than a temporary reparation from friends.
They whom we have loved, still live, though
not present to us. They are only removed into
a different mansion in the house of the common
father. The toils of their pilgrimage are finish-
ed; and they are gone to the land of reft and
peace. they are gone from this dark and trou-
bled world, to join the great assembly of the just;
and to dwell in the midit of everlasting light.
In due time we hope to be associated with them
in these blissful habitations. Until this season of
re-union arrive, no principle of religion difco.t
rages our holding correspondence of affe&ion
with thetn by means of faith and hope.

FORGIVENESS.
IS there a man who, if he were admitted to

sand by the death-bed of his bitterest enemy,-

and beheld him enduring that conflid which hu-
man nature mufft susser at the last, would not be
inclined to stretch forth the hand of friendship,.
to utter the voice of forgiveness, and to with for
perfel reconciliation with him before he left the
world ? Who is there that when he beholds the
remains of his adversary deposited in the duff,
feels not, in that moment, some relentings at the

M 2 remem-

rememlbrance of those paRs animolitics which
nu:.Lally embittered their life ?-" There lies
" the man with whom I contended so long, si-
" lent and mute for ever. -He is fallen; and I
u atm about to follow him. How poor is the ad-
" vantage which I now enjoy? thllcte arc the
" fruits of all our contests ? In a f ort time we
" flall be laid together; and no remiembrance
( re:ain of either of us under the lfun. How
" manv mirtakes may there have been between

us ? Had not he his virtues and good qualities

' as well as I ? When we (hail both appear before
" the judgment-feat of God, (hall I be found in-
" nocent and free of blamc, for all the enmity I
" have borne to him s"-My friends, let the an-
ticipation of such sentiments serve now to correc
the inveteracy of prejudice, to cool the heat of
anger, to allay the fierceness of resentment. How
unnatural is it for animofities so lafiing to possess
the hearts of mortal men, that nothing can extin-
guifh them but the cold hand of death ? Is there
not a sufficient proportion of evils in the short
span of human life, that we seek to increase their
number, by rulhing into unneceflary contests
with one another ? When a few fiuns more have
rolled over our heads, friends and foes shall have
retreated together; and their love and their ha-
tred be equally buried. Let our few days, then,
be spent in peace. While we are all journeying

onwards

# INSTRUCTION.

onwards to death, let us rather bear one another's
burdens, than harrafs one another by the way.
Let us finooth and cheer the road as much as we'
can, rather than fill the valley of our pilgrimage
with the hateful monuments of our contention
and strife.

INSTRUCTION.
M ORAL and religious inftrucion derives its

efficacy, not so much from what men are

taught to know, as from what they are brought
to feel. It is not the dormant knowledge of any
truths, but the vivid impression of them, which
has influence on practice. Neither let it be
thought that such meditations are unseasonable
intrusions upon those who are living in health,
in affluence, and ease. There is no hazard of
their making too deep or painful an impression.
The gloom which they occasion is transient; and
will Goon, too soon, it is probable, be dispelled
by the succeeding affairs and pleasures of the
world. To wisdom it certainly belongs, that
men should be imprefled with just views of their
nature and their state; and the pleasures of life
will always be enjoyed to moif advantage when
they are tempered with serious thought.

M 3 PRO,

# PROGRESS OF VICE.

PROGRESS OF VICE.
THERE are certain degrees of vice which

are chiefly stamped with the chara&er of

the ridiculous, and the contemptible; and there
are allb certain limits, beyond which if it pass,
it becomes odious and execrable. If, to other
corruptions which the heart has already received,
be added the infusion of sceptical principles, that
worfl of all the evil communications of finners,
the whole of morals is then on the point of
being overthrown. For, every crime can then
be palliated to conscience ; every check and re-
ltraint which had hitherto remained; is taken
away. He who, in the beginning of his course,
soothed himself with the thought that while he
indulged his desires, he did hurt to no man; now
pressed by the necessity of supplying those wants
into which his expensive pleasures have brought
him, goes on without remorse to defraud and to
oppress. The lover of pleasure now becomes
hardened and- cruel; violates his trust, or be-
trays his friend; becomes a man of treachery, or
a man of blood; satisfying, orat leait endeavour-
ing all the while to satisfy himself, that circum-
fiances form his excuse; that by neceflity he is
impelled; and that) in gratifying the passions

which

# CHOICE OF FRIENDS.

which nature had implanted within him, he does
no more than follow nature.

Miserable and deluded man! to what art thou

come at the last! Dost thou pretend to follow
nature, when thou art contemning the laws of
the God of nature ?-when thou art fifling his
voice within thee, which remonstrates against
thy crimes? when thou art violating the best
part of thy nature, by counteracting the dictates
of justice and humanity? Dost thou follow na-
ture, when thou rendereft thyself an useless ani-
mal on the earth; and not useless only, but noxi-
ous to the society to which thou belongefd ?-
Look with horror at the precipice, on the brink
of which hou standef ; and if yet a moment be
left for retreat, think how thou mayest escape,
and be saved.

CHOICE OF FRIENDS.
N OTH ING is of more importance

for the young, than to be careful in the

choice of their friends and companions. This
choice is too frequently made without much
thought, or is determined by some casual con-
nedion; and yet, very often, the whole fate of

their

# SETTLED PRINCIPLES.

tieir future'life depends upon it. The circurn
itances which chiefly attract the liking and the
friendship of youth, are vivacity, good humour,
engaging manners, and a cheerful or easy tem-
per; qualities, I confess, amiable in themselves,
and useful and valuable in their place. But I in-
treat you to remember, that these are not. all the
qualities requisite to form an intimate companion
or friend. Something more is still to be looked
for; a found understanding, a ifeady mind, a
firm attachment to principle, to virtue, and ho-
nour. As only solid bodies poliih well, it is only
on the substantial ground of these manly endow-
ments, that the other amiable qualities can re-
ceive their proper lufire..

SETTLED PRINCIPLES.

I N order to prevent the influence of evil corm

- municatons, it is needful that you fix to your-
selves certain principles of conduct, and be re-
solved and determined on no occasion to swerve
from them. Setting the-confideration of religion
and virtue aside, and attending merely to interest
and reputation, it will be found, that he who en-
ters on aftive life without having ascertained
some regular plan, according to which he is to

guide

guide himself, will be unprofperous in the whole
of his subsequent progress. But when conduct is
viewed in a moral and religious light, the eft'et
of having fixed no principles of acion, of hav-
ing formed no laudable standard of character, be-
comes more obviously fatal. For hence it is, that
the young and thoughtless imbibe so readily the
poison of evil communications, and fall a prey to
every seducer. They have no internal guide
whom they are accullomed to follow and obey;
niothing within themselves that can give firmness
to their condud. They are of course the victims
of momentary inclination or caprice; religious
and good by trarts, when, during the absence of
temptation and tempters, the virtuous principle
flirs within them; but never long the fame;
changing and flutuating according to the palfion
that chances to rife, or the instigation of those
with whom they have conneted themselves.
They are failing on a dangerous lea, which
abounds with rocks; without compass, by which
to direct their course; or helm, by which to guide
the vefiel. Whereas, if they ased on a system,
if their behaviour made it appear that they were
determined to conduct themselves by certain rules
and principles, not only would they' escape innu-
merable dangers, but they would command re-
fpe& from the licentious themselves. Evil doers
would cease to lay their snares for one whom they

saw

# FORTITUDE.

saw moving above them, in a higher sphere, and
with a more steady course.

FORTITUDE.
FORTITUDE was justly classed by the an-

cient philosophers, among the cardinal vir-

tues. It is indeed eilential to the support of
them all; and it is most necessary to be acquired.
by every one who vwithes to.difcharge with fide-
lity the duties of his station. It is the armour of
the mind, which will fit him for encountering
the trials, and surmounting the dangers, that are
likely to occur in the course of his life. It may
be thought, perhaps, to be a quality, in fbme
measure, constitutional; dependent on firmness
of nerves, and strength of spirits. Though,
partly it is so, yet experience shews that it may
also be acquired by principle, and be fortified by
reason; and it is only when thus acquired,. and
thus fortified, that it can be accounted to carry
the character of virtue. Fortitude is opposed, as
all know, to timidity, irresolution, a feeble and a
wavering spirit. It is placed, like other virtues,
in the middle, between two extremes; standing
at an equal diflance from rashness on the one
hand,, and from pusillanimity on the other.

CHRISP

# CHRISTIAN FORTITUDE.

# FALSE COURAGE.

CHRISTIAN FORTITUDE.
W ITHOUT Fortitude, no man can be a

thorough Chriflian. For his profeflion,

as such, requires him to be superior to that fear
of man which bringeth a stare; enjoins him, for
the fake of a good conscience, to encounter every
danger; and to be prepared, if called, even to lay
down his life in the cause of religion and truth.
All who have been distinguished as servants of
God, or benefators of men; all who, in peril-
ous situations, have acted their part with such
honour as to render their names illustrious through
Succeeding ages, have been eminent for forti-
tude of mind.

FALSE COURAGE.
A CORRUPTED and guilty man can pof-

fess no true firmness of heart. He who,

by crooked paths, pursues di(honourable ends,
has many things to difinay him. He not only
dreads the disappointment of his designs, by some
of those accidents to which .all are exposed; but
he has also to dread the treachery of his confede-

i rates,

# DIVINE SUPPORT.

rates, the difcoverv and reproach of the world,
and the just difplealure of Heaven. His fears he
is obliged to conceal; but while he aflumes the
appearance of intrepidity before the world, he
trembles within himself; and the bold and .feady
eye of integrity frequently darts terror into his
heart. There is, it is true, a fort of conflitu-
tional courage, which sometimes has rendered
men daring in the most flagitious attempts. But
this fool-hardiness of the rash, this boldness of the
ruffian, is altogether different from real fortitude.
It arises merely from warmth of blood, from want
of thought, and blindners to danger. As it forms
no charater of value, so it appears only in occa-
fional sallies; and never can be uniformly main-
tained. It requires adventitious props to support
it; and, in some hour of trial, always fails.-
There can be no true courage, no regular per-
fevering confRancy, but what is conneRed with
principle, and founded on a consciousness of rec-
titude of intention.

DIVINE SUPPORT.

HE good man knows, that he is ading un-
der the immediate eye and protecion of the
Almighty. Behld my witnefi is in heaven i ud

my

# ENVY.

my record is on high. The confcioufilefs of such
an illustrious fpeEator, invigorates and animates
him. He trufls, that the eternal lover of righte-
,ouflefs not only beholds and approves, but will
strengthen and assist; will not susser him to be un-
justly opprefled, and will ieward his constancy
in the end, with glory, honotr, and immartality.
A good conscience, thus fipported, bellows on
the heart a much greater degree of intrepidity
than it could otherwise inspire. One who refts
on an almighty, though invisible, Protetor,
exerts his powers with double force; and asss
with vigour not his own.

ENVY.

NVY is a sensation of uneasiness and dir-

- quiet, arising fiom the advantages which
others are supposed to possess above us, accompa-
nied with malignity towards those who possess
them. This is universally admitte.l m be one of
the blackefr paflions in the human heart. In this
world we depend much on one another; and
were therefore formed by Godi to be mutually
useful and aflifting. The inltinas of kindness
and compafion which belong to our frame, shew
how much it was the intention of our Creator

N that

# EFFECTS OF INDOLENCE.

that we fliould be united in fricndllip. If any
infringe this great law of nature, by ads of caufc-
Icfs hostility, resentment may jutfly arifl. No
one is to be condemned for defending his rights,
and ihcwing difplealure against a malicious ene-
my. But to conceive ill-will at one who has
attacked none of our rights, nor done us any in-
jury, solely becaufc he is more prosperous than
we are, is a disposition altogether unnatural; it
suits not the human conifitution, and partakes
more of the rancour of an evil spirit. Hence,
the character of an envious man is univerlslly
odious. All disclaim it; and they who feel
themselves under the influence of this paflion,
carefully conceal it.

EFFECTS OF INDOLENCE.
T HE human mind cannot remain always un-

employed. Its paiions muff have some

exercise. If we supply them not with proper
employment, they are sure to run loose into riot
and disorder. While we are unoccupied by what
is good, evil is continually at hand; and hence
it is said in Scripture, that as soon as Satan oourtd
the h:bfe mply, he took pofleffion, and filled it
with evilpirils. Every man who recollccts his

conduct,

conduce, may be satisfied, that his hours of idle-
ness have always proved the hours mofi danger-
ous to virtue. It was then that criminal dcfires
arose; guilty pursuits were liggefed; and de-
iigins were formed, which, in their ilfue, have
disquieted and embittered his whole life. If sea-
sons of idleness be dangerous, what mull a con-
tinued habit of it prove ? Habitual indolence, by
a silent and secret progress, undermines every
virtue in the foul. More violent passions run
their course, and terminate. They are like ra-
pid torrents, which foam, and fwvll, and bear
down every thing before them. But after hav-
ing overflowed their banks, their impetuosity
subsides. They return, by degrees, into their
natural channel; and the damage which they
have done can be repaired. Sloth is like the
flowly-flowing, putrid stream, which stagnates
in the marfb, breeds venomous animals, and
poisonous plants; and infeats with pestilential
vapours the whole country round it. Having
once tainted the foul, it leaves no part of it found;
and, at the fame tinme, gives not those alarms to
conscience, which the eruptions of bolder and
fiercer emotions often occasion. The disease
which it brings on, is creeping and insidious;
and is, on that account, more certainly mortal.

N 2 ADVAN-

# ADVANTAGES OF LABOUR.

ADVANTAGES OT LABOUR.
H E who knows not what it is to l.abuiio

knows not what it is to cnjoy. The celi-

city of hunan life depends on the regular proli-
cution of fonw laudable purpose or ehjed, vwhich
keeps awake and enlivens all our powers. Our
happinels conifits in the pursuit, much more than
in the attainment, of any temporal good. Reft
is agreeable; but it is only from preceding la-
bours that reft acquires its true relifi. When
the mind is ufiffcici to remain in continued in-
dcion, all its powers dcay. It loon languifihc
anwd tickens; and the plealilres which it proposed
to obtin from rei), end in tediousness and infipi-
dity. To this, let that miserable set of men bear
witness, who, after spending great part of their
life in aftive indullry, have retired to what they
fancied was to be a pleasing enjoyment of them-
selves, in wealthy inactivity, and profound rc-
pose. Where they cxpe.cd to find an elysium,
they have found nothing but a dreary and con-
fortlefs waste. Their days have dragged on, in
uniform languor; with the melancholy remem-
brance often returning, of the cheerful hours they
pasTed, when they were engaged in the honest
business and labours of the world.

THE

# THE DIVINE PRESENCE.

TIHE DIVINE PRESENCE.

E live in a world which is full of the Di-
vine pretence and power. VW behold

every where around us the traces of that (ulpreme
goodness which enlivens and fiipports tle uni-
verse. Day uttercth fpccch of it t5 day; and night
jlJh'cth knswzlvdlge of it to night. Yet, surrounded
as we are with the perfetions of God, meeting
him wherever we go, and called upon by a thou-
sand objeas, to confers his presence, it is both
the misfortune and the crime of a great part of
mankind, that they are strangers to Him, in
whose world they dwell. Occupied with nothing
but their pursuits of interest and plearure, they
pass through this world, as though God were not
there. The virtuous and refeiing arc particu-
larly diflinguiflhed from the giddy and dibolute,
by that habitual sense of the Divine pretence
which charaderifes the former. To them, no-
thing appears void of God. They contemplate
his perfections in the works of nature ; and they
trace his Providence in the incidents of life.-
When retired from the world, he often employs
their meditation.-When engaged in action, he
always influences their condut.-W-herever a
pious man is, or whatever he does, he is conti-
nually vwith God.

N 3 The

The presence of one whom we highly esteen

and revere, of a Sovereign, for intfance, a father,
or a friend, whose approbation we are solicitous
to gain, is always found to exalt the powers of
men, to refine and improve their behaviour.-
Hence, it has been given as a rule by ancient
moralists, that, in order to excel in virtue, we
ihould propound to ourselves some person of emi-
nent and distinguished worth; and should accuf-
tom ourselves to aa as if'he were landing by,
and beholding us. To the efleem and approba-
tion of their fellow-creatures, none are insensible.
There are few who, in the conspicuous parts of
their life, when they know the eyes of the pub-
lic to be fixed on them, a& not their part with
propriety and decorum. But what is the obfer-
vation of the public, what is the pretence of the
greatest or wisest men on earth, to that presence
of the Divinity which constantly surrounds us ?
The man who realizes to his mind this auguif
presence, feels a constant incentive for acquitting
himself with dignity. He views himself as
placed on an illustrious theatre. To have the
Almighty for the fpeaator and witness of his
condu&t, is more to him than if the whole world
were assembled to obfervc him. Men judge often,
falsely, always imperfectly, of what passes be-
fore them. They are imposed on by specious
appearances; and the artful carry away the praise

which

# DIVINE OMNISCIENCE.

which is due to the deserving. Even supposing
them to judge fairly, we may want the oppor-
tunity of doing justice to our characer, by any
proper display of it in the fight of the world.
Our situation may bury in obscurity, those ta.
lents and virtues which were entitled to com-
mand the highest esteem. But he, in whose pre-
fence the good man acts, is both an impartial,
and an unerring, judge of worth. No fallacious
appearances impose on him. No secret virtue is
hidden from him. He is attentive equally to the
meanest and the greatest; and his approbation
confers eternal rewards. The man, therefore,
who sets the Lord always before him, is prompted
to excel in virtue by motives which are peculiar
to himself, and which engage, on the fide of
duty, both honour and interest. I have kept thy
precepts and thy tefJimonies for all my ways are be-
fore thee.

DITINE OMNISCIENCE.
HI E hears the whisper of devotion as it rites in

the foul. He beholds the tear of contrition

which falls in secret. He fees the good intention
itruggling in its birth; and pursues it, in its
progress, through those various obstacles which

may

# PROSPERITY AND ADVERSITY.

may prevent it from ripening into a 'ion. Good
men, therefore, in their most humbled and de-
je&ed Rfate, draw some consolation from his
knowledge of their heart. Though they may
have erred from the right path, they can look up
to him who is ever with them, and fay, ls an
apostle, who had grievously offended, once said
to his great Master, Lard, thou knowv fl all th'?:gs:
thou knowse that I love thee.

PROSPERITY AND ADVERSITY.
LET us sirs view the good man in what the

world calls prosperity; when his circum-

frances are easy or affluent, and his life flows in
a smooth untroubled stream. Here, it might be
thought, that a sense of the Divine presence could
operate upon him only, or chiefly, for promot-
rig temperance, and restraining the disorders inci-
dent to a prosperous tRate. Valuable effects, in-
deed, these are; and m6ft conducive to the true
enjoyment of all that is agreeable in life. But
though it, doubtless, does exert this salutary in-
fluence, yet it flops not there. It not only pre-
serves the virtue of a good man amidst the temp-
tations of pleasure, but it gives to his prosperity
a-fecurity, and a peculiar relish, which to others

is

is unknown. He who is without a sense of God
upon his mind, beholds in human affairs nothing
but a perpetual flutuation, and vicissitude of
events. He is surrounded with unknown caufcs,
which may be working his deftrudion in secret.
He cannot avoid perceiving, that there hangs
over him the irresistible arm of that Providence,
whose difplcafurc he has done nothing to flay or
avert. But he who, in the day of prosperity,
dwells with God, is delivered from those dif-
quieting alarms. He dwells as with a friend and
protedor, from whom he conceives his bleflngs
to proceed. He can appeal to him for the thank-
fulness with which he receives them; and for his
endeavours to employ them well. He trusts that
the God whom he serves will not forsake him;
that the goodness which he has already expe-
rienced, will continue to bless him; and though
he believes himself not exempted from the changes
of the world, yet in the midst of there, he has
ground to hope that sources of comfort and hapD
piness shall always be left open to him.

Moreover, the pleafurcs of life, while they last,

are unspeakably heightened by the pretence of
that benefactor who bestows them. The pleas-
ing emotion of gratitude to the giver mingles
with the enjoyment of the gift. While to the
mere worldly man, the whole frame of nature is

only

only a vast irregular fabric; and the course of hu-
man affairs no more than a coinfiuted fucceflion of
fortuitous events; all nature is beautified, and
every agreeable incident is enlivee!d, to him who
beholds God in all things. Hence arise a variety
of pleating sensations, to fill up thole solitary
hours, in which external prosperity fup;!ies him
with no entertainment. In the smiling scenes of
nature, he contemplates the benignity of its au-
thor. In its fiblime objecs, he admires his ma-
jefty. In its awful and terrible ones, he adores
his power. He dwells in this world as in a mag-
nificent temple, which is full of the glory of its
founder; and every where views nature offering
up its incense to him, from a thousand altars.-
Such ideas exalt and ennoble the human mind;
and reflec an additional lufre on the brightness
of prosperity.

From the prosperous, let us next turn to the

afflicted condition of a good man. For as pro-
fperitv may, afflicion certainly will, at one
time or other, be his lot. It enters into the ap-
pointed trial of his virtue; and, in one degree or
other, is the doom of all. Here we {hall find
various situations occur, in which no relief is
equal to what a virtuous and holy man derives
from a sense of the perpetual presence of God.

Is

Is lie, for instance, thrown into an obscure

condition in the world, without friends to aflift
him, or any to regard and confider his estate?
He enjoys the fatisfacrion of thinking, that
though he may be neglecaed by men, he is not
forgotten by God. Inconsiderable as he is in
himself, he knows, that he will not be over-
looked by the Almighty, amidst the infinite va-
riety of being, or loft in the immensity of his
works. The poor man can, with as much en-
couragement as the rich or great, lift up his eyes
to heaven, and fay, .Nv'rthecl3, 0 Lord, I am
continually with th'e: Thou /o.dflt me ly mry right
hand. The gracious presence of that Supreme
Being is affected by no diversity of rank or for-
tune. It imparts itself alike to all the virtu-
ous and upright; like its glorious image, the fun
in the firmament, which sheds its rays equally
upon the humble cottage, and upon the palace of
kings. In the pretence of the great Lord of
heaven and earth, all the diftiniions which va-
nity has contrived to make among men, totally
dialppear. All ranks are on one level. The rich
and the poor here indeed meet tigethcr; without
any other dilfincion than what arilcs from the
heart and the foul. The sense of this, lifts the
poor man above contempt; supports his spirits
when apt to be dejeaed; and bestows dignity on
the part which he acts. How inconsiderable

soever

# COMMUNION WITH GOD.

soever that part may appear in the estimation of
an injudicious world, it is ennobled, when vir-
tuoully performed, by the approbation of his di-
vine witness. He can bear with indifference the
scorn of the proud, as long as he knows that
there is one higher than the highest to regard
him. He can enjoy himself with pleasure in his
mean habitation, because he believes that God
dwells with him there. The Divine pretence
cheers to him the most lonely retreat. It accom-
panies his steps to the most distant regions of the
earth. If he (hould be driven into exile from all
his friends, and obliged to dwell in the uttirmsji
parts of the fa, even there God's hand woull hold
hin, and his right hand rtwuld guide him. Though
left without companion or friend, he never thinks
himself desolate, as long as he can fay, I amJtill
with God.

COMMUNION WITH GOD.

E all know that to communicate our grief
to a faithful friend, often gives cafe and

relief to the burdened heart. Such communica-
tion we are encouraged to make, and such relief
we may expe&c to find, in pouring out our heart
before that God in whcm compoffons ftw. We

3 may

may have no earthly friend to whom we can
with full confidence dilclole all our furrows; or
we may want words in which to express them.
But God is the searcher of all hearts; and the
hearer of all prayers. To the fecrct anguiflh of
the foul, he is no inattentive witness. Every
groan which is heaved from the labouring bosom,
though heard by no human ear, reaches his throne.
As he knows o62 franre, lib he rem'll b rs we (re
dutl; and thence l,',ht (ir!/s s1 the upright in di.ri-

'/s.. For the hope naturally springs, that this
beneficent being will pity them, as a jfathr ,i-
tiih his chi!drt-:Z; and in the niidft of those dif-
trellcs which the prcfeent circumifances of man
render unavoidable, will f/nd them hep hfrom- his
faiinltuan. Surrounded wvith this compafionate
presence of the Almighty, good men never viewv
themiclves as left in this vale of tears, to bear,
solitary and alone, the whole weight of human
woe. In their dark, as well as in their brighter
hours, God is with them. Even in that valley
of the shadow of death, where no friend, no com-
forter, can go along to aid them, he is with them
flill. In the lalt extremity of nature, the rod arl
'J; cf 1thb/ S;,./,ei ! f Ifi -, l fippsrt them.

0 THE

# THE PASSIONATE MAN.

THE PASSIONATE MAN.
H ARDLY a day paflis, without somewhat

or other occurring, which serves to ruffle

the man of impatient spirit. Of course, such a
man lives in a continual storm. He knows not
what it is to enjoy a train of good humour. Ser-
vants, neighbours, friends, lfoufe, and children,
all, through the unrestrained violence of his tem-
per, become sources of disturbance and v::.:tion
to him. In vain his affluence; in vain arc heaith
and profperitv. The leatl trifle is fuf'iic;it to
discompose his mind, and poilon his plcafures.
His very amulements are mixed with turbulence
and passion,

I would beseech this man to confider, of what

small moment the provocations which he receives,
or at least imagines himself to -eceive, are really in
themselves; but of what great moment he makes
them, by suffering them to deprive him of the
possession of himielf. I woiild beseech him to
confider, how many hours of happinels he throws
away, which a little more patic!,ce would allow
hi n to cnjov; and how much he puts it in the
power of the most insignificant peribns to render
him miserable. " But who can expet," we
hear him exclaim, " that he is to poflefs the in-

" fenllbility

" sensibility of a stone? How is it po.fible f;r
" human nature to endure so many repeated pro-
" vocations ? or to bear calmly with iuch ulrc:a-
" obnable behaviour ?"--My brother ! If you cal:
bear with no ilfl:ances of tuirea:folnah'le behaviour,
withdraw yourlclf from the world. You are no
longer fit to live in it. Leave the intercourse of
men. Retreat to the mountain and the dcfart;
or flhut yolurfl:f iup in a cell. For here, in the
inidft of Iocietvy, offenccs nmu/f com.e. You tnight
as well expecA, when you behold a calm atmo-
sp]here, and a clear sky, that no clouds were ever
to rife, and no winds to blow, as that your life
was long to proceed, without receiving provoca-
tions from human frailty. The careless and the
imprudent, the giddy and the fickle, the ungrate-
ful and the interested, every where meet us.-
They are the briars and the thorns, with which
the paths of human il;e are beset. He only who
can hcld hli couri e amo:gll them with patience
and equai. !!ity, he who is prepared to bear what
he mu!: cxpect to happen, is worthy of the name
of a man.

Did you only prefcrve yourself cornpored for a

moment, you would perceive the insignificancy
of mnoll of those provocations which you magniiy
lb highly. WVhen a few funs more have rolled
over your head, the florm will have, of itself)

0 2 lub-

# PATIENCE.

fi...,;I't;'; rth c;uile of your present impatience
and ditLi-'.:bance will be utterly fbrgotten. Cari
vou niot, thcn, ;t.iicipatc this hour of calnin'cls
to y..-irilf; and begin to enjoy the peace which
it ;:ill certai:nl bringr? If others have behaved
i;mlproperlv, leave tihem to their own folly, with-
out bzconiin the victim of their caprice, and pu-
ni;lhini: ,yourlei:f on their account.-Patience, in
this exeicile of it, cannot be too much lfudied by
l'li who wish t hir life to flow in a smooth itream.
It is the reaion of a man, in opposition to the
p:-iionl of n child. It is the enjoyment of peace,
in oppofiti.:1 to uproar and confusion. Ie that

;oit i ,i r:'I c Se''! .'.'S ':C' n j^.i) i lir:, a city Ihat is
brskci: ;wi;; aind wilhmut wa'ls,

PATIENCE.
TISAPPOINTMENTS will often happen

to the best and wisest men; sometimes to

the wisest and beft-concerted plans. They may
happen, too, not through any imprudence of
thole who have devised the plan, not even through
the malice or ill design of others; but merely in
consequence of some of those cross incidents of
life which could not be foreseen. On such occa-
fins, 'persons of a warm and sanguine temper

are

are prefentlv in a ferment. They had formed
their hopes, as they think, upon the ju!teft
grounds. The)' had waited long for filccclS; and
borne with many delays. But when their dc-
J;tnSs are broiught to tb unexpedced an issue;
when, without any fault of their own, they find
their hopes finally blafled, all patience torl-kes
them; they no longer pofln'ls their fouls; the
inoft paflionate exclamations break forth. " T o

w' whom, except to them, could such a dilap-

" pointment have happened ? Since the creation
' of the world, was such a combination of dil-

aftrous incidents ever beheld ? Why are they

" doomed to be so unfortunate beyond all others "
-Alas! how unfkilfilly have you calculated the
courle of human events ? How rafily and pre-
fumptuoufl had you truf-ed to iucces ? To vhom
was it ever given, to guard againit all the vicif-
fitudes, which the fluctuating rf/hio of sthe wr/ld
is inceflantly hringing about? If one fricnd, to
whom you looked up, has died, or another has
loft his influence and power; if the opinion of
the public is changed, and its favour has been
withdrawn; if tome millakes have occurred to
lefiin the good-will of a patron on whom you de-
pended; if, through the concurrence of these, or
such like circumstances, a more fortunate rival
has prevailed against you; what is there in all
this, that differs from the ordinary lot of man ?

03 Are

Are we not, each in his turn, doomed to experi-
ence the uncertainty of worldly purfliits ? Vhy,
then, aggravate our misfortunes by the unreason-
ab!e violence of an impatient ipirit ? If our de-
signs have failed through rafllnefs or miicondut,
let us blame ourselves. If they have failed through
circumitances which we could not prevent, let
us submit to the fate of man; and wait, with pa-
tience, till a more favourable opportunity fliall
occur of regaining success.

Meanwhile, let us turn to the other fide of the

profpeti; and calmly confider how dubious it
was, whether the success which we longed for,
wvould have proved a blessing. W['/ho knz.cth what
is g,:adfr man in this life Perhaps the accom-
piilhment of our designs might have been pregnant
with misery. Perhaps, from our prelent difap-
paintment, future proiiprity may rife. Of such
unlooked for ifiues, we all know there have been
many examples. WVho can tell, whether our
cifc may not add one to the number ?-At any
r-:e, let us recollec, that there is a Supreme
Ruler, who difpofcs of the affairs of men; under
whom, all second caures work only as frubordi-
nate agents. Looking up to that irrefiflible arm
which is firetched over our heads, let us be calm;
let us submit, and adore. Either to despair, or
to rage, under difappoinment, is sinful. By the

former,

# RESTRAINT.

former, we injure ourselves. By the latter, we
insult Providence, and provoke its dilpleafure to
continue.

RESTRAINT.

,TUMEROUS are the rcftraints imposed on
N S ,

us, by the nature of the human condition.

To the reitraints of authority and law, all must
submit. The restraints of education and difci-
pline lie on the young. Considerations of health
restrain the indulgence of pleasure. Attentions
to fortune restrain expence. Regard to friends,
whom we are bound to please, respc& to efta-
blifhed customs, and to the opinions of society,
impose reitraint on our general behaviour. There
is no man, in any rank of lile, who is always at
liberty to act according as he would incline. In
some quarter or other, he is limited by circum-
stances, that either actually confine, or that ought
at least to confine and restrain him.

There refhlaiits, the impatient are apt to scorn.

They will needs burst the barriers which reason
had ereated, or their situation had formed; and
without regard to consequences, give free scope
to their present wish. Hence, many dangerous

exceflcs

# PASSION AND PATIENCE.

excefles flow; much confusion and misery are
produced in human life. Had men the patience
to lubmit to their condition, and to wait till it
should allow them a freer indulgence of their de-
fires, they might, in a short time, obtain the
power of gratiiying them with fafetv. If the
youngt, for initance, would under-go wi;h pa-
tience, the labours of education, they v.:uld riic,
at a proper period, to honours, riches, or cafe.
If the infirm would, with patience, bear the re-
gulations which their constitution demands, they
might regain the comforts of health. If perlbns
of firaightened fortune i:hd patience to conform
themselves to their circumstances, an' to abridge
their pleasures, they might, by degrees, improve
and advance their fate. Whereas, by cagerncls
of temper, and precipitancy of indulgcnce, they
forfeit all the advantages which patience would
have procured; and incur the opposite evils to
their full extent.

PASSION AND PATIENCE.

OTHING is so inconfiptent with felf-pof-
feflion as violent anger. It overpowers

reason; confounds our ideas; distorts the appear-
ance, and blackens the colour, of every objeCt.

By

# PATIENCE UNDER AFFLICTION.

1B the storm which it raises within, and by the
minichiefs which it occasions without, it generally
brings, on the paliionate and revengeful man,
grc.ater m'ifey than he can bring on his enemv.
Patience allays this dcitrucive tempcl,-, by mak-
i;g rooml for the rcturn of calm and bober thought.
It flipends the blow which ftdden refentmcnt
was read, to inflilct. It disposes us to attend to
the alleviating circumstances, which may be dil-
covercd in the midit of the wrongs we suppose
ourselves to have fufiered. Hence it naturally
inclines us to the moderate and gentle fide;
and while it allows all proper mealures to be
taken, both for safety, and for just redress, it
makes way. for returning peace.--_Without
some degree of patience exercised under inju-
ries, human life would be rendered a state of
perpetual hostility; offences and retaliations
would succeed to one another in cndiefs train;
and the world would become a field of blood,

PATIENCE UNDER AFFLICTION.
pATIENCE, with refpea to God, muif, in

the days of trouble, 1i:pprefs the rfinc of

a murmuring and rebellious spirit. It must ap-
pear in that calm resignation to the will of

Heaven

Heaven, which is exprcficd in tho'se pious senti-
ments of ancient good men :

i was dumii;); I :te-

cd r.:t ,z!,v

n:.u:h, ,'act,sI' t.';, i .;,'/ it. It is te'.' Lcr',

let him tl w,'at /fmn/t':!' gs ;..! h: hi ')', . Sh,:! we
rcvt'i'V gJsd att th't, ha,:t f

i:t L a

t-,.'' ,
,. !

;

e' nst,

receive cvnl al/b ? This is 1,;a'.!;) to :he grc:.t
Governor of the Univei i. I his is that reve-
rence -whlich so well bKcomes crc::turcs wvho know
they are dependent, and who nuiil coniels them-
selves to be finfuhl. Vherc:s the itubborn and
impatient, who fuibiit not themielves to the de-
crces of the MAof High, require to be humbled
and subdued by a continuance of chaftifcenct.

Patience in adversity, with refpe& to men,

must appear by the composure and tranquillity of
our behaviour. The loud complaint, the que-
rulous temper, and fretful spirit, dilgrace every
character. They shew a mind that is unmanned
by misfortunes. WTe weaken thereby the sym-
pathy of others; and estrange them from the of-
sices of kindness and comfort.-Patience, by prc-
serving compolilre within, rclifls the imprcflion
which trouble makes from without. By leaving
the mind open to every consolation, it naturally
tends to alleviate our burden.-To maintain a
steady and unbroken mind, amidst all the flhocks
of the world, forms the highest honour of a man.
Patience, on such occasions, riles to magnanimity.

It

# AMBITION.

flhews a great and noble mind, which is able to
retl on itlelf, on God, and a good conscience;
which can enjoy itfclf amidit all evils; and
would rather endure the greateuf hardihips, than
submit to what was dishonourable, in order to
obtain relief. This gives proof of a ftrcngth that
is derived from Hcaven. It is a beam of the ima
mortal light, flining on the heart. Such pa-
tience is the most complete triumph of religion
and virtue; and accordingly it has ever charac-
terifcd those whose names have been tranlfmitted
with honour to poitcrity. It has ennobled the
hero, the faint, and the matrtysr. Wfl' arc tiourtile
on evc)ryfidc, vyt not st,

i/' d

2 e: .wc are p,rpl',xed, blt

;:t in d ij,'ir ; pcf.'latti, bat ;ot Jsrjakcn ; ca/l
(toIwnU but i:ot dl7?rsQycd.

A2MBITION.
T HE antive mind of man seldom or never refis

- fitisficd with its present condition, how pro-

fperous ocver. Originall fornmed for a wider
lange of objecs, for a higher sphere of enjoy-
men;ts, it finds itself, in every situation of for-
tune, straightencd and confined. Scnfible of de-
ficiency, in its iate, it is ever fending forth the
fond dcfire, the aspiring willi, aftcr something

3 beyond

beyond what is enjoyed at present. Hence, that
reftlefl'efs which prevails so generally among
mankind. Hence that ditiufr of pleasures which
they have tried; that pafilon for novelty; that
ambition of riling to some degree of eminence or
felicity, of which they have formed to themselves
an indifinal idea. All which may be confidered
as indications of a certain native, original, great-
nets in the human foul, swelling beyond the limits
of its present condition; and pointing at the
higher obieds for which it was made. Happy, if
theie latent remains of our primitive frate served
to direct our wifles towards their proper deftina-
tion, and to lead us into the path of true bliss !

But in this dark and bewildered ftatc, the as-

piring tendency of our nature unfortunately takes
an opposite direction, and feeds a very misplaced
ambition. The flattering appearances which
here present themselves to sense ; the diftintions
which fortune confers; the advantages and plea-
fures which we imagine the world to be capable
of best:owing, fill up the ultimate wish of most
men. These are the objecs which engross their
solitary musings, and stimulate their aative la-
bours; which warm the breast of the young,
animate the indufiry of the middle-aged, and
often keep alive the paflions of the old, until
the very close of life. Affuredly)-there is no-

thingl

thing unlawful in our wishing to be freed from
whateyer is difigreeable, and to obtain a fuller
enjoyment of the comforts of life. But when
these wishes are not tempered by reason, they are
in danger of precipitating us into much extrava-
gance and folly.

You have itrayed, my friends, from the road

which conducs to felicity; you have difliorourcd
the native dignity of your fouls, in allowing
your withes to terminate in nothing higher than
worldly ideas of greatness or happiness. Your
imagination roves in a land of ihadows. Unreal
forms deceive you. It is no more than a phan-
ton, an illusion of happiness which attracts your
fond admiration; nay, an illusion of happiness
which often conceals much real misery. Do you
imagine, that all are happy, who have attained
to those summits of difrinaion, towards which
your wishes aspire ? Alas! how frequently has
experience shewed, that where roses were sup-
posed to bloom, nothing but briars and thorns
grew ? Reputation, beauty, riches, grandeur,
nay, royalty itself, would, many a time, have
been gladly exchanged by the pofleflbrs, for that
more quiet and humbles tation, with which you
are now difl;tixned. With all that is splendid
and fmining in the world, it is decreed that there
should mix many deep shades of woe, On the

P elevated

# INTEMPERANCE.

elevated situations of fortune, the great calan;i-
ties of life chiefly fall. There the itorm spends
its violence, and there the thunder brcak,; while
safe and unhurt the inhabitant of the vale remains
below.-Retreat, then, from those vain and per-
nicious excursions of extravagant desire. Satisfy
vourfelves with what is rational and attainable.
Train your minds to moderate views of human
life and human happiness.

INTEMPERANCE.
IN all the pleasures of sense, it is apparent,

that only when indulged within certain li-

mits, they confer satisfaction. No sooner do we
pass the line which temperance has drawn, than
pernicious effei's come forward and flhcw them-
selves. Could I lay open to your view the mo-
numents of death, they would read a lecture in
favour of modela;tio, much more powerful than
any that the most eloquent preacher can give.
You would behold the graves peopled with the
victims of intemperance. You would behold
those chambers of darkness hung round, on every
fide, with the trophies of luxury, drunkenness,
and sensuality. So numerous would you find
those martyrs of iniquity, that it may safely be

af;crtcd,

# MODERATION.

al'erted, where war and pestilence have (lain their
thousands, intemperate pleasure has slain its tec
thoufalds.

MODERATION.
THIE man of moderation brings to all the na-

tural and innocent pleasures of life, that

found, uncorrupted relish, which gives him a
much fuller enjoyment of them, than the palled
and vitiated appetite of the voluptuary allows
him to know. He culls the flower of every al-
lowable gratification, without dwelling upon it
until the flavour be loft. He taftes the sweet of
every pleasure, without pursuing it till the bitter
dregs arifc. Whereas the man of opposite cha-
racer dips so deep, that he never fails to fir an
impure and noxious sediment, which lies at the
bottom of the cup.-In the plealures, besides,
which are regulated by moderation, there is !-
ways that dignity which goes along with inno-
cence. No man needs to be ashamcd of them.
They are confiilent with honour; with the fa-
vour of God, and of man. But the fenfualiit,
who disdains all reltraint in his pleasures, is odi-
ous in the public eye. His vices become gross;

P 2 his

# HAPPINESS.

his charazlcr contemptible; and he ends in being
a burden both to himielf and to society.

HAPFINESS.
IF you would judge whether a man bc really

happv, itis not solely to his houses and his

lands, to his equipage and his retinue, you are
to look. Unle's you could fee farther, and dil;
cern what joy, or what bitterness, his heart feels,
you can pronounce nothing concerning him.
That proud and wicked man whom you behold
surrounded with itate and splendour, and upon
whom you think the favours of Heaven so im-
properly lavished, may be a wretch, pining away
in secret, with a thousand griefs unknown to the
world. That poor man, who appears neglected
and overlooked, may, in his humble Ration, be
partaking of all the moral, and all the social joys,
that exhilarate the heart; may be living cheer-
ful, contented and happy. Cease then to mur-
mur against dispensations of Providence, which
are, to us, so imperfetly known. Envy not the
prosperity of finners. Judge not of the real con-
dition of men, from what floats merely on the
surface of their state.

GOOD-

# GOOD-NATURE.

GOOD-NATURE.

HE good qualities which some men pofflTr,
borler on certain weaknelfes of the mind;

and these weaknesss are apt to betray them in-
sensibly into vices,- with which they are con-
neeted.

Good-nature, for instance, is in danger of run-

ning into that unlimited complaisance, which as-
fimilates men to the loose manners of those who!n
they find around them. Pliant, and yielding in
their temper, they have not force to itand by the
decisions of their own minds, with regard to right
and wrong. Like the animal which is said to
afrume the colour of every object to which it is
applied, they lose all proper character of their
own; and are formed by the charactrs of those
with whom they chance to associate. The mild
are apt to fink into habits of indolence and sloth.
The cheerful and gay, when warmed by pleafulre
and mirth, lose that sobriety and fclf-denial, which
is essential to the support of virtue.-Even modes-
ty and submission, qualities so valuable in them-
felvcs, and so highly ornamental to youth, some-
times degenerate into a vicious timidity; a timi-
dity which refirains men from doing their duty
with firmners which cannot stand the frown of

P 3 the

# PIETY.

the great, the reproach of the multitude, or even
the ridicule and sicer of the scorner.

Nothing can be more amiable than a constant

desire to please; and an unwillingness to offend
or hurt. Yet in characters where this is a pre-
dominant feature, defets are often found. Fond
always to oblige, and afraid to utter any difigree-
able truth, such persons are sometimes led to dif-
femble. Their love of truth is sacrificed to their
love of pleasing. Their speech, and their man-
ners, assume a studied courtesy. You cannot al-
ways depend on their smile; nor, when they pro-
mise, be sure of their performance. They mean
and intend well; but the good intention is tem-
porary. Like wax, they yield easily to every
impression; and the transient friendship contra&t-
ed with one person, is effaced by the next.

PIETY.
PIETY must form the basis of firm and cRta-

blifhed virtue. If this be wanting, the cha-

racer cannot be found and entire. Moral virtue
will always be endangered, often be overthrown,
when it is separated from its surest support. Con-
fidence in God, tlrengthened by faith in the

3 great

# DEATH OF CHRIST.

great Redeemer of mankind, not only amidst
the fevcrer trials of virtue, gives conitancy to
the mind, but, by nourishing the hope of im-
mortality, adds warmth and elevation to the as-
fetions. They, whose conduct is not animated
by religious principle, are deprived of the most
powerful incentive to worthy and honourable
deeds.

DEATH OF CHRIST.
CONTEMPLATE the manner in which

our blessed Lord died. You behold him,

amidst the extremity of pain, calm in,: col-
leed within himleif; poflUeing his fpi iit with
all the serenity 'which sublime devotion, and
exalted benevolence inspire. You hear him, first,
lamenting the fate of his unhappy country next,
when he was fastened to the cross, addrefling
words of confolatio; to his affliced parent; and,
]aftly, fending up prayers mixed with compal-
fionate apologies for those who were shedding his
blood. After all those exercises of charity, you
behold him in an ac of devout adoration and
trust, resigning his breath: Father, into hy hands,
I commnend my Jpirit. - Can any death be pro-

nounced

# PLEASURE.

nounced unhappy, how distressful soever its cir-
'cumitances may he, which is thus supported, and
dignified ? What could we wilh for more in our
lald moments, than with this peaceful frame of
mind, this calm of all the afFtetions, this exalta-
tion of heart towards God, this ditfuifion of be-
nevolence towards men, to bid adieu to the
world ?

if in such a spirit as this, we would all wish

to die, let us think that now is the time to pre-
pare for it, by seasonably cultivating this fplirit
while we live; by imbibing those difroi'tions and:
affeaions which we would with to poltefb at our.
latest period..

PLEASURE.
A MONG the crowd of amusements, the vo-

luptuary may endeavour to tifle his unea-

finess; but through all his defences it will pene-
trate. A conscious sense of his own infignifi-
cance, when he fees others distinguished for a&t-
ing a manly and worthy part; reflection on the
time he has wafted, and the contempt he has in-
curred; the galling remembrance of his earlier
and better days, when he gave the fair promise

of.

of accomplifllments, which now are blasted,
have frequently been found to faddcn the festive
hour. The noise of merriment may be heard;
but hcavinefs lies at the heart. While the tabret
and the viol play, a melancholy voice founds in
his cars. The watled cflate, the neglected halls,
and ruined mansions of his father, rife to view.
Tlhe angry countenances of his friends Seem to
flare him in the face. A hand appears to come
forth on the wall, and to write his doom.

Retreat, then, from your dishonourable courses,

ye who by licentioufiefs, extravagance, and vice,
are abusers of the world! You are degrading-
you are ruining yourselves. You are grossly
miremploying the gifts of God; and the Giver
will not fail to punish. Awake to the pursuits
of men of virtue and honour. Break loose from
that magic circle, within which you are at pre-
sent held. Rejea the poisoned cup which the
enchantress Pleasure holds up to your lips. Draw
aside the veil which ihe throws over your eyes.
You will then fee other objects than you now be-
hold. You will fee a dark abyss opening below
your feet. You will fee virtue and temperance
marking out the road, which condu&s to true
felicity. You will be enabled to discern, that
the world is enjoyed to advantage, by none but
such as follow thole divine guides; and who con-

fider

# VANITY OF THE WORLD.

# JUSTICE AND MERCY.

fider picafure as the seasoning, but not as the bu-
finess, of life.

VANITY OF THE WORLD.
T HE fashion of the world paffeth away. Its

pomp and its pleaiures, its riches, magni-

ficence, and glory, are no more than a transient
shew. Every thing that we here enjoy, changes,
deays, and comes to an end. Ail floats on the
surface of a river, which, with swift current, is
running towards a boundless ocean. Beyond this
present scene of things, above those sublunary
regions, we are to look for what is permanent
and flable. The world paflns away; but God,
and heaven, and virtue, continue unchangeably
the fame. We are soon to enter into eternal
habitations;, and into these, our works flall. fol-
low us.

JUSTICE AND MERCY.
VgW E must undoubtedly begin with being just,

before we attempt to be generous. At
the fame time, he who goes no farther than, bare

jufLicc,

# CHRISTIANITY RATIONAL.

justice, flops at the beginning of virtue. We
are commanded to do jtyly, but to love mcrcy.-
The one virtue regulates our actions. The
other improves our heart and affetions. Each
is equally necessary to the happiness of the world.
Justice is the pillar that upholds the whole fabric
of human fbciety. Ilercy is the genial ray,
which cheers and warms the habitations of men.
The perfealion of our social charaEter confilts in
properly tempering the two with one another;
in holding that middle coul-fe, which admits of
our being just, without beling rigid; and allows
us to be generous, without being unjust.

CHRISTIANITY RATIONAL.
T HE doArines of the Christian religion are

rational and pure. All that it has revealed

concerning the perfections of God, his moral
government and law;s, the dfclination of man,
and the rewards and punilhments of a future state,
is perfeicly consonant to the most enlightened
reaion. In some articles which transcend the
limits of our present faculties, as in what relates
to the efience of the Godhead, the fallen slate of
mankind, and their redemption by Jesus Christ,
its doctrines may appear inyferious and dark.

Aga:iin

Against these the scoffer has often direaced his at-
tacks, as if whatever could not be explained by us,
ought upon that account to be exploded as absurd.

It is unnecessary to enter, at present, on any

particular defence of these docrines, as there is
one observation which, if duly weighed, is sus-
ficient to silence the cavils of the scoffer. Is he
not compelled to admit, that the whole fyflem
of nature around him is full of mystery ? What
reason, then, had he to fuppole, that the doc-
trines of revelation, proceeding from the fame
author, were to contain no mysterious oblcurity ?
All that is requisite for the conducl of life, both
in nature and in religion, divine wildom has
rendered obvious to all. As nature has afforded
us sufficient information concerning what is ne-
ceffary for our food, our accommodation, and
our safety; so religion has plainly infiruted us
in our duty towards God, and our neighbour.
But as soon as we attempt to rife towards objeds
that lie beyond our immediate sphere of anion,
our curiosity is checked; and darkness meets us
on every fide. What the essence is of those ma-
terial bodies which we fee and handle; how a
feed grows up into a tree; how man is formed
in the womb; or how the mind ads upon the
body, after it is formed; are myfferies of which
we can give no more account, than of the most

obscure

osicure and difficult parts of revelation. VWe are
obliged to admit the exiltence of the sa;c, thJugh
the oxplanation of it exceeds our faculties.

After the fame mainner, in natural religion,

quellions arise concerning the creation of the
world fiom nothing, the origin of evil under the
government of a perfect Being, and the confit-
ency of human liberty with divine prercicnce,
which are of as intricate nature, and of as dif-
ficult solution, as any questions in Christian the-
ology. We may pliinl flee, that we are not
admitted into the fecre:s of Providence, any
more than into the m) terics of the Godhead. In
all hi w\a)ys, the Almighty is a G.d that hldctlb h'nm-
tf',f. Hc makth t;.rk:: / ,hiss sp'.'ici. H,: ho/lleth back
the frac:' f /'.: th,'nal ; aid arcaTe'.h a thick cAchil
uiit it.-Inlfc::d of its being any objecio n to re-
velation, that iobme of its dotfrines are miyferi-
ous, it would be much 'more ifrange and u;'ac-
countable, if no such donsriiies were found in it.
Had every thing in the Chriflian system been per-
fecly level to our capacities, this might rather
have given ground to a fulpicion, of its not pro-
ceeding from God; since it would have been then
so unlike to what we find, both in the fyftcm of
the universe, and in the system of natural reli-
gion. Whereas, according as matters now fland,
the gospel has the fame features, the faune general

Q. chara.ter,

# RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.

with the other two, which are acknowledged to
be of divine origin ; plain and comprehensible, in
what relates to practice; dark and mysterious, in
what relates to fpeculalion and belief.

RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.
T HOUGHTLESS as the bulk of men are,

and attached only to objecs which they fee

around them, this principle has never been ex-
tinguified in their breasts, that to the great Pa-
rent of the human race, the universal, though
invisible, benefaRor of the world, not only inter-
r.al reverence, but external homage, is due.
Whether he need that homage or not, is not the
question. It is what, on our part, we undoubt-
edly owe; and the heart is, with reason, held to
be base, which flifles the emotions of gratitude
to a benefactor, how independent soever he may
be of any returns. True virtue always prompts
a public declaration of the grateful sentiments
which it feels; and glories in expressing them.
Accordingly, over all the earth, crowds of wor-
shippers have aflembled to adore, in various
forms, the Ruler of the world. In these adora-
tions, the philosopher, the savage, and the faint,
have equally joined. None but the cold and un-

feeling

# THE SCOFFER.

feeling can look up to that beneficent Being, who
is at the head of the universe, without some incli-
nation to pray, or to praise. In vain, therefore,
would the scoffer deride what the loud voice of
nature demands and juflifies. He ereas himself
against the general and declared sense of the hu-
man race.

THE SCOFFER.
a E who treats sacred things with any degree

of levity and scorn, is acting the part, per-

haps without his feeing or knowing it, of a pub-
lic enemy to society. He is precisely the mad-
man described in the book of Proverbs, iwho raft-
eth firebrands, arrows, and deathl, and faith, am
I not in sport ? We shall hear him, at times, com-
plain loudly of the undutifulnels of children, of
the difloncfty of servants, of the tumults and in-
folence of the lower ranks; while he himself is,
in a great measure, re(ponfible for the disorders
of which he complains. By' the example which
he sets of contempt for religion, he becomes ac-
celiary to the manifold crimes, which that con-
tempt occasions among others. By his scoffing
at sacred inflitutions, he is encouraging the rab-
ble to uproar and violence; he is emboldening

Q2 the

# THE TEMPORIZER.

the false witness to take the iname of God in
vain; he is in effcdt, putting arms into the hands
of the highwaym an ad letting looib the robber
on the itreets by night.

TIHE TE0MPORIZER.
T HE mere temporizer, the man of accon-

modating principles, and inf'crir 'vrtue,

may support a plausible charater for a while
among his friends and followers; but as soon as
the hollowners of his principles is deteted, he
finks into contempt. They who are prone to
deride men of inflexible integrity, only betray
the littleness of their minds. They few that
they understand not the sublime of virtue; that
they have no discernment of the true excellence
of man. By affecicg to throw any discourage-
ment on puiity and ftricniefs of morals, they not
only expose themfel yes to just contempt, but propa-
gate sentiments very dangerous to society. For, if
we loosen the regard due to virtue in any of its
parts, we begin to sap the whole of it. No man,
as it has been often said, becomes entirely profli-
gate at once. He deviates, ttep by ftep, from
conscience. If the loose cafuifiry of the scoffer
were to prevail, open dihoneRfy, falsehood, and

trea-

# RIDICULE OF RELIGION.

treachery, would speedily grow out of thote
complying principles, those relaxations of virtue,
which he would represent to be neceflary for
every man who knows the world.

RIDICULE OF RELIGION.

ELIGION and virtue, in all their forms,
either of dotrinc or of precept; of piety

towards God, intregrity towards men, or regu-
larity in private conduct; are so far from afford-
ing any grounds of ridicule to the petulant, that
they are entitled to our highest veneration; they
are names which should never be mentioned, but
with the utmolt honour. It is said in Scripture,
Fools make a mock at fin. They had better makwa
mock at pestilence, at war, or famine. With
one who should chufe there public calamities for
the fubje& of his sport, you would not be inclin-
ed to associate. You would fly from him, as
worse than a fool; as a man of distempered mind,
from whom you might be in hazard of receiving
a sudden blow. Yet certain it is, that to the
great society of mankind, fin is a greater cala-
mity than either pestilence, or famine, or war.
Thele operate only as occasional causes of mi-
fery. But the fins and vices of men, are perpe-

tual

# CREATION.

tual scourges of the world. Impiety and injuf-
tice, fraud and falfihood, intemperance and pro-
fligacy, are daily producing mischief and disorder;
bringing ruin on individuals; tearing families
and communities in pieces; giving rife to a thou-
sand tragical scenes on this unhappy theatre. In
proportion as manners are vicious, mankind are
unhappy. The perfection of virtue which reigns
in the world above, is the chief source of the
perfec blessedness which prevails there.

CREATION.
T HOUGH there was a period when this

globe, with all that we fee upon it, did nut

exist, we have no reason to think that the wis-
dom and power of the Almighty were then with-
out exercise or employment. Boundless is the
extent of his dominion. Other globes and
worlds, enlightened by other funs, may then
have occupied, they still appear to occupy, the
immense regions of space. Numberless orders
of bei:ns, .to us unknown, people the wida ex-
tent of the universe; and afford an endless va-
riety of objeqs to the ruling care of the great
Father of all. At length, in the course and pro-
grels of his government, there arrived a period,

when

when this earth was to be calle. into existence.
\hen the signal moment, predestine, fiom all
eternity, was conme; the Deity arose in his might;
and with a word created the world.-What an
illustrious moment was that, when, from non-
exiftence,there fpra g at once into being this migh-
ty globe, on which so many millions of creatures
now dwell ?-No preparatory measures were re-
quired. No long circuit of mears was employ-
ed. Hie fp:.i ', nl t w.ss ldon : He cn;mnandd,
and it fodl fel. The earth was, at first, with-
out fo-rmi, ,iinl oid; and l aar/knjy' was .n the face of
the de.p. The Almighty firveyed the dark abyss;
and fixed bounds to the several divisions of na-
ture. Iie said, L.t the.'r be li'ht, andl t'ere was
light. Then appearedt the sea, and the dry land.
The mnrmntains rol ; lnd the rivers flowed.
T'he fun and moon bO-:an their course in the
skies. Herbs and plants clothed the ground.
The air, the earth, and the waters, were ftoicd
with their relpe.ctive inhabiiants. At last, man
was made after the in;age of God. He appeared,
walking with countenance erect; and received
his Creator's benedilio;, as the Lord of this
new world. The Almighty beheld his work
when it wa; finilhed; and pronounced it good.
Superior beings saw with wonder this new ac-
ceflion to exillence. 'I/.h morning jianrs fiJn toge-
thor; and all thefoiI of G;dJiiut,'dfor j),.

THE

# THE STUDY OF NATURE.

# GOODNESS OF THE CREATOR.

THE STUDY OF NATURE.
T HE study of nature, which, for ages, has

employed the lives of To many learned

men, and which is ttill lo far from being exhaust-
ed, is no other than the fludy of divine wifdoin
displayed in the creation. The farther our re-
searches are carried, more liriking proofs of it
every where meet us. The provision made for
the constant regularity of the univcrfe, in the
difpofitio;i of the heavenly bodies, so that in the
course of several thousand years, nature should
ever exhibit the fame uieful and grateful variety,
in the returns of light and darkness, of summer
and winter; and ever furnish food and habitation
to all the animals that people the earth; mufl be
a lasing theme of wonder to every reflecting
mind.

GOODNESS OF THE CREATOR.
M ALIGNANT must be the mind of that

person; with a distorted eye he must have

contemplated creation, who can fufpet, that it
is not the production of infinite benignity and
goodness. How many clear marks of benevo-

lent

lent intention appear every where around us;
What a profusion of beauty and ornament is
poured forth on tlic face of nature ? What a mag-
niticent ipect;lcle prefcnted to the view of man ?
What supply contrived for his wants? What a
variety of objct? set before him, to gratify his
senses, to employ his undcrltardinL, to entertain
his imagination, to cheer and gladden his heart?
Indeed, the very cxiftcncc of the uiniverfc is a
fianding memorial of the goodness of the Creator.
For nothilng except goodnels, could originally
prompt creation. The Supreme Being, f!s-
existent and all-fufficient, had no wants which
he could seek to supply. No new accefflon of
felicity or glory was to result to him, from crea-
tures whom he made. It was goodness, commu-
nicating and pouring itself forth, goodness de-
lighting to impart happine:s in all its forms,
which in the beginning created tlh heaven and
the earth. Hence those innumerable orders of
living creatures with which the e.rrch is peopled;
from the lowlcft class of ifnfitive being, to the
highest rai.k of reason and intelligence. Where-
over there is lite, there is lone degree of happi-
nels; there are enjoyments suited to the different
powers of feeling; and earth, and air, a:nd wa-
ter, are with magnificent liberality made to tcem
with life.

Let

# THE DISSOLUTION OF THE WORLD.

Let those striking displays of creating goodness

call forth, on our part, responsive love, grati-
tude, and veneration. To this great Father of
all exifience and life, to Him who hath raised
us up to behold the light of day, and to enjoy all
the comforts which his world presents, let our
hearts fend forth a perpetual hymn of praile.
Evening and morning let us celebrate Him, who
maketh the morning and the evening to rejoice
over our heads; who openeth his hand, and fatisfictb
the defe oy ve'y v.'ivg thing. Let us rejoice, that
we are brought into a world, which is the pro-
duEtion of infinite goodness, over which a fu.
preme intelligence presides; and where nothing
happens, that was not planned and arranged from
the beginning, in his decree.

THE DISSOLUTION OF THE WORLD.
T HIS earth has been the theatre of many a

great fpec'acle, and many a high atchieve-

ment. There, the wife have ruled, the mishty
have fought, and conquerors have triumphed. Its
surface has been covered with proud and flately
cities. Its temples and palaces have raised their
heads to the skies. Its kings and potentates, glo-
rying in their magnificence, have erected pyra-

mids,

mids, conftluted towers, founded monuments,
which they imagined were to defy all the aflaults
of time. Their inward thought was, that their
JoIfcs were to continue for ever, and their dwelling-
places to allgeneratilozs. Its philosophers have ex-
plored the secrets of nature; and flattered them-
selves, that the fame of their difeoveries was to
be immortal.-Alas ! all this was no more than a
transient ihew. Not only thefal),ion of the worl,
but the world itself, pafeth away. The day
cometh, when all the glory of this world ihall
be remembered, only as a dream when one awakieth.
No longer shall the earth exhibit any of those
scenes which now delight our eyes. The whole
beautiful fabric is thrown down, never more to
arise. As loon as the dfitroying angel has found-
ed the lass trumpet, the everlasting mountains
fall; the foundations of the world are ihaken , the
beauties of nature, the decorations of art, the la-
bours of industry, perilh in one common flame.
The globe itself (hall either return into its an-
cient chaos, without form and voi:; or, like a isar
fallen from the heavens, shall be effaced from the
universe, and its place shall kniw it no more.

THE

# THE NEW HEAVENS AND EARTH.

THE NEW IIEAVENS AND EARTH.
XWVE contemplate the difiblution of the world,

as the introduction to a greater and no-

bier s)ystem, in the government of God. I1.,
according t his ipr'om;.f lo.k fojr new 'heav 'ns a a

'new ea,':hc, w h'rcci vel',th 1igti-,to J;zlj. Teni-

poral things are now to give place to things eter-
nal. To this earthly habitation is to lucceed the
city of the living God. The earth had completed
the purpose for which it was created. It had
been employed as a theatre, on which the human
generations were fucceflive!y to come forth, and
to fulfil their term of trial. As long as the period
of trial continued, much obscurity was of course
to cover the counsels of Providence. It was ap-
pointed, that a/! tlhirs should appear as :im,1g
alike to a!.; that the righteous should feei often
neglected by Heaven, and the wicked be allowed
externally to prosper; in order that virtue and
piety might undergo a proper tefl; that it might
be fliewn who weie sincere adherents to confci-
ence, and who were mere followers of fortune.
The day which terminates the duration of the
world, terminates all those seeming disorders.
The time of trial is concluded. The final dif-
crimination of characters is made. When the

righteous

rinltirous go into everlailing happines, and tihe
wicked are difiniifcd into the regions of punish-
nent, the whole mvficry of human affairs is un-
ravelled, and the conduct of Providence is jufti-
fed to ma:in.

Suited to a condition of trial was the Ifate and

form of the world, which we now inh;!bit. It
was not defined to be a malfion for innocent
and happy spirits; but a dwelling for creatules of
tallen nature and of mixed charaters. Hence,
those mixtures of pleasure and pain, of disorder
and beauty, with which it abounds. Hence, forne
regions of the earth, presenting gay and plealing
scenes; others, exhibiting nothing but rugged-
ness and deformity; the face of nature, some-
times brightened by a serene atmosphere, and a
splendid fun; tometimes disfigured by jarring
elements, and overcalt with troubled skies. But
far unlike fliall be the everlalffing habitations of
the juRf. T'hough how they are formed, or what
obje&ts they contain, is not given us now to con-
ceive, nor, in all probability would our facul-
ties be'equal to the conception ; the emblcmatical
descriptions of them in Scripture are calculated
to excite high ideas of magn.ificence and glory.
This one particular we know with certainty, that
therein dwcl/,lli rights'!fi;l/s; that is, complete vir-
tue and eternal order; and wherever these are

R found,

# THE KINGDOM OF GOD.

found, the most perfcA sources are opened of joy
and bliss. This earth was never intended for
more than the outer court, the porch, through
which the righteous were to pals into the temple
and sanctuary of the Divinity. 1/1,ez that lwhich
is pe;rfi;. is come, that which is in part fJiall be done
cwvi'.

TIlE KINGDOM OF GOD.

ITH reverence we contemplate the hand of
God in the signal dispensations of Provi-

dence among men; deciding the fate of battles;
railing up, or overthrowing enpires; calting
down the proud, and lifting the low from the
dull. But what are such occurrences to the
power and wisdom which He displays in the
higher revolutions of the universe; by his word,
forming or dissolving worlds; at his pleasure,
transplanting his creatures from one world to
another; that he may carry on new plans of
wisdom and goodness, and fill all space with the
wonders of creation? Successive generations of
men have arifcn to poflfse the earth. By turns
they have passed away aid gone into regions un-
known. Us he hath raised up, to occupy their
room. We too shall shortly disappear. But

human

hlumil. exiftcnce never perishes. Life only
changes its form, and is renewed. Creation is
ever filling, but never fill. When the whole
intended course of the generations of men flall
be finifled, then, as a flhepherd leads his flock
from one pailure to another, so the great Creator
leads forth the fouls which he has made into
new and prepared abodes of life. They go from
this earth to a new earth, and new heavens; and
Ifill they remove only from one province of the
divine dominion to another. Amidst all those
changes of nature, the great Rukcr himeilf re-
mains without variablenrjf or fla;7zv of turning.
To him, these successive revolutions of being
are but as yjlerday wlken it is pafl. From his eter-
nal throne he beholds worlds riing and pasing
away; measures out, to the creatures who-inha-
bit them, powers and faculties suitcd to their
state; and distributes among them rewards and
punishments, proportioned to their acions.-.
What an aftoniiing view do such meditations
afford of the kingdom of God; infinite in its ex-
tent; everlasting in its duration; exhibiting, in
every period, the reign of perfect righteoufl.efs
and wisdom !

R 2 INAC-

# INACTIVITY.

INACTIVITY'
pERSONS in easy circumflances, who are

not e!gagecd in any of the laborious occupa-

tions of tie world, and who arc, at the fame
time, without encrgy of mind to call them forth
into any oilier line of aitive exrtion, have often
so many)' aca;: hc.iirs, and are so much at a loss
how to fill up their time, that their iirits utterly
fink; they become burdcnibme to themnfelves,
and to every one around them; and drag with
pain the load of exittcnce. What a convincing
proof is hereby afforded, that man was defig.cd
by his Creator to be an ative being, vlhol'e hap-
pinelfs is to be found not merely in relt, but in
occupation and pursuit ? The idle are doomed to
susser the natural punishment of their inactivity
and folly; and for their complaints of the tire-
fotrenefs of life there is no remedy but to awake
from the dream of sloth, and to fill up with pro-
per employment the miserable vacancies of their
days. Let them fludy to become useful to the
world, and they shall soon become less burden-
some to themselves. They shall begin to enjoy
exiflence, and lhall reap the rewards which Pro-
vidence has annexed to virtuous activity.

CHA-

# CHARITY

CHARITY

C ONSISTS not in speculative ideas of gene-
c ral benevolence floating in the head, and
leaving the heart, as speculations too often do,
untouched and cold. Neither is it confined to
that indolent good-nature, which makes us reft
satisfied with being free from inveterate malice,
or ill-will to our fellow-creatures, without
prormpti:rg us to be of service to any. True
charity is an a'tive principle. It is not properly
a single virtue; but a dilfofition residing in the
heart, as a fountain whence all the virtues of be-
nignity, candour, forbearance, generosity, com-
pafion, and liberality flow, as so many native
Itreams. From general good-will to all, it ex-
tends its influence particularly to those with
whom we fland in nearelt connexion, and who
are direcly within the sphere of our good of-
sices. From the country or community to which
we belong, it descends to the linaller afbciations
of ncighbourhood, relations, and friends; and
ipreads itself over the whole circle of social and
donmetic life.

[Charity is the comforter of the af.iqced, the

protetor of the oppressed, the reconciler of dif-
ferences, the Jiterceffor for offenders. It is

R 3 faith-

# FAITH.

faithfulness in the friend, public spirit in the ma-
giitrate, equity and patience in the judge, mode-
ration in the sovereign, and loyalty in the sub-
ject. In parents it is care and attention; in
children it is reverence and fibmiffon. In a
word, it is the foul of social life. It is the fun
that enlivens and cheers the abodes of men. It
is like the dew of Hermnn , fiys3 the Pialmitf, and
the dre that dfccndleth on the mountains cf Zion,
where ths Lord commanded the blessing, even ls for
termcre,.]

FAITH.
FAITH, when pure and.genuine, supplies to

every part of virtue, and in particular to the

virtue of charity, many motives and afliflances,
of which the unbeliever is destitute. He who
ads from faith, acs upon the high principle of
regard to the God who hath made him, and to
the Saviour who redeems him; which will often
Stimulate him to his duty when other principles
of benevolence become faint and languid, or are
crossed by opposite interests. When he confiders
himself as pursuing the approbation of that Divine
Beil;g, from whom love descends, a lacred en-
thufiafm both prompts, and consecrates, his cha-

ritable

# NEW YEAR.

ritable dispositions. Regardless of men, or of
human recompence, he is carried along by a
higher impulse. He ats with the spirit of a
follower of the Son of God, who not only has
enjoined love, but has enforced it by the exam-
ple of laying down his life for mankind, Hence
charity is with him, not only a moral virtue, but
a Christian grace. It acquires additional dignity
and energy from being connected with the hea-
venly ifate and the heavenly inhabitants. He
mingles with beings of a higher order, while he
is discharging his duty to his fellow-creatures on
earth; and by joining faith and piety to good
works, he completes the charaater of a Chris-
tian.

NEW YEAR.
IN the commencement of a new year, we are

entering on an untried, undiscovered country,

where, as each succeeding month comes forward,
new scenes may open; new objets may engage
our attention; changes at home or abroad, in
public or in private affairs, may alter the whole
state of our fortune. New connexions may be
at hand to be formed, or old ones jus about to be
dissolved; perhaps we may have little more to do

with

# PROVIDENCE.

with this world, or with any of its connexionrs;
we may be hianding on the verge of time and
life, and on the point of palling itto a newv region
of exifence. In short, the profpeA before us is
full of awful uncertainty. Life and death, pro-
fperity and adversity, health and sickness, joy and
trouble, lie in one undiftinguifhable mass, where
our eye can descry nothing through the obscurity
that wraps them up.

PROVIDENCE.
T HE first view under which human affairs

present themselves to us, is that of con-

fused and irregular fuccefflon. The events of the
world seem thrown together by chance, like the
billows of the sea, tumbling and tofling over each
other, without rule or order. All that is appa-
rent to us is the flucuation of human caprice, and
the operation of human passions. We fee the
strife of ambit'on, and the efforts of itratagem,
labouring to accomp!ifh their several purposes
among the societies of men. But it is no more
than the surface, the outside of things that we
behold. Higher counsels than it is in our power
to trace, are concerned in the tranlaii ions of the
world. If we believe in God at all, as the Go-
'' ' vernoT

vernor of the universe, we must believe that,
without his providence, nothing happens on earth.
He over-rules, at his pleasure, the paflions of
men. He bends all their designs into subserviency
to his decree. Ale make's the wrath of man to
praVf him; and reirai.', in what measure he
thinks fit, the remainder of wrath. He brings
forth in their course all the generations of men.
'.When the time is come for their entering into
light, they appear on the stage; and when the
time fixed for their difiniflion arrives, he cr/ngcs
their countenanlce, and fends them away. The
time of our appearing is now come, after our an-
ceftors had left their place, and gone down to the
dust. We are at present permitted to aa our
part freely and without constraint. No violence
is done to our inclination or choice. But as-
furedly there is not a day of our life, nor an event
in that day, but was foreseen by God. That
succession of occurrences, which to us is full of
obscurity and darkness, is all light and order in
his view. He fees from the beginning to the
end; and brings forward every thing that hap-
pens, in its due time and place.

FUTU-

# FUTURITY.

FUTURITY.
THE mooO common propensity of mankind

is to store futurity with whatever is agree-

able to them; efpccially in those periods of life
when imagination is lively, and hope is ardent.
Looking forward, they are ready to promilf
themselves much from the foundations of profpe-
rity which they have laid; from the friendships
and connexions which they have secured; from
the plans of conduct which they have formed.
Alas ! how deceitful do all these dreams of hap-
pinels often prove! While many are faying in
secret to their hearts, To-morrow fl2al! be as this
day, and mare abundantly, we are obliged in return
to fay to them, Boaj/ not thyself of to-morrow, for
thou knowses not what a day may bring fortb. I
do not mean, that in the unknown profpet which
lies before us, we ihould forbode to ourselves no-
thing but misfortunes.-May it be the pleasure of
Heaven that this year run on in a placid and
tranquil tenor to us all !-But this I fay, that in
such foresight of futurity as we are allowed to
take, we may reckon upon it as certain, that this
year shall prove to us, as many past have proved,
a chequered scene of some comforts and rome
troubles. In what proportion one or other of
these ihall prevail in it; whether when it ends,

it

# LONG LIFE.

k shall leave with us the memory of joys or of
sorrows, is to be determined by him in whose
hands cur times arc. Our wifdorn is, to be pre-
pared to receive comforts with thankfulness, trou-
bles with fortitude; and to improve both for the
great purposes of virtue and eternal life.

LONG LIFE.

0'O enjoy long life, and fee. many days, is the
unrivcrfal wish; and, as the wish is prompt-

ed by nature, it cannot be in itself unlawful. At
the fame time, several circumfiances concur to
temper the eagerness of this wilh; and to shew
us that it should always be formed under due sub-
miflion to the wiser judgment of Heaven. Who
among us can tell whether, in wishing for the
continuance of many years on earth, we may not
be only wiihing for a prolongation of distress and
mifery?-You might live, my friends, till you
had undergone lingering rounds of severe pain,
from which death would have proved a seasonable
deliverance. You might live till your breasts
were pierced with many a wound, from public
calamities or private sorrows. You might live
till you beheld the death of all whom you had
loved till you survived all those who love you;

1 till

# CONSOLATION.

till you were left as desolate firangers on earth,
in the midst of a new race, who neither knew
you, nor cared for you, but who wished you off
the flage.-Of a nature so ambiguous are ail the
profpets which life sets before us, that in every
wish we form, relating to them, much reason
we have to be satisfied that our times are in the
hands of God, rather than our own.

CONSOLATION.
THE life of man on earth is doomed to be

clouded with various evils. Throughout

all ranks the affliaed form a considerable propor-
tion of the human race; and even they who have
a title to be called prosperous, are always, in
some periods of their life, obliged to drink from
the cup of bitterness. The Christian religion is
particularly entitled to our regard, by accommo-
dating itself with great tenderness to this dif-
treffied condition of mankind. It is not to be
confidered as merely an authoritative system of
precepts. The fame voice which enjoins our
duty, utters the words of consolation. The gof-
pel deserves to be held a dispensation of relief to
mankind under both the temporal and spiritual
distresses of their state.

COM-

# COMFORT TO THE PENITENT.

COMFORT TO THE PENITENT.

HRIST affords reft to the diflurbed mind
that labours under apprehensions and fears

of guilt. Let tholte who susser diflrefs of this
nature come tI Chbr'!l with contrition and repent-
ance, and they shall regain quietners and peace.
Foolilh and guilty they have been, and julily lie
under dread of punilhment but the penitent for-
row which they now feel implies their diiofi-
tion to be chaiged. It implies, as far as it is
genuine, that, fcnfible of their folly, they now
delfre to become good and wile; and are deter-
mined for the future to hold a virtuous course,
could they only hope to obtain pardon for the
patI. In this situation of mind, let them not be
cast down and despair. Chrilt has brought with
him friom heaven the olivc-bramnch. He carries
in his hand the signal of forgiveness. Infuflicient
though our own repentance be, to procure par-
don fiom Heaven, we are informed, that an al!-
fulficient atonement has been made by Chris-.
Neither the number ndr the atrocity of offences
excludes from tfrgivenefs, the penitent who re-
turns to his duty. To all who come under this
description, the offer of mercy extends, without
exception.

S This

# COMFORT IN AFFLICTION.

This discovery of divine government, afford-

ed by the Gospel, is perfectly calculated to scat-
ter the gloom which had overcast the desponding
heart. The atmosphere clears up on every fide;
and is illuminated by cheering rays of celestial
mercy. Not only is hope given to the penitent,
but it is rendered sinful not to indulge that hope.
We are not only allowed and encouraged, but we
are commanded to trust in the divine clemency.
Ve are commanded to believe that none zwso come
unto Chrjil he will in any wifi cafl out. Such is the
relief which the religion of Chrifl brings to them
who labour and are ;ealy lalden under the imprcf-
lions of guilt and divine difpieafure.

COMFORT IN AFFLICTION.
W HILE bad men trace, in the calamities

with which they are visited, the hand of

an offended Sovereign, Christians are taught to
view them as the well-intended chafliiemcnts of
a merciful Father. They hear amidif them, that
fiill voice which a good conscience brings to their
ear: Fear not, for I am with thee i be not dflma)ynd
for I am thy God. They apply to themselves the
comfortable promises with which the Gospel
abounds. They discover in these the happy iflile

decreed

decreed to their troubles; and wait with patience
till Providence fiall have accomplifled its great
and good designs. In the mean time, devotion
opens to them its blefled and holy sanctuary: that
falnuary in which the wounded heart is healed,
and the weary mind is at ref ; where the cares
of the world are forgotten, where its tumults are
hufled, and its miseries disappear; where greater
objeAs open to our view than what the world
presents; where a more serene sky fnines, and a
fweetcr and calmer light beams on the affliced
heart. In those moments of devotion, a pious
man, pouring out his wants and sorrows to an
Almighty Supporter, feels that he is not left so-
litary and forsaken in a vale of woe. God is
with him; Chrifr and the Holy Ghost are irth
him; and, though he should be bereaved of every
earthly friend, he can look up in heaven to a
Friend who will never die.

To these present consolations, the religion of

Christ adds the joyful profpec of that future state,
where eternal reft rmnainrth for the peope of God.
This life they are tau.ht to confider as only the
hotte' oftheir pilgrimge ; the temporary mansion of
painful though necessary discipline. But let themn
endure for a little, and the pilgrimage (hall end,
the discipline shall be finished; and all the vir-
tuous be assembled in those blissful regions which

S 2 are

# PRACTICAL ATHEISM.

are prepared for their reward. Such a prolicct
cheers the darkelt hours of life; and alfords a re-
medy to every trouble. Thre frn s

o ,;-t p-

int: time are nit worthy to be coornredl with the
glory which hcall be revealed. They appear, in
this comparative view, as no more than a diltrrf-
ing Idrear of the night, from which one awakes
into health, and light, and joy.

PRACTICAL ATHEISM.

S soon as the sense of a Supreme Being is
loft, the great check is taken off, which

keeps under restraint the paflions of men. eAlan
desires, and low plcafurcs, take place of the
greater and nobler sentiments which reason and
religion inspire. Amidst the tumult of the wine
and thefeafl, all proper views of human life are
forgotten. The duties Which, as men, they
have to perform, the part they have to at in the
world, and the diltreffes to which they are ex-
posing themselves, are banished from their
thoughts. To mirrozu fJall be as this day, and
more abundantly, is the only voice. Inflamed by
society, and circulated from one loose companion
to another, the spirit of riot grows and fwvlls,
till it ends in brutal excess.

Nou-

# SENSE OF THE DIVINE PRESENCE.

Nourished by repetition and habit, these difor-

ders grow up among too many, to become the
business and occupation of life. By thcie unfor-
tunate votaries of pleasure, they are accounted
essential to happiness. Life appears to flagnate
without them. Having no rclource within
themselves, their spirits fink, and their very be-
ing seems annihilated, till the return of their fa-
vourite pleasures awaken within them iome tran-
fient sparkles of joy.-Idlencfs, ease, and pro-
fperity, have too natural a tendency to generate
the follies and vices now described. B,'cafe th,y
have no changes, said the Plalmift, therefore they
fear ,ot God.

SENSE OF THE DIVINE PRESENCE.

A PREVAILING sense of God on the mind
d/A2 is to be ever held the surest guard of inno-
cence and virtue, amidif the allurements of plea.
sure. It is the salutary mixture which muff be
infused into the cup of joy, in order to render it
safe and innoxious.

This sense of God should lead us, in the Jan-

guage of the prophet, to regardl the work of the
Lord, and to co7fider the operation of his hands;

S 3 which

# THE GOD OF NATURE.

which exprefions may be underflood as requiring
us to have God upon our thoughts under two
views; to regard his work, as the Author of na-
ture; and to confder the operaticn of his hands, as
the Governor of the world.

THE GOD' OF NATURE.

IFT your view to that immense arch o
heaven which encompafies you above. Be-

hold the fun in all his splendor rolling over your
head by day; and the moon, by night, in mild
and serene majesty, surrounded with that host of
Jtars which present to your imagination an innu-
merable multitude of worlds. Liften to the
awfil voice of thunder-Liften to the roar
of the tempest and the ocean. Survey the won-
ders that fill the earth which you inhabit. Con-
template a steady and powerful Hand, bringing
round spring and summer, autumn and winter, in
.egular course; decorating this earth with innu-
nerable beauties, diversifying it with innumer-
able inhabitants pouring forth comforts on all
that live; and, at the fame time, overawing the
nations with the violence of the elements, when
it pleases the Creator to let them forth.-Aftcr
-.you have viewed yourselves as surrounded with
such a scene of wQoders-after you have beheld

on

on every hand, such an aftoni/hing display of
majeffy united with wisdom and goodnefs-are
you not fiized with solemn and serious awe ? Is
there not something which whispers you within,
that to this great Creator reverence and homage
are due by all the rational beings whom he has
made ? Admitted to be fpeltators of his works,
placed in the midfl of so many great and interest-
ing objets, can you believe that you were
brought hither for no purpose, but to immerse
yourselves in gross and brutal, or, at belt, in
trifling pleasures; loft to all sense of the wonders
you behold; loft to all reverence of that God
who gave you being, and who has erected this
amazing fabric of nature, on which you look
only with tfupid and unmeaning eyes ?-No:
Let the scenes which you behold prompt corref-
pondent feelings. Let them awaken you from
the degrading intoxication of licentiousness, into
nobler emotions. Every object which you view
in nature, whether great or small, serves to in-
ftruct you. The sTar and the insea, the fiery
meteor and the flower of spring, the verdant field
and the lofty mountain, all exhibit a Supreme
Power, before which you ought to tremble and
adore all preach the dostrine, all inspire the
spirit, of devotion and reverence. Regarding,
then, the work of the Lord, let rising emotions
of awe and gratitude call forth from your fouls

such

# LAWFUL PLEASURE.

such sentiments as these:-" Lord, wherever I
" am, and whatever I enjoy, may I never forget
" thee, as the Author of nature! May I never
"forget that I am thy creature and thy subject !
" In this magnificent temple of the universe,
" where thou haft placed me, may I ever be thy
" faithful worihippcr, and may the reverence
" and the fear of God be the firfi fcntiments of
" my heart !"

LAWFUL PLEASURE.

UMAN life is full of troubles. We are
all tempted to alleviate them as much as

we can, by freely enjoying the pleasurable mo-
ments which Providence thinks fit to allow us.
Enjoy them we may: But, if we would enjoy
them safely, and enjoy them long, let us temper
them with the fear of God, As soon as this is
forgotten and obliterated, the found of the harp
end the viol is changed into the signal of death.
The serpent comes forth from the roses where it
had lain in ambush, and gives the fatal fling.
Pleasure in moderation is the cordial, in excess it
is the bane, of life.

THE

# THE FOUNTAIN OF HAPPINESS.

THE FOUNTAIN OF HAPPINESS.
A LL happiness aflurcdly dwells with God.

The fountain of life is justly said to be with

him. That Supreme and Independent Being muff
necefarily posse's within himself every principle
of beatitude; and no cause from without can pof-
sibly affeLt his untroubled felicity. Among
created dependent beings, happiness flows in
scattered and feeble streams; fireams that are
often tinged with the blackness of misery. But
from before the throne of God issues the river of
life, full, unmixed, and pure; and the pleasures
which now in fcantv portions we are permitted
to tafle, are all derived from that source. What-
ever gladdens the hearts of men or angels, with
any real and fatisfactoryjoy, comes from Heaven.
It is a portion of the pure iynfuelce finwing from
the glory of the Almighty; a ray iffing from the
brightness of the everlafling life. It is manifest,
therefore, that every approach to God must be
an approach to felicity: and that the enjoyment
of his immediate pretence must be its confumma-
tion.

GOD

# GOD IS LIGHT.

GOD IS LIGHT.
T HE revelation of his pretence infers, of

course, a complete difufion of light and

knowledge among all who partake of that pre.
fence. This unquestionably forms a primary in-
gredient of happiness. Jgnorance, or the want
of light, is the source of all our present mifcon-
dulc, and all our misfortunes. The heart of
man is dark; and in the darkness of his heart is
the feat of his corruption. He is unable to dif-
cern what is truly good. Perpetually employed
in search of happiness, he is perpetually milled
by false appearances of it. The errors of his
underllanding impose upon his paflions; and, in
consequence of the wrong direction which his'
paifions take, he is betrayed into a thousand dif-
orders. But once open to him the perfet sources
of knowledge and truth; suppose him placed in
the pretence of that God who is Light; suppose
him illuminated by light derived immediately
from the Supreme Being; presently all his for-
mer errors would fly away, as mills are difpclled
by the rising fun. His whole nature would be
changed and reformed. Reditude and virtue,
would take entire poffeflion of his heart. An-
gels are happier than men, because they enjoy
more enlarged knowledge and views; because

they

they labour under none of our unhappy decep-
tions; but fee the truth as it is in itself; fee it, as
it is in God. Sharing the fame light which illu-
minates them, good men, in a future state, will
flare in their felicity.

Moreover, the light that flows from the pre-

fence of Him who is the original source of light,
not only baniflies iniferies which were the cfeeTs
of former darkness, but also confers the most ex-
quifite enjoyment. The knowledge afforded us
at present is imperfea and unfatisfaaory. Nar-
row is the sphere within which the mind can fee
at all; and even there it can fee only darkly as
th.roh a lgifs. But when it lhall be enlarged
beyond this dusky territory, let loose from this
earthly prison, and in God's light permitted tofee
light, the moat magnificent and glorious fpecacles
must open to the view of the purified spirit.-
What must it be to behold the whole stupendous
scene of nature unveiled, and its hidden mysteries
disclosed ! To trace the wife and just government
of the Almighty, through all those intricacies
which had so long perplexed us ! To behold his
hand conducting ten thousand worlds, which are
now unknown to us; and throughout all the
regions of boundless space, to view wisdom and
goodness perpetually acling, and diversifying its
operations in forms of endless variety ! Well may

such

# GOD IS LOVE.

such discoveries inspire that song of.the blfl'cd,
which the Apostle John heard as the vace of many
waters, and as the v:ice of mighty thuld.rigls, fay-
ing, Aileluia ! For the Lord God czmnipt,'nit rtign.
eth. Great and marvellous are thy u works, Lrd'
God Albn.:yty; juii and true are thy ways, thou
King of Saints !

GOD IS LOVE.
H IS presence must of course diffuse love among

all who are permitted to dwell in it. He

that lov'th not, knoweth not God. I-' that dw!.lcth
in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him. Were
man a single, solitary being, the full enjoyment
of light might suffice for his happiness; as the
perfetion of knowledge would re&ify and im-
prove to the highest all his faculties. But, both
here and hereafter, he is conneded with other
beings. Heaven implies a society; and the feli-
city of that society is constituted by the perfec-
tion of love and goodness, flowing from the pre-
fence of the God of Love.

Hence follows the entire purification of hu-
man nature from all those malevolent passions,

which

which have so long rendered our abode on earth
the abode of misery. We greatly deceive our-
selves, when we charge our chief diftrcffes mere-
ly to tihe account of our external condition in
the world. The worst evils of our present con-
dition ari'e from the want of goodness and love;
fiom the disorders of selfish paflions; from the
irritation which these occasion when working
within ourselves, and the diffrefs which they
produce when breaking out upon us from others.
Could you banish difirull, craft, and uncharitable-
ness, from the earth, and form all mankind into
an aflembly of the just and the benevolent; could
you inplire every heart with kind affections, and
render every one fiiendly and generous to his
neighbour; you would banish at once the nmot
aflictive tribe of human evils. Seldom would
the voice of complaint be heard. All nature
would aflume a different aspect. Cheerfulness
would be seen in every countenance. Paradise
would return. The wilderness would finie;
the defart rejoice and bljofon as the rofr.--Now such
are the effeats which the presence of the God of
Love muff produce on the inhabitants above.-
Beholding his glory, they are changed into the fanme
image. In that temple of eternal love, which
his prelence has hallowed and consecrated, no found
but the voice of harmony is ever heard ; no ap-

T pear-

# IDLE CURIOSITY.

pcarances ever present themselves but those of
peace and joy.

IDLE CURIOSITY.
-T'HAT idle curiosity, that inquisitive and

meddling spirit, which leads men to pry

into the affairs of their neighbours, is reprehen-
fible on three accounts.

It interrupts the order, and breaks the peace

of society. In this world we are linked together
by many ties. We are bound by duty, and we
are prompted by interest, to give mutual afifr-
ance, and to perform friendly offices to each
other. But those friendly offices are performed
to moil advantage, when we avoid to interfere
unnecessarily in the concerns of our neighbour.
Every man has his own part to at, has his own
interelt to consult, has affairs of his own to ma-
x;age, which his neighbour has no call to fcruti-
nize. Human life then proceeds in its mobt na-
tural and orderly train, when every one keeps
within the bounds of his proper province; when,
as long as his puifuits are fair and lawful, he is
allowed, without disturbance, to conduct them
in his own way.

This

This spirit of meddling curiosity ;:Iib nourifhc,

among individuals who are addicted to it, a mul-
titude of bad paflions. lts most frequent source
is mere idleness, which, in itfllf a vice, never
fhils to engender many vices more. The mind
of man cannot be long without some food to
nourish the activity of its thoughts. The idle,
who have no nouriflmient of this fort within
themselves, feed their thoughts with inquiries
into the conduat of their neighbours. The in-
quifitive and curious are always talkative. What
they learn, or fancy themselves to have learned,
concerning others, they are generally in haste
to divulge. A tale which the malicious have
invented, and the credulous have propagated; a
rumour which, arising among the multitude, and
transmitted by one to another, has, in every tfep
of its progress, gained freih additions, becomes
in the end the foundation of confident assertion,
and of rafil and feveie judgment.

It is often by a spirit of jealousy and rivalry,

that the researches of such perlbns are prompted.
They wilh to discover something that will bring
down their neighbour's character, circumfiances,
or reputation, to the level of their own; or that
will flatter them with an opinion of their own
superiority. A secret malignity lies at the bot-
tom of their inquiries, even though it may be

T 2 veiled

veiled with the appearance of a friendly concern
for the intcrefts of others, and with afifeced aplo-
logies ijr their ftilings.

It is to be farther obfcrrcd, that all imperti-

nent curiofitv about the affairs of others tends
greatly to oblrruai perlbnaI refornimion ; as it
draws men's thoi:uglts aside fiom what ought to
be the chief object of attention, the improvement
of their own heart and life. They who are so offi-
ciouflv occupied about their neighbours, have
little leisure, and iefs inclination, to obflrve their
own d-iccts, or to mind their own duty. From
their inqlfitivc re'carches, they find, or imagine
they sil:d, in the behaviour of others, an apology
for their own failings: and the favourite result
of their inquiries generally is, to reft satisfied
with themnfelves. The, condemnation which
they pass on the vices of their neighbours, they
interpret to be a sentiment of virtue in them-
selves. They become those hypocrites described
by our Lord, who fee clearly the mate that is i.;
their yribks.'Lr's ey while they dlifcern nat t.'c bcam
that is in thiir Ciln.

THE

# THE EXAMPLE OF CHRIST.

THE EXAMPLE OF CHRIST.

HE example of Chriif exhibits the great
model oni which our conduct ought to be

formed. Examples have great influence on all.
But by all human examples, we are ii dtanger of
being occafionalllymifled. WVe are ever obliged
to be on our guard, left the admiiation of what
is eflimable betray us into a refcmblance of what
is blemifled and faulty. For the moli perfect
human characters, in the midst of their brightnels
and beauty, are always marked with fonme or
those dark spots which slain the nature of man.
But our Lord possesed all the virtues of the
greatest and best men, without partaking
any of their defects. In him, all was light
without a ihade, and beauty without a slain.-
At the fame time, his example is attended with
this singular advantage, of being more accom-
modated than any other to general imitation. It
was diflinguiflled by no unnatural austerities, no
ass'eted singularities; but exhibits the plain and
simple tenor of all those virtues for which we
have most frequent occasion in ordinary life. In
order to render it of more universal benefit, our
Lord fixed his residence in no particular place;

T 3 he

he tied himself down to no particular calling or
way of living; but gives us the opportunity of
viewing his behaviour, in that variety of lights
which equally and indifferently regard all man-
kind, His life was divided between the retired
and the actiie tfate. Devotion and business
equally shared it. In the discharge of that high
office with which he was vested, we behold the
perseEt model of a public character; and we be-
hold the moss beautiful example of private life,
when we contemplate him among his disciples,
as a father in the midst of his family.-By such
means he has exhibited before us specimens of
every kind of virtue; and to all ranks and
clafles of men has afforded a pattern after which
they may copy. Hardly is there any emergency
which can occur in life, but from some incident
in our Saviour's conduct, from some feature dif-
played in his characer, we are enabled to fay
to ourselves, " Thus Christ would have spoken,
" thus he would have acted, thus he would have
" fiffered, if he had been circumstanced as we
' 2are now."

MYS-

# MYSTERIES OF PROVIDENCE.

MYSTERIES OF PROVIDENCE.
T HE monarchy of the universe is a great

and complicated yfRem. It comprehends

numberless generations of men, who arc brought
forth to acd their parts for purposes unknown to
us. It includes two worlds at once ; the world
that now is, and which is only a finall portion of
cxitecnce; and a world that is to come, which
endures for eternity. To us, no more than the
beginnings of things are visible. We fee only
some broken parts of a great whole. We trace
but a few links of that chain of being, which,
by secret connexions, binds together the present
and the future. Such knowledge is afforded us as
is sufficient for supplying the exigencies and wants
of our present state; but it does no more. Peep-
ing abroad from a dark corner of the universe,
we attempt in vain to explore the counsels that
govern the world. It is an attempt to found an
unfathomable deep with a scanty line; and with
a feeble wing to ascend above the fears. In any
complicated work, even of human art, it is
found necefary to be acquainted with the design
of the whole, in order to judge of the fitness of
its parts. In a fi:heme so complex as the admi-
niftration of the ivorld, where all the parts refer
to one another, and where what is seen is often sub-

ordi,

# USES OF THE OBSCURITY OF PROVIDENCE.

ordinate to what is invifiblc, how is it pofliblc but
our judgments muRf be often erroneous, and our
complaints ill-founded ? If a peasant or a cottager
be incapable of judging of the government of a
mighty empire, is it surprising that we should be
at a lots concerning the conduct of the Almighty
towards his creatures ?

USES OF THE OBSCURITY OF

PROVIDENCE.
OIOMPLETE information refpeaing the

ways of God, not only was not to be ex-

pe6ted here; but, moreover, that it would have
been hurtful, if granted to us in our present Rate.
It would have proved inconsistent with that lnatc;
with the actions which we have to perform in it,
and the duties we have to fulfil. It would in-
deed have overthrown the whole design of our
being placed in this world. We arc placed here
under the trial of our virtue. Ignorance of the
events that are ordained to befal us, ignorance
of the plans and the decrees of Heaven, enter
necelfarily into a ltate of trial. In order to cx-
ercife both our intelleAual and moral powers, and
to carry them forward to improvement, we muff
be left to find our way in the midst of difficulies

3 and

knd doubts, of hardflips and fuffirings. We
mulf be taught to adt our part with contlancy,
though the reward of our conltancy be distant.
We muff learn to bear with patience whatever
our Creator judges proper to lay upon us, though
we fee not the reason of the hardships he inflicts.
If we were let into the secret of the whole plan
of Providence ; if the jultice of Heaven were, in
every Rsep of its procedure, made manifest to our
view, man would no longer be the creature he
now is, nor would his prefcnt slate answer any
purpose of discipline or trial.

Myflery and darkness, therefore, must of ne-

ceffity now take place in the course of things.
Our present state can be no other than a state of
twilight or dawn, where dubious forms shall often
present themselves to us, and where we shall find
ourselves in a middle condition between complete
light and total darkness. Had we enjoyed no
evidence of a just Judge ruling the earth, and of
his providence intcrpofing in our affairs, virtue
would have been altogether deprived of its en-
couragement and support. Had the evidence, on
the other hand, been so strong as to place the
hand of the Almighty constantly before our eyes,
the intention of our present existence would have
been defeated, and no trial of virtue have re-
rained. Instead, therefore, of complaining of

the

# DARK PROVIDENCES ILLUSTRATED.

the obscurity which at present covers the conduct
of Providence, we tee that, on the whole, we
have realon to submit and adore.

DARK PROVIDENCES ILLUSTRIATED.

1T often happens that the consequences of
things throw light on the defgns of God.

The history of Providence, in proportion as it
advances, disembroils itself. Thus, in the pub-
lic affairs of the world, it has been frequently
seen, that from the moit unpromising causes im-
portant and beneficent eff'ects have, in the sequel,
arisen. In our own country, at one period, the
violent paflions of a prince gave beginning to the
Reformation. At another period, arbitrary at-
tempts against religion and liberty occasioned
that happy Revolution which has formed the
era of national prosperity. In many instances,
the wrath of man has been made to praise God.
Thole wars and commotions that shake the mo-
ral world have answered similar purposes with
tempests in the natural world, of purging the
air from noxious vapours, and restoring it to a
temperature more found and wholesome. From
the midit of confifion, order has been made to
spring; and from temporary mischiefs, lasting

advan-

advantages to arife.-In all cafes of this nature,
with which sacred and civil hiitory abounds, fe-
cret deligns of Heaven were goi:g on, which
were unfolded in the end. The wheel was al-
ways in motion. Ihe hand of the clock was
advancing with unperceived progress, till the mo-
ment came of its itriking the appointed hour.

In like manner, with respect to individuals,

there is often a htra:!cr in the courle of their
lives, which difcloies and iuftifies the ways of
God. Not to mention the good c.edits which
misfortunes are found to produce on the rminids of
men, by checkiing their vices, and correctiing their
errors, innunmcr.lle exen.plifications can be given,
of misfortunes paving their way to future ad-
vancement in the world. Confider only in how
different a light the Pai'tiarch Joieph would view
the events of his life after he had seen in what
they had terminated, from the lig'it in which lihe
saw them, when led away by tlih I{hmaclitcs as
a slave, or when thrown by Poiiphar into the
Egyptian prifbn. We murmur againif Provi-
dence, just as the impetuous youth frets against
his inftruators and tutors, who arc keeping him
under a ftri&, and as he thinks a needless, difci-
pline. He knows not that, by their initruaion
and difciplinc, they are laying the foundation of
his future fortunes. What may justly be said to

him

# THE SLAVERY OF VICE.

him by his tutors and inftru6tors, is equally ap-
plicable to us all under our prefient itate of educa-
tion; lWhat I do, thou klnowtul nst no W but tho
/salt know hereafter.

THE SLAVERY OF VICE.
V ICE is inconsistent with liberty, as it de-

prives finners of the power of free choice,

by bringing them under the dominion of passions
and habits. Religion and virtue address them-
selves to reason. They call us to look round on
every fide; to think well of the consequences of
our acions; and, before we take any ftep of im-
portance, to compare the good with the evil that
may ensue from it. He, therefore, who follows
their dicates, ats the part of a man who freely
consults, and choofes, for his own interest. But
vice can make no pretensions of this kind. It
awaits not the test of deliberate comparison and
choice; but overpowers us at once by rome frik-
ing impression of present advantage or eijoyment.
It hurries us with the violence of passion; cap-
tivates us by the allurements of pleasure; or
dazzles us by the glare of riches. The finner
yields to the impulse, merely because he cannot
refft it. Reason remonltrates; conscience en-

deavours

dcavours to check him ; but all in vain. Having
once allowed fonme strong paflion to gain the at-
cendant, he has thrown himself into the middle
of a torrent, against which he may Sometimes
faintly itruggle, but the impetuosity of the stream
bears him along. In this situation he is so far
from being free, that he is not mailer of himself.
He does not go, but is driven ; toffed, agitated,
and impelled; passive, like a £hip to the violence
of the waves.

After paflion has for a while exercised its ty-

rannical sway, its vehemence may by degrees
subside. But when, by long indulgence, it has
efCablifhed habits of gratification, the finner's
bondage becomes then moie confirmed, and more
milerable. How many slaves do we fee in the
world to intemperance, and all kinds of criminal
pleaifre, merely through the influence of cufloms
which they had allowed to become so inveterate
that it was not in their power to alter them ? Are
they not often reduced to a condition so wretched,
that when their licentious pleafuies have become
utterly insipid, they are fiill forced to continue
them, folcl- becafie they cannot refrain; not be-
caulc the indulgence gives them pleasure, but
because abitiinnce would give them pain; and
this too, even when they are obliged at lafi to
condemn their habits of life, as injuring their

U fortune,

# PROPRIETY OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.

fortune, iimp:airi:ng their contitution, or difirac-
ing their clarac!er ? Vice is not of fich a nature
that we can

C lty to it, I'ithcrta jlfat thoi cime anl

tno firtir. No man who has once lyiclicl up
the government of his mind, and given loolf
rein to his deftres and paflions, can tell now far
there may carry him.

PROPRIETY OF RELIG10US WO'IISIIP.

F there exist a Supreme Beinl, the Creator of
the world, no consequence appears lore na-

tural and dirEt than this, that he ought to be
worshippcd by his creatures, with every outward
expression of submission and honour. We need
only appeal to every man's heart, whether this
be not a principle which carries along with it its
own obligation, that to Him who is the Foun-
tain of our life and the Father of our mercies; to
Him who has raised up that beautiiul firucaurc of
the universe in which we dwell, and where we
are surrounded with so many blessings and com-
forts; solemn acknowledgments of gratitudee
should be made, prailes and prayers filiuld be
oftfred, and ail suitable marks of dependence on
him be cxpreflcd.-This obligation extends he-
yond the iilent and fecrct sentiments of our hearts.

Betides

# UTILITY OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.

Betides private devotion, it naturnlly leads to
aflociations for public worlhipl; to opZn and de-
clared profeflions of refpc't for the Dcity. WVihere
bieffings are received in common, an obligation
lies upon the community, jointly to acknowledge
them. Sincere gratitude is always of an open
and diffusive nature. It loves to pour itself tfrth;
to give siee vent to i:: emotions; and, before
the world, to acknowledge and honour a Bene-
factor.

UTILITY 01 RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.
W HEN we survey the general slate of man-

kind, we find them continually immersed

in worldly affairs; busied about providing the
neceflhries of life, occupied in the purluits of
their plealiues, or cinerly p;ofccuiting tile ad-
vancemenlt of i' .I- i..,:cr.lts. In such a situation
of thilngl, . ,:.::i i!aliilre of re.qScion might
convi;.:' .-;. .;::;e, that withlout forne returns of'
sa.-r.-.i ! i,'s, and fiome solemn calls to public wor-
fi.i;, it were imiof,'lle to preserve in the world
any seise of chjecs, so foreign to the general
current of thought, as an invifib' Gv;)ernor,
and a future ilate. If it be of impr ;:.,- to the
peace and good order cf society, th:lt tilere fliould

U 2 prevail

# ENDS OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.

prevail amnong nmen the belief of One in the
heavens, who is the protector of rigliteoutihes
and the avenger of crimes, if it be of iiportince
that they be taught to look forward to a day of
juidgmentt, when tlhe arc to he b:ought to
account for their most secret ations, ;.i.l eter-
nallv rewarded or pniifhe'J, according as their
condu' has been goad or evil ; if such principles
as there, I fay, be of confiequence to the public
welfare, they certainly enforce the authority of
public worship, and prove the necefiity of reli-
gious infiruftion.

ENDS OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.
T'HE ends for which we assemble in the house

of God are two; to worflip God, and to
liften to religious infiruAtions.

The public worship of God is the chief and

most sacred purpose of every religious assembly
of Christians. Let it here be remembered, that
it is not the uttering, or the hearing of certain
words, that constitutes the worflip of the Al-
mighty. It is the heart that praises or prays.
If the heart accompany not the words that are
spoken or heard, we offer th sacrifice of so/s. By

the

the inattentive thought, and the giddy and wan-
derin)g cye, we profane the temple of the Lord,
and turn the appearance of devotion into intult
and mockery.

1With regard to religious inftruaion, attention

and rcvcrcnce are unqicPi:;nbly due. All reli-
gious and moral knowledge comes from God,
It is a light from heaven, firil tranfinittcd to man
by the original constitution of his nature, and
afterwards made to shine with fairer and fuller
lustre by the revelation of the gospel in Jesus
Chrifr. Its brightnlfs may fomntimes be Tfronger,
and fomctimes weaker, according to the mediums
by which it is conveyed. But still, as far as the
inftrutions delivered froin the pulpit are illumi-
nated by the ray from heaven, they are the truths
of God, and ought to be received as ltlch. Re-
finements of vain philosophy, or intricate fubtil-
ties of theological controversy, are undoubtedly
not entitled to such regard. But when the great
principles of natural or revealed religion are dif-
cuiled ; when the important dotrines of the gof-
pel concerning the life, and sufferings, and death
of our blessed Redeemer are displayed; or useful
infirutions regarding the regulation of life, and
the proper discharge of our several duties, are
the fubjeEs brought into view ; it is not then

U 3 the

# HUMAN VICISSITUDES.

the human speaker, but the divine authority, that
is to be regarded.

HUMAN VICISSITUDES.
T HE fi/-,isn of the world paffith uaway, as the

opinions, ideas, and manners of men are

always changing. We look in vain for a fland-
ard to ascertain and fix any of thele ; in vain
expet that what has been approved and efablilh-
ed for a while, is always to endure. Principles
which were of high authority among our ancef-
tors are now exploded. Systems of philosophy
which were once universally received, and taught
-as infallible truths, are now obliterated and for-
gotten. Modes of living, behaving, and em-
ploying time, the pursuits of the bury, and the
entertainments of the gay, have been entirely
changed.-As one wave effaces the ridge which
the former had made on the sand by the sea Chore,
so every succeeding age obliterates the opinions
and modes of the age which had gone before it.

Let us only think of the changes which our

own ideas and opinions undergo in the progress
of life. One man differs not more from another,
than the fame man varies from himnfelf in dif-

ferent

# TRANSITORINESS OF LIFE.

ferent periods of his age, and in different
situations of fortune. In youth, and in opu-
lence, every thing appears smiling and gay. We
fly as on the wings of fancy; and survey beauties
wherever we cast our eye. But let some more
yeais have pafled over our heads, or let dilap-
pointments in the world have depressed our fpi-
rits; and what a change takes place? The pleas-
ing illusions that once shone before us; the Iplen-
did fabrics that imagination had reared; the en-
chanting maze in which we once wandered with
delight, all vanill and are forgotten. The
world itself remains the fame. But its form,
its appearance, and aspet, is changed to our
view; itsfa/hi:n, as to us, hath pasfd away.

TRANSITORINESS OF LIFE.
APHE world is made up of unceasing rounds

of transitory exiflence. Some generations

are coming forward into being, and others halten-
ing to leave it. The fiream which carries us all
along is ever flowing with a quick current,
though with a frill and noiseless course. The
dwelling place of man is continually emptying,
and by a fresh fucceflion of inhabitants, continu-
ally filling anew. The memory of man p7ffith

(11UL2-Y

# THE UNCHANGEABLENESS OF GOD.

awaly I:ke tlh reezmbrance of a gurj! wh) bath tar-
riei but one night.

As the life of man, confidered in its duration,

thus fleets and pafies away, so, during the time
it lasts, its condition is perpetually changing, It
affords us nothing on which we can let up our
refl; no enjoyment or pofefflion which we can
properly call our own. WThen we have begun
to be placed in fich circumstances as we desired,
and wish our lives to proceed in the fame agrec-
able tenor, how often comes omne unexpelced
event across to disconcert all our schemes of hap-
pineRs? Our health declines; our friends die;
our families are scattered; something or other is
not long of occurring, to fliew us that the wheel
must turn round; the faJhion of the world must
pajs away.

THE UNCHANGEABLENESS OF GOD.
GOD never changes. Amidlt the unceasing

vicissitude of earthly things, there remains

at the head of the universe an eternal Protestor
of virtue, whose throne is eficbl:jhed for ever.
With him there is no variablenifs, neither any/ha-
dsw of turning; no inconflancy of purpose, and

no

no eccay of wiifdom or of power. We know
that he loved righteouifncl from the beginnin g of
days, and that he will continue to love it unal-
tcr;.bly to the lail. Forclcen by him was every
revolution which the course of ages has produced.
All the changes which happen in the state of na-
ture, or the life of men, were comprehended in
his decree. How much soever worldly things
may change in themselves, they are all united in
his plan; they constitute one great fvlftem or
whole, of which he is the Author and which,
at its final completion, shall appear to be perfect.
His dominion holds together, in a continued
chain, the fucceflive variety of human events;
gives itability to things that in themselves are
fluctuating; gives constancy even to the falhion
of the world while it is piajing away. Wherefore,
though all things change on earth, and we our-
selves be involved in the general mutability, yet
as long as, with trufl and hope, we look up to
the Supreme Being, we reft on the rock of ajcs,
and are safe amidit every change. We possess a
fortress to which we can have recourse in all
dangers; a refilge under all storms; a dwelling
place in allgenerations.

ON.

# ON MEDITATION.

# TRANQUILLITY.

ON MIEDITATION.

EFLECTION and meditation allny the
woorkings of many unquiet paflions; alid

place us at a distance from the tumults of the
world. When the mind has either been ruffled
or ca.f down, an intercourlf with God and
heavec; we find a iantcuarv to which we can re-
treat. In the hours of contemplation and devo-
tion, a good man enjoys himself in peace. He
beholds nobler objeAts than what worldly men
can behold. He afflumes a higher chara; cr.-
He iilens to the voice of nature and of God;
and fiom this holy fantuary comes forth with a
milid fortified againit the little disturbances of the
world.

TRANQUILLITY.
T HE three great enemies to tranquillity are,

Vice, Superflition, and Idleness; Vice,

which poisons and disturbs the mind with bad
paffionsl Superltition, vhich fills it with ima-
ginary terrors; Idleners, which loads it with
tedioulfefs and difgufr. It is only by following ,
the path which Eternal Wrifdom has pointed out,

that

# SIN THE SOURCE OF SORROW.

that we can arrive at the blcfed temple of Tran-
quillity, and obtain a hlation there: By doing,
or at lcaft cndeavouring to do, our duty to God
and man; by acquiring a humble trutl in the
mercy and favour of God through Jelus Christ;
by cultivating our mindis, and properly cmploy-
ing our time and thoughts; by governing our
paf.ions and our temper; by corlrctin,, all unrea-
foiabl!e expectations fiom the world, and from
men ; aid, in the mid; of worldly buflnefs, ha-
bituating ourfc!\vcs to calm rctri.t a:.d serious
recollection. By lucIl meins as thcee it nima be
hio)ed, that, through the divine bicfing, our
ldas ihall flow in a fiream as unruf'ilecd as the hu-
man itate admits. 7hc ti' L'd ari' i ,: the ltr'gou/i
'..7, w hc :it can.zot rt'. i, t th/ work of !i.'teoi',f-
njs is pI:S-r; a,;d tSe cf7 cif rhto!j;'/; is qitt-
n:j and npl a 0J7./I' 'fr v'cr.

SIN THE SOURCE OF SORROW.

IN is the source of all our miseries. It may
foimctimlics afilmc the gcntlcr namcs of folly,

irregularity, or levity; but under whatever forin
it appears, it always imports a deviation from
that flcrcd Jaw which ouht to rcgulate our con-
du t. It is fiill thL,' rt at lbareh ga/ll a wd .'n-

3 WGo:I;

vlood; and in cxadt proportion to the quantity of
this poisonous weed, which we ourselves have
infused into our cup, we muff cxpec to drink the
waters of bitterness. Indeed, of every evil which
we now endure, of those evils which we look
upon to be the appointment of Providence, as
well as of others, fin is ultimately the caue ; as
it was man's revolt from God, which gave rife
originally to those evils, and which rendered
the chaltifements we undergo, in this state of
discipline, necessary, even for the fois of God.
To Providence, then, let us look up with rever-
ence. On fin let our indignation be vented
and, what is of more confcquence, against fin and
all its approaches, let our utmost caution be em-
ployed. As we proceed through the different
paths of life, let us accustom ourselves to beware
of fin, as the hidden snake lurking among the
grass, from whose fatal touch we nuft fly in
haste; if we would not experience its fting.-
Too many have no just apprehensions of this
danger. Fools, said the wife man, make a mck
at in. A fool indeed he must be, who dares to
think lightly of it.

THE

# THE SOURCE OF EVIL.

TH-IE SOURCE OF EVIL.
BOTH good and evil come from the hand of

D God. A little rcflection may convince us,

that in (God's world, reither good nor evil ca;
happen by chance. If there were any one mo-
melnt, in which God quitted the reins of the uni-
verse, and fieffred any power to interfere wiil
his admiliirratioll it is evident, that firon that
moment, the mcafures of his govern:ma:lt mul
become disjointed and inconmplte. HL ;ho go-
verns all thinrc, mnuil govern contii;,ual'; and
govern the leati thinls as well as the grcateft.

]4. ,,'v vr/,7,i, irs mr~p;, ,

l s. There are no void

ipaccs, no broken .pla;s, in his admni'ililation;
no leflings thit drop upon us without his inten-
tion; nor any crofies that visit us, unlcnt by
him.

lHow it has come to paTs, that this life lfhould

contzin iuch a mixture of goods and evils, and
that the mixture too should be of God's appoint-
ment, gives rile to a difficult crquiry. For
how c;n anI thing but what is good proceed
from the God of love ? Can darkness iflhe from
the source of Ihl ? or canl it be any fatisfaAion
to the Faibh tr !f ':.;ci'S, to behold the sorrows of
creatures whoni he has maje e
-H there was

X roo.ul

# FRIENDSHIP.

room for much perplexity, till revelation inform..
cd us, that the mixture of evils in man's ellate
is owing to man himself. Had he continued as
God originally made him, he would have receiv-
ed nothing but good fiom his Creator. His apof-
tacy and corruption opened the gates of the ta-
bernacle of darknc's. Misery issued forth, and has
ever since pursued him. In the present condition
of his nature, that mifcry is partly punishment,
partly trial. He is become incapable of bearing
uninterrupted prosperity; and by the mixture
of evils in his lot, merciful designs are carried
on for his improvement and refloration.

FRIENDSHIP.
FRIENDSHIPS, car'y ccntr:aed, retain to

the lass a tenderness and warmth, seldom

poflefed by friendships that are formed in the
riper periods of life. The remembrance of an-
cient and youthful connexions melts every human
heart; and the dissolution of them is, perhaps,
the most painful feeling to which we are exposed
here below.-But at whatever period of life
friendShips are formed, as long as they contin.ue
sincere and affcctionate, they form, undoubtedly,
one of the greatest blefiings we can enjoy. By

3 the

# FIDELITY.

tlie pleasing communication of all our sentiments
which they prompt, they are justly slid to dou-
ble our pleasures, and to divide our sorrows.
They give a brighter funihine to the gay inci-
dents of life; and they enlighten the gloom of
its darker hours. A /aithfi friend, it is jutfly
and beautifully said, by one of the Apocryphal
writers, is the mn.'icin. of lfe. A variety of oc-
cafions happen, when to pour forth the heart to
one whom we love and trull, is the chief com-
fort, perhaps the only relief, we can enjoy. Mi-
ferable is he who, sLut up within the narrow
inclofure of feifi:i: interest, has no person to
whom he can at ail times, with full confidence,
expand his foul.

FIDELITY.
D ESERT not your fiiend in danger or dif-

trefs. Too many there are in the world,

whole attachment to those they call their friends is
confined to the day of their profperit). As long
as that continues, they are, or appear to be, as-
feEtionate and cordial. But as soon as their friend
is under a cloud, they begin to withdraw, and
to separate their interests from his. In friend-
ships of this fort, the heart, assuredly, has never

X z had

had much co;-nccrn. For the grcat tcfof' true iriend-
iiip, is conflancy in the hour of danger, adher-
ence in the leafon of diftefs.--\Vhen vour frie nd
is c.aumnii'.tcd, then is the time topcn!ld a!nd
boldil' to. e-,.)Ol; his csauf. \hc:i his ft:!U; <.tii
is cl.:a; . , or ins fortu :c- are ilili , ;

the: iE the

time o?. afi ;rdiin* pro;mpt and zealous aid. Wlheln
ficknci, or ii;.firni-y occalions him to be neglcltc(l
by othcrs, that is the opportunity which every
real friend will fcizc, of redoublini all the as-
fehiona.e attcntions which love fuggcfls. Thel
are tlhe importcnt duties, the sacred claims of
fiiienilhip, whicih rcli!ion a!:d virtue enforce oil
every wor:h; mindi;.--To ihewC )our!lives warnil
aiteli tils mia:iler, in the cause of your friend,
commands eiteem, even from those who have
personal interefl in opposing him. This honour-
able zeal of friendlthip has, in every age, attract-
ed the veneration of mankind. It has conecrated
to the latefc poftcrity the names of those who
have given up their fortunes, and have even ex-
posed their lives, in behalf of the friends whom
they loved; while ignominy and disgrace have
ever been the portion of them, who deserted their
friends in the evil day.

ANX-

# ANXIETY.

ANXIETY.
D ISTRESS not yourselves with anxious fears

about to-morrow. Dismiss all solicitude

which goes beyond the bounds of prudent pre-
caution. Anxiety, when it seizes the heart, is
a dangerous difcafe, productive both of much fin,
and much misery. It asfi as a corrosive of the
mind. It eats out our present enjoyments, and
substitutes, in their place, many an acute pain.

Our Saviour has inftruaed us to takc no th.u:ght

for the morrow : The Nmoi-rcU, fays he, 7,ail take
thoughtlfor the things of itsel We flall be better
able to judge of the course most proper for us to
hold, when events have begun to come forward
in their order. Their pretence often fuggeits
wiser counsels, and more successful expedients,
than it is pofiible for us to contrive at a difiance.
By excess of iblicitude beforehand, we frequently
introduce that confusion of mind, and that hurry
and disorder of fpirits,which bring us into the nmoft
unfavourable state for judging soundly. Wherefore
affright not yourselves with imaginary terrors.
Anticipate not evils, which perhaps may never
come. Make the best which you can of this day,
in the fear of God, and in the practice of your
duty; and, having done so, leave to-morrow to

X 3 itfclf.

# PROCRASTINATION.

itself. Svi:un!tfir the d Ir', when it comes, wvill
be te evil tl2er'-f.

_ ~ ~ ~ -

_

-

PROCRASTINATION.
PROCRAS TI NAT I O N has, throughout

every age, been the ruin of manki:d. Dwel-

ling amidfl endless projcEts of what they arc
hereafter to do, they cannot so properly be haid
to live, as to be always about to livec ;and the
future has ever been the gulph in which the pre-
f;lt is swallowed up and lot.- Hence arifi n:any
of those misfortunes which befal men in their
worldly concerns. What might at present be
arranged in their circumstances with advantage,
being delayed to another opportunity, cannot le
arrangced at all; To-morrow being loaded wvith
the concerns of to-day, in addition to its own, is
clogged and cmbarrafed. Aftairs, which have
been potfponed, multiply and crowd upon one
another; till, at last, they prove so intricate and
perplexe', and the pressure of business becomes
nt great, that nothing is left, but to link under
the burden.

Evils of the fame kind, arising from the fame
canilu overtake men in their moral and spiritual

interests.

interets. There are few, but who are sensible
of foime things in their character and behaviour,
which ought to be correced, and which, at one
time or other, they intend to corret; some
headitrong passion, which they defirn to subdue
foine bad habit, which they. purpose to reform;
tome dangerous connexion, which they are re-
solved to break off. But the convenient fcafon
for thele reformations is not yet come. Certain
obsiaches are in the way, which they expect by
and by to surmount; and therefore they go on in
peace for the present, in their usual courses, truPi-
ing, at a future day, to begin their designed inm-
provement. In the mean time the angel of death
defends; and, in the midst of their ditlant plans,
executes his commilFon, and carries them away.
-Guard againif delusions of this kind, which
have been fatal to so many.-Thou art now in
tranquillity, in health, in possession of a calm
mind. Improve these advantages, for perform-
ing all that becomes thee, as a man, and as a
Chriltian; for who can tell how long thou Ialt
he permitted to enjoy them?

THE

# THE WAY OF THE WORLD.

TIlE WAY OF THE WORLD,
T HE world is a school wherein every vice is

taught, and too easily learned. Even from

our earliest childhood, faife sentiments are instil-
lcd into our minds. We are bred up in admira-
tion of the external shew of life. We are ac-
cultomed, as soon as we can understand any
thing, to hear riches and honours spoken of as
the chief goods of men, and proposed to us as the
objects to which our future pursuits are to be di-
rected. We fee the measures of outward refpeet
and deference taken from these alone. Religion
and virtue are recommended to us, in a formal
manner, by our teachers and inftrucors, but all
improvements of the mind and heart are visibly
placed by the world, in an inferior rank to the
advantages of fortune. Vices, that chance to be
fashionable, are treated as flight failings; and co-
loured over in common diicourie, with those soft
and gentle names which express no condemna-
tion. We enter perhaps, on the world, with
good principles, and an aversion to downright
vice. But when, as we advance in life, we be-
come initiated in that mystery of iniquity, which
is called the way of the world ; when we meet
with deceit and artifice in all ranks of men; when
we behold iniquity authorised by great names,

and

# DANGER OF BAD EXAMPLES.

.and often rewarded with success and advance-
Icnl:, our original good inlprcflions too soon de-
c:y. ''The practice of the multitude renders vice
s:m;iliar to our thoughts, and gradually wears
oit tle abhorrence with which we once beheld it.
rLW begin to think, that wlhat is so very general,
cannot be hih!ly criminal. The malignity of
in appears diminiflhed, by so many being snarers
in the repronch and infiead of men's vices de-
traching, as they ought to do, from our good opi-
nion oi the men, our attachment to the nmen
oftener rcco;cilcs us to the vices of which they
are gililty.

DANGER OF BAD EXAMPLES.

HE countenance which fin receives from
the practice of the multitude, nlot only re-

moves the refnraints which are imposed by mo-
dcty and flaine; but, flich is the degeneracy of
the world, that shame is too often employed
againit the caife of religion and virtue. The
ridicule of the giddy and untiiinkiing bears down
the conviaionl of the fober and nodes-. Againit
their own belief, they appear to adopt the notions
of the infidel; and against their own choice, they
join in the vices of the libertine; that they may

110H

# THE LIMITS OF HUMAN KNOWLEDGE.

not be reproached as persons of a narrow mind,
and still enslavcd to the prejudices of cducati)!l.
Interef, too, often coincides with this wc.tki:cfs
of disposition, in tempting such persons to follow
the multitude. To fall in with the prevaiiing
taste, to suit themselves to the liafions of the
great, or to the humours of the low, with whom
they chance to be cunnected, appears the readiest
way to rife in the world. Hence they are natu-
rally led to relinquilh the firmness of an upright
character for that iupple and verfable turn, which
accommodates itself to the times, and afumies
whatever appearance seems most convenient for
interefi.-Such are the dangers to which we are
exposed, in time of corruption, of folowiig the
mu.'titude tis do ;ev.l; dangers which require our
motl serious attention and care, in order to guard
ourselves against them.

THE LIMITS OF HUlMAN KNOWLEDGE.
T HERE is nothing of which we are more

ready to complain, than of our narrow and

confined-views of nature, and of Providence, and
of all things around us: and yet upon examina-
tion, it will be found, that our views extend, on
every fide, just as far as they ought; and that,

to

to fee and know more than is allowed us, instead
of bringing any advantage, would produce certain
mifery.-We pry, for initance, with impatient
curiosity, into future events. Happily for us, they
are veiled and covered up; and one peep behind
that veil, were it permitted, would be sufficient
to poitbn the whole comfort of our days, by the
anticipation of sorrows to come.-In like manner,
we often wish with eagerness to penetrate into
the secrets of nature, to look into the invisible
world, and to be made acquainted with the whole
destiny of man. Our wish is denied; we are
environed on all hands with mystery; and that
mystery is our happinefsi For were those great
invisible objets fully disclosed, the fight of them
would confound and overwhelm us. It would
either totally derange our feeble faculties, or
would engross our attention to such a degree, as
to lay us aside from the business and concerns of
this world. It would have the fame cffec, as if
we were carried away from the earth, and min-
gled among the inhabitants of some other planet.
The knowledge that is allowed to us, was dc-
signed to fit us for asing our part in our present
slate. At the exat point, therefore, where use-
fulness ends, knowledge flops, and ignorance
commences. Light shines upon us, as long as it
serves to guide our path; but forsakes us, as lbon
as it becomes noxious to the e)ye; and salutary

darkness

# THE WISDOM OF GOD.

darkness is appointed to cloie the scene.-
Thoughtless and itupid mull that manl be, who,
in all this furniture of the hunan mind, in this
e.xaH adjustment of its fevcral powers to the
great purposes of life, dilcerns not the hand
of adorable VWitlom, as well as of infinite Good-

THE WISDOM OF GOD.
W ';IHEN we view that immcnfle irtilcire of

the univerle in whiih we dwell; when

we think of Him, v hols wii!oin has planned the
whole 1yflem of being; v,hofe mind compre-
hends, whose counsels direct, the whole course of
events, from the beginning to the end of time; by
whom nothing is so inconsiderable as to be over-
looked, or so transient as to be forgotten; who
attends to the concerns of the poor man in his
cottage, while he is ftecring the fun and the
moon in their course through the heavens; into
what alronlihme:lt and fel-annihilation do we
fall! Before him all our boased knowledge is
ignorance, and our wifdoin is folly. Wherever
we cast our eyes on his works and wayw, ve fi:d
all things adjtfted in znut!iber, e !,.,'.t, Ncizml-a-
fire; d
nd after all that we can furvc,, Lo thefc

ate

are but a part of his ways; and how small a par.
t,:on is heard of him !

It is the power of God, which produces among

the multitude of men any impreflions of religion.
When thunder roars in the heavens, or an earth-
quake flakes the ground, they are itruck with
nVce, and dilopo'cd to worlhip an invisible power.
But flch impreflions of the Deity are occasional and
transitory. The lafling reverence of a Supreme
Being arises, in a well-informed mind, from the
diiplay of that infinite wisdom which all the uni-
verIc presents. Its operations are conifantly,
though silently, going on around us. We may
view it in the peaceful and sedate state of the
universe, as well as in its greatest commotions;
we behold it in every infeet that moves on the
ground, at the fame time that we admire it in the
revolutions of the ceieffial bodies. Happy for
us if the contemplation shall nourish that temper
of habitual devotion, which so well becomes
dependent beings, and is so intimately conneAcd
with all virtue

Y THE

# THE COMPASSION OF GOD.

THE COMPASSION OF GOD.
COMPASSION to the unfortunate, as it is

exerted among men, is indeed accompanied

with certain disturbed and painful feelings, arif-
ing from sympathy with those whom vwe pity.
But every such feeling we must remove from our
thoughts, when we ascribe an afftetion of this
nature to the Deity. It is true, that, in scrip-
ture language, the divine compaflion is sometimes
figured by strong allusions to'the relenting fitug-
gles and paflionate meltings of the human heart.
But we easily perceive that such representations
are to be underitood with the allowances which
figurative language requires. All that is amiable
in compaflion belongs to God; but all that is
imperfect in it must be left to man. In the Su-
preme Being there can be no perturbation or
,uneasiness; no contrast of feelings, nor fluctua-
tion of purpose. His compafrion imports a kind
regard to the circumtfances of the unhappy. But
still it is such a regard as suits the perfection of
the great Governor of the universe; whose be-
nignity, undisturbed by any violent emotion, ever
maintains the fame tranquil tenor, like the un-
ruffled and uninterrupted serenity of the highest
heavens.

It

# COMPASSION.

It is important to obfcrvc, that this pity and

compassion of our heavenly Father extends itself
to our moral and spiritual concerns, in like man-
ner as to our natural and external distresses. In
that great dispensation of the redemption of the
world by his son Jcfus Chrifft, he is always re-
presented in scripture as moved by pity for our
fallen and wretched eltate. The fame principle
which leads him to regard with compassion the
widow and the fatherless, led him to look down
with compaflion on an helpless and forlorn race,
degraded from their original honour. From in-
finite mercy he sent his Son tofeek and tofave that
which was loIs. Agreeable to this spirit of com-
passion, displayed in our redemption, is the whole
dispensation of divine grace towards man in his
present slate of infirmity. It speaks continually
the dotrine of consolation and merciful' aid;
grace to be flffcicnt for us, andjirength to be madn
perfe1I in our weakn fs.

COMPASSION.
C AN any virtue admit of a higher recom-

mendation than its being that disposition

under the character of which the Almighty
choofes to be peculiarly known to us ? How can
we claim any relation to the Father of mercies,
or how look up to him for comfort and grace, if

T 2 we

we ihew no bowels of mercy, gentiencef, and
kindnels, to one another ?-The whole plan, in-
deed, on which he hath formed human nature,
and all the circumltances in which he hath placed
us on earth, are plainly contrived to excite tifec-
tions of benevolence, and to enforce works of
mercy. Not only hath he planted compafion in
the human breast, as one of the ftrongeit inftints
there, but he hath so conneced us in society, as
necesSarily to require that our benevolent iiiitinAs
thould be brought into exercise. For it is appa-
rent that no man, in any rank of life, even the
highest, is sufficient for his own well-being. IIe
can neither supply his own wants, nor provide
for his own comforts, without the co-operation
of others. The dependence here is mutual be-
tween the high and the low, the rich and the
poor. Each, in one way or other, calls on each
for aid. All are so linked together, as to be im-
pelled by a thousand motives to aflift one another
in the time of need. This is what nature, what
society, what Providence, all speak with a loud
voice; a voice which may be laid to have gone
forth even to the ends of the earth, and to have
been heard and underitood by the moos barbarous
tribes of men. For among savage and unculti-
vated nations, no less than among the most
civilized and polished, the energy of compaflion
is felt, and its claims are recognised and obeyed.

BEAUTIES

# BEAUTIES OF BLAIR's LECTURES ON RHETORIC, &c. OF SPEECH.

BEAUTIES

OF
BLAIR's LECTURES

O N
RHETORIC, &c.

OF SPEECH.
O NE of the most distinguished privileges

which Providence has conferred upon man-

kind, is the power of communicating their
thoughts to one another. Destitute of this
power, Reason would be a solitary, and, in
some measure, an unavailing principle. Speech
is the great instrument by which man becomes
beneficial to man: and it is to the intercourse
and tranfiniflion of thought, by means of speech,
that we are chiefly indebted for the improvement
of thought itself. Small are the advances which
a single unassisted individual can make towards
perfecting any of his powers. What we call
Iruman reason, is not the effort or ability of one,
so much as it is the result of the reason of many,.
arising from lights mutually communicated, in
consequence of discourse and writing.

Y3 OF

# OF TASTE.

OF TASTE.
TASTE may be defined, " The power of

"receiving plcarure from the beauties of

" nature and art." The firit question that oc-
curs concerning it is, whether it is to be confi-
dered as an internal sense, or as an exertion of
reason ? Reason is a very general term; but if
we understand by it, that power of the mind
which in speculative matters discovers truth, and
in pracical matters judges of the fitness of means
to an end, I apprehend the question may be ea-
fily answered. For nothing can be more clear,
than that Taste is not resolvable into any such
operation of reason. It is not merely through a
discovery of the underflanding, or a deduction
of argument, that the mind receives pleasure
from a beautiful profpea or a fine poem. Such
objects often strike us intuitively, and make a
firong impreflion, when we are unable to aflign
the reasons of our being pleased. They some-
times strike in the fame manner the philosopher
and the peasant; the boy and the man. Hence
the faculty by which we relish such beauties,
seems more nearly allied to a feeling of sense,
than to a process of the underStanding: and ac-
cordingly, from an external sense it has borrow;
ed its name 3 that ft.ife by which we receive and

4 diitinguilf

# IMPROVEMENT OF OUR FACULTIES.

(Ilflinguifl the pleasures of food having, in feve-
ral languagds, given rife to the word Taste in
the metaphorical meaning under which we now
confider it. However, as, in all fubjeas which
regard the operations of the mind, the inaccurate
use of words is to be carefully avoided, it must
not be inferred from what I have said, that Rea-
son is entirely excluded from the exertions of
Taite. Though Taste, beyond doubt, be ul-
timatels founded on a certain natural and inftinc-
tive fenfibilitv to beauty, yet Reason, as I shall
shew hereafter, assists Tafite in many of its ope-
rations, and serves to enlarge its power.

IMPROVEMENT OF OUR FACULTIES.

EFLECT first upon that great law of our
nature, that exercise is the chief source of

improvement in all our faculties. This holds
both in our bodily, and in our mental powers.
It holds even in our external senses; although
there be less the subjed of cultivation than any
of our other faculties. We fee how acute the
senses become in persons ivhofe trade or business
leads to nice exertions of them. Touch, for in-
fiance, becomes infinitely more exquisite in men
whose employment requires them to examine the

polish

polilf of bodies, than it is in others. They who
deal in microscopical observations, or are accuf-
toned to engrave on precious flones, acquire fur-
prifing accuracy of fight in discerning the mi-
nutel objiccds; and practicc in attending to dif-
ferent flavours and tafles of liquors, wonderfully
improves the power of diftinguinliii them, and
of tracing their composition. PlaciigI internal
Taste therefore on the footing of a fimpl! sense,
it cannot be doubted that frequent cxerci;f, and
curious attention to its proper objects, muff
greatly heighten its power. Of this we have
one clear proof in that part of Talte, which is
called an ear for music. Experience every day
shews, that nothing is more improveable. Only
the simplest and plainest compositions are reliflied
at first; use and practice extend our pleasure;
teach us to relish finer melody, and by degrees
enable us to enter into the intricate and com-
pounded pleasures of harmony. So an eye for the
beauties of painting is never all at once acquired.
It is gradually formed by being conversant
among pi&ures, and fludying the works of the
best masters.

Precisely in the fame manner, with refpeLt to

the beauty of composition and discourse, attention
to the most approved models, study of the best
authors, comparisons of lower and higher degrees

of

# OF CRITICISM.

of the fame beauties, operate towards the refine-
mient of Tatc. When one is only beginning
his acqluaintance with works of genius, the senti-
ment which attends thelm is obscure and confused.
He camnot point out the several excellencies or
blemifilcs of a pcrformance which lie peruses;
he is at a loss on what to reft his judgment; all
that can be expected is, that he should tell in
general whether he be pleated or not. But al-
low him more experience in works of this kind,
and his Tafle becomes by degrees more cxaat and
enlightened. He begins to perceive not only
the chara}cr of the whole, but the beauties and
defects of each part; a'd is able to describe the
peculiar qualities which lhe praises or blames.
'Ile inifr is dlifipatcJ wvhich feeld formerly to
hang over the obiect; and he can at length pro-
nounce firmly, and without hesitation, concern-
ing it. Thus in Taste, confidered as mere fen-
fibility, exercise opens a great source of improve-
ment.

OF CRITICISM.
TRUE Criticism is the application of Taste

and of good sense to the fine arts. The
objet which it proposes is, to distinguish what

is beautiful and what is faulty in every perform-
hnce; from particular instances to ascend to ge.
neral principles; and so to form rules or conclu-
sions concerning the several kinds of beauty in
works of Genius.

The rules of Criticism are not formed by any

induAion, ad .riori, as it is called; that is, they
are not formed by a train of abltrat reasoning,
independent of fads and observations. Criticinlm
is an art founded wholly on experience; on the
oblervation of such beauties as have been found to
please mankind most generally. For example;
Aristotle's rules concerning the unity of ascion
in dramatic and epic composition, were not rules
first discovered by logical reasoning, and then
applied to poetry but they were drawn from the
practice of Ho;net and Sophocles: they were
founded upon observing the superior pleasure
which we receive from the relation of an acion
which is one and entire, beyond what we receive
from the relation of scattered and unconnected
fa&s. Such observations taking their rife at first
from feeling and experience, were found on exa-
mination to be so consonant to reason, and to the
principles of human nature, as to pass into efta-
bliihed rules, and to be conveniently applied for
judging of the excellency of any performance.

Thir

# TASTE AND GENIUS DISTINGUISHED.

'This is the most natural account of the origin
of Criticism.

TASTE AND GENIUS DISTINGUISHED.
T ASTE and Genius are two words frequently

joined together; and therefore, by inaccu-

rate thinkers, confounded. They signify how-
ever two quite different things. The difference
between them can be clearly pointed out; and it
is of importance to remember it. Taste consists
in the power of judging: Genius, in the power
of executing. One may have a considerable de-
gree of Taste in Poetry, Eloquence, or any of
the fine arts, who has little or hardly any Genius
for composition or execution in any of these arts;
but Genius cannot be found without including
Taste alfb. Genius, therefore, deserves to be
confidered as a higher power of the mind than
Tafle. Genius always imports something in-
ventive or creative; which does not reft in mere
sensibility to beauty where it is perceived, but
which can, moreover, produce new beauties, and
exhibit them in such a manner as strongly to im-
press the minds of others. Refined Taste forms
a good critic; but Genius is farther necessary to
form the poet, or the orator.

OF

# OF GENIUS.

OF GENIUS.

ENIUS is used to signify that talent or aptii
tude which we receive from nature, for ex-

celling in any one thing whatever. Thus we
speak of a Genius for mathematics, as well as a
Genius for poetry; of a Genius for war, for po-
litics, or for any mechanical employment.

This talent or aptitude for excelling in some

one particular, is, I have laid, what we receive
from nature. By art and ltudy, no doubt, it may
be greatly improved; but by them alone it can-
not be acquired. As Genius is a higher faculty
than Taste, it is ever, according to the ulilal
frugality of nature, more limited in the sphere of
its operations. It is net uncommon to meet with
persons who have an excellent tatle in fevcral of
the polite arts, such as mulic, poctry, painting,
and eloquence, all together: but, to find one
who is an excellent performer in all these arts, is
much more rare; or rather, indeed, such an one
is not to be looked for. A fort of Universal
Genius, or one who is equally and indifferently
turned towards several different profeslions and
arts, is not likely to excel in any. Although
there may be some few exceptions, yet in general
it holds, that when the bent of the mind is

wholly

# OF GRANDEUR.

wholly direced towards some one objec, exclu-
ive, in a manner, of others, there is the fairclt
prolpect of eminence in that, whatever it be.
The rays must converge to a point, in order to
glow inltenfely. This rcmark I make, on ac-
count of its great importance to young people;
in leading them to examine with care, and to
pursue with ardour, the current and pointing of
nature towards tholf exertions of Genius in
which they are molt likely to excel.

OF GRANDEUR.
TT is not cafy to dcfcribe, in words, the pre-

cife impreflion which great and sublime ob-

jects make upon us, when we behold them ; but
leery one ha; a conception of it. It produces a
fort of internal elevation and expansion ; it raises
the mind much above its ordinary siate; and fills
it with a degree of wonder and aftonifhmect,
which it cannot well express. The emotion is
certainly delightful; but it is altogether of the
serious kind: a degree of awfilnefs and folem-
nits, even approachilng to feverit, commonly
attends it when at its height; verv dilil:.guihable
from the inore g.y and brilk enmotionl railed by
b:.autiful oblj- s.

Z The

The finplelt form of external Grandeur ap-

pears in the vast and boundless profpeats present-
ed to us by nature; such as wide extended plains,
to which the eye can fee no limits; the firma-
mcnt of Heaven; or the boundless expanse of the
Ocean. All vaitnefs produces the impression of
Sublimity. It is to be remarked, however, that
space, extended in length, makes not so strong
an impression as height or depth. Though a
boundless plain be a grand objec, yet a high
mountain, to which we look up, or an awful
precipice or tower whence we look down on the
objects which lie below, is still more so. The
excessive Grandeur of the firmament arises from
its height, joined to its boundless extent; and
that of the ocean, not from its extent alone, but
from the perpetual motion and irrefilible force
of that mass of waters. Wherever space is con-
cerned, it is clear, that amplitude or greatness of
extent, in one dimension or other, is neceliary
to Grandeur. Remove all bounds from any ob-
ject, and you presently render it sublime. Hence
infinite space, endless numbers, and eternal du-
ration, fill the mind with great ideas.

OF

# OF THE SUBLIME.

OF THE SUBLIME.
T HE foundation of the Sublime in compofi-

tion must always be laid in the nature of

the objeA described, Unless it be such an object
as, if presented to our eyes, if exhibited to us in
reality, would raise ideas of that elevating, that
awful, and magnificent kind, which we call Su-
blime; the description, however finely drawn, is
not entitled to come under this class. This ex-
cludes all objets that are merely beautiful, gay,
or elegant. In the next place, the object muff
not only, in itself, be ubliime, but it must be
set before us in such a light as is molt proper to
give us a clear and full impression of it; it must
be described with strength, with conciseness, and
simplicity. This depends, principally, upon the
lively impreflion which the poet, or orator, has
of the object which he exhibits; and upon his
being deeply affected, and warmed, by the fu-
blime idea which he would convey. If his own
feeling be languid, he can never inspire us with
any ffrong emotion. Infiances, which are ex-
tremely neceflary on this 'ubjet, will clearly
fhcw the importance of all the requisites which
I have just now mentioned.

Z2 It

# SUBLIMITY OF SCRIPTURE.

It is, gcncralll, {icaking, among the most an-

cient authors, that we are to look tor the moilt
ftrikin; infitalcts of the Sublime. I .m inclied
to think, that the early agcs of the world, and
the rude unimproved tiate of focityv, are peculi-
arly tfaourabie to the firong emotions of Subli-
mity. The genius of men is then much turned
to admiration and aitonifimcnt. Mecei;g with
many objcs, to them ;new and ilange, their
ima gination is kept giowinig, and their pailSons
are often railed to the utmost. They think, and
express themiclves boldly, and without refiraint.
In the progress of society, the genius and man-
ners of men undergo a change more favourable
to accuracy, than to strength or Sublimity.

SUBLIMITY OF SCRIPTURE.
O F all writings, ancient or modern, the Sacred

Scriptures afford us the highef instances of

the Sublime. The deferiptions of the Deity, in
them, are wonderfully noble; both from the
grandeur of the objet, and the manner of repre-
enting it. What an afnemblage, for instance, of
awful and fublirne ideas is prceented to us, in the
1th Psalm, ,.here an appearance of the Alnighty
is described ?

The

# OF HOMER.

The inflance, given by Longinus, from MoTes,

God fair, let th1ere be light; and there was ighat;
belongs to the true Sublime ; and the Sublimity
of it ariles from the trong conception it gives,
of an exertion of power, producing its esid with
the utmost specd and facility.

OF HOMER.
HO OMER is a poet, who, in all ages, and by

all critics, has been greatly admired for

Sublimity; and he owes much of his grandeur
to that native and unaffected simplicity which
charaEeriles his manner. His descriptions of
hofls engaging; the animation, the fire, and ra-
pidity, which he throws into his battles, present
to every reader of the Iliad frequent instances of
Sublime Writing. His iitruduction of the
Gods tends often to heighten, in a high degree,
the majesty of his warlike scenes. Hence Lon-
ginus bellows such high and just commendations
on that paffige, in the XVth book of the Iliad,
where Neptune, when preparing to issue forth
into the engagement, is described as fliaking the
mountains with his fleps, and driving his chariot
along the ocean. Minerva, arming herself for
fight in the Vth book; and Apollo, in the

Z 3 XVth,

# OF OSSIAN.

XVth, leading on the Trojans, and flaflhilg tcr-
ror with his :Egis on the face of the Grecks,
are similar inflances of great Sublimily added to
the de!cription of battles, by the app.ar.ulccs ot
thole celeitial bcings. In the XXth book, where
all the Gods take part in the engagemenr, ac-
cording as they fevcrally favour cither the Gre-
cians or the Trojans, the poet's genius is fig-
nnily dililayed, and the dceifri;tion rifes iito the
moit awful ;nagnificence. All nature is reprc-
fei.ted as in commotion. Jupi;cr thuiders ia; the
heavens; Neptune firikes the earth with his
Trident; the ships, the city, and the mountains
shake; the earth trembles to its centre; Pluto
starts from his throne, in dread leai tlhe ieclets
of the infernal regionl Ihould be laid open to the
view of mortals.

OF OSSIAN.
T HE works of Ossian abound with example9

of the Sublime. The fiubjcCts of which

that author treats, and the manner in which he
writes, are particularly favourable to ii. HIe
!pofiflics all the plain and venerable mamnner of the
ancient times. He deals in no superfluous or
gaudy onraments; but throws forth his images

with

with a rapid concilenefs, which enables them to
firike the mind with the greatest force. Among
poets of more poliied times, we are to look for
the graces of correct writing, for just proportion
of parts, and fl:ilfilly conducted narration. In
the Inidfl of fiiiing fcencry and pleasurable
thcmes, the gay and the beautiful will appear,
undoubtedly, to more advantage. But amidf the
mudc fctines of nature and of society, such as Or-
fian deccribcs; amidit rocks, and torrents, and
whirlwinds, and battles, dwells the Sublime;
a;d naturally aflociates itself with that grave and
Jolemn spirit which diflinguifles the Author of
Fingal. I" As autumn's dark storms pour from
"two echoing hills, so toward each other ap-

proached the heroes. As two dark fireams

" from high rocks meet and mix, and roar on
" the plain: loud, rough, and dark, in battle,
" met Loch!in and Inisfaii; chief mixed his
" firokes with chief, and man with man. Steel
"clanging bounded on steel. Helmets are cleft
" on high; blood burfis, and finokes around.
" As the troubled noise of the ocean when roll
"the waves on high; as the lait peal of the
" thunder of heaven; such is the noise of battle.
" The groan of the people spread over the hills.
" It was like the thunder of night, when the
" cloud bursts on Cona, and a thousand ghoits
't shriek at olce on the hollow wind." Never

were

# THE USE OF FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE.

were images of more awful Sublimity employed
to heighten the terror of battle.

THE USE OF FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE.

TITHOUT a genius for Figurative Lan-
Wv guage, none ihould attempt it. Imagi-
nation is a power not to be acquired; it must be
derived from nature. Its redundancies we may
prune, its deviations we may correEt, its sphere
we may enlarge; but the faculty itself we can-
not create: and all efforts towards a metaphori-
cal ornamented Style, if we are destitute of the
proper genius for it, will prove awkward and
disgusting. Let us satisfy ourselves, however,
by confidering, that without this talent, or at
least with a very small measure of it, we may
both write and speak to advantage. Good fenie,
clear ideas, perspicuity of language, and proper
arrangement of words and thoughts, will always
command attention. These are indeed the foun-
dations of all solid merit, both in speaking and
writing. Many fubjeds require nothing more;
and those which admit of ornament, admit it only
as a secondary requisite. To study and to know
our own genius well; to follow nature; to feck
to improve, but not to force it; are direftions

which

# ENGLISH STYLE.

which cannot be too often given to thaie who
desire to excel in the liberal arts.

ENGLISH STYLE.
rHIHE reltoration of King Charles II. seems

to be the .era of the formation of our pre-

sent Style. Lord Clarendon was one of the firlf
who laid aside those frequent inversions which
prevailed among writers of the former age. As-
ter him, Sir William Temple polished the lan-
guage still more. But the author, who, by the
number and reputation of his works, formed it
more than any one into its present state, is Dry-
den. Dryden began to write at the Restoration,
and continued long an author both in poetry and
prose. He had made the language his fRudy;
and though he wrote haitily, and often incorrect-
ly, and his Style is not flee from faults, yet there
is a richnets in his diction, a copioulhefs, ease,
and variety in his expreflion, which has not beon
urpa;flel by any who have come after him. Since
his time, confideral l attention has been paid to
Purity and Elegance of Style: But it is Elegance
rather than Strength, that forms the diftinguifl-
ing quality of moot of the good English writers.
Some of them compose in a more manly and ncr-

v'Ous

# DIRECTIONS FOR FORMING A GOOD STYLE.

vous manner than others; but, whether it be
from the genius of our language, or from what-
ever other caufc, it appears to me, that we are
far from the strength of several of the Greek
and Roman authors.

DIRECTIONS FOR FORMING A GOOD

STYLE.
T HE firlt direction which I give for this pur-

pose, is, to study clear ideas on the subjeL

concerning which we are to write or speak. This
is a direction which may at first appear to have
small relation to Style. Its relation to it, how-
ever, is extremely close. The foundation of all
good Style, is good sense accompanied with a
lively imagination. The Style and thoughts of
a writer are so intimately connected, that, as I
have several times hinted, it is frequently hard
to diffinguifh them. Wherever the impreflions
of things upon our minds are faint and indicfinel,
or perplexed and confused, our Style in treating
of such things will infallibly be so too. Where-
as, what we conceive clearly and feel itrongly,
we {hall naturally express with clearness and
with strength. This, then, we may be asSured,
is a capital rule as to Style, to think closely of

the

the subjet, till we have attained a full and dif-
t.inA view of the matter which we are to clothe
in words, till we become warm and interested in
it; then, and not till then, shall we find expref-
sion begin to flow. Generally speaking, the best
and moRt proper expreflions, are those which a
clear view of the subjeA fuggeits, without much
labour or enquiry after them.

In the second place, in order to form a good

Style, the frequent practice of composing is in-
difpenfably necessary. Many rules concerning
Style I have delivered; but no rules will answer
the end without exercise and habit. At the fame
time, it is not every fort of composing that will
improve Style. This is so far from being the
cafe, that by frequent, careless, and hasty com-
position, we fllall acquire certainly a very bad
Style; we ilall have more trouble afterwards in
unlearning faults, and correcting negligences,
than if we had not been accustomed to compofi-
tion at all. In the beginning therefore, we ought
to write fowly and with much care. Let the
facility and speed of writing be the fruit of lon-
ger practice.

We must obfervc, however, that there may

be an extreme, in too great and anxious a care
about words. We muff not retard the course of

thought,

thought, nor cool the heat of imagination, by
pausing too long on every word we employ.
There is, on certain occasions, a glow of com-
position which flould be kept up, if we hope to
express ourselves happily, though at the expence
of allowing tome inadvertencies to pass. A more
severe examination of there must be left to be the
work of corretion. For, if the practice of compo-
fition be uieful, the laborious work of correcaing
is no iefs so; is indeed aboblutely necessary to our
reaping any benefit from the habit of composition.
What \ve have written, fliould be !aid by for onme
little time, till the ardour of composition be pallt
till the fondness for the expreslions we have used
be worn off, and the expressions themselves be
forgotten; and then reviewing our work with a
cool and critical eye, as if it were the perforn-
ance of another, we fiall discern many imper-
fecions which at firfl escaped us.

In the third place, with refpe6 to the afliiance

that is to be gained from the writings of others,
it is obvious, that we ought to render ourselves
well acquainted with the Style of the best authors.
This is requisite both in order to form a just taste
in Style, and to supply us with a full itock of
words on every subjet. In reading authors with
a view to Style, attention ihould be given to the
peculiarities of their different manners. I know

3 no

no exercise that will be found more useful for
acquiring a proper Style, than to translate some
paflage from au eminent English author into our
own words.

In the fourth place, I must caution, at the

fame time, againf; a servile imitation of any au-
thor whatever. This is always dangerous. It
hampers genius; it is likely to produce a stiff
manner; and those who are given to close imi-
tation, generally imitate an author's faults as
well as his beauties. No man will ever become
a good writer or ipeaker, who las inot fomc de-
gree of conide;:ce to follow his ovwn Eenius.
We ou ht to beware, in particular, of adopting
any author's noted phrases, or tranf:ribing pal-
fagcs from him. Such a habit will prove fatal
to all genuine composition. Infinitely better it
is to have something t-hat is our own, though of
moderate beauty, than to aflfet to shine in bor-
rowed ornaments, which will, at last, betray the
utter poverty of our genius.

In the fifth place, it is an obvious, but material

rule, with relfpc to Style, that w;e alw:!ys study
to adapt it to i!:,_ b eet, and alob to the capacity
of our hearers, if wec ;uar to ipc;ik in public. No-
tliii; merits the name of eloquent or beautiful,

A a which

which is not suited to the occasion, and to the
persons to whom it is addressed.

In the last place, I conclude the fubje with

this admonition, that, in any cafe, and on any
occasion, attention to Style must not engrols
us so much, as to detract from a higher degree of
attention to the thoughts:-" To your expref-
" sion be attentive ;" iays the great Roman Cri-
tic, " but about your matter be solicitous." A
direclion the more neccfiiry, as the present taste
of the age in writing seems to lean more to Style
than to thought. It is much easier to dress up
trivial and common sentiments with some beauty
of expression, than to afford a fund of vigorous,
ingenious, and useful thoughts. The latter re-
quires true genius; the former may be attained
by industry, with the help of very superficial
parts. Hence, we find so many writers frivo-
loufln rich in Style, but wretchedly poor in senti-
inent. The public ear is now so much accuf-
tomed to a correct and ornamented Style, that no
writer can, with safety, neglea the fludy of it.
But he isa contemptible one, who does not look
to something beyond it; who does not lay the
chief stress upon his matter, and employ fitch or-
naments of Style to recommend it, as are manly
not foppith.

RISE

# RISE OF ORATORY.

RISE OF ORATORY.

N tracing the rife of Oratory, we need not
attempt to go far back into the early ages of

the world, or search for it among the monuments
of Eastern or Egyptian antiquity. Il those ages
there was, indeed, an Eiltcuence of a certain
kind; but it approached nearer to Poetry, than
to what we properly call Oratory. There is
reason to believe, as I formerly shewed, that the
Language of the firit ages was pai'ionate and
metaphorical; owing partly to the scanty stock
of words, of which Speech then confiited; and
partly to the tincture which Language naturally
takes from the savage and uncultivated Rtate of
men, agitated by unrestrained paflions, and struck
by events, which to them are itrange and fur-
prifing. In this state, rapture and enthusiasm,
the parents of Poetry, had an ample field. But
while the i:'tercouiri' of men w'as as vet uniire-
quent, and force ;and firength were the chief
means employed in deciding controversies, the
arts of C)ratory and eruo, of Reasoning and
Debate, could be but little known. The firit
empires that arose, the Allyrian and Egyptian,
were of the defpiotic kind. The whole power
was in the hands of one, or at most of a few.
The multitudc were accustomed to a blind re-

A a 2 v erence;

# GRECIAN ELOQUENCE.

vercncc; they were led, not pc: iaded ; and
none of tlofe refinements of socict), which Inake
public

h packing an objcA of importaice, were as
yet introduced.

GRECIAN ELOQUENCE.

T is not till the rifie of the Grecian Repubiics,
that we find any rc;iirkab!e appe;i;:nccs of

Eh!ucince as the art of pcrlilafioll; and thefi
gave it ltch a field as it' iicver had before, an!d,
pcrhap., h.:s ncver had ag;ai; since that time.

Greece was divided into a multitude-of petty

fates. Thele were governed, at firlf, by kings
who were called Tyrants; on whole cxpulfion
from all these Rates, there sprung up a great nuln-
ber of democratical governments, founded nearly
on the fame plan, animated by the fame high
spirit of freedom, mutually jealous, and rivals of
one another.

Of these Grecian Republics, the most noted,

by far, for Eloquence, and, indeed, for arts of
every kind, was that of Athens. The Athenians
were an ingenious, quick, sprightly people;
praclifed in bufinels, and sharpened by frequent

and

and sudden revolutions, which happened in their
govcrnment. The genius of their, government
was altogether democratical; their legislature
consisted of the whole body of the people. They
had, indeed, a Senate of iive hundred; but in the
general convention of the citizens, was placed
the lait resort; and aftl.irs were conduaed there,
entirely by reasoning, speaking, and a skilful ap-
plication to the palfions and interests of a popular
assembly. There, laws were made, peace and war
decreed, and thence the magiffrates were chosen.
For the highest honours of the state were alike
open to all; nor was the meanest tradefiman ex-
cluded from a feat in their supreme courts. In
such a ftatc, Eloquence, it is obvious, would be
much fiudied, as the itreft means of rising to in-
fluence and power; and what fort of Eloquence
Not that which was brilliant merely, and showy,
but that which was found, upon trial, to be most
effeaual for convincing, interesting, and per-
fiading the hearers. For there, public speaking
was not a mere competition for empty applause,
but a serious contention for that public leading,
which was the great object both of the men of.
ambition, and the men of virtue.

In so enlightened and acute a nation, where the

higheit attention was paid to every thing elegant
in the arts, we may naturally expea to find the

A a 3 public

public taste refined and judicious. Accordingly,
it was improved to such a degree, that the Attic
taste and Attic manner have pafled into a proverb.
It is true, that ambitious demagogues, and cor-
rupt orators, did sometimes dazzle and iiillcad
the people, by a flowy but falle Eloquence; fbr
the Athenians, with all their acutenels, were
fadious and giddy, and great admirers of every
novelty. But when some important interesi
drew their attention, when any great danger
routed them, and put their judgment to a feri-
ous trial, they commonly diflinguilhed, very
justly, between genuine and spurious Eloquence:
and hence Demoithenes triumphed over all his
opponents; because he spoke always to the pur-
pose, affected no insignificant parade of words,
used weighty arguments, and fliewed them
clearly where their interefi lay. In critical
conjunctures of the slate, when the public was
alarmed with some pressing danger, when the
people were aflernbled, and proclamation was
made by the crier, for any one to rile and deliver
his opinion upon the present situation of affairs,
empty declamation and sophistical rcaiulning
would not only have been hissed, but resented
and puniflid by an assembly so intelligent a:nd
accuitomed to business. Their greatelt orators
trembled on such occasions, when they rose to
address the people, as they knew they were to

be

# ROMAN ELOQUENCE.

be held answerable for the ifiue of the counsel
which they gave. The most liberal endowments
of the greatest princes never could found such a
fcihool for true oratory, as was formed by the
nature of the Athenian Republic. Eloquence
there sprung, native and vigorous, from anmidi
the contentions of fation and freedom, of public
bufiTefs and of a&ive life; and not from that re-
tirement and speculation, which we are apt some-
times to fancy more favourable to Eloquence
than they are found to be.

ROIMAN ELOQUENCE.
NI-WHEN we compare together the various

rival productions of Greece and Rome,

we fliall always find this diftintion obtain, that
in the Greek produtions there is more native
genius; in the Roman, more regularity and art.
What the Greeks invented, the Romans polish-
ed; the one was the original, rough sometimes,
and incorrec't; the other, a finillied copy.

As the Roman government, during the repub-

lic, was of the popular kind, there is no doubt
but that, in the hands of the leading men, public
lipeaking became early aji engine of government,

and

and was employed for gaining diffin&ion and
power. But in the rude unpoliihed times of the
State, their speaking was hardly of that fort that
could be called Eloquence. Though Cicero en-
deavours to give some reputation to the elder
Cato, and those who were his cotemporaries,
yet he acknowledges it to have been " a rude
" and harsh 1train of speech." It was not till
a short time preceding Cicero's age, that the Ro-
man Orators rose into any note. Crassus and
Antonius, two of the Speakers in the dialogue
de Oratore, appear to have been the most emi-
nent, whose different manners Cicero defcribcs
with great beauty in that dialogue, and in his
other rhetorical works. But as none of their
produtions are extant, nor any of Hortenfius's,
who was Cicero's cotemporary and rival at the
bar, it is needless to transcribe from Cicero's
writings the account which he gives of those
great men, and of the character of their Elo-
quence.

The objec in this period most worthy to draw

our attention, is Cicero himself; whose name
alone suggests every thing that is splendid in
Oratory. His method is clear, and his argu-
ments are arranged with great propriety.
He never attempts to move, till he has endea-
voured to convince; and in moving, especially

the

# CICERO AND DEMOSTHENES COMPARED.

the softer passions, he is very successful. No
man kncvw the power and force of' words better
than Cicero. IIe rolls them along with the
greatest be:irty) and pomp ; and, in the ftrudure
of his icntences, is curious and exact to the high-
ei, Je';ree. Iie is always full and flowing, never
ab;up:. He is a great amplifier of every fubjeat
magnificcnt, and in his lentimenrs highly moral.
His manner is on the whole difiufe, yet it is of-
ten happily varied, and suited to the fubjedc.-
When a great public object routed his mind, and
demanded indignation and force, he departs con-
fiderably from that loose and declamatory manner
to which he leans at other timcs, and becomes
exccedingiy cogent and vehement.
CICERO AND DEMOSTHENES COMPARED.

HE different manners of there two Princes
of Eloquence, and the distinguishing cha-

zadcrs of each are so frrongly marked in their
writings, that the conparilbn is, in many re-
fpedts, obvious and easy. The character of De-
mofihencs is vigour and autierity; that of Cicero
is gentleness and insinuation. In the one, you
find more manliness, in the other, more ornament.
The one is more harsh, but more spirited and

cogent;

cogent; the other, more agreeable, but withal>
looser and weaker.

It is a difadvantagc to Demorthenes, that, be-

fides his concilines, which sometimes produces
obscurity, the language, in which he writes, is
less familiar to mod of us than the Latin, and
that we are less acquainted with the Greek an-
tiquities than we are with the Roman. WVe read
Cicero with more ease, and of course with more
pleasure. Independent of this circumstance too,
he is no doubt, in himself, a moie agreeable
writer than the other. But notwithlfanding this
advantage, I am of opinion, that were the state
in danger, or tome great national interefl at stake.
which drew the serious attention of the public,
an Oration in the spirit and itrain of Denof-
thenes, would have more weight, and produce
greater effe&ts than one in the Ciceronian man.
ner. Were Demoflhenes's Philippics spoken
in a Britifl Aflembly, in a similar conjuneture of
affairs, they would convince and persuade at this
day. The rapid Style, the vehement reasoning,
the disdain, anger, boldness, fireedom, which
perpetually animate them, would render their
success infallible over any modern assembly. I
question whether the fame can be said of Cicero's
Orations; whose Eloquence, however beautiful,
and however well suited to the Roman taste, yet

borders

# ELOQUENCE OF THE CHRISTIAN FATHERS.

borders oftener on declamation, and is more re-
mote from the manner in which we now expet
to hear real bulinefs and causes of importance
treated.

ELOQUENCE OF THE CHRISTIAN

FATHERS.

N the decline of the Roman Empire, the in-
troducion of Christianity gave rife to a new

ipecies of Eloquence, in the apologies, sermons,
and pastoral writings of the Fathers of the
Church. Among the Latin Fathers, Lactantius
and Minutius Felix are the most remarkable for
purity of Style; and, in a later age, the famous
St. Augustine pofleffes a considerable lhare of
sprightliness and strength. But none of the Fa-
thers affird any jutl models of Eloquence. Their
Language, as soon as we descend to the third or
fourth century, becomes harsh ; and they are, in
general, infeced with the taste of that age, a
love of fwoln and firained thoughts, and of the
play of words. Among the Greek Fathers, the
most diftinguifled, by far, for his oratorial me-
rit, is St. Chryfoftoie. His Language is pure;
his Style highly figured. He is copious, smooth,
and sometimes pathetic. But he retains, at the

3 fame

# ENGLISH AND FRENCH ELOQUENCE.

fame time, much of that charactcr which has
been always attributed to Asiatic Eloquence, dif-
fuse and redundant to a great degree, and often
overwrought and tumid. He may be read, how-
ever, with advantage, for the Eloquence of the
pulpit, as being freer from false ornaments than
the Latin Fathers.

ENGLISH AND FRENCH ELOQUENCE.
iT seems particularly surprising, that Great-

Britain should not have made a more confpi-

cuous figure in Eloquence than it has hitherto
attained; when we confider the enlightened, and,
at the fame time, the free and bold genius of the
country, which seems not a little to favour Ora-
tory; and when we confider that, of all the polite
nations, it alone possesses a popular government,
or admits into the legislature futch numerous as-
femblies as can be supposed to lie under the do-
minion of Eloquence. Notwithitanding this ad-
vantage, it must be confessed, that, in most parts
of Eloquence, we are undoubtedly inferior, not
only to the Greeks and Romans, by many de-
grees, but also in some refpeAs to the French.
We have Philosophers, eminent and conspicuous,
perhaps, beyond any nation, in every branch of

science.

fcrknce. We have both taste and erudition, in a
high degree. \Ve have Historians, we have
Poets of the grcatefi name; but of Orators, or
Public Speakers, how little have we to boafl?
And where are the monuments of their genius
to be found r In every period we have had some
who made a figure, by managing the debates in
Prllliament; but that figure was commonly ow-
ing to their wisdom, or their experience in bufi-
ness, more than to their talents for Oratory ; and
unless, in some tfev inflances, wherein the power
of Oratory has appeared, indeed, with much
lufre, the art of Parliamentary Speaking rather
obtained to fevcral a temporary applause, than
conferred upon any a lasting renown. At the
bar, though, questionless, we have many able
pleaders, yet few or none of their pleadings have
been thought worthy to be tranfinitted to poftc-
rity. In the fame manner the Britifll divines
have diltinguiihed themselves by the most accu-
rate and rational compositions which, perhaps,
any nation can boass of. Many printed sermons
we have, full of good fcnfe, and of found divinity
and morality; but the Eloquence to be found in
them, the power of persuasion, of intereflin!
and engaging the heart, which is, or ought to
be, the great object of the. pulpit, is far fromn
bearing a suitable proportion to the excellence of
thie matter. An Englifl ferinon, inficad of be-

B b iug

ing a perfuafivc animated Oration, seldom rifes
beyond the itrain of correc and dry reasoning.
Whereas, in the sermons of Bossuet, Maffillon,
Bourdaloue, and Flechier, among the French,
we fee a much higher species of Eloquence aimed
at, and in a great measure attained, than the Bri-
tifh preachers have in view.

In general, the charateriftical difference be-

tween the fRate of Eloquence in France and in
Great-Britain is, that the French have adopted
.higher ideas both of pleasing and persuading by
means of Oratory, though sometimes, in the exe-
cution they fail. In Great-Britain, we have
.taken up Eloquence on a lower key; but in our
execution, as was naturally to be expected, have
been more correa. In France, the style of their
.Orators is ornamented with bolder figures; and
their discourse carried on with more amplifica-
tion, more warmth and elevation. The compo-
fition is often very beautiful; but sometimes,
.also, too diffuse, and deficient in that strength and
cogency which renders Eloquence powerful.

Several reasons may be given, why Modern

Eloquence has been so limited and hurr.ble in its
efforts. I am of opinion, that this change must,
in part, be ascribed to, that correc turn of think-
ing, which has been so much studied in modern

times.

nimes. It can harldly be doubted, that, in many
efforts of mere genius, the antient Greeks and
Romans excelled us; ,but, on the other hand,
that, in accuracy and closeness of reasoning on
many fubjccts, we have some advantage over
them, ought, I think, to be admitted also. In
proportion as the world has advanced, philosophy
has made greater progress. A certain ftriEtnefs
of good sense has, in this illand particularly,
been cultivated, and introduced into every sub-
jeE. Hence we are more on our guard against
the flowers of Elocution; we are on the watch i
we are jealous or being deceived by Oratory.
Our Public Speakers are obliged to be more re-
served than the Antients, in their attempts to
elevate the imagination, and warm the passions;
and, by the influence of prevailing tafle, their
own genius is sobered and chastened, perhaps, in
too great a degree. It is likely too, I confess,
that what we fondly ascribe to our corretnefs
and good sense, is owing, in a great measure, to
our phlegm and natural coldness. For the vi.,
vacity and sensibility of the Greeks and Romans,
more especially of the former, seem to have been
much greater than ours, and to have given them
a higher relifl of all the beauties of Oratory.

B b 2 MEANS

# MEANS OF IMPROVING IN ELOQUENCE.

IMEANS OF IMPROVING IN ELOQUENCE.
W''HETHER Nature or Art contribute molt

to form an Orator, is a trifling inquiry.

In all attaiiimcuts whatever, Nature niuft be tlie
prime agent. She mult bestow the original ta-
lents. She must sow the feeds; but culture is
requisite for bringing there feeds to perfefion.
Nature must always have done fobmewhat; but
a great deal will always be left to be done. by
Art.

What itands highest in the order of means, is

personal charaiter and disposition. In order to
be a truly eloquent or pcrluafive Speaker, no-
thing is more neceflary than to be a virtuous
man.

For, confider sirs, whether any thing contr-'

bute more to persuasion, than the opinion which
-we entertain of the probity, difintereflednefs,
candour, and other good moral qualities of the
person who endeavours to persuade ? These give
weight and force to every thing which he utters;
nay, they add a beauty to it; they diinofe us to
iiten with attention and pleasure; and create a
secret partiality in favour of that fide which he
espouses. Whereas) if we entertain a fulficion of

craft

craft and difingenuity, of a corrupt, or a base
mind, in the Speaker, his Eloquence loses all its
real effet. It may entertain and amuse; but it
is viewed as artifice, as trick, as the play only of
Speech; and, viewed in this light, whom can
it persuade? W'e even read a book with more
pleasure, when we think favourably of its Au-
thor; but when we have the living Speaker be-
fore our eyes, addrelling us perfonaily on rome
subjea of importance, the opinion we entertain
of his characer must have a much more power-
ful effeat.

Next to moral qualifications, what, in the fe-

cond place, is molt necessary to an Orator, is a
fund of knowledge. We must never forget that
good sense and knowledge are the foundation of
all good speaking. There is no art t at can
teach one to be eloquent, in any sphere, without
a sufficient acquaintance with what belongs to
that sphere; or if there were an art that made
such pretensions, it would be mere quackery,
like the pretensions of the Sophists of old, to
teach their disciples to speak for and against every
subje&i; and would be dciervedly exploded by all
wife men. Attention to Style, to Composition,
and all the Arts of Speech, can only assist an
Orator in setting off, to advantage, the flock of
materials which he poffefies; but the Hock, the

B b 3 mate-

materials themselves, muff be brought from other
quarters than from Rhetoric. He who is to
plead at the Bar, muff make hinfelf thoroughly
master of the knowledge of the Law; of all the
learning and experience that can be useful in his
profeflion, for supporting a cause, or convincing
a Judge. He who is to speak from the Pulpit,
must apply himself closely to the study of divi-
nity, of pracical religion, 6o morals, of human
nature; that he may be rich in all the topics,
both of inftru&ion and of persuasion. He who
would fit himself for being a Member of the
Supreme Council of the Nation, or of any Pub-
lic Assembly, must be thoroughly acquainted with
the business that belongs to such Assembly; he
must study the forms of Court, the course of
procedure; and mutt attend minutely to all the
fads that may be the fubjecd of question or deli-
beration.

Besides the knowledge that properly belongs

to his profession, a Public Speaker, if ever he
expects to be eminent, muff make himself ac-
quainted, as far as his necessary occupations al-
low, with the general circle of polite literature.
The fludy of Poetry may be useful to him, on
many occasions, for embellishing his Style, for
fuggefling lively images, or agreeable allusions.
The fludy of Hiflory may be still more useful to

him;

him; as the knowledge of fa&ts, of eminent
characers, and of the course of human affairs,
finds' place on many occasions. There are few
great occasions of Public Speaking, in which one
may not derive afliftance from cultivated taste,
and extensive knowledge. They will often yield
him materials for proper ornament; sometimes,
for argument and real use. A deficiency of
knowledge, even in fubjecs that belong not di.
realy to his own profession, will expose him to
many disadvantages, and give better qualified ri-
vals a great superiority over him,

Allow me to recommend, in the third place, a

habit of application and induifry. Without this,
it is impoflible to excel in any thing. We must
not imagine, that it is by a fort of nmuhroom
growth, that one can rife to be a diftinguifled
Pleader, or Preacher, or Speaker in any .afiem-
bly. It is not by starts of application, or by a
few years preparation of study afterwards difcon-
tinued, that eminence can be attained. No; it
can be attained only by means of regular indus-
try, grown up into a habit, and ready to be ex-
erted on every occasion that calls for induifry.
This is the fixed law of our nature; and he must
have a very high-opinion of his own genius in-
deed, that can believe himself an exception to it.

Il

In the fourth place, Attention to the best mo--

dels will contribute greatly towards improvement.
Every one who speaks or writes should, indeed,
endeavour to have somewhat that is his own, that
is peculiar to himself, and that charaderifes his
Composition and Style. Slavish Imitation de-
presses Genius, or rather betrays the want of it.
But withal, there is no Genius so original, but
may be profited and aflifted by the aid of proper
examples, in Style, Composition, and Delivery.
They always open some new ideas; they serve
to enlarge and corret our own. They quicken
the current of thought, and excite emulation.

In the fifth place, Besides attention to the belf

models, frequent exercise both in composing and
speaking, will be admitted to be a neceifary mean
of improvement. That fort of Composition is,
doubtless, most useful, which relates to the pro-
session, or kind of Public Speaking, to which
persons addi& themselves. This they ihould
keep ever in their eye, and be gradually inuring
themselves to it. But let me also advise them,
not to allow themselves in negligent Compofi-
tion of any kind. He who has it for his aim to
write, or to speak correcly, ihould, in the moit
trivial kind of Composition, in writing a letter,
nay, even in common discourse, fludy to acquit
himself with propriety. There is, in every thing,

I a man-

a manner which is becoming, and has propriety ;'
and opposite to it there is a clumsy and faulty
performance of the lame thing. The becoming
manner is very often the most light, and seen.;
iogly careless nanner; but it requires talte and
attention to seize the juss idea of it. That idea,
when acquired, we should keep in our eye, and.
form upon it whatever we write or fay.

It now only remains to inquire, of what use

may the study of Critical and Rhetorical Writers
be for improving one in the practice of Elce
quence? These are certainly not to be neglecb
ed; and yet, I dare not l;.y that much is to be
expeced from them. For profeflkd Writers on
Public Speaking, we muff look chiefly among
the Antients. In modern times, Popular Elo-
quence, as an Art, has never been very much
the obje& of study; it has not the fane power-
ful effets among us that it had in more.demo-
cratical itates; and therefore has not been culti-
vated with the fame care. Among the Moderns,
though there has been a great deal of good criti-
cifm on the different kinds of Writing, yet much
has not been attempted on the subjeA of Elo-
quence or Public Discourse; and what has been
given us of that kinds has been drawn mostly
from the Antients.

It

# THE ANTIENTS AND MODERNS COMPARED.

It is to the original Antient Writers that we

muit chiefly have recourse;. and it is a reproach
to any one, whose profcffion calls him to speak
in public, to be unacquainted with them. In all
the Antient Rhetorical Writers, there is, indeed,
this defe&, that they are too fyilematical; they
aim at doing too inuch; at reducing Rhetoric to
a complete and perfec Art, which may even
supply invention with materials on ever) iubje ;
insomuch, that one would imagine they expected
to form an Orator by rle;, in. as mechanical a
manner as one would form a Carpenter. Where.
as, all that can, in truth, be done, is to give-
openings for afiiting and enlightening Taste, and
fr pointing out to Genius the course it ought
to hold..

THE. ANTIENTS AND MODERNS

COMPARED.
IF any one, at this day, takes upon him to de-

cry the. antient Classics; if he pretends to

have discovered that Homer and Virgil are Poets
of inconsiderable merit, and that Demosthenes
and Cicero are not great Orators, we may boldly
venture to tell such a man, that he is come too
late with his discovery. The reputation of such

WTriters

'Writers is established upon a foundation too solid,
to be now lhaken by any arguments whatever;
for it is established upon the almost universal taste
of mankind, proved and tried throughout the
fucceflion of so many ages. Imperfeaions in
their works he may indeed point out; pasSages
that are faulty he may shew; for where is the
human work that is perfec ? But, if he attempts
to discredit their works in general, or to prove
that the reputation which they have gained is,
on the whole, unjust, there is an argument againfl
him, which is equal to full delnonftration. He
must be in the wrong; for human nature is
.against him. In matters of taste, such as Poetry
and Oratory, to whom does the appeal lie ? where
is the standard ? and where the authority of the
lalt decision ? where is it to be looked for, but in
those feelings and sentiments that are found, on
the most extensive examination, to be -the com-
mon sentiments and feelings of men ? These have
:been fully consulted on this head. The Public,
the unprejudiced Public, has been tried and ap-
pealed to for many centuries, and throughout aL
.most all civilized nations. It has pronounced
its verdid; it has given its fanscion to there
Writers; and from this tribunal there lies no
farther appeal,

Let
.Q.

Let us guard, however, against a blind and

implicit veneration for the Antients, in every
thing. I have opened the general principle,
which muft.go far in.inflituting a fair compari-
son between them and the Moderns. Whatever
superiority the Antients may have had in point of
genius, yet in all arts, where the natural progress
of knowledge has had room to produce any con-
fiderable effects, the Moderns cannot but have
some advantage. The world may, in certain
refpeas, be confidered as a person, who mufl
needs gain somewhat by advancing in years. Its
improvements have not, I confess, been always
in proportion to the centuries that have passed
over it; for, during the course of some ages, it
has funk as into a total lethargy. Yet, when
roused from that lethargy, it has generally been
able to avail itself, more or less, of former dif-
coveries. At intervals, there arose some happy
genius, who could both improve on what had
gone before, and invent something new. With
the advantage of a proper flock of materials, an
inferior genius can make greater progress, than
a much superior one, to whom these materi.ils
are wanting.

Hence, in Natural Philosophy, Affronomy,

Chemifiry, and other Sciences that depend on
an extensive knowledge and observation of fats,

Modern

Modern Philofophelrs have ani unquetrionable fu-
periority over the Anticnt. I am inclined alfi)
to think, thl:t in matters of pure reabfning, there
is more precision among the Moderns, than ill
itme initlanccs there was aionS the Anttients;
owiing perhaps to a more cxtenfive literary il-
tercourlc, which has inlroved a;d fharpel:ed the
ficultics of micn. In some f-udies tob, that re-
]:aC to t:lfc a!nd1 fine writin , which is our ob-
jcd, the pro 'rcif of Society miufl, in equity, be
admitted to ha;e gi 'en us F;mc

ad\vanta:egs. For

i~;fhcnicc, iin i'.Tory,' the.'c is cci';.l Iv mo:re po-
litic:al k;l:oi vlct ;c inl levc.i'al '!r'C.cn.:; naiio! at
prelcfi., thaii there ,;i :s in ,.natient Greece and
Rome. 'c, -c r better ,.cqu,:itcd with the na-
ture of govern r. -nt, i.rc::!u we have ften it
uiider a reat-er variety ot fiirms and rev oluticns.
The corld is morie lai ( n th. it v;is in bor-
i,.'. t! .e.; Co!mtli rcC i. j"C;:".: nlarg;lC more
couin'ries are ci:'ili.ed ; .tfLs are every where
celanlifhiedl ii;tercour'! is beco!Tme mc:e c.:;'-;
and the knowle;. o) inz.' b ..; co .iiIc;xce
more attaini::.bi. A !ii ; are ;:ct ;'va;"taes
to Hiitor-iais ; of v, -!.;ch iil ft.:C 1 iiCeliire, as I

;.ali' aftcrv,'ar\i-s icev, tihe'- h:ua availed themn-
feivc.". Ini tihe tiorC cil',lex,: ,kic.s of Poetry,
likL.wiif) vcw may ihave ..'.inz ic'newhat t per-
hap%, in point of rC.'u:ari'tv amd accurac'. In
DL)rlllaric Pel'ri..;i;;c, ii.;;;r 1,; a':; , a"tn C

C c of

of the antient models, we may be allowed to
have made tome improvements in the variety of
the characers, the conduc of the plot, atten-
tions to probability, and to decorums.

These teem to me the chief points of filperio-

rity we can plead above the Antients. Neither
do they extend as far as might be imagined at
first view. For if the firength of genius be on
one fide, it will go far, in works of taste at leafr,
to counter-balance all the artificial improvements
which can be made by greater knowledge and
corre&tnes. To return to our comparison of
the age of the world with that of a man ; it may
be said, not altogether without reason, that if the
advancing age of the world bring along with it
more fclence and more refinement, there belong,
however, to its earlier periods, more vigour,
more fire, more enthusiasm of genius. This
appears indeed to form the charaterillical dif-
ference between the Antient Poets, Orators, and
Historians, compared with the Modern. Among
the Antients, we find higher conceptions, greater
simplicity, more original f..ncy. Amorng the
Moderns, sometimes more art and corredines,
but feebler exertions of genius. But though this
be in general a mark of diitincion between the
Antients and Moderns, yet, like all general ob-
servations, it must be underlfood with tome ex-

ceptions ;

# OF DIALOGUES.

ceptions; for, in point of poetical fire and ori-
ginal genius, Milton and Shakespeare are inferior
to no Poets in any age.

_ ~ ~ ~

:

OF DIALOGUES.
DIALOGUE Writing may be executed in

two ways, either as direct converahtion,

where none but the Speakers appear, whizh is
the method that Plato uses; or as the recital of
a conversation, where the Author himself ap-
pears, and gives an account of what palsed in
discourse; which is the method that Cicero ge-
nerally follows. But though thole different me-
thods make some variation in the form, yet the
nature of the Composition is at bottom the fame
in both, and subjec to the fame laws.

A Dialogue, in one or other of tefre forms, on

some philolophical, moral, or critical filbiet,
when it is well condutced, flands in a high rank
among the Works of Taste; but is much more
difficult in the execution than is commonly ima-
gined. For it requires more, than merely the
introduction of persons speaking in succession.
It ought to be a natural and spirited reprefenta-
tion of real conversation; exhibiting the cha-

C c 2 rafter

nr^.2r a.Jd i:nniurs of the fcvcr.al ap.akers, and
fuitinig to the charicL'lr of each that pccli.airi:.y
of thoug;hlt :and cxpir'ion which dilii',iillics
himn trlon aioh cr. A Dialogue, thus co!;du;tc1J,
gives the Rea:.cr a veiv' .treeable entertaii;i!;lc,:
a.> by ;n.s oi the I!L _."e

L 'oni.rs 0on aniol:nr tllc

pe-c.;a:cs, he rcccivr a f:ir and tliti view of
both fidics of tlhe t.li'lciit, <and is, at the i, nie
tine, anus;el x:wi!h politc convc.ration, and with
a di0pil of coii;lteit all(l wcl-lupportcd cha-
rl.iers. An author, therefLirc, whio li.s genius
for exccutili iuch a Composition after this man-
ner, has it in his power both to initrtiLa ald to
pleaic.

Aimong the Antients, Plato is eminent for

the beauty of his Dialogues. The scenery, and
the circumniiances of many of them, are beauti-
fully painted. The characters of the Sophists,
with whom Socrates dilputed, are well drawn;
a variety of personages are exhibited to us; we
are introduced into a real conversation, often sup-
ported with much life and spirit, after the Socratic
manner. For richness and beauty of imagina-
sion, no Philosophic WVriter, Antient or Mo-
dern, is comparable to Plato. The only fault
of his imagination is, such an excess of fertility
ais allows it sometimes to obscure his judgment.
It frequently carries him into Allegory, Ficiion,

Enthu-

Enthufiafin, and the airy regions of Myflical
Theology. The Philosopher is, at times, loft
in the Poet. But whether we be edified wi:h
the matter or not, (and much edification he often
affords,) we are always entertained with the
manner; and left with a itrong impreflion of the
sublimity of the Author's genius.

Cicero's Dialogues, or those recitals of con-

verfation which he has introduced into several of
his Philosophical and Critical Works, arc not so
spirited, nor so charateriflical, as thole of Plato.
Yet some, as that " De Oratore" eipecially, are
agreeable and well supported. They shew us
conversation carried on among rome of the prin-
cipal persons of antient Rome, with freedom,
good breeding, and dignity.

Lucian is a Dialogue Writer of much emi-

nence; though his fubjeAs are seldom such as
can entitle him to be ranked among Philosophical
Authors. He has given the mod!ei of the light
and humourous Dialogue, and has carried it to
great perfection. A charater of levity, and at
the fame time of wit and penetration, diftin-
guiihes all his writings.

Cc 3 EPIS-

# EPISTOLARY WRITING.

EPISTOLARY WRITING.
E PISTOLARY WVriting appears, at first.

view, to itretch into a very wide sicld.

For there is no fiuhjcjt whatever, on which one
may not convely his thoughts to the Public in
the form of a Letter. Lord Shaftfbtury, ftr in-
itance, Mlr. Harris, and feeral other \Vriters,
have cho!en to give this form to phiioiiphical
treatiles. But Epiltklary \Vriting becomes a
difli!inct fiecies if Composition, luiject to the
cognizanlce of Criticifm,n onli vr chiefly, when
it is of the east, alnd ia.niliatr kinl.; wheln it
is convcriation carried on upon paper, hetween
two friends at a dilfance. Such an intercourse,
when well coiidutced, may be rendered very
agreeable to Readers of talie. If the subject of
the Letters be important, they will be the more
vaiuable. Even though there {hfiuld be nothing
VLTv colrnideralle in the fuijedt, yet if hie fpiric
:!nd turn of the correlponde;cc be aogreeable if
thev be written in a lpriglltly manncr, and with
native grace a!d cafe, they nma iill bc entertain-
;:' ; more elpcci.lly if there be any thing to
interest us, in the characers of thoiev who write
thein. Hence the curiosity which the Public
has always difcoveredl, concerning the Letters of
eminent persons. VW expect ill them to diicovcr

somewhat of their real charadter. It is childiih
indeed to expea , that in Letters we are to find
the whole heart of the Author unveiled. Con-
cealment and diiluilc take place, more or lcis,
in all human intercourse. But iti!l, as Letters
from one friend to another make the neareit ap-
proach to colv'erfition, we may expect to fee
more of a charactrc dif!)layed in there than in
other prodLnuaions, which are studied for public
view. \'e please ourllvihes with beholding the
Writer in a situation which allows him to be at
his cafe, and to give vent occafonally to the
o\erfiovwins of his heart.

Much, therefore, of the merit, and the aree-

ablencis of Epiitolary. Writing, will depend on
its introducing us into some acquaintance with
the Writer. There, it any vwherc, we look
for the Man, not for the Author. Its firfl and
fundamental requisite is, to be natural and fin-
ple; for a stiff and laboured mainer is as bad in
a Letter, as it is in Conversation. This does
not banish sprightliness and wit. These are
gracefll in Letters, juit as they are in conver-
lhtion ; when they flow easily, and without be-
ing fludied; when employed so as to season, not
to cloy. One who, either in Conversation or in
Letters, afiects to shine and to sparkle alvays,
will not please lolg. The ityle of Letters

Ihould

should not be too highly polifled. It ought to
be neat and corret, but no more. All nicety
about words, betrays study; and hence musical
periods, and appearances of number and harmony
in arrangement, should be carefully avoided in
Letters. The best Letters are commonly such
as the Authors have written with most facility.
What the heart or the imagination dictates, al-
ways flows readily; but where there is no sub-
jeEt to warm or interest these, constraint appears;
and hence, those Letters of mere compliment,
congratulation, or affected condolancc, which
have cost the Authors most labour in composing,
and which, for that reason, they perhaps confi-
der as their maiter-pieces, never fail of being
the mofi disagreeable and insipid to the Readers.

Pliny's Letters are one of the mofR celebrated

colleAions which the Antients have given us, in
the epistolary way. They are elegant and po-
lite; and exhibit a very pleasing and amiable
view of the Author. But, according to the
vulgar phrase, they smell too much of the lamp.
They are too elegant and fine; and it is not easy
to avoid thinking, that the Author is caffing an
eye towards the Public, when he is appearing to
write only for his friends.

Cicero's

Cicc!ro's E1iftles, tlough not ib flewy as

thoil of Pliny, arc, on fevera! acco:unts, a far
more va!uable coilcctiun; iiedcz1, tihe Ioftl va-
luiblce collceiJion of Letters cx.c.:it in any lan-

,iu.ac. T1hey arc Icttl's of real buiics, writrcn

to tile gtceatlct l mien of thc ae, coiipolfed wit h
purity a.iid cle;:'.cnc, but wi;'i;out the leafit .asec-
tationi; and, what adds grcaidy to their merit,
written withlout any intention of being publi!hed
to the world. For it appcars, that Cicero never
kept copies of his own Lettcrs; and we are
wholly indebted to the care of his freed-man
Tyro, for the large coilecion that was made,
after his death, of those which are now extant,
amounting to near a thousand. They contain
the most authentic materials of the history of that
age; and are the lafi monuments which remain
of Rome in its free state; the greatest part of
them being written during that important crisis,
when the Republic was on the point of ruin;
the most interesting situation, perhaps, which is
to be found in the affairs of mankind. To his
intimate friends, especially to Atticus, Cicero
lays open himself and his heart, with entire free-
doin. In the course of his corrcipondence with
others, we arc introduced into acquaintance with
several of the principal peifoniagcs of Rome ; and
it is rem;arkable that nioft of Cicero's corref-
pondents, as well as himfcif, are elegant and

polite

# OF FICTITIOUS HISTORY.

polite Writers; which serves to heighten our
idea of the taste and manners of that age.

OF FICTITIOUS HISTORY.

ICTITIOUS hiflories might be employed
for very useful purposes. They furnish one

of the best channels for conveying inftruAion,
for painting human life and manners, for shew-
ing the errors into which we are betrayed by our
paflions, for rendering virtue amiable and vice
odious. The effe&t of well-contrived stories, too
wards accomplishing there purposes, is stronger
than any effec that can be produced by simple
and naked inftrucion; and hence we find, that
the wifelt men in all ages have more or less em-
ployed fables and fitions, as the vehicles of
knowledge. These have ever been the bails of
both Epic and Dramatic Poetry. It is not, there-
fore, the nature of this fort of Writing, confi-
dered in itielf, but the faulty manner of its exe-
cution, that can expose it to any contempt.

In all countries we find its origin very antient.

The genius of the Eastern nations, in particular,
was from the earlieff times much turned towards
invention, and the love of fiction. Their Divi-

nity,

nity, their Philolbphy, and their Politics, were
clothed in fables and parables. The Indians, the
Persians, and Arabians, were all famous for their
tales.

During the dark ages, this fort of writing as-

fuiied a new and very singular form, and for a
long while made a great figure in the world.-
The martial spirit of those nations, among
whom the feudal government prevailed; the
efcablifhment of single combat, as an allowed
method of deciding causes both of justice and
honour; the appointment of champions in the
cause of women, who could not maintain their
own rights by the sword; together with the in-
fritution of military tournaments, in which dif-
ferent kingdoms vied with one another, gave
rife, in those times, to that marvellous system
of chivalry, which is one of the most singular
appearances in the hiftor), of mankind. Upon
this were founded those romances of knight-er-
rantry, which carried an ideal chivalry to a still
more extravagant height than it had rife; in fail.
There was difiplayed in them a new and very
wonderful fort of world, hardly bearing any re-
feiblance to the world in which we dwell. Not
only knights letting forth to redress all manner
of wrongs, but in every page, magicians, dra-
sons, and giants, invulnerable men, winged

3 hor!ks,

horlcs, enchanted armour, and enchanted caf-
tles; adventures abollutcly incredible, yet flisted
to the gross ignorance of th:ef ages, a:ul to the
legends, and luperilhtious notions uOilccr!'ing
magic and :necromancy, which then p:,.-.'. ai!.
This merit they had, of bei:n writill'; of tih
highly moral and heroic kind. Their k'ights
were patterns, not of courage mcrely, but of rc-
ligion, generosity, courtclf, and iidelitv; and
the heroines werc no le's difting uiiled for mo-
defl), delicacy, and the utmost dignity of man-
ners.

These were the first Compositions that receiv-

ed the name of Romances.-In Spain, where the
tate for this fort of writing had been mofll gree-
dil:y caught, the ingenious Cervanrtcs, in the be-
ginning of the lafi century, contributed greatly
to explode it; ahd the abolition of tournamlents,
the prohibition of single combat, the dilbelicf of
magic and cnchantments, and the change in ge-
neral of manners throughout Europe, began to
give a new turn to fictitious Conpoiition. The
heroifin and the gallantry, the moral and virtu-
ous turn of the chivalry romance, were still Iprc-
served; but the dragons, the necromancers, e:nd
the enchanted castles, were baniihed, and sone
small resemblance to human nature was intro-
duced. Still, however, there was too much of

the

the marvellous in them to please an age which
now aspired to refinement. The characters were
difccrned to be strained; the fiyle to be fwoln;
the adventures incredible : the books themselves
were voluminous and tedious.

Hence, this fort of Composition soon assumed

a third form, and from magnificent Heroic Ro-
mance, dwindled down to the Familiar Novel.
These novels, both in France and England, dur-
ing the age of Louis XIV. and King Charles II.
were in general of a trifling nature, without the
appearance of moral tendency, or useful infnruc-
tion. Since that time, however, somewhat bet,
tcr has been attempted, and a degree of reforma-
tion introduced into the spirit of Novel Writing.
Imitations of life and character have been made
their principal object. Relations have been pro-
fefled to be given of the behaviour of persons in
particular interesting situations, such as may ac-
tuaily occur in life; by means of which, what is
laudable or defctive in character and conduct
may be pointed out, and placed in an useful
light.

No fiction, in any language, was ever better

supported than the Adventures of Robinoln Cru-
foe. While it is carried on with that appearance
of truth and simplicity, which takes a strong

D d hold

li1ld of the imagination of all Readers, it fug-
ge{Es, at the f.me time, very useful inftlruAion;
by flecwing how much the native powers of man
may be exerted for surmounting the difficulties of
any external situation. Mr. Fielding's Novels
are highly diflinguiflied for their humour; a hu-
mour which, if not of the molt refined and deli-
cate kind, is original, and peculiar to himself.
The characers which he draws are lively and
natural, and marked with the itrokes of a bold
pencil. The general scope of his storics is fa-
vourable to humanity and goodness of heart; and
in Tom Jones, his greatest work, the artful
condu& of the fable, and the subserviency of all
the incidents to the winding up of the whole, de-
serve much praise. The most moral of all our
Novel Writers is Richardson, the Author of
Clariifa, a Writer of excellent intentions, and
of very considerable capacity and genius; did he
not posiess the unfortunate talent of spinning out
pieces of amusement into an immeasurable length.
The trivial performances which daily appear in
public under the title of Lives, Adventures, and
Histories, by anonymous Authors, if they be
often innocent, yet are molt commonly insipid;
and, tjiough in the general it ought to be admitted
that Characteriftical Novels, formed upon Na-
ture and upon Life, without extravagance, and
without licentiousness, might furnifl an agree-

ablc

# OF POETRY.

able and useful entertainment to the mind ; yet
confidcring the manner in which there writings
have been, for the most part, conduted, it
nuft also be confessed, that they oftener tend
to diflipation and idleness, than to r.y good
purpofc.

OF POETRY.

H-E most ju:t and comprehensive definitioli
which, I thirk, can be given of Poetry, is,

" That it is the language or paflion, or of en-
" livened imagination, fortne;, mo't commo;ly,
" into remilar nrumbers." The Historian, the
Orator, the Philosopher, address themselves, for
the mofl part, primariiy to the u:lderiiiJing:
their direct aim is to inform, to pe;liiade, or to
instruc:t. But the pri:n?.ry aim of a Powt is to
plealc, and to move; aid, therefore, it is to the
Imagination, and the Palsions, that he speaks.
He may, and he ouiht to have it in his view, to
inftrut, and to reform ; but it is indirectly, and
by pleasing and moving, that he accomplishes
this end. His mind is supposed to be animated
by some interesting objea which fires his Ima-
gination, or engages his Paflions; and which,
of course, communicates to his Style a peculiar

D d a eleva-

# THE ORIGIN OF POETRY.

elevation suitcd to his ideas; very diffircnt from
that mode of exprclion, which is natural to the
mind in its calm, ordinary flatc. I have added
to my definition, that this language of Passion,
or Imagilnaion, is formed, mJi cmmsns , into
regular numbers; because, though Vcrfification
be, in general, the exterior difincrion of Poetry,
vet there are bome forms of Verse lb loose and
familiar, as to be hardly difiinguifhable from
Prose; such as the \Verse of Terence's Come-
dies; and there is also a species of Prose, so mea-
fured in its cadence, and so much raised in its
tone, as to approach very near to Poetical Num-
bers; such as the Telemachus of Fcnclon ; and
the English Translation of Oflian. The truth
is, Verse and Prose, on some occasions, run in«
to one another, like light and shade. It is hard-
ly poflible to determine the exatC limit where
Eloquence ends, and Poetry begins; nor is there
any occasion for being very precise about the
boundaries, as long as the nature of each is uno
derftood.

THE ORIGIN OF POETRY.

T has been often said, and the concurring

voice of all antiquity affirms, that Poetry is
older than Prose. But in what sense this seem-

ingly

ingly strange paradox holds true, has not always
been well undcrftood. There never, certainly,
was any period of society in which men con-
versed together in Poetical Numbers. It was
in very humble and scanty Prose, as we may
cafily believe, that the flrft tribes carried on in-
tercourle among themselves, relating to the wants
and necefities of life. But from the very be-
ginning of Society, there were occalions on
which they met together for feasts, sacrifices,
and public assemblies; and on all such occafionsj
it is well known that music, song, and dance,
made their principal entertainment. It is chiefly
in Americas that we have had the opportunity of
being made acquainted with men in their savage
state. We learn from the-particular and concur-
ring accounts of Travellers, that, among all the
nations of that vast continent, cfpecially among
the Northern Tribes, with whom we have had
mort intercourse, music and iong are, at all their
meetings, carried on with an incredible degree
of enthusiasm; that the Chiefs of the Tribe are
thole who ign:llize themfelvcs mnoit on such oc-
cafions; that it is in Longs they celebrate their
religious rites; that, by there, they lament their
public and private calamities, the death of friends,
or the lots of warriors; express their joy on their
vicories; celebrate the great actions of their na-
:ion, and their heroes; excite each other to per-

D d 3 form

form brave exploits in war, or to susser death and
torments with unshaken conifancy.

Here then we fee the firit beginnings of Poe-

tic Composition, in those rude effusions, which
the enthufiafin of fancy or paflion fuggefied to un-
taught men, when roused by interelting events,
and by their meeting together in public assem-
blies. Two particulars would early distinguish
this language of song, from that in which they
conversed on the common occurrences of life;
namely, an unusual arrangement of words, and
the employment of bold figures of speech. It
would invert words, or change them from that
order in which they are commnonly placed, to
that which most suited the train in which they
rose in the Speaker's imagination; or which was
molt'accommodated to the cadence of the paflion
by which he was moved. Under the influence
too of any firong emotion, objects do not appear
to us such as they really are, but such as pafiion
makes us fee them. We magnify and exagge-
ra:e; we seek to interest all others in what causes
cur emotion; we compare the least things to the
greatef; we call upon the abfcnt as well as the
present, and even address ourselves to things in-
animate. Hence, in congruity with those various
movements of the mind, arise those turns of ex-
pression, which we now diftinguifli by the learned

nuames

names of Hyperbole, Prosopopoeia, Simile, &c.
but which are no other than the native original
language of Poetry, among the most barbarous
nations.

It appears from what has been said, that the

firfl Compositions which were either recorded
by Writing, or tranfinitted by Tradition, could
be no other than Poetical Compositions. No
other but these, could draw the attention of men
in their rude uncivilised tfate. Indeed they knew
no other. Cool reasoning, and plain discourse,
had no power to attraA savage Tribes, addited
only to hunting and war. There was nothing
that could either rouse the Speaker to pour him-
self forth, or draw the crowd to liften, but the
high powers of Paflion, of Music, and of Song.
This vehicle, therefore, and no other, could be
employed by Chiefs and Legislators, when they
meant to inftrud or to animate their Tribes.
There is, likewise, a farther reason why such
Compositions only could be tranfinitted to pofte-
rity; because, before Writing was invented,
Songs only could last, and be remembered. The
ear gave assistance to the memory, by the help of
Numbers; fathers repeated and futng them to
their children; and by this oral tradition of na-
tional Ballads, were conveyed all the historical

know-

# THE UNION OF POETRY AND MUSIC.

knowledge, and all the instruction, of the first
ages.

The earlieff accounts which History gives us

concerning all nations, bear testimony to there
sacs. In the first ages of Greece, Prieffs, Phi-
lofophers, and Statesmen, all delivered their in-
tructions in Poetry. Apollo, Orpheus, and
Amphion, their mofr antient Bards, are repre-
sented as the firif tamers of mankind, the first
founders of law and civilization. Minos and
Thales sung to the Lyre the laws which they
composed; and till the age immediately preced-
ing that of Herodotus, History had appeared in
no other form than that of Poetical Talcs.

THE UNION OF POETRY AND MUSIC..

URING the infancy of Poetry, all the dif-
ferent kinds of it lay confused, and were

mingled in the fame Composition, according as
inclination, enthusiasm, or casual incidents, di-
re&ed the Poet's firain. Indeed, not only were
the different kinds of Poetry then mixed together,
but all that we now call Letters, or Composition
of any kind, was then blended in one mass. At

firfil,

firif, Hiflory, Eloquence, and Poetry, were all
the fame. Whoever wanted to move or to
perfua:dc, to inform or to entertain his country-
men and lcighbours, whatever was the fubjeat,
accompanied his sentiments and tales with the
melody of Song. This was the cafe in that pe-
riod of Society when the character and occupa-
tions of the husbandman and the builder, the
warrior and the statesman, were united in one
person. When the progress of Society brought
on a separation of the different Arts and Profef-
sions of Civil Life, it led also by degrees to a fe-
paration of the different literary provinces from
each other,

The Art of Writing was in process of time

invented; records of past tranfafions began to
be kept; men, occupied with the fubjeas of
policy and useful arts, wished now to be initru.-
ed and informed, as well as moved. They rea-
soned and reflected upon the affairs of life; and
were interested by what was real, not fabulous,
in past tranfadions. The Historian, therefore,
now laid aide the buskins of Poetry; he wrote
in Prose, and attempted to give a faithful and
judicious relation of former events. The Phi-
lofopher addressed himself chiefly to the under-
itanding. The Orator studied to persuade by
realbning, and retained more or less of the an-

tient

tient paflionate and glowing Style, according as
it was conducive to his purpose. Poetry became
now a separate art, calculated chiefly to please,
and confined generally to such fubjeóts as related
to the imagination and paflions. Even its carlicfl
companion, Music, was in a great measure di-
vided from it.

The separation of Music from Poetry, pro-

duced consequences not favourable in bome re-
fpeAs to Poetry, and in many refpecas hurtful to
Miufic. As long as they i mained united, Music
enlivened and animated Poetry, and Poetry gave
force and expreflion to musical found. The
Mlufic of that early period was, beyond doubt,
extremely simple; and must have conifiled chiefly
of such pathetic notes, as the voice could adapt
to the words of the Song. Musical instruments,
fich as flutes, and pipes, and a lyre with a very few
firings, appear to have been early invented among
some nations; hut no more was intended by thelb
instruments, thai simply to accompany the voice,
and to heighten the melody of Song. The
Poet's itrain was always heard; and, from many
circumstances, it appears, that among the antient
Greeks, as well as among other nations, the
Bard sung his verses, and played upon his harp
or lyre at the fame time. In this state,. the art
of Mufir was, when it produced all those great

effects,

# OF PASTORAL POETRY.

e'eEts, of which we read so much in antient
story. And certain it is, that from simple Music
only, and from Music accompanied with Verse
or Song, we are to look for strong expression,
and powerful influence over the human mind.
When inflrumental Music came to be fludied as
a separate art, divefled of the Poet's Song, and
formed into the artificial and intricate combina-
tions of harmony, it loft all its antient power
of inflaming the hearers with strong emotions;
and funk into an art of mere amusement, among
polished and luxurious-nations.

OF PASTORAL POETRY.

HE great charm of Pastoral Poetry arises
from the view which it exhibits of the

tranquillity and happiness of a rural life. This
pleating illusion, therefore, the Poet mufl care-
fully maintain. He must display to us all that is
agreeable in that fiate, but hide whatever is dif-
pleasing. Let him paint its simplicity and inno-
cence to the full; but cover its rudeness and mi-
fery. Diftreflls, indeed, and anxieties, he may
attribute to it; for it would be perfelly unnatu-
ral to suppose any condition of human life to be
without them; but they must be of such a na-

ture,

# OF MILTON'S PARADISE LOST.

ture, as not to shock the fancy with any thing
peculiarly difguffing in the pafloral life. The
Shepherd may well be affliaed for the displeasure
of his mistress, or for the loss of a favourite
lamb. It is a sufficient recommendation of any
fiate, to have only such evils as these to deplore.
In flhort, it is the pafloral life somewhat embel-
lifhed and beautified, at leak seen on its fairest
fide only, that the Poet ought to present to us.
But let him take care, that, in embellishing na-
ture, he donot altogether disguise her; or pre-
tend to join with rural simplicity and lappinefs,
such improvements as are unnatural and foreign
to it. If it be not exactly real life which he
presents to us, it muff, however, be somewhat
that resembles it. This, in my opinion, is the
general idea of Pastoral Poetry.

OF MILTON'S PARADISE LOST.

ILTON chalked out for himself a new,
and very extraordinary road in Poetry.

As soon as we open his Paradise Loss, we find
ourselves introduced all at once into an invisible
world, and surrounded with celestial and infer-
nal beings. Angels and Devils are not the ma-
chinery, but principal acors, in the Poem; and

3 what,

what, in any other composition would be the
marvellous, is here only the natural course of
events. A subjec so remote from the affairs of
this world, may furniill ground to those who
think such difcuflions material, to bring it into
doubt, whether Paradile Loft can properly be
clafled among Epic Poems. By whatever name
it is to be called, it is, undoubtedly one of the
higheit efforts of poetical genius; and in one
great charaaeriftic of the Epic Poem, Majesty
and Sublimity, it is fully equal to any that bear
that name.

The nature of the fiu jete did not admit any

great display of charaite' ; but such as could be
introduced are fuili:o:;L i with much propriety.
Satan, in paricu larl nl.kes a ftrikirhg figure,
and is, indced, the best IJvirwn claracter in the
Po°m. Miion lhas not defcrihed him, flch as
we iupp'.lc an infernai spirit. to be. -He has,
more li;a'lir t,' his oi;':; purpoil, given himn a
humarn, ithi. i, a mixed charact 'er, not altoec-
ther viii .i f,;l:

l o,' i Iquaiiics. He is brave

and .,ltil' i>. 'ni' troops. In the midi} of his
impne. y, h' ,. wvit':jut remorse. He is even
t;:.u'/ihed .,

i p itS tor ,tiu- irit parents; andl jus-

tihes i'-.l::ei in 'i:s t'efgn againfr them, from
the :,,e.rfty Oi h.- ! ...ationl. Ic is aduatctd by
amnoiion and rele:tn;c,:t, rather than by pure

L e malice.

malice. In flort, Milton's Satan is no worse
than many a conspirator or factious chief, that
makes a figure in history. The different cha-
raaers of Bcelzebub, Moloc, Belial, are exceed-
ingly well painted in thole eloquent speeches.
which they make, in the Second Book. The
good Angels, though always decfribed with dig-
nity and propriety, have more uniformity th;an
the Infernal Spirits in their appearance; though
among them, too, the dignity of Michael, the
mild condescension of Raphael, and the tried si-
delity of Abdiel, form proper charaderiltical dif-
tintions. The attempt to describe God Al-
mighty himself, and to recount dialogues between
the Father and the Son, was too bold and arduous,
and is that wherein our Poet, as was to have
been expected, has been most unsuccessful. With
regard to his human charaters; the innocence
of our sirs parents, and their love, are finely
and delicately painted. In some of his Ipeeches
to Raphael and to Eve, Adam is, peihaps, too
knowing and refined for his situation. Eve is
more difinftly characerifed. Her gentlenrcs,
modesty, and frailty, mark very expreffivly a
female chara&er.

Milton's great and diflinguifhing excellence is,

his sublimity. In this, perh.ps, he excels Ho-
mer; as there is no doubt of his leaving Virgii,

and

and every other Poet, far behind him. Almost
the whole of the Firif and Second Books of Pa-
radife Loft are continued instances of the sublime.
The profpeft of Hell and of the fallen IHof, the
appearance and behaviour of Satan, the confulta-
tion of the infernal chiefs, and Saran's flight
through Chaos to the borders of this world, dif-
cover the most lofty ideas that ever entered into
the conception of any Poet. In the Sixth Book
also, there is much grandeur, particularly in the
appearance of the Messiah; though foime parts of
that book are censurable; and the witticisms of
the Devils upon the efftc of their artillery, form
an intolerable blemish. Milton's sublimity is of
a difccrent kind from that of Homer. Homer's
is generally accompanied with fire and impetuo-
fity; AMilton's poSflfies more of a calm and amaz-
ing grandeur. Honmer warms and hurries us
along; Milton fixes us in a state of arfonifhment
and elevation. Homer's sublimity appears most
in the de'cription of ac'ions; XMilton's, in that
of wonderful and stupendous objefs.

But though Milton is most distinguished for

his sublimity, yet there is also much of the beau-
tiful, the tender, and the pleasing, in many parts
of his work. V'hen the scene is laid in Paradise,
the imagery is always of the most gay and fmnil-
ing kind. His descriptions shew an uncommonly

E e 2 fertile

fertile imagination; and in his funilics, he is,
for the molt part, remarkably happy. They are
seldom improperly introduced; seldom either low,
or trite. They generally prelent to us images
taken from the sublime or the beautiful class of
obje&s; if they have any faults, it is their al-
luding too frequently to matters of learning, and
to fables of antiqulity. In the latter part of Pa-
radife Loft, there inufi be confelted to be a fall-
ing off. With the fall of our first parents, iMil-
ton's genius fcuns to decline, Beauties, how..
ever, there are, in the concluding Books, of the
tragic kind. The remorse and contrition of the
guilty pair, and their lamentations over Paradise,
wvhen they are obliged to leave it, are very mov-
ing. The last Fpifode of the Angel's fewicn
Adam the fate of his poftericy, is happily ima-
gined; but, in many places, the execution is
languid.

Milton's language and verfifcation have high

merit. His Style is full of majesty, and won-
derfully adapted to his fubjct. His blank verfc
is harmonious and diversified, and affords the
most complete example of the elevation, which
our language is capable of attaining by the force
of numbers. It does not flow like the French
verse, in tame, regular, uniform melody, which
soon tires the ear; but is sometimes finooth and

. Rflowing,

flowing, sometimes rough; varied in its cadence,
and intermixed with discords, so as to suit the
strength and freedom of Epic Compolition.
Negle&ed and prosaic lines, indeed, we some-
times meet with; but, in a work so long, and
in the main so harmonious, these may be for-
given.

On the whole, Paradise Loft is a Poem that

abounds with beauties of every kind, and that
jufly entitles its Author to a degree of fame not
inferior to any Poet; though it muff be also ad-
mitted to have many inequalities. It is the lot
of almost every high and daring genius, not to
be uniform and corre&t. Milton is too frequent-
ly theological and metaphysical; sometimes harsh
in his language; often too technical in his words,
and affeaedly ostentatious of his learning. Many
of his faults muff be attributed to the pedantry of
the age in which he lived. He discovers a vi-
gour, a grasp of genius equal to every thing that
is great; if at some times he falls much below
him!flf, at other times he rites above every Poet,
of the antient or modern world.

Ee3 ON

# ON TRAGEDY.

ON TRAGEDY.
TRAGEDY, confidered as an exhibition of

the chara&ers and behaviour of men, in

some of the most trying and critical situations of
life, is a noble idea of Poetry. It is a direct
imitation of human manners and actions. For
it does not, like the Epic Poem, exhibit charac-
ters by the narration and description of the Poet;
but the Poet disappears; and the personages them-
selves are set before us, afting and speaking what
is suitable to their characers. Hence, no kind
of writing is so great a trial of the Author's pro-
found knowledge of the human heart. No kind
of writing has so much power, when happily
executed, to raise the ifrongeff emotions. It is,
or ought to be, a mirror in which we behold our-
selves, and the evils to which we are exposed; a
faithful copy of the human paflions, with all their
direful effTes, when they are suffered to become
extravagant.

As Tragedy is a high and diftinguiihed species

of Composition, so also, in its general strain and
spirit, it is favourable to virtue. Such power
hath virtue happily over the human mind, by the
wife and gracious constitution of our nature, that
as admiration cannot be railed in Epic Poetry,

so

so neither in Tragic Poetry can our passions be
strongly moved, unless virtuous emotions be
awakened within us. Every Poet finds, that it
is impossible to interest us in any charaaer, with-
out representing that character as worthy and ho-
nourable, though it may not be perfect; and that
the great secret for raising indignation, is to paint
the person who is to be the object of it in the
colours of vice and depravity. He may, indeed,
nay, he muff, represent the virtuous as sometimes
unfortunate, because this is often the cafe in real
life; but he will always fludy to engage our
hearts in their behalf; and though they may be
described as unprofperous, yet there is no instance
of a Tragic Poet representing vice as fully trium-
phant, and happy, in the catallrophe of the piece.
Even when bad men succeed in their designs, pu-
nilhment is made always to attend them; and
misery of one kind or other is shewn to be un-
avoidably conneAed with guilt. Love and admi-
ration of virtuous characters, compafion for the
injured and the diftrefl'ed, and indignation against
the authors of their sufferings, are the sentiments
mofl generally excited by Tragedy. And, there,
fore, though Dramatic Writers may sometimes,
like other Writers, be guilty of imnproprieties,
though they may fail of placing virtue precisely
in the due point of light, yet no reasonable person
can deny Tragedy to be a moral species of Com-
position, THE

# THE ORIGIN OF TRAGEDY.

THE ORIGIN OF TRAGEDY.
T RAGEDY, like other arts, was, in its be-

ginnings, rude and imperfet. Among the

Greeks, from whom our Dramatic Entertain-
ments are derived, the origin of Tragedy w.;s
no other than the Song which was wont to be
sung at the festival of Bacchus. A goat was the
sacrifice offered to that God; after the sacrifice,
the Priefrs, with the company that joined them,
sung hymns in honour of Bacchus ; and from the
name of the victim, Tragos, a Goat, joined with
Ode, a Song, undoubtedly arose the word, Tra-
gedy.

These Hymns, or Lyric Poems, were sung

sometimes by the whole company, sometimes by
separate bands, answering alternately to each
other; making what we call a Chorus, with its
Strophes and Antifirophes. In order to throw
some variety into this entertainment, and to re-
lieve the Singers, it was thought proper to intro-
duce a person who, between the Songs, should
make a recitation inVerse. Thespis, who lived
about 536 years before the Christian sera, made
this innovation; and, as it was relished, Efchy-
lus, who came 50 years after him, and who is
properly the father of Tragedy, went a tfep far-

ther,

# THE CHARACTER OF SHAKESPEARE.

ther, introduced a Dialogue between two persons,
or actors, in which he contrived to interweave
some interefing Story, and brought his ators on
a Stage, adorned with proper scenery and deco-
rations. All that these actors recited, was called
Episode, or additional Song; and the Songs of
the Chorus were made to relate no longer to
Bacchus, their original libject, but to the Story
in which the Actors were concerned. This be-
gan to give the drama a regular form, which was
loon after brought to perfection by Sophocles and
Euripides. It is remarkable, in how fiort a
space of time Tragedy grew up among the
Greeks, from the ruderl beginnings to its molt
pertfect Rate. For Sopllocles, the greatef and
moR correct of all the Tragic Poets, flourished
only 22 years after iEfchylus, and was little
more than 70 years posterior to Thespis.

THE CHARACTER OF SHAKESPEARE.
T HE firfl object which presents itself to us

on the Englifli Theatre, is the great

Shakespeare. Great he may be justly called, as
the extent and force of his natural genius, both
for Tragedy and Comedy, are altogether unri-
valled. But, at the fame time, it is genius

3 Hooting

shooting wild ; deficient in ul.t taftc, and alto-
gether unafifled by knowledge or art. Long
has he been idolised by the British nation; much
has been laid, and much has been written con-
cerning him; Criticifin has been drawn to the
very dregs, in commentaries upon his words and
witticifins; and yet it remains, to this day, in
doubt, whether his beauties, or his f£ults, be
greatest. Admirable fecnes, and passages, with-
out number, there are in his Plays; pafikges be-
yond what are to be found in any other Dramatic
Writer; but there is hardly any one of his Plays
which can be called altogether a good one, or
which can be read with uninterrupted plealure
from beginning to end. Besides extreme irregu-
larities in condut, and grotesque mixtures of
serious and comic in one piece, we are often in-
terrupted by unnatural thoughts, harfli expref-
sions, a certain obscure bombast, and a play upon
words, which he is fond of pursuing; and these
interruptions to our pleasure too frequently oc-
cur, on occasions when we would least wiih to
meet with them. All there faults, however,
Shakespeare redeems, by two of the greatest ex-
cellencies which any Tragic Poet can lossess;
his lively and diversified paintings of charader;
his strong and natural expreflions of paflion.
These are his two chief virtues; on there his
merit lefts. Notwithstanding his many abfurdi-

ties,

tics, all the while we are reading his Plays, we
find ourselves i;! the midst of our fellows; we
meet with men, vulgar perhaps in their manners,
coarse or harsh in their sentiments, but flill they
are men; they speak with human voices, and are
actuated by human passions; we are interested in
what they fay or do, because we feel that they
are of the fame nature with ourselves. It is
therefore no matter of wonder, that from the
more polished and regular, but more cold and
artificial performances of other Poets, the Public
should return with pleasure to such warm and
genuine representations of human nature. Shake-
fpeare possesses likewise the merit of having
created, for himself, a fort of world of preter-
natural beings. His witches, ghosts, fairies,
and spirits of all kinds, are decfribed with such
circumstances of awful and myfierious folem-
nity, and speak a language so peculiar to them-
selves, as firongly to affect the imagination. His
two master-pieces, and in which, in my opinion,
the strength of his genius chiefly appears, are
Othello and Macbeth. With regard to his his-
torical plays, they are, properly speaking, neither
Tragedies nor Comedies; but a peculiar species
of Dramatic Entertainment, calculated to describe
the manners of the times of which he treats, to
exhibit the principal charac'ers, and to fix our

imagina-
3

# ON DRAMATIC POETRY.

imagination on the most interesting events and
revolutions of our own country.

ON DRAMATIC POETRY,

' RAMATIC Poetry has, among all civi-
mD lized nations, been confidered as a rational
and useful entertainmei:t, and judgcd worthy of
careful and serious dilcuflion. According as it
is employ.cd upon the light and the gay, or upon
the grave and affecting incidents of human life,
it divides itilf into the two forms, of Comedy
or Tragedy. But as great and serious objeds
command more attention than little and ludicrous
ones; as the fall of a Hero interefis the public
more than the marriage of a private person ; Tra-
gedy has been always held a more dignified en-
tertainment than Comedy. The one rels upon
the high paflions, the virtues, crimes, and sus-
ferings of mankind; the other on their humours,
follies, and pleasures. Terror and pity arc the
great infiruments of the former; ridicule is the
sole infirument of the latter.

F I-N-I S.
