1

s
1

- 1 17 d."
j -l 1 s

1

1

SERMONS,

BY
HUGH BLAIR, D.D. F.R.S. Ed.

One of the MINISTERS of the HIGH CHURCH,

AND
PROFESSOR of RHETORIC and BELLES LETTRES

in the UNIVERSITY, of EDINBURGH,

VOLUME THE THIRD.
THE EIGHTH EDITION.

LONDON:
PrintedforA.STRAHAN; and T. CADELL, inthe Strand;

and W. CREECH, Edinburgh.

M PCC XCIY.

# TO THE QUEEN.

TO THE
Q U E EN.

MAD A M,
W HEN the First Volume of these

Sermons was published, I did

not presume to request the liberty
of prefixing to them a Name so
illustrious. Encouraged by the
favourable manner in which the
Public has received Two Volumes,,

A 2 I now

I now humbly beg leave, on the
publication of a Third, to lay them
all before your MAJESTY.

Had I been in doubt to whom

they could be presented with the
greatest propriety, the public voice
would instantly have direced me
to the Person to whom I have now
the honour of addressing myself.
Discourses intended to promote re-
ligion and virtue can be inscribed
to none more suitably than to One
who, in the highest nation of life,
has ever supported the cause of re-
ligion by her conspicuous regard
for it; who has advanced the in-
terefts-of virtue, by her distinguish-
ed example; and who, by a happy
union of the amiable with the efti-
mable qualities, has commanded

5 the

the love and the refpea of a great
nation.

It is a signal blessing to a king-

dom, when a Person whose charac-
ter would have refleced honour
upon any condition of fortune, is
placed by Providence in that ele-
vated rank, which allows her virtues
to shine with extensive lustre, and
to diffuse their auspicious influence
over a whole land.

That this influence of your MA-

JESTY'S virtues may long continue
to be felt; that while they alleviate
the cares, and increase the comfort
of our gracious Sovereign; while
they improve the minds, and con-
tribute to the felicity of your illus-
trious offspring; they may, at the
fame time, successfully exert their

A 3 power

power in forming the public man-
ners on a pattern so worthy of imi-
tation, shall be my sincere wish
and earnest prayer.

I have the honour to be, with
profound refpe&,

MAD AM,
Your MAJESTY'S most humble,

And most devoted servant,

HUGH BLAIR.

# THE CONTENTS.

THE
CO N T E N T S.

SERMON I.

On the True Honour of Man.

PROVERBS, iv. 8. Exalt her, andJf '

Jhall promote thee; fl[e Jaall bring thee
to honour. - - Page I

SERMON II.

On Sensibility.
ROMANS, xii. I. Rejoice with them

that do rejoice, and weep with them
that weep. - 22

SERMON III.

On the Improvement of Time.
GENESIS, xlvii. 8. A-ndPharaohfaid

unto ,acob, How old art thou ? 44

2

SERMON IV.

On the Duties belonging to Middle Age.
r COINTHE xiii. 1. I.- When I be-

came a man, I put away childjfl
things. - ,. Page 65

SERMON V.

On Death.
ECCLESIASTES, xii. 5.-Man goeth

to his long home, and the mourners go
about theJreets. - - 88

SERMON VI.

On the Progress of Vicc.
I CORINTH. v. 3. Be not de-

ceivied: Evil communications corrlpt
good manners. - - 1o8

SER MO N VII.

On Fortitude.
PSALM xxvii. 3. Tholugh an hol fl:olld

encamnp againal me, mty heart Jaall
not/fcar. - - 29

SERMON VIII.

On Envy.
I CORINTH. xiii. 4. Charity envieth

not. - - Page iSo

SERMON IX.

On Idleness.
MATTHEW, xx. 6.--TIhy iand ,e

here all the day idle? - 172

SERMON X.

On the Sense of the Divine Presence.
PsAIM lxxiii; 23.-lam continually

with thee.- - 96

SERMON XI.

On Patience.
ILUKE, Xxi. 19. I yoour Patience pojfs

ye yotr fouls. - 219

SERMON XII.

On Moderation.
PHILIPPIANS, iv. 5. Letyour Mode-

ration be kvown unto all men..- 242

S E R M N XIII.
On the Joy and the Bitterness of thlE

Heart.
PROVERBS, xiv. IO. I'he heart knowuctb

his own bittLirnLes, and aJlranger doth
not intermnddle with his jo). Page 263

SERMON XIV.

On Charaters of ImperfeLt Goodness.
MARK, x. 21. 7Then YJcfs bcholling

him, loved him.- - 286

SER MON XV.
On the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,

as a Preparation for Death.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.
MATTHEW, xxvi. 29. But Ifay unto

you, I will not drink henceforth of this
fruiit of the vine, until that day when I
drink it new with you in my Father's
kiigdom. - - 305

SERMON XVI.

On the Use and Abuse of the World.
I CORINTH. Vii. 3vI.-- They that fie

this world as not abefig it.---Page 329

SERMON XVII.
On Extremes in Religious and Moral

Condut.
PROVERBS, iv. 27. Turn not to the

right hand, nor to the left.- 35

S E R M ON XVIII.

On Scoffing at Religion.
2 PETER, iii. 3.-- here Jhall come in

the latI days Scoffers. - 371

S ER M O N XIX.

On the Creation of the World.
GENESIS, i. I. In the beginniiilg God

created the heaven and the earth. 391

SERMON XX.

On the Diffblution of the World.
2 PETER, iii. Io. But the day of the

Lord will come as a thief in the night;
in the which the heavens J7jallpafs
away with a great noise, and the ele-
ments fJall melt with fervent heat;
the earth alo, and the works that are
therein, fiall be burnt up Page 413

# SERMON I. On the TRUE HONOUR of MAN. PROVERBS, iv. 8. Exalt her, and she shall promote thee; she shall bring thee to honour. —

SERMON I.
On the TRUE HONOUR of MAN.

PROVERBS, iv. S.
Exalt her, and Jke Jfall promote thee; Jhe

Jhall bring thee to honour.-

St' HI E love of honour is one of the s ER M.
T firongeft passions in the human

k A. heart. It shews itself in our earlicft
years; and is coeval with the first exer-
tions of reason. It accompanies us through
all the stages of subsequent life; and in
private stations discovers itself no less than
in the higher ranks of society. In their
ideas of what constitutes honour, men

VOL. III. B greatly

SER M. greatly vary, and often,groisly err. But
__y o of somewhat which they conceive to form

pre-eminence and diltinction, all are de-
lirous. All wish, by some means or other,
to acquire refpe& from those among whom
they live; and to contempt and disgrace,
none are insensible.

Among the advantages which attend re-

ligion and virtue, the honour which they
confer on man is frequently mentioned in
scripture as one of the most considerable.
I'Vfdom is the principsal thing, fays Solomon
in the passage where the text lies, therefore
get wifiom; and .ith all 't/y getting, get
zind'erftaniT1ng. Exalt her, alndfJ7e Jfall pro-
mote thee; Ji'c Jhall bring thee to honour, uwhen
thou dof enmbrace her. She fall give to thine
head al n onant fgrace ; a crown of glo-y,
flJa/l Je deliver to thcc. It is evident that
throughout all the sacred writings, and par-
ticularly in the book of Proverbs, by w/f-
don is to be understood a principle of re-
ligion producing virtilous conduc. The
fear of the Lnrd is said t Loe tbc begining
cf w.U/dom: And bv this fear of tha Lord

men

men are said to depart from evil; to walk SERM.
in the way of good men, and to keep the path
of the righteous *. Man is then regulated by
the wisdom which is from above, when he is
formed by piety to the duties of virtue and
morality; and of the wisdom which pro-
duces this effe&c, it is asserted in the text,
that it bringeth us to honour0

On this recommendation of religion it

is the more necessary to fix our attention,
because it is often refused to it by men of
the world. Their notions of honour are
apt to run in a very different channel.
Wherever religion is mentioned, they con-
ne& with it ideas of melancholy and de-
jeation, or of mean and feeble spirits. They
perhaps admit that it may be useful to the
multitude, as a principle of restraint from
disorders and crimes; and that to persons
of a peculiar turn of mind, it may afford
consolation under the difireffes of life. But
from the afive scenes of the world, and
from those vigorous exertions which dif-
play to advantage the human abilities, they

* Prov. ii. 20.

B 2 incline

s I R M. incline totally to exclude it. It may sooth

I.

the timid or the fad: But they confider it
as having no connedion with what is pro-
per to raise men to honour and diftintion.
I shall now endeavour to remove this re-
proach fiom religion; and to shew that in
every situation of human life, even in the
higlheft flations, it forms the honour, as well
as the happincfs of man.

But first, let us be careful to ascertain

what true religion is. I admit that there
is a certain species of religion, (if we can
give it that name,) which has no claim to
such high difsindion; when it is placed
wholly in tfeculation and belief, in the re-
tgulaity of external homage, or in fiery
zeal about contestcd opinions. From a fu-
perftition inherent in the human mind, the
religion of the multitude has always been
tin'tured with too much of this spirit.
They fecrve God as they would serve a
proud mafier, who may be flattered by
their proi.rations, appeased by their gifts,
and gained by loud protestations of attach-
ment to his interelRs, and of enmity to all

whom.

whom they suppose to be his foes. But S E R M.
this is not that :iiflom to which Solomon
ascribes, in the text, such high preroga-
tives. It is not the religion which we
preach, nor the religion of Christ. That
religion consists in the love of God and
the love of man, grounded on faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ, the great Redeemer of
the world, the Intercessor for the penitent,
and the Patron of the virtuous; through
whom we enjoy comfortable access to the
Sovereign of the universe in the ads of
worlhip and devotion. It consists in jus-
tice, humanity, and mercy; in a fair and
candid mind, a generous and affectionate
heart; accompanied with temperance, self-
government, and a perpetual regard in all
our ations to conscience, and to the law
of God. A religious, and a thoroughly
virtuous character, therefore, I confider as
the fame,

BY the true honour of man is to be un-

derftood, not what merely commands ex-
ternal refpeet, but what commands the re-

B 3 fpct

S E R M, fpea of the heart; what raises one to ac-
i-, iknowledged eminence above others of the

fame species; what always creates esteem,
and in its highest degree produces vene-
ration. The question now before us is,
from what cause this eminence arises? By
what means is it to be attained ?

I SAY, first, from riches it does not arise,

These, we all know, may belong to the
vilet of mankind. Providence has scattered
them among the crowd with an undiltin-
guifhing hand, as of purpose to shew of
what small account they are in the fight of
God. Experience every day proves that
the possession of them is consistent with
the most general contempt. On this point
therefore I conceive it not necessary to in-
sift any longer.

NEITHER does the honour of man arise

from mere dignity of rank or office. Were
such diftinftions always, or even generally,
obtained in consequence of uncommon me-
rit, they would indeed confer honour on
the charader. But, in the present Rtate of

society,

society, it is too well known that this is S E R M,
not the cafe. They are often the confe- 1.,_
quence of birth alone. They are some-
times the fruit of mere dependence and
assiduity. They may be the recompence
of flattery, versatility, and intrigue; and
to be conjoined with meanness and base-
ness of character. To persons graced with
noble birth, or placed in high Rtations,
much external honour is due. This is
what the fulbordination of society neceffa-
iily requires; and what every good mem-
ber of it will cheerfully yield. But how
often has it happened that such persons,
when externally relpeted, arc, neverthe-
less, despised by men in their hearts; nay,
Sometimes execrated by the public ? Their
elevation, if they have been unworthy of
it, is so far from procuring them true ho-
nour, that it only renders their infignifi-
cance, perhaps their infamy, more confpi-
cuous. By drawing attention to their con-
duct, it discovers in the most glaring light
how little they deserved the Ration which
they possess.

B. I MUST

s E R M. I MUST next observe, that the proper ho-

nour of man arises not from some of those
splendid actions and abilities which excite
high admiration. Courage and prowels,
military renown, signal vitories and con-
quests, may render the name of a man
famous, without rendering his character
truly honourable. To many brave men,
to many heroes renowned in story, we look
up with wonder. Their exploits are re-
corded. Their praises are flng. They stand
as on an eminence, above the reft of man-
kind. Their eminence, nevertheless, may
not be of that sett before which we bow
with inward esteem and rcfpet. Some-
thing more is wanted for that purpose, than
the conquering arm, and the intrepid mind.
The laurels of the warrior muff at all times
be dyed in blood, and bedewed with the
tears of the widow and the orphan. But
if they have been stained by rapine and in-
humanity; if fordid avarice has marked his
characer; or low and gross sensuality has
degraded his life; the great hero links into
a little man. What at a difiance, or on a

superficial

superficial view, we admire, becomes mean, s E R M.
perhaps odious, when we examine it more _
closely. It is like the Colossal statue, whose
immense size firuck the fpeaator afar off
with astonishment; but when nearly viewed,
it appears disproportioned, unfhapely, and
rude.

Observations of the fame kind may be

applied to all the reputation derived from
civil accompliflhments; from the refined
politics of the flatefnan; or the literary
efforts of genius and erudition. These be-
flow, and, within certain bounds, ought
to beflow, eminence and diftintion on
men. They discover talents which in -them-
selves are flining; and which become high-
ly valuable, when employed in advancing
the good of mankind. Hence, they fre-
quently give rife to fame. But a diftinc-
tion is to be made between fame and true
honour. The former is a loud and noisy
applause; the latter, a more silent and in-
ternal homage. Fame floats on the breath
of the multitude: Honour refis on tile
judgment of the thinking. Fame may

give

S ER M. gve praise while it with-holds esteem;
AvJ True honour implies esteem mingled with

respect. The one regards particular diftin-
guifhed talents; the other looks up to the
whole character. Hence the statesman, the
orator, or the poet, may be famous; while
yet the man himself is far from being ho-
noured. We envy his abilities. We with
to rival them. But we would not chufe to
be classed with him who pofieffed them.
instances of this fort are too often found in
every record of antient or modern history.

FROM all this it follows, that in order to

discern where man's true honour lies, we
muff look, not to any adventitious circum-
fiance of fortune; not to any single sparkling
quality; but to the whole of what forms
a man; what entitles him, as such, to rank
high among that class of beings to which
he belongs; in a word, we must look to
the mind and the foul.-- A mind superior
to fear, to felffh interest and corruption;
a mind governed by the principles of uni-
form reditude and integrity; the fame in

profpcrity

prosperity and adversity; which no bribe SERM.
can seduce, nor terror overawe; neither by ,
pleasure melted into effeminacy, nor by
distress funk into dejecion; such is the
mind which forms the diltintion and emi-
nence of men.-One, who in no fitua-
tion of life is either aflamcd or afraid of
discharging his duty, and acding his proper
part with firmness and constancy; true to
the God whom he worships, and true to
the faith in which he professes to believe;
full of affecion to his brethren of man-
kind; faithful to his fiiends, generous to
his enemies, warm with compaflion to the
unfortunate; felf-denying to little private
interests and pleasures, but zealous for pub-
lic interest and happiness; magnanimous,
without being proud; humble, without be-
ing mean; just, without being harmh; fim-
ple in his manners, but manly in his feel-
ings; on whose word you can entirely rely;
whose countenance never deceives you;
whose professions of kindness are the effu-
sions of his heart; one, in fine, whom, in-
dependent of any views of advantage, you

So would

S E R M. would choose for a superior, could trust inr

as a friend, and could love as a brother:
-- This is the man, whom in your heart,
above all others, you do, you muf:, ho-
nour.

SUCH a charader, imperfectly as it has

now been drawn, all muff acknowledge to
be formed solely by the influence of steady
religion and virtue. It is the effec of
principles which, operating on conscience,
determine it uniformly to pursue whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are hones,
whatsoever things are jifl, what /ever things
are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, what-
fever things are of good report, f there be
any virtue, and f there be aln plraiJe *. By
these means, wlfdoi0 , as the text asserts,
bringeth us to honour.

IN confirmation of this dotrine it is to

be observed, that the honour which man
acquires by religion and virtue is more in-
dependent, and more complete, than what

Philip. iv. 8.

can

can be acquired by any other means. It is SERM.
independent of any thing foreign or exter-
nal. It is not partial, but entire refpec
which it procures. Wherever fortune is
concerned, it is the Rfation or rank which
commands our deference. Where tome
flining quality attracs admiration, it is only
to a part of the charaaer that we pay ho-
mage. But when a person is distinguished
for eninent worth and goodness, it is the
man, the whole man, whom we refpecr.
The honour which he poffeics is intrinsic.
Place him in any situation of life, even an
obscure one; let room only be given for
his virtues to come forth and fIwc them-
selves, and you will revere him; as a pri-
vate citizen; or as the father of a family.
If in higher life he appear more illuftlious,
this is not owing merely to the refpc&e
created by rank. It is, because there a nobler
sphere of aation is opened to him; because
his virtues are brought forth into more
extended exertion; and placed ii fuchi
conlpicuous view, that he appears to grace
and adorn the station which he !ill, Evae

in

SER M. in the silence of retirement, or in the re-

; .J treat of old age, such a man finks not into

forgotten obscurity. His remembered vir-
tues continue to be honoured, when their
acaive exertions are over; and to the last
stage of life he is followed by public esteem
and refped. Whereas, if genuine worth
be wanting, the applause which may have
attended a man for a while, by degrees dies
away. Though, for a part of his life, he
had dazzled the world, this was owing to
his deficiency in the eflential qualities hav-
ing not been fufpe&ed. As soon as the
imposture is difcQvered, the falling fiar
finks in darknefs.-There is therefore a
standard of independent, intrinsic worth,
to which we must bring in the end what-
ever claims to be honourable among men.
By this we must rneafure it; and it will
always be found, that nothing but what is
essential to man has power to command the
refpe& of man's heart.

IT is to be further observed, that the
universal confint of mankind in honouring

real

real virtue, is sufficient to shew what the E R M.
genuine sense of human nature is on this _J
subjec. All other claims of honour are
ambulatory and changeable. The degrees
of refpea paid to external stations vary with
forms of government, and fashions of the
times. Qualities which in one country are
highly honoured, in another are lightly
esteemed. Nay, what in some regions of
the earth diftinguifles a man above others,
might elsewhere expose him to contempt or
ridicule. But where was ever the nation
on the face of the globe, who did not ho-
nour unblemished worth, unaffeed piety,
fledfafl, humane, and regular virtue? To
whom were altars creded in the Heathen
world, but to those whom their merits and
heroic labours, by their invention of useful
arts, or by tome signal ads of beneficence
to their country, or to mankind, were
found worthy, in their opinion, to be tranf-
ferred from among men, and added to the
number of the gods ?-- . Even the coun-
terfeited appearances of virtue, which arc
so often found in the world, are teftiino-

nies

.rnies to its praise. The hypocrite knows

I t, kithout assuming the garb of virtue,

;- ci oilcr advantage he can possess, is in-
Ii -:ant to procure him esteem. Interfer-
cl ce of interest, or perversity of difpofi-
tion, may occasionally lead individuals to
oppose, even to hate, the upright and the
good. But however the charaters of such
persons may be miftakcn or misrepresent-
ed, yet, as far they are acknowledged to
be virtuous, the profligate dare not traduce
them. Genuine virtue has a language that
speaks to every heart throughout the world.
It is a language which is understood by all.
In every region, every clime, the homage
paid to it is the fame. In no one senti-
ment were ever mankind more generally
agreed.

FINALLY, the honour acquired by reli-

gion and virtue is honour divine and im-
mortal. It is honour, not in the eltima-
tion of men only, but in the fight of God;
whose judgment is the standard of truth
and right; whose approbation confers a

4 croW£n

tCr'own of glory that fideth not away. All s R M.
the honour we can gain among men is li- ,
mited and confined. Its circle is narrow.
Its duration is ihort and transitory. But
the honour which is founded on true good-
ness, accompanies us through the whole pro-
grefs of our existence. It enters with man
into a future fiate; and continues to brighten
throughout eternal ages. What procured
him refpeat on earth, ihall render him efli-
mable among the great assembly of angels,
and spirits of jiift men made perfect; where,
we are assured, they who have been eminent
in righteousness shall Jhine as the brightness
of the firmament, anil as the Jars Jor ever
andever*.-Earthly honours are both flort-
lived in their continuance, and, while they
last, tarnished with spots and stains. On
some quarter or other, their brightness is
obscured ; their exaltation is humbled. But
the honour which proceeds from God, and
virtue, is unmixed and pure. It is a lultre
which is derived from heaven; and is likened,
in scripture, to the ligbt of the miornil, w.r:n

Daniel, xii. 3
VOL. III. C, the

SE R M. the fin rieth, even a morning without clouds;

to the light which fJineth more and more unto
the perfei day *. Whereas the honours which
the world confers resemble the feeble and
twinkling flame of a taper; which is often
clouded by the smoke it fends forth; is
always wafting, and soon dies totally away.

LET him, therefore, who retains any sense

of human dignity; who feels within him
that desire of honour which is congenial to
man, aspire to the gratification of this pas-
sion by methods which are worthy of his
nature. Let him not reft on any of those
external diftindions which vanity has con-
trived to introduce. These can procure
him no more than the semblance of re-
fpeet. Let him not be flattered by the ap-
plause which some occasional display of
abilities may have gained him. That ap-
plause may be mingled with contempt.
Let him look to what will dignify his
character as a man. Let him cultivate those
moral qualities which all men in their hearts

2 Sam. xxii. 4,; Prov. iv. 18.

refpea.

refpec. TZif d:" hall then give to hkis heads E R M.
an ornament of grace, a crown of glory Jhall ,
fie deliver to him. This is an honour to
which all may aspire. It is a prize, for which
every one, whether of high or low rank,
may contend. It is always in his power so
to distinguish himself by worthy and virtuous
conduct, as to command the refpea ofthofe
around him; and what is highest of all, to
obtain praise and honour from God.

LET no one imagine that in the religious

part of this charader there is any thing
which casts over it a gloomy shade, or dero-
gates from that esteem which men are gene-
rally disposed to yield to exemplary virtues.
False ideas may be entertained of religion;
as false and imperfect conceptions of virtue
have often prevailed in the world. But to
true religion there belongs no fullen gloom;
no melancholy austerity, tending to with-
draw men from human society, or to dimi-
nifh the exertions of adive virtue. On the
contrary, the religious principle, rightly
understood, not only unites with all such

(C 2 virtues,

S E R M. virtues, but supports, fortifies, and confirms

them. It is so far from obfcuringthe luftrc
of a character, that it heightens and ennobles
it. It adds to all the moral virtues a vene-
rable and authoritative dignity. It renders
the virtuous character more august. To the
decorations of a palace, it joins the majesty
of a temple.

He who divides religion from virtue

understands neither the one nor the other.
It is the union of the two, which confum-
mates the human character and state. It
is their union which has diftinguifled those
great and illufirious men, who have ihone
with so much honour in former ages; and
whose memory lives in the remembrance
of succeeding generations. It is their
union which forms that wij/!om which is
ifom above; that wildoml to which the text
ascribes fucli high efieds; and to which
belongs the iublime cncomiumn given of it
by an author of one of the apocryphal
books of Scripture; with whose beautiful
and emphatical expreflions I conclude this
discourse. Thg mcmol7ril fr virlle ililmmor-

7 t

ial. It is known with God, and with men. S E R M.
Wlhen it is preif nt, mlen take exanple at it;
and when it is gone, they desire it. It wear-
eth a crown, and triiilphelhbjor ever ; hav-
ing gotten the victory, Jlriving for underfled
rewards. Wldom is the breath of the power
of God; and a pure ifluence flowin: from
the glory of the llnigJhty. Therefore can no
defiled thing fall into her. She is the bright-
ness of the everlaftling light; the uJfpotted
mirror of the power of God; and the image
of his goodness. Remaining in herJlf; hce
makcth all things new; and in all ages, en-
tering into hol, fouls,Jhje maketl them friends
[f' God, and prophets: For God loveth noif
but him that dweleth with w iflom. She is
more beatifi thanl th heifui; and ab&ve all the
order of tCheJars. Being compared w7ith light,
Jfle is found before it *.
* Wisdom of Solomon, iv. 2, 3.--vii. 25, z6, 27, 29, 2g.

C3

# SERMON II. ON SENSIBILITY. ROMANS, xii. 15. Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

[ 22 ]
SERMO N II.

ON SENSIBILITY.

ROMANS, xii. 15:
Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep

with them that weep.
SER M. HE amiable spirit of our holy reli-

II. - gion appears in nothing more than

in the care it hath taken to enforce on men
the social duties of life. This is one of the
clearest charaderifiics of its being a reli-
gion whose origin is divine: For every doc-
trine which proceeds from the Father of
mercies will undoubtedly breathe benevo-
lence and humanity. This is the scope of
the two exhortations in the text, to rejoice
vitb them that rejoice, and to weep with them

that

that weep; the one calculated to promote S E R M.
the happiness, the other to alleviate the,_
oirrows, of our fellow-creatures; both con-
curring to form that temper, which interefis
us in the concerns of our brethren; which
dillpofes us to feel along with them, to take
part in their joys, and in their sorrows.
This temper is known by the name of Sen-
fibility; a word which in modern times
we hear in the mouth of every one; a qua-
lity which every one affects to possess; in
itself a most amiable and worthy difpofi-
tion of mind, but often miitaken and
abused; employed as a cover, sometimes,
to a capricious humour; sometimes, to selfish
palfions. I shall endeavour to explain the
nature of true sensibility. I ihall confider
its effec:s; and after shewing its advantages,
shall point out the abuses and iniftaken
forms of this virtue.

THE original constitution of our nature

with refpeac to the mixture of selfish and
social affecions, discovers in this, as in
every other part of our frame, profound and

C 4 admi-

s E R M. admirable wifldom. Each individual is, by

-_ .ahis Creator, committed particularly to him-

self, and his own care. He has it more in
his power to promote his own welfare, than
any other person can possibly have to pro-
mote it. It was therefore fit, it was necef-
fary, that in each individual felf-love should
be the strongest and most aaive inflina.
This felf-love, if he had been a being who
flood solitary and alone, might have pro-
ved sufficient for the purpose both of his
preservation and his welfare. But such is
not the situation of man. He is mixed
among multitudes of the fame nature. In
these multitudes, the felf-love of one man,
or attention to his particular interest, en-
countering the felf-love and the interests of
another, could not but produce frequent
opposition, and innumerable mischiefs. It
was neceflary, therefore, to provide a coun-
terbalance to this part of his nature; which
is accordingly done by implanting in him
those social and benevolent inftinds which
lead him in some measure out of himself, to
i-oilow the interest of others. The strength

of

of these social inftinas is, in general, SERM-

II.

proportioned to their importance in hu- --.
man life. Hence that degree of fenfi-
bility which prompts us to weep with
them that weep, is itronger than that which
prompts us to rejoice with them that rejoice;
for this reason, that the unhappy stand
more in need of our fellow-feeling and
afliflance than the prosperous. Still, how-
ever, it was requisite, that in each indivi-
dual the quantity of felf-love fllould remain
in a large proportion, on account of its
importance to the. preservation of his life
and well-being. But as the quantity rc-
quifite for this purpose is apt both to in-
gross his attention, and to carry him into
criminal excesses, the perfecion of his na-
ture is measured by the due counterpoise
of those social principles which, tempering
the force of the selfish affection, render
man equally iufeful to himself, and to those
with whom he is joined in society. Hence
the use and the value of that sensibility of
which we now treat.

TIAT

SERM. THAT it confitutes an essential part of a
L-,-_ religious charaCter, there can be no doubt.

Not only are the words of the text express
to this purpose, but the whole New Tesla-
ment abounds with passages which enjoin
the cultivation of this disposition. Being
all one body, antd cmembers one of another, we
are commanded to love our neighbour as our-
Js l; to look every, .znan not on his own things
only, bat cn tbofe of others ao o; to be piliful,
to be courteous, to be tender-hcarted; to bear
one anothcr's burdens, andfo to filfil thc law
of ChriJt Y. The dispositions opposite to
sensibility are cruelty, hardness of heart,
contracted attachment to worldly interests;
which every one v:ill admit to be directly
opposite to the Christian characer. Accord-
ing to the different degrees of conftitu-
tional warmth in men's affeCtions, sensibility
may, even among the virtuous, prevail in
different proportions. For all derive not
from nature the fame happy delicacy, and
tenderness of feeling. With some, the heart

* Luke, x. 27.; Philip. ii. .; i Peter, iii. 8.; Ephef.
iv. 23.; Galat. vi. z.

melts,

melts, and relents, in kind emotions, much s E R M.
more easily than with others. But with -
every one who aspires to the character of a
good man, it is necessary that the humane
and compassionate dispositions should be
found. There must be that within him
which shall form him to feel in some degree
with the heart of a brother; and when he
beholds others enjoying happiness, or fees
them funk in sorrow, flall bring his as-
fedions to accord, and, if we may speak
so, to found a note unison to theirs. This
is to rejoice with them that rejoice, and to
weep with them that weep. How much
this temper belongs to the perfection of
our nature, we learn from one who exhi-
bited that perfeCtion in its highest degree.
When our Lord Jesus, on a certain occa-
sion, came to the grave of a beloved friend,
and saw his relations mourning around it,
he presently caught the impreflion of their
sorrow; he groaned infpi.it, and was trou-
bled. He knew that he was about to re-
move the cause of their distress, by re-
calling Lazarus to life: Yet, in the mo-

ment

SE R M. mert of grief, his heart sympathised with

._v .theirs; and, together with the weeping

fiiends, YcJits wept %.

Lr.T us next proceed to confider the effeCt

of this virtuous sensibility on our character,
and our flatc. I ihall confider it in two
views; its influence on our moral conduct,
and its influence on our happincfs.

FIbST, it powerfully influences the pro-

per discharge of all the relative and social
duties of life. Without some dilclharge of
thoif duties there could be no comfort or
fccurity in human society. Men would
become hords of savages, perpetually ha-
rafling onc another. In one way or other,
therefore, the great duties of social life must
be performed. There must be among man-
kind some reciprocal co-operation and aid.
In this, all content. But let us observe,
that these duties may be performed from
different principles, and in different ways.
Sometimes they are performed merely from

* John, ii. 35.

decency

decency and regard to charaer; some- SE RM.
times from fear, and even fiom felfiPinefs,
which obliges men to fliew kindnel;, in or-
der that they may receive returns of it. In
such cafes, the exterior of fair behaviour
may be preserved. But all will admit, that
when from constraint only, the oflices of
seeming kindness are performcd, little de-
pendance can be placed on them, and little
value allowed to them.

By others, these offices arc discharged

solely from a principle of duty. They are
men of cold affetions, and perhaps of an
interested character. But overawed by a
sense of religion, and convinced that they
are bound to be beneficent, they fulfil the
course of relative duties with regular tenor.
Such men ad: from conscience and prin-
ciple. So far they do well, and are wor-
thy of praise. They afliit their friends;
they give to the poor; they do justice to
all. But what a differcnt complexion is
givrn to the fame ations, how much higher
flavour do they acquire, when they sow
from the sensibility of a fccling heart? If

one

S E R M. one be not moved by affecion, even sup-

_, posing him influenced by principle, he

will go no farther than ftri& principle
appears to require. He will advance flow-
ly, and relucantly. As it is justice, not
generosity, which impels him, he will
often feel as a task what he is required by
conscience to perform. Whereas, to him
who is prompted by virtuous sensibility,
every office of beneficence and humanity
is a pleasure. He gives, assists, and relieves,
not merely because he is bound to do so,
but because it would be painful for him
to refrain. Hence, the smallest benefit he
confers rifes in its value, on account of its
carrying the affeaion of the giver impressed
upon the gift. It speaks his heart; and the
discovery of the heart is very frequently of
greater consequence than all that liberality
can bestow. How often will the affeaion-
ate smile of approbation gladden the humble,
and raire the dejeced ? How often will
the look of tender sympathy, or the tear
that involuntarily falls, impart consolation
to the unhappy ? By means of this cor-

6 refpondence

rerpondence of hearts, all the great duties E R M.
which we owe to one another are both per- IA_
formed to more advantage, and endeared
in the performance. From true sensibility
flowv a thousand good offices, apparently
fmiall in themselves, bu: of high import-
ance to the felicity of others; offices which
altogether escape the observation of the cold
and unfeeling, who, by the hardness of
their manner, render themselveS unamiablc,
even when they mean to do good. How
happy then would it be for mankind, if this
affectionate disposition prevailed more ge-
nerally in the world! How much would
the fim of public virtue and public felicity
be increased, if men were always inclined
to rejoice with them that rejoice, and to weep
with tihem that weep !

BUT, besides the effet of such a temper

on general virtue and happiness, let us con-
fider its effect on the happiness of him who
possesses it, and the various pleasures to
which it gives him access. If he be master
of riches or influence, it affords him the

nmans

SE R M. means of increasing his own enjoyment,

II. by relieving the wants, or increasing the

comforts, of others. If he command not
these advantages, yet all the comforts
which he fees in the poffeflion of the
deserving, become in some fort his, by his
rejoicing in the good which they enjoy.
Even the face of nature yields a fatisfadion
to him which the insensible can never
know. The profusion of goodness which
he beholds poured forth on the universe,
dilates his heart with the thought that in-
numerable multitudes around him are blest
and happy. When he fees the labours of
men appearing to prosper, and views a
country.flourifhing in wealth and indus-
try; when he beholds the spring coming
forth in its beauty, and reviving the de-
cayed face of nature; or in autumn be-
holds the fields loaded with plenty, and
the year crowned with all its fruits; he lifts
his affetions with gratitude to the great
Father of all, and rejoices in the general
felicity and joy.

It

IT may indeed be objected, that the fame s E R M

II.

sensibility lays open the heart to be pierced
with many wounds from the distresses
which abound in the world; exposes us to
frequent suffering from the participation
which it communicates, of the sorrows, as
well as of the joys of friendship. But let
it be confidered, that the tender melan-
choly of sympathy is accompanied with a
sensation, which they who feel it would
not exchange for the gratifications of the
selfish. When the heart is strongly moved
by any of the kind affections, even when
it pours itself forth in virtuous sorrow, a
secret attractive charm mingles with the
painful emotion; there is a joy in the
midst of grief. Let it be farther confidered,
that the griefs which sensibility intro-
duces are counterbalanced by pleasures
which flow from the tame Iburce. Senfibi-
lity heightens in general the human pow-
ers, and is connected with acuteness in all
our feelings. If it makes us more alive to
some painful sensations, in return it ren-
ders the pleasing ones more vivid and
animated. The selfish man languishes in

VOL. III. D his

S E R M. his narrow circle of pleasures. They are
a_- confined to what assets his own interest.

He is obliged to repeat the fame gratifica.
tions, till they become insipid. But the
man of virtuous sensibility moves in a wider
sphere of felicity. His powers are much
more frequently called forth into occupa-
tions of pleating activity. Numberless oc-
cafions open to him, of indulging his fa-
vourite taste, by conveying fatisfation to
others. Often it is in his power, in one way
or other, to tooth the afflited heart; to
carry some consolation into the house of
woe. In the scenes of ordinary life, in the
domestic and social intercourses of men,
the cordiality of his affetions cheers and
gladdens him. Every appearance, every
description of innocent happiness, is enjoy-
ed by him. Every native expression of
kindnles and affection among others is felt
by him, even though he be not the object
of it. Among a circle of friends, enjoying
one another, he is as happy as the happiest.
In a word, he lives in a different fort of
wvorld from what the selfish man inhabits.

1so He

PHe possesses a new sense, which enables S EM.
him to behold objects which the selfish;
cannot fee. At the fame time, his enjoy.
ments are not of that kind which remain
merely on the surface of the mind. They
penetrate the heart. They enlarge and
elevate, they refine and ennoble it. To all
the pleating emotions of affection, they add
the dignified consciousness of virtue.--
Children of Men! Men formed by nature
to live and to feel as brethren! How long
will ye continue to efirange yourselves from
one another by competitions and jealou-
fies, when in cordial union ye might be so
much more blest ? How long will ye seek
your happiness in selfish gratifications alone,
neglecing those purer and better sources of
joy, which flow from the affections and
the heart ?

HAVING now explained the nature, and

ihown the value and high advantages of
true sensibility, I proceed to point out some
of the mistaken forms, and abuses of this
virtue.- In modern times, the chief im-

D 2 provement

S E M. provement of which we have to boast, is a

sense of humanity. This, notwithstanding
the felfiihnefs that fiill prevails, is the fa-
vourite and distinguishing virtue of the age.
On general manners, and on several depart-
ments of society, it has had considerable
influence. It has abated the spirit of per-
fecution: It has even tempered the horrors
of war; and man is now more ashamed than
he was in some former ages, of ading as a
savage to man. Hence, sensibility is be-
come so reputable a quality, that the ap-
pearance of it is frequently assumed when
the reality is wanting. Softness of man-
ners must not be mittaken for true fenfi-
bility. Sensibility indeed tends to produce
gentleness in behaviour; and when such
behaviour flows from native affetion, it is
valuable and amiable. But the exterior
manner alone may be learned in the school
of the world; and often, too often, is found
to cover much unfeeling hardness of heart.
Profeflions of sensibility on every trifling
occasion, joined with the appearance of ex-
ceiTive ibftnelf, and a profusion of fcnti-

~. ., mental

mental language, afford always much S E R M.
ground for distrust. They create the sus- ,-
picion of a studied character. Frequently,
under a negligent and seemingly rough
manner, there lies a tender and feeling
heart. Manliness and sensibility are so far
from being incompatible, that the truly
brave are for the molt part generous and
humane; while the soft and effeminate are
hardly capable of any vigorous exertion of
affection.

As sensibility supposes delicacy of feel-

ing with refpea to others, they who affect
the highest sensibility are apt to carry this
delicacy to excess. They are, perhaps, not
incapable of the warmth of disinterested
friendihip; but they are become so re-
fined in all their sensations; they enter-
tain such high notions of what ought to
correspond in the feelings of others to their
own; they are so mightily hurt by every
thing which comes not up to their ideal
standard of reciprocal affection, as to pro-
duce disquiet and uneasiness, to all with

D 3 whom

S E R M. whom they are conneaed. Hence, unjust

II. _..j suspicions of their friends; hence, ground-

less upbraidings, and complaints of un-
kindness; hence, a proneness to take vio-
lent offence at trifles. In consequence of
examining their friends with a micro-
scopic eye, what to an ordinary observer
would not be unpleafing, to them is grat-
ing and disgusting. At the bottom of the
characer of such persons there always lie
much pride, and attention to themselves.
This is indeed a false species of sensibility.
It is the substitution of a capricious and
irritable delicacy, in the room of that plain
and native tenderness of heart, which
prompts men to view others with an indul-
gent eye, and to make great allowances for
the imperfections which are sometimes ad-
herent to the most amiable qualities.

THERE are others who assea not fenfi-

bility to this extreme, but who found
high claims to themselves upon the degree
of interest which they take in the concerns
of others. Although their sensibility can

pro.

produce no benefit to the person who is S E R M.
its objet, they always conceive that it en- ..
titles themselves to some profitable returns.
These, often, are persons of refined and art-
ful character; who partly deceive them-
selves, and partly employ their sensibility
as a cover to interest. He who acs from
genuine affection, when he is feeling along
with others in their joys or sorrows, thinks
not of any recompence to which this gives
him a title. He follows the impulse of his
heart. He obeys the dictates of his nature;
just as the vine by its nature produces
fruit, and the fountain pours forth its
streams. Wherever views of interest, and
profpecs of return, mingle with the feel-
ings of affection, sensibility aCts an imper-
sect part, and entitles us to finall share of
praise.

BUT supposing it to be both complete

and pure, I muff caution you against reft-
ing the whole merit of your character on
sensibility alone. It is indeed a happy con-
ftitution of mind. It fits men for the pro-

D 4 per

E RM. per discharge of many duties, and gives

them access to many virtuous pleasures.
It is requisite for our acceptance either
with God or man. At the fame time, if
it remain an inftindive feeling alone, it
will form no more than an imperfect cha-
rader. Complete virtue is of a more
exalted and dignified nature. It supposes
sensibility, good temper, and benevolent
aftedions; it includes them as essential
parts; but it reaches farther: It supposes
them to be itrengthened and confirmed by
principle; it requires them to be support-
ed by justice, temperance, fortitude, and
all those other virtues which enable us to
ad with propriety in the trying situations
of life.

It is very possible for a man to possess

the kind affecions in a high degree, while
at the fame time he is carried away by
paflion and pleasure into many criminal
deeds. Almost every man values himself
on possessing virtue in one or other of its
forms. He wishes to lay claim to some
quality which will render him inestimable

in

in his own eye, as well as in that of the SEIR M.

II.

public. Hence it is common for many, Y
especially for those in the higher classes of
life, to take much praise to themselves on
account of their sensibility, though it be, in
truth, a sensibility of a very defective kind.
They relent at the view of misery when it is
strongly set before them. Often too, affected
chiefly by the powers of description, it is at
feigned and pictured difirefs, more than at
real misery, that they relent. The tears which
they shed upon these occasions they confider
as undoubted proofs of virtue. They applaud
themselves for the goodness of their hearts;
and conclude, that with such feelings they
cannot fail to be agreeable to Heaven. At
the fame time these transient relentings
make flight impression on conduat. They
give rife to few, if any, good deeds; and
ioon after such persons have wept at some
tragical tale, they are ready to stretch forth
the hand of oppreflion, to grasp at the gain
of injustice, or to plunge into the torrent
of criminal pleasures. This fort of fenfi-
bility affords no more than a fallacious

claim

SE R M. claim to virtue, and gives men no ground
*-- to think highly of themselves. We must

inquire not merely how they feel, but how
their feelings prompt them to aa, in order
to ascertain their real characer.

I SHALL conclude with observing, that

sensibility, when genuine and pure, has a
strong connection with piety. That warmth
of affecion and tenderness of heart, which
lead men to feel for their brethren, and to
enter into their joys and sorrows, ihould
naturally dispose them to melt at the re-
membrance of the divine goodness; to
glow with admiration of the divine Ma-
jefty; to fend up the voice of praise and
adoration to that Supreme Being who
makes his creatures happy. He who pre-
tends to great sensibility towards men, and
yet has no feeling for the high objecs of
religion, no heart to admire and adore the
great Father of the universe, has reason to
distrust the truth and delicacy of his fenfi-
bility. He has reason to fufped, that in
some corner of his heart there lodges a fe-

cret

cret depravity, an unnatural hardness and S E RM.
callousness, which vitiates his characer.-
- Let us study to join all the parts of
virtue in proper union; to be confidently
and uniformly good; just and upright, as
well as pitiful and courteous; pious, as well
as sympathising. Let us pray to him who
made the heart, that he would fill it with
ail proper dispositions; re&ify all its errors;
,.nd render it the happy abode of personal
integrity and social tenderncfs, of purity,
benevolence, and devotion.

# SERMON III. On the IMPROVEMENT of TIME. GENESIS, xlvii. 8. And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old art thou?

[ 44 ]

SE RMON III.
On the IMPROVEMENT of TIME.

GENESIS, xlvii. S.
Aind Pharaoh said unto Jacob, lcow old

art thou ?
E R M. T I E is of To great importance to man-

kind that it cannot too often employ

religious meditation. There is nothing in
the management of which wifdomi is more
requisite, or where mankind display their
inconsistency more. In its particular par-
cels, they appear entirely careless of it; and
throw it away with thoughtless profusion.
But, when collected into some of its great
portions, and viewed as the measure of
their continuance in life, they become fen-

fible

fible of its value, and begin to regard it SE R M.
with a serious eye. While day after day is
wafted in a course of idleness or vicious
pleasures, if some incident shall occur
which leads the most inconsiderate man to
think of his age, or time of life; how
much of it is gone; at what period of it he
is now arrived; and to what proportion of
it he can with any probability look for-
ward, as yet to come; he can hardly avoid
feeling some secret compunction, and re-
flefting seriously upon his slate. Happy,
if that virtuous impression were not of mo-
mentary continuance, but retained its in-
fluence amidst the succeeding cares and
pleasures of the world! To the good old
Patriarch mentioned in the text, we have
reason to believe that such impreflions
were habitual. The question put to him
by the Egyptian monarch produced, in his
answer, such reflections as were naturally
suited to his time of life. Anld Jacob ,said
unto Pharaoh, the days of the years of Imy pil-
grimage re re an thundred and thirty years:
few and evil have the days of the years of my

1;

S E R M. liJf been, and have not attained unto the days

\- - i
* of the years of the life of my fathers, in the

days of their pilgrimage. But the peculiar
circumstances of the Patriarch, or the num-
ber of his years, are not to be the fubjeat
of our present consideration. My purpose
is to show how we should be affeced in
every period of human life, by reflection
upon our age, whether we be young or
advanced in years; in order that the quef-
tion, How old art thou . may never be put
to any of us without some good effec.
There are three different portions of our
life which such a queflion naturally calls to
view; that part of it which is past; that
which is now present; and that to which
we fondly look forward, as future. Let us
confider in what manner we ought to be
affected by attending to each of these.

I. LET us review that part of our time

which is past. According to the progress
which we have made in the journey of life,
the field which paet years present to our re-
view will be more or less extensive, But

to

to every one they will be found to afford s E RM.
sufficient matter of humiliation and regret. -V--
For where is the person who having aded
for any time in the world, remembers not
many errors, and many follies in his past
behaviour? Who dares to fay, that he has
improved, as he might have done, the va-
rious advantages which were afforded him;
and that he recalls nothing for which he
has reason either to grieve, or to blush?
When we recolleC the several flages of life
through which we have passed; the fuc-
ceffive occupations in which we have been
engaged, the designs we have formed, and
the hopes and fears which alternately have
filled our breast; how barren for most
part is the remembrance; and how few
traces of any thing valuable or important
remain? Like characters drawn on the
sand, which the next wave washes totally
away, so one trivial fucceflion of events has
effaced the memory of the preceding; and
though we have seemed all along to be
busy, yet for much of what we have aaed,
we are neither wiser nor better than if such

aaions

S E R M. acions had never been. Hence let the re-

_I j trofped of what is past produce, as its first

effect, humiliation in our own eyes, and
abatement before God. Much do human
pride and felf-complacency require some
correction; and that correction is never
more effectually administered, than by an
impartial and serious review of former life.

But though pal time be gone, we are

not to confider it as irredeemably loft. To
a very profitable purpose it may yet be ap.
plied, if we lay hold of it while it remains in
remembrance, and oblige it to contribute to
future improvement. If you have gained
nothing more by the years that are past,
you have at least gained experience; and
experience is the mother of wisdom. You
have seen the weak parts of your character;
and may have discovered the chief sources of
your misconduct. To these let your atten-
tion be directed; on there, let the proper
guards be set. If you have trifled long,
resolve to trifle no more. If your passions
have often betrayed and degraded you,
study how they may be kept, in future,

3 under

under better discipline. Learn, at the fame s EIRMi
time, never to trust presumptuously in your ,-
own wisdom. Humbly apply to the Au-
thor of your being, and beseech his grace
to guide you safely through those slippery
and dangerous paths, in which experience
has shown that you are so ready to err, and
to fall.

In reviewing past life, it cannot but oc-

cur, that many things now appear of in-
considerable importance, which once occu-
pied and attached us, in the highest de-
gree. Where are those keen competitions,
those mortifying disappointments, those
violent enmities, those eager pursuits, which
We once thought were to last for ever, and
on which we confidered our whole happi-
ness or misery as suspended ? We look
back upon them now, as upon a dream
which has passed away. None of those
mighty consequences have followed which
we had predicted. The airy fabric has va-
nifhed, and left no trace behind it. We
smile at our former violence; and wonder
how such things could have ever appeared

VOL, III. E so

S E R s. o significant and great. We may reft as-
-_ fured, that what hath been shall again be.

When time shall once have laid his lenient
hand on the passions and purluits of the
present moment, they too shall lose that
imaginary value which heated fancy now
beltows upon them. Hence, let them al-
ready begin to subside to their proper level.
Let wifdomn infuse a tin&.ire of moderation
into the eagerness of contcft, by anticipat-
ing that period of coolncfs, which the lapse
of.tilne will, o' itiflf, certainly bring.--
When we look back on years that are past,
how swiftly do they appear to have fleeted
away ? How inenfibly has one period of
life stolen upon us after another, like the
luccefive incidents in a tale that is told?
Before we were aware, childhood had grown
up into youth; youth had passed into man-
hood; and manhood now, perhaps, begins
to assume the grey hair, and to decline
into old age. When we are carrying our
views forward, months and years to come
teem to firetch through a long and exten-
live space. But when the time fliall arrive

of

of our looking back, they shall appear con- S El R M.

lI.

traaed within narrow bounds. Time, when Hy
yet before us, seems to advance with flow
and tardy steps; no sooner is it palt, than
we discern its wings.

It is a remarkable peculiarity in the re-

trofpea of former life, that it is commonly
attended with some measure of heaviness of
heart. Even to the most prosperous, the
memory of joys that are palt is accompa-
nied with secret sorrow. In the days of
former years, many objecs arise to view,
which make the most unthinking, grave;
and render the serious, fad. The pleafur-
able scenes of youth, the objects on which
our affecions had been early placed, the
companions and friends with whom we had
spent many happy days, even the places
and the occupations to which we had been
long accustomed, but to which we have
now bid farewell, can hardly ever be re-
called, without softening, nor, sometimes,
without piercing the heart. Such sensa-
tions, to which few, if any, of my hearers
are wholly strangers, I now mention, as

E 2 affording

S E M. affording, a fRrong proof of that vanity cf

- the human state, which is so often repre-

sented in the sacred writings: And vain
indeed mutt that (tate be, where shades of
grief tinge the recollecion of its brightest
icenes. But, at the fame time, though it
be very proper ilat such meditations should
fometctes enter the mind, yet on them I
advise not the gentle and tender heart to
dwell too long. They are apt to produce
at fi'itcfs mclancholy; to dejec, without
brinilg mu;nch improvement; to thicken
the gloomwhich already hangs over human
life, without furnishing proportionable assist-
ance to virtue.

Let me advise you, rather to recall to view,

such parts of former conduct, if any fich
there be, as afford in the remembrance a
rational fatisfation. And what parts of
conduct are these? Are they the pursuits
of sensual pleasure, the riots of jollity, or
the displays of show and vanity? No; I
appeal to your hearts, my friends, if what
you recolleCt with most pleasure be not the
innocent, the virtuous, the honourable parts

of

of your paR life; when you were employed s ElR M.
in cultivating your minds, and improv- -
ing them with useful knowledge; when,
by regular application and persevering la-
bour, you were laying the foundation of
future reputation and advancement; when
you were occupied in discharging with fide-
lity the duties of your flation, and ac-
quiring the elteem of the worthy and the
good; when, in some trying situation, you
were enabled to at your part with firm-
ness and honour; or had eiized the happy
opportunity of affifling the deserving, of
relieving the distressed, and bringing down
Upon your heads the blhigs of thJo that
were ready to per/if.-Thcfe, these are the
parts of former life which are recalled with
most fatisfation ! On them alone, no hea-
viness of heart attends. You enjoy them as
a treacure which is now flored up, and put
beyond all danger of being loft. These
cheer the hours of fadneis, lighten the bur-
den of old age, and, through the mortify-
ing remembrance of much of the past, dart
a ray of light and joy.-From the review

E 3 of

s E R M. of these, and the comparison of them with
i_-
- the deceitful pleasures of fin, let us learn

how to form our effimate of happiness. Let
us learn what is true, what is false, in hu-
man pleasures; and from experience of the
past, judge of the quarter to which we
muff in future turn, if we would lay a foun-
dation for permanent fatisfacion. After
having thus reviewed the former years of
our life, let us confider,

II. WHAT attention is due to that period

of age in which we are at present placed.
Here lies the immediate and principal ob-
jea of our concern. For the recollection
of the past is only as far of moment, as it
aQs upon the present. The past, to us
now, is little; the future, as yet, is no-
thing. Between these two great gulphs of
time fubfits the present, as an isthmus or
bridge, along which we are all pafling.
With hasty and inconsiderate steps let us
not pass along it; but remember well, how
much depends upon our holding a fleady,
and properly conducted course. kihatfo-

ever

ever thine 1jhaudfnzdeth to do, do it niC with S E R M.
all th might; for now is the acce/ted time;

i-i -

now is the day offalvntion. Many directions
might be given for the wife and religious
improvement of the present; a few of
which only I flall hint.

Let us begin with excluding those super-

iluous avocations which unprofitably con-
fume it. Life is fliort; much that is of
real importance remains to be done. If we
fiifler the present tim,;e to he wafted either
in absolute idlcnefs or in frivolous em-
ployments, it will hereafter call for ven-
geance against us. Removing therefore
what is merely filper;luous, let us bethink
ourselves of what is most material to be at-
tended to at prefcnt: As, first and chief,
the great work of our lhlvation; the dif-
charge of the religious duties which we
owe to God our Creator, and to Christ our
Redeemer. God wailchb as yr' to be gr7a-
cious ; whether he will wait longcr, none of
us can tell. Now, therefore, efie, the Lord
while he may be found, call upon him

S ieh'ilC
he is near. Our spiritual interefis will be

E. best

S E R M. best promoted by regular performance of

all the duties of ordinary life. Let these,
therefore, occupy a great share of the pre.
sent hour. Whatever our age, our charac-
ter, our profeflion, or station in the world,
requires us to do, in that let each revolving
day find us busy. Never delay till to-mor-
row, what reason and conscience tell you
ought to be performed to-day. To-mor-
row is not yours; and though you should
live to enjoy it, you must not overload it
with a burden not its own. Sfficient for
the day will prove the ditty thereof.

The observance of order and method, is

of high consequence for the improvement
of present time. He who performs every
cmployment in its due place and season,
suffers no part of time to escape without
profit. He multiplies his days; for he
lives much in little space. Whereas he who
negleCts order in the arrangement of his
occupations, is always losing the present in
returning upon the past, and trying, in
vain, to recover it when gone.-Let me
advise you frequently to make the present

employ,

employment of time an objeet of thought. SER M.
Ask yourselves, about what are you now
busied ? What is the ultimate scope of
your present purfiits and cares ? Can you
justify them to yourselves ? Are they likely
to produce any thing that will survive
the moment, and bring forth some fruit
for futurity? He who can give no satis-
facory answer to such quellions as these,
has reason to fufpeQ that his employment
of the present is not tending either to his
advantage, or his honour.- Finally, let
me admonifl you, that while you study to
improve, you fliould endeavour also to en-
joy, the present hour. Let it not be dif-
turbed with groundless discontents, or poi-
soned with foolifl anxieties about what is
to come: But look up to Heaven, and ac-
knowledge, with a grateful heart, the adual
blessings you enjoy. If you must admit,
that you are now in health, peace, and
safety; without any particular or uncom-
mon evils to afflit your condition; what
more can you reasonably look for in this
vain and uncertain world ? How little can

the

S ER M. the greatest prosperity add to such a state
Li-y-- Will any future situation ever make you

happy, if now, with so few causes of grief,
you imagine yourselves miserable? The
evil lies in the state of your mind, not in
your condition of fortune; and by no al-
teration of circumfianccs is likely to be re-
medied. Let us now,

III. CONSIDER with what dispositions

we ought to look forward to thole years of
our life that may yet be to come. Merely
to look forward to them, is what requires
no admonition. IFuturity is the great ob-
jec on which the imaginations of men are
employed; for the fake of which the past
is forgotten, and the prcfent too often ne-
gleEed. All time is in a manner swallow-
ed up by it. On futurity men build their
designs; on futurity, they reft their hopes;
and though not happy at the present, they
always reckon on becoming so, at some
subsequent period of their lives. This pro-
penfity to look forward, was for wife pur-
poles implanted in the human breast. It

1I ferlves

serves to give proper occupation to the active s E R M.
powers of the mind, and to quicken all its i.--1
exertions. But it is too often immoderately
indulged and grossly abused. The cu-
riofity which sometimes prompts persons to
inquire, by unlawful methods, into what
is to come, is equally foolish and sinful.
Let us restrain all desire of penetrating far-
ther than is allowed us, into that dark and
unknown region. Futurity belongs to God;
and happy for us is that mysterious veil,
with which his wisdom has covered it.
Were it in our power to lift up the veil,
and to behold what it conceals, many and
many a thorn we should plant in our
breafds. The proper and rational condu&
of men with regard to futurity, is regulated
by two considerations: Firif, that much
of what it contains, must remain to us
absolutely unknown; next, that there are
also some events in which it may be cer-
tainly known and foreseen.

First, much of futurity is, and must be,
entirely unknown to us. When we fpecu-

late

SERM. late about the continuance of our life, and
..-Y-a the events which are to fill it, we behold a

river which is always flowing; but which
soon escapes out of our fight, and is cover-
ed with mists and darkness. Some of its
windings we may endeavour to trace; but
it is only for a very short way that we are
able to pursue them. In endless conjec-
tures we quickly find ourselves bewil-
dered; and, often, the next event that
happens, baffles all the reasonings we had
formed concerning the succession of events.
The consequence which follows from this
is, that all the anxiety about futurity,
which passes the bounds of reasonable pre-
caution, is unprofitable and vain. Certain
measures are indeed necefiary to be taken
for our safety. We are not to rulh for-
ward inconsiderate and headlong. We muff
make, as far as we arc able, provision for
future welfare; and guard against dangers
which apparently threaten. But having
done this, we must stop; and leave the reft
to him who difpofeth of futurity at his

will.

will. He who fittelt in the heavens laughs EIR M.
at the wisdom and the plans of worldly .-
men. Wherefore boqnJ not thfdlf of to-mor-
row; for thou iknoweZ not owchat a day may
bring forth. For the fame reason, despair
not of to-morrow; for it may bring fortli
good as well as evil. Vex not yourselves with
imaginary fears. The impending black
cloud, to which you look up with so much
dread, may pass by harmless; or though it
should discharge the florm, yet, before it
breaks, you may be lodged in that lowly
man!;on which no storms ever touch.

In the next place, there arc in futurity

some cvents which may be certainly fore-
fcen by us, through all its darkncfs. First,
it may be confidently predited, that no
situation ir.to which it will bring us, shall
ever anfwver fully to our hopes, or confer
perfecil happineis. This is as certain as if
we already ahw it, that life, in its future
periods, will continue to be what it has
heretofore been; that it will be a mixed
and varied slate; a chequered scene of
pleafires and pain?, of fiu;itive joys and

transient

SE RM. transient griefs, succeeding in a round to

Ill.
h-i-. one another. Whether we look forward

to the years of youth, or to those of man-
hood and advanced life, it is all the fame.
The world will be to us, what it has been
to generations pat. Set out, therefore, on
what remains of your journey under this
persuasion. According to this measure,
estimate your future pleasures; and calcu-
late your future gains. Carry always along
with you a modeit and a temperate mind.
Let not your expectations from the years
that are to come rife too high; and your
disappointments will be fewer, and more
easily supported.

Farther; this may be reckoned upon as

certain, that in every future situation of life,
a good conscience, a well-ordered mind, and
a humble trust in the favour of Heaven,
will prove the essential ingredients of your
happiness. In refleding upon the past,
you have found this to hold. Assure your-
selves that in future, the cafe will be the
fame. The principal corredives of human
vanity and distress, must be fought for in

religion

religion and virtue. Entering on pathsSERM.

II.

which to you are new and unknown, place
yourselves under the condua of a divine
guide. Follow the great Shepherd of Israel,
who, amidst the turmoil of this world,
leads his flock into greei pflur'es, and by the
.fill waters. As you advance in life, fludy
to improve, both in good principles and
in good praacice. You will be enabled to
look to futurity without fear, if, whatever
it brings, it lhall find you regularly em-
ployed in doino jif;lj, loving mercy, and
walking humnbly with the Lor d you God.

Lastly, Whatever other things may be

dubious in futurity, two great events are
undoubtedly certain, death and judgment.
These, we all know, are to terminate the
whole course of time; and we know them
to be not only certrin, but to bc approach-
ing nearer to us, in confcquence of every
day that pafies over our heads. To there,
therefore, let us look forward, not with the
dread of children, but with that manly fe-
rioufinefs which belongs to men and Chris:-
ians. Let us not avert our view from

them,

SE R M. them, as if we coulJ place them at some

IlL
_.-Ji greater diltance by excluding them from

our thoughts. This indeed is the refuge of
too many; but it is the refuge of fools,
who aggravate thereby the terrors they
muff: encounter. For he that concth, fJall
co1me, and will not tarry. To his coming,
let us look with a feady eye; and as life
advances through its progreflive flages, pre-
pare for its close, and for appearing before
him who made us.

THUS I have endeavoured to point out

the refletions proper to be made, when the
question is put to any of us, low old art
thouP I have Ihewn with what eye we should
review the pal: years of our life; in what
light we should confider the present; and
tvith what dispositions look forward to the
future: In order that such a question may
always leave some serious impression be-
hind it; and may dilpofe us so to number
the years of our life, that we amay apply our
hearts unto iwjionz.

# SERMON IV. On the DUTIES belonging to MIDDLE AGE. I CORINTHIANS, xiii. 11. — When I became a man, I put away childish things.

[ 65 ]

SERMON IV.
On the DUTIES belonging to MIDDLE

AGE.

I CORINTHIANS, xiii. II.
--When I became a man, I put away

childi/h things.
TO every thing, fays the wife man, there S ER M.

is a fi'aon; and a time to every purpose ,

under heaven %. As there are duties which
belong to particular situations of fortune,
so there are duties also which result from
particular periods of human life. In every
period of it, indeed, that comprehensive
rule takes place, Fear God, and keep his corn-

Eccles .

ii .
VOL. III. F mand-

s E R M. Rl.aiim ents; for this is the whole duty of

IV.
i ^ 1man ~.' Piety to God, and charity to men,

are incumbent upon persons of every age, as
i'on as they can think and as. Yet these
virtues, in different stages of life, assume
different forms; and when they appear in
that form which is most suited to our age,
they appear with peculiar gracefulness;
they give propriety to conduet, and add
dignity to charader. In former discourses
I have treated of the virtues which adorn
youth, and of the duties which specially
belong to old age t. The circle of those
duties which reipect middle age is indeed
much larger. As that is the busy period
in the life of man, it includes in effelt the
whole compass of religion, and therefore
cannot have its peculiar characer so de-
finitely marked and afccrtained. At the
fame time, during those years wherein one
is sensible that he has advanced beyond
the confines of youth, but has not yet
passed into the region of old age, there are
* Eccles. xii. I. t See vol. i. Sermons i and 12.

8 several

several things which refledion on that por- SER M.
tion of human life suggests, or at least ,
ought to suggest, to the mind. Inconfi-
derate muff he be, who, in his gradual
progress throughout middle age, pauses not,
at times, to think how far he is now re-
ceding from youth; how near he draws to
the borders of declining age; what part it
is now incumbent on him to ad; what
duties both God and the world have a title
to exped from him. To there I am at
present to call your attention; as what
materially concern the greatest part of those
who are now my hearers.

I. I BEGIN with observing, that the firtP

duty of those who are become men is, as
the text expresses it, to put away childijh
things. The season of youthful levities,
follies, and paflions, is now over, These
have had their reign; a reign perhaps too
long; and to which a termination is cer-
tainly proper at last. Much indulgence is
due to youth. Many things admit of ex-
cure then, which afterwards become un-

F ? pardon-

SERM . pardonable. Some tings may even be
. . graceful in youth, which, if not criminal,

are at least ridiculous, in persons of matu-
rer years. It is a great trial of wifilom,
to make our retreat from youth with pro-
priety; to aflimre the character of man-
hood, without exposing ourfelvcs to re-
proach, by an unseasonable remainder of
juvenility on the one hand, or by precise
and difgulting formality, on the other.
Nature has placed certain boundaries, by
which she discriminates the pleasures, ac-
tions, and employments, that are suited to
the different Rtages of human life. It be-
comes us neither to overleap those boun-
daries by a transition too hasty and vio-
lent; nor to hover too long on one fide of
the limit, when nature calls us to pass over
to the other.

There are particularly two things in

which middle age flould preserve its dif-
tinaion and separation from youth; these
are levities of behaviour, and intemperate
indulgence of pleasure. The gay spirits of
the young often prompt an inconsiderate

degree

degree of levity, sometimes amusing, some- E R M.
times offensive; but for which, though be- _i
traying them occasionally into serious dan-
gers, their want of experience may plead
excuse. A more composed and. manly
behaviour is expeded in riper years. The
affecation of youthful vanities degrades
the dignity of manhood; even renders its
manners less agreeable; and by awkward
attempts to please, produces contempt.
Chlerfulnefs is becom;:g in every age.
But the proper cheerfulness of a man is as
different from the levity of the boy, as the
fligllt of the eagle is from the fluttering of
a sparrow in the air.

As all unseasonable returns to the levity

of youth ought to be laid afide,-an admo-
nition which equally belongs to both the
fexes,,-ftill more are we to guard against
those intemperate indulgences of pleasure,
to which the young are unhappily prone.
From these we cannot too soon retreat.
They open the path to ruin, in every pe-
riod of our days. As long, however, as
rllefe excefles are confined to the rffi fltage

F 3 or

S E R M. of life, hope is left, that when this fever of
il__ the spirits ihall abate, sobriety may gain the

ascendant, and wiser counsels have power
to influence conduc. But after the sea-
son of youth is past, if its intemperate fpi-
rit remain; if, instead of listening to the
calls of honour, and bending attention to
the cares and the business of men, the
fame course of idleness and sensuality con-
tinue to be pursued, the cafe becomes
more desperate. A fad presumption arises,
that long immaturity is to prevail; and
that the pleafires and passions of the
youth are to fink and overwhelm the man.
Difficult, I confess, it may prove to over-
come the attachments which youthful habits
had for a long while been forming. Hard,
at the beginning, is the talk, to impose on
our conduc rctraints which are altogether
unaccuflomed and new. But this is a trial
which every one must undergo, in enter-
ing on new scenes of action, and new pe-
riods of life. Let lhofe who are in this
situation bethink themfclves, that all is now
at flake. Their charaaer and honour, their

future

future fortune and success in the world, S E R M.

IV.

depend in a great measure on the steps they
take, when first they appear on the stage
of active life. The world then looks to
them with an observing eye. It fludies their
behaviour; and interprets all their motions,
as presages of the line of future conduca
which they mean to hold. Now, there-
fore, put away chlddiJsJ things; dirnifs your
former trifling amusements, and youthful
pleasures; blast not the hopes which your
friends are willing to conceive of you.
Higher occupations, more serious cares,
await you. Turn your mind to the steady
and vigorous discharge of the part you are
called to ac. This leads me,

II. To point out the particular duties

which open to thole who are in the middle
period of life. They are now come for-
ward to that field of aftion where they are
to mix in all the fiir and bustle of the
world; where all the human powers are
brought forth into full exercise; where all
that is conceived to be important in hu-

4 man

SE R M. man affairs is incessantly going on around

IV.
1.-v- them. The time of youth was the prepa-

ration for future afaion. In old age our ac-
tive part is supposed to be finished, and reft
is permitted. Middle age is the season when
we are expeced to display the fruits which
education had prepared and ripened. In
this world, all of us were formed to be
assistants to one another. The wants of
society call for every man's labour, and re-
quire various departments to be filled up.
They require that some be appointed to
rule, and others to obey; some to defend
the society from danger, others to main-
tain its internal order and peace; some to
provide the conveniencics of life, others to
promote the improvement of the mind;
many to work; others to contrive and di-
rect. In short, within the sphere of society
there is employment for every one; and in
the course of there employments, many a
moral duty is to be performed; many a
religious grace to be exercised. No one is
permitted to be a mere blank in the world.
No rank, nor fIation, no digpity of birth,

no,

nor extent of poflhefions, exempt any man S ER RM.
fro;n contributing his share to public uti- ....
lity and good. This is the precept of God.
This is the voice of nature. This is the
just demand of the human race upon one
another.

One of the first queflions, therefore,

which every man who is in the vigour of
his age flould put to himifel is, " What
" am I doing in this world ? What have
" I yet done, whereby I may glorify God,
" and be useful to my fellows ? Do I pro-
" perly fill up the place which belongs to
' my rank and station? Will any memo-
" rial remain of my having existed on the
" earth? or are my days passing fruitless
" away, now when I might be of some
" importance in the system of human as-
" fairs?"-Let not any man imagine
that he is of no importance, and has,
upon that account, a privilege to trifle
with his days at pleasure. Talents have
been given to all; to some ten; to others,
?/1ew; to others, two. Occury with thefct

* Luke, xix. 13.

till

SER M. till I com;e, is the command of the great

IV.
,__^ Master to all. Where superior abilities are

possessed, or diftinguiihed advantages of
fortune are enjoyed, a wider range is as-
forded for useful exertion, and the world is
entitled to expeC it. But among those
who fill up the inferior departments of
society, though the fphcre of usefulness be
more contracted, no one is left entirely
insignificant. Let us remember, that in
all stations and conditions, the important
relations take place, of masters and ser-
vants, hufuands and wives, parents and
children, brothers and friends, citizens and
fubjeds. The discharge of the duties ari-
sing from those various relations, fobrms
a great portion of the work assigned to
the middle age of man. Though the part
we have to aa may be confined within a
humble line, yet if it be honourably acled,
it will be always found to carry its own
reward.

In fine, industry, in all its virtuous

forms, ought to inspirit and invigorate
manhood. This will add to it both latif-

fadion

fation and dignity; will make the current s E R M.

IV.

of our years, as they roll, flow along in a
clear and equable stream, without the pu-
trid stagnation of sloth and idleness. Idle-
ness is the great corrupter of youth; and
the bane and diflonour of middle age. He
who, in the prime of life, finds time to hang
heavy on his hands, may with much reason
fuipec, that he has not consulted the duties
which the consideration of his age im-
posed upon him; assuredly he has not
consulted his own happiness. But amidst
all lte bustle of the world, let us not
forget,

III. To guard with vigilance againit the

peculiar dangers which attend the period of
middle life. It is much to be regretted,
that in the present state of things there is
no period of man's age in which his virtue
is not exposed to perils. Pleasure lays its
snares for youth; and after the season of
youthful follies is past, other temptations,
no less formidable to virtue, presently arise.

The

SbR . 'P The love of pleasure is su;cceeded by the

IV.
_,) passion for interest. In this passion the

whole mind is too often ablbrbed ; and thle
change thereby induced on the charader is
of no amiable kind. Amidrf the excesses
of youth, virtuous affeciions often remain.
The attachments of fricndilip, the love of
honour, and the warmth of feinibility, give
a degree of lustre to the clharacer, and co-
ver many a failing. But intercft, when it is
become the ruling principlc, both debates
the mind, and hardens the heart. It dead-
ens the feeling of every thing that is sub-
lime or refined. It contrads the afiections
within a narrow circle; and cexinguiflcs
all those sparks of generofiy and te nderneis
which once glowed in the brcat.

In proportion as worldiy puriuits multi-

ply, and competitions rife, ambition, jcalou-
fy, and envy, combine with interest to ex-
cite bad passions, and to increase the corrup-
tion of the heart. At first, perhaps, it was
a man's intention to advance himself in the
world by none but fair and laudable mc-

thods,

thods, He retained for some time an aver- S E R M.
sion to whatever appeared dishonourable. -
But here, he is encountered by the violence
of an enemy. There, he is supplanted by
the address of a rival. The pride of a fu-
perior insults him. The ingratitude of a
friend provokes him. Animofities ruffle
his temper. Suspicions poison his mind.
-He firids, or he imagines that he finds, the
artful and designing surrounding him on
every hand. He views corruption and
iniquity prevailing; the modest negleaed;
the forward and the crafty riGng to diftinc-
tion. Too cafily, from the example of
cthers, he learns that mynflry of vice; call-
ed the way of the world. What he has
learned lie fancies neceflary to pracife for
his own defence; and of course afinmes that
ifpple ano verlatile characdr, which he ob-
lervcs to le fircquent, and whicl often has
appeared to him fluccefi:fil.

To tihefl, and many more dangers of the

ilumc kindi, is the InI1 expotfd who is deep-
ly engaged in a.iive liNi . No fin:ll degree

SERM. of firmness in religious principle, and of

Iv. A_-~ constancy in virtue, is requisite, in order to

prevent his being aflimilated to the spirit of
the world, and carried away by the multi-
tude of evil doers. Let him therefore call
to mind those principles which ought to
fortify him against such temptations to vice.
Let him often recollect that, whatever his
fation in life may be, he is a man ; he is
a Christian. These are the chief characers
which he has to support; charaders fupe-
rior far, if they be supported with dignity,
to any of the titles with which courts can
decorate him; superior to all that can be
acquired in the strife of a busy world. Let
him think, that though it may be desire-
able to increase his opulence, or to advance
his rank, yet what he ought to hold. much
more sacred is, to maintain his integrity and
honour. If these be forfeited, wealth or
station will have few charms left. They
will not be able to protec: him long from
finking into contempt in the eye of an ob-
serving world. Even to his own eye he

will

will at last appear base and wretched.-- E R M.

,V.

Let not the affairs of the world entirely '-V
ingrofs his time and thoughts. From that
contagious air which he breathes in the
midst of it, let him sometimes retreat into
the salutary fhadc consecrated to devotion
and to wisdom. There, converting serious-
ly with his own foul, and looking up to
the Father of spirits, let him fludy to calm
those unquiet pafions, and to recify those
internal disorders, which intercourse with
the world had excited and increased. In
order to render this medicine of the
mind more effetual, it will be highly
proper,

IV. THAT as we advance in the course

of years, we often attend to the lapse of
time and life, and to the revolutions which
there are ever effecting. In this medita-
tion, one of the first refletions which
should occur is, how much we owe to that
God who hath hitherto helped us; who
hath brought us on so far in life; hath
guitded us through the lippery paths of

youth,

s E R M. youth, and now enables us to flourish in

IV.
-_ the strength of manhood. Look back, my

friends, to those who started along with
yourselves in the race of life. Think
how many of them have fallen around
you. Observe how many blank spaces
you can number in the catalogue of those
who were once your companions. If, in
the midst of so much devastation, you
have been preserved and blessed; confider
seriously what returns you owe to the
goodness of Heaven. Inquire whether
your conduct has corresponded to these
obligations; whether, in public and in
private, you have honoured, as became
you, the God of your fathers; and whc-
ther, amidst the unknown occurrences that
are yet before you, you have ground to hope
for the continued protecQion of the Al-
mighty.

Bring to mind the various revolutions

which you have beheld in human affairs,
since you became actors on this bury
theatre. Reflec on the changes which have
taken place in men and manners, in opi-

nions

nions and customs in private fortunes, and S E R M.

IV.

in public condut. By the observations A
you have made on these, and the experi-
ence you have gained, have you improved
proportionably in wisdom? Have the
changes of the world which you have wit-
neffed, loosened all unreasonable attachment
to it? Have they taught you this great
lesson, that, while thefaJh'ion of the world is
ever pafng away, only in God and in vir-
tue lfability is to be found ? Of great use,
amidst the whirl of the world, are such
pauses as there in life; such refting-places
of thought and reflection; whence we can
calmly and deliberately look back on the
pafl, and anticipate the future.

To the future, we are often calling an

eager eye, and fondly storing it, in our
imagination, with many a pleasing scene.
But if we would look to it, like wife men,
let it be under the persuasion that it is
nearly to resemble the pals, in bringing
forward a mixture of alternate hopes and
fears, of griefs and joys. In order to be

VOL. III. G pre-

S E R M prepared for whatever it may bring, let us

iV.

cultivate that manly fortitude of mind,
which, supported by a pious trust in God,
will enable us to encounter properly the
vicissitudes of our slate. No quality is
more neceflary than this, to them who are
palling through that stormy season of life
of which we now treat. Softness and es-
feminacy let them leave to the young and
unexperienced, who are amusing themselves
with florid profpeds of bliss. But to those
who are now engaged in the middle of
their course, who are supposed to be well
acquainted with the world, and to know
that they have to firuggle in it with va-
rious hardships; firmness, vigour, and re-
solution, are dispositions more iuitable.
They mufft buckle on well this armour of
the mind, if they would issue forth into
the contest with any profped of success.-
While we thus study to correct the er-
rors, and to provide against the dangers,
which are peculiar to this stage of life, let
us also,

V. LA.

V. LAY foundation for comfort in old S R M.

age. That is a period which .all ex-petd and --L
hope to fee; and to which, amidl the toils
of the world, men fomctimcs look for-
ward, not without iiltisrf.tio!, as to the
period of retreat and reft. But let them not
deceive themselves. A joyless and dreary
season it will prove, if they arrive at it with
an unimproved, or corrupted mind. For
old age, as for every other thing, a certain
preparation is requisite; and that prepara-
tion consists chiefly in three particulars; in
tlie acquisition of knowledge, of friends,
of virtue. There is an acquisition of an-
other kind, of which it is altogether needless
for me to give any recommendation, that of
riches. But though this, by many, will be
etteemed a more material acquisition than all
the three I have named, it may be confi-
dently pronounced, that without these other
rcquilites, all the wealth we can lay up in
store will prove inilfficient for makiin' our
latter days pass finoothly away.

FirPt, He who wilies to render his old
age comfortable, ihould itudy betimes to

G 2 enlarge

S E R. enlarge and improve his mind; and by

thought and inquiry, by reading and re-
flecting, to acquire a taste for useful know-
ledge. This will provide for him a great
and noble entertainment, when other en-
tertainments leave him. If he bring into
the solitary retreat of age, a vacant, unin-
formed mind, where no knowledge dawns,
where no ideas rife, which has nothing to
feed upon within itself, many a heavy and
comfortless day he must necessarily pass.-
Next, When a man declines into the vale
of years, he depends more on the aid of
his friends, than in any other period of his
life. Then is the time, when he would
especially wish to find himself surrounded
by some who love and refpea him; who
will bear with his infirmities, relieve him
of his labours, and cheer him with their
society. Let him, therefore, now, in the
summer of his days, while yet acive and
flourishing, by acs of seasonable kindness
and beneficence ensure that love, and by
upright and honourable conduct lay foun-
dation for that refpeet, which in old age

he

he would wiih to enjoy.--In the last place, S E R M.

IV.

Let him confider a good conscience, peace i-r
with God, and the hope of heaven, as the
most effectual consolations he can possess,
when the evil days JJhall come, wherein,
otherwise, he is likely to find little pleasure.
It is not merely by transient ads of devo-
tion that such consolations are to be pro-
vided. The regular tenor of a virtuous and
pious life, spent in the faithful discharge of
all the duties of our station, will prove the
best preparation for old age, for death, and
for immortality.

AMONG the measures thus taken for the

latter scenes of life, let me admonish every
one not to forget to put his worldly affairs
in order in due time. This is a duty
which he owes to his character, to his fa-
mily, or to those, whoever they be, that
are to succeed him; but a duty too often
unwisely delayed, from a childilh aversion
to entertain any thoughts of quitting the
world. Let him not trust much to what
he will do in his old age. Sufficient for

G 3 that

S E R M. that day, if he flall live to fee it, will be

IV.

the burden thereof. It has been remarked,
that as men advance in years, they care
less to think of death. Perhaps it occurs
oftener to the thoughts of the young,
than of the old. Fecblenefs of spirit ren-
ders melancholy ideas more oppreflive;
and after having been so long accustomed
and inured to the world, men bear worse
with any thing which reminds them that
they must soon part with it.-However,
as to part with it is the doom of all, let us
take measures betimes for going off the
silage, when it flall be our turn to with-
draw, with decency and propriety; leaving
nothing unfulfilled which it is expedient
to have done before we die. To live long,
ought not to be our favourite wifll, so
much as to live well. By continuing too
long on eaith, we might only live to wit-
nels a greater number of melancholy scenes,
and to expose ourselves to a wider compals
of human woe. He who has served his
generation faithfully in the world, has duly
honoured Ccod, and been beneficcnt and

I urlefi,!

useful to mankind; he who in his life has s R M.

IV.

been refpeded and beloved; whllofe death '
is accompanied with the sincere regret of
all who knew him, and whose memory is
honoured; that man has sufficiently fulfil-
led his course, whether it was appointed by
Providence to be long or flort. For ho-
notrable age is not that which Jlandeth in
length of time, nor that which is measured by
number of years; but wisdom is the grey hair
to man; and an ulfpotted life is old age*.

* Wisdom, iv. 8, 9.

G

# SERMON V. On DEATH. ECCLESIASTES, xii. 5. — Man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets.

[ 88 ]
SERMON V.

On DEATH.

ECCLESIASTES, xii. 5.
--Man goeth to his long home, and the

mourners go about the Jlreets.
SERM. THIS is a fight which incefrantly pre-

sents itself. Our eyes are so much

accustomed to it, that it hardly makes any
impression. Throughout every season of
the year, and during the course of almost
every day, the funerals which pass along
the fireets, ihow us man going to his long
home. Were death a rare and uncommon
objeCt; were it only once in the course of
a man's life, that he beheld one of his fel-
low-creatures carried to the grave, a solemn

awe

awe would fill him; he would flop fiort in S E M.

V.

the midfl. of his pleasures; he would even -
be chilled with secret horror. Such impref-
sions, however, would prove unsuitable to
the nature of our present ltate. When they
became so itrong as to render men unfit for
the ordinary business of life, they would in
a great measure defeat the intention of our
being placed in this world. It is better
ordered by the wisdom of Providence, that
they should be weakened by the frequency
of their recurrence; and so tempered by
the mixture of other passions, as to allow
us to go on freely in acting our parts on
earth.

Yet, familir as death is now become, it

is undoubtedly fit, that by an event of so
important a nature, some impreflion should
be made upon our minds. It ought not to
pass over, as one of those common incidents
which are beheld without concern, and
awaken no reflecion. There are many things
which the funerals of our fellow-creatures
are calculated to teach; and happy it were
for the gay and dissipated, if thec would

lifteu

SE R M. lifen more frequently to the inftrutions

V.
_-~ i of so awful a monitor. In the context, tho

wife man had described, under a varictv ci
images suited to the eaflern style, the grcw-
ing infirmities of old age, until.they arrive
at that period which concludes them all;
when, as he beautifully exprc ies it, the
flecr cord bcing loofC'i'd, amt/he go.:Cle bowl
broken, the pitcheri bMig broken at the fojun-
tain, and the wheel at i/e cj'crn', man gocth
to his long home, .and the mourners go abont
tbefirects. In discoursing from these words,
it is not my purpole to treat, at present, of
the infruaions to be drawn from the
profpec of our own death. I am to
confine myself to the death of others; to
confider death as one of the molt frequent
and considerable events that happen in
the course of human afiairs; and to show
in what manner we ought to be affected,
fi'rt, by the death of strangers, or indif-
ferent persons; secondly, by the death of
friends; and thirdly, by the death of
enemies.

I. BY

I. BY the (cath of indiffercnt per-sons; S R .

V.

if any can be called indificrent to whom l
we are so nearly allied as brethren by na-
ture, and brethren in mortality. 'When
we obfcrve the funerals that pass along the
ftrects, or when \we walk among the mo-
numcnts of death, the firit thing that na-
turally firikcs us, is the undilinguilinig
blow, with which tlat comimoni enemy
levels all. We behold a great promiicuous
multitude all carried to the lamce abode;
all lodged in the lame dark and silent inan-
lions. There, mingle pclons of every age
and charater, of evcry rank and condition
in life; the young and the old, the poor
and the rich, the gay and the grave, the
renowned and the ignoble. A few weeks
ago, ImI of those whom we hae hae icn car-
ricd to the ,rave, "walked about as we do
i.ow on the eartll; enjoyed their fiiends,
beheld the light of the fun, and were form-
ing designs for future days. Perhaps, it is
not long since they were engaged in tCCeneI
of hiigh felivitv. For them, perhaps, the
cccr-ful coIllpany allCImbldll ; and in the
i.l';It of the ci;cle they shone with gay and

plea ling

sE R M. pleasing vivacity. But now-to them, all is

V.
*-ys finally closed. To them no more shall the

seasons return, or the fun rife. No more
shall they hear the voice of mirth, or behold
the face of man. They are swept from the
univerfc, as though they had never been.
They are carric-l awar ' as wiith ajlood: The
wind has pqjed ov'r tcCi, e1a thy ar 1c gone'.

When we contemplate this desolation of

the human race; this final termination of
so many hopes; this silence that now reigns
among thole who, a little while ago, were
so busy, or so gay; who can avoid being
touched with sensations at once awful and
tender? What heart but then warms with
the glow of humanity? In whole eye does
not the tear gather, on revolving the fate of
passing and short-lived man? Such sensa-
tions are so congenial to human nature, that
they are attended with a certain kind of
sorrowful pleasure. Even voluptuaries them-
selves fometirnes indulge a talle for fune-
real melancholy. After the feflive assembly
is difiniffed, they chute to walk retired in the
shady grove, and to contemplate the ve-
nerable sepulchres of their ancestors. This

melancholy

melancholy pleasure arises from two differ- s R M'

V.

ent sentiments meeting at the fame time in J-,-
the breast; a sympathetic sense of the fliort-
ness and vanity of life, and a pcrfuafion
that something exists after death; senti-
ments which unite at the view of the hotf
appointed for al living. A tomb, it has
been justly said, is a monument situated on
the confines of both worlds. It, at once,
presents to us the termination of the inquic-
tudes of life, and sets before us the image
of eternal reft. T7ere, in the elegant ex-
prefions of Job, the wi'ckd ceaf' fiom trou-
bling; and there the weary' be at reft. There
the prfoners reft together; they hzea.r not ihe
voe of theo opprefor. The final! a,'lthe great
are there; and the firvan:t is fri. from his
mafJer. It is very remarkable, that in all
languages, and among all nations, death
has been described in a style of this kind;
expressed by figures of speech, which con-
vey every where the fame idea of reft, or
sleep, or retreat from the evils of life. Such
a flyle perfectly agrees with the general be-
lief of the foul's immortality; but assuredly

conveys

SER M. conveys no high idea of the boaitcd plca-

V.
.., fures of the world. It shows how much all

malnkdind have felt this life to be a scene of
trouble and care; and ha' --:: ed in
opinion, that perifet reft is t :rpced
only in the grave.

T'here, fays Job, are t/h /e fi:ll ,:'.! i/c

great. There the poor man lays dovn at
last the burden of hls wearifime life. No
more shall he groan under the load of po-
varty and toil. No more flall he hear the
infilent calls of the mafier, fiom whoml he
received his scanty wages. No more flall
he be raised from needful flumbcr on his
bed of firaw, nor be hurried away from
his homely meal, to undergo the repeated
labours of the day. While his humble grave
is preparing, and a few poor and decayed
neighbours are carrying him thither, it is
good for us to think that this man too was
cur brother; that for him the aged and
destitute wife, and the needy children, now
weep; that, neglected as he was )y the
world, he pofifeied perhaps both a found
underfanding, and a worthy heart; and is

now

now carried by angels to reft in Abraham's s E R Mi

V.

bofom.-At no great distance from him, tlhe
grave is opened to receive the rich and proud
man. For, as it is said with emphasis in
the parable, the rich man alo died, and i'as
bulric"*. He a/Jo died. His riches prevent-
ed not his fliaring the fame fate with the
poor man; perhaps, through luxury, they
accelerated his doom. Then, indeed, t&Je
moiirners go abocut thC J.-eets ; and while, in
all the pomp and magnificence of woe, his
funeral is prepared, his heirs, in the mean
time, impatient to examine his will, are
looking on one another with jealous eyes,
and already beginning to quarrel about the
divilion of his substance.-- One day, we
fee carried along the coffin of the finiling
infant; the flower just nipped as it began to
blofiom in the parents view; and the next
day we behold the young man, or young
woman, of blooming form and promising
hopes, laid in an untimely grave. While
the funeral is attended by a numerous, un-

r Luke, xvi. zz.

concerned

S1 R M. concerned company, who are discoursing

V.
LI - - to one another about the news of the day,

or the ordinary affairs of life, let our
thoughts rather follow to the house of
mourning, and represent to themselves what
is going on there. There, we should fee a
disconsolate family, fitting in silent grief,
thinking of the fad breach that is made in
their little society; and with tears in their
eyes, looking to the chamber that is now
left vacant, and to every memorial that
presents itfeif of their departed friend. By
such attention to the woes of others, the
selfish hardness of our hearts will be gra-
dually softened, and melted down into hu-
manity.

Another day, we follow to the grave one

who, in old age, and after a long career
of life, has in full maturity funk at last
into reft. As we are going along to the
mansion of the dead, it is natural for us to
think, and to difeourfe, of all the changes
which such a person has seen during the
course of his life. He has passed, it is
likely, through varieties of fortune. He

5 has

has experienced prosperity and adversity. S E R M.

V.

He has seen families and kindreds rife and
fall. He has seen peace and war succeed-
ing in their turns; the face of his country
undergoing many alterations; and the very
city in which he dwelt, rising, in a manner,
new around him. After all he has be-
held, his eyes are now closed for ever.
He was becoming a stranger in the midst
of a new succession of men. A race who
knew him not, had arisen to fill the earth.
Thus palses the world away. Throughout
all ranks and conditions, one generation pai-
c/h, and another generation cometh; and this
great inn is by turns evacuated, and re-
plenished by troops of Succeeding pilgrims.
- 0 vain and inconstant world ! 0 fleet-
ing and transient life ! When will the sons
of men learn to think of thee as they
ought? When will they learn humanity,
from the afflicions of their brethren; or
moderation and wisdom, from the sense of
their own fugitive state?-- But, now to
come nearer to ourselves, let us,

VOL. III. H II. CON-

SERM. tI. CONSIDER the death of our friends,

V. _i.y.-j Want of refletion, or the long habits ei-

ther of a very bury, or a very diflipated life,
may have rendered men insensible to all
such objets as I have now described. The
firaiger, and the unknown, fall utterly
uinotied at their fide. Life proceeds with
them *in its usual train, without being as-
fested by events in which they take no
personal concern. But the dissolution of
those ties, which had long bound men toge-
ther in intimate and familiar union, gives
a painful shock to every heart. When a
family, who, for years, had been living in
comfort and peace, are suddenly Shattered
by'fome of their most beloved or refpeeed
members being torn from them; when
the husband or the spouse are separated for
ever from the companion, who, amidst every
vicissitude of fortune, solaced their life;
who had shared all their joys, and partici-
pated in all their sorrows; when the weep-
ing parent is folding in his arms the dying
child whom he tenderly loved; when he
is giving his last blessing, receiving the

lag

last fond adieu, looking for the last time S E RM.

V.

on that countenance, now wafting and ---J
faded, which he had once beheld with much
delight; then is the time, when the heart
is made to drink all the bitterness of hu-
man woe.-But I feel not to wound your
feelings by dwelling on these fad defcrip.
tions. Let us rather turn our thoughts to
the manner in which such events ought to
be received and improved, since happen
they must in the life of man.

Then, indeed, is the time to weep. Let

not a false idea of fortitude, or mistaken
conceptions of religious duty, be employed
to restrain the buriting emotion. Let the
heart seek its relief, in the free effusion of
just and natural sorrow. It is becoming in
every one to show, on such occasions, that
he feels as a man ought to feel. At the
fame time, let moderation temper the grief
of a good man and a Chriltian. He must
not sorrow like those who have no hope. As
high elation of spirits befits not the joys,
so continued and overwhelming dejetion
suits not the griefs of this transitory world.

H 2 Grief,

S E R M. Grief, when it goes beyond certain bounds,
L---i becomes unmanly; when it lasts beyond a

certain time, becomes unseasonable. Let
him not reject the alleviation which time
brings to all the wounds of the heart, but
susser excessive grief to subside, by degrees,
into a tender and affeaionate remem-
brance. Let him confider, that it is in the
power of Providence to raise him up other
comforts in the place of those he has loft.
Or, if his mind, at present, reject the
thoughts of such consolation, let it turn
for relief, to the profpea of a future meet-
ing in a happier world. This is indeed
the chief soother of affliction; the moR
powerful balm of the bleeding heart. It
aflifts us to view death, as no more than a
temporary separation from friends. They
whom we have loved, fill live, though not
present to us. They are only removed in-
to a different mansion in the house of the
common father. The toils of their pil-
grimage are finished; and they are gone
to the land of reft and peace. They are
gone from this dark and troubled world, to

join

join the great assembly of the just; and SER M.
to dwell in the midst of everlasting light. ---
In due time we hope to be associated with
them in these blissful habitations. Until this
season of re-union arrive, no principle of
religion discourages our holding correspond-
ence of affedion with them by means of
faith and hope.

Meanwhile, let us refpea the virtues,

and cherish the memory of the deceased.
Let their little failings be now forgotten.
Let us dwell on what was amiable in their
characer, imitate their worth, and trace
their fleps. By this means, the remem-
brance of those whom we loved shall be-
come useful and improving to us, as well
as sacred and dear; if we accustom our-
selves to confider them as frill speaking,
and exhorting us to all that is good; if,
in situations where our virtue is tried, we
call up their refpeded idea to view, and,
as placed in their presence, think of the
part which we c5uld aft before them with-
out a blulh.

H 3 More-

S E R M. Moreover, let the remembrance of the

V.

.-.i_ friends whom we have loft, strengthen our

affedion to those that remain. The nar-
rower the circle becomes of those we love,
let us draw the closer together. Let the
heart that has been softened by sorrow, mel-
low into gentleness and kindness; make libe-
ral allowance for the weaknesses of others;
and divest itself of the little prejudices that
may have formerly prepoflefled it againlt
them. The greater havock that death has
made among our friends on earth, let us
cultivate connection more with God, and
heaven, and virtue. Let those noble views
which man's immortal character affords, fill
and exalt our minds. Passengers only
through this sublunary region, let our
thoughts often ascend to that divine country,
which we are taught to confider as the na-
tive feat of the foul. There we form con-
nections that are never broken. There we
meet with friends who never die. Among
celestial things, there is firm and lasting
constancy, while all that is on earth changes
and passes away.--Such are some of the

fruits

fruits we should reap from the tender feel- s E R M.
ings excited by the death of friends. But _
they are not only our friends who die. Our
enemies also must go to their long home.
Let us, therefore,

III. CONSIDER how we ought to be

asseted, when they from whom suspicions
have alienated, or rivalry has divided us;
they with whom we have long contended,
or by whom we imagine ourselves to have
suffered wrong, are laid, or about to be
laid, in the grave. How inconsiderable
then appear those broils in which we had
been long involved, those contests and
feuds which we thought were to last for
ever? the awful moment that now ter-
minates them, makes us feel their vanity.
If there be a spark of humanity left in the
breast, the remembrance of our common
fate then awakens it. Is there a man who,
if he were admitted to stand by the death-
bed of his bitterest enemy, and beheld him
enduring that conflic which human na-
ture muff susser at the last, would not be

H 4 inclined

S E R M. inclined to stretch forth the hand of friend-

V.

S/hip, to utter the voice of forgiveness, and
to with for perfect reconciliation with him
before he left the world ? Who is there
that when he beholds the remains of his
adversary deposited in the dust, feels not,
in that moment, some relentings at the re-
membrance of those past animofities which
mutually embittered their life ?-" There
" lies the man with whom I contended so
" long, silent and mute for ever. He is
"fallen; and I am about to follow him.
" How poor is the advantage which I now
" enjoy? Where are the fruits of all our
" contests? In a short time we shall be
"laid together; and no remembrance re-
"main of either of us under the fun.
" How many mistakes may there have
" been between us ? Had not he his vir-
"tues and good qualities as well as I?
" When we both shall appear before the
" judgment-feat of God, shall I be found
"innocent and free of blame, for all the
" enmity I have borne to him ?"--My
friends, let the anticipation of such senti-

ments

ments serve now to correct the inveteracy SER M.

V.

of prejudice, to cool the heat of anger, to -
allay the fierceness of resentment. How
unnatural is it for animofities so laiting to
possess the hearts of mortal men, that no-
thing can extinguish them, but the cold
hand of death? Is there not a sufficient
proportion of evils in the short span of
human life, that we seek to increase their
number, by ruffing into unnecessary con-
tests with one another ? When a few funs
more have rolled over our heads, friends
and foes fiall have retreated together; and
their love and their hatred be equally bu-
ried. Let our few days, then, be spent in
peace. While we are all journeying on-.
wards to death, let us rather bear one
another's burdens, than harass one another
by the way. Let us smooth and cheer
the road as much as we can, rather than
fill the valley of our pilgrimage with
the hateful monuments of our contention
and. trife.

TlIus

SERM. THUS I have set before you some of

V.
^- those meditations which are naturally fug-

gested by the prevalence of death around
us; by the death of firangers, of friends,
and of enemies. Because topics of this na-
ture are obvious, let it not be thought that
they are without use. They require to be
recalled, repeated, and enforced. Moral
and religious inftruaion derives its efficacy,
not so much from what men are taught to
know, as from what they are brought to
feel. It is not the dormant knowledge of
any truths, but the vivid imprefion of
them, which has influence on practice.
Neither let it be thought that such medi-
tations are unseasonable intrusions upon
those who are living in health, in afflu-
ence, and ease. There is no hazard of
their making too deep or painful an im-
pression. The gloom which they occasion
is tranlient; and will soon, too soon, it is
probable, be dispelled by the succeeding
affairs and pleasures of the world. To
wifdcm it certainly belongs, that men

flould

should be Impressed with just views of their s E R M.

V.

nature, and their fate; and the pleasures .,
of life will always be enjoyed to most ad-
vantage when they are tempered with serious
thought. There is a time to mourn, as well
as a time to rejoice. There is a virtuousfor-
row, which is better than laughter. There
is afadnejs of the countenance, by which the
kiart is made better.

# SERMON VI. On the PROGRESS of VICE. I CORINTHIANS, xv. 33. Be not deceived: Evil communications corrupt good manners.

[ o18 ]

SERMON VI.

On the PROGRESS of VICE.

I CORINTHIANS, XV. 33.
Be not deceived : Evil communications corrupt

good manners.

SERM. TR HOUGH human nature be now
ok,. T fallen from its original honour, feve-

ral good principles still remain in the hearts
of men. There are few, if any, on whose
minds the reverence for a Supreme Being
continues not, in some degree, impressed. In
every breast, some benevolent affetions are
found, and conscience still retains a sense
of the distinCtion between moral good and
evil. These principles of virtue are always
susceptible of improvement; and, in favour-

able

able situations might have a happy in- SERM.
fluence on pratice. But such is the frail-
ty of our nature, and so numerous are the
temptations to evil, that they are in perpe-
tual hazard of being either totally effaced,
or so far weakened as to produce no effect
on conduct. They are good feeds original-
ly sown in the heart; but which require
culture, in order to make them rife to any
maturity. If left without assistance, they
are likely to be stifled by that profusion of
noxious weeds which the foil fends forth
around them.

Among the numerous causes which in-

troduce corruption into the heart, and ac-
celerate its growth, none is more unhappily
powerful than that which is pointed out in
the text, under the description of evil com-
nminications ; that is, the contagion which is
diffused by bad examples, and heightened
by particular connections with persons of
loose principles, or dissolute morals. This,
in a licentious state of society, is the most
common source of those vices and disorders
which so much abound in great cities;

13 and

SER M. and often proves, in a particular manner,
h-·-i fatal to the :young; even to them whose

beginnings were once auspicious and.pro-
mifing. It may therefore be an useful em-
ployment of attention, to trace the progress
of this principle of corruption; to examine
the means by which evil communications gra-
dually undermine, and at last destroy, good
manners, or (which here is the proper fig-
nification of the original word) good morals.
It is indeed disagreeable to contemplate hu-
man nature, in this downward course of its
progress. But it is always profitable to
know our own infirmities and dangers.
The consideration of them will lead me to
suggest some of the means proper to be
used, for preventing the mischiefs arising
from evil communications.

AGREEABLY to what I observed of cer-

tain virtuous principles being inherent in
human nature, there are few but who set
out at first on the world with good difpofi-
tions. The warmth which belongs to youth
naturally exerts itself in generous feelings,

and

and sentiments of honour; in itrong at- s ER M.

VI.

tachments to friends, and the other emo- '--»
tions of a kind and tender heart. Almost
all the plans with which persons who have
been liberally educated, begin the world, are
connected with honourable views. At that
period they repudiate whatever is mean
or base. It is pleasing to them to think of
commanding the esteem of those among
whom they live, and of acquiring a name
among men. But alas! how soon does this
flattering profpec begin to be overcast!
Desires of pleasure uflier in temptation, and
forward the growth of disorderly passions.
Ministers of vice are fcldom wanting to en-
courage, and flatter the paflions of the
young. Inferiors study to creep into fa-
vour, by servile obfequioufi:efs to all their
desires and humours. Glad to find any
apology for the indulgences of which they
are fond, the young too readily liften to the
voice of those who suggest to them, that
striCt notions of religion, order, and vir-
tue, are old-fafhioned and illiberal; that
the restraints which they impose are only

1l fit

SE RM. fit to be prescribed to those who are in the
r- firfl stage of pupillage; or to be preached

to the vulgar, who ought to be kept within
the closest bounds of regularity and subjec-
tion. But the goodness of their hearts, it is in-
finuated to them, and the liberality of their
views, will fully justify their emancipating
themselves, in some degree, from the rigid
discipline of parents and teachers.

Soothing as such insinuations are to the

youthful and inconsiderate, their first steps,
however, in vice, are cautious and timid,
and occasionally checked by remorse. As
they begin to mingle more in the world,
and emerge into the circles of gaiety and
pleasure, finding these loose ideas counte-
nanced by too general practice, they gra-
dually become bolder in the liberties they
take. If they had been bred to bufineis,
they begin to tire of industry, and look
with contempt on the plodding race of citi-
zens. If they be of superior rank, they
think it becomes them to resemble their
equals; to assume that freedom of beha-
viour, that air of forwardness, that tone of

diflipation,

,{

dissipation, that easy negligence of those SE R M.
with whom they converse, which appear a
fashionable in high life. If affluence of
fortune unhappily concur to favour their
inclinations, amusements and diversions
succeed in a perpetual round; night and
day are confounded; gaming fills up their
vacant intervals; they live wholly in public
places; they run into many degrees of e-
cess, disagreeable even to themselves, merely
from weak complaisance, and the fear of
being ridiculed by their loose associates.
Among these associates, the most hardened
and determined always take the lead. The
reft follow them with implicit submission;
and make proficiency in the school of ini-
quity, in exact proportion to the weakners
of their underitandings, and the strength of
their paflions.

How many pass away, after this manner,

iome of the most valuable years of their
life, tolt in a whirlpool of what cannot be
called plcafure, so much as mere giddiness
and folly ? In the habits of perpetual con-
neeion with idle or licentious company,

VOL. Il I all

S E R M. all reflection is loft; while circulated frozi

VI.
Iv--J one empty head, and one thoughtle;f heart,

to another, folly ihoots up into all its
most ridiculous forms; prompts the extra-
vagant unmeaning frolic in private; or
sallies forth in public into mad riot; im-
pelled sometimes by intoxication, sometimes
by mere levity of spirits.

All the while, amidst this whole course

of juvenile infatuation, I readily admit, that
much good nature may {till remain. Ge-
nerofity and attachments may be found;
nay, some awe of religion may still fubli;t,
and some remains of those good impressions
which were made upon the mind in early
days. It might yet be very possible to re-
claim such persons, and to form them for
useful and refpeitable stations in the world,
if virtuous and improving society should
happily succeed to the place of that idle
crew with whom they nmw associate; if
important business should occur, to bring
them into a different sphere of acion; or
if some reasonable itroke of affliction mhould
in mercy be lent, to recall them to them-

selves,

selves, and to awaken serious and manly S E R M.
thought. But, if youth and vigour, and -
flowing fortune, continue; if a similar fuc-
cession of companions go on to amuse them,
to ingrofs their time, and to stir up their
pallions; the day of ruin,--let them take
heed and beware !-the day of irrecover-
able ruin begins to draw nigh. Fortune
is squandered; health is broken; friends
are offended, affronted, estranged; aged
parents, perhaps, sent afflicted and mourn-
ing to the dust.

There are certain degrees of vice which

are chiefly stamped with the character of
the ridiculous, and the contemptible; and
there are also certain limits, beyond which
if it pass, it becomes odious and execra-
ble. If, to other corruptions which the
heart has already received, be added the
infusion of sceptical principles, that worst
of all the evil communications of finners, the
whole of morals is then on the point of
being overthrown. For, every crime can
then be palliated to conscience; every check
and restraint which had hitherto remained,

I 2 is

S ER M. is taken away. He who, in the beginning

Vi.
- of his course, soothed himself with the

thought, that while he indulged his de-
fires, he did hurt no man; now presscd
by the necessity of supplying those wants
into which his expensive pleasures have
brought him, goes on without remorse to
defraud and to oppress. The lover of plea-
sure now becomes hardened and cruel;
violates his trul, or betrays his friend;
becomes a man of treachery, or a man of
blood; satisfying, or at least endeavouring
all the while to satisfy himself, that circum-
fiances form his excuse; that by necessity
he is impelled; and that, in gratifying the
pafiions which nature had implanted within
him, he does no mere than follow nature.

Miserable and deluded man! to what

art thou come at the last? Dost thou
pretend to follow nature, when thou art
contemning the laws of the God of nature ?
when thou art stifling his voice within thee,
which remonstrates againfl thy crimes?
when thou art violating the best part of
thy nature, by counteracting the ditatcs

of

of justice and humanity? Dost thou fol- SER M.

VI.

low nature, when thou rendereft thyself an '-.-
useless animal on the earth; and not ule-
less only, but noxious to the society to
which thou belongeft, and to which thou
art a dilgrace; noxious, by the bad ex-
ample thou haft set; noxious, by the crimes
thou haft committed; sacrificing innocence
to thy guilty pleasures, and introducing
shame and ruin into the h.bitations of
peace; defrauding of their due the unfif-
picious who have trufled thee; involving
in the ruins of thy fortune many a worthy
family; reducing the induflrious and the
aged to misery and want; by all which, if
thou haft escaped the defervrd sword of
justice, thou haft at least brought on thyself
the resentment, and the reproach, of all the
refpedable and the worthy ?-Tremble then
at the view of the gulph which is opening
before thee. Look with horror at the pre-
cipice, on the brink of which thou ftandeft;
and if yet a moment be left for retreat,
think how thou mayest escape, and be
saved.

1 3 TIis

SE R M. THIS brings me to what I proposed as
Ai the next head of discourse; to suggest some

means that may be used for flopping in time
the progress of such mischiefs; to point out
some remedies against the fatal infetion of
evil communications.

THE first and moil obvious is, to with-

draw from all associations with bad men,
with persons either of licentious principles,
or of disorderly condui. I have shewn to
what issue such dangerous connections are
apt to bring men at last. Nothing, there-
fore, is of more importance for the young,
to whom I now chiefly address myself, than
to be careful in the choice of their friends
and companions. This choice is too fre-
quently made without much thought, or
is determined by some casual connecion;
and yet, very often, the whole fate of their
future life depends upon it. The circum-
stances which chiefly attracd the liking and
the friendihip of youth, are vivacity, good
humour, engaging manners, and a cheer-
ful or easy temper; qualities, I confess,

amiable

amiable in themselves, and uefuil and va- SE RM.

VI.

luable in their place. But I intreat you to '-a
remember, that these are not all the quali-
ties requisite to form an intimate compa-
nion or friend. Something more is flill to
be looked for; a found understanding, a
feady mind, a firm attachment to prin-
ciple, to virtue, and honour. As only iblid
bodies poliih well, it is only on the ihb-
tfantial ground of these manly endowments,
that the other amiable qualities can receive
their proper luflrc. Deflitute of these effcn-
tial requisites, they thine with no more than
a tinsel brilliancy. It may fparklle for a
little, amidflt a few circles of the fiivolous
and fiuperficial; but it iinpofes not on the
dilcernment of the public. The world in
general seldom, after a flort trial, judges
amiss of the characters of men. You may
be aflured, that its character of you will be
formed by the company you fiequent; and
how agreeable soever they may seem to be,
if nothing is to be found among them hut
hollow qualities, and external accomplifl-

I 4 ments,

SE R M. ments, they soon fall down into the class,

VI.
.-V.-. at best, of the insignificant, perhaps of the

worthless; and you fink, of course, in the
opinion of the public, into the fame defpi-
cable rank

Allow me to warn you, that the most

gay and pleasing, are fomelimcs the most
insidious and dangerous companions; an
admonition which refpeas both the sexes.
Often they attach themselves to you fiom
interefled motives; and if any taint or sus-
picion lie on their charader, under the cover
of your rank, your fortune, or your good
reputation, they seek protetion for them-
selves. Look round you, then, with atten-
tive eye, and weigh charaters well, before
you connet yourselves too closely with any
who court your society. He that walkcth
with wfe men fJiall be wie; but a conpanioi
offools Jhall be dcfiroed. Wherefore, enter
not thou into the colanfel oftheJfcorncr. Tl/k
not in the 'way; with evil menl; avoid it; pj%,
not b it,

t.rb fyom it,

ld p;ifZS

ait,
nd wa'i.

' Prov. xii. 20 ; Prov. iv. 14.

IN

IN order to prevent the influence of evil S E R M.

Vi.

commz72niications, it is farther needful, that _ .
you fix to yourselves certain principles of
conduct, and be resolved and determined
on no occasion to wverve from them. Set-
ting the consideration of religion and vir-
tue aside, and attending merely to interest
and reputation, it will be found, that he
who enters on acive life without having
alcertained some regular plan, according to
which lie is to guide himself, will be un-
prosperous in the whole of his fiibfequcnt
progress. But when condua is viewed in
a moral and religious light, the cihct of
having fixed no principles of action, of
having formed no laudable standard of
characer, becomes more obviously fatal.
For hence it is, that the young and thought-
lcfs imbibe so readily the poison of evil
colmmunications, and fall a prey to every fc-
ducer. They haie no internal guide whom
they are accustomed to follow and obey;
nothing within themfeives that can give
firmneis to their conlduF. They are of
course the victims of momentary inclination

or

E R M. or caprice; religious and good by flarts,
--_ when, during the absence of temptation

and tempters, the virtuous principle stirs
within them; but never long the fame;
changing and flucuating according to the
paflion that chances to rife, or the inftiga-
tion of those with whom they have con-
nedted themselves. They are failing on a
dangerous sea, which abounds with rocks;
without compass, by which to direct their
course; or helm, by which to guide the
veltel. Whereas, if they aded on a system,
if their behaviour made it appear that they
were determined to conduct themselves by
certain rules and principles, not olly would
they escape innumerable dangers, but they
would command refped from the licentious
themselves. Evil doers would cease to lay
their snares for one whom they saw moving
above them, in a higher sphere, and with
a more feady course.

As a farther correcive of evil commnnzi-

cations, and as a foundation to those prin-
ciples which you lay down for condud,

Ic1

let me advise you sometimes to think fe- SE RM.

VI.

rioufly, of what constitutes real enjoyment i
and happiness. Your days cannot be en-
tirely spent in company and pleasure.
How closely soever you are surrounded and
besieged by evil companions, there must
be tome intervals, in which you are left by
yourselves; when, after all the turbulence
of amusement is over, your mind will na-
turally assume a graver and more pensive
cast. These are precious intervals to you,
if you knew their value. Seize that fober
hour of retirement and silence. Indulge
the meditations which then begin to rife.
Cast your eye backwards on what is pall
of your life; look forward to what is pro-
bably to come. Think of the part you
are now acting; and of what remains to
be afted, perhaps to be suffered, before you
die. Then is the time to form your plans
of happiness, not merely for the next day,
but for the general course of your life.
Remember, that what is pleasing to you at
twenty, will not be equally so at forty or
fifty years of age; and that what continues

longest

SE R M. longest pleasing, is always moll valuable.

Recolle2l your own feelings in different
scenes of life. Inquire on what occasions
you have felt the truest fatisfaftion ; whe-
ther days of lobriety and a rational employ-
ment have not left behind them a more
agreeable remembrance, than nights of li-
centioufnefs and riot. Look round you on
the world; reflect on the different focie-
ties which have fallen under your obfer-
vation; and think who among them ap-
pear to enjoy life to most advantage; whe-
thcr they who, encircled by gay compa-
l:ion:, are constantly fatiguing themielves
in quest of plcafirce; or they to wlhom plea-
li:rc comes unsought, in the course of an
acive, virtuous, and manly life. Compare
together thee tLwo classes of mankind, and
ask your own hearts, to which of theml
you would chule to belong. If, in a
happy moment, the light of truth begin to
break in upon you, resi;le not admittance
to the ray. If your hearts secretly re-
proach you for the wrong choice you have
nmadle, bcthiklil yoursElves that the evil is

not

not irreparable. Still there is time for re- s E R M.

VI.

pentance and retreat; and a return to wis-
dom is always honourable.

Were such meditations often indulged,

the evil communltications of finners would die
away before them; the force of their poi-
obn would evaporate ; the world would be-
gin to aflume in your eyes a new form
and flape. Disdain not, in these solitary
hours, to recollec' what the wiset have
said, and have written, concerning human
happiness, and hluman vanity. Treat not
their opinions, as effufious merely of pee-
viihnels or disappointment: but believe
them to be, what they truly are, the result
cf long experience, and thorough acquaint-
ance with the world. Confider that the
foafon of youth is pasing fast away. It
is time for you to be taking measures for
an eftabliflhment in life; nay, it were swi!
to be looking forward to a placid enjoy-
ment of old age. That is a period you
wiflh to fee; but how miierable when it
arrives, if it yield you nothing but the
dii'gs of life; and prefint no ret'olcl;,

13 e--ept

S E R . except that of a thoughtless, and difho-
11,_ noured youth.

LET me once more advise you, to look

forward sometimes beyond old age; to
look to a future world. Amidst evil con-.
munications, let your belief, and your cha-
raQer as Christians arise to your view.
Think of the sacred name in which you were.
baptised. Think of the God whom your
fathers honoured and worshipped; of the
religion in which they trained you up; of
the venerable rites in which they brought
you to partake. Their paternal cares have
now ceased. They have finished their
earthly course; and the time is coming
when you must follow them. You know
that you are not to live always here; and
you surely do not believe that your exist-
ence is to end with this life. Into what
world then are you next to go ? Whom
will you meet with there? Before whose
tribunal are you to appear ? What account
will you be able to give of your present
trifling and irregular conduct to him who

made

made you ?-Such thoughts may be treated s E R M.
as unseasonable intrusions. But intrude i.
they Ibmetimes will, whether you make
them welcome or not. Better then to al-
low them free reception when they come,
and to confider fairly to what they lead.
You have sicen persons die; at least, you
have heard of your friends dying near you.
Did it never enter into your minds, to
think what their last rcfilecions probably
were in their concluding moments; or
what your own, in such a lituation, would
be ? What would be then your hopes and
fears; what part you would then with to
have aaed; in what light your closing
eyes would then view this life, and this
world ?

There are thoughts, my fiiends, too im-

portant to be always excluded. These are
things too solemn and awful to'be trised
with. They are fuiperior to all the ridicule
of fools. They come home to every man's
bolom; and are entitled to every man's
highest attention. Let us regard them as
becomes realonable and mortal creatures;

I and

SE R M. and they will prove effecual antidotes to

VI.
L--Y-~ the evil communications of petulant fcoffcrs.

When vice or folly arise to tempt us under
flattering forms, let the serious charaaer
which we bear as men come also forward
to view; and let the solemn admonitions,
with which I conclude, found full in our
ears: 1.y foil, iffinners entice thee, conl fnt
thou not. Come out from amongfi them, and
befeparate. Remember thy Creator in the days
of thy jouth. Fear the Lord, and depart
from evil. The way of life is above to the
wife; and he that keepeth the commandment,
keepctb his own Jfoul .

* Prov. i. Io.; 2 Corinth. vi. 17.; Eccles. xii. I.;
Prov. xv. 21±

# SERMON VII. On FORTITUDE. PSALM xxvii. 3. Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear.

[ 129 ]
S E R M O N VII.

On FORTITUDE.

PSALM xxvii. 3.
Though an hoJt flould encamp agaifl mne, my

heart Jhall not fear.
'THIS world is a region of danger, insERM.

which perfet safety is pofleffed by v.

no man. Though we live in times of
eltablifhed tranquillity, when there is no
ground to apprehend that an hofi shall, in
the literal sense, encamp agaifj us; yet
every man, from one quarter or other, has
somewhat to dread. Riches often make to
thetfnelves wings, andflee away. The firm-
eft health may in a moment be shaken.
The moft-flourifhing family may unexpet-

VOL. III. K edly

S E R M. edly be scattered. The appearances of oir;
^V_ Sfecurity are frequently deceitful. When

our fly seems more fettled and serene, in
some unobserved quarter gathers the little
black cloud, in which the tempest ferments,
and prepares to discharge itself on our head.
Such is the real situation of man in this
world ; and he who flatters himself with an
opposite view of his tate, only lives in the
paradise of fools.

In this situation, no quality is more

requisite than constancy, or fortitude of
mind; a quality which the Pfalmfit ap-
pears, from the sentiment in the text, to
have possessed in an eminent degree. For-
titude was justly classed by the ancient
philosophers, among the cardinal virtues.
It is indeed efiential to the support of them
all; and it is most necessary to be acquired
by every one who withes to discharge with
fidelity the duties of his station. It is the
armour of the mind, which will fit him
for encountering the trials, and surmount-
ing the dangers, that are likely to occur in
the course of his life. It may be thought,

perhaps,

erlhaps, to be a quality, in some measure, s E R M.
cbnftitiutioal; dependent on firinefs of .
nerves, and strength of spirits. Though,
partly, it is so, yet experience flioxvs tliat it
liiay also be acquired by principle, and be
fortified by reason; and it is only wlheii
thus acquired, and thus fortified, that it
can be accounted to carry the chara&er of
virtue. Fortitude is opposed, as all know,
to timidity, irresolution, a feeble and a
wavering spirit. It is placed, like other
virtues, in the middle between two ex-
tremes; ftandihg at an equal distance from
ralhnefs on the one hand, and from pufil-
lanimity on the other. In discoursing on
tlis subjet, I propose, first, to show the
importance of fortitude or cohftancy; next,
to afcertairi the grounds on which it must
reft; and lastly; to suggest some confidera-
lions for assisting the exercise of it.

I. THE high importance of fortitude will
easily appear, if we confider it as refpe&-
ing either the happiness of human life, or
the proper discharge of its duties.

K 2 W\ithout

SERM. Without some degree of fortitude there
VII.

-- can be no happiness; because, amidst the

thousand uncertainties of life, there can be
no enjoyment of tranquillity. The man
of feeble and timorous spirit lives under
perpetual alarms. He foresees every distant
danger, and trembles. He explores the
regions of possibility, to discover the dangers
that may arise. Often he creates imaginary
ones; always magnifies those that are real.
Hence, like a person haunted by speares,
he loses the free enjoyment even of a safe
and prosperous state. On the first shock of
adversity, he desponds. Instead of exerting
himself to lay hold on the resources that
remain, he gives up all for loft; and re-
signs himself to abject and broken spirits.
-On the other hand, firmness of mind is
the parent of tranquillity. It enables one
to enjoy the present without disturbance;
and to look calmly on dangers that ap-
proach, or evils that threaten in future. It
suggests good hopes. It supplies resources.
It allows a man to retain the full possession
of himself, in every situation of fortune.

Loo':

Look into the heart of this man, and you SEVRM.
will find composure, cheerfulness, and mag- .J
nanimity. Lookinto the heart of the other,
and you will fee nothing but confusion,
anxiety, and trepidation. The one is the
castle built on a rock, which defies the attacks
of surrounding waters. The other is a hut
placed on the shore, which every wind
ihakes, and every wave overflows.

IF fortitude be thus essential to the enjoy-

ment of life, it is equally so to the proper
discharge of all its most important duties.
He who is of a cowardly mind is, and
muff be, a slave to the world. He faflions
his whole conduc according to its hopes
and fears. He finiles, and fawns, and be-
trays, from abject considerations of personal
safety. He is incapable of either conceiv-
ing, or executing, any great design. He
can neither stand the clamour of the mul-
titude, nor the frowns of the mighty. The
wind of popular favour, or the threats of
power, are sufficient to ihake his most
determined purpose. The world always

K 3 k;ows

s E R M. knows where to find him. IIe may pretend
-v_-_ to have principles; but on every trying oc.

cation, it will be seen, that his pretended
principles bend to convenience and safety.
-The man of virtuous fortitude, again,
follows the ditates of his heart, unembar-
rafted by those restraints which lie upon
the timorous. Having once determined
what is fit for him to do, no threatenings
can 1ihake, nor dangers appal him. He
refts upon himself, supported by a confci-
oufnefs of inward dignity. I do not fay
that this disposition alone will secure him
againit every vice. He may be lifted up
with pride. He may be seduced by plea-
sure. He may be hurried away by pafIion.
But at leaf: on one quarter he will be safe;
by no abjeft fears miflled into evil.

Without this temper of mind, no man

can be a thorough Chriilian. For his pro-
session, as such, requires him to be fupe-
rior to that jcar o' man which br-iigcth a
fiare ; enjoins him, for the fake of a good
conicience, to encounter every danger; and
to be prepared, if called, even to lay down

hik

hls life in the cause of religion and truth. S ER M.
All who have been distinguished as ser- -
vants of God, or benefadors of men; all
who, in perilous situations, have aded their
part with such honour as to render their
names illustrious through succeeding ages,
have been eminent for fortitude of mind.
Of this we have one conspicuous example in
the apostle Paul, whom it will be inftruc-
tive for us to view in a remarkable occur-
rence of his life. After having long adted
as the apostle of the Gentiles, his million
called him to go to Jerusalem, where he
knew that he was to encounter the utmost
violence of his enemies. Just before he set
fail, he called together the elders of his fa-
vourite church at Ephefis, and in a pa-
thetic speech, which does great honour to
his character, gave them his last farewel.
Deeply affeced by their knowledge of the
certain dangers to which he was exposing
himself, all the assembly were filled with
dilirefs, and melted into tears. The cir-
cumftances were filch as might have con-
veyed dejection even into a resolute mind;

K 4 and

SERM. and would have totally overwhelmed the
VII.

feeble. they all wept fre, andfell on Paul's
neck, and kifed him; sorrowing moJt of all
for the words which hefpake, that theyf hould
fee his face no more. What were then the
sentiments, what was the language of this
great and good man? Hear the words
which spoke his firm and undaunted
mind. Behold, I go bound in the JSirit
unto 7erufalem, not knowing the things that
Jhall befal me there; save that the Holy
GhofJ wittineeth in every city, faayng, that
bonds and afictions abide me. But .::':> of
these things move me; neither count 1 :j: ife
dear unto n2myfe, so that I migrht js/, ily
course with joy, and the miniJryy which I
have received of the Lord Jefis, to tcjfij' the
go/pel of the Grace of God '. There was
uttered the voice, there breathed the fplirt,
of a brave, and a virtuous man. Such a man
knows not what it is to shrink from dan-
ger, when conscience points out his path.
In that path he is determined to walk; let
the consequences be what they will. Till

' Ais, xx. 22, z3, 24; 37, 38.

I die,

1 die, I will not remove my integrity from S E RM.
me. My righteotfitefs I hold fafl, and will -v--
not let it go. My heart Ihall not reproach
mefo long as I live ". " For me, there is a
' part appointed to ad. I go to perform
"it. My duty I shall do to-day. Let to.
" morrow take thought for the things of
" ifelf."- Having thus shewn the im-
portance, I proceed,

II. To ihew the proper foundations of

conflancy and fortitude of mind. They
are principally two; a good conscience, and
trust in God.

A corrupted and guilty man can possess

no true firmness of heart. He who, by
crooked paths, pursues dishonourable ends,
has many things to dismay him. He not
only dreads the disappointment of his de-
signs, by some of those accidents to which
all are exposed; bat he has also to dread
the treachery of his confederates, the dif-
covery and reproach of the world, and the

, Job, xxvii. 5, 6.

just

5ER. jufi diipz easure cf I-eaven. His fears Iht
-,--_ is obliged to concc;al; but while he aflumes

the appearance of ilntlepidity before the
\vrltd, he trembis within hiiifelf; and
the bold and ficady eye of integrity fre-
quently cdurts terror into his heart. Therc
is, it is true, a fort of conltitutional cou-
rage, vhich fcnietinlcs has rendered men
darinhg in the m tI fllagitious attempts.
But this fool-hardii cfs of the rash, this
boldness of the ruinian, is altogether dif-
ferent from real fortitude. It arises merely
from walrmth of blocd, from rwant of
thoughlt, and blindness to danger. As it
forms no chara'cer of value, so it appears
only in occasional ailies; and never can be
uniformly maintained. It requires adven-
ttitous props to support it; and, in some
hour of trial, always fails. There can be
no true courage, no regular peri-verilng
constancy, but what is conneted with
principle, and founded on a consciousness

,f rectitude of intention. This, and this
only, erets that brazen wall which we can

¥p,!,; to every hoflile attack. It clothes

us with an armour, on which fortune will s E R M.

VI.

spend its fliafts in vain. All is found '-r
within. There is no weak place, where we
particularly dread a blow. There is no
occasion for false colours to be hung out.
No disguise is needed to cover us. We
would be satisfied if all mankind could
look into our hearts. What has he to
fear, who not only ads on a plan which
his conscience approves, but who knows
that every good man, nay, the whole un-
biassed world, if they could trace his in-
tentions, would justify and approve his
condua ?

I-H knows, at the fame time, that he is

ading under the immediate eye and pro-
teftion of the Almighty. Behold my witne/s
is in heaven; and my record is on higbh .
Here opens a newfource of fortitude to every
virtuous man. The consciousness of such
an illustrious fpedator, invigorates and ani-
Erates him. He trusts, that the eternal lover

* Job, xvi. i9.

of

S E R M. of righteousness not only beholds and

VII.
_ ,i approves, but will strengthen and affit;

will not fufler him to be unjustly oppressed,
and will reward his constancy in the end,
with glory, honour, and immortality. A
good conscience, thus supported, beflows
on the heart a much greater degree of intre-
pidity, than it could otherwise inspire. One
who refts on an almighty, though invisible,
ProtecAor, exerts his powers with double
force; ads with vigour not his own. Ac-
cordingly, it was from this principle of
trust in God, that the Psalmist derived that
courage and boldness, which he expresses
in the text. He had said immediately be-
fore, The Lord is my light and 1my Jalvation ;
the Lord is thcJircnngth of my lfe. The con-
sequence which diref2ly follows is, of whotn
Jfall I be aj'raid ? though an hoJI ftould en-
canm agaitl mne, mly hcart Jhall notfear. It
remains,

III. THAT I suggest a few considerations
which may prove auxiliary to the exercise

of

of virtuous fortitude in the mida of dan- SE R M.

VII.
gers. .-

From what was jufl now said, it appears,

frfi, that it Is of high importance to every
one who wishes to acf his part with be-
coming resolution, to cultivate a religious
principle, and to be inspired with trull in
God. The imperfecions of the bel are
indeed so numerous, as to give them no
title to claim, on their own account, the
protetion of Heaven. But we arc taught
to believe, that the merciful God, who made
us, and who knows our frame, favours the
sincere and upright; that the supreme ad-
ministration of the universe is always on
the fide of truth and virtue; and that,
therefore, every worthy charaaer, and every
just and good cause, though for a while
it should be depressed, is likely to receive
countenance and protetion in the end.
The more firmly this belief is rooted in
the heart, its influence will be more power-
ful, in surmounting the fears which arise
from a sense of our own weakness or dan-
ger. The records of all nations afford a

thousand

S ER R thousand remarkable instances of the edf
\-.ye fede of this principle, both on individuals,

and on bodies of men. Animated by the
firong belief of a just cause, and a pro-
teding God, the feeble have waxed Jironlg
and have despised dangers, sufferings, and
death. Handfuls of men have defied hoils
that weere encamped againlj them; and have
gone forth, conquering and to conquer.
The Jlcord of the Lord and of Gi:deon, have
called forth a valour which aflonifhed the
world; and which could have been exerted
by none, but those who fought under a di-
vine banner.

IN the next place, let him who would

preserve fortitude in difficult situations, fill
his mind with a sense, of what constitutes
the true honour of man. It consists not in
the multitude of riches, or the elevation of
rank; for experience shows, that these may
be possessed by the worthless, as well as by
the deserving. It consists in being deterred
by no danger when duty calls us forth; in
fulfilling our allotted part, whatever it may

I be,

l)e, witli faitlhfulnels, bravery, and con* '

: , ?'

flancy of mind. These qualities never fail i-
to stamp diftinlion on the charaTter. They
confer on him who discovers them, an ho-
nourable superiority, which all, even ene-
mies, feel and revere. Let every man
therefore, when the hour of danger comes,
lethink hbimfelf that now is arrived the
hour of trial, the hour which must deter-
mine, whether he is to rife, or to link for
ever, in the esteem of all around him. If,
when put to the telt, he discover no firm-
ness to maintain his ground, no fortitude
to Itand a flock, he has forfeited every-
pretenlion to a manly mind. He nmurt
reckon on being cxpolfd to general con-
tempt ; and wllat is vcrlfe, hle will feel that
he deserves it. In his own eyes he will be
contemptible; than which, furcly, no mi-
fery can be more severe.

BUT in order to acquire habits offorti-

tude, what is of the highest consequence
is to have formed a just efimate of the
goods and evils of life, and of the value of

life

s E R M. life itself. For here lies the chief source of
AI_, our weakness and pusillanimity. We over-

value the advantages of fortune; rank and
riches, ease and safety. Deluded by vain
opinions, we look to these as our ultimate
goods. We hang upon them with fond at-
tachment; and to forfeit any hope of ad-
vancement, to incur the least discredit with
the world, or to be brought down but one
ftep from the station we pollefs, is regarded
with conflernation and dismay. Hence,
a thousand weights hang upon the mind,
which depress its courage, and bend it to
mean and dishonourable compliances. What
fortitude can he possess, what worthy or
generous purpose can he form, who con-
ceives diminution of rank, or loss of for-
tune, to be the chief evils which man can
susser? Put these into the balance with
true honour, with conscious integrity, with
the esteem of the virtuous and the wife,
with the favour of Almighty God, with
peace of mind and hope of heaven; and
then think, whether those dreaded evils are
sufficient to intimidate you from doing

4 your

your duty. Look beyond external appear- s E R M.
ances to the inside of things. Suffer not ._
yourselves to be imposed on by that glitter-
ing varnish, with which the surface of the
world dazzles the vulgar. Confider how
many are contented and happy without
those advantages of fortune, on which you
put so extravagant a value. Confider whe-
ther it is poflible for you to be happy with
them, if, for their fake, you forfeit all that
is estimable in man. The favour of the
great, perhaps, you thinik, is at stake; or
that popularity with the multitude, on
which you build plan' of advancement.
Alas! hiow precarious are the mens' which
you employ in order to attain the end you
have in'view; and the enid itself, how little
is it worthy of your ambition ? That favour
which you pu'rsue, of dubious advantage
tvhcn gained, is frequently loft by servile
compliance. The timid' and abjec are de-
teted, and despised even by those whom
they court; while the firm and resolute rife
in the end to those honours, which the other
pursued in vain.

VOL. II. L PUT

S E R M. PUT the cafe at the worst. Suppose not

_-v- your fortune only, but your safety, to be

in hazard; your life itself to be endan-
gered, by adhering to conscience and vir-
tue. Think, what a creeping and igno-
minious state you would render life, if,
when your duty calls, you would expose it
to no danger; if, by a dastardly behaviour,
you would, at any expence, preserve it.
That life which you are so anxious to pre-
serve, can at any rate be prolonged only
for a few years more; and those years may
be full of woe. He who will not risk death
when conscience requires him to face it,
ought to be ashamed to live.-Confider
as a man and a Christian, for what purpose
life was given thee by Heaven. Was it,
that thou mighteft pass a few years in low
pleasures, and ignoble sloth; 'flying into
every corner to hide thyself, when the leaf
danger rifes to view? No: Life was given,
that thou mighteft come forth to at some
useful and honourable part, on that theatre
where thou haft been placed by Provi-
dence; mighteft glorify him that made

thee;

thee; andlby fleaY''perfeverance in virtue, s ER M.
rife in the end to an immortal state.

Son of man! Remember thine original

honours. Aflert the dignity of thy nature.
Shake off this pusillanimous dread of death;
and seek to fulfil the ends for which thou
wert sent forth by thy Creator.--The
Sentiment of a noble mind is, I count not
my life dear unto nmy/lf, so that I may fn'bh
my course with joy. To the finjhing of his
course, let every one direCt his eye; and let
him now appreciate life according to the
value it will be found to have, when fum-
med up at the close. This is the period
which brings every thing to the test. Illu-
sions may formerly have imposed on the
world; may have imposed on the man him-
self. But all illusion then vanishes. The
real character comes forth. The estimate
of happiness is fairly formed. Hence it
has been juRly said, that no man can be
pronounced either great or happy, until his
last hour come. To that last hour, what
will bring such fatisfation, or add so much
dignity, as the refleCion, on having fur-
mounted with firmness all the discourage-

L 2 Mernte

s E R M. ments of the world, and having persevered
VII.

_Y -to the end in one uniform course of' fidelity

and honour? We remarked before, the
magnanimous behaviour of the Apostle
Paul, when he had persecution and distress
full in view. Hear now the sentiments of
the fame great man, when the time of his
last suffering approached; and remark the
majesty and the ease with which he looked
on death. Iamn nowr ready to be ofered,
and the time of my departure is at band. I
havefougbt the good fight. I have finificd
my courfi. I have kept the faith. Hence-
forth there is laid up for me a crown of rigb-
teofilefs . How many years of life does
such a dying moment overbalance? Who
would not choose in this manner to go off
the Rage, with such a song of triumph in
his mouth, rather than prolong his exist-
ence through a wretched old age, Rained
'with fin and shame ?

ANIMATrD by these considerations, let
us nourith that fortitude of mind, which is

' z Timothy, iv. 6, 7.

so

so essential to a man and a Chriftlan. Let s E R M.

V1I.

no discouragement nor danger deter us from -y
doing what is right. Through honour and
diJonour, through good report and bad re-
port, let us preserve fidelity to our God and
our Saviour. Though an hof Jhfould en-
camp againif us, let us not fear to discharge
our duty. God affills us in the virtuous
conflial; and will crown the conqueror with
eternal rewards. Be thou faithful tlto
death, and I will give thee a crown of life,
To him that overcometh, faith our blessed
Lord, I will grant to fit with me on my
throne; even as I also overcame, and am Jet
'own with my Father on his throne *.

Rev. ii, io--iii. 21.

L3

# SERMON VIII. On ENVY. I CORINTHIANS, xiii. 4. Charity envieth not —

[ Io ,0
SER M O N VIII.

On ENVY.

I CORINTHIANS, xiii. 4.

Char;ty envietb not-

SERM. NVY is a sensation of uneasiness
VIII. and disquiet, arising from the ad-

vantages which others are supposed to
possess above us, accompanied with ma-
lignity towards those who possess them.
This is universally admitted to be one of
the blackest passions in the human heart.
In this world we depend much on one
another; and were therefore formed by
God to be mutually useful and assisting.
The instincts of kindness and compassion
which belong to our frame, show how

much

much it was the intention of our Creator S E R M.
that we should be united in friendship. If v-
any infringe this great law of nature, by
aas of causeless hostility, resentment may
justly arise. No one is to be condemned
for defending his rights, and showing dif-
pleasure against a malicious enemy. But
to conceive ill-will at one who has attacked
none of our rights, nor done us any in-
jury, solely because he is more prosperous
than we are, is a disposition altogether un-
natural; it fults not the human confittu-
tion, and partakes more of the rancour of
an evil spirit. Hence, the charater of an
envious man is universally odious. All
disclaim it; and they who feel themselves
under the influence of this passion, carefully
conceal it.

But it is proper to oonfider, that among

all our passions, both good and bad, there
are many different gradations, Sometimes
they swim on the surface of the mind,
without producing any internal agitation.
They proceed no farther than the begin-
nings of passion. Allayed by our confli-

L 4 tution,

s E R M. tution, or tempered by the mixture of other

VIII.
.---' dispositions, they exert no considerable inll

fluence on the temper. Though the cha-
raaer in which envy forms the ruling pas-
sion, and reigns in all its force, be one too
odious, I hope, to be common; yet some
shade, some tinaure, of this evil difpofi.
tion mixes with most charadters in the
world. It is, perhaps, one of the most pre-
vailing infirmities to which we are subjec2.
There are few but who, at one time or
other, have found somewhat of this nature
stirring within them; tome lurking unea-
finess in their mind, when they looked up
to others, who enjoyed a greater ilare than
had fallen to their lot, of some advantages
which they wished, and thought themselves
intitled, to possess. Though this fliould
not embitter their disposition; though it
ihould create the uneasiness only, without
the malignity, of envy; yet still it is a dif-
turbed state of mind; and always borders
upon, if it actually include not, some vi-
cious affections. In order, as far as pof-
nfble, to remedy this evil, I liall now con-

fider

fider what are the most general grounds of S E R M.

VIII.

the env- which men are apt to bear to _.-,
others; and shall examine what foundation
they afford, for any degree of this trouble-
some and dangerous passion.- The chief
grounds of envy may be reduced to three:
Accomplishments of mind; advantages of
birth, rank, and fortune; superior fucccfs
in worldly pursuits.

I. ACCOMPLISHMENTS, or endowments

of the mind. The chief endowment for
which man deserves to be valued, is virtue.
This unquestionably forms the most eili-
mable diftindion among mankind. Yet
this, which may appear surprising, never
forms any ground of envy. No man is
envied for being more just, more generous,
mere patient, or forgiving than others.
This may, in part, be owing to virtue pro-
ducing in every one who beholds it, that
high degree of refpea and love, which ex-
tinguilfhes envy. But, probably, it is more
owing to the good opinion which every
one entertains of his own moral qualities.

Some

s E R M. Some virtues, or, at least, the feeds of them,

VIII.
L-^««s he finds within his breast. Others, te vainly

attributes to himself. Those in which he
is plainly deficient, he undervalues; as
either not real virtues, or virtues of very
inferior rank; and refts satisfied, that, on
the whole, he is as worthy and refpecable
as his neighbour.

The cafe is different, with regard to those

mental abilities and powers which are as-
cribed to others. As long as these are ex-
erted in a sphere of acion remote from
ours, and not brought into competition
with talents of the fame kind, to which we
have pretensions, they create no jealousy.
They are viewed as distant objects, in
which we have not any concern. It is not
until they touch our own line, and appear
to rival us in what we wish to excel, that
they awaken envy. Even then, envy is,
properly speaking, not grounded on the
talents of others. For here, too, our self-
complacency brings us relief; from the per-
suasion, that were we thoroughly known,
and full justice done to us, our abilities

would

would be found not inferior to those of SE R M.

VIII.

our rivals. What properly occasions envy, VT
is the fruit of the accomplishments of
others; the pre-eminence which the opi-
nion of the world bestows, or which we
dread it will bestow, on their talents above
ours. Hence, distinguished superiority in
genius, learning, eloquence, or any other
of those various arts that attrac the no-
tice of the world, often become painful
grounds of envy; not indeed to all indif-
ferently, but to those who follow the fame
line of pursuit. Mere rivality, inspired by
emulation, would carry no reproach; were
not that rivality joined with obliquity, and
a malignant spirit; did it not lead to fe-
cret detraEtion, and unfair methods of di-
minifhing the reputation of others. Too
frequently has such a spirit tarnished the
character of those who fought to shine in
the elegant arts; and who, otherwise, had a
just title to fame.- Let such as are ad-
dited to this infirmity confider, how much
they degrade themselves. Superior merit,
of any kind, always refts on itself. Con-

fcious

S E R M. fcious of what it deserves, it disdains low

VIII.
.-.i competitions and jealousies. They who

are stung with envy, efpeciaily when they
allow its malignity to appear, confess a sense
of their own inferiority; and, in effect,
pay homage to that merit from.which they
endeavour to detrat.

But in order to eradicate the pafflon,

and to cure the disquiet which it creates,
let such persons farther confider, how in-
considerable the advantage is which their
rivals have gained, by any superiority over
them. They whom you envy, are them-
lelves inferior to others who follow the
fame pursuits. For how few, how very
few, have reached the summit of excel-
lence, in the art or study which they cul-
tivate? Even that degree of excellence
which they have attained, how seldom is
it allowed to them by the world, till after
they die? Public applause is the rmot fluc-
tuating and uncertain of all rewards. Ad-
mired as they may be, by a circle of their
friends, they have to look up to others,
-who stand above them in public opinion;

and

and undergo the fame mortifications wlich s ER M.

VIII.

you susser in looking up to them. Con- _
fider what labour it has cost them to arrive
at that degree of eminence they have gain-
ed; and, after all their labour, how im-
perfet their recompence is at lafl. Within
what narrow bounds is their fame con-
fined? With what a number of humili-
ations is it mixed? To how many are they
absolutely unknown? Among those who
know them, how many censure and decry
them ?- Attending fairly to these confi-
derations, the envious might come in the
end to discern, that the fame acquired by
any accomplishment of the mind, by all
that skill can contrive, or genius can exe-
cute, amounts to no more than a small ele-
vation, raises the possessor to such an in-
considerable height above the crowd, that
others may, without disquiet, fit down con-
tented with their own mediocrity.

II. ADVANTAGES of fortune, superiority

in birth, rank, and riches, even qualifica-
tions of body and form, become grounds

10 of

S ER M. of envy. ' Among external advantages,

_---, those which relate to the body ought cer-

tainly, in the comparative estimation of
ourselves and others, to hold the lowel
place; as in the acquisition of them we
can claim no merit, but must ascribe them
entirely to the gift of nature. Yet envy
has often shewed itself here in full malig-
nity; though a small measure of reflection
might have discovered that there was little
or no ground for this passion to arise. It
would have proved a blessing to multi-
tudes, to have wanted those advantages for
which they are envied. How frequently,
for instance, has beauty betrayed the pof-
fesóors of it into many a snare, and brought
upon them many a disaster? Beheld with
spiteful eyes by those who are their rivals,
they, in the mean time, glow with no
less envy against others by whom they
are surpassed; while, in the midst of
their competitions, jealousies, and con-
cealed enmities, the fading flower is
easily blasted; short-lived at the belt; and
trifling at any rate, in comparison with

S~~~5 ^the

the higher and more lasting beauties of s E R M

VIII.
the mind.. -

But of all the grounds of envy among

men, superiority in rank and fortune is
the most general. Hence the malignity
which the poor commonly bear to the
rich, as ingrofling to themselves all the
comforts of life. Hence, the evil eye, with
which persons of inferior Ration scrutinize
those who are above them in rank; and if
they approach to that rank, their envy is
generally strongest against such as are just
one ftep higher than themfelves.-Alas! my
friends, all this envious disquietude, which
agitates the world, arises from a deceitful
figure which imposes upon the public view.
False colours are hung out: the real Rfate
of men is not what it seems to be. The
order of society requires a diftindion of
ranks to take place; but, in point of hap-
piness, all men come much nearer to equa-
lity than is commonly imagined; and the
circumstances, which form any material
difference of happiness among them, are not
of that nature which renders them grounds

of

sE R M. of envy. The poor man possetses not, it

VIII.
- __is true, ibme of the conveniencies and

pleasures of the rich; but, in return, he
is free from many embarrassments to which
they are fubje&. By the simplicity and
uniformity of his life, he is delivered from
that variety of cares, which perplex those
who have great affairs to manage, intricate
plans to pursue, many enemies, perhaps, to
encounter in the pursuit. In the tranquil-
lity of his small habitation, and private
family, he enjoys a peace which is often
unknown at courts. The gratifications of
nature, which are always the most satis-
factory, are possessed by him to their full
extent; and if he be a firanger to the re-
fined pleasures of the wealthy, he is un-
acquainted also with the desire of them,
and by consequence feels no want. His
plain meal satisfies his appetite, with a re-
lifh, probably higher than that of the rich
man, who fits down to his luxurious ban-
quet. His sleep is more found; his health
more firm; he knows not what spleen,
languor, or listlessness are. His accustom-

ed

ed employments or labours are not more SERM.
oppressive to him, than the labour of at- --.-
tendance on courts and the great, the la-
bours of dress, the fatigue of amusements,
the very weight of idleness, frequently are
to the rich. In the mean time, all the
beauty of the face of nature, all the enjoy-
ments of dometfic society, all the gaiety
and cheerfulness of an easy mind, are as
open to him as to those of the highest
rank. The splendour of retinue, the found
of titles, the appearances of high refpet,
are indeed soothing, for a short time, to
the great. But become familiar, they are
soon forgotten. Custom effaces their im-
pression. They fink into the rank of those
ordinary things which daily recur, without
raising any sensation of joy.-Ceafe, there-
fore, from looking up with discontent and
envy, to those whom birth or fortune have
placed above you. Adjust the balance of
happiness fairly. When you-think of the
enjoyments you want, think also of the
troubles from which you are free. Allow
theirjuft value to the comforts you possess;

Vor,, 111. MI and

SER M. and you will find reason to reft satisfied,
VIII. ,.--- with a very moderate, though not an opu-

lent and splendid, condition of fortune.
Often, did you know the whole, you would
be inclined to pity the state of those whom
you now envy.

III. SUPERIOR success in the course of

worldy pursuits, is a frequent ground of
envy. Among all ranks of men, compe-
titions arise. Wherever any favourite ol-
jec is pursued in common, jealousies fel-
dom fail to take place among those who
are equally desirous of attaining it; as in
that ancient inflance of envy recorded of
Joseph's brethren, who hated their brother,
becaife their father loved hin more than all
the r^s''. " I could easily bear," fays one,
" that some others fiould be more. repu-
" table or famous, should be richer or
"greater than I. It is but just, that this
" man should enjoy the diftindion to

which his splendid abilities have raised

* Gen, xxxvii. 4.

" him.

"' him. It is natural for that man, to SE R M.
" command the refpet to which he is in- Vl.
' titled by his birth or his rank. But
"when I, and another, have flarted in the
' race of life, upon equal terms, and in
" the fame rank; that he, without any
' pretension to uncommon merit, flould
" have suddenly so far outstripped me;
" should have engrofed all that public fa-

vour to which I am no less intitled than

" he; this is, what I cannot bear; my
" blood boils, my spirit swells with indig-
"nation, at this undeserved treatment I
"have suffered from the world." Com-
plaints of this nature are often made, by
them twho seek to justify the envy which
they bear to their more prosperous neigh-
bouis. But if such persons wifli not to be
thought unjust, let me desire them to in-
quire, whether they have been altogether
fair in the comparison they have made of
their own merit with that of their rivals;
and whether they have not themselves to
blame, more than the world, for being left
behind in the career of fortune. The world

M 2 is

S R M. is not always blind or unjust, in conferring
.v.. its favours. Instances indeed, sometimes,

occur, of deserving persons prevented, by
a succession of gross incidents, from rising
into public acceptance. But in the ordi-
nary course of things, merit, sooner or later,
receives a reward, while the greater part
of men's misfortunes and disappointments
can, generally, be traced to some mifcondua
of their own. Wisdom bringeth to honour:
ffhe handof the diligent maketh rich; and, it
has been said, not altogether without rea-
son, that, of his own fortune in life, every
man is the chief artificer. If Joseph was
preferred by the father to all his brethren,
his subsequent conduct showed how well he
merited the preference.

Supposing, however, the world to have

been unjust, in an uncommon degree, with
regard to you, this will not vindicate ma-
lignity and envy towards a more pro-
fperous competitor. You may accuse the
world; but what reason have you to bear
ill-will to him, who has only improved the
favour which the world thewed him ? If,

6 by

by means that are unfair, he has risen, SER M.
and, to advance himself, has ated inju- ,
rioully by you, resentment is justifiable;
but, if you cannot accuse him of any such
improper conduct, his success alone gives
no fandion to your envy. You, perhaps,
preferred the enjoyment of your ease, to the
stirs of a busy, or to the cares of a thought-
ful, life. Retired from the world, and fol-
lowing your favourite inclinations, you were
not always attentive to seize the opportu-
nities, which offered for doing justice to
your character, and improving your fitua-
tion. Ought you then to complain, if the
more active and laborious have acquired
what you were negligent to gain? Confi-
der, that if you have obtained less prefer-
ment, you have pofeeffed more indulgence
and ease. Confider, moreover, that the ri-
val to whom you look up with repining
eyes, though more fortunate in the world,
may perhaps, on the whole, not be more
happy than you. He has all the viciffi-
tudes of the world before him. He may
have much to encounter, much to fiiffer,

M 3 from

SERM. from which you are protected by the

VIII.
,__ greater obscurity of your station. Every

situation in life, has both a bright and a
dark fide. Let not your attention dwell
only on what is bright on the fide of those
you envy, and dark on your own. But,
bringing into view both fides of your re-
fpcdive conditions, estimate fairly the fum
of felicity.

Thius I have suggested several confider-

ations, for evincing the unreasonableness of
that disquietude which envy raises in our
breasts; considerations, which tend at leans
to mitigate and allay the workings of this
malignant paflion, and which, in a fober
mind, ought totally to estinguifh it. The
scope of the whole has been, to promote,
in every one, contentment with his own
slate. Many arguments of a different na-
ture may be employed against envy; some
taken from its sinful and criminal nature;
some from the mischiefs to which it gives
rife in the world ; others, from the misery
.,hich it produces to him who nourishes

3 this

this viper in his bosom. But, undoubtedly, s E R M.

V111.

the most efficacious arguments, are- such v
as ihew, that the circumstances of others,
compared with our own, afford no ground
for envy. The mift.ken ideas which are
entertained of the high importance of cer-
tain worldly advantages and diftindions,
form the principal cause of our repining
at our own lot, and envying that of others.
To things light in themselves, our imagi-
nation has added undue weight. Did we
allow reflecion and wisdom to corre-t the
prejudices which we have imbibed, and to
disperse those phantoms of our own creating,
the gloom which overcasts us would gra-
dually vanish. Together with returning
contentment, the sky would clear up, and
every objet brighten around us. It is in
the fullen and dark shade of discontent, that
noxious passions, like venomous animals,
breed and prey upon the heart.

ENVY is a passion of so odious a nature,

that not only it is concealed as much as
possible from the world, but every man is

M 4 glad

S E R M. glad to dissemble the appearances of it to
VIII.

1 his own heart. Hence, it is apt to grow

upon him unperceived. Let him who is
desirous to keep his heart chafle and pure
from its influence, examine himself ftrilUy
on those dispositions which he bears to-
wards his prosperous neighbours. Does he
ever view, with secret uneasiness, the merit
of others rising into notice and diftindion?
Does he hear their praises with unwilling
ear ? Does he feel an inclination to depre-
ciate what he dares not openly blame?
When obliged to commend, does his cold
and awkward approbation insinuate his
belief of some unknown defects in the ap-
plauded charaCer ? From such symptoms
as these, he may infer that the disease of
envy is forming; that the poison is be-
ginning to spread its infection over his
heart.

THE causes that nourish envy are prin-

cipally two; and two which, very frequent-
ly, operate in conjunction; these are, pride
.and indolence, The connection of pride

with

with envy, is obvious and diceaq. The high s E R M.

VIII.

value which the proud set on their own \__.
merit, the unreasonable claims which they
form on the world, and the injustice which
they suppose to be done to them by any pre-
ference given to others, are perpetual sources,
first of discontent, and next of envy. When
indolence is joined to pride, the disease of
the mind becomes more inveterate and in-
curable. Pride leads men to claim more
than they deserve. Indolence prevents them
from obtaining what they might justly
claim. Disappointments follow; and spleen,
malignity, and envy, rage within them.
The proud and indolent are always envi-
ous. Wrapt up in their own importance,
they fit still, and repine, because others are
more prosperous than they; while, with
all their high opinion of themnfelves, they
have done nothing either to deserve, or to
acquire, prosperity. As, therefore, we va-
lue our virtue, or our peace, let us guard
against there two evil dispositions of mind.
Let us be modest in our esteem, and,
by diligence and industry, fludy to acquire

the

SE R M. the esteem of others. So shall we slut up

VIII.
_ _, the avenues that lead to many a bad pal-

sion; and shall learn, in vhartJbcverJfiae wvc
are, therewith to be content.

FINALLY, in order to subdue envy, let

us bring often into view those religious
considerations which regard us particularly
as Chrifians. Let us remember how un-
worthy we arc in the fight of God; and
how much the blefingsi which each of us
enjoy, are beyond what we diefrve. Let us
nourish reverence and fubmiflion to that
Divine Government, which has appointed
tto every one such a condition in the world
as is fittest for him to possess. Let us re-
collea how opposite the Chriflian spirit is
to envy; and what sacrcd obligations it
lays upon us, to walk in love and charity
towards one another. Indeed, when we
reflec on the many miseries which abound
in human life; on the scanty proportion of
happiness which any man is here allowed
to enjoy; on the small difference which the
diversity of fortune makes on that scanty

propor-

proportion; it is surprising that envy Ihould s E R M.
ever have been a prevalent passion among I
men, much more that it Ihould have pre-
vailed among Christians. Where so much
is suffered in common, little room is left
for envy. There is more occasion for pity
and sympathy, and inclination to assist each
other. To our own good endeavours for
reaifying our dispositions, let us not forget
to add serious prayers to the Author of our
being, that he who made the heart of man,
and knows all its infirmities, would tho-
roughly purify our hearts from a passion so
base, and so criminal, as envy. Create in
ne, 0 God, a clean heart; and renew a right
Jpirit within me. Search me, and know my
heart. Try me, and know 1nm thoughts. See
f there be any wicked way in me, and lead
iwe in the way everlafing'i,

*P, 11. I ; cxxxix. z, :2.

# SERMON IX. On IDLENESS. MATTHEW, xx. 6. — Why stand ye here all the day idle?

[ 172 ]
SERMON IX,

On IDLENESS.

MATTHEW, XX. 6.

- Wihy sand ye here all the day idle ?

s E R M. I T is an observation which naturally oc-
A._-.-.i curs, and has been often made, that all

the representations of the Chriftlian life in
scripture are taken from active scenes;
from carrying on a warfare, running a
race, striving to enter in at a firait gate;
and, as in this context, labouring in a vinc-
yard. Hence the conclusion plainly fol-
lows, that various aftive duties are requi-
red of the Christian; and that sloth and
indolence are inconsistent with his hope of
heaven.

But

But it has been sometimes supposed, that s E R M.

industry, as far as it is matter of duty, re- x
gards our spiritual concerns and employ-
mcnts only; and that one might be very
busy as a Chriptian, who was very idle as a
man. Hence, among some denominations
of Christians, an opinion has prevailed, that
the perfecion of religion was to be found in
those monastic retreats where every adive
function of civil life was totally excluded,
and the whole time of men filled up with
cxercises of devotion. They who hold such
opinions proceed on the fuppofitidn, that
religion has little or no concern with the
ordinary affairs of the world; that its du-
ties stand apart by themselves, and mingle
not in the intercourse which men have with
one another. The perfect Chriflian was
imagined to live a fort of angelic life, fe-
questered from the business or pleasures
of this contemptible tfate. The gospel, on
the contrary, represents the religion of
Christ as intended for the benefit of human
society. It assumes men as engaged in the
business of active life; and direas its ex-

horta-

S ERM. hortations, accordingly, to all ranks and

Ix.
-__ fl tations; to the magistrate and the fubje&.;

to the malter and the servant, to the rich
and the poor, to them that buy and them
that fell, them that sic and them that abif
the world. Some duties, indeed, require
privacy and retreat. But the most import--
ant mufi be performed in the midst of the
world, where we are commanded to Jl.ine
as lights, and by otr good works to glorJi/
our Father which is in heaven. This world;
as the context represents it, is God's vine-
yard, where each of us has a task assigned
him to perform. In every flation, and at
every period of life, labour is required. At
the third, the sixth, or the eleventh hour;
we are commanded to work, if we would
not incur, from the great Lord of the vine-
yard, this reproof, Why IJfand ye here all the
day idle- -We may, I confers, be busy
about many things, and yet be found neg-
ligent.of the One thing neerdydl. We may
be very adive, and, withal, very ill employ-
ed. But though a person may be indus-
trious without being religious, I must at

the

ihe fame tinm admonlifn you, that no man F. R M.

lx.

can be idle without being sinful. This I ,
fliall endeavour to show in the lequel of thec
discourse; wherein I purpose to reprove a
vice which is too common among all ranks
of men. Superiors admonish their infe-
riors, and parents tell their ,'hildren, that
idleness is the mother of every fin; while,
in their own practice, they often set the
example of what they reprobate severely
in others. I shall study to flow, that the
idle man is, in every view, both foolifl
and criminal; that he neither lives to
God; nor lives to the world; nor lives to
himself.

I. HE lives not to God. The great and

wife Creator certainly does nothing in vain.
A small measure of refleCtion might con-
vince every one, that for tome ufcful pur-
pose he was sent into the world. The na-
ture of man bears no mark ofinfignilicancyi
or neglect. He is placed at the head of
all things here below. He is furnished
with a great preparation of faculties and

powers,

S E R M. powers. He is enlightened by reason will;
If-- many important discoveries; even taught

by revelation to confider himself as ransom-
ed, by the death of Christ, from misery;
and intended to rife, by gradual advances,
to a Aill higher rank in the universe of
God. In such a situation, thus diftin-
gui5hed, thus favoured and assisted by his
Creator, can he hope to be forgiven, if he
aim at no improvement, if he pursue no
useful design, live for no other purpose but
to indulge in sloth, consume the fruits
of the earth, and to spend his days in a
dream of vanity? Existence is a sacred
trust; and he who thus misemploys and
squanders it away, is treacherous to its Au-
thor.- Look around you, and you will
behold the whole universe full of acive
powers. Acion is, to speak so, the genius
of nature. By motion and exertion, the sys-
tem of being is preserved in vigour. By
its different parts always ading in fubordi-
nation one to another, the perfection of the
whole is carried on. The heavenly bodies
perpetually revolve. Day and night incef-

fantly

fantly repeat their appointed course. Con- S E R M,

Ix.

tinual operations are going on in the earth, .
and in the waters. Nothing stands still.
All is alive, and firring throughout the
univerfe.-In the midst of this animated
and busy scene, is man alone to remain
idle in his place? Belongs it to him, to be
the sole inadive and slothful being in the
creation, when he has so much allotted
him to do; when in tb many various ways
he might improve his own nature; might
advance the glory of the God who made
him; and contribute his part to the general
good ?

Hardly is there any feeling of the hul

man heart more natural, or more univer-
fal, than that of our being accountable to
God. It is, what the most profligate can
never totally erase. Almost all nations have
agreed in the belief, that there is to come
some period, when the Almighty will aft
as the Judge of his creatures. Prefenti-
ments of this, work in every breast. Con-
science has already erected a tribunal, on
which it anticipates the sentence which at

VoL. III. N that

S ER M that period shall be passed. Before this tri-

_-v-« bunal let us sometimes place ourselves ia

serious thought, and confider what account
we are prepared to give of our conduit to
Him who made us. " I placed you," the
great Judge may then be supposed to fay,
" in a Ration where you had many occa-
" sions for ation, and many opportunities
" of improvement. You were taught, and
" you knew, your duty. Throughout a
" coui Ce of years I continued your life. I
" surrounded you with friends to whom
" you might be useful. I gave you health,
" ease, leiiure, and various advantages of
' situation. --Where are the fruits of
" those talents which you possessed? What
" good have you done with them to your-
" selves? What cod to others? How
"have you filled up your place, or aniwered
"your deftinatien, in the world ? Pro-
" duce ibone evidence, of your not having
"exifled altogether in vain."-- Let fci
as are now mere blanks in the world, and
a burden to the earth, think what answer
they will give to those awful questions.

II. TnE

II. THE idle live not to the world, and S F M.

Ix.

their fellow-creatures around them, any _
more than they do to God. Had any man
a title to stand alone, and to be independ-
ent of his fellows, he might then confider
himself as at liberty to indulge in solitary
ease and iloth, without being responsible
to others for the manner in which he
chose to live. But, on the face of the
earth, there is no such person, from the
king on his throne, to the beggar in his
cottage. We are all conneced with one
another, by various relations; which create
a chain of mutual dependence, reaching
from the highest to the lowest station inl
society. The order and happiness of the
world cannot be maiatained, without per-
petual circulation of active duties and of-
sices, which all are called upon to perform
in their turn. Superiors are no more inde-
pendent of their inferiors, than these infe-
riors are of them. Each have demands
and claims upon the other; and he, who
in any situation of life refuses to alI his
part, and to contribute his flare to the ge-

N 2 neral

s E RM. neral fock of felicity, deserves to be pro-

feribed from society, as an unworthy mem-
ber. If any nan will not work, fays the
Apoffle Paul, neither Jfould he eat * If
he will do nothing to advance the purposes
of society, he has no title to enjoy the ad-
vantages of it.

It is sometimes supposed, that industry

and diligence are duties required of the
poor alone, and that riches confer the pri-
vilege of being idle. This is so far from
being justified by reason, how often soever
it may obtain in fa&, that the higher one
is railed in the world, his obligation to be
useful is proportionably increased. The
claims upon him, from various quarters,
munltiply. The sphere of his active duties
widens on every hand. Even supposing
him exempted from exerting himself in be-
half of his inferiors, supposing the relation
between superiors and inferiors aboliflied,
the relation among equals must frill subsist.
if there be no man, however high in rank,
who stands not frequently in need of the

* Thcf. iii. io.

good

good offices of his friends, does he think S ER M;
that he owes nothing to them in return? IX.
Can he fold his arms in selfish indolence,
and expet to be served by others, if he
will not exert himself, in doing service to
any?- Were there no other call to in-
duftry, but the relation in which every one
tlands to his own family, the remembrance
of this alone fliould make the man of idle-
ness blush. Pretends he to love those with
whom he is connected by the dearest ties,
and yet will he not bestir himself for their
guidance, their support, or their advance-
ment in the world? How immoral, and
cruel, is the part he aCts, who slumbers in
sensual ease, while the wants and demands
of a helpless family cry aloud, but cry in
vain, for his vigorous exertions? Is this a
husband, is this a father, that deserves to
be honoured with those sacred names?
How many voices will be lifted up against
him at the last day! Let such persons re-
member the awful words in Scripture, and
tremble. It is written in the First Epistle
to Timothy, the fifth chapter, and eighth

N 3 veriu,

S E R M. verse, If any provide notfor his own, and
L-_ Jfpccially for itbh of his own hoIfe, he hath

denied the faith, and is wowfe than an
izfdl.

ITI. THE idle man lives not to himself,

with any more advantage than he lives to
the world. It is indeed on a supposition
entirely opposite, that persons of this cha-
rater proceed. They imagine that, how
deficient soever they may be in point of
duty, they at least consult their own satis-
fadion. They leave to others the drudgery
of life; and betake themselves, as they
think, to the quarter of enjoyment and
ease. Now, in contradiction to this, I
assert, and hope to prove, that the idle man,
firif, sluts the door against all improve-
ment; next, that he opens it wide to every
defructive folly; and, lastly, that lie ex-
cludes himself from the true enjoyment cf
pleasure.

FIRST, He shuts the door against im-
provement of every kind, whether of mind,

4 body,

body, or fortune. The law of our nature, s E R M.
the condition under which we are placed _,
from our birth, is, that nothing good or
great is to be acquired, without toil and
industry. A price is appointed by Provi-
dence to be paid for every thing; and the
price of improvement, is labour. Industry
may, indeed, be sometimes disappointed.
The race may not be always to the ficift,
nor the battle to the Jtrong. But, at the
fame time, it is certain that, in the ordi-
nary course of things, without ftrcngth,
the battle cannot be gained; without swift-
ness, the race cannot be run with Iuccefs.
In all labour, fays the wife man, there is
profit; but the foul of the Jiuggard dofireth,
and bath !othing*. If we coniult either
the improvement of the mind, or the health
of the body, it is well known that exercise
is the great instrument of promoting both.
Sloth enfeebles equally the bodily and the
mental powers. As in the animal ivftem
it engenders disease, so on the faculties of

* Prov. xiv. 23; xiii. 4.

N 4 the

S E R M. the foul it brings a fatal rust, which cor-

Ix.
CL-ye. rodes and waftes them; which, in a flnrt

time, reduces the brightest genius to the
fame level with the meanest underl; ndiilg.
The great differences which take }llace
among men, are not owing to a diftin4iion,
that nature has made in their original
powers, so much as to the superior dili-
gence with which some have improved
these powers beyond others. To no pur-
pose do we possess the feeds of many great
abilities, if they are suffered to lie dormant
within us. It is not the latent poffeffi:n,
but the aaive exertion of them, which
gives them merit. Thousands whom indo-
lence has funk into contemptible obscurity,
might have come forward to the highef .iif-
tinfion, if idlcnefs had not frustratcd the
effect of all their powers.

Initead of going on to improvement, all

things go to decline, with the idle man.
His charaaer falls into contempt. His.
fortune is consumed. Disorder, confusion,
and embarrassment, mark his whole fitua-
tion. Observe in what lively colours the

state

state of his affairs is described by Solomon. s E R baI.

IX

I went by the feld of the lothfzil, and by the I
vineyard of the man void of undetfiandiig:
And lo! it was allgrown over with thorns;
and nettles had covered the face thereof; and
the jtore wall thereof was broken down.
Y'hen I Jaw and cotftidered it well: I looked
upon it, and received inlfruion .. In the
midst, too, of those distresses which idle-
ness brings on its votaries, they must sub-
mit to innumerable mortifications, which
never fail to attend their flameful conduCt.
They mufft reckon, on feeing themselves
contemned by the virtuous and wile, and
flighted by the thriving part of manilind.
They must expet to be left behind by
every competitor for rank or fortune. They
will be obliged to humble thcmfelves be-
fore persons, now far their superiors in the
world, whom, once, they would have dif-
dained to acknowledge as their equals.-
Is it in this manner that a man lives to
himself? Are these the advantages, whlich

* Prov. xxiv. 30, 31, 32.

10 were

SE R M. were expected to be found in the lap of

IX.

>Sj ease ? The down may at first have appeared

soft: But it will soon be found to cover
thorns innumerable. How lon-g wilt thou
sleep, 0 Jiggard? WEhen wilt thou arise out
of thy eep ? Yet a little JIep; yet a little
fJmiber, a little folding of the hbands to Jecp,
So shall thy poverty come as one that iravel-
efh ; and thy want as an armed man.-
But this is only a small part of the evils
which persons of this description bring on
themselves: For,

IN the second place, while in this man-

ner they shut the door against every im-
provement, they open it wide to the most
deftruative vices and follies. The hu-
man mind cannot remain always unem-
ployed. Its passions must have some ex-
ercife. If we supply them not with proper
employment, they are sure to run loose
into riot and disorder. While we are un-
occupied by what is good, evil is continu-

* Prov. xxiv. 33, 34.

ally

ally at hand; and hence it is said in Scrip- s F R M.
ture, that as soon as Satan found lhe hon/fe ^_j
empty, he took possession, and filled it with
evail piits*. Every man who recollcas
his condu&t, may be satisfied, that his
hours of idlcnefs have always proved the
hours most dangerous to virtue. It was
then that criminal desires arose; guilty
pursuits were suggested; and dcfigns were
formed, which, in their issue, have dif-
quieted and embittered his whole life. If
seasons of idleness be dangerous, what muff
a continued habit of it prove? Habitual
indolence, by a silent and secret progress,
undermines every virtue in the foul. More
violent passions run their course, and ter-
minate. They are like rapid torrents, which
foam, and swell, and bear down every
thing before them. But after having over-
flowed their banks, their impetuosity sub-
fides. They return, by degrees, into their
natural channel; and the damage which
they have done, can be repaired. Sloth is

*Matth. xii. 44.

like

SE R M. like the flowly-flowing, putrid fiream,

* which stagnates in the marsh, breeds veno-

mous animals, and poilbnous plants; and
intets with pestilential vapours the whole
country round it. Having once tainted
the foul, it leaves no part of it found; and,
at the fame time, gives not those alarms to
conscience, which the eruptions of bolder
and fiercer emotions often occasion. The
disease which it brings on, is creeping and
insidious; and is, on that account, mole
certainly mortal.

One constant effea of idleness, is to nou-

rifh the passions, and, of course, to heighten
our demands for gratification; while it
unhappily withdraws from us the proper
means of gratifying these demands. If the
desires of the industrious man be set upon
opulence or rank, upon the conveniencies
or the splendour of life, he can accomplifl
hi, desires, by methods which are fair and
allowable. The idle man has the fame de-
fires with the industrious, but not the fame
resources for compafling his ends by ho-
nourable means. He must therefore turn

himlelf

himself to seek bv fiaud, or by violence, S E RM.
what he cannot ! bmit to acquire by in- L
lduftry. Hence, the origin of those multi-
plied crimes to which idleness is daily giv-
ing birth in the world; and which con-
tribute so much to violate the order, and
to disturb the peace, of fociety.-In gene-
ral, the children of idleness may be rank-
ed under two denominations or classes of
men; both of whom may, too justly, be
termed, The children of the devil. Either,
incapable of any effort, they are such as fink
into absolute meanness of character, and
contentedly wallow with the drunkard and
debauchee, among the herd of the sensual;
until poverty overtake them, or disease cut
them off: Or, they are such as, retaining
some remains of vigour, are impelled, by
their passions, to venture on a desperate at-
tempt for retrieving their ruined fortunes.
In this cafe, they employ the art of the
fraudulent gamester to ensnare the un-
wary. They issue forth with the high-
wayman to plunder on the road ; or with
the thief and the robber, they infest the

city

SE R M. city by night. From this class, our prisons

lx.

are peopled; and by them the scaffold is
furnished with those melancholy admoni-
tions, which are so often delivered from it
to the crowd. Such are frequently the tra-
gical, but well known, consequences of the
vice against which I now warn you.

IN the third, and last place, how dan-

gerous obever idleness may be to virtue,
are there not pleasures, it may be said,
which attend it ? Is there not ground to
plead, that it brings a release from the op-
prefilve cares of the world ; and soothes the
mind with a gentle fatisfaaion, which is
not to be found amidst the toils of a busy
and adive life ?- This is an advantage
which, learn of all others, we admit it to
possess. In behalf of incessant labour, no
man contends. Occasional release from toil,
and indulgence of ease, is what nature de-
mands, and virtue allows. But what we
assert is, that nothing is so great an enemy
to the lively and spirited enjoyment of lifL,
as a relaxed and indolent habit of mind.

He

He who knows not what it is to labour, S E R M.
knows not what it is to enjoy. The fell- A .
city of human life depends on the regular
prosecution of some laudable purpose or
objec, which keeps awake and enlivens all
our powers. Our happiness consists in the
pursuit, much more than in the attainment,
of any temporal good. Reft is agreeable;
but it is only from preceding labours that
reft acquires its true rclifh. When the
mind is suffered to remain in continued
inaction, all its powers decay. It soon lan-
guifhes and sickens; and the plcafurec
which it proposed to obtain from reft, end
in tediousness and insipidity. To this, let
that uifcrable set of men bear witness,
who, after spending great part of their life
in aaive indufiry, have retired to what
they fancied was to be a pleasing enjoy-
ment of themselves, in wealthy inacti-
vity, and profound repose. Where they
expeted to find an elysium, they have
found nothing but a dreary and com-
fortlefs waste. Their days have dragged
on, in uniform languor; with the melan-

choly

s E R A. choly remembrance often returning, of the

IX.
'-V cheerful hours they patred, when they were

engaged in the honest business and labours
of the world.

We appeal to every one who has the least

knowledge or observation of life, whether
the busy, or the idle, have the most agree-
able enjoyment of themselves? Compare
them in their families. Compare them
in the societies with which they mingle;
and remark, which of them discover most
cheerfulness and gaiety; which possess the
most regular flow of spirits; whole temper
is mot equal; whose good humour, most
unclouded. While the aaive and diligent
both enliven, and enjoy, society, the idle
are not only a burden to themselves, but a
burden to those with whom they are con-
nected; a nuisance to all whom they op-
press with their company. On whom does
time hang so heavy, as on the slothful and
lazy? To whom are the hours so linger-
ing? Who are so often devoured with
spleen, are obliged to fly to every expedi-
ent which can help them to get rid of

themselves?

themselves ? Instead of producing tranquil- s E R M.

Ix.

lity, indolence produces a fretful restless-
neIs of mind; gives rife to cravings which
are never satisfied; nourishes a sickly effe-
minate delicacy, which fours and corrupts
every pleasure.

ENOUGH has now been said to convince

every thinking person, of the folly, the
guilt, and the misery, of an idle Rtate. Let
these admonitions stir us up, to exert our-
selves in our different occupations, with
that virtuous activity which becomes men
and Christians. Let us arise from the bed
of sloth; distribute our time with attention
and care; and improve to advantage the
opportunities which Providence has bellow-
ed. The material business in which our
several stations engage us, may often prove
not sufficient to occupy the whole of our
time and attention. In the life even of
busy men, there are frequent intervals of
leisure. Let them take care, that into
these, none of the vices of idleness creep.
Let some secondary, some subsidiary em-

VOL. III. 0 ployment,

SERM: ployment, of fair and laudable kind, be
i -.y . always at hand to fill up those vacant spaces

of life, which too many assign, either to
corrupting amusements, or to mere inac-
tion. We ought never to forget, that en-
tire idleness always borders, either on mi.
fery, or on guilt.

AT the fame time, let the course of our

employments be ordered in such a manner,
that in carrying them on, we may be also
promoting our eternal interest. With the
business of the world, let us properly in-
termix the exercises of devotion. By reli-
gious duties, and virtuous actions, let us
study to prepare ourselves for a better world.
In the midst of our labours for this life, it is
never to be forgotten, that we must firJ
seek the kingdom of God, and his rigzteorf-
ness; and give diligence to make our calling and
election fire. Otherwise, how active soever
we may seem to be, our whole activity will
prove only a laborious idleness: We shall
appear, in the end, to have been busy to no
purpose, or to a purpose worse than none.

6 Then

Then only we fulfil the proper character of s E R M.

IX.

Christians, when we join that pious zeal --..
which becomes us as the servants of God,
with that industry which is required of us,
as good members of society; when, ac-
cording to the exhortation of the Apostle,
we are found notJfothful in b finess, and, at
the fame time, fervent in spirit, serving the
Lordo
.

Rom. xii. 1.
Oa

# SERMON X. On the SENSE of the DIVINE PRESENCE. PSALM lxxiii. 23. — I am continually with thee —

i[ 96 ]

SERMON X.
On the SENSE of the DIVINE PRESENCE,

PSALM Ixxiii. 23.

--, I am continually with thee--
SERM. W/ E live in a world which is full of the

x._, Divine presence and power. We be-

hold every where around us the traces of
that supreme goodness which enlivens and
supports the universe. Day uttereth Jpcclc
of it to day; and night Jheweth knowledge of
it to night. Yet, surrounded as we are with
the perfections of God, meeting him where-
ever we go, and called upon by a thousand
objets, to confess his pretence, it is both the
misfortune and the crime of a great part

1 of

of mankind, that they are strangers to Him S ER M.

X.

in whose world they dwell. Occupied with x
nothing but their pursuits of interefi and
pleasure, they pass through this world, as
though God were not there. The virtu-
ous and reflecing are particularly diftin-
guifhed from the giddy and diflolute, by
that habitual sense of the Divine presence
which charaderifes the former. To them,
nothing appears void of God. They con-
template his perfecions in the works of
nature; and they trace his Providence in
the incidents of life. When retired from
the world, he often employs their medita-
tion. When engaged in acdion, he always
influences their conduct. Wherever a pious
man is, or whatever he does, in the style of
the text, he is continually with God.

The happy effec of this sentiment on

the heart, is fully displayed in the context.
We fee it allaying all the disquiet which
the Pfalmifl, in the preceding verses, de-
scribes himself to have suffered on account
of the prosperity of the wicked. The first
reflection which refiored tranquillity to his

0 mind,

S ER M. mind, was the remembrance of the pre-

fence of God. Neverthcelef, I am continu-
ally with thee; thou haft holden me by my,
right hand. He became sensible, that what-
ever distresses the righteous might fiffer
for a time, they could not fail of being
compensated in the end, by that Almighty
Proteaor, whose propitious pretence ever
continued to surround them. Whereupon
follow those memorable expressions of his
trust and joy in God. Thou fJialt guide nm
with thy counsel; and afterwards receive nml
to glory. Whom have I in heaven but thee 3
and there is none upon earth I desire bestd
thee.

THERE are principally two effeCts, which

the sense of the Divine presence is fitted to
produce upon men. One is, to restrain
them from vice; the other, to encourage
their virtue. Its operation, as a check up-
on the finner, is obvious. The perpetual
presence of so powerful and venerable a
witness, is one of the most awful confidera-
tions which can be addressed to the dif-

solute.

lblute. It removes all the security which S ER M.

X.

secrecy can be supposed to give to crimes, .
It aggravates the guilt of them, from be-
ing committed in face of the Almighty;
and has power to strike terror into the
heart of the greatest criminal, in the midst
of his misdeeds. While this principle of
religion thus checks and terrifies the fin-
ner, it produces also another effec, that of
itrengthening and comforting the good
man, in the practice of his duty. It is the
influence of the Divine presence on good
men, which, in consequence of the Psalmist's
sentiment, I purpose to confider. To their
charaaer it belongs to be continually with
God. I shall endeavour to show the high
benefit and comfort which they derive from
such a habit of mind; and shall, for this
end, first confider their internal moral state;
and next, view them as they are affeaed by
several of the external accidents and fitua.
tions of life.

LET us begin with confidering them in
their internal state. The belief of Divine

0 4 pretence

S E RM. pretence acts upon them here, firlt, as al

.-j- incitement to virtue. The presence of one

vwhom we highly c!i'ccm and revere, of ;i
fovcreiSn, for infiancc. a father, or a fr.i:t!,
v.i'olI arpprobltionl we ;urc ,licitoll to

. ::.,

i.l.w:";s f(,::ud t~ cx;l'r t!' lnov:- oi n: .".
', rC i ' : -! '|p :' 'it 'Id ' '::

h

. . . . ,. l

. . ,

*
i: 31 : '. 1 .' 1 :,.

tive for acquitting himself with dignity. SERM.

x.

He views himself as placed cn an illus- _
trious theatre. To have the Almighty for
the fpeCator and witncls of his conduct,
is more to him thanl if the whlhole world
were ;,,iikttilcd1 to o()lclrvc hlil, l:i1n .jllige

ittl iv, W . ; il: 't . ' it

a, ^ ,' * , '1' , i I 1;,
:a

' :' 7

.' ' r ; : . '.;'
, ' 1 | : i 1 11

SE R M. mind, was the remembrance of the pre-

XI._ fence of God. Nevcrtbclefs, I am continu-

ally 'ith thee; thou hans holden me by my
right hand. He became sensible, that what-
ever distresses the righteous might fiffer
for a times they could not fail of being
compensated in the end, by that Almighty
Protector, whose propitious presence ever
continued to surround them. Whereupon
follow those memorable expressions of his
trust and joy in God. Thou J.halt guide ne
with thy counsel; and afterwards receive ime
to glory. Whom have I in heaven but thee ?
and there is none upon earth I desire befidae
thsee.

THERE are principally two effets, which

the sense of the Divine presence is fitted to
produce upon men. One is, to restrain
them from vice; the other, to encourage
their virtue. Its operation, as a check up-
on the finner, is obvious. The perpetual
presence of so powerful and venerable a
witness, is one of the most awful confidera-
tions which can be addressed to the dif-

solute,

iolute. It removes all the security which S E R M.

X.

secrecy can be supposed to give to crimes.
It aggravates the guilt of them, from be-
ing committed in face of the Almighty;
and has power to strike terror into the
heart of the greatest criminal, in the midst
of his misdeeds. While this principle of
religion thus checks and terrifies the fin-
ner, it produces also another effect, that of
strengthening and comforting the good
man, in the pracice of his duty. It is the
influence of the Divine presence on good
men, which, in consequence of the Psalmist's
sentiment, I purpose to confider. To their
characer it belongs to be continually with
God. I ihall endeavour to ihow the high
benefit and comfort which they derive from
such a habit of mind; and shall, for this
end, first confider their internal moral state;
and next, view them as they are affeced by
several of the external accidents and fitua.
tions of life.

LET us begin with confidering them in
their internal state. The belief of Divine

0 4 presence

SERIM. pretence ads upon them here, firif, as an

X.
,--.. incitement to virtue. The pretence of one

whom we highly eftecm and revere, of a
sovereign, for instance, a father, or a friend,
whose approbation we are solicitous to gain,
is always found to exalt the powers of men,
to refine and improve their behaviour.
Hence, it has been given as a rule by an-
cient moralists, that, in order to excel in
virtue, we should propound to ourselves
some person of eminent and diltinguifhed
worth; and should accustom ourselves to
ad, as if he were standing by, and behold-
ing us. To the esteem and approbation
of their fellow-creatures, none are inlLn-
fible. There are few who, in the corlpi-
cuous parts of their life, when they know
the eyes of the public to be fixed on them,
ad not their part with propriety and de-
corum. But what is the obiervation of the
public, what is the presence of the greateit
or wisest men on earth, to that prelence of
the Divinity which conflantly ifurrounds
us ? The man who realizes to his mind
this auguf presence, feels a confant incen-

tive

tive for acquitting himself with dignity. SE RM.
He views himself as placed on an illus- ^
trious theatre. To have the Almighty for
the fpeatator and witness of his condu:t,
is more to him than if the whole world
were assembled to observe him. Men judge
often falsely, always imperfeEtly, of what
pa'es before them. They are imposed on
by Ipecious appearances; and the artful
carry away the praise which is due to the
deserving. Even supposing them to judge
fairly, we may want the opportunity of
doing jurcice to our character, by any pro-
per display of it in the fight of the world.
Our situation may bury in obscurity, those
talents and virtues which were entitled to
command the highest esteem. But he, in
whose presence the good man aCs, is both
an impartial, and an unerring, judge of
worth. No fallacious appearances impose
on him. No secret virtue is hidden from
him. He is attentive equally to the mean-
eft and the greatest; and his approbation
confers eternal rewards. The man there-
fore, who fits the Lord always be/ore him,

is

E R M. is prompted to excel in virtue by motives,
X. a_,
- which are peculiar to himself, and which

engage, on the fide of duty, both honour
and interest. I have kept thy prec!pts a/d
thy tf,,imonlies; for all ny ways are befo-e

SUPPOSING, however, his virtuous en-

deavours to be faithful, many imperfec-
tions will attend them. A faultless tenor
of unblemished life, is beyond the reach of
man. Paflions will sometimes overcome
him; and ambition or interest, in an un-
guarded hour, will turn him aside into
evil. Hence he will be ashamed of him-
self, and disquieted by a sense of guilt and
folly. In this state, to which we are often
reduced by the weakness of human nature,
the belief of God's continual pretence brings
relief to the heart. It aded before as an
animating principle. It now ads as a prin,
ciple of comfort. In the midst of many
irperfe'tions, a virtuous man appeals to
his Divine witness, for the sincerity of his

* P:"ld cxki, 168.

intentions.

intentions. He can appeal to him who S R M.

X.

knoc1s his Iframe, that, in the general train ..-
of his conduCt, it is his study to keep the
law of God.

Mere law, among men, is rigid and

inflexible. As no human law-giver can
look into the hearts of his fubjeets, he
cannot, even though he were ever pre-
sent with them, estimate their character
exactly. He can make no allowance for
particular situations. He must prescribe
the fame terms to all whom he rules; and
treat all alike, according to their outward
acions. But every minute diversity of
character, temper, and situation, is known
to God. It is not only from what his ser-
vants do, but from what they seek to do,
that he forms his judgment of them. He
attends to all those circumstances which
render the trial of their virtue, at any time,
peculiarly hard. He hears the whi.fer of
devotion as it rites in the foul. He beholds
the tear of contrition which fals in ficret.
He fees the good intention ftruggiing in
its birth; and pursues it, in its proreif,

!-:.ouS1h

SE RM. through those various obtacles which may

X.
_iy >prevent it from ripening into action. Good

men, therefore, in their most humbled and
dejected fiate, draw iome consolation from
his knowledge of their heart. Though they
may sometimes have erred from the right
path, they can look up to him who is ever
with them, and fay, as an apoltle, who
had g;rievously offended, once said to his
grat Maafter, Lo-r, thou kiizo-wc, all thigs :
tboci kji?,olw that I lavw tbe e?.

Appealing thus to their omniscient wit-

ness, they are naturally toothed and encou.
raged by the hope of his clemency. At
the fame time, it is the peculiar advantage
of this sentiment of the Divine pretence,
that it prevents such hope from flattering
them too much, or rising into undue pre-
fumption. For while it encourages, it tends
alto to humble, a pious man. If it encou-
rage him, by the reflecion on all his good
diSpositions being known and attended to
by God, it humbles him, by the remem-

John, xxi. 17.

brancee,

brance, that his secret fins also are ever in S ER M
t

X.

the light of the Divine countenance. So that, --
by dwelling under the sense of God being
continually with us, we keep alive the pro-
per temper of a christian in the foul; hu-
mility, without dejed©ion; fear, mingled with
hope. We are cheered, without being lifted
up,. 'We feel ourselves cbnoxious to the all-
observing eye ofjuftice; but are comfcrted
with the thoughts of that mercy which,
through Jesus Christ, the Discerner of all
H-earts holds forth to the sincere and penitent.
-Such are the blcfed efficds which this prin-
ciple of religion produces upon :he inward
mor:al state of a good man. Let us now,

IN the second place, confider his exter-

nal circumstances; and examine the in-
fluence which the fame principle has upon
his happiness, in several diserent situations
of life.

LET us firfc view him in what the world

calls prosperity; when his circumllances
are easy or affluent, and his life flows in a;

smooth

s E R M. smooth untroubled fiream. Here, it mig:t

A-~ be thought, that a sense of the Divine pre-

fence could operate upon him only, or
chiefly, for promoting temperance, and re-
firaining the disorders incident to a profpe-
rous slate. Valuable effets, indeed, these
are; and most conducive to the true enjoy-
ment of all that is agreeable in life. But
though it, doubtless, does exert this falu-
tary influence, yet it flops not there. It
not only preserves the virtue of a good man
amidst the temptations of pleasure, but it
gives to his prosperity a security, and a pe-
culiar relish, which to others is unknown.
He who is without a sense of God upon
his mind, beholds in human affairs nothing
but a perpetual fluctuation, and viciflitude of
events. He is surrounded with unknown
causes, which may be working his deftruc-
tion in secret. He cannot avoid perceiving,
that there hangs over him the irrcfiftible
arm of that Providence, whose difpleafire
he has done nothing to stay or avert. But
he who, in the day of prosperity, dwells
with God, is delivered from those disquiet-

ing

ing alarms. He dwells as with a friend SERM.

X.

and protedor, from whom he conceives his -J
blessings to proceed. He can appeal to him
for the thankfulness with which he receives
them; and for his endeavours to employ
them well. He trults that the God whom
he serves will not forsake him; that the
goodness which he has already experienced,
will continue to bless him; and though he
believes himself not exempted from the
changes of the world, yet, in the midst of
thcfe, he has ground to hope, that sources
of comfort and happiness shall always be
left open to him.

Moreover, the pleasures of life, whlile

they last, are unspeakably heightened by
the presence of that Ienefador who be-
ltows them. The pleating emotion of gra-
titude to the giver, mingles with the enjoy-
ment of the gift. While to the mere world-
ly man, the whole frame of nature is only
a vast irregular fabric; and the course of
human affairs no more than a confuted fuc-
ceflion of fortuitous events; all nature is
beautified, and every agreeable incident is

enlivencd,

SE R M. enlivened, to him who beholds God in all

X.

things. Hence arise a variety of pleasing
fenfaticns, to fill up those solitary hours, in
which external prosperity supplies him with
no entertainment. In the Imiling scenes of
nature, he contemplates the benignity of
its author. In its sublime objes, he ad-
mires his majesty. In its awful and terri-
ble ones, he adores his power. He dwells
in this world as in a magnificent temple,
which is full of the glory of its founder;
and every where views nature offering up
its incense to him, from a thousand altars.
Such ideas exalt and ennoble the human
mind; and reflec an additional lustre on
the brightness of prosperity.

iROM the profpcrous, let us next turn to

the afflicted co:idition of a good man. For,
as prosperity may, anidlion certainly will,
.t one time or other, be his lot. It enters
into the appointed trial of his virtue; and,
in one degree or other, is the doom of all.
Here we fiall find various situations occur,
in vwhich no rc!ief is equal to what a vir-

tuou3

tuous and holy man derives from a sense of s ER M.
the perpetual presence of God. X

Is he, for instance, thrown into an ob-

fcure condition in the world, without friends
to assist him, or any to regard and confider
his estate ? He enjoys the fatisfadion of
thinking, that though he may be neglected
by men, he is not forgotten by God. In-
considerable as he is in himself, he knows,
that he will not be overlooked by the Al-
mighty, amidst the infinite variety of be-
ing, or loft in the immensity of his works.
The poor man can, with as much en-
couragement as the rich or great, lift up
his eyes to heaven, and fay, Nevertheless, 0
Lord, 1 am continually with thee: T7hou hold-
ffl me by my right hand. The gracious pre-
fence of that Supreme Being is affeced by
no diversity of rank or fortune. It imparts
itself alike to all the virtuous and upright;
like its glorious image, the fun in the fir-
mament, which iheds its rays equally upon
the humble cottage, and upon the palace of
kings. In the pretence of the great Lord
of heaven and earth, all the diftindions

VOL. III. P which

.E R Mr. which vanity has contrived to make among

X.
_,-^ men, totally disappear. All ranks are on one

level. The rich and the poor here indeed
meet together; without any other diftindion
than what arises from the heart and the foul.
The sense of this, lifts the poor man above
contempt; supports his spirits when apt to
be dejeded; and betlows dignity on the
part which he adcs. How inconsiderable
soever that part may appear in the eftima-
tion of an injudicious world, it is ennobled,
when virtuously performed, by the appro-
bation of his divine witneis. He can bear
with indifference the scorn of the proud,
as long as he knows, that there is one
higher than the highest to regard him.
He can enjoy himself with pleasure in
his mean habitation, because he believes
that God dwells with him there. The
Divine pretence cheers to him the most
lonely retreat. It accompanies his steps to
the most distant regions of the earth. If
he fiould be driven into exile from all his
friends, and obliged to dwell in thc utter-
/of1 parts as the fa, even there God's hald

. . Il

tvould hold him, and his right hand would S E P M.
guide him. Though left without compa-
nion or friend, he never thinks himself de-
solate, as long as he can fay, I .mfIill with
God.

BUT though raised above obfcurlty or

poverty, yet, in any situation of fortune,
calumny and reproach may be the lot of the
servant of God. His good intenti:,:i3 may
be misconstrued; his character uijufily
traduced; and, to the open reviling of ene-
mies, the more bitter unkindness of friends
may sometimes be joined. In this filua-
tion, when wounded in spirit, and, pe-
haps, unable to make his innocence appear,
to whom shall he have recourse for defence,
to whom make his last appeal, but to that
God who is ever present with him, and
who knoweth his heart? How frequent-
ly, amidst the injuRice and oppression of
the world, has distressed innocence had no
other relief but this? " God is my wit-
"ness. God is my avenger. He hath seen
" it, and he will repay." A good con-

P 2 science,

SE R I. science, it is true, is, of itself, a powerful

_-v-' support. But God is Lord of the con-

icience; and it is only when conneaed
with a sense of Divine presence and appro-
bation, that a good conscience becomes a
fleady principle of fortitude in the mind,
under all discouragements. Hence, a vir-
tuous man poiseses a high degree of inde-
pendence, both on the praise, and on the
censure of the world. It is enough to him
if, when undergoing the fame reproaches
which Job suffered from his mistaken
friends, he can fay with him, Behold ny
wvitnefs is in heaven, and my record is on
high*. He affects not to divulge his good
deeds to the world. He is without con-
cern whether the world be acquainted with
them or not. He knoweth that his Father
which is in heaven feeth in secret; and that
his prayers and his alms come up in grateful
memorial before him. With me, it is a small
thing to be judged of you, or of man's judg-
ment; be thatjudgeth me is the Lord t. HIe

Job, xvi. 19. ' x Cor, iv. 3, 4.

jhall

jhall bring forth my rightcoofnefs, at lalt, as SERM.
the light, and my judgment as the noon day.
In this consciousness of integrity, he looks
down with indifference, as from a superior
fiation, upon the harsh censures of a giddy
and ignorant world. The sense of being
continually with God diffuses over his foul
a holy calm, which unjust reproach cannot
disturb. In the pretence of that august and
venerable witness, all the noise and cla-
mours of men, like the murmurings of a
diflant storm, die away.

LASTLY, Supposing the character of a

good man to be untainted by reproach,
supposing also his external situation to be
opulent or distinguished; many, notwith-
standing, and severe, are the distresses to
which he may be exposed. Secret griefs
may be preying upon him; and his heart
left to feed in silence on his own bitterness.
He may labour under fore disease, and dif-
cern his earthly frame gradually moulder
into dust. He may be deprived of those
friends and relatives who had been the

P 3 chief

SERM. chief comforts of his state; or may be

X.

.-.- . obliged to prepare himself for taking fare-

wel of them for ever. In the midst of these
various afflicting scenes of human life, no
consolation can be more powerful than what
arises from the pretence of a Divine pro-
tector and guardian, to whom our cafe,
with all its sorrows, is perfectly known.
To ive,, fays the Psalmist, Ipoured out my
complailt. IJflewed before him my trouble.
I looked on 1my right hand and viewed; but,
behold there was no man who caredfor my
Jful. I si ui nto thee, 0 Lord, thou art imy
reforge. 4Whcen my spirit was overwhelmed
vwith':n me, then thou knewefJ my path *.

We all know that to communicate our

grief to a faithful friend, often gives ease
and relief to the burdened heart. Such com-
munication we are encouraged to make,
and such relief we may expect to find, in
pouring out our heart before that God in
lwom compa.ions flow. We may have no
earthly friend to whom we can with full con-

* Psalm cxlii. z, 3, 4.

fidence

fidence disclose all our sorrows; or we may s E R M.
want words in which to express them. But _- _
God is the searcher of all hearts; and the
hearer of all prayers. To the secret an-
guifh of the foul, he is no inattentive wit-
ness. Every groan which is heaved from the
labouring bosom, though heard by no hu-
man ear, reaches his throne. As he knows
our frame, so he remembers we are dnll; and
thence light arises to the upright in dark-
nef,. For the hope naturally springs, that
this beneficent being will pity them, as a
father pitieth his children; and in the midst
of those distresses which the present cir-
cumftances of man render unavoidable,
willfend them help from lis faiincar). Sur-
rounded with this compaflionate pretence
of the Almighty, good men never view
themselves as left in this vale of tears, to
bear, solitary and alone, the whole weight
of human woe. In their dark, as well as
in their brighter hours, God is with them.
Even in that valley of the shadow of
death, where no friend, no comforter, can
go along to aid them, he is with them fiill.

P 4 In

S E R M. In the last extremity of nature, the rod and

X. Jfiqf ofrhe Shephcrd of Israel support them.

THUS I have fliown, though in an im-

perfed manner, what benefits holy men
derive from a habitual sense of the Divine
pretence. It animates and strengthens their
virtue. It enlivens and brightens their
prosperity. Under various forms of adver-
fity, it affords them consolation and relief.-
Such considerations, undoubtedly, form a
strong argument in favour of a devout spirit,
and a virtuous life. But they are confidera-
tions which may, probably, be regarded
by some, as ideal and visionary; requiring
aid from a heated, or an enthusiastic, fancy,
in order to give them force. I readily ad-
mit, that amidst the hurry and turbulence
of the world, it may be difficult to bring
these religious sentiments as fully into
view, as is necessary for their making a
jus impression on the foul. This requires
the effort of an intelligent and feeling
mind; and therefore cannot be expeted
to be commonly found. To the unrefle&-

n;,

ing crowd, nothing appears real, but what s E R M.
is exposed to sense. What is invisible, is ,x
the fame to them, as if it had no existence.
But by the grossness of their own concep-
tions, they have no title to measure those of
others. While they affect to treat all con-
fiderations taken from the sense of the Di-
vine presence, as visionary and enthufiaf-
tic, it can, on the contrary, be clearly
shown, that they are founded on the most
certain and unquefRionable principles of
reason. They essentially belong not to re-
vealed only, but to natural, religion. Their
reality can be denied by none, but those
who deny that God exists, or that he go-
verns the world. For if he exists, he muff
undoubtedly pervade and infpeE the world
which he governs. He muff know what
is going on throughout his own universe;
and especially muff know what passes with-
in the hearts which he has made, and of
which he is to judge. To be every where
present, is the attribute of his nature,
which, of all others, is the most necessary
to his adminiitration of the universe. This,

accord-

SER I. accordingly, is an attribute which all reli-

x.
x _ j gions have ascribcd to him. All nations

have believed in it. All societies appeal to
it, in the solemnitics of an oath, by which
they determine controversies. This attri-
bute being once admitted to belong to the
Deity, the confequenccs which I have de-
duced from it, plainly and naturally follow:
And every good man has ground to fay, 0
Lord, I ,am conl!i;Z!l:,! ' wit thee.

# SERMON XI. On PATIENCE. LUKE, xxi. 19. In your Patience possess ye your souls.

[ 219 i
SERMON XI.

On PATIENCE.

LUKE, Xxi. 19.

In your Patience poefs ye your foulls.
p-T HE poJfeion of our fouls is a very em- S E R M.

phatical expreflion. It deicribes that XI.

slate in which a man has both the full
command, and the undisturbed enjoyment,
of himself; in opposition to his under-
going some inward agitation which difcom-
poses his powers. Upon the least reflec-
tion it muff appear, how eflential such a
state of mind is to happiness. He only
who thus poe/es his foul is capable of pof-
fefling any other thing with advantage;
and in order to attain and preserve this

self-

tions which n.ay, 1!('o).1!)1\, l)c

rcgartJ.

byv l;nlc, as ideal and vlilio!nirv; requirinl
aid from a heated, or an c;ntllhuiatic, fancy,
in order to give them force. I readily ad-
mit, that amidfl tile hurry and turbulence
of the world, it may be diflicult to bring
thele religious sentiments as filly into
view, as is necessary for their making a
just imprefflon on the foul. This requires
the effort of an intelligent and feeling
mind; and therefore cannot be expcaed
to be commonly found. To the unrefleCt

hi".

r..l'itv ca:i he de(nied by 1non', ult thl i'C
v'.io ldey that (;(l c.'xil,, or ltht hII ro-
V',rns the world. For if lie (;ilis, ehc inmit
in(doubil)tc(lyl pcrv.lad and infpcdl thc world
whiich hie governs. lie miilt know what
is going on throughout his own iinivcrte;
and cfpccially must knowl what paiFcs witli-
in the hearts which lie has made, and of
which he is to judge. To be every where
present, is the attribute of his nature,
which, of all others, is the most neccfliry
to his administration of the universe. This,

accord-

S E R M. accordingly, is an attribute which all reli-

. gions have ascribed to him. All nations

have believed in it. All societies appeal to
it, in the folemnities of an oath, by which
they determine controversies. This attri-
bute being once admitted to belong to the
Deity, the consequences which I have de-
duced from it, plainly and naturally follow:
And every good man has ground to fay, 0
ford, I am continually witb thee.

[ 219 ]
SERMON XI.

On PATIENCE.

LUKE, xxl. 19.

In your Patience poefi ye your fouls.
p HE poj ffieon of ourfouls is a very em- S ERM.

phatical expression. It describes that XI,

state in which a man has both the full
command, and the undisturbed enjoyment,
of himself; in opposition to his under-
going some inward agitation which difcom-
poses his powers. Upon the least reflec-
tion it muff appear, how essential such a
state of mind is to happiness. He only
who thus poseses his foul is capable of pof-
fessing any other thing with advantage;
and in order to attain and preserve this

self-

oE R M. feif-poffeffion, the mofl important requilite

is, the habitual excrcile of patience.

I know that patience is apt to be ranked

by many, among the more humble and
obl'cure virtues; belonging chiefly to those
who groan on a sick bed, or who languith in
a prison. If their Iituation be, happily, of
a different kind, they imagine, that there is
no occasion for the discipline of patience
being preached to them. But I hope to
make it appear, that, in every circumflance
of life, no virtue is more important, both
to duty and to happiness; or more requi-
site for forming a manly and worthy cha-
rader. It is not confined to a situation of
continued adversity. It principally, indeed,
regards the disagreeable circumstances which
are apt to occur. But in our present state,
the occurrence of there is so frequent,
that in every condition of life, pati-
ence is incefiantly called forth. Profpe-
rity cannot be enjoyed, any more than
adversity supported, without it. It muff
enter into the temper, and form the ha-
bit of the foul, if we would pass through

the

the world with tranquillity and honour. s R M.

Xl.

What I purpose is to point out some of the
chief occasions on which patience is re-
quired; and to recommend and enforce
the exercise of it, in order to our pojftng
ourfouls.

I. PATIENCE under provocations. The

wide circle of human society is diversified
by an endless variety of charaaers, difpo-
fitions, and passions. Uniformity is, in no
refpeet, the genius of the world. Every
man is marked by some peculiarity which
distinguishes him from another; and no
where can two individuals be found who
are exacly, and in all refpeds, alike.
Where so much diversity obtains, it can-
not but happen, that, in the intercourse
which men are obliged to maintain, their
tempers shall often be ill adjusted to that
intercourse; shall jar, and interfere with
each other. Hence, in every Ration, the
highest as well as the lowest, and in every
condition of life, public, private, and domes-
tic, occasions of irritation frequently arise.

14 . We

SERM. We are provoked Sometimes by the folly

XI.

and levity of those with whom we are con-
neded; sometimes, by their indifference or
neglea; by the incivility of a friend, the
haughtiness of a superior, or the insolent
behaviour of one in lower station. Hardly
a day passes, without somewhat or other oc-
curring, which serves to ruffle the man of
impatient spirit. Of course, such a man
lives in a continual storm. He knows not
what it is to enjoy a train of good humour.
Servants, neighbours, friend, spouse, and
children, all through the unrefirained vio.
lence of his temper, become sources of dif-
turbance and vexation to him. In vain is
affluence; in vain are health and prosperity.
The least trifle is sufficient to discompose
his mind, and poison his pleasures. His
very amusements are mixed with turbulence
and passion.

I would beseech this man to confider, of

what small moment the provocations which
he receives, or at least imagines himself to
receive, are really in themselves; but of
what great moment he makes them, by

suffering

fiffering them to deprive him of the pof- s E R M.

XI.

session of himfclf. I would beleech him _
to confider, how many hours of happiness
he throws away, which a little more pa-
tience would allow him to enjoy; and how
much he puts it in the power of the most
insignificant persons to render him mise-
rable. " But who can expect," we hear him
exclaim, " that he is to possess the infenli-
" bility of a fione? How is it poflible for
" human nature to endure so many re-

peated provocations? or to bear calmly

"with such unreasonable behaviour?"-
My brother ! If you can bear with no in-
stances of unreasonable behaviour, with-
draw yourielf from the world. You are
no longer fit to live in it. Leave the in-
tercourfe of men. Retreat to the moun-
tain and the desert; or shut yourself up
in a cell. For here, in the midst of society,
ofentces mnit conme. You might as well
expect, when you beheld a calm atmo-
sphere, and a clear sky, that no clouds were
ever to rife, and no winds to blow, as that
your life was long to proceed, without re-

I ceiving

S ERM. ceiving provocations from human frailty.
A- _- The careless and the imprudent, the giddy

and the fickle, the ungrateful and the in.
terested, every where meet us. They are
the briars and the thorns, with which the
paths of human life are beset. He only
who can hold his course among them with
patience and equanimity, he who is pre-
pared to bear what he must expect to hap.
pen, is worthy of the name of a man.

Did you only preserve yourself compos-

ed for a moment, you would perceive the
insignificancy of most of those provocations
which you magnify so highly. When a few
funs more have rolled over your head, the
storm will have, of itself, subsided; the cause
of your present impatience and disturbance
will be utterly forgotten. Can you not, then,
anticipate this hour of calmness to your-
self; and begin to enjoy the peace which
it will certainly bring? If others have be-
haved improperly, leave them to their own
folly, without becoming the victim of their
caprice, and punishing yourself on their
account.- Patience, in this exercise of it,

cannot

cannot be too much studied by all who S E R M.

XI.

with their life to flow in a linooth fiream. -^->
It is the reason of a man, in opposition to
the passion of a child. It is hie enjoyment
of peace, in opposition to uproar and con-
fusion. He that hath no rldl ovcr his owni
firit, is like a city that is broken Cdown and
without walls .-The next important excr-
cife of patience is,

II. PATIENCE under disappointments.

These will often happen to the best and
wisest men; fometimcs, to the wisest and
best concerted plans. They may happen,
too, not through any imprudence of those
who have devised the plan, not even
through the malice or ill design of others;
but merely in consequence of lone of thole
cross incidents of life vwllich could not be
foreseen. On such occasions, persons of a
warm and sanguine temper are presently in
a ferment. They had formed their hopes,
as they think, upon the jufrcfl grounds,

'Prov. xxv. 2S.
VoLr. III. Q They

SE RM. They had waited long for success; and'

XI.

borne with many delays. But when their
designs are brought to so unexpected an
issue; when, without any fault of their
own, they find their hopes finally blasted,
all patience forsakes them; they no longer
possess their fouls; the most passionate cx-
clamations break forth. " To whom, ex-
" cept to them, could such a disappoint-
" mcnt have happened? Since the creation
" of the world, was such a combination of
" disastrous incidents ever beheld? Why
"are they doomed to be so unfortunate
"beyond all others?"- Alas! how un-
skilfully have you calculated the course of
human events ? How rafliy and prefump-
tuoufly had you trufled to success? To
w.hom was it ever given, to guard againfi
all the vicissitudes, which the fluctuating
fla/Jon cf the world is inceflantly bringing
about? If one friend, to whom you looked
un, has died, or another has loft his in-
fluence and power; if the opinion of the
public is changed, and its favour has been
:itbhdrawn ; if some mistakes have occur-

red

red to lessen the good-will of a patron on S E RM.

XI.

whom you depended; if, through the con- s
currence of these, or such like circum-
stances, a more fortunate rival has prevail-
ed against you; what is there in all this,
that differs from the ordinary lot of man?
Are we not, each in his turn, doomed to
experience the uncertainty of worldly pur-
suits ? Why, then, aggravate our misfor-
tunes by the unreasonable violence of an
impatient spirit? If our designs have fail-
ed through rashness or mifconduE, let
us blame ourselves. If they have failed
through circumstances which we could not
prevent, let us submit to the fate of man;
and wait, with patience, till a more favour-
able opportunity shall occur of regaining
luccefs.

Meanwhile, let us turn to the other fide

of the profped; and calmly confider how
dubious it was, whether the success which
we longed for, would have proved a blef-
sing. VWho knowcth what is good for man
in this life? Perhaps, the accomplishment
of our designs might have been pregnant

Q 2 with

S E R ML with misery. Perhaps, friom our prelcilt
.-. dilappoiltment, future prosperity may rile.

Of fulcl unlooked-for issues, we all know
there have been many examples. Who can
tell, whether our cafe may not add one to
the number ?-At any rate, let us recollea,
that there is a Supreme Ruler, who disposes
of the affairs of men; under whom, all
second causes work only as subordinate
agents. Looking up to that irresistible arm
which is firetched over our heads, let us
be calm; let us submit, and adore. Either
to despair, or to rage, under disappoint-
ments, is sinful. By the former, we injure
ourlelves. By the latter, we insult Provi-
dence, and provoke its displeasure to con-
tinue. T1 'cCJj' our Jfols in paticnce is, at
once, our wildom as men, and our duty
as Chriflians. The benefits of this virtue
are lb often repeated in this world, that
good policy alone would recommend it to
every thinking man. Disappointments de-
range, and overcome, vulgar minds. The
patient and the wife, by a proper improve-
ment, frequently make them contribute to

I their

their high advantage.-Let me next recom- S E R M;

XI.
mllelnd, ._ _

III. PATIENCE under refraints. Nu-

merous are the refiraints imposed on us, by
the nature of the human condition. To
the restraints of authority and law, all
must submit. The rectraiits of education
and discipline lie on the young. Confi-
derations of health refhrain the indulgence
of pleasure. Attentions to fortune restrain
expence. Regard to friends, whom we
are bound to please; refpea to established
cuftoins, and to the opinions of society,
impose restraint on our general behaviour.
There is no man, in -- rank of life, who
is always at liberty to aa according as he
would incline. In some quarter or other,
he is limited by circumstances, that either
actually confine, or that ought at least to
confine and restrain him.

Thcee restraints, the impatient are apt to

scorn. They will needs burR the barriers
which reason had erected, or their fitua-
tion had formed; and without regard to

Q 3 confe-

S ER M. consequences, give free scope to their pre-

XI. sent wish. Hence, many dangerous ex-

cesses flow; much confusion and misery
are produced in human life. Had men
the patience to submit to their condition,
and to wait till it should allow them a
freer indulgence of their desires, they
might, in a short time, obtain the power
of gratifying them with safety. If the
young, for instance, would undergo, with
patience, the labours of education, they
would rife, at a proper period, to honours,
riches, or ease. If the infirm would, with
patience, bear the regulations which their
constitution demands, they might regain
the comforts of health. If perions of strait-
ened for.une had patience to comform them-
selves to their circumstances, and to abridge
their pleofures, they might, by degrees, im-
prove and advance their Rlate. Whereas,
by eagerness of temper, and precipitancy
of indulgence, they forfeit all the advan-
tages which patience would have pro-
cured; and incur the opposite evils to their
full extent.

IN

IN the present state of human affairs, S E R M.

no leflon is more necessary to be learned X
by all, to be inculcated on the young, and
to be pratifed by the old, than that of
patient submission to necessity. For under
the law of necessity, we are all inevitably
placed. No man is, or can be, always his
own maiter. We are obliged, in a thou-
sand cafes, to fiubmit and obey. The dif-
cipline of patience prefcrves our minds
cafy, by conforming them to our state. By
the impetuosity of an impatient and un-
submitting temper, we fight against an
unconquerable power; and aggravate the
evils we must endure.-Another important
exercise of the virtue concerning which we
discourse, is,

IV. PATIENCE under injuries and

wrongs. To these, amidst the present con-
fulion of the world, all are exposed. No
station is so high, no power so great, no
character so unblemished, as to exempt
men from being attacked by rashness, ma-
lice, or envy. To behave under such at-

Q 4 tacks

S E R , tacks whh cdue paticnce and moderation, i;,

it mufl be confe Ted, one of the nioft trying
exercises of virtue.-But, in order to pre-
vent mifiakes on this fulljecE, it is necessary
to obfcrve, that a tame submission to wrongs
is not required by religion. We are, by no
means, to imagine, that religion tends to
extinguifl, the finfe of honour, or to sup-
press the exertion of a manly spirit. It is
under a falf'c apprehension of this kind, that
Christian patience is sometimes stigmatised
in dicfourfe as no other than a different name
for cowardice. On the contrary, every man
of virtue ouwht to feel what is due to his
charader, and to flipport properly his own
rights. Rci'cltmclen of wrong, is an ufefuil
principle in human nature; and for the wisest
purpolfc, was implanted in our frame. It is
the ncceflary guard of private rights; and the
great rcfiraint on the insolence of the violent,
who, if no reliftance were made, would
trample on thc gentle and peaceable.

Rescn;imcnt, however, if not kept within

due bounds, is in hazard of riing into
fierce and cruel revenge. It is the oifice of

patience,

patience, to temper rerfetmcnt by reason. S R M.
In this view, it is nmotl properly deicribcd in ,
the text, by a man's .jl, fig his oul; acing
the part whih lf-dcnc, hich justice, or
hono:ur, require him to a&d, without being
transiportcd out of hlumiflf by the vehe-
mence ot anger; or initing on such de-
grees of relparation as bear no proportion
to the wrong that he has f;!ffercd. What
proportion, for inraance, is there between
the life of a man, and an afi'onit received
by tome rafl expreflion in converlation,
which the wife would have flighted; and
whicl, in the course of a fiw weeks, would
have been forgotten by every one ? How
fantastic, then, how unjuflifiable, are those
Iuppofed laws of modern honour, which,
for such an affront, require no less repara-
tion than the death of a fellow-creature;
and which, to obtain this reparation, re-
quire a man to endanger his own life?
Laws, which, as they have no foundation
in reason, never received the leaPt fandion
from any of the wife and poliflied nations

of

SERM. of antiquity; but were devised in tiih

XI.
»"_Y_~ darkest ages of the world, and are derived

to us from the ferocious barbarity of Gothic
manners.

Nothing is so inconsistent with felts

possession as violent anger. It overpowcrs
reason; confounds our ideas; distorts the
appearance, and blackens the colour, of
every objet. By the fIorm which it raises
within, and by the milchiefs which it oc-
cafions without, it generally brings, on the
passionate and revengeful man, greater
misery than he can bring on his enemy.
Patience allays this deftruaive tempest, by
making room for the return of calm and
fober thought. It filfpends the blow which
sudden resentment was ready to infli:. It
disposes us to attend to the alleviating cir-
cumfiances, which may be discovered in
the midst of the wrongs we suppose our-
selves to have suffered. Hence it natu-
rally inclines us to the moderate and gentle
fide; and while it allows all proper mea-
iures to be taken, both for safety, and for

just

just redress, it makes way for returning SE RM.

Xi.

peace. Without some degree of patience _
exercised under injuries, human life would
be rendered a state of prepetual hostility;
offences and retaliations would succeed to
one another in endless train; and the world
would become a field of blood.-It now
remains to recommend,

V. PATIENCE under adversity and as-

fliction. This is the molt common sense
in which this virtue is underitood; as it
refpeCs disease, poverty, old age, loss of
friends, and the other calamities which are
incident to human life. Tlhough a man live
many years, and rejoice in them all, yet let
him remember the days of darkness, for they
fall be many*'. The various duties to
which patience, under this view, gives rile,
afford a larger subjeC to discourse than I
am at present to pursue. In general, there
are two chief exercises of patience under
adversity; one refpeaing God, and another
refpecing men.

* Eccles. xi. S.

Patience,

SP PElM. Paticnce, wvith rice^ to God, il'if, in

XI. -.,l- lhc days of trolible, fuirrefs the riifngs of

a murmuring anc *:':!ulious flirit. It n:ust
apeear in that can resignation to the will
of I--eavcn, v whic is cxprcfled in those
pious ifetinel'ts of ancient good men:
I' raJs .v:.::; I t,'.": .

,J o' oi moiibh, becalms

ijbo .'j' i'. '/ -'L'. i.-, llet hi, 7 do whJat
J :.izneth ooUd ;II is I |sS SblIll we receic
good ,t. ae hd i./ tLc Lord, antd jl7all iwe
not receive evil a1// ? This is loyalty to the
great Governor of the universe. This is
that reverence which so well becomes crea-
tures who know they are dependent, and
who must confels themselves to be sinful.
Such a spirit is fitted to attrac[ the favour
of Heaven; and to bring the severe vifita-
tion sooner to a clofc. Whereas the stub-
born and impatient, who fuibmit not tlhem-
lelves to the decrees of the Most High, re-
quire to be humbled and subdued by a
continuance of chaftile lent.

Patience in adv'ersity, witl refrpc& to

men, mult appear by the compoliure and
tranquillity of our behaviour. The loud

complaint,

c-0omilaint, the querulous temper, and ,frt- x .-
ful ipiiit, disgrace every claraeler. lLhy ,-_.,
iliow a mind that is unmanned by misfr-
tunes. We weaken thereby the iy'mpathy
of others; and estrange then from the of-
lices of kindncfs and comlfort. The excr-
tions of pity will be feeble, whli it is
mingled with contempt. At thle i:ae time,
by thus weakly yielding to aldverfit, we
allow its weight to bear us down with
double preflure. Patience, by preserving
compoilre witin, relifis the imprcjeona
whichl trouble makes from without. By
leaving tec mind open to every coniolation,
it naturally tends to alleviate our burden.
- To maintain a steady and unbroken
mind, amidlf all the fiocks of the world,
forms the highest honour of a man. Pa-
tience, on iuch occafirns, rises to n:ana:.-
nimity. It flows a re'cat and nolc !i ind,
,which is aile to refi on it'sef, on GCd, and
a gnod con:licnce,; e v.ehich can cnjov;. itself:
amid(l ali cvih;; :'nd w.ould ratle!r endiw!
tlae grt. hardfliips, t^han ihutmin to wli:.i:
,.as dliic.Lnouriztlc, in: order to obtiin Ic-

Si~el,

SERM. lief. This gives proof of a strength that

X.. is derived from Heaven. It is a beam of

the immortal light, Ihining on the heart.
Such patience is the most complete triumph
of religion and virtue; and accordingly it
has ever charaaerifed those whose names
have been transmitted with honour to po.
fterity. It has ennobled the hero, the faint,
and the martyr. We are troubled on every
fJde, yet not difrefed: we are perplexed, but
not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken;
cajf down, but not deJfroyed*.

THUS I have traced Patience through

several of its most important operations in
different circumstances of life; under pro-
vocations; under disappointments; under
restraints; under injuries; and under as-
flictions. We now fee, that it is a virtue
of universal use. No man, in any condi-
tion, can pals his days with tolerable com-
fort who has not learned to pradife it.
His prosperity will be continually disturb-

* 2 Cor. iv. S, 9.

ed;

ed; and his adversity will be clouded with sERM.

XI

double darkness. He will be uneasy and
troublesome to all with whom he is con-
neted; and will be more troublesome to
himself than to any other.- Let me
particularly advise those who with to cul-
tivate so necessary a virtue, to begin their
cultivation of it, on occasions when small
ofiences and provocations arise. It is a
great, but common error to imagine, that
we are at liberty to give loose reins to tem-
per, among the trivial occurrences of life.
No excuse for irritation and impatience can
be worse, than what is taken from the per-
son being inconfilcrable, or the incident
being flight, which threw us off our guard.
With inconsiderable pcrfons we are fur-
rounded. Of flight incidents, the bulk of
ihuman life is compoied. In the midst of
tlefe, the ruling temper of the mind is
formed. It is only by moderation and self-
command then acquired, that we can inure
ourselves to patience, when the great con-
juncures of life fliall put it to a feverer
trial. If neglected then, we fliall after-

S wards

SERM. wards folcit its return in vain, I th,
,_I. haft run with fol;ioce, and t.hey have wea-

ried thee, how catfl thou conllcnd with hor/ss?
A/nd if in the land of pcac, wherein thol
trifJed/, they ,aeid tbhc, then how wilt
thou do in the fwell'hs o'f j' Jrian

IN order to afiit us n tlhe acquisition of

this gracc, let us often contemplate that
great motel of it, vwhich is displayed in the
whole life of our ,Saviour Jesus Christ.
Whole temper was ever tried by more frc-
quent provocations, more repeated difap-
pointments; more flagrant injuries, or more
severe distress? Yet, amiilit them all, we
behold him patiently enduring the contra-
dif7ion of Jinncrs; to their rudeness, oppo.
sing a mild and unrufflcd, though firm,
spirit; and, in the cause of mankind, gene-
roufly bearing with every indignity. Well
might he fay, Learn of mc, r I am n mcek
and lowly in heart.l . Having filch a high
example before our eyes, let us be ashamed

* Jer, xii. 5. I Math, xi. 29.

of

of those sallies of impatience which we so S E R M.

XI

often susser to break forth, in the midst of -
prosperity. By a more manly tranquillity
and felf-command, let us discover to the
world, that, as men, and as ChriAtians, we
have learned in patince to pofis our fouls.
VOL. III. R

# SERMON XII. On MODERATION. PHILIPPIANS, iv. 5. Let your Moderation be known unto all Men.

[ 242 ]
SERMON XII.

On MODERATION.

PHILIPPIANS, iv. 5.
Let your Moderation be known unto all

Metn.
SERM. T HE present slate of man is neither

doomed to constant nifery, nor de-

signed for complete happiness. It is, in
general, a mixed state, of comfort and for-
row, of prosperity and adversity; neithet
brightened by uninterrupted funihine, nor
overcast with perpetual shade; but subjea
to alternate successions of the one, and the
other. While such a state forbids despair,
it also checks presumption. It is equally
adverse to despondency of mind, and to

high

high elevation of spirits. The temper which SE R M.
best suits, is espreffed in the text by mo- -
deration; which, as the habitual tenor of
the foul, the apostle exhorts us to discover
in our whole conduct; let it be known unto
all men. This virtue consists in the equal
balance of the foul. It imports such pro-
per government of our passions and plea-
fures, as shall prevent us from running
into extremes of any kind; and shall pro-
duce a calm and temperate frame of mind.
It chiefly refpets our conduct in that slate
which comes under the description of ease,
or prosperity. Patience, of which I treat-
ed in the preceding discourse, direas the
proper regulation of the mind, under the
disagreeable incidents of life. Moderation
determines the bounds within which it
should remain, when circumstances are
agreeable or promising. What I how pur-
pose is, to point out some of the chief in-
stances in which Moderation ought to take
place, and to Ihew the importance of pre-
serving it.

R I. Mo-

SERM. I. MODERATION in our wishes. The
X-- i active mind of man seldom or never refts

satisfied with its present condition, how
prosperous soever. Originally formed for
a wider range of objects, for a higher sphere
of enjoyments, it finds itself in every
situation of fortune, straightened and con-
fined. Sensible of deficiency in its state, it
is ever fending forth the fond desire, the
aspiring with, after something beyond what
is enjoyed at present. Hence, that reftlefl-
ness which prevails so generally among
mankind. Hence, that disgust of pleasures
which they have tried; that paflion for
novelty; that ambition of rising to some
degree of eminence or felicity, of which
they have formed to themselves an in-
diftint idea. All which may be confidered
as indications of a certain native, original
greatness in the human foul, swelling be-
yond the limits of its present condition;
and pointing at the higher objecs for
which it was made. Happy, if these latent
remains of our primitive state served to di-
rect our wishes towards their proper defli-

nation,

nation, and to lead us into the path of true S ER M.

XII.
bliss !

But in this dark and bewildered state,

the aspiring tendency of our nature unfor-
tunately takes an opposite direction, and
feeds a very misplaced ambition. The
flattering appearances which here present
themselves to sense; the diftindions which
fortune confers; the advantages and plea-
fures which we imagine the world to be
capable of bestowing, fill up the ultimate
wish of most men. These are the objets
which engross their solitary musings, and
flimulate their active labours; which warm
the breast of the young, animate the in-
dufiry of the middle aged, and often keep
alive the palfions of the old, until the very
close of life. Afluredly, there is nothing
unlawful in our wifling to be freed from
whatever is disagreeable, and to obtain a
fuller enjoyment of the comforts of life.
But when there wishes are not tempered by
reason, they are in danger of precipitating
us into much extravagance and folly. Dc-
fires and wishes are the first springs of ac-

R 3 tion.

SERM. tion. When they become exorbitant, the

XII. __v_
- whole charaaer is likely to be tainted. If

we susser our fancy to create to itself worlds
of ideal happiness; if we feed our imagi-
nation with plans of opulence and splendour
far beyond our rank; if we fix to our
withes certain tfages of high advancement,
or certain degrees of uncommon reputation
or diftintion, as the sole fiations of feli-
city; the assured consequence will be, that
we shall become unhappy in our present
slate; unfit for ating the part, and dif-
charging the duties that belong to it; we
shall discompose the peace and order of our
minds, and foment many hurtful passions.
Here, then, let Moderation begin its reign;
by bringing within reasonable bounds the
wishes that we form. As soon as they be-
come extravagant, let us check them by
proper reflecions on the fallacious nature
of those objects which the world hangs out
to allure desire.

You have strayed, my friends, from the

road which conduts to felicity; you have
dishonoured the native dignity of your

fouls,

fouls, in allowing your wishes to terminate s ER M.
on nothing higher than worldly ideas of -v-
greatness or happiness. Your imagination
roves in a land of shadows. Unreal forms
deceive you. It is no more than a phan-
tom, an illusion of happiness which at-
traats your fond admiration; nay, an illu-
sion of happiness which often conceals
much real misery. Do you imagine, that
all are happy, who have attained to those
summits of diftinaion, towards which your
wishes aspire? Alas! how frequently has
experience shewed, that where roses were
supposed to bloom, nothing but briars and
thorns grew? Reputation, beauty, riches,
grandeur, nay, royalty itself, would, many
a time, have been gladly exchanged by the
possessors, for that more quiet and humble
station, with which you are now diffatif-
fled. With all that is splendid and shining
in the world, it is decreed that there should
mix many deep shades of woe. On the
elevated situations of fortune, the great ca-
lamities of life chiefly fall. There the storm
spends its violence, and there the thunder

R 4 breaks;

S ERM. breaks; while safe and unhurt the inha-

bitant of the vale remains below.-Retreat,
then, from those vain. and pernicious excur-
sions of extravagant .desire.- Satisfy your-
selves with what is rational and attainable.
Train your minds to moderate views of
human life, and human happiness. Re-
member, and admire, the wifdotn of Agur's
wish. Remove far from me vanity and lies.
Give me neither poverty nor riches. Feed me
with food convenient jbr me: Left I be full,
and deny thee, and Jay, Who is the Lord?
or left Ibe poor, andJteal, and take the name of
9my God in vain *.-Let me recommend,

II. MODERATION in our pursuits.

Wiffes and desires reft within. If immo-
derate and improper, though they taint
the heart, yet society may not be asseted
by them. The obscure and harmless in-
dividual may indulge his dreams, without
disturbing the public peace. But when
the ative pursuits in which we engage

* Prov. xxx. 8j 9.

rife

rife beyond moderation, they fill the world SERM.

XII.

with great disorders; often with flagrant ,.j
crimes. This admonition chiefly refpeds
the ambitious men of the world. I fay not
that all ambition is to be condemned; or
that high pursuits ought, on every occasion,
to be checked. Some men are formed
by nature, for rising into conspicuous
Rtations of life. In following the impulse
of their minds, and properly exerting the
talents with which God has blessed them,
there is room for ambition to a& in a
laudable sphere, and to become the inftru-
ment of much public good. But this may
safely be pronounced, that the bulk of men
are ready to over-rate their own abilities,
and to imagine themselves equal to higher
things than they were ever designed for
by nature. Be fober, therefore, in fixing
your aims, and planning your destined
pursuits. Beware of being led aside
from the plain path of found and moderate
conduct, by those false lights which self-
flattery is always ready to hang out.
By aiming at a mark too high, you may

fall

ER M. fall fort of what it was within your power
L-r~1 to have reached. Inflead of attaining to

eminence, you may expose yourselves to
derision; nay, may bring upon your heads
manifold disasters. Ifay to every man that
is among jtou, not to think of hinftif more
highly than he ought to think, but to think
fiberly .

Whatever your aims be, there is one

exercise of moderation which must be
enjoined to those of the greatest abilities,
as well as to others; that is, never to
transgress the bounds of moral duty.
Amidst the warmth of pursuit, accustom
yourselves to submit to the restraints, which
religion and virtue, which propriety and
decency, which regard to reputation and
characer, impose. Think not, that there
are no barriers which ought to stop your
progress. It is from a violent and impe-
tuous spirit that all the evils spring, which
are so often found to accompany ambition.
Hence, in private life, the laws of truth

X Rom. xii, 3,

and

and honour are violated. Hence, in SERM.
public contests, the peace and welfare of _
nations have been so often sacrificed to the
ambitious projects of the great. The man
of moderation, as he is temperate in his
withes, so in his pursuits he is regulated
by virtue. A good confcicnce is to him
more valuable than any success. He is
not so much bent on the accomplishment
of any design, as to take a dishonourable
flep, in order to compass it. He can have
patience. He can brook disappointments.
He can yield to unsurmountable obstacles;
and, by gentle and gradual progress, is
more likely to succeed in the end, than
others are, by violence and impetuosity.
In his highest enterprise, he wifies not to
have the appearance of a meteor, which
fires the atmosphere; or, of a comet,
which astonishes the public, by its blazing,
eccentric course; but rather to resemble
those steady luminaries of heaven, which
advance in their orbits, with a silent and
regular motion. He approves himself
thereby to the virtuous, the wife, and

discerning;

S E R M. discerning; and, by a temperate and unex-
XII.

ceptionable condut, escapes those dangers
which persons of an opposite description are
perpetually ready to incur.

III. BE moderate in your expecations.

When your state is flourishing, and the
course of events proceeds according to
your wifl, susser not your minds to be
vainly lifted up. Flatter not yourselves
with high profpeas of the increasing fa-
vours of the world, and the continuing
applause of men. Say not within your
hearts, My mountain ftandsjirong, and jsall
never be moved. I/hall never jfe adversity.
To-morrow Jfall be as this day, and more
abundantly.-You are betraying yourselves;
you are laying a sure foundation of difap-
pointment and misery, when you allow
your fancy to soar to such lofty pinnacles
of confident hope. By building your house
in this airy region, you are preparing for
yourselves a great and cruel fall. Your trust
is the spider's web. You may lean on your
bouse; but it Jhall not fland, Tott may hold

II it

itfal; but itJhall not endure. For, to man S E R M.
on earth it was never granted, to gratify all L- i
his hopes; or to persevere in one trad of
uninterrupted prosperity. Unpleafing vi-
ciffitudes never fail to succeed those that
were grateful. The faJhion of the world,
how gay or smiling soever, pajfctb, and often
pafleth suddenly, away.

By want of moderation in our hopes, we

not only increase dejection when difap-
pointment comes, but we accelerate difap-
pointment; we bring forward, with greater
speed, disagreeable changes in our state.
For the natural consequence of prefump-
tuous expectation, is rashness in conduEt.
He who indulges confident security, of
course negleas due precautions against the
dangers that threaten him; and his fall will
be foreseen and prediEted. He not only
exposes himself unguarded to dangers, but
he multiplies them againfl himself By
presumption and vanity, he either provokes
enmity, or incurs contempt.

The arrogant mind, and the proud hope,
are equally contrary to religion, and to pru-

dence.

SE R M. dence.' The world cannot bear such a fpi-

XII.
L- J rit; and Providence seldom fails to check it.

The Almighty beholds with displeasure those
who, intoxicated with prosperity, forget
their dependance on that Supreme Power
which raised them up. His awful govern-
ment of the world has been in nothing more
conspicuous than in bringing low the lofty
looks of man, and scattering the proud in the
imaginations of their minds.-Is not this the
great Babylon which I have built by the might
of my power, and.for the honour of my Ma-
jefly*? Thus exclaimed the presumptuous
monarch in the pride of his heart. But,
lo! when the word was yet in his mouth,
the visitation from Heaven came, and the
voice was heard; 0, Nebuchadnezzar! to
thee it is foken; thy kingdom is departed
from thee.-H-e that exalteth hinfelf, fJall be
humbled; and he that humbleth himself, Jhall
be exatedt. A temperate spirit, and mo-
derate expectations, are the best safeguard
of the mind in this uncertain and changing

* Daniel, iv. 30, 31 . Luke, xiv. II.

state.

slate. They enable us to pass through life s E R M.
with most comfort. When we rife in the Xl.
world, they contribute to our elevation;
and if we must fall, they render our fall
the lighter.

IV. MODERATION in our pleasures is an

important exercise of the virtue which we
are now confidering. It is an invariable law
of our present condition, that every plea-
sure which is pursued to excess, converts it-
self into poison. What was intended for
the cordial and refreshment of human life,
through want of moderation, we turn to its
bane. In all the pleasures of sense, it is
apparent, that only when indulged within
certain limits, they confer fatisfaCion. No
sooner do we pass the line which temperance
has drawn, than pernicious effees come
forward and show themselves. Could I
lay open to your view the monuments of
death, they would read a lecture in favour
of moderation, much more powerful than
any that the most eloquent preacher can
give. You would behold the graves peo-

14 pled

s E R M. pied with the vilims of intemperance. Yot

XII
.- .-. would behold those chambers of darkness

hung round, on every fide, with the tro-
phies of luxury, drunkenness, and fenfua-
lity. So numerous would you find those
martyrs of iniquity, that it may safely be
asserted, where war or peflilence have slain
their thousands, intemperate pleasure has
slain its ten thousands.

While the want of moderation in plea-

sure brings men to an untimely grave,
at the fame time, until they arrive there,
it pursues and afflits them with evils
innumerable. To what cause so much
as to this, are owing, faded youth, and
premature old age; an enervated body,
and an enfeebled mind; together with
all that long train of diseases, which the
indulgence of appetite and sense have in-
troduced into the world? Health, cheer-
fulness and vigour, are known to be the
offspring of temperance. The man of
moderation brings to all the natural and
innocent pleasures of life, that found, un-
corrupted relish, which gives him a much

fuller

fuller enjoyment of them, than the palled SE R M.

XII.

and vitiated appetite of the voluptuary al- .-
lows him to know. He culls the flower of
every allowable gratification, without dwell-
ing upon it until the flavour be loft. He
taftes the sweet of every pleasure, without
pursuing it till the bitter dregs rife. Where-
as the man of opposite character dips so
deep, that he never fails to stir an impure
and noxious sediment, which lies at the
bottom of the cup.-- n the pleasures,
besides, which are regulated by modera-
tion, there is always that dignity which
goes along with innocence. No man needs
to be ashamed of them. They are consist-
ent with honour; with the favour of God,
and of man. But the sensualist, who dif-
dains all restraint in his pleasures, is odious
in the public eye. His vices become gross;
his characer contemptible; and he ends
in being a burden both to himself and to
society. Let me exhort you once riore,

V. To moderation in all your pafllond.
This exercise of the virtue is the more re-

VOL. III. S quifite,

SE. R M. quifte, because there is no pafllon in hu-
'.-v,_ man nature but what has, of itself, a ten-

dency to run into excess. For all passion
implies a violent emotion of mind. Of
course, it is apt to derange the regular
course of our ideas; and to produce con-
fusion within. Nothing, at the fame time,
is more seducing than paflion. During the
time when it grows and swells, it conflant-
lyjuftifies, to our apprehension, the tumult
which it creates, by means of a thousand
false arguments which it forms, and brings
to its aid. Of some passions, such as anger
and resentment, the excess is so obviously
dangerous, as loudly to call for modera-
tion. He who gives himself up to the im-
petuofity offuch paflions, without reRraint,
is universally condemned by the world;
and hardly accounted a man of found
mind. But, what is less apt to be attend-
ed to, some even of those passions which
are reckoned innocent, or whose tendency
to disorder and evil is not apparent, stand,
nevertheless, in need of moderation and re-
Qraint, as well as others. For such is the

feebleness

feebleners of our nature, that every passion s E R M.
which has for its objeC any worldly good, ,
is in hazard of attaching us too strongly,
and of transporting us beyond the bounds
of reason. If allowed to acquire the full and
unrestrained dominion of the heart, it is
sufficient, in various situations, to render
us miserable; and almost in every situation,
by its ingroffing power, to render us negli-
gent of duties which, as men or Christians,
we are bound to perform.

Of the insidious growth ofpatflon, there-

fore, we have great reason to beware. We
ought always to have at hand confidera-
tions, which may aflfil us in tempering its
warmth, and in regaining possession of our
fouls. Let us be persuaded, that moments
of paflion are always moments of delusion;
that nothing truly is, what it then seems to
be; that all the opinions which we then
form, are erroneous; and all the judge-
ments which we pass, are extravagant. Let
moderation accuflom us to wait until the
fumes of paflion be spent; until the mist
vhich it has raised begin to be dissipated.

S 2 We

S E R M. We shall then be able to fee where truth
XII.

and right lie; and reason shall, by degrees,
resume the ascendant. On no occasion let
us imagine, that strength of mind is ihown
by violence of passion. This is not the
strength of men, but the impetuosity of
children. It is the strength of one who is
in the delirium of a fever, or under the
disease of madness. The strength of such a
person is indeed increased. But it is an
unnatural strength; which, being under no
proper guidance, is directed towards ob-
jeas that occasion his deftruaion. True
strength of mind is shown in governing
and resisting passion, not in giving it scope;
in restraining the wild beast within; and
acting, on the most trying occasions, ac-
cording to the diacates of conscience, and
temperate reason.

THUS I have pointed out, in several in-

instances, how moderation ought to be dif-
played: moderation in our wishes; mo-
deration in our pursuits; moderation in
our hopes; moderation in our pleasures;

1o moderation

moderation in our passions. It is a prin- S E R M.
ciple which should habitually influence our XI.L
condut, and form the reigning tempera-
ture of the foul.

THE great motive to this virtue is suggest-

ed by the words immediately following the
text; the Lord isat hand. The Judge is com-
ing, who is to close this temporary scene of
things, and to introduce a higher state of
existence. The day is at hand, which will
place the great concerns of men in a point
of view very different from that in which
they are at present beheld; will strip the
world of its false glory; will detect the va-
nity of earthly pursuits; and disclose ob-
jeas which have the proper title to interest
a rational mind. Objecs acquire power
to engage our passions, only in proportion
as they are conceived to be great. But
great, or little, are no more than terms of
comparison. Those things which appear
great to one who knows nothing greater,
will fink into a diminutive size, when he
becomes acquainted with objects of a higher

S 3 nature,

S E R M. nature. Were it oftener in our thoughts,
XII. _,, that the Lord is at band, none of those

things which now discompose and agitate
worldly men would appear of sufficient
magnitude to raise commotion in our
breasts. Enlarged views of the future de-
flination of man, and of the place which
he may hope to possess in an eternal
world, naturally give birth to modera-
tion of mind. They tend to cool all mif-
placed ardour about the advantages of this
state; and to produce that calm and tem-
perate frame of spirit, which becomes men
and christians. They give no ground for
entire disregard of earthly concerns. While
we are men, we must feel and aa as such.
But they afford a good reason why they
who believe the Lord to be at hand, should
let their moderation appear, and be known
unto all men.

# SERMON XIII. On the JOY, and the BITTERNESS of the HEART. PROVERBS, xiv. 10. The heart knoweth his own bitterness, and a stranger doth not intermeddle with his joy.

[ 263 ]

S E R M O N XIII.
On the Joy, and the BITTERNESS of the

HEART.

PROVERBS, Xiv. 10.

SThe heart knowleth his own bitterness, and a

Jfranger doth not intermeddle with his joy.
IT is well known, that men have always s E R M.

been much inclined to place their hap- xnr.

piness in the advantages of fortune, and
the.diftin&ions of rank. Hence these have
been pursued by the multitude with such
avidity, that every principle of honour,
probity, and virtue, have been sacrificed
to the attainment of them. At the fame
time, many circumstances might have con-
vinded men, that supposing them to be fuc-

S 4 cefsful

s E RM. cefsful in the pursuit, it by no means fol.
XIII.

,-, lowed, that happiness was to be the re-

ward. For if happiness be, in truth, es-
fentially conneEted with splendid fortune,
or exalted rank, how comes it to pass, that
many in the inferior stations of life, visibly
spend their days with more comfort, than
they who occupy the higher departments
of the world ? Why does the beggar sing,
while the king is fad? A small measure
of reflection on our nature might satisfy us,
that there are other principles of happiness
or misery, too often overlooked by the
world, which immediately affect the heart,
and operate there with greater force and
power than any circumstances of rank or
fortune. This is the observation of the
wife man in the text; and what I now pur-
pose to illustrate. I lhall take a view of
the chief sources of that bitterness which the
heart knoweth, and of that jcr with which
a Jtranger doth not intermeddle; and then
shall point out the proper improvements to
?e made of the subjea.

IF we inquire carefully into the sources s ER M.

of the joy or bitterness of the heart, we -
shall find, that they are chiefly two: that
they arise either from a man's own mind
and temper; or, from the connecion in
which he stands with some of his fellow-
creatures. In other words, the circum-
frances which most essentially assea every
man's happiness are, his personal characer,
and his social feelings.

I. EVERY man's own mind and temper

is, necessarily, to himself a source of much
inward joy or bitterness. For every man,
if we may be allowed the expression, is
more conneced with himself, than with
any external objet. He is confiantly a
companion to himself in his own thoughts;
and what he meets with there, muff, of all
things, contribute most to his happiness or
his disquiet. Whatever his condition in
the world be, whether high or low, if he
find no cause to ujpraid himself for his
behaviour; if he be satisfied that his con-
duCt proceeds upon a rational plan; if,

amidst

S E R M. amid the failings incident to humanity,
.II _. his conscience be, in the main, free from

reproach, and his mind undisturbed by
any difinai presages of futurity; the foun-
dation is laid for a placid and agreeable te-
nor of life. If to this you add a calm and
cheerful temper, not easily fretted or dif-
turbed, not subject to envy, nor prone to
violent passion, much of that joy will be
produced, which it is said in the text, a
stranger intermeddietb not with. For this is
an intrinsic joy, independent of all foreign
causes. The upright man, as it is written,
is fatisfed from bimfcilf. Undisturbed by
the vexations of folly, or the remorse of
guilt, his nights will be peaceful, and his
days serene. His mind is a kingdom to it-
self. A good conscience, and good temper,
prepare, even in the midst of poverty, a
continualfeaJ.

But how sadly will the scene be reverted,

if the first thoughts which occur to a man
concerning himself, shall be of a gloomy
and threatening kind; if his temper, in-
Riead of calmness and felf-enjoyment, shall

yicld

yield him nothing but disquiet and painful SER M.
agitation ? In any situation of fortune, is
it possible for him to be happy, whose
mind is in this troubled state? The spirit
of a man will fit/ain his iisarmities; but a
wounded spirit who can bear? Vigour of
mind may enable a man to filflain many
fiocks of adversity. In his spirit, as long
as it is found, he can find a resource,
when other auxiliaries fail. But if that
which should sustain him be enfeebled and
broken; if that to which he has resource
for the cure of other sorrows, become itself
the wounded part; to what quarter can he
turn for relief?

The wounds which the spirit suffers are

owing chiefly to three causes: to folly, to
passion, or to guilt. They frequently ori-
ginate from folly; that is, from vain and
improper pursuits, which, though not di-
reely criminal, are unsuitable to a man's
age, characer, or condition, in the world.
In consequence of these, he beholds him-
self degraded and exposed; and suffers the
pain of many a mortifying reflection, and

many

SERM. many a humbling comparison of himself
XIII. ccrJ_ with others. The distress occasioned by a

sense of folly, is aggravated by any violent
passion being allowed to take possession of
the heart. Even though it be of the class
of those which are reckoned innocent, yet,
if it have entirely seized and overpowered
a man, it destroys his tranquillity, and
brings his mind into a perturbed state.
But if it be a paifion of the black and vi-
cious kind, it is sufficient to blast the most
flourishing condition, and to poison all his
joys. If to those wounds infliced by fol-
ly, or by paiion, you add the wound of
guilt, the remorse and fear produced by
criminal deeds, you fill up the measure of
pain, and bitterness of heart. Often have
the terrors of conscience occasioned inward
paroxysms, or violent agitations of mind.
A dark and threatening cloud seems, to the
conscious finner, to be hanging over hls
head. He who believes himself despised,
or hated, by men, and who dreads, at the
fame time, an avenging God, can derive
little pleasure from the external comforts of

life.

life. The bitterness of his heart infuses it- E R M.

XIII.

self into every draught which pleasure offers .j
to his lips.

The external misfortunes of life, difap-

pointments, poverty, and sickness, are nothing
in comparison of those inward distresses of
mind, occasioned by folly, by passion, and by
guilt. They may indeed prevail in different
degrees, according as one or other of those
principles of bitterness is predominant. But
they are seldom parted far asunder from one
another; and when, as it too often happens,
all the three are complicated, they complete
the misery of man. The disorders of the
mind, having then arisen to their height, be-
come of all things the most dreadful. The
shame of folly, the violence of passion, and
the remorse of guilt, acting in conjuncion,
have too frequently driven men to the last
and abhorred refuge, of seeking relief in
death from a life too embittered to be any
longer endured. I proceed to confider,

II. OTHER troubles and other joys of
the heart, arising from sources different

from

SE R M. from those that I have now described;

XIII.
u,.. founded in the relations or connections

which we have with others, and springing
from the feelings which these occasion.
Such causes of Ibrrow or joy are of an
external nature. Religion does not teach
that all the sources of inward pleasure or
pain are derived from our temper, and mo-
ral behaviour. These are indeed the prin-
cipal springs of bitterness or joy. In one
way or other, they affeet all the pleasures
and pains of life; but they include not,
within themselves, the whole of them. Our
Creator did not intend, that the happiness
of each individual should have no depend-
ence on those who are around him. Hav-
ing conneted us in society by many ties, it
is his decree, that there ties should prove,
both during their subsistence and in their
dissolution, causes of pleasure or pain, im-
mediately, and often deeply, affecting the
human heart. My doctrine, therefore, is
not, that the bitterness which the heart know-
eth 'as its own, and the joy with which a
firanger intermeddlth not, is independent of

14 every

every thing external. What I assert is, SER M.
that this bitterncfs and this joy depend ,
much more on other causes, than on
riches or poverty, on high or low fla-
tions in the world; that, equally in the
conditions of elevated fortune and of
private life, the most material circum-
stances of trouble or felicity, next to
the state of our own mind and temper,
are the sensations and afleLions which
arise from the conrneaions we have wxith
others.

IN . rder to make this appear, let us up-

pose a man in any rank or conlition of
life, happy in his family and his friends;
toothed by the cordial intcrcourfi of kind
affedtions, which lie partakes with them;
enjoying the comfort of doing them good
offices, and receiving in return their since-
reft gratitude; experiencing no jealousy
nor envy, no disquiet or alienation of as-
fecion, among those with whom he is con-
neeed ;- how many, and how copious
sources of inward joy open to such a man!

How

SE R M. How smooth is the tenor of a life that proc
XIII. _...s ceeds in such a course! What a smiling

afpe& does the love of parents and chil-
dren, of brothers and fiftersj of friends and
relations, give to every surrounding objet,
and every returning day! With what a
lustre does it gild even the small habitation
where such placid intercourse dwells; where
such scenes of heart-felt fatisfaaion succeed
uninterruptedly to one another!

But let us suppose this joyful intercourse

to be broken off, in an untimely hour, by
the cruel hand of the last foe; let us ima-
gine the family, once so happy among
themselves, to behold the parent, the child,
or the spouse, to whom their hearts were
attached by the tenderedf ties, stretched on
the cold bed of death; then, what bitter-
ness does the heart know! This, in the
ftriteft sense, is its own bitternesS; from
which it is not in the power of any exter.
nal circumstance whatever to afford it re-
lief. Amidst those piercing griefs of the
heart, all ranks of life are levelled; all dif-
tincions of fortune are forgotten. Un-

availing

availing are the trophics of splendid woe, SE RM.
with which riches deck the fatal couch, to v
give the least comfort to the mourner.
The prince, and the peasant, then equally
fcel their own bitterness. Dwelling on the
melancholy remembrance of joys that are
past and gone, the one forgets his poverty;
the other despises the gilded trappings of
his state. Both, in that fad hour, are fully
sensible, that on the favours of fortune it
depends not to make man happy in this
world.

But it is not only the death of friends,

which, in the midst of a seemingly pro-
fperous slate, is able to bring distress home
to the heart. From various failures in their
conduct when living, arises much of the
inward uneasiness we susser. It will, in
general, be found, that the behaviour of
those among whom we live in near con-
netion, is, next to personal character and
temper, the chief source, either of the plea-
fures, or of the disquietudes, of every man's
life. As when their behaviour is cordial
and fatisfatory, it is of all external things

VOL. III. T the

S E R M. the most soothing to the mind; so, on the

XIII.
- other hand, their levity, their .inattention,

or occasional harihnefs, even though it pro-
ceed to no decided breach of friendship, yet
ruffles and frets the temper. Social life,
harassed with those petty vexations, refem-
bles a road which a man is doomed daily to
travel; but finds it rugged, and flony, and
painful to be trod.

The cafe becomes much worse, if the base

and criminal conduct of persons whom we
have once loved, dissolve all the bonds of
amity, and show that our confidence has
been abused. Then are opened, some of
the deepest springs of bitterness in the hu-
man heart.- Behold the heart of the
parent, torn by the unworthy behaviour,
and cruel ingratitude, of the child, whom
he had trained up with the fondest hopes;
on whom he had laviflied his whole assec-
tion; and for whose fake he had laboured
and toiled, through the course of a long life.
Behold the endearments of the conjugal
state changed into black suspicion, and
mistrust; the afi:ctionate spouse, or the

virtuous

virtuous husband, left to mourn, with a SERM.
broken heart, the infidelity of the once- ..
beloved partner of their life. Behold the
unfiifpeaing friend betrayed, in the hour of
danger, by the friend in whom he trusted;
or, in the midst of revere misfortune, meet-
ing nothing but cold indifference, perhaps
scorn and contempt, where he had expeced
to find the kindest fympathy.-Are these,
let me ask, uncommon scenes in the world ?
Are such distresses peculiar to any rank or
flation? Do they chiefly befall persons in
humble life, and have the great any pre-
rogative which affords them exemption?
When the heart is sorely wounded: by the
ingratitude or faithlessness of those on
whom it had leaned with the whole weight
of affection, where fhail it turn for relief?
W\ill it find comfort in the recollection of
honours and titles, or in the contemplation
of surrounding treasures ?- Talk not of
the honours of a court. Talk not of the
wealth of the east. These, in the hours
of heart-bitternefs, are spurned, as con-
temptible and vile; perhaps cursed, as in-

T 2 direc

SE R M. direc causes of the present ditrefs. The

dart has made its way to the heart. There,
there it is fixed. The very feat of feeling
is assailed; and in proportion to the fenfi-
bility of the sufferer's heart, and the ten-
dernefs of his affections, such, unfortunate-
ly, will be his degree of anguish. A good
conscience, and hope in God, may indeed
bring him consolation. But under such
distresses of the heart, as I have described,
fortune, be it as flourishing as you will, is
no more than an empty pageant. It is a
feeble reed, which affords no support. It
is a house of itraw, which is scattered before
the wind.

Tius you fee this doctrine meeting us,

from many quarters, that the heart knows
a bitterness and joy of its own, altogether
distinct from the uneasiness or the pleasure
that is produced by the circumflances of
external fortune; arising either from per-
fonal character, and the state of a man's
own mind; or from the affections excited
by the relations in which he tfands to

others.

others. This joy, and this bitterness, are, SERM.
each of them, of so much greater confe- ,--
quence than any diftindions of fortune,
that blessed with the former, one may be
happy, as far as human happiness goes, in
a cottage; and afflited with the latter, he
nuft be miserable in a palace.- Let us
now proceed to an important part of the
subjeCt, the practical improvement to which
this doctrine leads.

FIRST, Let it serve to moderate our pas-

sion for riches, and high situations in the
world. It is well known, that the eager
pursuit of these is the chief incentive to the
crimes that fill the world. Hence, among
the middle and lower ranks of men, all the
fraud, falsehood, and treachery with which
the competition for gain infests society.
Hence, in the higher flations of the world,
all the atrocious crimes flowing from ambi-
tion, and the love of power, by which the
peace of mankind has so often been broken,
and the earth slained with blood. Had
thefc coveted advantages the power, when

T 3 obtained,

s ER M. obtained, of ensuring joy to the heart, and
i-... rendering it a firanger to bitterness, some

apology might be offered for the violence
to which they have given occasion. The
prize might be supposed worthy of being
acquired at a high expence, when so
much depended on the attainment. But
I have shown, I hope with fatisfatory
evidence, that the contrary is the truth.
1 fay not, that the advantages of fortune
deserve no regard from a wife or a good
man. Poverty is always distressing. Opu-
lence and rank are both attended with
many comforts, and may be rendered sub-
servient to the molt valuable purposes. But
what I fay is, that it is a great error to rate
them beyond their just value. Secondary
advantages, inferior assistances to felicity,
they are; and no more. They rank below
every thing that immediately affecs the
heart, and that is a native source of joy or
bitterness there. If a man be either un-
happy in his dispositions, or unhappy in all
his connections, you heap upon him in
vain, all the treasures, and all the honours,

which

which kings can bestow. Divest these things, s E R M.
then, of that false glare which the opinions -y-
of the multitude throw around them. Con-
template them with a more impartial eye.
Pursue them with lets eagerness. Above all,
never sacrifice to the pursuit any degree of
probity or moral worth, of candour or good
affeQcion; if you would not lay a foundation
for that bitterness of heart, which none of
the goods of fortune can either compensate
or cure.

SECONDLY, Let the observations which

have been made correc our mistakes, and
check our complaints concerning a sup-
posed promiscuous distribution of happiness
in this world. The charge of injustice,
which so often, on this account, hath been
brought against Providence, refts entirely
on this ground, that the happiness and
misery of men may be estimated by the
degree of their external prosperity. This
is the delusion under which the multitude
have always laboured; but which a just
consideration of the invisible springs of

T 4 happiness

E R M. happiness that assea the heart, is sufficient

to correct. If you would judge whether a
man be really happy, it is not solely to his
houses and his lands, to his equipage and
his retinue, you are to look. Unless you
could fee farther, and discern what joy, or
what bitterness, his heart feels, you can
pronounce nothing concerning him. That
proud and wicked man whom you behold
surrounded with state and splendour, and
upon whom you think the favours of
Heaven so improperly lavished, may be a
wretch, pining away in secret, with a
thousand griefs unknown to the world.
That poor man, who appears negleted and
overlooked, may, in his humble station,
be partaking of all the moral, and all the
social joys, that exhilarate the heart; may
be living cheerful, contented, and happy.
Cease then to murmur against dispensations
of Providence, which are, to us, so imper-
feEly known. Envy not the prosperity of
finners. Judge not of the real condition of
men, from what floats merely on the surface
of their tfate. Let us rather,

THIRDLY,

TIIRDLY, Turn our attention to those SERM.

internal sources of happiness or misery, on t-
which it hath been ihown that so much
depends. As far as the bitterness or joy
of the heart arises from the first of those
great springs which I afligned to it, our
own conduct and temper, lo far our hap-
piness is placed, in sone measure, in our
own hands. What is amiss or disordered
within, in consequence of folly, of passion,
or guilt, may be recdtfied by due care, un-
der the assistance of divine grace. He who
thereby attains to a tranquil and compored
slate of heart, free from ill humour and
dilgu{t, from violent passions, and from vex-
ing remorse, is laying a foundation for en-
joyment of himself, much furer and broader
than if he were amafling thousands to in-
crease his estate.

With regard to the other spring of joy

or bitterness of heart, arifng from our con-
nections with others, here, indeed, we are
more dependent on things not within our
power. These connections are not al-
ways of our own forming; and even when

they
S

S ER Mi they have been formed by choice, the wisest
XII[.

'Y are liable to be disappointed in their expec-

tations. Yet here too it will be found, that
the proper regulation of the heart is of the
utmost importance, both for improving the
joys which our situation affords, and for
mitigating the griefs which our connec-
tions may render unavoidable. As far as
the choice of friends or relatives depends
on ourselves, let their virtue and worth
ever. direc that choice, if we look for
any lasting felicity from it. In all the
habits and attachments of social life, after
they are formed, let it be our study, to ful-
fil properly our own part. Let nothing be
wanting on our fide, to nourish that mutual
harmony and affelionate friendship which,
in every situation of life, as has been shown,
is of so great consequence to our peace and
fatisfation. It is not, indeed, in our power
to preserve always alive those friends, in
whom our hearts delight. It is often not
in our power to prevent the ingratitude and
unworthy behaviour of other fiiends, from
whom we once expeeted comfort. But

under

under those affliting incidents of life, SERM.

XIII.

much may be done by proper employment
of the thoughts, and direacion of the assec-
tions, for obtaining relief. To a purified
and well regulated heart, reason and reli-
gion can bring many aids for healing its
wounds, and restoring its peace; sid!s which,
to the negligent and viciouw, are wholly
unknown. The greater experience we have
of the vicissitudes of human life, with more
weight will that precept of the wife man
always come home to our remembrance;
Keep thy heart w'ith all diligence; for out of
it are the iles of life *.- Hence arises,

IN the fourth and last place, another in-

ftrudion, that it is of the utmost import-
ance to us all, frequently to look up to
Him who made the human heart; and to
implore his afiftance in the regulation and
government of it. Known to him are all
the sources of bitterness and joy by which
it is asseted. On him it depends, to let

-* Prov, iv. 23.

them

SE RM. them forth, or to shut them up; to in-
_. create, or to diminish them, at his plea-

sure. In a study so infinitely important to
happiness, as that of the preservation of in-
ward peace, we cannot be too earnest in
beseeching aid from the great Father of
Spirits, to enable us to keep our hearts free
from distress and trouble.-IBelides the
afliftance which we may hope to derive
from divine grace, the employments of de-
votion themselves, form one of the moll
powerful means of composing and tran-
quilifing the heart. On various occasions,
when the sources of heart-bitternefs have
been most overflowing, devotion has been
found the only refuge of the sufferer. De-
votion opens a fantuary, to which they
whose hearts have been molt deeply wound-
ed, can always fly. Within that quiet and
sacred retreat, they have often found a
healing balsam prepared. When grieved
by men, they have derived, from the ascent
of the mind towards God and celestial ob-
jeds, much to sooth them at present, and
much to hope for in future. Let us, there-

fore,

fore, neglea no mean with which religion s ERM.
can furnish us, for promoting the joys, and --..'
assuaging the bitterness, of the heart.
Amidif the frailties of our nature, the in-
constancy of men, and the frequent changes
of human life, we shall find every afliftance
that can be procured, little enough, for en-
abling us to pass our few days with tolerable
comfort and peace.

# SERMON XIV. On CHARACTERS of IMPERFECT GOODNESS. MARK, x. 21. Then Jesus, beholding him, loved him. —

[ 286 ]

S ER M ON XIV.
On CHARACTERS of IMPERFECT

GOODNESS.

MARK, X. 21.

Then ,Jefis, beholding him, loved im,--

ER M. T HE charaEers of tnen which the world
_XIV., presents to us are infinitely diversified.

In some, either the good or the bad qualities
are so predominant as strongly to mark
the characer; to discriminate one person
as a virtuous, another as a vicious man.
In others, these qualities are so mixed to-
gether, as to leave the character doubtful.
The light and the shade are so much blend-
ed, the colours of virtue and vice run in
such a manner into one another, that we

13 can

can hardly distinguish where the one ends, s E R M.

XIV.

and the other begins; and we remain in -
fufpence whether to blame or to praise.
\Vhile we admire those who are thoroughly
good, and detest the grossly wicked, it is
proper also to bestow attention on those
imperfeE charaders, where there may be
much to praise, and somewhat to blame;
and where regard to the commendable part,
llall not hinder us from remarking what
is defetive or faulty. Such attentions will
be found the more useful, as charaaers of
this mixed fort are, more frequently than
any other, exhibited to us in the commerce
of society.

It was one of this fort, which gave occa-

sion to the incident recorded in the text. The
incident seems to have been confidcred as
remarkable, since it is recounted by three
of the evangelical writers; and by them all,
with nearly the fame circumfrances. The
person to whom the history relates was a
rltrr; one of higher rank and fiation than
those who usually retorted to Jcfus. He
was a rich man: He was a)'otlmg man. His

whole

SE R M. whole behaviour was prepossessing and en-

XIV.
,_y- gaging. He appears to have conceived a

high opinion of our Lord. He addressed
him with the utmost refped; and the
question which he put to him was proper
and important. He kneeled to him and said,
Good lMaifer, what fall I do that mnay in-
heriit eternal lfre ? His condua in the world
had been regular and decent. He could
protest, that he had hitherto kept himself free
from any gross vice; and in his dealings
with others, had observed the precepts of
God. Our Lord, beholring him, is said to
have loved him; whence we have reason to
conclude, that he was not hypocritical in
his profefions; and that his countenance
carried the expreflion of good dispositions,
as his speech and his manners were altoge-
ther complacent and gentle. Yet this per-
son, amiable as he was, when his virtue
was put to the test, disappointed the hopes
which he had given reason to form. At-
tached, in all probability, to the indulgence
of ease and pleasure, he wanted fortitude
of mind to part with the advantages of the

world,

world, for the fake of religion. When our S E R M.

XIV.

Lord required him to fulfil his good inten- -
tions, by relinquishing his fortune, becom-
ing one of his followers, and preparinghim-
self to encounter sufferings, the sacrifice ap-
peared to him too great. Impressions of
virtue however still remained on his mind.
He was sensible of what he ought to have
done; and regretted his want of courage
to do it. He was sorrow fid: He was
,rievcd: Yet he went awn '.

PERSONS of a character somewhat rc-

Lembling this, all of us may have met with;
cfpecially among the young; among those
who have been liberally educated, and
polifled by a good society. They abhor
open vice, and crimes that disturb the
world. They have a refped for religion.
They are willing to receive inftrudcion for
their conduct. They are modest and un-
assuming; refpedful to their superiors in
age or station; gentle in their address; in-
offensive and courteous in their whole be-
haviour. They are fond of obliging every

VOL. III. U one;

SE R M. one; unwillingto hurt or displease any.-
XIV. Such persons we cannot but love. We

gladly promise well of them; and are dif-
posed to forward and assist them. Yet such
is the weakness of our nature, that at the
bottom of this character there may lie,
as we fee exemplified in the inrfance before
us, some secret and material defects. That
vigour of mind, that firmness of principle,
may be wanting, which is requisite for en-
abling them to adc with propriety, when
their virtue is put to a decisive trial. The
softness of their nature is unfavourable to a
steady perseverance in the course of inte-
grity. They possess the amiable qualities;
but there is ground to fufpet, that in the
estimable ones they are deficient. While,
therefore, we by no means class them among
the bad, we dare not give them the full
praise of virtue. When they set out in the
world, we cannot pronounce with confi-
dence, what confirmed features their cha-
raCter will assume; nor how far they can
be depended upon, in future life. Allow
me now to point out the dangers which

fcuh

such persons are most likely to incur; and s , R M.

xV

to /hew what is requisite for them farther Am
to fludy, in order to their fulfilling the part
of good men and true Chriflians.

I. PERSONS of this description are not

qualified for discharging aright many du-
ties, to which their situation in life may
call them. In certain circumfiances, they
behave with abundance of propriety. When
all is calm and smooth around them; when
nothing occurs to agitate the mind, or to
disturb the tenor of placid life, none of
their defects come forward. They are be-
loved; and they are useful. They promote
the comfort of human society, and, by
gentleness and courtesy of manners, serve
to cement men together in agreeable union.
But to fail on the tranquil surface of an
tnruffled lake, and to steer a safe course
through a troubled and stormy ocean,
require different talents; and, alas! hu-
man life oftener resembles the flormy
ocean, than the unruffled lake. We shall
not have been long embarked, without

U 2 finding

SERM. finding the resemblance to hold too

XIV.
otk-y- closely.

Amidst the buffle of the world, amidst

the open contentions, and secret enmities
which prevail in every society, mildness
and gentleness alone are not sufficient to
carry us with honour through the duties
of our different flations; as heads of fami-
lies, citizens, subjects, magistrates, or as
engaged in the pursuits of our several call-
ings. Disturbances and trials arise, which
demand vigorous exertions of all the moral
powers; of patience, vigilance, and self-
denial; of constancy and fortitude, to sup.
port us under danger and reproach; of
temperance, to refirain us from being car-
ried away by pleasure; of firm and deter-
mined principle, to make us despise the
bribes of fin. These manly dispositions of
mind are indispensably necessary to prepare
one, for iurmounting the discouragements
of virtue, and for struggling honourably
through the hardships of life. Unlels he
be thus armed and fortified, whatever good
intentions have been in his heart, they are

li ely

likely to be frustrated in action. Nothing SER M.

XIV.

that is great, can be undertaken. Nothing
that is difficult or hazardous, can be accom-
plifhed. Nor are we to imagine, that it is
only in times of persecution, or war, or ci-
vil commotions, that there is occasion for
those fironger efforts, those masculine vir-
tues of the foul, to be displayed. The pri-
vate, and seemingly quietfltations of life,
often call men forth, in the days of peace,
to severe trial of firmness and constancy.
The life of very few proceeds in so uniform
a train, as not to oblige them to discover,
in some situation or other, what portion
they possess of the eflimable qualities of
man. Hence it sometimes happens, that
persons whose manners were much less
promising and engaging than those of others,
have, nevertheless, when brought to at a
part in critical circumstances, performed
that part with more unfullied honour, and
firmer integrity, than they.

II. PERSONS of the charater I have de-

icribed are ill fitted, not only for difcharg-
ing the higher duties of life, but also for

IT 3 resisting

SE R M. refifing the common temptations to vice,
.-?j With good dispositions in their mind, with

a desire, like the young ruler in the text,
to know what they shall do in order to in-
berit eternallife; yet, when the terms re-
quired of them interfere with any favou-
rite enjoyment, like him, they areforrow-
fil, and go away. The particular trial to
which he was put, may appear to be a hard
one, and to exceed the ordinary rate of
virtue. Our Lord, who discerned his heart,
saw it to be necefary, in his cafe, for
bringing his character to the test. But in
cafes, where trials of much less difficulty
present themselves, they who partake of a
chdrac2er similar to his, are often found to
give way. The good qualities which they
possess, border on certain weaknesses of the
mind; and these weaknesses are apt to be-
tray them insensibly into vices, with which
they are conneted.

Good nature, for instance, is in dan-

ger of running into that unlimited com-
plaifance, which assimilates men to the
loose manners of those whom they find
around them. Pliant, and yielding in

their

their temper, they have not force to stand SERM;

XIV.

by the decisions of their own minds, with
regard to right and wrong. Like the
animal which is said to assume the colour
of every objet to which it is applied, they
lose all proper characer of their own; and
are formed by the characters of those with
whom they chance to associate. The mild
are apt to fink into habits of indolence and
sloth. The cheerful and gay, when warm.
ed by pleasure and mirth, lose that sobriety
and felf-denial, which is essential to the
support of virtue.- Even modesty and
fubmiflion, qualities so valuable in them-
selves, and so highly ornamental to youth,
sometimes degenerate into a vicious timi-
dity; a timidity which restrains men from
doing their duty with firmness; which can-
not tand the frown of the great, the re-
proach of the multitude, or even the ridi-
cule and sneer of the scorner.

Nothing can be more amiable than a

constant desire to please; and an unwilling-
ness to offend or hurt. Yet in characters
where this is a predominant feature, de-

U 4 sets

S E R M. seas are often found. Fond always to
XI. oblige, and afraid to utter any disagreeable

truth, such persons are sometimes led to
dissemble. Their love of truth is sacrificed
to their love of pleasing. Their speech, and
their manners, assume a studied courtesy.
You cannot always depend on their inile;
nor, when they proinie, be sure of the
performance. They mean and intend well.
But the good intention is temporary. Like
wax, they yield easily to every impression;
and the transient friendlhip contracted with
one peTfon, is effaced by the next. Undif-
tingui(ling desire to oblige, often proves,
in the present state of human things, a dan-
gerous habit. They who cannot, on many
occasions, give a firm and steady denial, or
who cannot break off a connetion, which
has been hastily and improperly formed,
sand on the brink of many mischiefs.
They will be seduced by the corrupting,
ensnared by the artful, betrayed by those
in whom they had placed their trust. Un-
suspicious themselves, they were flattered
with the belief of having many friends

around

around them. Elated with sanguine hopes, E R M.
and cheerful spirits, they reckoned, that to- xv
morrow would be as this daIy, aud more abun-
dant. Injudicious liberality, and thought-
less profusion, are the consequence; until,
in the end, the straits to which they are re-
duced, bring them into mean or dishonour-
able courses. Through innocent, but un-
guarded weakness, and from want of the
feverer virtues, they are, in process of time,
betrayed into downright crimes. Such may
be the conclusion of those, who, like the
young ruler before us, with many amiable
and promising dispositions, had begun their
career in life.

III. SucH persons are not prepared for

sustaining, with propriety and dignity, the
distresses to which our fRate is liable. They
were equipped for the season of sunshine
and serenity; but when the fly is overcast,
and the days of darkness come, their feeble
minds are destitute of ihelter, and ill pro.
vided for defence. Then is the time, when
more hardy qualities are required; when

courage

s ER M. courage must face danger, conflancy flpport

_ pain, patience possess itlelf in the midit of

discouragements, magnanimity display its
contempt of threatenings. If those high
virtues be altogether strangers to the mind,
the mild and gentle will certainly fink
under the torrent of difafters.-The ruler
in the text could plead, that his behaviour
to others, in the course of social life, had
been unexceptionable. So far, the refletion
on his conduac would afford him comfort
amidst adversity. But no man is without
failings. In the dejecing season of trouble
it will occur to every one, that he has been
guilty of frequent trangreffion; that much
of what ought to have been done, was
neglected; and that much of what has
been done, had better have been omitted.
In such situations, when a thousand appre-
henlions arise to alarm conscience, nothing
is able to quiet its uneasiness, except a well-
grounded trust in the mercy and acceptance
of Heaven. It is firm religious principle,
a&ing upon a manly and enlightened mind,
that gives dignity to the character, and

composure

composure to the heart, under all the trou- ER M.

XIV.

bles of the world. This enables the brave
and virtuous man, with success to buffet the
storm. While he, who had once sparkled
in society with all the charms of gay viva-
city, and had been the delight of every
circle in which he was engaged, remains
dispirited, overwhelmed, and annihilated,
in the evil day.

SUCH are the failings incident to persons

cf mixed and imperfect goodness; such the
defeats of a character formed merely of the
amiable, without the eflimable qualities of
man.

It appears from this, that we muff not

place too much trust in the fair appear-
ances, which a characer may at first ex-
hibit. In judging of others, let us always
think the best, and employ the spirit of
charity and candour. But in judging of
ourselves, we ought to be more revere. Let
us remember him whom our Lord beheld,
and loved; and who yet fell liort of the
kingdom of heaven. Let us not forget,

5 that

SERM. that something more than gentleness and

XIV.
xl 'r modesty, than complacency of temper and

affability of manners, is requisite to form
a worthy man or a true Christian. To a
high place in our esteem, these qualities are
justly intitled. They enter effemtially into
every good man's character. They form
some of its most favourable diftindions.
But they constitute a part of it; not the
whole. Let us not, therefore, reft on them
entirely, when we conceive an idea of what
manner of persons we ought to be.

LET piety form the basis of firm and

established virtue. If this be wanting, the
character cannot be found and entire. Mo-
ral virtue will always be endangered, often
be overthrown, when it is separatcd from
its surest support. Confidence in God,
strengthened by faith in the great Redeemer
of mankind, not only amidst the feverer
trials of virtue, gives constancy to the mind,
but, by nourishing the hope of immortality,
adds warmth and elevation to the assec-
tions. They whose conduac is not animated

14 bby

by religious principle, are deprived of the SE R M.
most powerful incentive to worthy and I
honourable deeds.

Let ifch discipline, next, be studied, as

may form. us to the ative and manly vir-
tues. To natural good affections, we can
never entirely trust our conduc. These, as
has been shown, may sometimes be warped
into what is wrong; and often will prove
insufficient for carrying us rightly through
all the duties of life. Good affetions are
highly valuable; but they must be sip-
ported by fixed principles, cultivated in the
understanding, and rooted in the heart.
Habits must be acquired of temperance
and felf-denial, that we may be able to
resist pleasure, and endure pain, when ei-
ther of them interfere with our duty; that
we may be prepared to make a sacrifice of
any worldly interest, when the voice of
God and conscience demand it. Let us
always remember, that without fortitude
of mind, there is no manhood; there can
be no perseverance in virtue. Let a sacred
and inviolable regard for truth reign in our

whole

SER M. whole behaviour. Let us be diflinguiflled
XIV. for fidelity to every promise we have made;

and for constancy in every worthy friend-
ihip we have formed. Let no weak com-
plaifance, no undue regard to the opinions
of men, ever make us betray the rights of
conscience. What we have once, upon due
consideration, adopted as rules of conduct,
to these let us adhere unshaken. How-
ever the world may change around us, let
it find us the fame in prosperity and adver-
fity; faithful to God and virtue; faith-
ful to the convitions of our own heart.
What our lot in the world may be, is not
ours to foresee or determine. But it is
ours to resolve, that, whatever it shall be, it
shall find us persevering in one line of up-
rightness and honour.

BY such discipline, such attentions as there,

we are to guard against those failings, which
are sometimes found to stain the most en-
gaging charaders. Joining in proper union
the ainiable and the estimable qualities, by
the one we shall attract the good; and by

the

the other, command refpeC from the bad. E RM.
We ihall both secure our own integrity,
and shall exhibit to others a proper view
of what virtue is,' in its native grace and
majesty. In one part of our characer, we
shall resemble the flower that finiles in
spring; in another, the firmly rooted tree,
that braves the winter storm. For, remem-
ber we mulf, that there is a season of win-
ter, as well as of spring and summer, in hu-
man life; and it concerns us to be equally
prepared for both.

A HIGHER and more perfct example of

such a character as I now recommend, can-
not be found, than what is presented to us
in the life of Jesus Christ. In him, we
behold all that is gentle, united with all
that is refpecable. It is a remarkable ex-
preflion, which the Apotlle Paul employs
concerning him; I 1cf/cch l)o ji' ic m'tck-
neJs and gentleness of ChIbrJt. Well might
these qualities be singled out, as thofc for
which he was 'known and difinguidled.

* Cor . i.

wr

SERM. We fee him in his whole behaviour affable,
XIV. XIV. courteous, and easy of access. He conversed

familiarly with all who presented themselves;
and despised not the meanest. With all the
infirmities of his disciples he calmly bore;
and his rebukes were mild, when their pro-
vocations were great. He wept over the
calamities of his country, which persecuted
him; and apologised and prayed for them
who put him to death. Yet the fame Jesus
we behold, awful in the ftrianefs of his vir-
tue; inflexible in the cause of truth; un-
complying with prevailing manners, when
he found them corrupt; setting his face
boldly against the hypocritical leaders of the
people; overawed by none of their threat-
enings; in the most indignant terms, re-
proving their vices, and stigmatizing their
characers. We behold him gentle, with-
out being tame; firm, without being stern;
courageous, without being violent. Let this
mind be in us zc'which was ano in Ycftis Cbri/;
and we flhall attain to honour, both with
God and with man,

# SERMON XV. On the SACRAMENT of the LORD'S SUPPER, as a PREPARATION for DEATH. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. MATTHEW, xxvi. 29. But I say unto you, I will not drink...

[ 30s ]

SERMON XV.
On the SACRAMENT of the LORD'S SUP.

PER, as a PREPARATION for DEATH.
Freached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.

MATTHEW, xxvi. 29.

?lat I fay unto you, I will not drink hence-
forth of this fruit of the vine, until that
day when I drink it new with you in my
Father's kingdom.
W ITH these words of our blefled Lord s ER M.

the Evangelist concludes his account ,.

of the institution of the Sacrament of the
Supper. It is an inflitution which, solemn
and venerable in itself, is rendered still more
so by the circumstances which accompanied

VOL. III. X it.

SERM. it. Our Lord had now, for about three

xv.
,---i- years, continued to appear in his public

characer, in the land of Judea. He had,
all along, been watched with a jealous eye,
by his enemies; and the time was come,
when they were to prevail againfl him. A
few friends he had, from the beginning,
feleted, who, in every vicissitude of his
fiate, remained faithfully attached to him.
With these friends he was now meeting for
the last time, on the very evening in which
he was betrayed and seized. He perfetly
knew all that was to befall him. He knew
that this was'the last meal in which he was
to join with those, who had been the com-
panions of all his labours, the confidants of
all his griefs; among whom he had passed
all the quiet and private moments of his life.
He knew that within a few hours, he was
to be torn from this loved society, by a
band of ruffians; and by to-morrow, was
to be publicly arraigned as a malefactor.
With a heart melting with tenderness, he
said to the twelve Apostles, as he fat down
with them at table, With desire I have desire

to eat this paafover with you before Ifujfr *. s E R M.
And then, having gratified himself for the i--i
last time in their society, and having infti-
tuted that commemoration of his death
which was to continue in the Christian
church until the end of ages, he took a so-
lemn and affedionate farewell of his friends,
in the words of the text, Ifay unto you,
bhat I will not drink henceforth of this fruit
of' the vine, until that day when I drink it
new wiith you in my Father's kingdom.

As these words were uttered by our

Lord, in the profpea of his sufferings;
when preparing himself for death, and
looking forward to a future meeting with
his friends in heaven; let us, under this
view, confider the sacrament, which he
then instituted, as a preparation for all the
sufferings of life, and, especially, a prepa-
ration for death. It is fit and proper, that
such solemn profpeEs ihould enter into the
service which we are this day to perform.
We have no reason to imagine, that they

*Luke, xxii, 15.

X 2 will

S E R .will render it a gloomy service. A good

xv.

and wife man is often disposed to look for-
ward to the termination of life. The num-
ber of our days is determined by God; and
certainly it will not tend to ihorten their
number, that we employ ourselves in pre-
paring for death. On the contrary, while
our days last, it will tend to make us pass
them more comfortably, and more wifely.
Let us now then, as if for the last time we
were to partake of this sacrament, confider
how it may serve to prepare us for the
dying hour.

I. IT is a high exercise of all those difpo-

fitions and affetions, in which a good man
would wish to die. He would surely wifl
to leave this world, in the spirit of devo-
tion towards God, and of fellowship and
charity with all his brethren on earth.
Now these are the very sentiments, which
the sacrament of the Lord's Supper in-
spires into the heart of every pious com-
municant. It includes the highest acs of
devotion of which human nature is ca-

pable.

pable. It imports, a lively sense of the in- s E R M.

xv.

finite mercies of Heaven; of the gratitude _,
we owe to that God, who, by the death of
his Son, hath restorcd the forfeited happi-
ness and hopes of the human race. It im-
ports, the consecration of the foul to God;
the entire resignation of ourselves, and all
our concerns, into his hands; as to the God
whom we serve and love; the guardian in
whom we confide. To thee, 0 Lord, do I lift
up 7my foul. Iwillgo to the altar of God, to God
nm exceeding joy. I will come into thy houfc in
the multitude of thy mercy; and in thyfear,
[ will wsorfi/ip towards thy holy temple *.

These devout affecions towards God are,

on this occafiori, necessarily accompanied
with benevolent dispositions towards men.
Our communion is not only with God, but
with one another. In this solemn service,
the distinCtion of ranks is abolished. We
aflemble in common before our great
Lord, profefling ourlelves to be all mem-
bers of his family, and children of the
fibae Fathcr. No feud, nor firife, nor en-

Pfdlpl xliii. 4.; v. 7.

X 3 mity,

SER M. mity, is permitted to approach the fa-

xv.
am-^ cred table. All within that hallowed space

breathes peace, and concord, and love. If
thou bring thy gif to the altar, and there re-
membereji that thy brother hath ought aga'int
thee; leave there thy gift before the altar, and
go thy way; firfi be reconciled to thy brother,
and then come and offer ty gift . What can
be more becoming men and Christians,
than such sentiments of piety to the great
'Father of the universe; gratitude to the
merciful Redeemer of mankind; and cha-
rity and forgiveness towards all our bre-
thren ? Is not this the temper in which a
good man would wifi to live? more efpe-
cially is not this the frame of mind which
will give both dignity and peace to his lat
moments? How discomposed and embit-
tered will there important moments prove,
if, with a mind foured by the remembrance
of unforgiven injuries, with a breafi rankled
by enmity, with a heart alienated from
God, and insensible to devotion, one be
forced away from life ?

* Matthew, v. 23, 24.

Con-

Contemplate the manner in which our SER M.

XV.

blessed Lord died; which the service of this
day brings particularly into your view.
You behold him, amidst the extremity of
pain, calm and colleted within himself;
possessing his spirit with all the serenity
which sublime devotion, and exalted bene-
volence, inspire. You hear him, first, la-
menting the fate of his unhappy country;
next, when he was fastened to the cross,
addressing words of consolation to his as-
slided parent; and, lastly, fending up pray-
ers mixed with compassionate apologies, for
those who were shedding his blood. After
all those exercises of charity, you behold
him in an at of devout adoration and
trust, resigning his breath: Father, into thy
hands, I commend myfpirit.-Can any death
be pronounced unhappy, how distressful so-
ever its circumstances may be, which is
thus supported, and dignified ? What could
we wiih for more in our last moments, than
with this peaceful frame of mind, this
calm of all the affecions, this exaltation
of heart towards God, this diffusion of

X 4 bene.

S ER M. benevolence towards men, to bid adieu to

.xv.
L-1- the world ?

If in such a spirit as this, we would all

wifli to die, let us think that now is the
time to prepare for it, by feaobnably cul.
tivating this spirit while we live; by im-
bibing, in particular, from the holy sacra-
ment, those dispositions and affections
which we would with to possess at our
latef period. It is altogether vain to ima-
gine, that when the hour of' death ap-
proaches, we shall be able to form our-
selves into the frame of mind which is then
most proper and decent. Amidst the firug-
gles of nature, and under the load of sick-
ness or pain, it is not time for unaccustomed
exertions to be made, .or for new reform.
ations to be begun. Sfficient, and more
than futflcient,for that day is the evil there-
of It will be too late to affuhne then the
hero, or the faint, if we have been totally
unacquainted with the charader before.
The sentiments we would display, and the
language we would utter, will be alien and
firange to u%. They will be forced and fur

reign

reign to the heart. It is only in confe- SERM.
quence of habits acquired in former and ...-
better days, that a temper of piety and
charity can grow up into such strength, as
to confer peace and magnanimity on the
concluding hours of life. Peculiarly fa-
vourable to the acquisition of such a tem-
per, are the devotions of this day. In this
view, let us perform them; and fiudy to
be at the table of the Lord, what we would
wish to be when the summons of death hall
come.

II. THIS sacrament becomes a prepara-

tion for death, by laying a foundation for
peace with God. What is important at
the close of life, is not only the temper in
which we leave the world, but the situation
in which we fland with refpea to that
great Judge, before whom we are about to
appear. This view of our situation is apt
to escape us, during the ordinary course of
life. Occupied with the affairs and con-
cerns of this world; flattered by those illu-
five colours of innocence and virtue, in

which

SERM. which felf-love dresses up our charader,

XV.
* - _r' apprehensions of guilt create little uneafi-

ness to the multitude of men. But, on the
approach of death, their ideas change. As
the inquisition of the supreme Judge draws
nigh, remember transgressions crowd up-
on the mind. Guilt becomes strongly rea-
lized to the imagination; and alarms, be-
fore unknown, begin to arise. Hence that
anxiety, in the profpeC of a future invi-
fible world, which is so often seen to attend
the bed of death. Hence those various me-
thods which superstition has devised for
quieting this anxiety; the trembling mind
eagerly grasping every feeble plank on
which it can lay hold, and flying for pro-
tedtion to the most unavailing aid. The
stoutest spirits have been then known to
bend; the proudest hearts to be humbled.
They who are now most thoughtless about
their spiritual concerns, may, perhaps, be
in this state before they die.

The dispensation of grace dicfovered in

the gospel, affords the only remedy against
those terrors, by the promise of pardon, ex-

tended

tended to the penitent, through the merits s E R M.
of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is the very *J
essence of this sacrament, to exhibit this
promised grace to mankind; My body which
was broken for you; my blood Jhedfor many
for the remiffon of fins. Here ihines from
above, the ray of hope. Divine justice, we
are assured, is not inexorable. Divine mercy
is accessible to all who believe and repent.
The participation of this sacrament, there-
fore, naturally imparts comfort to the
worthy communicant; as it supposes, on
his part, a cordial compliance with those
terms, on which pardon is offered by the
gofpcl to mankind.

I mean not to fay, that the participation

of this sacrament, how pious and proper
soever our dispositions at that time may be,
is, of itself, sufficient to ensure us of com-
fort at death. It' were unwarrantable to
flatter Christians, with hopes to this extent.
No single ad of the most fervent devotion
can afford assured hopes of peace with Hea-
ven, until these hopes be confirmed by the
succeeding tenor of a good life. But what

may

SER M. may fafcly be asserted is, that communicat-

xv.

ing in a proper manner, makes way for
such hopes. It is an introduction to that
state of reconciliation with God, which will
give you peace in death. It is the begin-
ning of a good course, which, if duly pur-
sued, will make your latter end blessed. It
is the entrance of the path of thejujl; the
morning of that light, which Jhinieth more
and core unto the perseEl day. For this holy
sacrament is a professed renunciation of the
vices and corruptions of the world. It is
a professed dereliction of former evil ha-
bits; a solemn return, on our part, to God
and virtue, under the firm trust, that God
will, through Jesus Christ, thew mercy to
the frailties of the penitent. If you conti-
nue to support the character which you
this day assume, the invisible world will no
longer present to you a scene of terrors.
You will be comforted with the view of
goodness and compaflion, as predominant
In the administration of the univerle. After
having finis'hed a virtuous course, you
\wil be able to look up to that Ga(d whom

you

you have worshipped, and to fay, I ktl'O s , M.
;/ L whom I hJave tr/itjed. TJhough I qwa!l .
through b te vallcy of the Jhadow of death, I
will fear no evil;for thou art with me. Thy
rod and ty tJliff Jlall consort te.

III. Ti-s sacrament prepares us for a

happy death, by strengthening the con-
nexion between Chritlians, and Christ their
Saviour. This is a connexion which, in
various ways, redounds to their benefit;
and will be found particularly consolatory
at the hour of death. The awx'ful Majeftv
of Heaven is in danger of overwhelming
the mind, in the feeble moments of depart-
ing life. The reverence it inspires is min-
gled with fenfaticns of dread, which might
be too strong for us then to bear. When
we look up to it, through a Mediator and
Intercessor, that Majety aflumes a milder
aspect, and appears to invite our approach,
Whatever, therefore, forms a connexion
with this great Mediator, this powerful
friend and patron of the human race, must
be most desirable to every one, efpeci;.ldy to

the

SE R M. the dying man. Now, this sacrament unites

Xv.

us closely with him. It is the oath of
our allegiance. It is the aft of enlisting
ourselves under the banner of this divine
Leader. Of course it strengthens our faith
in him, as our guide through life, and our
guardian and protetor in death. It gives
us a title to look up to him, under the
confidence of that reciprocal engagement,
which fidelity on the one hand is always
understood to imply, of protection on the
other.

His participation of our nature conveys

a degree of encouragement, which we could
derive from no being altogether celestial,
how gracious or benign soever. In our ut-
most extremity, we can have recourse to
his sympathising aid, who had experience
both of the distresses of life, and of the
terrors of death. We behold, in the text,
with what firm tranquillity lie looked for-
ward to his approaching sufferings. Sin-
cere attachment to our great Master, may
be expected to infuse into us some degree
of the fame happy composure of mind, It

14 is

is owing to our losing out of view this per- S E R M.

XV.

set model; to our following the crowd, ...
and adopting the common spirit of the
world, that we become mean-fpirited and
base; servilely attached to life, and afraid
to die. Did we, according to our engage-
ments at the Lord's table, keep our eye
fixed on our divine Leader, and study to
follow his steps, a portion of his spirit
would descend upon us at the hour of
death. It would be as the mantle of Eli-
jah, falling on a chosen disciple; and would
enable us, as it did Elisha of old, to smite
and divide the waters.- We believe our
Saviour now to rule in the world of spirits.
The grave, therefore, bars not his follow-
ers from access to him. In the grave, for
our fake, he once lay down, that he might
dispel the gloom which appears to us to
cover that formidable mansion. In a short
time, he arose from it, in order to allure us,
that the dark and narrow house was not to
confine his followers for ever. By his
death, he conquered death, and him that
had the power of it; and his voice to us

is,

E R M. is, Becafe I live, ye Jhalt live also. Hence,
xv.
.-ea_ as long as we preserve that attachment to

him which we this day profess, we are fur-
nifhed with a variety of considerations pro-
per for supporting us in the profpea of our
dilfolution.-This leads me to observe.

IV. THAT the sacrament of which we

are to partake, prepares us for death, by
confirming and enlivening our hope of im-
mortality. In this sacrament, my friends,
you a&a for both worlds. As inhabitants
of the earth, you are on this day to look
forward, with care, to your future beha-
viour in it. For you are not, by any means,
disengaging yourselves totally from this life
and its concerns. On the contrary, you
are forming, and even strengthening, those
connexions, which virtue requires you to
maintain with your friends, and fellow-crea-
tures around you.- At the fame time,
you are not to confider yourselves as citizens
of earth only; but also as citizens of hea-
ven. You are to recognize, on this oc-
cafion, your relation to a higher and better

S6 country,

country, with which you are conneded by s E R M.
the molf sacred ties; and from which you -- -i
derive those comforts and hopes, that will
both purify your life and render your death
happy. The sacrament of the supper is, in
this view, an ascent of the mind above ter-
reftrial things. At the Lord's table, we as-
fociate ourselves, in some degree, with spirits
of a more exalted order. We declare, that
we are tending towards their society; and
have fixed our final reft within the veil.
This view of the institution, so comfortable
to the last period of life, is plainly given us
in the words of the text. For it is worthy
of particular observation, that, as soon as
our Lord had instituted this sacrament, he
straightway leads the thoughts of his dif-
ciples to a state of future existence. Em-
ploying that metaphorical style, which the
occasion naturally suggested, he tells them,
that though he was not henceforth to drink
of the fruit of the vine on earth, yet a day
was coming, when he was again to drink it
with them; to drink it, in his Father's king-
dom. Two diftint ideas are, in there words,

VOL. III. Y presented

SER M. presented to us. One is, the abode into
k>_i which our Saviour was to remove; his Fa:-

ther's kingdom. The other, the society which
he was there to enjoy; with you in my ;a-
ther's kingdom. These correspond to the
two views under which death is most for-
midable to men; both of which he intended
to banifii, by the institution of this sacra-
ment: first, that death is a transition to a
new and unknown world; and next, that
it is a final reparation fiom all the friends
whom we have loved on earth.

FIRST; if death terminates our existence

here, the abode to which it translates the
faithful followers of Christ, is the kingdom
of his Father. The institution of this
sacrament dispels all the gloomy ideas of
annihilation, of non-exiftcnce, of total
darkness, which our imagination is ready
to associate with the grave. We are here
alfured, that to good men, death is not the
close of being, but a change of lRate; a re-
moval, from a diflant and obscure province
of the universe, into the city of God, the

chief

chief feat of their Father's kingdom. They s E R M.
have every reason to believe, that the ob- -
jeEts which are to meet them there, how new
and unknown soever, ihall all be propitious
and friendly. For into the kingdom of his
Father, their Lord has declared, that he is
entered as theirforerunner. Igo to my Fa-
ther, and your Father; to my God, and your
God. In my Father's house are many man.
sions. I go to prepare a place for you. I
will come again and receive you to myfef,
that where I am, there ye may be aso. What
reasonings, what speculations, can have
power to impart so much peace to the dying
man, as a promise so direc and explicit,
coming from him who is truth itself, and
cannot lie If it were not jo, I would
have told you *. The profpec becomes
still more cheering and relieving, when we
include,

THE other circumstances mentioned in
the text; the society to be enjoyed in that

* John, xiv. z.

Y 2 future

SE. M. future state of being. lWith you, I JfJall
'.%..a drink of the fruit of the vine in my Father's

kingdom. In how amiable a light does our
Saviour here appear, looking forward to a
future reunion with those beloved friends,
whom he was now leaving, as to a circum-
stance which should increase both his own
felicity and theirs, when they met again in
a happier world ! Thus, in the most assec-
tionate manner, cheering their drooping and
dejeded spirits; and, by a similar profpet,
providing for the comfort of his followers
in future generations, when they should be
about to leave the world.

The expressions in the text plainly suggest

a joyful intercourse among friends, who had
been separated by death; and therefore seem
to give much confirmation, to what has al-
ways been a favourite hope of good men;
that friends shall know and recognise each
other, and renew their former connections,
in a future state of existence. How many
pleasing profpets does such an intimation
open to the mind! How much does it tend
to compensate the vanity of life, and to mi-

tigate

tigate the sorrows of death ! For it is not to s E R M.
be denied, that one of the most bitter cir- -v-
cumftances attending death, is the final fe-
paration from beloved friends. This is apt
equally to wring the hearts of the dying,
and the surviving; and it is an anguish of
that fort, which descends most deeply into
the virtuous and worthy breast. When
surrounded with an affe'tionate family, and
weeping friends, a good man is taking his
last adieu of all whom he held mos dear on
earth ; when, with a feeble voice, he is
giving them his blefling, before he leaves
them for ever; when, for the last time, he
beholds the countenance, lie touches the
hand, he hears the voice, of the person
nearest his heart: who could bear this bit-
ternefs of grief, if no support were to be
ministered by religious hope ? if there were
no voice to whisper to our spirits, that here-
after we, and those whom we love, ihall
meet again in a more blifsfiil land ?-
What higher view can possibly be given, of
the benefit redounding from this divine in-
flitution, than its affording us consolation

Y in

SE R M. in such situations of extreme ditrefs, by

XV.
y-' realising to our fouls the belief of an im-

mortal state, in which all the virtuous and
worthy shall be re-united in the presence of
their common Lord

THUS I have set before you many con-

fiderations, arising from the facramcnt of
our Lord's Supper, which render it a proper
preparation not only for a good life, but
for a comfortable and happy death. The
great improvement to be made of the fuh-
je&t is, to bring to the altar of God such
dispositions of heart, as may give us ground
to hope for this blessed effet. Let us ap-
proach to the sacrament with the fame fc-
rioufnefs of frame, as if it were the last time
we were ever to partake of it; as if we were
now making provision for a journey to that
land whence none return; as if we were
never to drink, in this manner, of the frlit
of the vine, until that day ,whn wce drA'in it,
with those whom we have loved, in our Fa.
ther's kingdomn.- God only knows to
whom this may be truly spoken! God knows

who,

who, of this assembly, ihall never have op- s E R M.

xv.

portunity to approach again to the sacred
table, and to meet with their brethren, on
fulch an occasion, in the courts of the Lord's
house !-Whatever our doom is to be, whe-
ther we are appointed for life or for death,
such is the frame of mind which now best
becomes, and will most improve us, in par-
taking of the holy sacrament.

LET me caution you, before I conclude,

againif judging of the propriety of your dif.
position in this solemn ad of worship, solely
by the warmth of your affeations, and the
fervour of your devotion. This state of
heart, how desirable soever it may be, can-
not be at all times possessed. It depends, in
some measure, on natural sensibility. All
are not equally endowed with warm and
tender feelings. Even they who are fufcep-
tible of the highest degrees of pious and
virtuous sensibility, cannot, on every occa-
sion, command that happy temperature of
mind. We are not, therefore, to judge un-
favourably of ourselves, if this be not always

Y 4 the

S E R M. the privilege of our devotions. It is chiefly
.-J ...a sedate and composed frame of spirit, that

we must study to cultivate; arising from
grave and fober thoughts; from serious and
penitent recollecion of past errors; from
good purposes for the future; and from a
deep sense of the approaching events of death
and immortality. Penetrated with such dif-
positions, you have ground to come to the
altar of God with humble trust and joy;
under the belief, that you are approaching,
through the great Redeemer, to that mer-
ciful Creator, to whom, in the high and holy
place of eternity, the devout aspirations of
his servants on earth, are ever acceptable
and pleating.

# SERMON XVI. On the USE and ABUSE of the WORLD. I CORINTHIANS, vii. 31. — They that use this World, as not abusing it. —

[ 329 ]

SERMON XVI.
On the USE and ABUSE of the WORLD.

I CORINTHIANS, Vii. 31.

-They that ife this World, as not abtfing it.-
TTHE world is always represented in SERM.

Scripture as the great scene of trial XV, .

to a Christian. It sets before him a variety
of duties, which are incumbent on him to
perform; and, at the fame time, surrounds
him with many dangers, against which he
has to guard. The part which is proper
for him to a&, may be comprised in these
two expressive words of the text; ifing the
world, and not abifing it; the significancy
and extent of which, I propose now to
explain. The subjed is of the higher im-

5 portance,

SERM. portance, as in the world we must live;
XVI. L.-_- _and according as we use, or abuse it, it will

prove either our friend, or our greatelt
foe.

It is natural to begin with observing,

that the Christian is here supposed to sJs
the world; by wlich wie must ccrtainly un-
derftand the Apostle to mean, maintaining
intercourse and conuieioni with the world;
living in it, as one of the members of hu-
man society; atiluning that rank which
belongs to his flation. No one can be said
to /fc the world who lives not thus. Hence
it follows, that sequestration from the world
is no part of christian duty; and it ap-
pears strange, that even among those who
approve not of monaflic confinement, fe-
clufion from the pleafulrcs of focicty flhould
have been fometimcs confidered, as belong-
ing to the charaater of a religious man.
They have been supposed to be the bceR
servants of God, who, consecrating their
time to the exercifcs of devotion, mingle
least in the ordinary commerce of the
world; and especially who abftlain mofl

rigidly

rigidly from all that has the appearance of S E RM.

XVI.

amusement. But how pious and sincere
soever the intentions of such persons may
be, they certainly take not the propereft
method, either for improving themselves, or
for advancing religion among others. For
this is not using the world, but relinquiih-
ing it. Instead of making the light of a
good example shine with useful splendour
throughout the circle of society, they con-
fine it within a narrow compals. Accord-
ing to the metaphor employed by our Sa-
viour, after the candle is lighted, they put it
under a buJhel. Instead of recommending
religion to the world, they exhibit it under
the forbidden aspet of unnecessary aufte-
rity. Instead of employing their influence,
to regulate and temper the pleasures of the
world, by a moderate participation of those
that are innocent, they deliver up all the
entertainments of society, into the hands of
the loose and giddy.

The various dangers which the world

presents to one who is desirous of main-
taining his piety and integrity, have given

8 rife

SERM. rife to this scrupulous caution concerning

the use of the world; and, so far, the prin-
ciple is commendable. But we muff re-
member, that the virtue of a Christian is to
be shown, in surmounting dangers which
he is called to encounter. Into the post of
danger we were ordered by Providence,
when we were brought into this world.
We were placed as soldiers, on the field of
battle. It is there that our fi:'lity to our
great commander muff appear. The most
signal virtues which adorn and improve the
human character, are displayed in active
life. There, the strength of the mind is
brought forth and put to the test. There,
all the amiable dispositions of the heart find
their proper exercise: humanity is culti-
vated; patience, fortitude, and felf-denial,
come forward in all their forms; and the
light of good men's works so ffines before
others, as to lead them to glorifj their Fa-
ther which is in heaven.

It may be assumed, therefore, as a prin-

ciple jutified by the text, and by the whole
frain of Scripture, that to tfe, and in a cer-

tain

tain degree to enjoy, the world, is altoge- S i RRM.

XVI.

ther consistent with religion. According ,
to the rank which men poflefs in society,
according to their age, their employment,
and connections, their intercourse with the
world will be more or lets extended. In
private life, they use the world with pro-
priety, who are ative and indulurious in
their callings; just and upright in their
dealings; fober, contented, and cheerful in
their station. When the circumstances of
men allow them a wider command of the
enjoyments of the world, of those enjoy-
ments they may freely partake, within the
bounds of temperance, moderation, and de-
cency. The highest situations of rankl and
opulence, ought to be distinguishcd by dig-
nity of charater; by extensive beneficence,
usefulness, and public spirit; by magni-
ficence, without ofientation; and generous
hospitality, without profusion.

We shall have a clearer view of the pro-

per use of the world, when we contral: it
with that abuse of the world, which we too
often observe. Thole abuses mantfeft then-

Iflvcs

S E R M. selves in various forms; but in general may

XVI.
_ be clafled under three great heads.

I. THEY are abusers of the world, who

intemperately give themselves up to its plca-
fures, and lead a life of licentiousness,
riot, and dissipation. Amidst the wealth
and luxury of the present age, it will be
admitted, that persons of this description
are not unfrequent, who, being opulent in
fortune, and perhaps high in rank, think
themselves entitled to pass their days in a
careless manner, without any other object
in view, than the gratification of their fenfcs
and passions. It shall be granted, that they
are not obliged to that exaCt economy and
attention in their manner of living, which
the slate of fortune may require of others.
Gaiety shall be permitted to them; change
of scene, and variety of amusements. But
let them not forget, that as men and mem-
bers of society, not to fay profeflbrs of the
Christian faith, they are bound to flop lhort
in their career of pleafire, as soon as it be-
comes disgraceful to themselves, and hurt-

ful

fll to the world. By tle train of life which s ER M.

XVI.

they lead, they defeat every purpose for
which Providence bestowed on them the
blelfings of prosperity. They fink every
talent which they possess, into useless infig-
nificancy. They corrupt the public man-
ners by their example; and diffiufe among
others the spirit of extravagance and folly.
They behave in a manner altogether un-
suitable to the condition of the world in
which we live; where we are exposed to so
much change, furruunded with so much
diltrefs, and daily behold so many affecing
scenes, as ought to awaken serious reflec-
tion, and chalten difrolute mirth.

With indignant eyes, the fober and think-

ing part of mankind view the luxury and
riot of those abusers of the world. To them
are owing the discontents of the poor, their
dilatffedion to their superiors, their prone-
ness to d'isturb the peace of the world.
When the poor behold wealth properly
ufedc they look up with refpea to them
who possess it. They reft contented in
their station; and bless the just and the ge-

nerous,

S E R M. nerous, from whose munificence they re-
xvI

ceive employment and reward. But when
they behold those men of pleasure diffi-
pating, in vice and folly, the fortune which
their forefathers had honourably earned;
when they behold them oppressing all their
dependents, merely that they may revel in
luxurious extravagance, then their hearts
swell within them; with murmurs of ful-
len grief, they eye their own mean habita-
tion, and needy family; and become pre-
pared for robbery, tumult, sedition, and
every evil work.

The conduc of such abusers of the

world, is not only pernicious to the wel-
fare of society, and to the interests of vir-
tue; it is equally ruinous to themselves.
I shall not insist on the loss of reputation,
the waste of fortune, the broken health, and
debilitated frame, which are the well-
known consequences of a life of intempe-
rate pleasure. I shall not recount all the
better and more substantial enjoyments
which they forfeit. Amidst the turbulence
of riot, and the fumes of intoxication, un-

known

known to them are the rational entertain- s E R M.

XVI.

ments of regular life; the enjoyment of the
face of nature; the pleasures of knowledge,
and an improved mind; the pleasures of
private friendship, and domestic society;
the conscious fatisfaEtion which accompa-
nies honourable labours, and the juftly-ac-
quired esteem of those who surround them.
All these they have thrown away; and in
their room have substituted, what they
think more high and vivid pleasures. But
of what nature are those pleasures? Even in
iaughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end!
of that mirth is heaviness .

At the bottom of the hearts of all men,

there lies a secret sense of propriety, virtue,
and honour. This sense may be so far blunt-
ed, as to lose its influence in guiding men to
what is right, while yet it retains its power
of making them feel that they are acting
wrong. Hence remorse often gnaws the
heart, which assets to appear light, and gay,
before the world. Among the crowd of

Prov. xiv. !5,
VOL. III. Z amuse-

SE R M. amusements, the voluptuary may endea-
XVI.

vour to flife his uneasiness; but through
all his defences it will penetrate. A con-
fcious sense of his own insignificance, when
he fees others distinguished for acing a
manly and worthy part; reflecion on the
time he has wafted, and the contempt he
has incurred; the galling remembrance of
his earlier and better days, when he gave
the fair promise of accomplishments, which
now are blasted; have frequently been found
to fadden the festive hour. The noise of
merriment may be heard; but heaviness
lies at the heart. While the tabret and the
viol play, a melancholy voice founds in his
ears. The wafted estate, the negleced halls,
and ruined mansions of his father, rife to
view. The angry countenances of his
friends seem to stare him in the face. A
hand appears to come forth on the wall,
and to write his doom.

Retreat, then, from your dishonourable

courses, ye who by liccntioufnefs, extra-
vagance, and vice, are abusers of the world!
You are degrading, you are ruining your-

I selves.

selves. You are grossly misemploying the SE R .
gifts of God; and the giver will not fail to
punish. Awake to the pursuits of men of
virtue and honour. Break loose from that
magic circle, within which you are at pre-
sent held. Rejec: the poisoned cup which
the enchantress Pleasure holds up to your
lips. Draw aside the veil which ihe throws
over your eyes. You will then fee other
objets than you now behold. You will
fee a dark abyss opening below your feet.
You will fee virtue and temperance mark-
ing out the road, which conduts to true
felicity. You will be enabled to discern, that
the world is enjoyed to advantage, by none
but such as follow those divine guides; and
who confider pleasure as the feaioning, but
not as the business, of life.

II. THE world is abused, not only by an

intemperate pursuit of its pleasures, but by
a fordid attachment to its gains. This re-
speCs a set of men of very different de-
scription from the former, more decent in
their carriage, and less flagrant in their

Z 2 vices;

SERM. vices; but corrupted by the world in no
XVI.

less a degree. For the world is often abused
by the men of business, as much as by the
men of pleasure. When worldly success
becomes the sole objet of their life; when
the accumulation of fortune so eugroffe3
them as to harden their heart against every
feeling of moral obligation; when it
renders them insensible to the calls of as-
feEtion, and to the impressions of piety
and religion; they then come under the
class of the covetous, whom, it is said, the
Lord abhorreth ".

The world, with its advantages, is a

lawful object of pursuit to a Christian.
He may seek, by fair industry, to ren-
der his circumstances affluent. Without
reproof, he may aim at diftintion and
consideration in the world. He maybe-
flow a considerable portion of his time and
attention, on the successful management of
his worldly interest. All this is within the
limits of that allowable use of the world, to
which religion gives its fanaion. But to

* Psalm x. 3.

a wife

a wife and good man, the world is only a SERM.
secondary object. He remembers there is XVI
an eternity beyond it. His care is, not
merely to amass and possess, but to use his
possessions well, as one who is accountable
to God. He is not a slave, either to the
hopes, or the fears, of the world. He would
rather forfeit any present advantage, than
obtain it at the expence of violating the di-
vine law, or neglecting his duty. This is
using the world like a good man. This is
living in it, as a fubje: of God, and a
member of the great community of man-
kind. To such a man, riches are a blef-
sing. He may enjoy them with magnifi-
cence; but he will use them with liberali-
ty. They open a wide field to the exercise
of his virtue, and allow it to shine with
diffusive lustre.

Very opposite to this, is the character of

the worldly-minded. To them, the mere
attainment of earthly poffeflions is an ul-
timate aim. They cannot be said to use the
world; for to possess, not to use or enjoy,
is their object. They are emphatically said

Z3 in

S E R M. in Scripture, to load thenfllvcy s with thick

clay i. Some fort of apology may be framed
for them who seek to extrac from the
world, plcafure of one kind or-other. But
for those who know no pleasure, farther
than adding hoifc to hopfe, andfield to feld,
and calling them their own, it is hardly
pofiible to frame any apology. Such per-
ions are idolaters of the worst kind; for
they have made the world their God. They
daily worship and bow down before it;
and hold nothing to be mean or bale, which
can promote the enlargement of their for-
tune.--He is an abuser of the world, let
his possession of it be ever so ample, who
knows nothing higher than the gains of the
world. He is an abuser of the world, who
sacrifices probity, virtue, or humanity, to
its interefis. He is an abuser of the world,
who cannot occasionally retreat from it, to
confider what characaer he bears in the
light of God; and to what ifiue his con-
ducL will bring him at lafl. In a word, the

* Habakkul;, ii. 6.

world

world is then properly used, when it is ge- S ER M.
neroufly and beneficently enjoyed; neither -j.
hoarded up by avarice, nor squandered by
ostentation.

III. THE world is abuscd, by those who

employ its advantages to the injury or op-
preflion of their brethren. Under this class
are included, the worst and most criminal
abusers of the world; who turn againit
their fellow-creatures, those advantages
with which it has pleased Heaven to diftin-
guifl them. It is a clas which compre-
hends, the bovereign who tyrannises over his
people; the great man who depreires his
dependents; the makter who is cruel to his
servants; every one, in fine, who renders
his superiority of any kind, whether of
wealth or power, unnecefarily grievous to
those who are his inferiors: Whose filper-
cilioufnefs dejecs the modest; whose info-
lence tramples on the poor; whose rigour
makes the widow and the orphan weep.
Persons of this characer, while thus abu-

Z 4 ting

E R M. sing the advantages of the world, may, for
XVI. .¥.... a while, enjoy their triumph. But let them

not think, their triumph is always to last.
Their turn (hall come to be humbled as
low as those whom they now oppress. For
there is a vigilant eye in the heavens, atten-
tive to observe their procedure. There is
an impartial ear, which listens to every just
complaint preferred against them. There
is an irrefiifible arm firetched over their
heads, whose weight they shall one day
feel. The Sovereign of the universe cha-
raalerifes himself in the sacred writings, as
peculiarly an adversary to the insolent and
haughty. For the pprcsion of the poor,for
the sighing of the need;', now will I arife,Jlith
the Lord; I will Jft himn i/n fafcty frollm hin
that ptffeth at him . I will come near to you
in j.udgment; and I will be a fr ift witness
aga'n f those that oppre/ss the hireling in his
wages, the widow, iand the fitherlejs, and
that turn aftde the jranger from his right t.
He that opprcfcth the poor, repracehcth his

Psalm xii. 5. Malachi, iii. 5.

Maker;

IMaker ". Tihe Lord will plcad their canfcl; S E R M.
and Sloil the oul of those that spoiled them t. i-

After hearing thele awful words, is it

not strange, O men at once infatuated and
cruel! that you cannot use the world, with-
out abusing it to the distress of your bre-
thren ? Even supposing no punishment to
be threatened, no arm to be lifted up
against you, is there nothing within you,
that relents at the circumstances of those
below you in the world ? Is it not enough,
that they susser their own hard fate, with-
out its being aggravated, by your severity
and oppression ? Why must the aged, the
poor, and the friendless, tremble at your
greatness? Cannot you be happy, unless
you make them eat their scanty morsel in
bitterness of heart ? You happy !-profane
not the word-what is such happiness as
yours, compared with that of him who
could fay, TWhaen the car heard me, then it
blqefd me; and when the eenfaw me, itgave
witness to me; becaife I delivered the poor

* Prov. xig. 31. 1' Prov. xxii. 23.

that

S R M. thiat cried, and the fathcrlcf, and himn that
XVI.

shad noie to help him. I was a sither to the

poor. The blefing of him that was ready to
perilh, came upon me; and lcatied the widow's
heart to fig for joy*. How properly did
such a man itfe the world, and with what
jufR honour did he flourish in it! Unto me
men gave ear; they keptfilence, and waited
for my conecl. The princes refrained talking.
The aged arose, and Jood up. My root was
spread out by the waters, and the dew lay
upon my branch.-Not only unknown to
you are such pleasures of virtuous profpe-
rity; but even previous to prepared pu-
nifhment, be assured, that remorse is ap-
proaching to wring your hearts. Of the
world, which you now abuse, in a short
time nothing lhall remain, but the horror
arising from remembered crimes. The
wages you have detained, the wealth you
have squeezed from the needy, shall lie
heavy on your fouls. The flately build-
ings which your pride has erected, by means

* Job, xxix. il-16,

of

of violence and opprefflon, shall seem haunt- s E R M.
ed by injured ghosts. The Jloec J/all cry XVI.
out of the wall; and the beam out of the tim-
ber-J all a1fwer it `. When you lie on the
bed of death, the poor, whom you have
oppressed, {hall appear to you, as gather-
ed together; stretching forth their hands,
and lifting up their voices against you, at
the tribunal of Heaven. I have Jeen the
wicked great in power, and spreading hii/elf
like a green bay-tree. But he pased away,
and was not. 7fought him, but he could not be
found. 'hcey are brought down to desolation
in a moment, and utterly confimed with ter-
rors. As a dream when one awaketh, so, 0
Lord, when thou awakefl, thou flJall defpie
their image 1-.

THus I have shown what it is to ife and

what to abfie the w Worlt. When, according
to our different stations, we enjoy the ad-
vantages of the world with propriety and
decency; temperate in our pleasures; mo-

l Habak., ii . I. Psalm xxxvii. 35.; Ixxiii. 19.

derate

SF.RM. derate in our pursuits of interest; mindful

_I_ , of our duty to God, and, at the fame time,

just, humnane, and generous to our bre-
thren; then, and then only, we ilfe t/c
world, as becomes men, and Christians.
Within these limits, we may safely enjoy
all the comforts which the world affords,
and our fiation allows. But if we pass be-
yond these boundaries, into the regions of
disorderly and vicious pleasure, of debating
covetousness, or of oppressive insolence, the
world will then serve only to corrupt our
minds, and to accelerate our ruin. The
licentious, the avaricious, and the insolent,
form the three great classes of abusers of
the world.

Let not those who are in wealthy and

flourishing circumstances, complain of the
restraints which religious doctrine attempts
to impose on their enjoyments. For, to
what do these restraints amount ? To no
more than this, that, by their pleasures,
they would neither injure themselves, nor
injure others. We call not on the young,
To relinquish their gaiety; nor on the rich,

to

to forego their opulence; nor on the great, s E R ,l.
to lay aside their state. We only call on _t
them, not to convert gaiety into licentious-
ness; not to employ opulence in mere ex-
travagance; nor to abuse greatness for the
oppreflion of their inferiors: While they
enjoy the world, not to forget that they are
the fubjeds of God, and are soon to pass
into another state. Let the motive by
which the Apofile enforces the exhortation
in the text, present itself to their thought;
Use this world as not abifng it; Jfr the fa-
Jflion of the weorld ptflth awc'y. Its pomp
and its pleasures, its riches, magnificence,
and glory, are no more than a transient
flew. Every thing that we here enjoy,
changes, decays, and comes to an end. All
floats on the surface of a river, which, with
swift current, is running towards a bound-
less ocean. Beyond this present scene of
things, above those sublunary regions, we
are to look for what is permanent and
stable. The world passes away; but God,
and heaven, and virtue, continue unchange-
ably the fame. We are soon to enter into

I eternal

S E R M. eternal habitations: and into these, our
XVI. sj works shall follow us. The consequences

shall for ever remain of the part which we
have aded as good, or bad men; as faith-
ful subjeCts of God, or as servants of a vain
world.

# SERMON XVII. On EXTREMES in RELIGIOUS and MORAL CONDUCT. PROVERBS, iv. 27. Turn not to the right hand, nor to the left. —

[ 35' ]

SERMO N XVII.
On EXTREMES in RELIGIOUS and MORAL

CONDUCT.

PROVERBS, iv. 27.

Tu rn not to the right hand, nor to the left.-
JW'illlhbehave myifelf wifily, said the Psalmist E R rM.

David, in a pesel n way"*. Wisdom .

is no less necessary in religious, and moral,
than in civil conduCt. Unless there be a
proper degree of light in the understand-
ing, it will not be enough, that there are
good dispositions in the heart. Without
regular guidance, they will often err from
the right scope. They will be always wa-

r Psalm ci. z,

vering

S ER M. vering and unsteady; nay, on some occa-

XVII.
c,_^ sions, they may betray us into evil. This

is too much verified by that propensity to
run into extremes, which so often appears
in the behaviour of men. How many have
originally set out with good principles and
intentions, who, through want of difcre-
tion in the application of their principles,
have in the end injured themflves, and
brought discredit on religion ? There is a
certain temperate mean, in the observance
of which piety and virtue confiit. On
each fide there lies a dangerous extreme.
Bewildering paths open; by deviating into
which, men are apt to forfeit all the praile
of their good intentions; and ,to finirn
with reproach, what they had begun with
honour. This is the ground of the wife
man's exhortation in the text. Let thine
eyes look right on, and let thine eye-lids look
Jlraight before thee. Ponder the path of tlh
feet, and let all tly ways be eflablij7.ed. Turn
not to the right hand, :r.r to the left; remove
thyJfotffrom evil. In discoursing from these
words, I purpose to point out some of the

extremes

extremes into which men are apt to run in s E R M.
religion and morals; and to suggest direc- Xv._
tions for guarding against them.

WITII regard to religious principle in

general, it may perhaps be expected, that I
should warn you of the danger of being, on
one hand, too rigid in adhering to it, and,
on the other hand, too easy in relaxing it.
But the diftinaion between there supposed
extremes, I conceive to have no foundation.
No man can be too strict, in his adherence
to a principle of duty. Here, there is
no extreme. All relaxation of principle, is
criminal. What conscience dictates, is to be
ever obeyed. Its commands are universally
sacred. Even though it flould be milled,
yet, as long as we conceive it to utter the
voice of God, in disobeying it we fin. The
error, therefore, to be here avoided is, not
too scrupulous or tender regard to con-
fcicnce, but too little care to have conscience
properly enlightened, with respeCt to what
is matter of duty and of fin.- Receive

VoL. III. A a not,

SE RM. not, without examination, whatever human
x_,V tradition has consecrated as sacred. Recur,

on every occasion, to those great fountains
of light and knowledge, which are opened
to you in the pure word of God. Diftin-
guifh, with care, between the fuperflitious
fancies of men, and the everlasting com-
mandments of God. Exhaust not on trifles
that zeal, which ought to be reserved for the
weightier matters of the law. Overload not
conscience, with what is frivolous and un-
necessary. But when you have once drawn
the line, with intelligence and precision, be-
tween duty and fin, that line you ought on
no occasion to transgress.

THOUGH there is no extreme in the re-

verence due to conscience, there may un-
doubtedly be an extreme in laying too
much stress, either on mere principle, or
on mere praaice. Here we must take par-
ticular care, not to turn to the right hand,
nor to the left; but to hold faith and a good
conscience united, as the scripture, with great

propriety,

propriety, exhorts us ". The error of reft- s E R M.
ing wholly on faith, or wholly on works, XVI.
is one of those fedulions, which most
easily mislead men; under the semblance of
piety on the one hand, and of virtue on
the other. This is not an error peculiar to
our times. It has obtained in every age of
the Christian church. It has run through
all the different modes of false religion. It
forms the chief diftinaion of all the va-
rious seCts which have divided, and which
till continue to divide, the church ; accord-
ing as they have leaned most to the fide of
belief, or to the fide of morality.

Did we liifen candidly to the voice of

scripture, it would guard us against either
extreme. The Apostle Paul every where
testifies, that by no works of our own we
can be justified ; and that without faith it is
impoble to please God. The Apofile James
as clearly {hews, that faith, if it be unpro-
duaive of good works, justifies no man.
Between those sentiments, there is no op-

* a Timothy, i. 9

A a 2 pofitionl

S E R M. position. Faith without works, is nnua-
XVI'. ,,. tory and insignificant. It is a foundation,

without any fuperftruaure raised upon it.
It is a fountain which fends forth no ifream;
a tree which neither bears fruit, nor affords
shade. Good works, again, without good
principles, are a fair but airy ftruture; with-
out firmness or fiability. They resemble the
house built on the sand; the reed which
ihakes with every wind. You muff join
the two in full union, if you would exhi-
bit the charater of a real Christian. He
who sets faith in opposition to morals, or
morals in opposition to faith, is equally an
enemy to the interest of religion. He holds
up to view an imperfect and disfigured
form, in the room of what ought to com-
mand refpeC from all beholders. By lean-
ing to one extreme, he is in danger of fall-
ing into vice; by the other, of running into
impiety.

VIIATEVER the belief of men be, they

generally pride themselves in the poffefion
of some good moral qualities. The sense

of

of duty is deeply rooted in the human sE R M.

XVII.

heart. Without some pretence to virtue,
there is no felf-efteem ; and no man wifles
to appear in his own view, as entirely
worthless. But as there is a constant strife
between the lower and higher parts of our
nature, between inclination and principle,
this produces much contradiation and in-
consistency in condut. Hence arise mofl
of the extremes, into which men run in
their moral behaviour; refting their whole
worth on that good quality, to which,
by conltitution or temper, they arc most
inclined.

OE- of the first and most common of

those extremes, is that of placing all virtue,
either in jufice, on the one hand ; or in
generosity, on the other. The opposition
between these, is molt discernible among
two different classes of men in society.
They who have earned their fortune by a
laborious and industrious life, are naturally
tenacious of what they have painfully ac-
quired. To juitice they conrider them-

A a 3 selves

SE R M. selves as obligcd; but to go beyond it in
XVII.

ads of kindness, they confider as super-
fluous and extravagant. They will not
take any advantage of others, which con-
icience tells them is iniquitous; but nei-
ther will they make any allowance for their
necessities and wants. They contend, with
rigorous exatnefs, for what is due to them-
selves. They are satisfied, if no man iuf-
ser unjustly by them. That no one is be-
nefited by them, gives them little concern.
--Another set of men place their whole
merit in generosity and mercy; while to
justice and integrity they pay small regard.
These are persons generally of higher rank,
and of easy fortune. To them, justice ap-
pears a fort of vulgar virtue, requisite chiefly
in the petty tranfaaions which those of
inferior station carry on with one another.
But humanity and liberality, they confider
as more refined virtues, which dignify their
character, and cover all their failings. They
can relent at representations of distress; can
bestow with ostentatious generosity; can
even occasionally fliare their wealth with a

companion

companion of whom they are fond ; while, s EM.
at the fame time, they with-hold from _XVll
others what is due to them; are negligent
of their family and their relations; and to
the just demands of their creditors give no
attention.

Both there classes of men run to a faulty

extreme. They divide moral virtue be-
tween them. Each takes that part of it
only which suits his temper. Without
justice, there is no virtue. But without hu-
manity and mercy, no virtuous character
is complete. The one man leans to the ex-
treme of parsimony. The other to that of
profusion. The temper of the one is un-
feeling. The sensibility of the other is
thoughtless. The one you may in some
degree refpea; but you cannot love. The
other may be loved; but cannot be re-
fpeied: and it is difficult to fay, which
character is most defective.-We muff un-
doubtedly begin with being just, before we
attempt to be generous. At the fame time,
he who goes no farther than bare justice,
flops at the beginning of virtue, We are

A a 4 com-

S E R M. commanded to do jijl,, but to love mIerc,.

L__ The one virtue regulates our acions. The

other improves our heart and affections.
Each is equally necessary to the happiness
of the world. Juflice is the pillar, that
upholds the whole fabric of human society.
Mercy is the genial ray, which cheers and
warms the habitations of men. The per-
feEaion of our social character consists, in
properly tempering the two with one ano-
ther; ih holding that middle course, which
admits of our being just, without being
rigid; and allows us to be generous, with-
out being unjust.

WE muff next guard againfl: either too

great severity, or too great facility of man-
ners. These are extremes of which we
every day behold instances in the world.
He who leans to the fide cf fcverity, is
harsh in his censures, and narrow in his
opinions. He cannot condescend to others
in things indifferent. He has no allowance
to make for human frailty; or for the dif-
fercnce of age, rank, or temper, among

manlkind.

mankind. With him, all gaiety is sinful SER M.

XVII.

levity; and every amusement is a crime,
To this extreme, the ad:nonition of Solo-
mon may be undertood to belong: Be not
rig.htecus obvermuch; nethcr mnch':. ijy /Gs' Jer-
wj. Wh/y J/'wz/yl? dr s ahfrcy tlayjc/f ?
When this severity of manners is hypocriti-
cal, and assumed as a cloak to fcret indul-
gence, it is one of the , ors protitutions of
religion. But I now confider it, not as the
effeet of design, but of natural austerity of
temper, and of contraded maxims of con-
duct. Its influence upon the person him-
self, is to render him gloomy and four;
upon others, to alienate them both from
his society, and his counsels; upon reli-
gion, to set it forth as a morole and for-
bidding principle.-The opposite extreme
to this is, perhaps, still more dangerous;
that of too great facility, and accommoda-
tion to the ways of others. The man of
this charater, partly fiom indolent weak-
pess, and partly from ioftnefs of temper, is

* Eccles. vii. 16.

disposed

SER M. disposed to a tame and universal assent.
xvI. Averse either to contradict or to blame,

he goes along with the manners that pre-
vail. He views every characer with in-
dulgent eye; and with good dilifolitions
in his breast, and a natural reluctance to
profligacy and vice, he is enticed to the
commiflion of evils which he condemns,
merely through want of fortitude to oppose
others.

Nothing, it must be confessed, in moral

condud, is more difficult, than to avoid
turning here, either to the right hand, or to
the left. One of the greatest trials both of
wiifdom and virtue is, to preserve a just me-
dium, between that harshness of austerity,
which disgusts and alienates mankind, and
that weakness of good-nature, which opens
the door to sinful excess. The one fepa-
rates us too much from the world. The
other connecs us too closely with it; and
seduces us to follow the multitude in doing
evil. One who is of the former character,
tfudies too little to be agreeable, in order
to render himself useful. He who is of

the

the latter, by fludying tco much to be SERM.
agreeable, forfeits his innocence. If the XVI.
one hurt religion, by clothing it in the
garb of unnecessary ftritnefs; the other,
by unwarrantable compliance, strengthens
the power of corruption in the world.
The one borders on the characer of the
Pharisee; the other, on that of the Sad-
ducee. True religion enjoins us to stand
at an equal distance from both; and to
pursue the difficult, but honourable, aim,
of uniting good-nature with fixed religious
principle; affable manners, with untainted
virtue.

FARTHER; we run to one extreme, when

we contemn altogether the opinions of man-
kind; to another, when we court their praise
too eagerly. The former discovers a high
degree of pride and felf-conceit. The latter
betrays servility of spirit. We are formed
by nature and Providence, to be connected
with one another. No man can stand en-
tirely alone, and independent of all his fel-
low-creatures. A reasonable regard, there-

fore,

S E R M. fore, for their esteem and good opinion, is a
XVIL.
c_-__ commendable principle. It flows from hu-

mnanity ; and coincides with the desire of
being mutually useful. But if that regard
be carried too 'far, it becomes the source
of much corruption. For, in the present
iate of mankind, the praise of the world
often interferes with our acting that ieady
and conlcientious part, which gains the ap-
probation of God. Hence ariies the diffi-
culty of drawing a proper line, between the
allowable regard for reputation, and the ex-
ceflive desire of praise. On the one fide, and
on the other, danger meets us; and either
extreme will be pernicious to virtue.

He who extinguishes all regard to the

sentiments of mankind, suppresses one in-
centive to honourable deeds; nay, he re-
moves one of the strongest checks on vice.
For, where there is no desire of praise, there
wiil be also no sense of reproach and shame;
and when this fcnfe is destroyed, the way
is paved to open profligacy. On the other
hand, he who is actuated Iblely by the love
of human praise, encroaches on the higher

8 refpe;

refpet which he owes to conscience, and to S E R M.
God. Hence, virtue is often counterfeited; XVII.
and many a 1plendil appearaiuce has been
exhibited to the world, which had no basis
in real principle, or inward affeCion.
Hence religious truths have been disguised,
or unfairly reprefenrted, in order to be
tuited to popular taste. Hence the Scribes
and Pharilees rejeted our blessed Lord,
bccaLfie the' loved the pramif of men more than
the praise of God.-Turn, therefore, neither
to the right .andl, nor to the left. AffecQ
not to deliife what the world thinks of
your conduce and characer; and yet, let
not the sentiments of the world entirely
rule you. Let a desire of efleem be one
motive of your condud ; but let it hold a
subordinate place. Measure the regard that
is due to the opinions of men, by the de-
gree in which theie coincide with the law
of God.

ALLOW me next to suggest, the danger

of running to the extreme of anxiety about
wvorldly interests on the one hand, and of

negligence

SE R M. negligence on the other. It is hard to fay

XVII.
*,_ -which of these extremes is fraught with

most vice and most misery. Industry and
diligence are unquestionable duties, ftrialy
enforced on all Christians; and he who fails
in making suitable provision for his house-
hold and family, is pronounced to be worse
than an inidel. But there are bounds, with-
in which our concern for worldly success
must be confined. For anxiety is the cer-
tain poison of human life. It debases the
mind; and sharpens ail the passions. It
involves men in perpetual diftrations, and
tormenting cares; and leads them aside
from what ought to be the great scope of
human ation. Anxiety is, in general, the
effect of a covetous temper. Negligence is
commonly the offspring of licentiousness,
and, always, the parent of universal dif-
order. By anxiety, you render yourselves
miserable. By negligence, you too often
occasion the ruin of others. The anxious
man is the votary of riches; the negligent
man, the votary of pleasure. Each offers
his mistaken worihip, at the flhrine of a

false

false deity; and each shall reap only such s ERM .
rewards as an idol can bestow; the one .
sacrificing the enjoyment and improvement
of the present, to vain cares about futurity ;
the other so totally taken up in enjoying the
present, as to store the future with certain
misery.-- True virtue holds a temperate
course between these extremes; neither
careless of to-morrow, nor taking too much
thought for it; diligent, but not anxious;
prudent, but not covetous; attentive to pro-
vide comfortable accommodation on earth,
but chiefly concerned to lay up treaitres in
Heaven.

I SHALL only warn you farther against

the extreme, of engaging in a course of life
too busy and hurried, or of devoting your-
selves to one too retired and unemployed.
We are formed for a mixture of adtion,
and retreat. Our connecions with focicty,
and the performance of duties which we
owe to one another, neceflarily engage us
in active life. What we owe to ot,-felves,
requires occasional retirement. For he who

14 lives

SERM. lives always in the bustle of the world,
XVII. cannot, it is to be feared, always preserve

his virtue pure. Sentiments of piety will be
deprived of that nourishment and support,
which they would derive from meditation
and devotion. His temper will be often
ruffled and diflurbed. His passions will be
kept too much on the stretch. From the
contagious manners which every where
abound, he will not be able to avoid con-
trading ibme dangerous infcetion.- On
the other hand, he who flies to total retreat,
in order either to enjoy cafe, or to escape
from the temptations of the world, will
often find difquict meeting him in solitude,
and the wornl temptations arising from
within himself. Unoccupied by active and
honourable pursuits, unable to devote his
whole time to improving thoughts, many
an evil passion will start up), and occupy the
vacant hour. Sullenness and gloom'will be
in danger of overwhelming him. Peevifn
displeasure, and flfpicions of mankind, arc
apt to persecute thole who withdraw them-
selves altogether from the haunts of men.

Steer

-- Steer therefore a middle course, be- SERM,

XVII.

tween a life oppressed with business on the iJ
one hand; and burdened, for the burden
is no less, with idleness on the other. Pro-
vide for yourselves matter of fair and ho-
nest pursuit, to afford a proper objet to the
ative powers of the mind. Temper business
with serious meditation; and enliven retreat
by returns of action and indultry.

THUS I have pointed out some of those

extremes into which men are apt to run,
by forsaking the line which religion and
wisdom have drawn. Many more, I am
sensible, might be suggested; for the field
is wide, and hardly is there any appearance
of piety, virtue, or good conduc, but what
the folly of men is apt to push into undue
excess, on one or other fide. What I have
mentioned, will be sufficient to show the
necessity of prudent circumfpetion, in or-
der to escape the dangers which beset us in
this slate of trial. Let us study to attain
a regular, uniform, confident character;
where nothing that is excessive or difpro-

VOL, III. B b portioned

S ER M. portioned shall come forward to view;
XVIr.
.-,_, which mhall not plume itself with a fair

mhow on one fide only, while in other quar-
ters it remains unadorned and blemished;
but, where the different parts of worth and
goodness shall appear united, and each shall
exert its proper influence on condut.
Thus, turning neither to the right hand nor
to the left, we shall, as far as our frailty per-
mits, approach to the perfecion of the hu-
man characer; and shall have reason not to
be afnJamd when we have equal refpet to all
God's commandments.

# SERMON XVIII. On SCOFFING at RELIGION. 2 PETER, iii. 3. — There shall come in the last days scoffers. —

[ 371 1

SERMON XVIII.
On SCOFFING at RELIGION.

2 PETER, iii. 3.

-There shall come in the last daysfcoffrs.-
AS the Christian religion is adverse to the s E R M.

inclinations and passions of the cor- XVIII

rupted part of mankind, it has been its fate,
in every age, to encounter the opposition of
various foes. Sometimes, it has undergone
the ftormsof violence and persecution. Some-
times, it has been attacked by the arms of
false reasoning, and sophistry. When these
have failed of success, it has at other times
been exposed to the scoffs of the petulant.
Men of light and frivolous minds, who had
no comprehension of thought for discerning

B b 2 what

s E R TM. what is great, and no solidity of judgment

-__ for deciding on what is true, have taken

upon them to treat religion with contempt,
as if it were of no consequence to the world.
They have affeced to represent the whole
of that venerable fabric which has so long
commanded the refped of mankind; which
for ages the learned have supported, and
the wife have admired, as having no better
foundation than the gloomy imagination of
fanatics and vifionaries. Of this character
were thofef/coers, predicted by the Apofile
to arise in the la days; a predicion which
awe have seen too often fulfilled. As the
false colours which such men throw on re-
ligion, are apt to impose on the weak and
unwary, let us now examine, whether re-
ligion affords any jult grounds for the con-
tempt or ridicule of the scoffer. They must
be either the doctrines, or the precepts, of
religion, which he endeavours to hold forth
to contempt.

TIIE doctrines of the Christian religion
are rational and pure. All that it has re-

vealed

vealed concerning the perfetions of God, SERM.

XVI11.

his moral government and laws, the defti-
nation of man, and the rewards and punish-
mcnts of a future Rate, is perfeEtly con-
sonant to the moat enlightened reason. In
some articles which transcend the limits of
our present faculties, as in what relates to
the essence of the Godhead, the fallen fRate
of mankind, and their redemption by Jesus
Christ, its dotrines may appear mysterious
and dark. Againit these the scoffer has
often directed his attacks; as if whatever
could not be explained by us, ought upon
that account to be exploded as absurd.

It is unnecessary to enter, at present, on any

particular defence of these doctrines, as there
is one observation which, if duly weighed,
is sufficient to silence the cavils of the
feoffer. Is he not compelled to admit, that
the whole fyflem of nature around him is
full of mystery? What realbn, then, had he
to suppose, that the docrines of revelation,
proceeding from the fame author, were to
contain no mysterious oblfcurity? All that
is requisite for the condua of life, both in

B b 3 nature

SE R M. nature and in religion, divine wisdom has
XVII.
,__^ rendered obvious to all. As nature has as-

forded us sufficient information concerning
what is necessary for our food, our accom-
modation, and our safety; so religion has
plainly inftrufed us in our duty towards
God, and our neighbour. But as soon as
we attempt to rife towards objets that lie
beyond our immediate sphere of acion, our
curiosity is checked; and darkness meets
us on every fide. What the essence is of
those material bodies which we fee and
handle; how a feed grows up into a tree;
how man is formed in the womb; or how
the mind ats upon the body, after it is
formed; are mysteries of which we can give
no more account, than of the most obscure
and difficult parts of revelation. We are
obliged to admit the existence of the fact,
though the explanation of it exceeds our
faculties.

After the fame manner, in natural reli-

gion, questions arise concerning the crea-
tion of the world from nothing, the origin
of evil under the government of a peried

5 Being,

Being, and the consistency of human liberty s ER M.
with divine prescience, which are of as , _
intricate nature, and of as difficult solution,
as any questions in Christian theology. We
may plainly fee, that we are not admitted
into the secrets of Providence, any more
than into the mysteries of the Godhead. In
all his ways, the Almighty is a God that
hideth hilfelf. He maketh darkness his pavi-
lion. He boldeth back theface of his throne;
and fpreadeth a thick cloud upon it.- In-
flead of its being any objecion to revela-
tion, that some of its doCrines are myfte-
rious, it would be much more strange and
unaccountable, if no such docrines were
found in it. Had every thing in the Christ-
ian system been perfecly level to our capa-
cities, this might rather have given ground
to a suspicion, of its not proceeding from
God; since it would have been then so un-
like to what we find, both in the system
of the universe, and in the system of natu-
ral religion. Whereas, according as mat-
ters now stand, the gospel has the fame sea-
tures, the fame general characer, with the

B b 4 other

S E RM. other two, which are acknowledged to be
XVIII.
,__ . of divine origin; plain and comprehensible,

in what relates to practice; dark and myfte-
rious, in what relates to speculation and be-
lief*. The cavils of the scoffer, therefore,
on this head, are so far from having any
just foundation, that they only discover
his ignorance, and the narrowness of his
views.

LET us next proceed to what relates to

practice, or the preceptive part of religion.
The duties which religion enjoins us to
perform towards God, are those which have
ofteneft furnished matter to the scoffs of
the licentious. They attempt to represent
there as so idle and superfluous, that they
could owe their birth to nothing but en-
thufiafm.-For, is not the Deity so far ex-
alted above us, as to receive neither advan-
tage nor pleasure from our worihip ? What
are our prayers, or our praises, to that infinite

* See this argument fully pursued, and placed in a

frong light, by the masterly hand of Bilhop Butler, in his
Analogy of Natural and Revealed Religion,

mind,

mind, who, refting in the full enjoyment SERM.

XVIII.

of his own beatitude, beholds all his crea-
tures passing before him, only as the insets
of a day ? What but fuperflitious terrors,
could have dictated those forms of homage,
and those diftinstions of sacred days, in
which vulgar minds delight, but which the
liberal and enlarged look upon with scorn?

Now, in return to such insults of the

scoffer, it might be sufficient to observe,
that the united sentiments of mankind, in
every age and nation, are against him.
Thoughtless as the bulk of men are, and
attached only to objels which they fee
around them; this principle has never been
extinguished in their breasts, that to the
great Parent of the human race, the uni-
versal, though invisible, benefaaor of the
world, not only internal reverence, but ex-
ternal homage, is due. Whether he need
that homage or not, is not the question. It
is what, on our part, we undoubtedly owe;
and the heart is, with reason, held to be
base, which Riifles the emotions of gra-
titude to a benefacCor, how independent so-

6 ever

S E RM. ever he may be of any returns. True vir-
XVIitl.

v__ tue always prompts a public declaration of

the grateful sentiments which it feels; and
glories in expressing them. Accordingly,
over all the earth, crowds of worshippers
have assembled to adore, in various forms,
the Ruler of the world. In these adorations,
the philosopher, the savage, and the faint,
have equally joined. None but the cold
and unfeeling can look up to that benc-
ficent Being, who is at the head of the uni-
verse, without some inclination to pray, or
to praise. In vain, therefore, would the
scoffer deride, what the loud voice of na-
ture demands and jufifies. He ereds him-
self againPt the general and declared sense
of the human race.

But, apart from this consideration, I must

call on him to attend to one of a still more
serious and awful nature. By his licentious
ridicule of the duties of piety, and of the
inflitutions of divine worship, he is weak-
ening the power of conscience over men;
he is undermining the great pillars of so-
ciety; he is giving a mortal blow to public

order,

order, and public happiness. All these rea s E R M.
on nothing so much, as on the general be-
lief of an all-feeing witness, and the gene-
ral veneration of an Almighty Governor.
On this belief, and this veneration, is found-
ed the whole obligation of an oath; with-
out which, government could not be ad-
ministered, nor courts ofjuflice adc; contro-
verfies could not be determined, nor private
property be preserved safe. Our only
security against innumerable crimes, to
which the refiraints of human life cannot
reach, is the dread of an invisible avenger,
and of those future punishments which he
hath prepared for the guilty. Remove this
dread from the minds of men; and you
strengthen the hands of the wicked, and cn-
danger the safety of human society.

But how could impressions so necefliry to

the public welfare be preserved, if there were
no religious aflemblies, no sacred inflitu-
tions, no days set apart for divine worship,
in order to be solemn remembrancers to
men of the existence, and the dominion of
God; and of the future account they have

to

S E R M. to give of their aacions to him ? To all ranks
XVII'.
, - , of men, the sentiments which public reli-

gion tends to awaken, are salutary and bc-
neficial. But with refped to the inferior
classes, it is well known, that the only prin-
ciples which refrain them from evil are
acquired in the religions assemblies which
they frequent. Destitute of the advantages
of regular education; ignorant, in great
measure, of public laws; unacquainted
with those refined ideas of honour and pro-
priety, to which others of more knowledge
have been trained; were thole sacred temples
deserted to which they now resort, they
would be in danger of degenerating into a
ferocious race, from whom lawless violence
was perpetually to be dreaded.

He, therefore, who treats sacred things

with any degree of levity and Icorn, is ad-
ing the part, perhaps without his feeing or
knowing it, of a Ipublic enemy to society.
He is prccifely the madmanl described in the
book of Proverbs*, wlho cafnctb firbrands,

Prcv. axvi, i?.

arr z'i;vA,

arrows, and rdel/at; aiz.dfiith, Aim I m in S E PR M.

XVI U.

/jport? Wve shall hear him, at times, coin- _
plain loudly of the undutifulness of chil-
dren, of the difhonetly of servants, of the
tumults and insolence of the lower ranks;
while he himself is, in a great meafurc,
responsible for the disorders of which he
complains. By the example which he sets
of contempt for religion, he becomes ac-
ceffary to the manifold crimes, which that
contempt occasions among others. By his
scoffing at sacred institutions, he is encou-
raging the rabble to uproar and violence;
he is emboldening the false witness to take
the name of God in vain; he is, in effet,
putting arms into the hands of the high-
wayman, and letting loose the robber on the
fireets by night.

W\IE come next to confider that great

class of duties, which refpea our condut
towards our fellow-creatures. The absolute
necessity of these to general welfare is so
apparent, as to have secured them, in a
great degree, from the attacks of the

fcof'er.

SER M. scoffer. He who would attempt to turn
xvml justice, truth, or honefly, into ridicule, would

be avoided by every one. To those who
had any remains of principle, he would be
odious. To those who attended only to
their interest, he would appear a dangerous
man. But though the social virtues are
treated in general as refpeCable and sacred,
there are certain forms and degrees of them
which have not been exempted from the
scorn of the unthinking. That extensive
generosity, and high public spirit, which
prompt a man to sacrifice his own interest,
in order to promote some great general
good; and that stria and scrupulous inte-
grity, which will not allow one, on any
occasion, to depart from the truth; have
often been treated with contempt by those
who are called men of the world. They
who will not stoop to flatter the great; who
disdain to comply with prevailing manners,
when theyjudge them to be evil; who re-
fuse to take the smallest advantage of others,
in order to procure the greatest benefit for
themselves are represented as persons of

romantic

romantic character, and visionary notions, SERi M.
unacquainted with the world, and unlit to
live in it.

Such persons are so far from being liable

to any just ridicule, that they are entitled
to a degree of refpca, which approaches to
veneration. For they are, in 'truth, the
great supporters and guardians of public
order. The authority of their charaoier
overawes the giddy multitude. The weight
of their example retards the progreld of ccr-
ruption; checks that relaxation of morals,
which is always too apt to gain ground in-
sensibly, and to make encroachments on
every department of society. Accordingly,
it is this high generosity of spirit, this in-
flexible virtue, this regard to principle, fu-
perior to all opinion, which has ever mark-
ed the characers of thole who have emi-
nently distinguished themselves in publ.
life; who have patronised the cause ot
justice against powerful oppressors; who, in
critical times, have supported the falling
rights and liberties of men; and have re-
fleded honour on their nation and country,

Such

s E R M. Such persons may have been scoffed at by
XVIII.

£, some among whom they lived; but pofte-

rity has done them ample justice; and they
are the persons, whose names are recorded
to future ages, and who are thought and
spoken of with admiration.

The mere temporizer, the man of accom.

modating principles, and inferior virtue,
may support a plausible characer for a
while among his friends and followers;
but as soon as the hollowness of his prin-
ciples is deteced, he finks into contempt.
They who are prone to deride men of in-
flexible integrity, only betray the littleness
of their minds. They lhow that they un-
derftand not the sublime of virtue; that
they have no discernment of the true ex-
cellence of man. By affeinug to throw
any discouragement on purity and firia-
ness of morals, they not only expose them-
selves to just contempt, but propagate fen-
timents very dangerous to society. For, if
we loosen the regard due to virtue in any
of its parts, we begin to sap the whole of
it. No man, as it has been often said, be-

comes

comes entirely profligate at once. lie de- SE R,
viates, flep by ltep, from conlcicnce. If the -/-
looe cafuiitry of the scoffer were to prevail,
open diflonefty, falsehood, and treachery,
would speedily grow out of thoiC complying
principles, those relaxations of virtue, which
he would represent to be neceiFary for every
man who knows the world.

THE last class of virtues I am to mention,

are those which are of a personal nature, and
which refpedt the government to be exer-
ciled over our pleasures and passions. Here,
the scoffer has always conlidered himself as
having an ample field. Often, and often,
have ifch virtues as sobriety, temperance,
modesty, and chaffity, been made the subje&t
of ridicule, as monkifl habits, which exclude
men from the company of the faihionable
andl the gay; habits, which are the effei
of low education, or of mean spirits, or of
mere feebleness of constitution ; while fcof-
sers, wallking, as it is too truly Iaid of them
by the Apotle, after their Ii/Iqs, boast of their
own manners as liberal and fric, as manly

VO. III. C c and

S E R M. and spirited. They fancy themselves raised
XVIII.

....-. thereby much above the crowd; and hold

all those in contempt, who confine them-
selves within the vulgar bounds of regular
and orderly life.

Infatuated men! who fee not that the vir-

tues of which they make sport, not only de-
rive their authority from the laws of God,
but are moreover essentially requisite both
to public and to private happiness. By the
indulgence of their licentious pleasures for
a while, as long as youth and vigour remain,
a few passing gratifications may be obtained.
But what are the consequences? Suppose
any individual to persevere unrestrained in
this course, it is certainly to be followed by
disrepute in his character, and disorder in
his affairs; by a wafted and broken confti-
tution; and a speedy and miserable old age.
Suppose a society to be wholly formed of
such persons as the scoffers applaud; sup-
pose it to be filled with none but those
whom they call the sons of pleasure; that
is, with the intemperate, the riotous, and
dissolute, among whom all regard to sobriety,

I decency,

decency, and private virtue, was abolished; s E RM.

XVIIL.

what an odious scene would such a society
exhibit ? How unlike any civilised or well-
ordered state, in which mankind have choien
to dwell ? What turbulence and uproar, what
contests and quarrels, would perpetually
reign in it ? What man of common under-
standing would not rather chufe to dwell in
a desert, than to be afociated for life with
such companions? Shall, then, the fcoffcr
prefume'to make light of those virtues, with-
out which there could be neither peace, nor
comfort, nor good order, among mankind ?

Let him be desired to think, of his do-

meftic situation and connetions. Is he a
father, a husband, or a brother? Has he
any friend or relation, male or female, in
whose happiness he is interefted(?---Let
us put the question to him, whether he be
willing that intemperance, unchastity, or dif-
fipation of any kind, should mark their cha-
raEter ? Would he recommend to them such
excesses? Would he chute, in their presence,
openly, and without disguise, to feoff at
the opposite virtues, as of no consequence

Cc 2 to

s E R M. to their welfare ?--If even the most licen-
XVIIL -J_ tious shudders at the thought; if, in the

midst of his loose pleasures, he be desirous
that his own family should remain untaint-
ed; let this teach him the value of thofc
private virtues, which in the hours of diffi-
pation, in the giddiness of his mind, he is
ready to contemn. Banibh sobriety, tem-
perance, and purity, and you tear up the
foundations of all public order, and all do-
meftic quiet, You render every house a di-
vided and miserable abode, resounding with
terms of shame, and mutual reproaches of
infamy. You leave nothing refpetable in
the human character. You change the man
into a brute.

THE conclusion fiom all the reasoning

which we have now pursued is, that religion
and virtue, in all their forms, either of doc-
trine or of precept; of piety towards God,
integrity towards men, or regularity in pri-
vate conduct are so far from affording any
grounds of ridicule to the petulant, that they
are entitled to our highest veneration; they

are

are names which should never be mention- S E R M.

XVIi,

ed, but with the utmost honour. It is laid v
in Scripture, Fools wmake a mock at finAt.
They had better make a mock at pestilence,
at war, or famine. With one who should
chute thetf public calamities for the subjea
of his sport, you would not be inclined to
aifociate. You would fly from him, as worse
than a fool; as a man of distempered mind,
from vhom you might be in hazard of re-
ceiving a sudden blow. Yet certain it is,
that, to the great society of mankind, fin is
a greater calamity, than either petillence, or
famine, or war. These operate, only as
occasional causes of misery. But the fins
and vices of men, are perpetual scourges of
the world. Impiety and injustice, fraud and
falsehood, intemperance and profligacy, are
daily producing mischief and disorder; bring-
ing ruin on individuals; tearing families
and communities in pieces; giving rife to a
thousand tragical scenes on this unhappy
theatre. In proportion as manners are

* Prov. xiv. 9.

C c 3 vicious,

S E R M. vicious, mankind are unhappy. The per-
XVII.
.. l -fetion of virtue which reigns in the world

above, is the chief source of the perfect
blessedness which prevails there.

When, therefore, we observe any ten-

dency to treat religion or morals with dif-
respect and levity, let us hold it to be a sure
indication of a perverted understanding, or
a depraved heart. In the feat of the scorner
let us never si;. Let us account that wit con-
taminated, which attempts to sport itself on
sacred fubjeEts. When the scoffer arises, let
us maintain the honour of our God, and our
Redeemer; and refohltely adhere to the
cause of virtue and goodness. The lips of
the wfie utter knowlcedge; but the month of
the fooli/J is ncar to deftruiiion. Him that
honoiireth God, God will honour. The fear
of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom : and
he that keepeth the commandment, keepeth his
own foul.

# SERMON XIX. On the CREATION of the WORLD. GENESIS, i. 1. In the beginning God created the heaven, and the earth.

[ 391 3

SERMON XIX.
On the CREATION of the WORLD.

GENESIS, i. I.
Ia the beginniing God created the heaven, and

the earth.
SUCH is the commencement of the hi- s E R M.

tory of mankind; an ara, to which we Xlx'

muff ever look back with solemn awe and
veneration. Before the fun and the moon
had begun their course; before the found of
the human voice was heard, or the name of
man was known; in the beginning God created
the heaven, and the earth.- To a begin-
ning of the world, we are led back by every
thing that now exists; by all history, all
records, all monuments of antiquity. In

C c 4 tracing

S E t M. tracing the tranfadions of pafl ages, we ar-

rive at a period, which clearly indicates the
infancy of the human race. We behold the
world peopled by degrees. We ascend to
the origin of all those useful and neceflary
arts, without the knowledge of which, man-
kind could hardly fubfilt. We discern so-
ciety and civiiization arising from rude be-
ginnings, in every corner of the earth; and
gradually a(dvancing to the slate in which
we now find them: All which afford plain
evidence, that there was a period, when
mankind began to inhabit and cultivate the
ear'h. 'What is very remarkable, tlic molP
authentic chronology and history of most
nations, coincides with the account of
Scripturc; and makes the period during
which the world has been inhalited by the
race of men, not to extend beyond fix
thousand years.

To the ancient philofophcrs, creation

from nothing appeared an unintelligible
idlea; They maintained the eternal cxiftence
of inatter, which they supposed to be mo-
delled by the fovcreign mind of the uni-

veric,

verse, into the form wh ich th'e carlh now S r R 1M.
exhibits. But there is nothing in this opi- --
nion which gives it any title to be opposed
to the authority of revelation. The docrine
of two felf-exiltent, independent principles,
God and matter, the one adtive, the other
passive, is a hypothcfis which presents difli-
culties to human reason, at leall as great as
the creation of matter from nothing. Ad-
hering then to the tefiniony of Scripture,
we believe, that in ihe brea nig God c;reated,
or from non-cxiftence brought into being,
the' heaven, anmd he earith.

But though there was a period wlen this

globe, with all that we fee upon it, did not
exist, we have no rehfon to think, that the
wisdom and power of the Almighty were
then without exercise or employment.
Boundless is the extent of his dominion.
Other globes and worlds, enlightened by
other funs, may then have occupied, they
still appear to occupy, the immense regions
of space. Numberless orders of beings, to
us unknown, people the wide extent of the

univcrfe;

SE R M, universe; and afford an endless variety of

objeats to the ruling care of the great Father
of all. At length, in the course and progress
of his government, there arrived a period,
when this earth was to be called into ex-
iftence. When the signal moment, pre-
deflined from all eternity, was come, the
Deity arose in his might; and with a word
created the world. - W\hat an illustrious
lmonent was that, when, from non existence,
there sprang at o;:cc into being this mighty
globe, on which so many millions of crea-
tures now dwell!-- No preparatory mea-
fures were required. No long circuit of
means was employed, Ife fpi.e; and it was
done: hie commanded'; (;;i;d it ood ffl. The
earth was, at firfc, v'i:biitfornm, and void;
and iarklnef waas on lhe fjce of te dee. The
Almighty surveyed the dark abyss; and
fixed bounds to the several divisions of na-
ture. He said, Let there e e liabt; and there
was lihnt. Then appeared the sea, and the
dry land. The mouintains rose; and the
rivers flowed. The fun and moon began
their course in the skies. Herbs and plants

clothed

clothed the aig

n The ;r, the carth, S R M.

and the w:,i:t x.,

, --',: i.; sl v; teir re- -

sp&ec. inlhabitant- ; ;.', , . ",- ;c
after the i;lage of God. I-e anpieared,
walking with countenance crcO ; an( re-
ceived his Creatov's henedilion, as the Lord
of this new world. The A!mrhtv beheld
his work when it was finished; and pro-
nounced li good. Superior beings saw witl
wonder this new acceflion to exiftencc. The
morni2ngJiars fimg together; aiJ all the fins
of God IJJted fIJrjoy :*.

But on this great work of creation, let

us not merely gaze with afltnilhinent. Let
us confider how it flould affect our condudt,
by presenting the divine perfeOdions in a
light which is at once edifying, and com-
forting to man. It difilays the Creator
as supreme in power, in wifilom, and in
goodness.

I. As fipreme in power. When we con-
fider with how much labour and dificulty

' Job, xxihiii. 7.

hu1 Al

5 '?si. h:;nrTI power performs its inconfidcrable
t.,-- )i works; what time it c'lS a
to rcu them;

a2nd how eail,;, 'he; iiherere, they are
deitro.cc!; the veri; iuca of creating power
verwh-:cirs the Iind with awe. Let us
lock around, and iurvcy this fli!endous
edifice, which we hiave been iiu anitted to
inhabit. Let us tl;ink of the extent of the
different climates a d relions of the earth
of the magnitude of the mounitains, and of
the expanie of the oceall. L,et us conceive
that imnienlfe gle lcwhich contains thln,
launched at once from the hand of the Al-
mighty ; made to rcvoilve incei[lltly on i;s
axis, that it might prodce the vicifTiludes
of day and night; thrown forth, at the ifme
tine, to run its aiinu!l courle in perpetual
circuit through the heavens: after such a
rm.ctit:rtiol, vwhcre is the greatnlefs, where
i:; .-c pride of man ? Into what total anni-
},i.',.tioln do we linkL, bcfTlre an omnipotent
E'.il,, ? !\vYho is not diiipoled to exclaim,
Lii^,, wt i.s ?:i..', i.out ! l r1

at mnuifdl of
ho;it or the Jon o/moi', uit thIjoItjouqII /J1 vsis"t

lui ? Wheu co;,;cJ w'iih i/b'(e, all en. are

vanit'

vwan.ity; ' lOUiGi7 aie .tl.'..g.-- RV- .S .i..
rence, and humble adoration, ought ljon- _--j
taneoufly to arise. He whio feels no pro-
penfity to worflip and adore, is dead to aUl
lense of grandeur and ',ajefly; has extin
guifiled one of the molt natural feelings of
the human heart. IKnow th Lord, fI/!t. Ij
is. Cod, wce are all Lis prfi/c; the wo'ir;;ii.7n-
Jli,5 of bis handsh. Let us wor/.;il and 'o,,p
downl. Let us knele bIf/re the Lord oar
Malehr.

Of all titles to legislation and rule, none

is lo evident and dirlce as that of a Cre:ctr.
The convidion is felt in cvcr' b-reaFi, that
he wlho gave us being, thiatli all .tj.! :
right to regulate our colnduc. Tiis gi'vsc
a fandlion to the precepts of God, w'i;'l
the mofrt hardened dare not controvecrt.
When it is a Creator and a Father t!hat
speaks, who would not liften and c!:y ?
Are jultice and humanity his declai'ed
laws; and flall \we, whclm ilt 'vcicrd 'N
he called from the dust, alnl svhon to-
moirow he can reduce into dust ag;in,
prefunae, in contcmpt of him, to be Cul'j!

or

E R M. or inhuman ? Are there any little interefb
XIX.

of our own which we dare to eret, in
opposition to the pleasure of him who made
us ? Fear ye nlot me, flith the Lord; will yc
Inr tremble at my prfenIce, wiho have placed
the /findfor the bound of the sea, by a perpe-
tuail dcc;cr, lthat it cannot p/ll it; who
Jiretch forth mly hand over the earth, and
none hi.dreth, ?

At the fame time, the power of a Creator

is encouraging, as well as awful. While it
enforces duty, it iil'Iires confidence under
afflicion. It brings to view a relation,
which imports tenderness and comfort; for
it ibggefts the compassion of a Father. In
the time of trouble, mankind are led, by
natural impulse, to fly for aid to Him, who
knows the wcaknefs of the frame which he
has made ; who remembers we ar c djl; and
fees the dangers with which we are envi-
roned. " I am thine ; for thou haft made
" e: forlake not the work of thine own
" hands," is one of the molt natural ejacu-
lations of the distressed imind.-How blcif-
ed are the virtuous, who can reft under the

protecion

proteaion of that powerful arm, which S ER M.
made the earth and the heaven? The J
omnipotence which renders God so awful
is to them a source of joy. In the whole
compass of nature, nothing is formidable to
them, who firmly repose their trust in the
Creator. To them, every noxious power
can be rendered harmless; every threatened
evil, if not averted, can be transformed
into good. In the Author of nature, thev
find not only the author of their being;
but their proteaor and defender, the lifter
up of their heads. Hlppy is he that hath
the God of Jacob for his help; whose hope is
in the Lord his God; which made heaven and
nartb, the fja and all that therein is; which
kccpcth truth for cver.:

II. THE work of creation is the display

of supreme wildom. It carries no character
more conlsiicuous than this. If, from the
firuEture and mechanism of sone of the
molt complicated works of human art, ev

* Psalm cxlvi. 5, 6.

are

S E R M. are led to high admiration of the wisdom of

XIX.
-,-i the contrivei,t what astonishment may fill

our minds, when we think of the ftrualure
of the universe ! It is not only the ftupen-
dous building itr!cl, which excites admira-
tion; but the exquisite tiill, wx it' which the
endlels variety of its parts are adapted to
their refpedive pullr'.es: Infolnuch that
the study of nature, which, for ages, has
employed the lives of Io many learn!ed
men, and which is 11ill tb fir from being
exhausted, is no other than the fRudy of
divine wisdom difpllayed in the creation.
The farther our relcarches are carried, more
striking proofs of it every where meet us.
The provi'or. made for the conRant regu-
larity of the universe, in the di!i;oiition of
the heavenly bodies, so that in the courle
of fevcral thousand ecars, nature fiouldl
ever exhibit the lailme ufefu! and grateful
variety, in the returns of light and darkness,
of rummer and winter; and cverj furniih
food and habitation to all t!: animals
that people the earth ; muff be a lasing
theme of wonder to every re Leing
' ind.

B tut

But they are not only the heavens that E R M.

dec/are the glory of God, and ,.;'fiNrmalr nt ,y
that fJevetwh forth his bandy-work. In the
most inconsiderable, as well as in the most
illustrious works of the Creator, consummate
art and design appear. There is not a crea-
ture that moves, nor a vegetable that grows,
but, when minutely examined, furnifles
materials of the highest admiration. The
fame wisdom that placed the fun in the
centre of the system, and arranged the fe-
veral planets around him in their order,
has no less shown itself, in the provision
made for the food and dwelling of every
bird that roams the air, and every beast
that wanders in the desert; equally great,
in the smallest, and in the most magnifi-
cent objets; in the star, and in the inlfet;
in the elephant, and in the fly; in the beam
that shines from heaven, and in the grass
that clothes the ground. Nothing is over-
looked. Nothing is carelessly performed.
Every thing that exists, is adapted with per-
feat symmetry, to the end for which it was
designed. All this infinite variety of par-

VOL. III. D d ticulars

S E R 1. ticulars mufft have been present to the mind
v__ --- of the Creator; all beheld with one glance

of his eye; all fixed and arranged, from
the beginning, in his great design, when
he formed the heavens and the earth. Just-
ly may we exclaim with the Psalmist, How
excellent, 0 Lord, is thy name in all the earth !
How nmanifold are thy works! In w2ldom ha3j
thou made them all. No man canfind out the
work that God maketh, from the beginning to
the end. Such knowledge is too wonde;fil
for us. It is high; we cannot attain unto it.

This wisdom displayed by the Almighty

in the creation, was not intended merely to
gratify curiosity, and to raise wonder. It
ought to beget profound submission, and
pious trust, in every heart. It is not un-
common for many who speak with rapture
of creating wisdom, to be guilty, at the fame
time, of arraigning the conduet of Provi-
dence. In the ftruEture of the universe,
they confess that all is goodly and beauti-
ful. But in the government of human as-
fairs, they can fee nothing but disorder and
.confusion.-- Have they forgotten, that

both

both the one and the other, proceed from SER M.

XIX.

the fame Author ? Have they forgotten, that _j
he who balanced all the heavenly bodies,
and adjusted the proportions and limits of
nature, is the fame who hath allotted them
their condition in the world, who diftri-
butes the measures of their prosperity and
adversity, and fixes the bounds of heir habi-
tation ? If their lot appear to them ill-forted,
and their condition hard and unequal, let
them only put the question to their own
minds, Whether it be most probable, that
the great and wife Creator hath erred in
his distribution of human things, or that
they have erred in the judgment which
they form concerning the lot assigned to
them? Can they believe, that the divine
Artist, after he had contrived and finished
this earth, the habitation of men, with
such admirable wisdom, would then throw
it out of his hands as a neglected work;
would susser the affairs of its inhabitants to
proceed by chance; and would behold them,
without concern, run into milrule and
disorder ? Where were then that consistency

D d 2 of

S E RM. of conduc, which we discover in all the
XIX.

works of nature, and which we cannot but
ascribe to a perfcd Being !--My brother!
when thy plans are disappointed, and thy
heart is ready to despair; lwhen virtue is
oppressed, and the wicked prosper around
thee; in those moments of disturbance, look
up to Him who created the heaven and the
earth; and confide, that he who made light
to spring from primneval darkness, will make
order at last to arise from the seeming con-
fusion of the world.

Had any one beheld the earth in its slate

of chaos; when the elements lay mixed and
confuscd; when the earth was witholutfojrm
and void; and darknt; ii was on th: face of the
deep; would he have believed, that it was
presently to become so fair and well-order-
ed a globe as we now behold? illumined
with the splendor of the fun, and decorated
with all the beauty of nature? The fame
powerful hand, which perfecEed the work
of creation, shall, in due time, disembroil the
plans of Providence. Of creation, we can
judge more clearly, because it flood forth

at

at once; it was perfect from the beginning. s E R M.

xIx.

But the course of Providence is progressive. _
Time is required for the progreflion to ad-
vance, and before it is finished, we can
form no judgment, or at least a very imper-
sea one, concerning it. We muff wait un-
till the great era arrive, when the secrets of
the universe ihall be unfolded; when the
divine designs shall be consummated ; when
Providence shall be brought to the fame
completion which creation has already at-
tained. Then we have every reason to be-
lieve, that the -*ife Creator flhall appear in
the end, to have been the wife and just ruler
of the world. Until that period come, let
us be contented and patient; let us submit
and adore. Although thou fayJte thoulJalt
notfee hidm, yet judgmenct is before himl; there-
fore tri/l thou in him "'. This exhortation
wtill receive more force, when we,

III. CONSIDER creationas a display offu-
preme goodness, no less than of wisdom and

j Job, xxxv. 14.
D d 3 power.

s E R M. power. It is the communication of num-
XIX. ,_* berlefs benefits to all who live, together

with existence. Justly is the earth said to
be full of the goodness of the Lord. Through-
out the whole system of things, we behold
a manifest tendency to promote the benefit
either of the rational, or the animal crea-
tion. In some parts of nature, this tendency
may be less obvious than in others. Ob-
jeets, which to us seem useless or hurtful,
may fometimcs occur; and strange it were,
if in so vast and complicated a fyRftem, dif-
ficultics of this kind should not occasionally
present themselves to beings, whose views
are so narrow and limited as ours. It is
well known, that in proportion as the
knowledge of nature has increased among
men, there difficulties have diminiflied. Sa-
tisfaaory accounts have been given of
many perplexing appearances. Uleful and
proper purposes have been found to be pro-
moted, by objeats which were, at sirss,
thought unprofitable or noxious.

Malignant muff be the mind of that per-
son; with a diflorted eye he must have con-

templated

templated creation, who can fufpet, that SE RM.
it is not the production of infinite benignity
and goodness. How many clear marks of
benevolent intention appear every where
around us ? What a profusion of beauty and
ornament is poured forth on the face of
nature ? What a magnificent fpeaacle pre-
sented to the view of man ? What supply
contrived for his wants? What a variety of
objects set before him, to gratify his senses,
to employ his understanding, to entertain
his imagination, to cheer and gladden his
heart? Indeed, the very existence of the
universe is a standing memorial of the
goodness of the Creator. For nothing ex-
cept goodness, could originally prompt crea-
tion. The Supreme Being, felf-exiflent and
all-fufficient, had no wants which he could
seek to supply. No new accession of felicity
or glory was to result to him, from crea-
tures whom he made. It was goodness
communicating and pouring itself forth,
goodness delighting to impart happiness
in all its forms, which in the beginning
created the heaven and the earth. Hence,

D d 4 those

S E R M. those innumerable orders of living creatures

with which the earth is peopled; from the
lowest class of sensitive being, to the highest
rank of reason and intelligence. Where-
ever there is life, there is some degree of
happiness, there are enjoyments suited to
the different powers of feeling; and earth,
aed air, and water, are with magnificent
liberality made to teem with life.

Let those striking displays of creating

goodness call forth, on our part, rcfponfive
love, gratitude, and veneration. To this
great Father of all cxiftence and life, to
Him who hath raised us up to behold the
light of day, and to enjoy all the comforts
which his world prefcnts, let our hearts
fend forth a perpetual hymn of praiic.
Evening and morning let us celebrate Him,
who maketh the morning and the evening
to rejoice over our heads; who o/eiieth his
hmizd, a;ndfJi;ifieth the dcfire o'fevey living
thing. Let us rejoice, that we are brought
into a world, which is the produCtion of
infinite gocdnefs, over which a supreme
intelligence presides; and where nothing

happens;

happens, that was not planned and arranged, SE R M.
from the beginning, in his decrce. Con- --
vinced that he hateth not the works which
he hath made, nor hath brought creatures
into existence merely to fufllr unnecessary
pain, let us, even in the midfi of sorrow,
receive with calm fubminfion, whatever he
is pleased to fend ; thankful for what he be-
ltows ; and latisficd, that, without good rea-
Ion, he takes nothing away.

SUCH, il general, are the cfitets which

meditation on the creation of the world
ought to produce. It prelcnts such an afto-
nifhing conjun&ion of pcnecr, wii'lom, and
goodness, as cannot he beheld wvithout re-
ligious veneration. Accordingly, among
all nations of the earth, it has given rile to
religious belief and worship,. The nmof
ignorant and savage tribes, lwhen they look-
ed round on the earth and the heavens,
could not avoid aficibiinb their origin to
iome invisible designing cause, and feeling
a propensity to adore. They are, indeed, the
awful appearances of the Creator's power,

by

s F R M'. by which, chiefly, they have been imprci-

Xi:.
-,.._ ed, and wIich have introduced into tlheir

Yworfhip so many rites of dark Iuerfitiol.
When the ufua! courle of nature feerned to
be interrupted, when loud thunder rolled
above them in the clouds, or earthquakes
shook the ground, the mu'itude tell on
their knees, and, with trembling horror,
b1rought forth the bloody sacrifice to ap-
pease the angry divi!ity. But it is not in
those tremendous appearances of power
merely, that a good and well-inf'ru:ed
man beholds the Creator of the world. In
the constant and re.gilar working of Ihis
h]ands, in the filtiit opr.:tions of his wis-
dom and goodnCi,; ever going, on through-
out nature, he ielgtits to contemplate and
adore hi'm.

This is one of t!h chief fruits to be de-

rived fromc that more pcrled kcuowlecde of
the Creator, v'which is impa;-ed to us by the
Chritian rc,!rve:l'tn. lmpreisnlg our minids
wvith a juO ine,1c of his attributes, as net

i-vie and great on!y, but as gracious and
nerciful, let it lead us to viev evecry object

of

of calm and undifturbedl nature, with a per- S R M.
petual reference to its Author. We flhall
then behold all the scenes which the hea-
vens and the earth present, with more re-
fined feelings, and sublimer emotions, than
they who regard them solely as objects of
curiosity, or amufeme nt. Nature will ap-
pear animated and enlivened, by the pre-
sInce of its Author. When the fun rifes
or lets in the heavens; Xwhen Ipring paints
the earth, when summer ihines in its glory,
when autumn pours forth its fruits, or
winter returns in its awful forms, we shall
view the Creator manifefiig himself in his
works. We shall meet his pretence in the
fields. We lhall feel his influence in the cheer-
ing beam. We flhall hear his voice in the
wind. We lhall behold ourselves every where
surrounded with the glory of that universal
Jfpirit, who fills, pervades, and upholds all.
We shall live in the world as in a great and
august temple, where the presence of the
divinity, who inhabits it, inspires devotion.

Magnificent as the fabric of the world
is, it was not, however, intended for per-

petual

S E R M. petual duration. It was ercaed as a tem-
XIX.

porary habitation for a race of beings, who,
after afting there a probationary part, were
to be removed into a higher fiate of exist-
ence. As there was an hour fixed from all
eternity for its creation, so there is an hour
fixed for its dissolution; when the heavens
and the earth fliall pats away, and their
place liall know them no more. Tie con-
fideration of this great event, as the coun-
terpart to the work of creation, lhall be the
subjet of the following Discourse,

# SERMON XX. On the DISSOLUTION of the WORLD. 2 PETER, iii. 10. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall...

[ 413 ]

SERMON XX.
On the DISSOLUTION of the WORLD.

2 PETER, iii. 10.
But the day f te'b Lord will come as a thief

in the igbht; ill w'hich the heavens hall
pass awajy c;ith a reat noifC, and the cle-
t:mnts //all melt with fIervent at; the
Cearth l-i, andl the Lwrks that arc therein,
J7:all be blrnt lp.

I-IESE words present to us an awful SERM.
view of the final catastrophe of the _

world. Having treated, in the preceding
Discourse, of the commencement, let -us
now contemplate the close, of all human
things. The diflolution of the material
i'fvem is an article of our faith, often al-

luded

S E R M. ludcd to in the Old TeRfament, clearly pre.

X- l dited in the New. It is an article of faith

so far from being incredible, that many ap-
pearances in nature lead to the belief of
it. We fee all terrestrial substances chang-
ing their form. Nothing that consists of
matter, is formed for perpetual duration.
Every thing around us, is impaired and
consumed by time, waxes old by degrees,
and tends to decay. There is reason, there-
fore, to believe, that a LiruQure so complex
as the world must be liable to the fame
law; and flall, at some period, undergo
the fame fate. Through many changes, the
earth has already passed; many fliocks it
has received, and is still often receiving. A
great portion of what is now dry land ap-
pears, from various tokens, to have been
once covered with water. Continents bear
the marks of having been violently rent,
and torn asunder from one another. New
islands have risen from the bottom of the
ocean; thrown up by the force of lilbterra-
neous fire. Formidable earthquakes have,
in divers quarters, flhaken the globe; and

la{~~ ?~.at

at this hour terrify, with their talnars, many :: ; : :,
parts of it. Burning mounl;;i;s have, I i_'
ages, been discharging torrcnts of flane;
and from time to lime renew their explo-
sions, in varicus regions. All thrce circum-
fiances show, that in the bowels of the
earth, the inifruments of its dissolution are
formed. To our viewr, who bIhold only
its f!l-face, it may appear firm1 and unfn:l-
ken; while its decfru.ion is preparing i
secret. The ground on which we trcad is
undermined. Combuflible materials arc
fiored. The train is laid. Wihen the mine
is to tfring, none of us can forefce.

Accuflomcd to behold the colrfe of na-

ture proceedirng in regular order, we i:-
dulge mcancnhile our pleasures and pur-
suits with full fccurity; and such as;'i'i
scenes as the convulicon of the lemenls,
and the diflolution of the wvorl, a' e

i o-

reign to our thoghts. Yet as it is ccr'ti:l
that obme generation of men muift wiv:tnr;s
this great cataftrophc, it is lst and p;r:'i,'
that we fhlouldl ibtimces \;z' for·ar;l to
it. Such prollc;s may net iimddj,
h;: 7'-

F R ?,. luring to the bulk of ncmn. But they carry
a-_- a grandeur and iolcmnity, which are con-

geuial to tiorc ofl the moll dignified feel-
ings in our nature; and tend to produce
elevation cf tlhought. Amidst the circle of
levities and follies, of little plealures and
little cares, which fill up the ordinary round
of life, it is neccflry that, we be occasional-
ly excited to attend to what is serious and
great. Such events as are now to be the
tlfbje& of our meditation, awake the slum-
bering mind ; check the licentiousness of
idle thought; and bring home our recollec-
tion to what mol2 concerns us, as men and
Christians.

Let us think what aftoniflment would

have filled oar minds, and what devout
emotions would have ifwelled our hearts, if
we could have been fpctators of the crea-
tion of the world ; if we had fecn the earth
when it arol at firflr 'Cit5o tfern and void,
and beheld its parts arranged by the divine
word; if we had heard the voice of the
Almighty, calling light to fring forth from
dte darki' hSal t was o/ !/cJ'ad,.c es the dee1)

8 if

if we had seen the fun rising, for the first SER M.

XX.

time, in the east with majestic glory; and _j
all nature instantly beginning to teem with
life. This wonderful scene, it was impoffi-
ble that any human eye could behold. It
was a fpeaacle afforded only to angels, and
superior spirits. But to a fpeaacle no less
astonishing, the final dissolution of the
world, we know there shall be many hu-
man witnesses. The race of men living in
that last age, {hall fee the presages of the
approaching fatal day. There {hall befigns
in thefin, as the Scripture informs us, and
signs in the moon, and Jfars; upon the carth,
did/refs of nations, with pe;ple:ity; the sea
and the waves roaring'*. They shall clearly
perceive, that universal nature is tending to
ruin. They shall feel the globe {hake;
fliall behold their cities fall; and the final
conflagration begin to kindle around them.
---Realising then this awful scene; ima-
gining ourselves to be already fpetators of
it, let us,

*Luke, xxi. 25.
VoL. III. E e I. CON-

SERM. I. CONTEMPLATE the Supreme Being

XX.
XLX Ldirecing the diflblution, as he directed the

original formation, of the world. He is
the great agent in this wonderful tranfac-
tion. It was by him foreseen. It was by
him intended; it entered into his plan
from the moment of creation. This world
was destined from the beginning to fulfil a
certain period; and then its duration was
to terminate. Not that it is any pleasure to
the Almighty, to display his omnipotence
in deflroying the works which he has made;
but as for wife and good purposes the earth
was formed, so for wife and good ends it
is dissolved, when the time molt proper for
its termination is come. He who, in the
counsels of his Providence, brings about so
many revolutions among mankind; who
changeth the times and the eafons; who raises
up empires to rule in succession, among
the nations, and at his pleasure puts an end
to their glory; hath also fixed a term for
the earth itself, the feat of all human great-
ness. He saw it meet, that after the pro-
bationary course was finished, which the

13 genera-

generations of men were to accomplifli, SE RM.
their present habitation should be made to X_
pass away. Of the seasonableness of the
period when this change should take place,
no being can judge except the Lord of the
universe. These are counsels, into which
it is not ours to penetrate. But amidst this
great revolution of nature, our comfort is,
that it is a revolution brought about by
Him, the measures of whose government
are all founded in goodness.

It is called in the text, the day of the Lord;

a day peculiarly his, as known to him
only; a day in which he ihall appear with
uncommon and tremendous majesty. But
though it be the day of the terrors of the
Lord, yet from these terrors, his upright
and faithful fubjedts hall have nothing to
apprehend. They may remain safe and
quiet fpeeators of the threatening scene.
For it is not to be a scene of blind confu-
sion; of universal ruin, brought about by
undesigning chance. Over the shock of
the elements, and the wreck of matter,
Eternal Wisdom presides. According to its

E e 2 diretion,

S E R M. direcion, the conflagration advances which

xx.

is to consume the earth. Amidst every con-
vulfion of the world, God shall continue to
be, as he was from the beginning, the dwell-
ing-place of his servants to all generations.
The world may be loft to them; but the
Ruler of the world is ever the fame, un-
changeably good and just. This is the high
tower to which they can fly, and be safe.
She righteous Lord lovetb r;ghteoirneJs; and
under every period of his government, his
countenance beholdeth the ulprieght.

II. LET us contemplate the difbolution of

the world, as the end of all human glory.
This earth has been the theatre of many a
great fpeCacle, and many a high atchieve.
ment. There, the wife have ruled, the
mighty have fought, and conquerors have
triumphed. Its iurface has been covered
with proud and itately cities. Its temples
and palaces have raised their heads to the
skies. Its kings and potentates, glorying
in their magnificence, have ereced pyra-
mids, conftruced towers, founded monu-

ments,

ments, which they imagined were to defy s ER M.
all the aflaults of time. Their inward _
tboi!gbt was, that thci bhozifcs were to conti-
nue for ever, and their dwelliig-places to all
generations. Its philosophers have explored
the secrets of nature; and flattered them-
selves,, that the fame of their discoveries
was to be immortal.- Alas! all this was
no more than a transient show. Not only
thefafnJion of the world, but the world it-
self, pangLft away. The day cometh, when
all the glory of this world ffiall be remem-
bered, only as a dream when one awaketh.
No longer llall the earth exhibit any of
those scenes which now delight our eyes.
The whole beautiful fabric is thrown down,
never more to arise. As soon as the de-
stroying angel has founded the last trum-
pet, the everlafling mountains fall; the
foundations of the world are shaken; the
beauties of nature, the decorations of art,
the labours of industry, perish in one com-
mon flame. The globe itfclf shall either
return into its ancient chaos witlhout form
and void; or, like a star fallen from the

E e 3 heavens,

S ERM. heavens, shall be effaced from the universe,
XX. -,. and its placeJiall know it no more.

THIS day of the Lord, it is foretold in

the text, will come as a thief in the night;
that is, sudden and unexpected. Mankind,
notwithstanding the presages given them,
{hall continue to the last in their wonted
security. Our Saviour tells us, that as in
the days of Noah before the flood, thcy were
eating and drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage, until the flood came, and took them
all away; fojhall aloA the coming of the Son
of Man be*.- How many projeCts and
designs ihall that day suddenly confound?
What long-contrived schemes of pleasure
{hall it overthrow? What plans of cunning
and ambition shall it utterly blast? How
miserable they, whom it shall overtake in
the midst of dark conspiracies, of criminal
deeds, or profligate pleasures? In what
itrong colours is their dismay painted, when
they are represented in the book of Reve.

Matthew, xxiv, 38.

lations,

lations, as calling to the hills and mountains S E R M.

XX.

tofall ont them and cover them ?--Such de-
scriptions are apt to be confidered as exag-
gerated. The imprefiion of those awful
events is weakened by the great distance of
time, at which our imagination places
them. But have not we had a firiking
image set before us, in our own age, of the
terrors which the day of the Lord shall pro-
duce, by thole partial ruins of the world,
which the visitation of God has brought on
countries well known, and not removed very
far from ourselves ? When, in the midst of
peace, opulence, and security, suddenly the
earth was felt by the terrified inhabitants to
tremble, with violent agitation, below them;
when their houses began to shake over their
heads, and to overwhelm them with ruins;
the flood, at the fame time, to rife from its
bed, and to swell around them; when en-
compassed with universal desolation, no
friend could aid another; no profped of
escape appeared; no place of refuge remain-
ed; how similar were such scenes of de-
ftrudlion to the terrors of the last day?

E e 4 What

SERM. What similar sensations of dread, and ra-

xx. X--_ morse, and too late repentance, must they

have excited among the guilty and pro-
fane ?

To such formidable convulsions of na-

ture, we, in these happy islands, through
the blessing of Heaven, are firangers; and
firangers to them may we long continue!
But however we may escape partial ruins
of the globe, in its general and final ruin
we also must be involved. To us must
come at last that awful day, when the fun
shall for the last time arise, to perform his
concluding circuit round the world. They
how blest, whom that day fhlll find em-
ployed in religious acs, or virtuous deeds;
in the conscientious discharge rs the duties
of life; in the exercise of due preparation
for the conclusion of human things, and for
appearing before the great Judge of the
world ! Let us now,

III. CONTEMPLATE the foul of man, as

remaining unhurt in the midit of this ge-
neral desolation, when the whole animal

X X creation

creation perishes, and the whole frame of SE RM.

XX.

nature falls into ruins. What a high idea _
does this preifnt, of the dignity pertaining
to the rational ipirit ! The world may fall
back into chaos; but, superior to matter,
and independent of all the changes of ma-
terial things, the foul continues the fame.
When the heaven pas a away with a great
iOL', ani! the clements melt with fervent heat,
the ioul of man, famiped for immortality,
retains its state unimpaired; and is capable
of fnouriflhing in undecaying youth and vi-
gour. Very different indeed the condition
of human spirits is to be, according as
their different qualities have marked, and
prepared them, for different future man-
sions. But for futurity, they are all def-
tined. Existence, still, is theirs. The ca-
pacity of permanent felicity they all possess;
and if they enjoy it not, it is owing to
themselves.

Here, then, let us behold what is the true

honour and excellence of man. It consists
not in his body; which, beautiful or vigor-
pus as it may now seem, is no other than

afa-

SER M. a fabric of dull, quickly to return to duff
,XX. 'again. It is not derived from any connec-

tion he can form with earthly things; which,
as we have seen, are all doomed to perish.
It consists in that thinking part, which is
susceptible of intelletual improvement and
moral worth; which was formed after the
image of God; which is capable of perpe-
tual progress in drawing nearer to his na-
ture ; and shall partake of the divine eter-
nity, when time and the world shall be no
more. This is all that is refpeaable in man.
By this alone, he is raised above perishable
substances, and allied to those that are ce-
leftial and immortal. This part of our na-
ture, then, let us cultivate with care; and,
on its improvement, reft our felf-eftimation.
If, on the contrary, suffering ourselves to
be wholly immersed in matter, plunged in
the dregs of sensuality, we behave as if we
were only made for the body and its ani-
mal pleasures, how degenerate and base do
we become? Deflined to survive this whole
material system, sent forth to run the race of
immortality and glory, shall we thus abuse

our

our Maker's goodness, degrade our original s E R M.

XX.

honour, and fink ourselves into deserved ,
misery ? t remains, that,

IV. WE contemplate the dissolution of

the world, as the introduaion to a greater
and nobler system, in the government of
God. We, according to his promise, look for
new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwell-
eth righteozflnefs . Temporal things are
now to give place to things eternal. To
this earthly habitation is to lucceed the city
of the living God. The earth had com-
pleted the purpose for which it was created.
It had been employed as a theatre, on which
the human generations were successively to
come forth, and to fulfil their term of trial.
As long as the period of trial continued,
much obscurity was of course to cover the
counsels of Providence. It was appointed,
that all things should appear as coming alike
to all; that the righteous should seem of-
ten negleced by Heaven, and the wicked be

z Peter, iii. 13.

allowed

s E R M. allowed externally to prosper; in order that

xx.

_»- j virtue and piety might undergo a proper

tef ; that it might be flown who were fin-
cere adherents to confciencc, and who were
mere followers of fortune. The day which
terminates the duration of the world, ter-
minates all those seeming disorders. The
time of trial is concluded. The final dif-
crimination of characers is made. When
the righteous go into everlasting happiness,
and the wicked are dismissed into the regions
ofpunifhment, the whole mystery of human
affairs is unravelled; and the conduct of
Providence is justified to man.

Suited to a condition of trial was the tfate

and form of the world, which we now in-
habit. It was not designed to be a mansion
for innocent and happy spirits; but a dwell-
ing for creatures of fallen nature, and of
mixed characters. Hence, those mixtures
of pleasure and pain, of disorder and beau-
ty, with which it abounds. Hence, some
regions of the earth, presenting gay and
pleating scenes; others, exhibiting nothing
but ruggedness and deformity; the face of

nature,

nature, sometimes brightened by a serene SERIM.
atmosphere, and a splendid fun; Sometimes XX
disfigured by jarring elements, and oveicaft
with troubled skies. But far unlike fliall
be the evcrlafsing habitations of the just.
Though how they are formed, or what ob-
jeLcs they contain, is not given us now to
conceive; nor, in all probability, would our
faculties he equal to the conception; the
emblematical descriptions of them in Scrip-
ture are calculated to e:cite high ideas of
magnificence and glory. This one particular
we know with certainty, that thercin. d'zc'cit!
rghteofncfis; that is, complete virtue and
eternal order; and wherever these are found,
the most perfecQ sources are opened of joy
and bliss. This earth was never intended
for more than the outer court, the porch,
through which the righteous were to pass
into the temple and fandtuary of the Divi-
nity. LWhen that which is pctfes is come,
that which is in part fall be done away.

THE inference which follows from what
has been said on this subjeCt, cannot be so

well

SERM. well expressed as in the words of the Apo.

xx.
»-y- f tle, in the verse immediately following the

text; Seeing that all the/e things fJall be
difolved, what manner of perJons ought we
to be in all holy conversation and godliness ?
Ought not the important discoveries which
have been made to us of the designs of the
Almighty, and of the destiny of man, to
exalt our sentiments, and to purify our life
from whai: is vicious or vain ? While we
pursue the business and cares of our present
flation, and partake of the innocent plea-
fures which the world affords, let us main-
tain that dignity of character, which be-
comes immortal beings; let us at with
that circumfpedion, which becomes those
who know they are soon to itand before
the judgment-feat of the son of God: In
a word, let us fludy to be what we would
wish to be found, if to us the day of the
Lord should come.

I KNOW it will occur, that the prospeCt of

that day cannot be expected to have much
influence on the present age. The events

of

of which I have treated, must needs, it will s E R M.

xx.

be said, belong to some future race of men. -_
Many prophecies yet remain to be fulfilled.
Many preparatory events muff take place,
before the world is ripe for final judgment.
-Whether this be the cafe or not, none of
us with certainty know.- But allow me
to remind you, that to each of us, an event
is approaching, and not far distant, which
{hall prove of the fame effet with the
coming of the day of the Lord. The day
of death is, to every individual, the fame
as the day of the dissolution of the world.
The fun may continue to shine; but to
them who are laid in the grave, his light
is finally extinguifled. The world may
remain adive, busy, and noisy; but to
them all is silence. The voice which gives
the mandate, Return again to your djl, is
the fame with the found of the last trumpet.
Death fixes the doom of every one, finally
and irrevocably. This surely is an event
which none of us can remove in our thoughts
to a remote age. To-morrow, to-day, the
fatal mandate may be issued. Watch there-

fore;

SE R M fore; be fober. and vigilant; ye know not at

XX. w v
... what hour the Son of Mlan cometh.

HAVING now treated both of the crea-

tion and dissolution of the world, I cannot
conclude without calling your thoughts to
the magnificent view, which these events
give us, of the kingdom and dominion of
the Almighty. With reverence we con-
template his hand in the signal dispensations
of Providence among men; deciding the
fate of battles; rairing up, or overthroving,
empires; cafPing down the proud, and lift-
ing the low from. the dull. But what are
such occurrences to the power and wisdom,
which He displays in the higher revolu-
tions of the universe; by his word, form.
ing or dissolving worlds; at his pleasure,
transplanting his creatures from one
world to another; that he may carry on
new plans of wisdom and goodness, and
fill all space with the wonders of creation ?
Successive generations of men have arisen
to possess the earth. By turns they have

passed

passed away, and gone into regions un- SERM.

XX.

known. Us he hath raised up, to occupy .-
their room. We too ihall shortly dilappear.
But human exiftcnce never perishes. Life
only changes its form, and is renewed.
Creation is ever filling, but never full.
When the whole intended course of the
generations of men {hall be finiihed, then,
as a shepherd leads his flock from one pas-
ture to another, so the great Creator leads
forth the fouls which he has made, into
new and prepared abodes of life. They go
from this earth to a new earth, and new
heavens; and Rill they remove, only from
one province of the divine dominion to
another. Amidt all those changes of na-
ture, the great Ruler himlelf remains,
without variableness or Jjadow of thrninzg.
To him, there successive revolutions of being
are but as ycJtlcday when it is bas. From
his eternal throne, he beholds worlds rising
and passing away; measures out, to the
creatures who inhabit them, powers and
faculties suited to their fate ; and difiributes

VOL. III. F f among

E R M. among them rewards and puniihments,
xx.
i^-< proportioned to their ations.-What

an atonifhing view do such meditations
afford of the kingdom of God; infinite in
its extent; everlasting in its duration; ex-
hibiting, in every period, the reign of per-
set righteousness and wisdom! Who by
fearchi?/g canfind out God? who can find out
the Almighty to perfection ? Great and mar-
vellous are all thy works, Lord God Al-
mighty! Jl7f and true are all thy ways,
thou King of faints!

F I N I S

# Just Published,

Jufi/ Puliljead,
In Two Volumes, 8vo. Price los. in Boards,

The SEVENTEENTH EDITION of
S E R MON S,

C Y

HUGH BLAIR, D.D.
One of the MINISTERS oi the IIIGII C!UVRCc,

A ;; D
IaOFESSoa of RHETORIC an1l BELLE' LETTRES il t.li

UNIVERSITY of EDINBURGH.
Printed for A. STRAHAN; and T. CADELL in the Strard.

Of wliho may be Lad,

Written by the fame AUTHOR,
LECTURES on RHETORIC and

BELLES LETTRES.
Fourth Edition, 3Vols. Otavo; adorned with a

Head of the Author; Iss. Boards.
