I~~ , 1t -1'1

SE]TIMENTAL BEAUTIES

AND
MORAL DELINEATIONS

FROM THE WRITINGS OF THE
.CELEBRATED DR. BLAIR,

AND OTHER MUCH ADMIRED- AUTHORS ;

SELECTED WITH A VIEW TO

REFINE THE TASTE,
RECTIFY THE JUDGMENT,

ANDn
MOULD THE HEART TO VIRTUE,

--The men whom moral duty guides,

And pure Religion charms, with God himself
Hold converse; grow familiar, day by day,
Vith-his conceptions, aR upon his plan;
And form to his, the reilh of their fouls.

LONDO N:
PRINTED FOR JOHN WALLIS AT YORICK'S IIEAD'

LUDGATE-STREET.

1I782.. ' -

# PREFATORY DEDICATION.

PREFATORY DEDICATION.1

T
L OR D HA WKE,

B RRON TOWTO N.

My Lord,
TN an era when ambition-diffipation

--and hypocritic gentleness of man-

ners are professedly the pursuits of the
noft diltinguithed chara&ers;-when
the external graces are more coveted,
and more assiduously cultivated than the
virtues of the heart :-In an era, my
Lord&when many authors, and some
the most eminent, labour to promote
the firfi-encreafe the fecond-heighten
the polish of the third-and prostitute
their pens, as if determined, to extinguish
the last, by every art of false reasoning,

a by

bv every in-vntion of imagination; it
may appear fngu!ar, that this little vo-
lume, dire&ly militating against these
accompifhments of the great world,
and attempting to supply their places
by qualities built on the more solid
basis of religion and morality, should
ask for patronage from one whom
fate has ordained to move in that
-levated fplere; but, my Lord, even
in courts the most notorious for the
profligacy of manners, virtue has ever
found some votaries.

The corruptions of vice become con-

sequential in proportion as they -te--
come fafhionable;-and folly airumes
the air of ornamental grace, and diffuses
itself almost universally, only whe-nche-
Trised and supported by those who6m the
little world look up to in the superior
.valks of life, and confider as exam-
ples of imitation.

From

From hence we find the advocates

for error perpetually multiplying, and
the clear fountain of true happiness ex-
changed for the turbid stream of unpro-
fitable pleafure.-For it is certain, real
felicity cannot be obtained but by a
firm adherence to virtue, and a deter-
mined conformity to its dicates.-The
glare of vice may, for a while, dazzle
the fight; but it cheers not the foul, or
makes glad the heart from the purity of
its lufire: like an ignis fatuus it leads
us into perplexities-doubts-and mif-
fortune, and there leaves us to struggle
with the calamities it has enticed us to
pursue.

The intent, therefore, of the follow-

ing flieets, is to give arelifh for the religi-
ous and moral duties; that the veil un-
der which vice approaches the young
and inexperienced may be thrown aside;
and its allurements, too often fatally fuc-
cefsful, be exposed and evidently dif-

covered

covered as the harpies of mischief, and
the harbingers of defcrution.

The intent is by gentle means to lead
the negligent and incautious into the
path of re&itude,-implant in their bo-
foms a love of truth,-and from the
richness of the manure and fertility of
the foil make the young plant Ihoot up.
with vigour, and bring forth the plea-
sant fruit of goodness in abundance and
perfection

The intent is, I will not fay to make

every man the builder of his own for-
tune, but I will fay more, the eftablifier
of his own peace ;-a blessing infinitely
more valuable than fame-riches-or
power.-For if he inculcates the maxims
herein contained, he will pass through
the bustle of the busy world, though
surrounded with the snares of villairy,
and machinations of treachery, in safety
and without reproach :--and when he

retires

retires into the sequestered and solitary
scene, he will provide for himself a rich
repafi, where refletion will feed on the
confolirary comfort of felf-approbation,.
and his hours pals away in the sweetness
of content.-He will view the misfor-
tunes of mankind with an eye of pity,
and afford them relief:-He will behold
the pleasures of his neighbours with a
smile of sympathy, and enjoy them as
his..-own :-he will pay. every tribute
due to his. Creator, with gratitude and
joy, and will hold converfewith theGod
of his worship from the incorruptibility
of his heart, and the purity of his a&ions.

From your Lordlhip's well-known

love of the social virtues,-from that phi-
lanthropy with which your bosom is re-
plete,-from the rising progeny of lit-
tle innocents with which Heaven has.
blessed you, it cannot be doubted but
every effort intended to produce these
effies will meet with your countenance

"a 3 and
;s'

and proteaion.-On these confidera-
tions, therefore, I have ventured to de-
dicate this fele&ion to your Lordship,
flattering myself the liberty will not be
offensive, as the motive originated from
an honest and laudable zeal, and the de-
fire of ihewing the gratitude and defe-
rence with which I am,

My Lord,
Your Lordihip's most devoted,

most obedient,
and very humble Servant,

THE EDITOR,
CONTENTS.

# CONTENTS.

CONTENTS.

A.

Page
ACUTENESS in Replication,

Affability, 3

Anxiety, the Vice of Age, 3
Applause, Indiscriminate 5
Arrangement of Ideas, the Method.ofits Utility) 6
Avarice, 8
L)Awe, I

B.

Behaviour,, 3
Bufmefs, Man of 14'

C,

Company, Mixed. i
Compaflion,, - 16
Confidants,. 17
Conscience, 19
Constancy and Firmness. o
Content, a x
Conversation, 2
Courtesy, Artificial: 24
Coquetry, 27
Courtlhip, 30

Danger'

D.

Danger and Security of Man in Youth, 32
Deceit, 33
Devotion, 35
Devotion and Morality separately insufficient, 37
Devotees, Sentimental 38
Discontent, *, . 41

Dissipation, 43
Duties of Old Age, 44

E. 1

Education, Female 46
Efects of Religion, 54
Enthusiasm and Superflition, -56.
Envy and Anger contraited, 56
Events uncertain, 58

F.

Faith, Piety, and acive Virtues 60
False Sentiment, 60
Felicity equally distributed, 64
Felicity, Temporal 65,
Felicity, Spiritual 66
Foresight, want of, refpeaing our spiritual

State, 67
Friendlhip, 69

G.

Gallantry, 74
God with refpe't to Man: 73

Good

Good and Evil, Ignorance of, its Utility, 74
Good Man, 75
Gratifications, loose, their Effc&, 77
-Gratitude, 77
Greatness and Honours, worldly 78

H.

HappintJs how judged of, 79
Happiness not independent, 80
Health, 8
History, 82
Honour, True 82
/Hope, 83
Humanity, 84
Humility in Company, 88
Humour 89

I,

-Indutry, - 89
Intent of Religion, 91
Justice, Love of 92.

K.
Knowledge, Self 93

L.
Levity in Youth and cheerfulness of Age

contrasted, 96

Life, Public, its inconveniencies, 07
Love, 98,
Lover, Artful and Sentimental oo-
Love, Honourable, its effects, a02

Male

M.

Male Coquetry, 103,
MIan of the World, los
Man's real Dependence, - o6
Man, Devout 1o8
Man and Woman, a comparative View of,

how differing in point of Underltanding, ino

Marriage% i11
iMaxims, moral 199
ileeknefs,true, 18
Middle age, 120
Morality and Piety, their Union, .1i

N.
Negle& of Religion, 122

O.

Old Maid, - 123
Old Age, 125

P.

Paflionate Woman, 127
Piety, the Appearance of .I28
Pleasure, true Men of . -
Pleasure, Man of
Pleasure, Sensual and Spiritual 132
Pleasure of old Age, 133
Presumption, 134
Pride, Disappointed 1AIz
Principle and Sentiment contralted, I37
Prosperity, 139

Prudence,

Prudence, its Necelfity in every Stage of

Life 140

R.

Redemption, 141
Reformation 142
Religion, r43
Religious Reflection, 145
Resignation, 146
Ridicule, 147

S.

Self-communion, 148
Sentiments detached z 96
Silence, 150
Sincerity, 152
Sloth, I53
Sobriety of Mind, its Necessity, I54
Solitude, 157
Study of Man, I6o
Study and Reading, 16z

T.
Tameness passive of Spirit and unlimited

Compliance, i68

Temperance, I64
True genuine Sentiment, 166
Temper, Government of 169
-Temper, Good, its Effecs and Utility, 181

U.
Vice, its Effeats 184

Villain,

Villain, 185
Virtue and Prosperity contrasted, 187
Virtue, true 188
Voluptuary, 190

W.

Wit, 191
Woman, 193
World, 195
Worfiip, Religious 196

Y.
Youth, 97

SENTIMENTAL

# ACUTENESS IN REPLICATION.

SENTIMENTAL BEAUTIES

AND
MORAL DELINEATIONS.

ACUTENESS IN REPLICATION.

T .H I S has ever been allowed a happiness

- peculiar to the female sex, particularly on
fubjeEts wherein they are in some degree con-
veifant; for their imaginations generally keep
pace with the narration, that they anticipate its
ends and are ready to deliver their fentirrents on
it as soon as it is finilhed, while some of the
male hearers, 'whose minds were buried in set-
tling the propriety, comparing the circumitances,
and examining the confitencies of what was said,
are obliged to pause and discriminate before they
think of answering.

B' Indeed

Indeed a man of reflection, if he does not

keep an intimate commerce with the world, will
be sometimes so entangled in the intricacies of
intense thought, that he will have the appear-
ance of a confifed and perplexed expression,
while a sprightly woman will extricate herself
with that lively and rajli dexterity which will al-
moit always please, though it is very far from
being always right

It is easier to confound than convince an op-

ponent; the former may be effeted by a turn
that has more happiness than truth in it, but a
young lady's vanity should not be too much ela-
ted with this false applause, which is given, not
to her merit, but her sex: ihe has not per-
haps gained a vitory, though fe may be al-
lowed a triumph; and it should humble her to
reflet, that the tribute is paid, not to her
flrength, but her weakness. It is worth while
to discriminate between the applause, which is
given from the complaisance of others, and that
which is paid to-our owrn merit.

AFFABILITY.

# AFFABILITY.

# ANXIETY, THE VICE OF AGE.

AFFABILITY.
fN order to render ourselves amiable in so-

ciety, we should corret every appearance

of harlhnefs in our behaviour. That courtesy
ihould distinguish our demeanour, which springs, -
not so much from studied politeness, as from a
mild and gentle heart. We ihould follow the
customs of the world in matters indifferent; but
tfop when they become sinful. Our manners
ought' to be simple and natural, and of course
they will be engaging. Affe&ation is certain
deformity-By forming themselves on fantastic
models, and vying with one another in every
reigning folly, the young begin with being ri-
diculous, and end in being vicious and immo-
ral.

ANXIETY, THE VICE OS-AGE.
·GNORANCEofwhatis goodor evilithould:cor-

rea Anxiety about worldly success. -As rah-

ness is the vice of youth, the opposite extremes
of immoderate care is the vice of advancing

B 2 years, :,.

years, but fmce attention is so often fruflrated,
it should never-be allowed to deprive us of tran-
quillity; that degree of uncertainty therefore
ought to render us temperate in pursuit, calm
the perturbation of hope and fear, and cure the
pain of anxiety.

Anxiety is the poison of human life. It is the

parent of many fins, and of more miseries. In a
world where every thing is so doubtful;-where
we may succeed in our with, and be miserable,
-where we may be difappointed,a nd be'blefs'd
in the disappointment; what means a restless
fiir and commotion of the mind? Solicitude

cannot alter the course, or unravel the intricacy
of human events :-Curiosity cannot pierce thro'
the cloud which the Supreme Being hath made
impenetrable to the human eye-Wifdom com-
mands man to retire after he has done all that

was incumbent on him, and to possess his mind
in peace. By going beyond this point, by giving
himself up to immoderate concern about un-
known events, he can do nothing to advance
his success, and does much to ruin his Peace;
-he plants within his breast the thorn which-is/
long to gall him-To the vanity of life he adds

-vexation

# INDISCRIMINATE APPLAUSE.

vexation of spirit, which is wholly of his own.
creation, not of divine appointment.

For the dubious 'goods of this world were

never designed by God to raise such eager at-
tachment. They were given to man for his oc-
cafional refreshment, not for his chief felicity:
by letting an exceflive value upon objects which
were intended only for his secondary regard, he,
changes their nature. Seeking more satisfaction'
from then than they are able to afford, he re-
ceiveslefs than they might give; from a mif-
taken care to secure his happiness, he brings
iupon himself certain misery.-

INDISCRIMINATE APPLAUSE.
IT is the fault of many that they do not always

carefully diftinguilh between running into the

error of detraction, and its opposite extreme of
undeserved praife-This proceeds from the false
idea they entertain, that the diret contrary to
what is wrong, must be right. Thus the dread
of only being suspected of one fault, makes them
actually guilty of another.

B3 The

# METHOD IN THE ARRANGEMENT OF IDEAS.

The desire of avoiding the imputation of envy,

impels them to be inficere; and to eftablifl a
reputation for sweetness of temper and genero-
fity, they asset to speak Sometimes of very in-
different charaCters with the most extravagant
applause. But this habit of exaggeration greatly
weakens their credit, and destroys the weight
of their opinion on other occasions; for people
very soon discover what degree of faith is to be
given both to their judgment and their veracity.
METHOD IN THE ARRANGEMENT OF

IDEAS.
IN delivering our sentiments on particular sub-

jects, there is nothing which is attended

with better effect, and makes us appear to
more advantage than offering our opinions with
clearness and precision; and this only can be
done by arranging them in proper order, so that
they may appear regularly to arise one from
the other: this is ftiled method, and prevents
confusion; hinders us from indulging in the
luxuriance of fancy, running into desultory di-
greffions. and makes us appear superior to our:
subjet.

Where

Where great sprightliness is the natural bent

of the temper, girls ihould endeavour to habi-
tuate themselves to a cuitom of observing,
thinking, and reasoning. It is not necessary
that they should devote themselves to abstruse
speculation, or the itudy of logic; but the who
is accustomed to give a due arrangement to her
thoughts, to reason jufly and pertinently on
common affairs, and judiciously to deduce effeCts
from their causes, will be a better logician than
some of those who claim the name, became
they have Iudlied the art. That species of
.nmowledge, which appears to be the result of
reflection rather than of science, fits peculiarly
well on women.

It is not uncommon to find a lady, who.

though she does not know a rule of syntax,
scarcely ever violate one; and who conftrucs
every sentence he utters with more propriety
than many a learned dunce, who has every rule
of Ariflotle by heart, and who can lace his own
thread-bare discourse with the golden flreds of
Cicero and Virgil.

B-3 AVARICE;

# AVARICE.

AVARICE.
0 NE of the vices of old age, which appears

the mos unaccountable, is that covetous

attachment to worldly interest with which it is
often charged. But this too can naturally be
deduced from the sense of its feebleness and
decay.

In proportion as the vigour both of body and

mind declines, timidity may be expected to'
encreafe. With anxious and fearful eye, the
aged look forward to the evils which threaten
them, and to the changes which may befal.
Hence, are they apt to overvalue riches, as the
infiruments of their defence against these dangers,
and as the moil certain means of focuring them
againlt solitude and difrefpet.

Sut though this cautious frugal ty may be jifti-

fled; fordid avarice can by no means be excused.
They should be charitable and do good. They
fould mix beneficence to their friends, with a
cheerful enjoyment of the comforts which befit

their

their faate. They will then receive the returns
of real refpee and love. Otherways, by their
riches, they procure no more than pretended
demonirations of regard; while their ill-judged
parsimony occasions many secret wilhes for their
death.

Chilled by the hand of time the heart loses

that tender sensibility, with which it -once en-
tered into the concerns and sorrows of others.
However, as in every period of life, humanity
and friendihip contribute to happiness, it is both
our duty and interest to cherish the remains of
the kind affe&tions, not susser them to be blunted
or destroyed by fordid avarice. We Ihould not,
from having suffered much in the course of our
long pilgrimages become callous to the susser-
ings of others. But, remembering we flill are
men, study to keep our heart open to the sense
of human woe.

Prafifed in the ways of men, we are apt to

be suspicious of design and fraud; for the know-
ledge and distrust of mankind too often go toge-
ther. We flould not however susser that wary
caution, which is the fruit of experience, to

B 5 dwindle

# AWE.

dwindle into craft; for amidst the falsehoods of
men, integrity is the best defence, he who con-
tinueth to the end to walk uprightly, ihall con-
tinue to walk surely.

A W E.
A WE is the first sentiment which arises in the

foul at the view of greatness. But in

the heart of a devout man, it is a solemn and
elevating, not a dejected emotion; for he glows,
rather than trembles, in the divine presence.
It is not the superstitious dread of unknown
power, but the homage yielded by the heart to
him, who is at once the greatest and best of
beings.

Omnipotence, viewed alone, would be a for-

midable objet. But, confidered in conjunaion.
with the moral perfedtions of the divine nature, ,
it serves to heighten devotion.

BRHAVIOUR.

# BEHAVIOUR.

B E H A V U R.
0 NE of the chief beauties in a female cha'

rarter is that modest reserve, that re-

tiring delicacy which avoids the public eye, and:
is disconcerted even t the gaze of admiration.
For when a girl.ceafes to blush, the has loft the.
most powerful charm of beauty. That extreme
sensibility, which it indicates, is pecularly en-
gaging.

Silence in company, particularly a large one,

is never mistaken by the judicious and discerning:
for dulness, but bespeaks. a modesty essential in;
the female sex. Dignity of behaviour is necef--
fary at public places, but care must be taken.
not to mistake that for that confident ease, that:
unabaihed countenance which seems. to set. the.
company at defiance.

Women lhould be cautious even in displaying

their good sense. It is often thought assuming.
a Superiority over the ref of the company; but.
their learning fliould be kept. a.profound secret,

especially

especially from men, who generally look with
a jealous and malign eye on a woman of great
parts, and a cultivated understanding.

The great art ofpleafing in conversation con-

fiits in making the company pleased with them-
selves. Detraction Ihould be avoided, especially
amongfi women where their own sex is con-
cerned; it would be more noble for them to
lhew a compaflionate sympathy to the unfortu-
nate, especially to those who are rendered so
by the villainy of men. It is a laudable pride, as
well as secret pleasure, which ought to be in-
dulged in being the friend and refuge of the uni
happy, but without the vanity of liewing it,

Every species of indelicacy in conversation

flould be confidered as ihameful and highly dif-
gusting. A sacred regard Ihould ever be had to
truth, for lying is a mean and despicable vice;
though a lively embellishment of a humourous
story, which is only intended to priioote inno-
cent mirth, cannot be underflood to fall under
that head.

Gentleness of spirit and manners is extremely
engaging; but not that indiscriminate attention,

that.

that unmeaning simper, which smiles on all alike.
For this arises either, from affecation of fofmnefs
or from perfect insipidity.

A fine woman, like other fine things in nature,

has her proper point of view, from which file
may be seen to most advantage. To fix this-
point requires great judgment, and an intimate
knowledge of the human heart. By the present
mode of female manners, the ladies seem to ex-
peRt that they fliall regain their ascendency over
men, by the fulleffdifplay of theirperfonarcharms,
by being always in their eyes at public places, by
converting wih them with the fame unreserved
freedom as theydowith one another; in hort, by
refemblirg men as near as theycan. The folly of
this expectation and conduc will soon be shown.
For the power of a fine woman over the hearts
of men, of men of the finest parts, is even be-
yond what ihe conceives. They are sensible of
the pleasing illufibn, but they cannot, nor do
they with, to defolve it. But if lie is determined
to dispel the charm, it certainly is in her power~
she may soon reduce the angel to a Very ordi-
nary girl.

There

# MAN OF BUSINESS.

There is a native dignity in ingenious mo-

defty to be expe&ed in the gentler sex, which.
is their natural protection from the familiarity
of men. The sentiment that a woman may al-
low all innocent freedoms, provided her virtue
is secure, is both grofy indelicate and dange-
rous, and has proved fatal to many who have
confided too much in this fallacious doctrine.

In fine, to form a complete lady she should

possess the most perfect simplicity of heart and
manners; dignity without pride, affability with-
out meanefs, and simple elegance without assec-
tation.

MAN O0F BUSINESS..
AN uninterrupted intercourse with the world,

oppresses the man of bufrefs and ambition..

The itrongeft spirit mull at length fail and fink
under it. The happiest temper must. be foured by
inceflant returns of the opposition,. the incon-
flancy and treachery of men. For he who lives
always in the bustle of the world, lives in a
perpetual warfare: here, an enemy encounters;,

there,

# MIXED COMPANY.

there, a rival supplants him. The ingratiude
of a'friend flings him this hour, and the pride
of a superior, wounds him the next. In vain he
flies for relief to trifling amusements. Thefl
may afford a temporary opiate to cure; but
they communicate no itrength to the mind.
On the contrary, they leave it more soft and de-
fenceless, when moleitations and injuries renew
the attack.

MIXED COMPANY.
THE mind of each sex has fame natural kind

of bias- which conffitutes a diftintion of

character, and the happiness of both depends,
in a great measure, on the preservation and ob-
fervance of this. distinction. For where would
be the superior pleasure and fatisfa&ion result-
ing from mixed conversation, -if this difference
was aboliihed ?

If the qualities of both were invariably and

exaftly the fame, no benefit or entertainment
would arise from the tedious and insipid unifor-
mity of such an iritercourfe; whereas confider-
able are the advantages reaped from a feled so-
ciety of both sexes,.

The

# COMPASSION.

The rough angles and afperities of male man-

ners are imperceptibly filed and gradually worn
smooth, by the polifting of female conversation,
and the refining of female taste: while the ideas
of women acquire strength and solidity by their
-associating with sensible, intelligent, and judi-
cious men,

C O I P ASSIO N.
COMPASSION is an emotion of which ws

ought never-to be alhamed. Graceful,parti-

cularly in youth, is the fear of fympathy,.and the
heart that melts at the tale of woe. We should

not permit ease and indulgence to contrast our
affections, and wrap us up in feflih .enjoyment.
But we should accustom ourselves to think of the
ditreffes of human life,. of the solitary cottage,
the dying parent, and the weeping orphan.
Nor ought we ever to sport with pain and dif-
trefs in any of our amusements; nor treat event
the meanest inset with wanton cruelty.

It has been objeced, and it is to be feared

with some reason, that female conversation is
too frequcntly tintured with a censorious spirit,

and-

# CONFIDANTS.

and that ladies are seldom apt to discover much
tenderness for the errors of a fallen filter. No
arguments can justify, no pleas extenuate it.

To insult over the miseries of an unhappy

creature is inhuman, not to compaflionate them is
unchristian. The worthy part of the sex always
express themselves humanely on the failings of
others, in proportion to their own undeviating
goodness, and bythat gentle virtue are prompted
to alleviate the difreffes of the unfortunate and
wretched; it prevents us from retaliating injuries;
and restrains our revere judgments and angry
paflions.

CONFIDANTS.
AMONGST women these appear to be necef-

fary associates without whom few pass

through life. If, therefore, they must have a
fiiend of this fort to pour out their heart to,
they lhould be sure of their honour and secrecy.
She lhould not be a married woman, especially
if she lives happily with her husband.

There are certain unguarded moments, in
which such a woman, though the best and

worthiest

worthieRt of her sex, may let hints escape, which,
At other times, or to any other person than her
huSband, she would be incapable of; nor will a
husband in this cafe feel hinafelf under the fame
obligation of secrecy and honour, as if confi-
dence had originally been put in hinifelf, efpe-
cially on fubjeas which the world is apt to treat
lightly.

Making confidants of servants should be care-

fully avoided. Dignity, not properly under-
ftood,very readily degenerates into pride, whicSi
enters into no friendihips, because it cannot bear
an equal, and is so fond of flattery as to grasp aS
it even from servants and dependents.

The most intimate confidants, therefore, of

proud people, are valets-de-chambres, and wait-
ing women. The utmost humanity mhould be
lhewn to servants; their situation made to them
as comfortable as possible; but if made confi-
dants, we spoil them and debase ourselves.

CONSCIENCE

# CONSCIENCE.

CONSCIENCE,
DURING the gay and active periods of life,

finners elude in mome measure its force.

Carried round in the whirlof affairs andpleafures;
intent on contrivance, eager in pursuit, amused
by hope, or elated by enjoyment, they are ihel-
tered by that crsud of trifles which surrounds
them from serious thought. But conscience is
too great a power to remain always suppressed.

In the dark and solitary hour of distress, the

recollection of the past becomes dreadful. It ex-
hibits a life thrown away in vanities and follies,
or consumed in flagitiousness and fin: crimes
rife in their native deformity. Howmiferable the
tate of that man condemned to endure at once
the pangs of guilt, and the vexations of cala-
mity !

But a clear conscience enjoys, in the worit

conjunction of human life, a peace, a dignity,
an elevation of mind peculiar to virtu, not'a
presumptuous boast of innocence, The better a

roa.

# CONSTANCY AND FIRMNESS OF ACTION.

man is, he will be more humble and sensible in
his failings. Of his piety and-virtue, he reaps
the fruits in the season of adversity: the im-
provement he makes; the temperate spirit with
which he enjoys those advantages; the bene-
ficent actions which he performed, and the good
example which he set to others, remain behind.

By the memory of these, he enjoys his pro-

fperity a second time in refleftion. His mind
has no load: futurity no terrors. For reflection
cheers the ionely house of poverty, and attends
the conscientious sufferer into prison and exile.

CONSTANCY AND FIRMNESS OF ACTION.
THE great motives which produce these, must

be of a palpable and itriking kind. A

divine legislator uttering his voice from hea-
ven ;-an omniscient witness beholding us in all
our retreats;-an Almighty governor firetching
forth his arm to punish or reward, disclosing
the secrets of the invisible wvorld, informing us
of perpetual reft prepared hereafter for the righ-

teous,

# CONTENT.

teous, and of indignation and wrath awaiting
the wicked.

These considerations overawe the world, sup-

port integrity, and check guilt; they add to
virtue that solemnity which ihould ever charac-
terife it.-to the admonitions of conscience they
give the authority of law.

CONTENT.
DURING the whole progress of the human

course and events, the principal materials of

our comforts, or uneasiness, lie within ourselves.
Every age will prove burdensome to those
who have no fund of happiness in their own
breasts. Could they be preserved fromrt-allinfir-
mities of frame could they have bellowed upon
them, if it were possible, perpetuiayouth; iill
they would Le refletlsand miferabte, through the
influence of il-gerned paffions-Itl s not fur-
prizing that such people are peevish, and queru-
lous when Tld; Unjustly they impute to their
.time of life, that miferr with which their vices
and follies embitter every age.

Whereasy

# CONVERSATION.

Whereas, to good men, no period of life is

insupportable, because they draw their chief
happiness from sources which are independent of
age or time; Wisdom, Piety, and Virtue grow
not old with our bodies; they susser no decay
from length of days; to them belongs only un-
alterable and unfading youth.

CONVERSATION.
JN conversing with a fellow-creature on earth,

it is not with his body we converse, though

it is his body only which we fee. From his
words and ations we conceive his mind; with
his mind, though invisible, we hold correspond-
ence, and direc towards this spiritual essence
our affection and regard.

It has been laid down as a rule, that in con-

verfation, women ihould carefully conceal any
knowledge or learning they happen to poflefs;
but there seems neither to be necessity or pro-
priety in this advice: let discretion and modefly,
without which all knowledge is little wczth, go-
vern a lady's underifanding, she will never make

an

an ostentatious parade of it, because Jhe will ra-
ther be intent on acquiring more) than on dif-
playing what ihe has.

For why ihould Ihe exhibit her skill in music,

dancing, singing, taste in dress, those orna-
mental graces, and heracquaintancewiththe most
fashionable arts and amusements; while her piety
is to be.anxioufly concealed, and her knowledge
affeetedly disavowed, left the former.fhould draw
on her the appellation of an enthusiast, or the
latter that of a pedant.

It would, without doubt, be, to the last de-

gree, presumptuous and absurd for a young wo-
man. to pretend to give the Ton to the-com-
pany; to interrupt the pleasure of othets, and
her own opportunity of improvement, by talk-
ing when she ought to liften;-or to introduce
subjects out of the common road, in order to
ihew her own wit, or expose the want of it in
others; but were the sex to be totally silent
when any topic of literature happens to be dif-
cuffed in their pretence, conversation would lose
much of its vivacity, and society would be rob-
bed of 6ie 'of its most interesting charms.

ARTIFICIAL

# ARTIFICIAL COURTESY.

ARTIFICIAL COURTESY.
T HI S is that studied smoothness of manners,

which is learned in the school of the world.

Such accomplishments, the most frivolous may
posTers. Too often they are employed by the
artful, as a snare; too often affeced by the
hard and unfeeling, as a cover to the balenefs
of their minds.

The imitation of virtue has been reduced into

art, and, in the commerce of life, the first study
of all who would either gain the esteem, or wil
the hearts of others, is to learn the speech, and
to adopt the manners of candour, gentleness,
and humanity; but nothing except what flows
from the heart, can render even external man-
ners truly and permanently pleating; for no as-
fumed behaviour can at all times hide the real
character.

A low voice and a soft address are the com-

mon indications of a well bred woman, and
ihould seem to be the natural effect of a meek,

and

and quiet spirit, but they are only the outward
and visible signs of it; for 'they are no more
meekness itself, than a red coat is courage, or a
black one devotion. To regulate the features,
while the foul is in tumult, or to command the
voice while the paflions are without refiraint,
is as idle as throwing odours into a steam whtn
the source is polluted.

It is not difficult to diftinguill the truefromthe

artificial meekness. The former is universal and

habitual; the latter, localand temporary; and this
we maybe assured of, that if we are not as gentle
to our servants, as to our. visitors, the spirit of
gentleness is not in us.

Must we not be shocked and disappointed

when we behold a well-bred young lady soft and
- engaging as the doves of Venus, displaying a

'thousand graces and attractions to win the
hearts of a large-company, and the inflant they
are gone,. to fee her look mad as the Pythian
maid, and all the frightened graces driven from
her furious countenance, only because her gown
was brought home a quarter of an hour later
t4an /he expeced, or her ribband sent half a
Ihade lighter or darker than she ordered.

C Amengif

Amongst women of breeding, the exterior of

gertlenefs is io uniformly assumed, and the whole
manner is so perfectly level and uni, that it is next
to impofELle for a stranger to know any thing
of their true dispositions by conversing with
them; and even the very features are so exactly
regulated, that phyfionomy, which may some-
times be trusted among the vulgar, is with the
polite, a most lying science. That gentleness is
ever liable to be fufpe&ted for tle counterfeited,
v-wi ch i. so cxceffive as to deprive people of the
pr2-er use of speech and motion, or which, as
Hamlet ifas, " makes them lisp and amble, and
n:ic'k-narc God's creatures."

-Amorn tle various artifices es faclitious meek-

neifs, one of tee most frequent arnd the most plau-
i:l, is that of .^.eejting to be alvways equally de-
i:sl:ted v.ith all persons and ch;aradcers. The so-
c:'et- oft'hfe lanciid beings is ilthol!t confidence,
tl:-2i r-:rendfuip ;ithout attaclirnt, andtheirlove
xilout ai:ec'ion, or even preference. This
iriipid mode of conduct may be safe, but is en-
do:.-ed with neither tafe, sense, or principle.

CCQiETRY.

# COQUETRY.

C 0 QJ UE TR Y.
;THERE is no charater more truly difgulting

then that of a coquette; it originates from

folly, is supported by vanity, and terminates in
contempt. It is the certain mark of a narrow
mind, the illiberal slave of fulsome adulation, and
hias allits enjoyments encreafed byfelf-adoration.

Yet there is a cafe where a woman may

coquet justifiably to the utmost verge which her
£onfcience will allow. It is where a gentleman
purposes, and declines to make his addresses, till
such time as he thinks himself perfectly sure of
her content. This at bottom is intended to force

*a woman to give up the undoubted privilege of
her sex, the privilege of refuting; it is intended
to force her to explain herself, in effect, before
the gentleman deigns to do it, and, by this
means, to oblige her to violate the modelly and
-delicacy of her sex, and to invert the clear it
order of nature.

All this sacrifice is propofed-to be made. merely
to gratify a mot despicable vanity in a ma-,

C 2 w o

who would degrade the very woman, whom he
wifies to make his wife.

But it mhould be diffinguifhed whether from

this motive he delays to speak explicitly, or
from a diffidence infeperable from true attach-
ment. In the one cafe he can scarce be used too
ill; in the other, he-ought to be treated with
the greatet kindness.

Women endeavour to justify themselves to

the world, and to their own consciences by a
variety of excuses, when they act otherwise.
Sometimes they plead ignorance, or at least un-
certainty of the gentleman's real sentiments.
Sometimes they plead the decorum of their sex,
vhich enjoins an equal behaviour to all men,
and forbids them to confider any man as a lover,
till he has directly told them so. But they are
.not entitled to plead the obligation of their
virtues in opposition to the superior ones of
gratitude, jufiH e, and humanity.

The man is entitled to all these, who prefers

one woman to the reft of her sex, and' perhaps
whose greatest weakness is this very preference.
The truth of the matter is vanity and the love

6s

of admiration is so prevailing a passion amongst
the sex, that they can be fond of the love, when
they are indifferent to, or, even, when they deft
pife the lover.

But the. deepest,, and' most artful coquettry is

employed by women of superior tate and sense,
to engage and fix the heart of a man whom the
world, and whom they themselves esteem, al-
though they are determined never to marry
him. His conversation amuses them, and his at-
tachment is the highest gratification to their
vanity; nay, they can sometimes be gratified
with the utter ruin of his fortune, fame, and
happiness.

How odious must characters of this kind ap-

pear, especially when contracted with those
who have principles, have generosity and dignity
of foul, that elevates them above the worthless
vanity recited !

Such a woman may always convert a lover,

if ihe cannot give him-her affections, into awarm
and fleady friend, provided he is a man of
sense, resolution and candour. If he explains
herself to him with a generous openefs and free,

C 3 ' dom

# COURTSHIP.

dom, he must feel the stroke as a man; but he'
will likewise bear it as a man: what he suffers
he will susser in silence.

Every fentiment'of esteem wilf remain; but

love, though it requires very little food, and is
easily surfeited with too much, yet it requires
some. He will view her in the light of a mar-
ried woman; and though paiion fiubfides, yet a
man of a candid and generous heart, always re-
tains a tenderness for a woman, he has once
loved, and who has used him well, beyond what
he feels for any other of her sex.

COURTSHIP.

F the attachment of a lover is agreeable to the
object of his wilhes, a woman should permit

nature, good-fenfe and delicacy to diret her.
If ihe loves him {he flould not discover to him
the full extent of her love; no, not although Ihe
marries him. That sufficiently Ihews her pre-
ference, which is all he is entitled to know. If
he has delicacy he will ask for no fironger proof

of

of her affeetion, for her fake: if he has sense, he
will not aik it for his own.

Violent love cannot subsist, at least cannot be

expreiled, for any time together on both fides;
otherwise the certain consequence,. however
concealed, is satiety and disgust: nature in this
cafe has laid the reserve on woman.

If she fees evident proofs of a gentleman's

attachment, and is determined to shut her heart
against him, The ihould treat him honourably and
humanely. She should not let him linger in a
miserable fufpence, but be anxious to let him'
know her sentiments with regard to him; and
this may be done by a variety of ways,--from a
certain species of easy familiarity in behaviour
he may be satisfied, if he has any discernment,:
he has nothing to hope for,-from follicitoiuly
avoiding hiscpmpany,.-from the interpofitionof
a common friend to explain matters to him.
But, if thefemethods areineligible, opportunities
of letting him explain himself, hlould not be
avoided; it is acting barbarously and unjufily.'
If he forces an explanation the answer ifould
be polite, resolute, and decisiVe,

C 4 MAN'S

# MAN'S DANGER AND SECURITY IN YOUTH.

MAN'S DANGER AND SECURITY IN YOUTH,

IN that period of life too often characterized

by forward presumption and headlong pur-

fuir, self conceit is the great source of those dan-
gers to which men are exposed ; and it is pecu-
liarly unfortunate, that the age which fiands
most in need of the counsel of the wife, should
be the moit prone to contemn it. Confident in
the opinions which they adopt, and in the mea-
fures which they pursue, the bliss which youth
aim at, is, in their opinion, fully- apparent.
It is not the danger of mistake, but the
fiilure offuccefs, which they dread. Activity to
seize, not sagacity to discern, is the only requisite
which they value.

The whole state of nature'is now become a.

scene of delusion to the sensual mind. Hardly
any thing is what it appears to be: 2nd what
flatters most is always farthest from reality,
There are voices which sing around us, but.
whose itrains allure to ruin,. There is a banquet
spread where poison is in every dih. There is

a couch

# DECEIT.

acouch which invites us to repose, but to nfum-
ber upon it is death. Sobriety ihould temper
unwary ardour; Modefy check ralh prefump-
tion; Wisdom be the offsping of refleetion now,
rather than the bitter fruit of experience here-
after.

D E C E IT.
THAT darkness of charater, where we can

fee no heart,-thofe foldings of art, through

which no native affection is allowed to penetrate,
present an object unamiable in every season of
life, but particularly odious in youth. If at an
age when the heart is warm, when the emo-
tions are itrong, and when nature is expeted to
1hew itself free and open, we can already smile
and deceive, what is to be cxpected, when we
Ihall be longer hackneyed in the ways of men,
when interest shall have completed the obdura-
tion of our hearts, and experience Ihall have im-
proved us in all the arts of guile ?

Dissimulation in youth is the forerunner of
perfidy in old age: its fi'rt appearance is the

C 5 fatal

fatal omen of growing depravity and future
shame. It.degrades parts and learning, obfeures
the lustre of every accompliihment, and finks
us into contempt with God and man. The path
of falflood is a perplexing maze. After the
firfi departure from sincerity, it is not in our
power to flop. One artifice unavoidably leads
on to another ; till, as the intricacy of the laby-
rinth increases, we are left entangled in our own
lnare.

Deceit discovers a little mind, which flops at

telnporary expedients, without rising to compre-
henfive views of conduc'. It betrays a dastardly
spirit. It is the resource of one wsho wants cou-
rage to avow his designs, or to reft upon him-
ielf. To set out in the world with-no other

principle than a crafty attention to interest, be-
tokens one who is defined for creeping through
the inferior walks of life. He may be fortunate,
le cannot be happy; the eye of a good man.
will weep at his error: he cannot tafle the
sweets of confidential friend'hip, and his evening
of life will be embittered by universal contempt.

DEVOTION,

# DEVOTION.

D EVOTION.

S the lively exercise of those affections, which

we owe to the supreme Being. It compre-

hends several emotions of the heart which ter-

minate in the fame object. The chief of them
are veneration, gratitude, desire, and lefig-
nation.

It implies firfl profound veneration for God,

that is an affection compounded of awe and.
love ;-secondly, sincere gratitude for all his:
benefits: this is a warmer emotion than vene-

ration ; veneration looks up to the Deity
as he is himself; gratitude regards what he
is towards us;-thirdly, the desire of the foul;
after the favour of the supreme Being, as its-
chief good and final refit ;-and fourthly, it ad-.
vances to an entire resignation of the foul to,'
God. It is the consummation of trust and hope.

Itbanifles anxious cares and murmuring.thouglhts.
It reconciles us to every appointment of divine
providence ; and resolves every wifl into the
desire of pleasing him, whom our hearts adore.

It

It is one of the noblest ats of which the hu-

man mind is capable. It is a powerful principle
which penetrates the foul, which purifies the as-
sections from debating attachments; and, by
a fixed and steady regard to God, subdues every
sinful paifion, and forms thelnclinations to piety
and viruie.

It exprefies the spirit which muff animate all

religious duties. It stands opposed not merely
to downright vice; but to a heart which is
cold and insensible to sacred things, and obeys
the divine commands without ardour, love and
joy. It is rational and wel!-founded. It is of the
highest importance to every other part of reli-
gion and virtue; and, in fine, is the moss con-
ducive to our happines. It diffuses an aufpici-
ous influence over the whole of virtue. It is
often found a powerful infirument in humanizing
the manners of men, and taming their unruly
paflions. It smooths what is rough, and softens
what is fierce in our nature. It is the greai
purifier of the. affections. It inspires contempt
of the low gratifications belonging to animal
life. It promotes a humble and cheerful con-
tentment with our lot, and subdues the eager
desire of riches and of power, which has filled

this

# MORALITY AND DEVOTION SEPERATELY INSUFFICIENT.

this unhappy world with crimes and'mifery.
The spirit of devotion is the gift of God. From,
his inspiration it proceeds; towards him it
tends; and in his presence hereafter, it liall
attain its full perfection.
MORALITY AND DEVOTION SEPERATE;

LY INSUFFICIENT.
-THE man of mere morality is a stranger to all

the delicate and refined pleasures of devo-

tion. In works of beneficence and mercy he
may enjoy fatisfaaion; but it will be destitute
of that glow of affection, which enlivens the:
feelings of one, who lifts his heart at the fame
time to the Father of the universe, and confiders
himself as imitating God.

The man again who refts solely on devotion,

if that devotion opens not his heart to humanity,
not only remains a stranger to the pleasures of
beneficence, but must often undergo the pain
arising from bad paflions.

MODERN

# MODERN SENTIMENTAL DEVOTEES.

MODERN SENTIMENTAL DEVOTEES..

F we trace the hiRorv of se-ntiment from its

liegiraing, we I{all find that girls, for a-

roongft this cias- it runs to its greatel excess,
or this call have had their heads originally turned
by pernicious reading, and the inianity confirmed
by imprudert friend'hips. They never fail to
ie'let beloved confidants of their own turn and
humour, thougih, if they can help it, not so
andfomi e as themnfelves. Violent iftimacies en-

file, or an i;:inate ulion if fouls immediately
tau-es plce.

They represent romantic love as the great

irportant business of human life, and defcrile
all the ctl er corcerns of it as too low and paltry
to merir the attention of such elevated beings,
and fit only to employ the daughters of the
ploddinrg vulgar.

Another favouri:e topic, is the groveling

f!irit and fordid temper of their parents, who
vvill be sure to find no quarter at the hands of

their

their daughters, lhould they prefuine to dired
theit course of reading, interfere in their choice
of friends, or interrupt their very important
correspondence. For a prohibited correfpon-
dence, is one of the great incidents of fentimen-
tal life, and a letter clandeflinely received, the
supreme felicity of a sentimental lady. Hence,
such prohibition with them carries a certain air
of tyranny and. persecution iwhich is -very de-
lig htfil.

They confider the aged and experienced,

who endeavour to defiroy this ignis fatuus, as
,wretches utterly ignorant of.the sublime plea-
fures of a delicate and exalted palion, as tyrants
whose authority is to be condemned, and as
lpies whole vigilance is to be eluded.. The pru-
dence of these worthy friends they term fufpi-
cion, and their experience dotage.

But young people never thew their folly and

ignorance more conspicuously, than by this over-
confidence in their own judgment, and this
haughty disdain of the opinion of those who
have known more days. Youth has a quickness
of apprehension, which -it is very apt to mif-
take for an acuteness of penetration. But youth,

like

like cunning, though very conceited, is very
short righted; and never more so, than when
it disregards the inftrutions of the wife, and
the admonitions of the aged.

These daughters of vanity imagile that none

bu:t ie young and beautiful have any right to
the pieas;res of society, or even to the common
benefits and blefinrgs of life.-Ladies of this
turn aifo afest the most lofty disregard for use-
ful qualities and domeflic virtues; they princi-
pally value themselves on the enlargement of
their notions, and their liberal way of thinking.
This superiority of foul chiefly manifests itself
in the contempt of those minute delicacies, and
little decorums, which, trifling as they may be
fhought, tend at once to dignify the characer,
restrain the levity of the younger part of the
sex, and to eradicate this fort of sentiment,
which is only a weed of idleness; for they,
who are conflantly and usefully employed, have
neither leisure nor propensity to cultivate this
deightful folly.

DISCONTENT.

# DISCONTENT.

DISCONTENT.

N the humble and seemingly quiet ihade of
private life, as well as among the great and

mighty, discontent broods over its imaginary
sorrows; preys upon the citizen no less than the
courtier, and often nouriihes paflions equally ma-
lignant in the cottage and in the palace. Hav-
ing once seized the mind, it spreads its own
gloom over every surrounding objet ; it every
where searches out materials for itlelf; and
in no direction more frequently employs its un-
happy activity, than in creating divisions among
mankind, and in magnifying flight provocations:
into mortal injuries..

I. In situations where much comfort might be

enjoyed, this man's superiority and that man's
neglect, ur jealousy of a friend, our hatred of a
rival, an imagined affront, or a mistaken point.
of honour, allow us no repose. Hence dif-
cord in families, animofities among friends, and
wars among nations Look around us i every
where we find a busy multitude. Restless and

uneasy,

uneasy in their present situation, they are incef-
fantly employed in accomplihing a change of it;
and as soon as their wifll is fulfilled, we discern
by their behaviour, that they are as dissatisfied as
they were before. Where they expected to
have found a paradise, they find a desert.

The man of bufines pines for leisure; the lei-

sure for which he had longed proves an irksome
gloom, and through .want of employment, he

nlanuiies, sickens, and dies.

The man of retirement fancies no state so

happy as that of acaive life ; but he has not en-
gaged long in the tumults and conteits of the
world, until he finds cause to look back with re-
gret on the calm hours of his former privacy and
retreat.

Beauty, vit, eloquence, and fame, are

eagerly desired by persons in every rank of life.
They are the parents fondest wifl for his child;
the ambition of the young, and the admiration
of the old; and yet in what numberless instances
have they proved, to those who possessed them,
no other than ihiing snares, feducions to vice,
instigations to folly, and, in the end, sources
of nifery.

DISSIPATION,

# DISSIPATION.

DIS SI P A T I 0 N.
THE love of diflipation is allowed to be the

reigning evil of the present day. It is an

evil which many content themselves with.regret-
; ting, without seeking to redress..

It is too, often cultivated' as the readiest relief

-to domestic infelicity; it draws the mind awhile
from the subjet of its distress, and ftifers it to
enjoy an interval of ease; but this resource is as
treacherous as it is momentary, and plunges the
mind into more real distress than that from which
it promiied to relieve it..

Every one seems convinced that the evil fio

-much complained of does really exist somewhere,
though all are inwardly persuaded that it is not
with themselves. All desire a general reforma-
tion, but few willliften to proposals of particular
amendment..

Dissipation not only indisposes its votaries, by
relaxing the tone of mind, and rendering it in-

capable

# DUTY OF OLD AGE.

capab!e of application, study or virtue, to every
thing useful and excellent, but disqualifies them
for the enjoyment of pleasure itself. It softens.
the foul so much, that the most superficial em-
ployment becomes a labour, and the slightest in-
convenience an agony. The roses of pleasure
seldom lait long enough to adorn the brow of -
.him who plucks them; for they are the only
roses which do not retain their sweetness after
they hav-e ioft their beauty..

DU T-Y OF OLD. AGE..
A MATERIAL part of the duty of the aged

consists in studying to be useful to the race

who are to succeed them. Here opens to them
extensive field, in which they may so employ
themselves as considerably to advance the hap-
piness of mankind. To them it belongs. to.
impart to the young the fruit of their long expe-
rience; to initruc them in the proper conduct,
and to warn them of the various dangers of
life , by wife counsel to temper their precipi.
rate ardour, and both by precept and example
to form them to piety and virtue.

It

It never appears with greater dignity, than

when tempered with mildness and enlivened
with good-humour; it acts as a guide and a
patron of youth.

Religion, displayed in such a character, strikes

the beholders, as at once amiable and venerable.
They revere its Sower, when they fee it adding
So much grace to the decays of nature, and ihed-
*ding so pleafmg a lustre over the evening of life.
The young with to tread in the fame steps, and
to arrive at the close of their days with equal
honour.

They liften with attention to counsels which

are mingled with.tendernefs, and rendered re.
jpeótable by grey hairs.

Aged wisdom, when joined witlh acknow,

Aedged virtue, exerts an authority over the hu-
,man mind, greater even than that which arises
fromn power and station. It can check the molt
rforward'; abafl the most profligate, and firike
with :awe thie most giddy and unthinking.

FEMALE

# FEMALE EDUCATION.

YFE IALE EDU CATION.
NOTWITHSTANDING the' great and real

improvements which have been .made hi the

affair of female education, and the more en-
larged and generous views- of it, which prevail
in the present day, there is still a material defet,
vwhich is not in general the object ,f attentidr
to remove. The -defect seems to consist in this,
that too little regard is paid to the dispositions
of the mind, that the indications of the temper
are not properly cherished, nor the affections of
the heart sufficiently regulated.

The exterior fliould be made a considerable

object of attention, but not the principal,
rot the only one. The graces ihould be in-
-dlriounvy cultivated, but they should not be'
cultivated at the expense of the virtues. The
arms, the head, the whole person ihould be
carefully poliflied, but the heart flould not be
the only portion of the human anatomy, which
lhould be totally overlooked.

Music;

:Music, dancing, and languages gratify those
who teach them, by perceptible and almost im-
mediate effects; and every observer can, in some
measure, judge of the progress. The effets of
there accomplilhments address themselves to the
senses; and there are more who can hear and
See, than there are who can judge and reflect.

Personal perfecion is not only more obvious,

it is also more rapid; and even in very accom-
plifhed charaaers, elegance usually precedes
principle.

But the heart, that natural feat of evil pro-

-penfities, that little troublesome empire of- the
passions; is led to what is right by flow mo-
tions and imperceptible degrees. It muff be ad-
monished by reproof, and allured by kindness.
Its livelicfr advances are frequently impeded' by
the obltinacy of prejudice, and its brightest pro-
.mises often c'bfcured by the tempeRs of paflio.L
It is flonw in its acquisition of -rtue,' and'rel
ucarint in its approaches to piety,.

The labours of a good and wife mother, whlo

*is anxious for her daughter's moRn important'in-
.terests, will seem to ye at variance with those

of

of her infmruóors. Humility and piety form the
solid and durable basis on which fie wishes to
raise the fuperftruaure of the accomnplifhments,

'hile the accomplilhments themselves are fre.

quently of that unsteady nature, that if the foun-
dation is r.ot ecured, in proportion as the build-
ing is enlarged, it will be overloaded and de-
stroyed by those very ornaments, which were
intended to embelliih what they have contri-
buted to ruin.

The more ofienfible qualifications'.-ihould be

carefully regulated, or they will be in danger of
putting to flight the modest train of retreating
-virtues, which cannot safely fubift before the
told eye of public observation, nor bear the
bolder tongue of impudent and audacious flattery.

Merely ornamental accomplithments will but

indifferently qualify a woman to perform the
-Iti es of life, though it is highly proper the ihould
pofiefsthem, inorder to furnifhtheamufements of
-it. Yet, thoughthe well-bred woman ihould learn
to dance, ing, recite, and draw; the end ofagood
education, is not that they may become fingers,
dancers, players or painters; its real obje& is to
mzne them good daughters, good wives good

miflrefles,

iniftreffes, good members of society, and goodc
chriitians.

To an injudicious and superficial eye, the best

educated girl may make the least brilliant figure,
as she will probably have less flippancy in her
manner, and less repartee in her expreflion;
and her acquirements will be rather enamelled
than embossed. But her merit will be known by
all who come near enough to discern, and have
taste enough to diflinguiih.

A truly good and well educated young -lady

will be found in the bosom of retirement, in
the practice of every domeffic virtue, in the
performance of every amiable accomplilimentex-
erted in the slade, to enliven retirement,-to
heighten the endearing pleasures of social inter-
courfe,-anid to embellifhthe narrow, but charm-
ing circle of family delights; and to this amiable
purpose dedicating her more elegant.accompliih-
ments, instead of exhibiting them to attract ad-
Wniration, or depress inferiority.

One great art of education consists in not sus-

-fering the feelings to become too acute by un-
necefTary awakening, nor too obtuse by the want
of exertion. The former renders them the source

D of

of calamity, and totally ruins the temper; while
the latter blunts and debases them, and produces
a dull, cold, and selfish spirit. The precious fen-
fibility of an open temper; the amiable glow of
an ingenuous foul; the bright flame of a noble
and generous spirit, are of higher worth than all
the documents of learning, of dearer price than
all the advantages, which can be derived from
the most refined and artificial mode of education,

Seniiblity, delicacy and an ingenuous temper,
re of more efleem than language or music, for
they are the language of the heart, and the rmfic
of he according pafflons. Every appearance of
amiable simplicity, or of honefl flame, will be
dear to sensible hearts; they should carefully
cheri, cvrry such indication in a young female;
for they will perceive that it is this temper,
w ifely c-.tivared, which will one day make her
enamoured of the !ovelinefs of virtue, and the
beauty of hoiinefs; from which fie will acquire
a tate for the dochrines of religion, and a spirit
to performn the duties of it.

Prudence is not natu-ai to children; however,
th¥.-- '-ln {ur:'.t.te art in its _-'-._ But there is

':: -. -

. .:.. - i: .
~ : -: v-- a errors of

nature,

nature, where they are undisguised, than in the
affeaation of virtue itself, where the reality is
wanting. The precise and premature wisdom,
which some girls have cunning enough to assume,
is of a more dangerous tendency than any of
their natural failings can be, as it effetually
covers those secret bad dispositions, which, if they
displayed themuelves, might be recified. The
hypocrisy of afluming virtues which are not in-
herent in the heart, prevents the growth and
disclosure of those real ones, which it is "he
great end of education to cultivate.

This cunning, which of all the different difpo-

fitions girls discover, is most to be dreaded, is
encreafed by nothing so much a; fear. The ii-
discreet transports of rage, which. mnany betray
-on everyflight occasion; and the little diitinctions
they make between venial errors and premedi-
tated crimes; naturally dispose a. child to con-
ceal, what fne does not however care to suppress;
anger in one, will not remedy the faults of
another.

Notwithitanding girls should not be trea 1

with unkindness, nor the firit openings of ihe
paffons blighted by cold severity; yet th.y

D z .ild

should be accustomed very early in life to a cer-
tain degree of reitraint. The natural cast of
chara&er, and the moral diftinftions of the sexes
should not be disregarded, even in childhood.

That bold, independent, enterprizing spirit,

which is so much admired in boys, should not,
when it happens to discover itself in the other
{ex, be encouraged, but fuppreled. Girls should
be taught to give up their opinions betimes,
and not pertinaciously carry on a dispute, even
if they know themselves to be in the right.
Yet t-ey should not be robbed of the liberty of
private judgment, but by no means encouraged
to contract a contentious or contradictory turn.
It is of the greatest importance to their future
happiness, that they /hould acquire a submissive
temper, and a forbearing spirit: for it is a les-
son the world will not fail to make them fre-

quently pratlife, when they come abroad into
it, and they will not prac'ife it the worse for
having learnt it the sooner.

There is more piety, as well as more sense,

in labouring to improve the talents which chil-
dren actually have, than in lamenting that they
donot possess supernatural endowments or angelic

perfecions

perfectins. A girl who has docility, will fel-
dom be found to want underllanding enough-
for all'the purposes of a social, a happy, and an.
useful life, and those who hope to do -a great
deal munit not expect to do every thing. If they
know any thing of the malignityof fin, theblind-
ness of prejudice, or the corruption of the human
heart; they will also know, that the heart will
always remain after the very best possible edu-
cation, full of infirmity and imperfection.-
They ihould confider that they are not educa-
ting cherubims and seraphims, but men and
women; creatures, who at their:beft estate, are
altogether vanity: how little can be expected
from them in the weakness and imbecillity of
infancy!

Our pafions themselves by proper manage-

ment, may be made subservient to some good
end, for there is scarcely a single one which may
not be turned to profitable account, if prudently
recified, and ikilfully direcRed into the road of
some neighbouring virtue. Envy and lying
must be always excepted, they must be radically
cured before any good can be expeAed from
the heart which has been infeLced with them.
For envy, though pafled through all the moral

D 3 strainers

# EFFECTS OF RELIGION.

frainers cannot be refined into virtuous emula-
tion, or lying improved into an agreeable turn
for innocent invention.

To win the passions, therefore, over to the

cause of virtue, answers a much nobler end than
their extinction would possibly do, even if that
could be effected; for they resemble fires, which
are friendly and beneficial when under proper
direcion; but if suffered to blaze without re-
ftraint they carry devastation along with them;
and, if totally extinguilhed, leave the benighted
mind in a state of cold and comfortless inanity.

EFFECTS OF RELIGION.
RELIGION prepares the mind of man for all

the events of this inconfant state, inflncqts -

him in the nature of true happiness; early wdans
him from an undue love of the world: affli&ions
do not attack him by surprise, and therefore do
not overwhelm him; he is equiped for the
storm, as well as the calm, in this dubious navi-
gation of life. He is not overcome bydiffappoint-
ment, when that which is mortal dies; when

that

that which is mutable begins to change; and
when that which he knew to be transient palres
away.

Religion, not only purifies, but also fortifies

the heart, so that the devout man is neither
lifted up by success, nor enervated by sensuality,
he meets the changes in his lot without unmanly
dejection.-He is inured to temperance and
reftraint.-he has learned firmness, and felf-com-
mand.-He is accustomed to look up to fuprerme
providence, not with reverence only, but with
trust and hope.

In prosperity he cultivates his mind. Stores

it with useful knowledge, with good principles,
and virtuous dispositions. The resources remain
entire when the day of trouble comes. His
chief pleasures are always of the calm innocent
and temperate kind, and over those, the changes
of the world have the least power. His mind is
a kingdom to him, and he can ever enjoy it.

D 4 SUPERSTITION

-
·

# SUPERSTITION AND ENTHUSIASM.

# ANGER AND ENVY CONTRASTED.

SUPERSTITION AND ENTHUSIASM.
SUPERSTITION and enthusiasm are two ca-

pital sources of delusion. SuperfRition, on

the one hand, attaching men with immoderate
zeal, to the ritual and external part of religion.
Enthufiafi, on the other, directing thcir whole
intention- to internal emotions, and m-ytical
communications with the spiritual world; while
neither the one, nor the other, has paid fuffi-
cient regard to the great moral. duties of the
Christian life. Indeed the horror of superstition
has sometimes reached so far, as to produce
contempt for all external institutions; whllil
persons of a devout turn being carried by warmin
affeltions at times into unjustifiable excesses,
have thence made many conclude that all devc-
tion was akin to enthusiasm.

ANGER AND ENVY CONTRASTED.
ANGER is less reasonable and more sincere

than envy. Anger breaks out abruptly;

envy is a great prefacer: anger withes to be
understood at once: envy is fond of remote

hints

hints and ambiguities; but obscure as it's oracles
are, it never ceases to deliver them till tLey are
perfetly comprehended': anger repeats the
-.!,,, circumstances over again; envy invents
new ones at every fresh recital: anger gives a
broken, vehement, and interrupted. narrative;
envy tells a more consistent,. and more probable,
though a falser tale: anger is excellively im-
prudent, for it is impatient to disclose every
thing it knows; envy is discreet for it has a
great deal to hide: anger, never consults times
or seasons; envy waits for the lucky moment
when the wound it meditates may be made the
most exquisitely painful, and the molt incurably
deep: anger uses more invective; envy docs
more milchief,.

Simple anger soon runs itself out of breath,

and is exhausted at the end of it's tale; but it
is for that chosen period that envy has treasured
up the most barbed arrow in its whole quiver':
anger puts a man out of himself; but the truly
malicious generally preserve the appearance of
felf-pofefllion, or they could not so effetually
injure: anger talks loudly of its own wrongs;
envy of its adversary's injustice: anger is a vio-
lent act; envy a constant habit: no one can he
always angry, but he may be always envious.

D 5 An

# EVENTS UNCERTAIN.

An angry man's enmity (if he be generous)

will subside when the objet of his resentment
becomes unfortunate; but the envious man can
extract food from his malice out of cail'sv
itself, if he finds his adversary bears it with
dignity, or is pitied. or afifted in it. The rage
of the passionate man is totally extingui/hed'by
the death of his enemy; but the hatred of the
malicious is not buried even in the grave of his
rival; he will envy the good name he has left
behind him; he will envy him the tears of his
widow, the prosperity of -his children, the
esteem of his friends, the praises of his epitaph;
nay, the very magnificence of his funeral.

EVENTS UNCERTAIN.
Ih/ AN walketh in a vain show, His fears are

often as vain as his wifles. As what flat-

tered him in expectation, frequently wounds
him in pofeffeion; so that the event to which
he looked forward with an anxious and fearful

eye, has often, when it arrived, laid its terrors
aside; nay, has brought in its train unexpected
blessings.

Both

Both good and evil are beheld at a distance4

through a perfpetive which deceives. The
colours of objets when nigh, are entirely dif-
ferent from what they appeared, when they ap-
peared in futurity. It is common for men to be
deceived in their prospects of happiness. They
judge by the sensations of the present moment,
and in the fervour of desire pronounce confi-
dently concerning the desired objet. But reflet
not that their minds, like their bodies, undergo
great alteration from the situation into which
they are thrown, and the progressive flages of
life through which they pass.

Hence, concerning any condition which is

yet untried, they conjeSture with much uncer-
tainty. In imagination they carry their pre-
sent wants, inclinations, and sentiments into
the state of life to which they aspire. But no
sooner have they entered into it than their fen-
timents and inclinations change. New wants
and desires arise, new objects are required to
gratify them; and by consequence their old dif-
.satisfaction returns, and the void which was to
have been filled remains as great as'it was
before,

FAITH,

# FAITH, PIETY, AND ACTIVE VIRTUE.

# FALSE SENTIMENT.

FAITH, PIETY, AND ACTIVE VIRTULE
LIFE pased under the influence of such dif-

positions naturally leads to an happy end.

it is not enough to fay faith and piety joined
with aative virtue constitute the requisite prepa-
ration for heaven. They in truth begin the
enjoyment of heaven. In every state of our
existence they form the chief ingredients of
felicity.

FALSE SENTIMENT.
THERE is a refined jargon, which has infelR-

ed letters and tainted morals unknown to

our plain ancestors called sentiment, which is the
var!ifhi of virtue to conceal. the deformity of

ice ; and it is not uncommon for the fame

persons to make a jest of religion, to break
through the most solemn ties andt engagements,
to pra&tife every art of latent fraud and' open
seduction, and yet to value themselves on speak-
ing and writing sentimentally.

Error

Error is never likely to do so much mischief

as when it disguises its real tendency, and puts
on . an engaging and attractive appearance.
iany a young woman who would be lhocked
-at the imputation of an intrigue, is extremely
flattered at the idea of a sentimental connexion,
though perhaps with a dangerous and designing
man. Such an engagement will be infinitely
dearer to her vanity, than an avowed and. au-
thorifed attachment ..

In order to maintain the sentimental cha-

racter with dignity and propriety, a woman en-
tertains the most elevated ideas of difpropor-
tionate alliances, and disinterested love; and
confiders fortune, rank, and reputation as mere
chimerical diftinfions and vulgar prejudices.
And among the many.fmo.oth nifchiefs of senti,
ment, it is one of its sure and successful frauds
to affect the most frigid indifference to those
external and pecuniary adyantages which is:
its great and real object to obtain..

A fentimental,girl very. rarely entertains any

doubt of her perfonal.beauty; for. she. has been
daily.accuftomed to contemplate it herself, and
to hear it from others.. She will not, therefore4

-:. - be

be very solicitous for the confirmation of a truth
so felf-evident; but ihe suspects her pretensions
to underflanding are more likely to be disputed;
and, for that reason, greedily devours every
compliment offered to those perfections which
are less obvious, and more refined. She is per-
fiaded that men need only open their eyes to
decide on her beauty; while it will be the most
convincing proof of the taste, sense, and ele-
gance of her admirer that he can discern, and
flatter those qualities in her.

This latent but leading foible forms a clue to

the heart; directed by this the lover assets to
overlook that beauty which attracts common
eyes: while he bestows the moif delicate praises
on the beauties of the mind; and finishes the
climax of adulation by hinting She is superior
to it.

These sublime attachments, if they end not

[ in seduction, seldom conclude delightfully, even

though they ihould terminate in the vulgar cata-
itrophe of marriage. The visionary heaverr
soon fleets away, and the deluded goddess is
Ihocked to find herself stripped of all her celeltial
attributes. She now beholds herself of less im-

portance

portance in the esteem of the man she has
chosen, -than any other mere mortal woman.

No longer fie is gratified with the tear of

counterfeited paflion, the sigh of dilfembled
rapture, or the language of premeditated ado-
ration. No longer is the altar of her vanity
loaded with the oblations of fictitious fondness,
the incense of falsehood, or the sacrifice of flat-
tery. Her apothofis is ended !-She feels her-
self degraded from the dignities and privileges
of a goddess, to all the imperfections, vanities,
and weaknefes of a flighted woman, and a neg-
lected wife. Her faults which were so lately
overlooked, or mistaken for virtues, are now
set in a note book. The passion, which was
vowed eternal, lasted only a few fliort weeks;
and the indifference which was so far from be-
ing included in the bargain, that it was not so
much as fufpeted, follows them through the
whole tiresome journey of their insipid, vacant
and joyless exiffence.

FELICITY

# FELICITY EQUALLY DISTRIBUTED.

FELICITY EQUALLY DISTRIBUTED,
A iONG the different conditions and ranks

of men, the balance of happiness. is pre-

served in a great measure equal; and the high
and low, the rich and the poor, approach in
point of real enjoyment much nearer to each
other than is commonly imagined. Providence
never- intended that any state here mhould either·
be completely happy, or entirely miserable.

If the feelings of pleasure are more numerous

and more lively, in the higher departments of
life, such also are those of pain.-If greatness
flatters our vanity, it multiplies our dangers.-
If opulence encreafes- our- gratifications, it en-
creases, in the fame proportion, our desires and
demands.-If the. poor are confined to a more
narrow circle, yet within.that circle lie most
of those natural fatisfa&ions,. which, after all:
the refinements of art, are found. to.be the most-
genuine and true. For the happiness of every
man depends more upon the state of his own;
mind than upon any one external circumstance;

navy,

# FELICITY TEMPORAL.

nay, more than upon all external things put to-
gether.

Inordinate passions are the great disturbers

of life; and unless we possess a good confci-
ence, and a-well governed mind, discontent
will blast every enjoyment, and the highest pro-
fperity will only prove disgusted misery. This
conclusion then should be fixed in the mind:
The deftrucdion of virtue is the deftruaion of
peace. In no flation-in no period are we fe-
cure from the dangers which spring from our
pafions. Every age, and every fation they
beset, from youth to grey hairs, and from the
peasant to the prince.

FELICITY TEMPORAL.
OUR imperfe& knowledge of what is good

or evil Ihould attach us- the more to those

few things, concerning which, these can be no
doubt of their being truly good.

Of.temporal things which belong to this class,
the catalogue,.it mutl be confessed,. is. small.

Perhaps

# SPIRITUAL FELICITY

Perhaps the chief worldly good we' should wifi
to enjoy, is a found mind in a found body.
Health and peace, a moderate fortune, and a
few friends, Tum up all the undoubted articles
of temporal felicity.

He whole withes, refpecing this world, are

the moit reasonable and bounded, is likely: to
lead the safest, and, for that reason, the most
desirable life. By aspiring too high we frequent-
ly miss the happiness, which by a less ambitious
aim, we might have gained. High happiness
on earth is rather a picture which the imagina-
tion forms, than reality which man is allowed
to possess.

SPIR1TUAL FELICITY
1WITH regard to spiritual felicity, we are.

not confined to humble views. Clear and

determinate objects are proposed to our pursuits,
and full scope is given to our most ardent desires.
The forgiveness of our fins, and God's holy
grace to guide our life; the protection and fa-
vour of the great father of all, 'of the blessed Re-

deemer

# WANT OF FORESIGHT RESPECTING OUR SPIRITUAL STATE.

:deemer of mankind, and of the spirit of far"tifi-
cation and comfort; these are objects, in the
pursuit of which there is no room for hesitation
and diftruf.

Had providence spread an equal obscurity

over happiness of every kind, we might have
had some reason to complain of the vanity of
our condition. But we are not left to so hard
afate. The Sonof God hath removed that veil
which covered true bliss from the search of wan-
dering mortals, and hath taught them the way
which leads to eternal life.

WANT OF FORESIGHT RESPECTING

OUR SPIRITUAL STATE.
WI E foresee the dangers of our spiritual frill

leTs than we do those of our natural state;

because we are less attentive to trace them. We

are still more exposed to vice than misery.
We cannot esteem him prosperous who is raised
*to a situation which flatter his passions, bit
which corrupts his principles, disorders his tem-
per, and, finally, oversets his virtue.

In

In the ardour of pursuit there effe&s are not

foreseen; and yet how often are they accoin-
plifned by the change. of condition. Latent
corruptions are called forth ;-feeds of guilt are
quickened into life;-a growth of crimes arises,
which, had it not been for the fatal culture :of
prosperity, would never have seen the light.

Man, boastful as he is of reason, is merely

the creature of his fortune, formed and moulded
by the incidents of his life; incapable of pro-
nouncingwith certainty concerning his own good
or evil; of futurity he'difcerns little, and even
that little he fees through a cloud.-Ignorant of
the alteration which his sentiments and desires
will undergo from new situations in life ;-igno-
rant of the consequences which will follow from
-the combination of his circumstances with those
of others around him;-ignorant of the influence
which the present may have on'the future events
of life;-ignorant of the effeetwhich a change of
condition may produce on his moral character
and his eternal interests; how can he know what
iS good for hir. all tie days of hi 'vain life, which
fjendeth as a Ji;adow. Initead therefore of la-
menting this ignorance only, he should confider

# FRIENDSHIP.

2low it onght to be improved i what duties it
fuggefis; and what wife ends it was intended
by providence to promote.

--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

FRIEND SHIP.
IN young minds there is commonly a firong

propensity to particular intimacies and friend-

flips. Youth, indeed, is the season when friend-
1hips are sometimes formed, which not only con-
tinue through succeeding life, but which glow
to the las, with a tenderness unknown to the
connetions begun in cooler years. The pro--
penfity therefore is not tobe discouraged,
though at the fame time, it must be regulated
with much circumfpeaion and care.

Too many of the pretended friendships of

youth, are mere combinations in pleasure. They
are often founded on capricious likings, sudden-
ly contracted, and as suddenly dissolved Some-
times they are the effel of interested complai-
fance and flattery on the one fide, and of cre-
dulous fondness on the other. Such rash and:dan-
gerous connections Ihould be avoided, left they:
afterwards load us. with dishonour.

WC

We fhouid ever have it fixed in our memories,

that by the charaRer of those whom we choose
for our friends our own is likely to be formed,
and will certainly be judged of by the world.
WVe ought, therefore, to be flow and cautious
in contracting intimacy; but when a virtuous
friendhip is once efabliffied we must ever con-
fider it as a sacred engagement.

We fhonld not expose ourselves to the re-

proach of lightness and inconstancy; which al-
ways befFeak either a trifling or a base mind.
'We mould not reveal any secrets of-our friends
but be faithful to his intereits. Forsake him
not in danger; and abhor the thought of acqui-
ring any advantage by his prejudice or hurt.

In the choice of friends principal regard flould
be had to goodness of heart and fidelity. If
they poiefs taste and genius, that will make
them more agreeable and useful companions.
To thole wiho deserve the name of friends we
should always unbosom ourselves with the mofl
unfLuficious confidence. An open temper., if re-
tfrained but by tolerable prudence, will make us,
upon the whole, much happier than a suspicious
one, although by it we may sometimes susser.

Coldness

# GALLANTRY.

Coldness and diltruft are but the too certain

£onfequences of age and experience; but they
are unpleasant feelings, and need not be antici-
pated before their time. We should never dif-
close the secrets of one friend to another. They
are secret deposits which do not belong to us,
-ior have we any right to make use of them.

GALLANTRY,
THiCU2SANDS of women of the best hearts

and finest parts have been ruined by men

who approach them under the specious name of
friendlhip. But supposing a man to have'the
molt undoubted honour, yet his friendfliip to
woman is often so near a-kin to love, that if
flhe be very agreeable in her person, fle will
probably very soon find a lover, where file wified
only to meet a friend. Yet women fliould be
warned against that weakness so common among
the vain, the imagination that every man who
takes particular notice of them- is a lover. -No-
thing can expose then more to ridicule, than ta-
king up a man on the fuipicion of being their
lover, -when perlhas he never once thought

of

es them in that view; and giving themselves
those airs so common to frily women on such oc-
cafions.

For there is a kind of unmeaning gallantry

Tmuch pra&ised by some men, which, by those
who have any discernment, will readily be found
harmless. The little observances, attentions
2ad compliments of such men ihould be regarded
as things of course, which they repeat .to every
agreeable woman of their acquaintance. There
is a familiarity they are apt to assume, which a
proper dignity of behaviour will be easily able to
check.

But there are people, wvhole sentiments, and

particularly whose taftes, correspond naturally,
like to associate together, although neither of
them have the molf distant view of any further
connection. But this similarity of minds often
gives rife to tenderness superior to what friend-
snip demands, it will be prudent in this cafe to
keep awatchful eye over ourfelves,left our hearts
become too far engaged before we are aware of
-that something more than friendly partiality;
and experience the unfufpe,,ed power of a too
interested attachment.

GOD

# GOD WITH RESPECT TO MAN.

GOD WITH RESPECT TO MAN.

N the midRf of his glory the Almighty is not

inattentive to the meanest of his fubjets.

Neither obscurity of station, nor imperfection of
knowledge, finks those below his regard who
worlhip and obey him.. Every prayer which
they fend up from their secret retirement is lif-
tened to by him; and every work of charity
which they perform, how unknown soever to
the world, attracs his notice.

He is the patron of the diftrefted. Compaf-

sion is that attribute of his nature which he has
chosen to place in the greatest variety of lights,
on purpose that he might accommodate his ma-
jefly to our weakness, and provide a cordial for
human griefs.

All his creatures he governs with justice and

wifdom-an afflicted fate he commifferates-he
is the refuge of the virtuous and pious, and in-
vites them, amidst all their troubles to pour out
their hearts before him. The neglect, or scorn

E of

# IGNORANCE OF GOOD AND EVIL, ITS UTILITY.

of the world, exposes them not to any contempt
in his fight.' No obfeurity conceals them from
his notice, and though they ihould be for-
gotten by every friend on earth, they are re-
membered by the God of heaven.

That sigh heaved from the afflited bofomn

which is heard by no human ear, is listened to
by him; and that tear is remarked which falls
unnoticed, or despised by the -world. These pre-
sent his administration under an aspect so mild
and benign as in a great measure to disperse
the gloom which hangs over human life.

IGNORAANCE OF GOOD AND EVIL,

ITS UTILITY.
IT serves to check presumption and ralhnefs,

and to enforce a diligent exertion of our ra-

tional powers, joined with a humble depend-
ence on divine aid. It moderates eager palfions
refperting worldly success. It inculcates refig-
nation to the disposal of a providence which is
ruch wiser than man. It restrains us from' em-
ploying unlawfu means in order to co;pafs our

-mofi

# GOOD MAN.

moil favourite designs. It tends to attach us
more closely to those things which are unquef-
'tionably good. It is therefore such a degree of
ignorance as suits the present circumstances of
man better than more complete information con-
cerning good and. evil. At the fame time the
causes which render this obscurity neceflary, too
plainly indicate a broken and corrupted slate of
human nature. They shew this life to be a flort
trial. They suggest the ideas of a land of pilgri-
mage, not of a houl'e of reft.

G OO D' M A N.
HE is devout and benevolent, and according

to his measure of religious knowledge flu-

dies to perform his duty, prays to God always,
and gives much alms to the people; joining'piety
with charity; faith with good works; devo-
tion with morality, confiltent with the con-
nexion ordained by God between them: for alms
without prayers, or prayers without alms; mo-
rality without devotion, or devotion without
-morality, are extremely defeaive.

D E z A good.

A good man afts with vigour, and suffers with

a patience more than human, when he believes
himself countenanced by the Almighty. Injured
or oppressed by the world, he looks up to a judge
who will vindicate his cause; he appeals to a
witness who knows his integrity; he commits
himself to a friend who will never forsake him.
When tired witih the vexations of life, devotion
opens to him its quiet retreat, where the tumults
of the world are hushed, and its cares are loft in
happy oblivion.

There his mind regains its serenity; the agi-

tation ofpaffion is calmed; and a softening balm
is infused into the wounds of the spirit; his heart
is lightened; he does not feel himfelffolitary or
forsaken; he believes God to be present with
him, and as he hears a voice which speaks to
none but the pure in heart, so he beholds a hand
which inners cannot fee.

Those afflictions which appear to others the

meflengers of the wrath of heaven, appear to
him the ministers of fanclification and jullice.
Where they discern nothing but the horrours of
the tempest which surrounds them, his more en-
lightened eye beholds the angel who rides in the
,vhirltindl * ";rets the storm.

EFFECT

# EFFECT OF LOOSE GRATIFICATIONS.

# GRATITUDE.

EFFECT OF LOOSE GRATIFICATIONS.
BY a continued series of loose, though appa-

-rently trivialgratifications, the heart is of-

ten as thoroughly corrupted, as by the commis-
sion of any one of those enormous crimes which
spring from great ambition, or great revenge.
Habit gives the passions strength, while the ab-
fence of glaring guilt seemingly justifies them;
and unawakened by remorse, the finner proceeds
in his course, till he waxes bold in guilt, and be-
comes ripe for ruin; for by gradual and latent
fleps the deitrution of our virtue advances.
We are imperceptibly betrayed; and from one
licentious attachment, are by a train of confe-
quences, drawn on to another, till the govern-
ment of our minds is irrecoverably loft.

GRATITUDE.
~i; G RATITUDE is a pleasing emotion. The

sense of being diffinguilhed by the kindness
of another gladens the heart, warms it with

' E 3 reciprocal

# WORLDLY GREATNESS AND HONOURS,

reciprocal affecion, and gives to any profeglion,
which is agreeable in itself, a double relish, from
its being the gift of a friend. Favours though,
conferred by men, may become burdensome;
but nothing of this kind can affect the inter-
course of gratitude with heaven. Its 'favours
are wholly disinterested. The Almighty aims
at no end but the happiness of those whom he
blesses, and who desires no return from them
but a devout and thankful heart.

WORLDLY GREATNESS AND, HONOURS,
;7HEN enjoyed with temperance and wis-

dom, both enlarge our utility, and con-

tribite to our comfort. But we fiould not over-

rate them; for unless we add to them the ne-
ceffary correlives of piety and virtue, besides
corrupting the mind, and ingendering internal
misery, they lead us among precipices, and be-
tray us into ruin,

HAPPINESS,.

# HAPPINESS  HOW JUDGED OF;

HAPPINESS-HOW JUDGED OF;
IMPERFECTLY can we judge of real happi-

ness or misery from external appearance.-

We are reduced aid deceived by that false glare
which prosperity throws around bad men;--
we are tempted to imitate their crimes, in order
to partake of their imagined felicity.

The pageant of grandeur displayed to public

view is not the ensign of certain happiness. We
mufl follow the great man into the retired
apartment, where he lays aside his disguise, in
order to form any just conclusion. We must
have a faculty by which we can look into the
inside of hearts; then ihould- we behold good
men, in proportion to their goodnefst satisfied
and easy; atrocious mnners always refflefs and
unhappy..

HAPPINESS

# HAPPINESS NOT INDEPENDENT.

HAPPINESS NOT INDEPENDENT.
NTO individual can be happy unless the circum-

stances of those around him be so adjusted

as to conspire with his interest. For in human
society, no happiness or misery flands uncon-
ne&ed and independent. Our fortunes are in-
terwoven by threads innumerable: one man's
success or misfortune, his wisdom or folly often,
by its consequences, reaches through multitudes.

Such a system is too far complicated for our

arrangement.-It requires adjustments beyond
our Lkill and power.-It is a chaos of events
into which our eye cannot pierce; and is capa-
ble of regulation only by him who perceives at
one glance the relation of each to all We are
ignorant of the influence .which the present
tranfaclions of our life may have upon those
which are future.

The important question is, not what will

yield to man a few scattered pleasures, but what
will render his life happy on the whole amount.

There

# HEALTH.

There is not any present moment that is uncon-
nected with. some future one.-The life of every
man is a continued chain of incidents, each link
of which hangs upon the former. The tranfi-
tion from cause to effecq, from event to event,
is often carried on by secret fleps, which our
foresight cannot divine, and our sagacity is un-
able to trace. Evil may at some future period
bring forth good; and good may bring forth
evil, both equally unexpected.

HEALTH..
THOUGH good health be one of the greatest

blessings of life, it is thought necessary pru-

dently to. caution women against making a boast
of it,. and exhort themn to enjoy it in grateful si-
lence. For men so naturally associate the idea
of female softness and delicacy with a correfpon-
dent delicacy of constitution, that when a wo-
man speaks of her great itrength, her extraordi-
nary appetite,- her ability to bear excessive fa-
tigue, we recoil at the description in a way ihe
is little aware of,

HISTORY;

# HISTORY.

# TRUE VIRTUE AND HONOUR.

HISTORY.
H ISTORY is a mirror which holds up man-

kind to their own view: in the circle of

worldly affairs the fame characters and fitua-
tions are perpetually returning, and in the fol-
lies and passions; the vices and crimes of the ge-
nerations that are past we read those of the
present.

The hiflory of mankind has ever been a con-

tinued tragedy-the world a great theatre, ex-
.hibiting the fame repeated scene of the follies of
men ihooting forth into guilt, and of their pas-
sions fermenting by a quick process into misery.

TRUE VIRTUE AND HONOUR.
m/EN possessed of these, value not themselves

upon any regard to inferior obligations,

and yet violate that which is the most sacred
and ancient of all,-religion.

They

# HOPE.

They Ihould confider such violation as a severe

reproach in the molt enlightened ftite of human
nature; and under the purest dispensation of reli-
gion, it appears to have extinguiihed the sense
of gratitude to Heaven, and to flight all acknow-
ledgment of the great and true God. Such con-
dutt implies either an intire want, or a wilful sup-
preflion of some of the bell and most generous
affections belonging to human nature.

'H 0 P E.
H OPE to the foul .when diffracted by tlie con-

fuilons of the world, is as an anchor to a

flip in a dark night, on an unknown coast, and
amidlit a boisterous ocean. In danger it gives
fecurity;-amidft general fluctuation it affords
one fixed point of reft.-It is the most eminent
of all the advantages which religion now con-
fers.-It is the universal comforter;-it is the
spring of all human activity.

Upon futurity, men are corlanrly suspended;

animated by the profpeft of some distant good,
they toil and susser through the whole course of

lifec

# HUMANITY.

life; and it is not so much what they are at
present, as what they hope to be in -ome after
time; that enlivens their motions, fixes their at-
tention, and ifimulates induffby..

Was this hope entertained with that full per-

flafion which Chrifiian faith demands, it v ould
in truth totally annihilate all human miseries; it-
would banifi discontent, extinguish grief, and
suspend the very feeling of pain..

H U M. A N I T Y.
GENTLENESS, which belongs to virhie, is:

to be carefully diftinguified from the.meant

spirit of cowards, and the fawning assent o " 'coc
phants.-It renounces no just right from fear:-it
gives up no important truth from flattery:-it
is indeed not only confitent with a firm mind,
but it neceflarily requires a. manly spirit and a
fixed principle in order to give it.any real value,

It stands opposed to harflnefs and severity,-

to pride and arrogance,-to violence and oppref-
fion:-it is, properly, that part of the real vir-

tue

tue charity, which makes us unwilling to give
pain to any of our brethren.-It corrects what-
ever is offensive in our manners, and by a con-:
slant train of humane attentions, studies to alle-
viate the burden of common mifery.-Its office
is therefore extenfive;-it is continually in action,
whYnk we are engaged in intercourse with men.
-It ought to form our address, to regulate our-
speech, and to.diffidfe itself over our whole be<-
haviour.

That gentleness which is chara&eriftic of a

good man, has, like every other virtue, its feat-
in the heart.-In that: unaffeled civility which;
iprings from a gentle mind, there is a. charm in-
finitely more powerful than in all the studied&
manners, of the most finished courtier..

it is founded on a sense of what we owe to,

him. who made us, and to, the common nature
of which we all ihare.-It arises from-refleciorr
on our own failings and wants; and form just.
views of the condition and duty-of man.-It is:
native feeling heightened and improved by prin-
ciple. It is the heart. which easily relents ;
which feels for every thing that is human; and
is backward and low to infit.the least wound.

It

It is affable in its address, and mild in its de-
meanour; ever ready to oblige, and be obliged
by others; breathing habitual kindness towards
friends, courtesy to strangers, long suffering to
enemies.

It exercises authority with moderation ;-ad-

ministers reproof with tenderness ;-confers fa-
vours with care and modefty.-It is unafluming
in opinion, and temperate in zeal.-It contends
not eagerly about trifles; flow to contradict,
and till flower to blame p but prompt to allay
diflention and restore peace.-It neither inter-
meddles unneceflarily with the affairs, nor pries
inquisitively into the secrets of others.-It de-
lights above all things to alleviate distress; and,
if it cannot dry up the falling tear, to soothe
at least the grieving heart.

Where it has not the power of being useful,

it is never burdenfome.-It seeks to please ra-
ther than shine and dazzle, and conceals with
care that superiority, either of talents or of
rank, which are oppressive to those who are
beneath it It is the great avenue to mutual en-
joyment: amidst the firife of interfering inte-
refts, it tempers the violence of contention, and

keeps

keeps alive the feeds of harmony.-It softens
animofities, renews endearments, and renders:
the countenance os.man a refreshment to man.
It prepossesses and wins every heart.-It per-
fuades when every other argument fails; often.
disarms the fierce, and melts the stubborn.

To the'man of humanity the world is gene-

rally disposed to ascribe every other good qua-
lity; of its influence all in some degree partake,
and therefore all love it.

The man of this chara&er rifes in the world

without struggle, and fiourilhes without envy:
his misfortunes are universally lamented, and
his failings are easily forgiven. The inward
tranquillity which it promotes is the first requi-
site of every pleasurable feeling. It is the calm
and clear atmosphere, the serenity and funihine
of the mind.

Attacked by great injuries, the man of mild'

and gentle spirit will feel what human nature
feels; and will defend and resent as his duty
allows him: but to flight provocations he is
happily fuperior.-Infpired with noble senti-
ments. taught to regard, with indulgent eye,

the

# HUMILITY IN COMPANY.

the frailties of men, the omiflions of the care-
less, the follies of the imprudent, and the levity
of the fickle; he retreats into the calmness of
his spirit, as into an undisturbed fanauary, and
quietly allows the usual current of life to hold
its course..

HUMILITY IN COMPANY..
OF all the qualifications for conversation, hu-

mility, if not the most brilliant, is the safest,

the most amiable, and the mofl feminine. The
affecation of introducing fubjecs with which
others are unacquainted, and of displaying ta-
-i.ts superior to the reft of the company, is as

dangerous as it is foolish..

There are many who never can forgive ano-

ther for Leing more , ,reeable and more accom-

pliflied tvan themnitives, and who can pardon
any ofence rather than an e-lipfng merit. The
fable cf-thc right gLaie r oul5i be ever hadin re-.
me.mbrance, a: : convesys a inoi- useful lesson
replete with valua;be i-.trrn:cios. Had the
fi!ly v..'riler conrqur ed._is vwn-ity, and riefiled

the:

# HUMOUR.

# INDUSTRY.

the temptation of liewing a fine voice, he might
have escaped the talons of the hawk. The me-
lody of his fmging was the cause of his defiruc-
tion; his merit brought him into danger, and his
vanity cost him his life.

H U M 0 U K.
HUMOUR, though often mistaken for wit, is

a very different quality. It makes our

company much solicited; but we Ihould be cau-
tious in indulging it. It is often a'great ene-
my to delicacy, and a itill greater one to digni-
ty of character. It may sometimes gain ap-
plause, but will never procure respect.

INDUSTRY.
DILIGENCE, and proper improvement of

time, are material duties of the young..

To no purpose are they endued with the best
abilities, if they want acivity for exerting
them.-In youth the habits of industry are most:

/ easily

easily acquired.-In youth the incentives to it-
.re the strongest; from ambition and from dity,,
from emulation and hope, all the, profpeas
which the beginning of life affords.

Indufhry is not only the instrument of im-

provement, but the foundation of pleasure. He
v o is a fkanger to it may possess, but cannot
enjoy. For it is labour only. which gives relifi
topleafure.-It is the appointed vehicle of every
good to man.-It is the- indifpenfible condition'
of our poffefling a found mind in a found body.

We should seek to fill our time with employ-

ments which may be reviewed'with fatisfaclion.
The acquisition of knowledge is one of the moss
honourable occupations of youth. The desire
of it discovers a liberal mind, and is conneaed
with many accomplishments, and many virtues.
But though our train of life thould not lead us
to Ldy, the course of education always fur-
nifhes proper employments to a well-difpofed.
mind. Whatever we pursue, we should be
emulous to exceh

Generous ambition and sensibility to praise',
are, especially at the youthful period, among

the-

# INTENT OF RELIGION.

tle mfarks of virtue. We never ought to think
that any affluence of fortune, or any elevation
of rank, exempts us, from the duties of applica-
tion and industry ; industry is the law of our
being; it is the demand of .nature, of re.'ason
and of God.

INTENT OF RELIGION.
IF there be any principle fully ascertained by

religion; it is, that this life was intended

for a state of trial and improvement to man.
His .preparation for a better world required a
gradual purification, carried on by steps of pro-
greflive discipline. The situation here affignedhim
was such as to answer this design, by calling
forth all his adive powers, by giving full scope
to his moral dispositions, and bringing to light
his whole character. Hence it became proper,
that difficulty and temptation should arise in the
course of his duty; ample rewards were pro-
inifed to virtue; but these rewards were left,.
as yet, in obscurity and distant profpet.

The impreflions of sense were so, balanced:
against immortality, as to allow a conflict be-

t tween.

# LOVE OF JUSTICE.

tween faith and fenfe,-between conscience and
defire,-between present pleasure and future
good. In this conflic the fouls of good men
are tried,-improved andftrengthened:-in this
field their honours are reaped;-here are formed
the capital virtues of fortitude, temperance,
and felf-denial;-moderation in prosperity, pa-
tience in adversity, submission to the will of
God, charity and forgiveness to men amidst the
various competitions of worldly interest.

LOVE OF JUSTICE.
A SENSE of juffice ihould be the foundation

of all our social qualities. In our most

early intercourfewith theworld, and even in our
moss youthful amusements, no unfairness should
be found. That sacred rule of doing all things
to others, according as we wish they would do
unto us, ihould be engraved on our minds.
For this end, we 'fould impress ourselves with
a deep sense of the original, and natural equa-
lity of men.

Whatever advantages of birth or fortune we,
poflefs, we ought never to display them with an

ostentatious

# SELF - KNOWLEDGE.

ostentatious superiority. We Should leave the
subordinations of rank, to regulate the inter-
course of more advanced years.-In youth it
becomes us to a6 among our companions, as
man with- man. We should remember how un-
known to us are the vicissitudes of the world;
and how often they, on whom ignorant and
contemptuous young men once looked down
with scorn, have risen to be their Superiors in
future years.

SELF-KNOWLED GE.
TO acquire a thorough knowledge of our-

selves, -is an attainment no less difficult

than important. For men are generally unwil-
ling to fee their own imperfecions; and when
they are willing to enquire into them, their
felf-love imposes upon their judgment. Their
intercourse with one another afifts their delu-
sion, to which, of themselves, they are prone.

For the ordinary commerce of the world, is

·a commerce of flattery and falfehobd; where
reciprocally they deceive and are deceived,

where

where every one appears under an aifumed
form, professes esteem, which he does not feel,
and bestows praise in order to receive it.

There are three chara&cers which every man

fiftains; and these often extremely different
from one another. One which he possesses is
hB own opinion;-another, which he carries in
efriarion of the world;-and a third, which he
bear; in the judgment of God:-it is only the last
which ascertains what he really is. Whether
the character which the world forms of him,
be above or below truth, it imports not much
to know. But it is of eternal consequence, that
the characer which a man possesses in his own
eyes, be formed upon that "which he bears in
the fight of God.

He ihould enquire, after laying aside all par-

tiality for himself, and exploring the heart with
such accurate scrutiny, as may bring all hidden
-defeas to light, whether he be not conscious,
'that the fair opinion which the world entertains
of him, is founded on their partial knowledge,
both of his abilities and virtues.-He ihould be
willing that all his actions ihould be publicly
canvafled.-He ihould bear to have his thoughts
laid open,

When

When he has kept from vice, it Ihould be

,known whether his innocence proceeded from
.purity of principle, or from worldly motives;
-whether any malignity or envy rites within
him, when he compares his own condition with
that of others.-He ihould.enquire whether he
has been as.follicitous-to regulate his heart, as
.to preftrve his manners from reproach;-pro-
fessing himself a Christian, whether the spirit of
Christ has appeared in his condut ;-declaring
that he hopes for immortality, whether that
hope surmounted undue attachment to the pre-
sent life.

Such investigation, seriously pursued, may

produce to every man many discoveries of him-
self; discoveries, not pleasing, perhaps, to va-
nity, but salutary and usefuL For he can only
be a flatterer, but no true friend to himself,
who aims not at knowing his own defects, as
well as virtues.

CHEERFULNESS

# CHEERFULNESS OF OLD AGE, AND LEVITY OF YOUTH, CONTRASTED.

CHEERFULNESS OF OLD AGE, AND LE-

VITY OF YOUTH, CONTRASTED.
CHEERFULNESS, in old age, is graceful. It

is the natural concomitant of virtue. But

this is widely different from the levity of youth.
Many things are allowable in that early period,
which, in maturer years, would deserve censure;
but which, in old age, become both ridiculous
and criminal.--By awkwardlyaffe&ting to imitate
the manners, and to mingle in the vanities of the
young; as.the aged depart from the dignity,
so they forfeit the privileges of grey hairs.
But if by follies of this kind they are degraded,
they are exposed to much deeper blame, by
descending to vicious pleasure, and continuing
to hover round those sinful gratifications to
which they were once addicted.

Amusement and relaxation the aged require

and may enjoy: but they 1hould confider well by
every intemperate indulgence they accelerate
decay; instead of enlivening, they oppress and
precipitate their declining state,

PUBLIC

# PUBLIC LIFE, ITS INCONVENIENCIES.

P U B L I C L I F E,

ITS INCONYENIENCrESi
H E who lives always in public cannot live to

his own foul. Conversation and inter-

course with the world is, ir. several refpecs, an
education for vice. From earliest youth we are
accustomed to hear riches and honour extolled
as the chief poffeflions of man, and proposed to
us as the principal aim of our future pursuits.
We are trained up to look with admiration on
the flattering marks of diftintion which they
bestow. In quest of those fancied blefings, we
fee the multitude around us eager and fervent.
Principles of duty we may, perhaps, hear
sometimes inculcated; but we seldom behold
them brought in competition with worldly
profit.

The soft names and plausible colours under

which deceit, sensuality, and revenge are pre-
sented to us in common difcourie, weaken,, by
degrees, our natural sense of the distinction be-

F tween

# LOVE.

tveen good and evil. We often meet with
crinmes authorized by high examples, and re-
warded with the caresses and smiles of the
-world. We discover, perhaps, at last, that
those whom we are taught to reverence and to
reixrd as our patterns of conduc, aat upon
Frinil!eks no purer than those of others.

L O V E.
W'HAT is commonly called love anngft the

women, is rather gratitude, and a parti-

ality to the man who prefers any individual to
the reft of the sex; such a man she often marries

with little of either personal esteem or affection.

Indeed without an unusual flare of natural fen-

fibility, and very peculiartood fortune, a woman
in this country has very little probability of
marrying for love.

For love is not to begin on the part of the fe-

male, but entirely to be the consequence of a
man's attachment to her. Nature has therefore
as wifely and benevolently afligned to the tender
sex, a greater flexibility of tafie on this subjec.

Sonim

Some agreeable qualities recommend a gentle-

man to common good liking, and friendship.
In the course of acquaintance, he contrats an
attachment. When a woman perceives it, it
excites her g, atitude; this rifes into preference,
and this preference, perhaps, at last advances to
some degree of attachment, especially if it
lfeets with crosses and difficulties; for these,
and a state of suspense are very great incite-
ments to attachment, and are the food of love
in both sexes.

The e'ffecs of love among men are divermficd

by their different tempers. An artful man may
counterfeit every one of them so, as easily to
impose on a young girl of an open, generous,
and feeling heart, if lle is not extremely on her
guard. The finest parts of such a girl may not
always prove fuficient for her security. The
dark and crooked paths of cunning are unl/efarch-
able, and inconceivable to an honourable and ele-
vated mind.

F 2 " ARTFUL

# ARTFUL SENTIMENTAL LOVER.

A-RTFUL SENTIMENTAL LOVER.
THE man versed in the wiles of deceit puts

on the mask of plausibility and virtue, and,

by there means, disarms the object of his atten-
tion and apparent administration of her pru-
dence, lays her apprehensions asleep, and in-
volves her in misery: misery the more inevita-
ble, because unsuspected. For he who appre-
hends no danger, will not think it necessary to
be always upon her guard; but will rather in-
vite than avoid the ruin which comes under so
tpecious and so fair a form.

One of these sentimental lovers will not fcru-

pie very seriously to assure a credulous girl, that
her unparalelled merit entitles her to the ado-
ration of the whole world; and that the univer-
fal homage of mankind is nothing more than
the unavoidable tribute extorted by her charms,

But he mfould reflect, that he who endeavours

to intoxicate her with adulation, intends one
day most effetually to humble-her. For an art-

ful

fill man has always a secret design to pay him-
self in future for any present sacrifice. If he
has address and conduct and the objet of his
pursuit much vanity, and some sensibility, he
seldom fails of success; for so powerful will be
his ascendency over her mind, that ihe will soon
adopt his notions and opinions.

The lover, deeply versed in all the obliqui-

ties of fraud, and Ikilled to wind himself into
every avenue of the heart which indiscretion has
left unguarded, soon discovers on which fide it
is molt acceffible.-He avails himself of this
weakness by addressing her in a language exact-
ly consonant to her own ideas.-He attacks her
with her own weapons, and opposes, if a senti-
mental girl, rhapsody to fentiment.-He pro-
fesses so sovereign a contempt for the paltry
concerns of money, that she thinks it her duty to
reward him forfo generous arenunciation.--Every
plea he artfully advances of his own unworthi-
ness, is confidered by her as a fresh demand, that
her gratitude must anfwer.-And She makes it a
point of honour to sacrifice to him that fortune
which he is too noble to regard.

F 3 These

# EFFECTS OF HONOURABLE LOVE.

T efe professions of humility are the common

artfices of the vain, and these prc\cflations of
Egte:rofty the refuge of the rapacious.

EFFECTS OF HONOURABLE LOVE.
d -IMA of delicacy oft betrays his pafrion by

his too great anxiety to conceal it; efpc-

ci:a.y if he has little hopes of success. True
o;ce, in all its frages, seeks concealment, and ne-
ver expects fuccefs-It renders a man not only
ref.pecful, but timid, to the highefr degree, in
his behaviour to the woman he loves.

To conceal the awe he flands in of her, he

may sometimes aseLt pleasantry, but it fits awk-
wardly on him; and he quickly relapses into fe-
rioufnefs, if not dullnefs.-He magnifies all her
real perfections in his imagination, and is either
blind to her failings, or converts them into
beauties.-Like a person conscious of guilt, he
is jealous that every eye observes him; and to
:.void this, he fiuns all the little observances of
conmon gallantry.

His

# MALE COQUETRY.

His heart and his charaser will be improved

in every refpeEt by his attachment.-His man-
ners will become more gentle, and his conver-
fation more agreeable; but diffidence and em-
barraffment will always make him appear to
disadvantage in the company of his mistress.
If the fascination continues long, it will depress
his spirit, and extinguish every vigorous and
manly principle of his mind.

MALE COQUETRY.
leALE coquetry is much more inexcusable

than female, as well as more pernicious;

but it is rare in this country. Very few men
will give themselves the trouble to gain, or re-
tain any woman's affecions, unless they have
views on them either of an honourable or dif-
honourable kind.

Men employed in the pursuits of business,

ambition or pleasure, will not give themselves
the trouble to engage a woman's affections,
merely from the vanity of conquefi, and of

triumphing

triumphing over the heart of an innocent and
ie.encelefs girl.

A man of parts, Sentiment, and address, if he

lays aside all regard to truth and humanity,
may engage the heart of fifty women at tile
fame time; and may likewise conduct his coque-
try -.sith So mnch art, as to put it out of the
power of any of them to specify a single expref-
sion that could be said to be directly expreflive
of love.

This ambiguity of behaviour, this art f kfeep-

i'j ce injfilfbeze, is the great surety of coque-
tr'- of both 'exes.-It is the more cruel in men,
because they can carryitwhat length theypleafe,
and continue it as long as theypleafe, witlout the
womenbeingfo much as at liberty to complain or
expostulate; whereas men can break the chain,
and force women to explain whenever they
elome impatient of their situation.

But as a woman in this country may easily

prevent the firIt impressions of love, every mo-
tive of prudence and delicacy flould make her
~gard her heart against them, till such time a;
fte has received the most convincing proofs of

the

# MAN OF THE WORLD.

the attachment of a man of such merit as will
justify a reciprocal regard. She hould studious-
ly labour to possess such high principles of ho-
nour and generosity, as will render her incapa-
ble of deceiving, and, at the fame time, to possess
that acute discernment which may secure her
against being deceived.

MAN OF THE WORLD.
HE pretends that virtue is, at least, a refpec-

table and, honoured name, while piety

founds meanly in his ears-and claims to be a
man of honour.-He refts upon humanity-
public fpirit-probity-and truth.-He arro-
gates to himself all the manly and active vir-
tues:-but devout affections and religious du-
ties he treats with contempt, as founded on
shadowy speculation, and fit to employ the at-
tention only of weak and fuperlitious minds.-
Hence this negle& of piety argues depravity of
foul-infers an irregular discharge of the duties
of morality, and discovers a cold and hard heart.

F5 . He

# MAN'S REAL DEPENDENCE.

He who ads from worldly wisdom lays prin-

ciple aside, and trust his defence to his art and
ability. He avails hinfelf of every advantage
which his knowledge of the world fuggefts-he
attends to nothing but what he confiders as his
interest; and uconfined by conscience, pursues
it by every course which proinifes him success.

Persons of this charater condemn themselves

to live a most unquiet life;-theypafs their days
in perpetual anxiety,-lifteningto every mo-
tion,-ftartled by every alarm,-changing their
measures on every new occurrence,-and when
dish-ess breaks in over all their defences, they
are left under it hopeless and disconsolate.

iAN:-S REAL DEPENDENCE.
iRJAN fliould proceed with caution and cir-

cumfpecion through a world, where evil

to frec.-uer.tly lurks under the form of good.-
To be humble and modest in opinion,-to be vi-
gilant and attentive in conduC,-to diffitil fair
-aear:es-I;-and to restrain raid deflres-are

inltructions

inftrii&ions which the darkness of his present
state ihould strongly inculcate.

God hath appointed his situation to be so am-

biguous in order both to call forth the exertion
of those intelligent powers which he hath given
him, and to enforce his dependence on his gra-
cious aid.-Surrounded by so many bewildering
paths, among which the wisest are ready to
(tray, he should earnefily implore, and thankful-
ly receive that divine illumination which is pro-
mifed to the pious and humble.

What muff be the fate of him who looks not

up to Heaven for direction, nor properly exerts
the reason which God hath given him ?-who
brings neither patience nor attention to the
search of true happiness ?--who applies to no
other counsellor than present pleafire, and with
a rash and credulous mind delivers himself up to
every suggestion of desire '

DEVOUT

# DEVOUT MAN.

DEVOUT MAN.
TjIS veneration is not confined to ads of im-

mediate worlhip. It is the habitual tem-

per of his foul. No place and no objec appear
to him void of God.--When he surveys this
vast universe, where beauty and goodness are
every where predominant ;-when he reflects
on the numberless multitudes of creatures,
who, in their different flations enjoy the blef-
sings of exigtence;-and when, at the fame time,
he looks up to an universal father, who hath
thus filled creation with life and happiness; his
heart glows within him. He looks forward
to immortality, and discovers the highest iubjecDs
of gratitude.-He views himself as a guilty crea-
ture, whom divine benignity has received into
grace, whose forfeited hopes it has restored,
and to whom it has opened the most glorious
prospect of future felicity.-He contemplates
with afoniihment the labours of the Son of God,
in accomplifbing redemption for men, and his
foul overflows with thankfulness to him.

To

To inferior enjoyments, he allots inferior and

secondary attachments.-He disclaims not every
earthly affection.-He pretends not to renounce
all pleasure in the comforts of this present tfate.
-Such an unnatural renunciation humanity for-
bids, and religion canmot require.-But from
these he expects not supreme blifs--He dif-
cerns the vanity which belongs to them all;
and beyond the circle of mutable objets, which
surround him, he aspires after some principles
of more perfelt felicity, which ihall not be sub-
jet to change or decay.

But where is this complete and permanent

good to be found ? Ambition pursues it in courts
and palaces, and returns from the pursuit load-
ed with forrows.-Pleafure -eeks it among
sensual joys, and retires with the confession of
disappointment.

After exploring heaven and earth for hap-

piness, to the devout man they seem a migh-
ty void, a wilderness of fladows, where all
would be empty and unsubstantial without God.
-True happinefi dwells only with God.

WOMEN

# MEN AND WOMEN. HOW DIFFERING IN POINT OF UNDERSTANDING.

MEN AND WOMEN.

HOW DIFFERING IN POINT OF UNDERSTANDING.
,JOQOMEN generally have quicker percep-

tions; men have juster fentiments.-Wo-

men confider how things may be prettily said;
men how they may be properly faid.-In wo-
men (young ones at leafl) speaking accompanies,
and Sometimes precedes reflection; in men re-
flection is the antecedent.

Women speak to ihine or please; men to con-

vince or confute.-Women admire what is bril-
liant; men what is folid.-WVomen prefer an
extemporaneous sally of wit, or a sparkling es-
fusion of fancy, before the mopt accurate reason-
ing, or the mo-s laborious investigation of fads.

In literary composition women are pleased

with point, turn, and antithesis; men with ob-
iervation, and a just deduction of effects from
their caufes.-Women are fond of incidents;
men of argument.-W"omen admire palfionate-

ly;

ly; men cautioufly.-One sex will think it be-
trays a want of feeling to be moderate in their
applause; the other will be afraid of exposing a
want of judgment by being in. raptures with any
thing.-Men refLfe to give way to the emo-
tions they actually feel; while women some-
times affect to be transported beyond what the
occasion will juflify.

The women of this country were not sent in-

to the world to shun society but embellish it ;
they were not designed for wilds and solitudes,
but for the amiable and endearing offices of so-
cial life.-They have useful flations to fill, and
important charalers to. fuftain.-They are of a
religion which does not impose penances, but en-
joins duties ; a religion of perfect purity, but of
perfect benevolence alfo,-a religion which does
not condemn its followers to indolent seclusion

from the world, but afligns them the more dan-
gerous, though more honourable province of liv-
ing. uncorrupted in it. In fine, a religion,
which does not direct them to fly from the mul-
titude, that they may do nothing, but which po-
fitively forbids them to follow a multitude to do
evil.

MAIRRIAGE.

# MARRIAGE.

MARRIAG E.
THERE is nothing which renders a woman

more despicable than her thinking it effen-

rial to happiness to be married. Besides the
gross indelicacy of the sentiment, it is a false
one, as thousands of women have experienced.
But a married ilate, if entered into from pro-
per motives of esteem and affection, is the hap-
pieft, makes women the most respectable in the
eyes of the world, and the moit useful members'
of society. Care should be taken not to relin-
quiih the ease and independence of a single life,
to become the saves of a fool, or a tyrant's
caprice.

Love is very seldom produced at firit fight;

at least, in that cafe, it muit have a very un-
juffifiable foundation. True love is founded on
esteem, in a correspondence of taftes and senti-
ments, and steals on the heart imperceptibly.
Therefore, before the affections come to be in
the leait engaged to any man, women Ihould
examine their tempers, their tafies, and their

hearts

hearts very severely and fettle in their own
minds, what are the requisites to their happi-
ness in a married Rate; and, as it is almost im-
pofible that they fliould get every thing they
wish, they ihould come to a tRe'ady determina-
tion what they are to confider as eflential, and
what may be sacrificed.

Should they have hearts disposed by nature

for love and friendlhip, and possess those feel-
ings which enable them to enter into all the re-
finements and delicacies of these attachments,
matters ihould be well confidered before they
give them any indulgence.

Should they have the misfortune to have such

tempers, and such sentiments deeply rooted in
them; should they have spirit and resolution to
refill the follicitations of vanity, the persecution
of friends: and can they support the profpeC& of
the many inconveniences attending the Hate of
an old maid, then they may indulge themselves
in that kind of sentimental reading and con-
verfation, which is moR correspondent to their
feelings.

But if it is found, on a ftric felf-examination,
that marriage is aboilutely essential to their

happiness,

happineif, the ficret flould be kept inviolable
in their own bofoms;-but they flould ihuni
Ls they would do the mofi fatal poison, all that
!pecies of reading and conversation, which
warms the imagination, which engages and
!boiens the heart, and raises the taste above the
leve! of common life. If they do othenvife,
let thmn confider the terrible conflict of pas-
fiuns this may afterwards raise in their breasts.

If this refinement once takes deep root in

their minds, and they do not mean to obey its
dictates, but marry from vulgar and mercenary
views, they may never be able to eradicate it
entirely, and then it will embitter all their mar-
ried days. Instead of meeting with fenfe,-ten-
dernefs,--delicacy,--a lover,-a friend,-an
equal companion in an husband, they may be
tried with insipidity and dulnefs;-fhockedwith
indelicacy;-and mortified by indifference.

To avoid these complicated evils, joined to

others which may arise from the opinion of the
world relative to the infelicity thence arising;
women, who are determined, at all events, to
marry, slould have all their reading and amife-
ments of such a kind, asdo not afiect the heart nor

the

the imagination, except in the way of wit and
humour.

Whatever are a woman's views in marrying,
lhe ihould take every possible precaution to pre-
vent being disappointed. If fortune, and the
pleasure it brings be her aims, the principal fe-
curity {he can have for this will depend on her
marrying a good natured, generous man; who
despises money, and who will let her live where
/he can belt enjoy that pleasure, that pomp, and
parade of life for which flie married him.

In order to ensure felicity, it is difficult to

point out in the married itate the most effectal
method; nor can we advise whom a woman
Sfiould marry, but we may with great confi-
dence advise whom mhe should not marry.

A companion that may entail any hereditary

disease on posterity, particularly madness should
be avoided. Such rifque is the height of impru-
dence and highly criminal.

A woman should not marry a fool; he is the

most intraCtable of all animals; he is led by his
passions and caprices, and is incapable of hear-

ing

ing the voice of reason. Betides it may probably
too hurt a woman's vanity to have an husband,

for wvhom fle has reason to blufl and tremble
every time he opens his lips in company.

But theworft circumRance that attends a fool,
s his conMant jealoufyoi'hiswife's being thought
to govern him. This renders it impofible to
lead him; and he is continually doing absurd
and difagreeabie things, for no other reason but
to fnew he dare do them.

A rake is always a fuipicious hulband, be-

cause he has -only known the most worthless of
the ser.

Women, who have a sense of religion, lhould

not think of husbands who have none. If they
have tolerable understandings, they will be glad
that their wives have religion, for their own
fakes, and for the fake of their familes; but it will
link them in their elteem.

If they are weak men, they will be continu-

ally flocking and teasing them about their prin-
ciples.

A sudden

A sudden sally of passion ihould never be given

way to, and dignified with the name of love.-
Genuine love is not founded on caprice; it is
founded in nature, or honourable views;-on
virtue-on fimiliarity of taftes-and sympathy
of fouls.

In point of fortune, which is necessary to the

happiness of both, a competency is requisite.
But what that competency may be, can only be
determined by their own taftes. If they have
enough between them, as will satisfy all de-
mands, it is sufficient.

Marriage will at once dispel the enchantment

raised by external beauty; but the virtues and
graces that sirs warmed the heart, that reserve,
and delicacy which always left the lover fomee
thing further to wilh, and often made him
doubtful of his mistress's sensibility and attach-
ment, may and ought ever to remain.

The tumult of passion will naturally subside;

but it will be succeeded by an endearment that
affects the heart in a more equal, more sensible,
-and more tender nanner.

TRUE

# TRUE MEEKNESS.

TRUE MIEEKNESS.
V,/EEKNESS, like moit other virtues, has

certain limits, which it no sooner exceeds

than it becomes criminal. She who hears' in-
nocence maligned without vindicating it,-falfe-
hood aflerted without contradicting it,-or reli-
gion profaned without refentingiit,.is not gentle,
but wicked.

AIeeknefs is imperfect, if it be not both

acive and pafive; if it will not enable us to
subdue our own paflions and resentments, as
well as qualify us to bear patiently the paflions
and resentments of others. If it were only for
mere human reasons, it would turn to a profi-
table account to be patient; nothing defeats the
malice of an enemy like the spirit of forbear-
ance; the return of rage for rage cannot be so
effectually provoking.

True gentleness, like an impenetrable ar-

mour, repels the most pointed flafts of-malice:
they cannot pierce through this vulnerable Jhield,

but

but either fall hurtless to the ground, or return
to wound the hand that thot them.

A meek spirit will not look out of itself for

happinesss becaune it finds a confant banquet at
home; yet, by a fort of divine alchymy, it
will convert all external events to its own pro-
fit; and be able to deduce some good, even from
the most unpromising, it will extrac comfort
and fatisfa&ion, from the most barren, circum-
stances; " It will fuck honey out of the rock,
tó and oil out of the flinty rock."

Meekness may be called the pioner of all the

other virtues, which levels every obstruction;
and smooths every difficulty that might impede
their entrance; or retard their progres.--Ho-
nours and dignities are transient ;-beauty and
riches frail and fugacious ;-but this amiable vir-
tue is permanent. And surely the truly wife
would wili to have some one profession, which
they might call their own in the severest exi-
gencies. This can only be accomplihled by ac-
quiring and maintaining that calm and absolute
felf-poffefion, which, as the world had no hand
in giving, so it cannot, by the moit malicious
exertion of its power, take \vay.

MIDDLE

# MIDDLE AGE.

MIDDLE AGE.
A S we advance from youth to middle age,

a new field of action opens, and a different

character is required.-The flow of gay and
impetuous spirits begins to fubfide.-Life gra-
dually assumes a graver cofi; the mind a more
sedate and thoughtful turn.-The attention is

l;ow transferred from pleasure to interest; that
is, to pleasure, diffuifed over a wider extent,
and measured by a larger scale.

Formerly, the enjoyment of the present mo-

ment occupied the whole attention. Now, no
aclion terminates alternately in itself, but refers
to some more diflant aim.-Wealth and power,
the instruments of lasting gratification, are now
coveted more than any single pleafure;-pru-
dence and foresight lay their plan;-induflry
carries on its patient efforts;-acdivity pushes
forward ;-address winds around ;-here, an
enemy is to be overcome;-there, a rival to be
difplaced;-competitions warm;-and the frife
the world thickens on every fide.

THE

# THE UNION OF PIETY AND MORALITY.

THE UNION OF PIETY AND MORALITY.
Ti1IS forms the confiitent, the graceful, the

refpe&able character of the real-chriifian,

the man of true worth. Either of them left

out, one fide of the character is only fair; the
other fide will be always open to much reproach.
Hence we dishonour ourselves, and do great in-
justice to religion: as by division it is exposed to-
the censure of the world.

The unbeliever will scoff at such piety, where

he fees neglect of moral duties. The bigot
will'decry all morality, -where he fees a pre-
tence of virtue, though a contempt of God.
Whereas he who fears God, and is at the fame
time just and beneficent to men, exhibits reli-
gion to the world with full propriety.-His cha-
racter is above reproach.-It is at once amiable
,and venerable.-MIalice itself is afraid to at-
tack him; and even the worst men refpe&t
and honour him in their hearts. He who fails

materially either inpiety, or virtue, is always ob-
noxious to the anguili of remorse.

G NEGLECT

# NEGLECT OF RELIGION.

NEGLECT OF RELIGION.
J/HERE Religion is neglested there can be

no regular or fleady pracice of the duties

of morality. The characer will be often incon-

fifent; and virtue, placed on a basis too narrow
to support it, will be always loose and tottering.
For such is the propensity of our nature to vice,
so numerous are the temptations to a relaxed and
immoral condu&t, that fironger rerfraints than
those of mere reason, are necessary to be impo-
fed on man.

The sense of right and wrong, the principle

of honour, "or the inflin& of benevolence, are
barriers too feeble to withstand the strength of
paiion. For the heart wounded by fore distress,
or agitated by violent emotions, soon discovers;
that virtue without religion is inadequate to tlhe
government of life. It is destitute of its proper
guard-of its firmest fupport-of its chief en-
couragement.-It will fink under. the weight
of misfortune,-or will yield to the solicitations
of guilt.

Humanity

# OLD MAID.

Humanity seconded by piety renders the

spring from whence it flows of course more re-
gular and conflant. In short, withdraw reli-
gion and you shake all the pillars of morality.
In every heart you weaken the influence of vir-
tue: and among the multitude, the bulk of man-
kind, you overthrow its power.

OLD MAID.
IT is to be lamented that so universal a stigma

should fall upon that state, called antiquated

virginity; and.that those whose unhappy lot it is
flhould experience such general derision. It is a
mistaken notion, though, to conclude that it al-
ways arises in consequence of the fituatipn of
such individuals; it often originates from their
own peculiar condut.

Being unable to bear with becoming fortitude

their forlorn and unprotected allotment in life,
chagrin and peevilhnefs are apt to infect their
tempers; and they too severely feel the great
difficulty of making a transition with dignity,

G 2 and

and cheerfulness, from the period of youth,
beauty, admiration, and relpea, into the calm,
silent, unnoticed retreat of declining years.

For we fee some unmarried women of aaive

vigorous minds and great vivacity of spirits de-
grading themselves; sometimes by entering into
a difipated course of life, unsuitable to their
years, and exposing themselves to the ridicule of
girls, who might have been their grand chil-
dren ;-forretimes by oppressing their acquaint-
ances by impertinent intrusions into their pri-
vate affairs;-and Sometimes by being the pro-
pagators of Scandal and defamation.

All this is owing to an exuberant activity of

spirit; which, if it had found employment at
home, would have rendered them refpeDtable
and useful members of society.

We fee other women, in the fame situation,

gentle, modet, blest with sense, tafle, delicacy,
and every *ilder feminine virtue of the heart,
but of weak fiprits, baihful and timid. Them
lwe fee finking into obscurity and insignificance,
and gradually losing every elegant accomplish-
ment; for this evident reason, that they are
not united to a partner who has sense and worth,

and
'V

# OLD AGE.

and taste to know their value;-one who is able
to draw forth their concealed qualities, and Ihew
them to advantage;-who can give that support
to their feeble spirits which they stand so much
in need of,-and who, by his affeftion and tender-
ness, might make such a woman happy in exert-'
ing every talent, and accomplishing herself in
every elegant art that could contribute to his
amui'ement.

,OLD AGE.
OLD Age is a stage of the human course,

which every one hopes to reach; it is a pe-

riod justly entitled to general respeCt. Even
its failings ought to be touched with a gentle
hand. For though in every part of life vexa-
tions occur; yet, in former years, either bufi-
ness, or pleasure, served to obliterate their im-
preiflon, by supplying occupation to the-mind.

Old age begins its advances by disqualifying

men either from relishing the one; or for taking
an active part in the other; while it withdraws
their accustomed supports, it imposes, at the fame

G 3 time

time, the additional burden of growing infirmi-
ties.

In the former stages of their journey, hope

continued to flatter them with many a fair and
enticing profpe&t; but as old age increases
these illusions vanifh.-Life is contrated within
a narrow and barren circle.-Year after year
steals somewhat away from their store of com-
fort,-deprives them of some of their antient
friends,--blunts some of their powers of sensa-
tion,-and incapacitates them for some function
of life:

The querulous temper, to them imputed, is to

be confidered as a naturalinfirmity, rather than
a vice: the fame apology cannot be made for'
that peevish disgust at the manners, and, thac
malignant tenfure of the enjoyments, of the
young, which is sometimes found to accompany
declining years.

It is too common to find the aged at declared

enmity with the whole system of present cuf-
toms and manners; perpetually complaining of
the growing depravity of the world, and of the
altonifling vices ald follies of the rising genera-

tion..

# PASSIONATE WOMAN.

tion. All things, according to them, are rushing
fast into ruin. Decency and good order have
become extinct; ever fice that happy discipline,
under which they spent their youth, has passed
away.

Former follies vanifli, and are forgotten.

Those which are present, strike observation and
sharpen censure. Had the depravation of the
world continued to increase in proportion to
those gloomy calculations, which, so many cen-
turies past, have estimated each race as worse
than the preceding; by this time, not one ray
of good sense% nor one spark of piety and virtue,
must have remained unextinguilhed among man-
kind.

PASSIONATE WOMAN.
A PASSIONATE woman's happiness is never

in her own keeping ;-it is the sport of ac-

cident and the save of events.-It is in the
power of her acquaintance,-her fervants,-but
chiefly her enemies;-and all her comforts lie at
the mercy of others. So far from being willing

G4 to

# APPEARANCES OF PIETY.

to learn of him who was meek and lowly,
ihe confiders meekness as the want of a becom-
ing spirit, and lowliness as a despicable and vul-
gar meanness.

An impericus woman will so little covet the

ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, that it is
the only ornament ihe will not be follicitous to

wear. But refentmenr is a very expensive vice.
How dearly has it colt its votaries, even from
the fin of Cain, the first offender of this kind.?
' It is cheaper (fays a pious writer) to forgive
a:id save the charges."'

APPEARANCES OF PIETY.
'THESE are often substituted in the place of

the great duties of humanity and mercy.-

Too many flatter themselves with the hope of
obtaining the friendlhip of their Creator, though
they neglet to do jufice to their fellow-crea-
tures.

But supposed piety is an invention of their
own, unknown to reafon-unknown in the word

of

# MEN OF TRUE PLEASURE.

of'God.-For piety is a principle which regene-
rates the heart, and forms it to goodnefs.-If
therefore, while piety seems ardent, morality
liall decline; or if ever the regard to it should
totally fail-if, whilst making prayers, no alms
are given-if, whilst we appear zealous for God,
we are false or unjust to men,-if we are hard
or contracted in heart, severe in our censures,
and oppressive in our conduc, then conclude
what we have termed piety, was no more than
an empty name, resolving itself either into an
hypocritical form of godlinefs-a transient im-
prelffon of ferioufnefs-an accidental melting of
the heart-or the deliberate refuge of a deluded
and fuperfiitious, but, at the fame time, a cor-
rupted mind. For all men,. even the most de-
praved, are subjet, more or less, to compunc-
tions of conscience.

MEN OF TRUE PLEASURE.
THE feat of enjoyment is the foul.-None but

the temperate, the regular, and the vir-

tuous know how to enjoy profperity.-They
bring to its comforts the manly reli{h of a found,

G 5 uncorrupted

uncorrupted mind.-They flop at the proper
point before enjoyment degenerates into difgufl,
and pleasure is converted into pain.-They are
strangers from those complaints which flow from
spleen, caprice, and all the fantastical difireffes of
a vitiated mind.-Purity and virtue heighten
all the powers of human fruition.-Moderate
and simple pleasures relish high with the tempe-
rate.

Innocence confers ease and freedom on the

mind; leaves it open to every pleasing sensa-
tion; gives a lightness to the spirits, similar to.
the native gaiety of youth and health;-for
prosperity is redoubled to a good man by his
generous use of it; it is reflected back upon him.
from every one whom he makes happy.

In the intercourse of domestic affection,-in

the attachment of friends,-the gratitude of de-
pendents,-the efleem and good will of all who
know him,-he fees blessings multiplied around
hir on every fide; like a tree in the midst of
an inhabited country, affording to some friendly
ffieler; to others fruit, which is not only ad-
mired by all for its beauty, but blessed by the
traveller for the slade, and by the hungry for
the fuienance it has given.

M.A N

# MAN OF PLEASURE.

M.AN OF PLEASUR.E.
To a man of pleasure every moment appears ib

be loft, whichpartakes not of thevivacity of

amufement.-To connet oneplan of gaiety with
another is his fore tudy, till in a very Short time
nothing remains but to tread the fame be?, a
round,-to enjoy what they have already- enjoy-
ed,-and to fee what they have often seen.

Pleasures thus drawn to the dregs become va-

pid and tasteless. What might have pleated
long, if enjoyed with temperance.and mingled
with retirement, being devoured with such eager.
haste, speedily surfeits and. disgusts. Hence,
having run through a rapid course of pleasure,
after having glittered for a few years in the fore-
most line of public amusements, such men are
the most apt to fly at las to a melancholy re-
treat; not led by religion or reason, but driven
by disappointed hopes and exhauffted spirits to
the pensive conclusion, that all is:,vanity.

PLEASURE,

# PLEASURE, SENSUAL AND SPIRITUAL.

PLEASURE, SENSUAL AND SPIRITUAL.
THE refined pleasures of a pious mind, are,

in many refpefts, superior' to the coarse

gratifications of fenfe';-they are pleasures
which belong to the highest powers and best as-
feetions of the foul;. whereas the gratifications
of sense reside in the lowest region of our na-
ture. To the one the foul stoops below its na-
tive dignity; the other raises it above. itself.
-The one leaves always a comfortless, often a
mortifying remembrance behind it; the other
is reviewed with applause and delight.-The
pleasures of some resemble a foaming torrent;
which, after. a disorderly course, speedily runs
out, and leaves an empty and offensive channel:
but the pleasures of devotion resemble the
equable current of a pure river, which enlivens
the fields through which it passes, and diffuses
verdure and fertility along its banks.

PLE.SUiRES

# PLEASURES OF OLD AGE.

PLEASURES OF OLD AGE.
THOUGH, in old age, the circle of plearure

is contracted, yet within its limits, many of

those enjoyments remain which are most grate-
ful to human nature.

Temperate mirth is not extinguified by ad-

vanced years;-the mild pleasures of domestic
life still cheer the heart.-The entertainments

of conversation and social intercourse continue
unimpaired.-The desire of knowledge is not
abated by the frailty of the body, and the lei-
sure of old age affords many opportunities for
gratifying that defire.-The sphere of obferva-
tion and reflection is not so much enlarged by
long acquaintance with the world, as to supply,
within itself, a wide range of improving thought:
whilst the aged are engaged in such employ-
ments as best suit the infirmities of their nature,
they are surrounded, perhaps, with families,
who treat them with attention and refpet;
they are honoured by their friends; their cha-
racters are eftablilhed, and are placed beyond.

the

# PRESUMPTION.

the reach of clamour and the strife of tongues;
and, free from difrafting cares, can calmly at--
tend to their eternal interests.

No age is doomed to total infelicity, provid-

ed that we attempt not to do violence to na-
ture, by seeking to extort from one age the plea-
fures of another, and to gather in the winter of
life those flowers which were defiined to blossom
only in its summer or its spring.

P R E S U P T'IO N.
THE constant concomitant of presumption is

felf-conceit and obstinacy; and of all the

follies incident to youth particularly, there are
none which either deform its present appear-
ance, or blast the profpeft of its future profpe-.
rity more than these. By checking its natural.
progrees in improvement, they fix it in long.
immaturity, and frequently produce mischiefs,.
which can never. be repaired..

These are the vices too commonly found:
among the young.-Big with enterprize. and.

elated

elated by hope, they resolve to. trust for success
to none but themfelves.-Full of their own abi-
lities, they deride the admonitions which are
given them by their friends, as the timorous fug-
geftions of age.-Too wife to learn,-too im-
patient to deliberate,-too forward to be re--
firained, they plunge with precipitate indifcre-
tion into the midst of all the dangers with
which life abounds.-Pofitive in opinion, and
confident in their assertions,. as -they are at.this-
period, the time will arrive when both men and.
things will appear in a different light. Many
characters now admired, will fink; by and by,
in efteem4-and many opinions of which. they
are at present most tenacious,. will alter as they
advance in years.

The glare of youthful presumption which

dazzles our eyes should always be diitrufled
we lhould not abound in our own sense, nor
put ourselves forward with too much eagerness 5
nor imagine that by the impetuosity of juvenile
ardour, systems can be overturned which have
been long established, or that the face of the
world can be changed; but by. patient and gra-
dual progreflion in improvement, we may in due
time command lasting esteem. But.by assuming,.

at

# DISSAPPOINTED PRIDE.

at present, a tone of superiority to which we
have no title, we shall disgust those whose ap-
probation it is moRs important to gain. For-
ward vivacity may fit us to be the companions
of an idle hour. Miore solid qualities mull re-
commend us to the wife, and mark us out for
importance and cornideration in subsequent life.

DISSAPPOINTED PRIDE.
W HEN a man's sufferings rifes from the

bad dispositions of his own heart; when

in the height of prosperity he is rendered mise-
rable solely by disappointed pride, every ordi-
nary motive for communication ceases. The
violence of anguilh drives him to confess a pas-
flon which renders him odious, and a weakness
which renders him despicable.

In the eye of his family, every man wilhes to

appear refpe&table, and to cover from their
knowledge whatever may vilify, or degrade
him. Attacked or reproached abroad, he con-
soles himself with his importance at home; and
in domestic attachment and refpe&, seeks for,

for.e

# PRINCIPLE AND SENTIMENT CONTRASTED.

some compensation for the injustice of the world,
But the torments this folly occasions forces him
to break through all restraints, and publish his
lhame before those from whom all men seek
mnof to hide it.

All the evils which poverty, disease, or vio-

lence can conflit, and their stings will be found
by far less pungent than those which such guilty
passions dart into the heart. But those disorders,
by seizing directly on the mind, attack human
nature in its strong hold, and cut off its last re-
source.. They penetrate to the very feat of
sensation, and convert all the powers of thought
into initruments of torture.
PRINCIPLE AND SENTIMENT

CONTRASTED.
SENTIMENT and principle are often miflaken

for each other; though in fat they widely

differ.-Sentiment is the virtue of ideas, and
principle the virtue of action.-Sentiment has
its feat in the head; principle in the heart.-
Sentiment suggests fine harrangues; and subtle

difindions;

ditinctions; principle conceives juRf notions,.
and performs good aAions il consequence of
them.-Sentiment refines away the simplicity
of truth, and the plainness of piety; and, as
Voltaire, that celebrated wit, has remarked of
his no less celebrated cotemporary Roufleau,
" gives us virtue in words and vice in deeds"-
Sentiment may be called the Athenian who-
knew what was right; and principle the Lace-
demonian who pracifed it.

These quali:ies may be exemplified from con-

fiderire two characlers beautifully drawn by the
admirable per. of Miklon.-Belial, who may be
called, and not imoioperly, the Demon of senti--
ment; and Abdiel, the Angel of principle.

BELIAL.

A fairer person loft not heaven; he seemed
For dignity compoied, and high exploit,
But all was false and hollow, tho' his tongue
Dropt manna, and could make the worse appear
The better reafeon :o perplex and dafl
Matureft couniels; ror his thoughts were low,.
To vice industrious, but to nobler deeds
Tim'rous and slothful; yet he pleated the ear.

ABDIEL..

# PROSPERITY.

ABDIEL.

**" ----- Faithful found

Among the faithless, faithful only he
Among innumerable false, unmoved,
Unihaken, unfeduced, unterrified;
His loyalty he kept, his love, his zeal.
Nor number, nor example with him wrought
To swerve from truth, or change his constant

mind,
Though single.-

PROSPERITY.
A SINGLE disappointment is sufficient to em-

bitter all the pleasures of worldly profpe-

rity. Though it might be expected, one in pof-
feflion of high power and station should difre-
gard flight injuries. But prosperity debilitates
instead of frengthening the mind.-Its common
effect is, to create an extreme sensibility to the
slightest wound.-It foments impatient desires;
and raises expectations which no success can f-
tisfy.-It soRters a false delicacy, which sickens

# NECESSITY OF PRUDENCE IN EVERY STAGE OF LIFE.

in the midst of indulgence;-by repeated grati-
ficatron, it blurts the feelings of men to what is
pieafiag; and leaves them unhappily acute to
-wh.atever is uneasy.
NECESSITY OF PRUDENCE IN EVERY

STAGE OF LIFE.
AT the first setting out in life, especially

when yet unacquainted with the world

and its snares, when every pleasure enchants
with its fmiie, and every objec&t fines with the
gloss of novelty, youth ihould beware of the
{educing appearances which surround them;
and recollea what others have suffered from

the power of head-strong desire. If any paflion
be allowed, even though it should be esteemed
innocent, to acquire an absolute ascendant, their
inward peace will be impaired. But if any,
which has the taint of guilt, they may date
from that moment the ruin of their tranquility.

Nor x'ith the season of youth does the peril

end. To the impetuosity of youthful desire;
succeed the more fober, but no less dangerous

attachments

# REDEMPTION.

attachments of advancing years; when the pas-
sions which are connedted with interest and am-
bition begin their reign, and too frequently
extend their influence, even over those periods
of life which ought to be the most tranquil.

From the firit to the last of man's abode on

earth, the discipline must never be relaxed of
guarding the heart from the dominion of pas-
sion. Eager passions and violent desires were
not made for man.-They exceed his sphere.
-They find no adequate object on earth ;-
and, of course, can be productive of nothing
but misery.

The certain consequence of indulging them,

is, that there lhall come an evil day, when the
anguish of disappointment Ihail acknowledge
that all which we enjoy availeth us nothing.

RE D E M PT 0 N.
THIS is one of the ioft glorious works of

the Almighty-illuftrious is the hour of
the restoration of the world-the hour when

from

# REFORMATION.

from condemnation and misery, it emerged
into happiness and peace.

In this hour, the long series of prophecies,

visions, types, and figures was accomplished.
This was the centerin which they all met;-this
the point to which they tended and verged,
throughout the course of so many generations.
--e behold the law and the prophets standing
at the foot of the cross, and doing homage.-We
behold Moses and Aaron bearing the ark of the
covenant;-David and Elijah presenting the ora-
cle of teftimony;-we behold all the priests and
facrifices,-all the rites and ordinances,-all the
types and symbols, assembled together to receive
their confummation.-In this hour every rite as-
fumed its significancy;- every prediaion met
its event; -every symbol displayed its corre-
fpondence.

R E F O -RM A T I O N.
THE rage for reformation commonly lhevws

itself in a violent zeal for fupprefling what

is wrong, rather than in a prudent attention
to eftabliih what is right; but we fiall never

obtain

# RELIGION.

obtain a fair garden merely by rooting upweeds;
we muff also plant flowers: for the natural
richness of the foil we have been clearing will
not susser it to lie barren, but whether it shall be
vainly or benficially prolific, depends on the
culture.

RELIGION.
TTHE spirit of true religion breathes gentle-

ness and affability.--t gives a native unaf-

feeed ease to the behaviour.-It is social, kind,
and cheerful;-far removed from that gloomy
and illiberal superstition which clouds the brow,
sharpens the temper, dejecs the spirit, and
teaches men to fit themselves for another world,
by negleting the concerns of this.

On the contrary, religion connects our pre-

paration for Heaven, with an honourable dif-
charge of the duties of acive life.-It is affo-
ciated in the imagination with all that is lovely
and ufefal,-with whatsoever things are true,
are just, are pure, are lovely, are of good
report,-wherever there is any virtue,--and
wherever there is any praise.

Religion

Religion is rather a matter of sentiment thain

reasoning. The important and interesting arti-
cles of faith are sufficiently plain.' Our atten-
tion should be fixed on these, and not suffered
to meddle with controversy. For there we are
plunged into a chaos, from which we never
T1a'l be able to extricate ourselves. It spoils
the temper, and has no good effet on the
heart.

Al bookis and all conversation that tend to

f£ake our faith, on those great points of religion
which ilould serve to regulate our condut, and
on which our hopes of future and eternal happi-
ness depend, flould be avoided.

Mre thould never indulge ourselves in ridi-

cule on religious fubjecs, nor give countenance
to it in others, by teeming diverted with what
they fay. This, to people of good breeding,
will be a sufficient check. It is not necessary to
go furiher than scripture for our religious opi-
nions.

We should embrace thore we find clearly re-

vealed, and never perplex ourselves about such
as we do not understand, but treat them with
silent and becoming reverence,

RELIGIOUS

# RELIGIOUS REFLECTION.

RELIGIOUS REFLECTION.
I there be any impression which man is fonn-

ed by nature to receive, it is religion.-As
oion as his mind opens to observation he dif-
cerns innumerable marks of his dependent
ftate;-he finds himself placed, by Come fupe-
rior power, in a vast world, where'the wisdom
and goodness of the Creator are conspicuous on
.every fide.

The magnificence, the beauty, the order of

nature, excite him to admire and adore. When
he looks up to the omnipotent hand which ope-
rates throughout the universe, he is impressed
with reverence !-when he receives blessings
which he cannot avoid ascribing to divine good-
ness he is prompted to gratitude.

Tribes of men, without policy, or laws, or

cities, or any of the arts of life are discovered;
but no where without some form of religion.
In every region we behold the prostrate worlip-
er, the temple, the altar, and the offering.

H RESIGNATION.

# RESIGNATION.

RESIGNATION.
IGN ORANCE of good or evil should determine

man to follow providence, and resign him-

self to God. Resignation to his maker is one of
the most important lessons which can be given
to man. He knows not what is good for him-
self in the future periods of life; but God per-
fctly knows it; and if he faithfully serves him,
he has reason to believe that God will always
consult it. Before him lies the whole succession
of events, which are to fill up man's existence.
It is in his power to arrange, and model them
at his pleasure.

Amidst the agitations of desire, and the per-

plexities of doubt, there is one fixed point of
reft. By this let man abide; and dismiss his
anxiety about things uncertain and unknown.
He fiould acquire an interest in divine favour;
and he may safely surrender himself to the di-
vine administration. When tempted to repine
at his condition he should reflec whether he
would have been happier in any other fRation.

He

# RIDICULE.

He ihould not be too particular in his petitions

to heaven concerning his temporal interest, but
susser God to govern the world according to his
own plan; and only pray, thathe would bestow
what his unerring wisdom fees to be belt for
him. On the whole he Should follow wherever
his providence leads; comply with whatever
he requires, and leave all the reft to him.

RIDICULE;
T-HE ffatal fondness for indulging a spirit of ri-

dicule, and the injurious and irreparable con-

sequences which sometimes attend the too revere
reply,cannever be condemnedwithmore asperity
than it deserves. Not to offend is the firfi flep
towards pleasing. To give pain is as much an
offence againit humanity as against good breed-
ing; and surely it is as well to abstain from an
aCtion because it is sinful, as because it is im-
polite,

A man of sense and breeding will sometimes
join in the laugh, which has been railed at his

H z expense

# SELF COMMUNION

expense by an ill-natured repartee; but if it was
very cutting, and one of those shocking forts of
truths, which as they scarcely can be pardoned
even in private, ought never to beuttered in pub-
lic. He does not laugh because he is pleased,
but because he wishes to conceal how much he is
hurt; and will remember it, as a treat of malice,
wvhen the whole company thould have forgotten
it as a firoke of ridicule.-Even women are so
far from being privileged by their sex to fay un-
handsome or cruel things, that it is this very
circumfrance which renders them intolerable.

When the arrow is lodged in the heart, it is no
relief to him who is wounded to reflec, that
the hand which hot it was a fair one.

SELF COMMUNION
AS recommended by men -of virtue and true

piety, is religious recollefion. It is to

commune with ourselves, under the character
of spiritual and immortal beings; and to ponder
those paths of our feet which are -leading us to
eternity.-It is to bring home to our fouls the
internal, authorative sense of God, as of a fove-

reign

reign and a father; to contemplate what is dif-
played of his perfections.-It is to realize the
presence of the supreme Being, so as to produce
the most profound veneration,--and to awaken
the earnest desire of as near an approach, as our
nature will permit, to that great fountain of hap-
pinels and life.

By this the pious man walks among the vari-

ous scenes of nature as within the precincts of a
great temple, in the habitual exercise of devo-
tion. And from hence, when his thoughts have
been thus employed, he returns to the world like
a superior being. He carries into aaive life,
those pure and elevating sentiments, to which
the giddy crowd are strangers. A certain odour
of fan&tity remains upon his mind, which, for
awhile at least, will-repel the contagion of the
world.

As he views the world with the eye of a chris-

tianhe willsee, that howevermenappeartomove
and a& after their own pleasure, they are never-
thelefs retained in secret bonds by the Almighty;
and all their operations rendered subservient to
the ends of his moral government.-He will be-
hold him punilhing the inner by means of his own

H 3 iniquities ;

# SILENCE.

iniquities; from the trials of therighteous bring-
ing forth their reward; and to a ftateof seeming
universal confusion preparing the wisest and
most equitable iffue.-WThile the faflion of this
world is passed falf away, he will discern the
glory of another arising fail to succeed it.-He
will behold all human events; our grief and our
joys,-our love and hatred,-our character and
our memo:r, absorbed in the ocean of eternity;
and no traces of our present existence left, ex-
cept its being for ever well with the righteous,
and ill with the wicked.

S I L E N C E.
SILENCE is one of the great arts of converfa-

tion, as allowed by Cicero himself, who fays,

AL there is not only an artbut an eloquence in it,"
and this opinion is confirmed by a great modern,
Lord Bacon. For a well-bred woman may easily
and effectually promote the most useful and ele-
gant conversation, without speaking a word.
The modes of speech are fcarcely.more variable
than the modes of silence,

The

The silence of listless ignorance, and the si-

lence of sparkling intelligence, are perhaps as
feperately marked, and as distinctly expressed,
as the fame feelings could have been by the most
unequivocal language. A woman, in a company
where she has the least influence, may promote
any subject by a profound and invariable atten-
tion; which flews that {he is pleased with it;
and by an illuminated countenance, which proves
she underfiands it.

Attention is the most flattering encourage-

ment in the world to men of sense and letters,
to continue any topic of inltrution, or enter-
tainment, they happen to be engaged in. It
owed its introduction perhaps to accident, the
best- introduction for a subje&t of ingenuity,
which, though it could not have been formally
proposed without pedantry, may be continued
with ease and good-humour; but which will be
frequently and effecually flopped by the lifflefs-
ness, inattention, or whispering of filly girls;
whose weakness betrays their ignorance, and
whose impatience exposes their ill-breeding.

H 4 SINCERITY,

# SINCERITY.

SINCERITY.
INCEPITY is the bails of every virtue. The

love of truth, as we value the approba-

tion of heaven, or the esteem of the world,
should be cultivated.-In all our proceedings it
will make us dire& and confiltent.-Ingenuity
and candour possess the most powerful charm;
they bespeak universal favour, and carry an
apology for almost every failing.

The path of truth- i a plain and safe pati.-

It supplies us with an openefs of character which
displays a generous boldness, necessary to dif-
tinguifa youth.---To give an early prefer-
ence to honour above gain when they fland in
competition ;--to despise every advantage, which
cannot be attained without diflioneft arts ;-to
brook no meannefs,-and stoop to no difimula-
tion, are the indications of a great mind, the
presages of future eminence and diftinftion in
life.

At the fame time, this virtuous fncerity is_
perfectly confifient with the most prudent vigi-

lance

# SLOTH.

lance and caution.-It is opposed to cunning,
not to true wifdom.-It is not the simplicity of
the weak and improvident, but the candour of
an enlarged and noble mind; of one who scorns
deceit, because he accounts it both base and un-
profitable; and who seeks no disguise, because
he needs none to hide him.

S L O T H.
NOTHING is fd opposite to the true enjoy-

ment of life, as the relaxed and feeble

ltate of an indolent mind. Sloth is so incon-

fiflent with both soundness of mind and body,
that it is harder to determine whether it be a

greater foe to virtue, or to health arid happiness.
-Inactive as it is in itself, its effets are fatally
powerful.-Though it appear a slowly flowing
itream, yet it undermines all that is stable and
flourifhing.-It not only saps. the foundation of
every virtue, but pours upon us a deluge of
crimes and evils--It is. like water, which first
putrifies by itagnation; and then fends up noxi-
ous. vapors; and fills the atmosphere with death.

H 5. Idlenefi

I

# SOBRIETY OF MIND, ITS NECESSITY.

Idleness is the certain parent both of guilt and

ruin which should be avoided.-Under this are

included, not mere inaction only, but all that
circle of trifling occupations, in which too many
saunter away their youth; perpetually engaged
in frivolous society, or public amusements ;-in
the labour of dress, or the oitentation of their
peribns.

Amusements, youth requires. It were vain

-it were cruel, to prohibit them. But, though
allowable as the relaxation, they are moioft cul-
pable as the business of the young. For they
then become the gulph of time, and the poison
of the mind.-They foment bad paffions-they
weaken the manly powers-they fink the na-
tive vigour of youth into contemptible effemi-
nacv.

SOBRIETY OF MIND,,

ITS NECESSITY.
SOBRIETY of mind is one of those virtues,

which the present condition of human life
itrongly inculcates, The uncertainty of its en-

joyments,

joyments, checks presumption; the multiplicity
of its dangers, demands perpetual caution.

Moderation,--vigilance,-and felf-govern-

ment, are duties incumbent on all; But especially
on such as are beginning the journey of life. For
the whole slate of youthful views and paflions,
is adverse to sobriety of mind.-The scenes.
which present themselves at our entering upon
the world, are commonly fiattering.-Whatever
they be in themselves, the lively spirits of the
young gild every opening profpect.-The field
·of hope appears to stretch wide before them.
P!eafure seems to put forth its blossoms on every
fide,.-Impelled by desire, forward they rufl
with inconsiderate ardour :-prompt to'decide
and to chafe;-averfe to hesitate or to enquire;
-credulous, because untaught by experience;-
rafll, because unacquainted with danger;-ihead-
strong, because unfubdued by disappointment.

In human acions there is a right and wrong.

-Those who are born with the fame advan-
tages of fortune, are not all equally prosperous
in the course of life.-Some of them, by wife
and steady condut,. attain diflincion in the
world,. and pass their days with comfort and

honour;

honour;-others, of the fame rank, by mean
and vicious behaviour, forfeit the advantages
of their birth,-involve themselves in much mi-
fery,-and end in being a disgrace to their
friends, and a burden on society. Early, then,
we may learn, that it is not on the external
condition in which we find ourselves placed;
but on that part on which we are to at, that
our welfare or unhappinefs;-our honour or in-
famv depend.

When -beginning to a. that part, it is of the

greatefr moment to regulate our plan of con-
duct, with the most serious attention before
we have yet committed any fatal or irretrevi-
able errors.-If, infread of exerting reflection
for this valuable purpose, we deliver ourselves
up, at so critical a timne to sloth and pleasure;
-if we refuse to liften to any counsellor but hu-
mour, or to attend to any purfait except that
of amufement;-if we allow ourselves to float
loose and careless on the tide of life, ready to
receive any direction which the- current of
fashion may chance to give us-the fad confe-
quences of such indiscretion will extend to us :
we cannot attain success without preparation,
and escape dangers witlhout precaution.-Hap-

piness.

# SOLITUDE.

piness will not grow up to us of its own ac-
cord, and solicit our exceptance, when to the
reft of mankind, it is the fruit of long cultiva-
tion, and the acquisition of labour and care.-
We fnould not deceive ourselves with such arro-

gant hopes.

Whatever be our rank, providence will not,
for our fakes, reverse its eflabliflied order. But,
by tempering the vivacity, of youth with a
proper mixture of serious thought, we may en-
sure cheerfulness for the reft of life; whilst by de-
livering ourselves up at present to giddiness and
levity, we lay the foundation of lasting heav-
hess of heart.

SOLITUDE.
SOLITUDE is the hallowed ground which re-

ligion hath, in every age, chosen for her

own.-There her inspiration is felt, and her
secret mysteries elevate the foul.-There, falls
the tear of contrition ;--there, rifes towards hea-
ven the sigh of' the heart;-there, melts the
foul with all the tenderness of devotion, arid

pours

pours itself forth before him who made and
redeemed it.

The great and worthy,-the pious and the

virtuous, have ever been addicted to serious
retirement. Refined and enlarged minds leave
the world behind them,-feel a call for higher
pleafures,-and seek them in retreat.

But a total seclusion from the world, is so

far from being the perfection of religion, that
it is no other than the abuse of it.-Yet there

will be neither confilfency in the conduct, nor
dignity in the character, of one who sets apart
no lhare of time for meditation and reflection.

If we wimi that reason mhould exert her native
power, we mull ftep aside from the crowd into.
the cool and silent Mhade.-It is there that with
fober and feady eye, he examines what is good
and evil, what is wife or foolish, in human con-
du ';--he looks back on the pall, and forms.
plans, not for the present moment only, but for
the whole of life.

'ian cannot discharge any part of his duty
aright, who never fuffirs his paflions to cool-

and

and his pafilons cannot cool, who is engaged
without interruption in the tumult of the world.
This incessant stir may be called the perpetual
drunkenness of life. It raises that eager ser--'"---
mentation of spirit which will ever be fending
forth the dangerous fumes of raihnefs and folly. -

Whereas, he who mingles religious retreat

with worldly affairs, remains calm and mailer
of himfelf-he is not whirled round, and ren-
dered giddy by the agitation of the world, but
comes forth with manly tranquility, fortified
by principles which he has formed, and pre-
pared for whatever may befal.-For he who
wishes for an effectual cure of the wounds
which the world can inflict, Ihould retire
from intercourse with men, to intercourse with
God.-When he enters into his closet, and
ihuts the door, let him fliut out at the fame time
all intrulion of worldly care, and dwell among
objees divine and immortal: for celestial inha-
bitants quarrel not.-For amongit them there
is neither ingratitude, nor envy, nor tumult;
concord and tranquility reign for ever--From.
such obje&ts, upon the mind of the pious man,
there beams a pure and enlivening light; there
is diffused over his. heart a holy calm.--his agi-

tated

# THE STUDY OF MAN.

tated spirit reaiFumes its firmness, and regains
its peace.-The world finks in its importance,
and the load of mortality and misery loses almost
all its weight.-The disturbances and alarms, so
formidable to those who are engaged in the
tumults of the world, seem to him like thunder
only rolling afar off.

Besides, it is also necelfary to prepare us for

a life to come. For breathing habitually a con-
tagious air, how certain is our ruin, unless we
Sometimes retreat from this pestilential region,
and seek for proper correctives of the disorders
which are contrated there ?-Religious retire-
ment both abates the disease, and furnishes the
remedy.-It leflens the corrupting influence of
the world- and it gives opportunity for better
principles to exert their power.

THE STUDY OF MAN.
THE life of man is a mixed slate full of un-

certainty and vicissitude, of anxieties and

fears.-For no man's prosperity on earth is
ltable and affured-hence no fludy, to a thought-

ful

ful mind, can appear more important than how
to be suitably prepared for the misfortunes of
life, so as to contemplate them in profpe& with-
out dismay; and, if they must befal, to bear
them without dejetion.

Throughout every age, power has endea-

voured to remove adversity to a distance.-
Philosophy has studied when it drew nigh, to
conquer it by patience,-and wealth has fought
out every pleasure that can compensate or ale-
viate pain.

But religion has been no less attentive to the

fame important object.-The defence which it
provides is altogether of an internal kind.-It
is the heart, not the outward ltate, which it
professes to guard, by affording the ditreffed
that security and peace, which arise from a be-
lief of divine protection.-It opens to them
sources of confolati6n which are hidden from

others.-By that strength of mind with which
it endowes them, it sets them upon a rock,
againtl which the tempest may violently beat,
but cannot shake: for it prepares the mind for
encountering with fortitude, the most severe
ihocks of adversity.

READING

# READING AND STUDY.

READING AND STUDY.
PREADING, unless perverted, as the befl

things may be, answers many excellent

purposes beside the great leading one; and is,
perhaps the faieft remedy for diflipation.

The woman who dedicates a portion of her

leisure to useful reading, feels her mind in a con-
slant progref.ive slate of improvement, whilfl
the mind of a diflipated female is continually
losing ground.-An acctive spirit rejoiceth, like
the fan, to run his daily course; while indo-
lence, like the dial of Ahaz, goes backwards.

As for fitdy, we may venture to aflert, that

next to religious influences, it is the most pro-
bable preservative of the virtue of young persons.

Those who cultivate letters, have rarely a

firong passion for promiscuous visiting, or diffi-
pated society; study therefore induces a relish
for domestic life, the most desirable temper in
the world for women,

Study,

# PASSIVE TAMENESS OF SPIRIT, AND UNLIMITED COMPLIANCE.

Study, as it rescues the mind from an inor-

dinate fondness for gaming, dress, and public
amusements, is an ceconomical propensity; for
a lady may read at a much less expense than fie
can play at cards.-As it requires some appli-
cation, it gives the mind an habit of industry;
as it is a relief againfl that mental disease,
which the French emphatically call ennui, it
cannot fail of being beneficial to the temper and
spirits: in that moderate degree, it is to be un-
derftood, in which ladies use it;-as an enemy
to indolence, it becomes a social virtue;-as
it demands the full exertion of our talents, it
grows a rational duty; and when direaed to
the knowledge of the supreme Being, and his
laws, it rifes into an at of religion.
PASSIVE TAMENESS OF SPIRIT, AND

UNLIMITED COMPLIANCE.
PASSIVE tameness which submits without

struggle, to every encroachment of the

violent and assuming, forms no part of Christian
duty, but is deftruaive of general happiness
and order.

Unlimited

Jó

# TEMPERANCE.

Unlimited complaisance which, on every oc-

cafion, falls in with the opinions and manners
of others, is so far from being a virtue, that it
is itself a vice, and the parent of many vices.-
It overthrows all steadiness of principle, and
produces that sinful conformity with the world,
which taints the whole character;

In the present corrupted state of human man-

ners always to assent and to comply, is the
very worfR maxim which can be adopted. It
is impossible to support the purity and dignity
of Christian morals, without opposing the world
on various occasions, even though we should
stand alone.

TE P E R A N C E.
TE\IPPRANCE in pleasure is elfentially ne-

ceffary to be obfenred,particularly byyouth,

that they may beware of that rock on which
thousands, from race to race, continue to split.
The love of pleasure, natural to man in every
period of his life, glows at this age with excefl
five ardour.-Novelty adds frelh charms, as yet,

to

to every gratification.-The world appears to
spread a continual feaft;-and health, vigour,
and high spirits invite them to partake of itwith-
out relsraint. In vain are they warned of the
latent danger.-The old, when they offer their
admonitions, are upbraided with having forgot
that they once were young. And yet, to what
do the counsels of age, with respect to pleasure,
amount ? They may all be comprized in few
words, not to hurt ourselves, and not to hurt
others by our pursuit of pleasure, and those will
be fully effected by temperance. Within these
bounds, pleasure is lawful, beyond them it be-
comes criminal, because it is ruinous.

Hence by this virtue we are not called to re-

nounce pleasure, but to enjoy it in fafety.--n-
flead of abridging it, we are exhorted to pur-
sue it on an extensive plan; we have measures
proposed for securing its poffefion, and for pro-
longing its duration.--As we confider ourselves
not only as sensitive, but as rational beings;-
not only as rational but focial;--not only as social
but immortal; whatever violates our nature in
any of there refpeas cannot afford true pleasure.

Have we not found that in the course of cri.
minal excess, pleasure was more than compen-

fated

# TRUE GENUINE SENTIMENT.

fated by succeeding pain ? Have we not from
every habit, at least, of unlawful gratification,
found some thorn spring to wound us; some
consequence to make us repent of it in the issue.
W'e fhouid therefore avoid temptations, for
which we have found ourselves unequal, with as
much care as we would shun pestilential insec-
tion.

TRUE GENUINE SENTIMENT.
TTRUE genuine Sentiment may be so connected

with the virtue of action, as to bestow on

it its brightest lustre, and its most captivating
graces. And enthusiasm under these circumftan-
f&ances is so far from being' disagreeable, that a
portion is indifpenfibly necessary in an engaging
woman; but it must be of the heart, not of the
fenfes.-It must grow up with a feeling mind,
and be cherithed by a virtuous education, not
compounded of irregular paflions and artificially
refined by books of unnatural ficion, and impro-
bable adventure.

But this dangerous merit cannot be too rigid-
ly watched, as it is very apt to lead those who

possess

possess it into inconveniencies from which
less interesting characers are happily exempt.
Strong sensibility may carry a very amiable tem-
per into the most alarming extremes.-The
taftes of those so actuated are paffions.-They
love and hate with all their hearts, and scarcely
susser themselves to feel a reasonable preference,
before it strengthens into a violent attachment.

When an innocent girl of this open, trusting,

tender heart, happens to meet with one of her
own sex and age, whose address and manners
are engaging, she is instantly seized with an ar-
dent desire to commence a friendship with her.
-She feels the most lively impatience at the re-
firaint of company and the decorums of ceremony.
-She longs tobealonewithher,-longs to assure
her of the warmth of her tendernefs,-and gene-
rally ascribes to the fair stranger all the good
qualities she feels in her own heart, or rather all
those which she has met with in her reading,
dispersed in a variety of heroines.-.She is per-
fuaded that her new friend unites them all in

herself, because lhe carries in her prepoffefling
countenance the promise of them all.

If hints of her defects are given, he mistakes
the voice of 'dicretion for the insinuation of an

uncharitable

uncharitable disposition. At first Ihe listens to
them with a generous impatience, and after-
wards with a cold and silent disdain, and de-
spifes them as the effecct of prejudice, mifrepre-
fentation, or ignorance.

Yet this truiring confidence, this honest indif-

cretion, is, at this early period of life, as amia-
ble as it is natural; and will, if wifely cultivated,
produce, at its proper season, fruits infinitely
more valuable than all the guarded circumfpec-
tion of premature, and therefore artificial pru-
dence. Nay, if the younger part of the sex are
bometimes deceived inthe choiceofa friend, they
enjoy even then an higher degree of satisfaction
than if they never trufted.-For to be always
clad in the burthenfome armour of suspicion is
more painful and inconvenient, than to run the
hazardof suffering, now and then, a transient in-
jury.

These observations chiefly refpeet the inex-

perienced; for it is a certainty that women are
capable of as faithful and as durable friendfllip
as dny of the other sex. They can enter not
cn-v into all the enthuflaftic tenderness) but into
all the solid fidelity of attachment.

GOVERNMENT

# GOVERNMENT OF TEMPER.

GOVERNMENT OF TEMPER.
E VERY human creature is.fenfible of the pro-

penfities to ibme infirmity.of temper, which

it fliould b'e his care to corret and subdue;
particularly in the early period of life; else,
when arrived at a slate of maturity, he may
relapse into those faults which were originally in
his nature, and which will require to be dili-
gently watc-hed, and kept under, througli the
whole course of lif&;-for the cultivation of an
amiable difdofition is a great part of religious
duty; since nothing leads more directly to the
breach of charity, and to the injury and mo-
leftation of our fellow-creatures, than the in-
dulgence. of an ill temper.

With respect to a woman, the principal vir-

tues and vices mu(t be of a domeflic kind.-

Within the circle of her own family and de-
pendents lies her sphere of action-the scene
of almost all those talks and trials, which muff

I determine

determine her character and her fate here and

hereafter.-The happiness of her hulband, chil-
dren, and servants, must depend on her temper;
and it will appear, that the greatest good or
evil which fie may ever have in her power to
do, may arise from her correcting or indulging
its inmirmities.

The greatefl outward blessings cannot afford

enjoyment to a mind uneasy and ruffled within.
-A fit of ill humour will spoil the fineit enter-
tainment, and is as real a torment as the most
painful difeafe.---Another unavoidable confe-
quence of ill temper, is the dislike and aversion
of all who are witnelfes to it; and, perhaps, the
deep and lafling resentments of those who susser
from its efects.

We all, from social and felf-love, earnestly

desire the esteem and affetion of our fellow-
creat.rrs; and indeed our condition renders
them so necessary to us, that the wretch, who
has forfeited them, must feel desolate and un-
done-deprived of all the belt enjoyments and
comforts the world can afford-and given up to
his inward misery, unpitied and scorned.

Every

Every temper is inclined, in some degree, to

paflion, peevishness, or obstinacy: we should
therefore always watch the bent of our nature,
and apply remedies proper for the infirmities to
which we are most liable.-The firR is so injuri- -
ous to society, and so odious in itself, that men
who give way to it render themselves, not only
disgusting, but dangerous:-hurried on by the
violence of rage, they break through the bounds
of decorum-deflroy the order of civil society-
disregard truth-facrifice juftice-and disgrace,
as well as offend, the dignity of their Creator.

In a female chara&er, one ihould think that

lhame alone would be sufficient to preserve a
young woman from becoming a lave to it; for
it is as unbecoming her characRer to be betrayed
into ill behaviour by passion, as by intoxication;
and lhe ought to be alhamed of the one, as
much as the other.-Gentlenefs,-meeknefs,-
andpatience, are her peculiar diffinaions, and
an enraged woman is one of the mofl difgufling
fights in nature.

The placid countenance-the mild deport-

ment-and a smooth address, are strong incen-
tives to just admiration, and to honest praise.-

I 2 But

But there perfections all fall victims to that
mionfle paflion.-It behoves us therefore to re-
tire from such an occasion of fin,-and wait
till we are cool, before we presume to judge
of what has palTed.

By acculroming ourselves thus to conquer and

disappoint our anger, we shall, by degrees, find
i: grow weak and manageable, so as to leave
our reafen at libertv.-We shall be able to re-

fi-ain our tongue from evil, and our looks and
geflures from all expreflions of violence and ill-
will.

Pride, which produces so many evils in the

human mind, is the great source of passion.-
Whoever cultivates in himself a proper humi-
lity,-a due sense of his own faults and infuffi-
ciences,-and a due refpef for others, will
nnd but small temptation to violent or unrea-
ionaibe arngr.

Whenever, therefore, we feel ourselves high-
y enraged, we should fufpec ourselves to be
in the wrong, and resolve to tand the delibe-
rate decision of our own conscience beforewe cafi

upon.

upon. another the puniflment which is perhaps
due to ourfelves.-This felf-examinaticn will,
at leafl, give us time to cool, and, if we are
just, as it should be our chief aim to be so, will
dispose us to balance our own wrong with that
of our antagonist, and to fettle the account
with him on equal terms.

There are many who acquire the charater

of ill-temper, when in reality they merit not the
severity of the accusation; and this arises mere-
ly from their mode of replication, or their man-
ner of interrogating--as they are generally and
unfortunately attended with a species of tart-
ness on every trivial occafion.-This indicates
to common observers a degree of petulance, and
seems to take its origin from a jealousy, or ra-
ther fear of their own consequence being de-
graded or injured in some refpect.-This ihould
be carefully avoided, for the very appearance
of peevishness, is ungraceful and painful.

The fretful man, though, he injures us less,

disgusts us more than him who is passionate:-
because he betrays a low and little mind,-in-
tent on trifes,-and engrossed by a paltry self-

1 3 lover

love, which knows not how to bear the appre-
henfion of any inconvenience. It is felf-love,
then, which we must combat, when we find
ourselves assaulted by this infirmity; and by vo-
luntarily enduring inconveniences, we Ihall ha-
bituate ourselves to bear them with ease, and
good humour, when occasioned by others.

We lhould endeavour, by denying ourselves

now and then innocent indulgences, to ac-
quire a habit of command over our passions
and inclinations, particularly such as are
likely to lead us into evil; and abftraat our
minds from that attention to trifling circum-
fances, which usually creates this uneasiness.-
Our minds should, therefore, have always some
objeRs in pursuit worthy of them, that they
may not be engrossed by such, as- are in them-
selves scarce worth a moment's anxiety; yet
from too minute and anxious attention seldom

fail to produce a teazing,-mean-and fretful
dipofition.

We lhould fibftitute in their room the pursuit

of glory and happiness in another life.-Read-
ing--reflection-rational converfation-and

above

above all, converging with God, by prayer and
meditation, would preserve us from taking that
interest in the little comforts and conveniences
of our remaining days, which usually gives birth
to so much fretfulness in old people.

Notwithifanding this is generally attributed

to age, fill we often fee the young-the healthy
-and those who enjoy the most outward blef-
iings, inexcusably guilty of it.-The fnialleft dif-
appointment in pleasure, or difficulty in the molt
trifling employment, will put wilful young
people out of temper, and their very amuse-
ments becomes sources of vexation and peevili-
nefs.-There is a degree of resignation necef-
fary even in the enjoyment of pleafure,--we
must be ready and willing to give up some part
of what we could wish for, before we can en-
joy that which is indulged to us.-The craving
of reflefs vanity, the too constant companion
of youthful bosoms, will endure a thousand mor-
tifications, which, in the midst of teeming plea-
sure, will secretly corode the heart; whilit the
meek and humble generally find more gratifica-
tion than they expeted, and return home plea-
fed and enlivened from every scene of amuse-

14 merr,

ment, though they could have fayed avay
from it with perlr- ease and contentment.

SuLenefs and obflinacy, is, perhaps, a worse

fault of temper than either of the former-and,
if indulged, may end in the most fatal extremes
cf Eihiborn melancholy-malice-and revenge.
-The refentmeut which, instead of being ex-
pref:de, is afled in secret, and continually ag-
grava:ed by the irwagination, will in time be-
come the ruling paflion; and then, how hor-
rible must be his cafe, whose kind and pleafur-
able afeStions are all swallowed up by the tor-
menting, as well as detefiable, lentiments of
hatred and revenge!

We ihould not brood over resentment, but

speak calmly-reafonably-and kindly-then
expostulate with our adversary; and either re-
concile curfelves to him, or quiet our minds
under the injury, we haye supposed he has
done us, by the principle of Christian charity.
-But if it appears we ourselves have been the
aggrdtibrs, we flould acknowledge our error
fairly and handsomely ;-a generous- confession
oftentimes more than atones for the fault which
requires it.

Truth

Truth and juflice demand that we lhould

acknowledge conviction, as Loon as we feel it,
and not maintain an erroneous 'opinion, or jus-
tify a'wrong conduct, merely from the false
shame of confessing our pals ignorance.--With
a'difpofition, strongly inclined to fullenefs or
obstinacy, this may appear perhaps imlpraci-
cable;-but by constant use the mind will
gain strength from the contest, and this inter-
nal einemy will 'by degrees be forced to give
ground.

The'love of truth, and a real desire of im-

piovement, ought to be the only motives of
argumentation; and where these are sincere,
no 'difficulty can be made of embracing the
truth, as Coon as it is perceived.-To' receive
advice-reproof-and inftrueion properly, is'
the surest sign of a sincere and humble heart,-
and ihews a greatness of mind, which commands
our refpef and reverence, while it appears so
willingly to yield to us in superiority.

We ihould confider, that those who tell us of
our faults, if they do it from motives of kind-

I 5 ness,

ness, and not of malice, exert their friendship in
a painful office; which must have cost them as
great an effort, as it can be to us to acknow-
ledge the fervice;-and if we refuse this en-
couragement, we cannot expect that any one,
who is not absolutely obliged to it by duty, will
a second time undertake such an ill requited
trouble.

Excessive and ill-judged indulgence, seldom

fails to reduce a woman to the miserable condi-
tion of a humoured child, always unhappy from.
having nobDdy's will to tludy but its own.-
The insolence of such demands for herself. and
such disregard to the choice and inclinations of
others, can seldom fail.to. make as many enemies.
as there are persons obliged to bear with those
humours; whilst a. compliant-reafonable-and,
contented disposition, would. render her, happy
in herself, and beloved by all her companions;
-particularly by those who live constantly with
her.

Family friendships are the. friendlbips made

for us by an. all-wife Providence-hence ought
w e to employ every faculty of entertainment-

every

every engaging qualification which we possess to
the best advantage for those, whose love is of
the most importance to us ;-for those, who live
under the fame roof, and with whom we are
connected in life, either by the ties- of blood
-or by the flill more sacred obligation of vo-
luntary engagement.-The sincere and genuine
fiiles of complacency and love liould adorn-
our countenance.--That ready compliance--
that alertness to affifu and oblige, which demon-
ftrates true affection, must animate our. behavi-
our, and endear our most common actions.-.
Politeness must accompany our greatef familia-
rities,. and restrain us fro-m every thing that is
really offensive, or which can give a moment's
unnecessary pain.-Converfation, which is so
apt to grow dull and insipid in families, nay,
in some to be almost wholly laid aside, must be
cultivated with the frankness and openers of
Friendlhip, and by the mutual communication.
of whatever may conduce to the improvement
or innocent entertainment of each other.

All these qualifications, which cannot fail to,

render us pleasing, will be the natural result of
a. well-governed temper, as it will derive. plea-.

fre.

sure to itself, in proportion as it has the power,
of communicating it to others.-This disposition
of mind Ihould therefore be. cultivated with the
utmotf care and diligence-thefymptoms of that -
humour, against which. all our artillery fiould.
be levied, ihould be minutely watched, and with.
a firm resolution conquered. as they rife;-for.
a sweet disposition is'its own reward, and is in
itself eflential to happiness.

GOOD

# GOOD TEMPER, ITS EFFECTS AND UTILITY.

G 0:0 D T E M P E R,

ITS EFFECTS AND UTILITY.
A good natured man, whatever faults he: may

have,:they will for the moftpart be treated.

with lenity;-hewill generallyfind an advocate
in every human heart;-his errors will be- la--
mented,. rather tha. abhorred;-and his virtues
will be -viewed-in the--faireft point of 'light-;--
His good humour, without the help of great ta-
lents or acquirements, will make his company
preferable to that of the most brilliant genius, in.
whom-this quality is wanting-but with it, such'
a brightness will be added to their-luftre, that;
all the world will-envy and admire, whilst his
associates will almost adore, and labour to imi-
tate him.-In fliort, it is almoftimpoffible that-'
we can be sincerely beloved by any body, with-
out this engaging property, whatever other
excellencies we may posess ;-but with it, we
fnall scarcely fail of finding some friends-and fa-
vourers, even- though we- hould be destitute -of-
almost every other advantage. '

It

It is true we are not all equally happy in our

dispositions; but human virtue conifits in che-
rifhing and cultivating every good inclination,
and in checking and subduing every propensity
to evii.-If a man had been born with a bad

temper, it might have been made a good one,
at least with regard to its outward effets, by
education, reason, and principle: and though
he is so happy as to have a good one while
young, he njuf not suppose it will always conti--
nue so, if he neglects to maintain a proper com--
mand over it.-Power-ficknefs--difappoint-
ments-or worldly cares may corrupt, or em--
bitter the finef difpufition, if they are not coun-
teracted by reason and religion.-Hence these
should be ever exerted in the exigencies of life-
they will teach us a becoming submission under
all the accidents of our mortal tfate, with which.
it is so variously chequered;-diveft calamity of
its severest fling-make our enemies alhamed of
their persecuting fpirit-and cause us to smile.
even in the mid/i of misfortune..

By good temper is not meant an insensible in-

difference to injuries-and a total forbearance.
from manly refentment.-There is a noble and.
gnerous kind of anger, a proper and necessary

part.
.-

part of our nature which has nothing in it fin-
ful or degrading-We are not to be dead to
this-for the person, who feels not an injury,.
must be incapable of being properly affected by
benefits.-With those, who treat, us ill without
provocation, we ought-to maintain our own dig-
nity-hut whilst we fliew a sense of their im-
proper behaviour, we must preserve calmness,
and even good breeding,-and thereby convince-
them of the impotence, as well, as injustice of
their malice..

Generous anger does not preclude esteem for-

whatever is really estimable, nor does it deRroy-.
good-will to the person of its object-or autho-.
rize any impeachment to reft on'the goodness--
of our difpofition:-It even inspires the desire;
of overcoming our enemy by benefits,-and
wilhes to inflic no other punilhment than the.
regret of having injured one who deserved his,-
kindnefs:-It is always placable, and ready-to,
be reconciled, as loon as the offender is convin-.
ced of his error ; nor can any subsequent injury..
provoke it to recur to past difobligations, which
had been once forgiven.-The coqnfcioufnefs of
injured innocence naturally produces. dignity,.
and nfually prevents anger ;-but if tempered:

with

# EFFECTS OF VICE.

with the calmness of a quiet'fpirit, it ever riles'
superior to the oppressive hand of insolence and
cruelty.

-_ _

EFFEC T S OF VICE;
VJICE by its natural influence on the temper

tends to produce dejection under the flight-

eft trials, and weakens that which only can sup-
port mankind when those vicissitudes come.-
For it is their mind which must thein support
them; and their mind, by their sensual attach-
ments, is corrupted and enfeebled-fo that they
have neither principles, nor temper which can
fland the aflault of trouble.

They have no principles which lead them to

look beyond the ordinary rotation of events-
and therefore, when misfortunes involve them,
the profpe& muff be comfortless on every 'ide.
-Strangers to all the temperate fatisfations of
a good and pure mind-Strangers to every plea-
sure except what was seasoned by vice or vanity,
their adversity is to the last degree difconfo-
late-From hence'we may deduce the causes

to

# VILLAIN.

to which we muit ascribe the broken spirits-
the peevish temper,-and impatient passions that
'o often attend the declining age, or falling for-
tunes of vicious men.

V I LL A IN.
J E climbs the steep rock, and treads on the

edge of a precipice, in order to catch a

lhadow-He has cause to dread not only the un-
certainty of the event which he wiihes to ac-
compliih, but the- nature also of that event when
accomplifhed-He is not only liable to that dif-
appointment. of success, which so often fruflrates
all designs of men; but liable to a disappoint-
ment lill more cruel, that of being successful
and'miferable at once.

Riches and pleasure are the chief temptations

to criminal deeds.-Yet those riches, when ob-
tained, may very pojlibly overwhelm him with
unforeseen miferies.-Thlofe pleasures may cut
hllort his health and life-And is it forfuch
doubtful and fallacious rewards, that the decei-
ver fills his'mouth with lies, the friend betrays

his

Iris benefactor, the apostate renounces his faith,
and the afaflin covers himself with blood

Whoever commits a crime, incurs a certain

evil for a most uncertain good-What will turn
to his advantage in the course of this life,
he cannot with any assurance know ;-but this'
he may know, with full certainty, that he will
draw upon his head that displeasure of the Al-
mighty, which lhall cruih iidm for ever.

The advantages of this world when obtained

by criminal means carry a curse in their bosom,
nay even when innocently gained, are uncertain
blefings.-To the virtuous, they are often no
more than chaff-to the guilty they are always
poison.

VIRTUE

# VIRTUE AND PROSPERITY CONTRASTED.

VIRTUE AND PROSPERITY CONTRASTED.
THOSE situations which favour pleasure are

too generally adverse to virtue.-Virtue

# requires internal government, and discipline;

prosperity relaxes the mind, and inflames the
paffions:-virtue is supported by a regard to
what is future-profperity attaches us wholly to
what is prefent-virtue checks our pursuits,
'which are the result of intemperance-refrains
our desires, and makes them flow in the calm
tide of moderation:-profperity encreafes our
evil propenfities---inflames our paffions--and
plunges us deep in the stream of riot and excess:
-virtue is the sovereign pilot which fleers us
into the harbour of true lasting pleafure-pro-
fperity is too apt to turn the helm to the port
of sensual enjoyment-unites us too closely to the
things of this world-and'makes us eye the mo-
ment of our Aiftolation with regret and horror.-
The chara&eriftics of virtue are modefty.and

humility-the most common attendants upon
prosperity are pride and presumption; and
often proves the motive of impiety.

VIRTUE.

# VIRTUE

VIRTUE

S the universal charm: even its fladow is

co-urted, when the fulbftace is wanting.-

It nmut be formed and supported, not by unfre-
tuent-ac's, but by daily and repeated exertions,
in order to its becoming vigorous and useful.-
Great events give scope for great virtues; but
the main tenour of human life is composed of
small occurrences-Within the round of these,
lie the materials of the happiness of most men;,
the subjects of their duty, and the trials of their
virtue.

Whatever is to be our profelnon, no educa-

tion is more neceftary to success, than the ac-
quirement of virtuous dispositions and habits.-'
This is the universal preparation for every cha-
rater, and every ltation in life-Bad as the
world is, refpea is always paid to virtue.-In
the ufuzl course of human affairs, it will'be found,
that a plain underRianding joined with acknow-
ledged worth, contributes more to prosperity
than the brightest parts without probity and.
hoir our.

Whether

Whether science, or business, or public life,

be our aim, virtue still enters, for a principal
lhare, into all those great departments of society.

It is connected with eminence, in every libe-

ral art;-with reputation, in every branch of
fair and useful business ;-with diftinftion, in
every public flation. The vigour which it gives
to the mind, and the weight which it adds to
the character;-the generous sentiment which
it breathes ;--the undaunted spirit which it in-
fpires;-the ardour of diligence whichit quickens;
-the freedom which it procures from pernicious
and dishonourable avocations, are the founda-
tion of all that is high in fame, or great- in
success among men.

Whatever ornamental or engaging endow-

ments we possess, virtue is a necessary requisite
in order to'their shining with proper lustre-
By whatever arts we may at first attrait the at-
tention, we can hold the esteem, and secure the
hearts of others, onty by amiable dispositions,
and the accomplishments of the mind-Tlhefe
are the qualities whose influence will last, when
the lultre of all that once sparkled and dazzled
has passed away,

VOLUPTUAPY.

# VOLUPTUARY.

VOLUPTUARY.
T-HE corrupted temper, and the guilty pas-

sions of the bad frustrate the effect of every

advantage which the world confers on them-
The world may call them men of pleasure; but
of all men they are the greatest foes to pleasure:
from their eagerness to grasp, they strangle
and destroy it-riotous indulgence enervates
both the body and the mind: so that in the
midst of his ltudied refinement the voluptuary
languishes.

Wherever guilt mingles with prosperity a

certain gloom and heaviness enter along with it.
Vicious intrigues never fail to entangle, and em-
barrafs those who engage in them ;-besides,
the felfibh gratifications of the bad are both nar-
row in their circle' and short in their duration.

WIT.

# WIT.

W IT.
W IT is the moRs dangerous talent we can

poffefs.-It muff be guarded with great

discretion, and good nature, otherwise it will
create many enemies.

Wit is perfe&tly confitent with softness and

delicacy; yet they are seldom found united.-
Wit is so -flattering to vanity, that they who ]
possess it become intoxicated, and love all self-
command.

Though it is the moss captivating, yet it is'

the most dreaded of all talents: the most dan-
gerous to those who have it, and the mofft
feared by those who have it not. He who is
grown rich without it, in safe and fober dull-
ness, ihuns it as a disease, and looks upon po-
verty as its invariable concomitant.

The moralist declaims againfi it as the source

of irregularity; and the frugal citizen dreads
it more than bankruptcy itself: for he confiders

it

it as the parent of extravagance and beggary.
-The Cynic will adio of what use is it? Of

very little perhaps: no more is a flower garden,
and yet it i; allowed, as an object of innocent
amiufement, and deiightful recreation.

A woman who poflefles this quality has re-

ceived a moR dangerous present, perhaps, not
lei so than beauty itself: especially if it be
not fhearted in a temper peculiarly inofrenfive,-
-chafLifed by a mofi corret judgment,-andre-
frrained by more prudence than falls to the
common lot.

This talent is more likely to make a woman;

vain than knowledge; for there is much more
danger that that folly should arise from the con-
iideration of what is our own, than of what we
borrow.-But wit, like learning, is not near so
common a thing as is imagined.-For flippancy,
pertness, and impudence are often mistaken for
this brilliant quality; and people often imagine
they are wity, only because they are indiscreet;
and this makes the name of wit so cheap, while
its real exilence is so rare.

But those who happily possess this talent,
cannot be too abstinent in the use of, it.-It

often

# WOMAN.

often makes admirers, but never makes friends;
and she, who does not desire friends, has a for-
did and insensible foul; but she, who is ambiti-
ous of making every man her admirer, has an
invincible vanity and a cold heart.

W O M A N.
THHE prevailing manners of an age depend

more than we are aware, or are willing

to allow, on the conduct of the women; this
is one of the principal things on which the
great machine of human society turns. Those
who allow the influence which female graces
have, in contributing to polish the manners of
men, would do well to reflect how great an in-
fluence female morals muftalfo have on their con-
dut. How much then is it to be regretted,
that women lhould ever fit down contented to

polish, when they are able to reform: to en-
tertain, when they might instruct; and to
dazzle for an hour, when they are candidates
for eternity!

In this land of civil and religious liberty,.

where there is as little defpotifin exercised over
the minds, as over the persons of women, they

K have

i::-ve e-ery liberty of choice, and every oppor-
r;nir- of improvement; and how greatly does
ti:is encreafe their obligation to be exemplary
i: their general condud, attentive to the govern-
n:ent of their families, and instrumental to the
good order of society.

The w-oman who is at a loss to find amuse-

meo-t at home, cannot apologize for her dif-
.il-:~cv abroad, by faying she is deprived of
:h. benefi and pleasure of books; and {he who
reg-rs being doomed to a slate of dark and
gloc my ignorance, by the injuRtice and tyranny
of the men, complains of an evil which does
not exifr.

It is a certain truth, that women the most

accompliihed are sure to acquire the universal
admiration and esteem of the world, if the im-
provement of the heart accompanies their thirst
of other m kowledge :-and vanity, that idol of
the sex, be supplanted by modest humility.

Nothing delights men more than the strength

of underfianding, when true gentleness of man-
ners is its afociate :-United, they become irre-
fidble orators-bleffed with the power of per-
if-,fn--fraught with the sweetness of inftruEtion
mrak'in, woman the highest ornament of human
nature. WORLD.

# WORLD.

W 0 R L D.
THE world is the great deceiver; whose fal-

lacious arts it highly imports us to detest.

But in the midst of its pleasures and pursuits, the
detection is impossible. We tread as within an
enchanted circle, where nothing appears as it
truly is.-We live in delusion, forming plans of
imaginary blifs.-We wander for ever in the
paradise of fools-meditating in secret on the
means of attaining worldly success ;-which ac-
quired has seldom, in one intfance, fulfilled our
expectation ;-but where we have reckoned
most upon enjoyment, there have we generally
found the least.

It is too often confidered as the only field of

pleasure; and beat over and over in quest of joys
unsubstantial and tranfitory:-Pleafed with the
visionary trifles which it affords, we forget the
probationary slate of our exiftence,--madly
pursue what at belt we cannot retain-barter
our eternal welfare for vain flladows and empty
flew ;-and as if careless of thejuftice of God
seem to regard not his threatened vengeance,
but depend solely on the extent of his mercy;
and diveit ourselves of the smallet right to
demand our promised felicity.

K z RELIGIOUS

# RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.

RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.
THE expressions of those affeCions under its

various forms, are no other than native

efufions of the human heart. Ignorance may
mislead, and superstition may corrupt them,
but their origin are derived from sentiments
that are efitntial to man.

Wherever men have exifled, they have been

ferfible that some acknowledgment was due, on
their part, to the Sovereign of the world;
which Christian revelation has placed in such a
light, as one should think were sufficient to over-
awe the most thoughtless, and to melt-the most
obdurate mind. -

But religious worship, disjoined from juflice

and virtue, can on no account whatever find ac-
ceptaice with the flpreme Being.-Becaufe it
is for the fake of man that worship and prayers
are required, that he may be rendered better,
and acquire those pious and virtuous dispositions,
in which his highest improvement consists.

YOUTH.

# YOUTH.

Y O U T H.
YOUTH is the season of warm and generous

emotions ;-the heart should then fponta-

neoufly rife into the admiration of what is great,
glow with the love of what is fair and excellent,
and melt at the discovery of tenderness and
goodnefs.-In this season we fould endeavour,
upon rational and fober enquiry, to have our
principles eftablihed, nor susser them to be
{haken by the scoffs of the licentious, or the
cavils of the fceptical.-No wantonefs of youth-
ful spirits, no compliance with the intemperate
mirth of others, hould ever betray us into pro-
fane rallies.

It Jhould not be barren of improvements, so
essential to future felicity and honour.

This is the seed-time of life.-The charater

is now, under divine assistance, of our own
forming; our fate is, in some measure, put into
our own hands.-Nature is as yet pliant and
foft-habits have not eftablilhed their dominion

-prejudices

-prejruices have not pre-occupied our under-
itanding--the world has not had time to cori-

tra&c and debase our affe tions.-All our powers
are mcre vigorous, disembarrassed and free, than
they will be at any future period. Whatever
imyulfe e re ow give to our desires and paflions,
the direction is likely to continue.-It will form
the channel in which our life is to run; nay, it
may determine its everlasting issue.

Virtuous youth gradually brings forward ae-

compliffed and flourifiing manhood; and such
manhood passes of itself without uneasiness, into
refpe-abhle and tranquil old age.-But if youth
be triaed away without improvement, manhood
xwill be contemptible, and old age miserable.-
If the beginning of life has been vanity, its

latter end can be no other than vexation of
spirit.

DETACHED

DETACHED SENTIMENTS

AND

MORAL MAXIMS.

H E things in our own power, are in their
own nature free, not capable of being coun-

termanded or hindered; but those that are not
in ourpower are feeble, servile, liable to oppofi-
tion, and not ours, but anothers.

When any frightful and discouraging imagi-

nations assaults us, we should harden ourselves,
and meet it boldly, with this reflection, that it
is only our apprehension of things, and not the
real nature of the things themselves.

We ihould, on all occasions, reflect with our-

selves, of what nature and condition those things
are, that minister delight, or are useful and be-
neficial to us, and that we have a natural tend-
ency for; and that these reflections may answer
their end, we should make them familiar, by

K 4 beginning

beginning at the lightest and moftinconfiderable
thir;gs, and so rife to the higher and more va-
luable.

In every action we undertake, we flould con-

fider sris with ourselves, and weigh well the na-
ture and circurmfances of the thing; nay,
thouogh it be a flight one represent to ourselves
iwhat accident we may probably meet with, and
determine to preserve our minds and reason un-
difhrbed-by which means we fliall be guarded
against their disagreeable effecs; which never
can be done, if we susser every one to difcom-
pose us.

That which gives men disquiet, and makes

their lives miserable, is not the nature of things
as they really are, but the notions and opinions
which they form to themselves concerning them.
-wherever therefore we meet with obftrutions

and perplexities-and fall into them, let us be
just, and not lay the blame where it is not due;
but impute it all to ourselves, and our prejudi-
cate opinions.

V.-e iould never be exalted with any excel-
lence that i; not properly our own.-We should

content

content ourselves with making a right use of
our own ideas, and when we manage these as
we ought, we may be allowed to please our-
selves; for this is being exalted with some ex-
cellence that is properly ours.

Let us not trouble ourselves with wifling that

things may be jus as we would have them; but
well pleased that they ihould be just as they are,
then we fliall live easy.

Upon every frefi accident we ought to turn

our eyes inward, and examine how we are qua-
lified to encounter it,-and prepare ourselves to
meet it with patier.ce and refolution-If we use
ourselves to these, by degrees no accident what-
ever will be able to furprize or subdue us,

Our constant care ihould be to behave our-

selves in all the affairs of human life, with the
fame decency as at a public entertainment-if
any thing be offered us, we fliould receive its .
with modesty; if it pass by us, and be fent,to.
another, let us not withhold it fromhim, or keep
what was not intended us; if it be not come
down to us, let us not lhew ourselves eager nor

K 5 snatch

snatch at it greedily, but walt patiently till it
comes to our turn.-In cafe of riches, honour,
power or preferment, we ihould manage our-
selves in the fame manner: it will render us
pleasing to man, and acceptable to God.

The world we liould confider as a theatre,

that our parts in this play of life is determined
by the poet; upon him it must depend whether
we flall a& a long or short one; whether our
characters liall be high or. low ;--if therefore
he afligns us that of a beggar, we must be care-
ful to humour it well;-if a cripple-or a
prince-or a private obscure man, and whatever
it be, we must make the befl of it.-The play-
ing of the parts commendably depends on our-
felves-the giving them out, and choofing the
ators is not ours but another person's.

It is always in our power to come off conque-

rors, provided we will never engage in any
combats, but such whose fuccefies will be deter-
mined by our own choice.

If we fee any person advanced to an eminent
ia.ion of honour and power, or any other kind

of

of prosperity, we ihould avoid being presently
furprized with a false idea of his condition, nor
rahlly pronounce him happy ;-for if all the
happiness and tranquillity of our minds depend
upon things within, our own. power, there cali
be no room for envy or emulation.

When any man reviles or fr-ikes us we fiould

confider that it is not the tongue that gives us
the opprobrious language, or the hand that deals
the blow that injures or affronts us; but it is
\our own resentment of it, as an injury or as-
'front, that makes it such to us; the provoca-
tion is entirely owing to our own apprehensions
\which swells us into revenge,

It is necessary to keep all those calamities, of

which mankind are most afraid, conflantly be-
fore our eyes, and let them be familiar to our
minds; but above all, death flould be ever pre-
sent there ;-it is an excellent remedy against
base and mean thoughts, and a powerful restraint
to all immoderate desires.

If we resolve to make wisdom and virtue the
study and bulinefs of our lives, we must be lhre

to.

to arm ourselves beforehand against all the in-
conveniencies and discouragements that are like
to attend this refolution.-We lhall meet with
many scoffs and much derifion-but let us not be
asse&ted, or supercilious; only stick close to
whatever we are in our judgment convinced is
virtuous and becoming-and confider this as our
proper station afligned by God, which we mutt
not quit upon any terms; and remember,
that if we persevere in goodness, those very
men who derided us at firit, will afterwards
turn our admirers;-but if we give way to
their reproaches, and are vanquished by them,
we lhail render ourselves doubly, and most de-
fervediv ridiculous.

If we ever happen to accommodate ourselves

to the humour of the world, for the fake of re-
putation and applause ;-we ihoul take notice
that it is below a philofopher:-and therefore
content ourselves upon all occasions with really
being what we would be thought-but if we
will need be thought so too, we Ihonld deserve
our own good opinion: that will be sufficient.

If we observe some other Ferfon more carefled
than ourfelves;-invited to entertainments when

we

we are left out;-faluted before we are
taken notice of;-thought more proper to ad-
vi'e with, and his counsel followed rather than
ours;-we /hould confider whether these re-
fpets paid to him are good things, or evil ;-
if they deserve to be esteemed good, this ought
to be matter of joy to us;-but if they be evil,
how unreasonable is it to be troubled because
they have not fallen to our lhare.

We Should confider with ourselves seriously,

what figure is most fit for us to make in the
world; and then fix upon a method and rule
in order hereunto: which we Should be sure to
observe nicely, both at home alone, .and abroad
in company.

One of our principal rules lhould be silence;-

and when we discourse, confine ourselves to such
fubjecs as are necessary, and express our sense
in as few words as possible. Loquacityis a most
impertinent intruder on society; and many
useless words, though the pride of the speaker,
the deftrucion of his consequence,- an un-
pardonable infringement on the laws of good-
breeding,-and a fatigue to his auditors.

Whenever

Whenever we- happen into company,where

we have authority, and influence enough to do
ir, we fould try to change the discourse if unin-
ftrutive, unentertaining, or 6fi'nfive, and bring
it to becoming fubjecs :-but if we are among
people of another temper, such as will not en-
dure refrraint or reproof, then it behoves us to
hold our owvn tongues.

Loud laughing is a mark of ill-breeding-

laughing at our own jokes, too oft the effect of
ignorance:-we should not indulge even in
laughing at all but upon few occasions, and then
i tould not be much.

If pofible we fnould avoid swearing altoge-

ther, it is vulgar and impious-but if we can-
not do that absolutely, we Jhould be sure to de-
cline it as much as is in our power.

All public entertainments and mixed compa-

nies wvithout they are calculated to produce in-
nocent amusement, improve the understanding,
or polish the manners, thould be declined:-
but if an. extraordinary occasion calls usto them,

;-e inculd keep a f'ri& guard upon ourselves,

left

left we should be infeced with rude and vulgar
conversation; for though .a man be never so
clear himself, yet, by frequenting company
that are tainted, he will of necessity contraa
some pollution from them.

Use and necessity lhould be the rule of all the

provisions we make for the body--ve should
choose meat and drink-apparel-houfe-and
retinue of such kinds, and in such proportions
as will most conduce to these purpofes.-but as
for all beyond this, which ministers to vanity
and luxury, let us retrench and despise.

To render us truly amiable, in the fight of

the just and virtuous, nothing, however it may be
laughed at by the dissolute, contributes so much
to that end.as chaftity,-but how perfet so-
ever ours may be, the conceit of this should not
make us troublesome to others, that are more
frail; nor should we be too laviih in either re-
proving their failings, nor iri commendation of
our own virtue.

If we happen to be told at any time, that
another.perfon hath spoken ill of us, we Ihould

never

never trouble ourselves to confute the report,
or exc-fe the thing without being publicly cal-
led forth, and the preservation of character-
makes it necelfary;-but rather put all up with
this reply,-that we have several faults besides
that, and if he had known us more, he would.
have spoken worse.-

In familiar conversations with our friends

and acquaintance, we lhould never make it our
bufnefs to entertain the company with tedious
narratives of ourselves, or our own affairs-
The exploits by which we have signalized our-
felves,-the successes we have obtained,--
the dangers we have encountered,-or the as-
flictions we have undergone, may be very
agreeable ifories for us to tell; yet they will.
not be equally so for others to hear..

It will not become us to render ourselves the:

common buffoon, and be always trying to make
a company latigh; for this is a nice and very
ticldih thing, exceeding apt to degenerate into.
vice and folly-and he that only tfudies men's
diverilon, flali be lure at the fame time to lose
their rSefte.

Of

Of all kinds of discourse, none is more unsafe,

-none more despicable than that which breaks
in upon modesty and good manners.-Wherever
therefore any person flies out into obscenity, if
such a liberty dare be taken, we ihould reprove
him publicly, and put a flop to his lewd conver-
fation;-but if that cannot conveniently be
done, yet at leat .we may do -ourselves the
justice to disapprove it; and by forbearing
to join with him-by bluihing for him-and by
chiding looks, let all the company fee plainly,
that we detest his filthy ribaldry.

When the idea of any pleasure strikes our

imagination, as we must on other occasions, so
fliould we in this, especially stand upon our
guard, and not susser ourselves to be hurried
away with the impetuous torrent;-we ihould
not run eagerly upon enjoyment, nor improve
the thought into action;-but take time to con-
fider, and let that time be employed in making
a just computation between the duration of the
pleasure, and that of the repentance sure to
follow it; and then we fiall not fail to check
our inclinations, and chide ourselves for indulg-
ing them in any degree at all.

When

When upon mature deliberation we ate per-

fuaded a thing is fit to be done-let us do it
boldly, and not affect privacy in it, nor con-
cern ourselves at all what impertinent censures,
or refciions the world may pass upon it; for
if the thing be just and innocent, it is foolilh to
tand in fear of those, who will themselves do
ill in cen.uring and condemning what we do
well.

If we take upon us a character above our ca-

pacity, we fall into a twofold inconvenience
-ni-r', to miscarry in what we have under-
talken; and then to lose the opportunity of un-
dertaking somewhat else, more proportionable
to our abilities, in which we might have come
off with honour.

In all the affairs of human life, we ihould

take care not to hurt our mind, or offend our
judgment; and this rule, if cautiously observed
in all our deportment, -will be a mighty fecu-
rity to us in all our undertakings, and prevent
us from being injured by folly, or aggreived
by impetuosity.

At

At the age of fourteen women begin to be

courted and carefled; then they think that the
recommending themselves to the affections of
the men is the only business they have to attend
to; and so presently fall to tricking-to dref-
fing-and pratifing all the little engaging arts
peculiar to their sex: in these they place all
their hopes, as they do all their happiness in
the success of them :-But they should under-
sand, that there are other attractives much
more powerful than these; that the refpea we
pay them, is not due to their heauty, so much
as to their modesty, and innocence, and unaf-
feEted virtue: and that these are the true,-
the irresistible charms, such as will make the
surest and most lasting conquests.

There is no furer sign of stupidity, and want

of sense, than to trifle away a great deal of time
in things relating to the body, as to be long at
exercife-or at meals-or drinking-or in the
other functions of nature. For we ought to
look upon all that is done to the body as things
by the by, and the improvement of the foul, as
that which challenges our time, and is the true
and main end, and business of our lives.

We

%We flould never profess ourselves philofo-

phers, nor talk much of rules and vise obferva-
tions among the ignorant and vulgar-but let
our rules be seen in our practice-norhllould
we be folticitous in making a /hew of our eru-
dition, or boast of our learning, it raises the
envy of the illiterate-difgufts the modest-
gives us the charafter of oflentatious, and loads
us with general odium.-Nay, if we happen in
conversation with ignorant and common men,
though they themselves start a discourse con-
cern ig some point in ph;lofophy, we should
forbear joining with them in it; for when men
are forward to vent their notions, it is a ihrewd
sign they are not well digefted.-We ffiould ra-
ther labour to approve the excellence of our
doctrines to the world, not by disputes and
plausible harrangues, but by digesting them into
pra'tice, and growing firong in virtue.

THE END.
pr-r.ie i.; C. ETHERLYGTON, 'o. 3,

Pit-r3¢r;Ais.-Co:;rt, Flitl-Str: f_: -
