SE R MON S

BY

U G H B L A I R, D.D.

Oneof the lMi N S T ER s of the H I G H C H

I R tc 1-,
PROFESSOR of RI-IETORIC and BELLES LETTRE.,

in the Univcrfity of Edinburgh.
T'HE S E V E N T E DIT O N

) U B L 1 N:
Printed for W I L L I AM H A L L HEAD,

No. 63, Damec-ftrcct.

M. .)CC;.LXSXIX.

# THE CONTENTS.

THE
CON T E N T S.

Page

S E R M O N I.

On the Union of Piety and Morality.

ACTS X. 4. Tby prayers and thine
alms are come zp for a memorial be-
fore God. r

SERMON II.
On the Influence of Religion upon

Adversity.
PSAL. xxvii. 5. In the time of trou-

ble, he Jhall hide me in his pavilion ;
in the iecret of his tabernacle Jhall.
he hide me ; he Jhall set me up zpon a
rock. 25

Az

THE
C O N T E N T S.

Page

SERMON I.

On the Union of Piety and Morality.

ACTS X. 4. Thy prayers and thine
al/ns are come up for a memorial be-
fore God.

SERMON IL.
On the Influence of Religion upon

Adversity.
PSAL. xxvii. 5. In the time of trou-

ble, he Jhall hide me in his pavilion;
in the Jecret of his tabernacle Jhall.
he hide me ; he Jhall set me up zpon a
rock. 25

A2

Page

SER M ON IIl.
On the Influence of Religion upon

Prosperity.
PSAL. i. 3. He Jfall be like a free

planted ,by the rivers of water, that
bringeth forth his fruitin his season;
his leaf alo JhJall not wither, and
whatsoever he doth JfJallprofper. 58

SERMON IV.
On our imperfet6 Knowledge of a

Future State.

I CORINTH. xiii. I2. For now We
fee through a glass, darkly--- 8

S E R M ON V.

On the Death of Christ.
JOHN XVii. I. ytss lift up his eyes.

to heaven, and fid, Father ! the
hour is come ;--- i

Page
SERMON VL

On Gentleness.
JAMES iii. 17. 7he wifdomi that is

from above, is---gentle-- I45

SERMON VII.

On the Disorders of the Passions.
ESTHER V. 13. YTet all this availeth

me nothing, so long; as I fee Mordecai
the few fitting at the lKinJg's gate. 173

SERMON VIII.
On our Ignorance of Good and Evil

in this Life.
ECCLESIAST. Vi. 12. Who knolweth

what isgood for man in this life, all
the days of his vain life, which he
fp)endeth as a Jshadow? 20o4.

Page

S E RMON III.
On the Influence of Religion upon

Prosperity.
PSAL. i. 3. He Jhall be like a tree

planted by the rivers of water, that
bringeth forth his fruit in his season;,
his leaf alo Jhall not wither, azndl
vwhahoever he doth Jhallprofper. S

SERMON IV.
On our imperfaet Knowledge of a

Future State.

I CORINTH. xiii. 12. For now We
fee through a glaJs, darkly--- 8

S BE RM ON V.

On the Death of Chriss.
JOHN xvii . Y. efis lift up his eyes

to heaven, and said, Father ! the'
hour is come;--- .I

Page
SERMON VI.

On Gentleness.
JAMES iii. 17. The zwifdom that is

from above, is---gentle--- 145

SERMON VII.

On the Disorders of the Passions.
ESTHER V. I 3. ret all this availeth

me nothing, so long; as I fee Mordecai
the yew fitting at the King's gate. 173

SERMON VIII.
On.our Ignorance of Good and Evil

in this Life.
ECCLESIAST. vi. 12. Who kno9wetA

'what isgood for man in this life, all
the days of his vain life, which he
f/pend.eth as a ftiadow? 204

Page

SERMON IX.:

On Religious Retirement.
PSAL. iv. 4. Commune 'with your own

heart, upon your bed, and be Jsill. 234

SERMON X.

On Devotion.
ACTS x. 2. Cornelius---a devout man. 264

SERMON XI.

On the Duties of the Young.
TITUS ii. 6. loung men likewise ex-

hort, to be fober-minded. 306

SERMON XII.
On the Duties and Consolations of

the Aged.
PROV. xvi. 31. TIhe hoary head is a

crown of glory, if it be found in the
way of righbteoufzefs. 4

Page

SERMON XIII.

On the Power of Conscience.
GENESIS xlii. 2, 22. And theyfaid

one to another, lWe are verily guilty
concerning our brother, in that we
Jaw the anguizj7 of his foul, wlhen he
beJought us; and we wouldnot hear:
Therefore is this dijrefs comee upon
us. And Retuben answered them, fay-
ing, Speak I not unto you, fayi-ig,
Do not fin againJt the child ; and
ye would not hear ? 'Therefore, be-
hold aso his blood is required. 375

SERMON XIV.
On the mixture of Joy and Fear in

Religion.
PSAL. ii. I i. Rejoice with trembling. 4I2

:i

Page

SERMON XV.
On the Motives to Constancy in

Virtue.
GAL. vi. 9. tAnd let zis not be weary

in well-doing; for in due season we
hJall reap, if we faint not, 439

S B R-

# SERMON I. On the Union of PIETY and MORALITY. ACTS x. 4. Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God.

S E R MN I.
On the Union of PIETY and MORALITY.

ACTS X. 4,
Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for

a memorial before God.

T HE High and Lofty One who inha- SER.M.
biteth eternity, dwelleth also with him that
is of humble and contrite heart. In the
midst of his glory, the Almighty is not
inattentive to the meanest of his fubjets.
Neither obscurity of station, nor imperfec-
tion of knowledge, finks those below his

B regard,

S E R M .regard, who. worship and obey him. Every

'--. prayer which they fend up from their fe-

cret retirements, is Iiflened to by him;
and every work of charity which they per-
form, how unknown soever to the world,
attracis his notice. The 'Tet presents a
signal inflance of this comfortable truth.
In the city of Casfarea, there dwelt a
Roman centurion, a military officer of
inferiour rank, a Gentile, neither by
birth nor religion entitled to the privi-
leges of the Jewifi nation. But he was a
devout and a benevolent man; who, ac-
cording to his measure of religious know-
ledge, fludied to perform his duty, prayed
to God ahl ys, and gave m7zch a/ms to the
people. Such a charaCter pasTed not un-
observed by God. So highly was it ho-
noured, that to this good centurion: an
Angel was sent from heaven, in order to
direLd him to the means of full infiruc-
tion in the truth. The Angel accofis hirii
with this filutation, Corneli's, TYhy prayers
and thine alms are come qup for a memolrial
be.foie-Gd 'Go

It

It is to the conjunction of prayers and S E R M.

alms, that I purpose now to direCt your t---
thoughts, as describing the refpedable
and amiable character of a man, as form-
ing the honour and the blessedness of a
true Christian; piety joined with charity,
faith with good works, devotion with mo-
rality. These are things which God hath
connected, and which it is impious in
man to separate. It is only when they
remain united, that they can come up as
a grateful memorial before God. I shall first
endeavour to shew you, That alms with-
out prayers, or prayers without alms, mo-
rality without devotion, or devotion with-
out morality, are extremely defective;
and then shall point out the happy effedts
of their mutual union.

LET us begin with confidering the cafe

of alms without prayers; that is, of good
works without piety, or a proper sense
of God and Religion. Examples of this
are not uncommon in the world. With
many, Virtue is, or at leait is pretended

B 2 to

S E R M. to be, a refpecdable and an honoured
*'---- name, while Piety founds meanly in their

ears. They are men of the world, and
they claim to be men of honour. They
reft upon their humanity, their publick
spirit, their probity, and their truth.
They arrogate to themselves all the manly
and the adtive virtues. But devout assec-
tions, and religious duties, they treat with
contempt, as founded on fladowy fpecu-
lations, and fit to employ the attention
only of veak and fuperfiitious minds.
Now, in opposition to fulch persons, I
contend, That this neglet of piety ar-
gues depravity of heart; and that it in-
sers an irregular discharge of the duties of
morality.

FIRST, It argues internal depravity;

for it discovers a cold and a hard heart.
If there be any impression which man is
formed by nature to receive, it is a sense
of religion. As soon as his mind opens
to observation and reflecion, he discerns
innumerable marks of his dependent aate.

He

He finds himself placed, by some fupe- s E R M.
riour power, in a vast world, where the -
wisdom and goodness of the Creator are
conspicuous on every fide. The magni-
ficence, the beauty and order of nature,
excite him to admire and adore. When
he looks up to that omnipotent hand
which operates throughout the universe,
he is impressed with reverence. When
he receives blessings which he cannot a-
void ascribing to divine goodness, he is
prompted to gratitude. The expressions
of those affecions under the various forms
of religious worfiip, are no other than
native effusions of the human heart. Ig-
norance may mislead, and fuperilition may
corrupt them; but their origin is derived
from sentiments that are essential to man.

Cait your eyes over the whole earth.

Explore the mofi remote quarters of the
east or the weft. You may discover tribes
of men, without policy, or laws, or cities,
or any of the arts of life: But no where
will you find them without some form of
religion. In every region you behold the

prostrate

E R M. profirate worshipper, the temple, the al-
L--J tar, and the offering. Wherever men have

existed, they have been sensible that tome
acknowledgment was due, on their part,
to the Sovereign of the world. If in their
rudefi and most ignorant slate, this obli-
gation has been felt, what additional force
must it acquire by the improvements of
human knowledge, but especially by the
great discoveries of the Christian revela-
tion? Whatever, either from reverence or
from gratitude, can excite men to the
worship of God, is by this revelation
placed in such a light, as one should
think were sufficient to over-awe the most
thoughtless, and to melt the most obdurate
mind.

Canst thou, then, pretend to be a man-

of reason, nay, a man of virtue, and yet
continue regardless of one of the first and
chief dicates of human nature? Where
is thy sensibility to what is right and fit,
if that loud voice which calls all nations
throughout the earth to religious homage,
has never been heard by thee? Or, if it

has

has been heard, by what firange and false s E R M,

I.

refinements haft thou fifled those natural --
sentiments which it tends to awaken?
Calling thyself a son, a citizen, a friend;
claiming to be faithful and affectionate
in these relations; haft thou no sense of
what thou oweft to thy first Parent, thy
highest Sovereign, thy greatest Benefac-
tor? Can it be confifent with true virtue
or honour, to value thyfeif upon thy re-
gard to inferiour obligations, and yet to
violate that which is the most sacred and
the molt ancient of all? When simple in-
ftincE teaches the Tartar and the Indian,
together with his alms and good works to
join his prayers to that Power whom he
confiders as the source of good, shall it be
no reproach, in the most enlightened state
of human nature, and under the purert
dispensation of religion, to have extin-
guifhed the sense of gratitude to Heaven,
and to flight all acknowledgment of the
great and the true God ? What does such
conduct imply, but either an entire want,
or a wiiful fuppreslion, of some of the best

andc

s E R M. and most generous affeteions belonging to

>-v3 human nature ?---Surely, there must be

an efential defect in that heart which re-
mains cold and insensible, where it ought
to be affected most warmly. Surely, such
a degree of depravity must be lodged there,
as is sufficient to taint all the other springs
of pretended virtue.

BUT besides this, I must contend, in

the second place, That where religion is
neglected, there can be no regular nor
fleady pradtice of the duties of morality.
The charadter will be often inconfifient;
and Virtue placed on a basis too narrow
to support it, will be always loose and
tottering.. For such is the propensity of
our nature to vice, so numerous are the
temptations to a relaxed and immoral
condudt, that fironger restraints than
those of mere reason, are necessary to be
imposed on man. The sense of right and
wrong, the principle of honour, or the
inflinEt of benevolence, are barriers too
feeble to withstand the strength of passion.

In

In the tranquil seasons of life, these natu- S E R M.
ral principles may, perhaps, carry on the -v
ordinary course of social duties with some
regularity. But wait until some trying
emergence come. Let the cenfici of
passions arise. Let the heart be cither
wounded by fore distress, or agitated by
violent emotions; and you flhall presently
fee, that virtue without religion is inade-
quate to the government of life. It is de-
flitute of its proper guard, of its firmest
support, of its chief encouragement. It
will fink under the weight of misfortune;
or will yield to the solicitation of guilt.

The great motives that produce con-

fIancy and firmness of acion, must be of
a palpable and firiking kind. A divine Le-
giflator, uttering his voice from heaven;
an omniscient Witness, beholding us in
all our retreats; an almighty Governour,
stretching forth his arm to punish or re-
ward, disclosing the secrets of the invisible
-world, informing us of perpetual reft pre-
pared hereafter for the righteous, and of
indignation and 'wrath awaiting the wicked:

These

s E R M. There are the considerations which over-
<- J awe the world, which support integrity,

and check guilt. They add to virtue that
solemnity which should ever characterize
it. To the admonitions of conscience they
give the authority of a law. Co-operating
with all the good dispositions of a pious
man, they strengthen and insure their in-
Uluence. On his alms you can have no
certain dependance, who thinks not of
God, nor has joined prayer to his cha-
ritable deeds. But when humanity is fe-
conded by piety, the spring from which
it flows is rendered, of course, more re-
gular and conftant.---In short, withdraw
religion, and you flake all the pillars of
morality. In every heart you weaken the
influence of virtue: And among the mul-
titude, the bulk of mankind, you over-
throw its power.

HAVING thus ihewn that morality

without devotion is both defective and
unflable, I proceed to confider the other
extreme, of prayers without alms, devo-
·tion without morality.

In

In every age the practice has prevailed, S E I M.

I.

of fubfituting certain appearances of piety ,--_-.
in the place of the great duties of huma-
nity and mercy. Too many there have
always been, who flatter themselves with
the hope of obtaining the friendship of
their Creator, though they negleCt to do
juflice to their fellow-creatures. But such
persons may be assured, that their supposcd
piety is altogether of a spurious kind. It
is an invention of their own, unknown to
reason, unknown in the word of God. In
scripture we are ever direded to try our
faith by our works, our love of God by our
love of men. We are direcQed to confider
piety as a principle which regenerates the
heart, and forms it to goodness. We are
taught, that in vain we address any aCts of
homage to Christ, unless we do the things.
which he faith; and that love, peace, gen-
tlenefi, goodnefi, mceknefs and temperance
are not-only the injunctions of his law, but
the nativefruzits of hisfpirit . If there-

Luk-e vi. 46. Galv. zv.

fore

s E R M. fore, while piety seems ardent, morality

-- shall decline, you have full reason to be-

lieve that into that piety some corrupting
ingredients have entered. And if ever
your regard to morality shall totally fail;
if, while you make many prayers, you
give no alms; if while you appear to be
zealous for God, you are false or unjust to
men; if you are hard or contraCted inl
heart, severe in your censures, and oppref-
five in your conduct; then, conclude with
certainty, that what you had termed piety
was no more than an empty name. For
as soon according to the scripture fimili-
tude, will bitter awaters yfowfrom a sweet
fountain, as such effects be produced by
genuine piety.

What you have called by that name,

resolves itself into one or other of three
things. Either it is a hypocritical form
of godliness, assumed in order to impose
on the world; or, which is the most fa-
vourable £uppofition, it is a transient im-
pression of seriousness, an accidental melt-
ing of the heart, which pajes away like

the

the morning cloud and the early dew; or, S E R M.
which I am afraid is too often the cafe, -
it is the deliberate refuge of a deluded
and superstitious, but at the fame time
a corrupted mind. For all men, even the
most depraved, are fubjeEt more or less,
to compunctions of conscience. It has
never 'been in their power to withdraw
totally beyond the reach of that warning
voice, which tells them that something is
necessary to be done, in order to make
their peace with the Ruler of the world.
But, backward at the fame time to resign
the gains of diflonefty, or the pleasures
of vice; averse from submission to that
sacred law which enjoins righteousness
in its whole extent, they have often at-
tempted to make a fort of composition
with Heaven; a composition, which,
though they dare not avow it in words,
lurks in secret at the bottom of many a
heart. If God will only dispense with
some articles of obedience, they will re-
pay him with abundant homage. If they
fail in good pradice, they will fludy to

be

S E R M. be found in belief; and, by the number of

--v their prayers, will atone, in some measure,

for their deficiency in charitable deeds.

But the attempt is as vain, as it is im-

pious. Fromi the simplest and plainest
principles of reason it must appear, that
religious worship, disjoined from juflice
and virtue, can upon no account what-
ever find acceptance with the Supreme
Being. To what purpose is the multitude
ofyour jacrifices unto me ? faith the Lord.
Bring no more vain oblations. Incense is an
abomination unto me. The new moons and
JZabbaths, the calling of ajinmblies, I cannot
away with; it is iniquity, even the solemn
meetings -.- Cease, foolifl and impious
man! Cease to confider the Almighty as
a weak or vain-glorious being, cwho is to
be appeased by thy devout prostrations,
and thy humble words; or to be gratified
by the parade and ostentation of external
worship. What is all thy worship to him ?
Will he eat the fi37J of thi, sacrifices, or
drink the blood of offered goats ? Was wor-

* Ifa. i. i i. f.

ship

ship required of thee, dost thou think, S E R /M.

I.

upon his account, that thou mighteft
bring any increase to his glory and feli-
city by thy weak and insignificant praises?
Sooner mighteft thou increafc the fplen-
dour of the fun by a lighted taper, or add
to the thunder by thy voice. No: It is
for the fake of man, not of God, that
worship and prayers are required; not that
God may be rendered more glorious, but
that man may be made better; that he may
be confirmed in a proper sense of his de-
pendent state, ana acquire those pious and
virtuous clifpofitions in which his highest
improvement conifits,

Of all the principles in religion, one

should take this to be the most evident;
and yet frequent admonitions are needed,
to renew the impression of it upon man-
kind. For what purpose did thy Creator
place thee in this world, in the midst of
human society, but that as a man among
men thou mighteft cultivate humanity;
that each in his place might contribute to
the general welfare; that as a spouse, a

brother,

S E R M. brother, a son, or a friend, thou mightef
-- , adt thy part with an upright and a tender

heart; and thus aspire to refembie Him
who ever consults the good of his crea-
tures, and whose tender mercies are over
all his works? And darefi thou, who haft
been sacrificing unfufpicious innocence to
thy loose pleasures; thou, who haft been
disturbing the repose of society by thine
ambition or craft; thou, who, to increase
thy treasures, haft been making the wi-
dow and the orphan weep; dareft thou
approach God with thy worship and thy
prayers, and entertain the hope that he
will look down upon thee in peace ? Will
the God of order and juitice accept such
poor compensation for his violated laws?
Will the God of love regard the services
of one who is an enemy to his creatures ?
Shall a corrupter of the society of men
aspire to the habitations of pure and blef-
fed spirits ?---Believe it, He that faith he
loveth God, mzi love his brother also. Cease
to do evil; learn to do well. Seek jzudg-
ment; relieve the opprefed, judge the fa-

therlefs,

fherlefs, pleadfobr the widow: And then, S E R M.
Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh --
to thee; call upon him in the day of trouble,
and he will answer thee. Thy prayers
and thine alms, shall then afeend, in joint
memorial, before the Most High.

I HAVE now shown the evil of maim-

ing and splitting religion; of dividing
asunder two things, which though in
theory they may be separated, yet in
practice must always co-exist if either of
them be real, Devotion to God and Cha-
rity to men. Let us confider next the
happy effeds of their union.

Their union forms the confifient, the

graceful, the refpedable charater of the
real Chrifcian, the man of true worth.
If you leave either of them out of your
syste.m, even though you excel in the
other, you can fland trial only in one
point of view. It is only on one fide
your charater is fair; on the other, it
will always be open to much reproach,.
And as you dishonour yourselves, so you

-C do

s E R M. do great injutfice to religion. For, by

,-^- dividing its parts from one another, you

never fail to expose it to the censure of
the world: And perhaps, by this fort of
partial and divided goodness, religion has
suffered more in the esteem of mankind,
than by open profligacy. The unbeliever
will scoff at your piety, when he fees you
negligent of moral duties. The bigot will
decry all morality, when he fees you pre-
tending to be a follower of virtue, though
you be a despiser of God. Whereas he
who fears God, and is at the fame time
just and beneficent to men, exhibits reli-
gion to the world with full propriety. It
jhines in his conduct with its native fplen-
dour; and its rays throw a glory round
him. His character is above reproach.
It is at once amiable and venerable. Ma-
lice itself is afraid to attack him; and
even the worst men refpedt and honour
him in their hearts.

This too is the man whose life will be

most peaceful and happy. He who fails
materially either in piety or in virtue, is

always

always obnoxious to the anguish of re- S E R MI
morse. His partial goodness may flatter x--
him in the day of superficial observation;
but when solitude or distress awakens the
powers of refledion, he shall be made to
feel, that one part of duty performed,
atones not for another which is neglected.
In the midst of his prayers, the remem-
brance of injustice will upbraid him with
hypocrisy; and in the distribution of his
alms, the prayers which the poor put up
for him, will make him blush for his ne-
gle~d of God. Conscience will supply the
place of the hand coming forth to write
over against him on the wall, Thou art
weighed in the balance, and art found want-
ing*. Whereas he who holds both faith
and a good conscience, who attends equally
to the discharge of his duty towards God
and towards man, enjoys, as far as hu-
man imperfection allows, the sense of
fairness and consistency in conduct, of in-
tegrity and soundness of heart.

The man of mere morality, is a firanger
to all the delicate and refined pleasures of

* Dan.v. 27.
C 2 devotion.

S iI R M. devotion. In works of beneficence and
--..--- mercy, he may enjoy fatisfadion. But

his fatisfadion is defitute of that glow of
afficion, which enlivens the feelings of
one who lifts his heart at the fame time
to the Father of the universe, and confi-
ders himself as imitating God. The man
again who refis solely on devotion, if that
devotion open not his heart to humanity,
not only remains a firanger to the plea-
fures of beneficence, but Imuft often un-
dergo the pain arising from bad passions.
But when beneficence and devotion are
united, they pour upon the man in whom
they meet, the full pleasures of a good
and pure heart. His alms connieded him
with men; his prayers with God. He
looks without dismay on both worlds.
All nature has to him a benign asped.
If engaged in active life, he is the
friend of men; and he is happy in the
exertions of that friendship. If left in
retirement, he walks among the works of
nature as with God. Every objet is en-
livened to him by the sense of the Divine

presence

presence. Every where he traces the be- s E R M.
nificent hand of the Author of nature; -,--
and every where, with glowing heart,
he hears and answers his fccret voice.
When he looks up to heaven, he rejoices
in the thought that there dwells that God
whom he serves and honours; that Sa-
viour in whom he trufis; that Spirit of
grace from whose inspiration his piety and
his charity flow. When he looks around
him on the world, he is soothed with the
pleating remembrance of good offices which
he has done, or at leaf: has studied to do,
to many who dwell there. How comfort-
able the reflection, that him no poor man
can upbraid for having with-held his due;
him no unfortunate man can reproach for
having seen and despised his sorrows. but
that on his head are descending the prayers
of the needy and the aged; and that the
hands of those whom his protedcion has
supported, or his bounty has fed, are lifted
up in secret to bless him!

Life paied under the influence of such
dispositions, naturally leads to a happy

end,

S E R M. end. It is not enough to fay, that faith

*-- and piety, joined with active virtue, con-

flitute the requisite preparation for hea-
ven. They in truth begin the enjoyment
of heaven. In every state of our exiflence,
they form the chief ingredients of felicity.
Hence they are the great marks of Chri-
ftian regeneration. They are the figna-
ture of that Holy Spirit, by which good
men are said to befealed unto the day of
redemrption.---The text affords a flriking
proof of the estimation in which they are
held by God. Amidst that infinite va-
riety of human events which pass under
his eye, the prayers and the alms of COR-
NELIUS attracted his particular notice. He
remarked the amiable dispositions which
rose in the heart of this good man. But
he saw that they were yet imperfedt,
while he remained unenlightened by the
principles of the Chriflian religion. In
order to remove this obftrution to his
rising graces, and to bring him to the full
knowledge of that God whom he fought
to honour, he was favoured with a super-

natural

natural message from heaven. While the S E R M.
princes of the earth were left to aCt by -
the counsels of their own wisdom ; while,
without interposition from above, Gene-
rals conquered or fell, according to the
vicissitude of human things; to this good
centurion an Angel was commissioned from
the throne of God.

What can I fay more or higher in praise

of this blessed character, than that it is
what God delights to honour? Men tingle
out as the objects of diftintion, the great,
the brave, or the renowned. But he who
feeth not as man Jeeth, pafling by those
qualities which often shine with false fplen-
dour to human observation, looks to the
inward principles of action; to those prin-
ciples which form the essence of a worthy
character; and which, if called forth,
would give birth to whatever is laudable
or excellent in condud.---Is there one,
though in humble flation or obscure life,
who feareth God and worketh righteozlf-
ness; whose prayers and alms, proceeding
in regular unaffected tenour, bespeak the

upright,

S E R M. upright, the tender, the devout heart?---
\vIP-- Those alms and prayers come up in me-

morial before that God who is no refpeSter
of persons. The Almighty beholds him
from his throne with complacency. Di-
vine illumination is ready to inftrua him.
Angels minister to him. They now mark
him out on earth as their future associate;
and for him they make ready in paradise,
the white robes, the palms, and the sceptres of
the just.

To this honour, to. this blessedness, let

our hearts continually aspire; and through-
out the whole of life, let those solemn and.
sacred words, with which I conclude,
found in our ears, and be the great di-
tedory of our conduc: * He hath jhewed
thee, 0 man, what is good; and what dotb
the Lord thy God require of thee, but--- to do
jufily, and love mercy---and to walk humbly
wvith thy God?

- Micah, vi. 8,

SER-

# SERMON II. On the Influence of RELIGION upon ADVERSITY. PSALM xxvii. 5. In the time of trouble, he shall hide me in his pavilion ; in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me ; he shall set me up ...

[ 25 I

S E R M N II.
On the Influence of RELIGION upon

ADVERSITY.

PSALM xxvii. 5.
In the time of trouble, he fJtall hide me in

bis pavilion; ii the secret of his taber-
nacle J7all he hide me 3 he jhallfeJt me up
upon a rock.

'H E life of man has always been a s E R M.

very mixed slate, full of uncertainty and -
vicissitude, of anxieties and fears. In every
religious audience, there are many who
fall under the denomination of the unfor-
tunate; and the reft are ignorant how
soon they may be called to join them.
For the prosperity of no man on earth is
flable and assured. Dark clouds may soon

gather

SE R M. gather over the heads of those whose
'--y- x flky is now moit bright. In the midst of

the deceitful calm which they enjoy,
the florm that is to overwhelm them has
perhaps already begun to ferment. If a
man live many years, and rejoice in them all;
yet let him remember the days of dareknefs,for
they Jhall be many %.

Hence, to a thoughtful mind, no fiudy

can appear more important, than how to
be suitably prepared for the misfortunes
of life; so as to contemplate them in pro-
sped without dismay, and, if they must
befal, to bear them without dejection.
Throughout every age, the wisdom of the
wife, the treasures of the rich, and the
power of the mighty, have been employ-
ed, either in guarding their state against
the approach of distress, or in rendering
themselves less vulnerable by its attacks.
Power has endeavoured to remove adver-
iity to a distance. Philosophy has fludied,
when it drew nigir,-to conquer it by pa-
tience; and Wealth has fought out every

* Eccles. xi. 8.

pleasure

vleafure that can compensate or alleviate s E R M.
pain.

While the wisdom of the world is thus

occupied, religion has been no less atten-
tive to the fame important object. It in-
forms us in the Text, of a pavilion which
God erets to shelter his servants in the
time of trouble, of a secret place in his taber-
nacle into which he brings them, of a
rock on which he Jets them zip; and else-
where he tells us, of a i eld and a buckler
which he spreads before them, to cover
them from the terrour by night, and the ar-
row that flieth by day. Now of what
nature are those infiruments of defence,
which God is represented as providing
with such solicitous care for those who
fear him? Has he reared up any bul-
warks, impregnable by misfortune, in
order to separate the pious and virtuous
from the reft of mankind, and to screen
them from the common disasters of life?
No: To those disasters we behold them
liable no less than others. The defence
which religion provides, is altogether of

an

E R M. an internal kind. It is the heart, not the
(-^ outward fIate, which it profcffes to guard.

When the time of trouble comes, as come
it must to all, it places good men under
thse pavilion of the Almighty, by afford-
ing them that security and peace which
arise from the belief of divine protection.
,It brings them into thefecret of his taber-
nacle, by opening to them sources of con-
folation which are hidden from others.
By that firength of mind with which. it
endows them, it Jits them zp upon a rock,
against which the tempefl may violently
beat, but which it cannot shake.

How far the comforts proceeding from

religion merit those high titles under
which they are here figuratively deferib-
ed, I shall in this discourse endeavour to
show. I Ihall for this end compare toge-
ther the situation of bad men and that of
the good, when both are suffering the
misfortunes of life; and then make such
improvement as the fubjedt will naturally
fuggeIt.

1 RELIGION

I. RELIGION prepares the mind for en- s E R M.

countering, with fortitude, the most severe ,-v-.
shocks of advcrfity; whereas vice, by its
natural influence on the temper, tends to
produce dejedion under the slightest trials.
While worldly men enlarge their posses-
sions, and extend their connections, they
imagine that they are strengthening them-
selves againfi all the possible vicissitudes of
life. They fay in their hearts, lMsy moun-
tain Jlfanls firong, and IJ'a1ll never be mov-
ed. But so fatal is their delusion, that, in-
fead of firengthening, they are weaken-
ing that which only can support them
when those vicirfitudes come. It is their
mind which muAf then support them
and their mind, by their sensual attaclh-
ments is corrupted and enfeebled. Ad-
dicted with intemperate fondness to the
pleasures of the world, they incur two
great and certain evils; they both ex-
clude themselves from every resource ex-
cept the world, and they increase their
sensibility to every blow which comes upon
them from that quarter.

They

S E R M. They have neither principles nor tern-

>,--Y* per which can stand the assault of trouble,

They have no principles which lead them
to look beyond the ordinary rotation of
events; and therefore, when misfortunes
involve them, the profpeet must be com-
fortlefs on every fide. Their crimes have
disqualified them for looking up to the
assistance of any higher power than their
own ability, or for relying on any better
guide than their own wisdom. And as
from principle they can derive no sup-
port, so in a temper corrupted by pro-
fperity they find no relief. They have
loft that moderation of mind which en-.
ables a wife man to accommodate himself
to his situation. Long fed with false
hopes, they are exasperated and stung by
every disappointment. Luxurious and
effeminate, they can bear no uneasiness.
Proud and presumptuous, they can brook
no opposition. By nourishing dispositions
which so little suit this uncertain state,
they have infused a double portion of bit-
ternefs into the cup of woe; they have

sharpened

iharpened the edge of that sword which is s E R M.
lifted up to finite them. Strangers to all -
the temperate fatisfadions of a good and
a pure mind ; firangers to every pleasure
except what was seasoned by vice or vanity,
their adversity is to the last degree difeon-
solate. Health and opulence were the two
pillars on which they relied. Shake either
of them ; and their whole edifice of hope
and comfort falls. Profirate and forlorn,
they are left on the ground; obliged to
join with the man of Ephraim in his ab-
jedc lamentation, 'hey have taken away
my gods, which I have made, and what
have I more ?---Such are the causes to
which we mufi ascribe the broken spirits,
the peevish temper, and impatient paflions.
that so often attend the declining age, or
falling fortunes of vicious men.

But how different is the condition of a

truly good man in those trying situations
of life! Religion had gradually prepared
his mind for all the events of this incon-
sant state. It had infiruded him in thd

Judges xviii. 24.

nature

s ER M. nature of true happiness. It had early

<, weaned him from the undue love of the

world, by discovering to him its vanity,
and by setting higher profpets in his
view. Affli:ions do not attack him by
surprise, and therefore do not overwhelm
him. He was equipped for the storm, as
well as the calm, in this dubious naviga-
tion of life. Under those conditions he
knew himself to be brought hither, that
he was not to retain always the enjoy-
inent of what he loved; And therefore he
is not overcome by disappointment, when
that which is mortal, dies; when that
which is mutable, begins to change; and
when that which he knew to be transient,
passes away.

All the principles which religion teaches,

and all the habits which it forms, are fa-
vourable to strength of mind. It will be
found, that whatever purifies, fortifies
also the heart. In the course of living
irghtepzJ, fober.l, cand godly, a good man
acquires a hteady and well-governed fpi-
rit. Trained, by Divine grace, to enjoy

with

With moderation the advantages of the s E R M
world, neither lifted up by success, nor -
enervated with sensuality, he meets the
changes in his lot without unmanly de-
jedion. He is inured to temperance and
refiraint. He has learned firmness and
felf-command. 'He is accustomed to
look up to that Supreme Providence,
which disposes of human affairs, not
with reverence only, but with trust and
hope.

The time of prosperity was to him not

merely a season of barren joy, but pro-
ductive of much useful improvement.
He had cultivated his mind. He had
fiored it with useful knowledge, with
good principles, and virtuous difpofi-
tions. These resources remain entire
when the days of trouble come. They
remain with him in sickness, as in
health; in poverty, as in the midst of
riches; in his dark and solitary hours,
no less than when surrounded with
friends and gay society. From the glare
of prosperity, he can, without dejedion,

n~D withdraw

S E R M. withdraw into the hade. Excluded from

~--v-~> several advantages of the world, he may

be obliged to retreat into a narrower
circle; but within that circle he will find
many comforts left. His chief pleasures
were always of the calm, innocent, and
temperate kind; and' over these, the
changes of the world have the least power.
His mind is a kingdom to him; and he
can fiill enjoy it. The world did not
beflow upon him all his enjoyments and
therefore it is not in the power of the
world, by its most cruel attacks, to carry
them all away.

II. THSi difireftes of life are alleviated

lo good men, by reflections on their past
conducts while, by such reflecions, they
are highly aggravated to the bad. During
the gay and acive periods of life, finners
elude, in some measure, the force of con-
science. Carried round in the whirl of
affairs and pleasures; intent on contriv-
ance, or eager in pursuit; amused by hope,
or elated by enjoyment; they are sheltered

by

by that croud of trifles which surrounds s E R M.
them, from serious thought. But con-
science is too great a power to remain
always suppressed. There is in every
man's life, a period when he shall be
made to fiand forth as a real object to
his own view: And when that period
comes, Wo to him who is galled by the
fight! In the dark and solitary hour of
distress, with a mind hurt and fore from
some recent wound of fortune, how shall
he bear to have his character for the firfi
time disclosed to him, in that humiliating
light under which guilt will necessarily
present it? Then the recolleation of the
past becomes dreadful. It exhibits to him
a life thrown away on vanities and follies,
or consumed in flagitiousness and fin; no
ilation properly supported; no material
duties fulfilled. Crimes which once had
been easily palliated, rife before him in
their native deformity. The sense of guilt
mixes itself with all that has befallen him.
Hie beholds, or thinks that he beholds,
the hand .of the God whom n le hath of-

D 2 fended

S E R M. fended, openly firetched out against him.

--- ---At a season when a man flands most in

need of support, how intollerable is the
weight of this additional load, aggravat-
ing the depreflion of disease, disappoint-
ment, or old age! How miserable his
state, who is condemned to endure at once
the pangs of guilt, and the vexations of
calamity! TJhe pirit of a man may fuJain
his ifirmnities; but a wouznded spirit, who
can bear ?

Whereas, he who is blessed with a clear

conscience, enjoys, in the worst conjunc-
tures of human life, a peace, a dignity,
an elevation of mind, peculiar to virtue.
The teflimony of a good conscience is
indeed to be always diflinguifhed from
that presumptuous boast of innocence,
which every good Chriflian totally dif-
claims. The better he is, he will be the
more humble, and sensible of his failings,
But though he acknowledge that he can
claim nothing from God upon the foot-,
ing of desert, yet he can trust in his mer-
ciful acceptance through Jesus Christ; ac-

cording

cording to the terms of the gospel. He S ER M.
can hope, that his prayers and his

ald his ,---

have come up in memorial before God. The
piety and virtue of his former life were
as feeds sown in his prosperous state, of
which he reaps the fruits in the season of
adversity. The riches, the pleasures, and
the friends of the world, may have made
wlings to themrfc lves, and sown away. But
the improvement which he made of those
advantages while they lasted, the tempe-
rate spirit with which he enjoyed them,
the beneficent actions which he perform-
ed, and the good example which he set to
others, remain behind. By the memory
of these, he enjoys his prosperity a fe-
cond time in reflection; and perhaps this.
second and reflected enjoyment is not in-
feriour to the firit. It arrives at a more
critical and needful time. It affords him
the high fatisfadtion of having extrated
lasting pleasure from that which is short;
and of having fixed that which by its
nature was changing.---" If my race be
"now about to end, I have this con-

"fort

S E R M. " fort that it has not been run in vain.
--w-' " I have fozgght the good fght; I have kept

" thefaith. My mind has no load. Fu-
"' turity has no terrors. I have endea-
"voured to do my duty, and to make
' my peace with God. I leave the reft
" to Heaven." These are the refletions
which to the' upright make light arise in
darkness; reflecions which chear the
lonely house of virtuous poverty, and at-
tend the conscientious sufferer into prison
or exile; which sooth the complaints of
grief, lighten the pressure of old age, and
furnish to the bed of sickness, a cordial
of more grateful relish, and more fove-
reign virtue, than any which the world can
afford.

Look abroad into life, and you will

find the general sense of mankind bearing
witness to this important truth, that mind
is fuperiour to fortune; that what one
feels within, is of much greater importance
than all that befals him without. Let a
man be brought into some such severe
and trying situation, as fixes the attention

of

of the publick on his behaviour. The s Er M.
first queflion which we put concerning -'
him, is not, What does he susser? but,
How does he bear it? Has he a quiet
mind ? or, Does he appear to be un-
happy within ? If we judge him to be
composed and firm, resigned to Provi-
dence, and supported by conscious inte-
grity, his charaCter rites, and his misery
leiens in our view. We efleem and ad-
mire, rather than pity him. Recollect
what holy men have endured for the fake
of conscience, and with what chearfulnefs
they have suffered. On the other hand,
when conscience has concurred with out-
ward misfortunes in difirefling the guilty,
think of the dreadful consequences which
have ensued. How often, upon a reverse
of fortune, after abused prosperity, have
they madly hurried themfelvcs over that
precipice from which there is no return;
and, in what nature most abhors, the vo-
luntary extincion of life, have fought re-
lief from that torment of reflection, which
was become too great for them to bear ?

Never

S E R M. Never then allow yourselves to imagine,

II. i-_-i that misfortunes alone form the chief

misery of man. None but the guilty are
completely miserable. The misgiving and
distrust, the accusations and reproaches of
their minds, the sense of having drawn
down upon their heads the evils which
they fufter, and the terrifying expectation
of more and worse evils to come; these
are the essential ingredients of human
misery. They not only whet the edge,
but they envenom the darts of affliEion,
and add poison to the wound. Whereas,
when misfortunes assail a good man, they
carry no such fatal auxiliaries in their
train. They may ruffle the surface of
his foul; but there is a strength within,
which refills their farther impression. The
constitution of his mind is found. The
world can inflict upon it no wounds, but
what admit of cure.

III. ILL men, in the time of trouble,

can look up to no protector; while good
men commit themselves, with trust and

hope,

hope, to the care of Heaven. The hu- S E RM.
man mind, naturally feeble, is made to -'
feel all its weakness by the pressure of
adversity. DejeCted with evils which
overpower its strength, it relies no longer
on itself. It catss every where around, a
wishing, exploring eye, for some fielter to
screen, some power to uphold it; and if,
when abandoned by the world, it can
find nothing to which it may fly in the
room of the world, its state is truly for-
lorn. Now, whither should the ungodly,
in this situation, turn for aid ? After hav-
ing contended with the storms of adverse
fortune till their spirits are exhausted,
gladly would they retreat at last to the
fandtuary of religion. But that fanftuary
is shut against them; nay, it is environed
with terrours. They behold there, not a
Proteator to whom they can fly, but a
Judge whom they dread; and in those
moments when they need his friendship
the most, they are reduced to deprecate
his wrath. If he once called when they
reife'd, and fretched out his hands when

they

s E R M. they would not regard, how much reason
--.-< have they to fear that he will leave them

now to eat the fruit of their own ways,
and to be flled with their own devices;
that he will latugh at their calamity, and
mock when their fear cometh ?

But of all the thoughts which can enter

into the mind, in the season of distress,
the belief of an interest in his favour
who rules the world is the most toothing.
Every form of religion has afforded to
virtuous men tome degree of this confo-
lation. But it was reserved for the Chri-
flian revelation, to carry it to its highest
point. For it is the direct scope of that
revelation, to accommodate itself to the
circumfiances of man, under two main
views; as guilty in the fight of God,
and as struggling with the evils of the
world. Under the former, it discovers
to him a Mediator and an atonement;
under the latter, it promises him the
Spirit of grace and consolation. It is a
system of complete relief, extending from
our spiritual to our temporal distresses.

The

The fame hand which holds out forgive- S E R M.
ness to the penitent, and afffifance to the '---r
frail, dispenses comfort and hope to the
afflicted.

It deserves your particular notice, in

this view, that there is no characder
which God more frequently assumes to
himself. in the sacred writings, than that
of the Patron of the distressed. Compaf-
sion is that attribute of his nature which
he has chosen to place in the greatest va-
riety of lights, on purpose that he might
accommodate his majetfy to our weak-
ness, and provide a cordial for human
griefs. He is the hearer of all prayers;
but with particular attention he is repre-
sented as listening to the cly of the poor,
and regarding the prayer of the destitute.
All his creatures he governs with justice
and wisdom; but he takes to himself, in
a special manner, the charge of executing
judgment for the opprefed, of proteffing the
jtranger, of delivering him who hath no
helper from the hand of the spoiler. For the
oppreion of the poor, and for the Jighing of

the

S E R M. the needy, will I arise, faith the Lord, to

j- set him in safety from him that puffeth at
him. He is the Father of the fatherless, and
the YzJdge of the widow, in his holy habi-
tation. He raifeth up them that are bowed
down. He dwelleth with the contrite. He
healeth the broken in heart, For he know-
eth our frame; he rememberetb that we
are duJt*.-If the wisdom of his provi-
dence saw it necessary to place so many
of his creatures in an afflided state, that
slate, however, he commiserates. He
disdains not to point out himself as the
refuge of the virtuous and pious; and to
invite them, amidst all their troubles, to
pour out their hearts before him. Those
circumstances which estrange others from
them, interest him the more in their situ-
ation. The neglect or scorn of the world
exposes them not to any contempt in his
fight. No obscurity conceals them from
his notice; and though they should be
forgotten by every friend on earth, they

* Pfal. ix. 8,-cii. 17.-cxlvi. 7.--xviii. 5.-cxlvii 3.

-ciii~. 4~.---~c. -are

are

are remembered by the God of heaven. E R M.
That sigh, heaved from the afflided bo- .---
fom, which is heard by no human ear, is
liflened to by him; and that tear is re-
marked, which falls unnoticed or defpiled
by the world.

Such views of the Supreme Being, im-

part the moif sensible consolation to every
pious heart. They present his admini-
ftration under an aspet so mild and be-
nign, as in a great measure to disperse
the gloom which hangs over human life.
A good man atds with a vigour, and sus-
sers with a patience more than human,
when he believes himself countenanced
by the Almighty. Injured or opprefed
by the world, he looks up to a Judge
who will vindicate his cause; he appeals
to a witness who knows his integrity;
he commits himself to a Friend who will
never forsake him. When tired with the
vexations of life, devotion opens to him
its quiet retreat, where the tumults of the
world are hushed, and its cares are loft in
happy oblivion; where the wicked ceaft

from

S E R M. from troubling, and the weary are at ret.

1I.
1-- There his mind regains its serenity j the

agitation of pafiion is calmed; and a
softening balm is infiifed into the wounds
of the spirit. Dicflofing to an invisible
Friend those secret griefs which he has
no encouragement to make known to the
world, his heart is lightened. He does
not feel hinfelf solitary or forsaken. He
believes God to be present with him, and
the Holy Ghost to be the inspirer of his
consolations. From that Jfcret place of
the divine tabernacle, into which the Text
represents him as admitted, he hears this
voice issue, Call zpon me in the day of
trouble, and I will anfzJwer thee. Fear not;
for I am with thee. Be not difnayed; for
I am thy God. And as he hears a voice
which speaks to none but the pure in
heart, so he beholds a hand which finners
cannot fee. He beholds the hand of
Providence conducting all the hidden
springs and movements of the universe;
and with a secret, but unerring operation;
direcing every event towards the happi-

ness

ness of the righteous. Those affliions s R Ma.
which appear to others the meifengers of
the wrath of Heaven, appear to him the
minifiers of fanaification and wisdom.
Where they discern nothing but the hor-
rours of the tempest which surrounds
them, his more enlightened eye beholds
the Angel who rides in the whirlwind,
and directs the florm. Hence a peace
keeping the mind and heart, which is no
where to be found but under the pavilion
of the Almighty.

IV. GooD men are comforted under

their troubles by the hope of Heaven;
while bad men are not only deprived of
this hope, but diftreifed with fears arising
from a future fiate. The foul of man
can never divest itself wholly of anxiety
about its fate hereafter. There are hours
when even to the prosperous, in the midst
of their pleasures, eternity is an awful
thought. But much more when those
pleasures, one after another, begin to
withdraw; when life alters its form, and

becomes

S ERAM. becomes dark and chearlefs; when its
,-4--w changes warm the motl inconsiderate, that

what is so mutable will soon pass entirely
away i then with pungent earnestness
comes home that question to the heart,
Into what world are we next to go ?---
How miserable the man, who, under the
difiradions of calamity, hangs doubtful
about an event which so nearly concerns
him; who, in the midftof doubts and
anxieties, approaching to that awful
boundary which separates this world from
the next, shudders at the dark profped
before him; wishing to exist after death.
and yet afraid of that exiflenee ; catching
at every feeble hope which fuperfition
can afford him, and trembling, in the
fame moment, from reflection upon his
crimes!

But blessed be God who hath brought

life and immortality to light; who hath not
only brought them to light, but secured
them to good men; and by the death and
refurredion cf Jesus Christ, hath begotten
them unto the lively hope of an inheritance

incorruptible,

incorruptible, undzefiled, and that fadeth not S ER M.
away. Juitly is this hope flyled in scrip- ----
ture, the anchor of the foul, both fire and
ftedf;fl. For what an anchor is to a ship
in a dark night, on an unknown coast,
and amidst a boisterous ocean, that is
this hope to the foul when diflraaed by
the confusions of the world. In danger,
it gives security; amidfl general fluCtua-
tion, it affords one fixed point of reft. It
is indeed the most eminent of all the
advantages which religion now confers.
For, confider the mighty power of hope
over the human mind. It is the univer-
fal comforter. It is the spring of all hu-
man activity. Upon futurity, mep are
constantly suspended. Animated by the
profpedt of tome diflant good, they toil
and susser through the whole course of
life; and it is not so much what they are
at present, as what they hope to be in
tome after time, that enlivens their mo-
tions fixes attention, and stimulates in-
duftry. Now, if in the common affairs
of life such is the energy of hope, even

1E when

S E R M. when its object is neither very confider-

v'---J able, nor very certain; what effets may

it not be expeaed to produce, when it
refits upon an object so splendid as a life
of immortal felicity ? Were this hope en-
tertained with that full persuasion which
Christian faith demands, it would, in truth,
not merely alleviate, but totally annihilate,
all human miseries. It would banish dif-
content, extinguish grief, and suspend the
very feeling of pain.

But allowing for the mixture of hu-

man frailty; admitting those abatements
which our imperfection makes upon the
effect of every religious principle, still
you will find, that in proportion to the
degree in which the hope of Heaven
operates upon good men, they will be
tranquil under sufferings; nay, they will
be happy, in comparison of those who.
enjoy no such relief. What indeed, in
the course of human affairs, .is sufficient
to distress, far less to overwhelm,. the
mind of that man who can look down
on all human things from an elevation so

-. ... much

much above them ? He is only a patnenger s E R M.
through this world. He is travelling to a ---»
happier country. How disagreeable soever
the occurrences of his journey may be, yet,
at every flage of that journey, he receives
the assurance that he is drawing nearer
and nearer to the period of reft and fe-
licity.---Endure, and thou shalt overcome.
Persevere, and thou shalt be successful.
The time of trial hastens to a close. Thy
mansion is prepared above; thy reft re-
maineth among the people of God. The
disorders which vice has introduced into
the works of God, are about to terminate;
and all tears are soon to be wiped away
from the eyes of the jufI.---The firm as-
furance of this happy conclusion to the
vexations and the vanities of life, works a
greater effeEt on the sincere illiterate Chri-
flian, than all the refinements of philofo-
phy can work on the most learned infidel.
These may gratify the mind that is at
ease; may sooth the heart when slightly
discomposed but when it is fore and
deeply torn, when bereaved of its best

E 2 and

S E R M. and mofi beloved comforts, the only con-
-"v- isolations that can then find access, arise

from the hope of a better world; where
those comforts thall be again refiored; and
all the virtuous shall he alfembled, in the
presence of him who made them. Such
hopes banish that despair which over-
whelms, and leave only that tender melan-
choly which softens the heart, and often
renders the whole characer more gentle
and amiable.

OF this nature are the resources which

religion provides for good men. By its
previous discipline, it trains them to for-
titude; by the reflections of a good con-
science it sooths, by the sense of Divine
favour it supports them; and when every
comfort fails them on earth, it chears
*them with the hope of Heaven. Diflin-
guifhing his Servants with such advantages,
God is justly laid to eret his pavilion over
them in the evil time. He not only f]-reads
a tent for them in the vilhterzefs, but he
transforms in some measure the. state of

nature

nature around them. To use the beautiful s El R M.
language of antient prophecy; In the de- --
fart, the thiftiy land, where no water is,
he openeth springs. I4lead of the thorn,
he maketh the fir-tree to come up; infead
of the briar, the myrtle to spring. In imidf
of the habitation of dragons, he maketh green
paflures rife, and fill waters flow around his
peoplL.

THE improvement to be made of these

truths, is as obvious, as it is important.
Let us fludy so to conduCt our lives, that
wve may be qualified for deriving such con-
folations from religion. To their reality,
and their importance, all mankind bear
witness. For no sooner are they overtak-
en by difirefs, than to religion they fly.
This, throughout every age, has been the
universal shelter which the young and the
old, the high and the low, the giddy and
the serious, have fought to gain, as soon
as they found that reft could be no where
clfe procured for the weary head, or the
aching heart. But amidst those multitudes

that

S E R M. that croud to religion for relief, how few

'--- are entitled to approach that sacred source

of comfort? On what feeble props do
their hopes and pretensions reft? How
much superstition mingles with that reli-
gion to which men are driven by distress
and fear ?---You must first apply to it as
the guide of life, before you can have re-
course to it as the refuge ,of sorrow. You
must submit to its legislative authority,
and experience its renewing influence, be-
fore you can look for its consolatory efeEt.
You must secure the tefrimony of a good
conscience, and peace with God through
Jesus Chrifi? otherwise, when the flods
Jjhall come, and the rains descend, and the
winds blow, the house which you had pro-
posed for your retreat, flall prove the hozfe
founded on the sand, not on the rock.

There are two plans, and there are but

two, on which any man can propose to
conduct himself through the dangers and
difireffes of human life. The one is the
plan of worldly wifdomr; the other, that
of determined adherence to conscience.

He

He who aCds upon the former, lays prin- s E R M.
ciple aside, and trufis his defence to his -
art and ability. He avails himself of
every advantage which his knowledge of
the world suggests. He attends to nothing
but what he confiders as his interefi;
and, unconfined by conscience, pursues it
by every course which promises him fuc-
cess. This plan, though too often adopt-
ed, will be found, on trial, ineffectual and
deceitful. For human ability is an un-
equal match for the violent and unfore-
seen vicissitudes of the world. When
these torrents rife in their might, they
sweep away in a moment the banks which
worldly wisdom had reared for defence,
and overwhelm alike the crafty and the
artless. In the mean time, persons of this
charater condemn themfelvcs to live a
most unquiet life. They pass their days
in perpetual anxiety, listening to every
motion; flartled by every alarm; chang7
ing their measures on every new occur-
rence; and when distress breaks in over
all their defences, they are left under it,
hopeless and disconsolate.

The

S E R M. that croud to religion for relief, how few
I-_b^J are entitled to approach that sacred source

of comfort? On what feeble props do
their hopes and pretensions reft? How
much fuperltition mingles with that reli-
gion to which men are driven by difirefs
and fear ?---You must first apply to it as
the guide of life, before you can have re-
course to it as the refuge ,of sorrow. You
mufi submit to its legislative authority,
and experience its renewing influence, be-
fore you can look for its consolatory effect.
You -must secure the testimony of a good
conscience, and peace with God through
Jesus Chrifi? otherwise, when the _Joods
fJall come, and the rains descend, and the
winds blow, the house which you had pro-
posed for your retreat, shall prove the hozfe
founded on the Jsnd, not on the rock.

There are two plans, and there are but

two, on which any man can propose to
conducE himself through the dangers and
distresses of human life. The one is the
plan of worldly wifdomr; the other, that
of determined adherence to conscience.

He

He who ats upon the former, lays prin- s E R M.
ciple aside, and trusts his defence to his --
art and ability. He avails himself of
every advantage which his knowledge of
the world suggests. He attends to nothing
but what he confiders as his interest;
and, unconfined by conscience, pursues it
by every course which promises him fuc-
cess. This plan, though too often adopt-
ed, will be found, on trial, ineffeCtual and
deceitful. For human ability is an un-
equal match for the violent and unfore-
seen vicissitudes of the world. When
there torrents rife in their might, they
sweep away in a moment the banks which
worldly wisdom had reared for defence,
and overwhelm alike the crafty and the
artless. In the mean time, persons of this
character condemn themselves to live a
most unquiet life. They pass their days
in perpetual anxiety, listening to every
motion; startled by every alarm; chang-
ing their measures on every new occur-
rence; and when distress breaks in over
all their defences, they are left under it,
hopeless and disconsolate.

The

s E R M. The plan which, in opposition to this,

^ ~religion recommends, as both more ho-

nourable in itself, and more effetual for
security, is, at all hazards, to do your
duty, and to leave the consequences to
God. Let him who would ad upon this
plan, adopt for the rule of his condut,
that maxim of the Psalmist's, Truof in thb
Lord, and do good*. To firm integrity,
let him join an humble reliance on God.
Let his adherence to duty, encourage his
religious trust. Let his religious trust,
inspire him with fortitude in the perfor-
mance of his duty. Let him know no
path but the straight and dired one. In
the mofi critical moments of ation, let
him ask no further questions, than What
is the right, the fit, the worthy part?
How as a man, and as a Christian, it be-
comes him to atd? Having received the
decision of conscience, let him commit his
-way unto the Lord. Let him, without
trepidation or wavering, proceed in dif-
charging his duty; resolved; that though

* Pfla. xxxvii. 3.

the

the world may make him unfortunate, it s E R M.
shall never make him base; and confiding, '
that in what God and his conscience re-
quire him to at or susser, God and a good
conscience will support him.---Such prin-
ciples as these, are the best preparation for
the viciflitudes of the human lot. They
are the shield of inward peace. He who
thinks and aEts thus, ihall be exposed to
no wounds but what religion can cure.
He may feel the blows of adversity ; but
he shall not know the wounds of the
heart.

SER Jb

# SERMON III. On the Influence of RELIGION upon PROSPERITY. PSALM i, 3. He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season ; his leaf also shall not ...

[ 58.J

SER M O N lit.
On the Influence of RELIGION ;apor

PROSPERITY.

P SALM j, 3
He f7all be like a tree planted by the rivers

of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in
his feaqfon ; his leaf also Jhall not wither,
and whatsoever he doth Jhallprofper.
SER M. Th

HI.
t--,~, HE happy influence of religion

upon human life, in the time of
adversity, has been confidered in the pre-
ceding discourse. Concerning this the fen-
timents of men are more generally agreed,
than with refpeEt to some other preroga-
tives which religion claims. They very
readily assign to it the office of a Comfor-
ter. But as long as their slate is profpe-
rous, they are apt to account it an unnecef-

fary

fary guef, perhaps an unwelcome intruder. s E R M.
Let us not be thus unjust to religion, nor - -
confine its importance to one period only
in the life of man. It was never intended
to be merely the nurte of sickness, and the
Rtaff of old age. I purpose now to show
you, That it is no less efifntial to the en-
joyment of prosperity, than to the comfort
of adversity: That prosperity is prosperous,
if we may be allowed the expreflion, to a
good man only: and that to every other
person, it will prove, notwithstanding its
fair appearance, a barren and joyless state.

The Pfalmiit, in the Text, by an image

taken from one of the moll beautiful ob-
jeCts in nature, describes a man who flou-
rifhes in full prosperity. But to whom is
the description limited? To him, as the
preceding verses inform us, that walketh
not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor Jiand-
eth in the 'way of jinners, nor fitteth in the
feat of the fJornfild, but hath his delight in
the lawe of God. He only is like the tree
planted by the rivers of waters; whilf the
zngodly, as he adds, are not so ; but, how

prosperous

s E R M. prosperous soever they may appear to the
- <---- world, are in truth but like the chaff 'which

the wind driveth away. In confirmation
of this dotrine, I fall lay before you,
some of those circumflances which diftin-
guifh the prosperity of the good man be-
yond that of the finner; and /hall conclude,
with pointing out the dangersand miseries,
into which the latter is apt to be betrayed,
by his favourable situation in the world.

I. PIETY, and gratitude to God, con-

tribute in a high degree to enliven pro-
fperity. Gratitude is a pleating emotion.
The sense of being diflinguifhed by the
kindness of another, gladdens the heart,
warms it with reciprocal affection, and
gives to any poifeffion which is agreeable
in itself, a double relish, from its being
the gift of a friend. Favours conferred
by men; I acknowledge, may prove bur-
denfome. For human virtue is never per-
set ; and sometimes unreasonable expeta-
tions on the one fide, sometimes a morti-
fying sense of dependence on the other,

corrode

corrode in secret the pleasure of benefits, s E R M.
and convert the obligations of friendship -
into grounds of jealousy. But nothing of
this kind can affedc the intercourse of gra-
titudewith Heaven. Its favours are wholly
dilinterefted; and with a gratitude the
moil cordial and unfufpicious, a good man
looks up to that Almighty Benefaitor, who
aims at no end but the happiness of thofc
whom he blesses, and who desires no re-
turn from them but a devout and thanklfut
heart. While others can trace their pro-
fperity to no higher source than a concur-
rence of worldly causes, and, often, of
mean or trifling incidents, which occafi-
onally favoured their designs; with what
fuperiour fatisfation 'does the servant of
God remark the hand of that gracious
Power, which hath raised him up; which
hath happily conduacd him through the
various steps of life, and crowned him
with the moftfavourable diftindion beyond
his equals?

Let us farther confider, that not only
gratitude for the pait, but a chearing sense

of

s E R M. prosperous soever they may appear to the

---- world, are in truth but like the chaf which

the wind driveth away. In confirmation
of this do6rine, I shall lay before you,
some of those circumfiances which diflin-
guifh the prosperity of the good man be-
yond that of the finner; and ihall conclude,
with pointing out the dangersand miseries.
into which the latter is apt to be betrayed,
by his favourable situation in the world.

T. PI-TY, and gratitude to God, con-

tribute in a high degree to enliven pro-
fperity. Gratitude is a pleasing emotion.
Thie sense of being distinguished by the
kindness of another, gladdens the heart,
warms it with reciprocal affetion, and
gives to any possession which is agreeable
in itself, a double relish, from its being
the gift of a friend. Favours conferred
by men; I acknowledge, may prove bur-
denfome. For human virtueis never per-
sect; and sometimes unreasonable expeCta-
tions on the one fide, sometimes a morti-
fying sense of dependence on the other,

corrode

corrode in secret the pleasure of benefits, s E R M.

III.

and convert the obligations of friendihip - _-
into grounds of jealousy. But nothing of
this kind can affect the intercourse of gra-
titudewith Heaven. Its favours are wholly
difnterefted; and with a gratitude the
most cordial and unfufpicious, a good man
looks up to that Almighty Benefadtor, who
aims at no end but the happiness of those
whom he blesses, and who desires no re-
turn from them but a devout and tllhakful
heart. While others can trace their pro-
fiperity to no higher source than a concur-
rence of worldly causes, and, often, of
mean or trifling incidents, which occuai-
onally favoured their designs; with what
fuperiour fatisfacion 'does the servant of
God remark the hand of that gracious
Power, which hath raised him up; which
hath happily conducted him through the
various fleps of life, and crowned him
with the moit favourable diftintion beyond
his equals?

.et us farther confider, that not only
gratitude for the past, but a chearing sense

of

s ER a . of God's favour at the present, enters into
-v--~ the pious emotion. They are only the

virtuous, who in their prosperous days
hear this voice addressed to them: Go thy
way, eat 'thy bread wit/h joy, and drink thy
wine with a merry heart; for God now
accepteth thy works '. He who is the
Author of their prosperity, gives them a
title to enjoy, with complacency, his own
gift. While bad men snatch the pleasures
of the world as by stealth, without counte-
nance from God the proprietor of the
world; the righteous fit openly down to
the feast of life, under the smile of ap-
proving Heaven. No guilty fears damp
their joys. The blessing of God refts upon
all that they poisess; his protection fur-
rounds them; and hence, in the habita-
tioizs of the righteous, is found the voice of
rejoicing and salvation. A lustre unknown
to others, invefis, in their fight, the whole
face of nature. Their piety-reflets a fiun-
shine from heaven upon the prosperity of
the world; unites in one point of view,

Eccles. ix. 7.

the

the smiling aspet, both of the powers S ER M
above, and of the objeCts below. Not ----
only have they as full a relifli as others, of
the innocent pleasures of life, but, more-
over, in these they hold communion with
God. In all that is good or fair, they trace
his hand, From the beauties of nature, from
the improvements of art, from the enjoy-
rnents offocial life, they raise their affeEti-
on to the source of all the happiness which
surrounds them; and thus widen the sphere
of their pleasures, by adding intellectual,
and spiritual, to earthly joys.

For illustration of what I have said on

this head, remark that chearful enjoyment
of a prosperous state which King David
had, when he wrote the twenty-third
Psalm; and compare the highest pleasures.
of the riotous finner, with the happy and
satisfied spirit which breathes throughout
that Pfalm.---In the midst of the splendour
of royalty, with what amiable simplicity
of gratitude does he look up to the Lord as
his Shepherd; happier in ascribing all his
success to divine favour, than to the policy

of

SE R iM. of his counsels, or to the force of his
- ,-- arms! How many inflances of divine

goodness arose before him in pleasing re-
membrance, when with such relish he
speaks of the green pafJzures aznd Jill waters
bAjide which God had led him; of his cup
which he hath made to overflow; and of
the table which he hath prepared for him
in presence of his eniemies ! With with per-
sect tranquillity does he look forward to
the time of his pasing through the valley
of tie Jhadow of death; unappalled by
that SpeEre, whose most difrant appear-
ance blarfs the prosperity of finners! He
fears no evil, as long as the rod and the
Jlajf of his Divine Shepherd are with him;
and, through all the unknown periods of
this and of a future existence, commits
himself to his guidance with secure and
triumphant hope. Surely goodneSs and
mercy jfall flbiw me all the days of my
life ; and I will dwell in the honfi of the'
Lord Jfr eve'.---What a purified, senti-
mental enjoyment of prosperity, is here
exhibited! Hiow different from that gross

relish

relish of worldly pleasures, which belongs s E R M.
to those who behold only the terrestrial
fide of things; who raise their views to
no higher oLbjccts than the fuccenlon of
human continSgecies, and the weak efforts
of humrn ,ability; who have no protector
or patron i.l the heavens, to enliven their
prosperity, or to warm their hearts with
gratitude and truit!

II. RELIGION affords to good men pe-

culiar security in the enjoyment of their
prosperity. One of the firfi reflections
which muf fLtrike every thinking man, as-
ter his situation in the world has become
agreeable is, That the continuance of such
a situation is moit incertain. From a va-
riety of causes, lie lies open to change.
On many fides he fees that he may be
pierced; and the wider his comforts ex-
tend, the broader is the mark which he
spreads to the arrows of misfortune. Hence
many a secret alarm to the reflecting mind;
and to those who reject all such alarms,
the real danger increases, in proportion to
their improvident security.

F By

S E .R M. By worldly afifance it is vain to think
_-... of providing any effectual defence, feeing

the world's mutability is the very cause of
our terrour. It is from a higher principle,
:from a power fuperiour to the world, that
relief muln be fought, amlidft such diiqui-
etudes of the heart. He who in his pro-
fperity can look up to One who is witness
to his moderation, humanity, and charity;
he who can appeal to Heaven, that he has
not been elated by pride, nor overcome
by pleasure, but has fiudied to employ its
gifts to the honour of the giver; this
man, if there be any truth in religion, if
there be any benignity or goodness in the
adminiflration of the universe, has just
cause for encouragement and hope. Not
that an interefl in the Divine grace will
perpetuate to a good man, more than to
others, a life of unruffled prosperity.
Change and alteration. form the very es-
sense of the world. 3ut let the world
change around him at pleasure, he has
ground to hope that it shall not be able to
make him unhappy. Whatever may vary,

God's

God's providence is still the fame; and S E R M.
his love to the righteous remains unaltered. --.
If it shall be the Divine will to remove
one comfort, he trusts that some other
shall be given. Whatever is given, what-
ever is taken away, he confides, that in
the last result all .fall work for his good.

Hence, he is not diflurbed, like bad
men, by the inflability of the world.

Dangers, which overcome others, shake

not his more steady mind. He enjoys the
pleasures of life pure and unallayed, be-
cause he enjoys them, as long as they last,
without anxious terrours. They are not
his all, his only good. He welcomes
them when they arrive; and when they
pass away, he can eye them, as they de-
part, without agony or despair. His pro-
fperity strikes a deeper and firmer root
than that of the ungodly, And for this
reason he is compared in the Text, to a
tree planted by the rivers of water; a tree.
whose branches the- tempefi may indeed
bend, but whose roots it cannot touch;
a tree, which may occasionally be stripped

F a of

S E R M. of its leaves and blossoms, but which still
'-v--- maintains its place, and in due season flou-

rifhes a-new. Whereas the finner in his
prosperity, according to the allusion in the
book of Job, resembles the rziJ/ that grow-
eth ztp in the mire *; a slender reed, that
may flourish green for a while by the fide
of the brook, as long as it is cherished by
the fun, and fanned by the breeze; till the
firfi bitter blast breaks its feeble ftem,
roots it out from its bed, and lays it in
the dust. Lo! such is the prosperity of
them2 that forget God; and thus their hope
Jhall perizl.

III. RELIGION forms good men to the

mofi proper temper.for the enjoyment of
prosperity. A little refledion may satisfy
us, that mere possession, even granting it
to be secure, does not constitute enjoyment.
Give a man all that is in the powter of the
world to bestow; surround him with riches;
crown him with honours; invest him, if
you will, with absolute dominion; but

Job. viii. i x.

leave

leave him at the fame time under some fe- s E R M.
cret oppression or heaviness of heart; you -v
bestow indeed the materials of enjoyment,
but you deprive him of ability to extract
it. You set a fcaft before him, but he
wants the pover of tailing it. Hence pro-
fperity is so often an equivocal word, de-
noting merely affluence of poeffeion, but
unjufily applied to the miserable possessor.

We all know the effects which any

indisposition of the body, even though
flight, produce on external prosperity.
Visit the gayest and most fortunate man
on earth, only with sleepless nights; dif-
order any tingle organ of his senses; cor-
rode but one of his smallef nerves; and
you shall prcfently fee all his gaiety va-
nifh; you shall hear him complain, that
he is a miserable creature, and express his
envy of the peasant and the cottager.---
And can you believe, that a disease in the
foul is lets fatal to enjoyment, than a dif-
ease in the animal frame; or that a found
mind is not as essential, as a found body,
to the prosperity of man?---Let us rate

sensual

S E R M. sensual gratifications as high as we please,

-- we ihrll be made to feel that the feat of

enjoyment is in the foul. The corrupted
temper, and the guilty passions of the
bad, frustrate the effect of every advantage
which the world confers on them. The
world may call them men of pleafuire;
but of all men they are the greatest foes
to pleasure. From their eagerness to
grasp, they fcrangle and defiroy it. None
but the temperate, the regular, and the
virtuous, know how to enjoy prosperity.
They bring to its comforts the manly re-
lifh of a found uncorrupted mind. They
flop at the proper point, before enjoyment
degenerates into disgust, and pleasure is
converted into pain. They are itrangers
to those complaints which flowfrom spleen,
caprice, and all the fantastical diftreiTes of
a vitiated mind. While riotous indulgence
enervates both the body and the mind, pu-
rity and virtue heighten all the powers of
human fruition. Moderate and simple
pleasures relish high with the temperate;
in the midst of his studied refinements, the
voluptuary languishes.

Wherever

Wherever guilt mingles with prosperity, S E R M.

a certain "loom andsl heavincfs enter along ---
with it. Vitious intrigues never fail to
entangle and emb;rrafs those who engage in
them. But innocence confers ease and
freedom on the mind; leaves it open to
every pleasing fnTiation; gives a lightness
to the spirits, similar to the native gaiety
of youth and health; ill imitated, and ill
fuipplied, by that forced levity of the viti-
ous, which arises not from the health, but
fiom the drunkenness of the mind.

Feeble are all pleasures in which the

heart has no part. The felfih gratifi-
cations of the bad, arc both narrow in their
circle, and short in their duration. But
prosperity is redoubled to a good man, by
his generous use of it. It is reflected back
upon him from every one whom he makes
happy. In the intercourse of domefiick
affection, in the attachment of friends,
the gratitude of dependents, the cfteern
and good will of all who know him, he
fees blessings multiplied around him on
every fide. ZWhen the ear heard we, then

it

E R M. it blefed me ; and when the eye a-w me,
Lv-- '- it gave witneJi to me; Becafe I delivered

the poor that cried, the fatherless, anld him
that had none to help him. the blfjing of
him that was ready to perijh came upon me,
and I caunfd the widow's heart to Jing with
joy. I was eyes to the blind, and set was
I to the lame : I was a fater to the ,toor;
and the can/e which I knew not, I searched
out .---Thus, while the righteous fo.z-
rwjJ.eth like a tree planted by the riv:rs of
water he bringeth forth also his frzit in
hisJfeafonz: And that fruit, to purfuue the
allusion of the Text, he brings forth not
for himself alone. He flourishes, not
like a tree in some solitary defart, which
scatters its blossoms to the wind, and com-
municates neither fruit nor shade to any
living thing: But like a tree in the midtf
of an inhabited country, which to some
affords friendly shelter, to others, fruit;
which is not only admired by all for its
beauty, but blessed by the traveller for the
shade, and by the hungry for the sustenance
it hath given.

* Job xxix. I I.-1 7.

IV.

IV. RELIGION heightens the profpe- S E R M.

rity of good men, by the profpeEtwhich _
it affords them of greater happiness to
come in another world. 1 showed, in the
foregoing discourse, the mighty effedt of
the hope of Heaven, in relieving the mind
under the troubles of life. And sure, if
this hope be able to support the falling, it
cannot but improve the flouriiing state
of man ; if it can dispel the thickest gloom
of adversity, it muit needs enliven profpe-
rity, by the additional lufire which it
throws upon it. What is present, is never
sufficient to give us full fatisfa'ion. To
the present we must always join some
agreeable anticipations of futurity, in or-
der to complete our plcafure. What an
accession then mufI the prosperity of the
righteous man receive, when, born with a
smooth and gentle gale along the current
of life, and looking round on all the
blessings of his state, he can confider these
as no more than an introduEion to higher
scenes which are hereafter to open he
can view his present life, as only the.

porch

S E Rl M. porch tlrough which he is to pass into the
---~_ ppalace of bliss; and his present joys, as

but a feeble iream, difpenfSd for his occa-
fional rcfrenehment, until he arrive at that
river of life, which flows at God's right
hand ?---Such prospects purify the mind,
at the Lime time that they gladden it.
They prevent a good man from setting
too high a value on his present poffeflions;
and thereby afift him in maintaining,
amidle the temptations of worldly plea-
sure, that command of himself which is
so effentik l to the wife and temperate en-
joyment of prosperity.

It is the fate of all human pleasures, by

continuance, to fade; of most of them,
to cloy. H-ence, in the most prosperous
Rtate, there are frequent intervals of lan-
guor, and even of dejetion. There are
vacuities in the happiest life, which it is
not in the power of the world to fill up.
What relief so adapted to those vacant or
dej.eded periods, as the pleaiing hopes
which arise from immortality ? How bar-
ren and imperfeóC that prosperity, which

can

can have recourse to no such fubflliirry S Er M-
comfort, in order to animate the flagna- ---
tion of vulgar life, and to supply the in-
sufficiency of worldly plcaurcs !

Worldly prosperity declines with de-

clining life. In youth its rclifh was
brilk and poignant. It becomes more
fober as life advances; and ilattens as
life descends. He who lately overflowed
with chearful spirits and high hopes, be-
gins to look back with heaviness on the
days of former years. He thinks of his
old companions, who are gone and re-
views past fcencs, more agreeable than any
which arc likely to return. The activity
of pursuit is weakened. The gaiety of
amusement is fled. The gratifcations
of sense languish. When his accufcomed
pleasures, one after the other, thus steal
treacherouny away, w-hat can he, whois
an utter firanger to religion, and to the
hope of heaven, fubciitute in their place ?
---But even in that drooping period, the
promifcs and hopes of religion support
the spirits of a good man till the latefi

hour,

s E R M- hour. His leaf, it is said in the Text,
a_, Ihall not wither. It ihall not be in the

power of time to blast his prosperity:
But old age hiall receive him into a quiet
retreat, where, if lively sensations fail,
gentle pleasures remain to sooth him.
That hope of immortality, which formerly
improved his other enjoyments, now in a
great measure supplies their absence. Its
importance rites, in proportion as its ob-
jetd draws near. He is not forfakenby
the world, but retires from it with digni-
ty; reviewing with a calm mind the part
which he has aded, and trufiing to the
promise of God for an approaching re-
ward. Such sentiments and expectations
shed a pleasing tranquillity over the old
age of the righteous man. They make
the evening of his days go down uncloud-
ed and allow the stream of life, though
fallen low, to run clear to the last drop.

THus I have flown, I hope, with full

evidence, what material ingredients reli-
gion and a good conscience are in the pro-

fperity

fperity of life. Separated from them, S F R M.
prosperity, how fair soever it may seem ----
to the world, is insipid, nay frequently
noxious to the poiTeflor: United with
them, it rites into a real blefflng bestowed
by God upon man. God givczh to a man
that is good in his fight,, wisdom, and know-
ledge, and joy ; but to the /innc^r he givcth
Jore travel, to gather, and to heap zp, that
he may give to him that is good bejbre God,.

ALLOW me now to conclude the sub-

jedt, with representing to the prosperous
men of the world, those crimes and mise-
ries into which the abuse of their condi-
tion is likely to betray them, and calling
upon them to beware of the dangers with
which they are threatened.

It is unfortunate for mankind,, that

those situations which favour pleasure, are
too generally adverse to virtue. Virtue re-
quires internal government and discipline;
prosperity relaxes the mind, and inflames
the passions. Virtue is supported by a

' Eclef. ii. 26.

regard

S E R M. regard to what is future ; prosperity at-
<_-^- tltaches us wholly to what is present. The

charadcriflicks of virtue, are modefly and
humility; the moil common attendants of
prosperity, are pride and presumption.
One should think, that prosperity would
prove the strongest incitement to remember
and to honour that God who beflows it.
Yet such is the perverseness of human na-
ture, that it proves much oftener the mo-
tive to impiety. The changes of the
world call the attention of men to an Invi-
lible Power. But a train of events pro-
ceeding according to their wifil, leads
them to nothing beyond what they fee.
The Supreme Giver is concealedfrom view
by his own ,gifts. This instance offuccefs
thev ascribe to a fortunate concurrence of
worldly causes; that acquisition, to their
own Ikill and induflry; unmindful of
him, who from the beginning arranged
that series of causes, and who placed them
in circumftancesswhere their industry could
operate writh success. From forgetting
God, they too often proceed to defpifehim.

All

All that is liht or giddy in their minds, s E R M.
is set in motion by the gale of prosperity. ,-
Arrogance and felf-fuiiiciency are lifted
up; and their slate is confidered, as fe-
cured by their own flrength. Hence that
pride of countenance, through which the
wickcd, in their prosperity, as David ob-
fervcs, r(fift to Jeck after God. They are
described as Jcfakiiig loftily, and Jetting7
their mouthl againfj the Ifi avens. Tri'2y
take the timbrel anld haipl, and rejoice at
the Jfzind of the organ ; and l t/Jhy unto
God, Depar. t from us, for q d/ie t/i the
knowulcdge of tIy ways. iWhat is the Al-
nzighty, that we ,JhouId f' Jve him ? Or
wh/at profit fclcul we /hazve, ij we pray
ulnto him?

TheG Jhy u7ntb God, depart fromn us.---

What an impious voice! Could we have
believed it poffiblc, that worldly plea-
fures should so far intoxicate any human
heart ? Wretched and infatuated men !
Have you ever examined on what your
confidence refts?---You have said in your
hearts, .2oz fJall never be 7movecd; you

fancy

.S E R M. fancy yourselves placed on a Zmounitait

'-----which Jflandeth Jfrong. Awake from those

flattering dreams, and behold how every
thing totters around you ! You. stand on
the edge of a precipice; and the ground
is sliding away below your feet. In your
health, life, pofTefions, conneCtions, plea-
fures, principles of deftrudion work. The
mine advances in secret, which saps the
foundations, while you revel on the fur-
face. No mighty effort, no long prepara-
tion of events, is needed to overturn your
prosperity. By flow degrees it rose. Long
time much labour, and the concurrence
of many asSisting causes, were neceTfary
to rear it up ; but one flight incident can
entirely overthrow it. Suspicions are in-
fused into the patron or the prince on
whom you depend; and your disgrace
ensues. Exercise, or amusement, kindles
a fever in the veins of those whom you
loved; and you are robbed of your com-
forts and hopes. A few grains of sand
lodge themselves within you; and the
reif of your life is disease and misery.

T en

Ten thousand contingencies ever float on s E R M-
the current of life, the smallest of which, ---
if it meet your frail bark in the paifing,
is sufficient to dash it in pieces.---Is this
a place, is this a time, to swell with fan-
cied security, to riot in unlawful pleasure,
and, by your disregard of moral and re-
ligious duties, to brave the government
of the Almighty ? He hath fiamped every
poffeflion of man with this inscription,
Rejoice with trembling. Throughout every
age he hath pointed his peculiar difplea-
sure against the confidence of prefump-
tion, and the arrogance of prosperity. He
hath pronounced, that who/oeever exalteth
himflffl/all be abased. And (hall neither
the admonitions which you receive from
the visible inconfiancy of the world, nor
the declarations of the Divine displeasure,
be sufficient to check your thoughtless ca-
reer? Know, that by your impiety, you
multiply the dangers which already threa-
ten you on every fide; you accelerate the
speed with which the changes of the world
advance to your deftruelion. The Al-

G mighty

s E R M. mighty touches with his rod that edifice

'- ' of duff, on which you fiand, and boast of

your strength; and, at that instant, it crum-
bles to nothing.

As men, then, bethink yourselves of

human inflability. As Christians, reve-
rence the awful government of God. In-
sure your prosperity, by consecrating it to
religion and virtue. Be humble in your
elevation; be moderate in your views;
be submissive to him who hath raised and
diflinguifhcd you. Forget not, that on
his providence you are as dependent, and
to the obedience of his laws as much
bounrd, as the meanest of your fellow-
creatures. Disgrace not your station, by
that grossness of sensuality, that levity
of dissipation, or that insolence of'rank,
which bespeak a little mind. Let the as-
fability of your behaviour, ihow that you
remember the natural equality of men.
Let your moderation in pleasure, your
command of paflion, and your Ready re-
gard to the great duties of life, show that
you possess a mindworthy of your fortune.

Efiablifh

Establish your charater on the basis of es- s E R M.
teem; not on the flattery of dependents, -
or the praise of sycophants, but on the
refpeEt of the wife and the good. Let in-
nocence preside over your enjoyments.
Let usefulness and beneficence, not often-
tation and vanity, diret the train of your
pursuits. Let your alms, together with
your prayers, come up in memorial before
God. So shall your prosperity, under the
blefling of Heaven, be as the Jhining light
which Jhineth more and more unto the per-
fedl day. So shall it resemble those celef-
tial fires which glow above, with beneficent,
with regular, and permanent lustre; and
not prove that miz:h of fools, which by So-
lomon is compared to the crackling of thorns
under a pot, a glittering and fervent blaze,
but speedily extint.

On the whole, let this be our conclu-

sion, That both in prosperity and in ad-
verfity, religion is the safest guide of hu-
man life, Conduted by its light, we
reap the pleasures, and at the fame time
escape the dangers, of a prosperous slate.

G 2 Sheltered

E R M. Sheltered under its protetion, we stand
-- - -- the shock of adversity with most intrepi-

dity, and susser least from the violence of
the storm. He that defreth life, and loveth
many days that he may fee good, let him keep
his tongue from evil, and his lips from guile.
Let him depart from evil, and do good. Let
him fJek peace with God, and pursue it.
Then, in his adversity, God Jhall hide him
in his pavilion. In his prosperity, he Jhall
fsourijJ like a tree planted by the rivers of
water. The zungodly are not o ; but are
like the chaff, light and vile, which the wind
driveth away.

SER-

# SERMON IV. On our Imperfect KNOWLEDGE of a FUTURE STATE. 1 COR. xiii. 12. For now we see through a glass darkly.---

[ 85 ]

SERMO N IV.
On our Imperfeat KINOWLEDGE of a

FUTURE STATE.

I C oR. Xiii. I2.

For now *we fee through a glass darkly.-,-

T HE Apostle here describes the im- sER M
perfection of our knowledge with rela- IV.
tion to spiritual and eternal objeCts. He
employs two metaphors, to represent
more strongly the disadvantages under
which we lie: One, that we fee those ob-
jeds through a glass, that is, through the
intervention of a medium which obscures
their glory; the other, that we fee them
in a riddle or enigma, which our tranfla-
tors have rendered by feeing them darkly;
that is, the truth in part discovered, in

part

E R M. Sheltered under its protedtion, we stand
"---,-^ the ihock of adversity with most intrepi-

dity, and susser least from the violence of
the storm. He that defreth life, and loveth
many days that he may fee good, let him keep
his tongue from evil, and his lips from guile.
Let him depart from evil, and do good. Let
him seek peace with God, and pztrfue it.
Then, in his adversity, God jhall hide him
in his pavilion. In his prosperity, he Jhall
Jfiolri7J like a tree planted by the rivers of
water. 'the ungodly are not so; but are
like the chaJ, light and vile, which the wind
driveth away.

SE R-

[ 85 ]

S E R M N IV.
On our Imperfea KNOWLEDGE Of a

FUTURE STATE.

C o R. Xiii. 12.
For now we fee through a glass darkly.--,

ll HE Apostle here describes the im- s E R M
perfection of our knowledge with rela- IV.
tion to spiritual and eternal objects. He
employs two metaphors, to represent
more strongly the disadvantages under
which we lie: One, that we fee those ob-
jeats through a glass, that is, through the
intervention of a medium which obscures
their glory; the other, that we fee them
in a riddle or enigma, which our tranfla-
tors have rendered by feeing them darkly;
that is, the truth in part discovered, in

part

S ER M. part concealed, and placed beyond our

IV. i-*--j comprehension.

This description, however, jus and true,

cannot fail to occasion some perplexity
to an enquiring mind. For it may seem
itrange that so much darkness should be
left upon those celeflial objects, towards
which we are at the fame time commanded
to aspire. We are firangers in the uni-
verse of God. Confined to that spot on
which we dwell, we are permitted to
know nothing of what is tranfadting in
the regions above us and around us. By
much labour, we acquire a superficial
acquaintance with a few sensible objects
which we find in our present habitation;
but we enter, and we depart, under a to-
tal ignorance of the nature and laws of
the spiritual world. One subjed in par-
ticular, when our thoughts proceed in this
train, must often recur upon the mind
with peculiar anxiety; tthat is, the im-
mortality of the foul, and the future state
of man. Exposed as we are at present to
such variety of affliCtions, and fubjedEed

to

to so much disappointment in all our pur- s E R M.

IV.

suits of happiness, Why, it may be said, ,-r-
has our gracious creator denied us the
consolation of a full discovery of our fu-
ture exifience, if indeed such an existence
be prepared for us ?---Reason it is true,
suggests many arguments in behalf of
immortality: Revelation gives full aTfu-
rance of it. Yet even that Gospel which
is said to have brought life and immortality
to light, allows us to Jee only through a
glass darkly. It doth not yet appear what
we Jhall be. Our knowledge of a future
world, is very imperfect our ideas of it,
are faint and confuted. It is not displayed
in such a manner, as to make an impref-
sion suited to the importance of the object.
The faith even of the belt men, is much
inferiour, both in clearness and in force,
to the evidence of sense; and proves, or}
many occasions, insufficient to counterba-
lance the temptations of the present world.
Happy moments indeed there sometimes
are in the lives of pious men, when fe-
questered from wordly cares, and born up

on

s E R M. on the wings of divine contemplation, they

IV.
'-s--a rife to a near and transporting view of

immortal glory. But such efforts of the
mind are rare, and cannot be long sup-
ported. 'When the spirit of meditation
subsides, this lively sense of a future state
decays; and though the general belief of
it remain, yet even good men, when they
return to the ordinarybufinefs and cares of
life, seem to rejoin the multitude, and to
re-affume the fame hopes, and fears, and
interests, which influence the.reft of the
world.

From such reflections, a considerable

difficulty refpeding this important sub-
jeC, either arises, or seems to arise. Was
such an obscure and imperfect difcovcry of
another life worthy to proceed from God ?
Does it not afford some ground, either to
tax his goodness, or to fufpedt the evi-
dence of its coming from him ?---This is
the point which we are now to confider;
and let us confider it with that close atten-
tion which the fubje tmerits. Let us en-
cjire, whether we have any reason, ei-

ther
7

ther to complain of Providence, or to ob- s ER M.
ject to the evidence of a future state, be- ar---
cause that evidence is not of a more fenfi-
ble and striking nature. Let us attempt
humbly to trace the reasons, why, though
permitted to know and to fee fovnewhat of
the eternal world, we are ncverthelefs per-
mitted only to know in part, and to fee
through a glass, darkly.

IT plainly appears to be the plan of

the Deity, in all his dispensations, to mix
light with darkness, evidence with uncer-
tainty. Whatever the reasons of this pro-
cedure be, the fact is undeniable. He is
described in the Old Tefiament, as a God
that hideth binjfclfS, Clouds and darkne/fi
are said to Jurround him. His way is in the
sea, and his path in the great waters ; his
footJteps are not known. Both the works
and the ways of God are full of myiftery.
In the ordinary course of his government,
innumerable events occur which perplex
us to the utmost. There is a certain limit

Ifa, xlv. 1 5.

to

S E R M. to all our enquiries in religion, beyond

IV.
<!-.-. which if we attempt to proceed, we are

loft in a maze of inextricable difficulties.
Even that revelation which affords fucli
material inftruEion to man, concerning
his duty and his happiness, leaves many
doubts unresolved. Why it was not given
sooner; why not to all men; why there
should be so many things in it hard to be un-
deJiood, are difficulties not inconsiderable,
in the midst of that incontestable evidence
by which it is supported. If, then, the
future fiate of man be not placed in so full
and clear a light as we desire, this is no
more than what the analogy of all reli-
gion, both natural and revealed, gave us
reason to expet.

But such a solution of the difficulty will

be thought imperfed. It may, perhaps,
not give much fatisfadion,- to show that
all religion abounds with difficulties of a
like nature. Our situation, it will be said,
is so much the more to be lamented, that
not on one fide only we are confined in our
enquiries, but on all hands environed with

myflerious

ryflerious obfcurity.---Let us then, if so S E R M

IV.

much dissatisfied with our condition, give '-
scope for once to Fancy, and confider how
the plan of Providence might be retified
to our wish. Let us call upon the Scep-
tick, and desire him to fay, what measure
of information would afford him entire fa-
tisfadion.

This, he will tell us, requires not any

long or deep deliberation. He desires only
to have his view enlarged beyond the li-
mits of this corporeal state. Instead of
refting upon evidence which requires dif-
cuflion, which must be supported by much
reasoning, and which, after all, he alledges
yields very imperfeCt information, he de-
mands the everlafling mansions to be so
displayed, if in truth such mansions there
be, as to place faith on a level with the
evidence of sense. What noble and happy
effects, he exclaims, would instantly fol-
low, if man thus beheld his present and
his future exifience at once before him!
He would then become worthy of his rank
in the creation. Instead of being the sport,

s E R M. as now, of degrading passions and childish

JV.
4-L- attachments, he would ac solely on the

principles of immortality. His pursuit of
virtue would be steady; his life would be
undiflurbed and happy. Superiour to the
attacks of distress, and to the Solicitations
ofpleafure, he would advance, by a regu-
lar progress, towards those divine rewards
and honours which were continually pre-
sent to his view.- --Thus Fancy, with
as much ease and confidence as if it were
a perfect judge of creation, erects a new
world to itself, and exults with admira-
tion of its own work. But let us pause,
and suspend this admiration, till we coolly
examine the consequences that would fol-
low from this supposed reformation of the
universe.

CONSIDER the nature and circumstances
of man. Introduced into the world in
an indigent condition, he is supported at
first by the care of others; and, as soon
as he begins to ad for himself, finds la-
bour and industry to be neceflary for sus-

taining

taining his life, and supplying his wants. s E R iM.

Iv.

Mutual defence and interest give rife to '--~,
society; and society, when formed, re-
quires diftindions of property, diversity
of conditions, Subordination of ranks,
and a multiplicity of occupations, in or-
der to advance the general good, The
services of the poor, and the protection
of the rich, become reciprocally necessary.
The governours, and the governed, mufi
co-operate for general safety. Various
arts must be studied; some refpeating the
cultivation of the mind, others, the care
of the body; some to ward off the evils,
and some to provide the conveniencies of
life. In a word, by the destination of
his Creator, and the necefities of his
nature, man commences, at once, an
active, not merely a contemplative being.
Religion assumes him as such. It sup-
poses him employed in this world, as on
a busy stage. It regulates, but does not
abolish, the enterprizes and cares of or-
dinary life. It addresses itself to the va-
xious ranks in society; to the rich and

the-

s E R M. the poor, to the magistrate and. the sub-

IV. ,-^- jeCt. It rebukes the slothful; direEts the

diligent how to labour; and requires every
man to do his own bfljznefs.

Suppose, now, that veil to be with-

drawn which conceals another world from
our view. Let all obscurity vanish ; Let
us no longer fJe dazrkl,, as through a glass;
but let every man enjoy that intuitive
perception of divine and eternal objects,
which the Sceptick was supposed to desire.
The immediate effeC of such a discovery
would be, to annihilate in our eye all
human objeds, and to produce a total
itagnation in the affairs of the world.
Were the celeflial glory exposed to our
admiring view; did the angelic harmo-
ny found in our enraptured ears; what
earthly concerns could have the power
of engaging our attention for a single mo-
ment ? All the fludies and pursuits, the
arts and labours, which now employ the
adtivity of man, which support the or-
der, or promote the happiness of society,
would lie neglected and abandoned. Those

desires

desires and fears, those hopes and interests s E R M.

IV.

by which we are at present stimulated, --
would cease to operate. Human life
would present no objects sufficient to
rouse the mind; to kindle the spirit of
enterprize, or to urge the hand of in-
dufiry. If the mere sense of duty en-
gaged a good man to take some part in
the business of the world, the tafl, when
submitted to, would prove diftafieful.
Even the preservation of life would be
flighted, if he were not bound to it by
the authority of God. Impatient of his
confinement within this tabernacle of
dust, languishing for the happy day of
his translation to those glorious regions
which were displayed to his fight, he
would sojourn on earth as a melancholy
exile. Whatever Providence has prepared
for the entertainment of man, would be
viewed with contempt. Whatever is now
attraCtive in society, would appear insipid.
In a word, he would be no longer a fit
inhabitant of this world, nor be qualified
for those exertions which are allotted to

him

S E RM. him in his present sphere of being. But,

IV. c-- all his faculties being Sublimated above

the measure of humanity, he would be
in the condition of a being of fuperiour
order, who, obliged to reside among men,
would regard their pursuits withfcorn, as
dreams, trifles, and puerile amusements
of a day.

But to this reasoning it may perhaps

be replied, That such consequences as I
have now flated, supposing them to fol-
low, deserve not much regard.--For what
though the present arrangement of human
affairs were entirely changed, by a clearer
view, and a stronger imprelion of our fu-
ture slate ? Would not such a change,prove
the highefi blessing to man ? Is not his
attachment to worldly objects the great
source both of his misery and his guilt ?
Employed in perpetual contemplation of
heavenly objects, and in preparation for
the enjoyment of them, would he not be-
come more virtuous, and of course more
happy, than the nature of his present em-
ployments and attachments permits him

to

to be ?---Allowing, for a moment, the E R M.
consequence to be such, this much is g-=
yielded, that upon the supposition which
was made, man would not be the crea-
ture which he now is, nor human life the
state which we now behold. How far the
change would contribute to his welfare,
comes to be confidered.

If there be any principle fully afcer.

tained by religion, it is, That this life was
intended for a state of trial and improve-
ment to man. His preparation for a bct-
ter world required a gradual purification,
carried on by steps of progressive difci-
pline. The situation, therefore, here as-
signed him, was such as to answer this
design, by calling forth all his aCtive
powers, by giving full scope to his moral
dispositions, and bringing to light his
whole characer. Hence it became pro-
per, that difficulty and temptation should
arise in the course of his duty. Ample re-
wards were promised to virtue; but these
rewards were left, as yet, in obscurity
and distant profpet. The impressions of

HE sense

S E' M. sense were so balanced againfi the disco-

IV.
-v--' veries of immortality, as to allow a con-

slid between faith and sense, between con-
science and desire, between present plea-
sure and future good. In this conflict,
the fouls of good men are tried, improv-
ed, and strengthened. In this field, their
honours are reaped. Here are formed the
capital virtues of fortitude, temperance,
and felf-denial ; moderation in prosperity,
patience in adversity, submission to the
will of God, and charity and forgiveness
to men, amidfi the various competitions
of worldly interest,

Such is the plan of Divine wisdom for

man's improvement. But put the cafe,
that the plan devised by human wisdom
were to take place, and that the rewards
of the juit were to be now fully displayed
to view ; the exercise of all those graces
which I have mentioned, would be en-
tirely superseded. Their very names would
be unknown. Every temptation being
withdrawn, every worldly attachment
being subdued by the overpowering dif-

coveries

coveries of eternity, no trial of sincerity, s EVR M.
no discrimination of characters, would re-, A
main; no opportunity would be afforded
for those active exertions, which are the
means of purifying and perfeding the
good. On the competition between time
and eternity, depends the chief exercise
of human virtue. Tbe obscurity which
at present hangs over eternal objects, pre-
serves the competition. Remove that ob-
fcurity,and you remove human virtue from
its place. You overthrow that whole sys-
tern of discipline, by which imperfect crea-
tures are, in this life, gradually trained
up for a more perfect state.

This, then, is the conclusion to which

at last we arrive, That the full display
which was demanded, of the heavenly
glory, would be so far from improving
the human foul, that it would abolish
those virtues and duties which are the
great infiruments of its improvement. It
would be unsuitable to the character of
man in every view, either as an active
being, or a moral agent. It would dif-

H 2 qualify

S ER M. qualify him for taking part in the affairs

of the world , for relifing the pleasures
or for discharging the duties of life: In
a word, it would entirely defeat the pur-
pose of his being placed on this earth.
And the questio-n, Why the Almighty has
been pleased to leave a spiritual world,
and the future existence of man, under so
much obscurity, resolves in the end into
this, Why there ihould be such a crea-
ture as man in the universe of God ?----
Such is the issue of the improvements
proposed to be made on the plans of Pro-
vidence. They add to the discoveries of
the fuperiour wisdom of God, and of the
presumption and folly of man.

FROM what has been said, it now ap-

pears, That no reasonable obj:etion to the
belief of a future state arises, from the
imperfect discoveries of it which we en-
joy; from the difficulties that are mingled
with its evidence; from our feeing as
through a glass darkly, and being left to
ialk by faith acnd not by fight. It cannot

.
. b%~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

be otherwise, it ought not to be other- s E R M.
wife; in our present fiate. The evidence A-
which is afforded, is sufficient for the
convition of a candid mind, sufficient
for arational ground of condu ; though
not so ilriking as to withdraw our atten-
tion from the present world, or altoge-
ther to overcome the impression of fenfi-
ble objects. In such evidence it becomes
us to acquiesce, without indulging either
doubts or complaints, on account of our
not receiving all the fatisfaQiion which
we fondly deSire, but which our present
immaturity of being excludes. For upon
the supposition of immortality, this life is
no other than the childhood of existence;
and the measures of our knowledge must
be proportioned to such a state. To the
successive stages of human life, from in-
fancy to old age, belong certain peculiar
attachments, certain cares, desires, and
interests; which open not abruptly, but
by gradual advances on the mind, as it
becomes fit to receive them, and is pre-
pared for adling the part to which, in

their

s E R M. their order, they pertain. Hence, in the

Iv.
'->-- education of a child, no one thinks of in-

spiring him at once with the knowledge,
the sentiments, and views of a man, and
with contempt for the exercises and amuse-
ments of childhood. On the contrary,
employments suited to his age are allow-
ed to occupy him. By these his powers
are gradually unfolded; and advantage
is taken of his youthful pursuits, to im-
prove and firengthen his mind; till, ftep
by ftep, he is led on to higher profpedts,
and prepared for a larger and more im-
portant scene of adion.

This analogy, which so happily illus-

trates the present conduct of the Deity
towards man, deserves attention the more,
as it is the very illustration used by the
Apostle, when treating of this subjeCt in
the context. Now, fays he, we know in
part.---hut wvhen .that vwhic is perfez is
come, that which is in part Jhall be done
a-way. Wlen I was a child, I spake as a
child, I underjfood as a child, I thought as a
iild; b ut zcwhcz I became a man, I put

icVóy

away childish things. For now we Jfe SE R M
through a glass, darkly; but then, face to
face: Now I know in part ; but then, I
JTall know even as I am known. Under
the care of the Almighty, our education
is now going on, from a mortal to an
immortal state. As much light is let in
upon us, as we can bear without injury.
When the objects become too splendid
and dazzling for our fight, the curtain
is drawn. Exercised in such a field of
acion, as suits the strength of our un-
ripened powers, we are, at the fame time
by proper profpets and hopes, prompted
to aspire towards the manhood of our
nature, the time when childijh things Jhall
be put aw~ay. 3ut frill, betwixt those
future prospeCts, and the impression of
present objects, such an accurate propor-
tion is established, as on the one hand
shall not produce a total contempt of
earthly things, while we aspire to those
that are heavenly; and on the other,
lhall not encourage such a degree of at-
tachment to our present state, as would

render

s E R M. their order, they pertain. Hence, in the

IV.
--- education of a child, no one thinks of in-

spiring him at once with the knowledge,
the sentiments, and views of a man, and
with contempt for the exercises and amuse-
ments of childhood. On the contrary,
employments suited to his age are allow-
ed to occupy him. By these his powers
are gradually unfolded; and advantage
is taken of his youthful pursuits, to im-
prove and firengthen his mind; till, flep
by flep, he is led on to higher profpets,
and prepared for a larger and more im-
portant scene of action.

This analogy, which so happily illus-

trates the present conduct of the Deity
towards man, deserves attention the more,
as it is the very illustration used by the
ApoRtle, when treating of this subjed in
the context. Now, fays he, vwe know in
part.---hut when that which is perifed is
come, that which is ini part J7hll be done
away. When, I was a child, I spake as a
child, I underflood as a child, I thought as a
C(hild; but Cwhen I became a man, I put

(zway'r

away childiJh things. For now we fee S R M.

1v.

through a glass, darkly; but then, face to -_
face: Now I know in part ; but thcn, I
fltall know even as I am known. Under
the care of the Almighty, our education
is now going on, from a mortal to an
immortal slate. As much light is-let in
upon us, as we can bear without injury.
When the objets become too splendid
and dazzling for our fight, the curtain
is drawn. Exercised in such a field of
acdion, as suits the firength of our un-
ripened powers, we are, at the fame time
by proper profpets and hopes, prompted
to aspire towards the manhood of our
nature, the time when childish things shall
be put away. but frill, betwixt those
future profpeds, and the impression of
present objects, such an accurate propor-
tion is established, as on the one hand
shall not produce a total contempt of
earthly things, while we aspire to those
that are heavenly; and on the other,
(hall not encourage such a degree of at-
tachment to our present fate, as would

render

s E R M. render us unworthy of future advance-

Iv. v--. ment. In a word, the whole course of

things is so ordered, that we may nei-
ther by an irregular and precipitate educa-
tion, become men too soon; nor by a fond
and trifling indulgence, be suffered to con-
tinue children for ever.

LET these refle6tions not only remove

the doubts which may iarife from our
obscure knowledge of immortality, but
likewise. produce the highest admiration
of the wisdom of our Creator. The ftruc-
ture of the natural world affords innume-
rable infiances of profound design, which
nro attentive fpesator can survey without
wonder. In the moral world, where .the
workmanship is of much finer and more
delicate contexture, fubjeats of still greater
admiration open to view. But admi-
ration mu.st rife to its highest point,
when those parts of the moral conftitu4
tion, which at first were reputed. ble-
mifhes, which carried the appearance of
objeCfions, either to the wisdom or the

goodness
7

goodness of Providence, are discovered, s E R IM.
on more accurate infpction, to be ad- <
juied with the most exquisite propriety.
We have now seen, that the darkness of
man's condition is no less essential to his
well-being, than the light which he en-
joys. His internal powers, and his ex-
ternal situation, appear to be exadcly fitted
to each other. Those complaints which
we are apt to make, of our limited capa-
city and narrow views, of our inablity to
penetrate farther into the future deftinati-
on of man, are found, from the foregoing
observations, to be just as unreasonable, as
the childish complaints of our not being
formed with a microscopic eye, nor fur-
nifhed with an eagle's wing; that is, of
not being endowed with powers which
would subvert the nature, and counteract
the laws, of our present slate.

In order to do justice to the subjed, I

must observe, That the fame reasoning
which has been now employed with refpedc
to our knowledge of immortality, is
aeually applicable to many other branches

of

s E R M. of intellectual knowledge. Thus, why

IV.

~-v we are permitted to know so little of the

nature of that Eternal Being who rules the
universe; why the manner in which he
operates on the natural and moral world,
is wholly concealed; wily we are kept in
such ignorance, with refpea to the extent
of his works, to the nature and agency of
spiritual beings, and even with refpedt to
the union between our own foul and body:
To all these, and several other enquiries
of the fame kind, which often employ the
solicitous researches of speculative men, the
answer is the fame that was given to the
interesting question which makes the sub-
jeCd of our discourse, the degree of know-
ledge delired, would prove incompatible
with the design, and with the proper bufi-
ness of this life. It would raise us to a
sphere too exalted; would reveal objects
too great and striking for our present facul-
ties; would excite feelings too strong for
us to bear; in a word, would unfit us for
thinking or aEting like human creatures.
It is therefore reserved for a more ad-

vanced,

vanced period of ournature; and thehand s E R M.
of Infinite wisdom hath in mercy drawn a
veil over scenes which would overpower
the fight of mortals.

One instance in particular, of Divine

wisdom, is so illufirious, and corresponds
so remarkably with our present subjei,
that I cannot pass it over without notice;
that is the concealment under which Pro-
vidence has placed the fiture events of
our life on earth. The desire of penetrat-
ing into this unknown region, has ever
been one of the most anxious passions of
men. It has often seized the wife as well
as the credulous, and given rife to many
vain and impious fuperfitions throughout
the whole earth. Burning with curiosity
at the approach of some critical event, and
impatient under the perplexity of conjec-
ture and doubt, How cruel is Providence,
we are apt to exclaim, in denying to man
the power of fore fight, and in limiting
him to the knowledge of the present mo-
ment ? Were he permitted to look forward
1ito the course of destiny, how much more

suitably

S ER M. suitably would he be prepared for the vari-
t--_- ous turns.and changes in his life? With

what moderation would he enjoy his pro-
fperity, under the fore-knowledge of an
approaching reverse ? And with what ea-
gernefs be prompted to improve the flying
hours, by feeing the inevitable term draw
nigh which was to finish his course?

But while Fancy indulges such vain de-

fires and criminal complaints, this coveted
fore-knowledge muit clearly appear to the
eye of reason, to be the moot fatal gift
w;hich the Almighty could bellow. If in
this present mixed state all the fucceflive
scenes of difirefs through which we are
to pass, were laid before us in one view,
perpetual sadness would overcafl our life.
Hardly would any transient gleams of in-
tervening joy be able to force their way
through the cloud. Faint would be the
relish of pleasures, of which we foresaw
the close ; Insupportable the burden of as-
flitions, under which we were oppressed
by a load, not only of present, but of an-
ticipated sorrows. Friends would begin

their

their union, with lamenting the day which s E R M.
was to dissolve it; and with weeping eye, _-v
the parent would every moment behold
the child whom he knew that he was to
lose. In short, as soon as that mytlerious
veil, which now covers futurity, was
lifted up, all the gaity of life would dif-
appear; its flattering hopes, its pleating
illusions, would vanish; and nothing but
its vanity and sadness remain. The fore-
fight of the hour of death would conti-
nually interrupt the course of human as-
fairs; and the overwhelming profped of
the future, instead of exciting men to pro-
per activity, would render them immove-
able with consternation and dismay.-
How much more friendly to man is that
mixture of knowledge and ignorance
which is allotted him in this slate! Igno-
rant of the events which are to befall us,
and of the precise term which is to con-
clude our life, by this ignorance our en-
joyment of present objeCts is favoured;
and knowing that death is certain, and
that human affairs are full of change, by

this

s E R M. this knowledge our attachment to those ob-e

AV.
'--- jeds is moderated. Precisely in the fame

manner as, by the mixture, of evidence
and obscurity which remains on the pro-
fpcCt of a future state, a proper balance is
preserved betwixt our love of this lifes
and our desire of a better.

The longer that our thoughts dwell on

this subjeC, the more we must be con-
vinced, that in nothing the Divine wisdom
is more admirable, than in proportioning
knowledge to the necessities of man. In-
fiead of lamenting our condition, that we
are permitted only tofee as through a glass
darkly, we have reason to bless our Creator,
no less for what he had concealed, than
for what he hath allowed us to know. He
is wondejful in counsel, as he is excellent
in working. LHe is wife in heart, and his
thoughts are deep. How unjz'archable are
the riches of the twifdonm of the knowledge
of God !

FROM the whole view which we have
taken of the fubjeat, this important in-

firuation
ity,

ftruction arises, That the great design of s E R M.

IV.

all the knowledge, and in particular of the
religious knowledge which God hath as-
forded us, is, to fit us for discharging the
duties of life. No useless discoveries are
made to us in religion: No discoveries
even of useful truths, beyond the precise
degree of information, which is subser-
vient to right conduct. To this great end
all our information points. In this center
all the lines of knowledge meet. Life and
immortality are brought to light in the goJ-
pel; yet not so displayed as to gratify the
curiosity of the world with an aflonifiing
fpedtacle; but only so far made known,
as to assist and support us in the practice
of our duty. If the discovery were more
imperfect, it would excite no desire of im-
mortality; if it were more full and ftrik-
ing, it would render us careless of life.
On the first supposition, no sufficient mo-
tive to virtue would appear; on the second,
no proper trial of it would remain. In the
one cafe, we should think and ad like men
who have their portion o01Y in this world

s E R M. this knowledge our attachment to those ob-j

IV.
-v- jeds is moderated. Precisely in the fame

manner as, by the mixture. of evidence
and obscurity which remains on the pro-
sped of a future state, a proper balance is
preserved betwixt our love of this life,
and our desire of a better.

The longer that our thoughts dwell on

this subjed, the more we muftt be con-
vinced, that in nothing the Divine wisdom
is more admirable, than in proportioning
knowledge to the necessities of man. In-
ltead of lamenting our condition, that we
are permitted only tofee as through a glass
darkly, we have reason to bless our Creator,
no less for what he had concealed, than
for what he hath allowed us to know. He
is wonderjfl in counsel, as he is excellent
in waorking. Ile is wife in heart, and his
thoughts are deep. How uznzearchable are-
the riches of the ivifdom of the knowledge
of God !

FROM the whole view which we have
taken of the subjed, this important in-.:

firu tion

firuCtion arises, That the great design of s E'R M.
all the knowledge, and in particular of the '-v--
religious knowledge which God hath as-
forded us, is, to fit us for discharging the
duties of life. No useless discoveries are
made to us in religion: No discoveries
even of useful truths, beyond the precise
degree of information, which is subser-
vient to right conduct. To this great end
all our information points. In this center
all the lines of knowledge meet. Lifj and
immortality are brought to light in the go.-
pel; yet not so displayed as to gratify the
curiosity of the world with an afionifling
fpeatacle; but only so far made known,
as to assist and support us in the practice
of our duty. If the discovery were more
imperfeat, it would excite no desire of im-
mortality; if it were more full and rilk-
ing, it would render us careless of life.
On the firit supposition, no sufficient mo-
tive to virtue would appear; on the second,
no proper trial of it would remain. In the
one cafe, we should think and at like men
who have their portion only in this wo:rldj

inL

s E R M. in the other cafe, like men who have no

IV.
-, concern with this world at all. Whereas

now, by the wife conflitution of Heaven,
we are placed in the most favourable fitua-
tion for adting, with propriety, our allotted
part here; and for riling in due course,
to higher honour and happiness hereafter.

Let us then second the kind intentions

of Providence, and aCt upon the plan
which it hath pointed out. Checking.
our incuifitive solicitude about what the
Almighty hath concealed, let us dili-
gently improve what he hath made known.
Inhabitants of the earth, we are at the
fame time candidates for Heaven. Look-
ing upon these as only different views of
one consistent character, let us carry on
our preparation for Heaven, not by ab-
flrating ourselves from the concerns of
this world, but by fulfilling the duties and
offices of every flation in life. Livingfo-
be7-ly, righteously, and godly in the prefenm
world, let us look for that bleffd hope, and
the glorious appearing of the great God, and
czur Saviour 7efis Ch;j/?.

Before

Before I conclude, it may be proper to s E R M.

observe, That the reasonings in this dif- '--
course give no ground to apprehend any
danger of our being too much influenced
by the belief of a future state. I have
shown, the hurtful effects which would
follow from too bright and full a discovery
of the glory of that slate; and in Ihewing
this, I have justified the decree of Provi-
dence, which permits no such discovery.
But as our nature is at present conflituted,
attached by so many strong connections
to the world of sense, and enjoying a com-
munication so feeble and distant with the
world of spirits, we need fear no danger
from cultivating intercourse with the latter
as much as possible. On the contrary,
from that intercourse the chief security of
our virtue is to be fought. The biass of
our nature leans so much towards sense,
that from this fide the peril is to be dread-
ed, and on this fide the defence is to be
provided.

Let us then walk by faith. Let us
flrengthen this principle of ation to the

I utmofl

p

S ER M. utmofi of our power. Let us implore the
I-_-- Divine grace, to firengthen it within us

more and more: That we may thence de-
rive an antidote against that subtile poison,
which incefrant commerce with the objects
of sense diffuses through our fouls; that
we may hence acquire purity and dignity
of manners, suited to our divine hopes;
and undefiled by the pleasures of the
world, unshaken by its terrours may pre-
serve to the end one conflant tenour of in-
tegrity. Till at last, having, under the
conduCt of Christian faith, happily finished
the period of discipline, we enter on that
slate, where a far nobler scene shall open;
where eternal objects ihall thine in their
native splendour; where this twilight of
moral life being past, the Sun of righteozt-
ness ihall rife; and that which is perfect
being come, that which is in part Jhall be
done away.

SE R-

# SERMON V. On the DEATH of CHRIST. Preached at the celebration of the SACRAMENT of the LORD'S SUPPER. JOHN xvii. 1. Jesus lift up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father ! The hour is come ;---

[ II5 ]
S ER M O N V.

On the DE'AT H Of CHRI ST.
Preached at the celebration of the SACRAMENT

of the LoRD's SUPPER.

JOHN XVii. I.
y7efis lift up his eyes to heaven, and said,

Father ! The hour is come ;--
T H E S E were the words of our blef- s E R M.

V.

fed Lord on a memorable occasion. The v-.
feast of the pairover drew nigh, at which
he knew that he was to susser. The
night was arrived wherein he was to
be delivered into the hands of his ene-
mies. He had spent the evening in con-
ference with his disciples; like a dying
father in the midst of his family, min-
gling consolations with his last inftruc-

I 2 tions.

s E R M. tions. When he had ended his discourse

V. i---.' to them, he lifted up his eyes to heaven,

and with the words which I have now
read, began that solemn prayer of inter-
cession for the Church, which closed his
ministry. Immediately after, he went
forth with his disciples into the garden of
Gethsemane, and surrendered himself to
those who came to apprehend him.

Such was the situation of our Lord at

the time of his pronouncing there words.
He saw his mission on the point of being
accomplished. He had the profpeEt full
before him, of all that he was about to
fuffer.---Father ! Thie hour is come.---What
hour? An hour the rmot critical, the
most pregnant with great events, since
hours had begun to be numbered, ince
time had begun to run. It was the hour
in which the Son of God was to termi-
nate the labours of his important life, by
a death still more important and illuftri-
ous; the hour of atoning, by his susser- .
i ng, for the guilt of mankind; the hour
of accomplishing prophecies, types, and

symbols,

symbols, which had been carried on s ER M.

V.

through a series of ages , the hour of con- --
cluding the old, and of introducing to the
world the new dispensation of religion
the hour of his triumphing over the
world, and death, and hell; the hour of
his ereting that spiritual kingdom which
is to last for ever. Such is the hour, such
are the events, which you are to comme-
morate in the Sacrament of our Lord's
Supper. I hall attempt to set them be-
fore you as proper fubjeds, at this time,
of your devout meditation. To display
them in their genuine majefiy, is beyond
the ability of man.

I. THIS was the hour in which Chrilt

was glorified by his sufferings. The
whole of his life had discovered much
real greatness, under a mean appearance.
Through the cloud of his humiliation,
his native lustre often broke forth, but
never did it mhine so bright, as in this last,
this trying hour. It was indeed the hour
of distress, and of blood. He knew it to

S E R M. be such; and when he uttered the words

V.
t -v-- of the Text, he had before his eyes, the

executioner and the cross, the scourge, the
nails, and the spear. But by profpets of
this nature his foul was not to be over-
come. It is distress which ennobles every
great character; and distress was to glo-
rify the Son of God. He was now to
teach all mankind, by his example, how
to susser and to die. He was to stand
forth before his enemies, as the faithful
wvitnefs of the truth; justifying by his
behaviour the character which he assumed,
and fealing with his blood the doctrine
which he taught.

What magnanimity in all his words

and aEtions on this great occasion ! The
court of Herod, the judgment-hall of
Pilate, the hill of Calvary, were so many
theatres prepared for his dieplaying all the
virtues of a constant and patient mind.
When led forth to susser, the first voice
which we hear from him, is a generous
lamentation over the fate of his unfortu-
nate, though guilty, country; and, to the

last

last moment of his life, we behold him in S E R M.

V.

pofeffion of the fame gentle and benevo- v-
lent spirit. No upbraiding no complain-
ing expression escaped from his lips, dur-
ing the long and painful approaches of a
cruel death. He betrayed no symptom of
a weak or a vulgar, of a discomposed or
impatient mind. With the utmost atten-
tion of filial tenderness, he committed his
aged mother to the care of his beloved
disciple *. With all the dignity of a So-
vereign, he conferred pardon on a peni-
tent fellow-fufferer. With a greatness of'
mind beyond example, he spent his last
moments in apologies and prayers for
thoie who were shedding his blood.

By wonders in heaven, and wonders on

earth, was this hour distinguished. All
nature seemed to feel it; and the dead and
the living bore witness to its importance.
The veil of the temple was rent in twain.
The earth (hook. There was darkness
over all the land. The graves were open-
ed, and many wh}o lept arose and went into

* See John xix. 26. 27.

tie

E R M. the Holy City. Nor were there the only
V.

- ~prodigies of this awful hour. The most

hardened hearts were subdued and chang-
ed. The Judge, who in order to gratify
the multitude pained sentence against him,
publickly attested his innocence. The
Roman centurion, who presided at the exe-
cution, glorified God, and acknowledged
the sufferer to be more than man. After
he Jaw the things which had pajfed, he
said, Certainly this was a righteous per-
fzn; truly, this was the Son of God. The
Jewish malefactor who was crucified with
him, addreTfed him as a King, and im-
plored his favour. Even the crowd of in-
sensible fpedators, who had come forth as
to a common fpedacle, and who began
with clamours and insults, returned home,
fmriting their breajfs.---Look back on the
heroes, the philosophers, the legislators of
old. View them in their lafi moments.
Recall every circumstance which diffin-
guiflles their departure from the world.
Where can you find such an aiTemblage of
high virtues, and of great events, as con-

curredc
A7 2

curred at the death of Christ ? Where, o s E R rM.

V.

many teflimonies given to the dignity of ._
the dying person, by earth, and by hea-
ven ?

II. THIS was the hour in which Christ

atoned for the fins of mankind, and ac-
complifhed our eternal redemption. It
was the hour when that great sacrifice was
offered up, the efficacy of which reaches
back to the first transgression of man, and
extends forward to the end of time; the
hour when, from the cross, as from an
high altar, that blood was flowing, which
washed away the guilt of the nations.

This awful dispensation of the Al-

mighty, contains mysteries which are be-
yond the discovery of man. It is one of
those things into which the angels desire to
look. What has been revealed to us, is,
That the death of Christ was the interpo-
fition of Heaven for preventing the ruin
of human kind. We know, that under
the government of God, misery is the na-
tural consequence of guilt. After rational

creatures

E' RM. creatures had, by their criminal condut,
'- - introduced disorder into the Divine king-

dom, there was no ground to believe, that
by their penitence and prayers alone,
they could prevent the destruCtion which
threatened them. The prevalence of pro-
pitiatory sacrifices throughout the earth,
proclaims it to be the general sense of
mankind, that mere repentance was not
of sufficient avail to expiate fin, or to
flop its penal effects. By the constant
allusions which are carried on in the
New Testament to the sacrifices under
the Law, as pre-signifying a great atone-
ment made by ChriL ; and by the strong
cxpreflions which are used in describing
the cffctis of his death, the sacred writers
show, as plainly as language allows, that
there was an efficacy in his fulfferings, far
beyond that of mere example and in-
firuLOion. The nature and extent of that
efficacy we are unable, as yet, fully to
trace. Part we are capable of behold-
ing; and the wisdom of what we behold,
we have reason to adore. We difeerni in

this

this plan of redemption, the evil of fin s E M.

V.

strongly exhibited; and the juflicc of the --
Divine government awfully exemplified,
in Christ suffering for finners. But let
us not imagine, that our prefcnt lifco-
veries unfold the whole influence of the
death of Christ. It is connected with
causes into which we cannot penetrate.
It produces consequences too extensive for
us to explore. God's thotughts are not as
our thoughts. In all things, we f'e only in
part ; and here, if any where, we fee also
as through a glass darkly.

This, however, is fully manifest, that

redemption is one of the molt glorious
works of the Almighty. If the hour of
the creation of the world was great and
illuitrious; that hour, when, from the
dark and formless mass, this fair system
of nature arose at the Divine command;
when the morning jlars fang together, and
all the Jbns of God flJoutedfor joy ; no less
illustrious is the hour of the restoration
of the world; the hour when, from con-
demnation and misery, it emerged into

happiness

SER M. happiness and peace. With less external
i-v-- majesty it was attended, but is, on that

account, the more wonderful, that under
an appearance so simple, such great events
were covered.

ILI. IN this hour, the long series of

prophesies, visions, types, and figures,
was accomplished. This was the center
in which they all met: This the point,
towards which they had tended and verg-
ed, throughout the course of so many
generations. You behold the Law and
the Prophets flanding, if we may speak
so, at the foot of the cross, and doing
homage, You behold Moses and Aaron
bearing the ark of the covenant; David
and Elijah presenting the oracle of tefti-
mony. You behold all the priests and
sacrifices, all the rites and ordinances,
all the types and symbols, assembled
together to receive their consummation.
Without the death of Chrifi, the worship
and ceremonies of the law would have
remained a pompous, but unmeaning in,

ftitution,

flitution. In the hour when he was cru- s E R M.

V.

cified, the book with the seven Jfals was '---
opened. Every rite assumed its fignifi-
cancy; every prediction met its event;
every symbol displayed its correspond-
ence.

The dark, and seemingly ambiguous

method of conveying important difcove-
ries under figures and emblems, was not
peculiar to the sacred books. The Spi-
rit of God, in pre-signifying the death of
Christ, adopted that plan, according to
which the whole knowledge of those
early ages was propagated through the
world. Under the veil of mysterious al-
lusion, all wifdorm was then concealed.
From the sensible world, images were
every where borrowed, to describe things
unseen. More was underitood to be
meant, than was openly expressed. By
enigmatical rites, the Priest communi-
cated his doctrines; by parables and al-
legories, the Philosopher inftrudted his
disciples; even the Legislator, by figu-
rative sayings, commanded the reverence

of

s EV M. of the people. Agreeably to this prevail-
'v--- iing mode of inftrudion, the whole dif-

penfation of the Old Testament was so
conducted, as to be the ihadow and the
figure of a spiritual fyfecm. Every re-
markable event, every distinguished per-
fonage, under the Law, is interpreted in
the New Teflament, as bearing some re-
ference to the hour of which we treat.
If Isaac was laid upon the altar as an in-
nocent victim; if David was driven from
his throne by the wicked, and restored
by the hand of God; if the brazen ser-
pent was lifted up, to heal the people ; if
the rock was fnitten by Moses, to furnish
drink in the wilderness; all were types of
Chris, and alluded to his death.

In predicting the fame event, the lan-

guage of ancient prophecy was magnifi-
cent, but seemingly contradicory: For it
foretold a Mefliah, who was to be at once
a sufferer and a conqueror. she Star was
to come out of Jacob, and the Branch to
./pring from the Jeem of Jeyfe. the Angel of
the Covenant, the Desire of all Nations, was

to

So come fuiddenly to his temple; and to him S E R M.

V.

was to be the gathering of the people. Yet
at the fame time, he was to be defpifedand
rejected of men ; he was to be taken from
prison and from judgment, and to be led as
a lamb to the Jlziaghter. Though he was a
manz of frrows and acquainted with grieJ,
yet the Gentiles were to come to his light,
and Kings to the brightness of his rising. In
the hour when Christ died, those prophe-
tical riddles were solved; those teeming
contradictions were reconciled. The ob-
fcurity of oracles, and the ambiguity of
types vanished. The Sun of righteofzjzels
rose ; and, together with the dawn of reli-
gion, those shadows passed away.

IV. THIS was the hour of the abolition

of the Law; and the introduction of the
Gospel; the hour of terminating the old,
and of beginning the new dispensation of
religious knowledge and worship, through-
out the earth. Viewed in this light, it
forms the most august ara which is to be
found in the history of mankind. When

Christ

s E R M. Christ was suffering on the cross, we are

V.
v -y- informed by one of the Evangelists, that he

said, I thirfl ; and that they filled a fpunge
with vinegar, and put it to his mouth. As-
ser he had tafied the vinegar, knowing that
all things were now accompli ed, and the
Jcripture fzlfilled, he Jiid, It is finijhed*;
that is, This offered draught of vinegar
was the last circumstance prediEted by an
ancient Prophet+, that remained to be
fulfilled. The vision and the prophecy are
now fealed: The Mofaick dispensation is
closed. And he bowed his head, and gave zup
the gho/l.

It is finiJhed.---When he uttered these

words, he changed the fiate of the uni-
verse. At that moment, the Law ceased,
and the Gospel commenced. This was the
ever-memorable point of time, which fe.
parated the old and the new world from
each other. On one fide of the point of
reparation, you behold the Law, with its
priefis, its sacrifices, and its rites, retiring
from fight. On the other fide, you be-

* John xix. 28, 29, 30. t Pfal. lxix. z1.

hold

hold the Gospel, with its simple and ve- s E R M.

V.

nerable inflitutions, coming forward into '-.---
view. Significantly was the veil of the
temple rent in this hour; for the glory
then departed from between the cherubirms
The legal High Priest delivered up his
Urim and Thummnim, his breast-plate,
his robes, arid his incense: And CHRIST
flood forth as the Great High Priest of all
fucceediiig generations. By that one fa-
crifice which he now offered, he abolished
sacrifices for eVer. Altars on which the
fire had blazed for ages, were now to smoke
nco more. Victims were no more to bleed.
Not with the blood of bulls and goats, btt
with his own blood, he now ?entered into the
Holy Place, there to appear in the presence
of Godfor us.

this was the hour of association and

union to all the worshippers of God.
When Christ said, it isfinidezd, he threw
down the wall of partition which had so
long divided the Gentile from the Jew.
He gathered into one, all the faithful, out
of every kindred and people. He pro-

K claimed

SE R M. claimed the hour to be come, when the

V.

knowledge of the true God should be no
longer confined to one nation, nor his wor-
ship to one temple; but over all the earth,
the worshippers of the Father fhouldferve
him in spirit and in truth. From that
hour, they who dwelt in the uttermoqf ends
of the earth, fJrangers to the covenant of
promnif, began to be brought nigh. In that
hour, the light of the Gospel dawned from
afar on the British islands.

During a long course of ages, Provi-

dence seemed to be occupied in preparing
the world for this revolution. The whole
Jewish oeconomy was intended to usher it
in. The knowledge of God was preserved
unextinguifhed in one corner of the world,
that thence, in due time, might issue forth
the light which was to overspread the
earth. Successive revelations gradually
enlarged the views of men beyond the nar-
row bounds of Judaea, to a more extensive
kingdom of God. Signs and miracles
awakened their expectation, and directed
their eyes towards this great event. Whe-

ther

ther God descended on the flaming moun- s E R M.

V.

tain, or spoke by the Prophet's voice; whe- . ---1
ther he scattered his chosen people into cap-
tivity, or re-assembled them in their own
land i he was fRill carrying on a progressive
plan, which was accomplished at the death
of Christ.

Not only in the territories of Israel, but

over all the earth, the great dispensations
of Providence refpeted the approach of
this important hour. If empires rose or
fell; if war divided, or peace united the
nations; if learning civilized their man-
ners, or philosophy enlarged their views;
all was, by the secret decree of Heaven,
made to ripen the world for that fld-
ness of time, when Christ was to publish the
whole counsel of God. The Persian, the
Macedonian, the Roman Conqueror, en-
tered upon the fiage, each at his prediced
period; and, though he meant not Jo, nei-
ther did his heart think so, ministered to
this hour. The revolutions of power, and
the fuccefion of monarchies, were so ar-
ranged by Providence, as to facilitate the

K 2 progress

s Et R M. progress of the Gospel through the habit-

V

_
-- J able world, after the day had arrived,

wvhen the fione which was cut out of the
jmRougntaizL without hands, I7Dould become a
great mnoz4tain, and fill the earth . This
was. the day, which Abraha-m Jiw afar of,
and was glad. This was the day, which
manzy Prophets and Kings, and righteous
men, desired to fee, but could not; the day
for which the earnest expetation of t-he crea-
ture, long oppressed with ignorance, gnd
bewildered in fuperifition, might be justly
said to wait.

THIS was the hour of Christ's tri-

umph over all the powers of darkness,;
the hour in which he overthrew dominions
and thrones, led captivity captive, and
gave gifts unto men. The contest which
the kingdom of darkness had long main-
tained againfl the kingdom of light, was.
now brought to its crisis. The period was
come, when the feed of the woman jhould
bruiJf the head of theferpent. For many

*Dan. ii. 34, 35.
5~~~~I ~ages

ages, the most gross fuperfiition had filled s E R M.

V.

the earth. the glory, of the uncorruptible l
God was, every where, except in the land
of Judaea, changed into images made like
to corruptible man, and to birds, and beafis,
and creeping things. The world, which
the Almighty created for himself, seemed
to have become a temple of idols. Even
to vices and passions, altars were raised
and what was intitled Religion, was in
effect a discipline of impurity. In the
mnidft of this universal darkncfs, Satan had
ereced his throne; and the learned and
polished, as well as the savage nations,
bowed down before him. But at the hour
when Christ appeared on the cross, the
signal of his defeat was given. His king-
dom suddenly departed from him; the
reign of Idolatry paiTed away: He was be-
held to fall like lightning from heaven. In
that hour, the foundation of every Pagan
temple shook. The statue of every false
God tottered on its base. The Priest fled
from his falling shrine; and the Heathen
oracles became dumb for ever.

As

s E R M. As on the cross Christ triumphed over

V.
d-o--- Satan, so he overcame his auxiliary, the

world. Long had it assailed him with its
temptations and discouragements. In this
hour of severe trial, he surmounted them
all, Formerly he had despised the plea-
fures of the world. He now baffled its
terrours. Hence he is justly said to have
crucified the world. By his sufferings,
he ennobled distress; and he darkened
the lustre of the pomp and vanities of
life. He discovered to his followers the
path which leads, through affliction, to
glory and to vidory; and he imparted to
them the fame spirit which enabled him
to overcome. My kingdom is not of this
world. In this world ye Jhall have tri-
bulation: but be of good cheer; have over-
come the world*.

Death also the last foe of man, was

the victim of this hour. The formidable
appearance of the fpedre remained; but
his dart was taken away. For, in the
hour when Christ expiated guilt, he dif-

? John xvi. 33.

7 armed

armed death, by securing the resurrection s E R M.

V.

of the just. When he said to his peni- v.--- ,
tent fellow-fufferer, - To-day thou Jfjalt be
with me in Parad¼ie, he announced to all
his followers the certainty of heavenly
bliss. He declared the cherzibims to be
dismissed and the flaming sword to be
Sheathed, which had been appointed at
the fall, to keep from man the way of the
Tree of life \. Faint, before this period,.
had been the hppe, indiftind the profped,
which even good men enjoyed of the
heavenly kingdom. Life and immortality
'were now broyzght to light. From the hill
of Calvary, the firit clear and certain
view was given to the world of the ever-
lasting masfions. Since that hour, they
have been the perpetual consolation of
believers in Christ. Under trouble, they
sooth their minds; amidit temptation,
they support their virtue; and, in their
dying moments, enable them to fay, 0
Death ! where is thy jling ? 0 Grave! where
is ihy vigtory ?

* Gen. iii. 24.

VI.

8.

S E R M. V!. TuIrs was the hour when our Lord
'- --- ereeed that spiritual kingdom which is

never to end. How vain are the counsels
and designs of men! H1aw shallow is the
policy of the wicked! How short their
triumphing! The enemies of Christ ima-
gined, that in this hour they had success-
fully. accomplished their plan for his de,
ftrudtion. They believed, that they had
entirely scattered the small party of his
followers, and had extinguishe-d his name
and, his honour for ever. In derision
they ad4reffed him as a King. They-
clothed him with purple robes; they.
crowned him with a crown of thorns
they put a reed into his hand; and, with
insulting mockery, bowed the knee before
him. Blind and impious men! How
little did they know, that the Almighty
was at that momentJetting him as a King
on the bill of Sion; giving him the Heathen
fir his inheritance, and the uttermon parts
of the earth for his posQeion ! How little
did they know, that their badges of
mock royalty were at that moment con-

verted

verted into the signals of absolute domi- s E R M.

V.

nion, and the inAfruments of irrefilible -,
power ! The reed which they put into
his hands, became a rod of iron, with
which he was to break in pieces his ene-
mires; a sceptre, with which he was to
rule the universe in righteousness. The
cross, which they thought was to stigma-
tize him with infamy, became the ensign
of his renown, Instead of being the re.
proach of his followers, it was to be their
boast and their glory. The cross was to
shine on palaces and churches, through-
out the earth. It was to be assumed as
the diftintion of the most powerful mo-
narchs, and to wave in the banner of
victorious armies, when the memory of
Herod and Pilate should be accursed;
when Jerusalem should be reduced to ash-
es, and the Jews be vagabonds over all
the world.

These were the triumphs which com-
menced at this hour. Our Lord saw
theM already in their birth; he saw of
the travail of his fodl, and was J;,tisfed.

He

S E R M. He beheld the word of God going forth,
'v--'J conquering, and to conquer; subduing to

the obedience of his laws, the subduers
of the world ; carrying light into the re-
gions of darkness, and mildness into the
habitations of cruelty. He beheld the
Gentiles waiting below the cross, to re-
ceive the Gospel. He beheld Ethiopia
and the Ijles Jiretching out their hands to
God ; the defirt bcgiwnning to rejoice, zad to
bloffibm as the rosie ; and the knowledge of the
Lord filling the earth, as the waters cover
the sea. Well pleased, he said, It issiniJh-
ed. As a conqueror, he retired from the
field, reviewing his triumphs: He bowed
his /had, and gave up the ghojg.---From
that hour, Christ was no longer a mor-
tal man, but Head over all things to the
Church; the glorious King of men and
Angels, of whose dominion there shall be
no end. His triumphs shall perpetually
increase. IHis name Jtall endure for ever;
it'J7all las as long as the fin ; men Jhall be
blef'd in him, and all naticns J7all call him

SUCH

SUCH were the tranfadions, such the es- s E R M.

V.

seas of this ever-memorable hour. With '-,--
all those great events was the mind of our
Lord filled, when he lifted up his eyes to
heaven, and said, Father ! the hour is come.

From this view which we have taken

of this fubjedt, permit me to suggest, what
ground it affords to confide in the mercy
of God, for the pardon of fin ; to truit
to his faithfulness, for the accomplishment
of all his promises; and to approach to
him, with gratitude and devotion, in ads
of worship.

IN the first place, The death of Christ

affords us ground to confide in the Divine
mercy, for the pardon of fin. All the fieps
of that high dispensation of Providence,
which we have confidered, lead diretly
to this conclusion, He that spared not his
own Son, but delivered him up for us all,
how Jhall be not witb him alo freely give
us all things ? This is the final result
of the discoveries of the gospel. On this

* Rom. viii. 32.

refls

S E R M. refis that great iyfiem of consolation,

V.
-- which it hath reared up for men. We

are not left to dubious and intricate rea-
fonings, concerning the conduc which
God may be expected to hold towards
his offending creatures. But we are led
to the view of important and illustriouss
fads, which strike the mind with evidence
irresistible. For,. is it possible to believe,
that such great operations as I have en-
deavoured to describe, were carried on by
the Almnighty in. vain? Did he excite, in
the hearts of his creatures, such encou-
raging hopes, without any intention to
filfill them ? After so long a-preparation
of goodness, could he mean to deny for-
givenefs to the penitent and the humble ?
When, overcome by the sense of guilt,
man looks up with an astonished eye to
the jullice of his Creator, let him recol-
ledthat hour of which the Text speaks, and
be comforted. The signals of Divine
mercy, erected in his view, are too con-
fpicuous to be either distrusted or mistaken.

IN

lN the next place, The discoveries of s E R M.

V.

this hour afford the highest reason to trust ------
in the Divine faithfulness, for the accom-
plifhment of every prornife which remains
yet unfulfilled. For this was the hour of
the completion of God's ancient covenant.
It was the performance of the mercy pro-
mifed to the fathers. We behold the con-
summation of a great plan. which through-
out a course of ages, had been uniformly
pursued; and which, against every hu-
man appearance, was, at the appointed
moment, exalfly fulfilled. No wcord that
is gone out of the mouth of the Lord, fJ2all
fail. No length of time alters his pur-
pose. No obifacles can retard it. To-
wards the ends accomp!iflhed in this hour,
the most repugnant initruments were
made to operate. We discern God bend-
ing to his purpose, the jarring passions,
the opposite interefis, and even the vices
of men; uniting ikeming contrarieties in
his scheme; making the wrath of man to
praiJe him obliging the ambition of
Princes, the prejudices of the Jews, the

malice

s E R M. malice of Satan, all to concur, either in

V.
'-v--i bringing forward this hour, or in com-

pleting its destined effects. With what
entire confidence ought we to wait for the
fulfillment of all his other promises in their
due time; even when events are most
embroiled, and the profpea is most difcou-
raging ? Althozugh thozu fayejt, Thou canji
not /fee him; yet judgment is before him;
therefre trui thou in him. Be attentive on-
ly to perform thy duty; leave the event to
God; and be assured, that under the di-
redion of his Providence, all things J7fall
work together for a happy issue.

LASTLY, The consideration of this

whole fubjedt tends to excite gratitude and
devotion, when we approach to God in
ads of worship. The hour of which I
hlave discoursed, presents him to us in the
amiable light of the Deliverer of mankind,
the Restorer of our forfeited hopes. We
behold the greatness of the Almighty,.
fiftened by the mild radiance of conde-
fcenrion and mercy. We behold him di-

minifhing

minifhing the awful difiance at which we s E R M.
fiand from his pretence, by appointing for --
us a Mediator and Intercessor, through
whom the humble may, without difinay,
approach to Him who made them. By
such views of the Divine nature, Christian
faith ,lays the foundation for a worship
which shall be at once rational and assec-
tionate; a worship, in which the light of
the understanding shall concur with the
devotion of the heart, and the mofi pro-
found reverence be united with the most
cordial love. Chrifian faith is not a sys-
tem of speculative truths. It is not a les-
son of moral inflruction only. By a train
of high discoveries which it reveals, by a
fucceflfon of interesting objects which it
places in our view, it is calculated to ele-
vate the mind, to purify the affections,
and, by the assistance of devotion, to con-
firm and encourage virtue. Such, in par-
ticular, is the scope of that divine infti-
tution, the Sacrament of our Lord's Sup-
per. To this happy purpose let it con-
duce, by concentering, in one firiking

point

s E R M. point of light, all that the Gospel has dif-

V.
-~ pplayed of what is most important to man.

Touched with just contrition for pafi of-
fences, and filled with a grateful sense of
Divine goodness, let us come to the altar
of God; and, with a humble faith in his
infinite mercies, devote ourselves to his
service for ever.

SER-

# SERMON VI. On GENTLENESS. JAMES iii. 17. The wisdom that is from above, is---gentle---

[ I45 ]

S E R M ON V
On G E N T L E N E SS.

J A It S iii. I76

The wifdorm that is from above, is---gentle---
`-T O be wife in our own eyes, to be SE R M

wife in the opinion of the world, ---r-

and to be wife in the fight of God, are
three things so very different, as rarely to
coincide. One may often be wife in his
own eyes, who is far from being so in
the judgment of the world; and to be re-
puted a prudent man by the world, is no
security for being accounted wife by God.
As there is a worldly happiness, which
God perceives to be no other than dif-
guised misery ; as there are worldly ho-
nours, which in his efiimnation are re-

L proach;

S l R M. proach ; so there is a worldly wifidoil,

VI.
-Js which, in his /fght, is foohliZeffi. Of this

worldly wifdlom the charadters are given
in the context, and placed in contraf with
those of the wi/ci7om which is from above.
The one is the wisdom of the crafty ;
the other, that of the upright. The one
terminates ini felfifhnefs; the other, in
charity. The one is full of J2?ije and bit-
ier envyings ; the other, of mercy and of
good fiuits. One of the chief charaCters
by which the wisdom from above is dif-
tinguifhed, is gentleness, of which I am
now to discourse. Of this there is the
greater occasion to discourse, because it is
too seldom viewed in a religio light;
and is more readily confidered by the
bulk of men, as a mere felicity of nature,
or an exterior accomplishment of man-
ners, than as a Chriflian virtue which
they are bound to cultivate. I frhll firfl
explain the nature of this virtue; and
filall then ofer some arguments to recorm-
mend, and some directions to facilitate,
the practice of it.

I BEGIN

I BEGIN with diflinguifhing true gen- s ER M.

VI.

tlenels from passive tameness of spirit, -
and from unlimited compliance with the
manners of others. That passive tame-
ness which submits, without struggle, to
every incroachment of the violent and as-
fuming, forms no part of Christian duty;
but, on the contrary, is deftrudtivc of
general happiness and order. That unli-
mited complaisance, which, on every oc-
cafion, falls in with the opinions and
manners of others, is so far from being a
virtue, that it is itself a vice, and the pa-
rent of many vices. It overthrows all
fleadincfs of principle: and produces that
sinful conformity with the world, which
taints the whole character. In the pre-
sent corrupted slate of human manners,
always to assent and to comply, is the
very worst maxim we can adopt. It is
impossible to support the purity and dig-
nity of Chriflian morals, without oppof-
ing the world on various occasions, even
though we should fland alone. That
gentleness therefore which belongs to vir-

L tue,

S E R M. tue; is to be carefully distinguished from

VI.
.-v- the mean spirit of cowards, and the fawn-

ing assent of sycophants. It renounces no
jul right from fear. It gives up no im-
portant truth from flattery. It is indeed
not only confiflent with a firm mind, but
it necelfarily requires a manly spirit, and
a fixed principle, in order to give it any
real value. Upon this solid ground only,
the polish of gentleness can with advan-
tage be fuperinduced.

It stands opposed, not to the mofi de-

termined regard for virtue and truth, but
to harfihnefs and severity, to pride and
arrogance, to violence and oppression.
It is, properly, that part of the great
virtue of charity, which makes us un-
willing to give pain to any of our bre-
thren. Compaifion prompts us to relieve
their wants. Forbearance prevents us
from retaliating their injuries. Meekness
restrains our angry palions; candour, our
severe judgments. Gentleness corrects
whatever is offensive in our manners;
and, by a conitant train of humane at-

tentions,

tentions, fludies to alleviate the burden of s r' R M.
common mircry, Its ofice, therefore, is --
extensive. It is not, like some other vir-
tues, called forth only on peculiar emer-
gencies; but it is continually in action,
when we are engaged in intercourse with
men. It ought to form our address, to rc-
gulate our speech, and to diffuse itself
over our whole behaviour.

I mufl warn you, however, not to

confound this gentle vwiSdoem which is fjom
above, with that artificial courtesy, that
studied smoothness of manners, which is
learned in the school of the world. Such
accomplishments, the most frivolous and
empty may possess. Too often they are
employed by the artful, as a snare ; too
often affcoded by the hard and unfeel-
ing, as a cover to the baseness of their
minds. We cannot, at the fame time,
avoid observing the homage, which, even
in such instances, the world is constrain-
ed to pay to virtue. In order to ren-
der society agreeable, it is found necef-
fary to assume somewhat, that may at

I . least1

S E R M. leaIf carry its appearance. Virtue is the

VI.
--- universal charm. Even its shadow is

courted, when the substance is wanting.
The imitation of its form has been re-
duced into an art; and, in the commerce
of life, the first study of all who would
either gain the efleem, or win the hearts
of others, is to learn the speech, and to
adopt the manners, of candour, gentle-
ness, and humanity. But that gentleness
which is the charaEteriftick of a good
man, has, like every other virtue, its
feat in the heart: And, let me add, no-
thing except what flows from the heart,
can render even external manners truly
pleating. For no aifumed behaviour can
at all times hide the real character. In
that unaffedted civility which springs
from a gentle mind, there is a charm
infinitely more powerful, than in all the
studied manners of the most finished
courtier.

True gentleness is founded on a sense

of what we owe to him who made us,
and to the common nature of which we

all

all share. It arises from refledtion on our S E R M.
own failings and wants; and from jui-t --
views of the condition, and the duty of
man. It is native feeling, heightened and
improved by principle. It is the heart
which easily relents which feels for every
thing that is human; and is backward
and flow to infliCt the least wound. It is
affable in its address, and mild in its de-
mcanour ; ever ready to oblige, and will-
ing to be obliged by others breathing
habitual kindness towards friends, cour-
tefy to firangers, long-fufFering to ene-
mies. It exercises authority with mode-
ration; administers reproof with tender-
ness ; confers favours with cafe and mo-
defly. It is unassuming in opinion, and
temperate in zeal. It contends not ea-
gerly about trifles; flow to contradic, and
frill flower to blame; but prompt to
allay dissention, and to restore peace. It
neither intermeddles unnecessarily with
the affairs, nor pries inquisitively into the
secrets, of others. It delights above all
things to alleviate distress, and, if it can-

not

S E R
M' not dry up the falling tear, to sooth at

VI. -.--' leafl the grieving heart. Where it has

not the power of being useful, it is never
burdensome. It seeks to please, rather
than to shine and dazzle ; and conceals
with care that superiority, either of ta-
lents, or of rank, which is oppressive to
those who are beneath it. In a word, it
is that spirit, and that tenour of manners,
which the gospel of Christ enjoins, when
it commands us to bear one another's bur-
dens; to rejoice with those who rejoice, and to
weep with those who weep ; to please every
one his neighbour for his good ; to be kind and
tender-hearted; to be pitifld and courteous;
to fitpport the weak, and to be patient towards
all men.

Having nowfufficiently explained the na-

ture of this amiable virtue, I proceed to re-
commend it to your practice. Let me, for
this end, desire you to confider the duty
which you owe to God; to confider the re-
lation which you bear to one another; to
confider your own interest.

I. CONSIDEF

T. CONSIDER the duty which you owe s ,ER M.

to God. When you survey his works, no- --,-
thing is so conspicuous, as his greatness and
majefiy. When you consult his word, no-
thing is more remarkable, than his attention
to soften that greatness, and to place it in
the mildest and least oppressive light. He
not only charaCterizes himself as the God of
conJolation, but, with condescending gentle-
ness, he particularly accommodates himself
to the situation of the unfortunate. Ie
dwelleth with the humble and contrite. He
hideth not his face when the afftied cry. He
healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up
their wounds---When his Son came to be
the Saviour of the world, he was eminent
for the fame attribute of mild and gentle
goodness. Long before his birth, it was
prophesied of him, that he should not
Jfrive, nor cry, nor cause his voice to be
heard in the Jireets ; that the bruised reed
he J7ould nzot break, nor quench the finok-
lzug fax *: And after his death, this

* Matth. xii. 19. 20.

difiin-

s E R M. diftinguiflhing feature in his characer was
' >,.I- so univerfaily rcllembered, thatthe Apostle

Paul, on occasion of a request which he
makes to the Corinthians, uses those re-
markable expressions , I beseech you by the
meekzeJis and gentleners of Chr/it. During
all his intercourse with men, no harfinefs,
or pride, or fLately difance, appeared in
his demeanour. In his access, he was easy;
in his manners, simple; in his answers,
mild ; in his whole behaviour, humble and
obliging. Learn of me, said he, for I am
meek and lowly in heart.---As the Son of
God is the pattern, so the Holy Ghost is
the inspirer of gentleness. His name is
the Corobrter, the Spirit of grace and peace.
His frJuits, or operations on the human
mind, are love, meekness, gentlenefis, and long-
fiehjring t---Thus, by every discovery of
the Godhead, honour is conferred upon
gentleness. It is held up to our view, as
peculiarly conneCted with Celeflial Nature.
And suitable to such discoveries, is the whole
strain of the Gospel. It wereunneceffary to

2 Cor. x.. . + Gal. v. 22.

appeal

appeal to any single precept. You need s E R M.
only open the New Testament, to find this __
virtue perpetually inculcated. Charity, or
love, is the capital figure ever prefcnted
to our view ; and gentleness, forbearance,
and forgiveness, are the founds ever recur-
ring on our ear.

So predominant, indeed, is this spirit

throughout the Christian dispensation,
that even the vices and corruptions of
men have not been able altogether to
defeat its tendency. Though that dif-
penfation is far from having hitherto pro-
duced its full effect upon the world,
yet we can clearly trace its influence, in
humanizing the manners of men. Re-
markable, in this refped, is the victory
which it has gained over those powers of
violence and cruelty, which belong to the
infernal kingdom. Whcrevcr Chrifliani-
ty prevails, it has discouraged, and, in
tome degree, abolished slavery. It has
rescued human nature from that ignomi-
nious yoke, under which, in former ages,
the one half of mankind groaned. It has

introduced

s E R M. int roduced more equality between the two
i_ -n sexes, and rendered the conjugal union

more rational and happy. It has abated
the ferocioufiefs of war. It has miti-
gated the rigour of despotism, mitigated
the cruelty of punishments; in a word,
has reduced mankind, from theirancient
barbarity, into a more humane and gentle
ftate.----Do we pretend refped and zeal
for this religion, and at the fame time
allow ourselves in that harshness and fe-
verity, which are so contradictory to its ge-
nius ? Too plainly we show, that it has no
power over our hearts. We may retain
the Christian name; but we have aban-
doned the Christian spirit.

II. CONSIDER the relation which you

bear to one another. Man, as a solitary
individual, is a very wretched being.
As long as he flands detached from his
kind, he ispoffeffcd, neither of happiness,
nor of strength. We are formed by na-
ture to unite; we are impelled towards
each other, by the compassionate inflinds

in

in onr frame; we are linked by a thou- S ER M.
sand connections, founded on common ---
wants. Gentleness therefore, or, as it is
very properly termed, humanity, is what
man, as such, in every station, owes to
man. To be inaccessible, contemptuous,
and hard of heart, is to revolt against
our own nature ; is, in the language of
scripture, to hide ozirclves -from our cow,
JleJ7. Accordingly, as all feel the claim
which they have to mildness and huma-
nity, so all are sensibly hurt by the want
of it in others. On no fide are we more
vulnerable. No complaint is more feel-
ingly made, than that of the harsh and
rugged manners of persons with whom
we have intercourse. Eut how seldom do
we transfer the cafe to ourselves, or exa-
mine how far wve are guilt; of inflicting on
others, whose sensibility is the fame with
ours, those very wounds of which we so
loudly complain ?

But, perhaps, it will be pleaded by

some, That this gentleness, on which we
now insist, regards cnly tlhof smaller

c sices

s ER M. offices of life, which in their eye are

VI.
-u- not essential to religion and goodness. Ne-

gligent, they confess, on flight occasions,
of the government of their temper, or
the regulation of their behaviour, they
are attentive, as they pretend, to the
great duties of beneficence; and ready,
whenever the opportunity presents, to
perform important services to their fel-
low-creatures. But let such persons re-
flect that the occasions of performing
those important good deeds, very rarely
occur. Perhaps their situation in life, or
the nature of their connections, may in
a great measure exclude them from such
opportunities. Great events give scope
for great virtues; but the main tenour of
human life, is composed of small occur-
rences. Within the round of these, lie
the materials of the happiness of most
men; the subjects of their duty, and
the trials of their virtue. Virtue muff
be formed and supported, not by unfre-
quent ads, but.by daily and repeated ex-
ertions. In order to its becoming either

vigorous

vigorous or useful, it must be habitually s ER M-
adive; not breaking forth occasionally y
with a transient lustre, like the blaze of the
comet; but regular in its returns, like the
light of day: Not like the aromatic gale,
which fonmetimes feasts the sense; but like
the ordinary breeze, which purifies the air,
and renders it healthful.

Years may pass over our heads, without

affording any opportunity for ads of
high beneficence, or extensive utility.
Whereas not a day passes, but in the
common tranfadions of life, and efpeci-
ally in the intercourse of domestic focie-
ty, gentleness finds place for promot-
ing the happiness of others, and for
strengthening in ourselves the habit of
virtue. Nay, by seasonable discoverics
of a humane spirit, we sometimes contri-
bute more materially to the advancement
of happiness, than by adions which are
seemingly more important. There are
situations, not a few, in human life,
where the encouraging reception, the
condescending behaviour, and the look

of

s E R M. of sympathy, bring greater relief to the

VI.

.J^ heart, than the most bountiful gift. While,

on the other fide, when the hand of libe-
rality is extended to bestow, the want of
gentleness is sufficient to frufirate the in-
tention of the benefit. We four those
whom we meant to oblige i and, by con-
ferring favours with ostentation and harih-
ness, we convert them into injuries. Can
any disposition then be held to- possess a
low place in the scale of virtue, whose in-
fluence is so considerable on the happiness
of the world ?

Gentleness is, in truth, the great ave-

nue to mutual enjoyment. Amidst the
firife of interfering interests, it tempers
the violence of contention, and keeps a-
live the feeds of harmony. It softens ani-
nofities; renews endearments; and ren-
ders the countenance of man, a refresh-
rnent to man. Banish gentleness from
the earth; suppose the world to be fill-
ed with none but harfi and contentious
spirits; and what fort of society would
remain ? The solitude of the defart were

preferable

preferable to it. The confliat of jarring s E R M.

VI.

elements in chaos; the cave, where fab- _
terraneous winds contend and roar; the
den, where serpents hiss, and beasts of the
forest howl , would be the only proper
representations of such assemblies of men.
---0 that Ihad wings like a dove ! for then
I would fly away, and be at reft. Lo ! then
I would wander fzr off and remain in the
'wilderznes ; I would hafnen rmy cfcape from
the windy Jiorm and tempest : For I have
f'en violence and firife in the city. Mif-
chief and sorrow are in the midfi of it: De-
ceit and guile depart not from the Jireet".
---Strange! that where men have all one
common interest, they should so often,
absurdly, concur in defeating it ! Has not
Nature already provided a sufficient quan-
tity of unavoidable evils for the state of
man ? As if we did not susser enough from
the storm which beats upon us without,
must we conspire alto, in those societies
where we alTemblc, in order to find a re-
treat from that form, to harass one ano-

* Plfl. Iv. 6, 7, 8.

MI ther?

: R

t M. ther ?---But if the sense of duty, and of
--.v- common happiness, be insufficient to re-

commend the virtue of which we treat,
then let me desire you,

III. To confider your own interest.

Whatever ends a good man can be sup-
posed to pursue, gentleness will be found
to favour them. It prepossess's and wins
every heart. It persuades, when every
other argument fails ; often disarms the
fierce, and melts the flubborn. Whereas
harshness confirms the opposition it would
subdue ; and, of an indifferent person,
creates an enemy. He who could over-
look an injury committed in the collision
of interests, will long and severely resent
the flights of a contemptuous behaviour.--
To the man of gentleness, the world is ge-
nerally disposed to ascribe every other good
quality. The higher endowments of the
mind we admire at a difiance; and when
an impropriety of behaviour accompanies
them, we admire without love. They are
like some of the ditfant stars, whose bene-

ficial

ficial influence reaches not to us. Where- S E R M.

VI.

as, of the influence of gentleness, all in ----
some degree partake, and therefore all love
it. The man of this character rites in the
world without struggle, and flourishes
without envy. His misfortunes are uni-
verfally lamented ; and his failings are ea-
fily forgiven.

But whatever may be the effect of this

virtue on our external condition, its influ-
ence on our internal enjoyment is cer-
tain and powerful. That inward tran-
quillity which it promotes, is the firit
requisite to every pleasurable feeling. It
is the calm and clear atmosphere, the fe-
renity and sun-shine of the mind. When
benignity and gentleness reign within, we
are always leait in hazard of being ruf-
fled from without; every person, and
every occurrence, are beheld in the most
favourable light. But let some clouds of
disgust and ill-humour gather on the mind;
and immediately the scene changes : Na-
ture teems transformed ; and the ap-
pearance of all things is blackened to our

M 2 view.

s E R IM. ther ?---But if the sense of duty, and of
'----- common happiness, be insufficient to re-

commend the virtue of which we treat,
then let me desire you,

III. To confider your own interest.

Whatever ends a good man can be sup-
posed to pursue, gentleness will be found
to favour them. It prepossess's and wins
every heart. It persuades, when every
other argument fails ; often disarms the
fierce, and melts the stubborn. Whereas
harshness confirms the opposition it would
subdue; and, of an indifferent person,
creates an enemy. He who could over-
look an injury committed in the collision
of interefis, will long and severely resent
the flights of a contemptuous behaviour.--
To the man of gentleness, the world is ge-
nerally disposed to ascribe every other good
quality. The higher endowments of the
mind we admire at a diflance; and when
an impropriety of behaviour accompanies
them, we admire without love. They are
like some of the distant flars, whose bene-

ficial

ficial influence reaches not to us. Where- S ER M.
as, of the influence of gentleness, all in ·-----'
some degree partake, and therefore all love
it. The man of this character rifes in the
world without itruggle, and flourishes
without envy. His misfortunes are uni-
verfally lamented ; and his failings are ea-
fily forgiven.

But whatever may be the effed of this

virtue on our external condition, its influ-
ence on our internal enjoyment is cer-
tain and powerful. That inward tran-
quillity which it promotes, is the first
requisite to every pleasurable feeling. It
is the calm and clear atmosphere, the fe-
renity and sun-shine of the mind. When
benignity and gentleness reign within, we
are always leaIl in hazard of being ruf-
fled from without; every person, and
every occurrence, are beheld in the most
favourable light. But let some clouds of
disgust and ill-humour gather on the mind;
and immediately the scene changes: Na-
ture seems transformed; and the ap-
pearance of all things is blackened to our

M 2 view.

s E Ri M. view. The gentle mind is like the smooth

V[.
-_ > Bftream, which reflects every objedt in its

just proportion, and in its fairest colours.
The violent spirit, like troubled waters,
renders back the images of things distort-
cd and broken; and communicates to
.them all, that disordered motion which a-
rifes solely from its own agitation.

Offences mufz come, As soon may the

waves of the sea cease to roll, as provo-
cations to arise from human corruption
and frailty. Attacked by great injuries,
the man of mild and gentle spirit will
feel what human nature feels; and will
defend and resent, as his duty allows him.
But to those flight provocations, and fri-
volous offences, which are the most fre-
quent causes of disquiet, he is happily
fuperiour. Hence his days flow in a far
more placid tenour than those of others ,
exempted from the numberless difcom-
pQfures which agitate vulgar minds. In-
spired with higher sentiments ; taught to
regard, with indulgent eye, the frailties
of men, the omiflions of the careless, the

follies

follies of the imprudent, and the levity of s i

M:

the fickle, he retreats into the calmness of --
his spirit, as into an undisturbed fanauary
and quietly allows the usual current of life
to hold its course.

This virtue has another, and still more

important connction with our interest, by
means of that relation which our present
behaviour bears to our eternal state.
Heaven is the region of gentleness and
friendship; Hell, of fierceness and animo-
fity. If then, as the scripture inftru6ts us,
according to what we now fbow, we ml]t
herefter reap ; it follows, that the culti-
vation of a gentle temper is necessary to
prepare us for heavenly felicity; and that
the indulgence of harsh dispositions, is the
introduction to future misery. Men, I
am afraid, too often separate those arti-
cles of their belief which relate to cterni-
ty, from the ordinary affaiis of the world.
They connect them with the seasons of
seriousness and gravity. They leave them
with much refpe6t, as in a high region,
to which, only on great occasions, they

resort

S E R M. resort; and, when they descend into com-

VI.

mon life, confider themselves as at li-
berty to give free scope to their humours
and pafions. Whereas, in fad, it is their
behaviour in the daily train of social in-
tercourfe, which, more than any other
cause, fixes and determines. their spiritual
character; gradually instilling those dif-
positions, and forming those habits, which
affect their everlasting condition. With
regard to trifles, perhaps, their malig-
nant dispositions may chiefly be indulged.
But let them remember well, that those
trifles, by increasing the growth of pee-
viihnefs and passion, become pregnant
with the most serious mischiefs; and may
fit them, before they are aware, for be-
ing the future companions of none but in-
fernal spirits.

I mean not to fay, that in order to our

preparation for Heaven, it is enough to
be mild and gentle; or that this, virtue
alone, will cover all our fins. Through
the felicity of natural conflitution, a cer-
tain degree of this benignity may be pof-

sessed

sessed by some, whose hearts are in other s E R M.

VI.

refpeds corrupt, and their lives irregular. -
But what I mean to assert, is, That where
no attention is given to the government
of temper, meetnefs for Heaven is not
yet acquired, and the regenerating power
of religion is as yet unknown. One of
the first works of the Spirit of God, is,
to infuse into every heart which it inha-
bits, that gentle wifzdom which is from
above. Ihecy who are ChrifJ's, have cruci-
ifed the feJh, *with its affieSions and lifts;
but let it not be forgotten, that among
the works of the fefis, 3atred, variance,
emulations, wrath, Jtrif, and envyings, are
as expressly enumerated, as zimcleannefi,
murders, drzunkeznefs, and revellinzg . They
who continue either in the one or the
other, Jrjall not inherit, indeed cannot in-
herit, the kingdom of God.

Having thus Ihown the importance of

gentleness, both as a moral virtue, and as
a Christian grace, I shall conclude the
subject, with briefly fuggefling some con-

* G l. v. 19, o0, 21.

fiderations

S E R M. fiderations which may be of use to facili-

VI-
v_--^ tate the pratice of it.

FOR this end, let me advise you to

view your charaCter with an impartial eye;
and to learn, from your own failings, to
give that indulgence which in your turn
you claim. It is pride which fills the
world with so much harshness and feve-
rity. In the fullness offelf-eftlimation, we
forget what we are. We claim attenti-
ons, to which we are not entitled. We are
rigorous to offences, as if we had never of-
fended; unfeeling to difirefs, as if we
knew not what it was to susser. From
those airy regions of pride and folly, let
us descend to our proper level. Let us
survey the natural equality on which Pro-
vidence has placed man with man, and
reflect on the infirmities common to all.
If the reflection on natural equality and
mitual offences be insufficient to prompt
humanity, let us at least remember what
we are in the fight of God. Have we
none of that forbearance to give to one

7 another,

another, which we all so earnefily intreat s E R M.
from Heaven ? Can we look for clemency A
or gentleness from our Judge, when wve
are so backward to show it to our own
brethren ?

Accustom yourselves, also, to reflect on

the small moment of those things which
are the usual incentives to violence and
contention. In the ruffled and angry
hour; we view every appearance through
a false medium. The most inconsiderable
point of interest, or honour, swells into a
momentous objedt ; and the flightclt at-
tack seems to threaten immediate ruin.
But after passion or pride has subsided, we
look round in vain for the mighty mif-
chiefs we dreaded. The fabric, which
our diflurbed imagination had reared,
totally disappears. But though the cause
of contention has dwindled away, its
consequences remain. We have alienated
a friend ; we have embittered an enemy;
we have sown the feeds of future fufpi-
cion, malevolence, or difguft.---Sufpend
your violence, I beseech you, for a mo-

ment,

s E R M. ment, when causes of discord occur. An-

-^i. ticipate that period of coolness, which, of

itself, will Loon arrive. Allow yourselves
to think, how little you have any profpea
of gaining by fierce contention; but how
much of the true happiness of life you
are certain of throwing away. Easily,
and from the smallest chink, the bitter
waters of firife are let forth ; but their
course cannot be foreseen ; and he seldom
fails of suffering most from their poisonous
effed, who firfi allowed them to flow.

But gentleness will, most of all, be pro-

moted by frequent views of those great
objeds which our holy religion presents.
Let the profpe6ts of immortality fill your
minds. Look upon this world as a fate
of passage. Confider yourselves as en-
gaged in the pursuit of higher interests;
as aching now, under the eye of God, an
introductory part to a more important
scene. Elevated by such sentiments, your
minds will become calm and sedate. You
wiil look down, as frorn a superior fia-
tion, on the petty disturbances of the

world.

world. They are the fehlfh, the sensual, S ER I.'
and the vain, who are mofl subjed to the -v_-
impotence of pailion. They are linked
so closely to the world ; by so many fides
they touch, every object, and every per-
son around them, that they are perpetu-
ally hurt, and perpetually hurting others.
But the spirit of true religion removes
us to a proper distance from the grating
objects of worldly contention. It leaves
us sufficiently connected with the world,
for acting our part in it with propriety;
but disengages us from it so far, as
to weaken its power of disturbing our
tranquillity. It inspires magnanimity; and
magnanimity always breathes gentleness.
It leads us to view the follies of men with
pity, not with rancour; and to treat, with
the mildness of a superior nature, what
in little minds would call forth all the bit-
ternefs of passion.

Aided by such considerations, let'ids

cultivate that gentle wisdom which is, in'
so many refpeds, important both to our
duty and our happincfs. Let us aufume

it

S E R M. it as the ornament of every age, and of

VI.
'-a_ every flation. Let it temper the petu-

lance of youth, and soften the morose-
ness of old age. Let it mitigate authority
in those who rule, and promote deference
among those who obey. I conclude with
repeating the caution, not to mistake for
true gentleness, that flimzy imitation of
it, called polished manners, which often,
among the men of the world, under a
finooth appearance, conceals much afpe-
rity. Let yours be native gentleness of
heart, flowing from the love of God, and
the love of man. Unite this amiable fpi-
rit, with a proper zeal for all that is right,
and just, and true. Let piety be combine
ed in your character with humanity. Let
determined integrity dwell in a mild and
gentle breast. A characer thus support-
ed will command more real respeCt, than
can be procured by the moit Ihining ac-
complifhments, when separated from vir-
tue.

SER-

# SERMON VII. On the DISORDERS of the PASSIONS. ESTHER v. 13. Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the King's gate.

[ I73 1

SE R MO N VII.
On theDis o R D E R s of the PA s I o N S.

E STHER 1 V. 13.
TYt all this availctb mie nothing, so long

as I fee Mordecai the yew fitting at the
King's gate.

T H E S E are the words of one, who, s E R M.
though high in ilation and power, con- m
sessed himself to be mifcrable. They re-
late to a memorable occurrence in the
Persian history, under the reign of Aha-
fuerus, who is supposed to be the Prince
known among the Greek historians by the
name of Artaxerxes. Ahasuerus had ad-
vanced to the chief dignity in his king-
dom Haman an Amalekite, who inherit-
ed all the ancient enmity of his race to

the

SERVti. the Jewish nation. He appears, from

_
--,-. what is recorded of him, to have been a

very wicked minister. RaiTed to greatness
without merit, he employed his power
solely for the gratification of his pailions.
As the honours which he possessed were
next to royal, his pride was every day fedi
with that servile homage which is peculi-
ar to Asiatic courts ; and all the servants
of the King proitrated themselves be-
fore him. In the midst of this general
adulation, one person only stooped not to
HIaman. This was Mordecai the Jew
who, knowing this Amalekite to be an
enemy to the people of God, and, with
virtuous indignation, despising that info-
lence of prosperity with which he saw
him lifted up, bowed not, nor did hiym re-
verence. On this appearance of difre-
sped from Mordecai, Haman was full of
wrath: Bzt he tlhonght fJorn to lay hands
on MAlordecai alone. Personal revenge was
not sufficient to satisfy him. So violent
and black were his passions, that he re-
solved to exterminate the whole nation to

which

which Mordecai belonged. Abusing, for s E R M.
this cruel purpose, the favour of his cre- ---
dulous Sovereign, he obtained a decree to
be sent forth, that, against a certain day,
all the Jews throughout the Periian do-
minions should be put to the sword.
Mean while, confident of success, and
blind to approaching ruin, he continued
exulting in his prosperity. Invited by
Ahafucrus to a royal banquet, which
Either the Queen had prepared, he went
forth that day joyJil, and with a glad heart.
But behold how flight an incident was
sufficient to poison his joy ! As he went
forth, he saw Mordecai in the King's
gate; and observed, that frill he refused
to do him homage: lie Jlood not zp, nor
was moved for him ; although he well
knew the formidable designs which Ha-
man was preparing to execute. One pri-
vate man, who despised his greatness,
and disdained fubmifilon, while a whole
kingdom trembled before him; one spirit,
which the utmost itretch of his power
could neither subdue nor humble, blait-

*iz ~~ed

S E j'T ', ed his triumphs. His whole foul was
'-/--- shaken with a form of passion. Wrath,

pride, and desire of revenge, rose into
fury. With difficulty he refrained him-
self in public; but as soon as he came
to his own house, he was forced to dif-
close the agony of his mind. He gather-
ed together his fi-iends and family, with
Zerifh his wife. He told them of the glory
of his riches, and the multitude of.his chil-
dlrev., ands all the things wherein the King
htad promoted him, and how he had advanc-
ed him above the princes and firvants of
the King. Iee said, moreover, Te'a, EfJher
the ewenz did let no man come in wvith the
Kitng, unto the banquet that Jhe had pre-
pared, but m)felf; and to-morrow alo am I
inviter unto her with the King. After all
this preamble, what is the conclusion ?---
2f't all this availcth me nothing, so long as
I ser AIordecai the Yew fitting at the
King's gate.

The sequel of Haman's history I shall

not now pursue. It might afford matter
for much inflrution, by the confpicu-

O0S

bus justice of God in his fall and punifih- s ER M
ment. But, contemplating only the fin-
gular situation in which the Text presents
him, and the violent agitation of his
mind which it displays, the following
reflections naturally arise, which, toge-
ther with some pracical improvements,
ihall make the subjeCt of this discourse.
I. How miserable is vice, when one guilty
paflion creates so much torment ! II. How
unavailing is prosperity, when, in the
height of it, a single disappointment can
destroy the relish of all its pleasures! III.
How weak is human nature, which, in
the absence of real, is thus prone to form
to itself imaginary woes!

I. How miserable is vice, when one

guilty passion is capable of creating so
much torment ! When we discourse to
you of the internal misery of finners;
when we represent the pangs which they
suser, from violent passions, and a cor-
rupted heart; we are sometimes fufpeded
of chufing a theme for declamation, and

N of

S Lt iM. of heightening the piCture which we
k---yJ draw, by colours borrowed from fancy.

They whose minds are, by nature, hap-
pily -tranquil, or whose lituation in life
removes them from the difsurbance and
tumult of passion, can hardly conceive,
that as long as the body is at cafe, and
the external condition prosperous, any
thing which pafles within the mind
lhould cause such exquisite woe. But,
for the truth of our assertions, we appeal
to the hiflory of mankind. We might
reason from the conflitution of the ra-
tional frame ; where the underflanding is
appointed to be supreme, and the passions
to be subordinate ; and where, if this due
arrangement of its parts be overthrown,
misery as necessarily ensues, as pain is
consequent in the animal frame, upon
the distortion of its members. But lay-
ing speculations of this kind aside, it is
sufficient to lead you to the view of fads,
the import of which can neither be con-
troverted, nor mistaken. This is, indeed,
the great advantage of history, that it is

a mir-

a mirrour which holds up mankind to their s E R M.

VII.

own view. For, in all ages, human na- -
ture has been the fame. In the circle of
worldly affairs, the fame characters and si-
tuations are perpetually returning; and in
the folliesand paifions, the vices and crimes,
of the generations that are pall, we read
those of the present.

Attend, then, to the infance now be-

fore us; and conceive, if you can, a per-
son more thoroughly wretched, than one
reduced to make this humiliating confeffi-
on, that though surrounded with power,
opulence and pleasure, he was loft to all
happiness, through the fierceness of his
resentment; and was at that moment
htung by disappointment, and torn by
rage, beyond what he could bear. A1l
this availeth me nothing, Jo long as I fee
Mordecai the yew fitting at the King's gate.
Had this been a soliloquy of Haman's
within himself, it would have been a sus-
cient discovery of his misery. But when
we confider it as a confeifion which he
makes to others, it is a proof that his

N 2 misery

S ER .I misery was become insupportable. -For
i-- -~ such agitations of the mind every man

frives to conceal, because he knows they
dilhonour him. Other griefs and for-
rows, he can, with freedom, pour out to
a confident. What he suffers from the
injustice or malice of the world, he is not
ashamed to acknowledge. But when his
suffering arises from the bad dispositions
of his own heart ; when, in the height
of prosperity, he is rendered miserable,
solely by disappointed pride, every ordi-
nary motive for communication ceases.
Nothing but the violence of anguish, can
drive him to confess a pafion which ren-
ders him odious, and a weakness which
renders him despicable. To what ex-
tremity, in particular, must he be re-
duced, before he can disclose to his own
family the infamous secret of his misery?
In the eye of his family every man wishes
to appear refpedtable, and to cover from
their knowledge whatever may vilify or
degrade him. Attacked or reproached
abroad,. he conroles himself with- his im-

";"·~' ." ' portance

portance at home; and in domeific at- s r R M'
tachment and refped, seeks for some corn- ,--
penfation for the injustice of the world.
Judge, then, of the degree of torment
which Haman endured, by its breaking
through all these restraints, and forcing
him to publish his shame before those,
from whom all men seek most to hide it.
How revere must have been the conflict
which he underwent within himself, be-
fore he called together his wife and all
his friends for this purpose ! How dread-
ful the agony he suffered at the moment
of his confession, when, to the aftonihced
company, he laid open the cause of his
distress !

Assemble all the evils which poverty,

disease, or violence can inflict. and their
flings will be found by far less pungent,
than those which such guilty passionS dart
into the heart. Amidst the ordinary cala-
mities of the world, the mind can exert
its powers, and fuggefl relief: And the
mind is properly the man j the sufferer,
and his sufferings, can be distinguished.

But

s ER M. But those disorders of paflion, by feiz-

VII. cc^ ing directly on the mind, attack hu-

man nature in its strong hold, and cut
off its last resource. They penetrate to
the very feat of sensa ion ; and convert all
the powers of thought into infiruments of
torture.

Let us remark, in the event that is now

before us, the awful hand of God; and
admire his jutlice, in thus making the
finner's own wickedness to reprove him, and
his backlidings to correit him. Scepticks
reason in vain against the reality of di-
vine government. It is not a subjea of
dispute. It is a faat which carries the
evidence of sense, and displays itself be-
fore our eyes. We seethe Almighty ma-
nifeftly pursuing the Jfnner with evil. We
fee him connecting with every single de-
viation from duty, those wounds of the
spirit which occasion the most exquisite
torment. He hath not merely promul-
gated his laws now, and delayed the dif-
tributijn of rewards and punishments
until a future period of being. But the

fanations

fanCions of his laws already take place; s E R lM.
their effets appear; and with such infi-
nite wisdom are they contrived, as to
require no other executioners of justice
against the finner, than his own guilty
pailions. God needs not come forth from
his secret place, in order to bring him to
puniihment. He needs not call thunder
down from the heavens, nor raise any
minifler of wrath from the abyss below.
IHe needs only fay, Ephraii is joincd to his
idols; let him alone : And, at that instant,
the finner becomes his own tormentor.
The infernal fire begins, of itself, to kin-
dle within him. The worm that never dies,
seizes on his heart.

Let us remark also, from this example,

how imperfectly we can judge from ex-
ternal appearances, concerning real hap-
pincfs or misery. All Persia, it is pro-
bable, envied Haman as the happiest per-
son in the empire 3 while yet, at the mo-
ment of which we now treat, there
was not within its bounds, one more
thoroughly wretched. We are seduced,

i and

s E R M. and deceived by that false glare which

-^-- prosperity sometimes throws around bad

men. We are tempted to imitate their
crimes, in order to partake of their ima-
gined felicity. But remember Haman,
and beware of the snare. Think not,
when you behold a pageant of grandeur
displayed to, publick view, that you dif-
cern the ensign of certain happiness. In
order to form any just conclusion, you
must follow the great man into the re-
tired apartment, where he lays aside his
disguise. You mufi not only be able to
penetrate into the interiour of families,
but you muff have a faculty by which
you can look into the inside of hearts.
Were you endowed with such a power,
you would most commonly behold good
men, in proportion to their goodness,
satisfied and easy ; you would behold
atrocious finners, always restless and un-
happy,

Unjufi are our complaints, of the pro-

rnifcuous diltribution made by Provi-.
dence, of its favours among men. From

7 superficial

superficial views such complaints arise. s E R M.

VII.

The diIributionofthe goods of fortune, --v
indeed, may often be promiscuous; that
is, disproportioned to the moral charac-
ters of men; but the allotment of real
happiness is never so. For to the wicked
there is no peace. They are like the troubled
sea when it cannot rejt. They travel with
pain all their days. Trouble and ang2ijh
prevail against them. Terrours make them
afraid on every fide. A dreadful Jfund is
in their ears; and they are in great fear
where no fear is.-- Hitherto we have
confidered Haman under the character of
a very wicked man, tormented by crimi-
nal passions. Let us now confider him,
merely as a child of fortune, a profpe-
rous man of the world; and proceed to
observe,

II. How unavailing worldly prosperity

is, since, in the midst of it, a single dif-
appointment is sufficient to embitter all
its pleasures. We might at first imagine,
that the natural effe;t of prosperity would

be,

S E R M. be, to di-suse over the mind a prevailing
< -,~£ fatisfation, which the lesser evils of life

could not ruffle or diflurb. We might
expect, that as one in the full glow of
health, despises the inclemency of wea-
ther; so one in possession of all the ad-
vantages of high power and flation,
should disregard flight injuries; and, at
perseet ease within himself, should view,
in the moft.favourable light, the behavi-
our of others around him. Such effets
would indeed follow, if worldly prosperity
contained in itself the true principles of
human felicity. But as it poffefies them
not, the very reverse of those confequen-
ces generally obtains. Prosperity debili-
tates, instead of firengthening the mind.
Its most common effet is, to create an
extreme sensibility to the slightest wound.
It foments impatient desires; and raises
expeCtations which no success can satisfy.
It foflers a false delicacy, which sickens
in the midst of indulgence. By repeat-
ed gratification, it blunts the feelings of
men to what is pleating; and leaves them

unhappily

unhappily acute to whatever is uneasy. s E R M.
Hence, the gale which another would
scarcely feel, is, to the prosperous, a rude
tempest. Hence, the rofe-leaf doubled
below them on the couch, as is told of the
effeminate Sybarite, breaks their refl.
Hence, the disrespect shown by Mordecai,
preyed with such violence on the heart of
Haman. Upon no principle of reason can
we assign a sufficient cause for all the dif-
trefs which this incident occasioned to him.
The cause lay not in the external incident.
It lay within himself; it arose from a mind
distempered by prosperity.

Let this example correct that blind

eagerness, with which we rush to the
chace of worldly greatness and honours.
I fay not, that it should altogether divert
us from pursuing them; since, when en-
joyed with temperance and wisdom, they
may doubtless both enlarge our utility,
and contribute to our comfort. But let it
teach us, not to over-rate them. Let it
convince us, that unless we add to them
the necessary corrctives of piety and vir-

tue,

S E R M. tue, they are, by themselves, more likely

VII.
'--^. to render us wretched, than to make us

happy.

Let the memorable fate of Haman

suggest to us also, how often, besides cor-
rupting the mind, and engendering inter-
nal misery, they lead us among precipices,
and betray us into ruin. At the moment
when fortune seemed to smile upon him,
with the most serene and fettled aspea
The was digging in secret the pit for his
fall. Prosperity was weaving around his
head the web of defirudtion. Success in-
flamed his pride; pride increased his thirfl
of revenge; the revenge which, for the
fake of one man, he fought to execute on
a whole nation, incensed the Queen ; and
he is doomed to susser the fame death
which he had prepared for Mordecai--.
Had Haman remained in a private flati-
on, he might have arrived at a peaceable
old age. He might have been, I shall not
fay, a good or a happy man; yet pro-
bably far less guilty, and less wretched,
than when placed at the head of the

greatest

greatest empire in the East. Who knoweth s E IM
'what is good for man in this life, all the ---'
days of his vain life, which he fpendeth as
a Jhadow ?

An extensive contemplation of human

affairs, will lead us to this conclusion,
That among the different conditions and
ranks of men, the balance of happiness
is preserved in a great measure equal ;
and that the high and low, the rich and
the poor, approach, in point of real
enjoyment, much nearer to each other,
than is commonly imagined. In the lot
of man, mutual compensations, both of
pleasure and of pain, universally take
place. Providence never intended, that
any slate here hould be either completely
happy, or entirely miserable. If the feel-
ings of pleasure are more numerous, and'
more lively, in the higher departments
of life, such also are those of pain. If
greatness flatters our vanity, it multiplies-
our dangers. If opulence increases our
gratifications, it increases, in the fame-
proportion, our desires and demands. If'

the

S E R M. the poor are confined to a more narrow cir-

'- ' cle, yet within that circle lie most of those

natural satisfaCtions, which, after all the re-
finements of art, are found to be the most
genuine and true.-----In a slate, therefore,
where there is neither so much to be co-
veted on the one hand, nor to be dreaded
on the other, as at firfi appears, How sub-
miflive ought we to be to the disposal of
Providence I How temperate in our de-
fires and pursuits! How much more at-
tentive to preserve our virtue, and to im n
prove our minds, than to gain the doubt-
ful and equivocal advantages of worldly
prosperity !---But now, laying aside the
consideration of Haman's great crimes;
laying aside his high prosperity; viewing
him simply as a man, let us observe, from
his history,

III. How weak human nature is, which,

in the absence of real, is thus prone to
create to itself imaginary woes. All this
availeth me nothing, Jo long as I fee Mor-
decai the Yew fitting at the King's gate.

---What

---What was it, 0 Haman ! to thee, SE R M.

VII.

though Mordecai had continued to fit '
there, and negledted to do thee homage ?
Would the banquet have been on that
account the less magnificent, thy palace
lets splendid, or thy retinue lcfs nume-
rous ? Could the difrefpedt of an obscure
stranger dishonour the favourite of a migh-
ty King ? In the midst of a thousand
fubmilive courtiers, was one fullen coun-
tenance an object worthy of drawing
thy notice, or of troubling thy repose ?--
Alas ! in Haman we behold too just a
picture of what often pafres within our-
selves. We never know what it is to be
long at cafe. Let the world cease from
changing around us. Let external things
keep that situation in which we molt
wish them to remain; yet somewhat
froim within shall soon arise, LO disturb our
happiness. A Mordecai appears, or sTems
to appear, .itting at the gate. Some
vexation, which our fancy has either
entirely created, or at least has unreason-
ably aggravated, corrodes us in fc'ret;

and

s E R M. and until that be removed, all that we en-

VII.
-y-. joy availeth us nothing. Thus, while we

are incessantly complaining of the vani-
ty and the evils of human life, we make
that vanity, and we increase those evils.
Unflcilled in the art of extracting happi-
ness from the objects around us, our inge-
nuity solely appears in converting them in-
to misery.

Let it not be thought, that troubles of

this kind are incident only to the great
and the mighty. Though they, perhaps,
from the intemperance of their pafions,
are peculiarly exposed to them ; yet the
disease itself belongs to human nature,
and spreads through all ranks. In the
humble, and seemingly quiet shade of
private life, discontent broods over its
imaginary sorrows ; preys upon the citi-
2en, no less than upon the courtier; and
often nourifhcs paflions, equally malig-
nrant in the cottage and in the palace.
Having once feizcdthe mind, it spreads
its own gloom over every surrounding
objedC, it every where searches out ma-

terials

terials for itself; and in no direaion more s R M.
frequently employs its unhappy aacivi- --
ty, than in creating divisions amongfi
mankind, and in magnifying flight pro-
vocations into mortal injuries. Those
felf-created miseries, imaginary in the
cause, but real in the suffering, will be
found to form a proportion of human
evils, not inferiour, either in severity ot
in number, to all that we endure from
the unavoidable calamities of life. In
situations where much comfort might be-
enjoyed, this man's superiority, and that
man's negleCt, our jealousy of a friend,
our hatred of a rival, an imagined as-
front, or a mistaken point of honour,
allow us no repose. Hence, discords in
families, animofities among friends, and
wars among nations. Hence, Haman
miserable in the midst of all that great-
ness could bestow. Hence, multitudes
in the most obscure flations, for whom
Providence seemed to have prepared a
quiet life, no less eager in their petty
broils, nor less tormented by their pas-

0 sions,

9 E Ri M. sions, than if princely honours were the

VII.

,-,---, prize for which they contended.

FROM this train of observation, whichl

the Text has suggested, can he avoid re-
flecting upon the disorder in which hu-
man nature plainly appears at present to
lie? We have beheld, in Haman, the
pictuie of that misery which arises from
evil passions; of that unhappiness, which
is incident to the highest prosperity; of
that discontent, which is common to
every slate. Whether we confider him
as a bad man, a prosperous man, or iim-
ply as a man, in every light we behold
reason too weak for passion. This is the
source of the reigning evil; this is the
root of the universal disease. The story
of Haman only shows us, what human
nature has too generally appeared to be
in every age. H-ence, when we read
the history of nations, what do we read
but the history of the follies and crimes
of men ? We may dignify those recorded
tranfadions, by calling them the intrigues

of

offtatefnen, and the exploits of conquer- s EIR M
ours; butthey are, in truth, no other than --
the efforts of discontent to escape from iti
misery, and the struggles of contending
passions among unhappy men. The hifto-
ry of mankind has been a continued tra-
gedy; the world, a great theatre exhibit-
ing the fame repeated scene, of the follies
of men (hooting forth into guilt, and of
their passions fermenting, by a quick pro-
cess, into misery.

But can we believe, that the nature of

man came forth in this state from the hands
of its gracious Creator ? Did he frame
this world, and ifore it with inhabi-
tants, solely that it might be replenished
with crimes and misfortunes ?---In the
moral, as well as in the natural world,
we may plainly discern the signs of some
violent convulsion, which has shattered
the original workmanship of the Almighty.
Amidst this wreck of human nature,
traces still remain which indicate its Au-
thor. Those high powers of conscience
and reason, that capacity for happiness,

0 2 that

s E R M. that ardour of enterprize, that glow of

VII.
- ^ affe6eion, which often break through the

gloom of human vanity and guilt, are
like the scattered columns, the broken
arches, .and defaced sculptures of some
fallen temple, whose ancient splendour
appears amidst its ruins. So conspicuous
in human nature are those characters,
both of a high origin, and of a degrad-
ed slate, that, by -many religious sets
throughout the earth, they have been
seen.. and confeiTed. A tradition seems to
have pervaded almost all nations, that
the human race had either through some
offence forfeited, or through some mif-
fortune loft, that flation of primaeval
honour which they once possessed. But
while; from this dodrine, ill underflood,
and'involved in many fabulous tales, the
nations wandering in Pagan darkness
could draw no consequences that were
jufR .while, totally ignorant of the na-
ture of the disease, they fought in vain
for the remedy ; the fame divine revela-
tion, which has informed us in what

·* ' -- manner

manner our apoftacy arofc, from the abuse s v R M.
of our rational powers, has inflruEted us ---a
also how we may be restored to virtue anc
to happiness.

LET US, therefore, tfudy to improve

the afliftance which this revelation affords,
for the restoration of our nature, and the
recovery of our felicity. With humble
and grateful minds, let us apply to those
medicinal springs which it hath opened,
for curing the disorders of our heart and
passions. -In this view, let us, with reve-
rence, look up to that Divine Personage,
who descended into this world, on pur-
ppfe to. be the light and the life of men.:
who came, in the fulness of grace and
truth, to repair the desolations of many
generations, to restore order among the
works of God, and to raise up a newr earth,
and - new heavens; wherein righteoufiefs
Jhould dwell for ever. .Under his tuition
let us put ourselves j and, amidst the
storms of pafion to which we are here
cxpofed, and the slippery paths which we

arc

S E R M. are left to tread, never trust prefumptu-

VII.
'---- oufly to our own understanding. Thank-

ful that a Heavenly Conductor vouchsafes
his aid, let us earnestly pray, that from
him may descend divine light to guide
our fieps, and divine strength to fortify
our minds. Let us pray, that his grace
may keep us from all intemperate paffi-
ons, and mistaken Pursuits of pleasure;
that whether it shall be his will to give or
to deny us earthly prosperity, he may bless
us with a calm, a found, and well-regu-
lated mind; may give us moderation in
success, and fortitude under disappoint-
ment; and may enable us so to take warn-
ing from the crimes and miseries of others,
as to escape the snares of guilt.

W H I L E we thus maintain a due de-

pendence on God, let us also exert our.
selves with care in ating our own part.
From the whole of-what has been said,.
this important inftruiion arises, That the
happiness of every man depends more
upon the slate of his own-mind, than

upon

upon any one external circumstance nay, S E R M.
more than upon all external things put
together. We have seen, that inordinate
pafions are the great disturbers of life;
and that, unless we polfefs a good confci-
ence, and a well-governed mind, difcon-
tent will blast every enjoyment, and the
highef prosperity will prove only difguif-
ed nifery. Fix then this conclusion in
your minds, that the delfrudtion of your
virtue, is the deftruaion of your peace.
Keep thy heart with all diligence; govern it
with the greatest care; for out of it are

ifes of life. In no station, in no period,

think yourselves secure from the dangers
which spring from your passions. Every
age, and every fiation, they beset; from
youth to grey.hairs, and from the peasant
to the prince.

At your first setting out in life, efpe-

cially, when yet unacquainted with the
world and its snares, when every plea-
sure enchants with its smile, and every
objeEt shines with the gloss of novelty ,
beware of the seducing appearances which

filrol nd

S E R M. surround you, and recolleC what others

VII.
-v have sufferei from the power of head-

ftron2 desire If you allow any paffi.n,
even though it be efleemed innocent,
to acquire an absolute ascendant, your
inward peace will be impaired. But if
any, which has the taint of guilt, take
early possession of your mind, you may
date from that moment the ruin of your
tranquillity. Nor with the season of
youth does the peril end. To the im-
petuofity of youthful desire, succeed
the more fober, but no lets dangerous,
attachments of advancing years5 when
the passions which are conneEted with
interest and ambition begin their reign,
and too frequently extend their malig-
nant influence, even over those periods
of life which ought to be most tranquil.
From the first to the laif of man's abode
on earth, the discipline must never be
relaxed, of guarding the heart from the
dominion of passion, Eager paTions, and
yiolent desires, were not made for man.
They exceed his sphere. They find no

adequate

adequate objets on earth; and of course s E R M.
can be produtive of nothing but misery. ,---,
The certain consequence of indulging them
is, that there shall come an evil day, when
the anguish of disappointment shall drive
us to acknowledge, that all which we en-
joy availeth us nothing.

You are not to imagine, that the warn-

ings which I have given in this discourse,
are applicable only to the cafe of such
signal offenders as he was, of whom the
Text treats. Think not, as I am afraid
too many do, that, because your pafions
have not hurried you into atrocious deeds,
they have therefore wrought no mischief
and have left no fling behind them. By a
continued series of loose, though appa-
rently trivial, gratifications, the heart is
often as thoroughly corrupted, as by the
commission of any one of those enormous
crimes which spring from great ambition,
or great revenge. Habit gives the passions
Srength, while the absence of glaring
guilt seemingly justifies them; and, un-
awakened by remorse, the finner proceeds

in

E R M. in his course, till he wax bold in guilt, and
'----- become ripe for ruin. For, by gradual

and latent steps, the deifruCtion of our
virtue advances. Did the evil unveil itself
atthe be.inrlii-; did the storm which is
to ovcrthiio.v our peace, discover, as it
rooe. all its horrours, precautions would
more frequently be taken against it. But
we are imperceptibly betrayed ; and from
one licentious attachment, one criminal
passion, are, by a train of consequences,
drawn on to another, till the government
of ou'r minds is irrecoverably loft. The
enticing and the odious passions are, in this
refpea, iimilar in their proce.ss., and,
though by different roads, conduC at. Iaft
to the fame issue. David, when he firfi
beheld Bathsheba, did not plan the death
of Uriah. Haman was not delivered up
all at once to the madness of revenge. His
passions rose with the rising tide of pro-
lperity ; and pride completed what profpe-
rity began. What was originally no more
than difpIeafure at Mordecai's disrespeCt,
iincreafed with every invitation he received

- " '

'
to

to the banquet of the Queen; till it im- s E R M.

VII.

pelled him to devise the slaughter of a -A-
whole nation, and ended in a degree of
rage, which confounded his reason, and
hurried him to ruin. In this manner, eve-
ry criminal passion, in its progress, swells
and blackens; and what was at first a
small cloud, such as the Prophet's servant
saw, no bigger than a man's hand, ri/ing
from the sea %, is soon found to carry the
tempefI in its womb.

' Kings xviii. 44

44.. ;,,
;

# SERMON VIII. On our IGNORANCE of GOOD and EVIL in this Life. ECCLES. vi. 12. Who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all the days of his vain life, which he spendeth as a shadow?

[ 204 ]

SE R M O N VIII.
On our IGNORANCE of Go o D and

E v I L in this Life.

E C L E S. vi. I2.
Who knoweth what is good for man in this

ife, all the days of his vain life, which
he fpendeth as a Jfadow ?
SE M.

. I HE measure according to which

knowledge is dispensed to man, as-
fords conspicuous proofs of divine wis-
dom. In many instances we clearly per-
ceive, that either more or less would have
proved detrimental to his slate; that en-
tire ignorance would have deprived him
of proper motives to anion; and that
complete discovery would have raised
him to a sphere too high for his pre-

sent

sent powers. He is, therefore, permitted s ERIM.
to know only in part; and to fee through --
a glass, darkly, He is left in that state
of conjecture, and partial information,
which, though it may occasionally sub-
jet him to distress, yet, on the whole,
conduces most to his improvement; which
affords him knowledge sufficient for the
purposes of virtue, and of active life, with-
out disturbing the operations of his mind,
by a light too bright and dazzling. This
evidently holds, with refpeA to that de-
gree of obscurity which now covers the
great laws of Nature, the decrees of the
Supreme Being, the slate of the invisible
world, the future events of our own life,
and the thoughts and designs which pass
within the breasts of others .

But there is an ignorance of another

kind, with refped to which the applica-
tion of this remark may appear more du-
bious ; the ignorance under which men
labour concerning their happiness in the
present life, and the means of attaining it.

7 Vid. S En . IV.

If

s E R M. If there be foundation for Solomon's c6m-
-t---/ plaint in the Text, qwho kznoweth 'what

is good for man in this lif ? this confe-
quence may be thought inevitably to fol-
low, That the days of his life must be vain
in every sense ; not only because they are
fleeting, but because they are empty too,
like the Jhadow. For, to what -purpose
are all his labours in the pursuit of an
object, which it is not in his power to
discover or ascertain ?---Let us then feri-
oufly enquire, what account can be given
of our present ignorance, refpeEting what
is good for us in this life; whether no-
thing be left, but only to wander in un-
certainty amidst this darkness, and to
lament it as the fad consequence of our
fallen state ; or whether such infiruc-
tions may not be derived from it, as give
ground for acknowledging, that by this,
as by all its other appointments, the wis-
dom of Providence brings real good out
of teeming evil. I shall, in order, to de-
termine this point, first, endeavour toil-
lustrate the docrine of the Text, That we

know

know not, or at molf know imperfetly, s E R M.
what is good for us in this life: I shall ---
next explain the causes to which this de-
fed in our knowledge is owing : And
then shall show the purposes which it
was intended to serve, and the effeEts
which it ought to produce on our con-
dut.

THE whole history of mankind seems

a comment on the doctrine of the Text.
When we review the course of human
affairs, one of the first objects which every
where attrads our notice, is, the mif-
taken judgment of men concerning their
own interest. That Jfre evil, w-hich So-
lomon long ago remarked with refpcc to
riches, of their being kept by the owners
thereof to their hurt, takes place equally
with respect to dominion and power, and
all the splendid objeCts and high fiations
of life. We every day behold men climb-
ing, by painful fleps, to that dangerous
height, which, in the end, renders their
gfall more revere, and their ruin more con-

xI ipl~fpicuous.

S E R M. fpicuous. But it is not to high ftationg

'-----that the doctrine of the Text is limited.

In the crimes by which too often these are
gained, and in the misfortunes which they
afterwards bring forth, the greater part of
every audience may think themselves lit-
tle concerned. Leaving such themes,
therefore, to the poet and the historian, let
us come nearer to ourselves, and survey
the ordinary walk of life.

Around us, we every where behold a

busy multitude. Restless and uneasy in
their prelent situation, they are incessant-
ly employed in accomplifiing a change of
it; and, as soon as their wifll is fulfill-
ed, we discern, by their behaviour, that
they are as dissatisfied as they were be-
fore. Where they expeLed to have found
a paradise, they find a defcrt. The man
of business pines for leisure. The leisure
for which he had longed, proves an irk-
some gloom; and, through want of em-
ployment, he languishes, sickens, and dies.
The man of retirement fancies no state to
be so happy, as that of adcive life. But

7 he

he has not engaged long in the tumults s E R M.
and contests of the world, until he finds D,
cause to look back with regret on the calm
hours of his former privacy and retreat.
Beauty, wit, eloquence, and fame, are
eagerly desired by persons in every rank
of life. They are the parent's fondest
wish for his child; the ambition of the
young, and the admiration of the old.
And yet, in what numberless instances
have they proved, to those who possessed
them, no other than ihining snares; fe-
ductions to vice, initigations to folly, and,
in the end, sources of misery ? Com-
fortably might their days have paged,
had they been less conspicuous. But the
diflinEtions which brought them forth
to notice, conferred splendour, and with-
drew happiness. Long life is, of all
others, the most general, and seemingly
the moR innocent, objeat of desire. With
refpea to this too, we so frequently err,
that it would have been a blessing to
many to have had their with denied.
There was a period, when they might

P have

S E R M. have quitted the tage with honour, and
»e-- iin peace. But by living too long, they out-

lived their reputation; outlived their fa-
mily, their friends, and comforts; and reap-
ed nothing from the continuance of days,
except to feel the pressure of age, to taste
the dregs of life, and to behold a wider
compass of human misery.

Man walketh in a vain lJow. His fears

are often as vain as his wiflhes. As what
flattered him in expeCation, frequently
wounds him in pofTeffion; so the event
to which he looked forward with an an-
xious and fearful eye, has often, when
it arrived, laid its terrours aside; nay,
has brought in its train unexpected bless-
ings. Both good and evil are beheld at
a difiance, through a perfpedive which
deceives. The colours of objets when
nigh, are entirely different from what
they appeared, when they were viewed
in futurity.

T H E fadt then being undoubtedly cer-
tain, that it is common for men to be

-~' '~ deceived

deceived in their profpeas of happiness, S E R M.
let us next enquire into the causes of that _--
deception. Let us attend to those peculiar
circumstances in our slate, which render
us such incompetent judges of future good
or evil in this life.

First, We are not sufficiently acquaint-

ed with ourselves, to foresee our future
feelings. We judge by the sensations of
the present moment: and, in the fervour
of desire, pronounce confidently concern-
ing the desired objet. But we reflect
not, that our minds, like our bodies, un-
dergo great alteration from the situations
into which they are thrown, and the pro-
greffive stages of life through which they
pass. Hence, concerning any condition
which is yet untried, we conjecture with
much uncertainty. In imagination, we
carry our present wants, inclinations, and
sentiments3 into the state of life to which
we aspire. But no sooner have we en-
tered on it, than our sentiments and incli-
nations change. New wants and desires
arise; new objeAs are required to gratify

P ' them;

S E R M. them; and by consequence our old diffa-

C- ~tisfadcion returns, and the void, which was

to have been filled, remains as great as it
was before.

But, next, supposing our knowledge of

ourselves sufficient to dired us in the
choice of happiness, yet fiill we are liable
to err, from our ignorance of the con-
nections which subsist between our own
condition and that of others. No indivi-
dual can be happy, unless the circum-
stances of those around him be so ad-
juiced as to conspire with his interest. For,
in human society, no happiness or mise-
ry flands unconnected and independent.
Our fortunes are interwoven by threads
innumerable. We touch one another on
all tides. One man's misfortune or fuc-
cess, his wisdom or his folly, often, by
its consequences, reaches through multi-
tudes. Such a system is far too compli-
cated for our arrangement. It requires
adjustments beyond our skill and power.
It is a chaos of events, into which our
eye cannot pierce.; and is capable of re-

gulation,

gulation, only by him who perceives at one s ER MI.
glance the relation of each to all. -

Farther, As we are ignorant of the

events which will arise from the combi-
nation of our circumstances with those of
others, so we are equally ignorant of the
influence which the present tranfadions of
our life may have upon those which are
future. The important question is not,
What is good for a man one day; but
what is good for him all the days of his
life ? Not, what will yield him a few
scattered pleasures ; but what will render
his life happy on the whole amount ?
And is he able to answer that queflion,
who knoweth not what one day may bring
forth; who cannot tell, whether the e-
vents of it may not branch out into con-
sequences, which will assume a diretion
quite opposite to that in which they set
forth, and spread themselves over all his
life to come ? There is not any present
moment that is unconnected with some
future one. The life of every man is a
continued chain of incidents, each link

°f

s ER M. of which hangs upon the former. The

VIII.
-a-,- transition from cause to effect, from event

to event, is often carried on by secret
steps, which our foresight cannot divine,
and our sagacity is unable to trace. Evil
may, at some future period, bring forth
good; and good may bring forth evil,
both equally unexpeced. Had the Pa-
triarch, Joseph, continued to loiter under
his father's fond indulgence, he might
have lived an obscure and insignificant
life. From the pit and the prison, arose
the incidents which made him the ruler
of Egypt, and the saviour of his father's
house.

Lafily, Supposing every other incapa-

city to be removed, our ignorance of the
dangers to which our spiritual state is
exposed, would disqualify us for judging
soundly concerning our true happiness.
Higher interests, than those of the present
world, are now depending. All that is
done or suffered by us here, ultimately
refers to that immortalworld, for which
good men are trained up, under the care

of

of an Almighty Parent. We are as in- s E R M.
competent judges of the measures necef- VI.
fary to be pursued for this end, as children
are, of the proper conduEt to be held in
their education. We foresee the dangers
of our spiritual, flill less than we do those
of our natural iRate; because we are less
attentive to trace them. We are still more
exposed to vice than to misery; because
the confidence which we place in our vir-
tue, is yet worse founded than that which
we place in our wisdom. Can you esteem
him prosperous, who is raised to a fitua-
tion which flatters his passions, but which
corrupts his principles, disorders his tem-
per, and, finally, oversets his virtue ? In
the ardour of pursuit, how little are these
effets forefcen ? And yet, how often are
they accomplished, by a change of condi-
tion ? Latent corruptions are called forth ;
feeds of guilt are quickened into life; a
growth of crimes arises, which, had it not
been for the fatal culture of prosperity,
would never have seen the light. How
often is man, boafiful as he is of reason,

merely

s E R M. merely the creature of his fortune ; form-

VII.
-~- ed, and moulded, by the incidents of his

life ?---Hazael, when yet a private man,
detested the thoughts of cruelty. Thouz
Jhalt flay the young men with the sword,
Laid the Prophet: Thou Jfalt dafhthe chil-
dren, and rip up the women with child. Is
thy servant a dog, replied Hazael, that he
Jfould d tlhefe things ? But no sooner was
he clothed with the coveted purple, than
it seemed to taint his nature. He com-
mitted the crimes of which, at a distance,
he believed himfelfincapable; and became
the bloody tyrant, whose charaIter his foul
once abhorred .

SucH then at present is man ; thus

incapable of pronouncing with certainty
concerning his own good or evil. Of
futurity he discerns little; and even that
little he fees through a cloud. Ignorant
of the alteration which his sentiments and
desires will undergo from new fituati-
ons in life; ignorant of the confequen-

* 2 Kings viii. 12, 13.

ces

ces which will follow from the combinati- S ra R M.
on of his circumstances with those of others TV
around him; ignorant of the influence
which the present may have on the future
events of his life; ignorant of the effedt
which a change of condition may produce,
on his moral character, and his eternal in-
terefis ; How can he know what is good
for him all the days of his vain life, which
de fpendeth as a jhadow? 2

Instead of only lamenting this ignorance,

let us, in the last place, confider how it
ought to be improved; what duties it
fuggefis, and what wife ends it was intend-
ed by Providence to promote.

I. LE r this doctrine teach us to pro-

ceed with caution and circumfpedion,
through a world where evil so frequent-
ly lurks under the form of good. To be
humble and modest in opinion, to be vigi-
lant and attentive in conduct, to difitruft
fair appearances, and to refirain rash de-
fires, are infirudions which the darkness
ps our present state should firongly in-

culcate.
7

s E R M. culcate. God hath appointed our fituati-

--v- on to be so ambiguous, in order both

to call forth the exertion of those intelli-
gent powers which he hath given us, and
to enforce our dependence on his gracious
aid. It is not' in man that walketh, to diret
his /feps. Surrounded with so many be-
wildering paths, among which the wisest
are ready to Pfray, how earnestly should
we implore, and how thankfully should
we receive, that divine illumination which
is promised in scripture to the pious and
the humble! 5The secret of the Lord is with
them that fear him. He will guide them
'with his council, He will teach them the
way that they jhould chufe. But what
must be the'fate of him, who, amidst
all the dangers attending human conduct,
neither looks up to Heaven for direction,
nor properly exerts that reason which
God hath given him ? If to the most
diligent enquirer, it proves so difficult a
tafl to diflinguifh true good, from those
fallacious appearances with which it is
ever blended, how should he discover it,

I who

who brings neither patience nor attention s E R I.1
to the search; who applies to no other --
counsellor than present pleasure, and, with
a rash and credulous mind, delivers himself
up to every suggestion of desire ?

This admonition I particularly dired to

those, who are in a period of life too
often charadcerized by forward prefump-
tion, and headlong pursuit. The self-
conceit of the young, is the great source
of those dangers to which they are ex-
posed ; and it is peculiarly unfortunate,
that the age which sands most in need of
the counsel of the wife, should be the
most prone to contemn it. Confident in
the opinions which they adopt, and in
the measures which they pursue, they
seem as if they underflood Solomon to
fay, not, Who knoweth, but, Who is igno-
rant of what is good for man all the days
of his life ? The bliss to be aimed at; is,
in their opinion, fully apparent. It is
not the danger of mitfake, but the failure
of success, which they dread. Adivity
to seize, not sagacity to discern, is the

only

s E R M. only requisite which they value.----How

< - 0long shall it be; ere the fate of your pre-

deceffors in the fame course, teach you
wisdom ? How long ihall the experience
of all ages, continue to lift its voice to
you in vain ? Beholding the ocean on
which you are embarked, covered with
wrecks, are not those fatal signals fuffi-
cient to adrnmomfli you of the hidden
rock ? If, in Paradise itself, there was a
tree which bare fruit fair to the eye, but
mortal in its effedts, how much more, in
this fallen state, may such deceiving ap-
pearances be expected to abound ! The
whole slate of Nature is now become a
scene of delusion to the sensual mind.
Hardly any thing is what it appears to
be: And what flatters most, is always
farthest from reality. There are voices
which sing around you; but whose strains
allure to ruin. There is a banquet spread,
where poison is in every dish. There is
a couch which invites you to repose; but
to slumber upon it, is death. In such a
situation, be not high-minded, but fear. Let

sobriety

sobriety temper your unwary ardour. Let s E R M.
modetfy check your rash presumption. Let _
wisdom be the offspring of refledtion now,
rather than the fruit of bitter experience
hereafter.

II. LET our ignorance of what is good

or evil, correct anxiety about worldly fuc-
cess. As rashness is the vice of youth, the
opposite extreme of immoderate care is the
vice of advancing years. The doctrine
which I have illufirated, is equally adapt-
ed for checking both. Since we are so of-
ten betrayed into evil, by the miitaken
pursuit of good, care and attention are
requisite, both in forming our choice, and
in conducting our pursuit; but since our
attention and care are liable to be so often
frustrated, they fould never be allowed to
deprive us of tranquillity.

The ignorance in which we are left con-

cerning good and evil, is not such as to
supersede prudence in conduEt: For wis-
dom is still found to excelfolly, as far as
light excelleth darkness. Burt it is that de-

gree

S E M. gree of uncertainty, which ought to ren-

v-' der us temperate in pursuit; which ought

to calm the perturbation of hope and
fear, and to cure the pain of anxiety,
Anxiety is the poison of human life. It
is the parent of many fins, and of more
miseries. In a world where every thing
is so doubtful; where you may succeed
in your wish, and be miserable; where
you may be disappointed, and be blest in
the disappointment ; what means this
restless stir and commotion of mind ? Can
your solicitude alter the course, or un-
ravel the intricacy of human events? Can
your curiosity pierce through the cloud
which the Supreme Being hath made im-
penetrable to mortal eye ?---To provide
against every apparent danger, by the em-
ployment of the most promising means,
is the office of wisdom. But at this point
wisdom stops. It commands you to re-
tire, after you have done all that was
incumbent on you, and to possess your
mind in peace. By going beyond this
point ; by giving yourselves up to immo-

derate

derate concern about unknown events, SE R M-
you can do nothing to advance your fuc- ~-
cess, and you do much to ruin your
peace. You plant within your breast the
thorn which is long to gall you. To the
vanity of life, you add a vexation of
spirit, which is wholly of your own cre-
ation, not of Divine appointment. For
the dubious goods of this world were
never designed by God to raise such eager
attachment. They were given to man fbr
his occasional refreshment, not for his
chief felicity. By setting an exceflive va-
lue upon objects which were intended
only for your secondary regard, you change
their nature. Seeking more Satisfadcion
from them than they are able to afford,
you receive less than they might give.
From a miflaken care to secure your hap-
piness, you bring upon yourselves certain
misery.

III. LET our ignorance of good and

evil, determine us to follow Providence,
and to resign ourselves to God. One of-

the

S E R M. the most important leflons which can be

given to man, is resignation to his Maker;
and nothing inculcates it more, than the
experience of his oWn inability to guide
himfelf.---You know not what is good for
you, in the future periods. of life. But
God perfectly knows it; and if you faith-
fully serve him, you have reason to be-
lieve that he will always consult it. Be-
fore him lies the whole succession of events,
which are to fill up your existence. It
is in his power, to arrange and model
them at his pleasure ; and so to adapt one'
thing to another, as to fulfil his promise
of making them all wiork together for good
totbl.o/e who love him. Here then, amidst
the agitations of desire, and the perplexi-
ties of doubt, is one fixed point of reft.
By this let us abide; and'difmifs. our
anxiety about things uncertain and un-
known. Acquaint yourfJlves with God, and
be at peace. Secure the one thing needsld.
Study to acquire an interest in the Divine
favour: And you may safely surrender
yourselves to the Divine adininiration.

When

When tempted to repine at your con- s E R M.

VIII.

dition, refle( how uncertain it is, whether - -
you should have been happier in any o-
ther. Remembring the vanity of many
of your former wishes, and the fallacy
which you have so often experienced in
your schemes of happiness, be thankful
that you are placed under a wiser dircc-
tion, than your own. Be not too parti-
cular in your petitions to Heaven, con-
ccrning your temporal interests. Suffer
God to govern the world according to
his own plan; and only pray, that he
would bellow what his unerring wisdom
fees to be best for you on the whole. In
a word, Commit your way untzo the Lord.
Triif in him and do good. Follow where-
ever his Providence leads; comply with
whatever his will requires; and leave all
the reft to him.

IV. LET our ignorance of what is good

for us in this life, prevent our taking any
unlawful Rep, in order to compass our
most favourite designs. Were the finner

Q bribed

s E R M. bribed with any certain and unqueftion-
'-y- able advantage; could the means which

he employs ensure his success, and could
that success ensure his comfort; he might
have some apology to offer for deviating
from the path of virtue. But the doc-
trine which I have illustrated, deprives
-him of all excuse, and places his folly in
-the most firiking light. He climbs the
-seep rock, and treads on the edge of a
precipice, in order to catch a shadow.
He has cause to dread, not only the un-
certainty of the event which he wishes to
accomplish, but the nature also of that
event when accomplished. He is not only
liable to that disappointment of success,
which so often frustrates all the designs of
men; but liable to a disappointment flill
more cruel, that of being successful and
miserable at once. Riches and pleasures
are the chief temptations to criminal
deeds, yet those riches, when obtained,
may very possibly overwhelm him with
unforeseen miseries. Those pleasures may
cut short his health and life. And is it

for

for such doubtful and fallacious rewards, s E R M.

VIII.

that the deceiver fills his mouth with lies,
the friend betrays his benefactor, the apof-
tate renounces his faith, and the affafin
covers himself with blood ?

Whoever commits a crime, incurs a

certain evil, for a most uncertain good.
Whavt will turn to his advantage in the
course of this life he cannot with any as-
furance know. But this he may know,
with full certainty, that by breaking the
Divine commandments he will draw up-
on his head that displeasure of the Al-
mighty, which shall crush him for ever.
The advantages of this world, even when
innocently gained, are uncertain blef-
sings; when obtained by criminal means,
they carry a curse in their bosom. To
the virtuous, they are often no more than
chaff. To the guilty, they are always
poison.

V. LET our imperfect knowledge of

what is good or evil, attach us the more
to those few things, concerning which

Q 2 there

s ElR M. there can be no doubt of their being
'-v--? truly good. Of temporal things which

belong to this class, the catalogue, it must
'be confessed, is finall. Perhaps the chief
worldly good we should wish to enjoy, is
a found mind in a found body. Health
and peace, a moderate fortune, and a few
friends, fum up all the undoubted articles
of temporal felicity. Wife was the man
who addressed this prayer to God; Re-
movefar from me vaniiy and lies. Give me
neither poverty nor riches. Feed me with
food convenient for me. LeJl I be fill and
deny thee, and fay who is the Lord ? or left
I be poor andfleal, and take the name of my
God in vain' He whose wishes, rcfpet-
ing the possessions of this world, are the
moif reasonable and bounded, is likely
to lead the safest, and for that reason,
the mot desirable life. By aspiring too
high, we frequently miss the' happiness,
which, by a less ambitious aim, we' might
have gained. High happiness on earth is
rather a picture which the imagination

* Prov. xxx. 8, 9.

forms,

forms, than a reality which man is allowed s E R M.

VIII.
to pofrc s.

But with regard to spiritual felicity, we

are not confined to such humble views.
Clear and determinate objects are pro-
posed to our pursuit; and full scope is
given to the most ardent desire. The for-
givenes of our fins, and the afiiflance of
God's holy grace to guide our life ; the
improvement of our minds, il knowledge
and wilfdom, in piety and virtue; the
protection anl favour of the great Father
of all, of the blessed Redeemer of man-
kind, and of the Spirit of fandiification
and comfort; there are objecs, in the
pursuit of which there is no room for
hesitation and difiruft, nor any ground for
the question in my Text, l/ho knoweth
what is good for nman ? Had Providence
spread an equal obscurity over happiness
of every kind, we might have had some
reason to complain of the vanity of our
condition. But we are not left to so
hard a fate. The Son of God hath de-
cfended from heaven, to be the Light of

the

s E R M. the world. He hath removed that veil

VII. -^L which covered true bliss from the search of

wandering mortals, and hath taught them
the way which leads to life; Worldly en-
joyments are shown to be hollow and de-
ceitful, with an express intention to direfi
their affections towards those which are
spiritual. The fame discoveries which di-
minifh the value of the one, serve to in
crease that of the other. Finally,

VI. LET our ignorance of what is go,,'i

or evil here below, lead our thoughts a.c;
desires to a better world. I have er-.:.
voured to vindicate the wisdom of Prr -
dence, by showing the many useful ;.,r-
poses which this ignorance at present pro-
motes. It serves to check presumption
and rashness, and to enforce a diligent
exertion of our rational powers, joined
with an humble dependence on Divine aid.
It moderates eager paflions refpeding
worldly success. It inculcates refignati-
on to the disposal of a Providence which
is much wiser than man. It refirains us

I from

from employing unlawful means, in order s E R i,
to compass our most favourite designs. -.
It tends to attach us more closely to those
things which are unquestionably good. It
is therefore such a degree of ignorance
as suits the present circumfiances of man
better than more complete information
concerning good and evil.

At the fame time, the causes which

render this obscurity necessary, too plainly
indicate a broken and corrupted slate of
human nature. They Ihow this life to be
a state of trial. They suggest the ideas of
a land of pilgrimage, not of the house of
reft. Low. minded and base is he, who
aspires to no higher portion; who could
be satisfied to spend his whole exifience,
in chafing those treacherous appearances
of good, which so often mock his pursuit.
What shadow can be more vain than the
life of the greatest part of mankind ? Of
all that eager and bufiling crowd which
we behold on the earth, how few discover
the path of true happiness ? How few can
we find, whose activity has not been mif-

employed,

s E R M. employed, and whose course terminates

VII'.
-v- not in confessions of disappointments ? Is

this the slate, are there the habitations,
to which a rational spirit, with all its
high hopes, and great capacities, is to
be limited for ever?-Let us bless that
God who hath set nobler profpeó2s be-
fore us; who, by the death and refurrec-
tion of his son Jesus Christ, hath begotten
us to the lively hope of an inheritance in-
corruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not
away, reJerved in the heavens. Let us
Show ourselves worthy of such a hope, by
setting our affteions upon the things above,
not upzon things on the earth. Let us walk
by faith and not by fight; and, amidst
the obscurity of this faint and dubious
twilight, console ourselves with the ex-
pedation of a brighter day which is soon
to open. This earth is the land of fha-
dows. But we hope to pass into the
world of realities; where the proper ob-
jects of human desire ihall be displayed;
where the substance of that bliPs shall be
found, whose image only we now pursue

where

where no fallacious hopes flall any longer S . R M.
allure, no £miling appearances shall betray, ----
no insidious joys ihall fling ; but where
truth shall be inseparably united with plea-
sure; and, the miss which hang over this
preliminary state being dissipated, the per-
sect knowledge of good shall lead to the full
enjoyment of it for ever.

S E R-

# SERMON IX. On RELIGIOUS RETIREMENT. PSALM. iv. 4. Commune with your own heart, upon your bed, and be still.

[ 234 ]

S E R M- O N X.
On RELI GIOUS RETIREM NT.

PSALM. iv. 4.
Commune with your own heart, upon your

bed, and be fill.
SERM.

X V U C H communing with themselves

there has always been among mankind;
though frequently, God knows, to no
purpose, or to a purpose worse than
none. Could we discover the employ-
ments of men, in retirement, how often
should we find their thoughts occupied
with fubjedts, which they would be a-
shamed to own ? What a large fiare
have ambition and avarice, at some times
the grossest passions, and at other times the
meanest trifles,, in their solitary musings?

They

They carry the world, with all its vices, s E M.
into their retreat; and may be said to dwell A
in tie midit of the world, even when they
seem to be alone.

This, surely, is not that fort of com-

muning which the Pfalmifr recommends.
For this is not properly commnuning with
our heart, but rather holding secret in-
tercourfe with the world. What the
Psalmist means to recommend, is religi-
ous recollection; that exercise of thought
which is connected with the precept given
in the preceding words, to Jland in awe,
and fin not. It is to commuue with our-
selves, under the character of spiritual
and immortal beings ; and to ponder those
paths of our feet, which are leading us to
eternity. I shall, in the first place, ihow
the advantages of such serious retirement
and meditation: and fiall, in the second
place, point out some of the principal
fubjeds which ought to employ us in our
retreat.

The advantages, of retiring from the
world, to commune with our heart, will be

found

s E R M. found to be great, whether we regard our

IX. .---happiness in this world, or our preparation

for the world to come.

LET us confider them, first, with re-

speCt to our happiness in this world. it
will readily occur to you, that an entire
retreat from worldly affairs, is not what
rligion requires; nor does it even enjoin
a great retreat from them. Some fiations
of life would not permit this ; and there
are few fiations which render it neceflary.
The chief field, both of the duty and of
the improvement of man, lies in active
life. By the graces and virtues which he
exercises amidst his fellow-creatures, he
is trained up for heaven. A total retreat
from the world, is so far from being, as
the Roman Catholic Church holds, the
perfection of religion, that, some particu-
lar cafes excepted, it is no other than the
abuse of it,

But, though entire retreat would lay

us aside from the part for which Provi-
dence chiefly intended us, it is certain,

that,

that, without occasional retreat, we must s I E 1/ I.

lx.

act that part very ill. There will be
neither confiltency in the conduct, nor
dignity in the charader, of one who sets
apart no flare of his time for meditation
and reflection. In the heat and bufile of
life, while passion is every moment throw-
ing false colourson the objects around us,
nothing can be viewed in a just light. If
you wish that Reason should exert heP
native power, you must ftep aiide from
the crowd, into the cool and silent shade.
It is there that, with fober and fleady eye,
the examines what is good or ill, what is
wife or foolish, in human conduct ; she
looks back on the pafR, _he looks forward
to :the future; and forms plans, not for
the present moment only, but for the
whole ds life. How should that man dif-
charge any part of his duty aright, who
never suffers his palfions to cool ? And
how ihould his passions cool, who is en-
gaged without interruption, in the tu-
mult of the world-? This incessant fir
may be called, the perpetual drunken-

ness

E I M. ness of life. It raises that eager fermen-
IX -^_^ tation of spirit, which will be ever fend-

ing forth the dangerous fumes of rahfnefs
and folly. Whereas he who mingles reli-
gious retreat with worldly affairs, remains
calm, and master of himself. He is not
whirled round, and rendered giddy, by
the agitation of the world ; but, from that
sacred retirement, in which he has been
conversant among higher objects, comes
forth into the world with manly tranquil-
lity, fortified by principles which he has
formed, and prepared for whatever may
befal.

As he who is unacquainted with re-

treat, cannot fuflain any charader with
propriety, so neither can he enjoy the
world with any advantage. Of the two
classes of men who are most apt to be ne-
gligent of this duty, the men of pleasure,
and the men of business, it is hard to fay
which susser most, in point of enjoy-
ment, from that negled. To the former
every moment appears to be loft, which
partakes not of the vivacity of amusement.

To

To connea one plan of gaiety with ano- s ER M.
ther, is their sole Pfudy; till, in a very 'v---
ihort time, nothing remain but to tread
the fame beaten round; to enjoy what
they have already enjoyed, and to fee
what they have often seen. Pleasures
thus drawn to the dregs, become vapid
and tasteless. What might have pleated
long, if enjoyed with temperance, and
mingled with retirement, being devoured
with such eager hafle, speedily surfeits
and difgufls. Hence, there are the per-
sons, who, after having run through a
rapid course of pleasure, after having
glittered for a few years in the foremost
line of public amusements, are the most
apt to fly at last to a melancholy retreat;
not led by religion or reason, but driven
by disappointed hopes, and exhausted fpi-
rits, to the pensive conclusion, that all
is vanity.

If uninterrupted intercourse with the

world wears out .the man of pleasure, it
no less opprefTes the man of bufines and
ambition. The firongeft spirits must at

length

SE R M. length fink under it. The happiest temr
---->, per must be toured by incessant returns

of the opposition, the inconflancy, and
treachery of men. For he who lives al-
ways in the bufle of the world, lives in
a perpetual warfare. Here an enemy en-
counters; there, a rival supplants him.
The ingratitude of a friend flings him
this hour; and the pride of a fuperiour
wounds him the next. In vain he flies
for relief to trifling amusements. These
may afford a temporary opiate to care;
but they communicate no strength to the
mind. On the contrary, they leave it more
soft and defenceless, when moleflations and
injuries renew their attack.

Let him whowifhes for an effettual cure

to all the wounds which the world -can
.inflit, retire from intercourse with men,
to intercourse with God, When he en-
ters into his closet, .and shuts the door,
let. him shut out, at the fame time, all
intrusion of worldly care; and dwella-
mong i'objets divine and immortal.----
,Those fair profpeas of order and peace,

' - Sfhall

ihall there open to his view, which form s E. M.
the most perseet contrast to the confusion -v-
and misery of this earth. The celestial
inhabitants quarrel not, among them
there is neither ingratitude, nor envy,
nor tumult. Men may harass one ano-
ther; but in the kingdom of God, con-
cord and tranquillity reign for ever.----
From such objects, there beams upon the
mind of the pious man, a pure and en-
livening light ; there is diffused over his
heart, a holy calm. His agitated spirit
re-affumes its firmness, and regains its
peace. The world finks in its import-
ance ; and the load of mortality and
misery loses almost all its weight. The
green pajftres open, and the Jill waters
flow around him, beside which the Shep-
herd of Israel guides his flock. The dif-
turbances and alarms, so formidable to
those who are engaged in the tumults of
the world, seem to him only like thunder
rolling afar off; like the noise of distant
waters, whose found he hears, whose
course he traces, but whose waves touch

R him

s E R M. him not.---As religious retirement is thus

Ix.
--. evidently conducive to our happiness in

this life, so.

IN the second place, it is absolutely

neceflary in order to prepare us for the
life to come. He who lives always in
public, cannot live to his own foul. The
world lieth in wvickednoefs; and with good
reason the Christian is exhorted, not to
be conformed to it, but transformed by the
renewing of his mind. Our conversation
and intercourse with the world, is, in
several refpeds, an education for vice.
From our earliefr youth, we are accuflom -
ed to hear riches and honours extolled as
the chief possessions of man and pro-
posed to us, as the principal aim of our
future pursuits. We are trained up, to
look with admiration on the flattering
marks of distinction which they bestow.
In quest of those fancied blessings, we fee
the multitude around us eager and ser-
vent. Principles of duty we may, per-
haps, hear sometimes inculcated; but

we

we seldom behold them brought into SERM.

IX.

competition with worldly profit. The ,_
soft names, and plausible colours, under
which deceit, feifuality, and revenge,
are prefcnted to us in common discourse,
weaken, by degrees, our natural sense of
the diftindion between good and evil.
We often meet with crimes authorized
by high examples, and rewarded with
the careifes and finiles of the world. We
discover, perhaps, at lait, that those
whom we are taught to reverence, and
to regard as our patterns of condut,
aa upon principles no purer than those
of others.---Thus breathing habitually a
contagious air, how certain is our ruin,
unless we sometimes retreat from this
pestilential region, and seek for proper
corredcives of the disorders which are
contracted there ? Religious retirement
both abates the disease, and furnishes the
remedy. It lessens the corrupting influ-
ence of the world; and it gives oppor-
tunity for better principles to exert their
power. He who is accustomed to turn

R 2 aside,

S E R M. aside, and commune with himself, will

Ix. -v-' so-metimes at least, hear of truths which

the multitude do not tell him. A more
found instruCtor will lift his voice, and
awaken withina the heart those latent fug-
geftions, which the world had overpow-
ered and suppressed.

The adts of prayer and devotion, the

exercises of faith and repentance, all the
great and peculiar duties of the religion
of Christ, necessarily suppose retirement
from the world. This was one chief end
of their institution, that they might be
the means of occasionally sequestering us
from that great scene of vice and folly,
the continued pretence of which is so
hurtful. Solitude is the hallowed ground
which religion hath, in every age, chosen
for her own. There her inspiration is
felt, and her secret mysteries elevate the
foul. There, falls the tear of contrition;
there, rites towards heaven the fight of the
heart ; there, melts the foul with all the
tenderness of devotion, and pours itself
forth, before him who made, and him

who

who redeemed it. Howcan any one, who s E R M.

IX.

is unacquainted with such employments ---
of mind, be fit for heaven ? If heaven be
the habitation of pure affections, and of
intellectual joy, can such a state be re-
lifhed by him who is always immersed a-
mong sensible objeCts, and has never ac-
quired any tafie for the pleasures of the
understanding, and the heart ?

The great and the worthy, the pious and
the virtuous, have ever been addicted
to serious retirement. It is the charac-
teriflic of little and frivolous minds, to
be wholly occupied with the vulgar ob-
jeds of life. These fill up their de-
fires, and supply all the entertainment
which their coarse apprehensions can re-
lifh. But a more refined and enlarged
mind leaves the world behind it, feels a
call for higher pleasures, and seeks them
in retreat. The man of public spirit has
recourse to it, in order to form plans for
general good, the man of genius, in or-
der to dwell on his favourite themes
the philosopher, to pursue his discoveries;

the

s E R M. the faint, to improve hinmfelf in grace.

Ix
v----' Isaac went out to meditate in the fields, at

the evening tide. David, amidst all the
splendour of royalty, often bears witness
both to the pleasure which he received,
and to the benefit which he reaped, from
devout meditation. 1 communed with my
own beari, and my spirit made diligentfearch.
I thought on my ways, and turned my feet
znto God's testimonies. In the multitude of
thoughts within me, his comforts delight tmy
fodl. Our blessed Saviour himself, though
of all who ever lived on earth he needed
least the affiltance of religious retreat, yet,
by his frequent practice, has done it fig-
nal honour. Often were the garden, the
mountain, and the silence of the night,
fought by him, for intercourse with hea-
ven. When he hadfezt the multitude away,
he went up into a mountain, apart, to pray.

The advantages of religious retirement

will still more clearly appear, by confider-
ing, as was proposed, in the next place,
some of those great objeats which should

there

there employ our thoughts. I shall men- s MNI.

Ix.

tion only three, which are of the most ,----r
plain and acknowledged importance ; God,
the world, and our own character.

I. WHEN yOU retire from the world,

,conminzie 7with your hearts concerning God.
Impressions of Deity, besides their being
the principle of what is ftriclly termed
religion, are the great support of all moral
Sentiment, and virtuous conduct, among
men. But with what difficulty are they
preserved in any due degree of force, a-
midfi the affairs and avocations of the
world ? While the crowd of surrounding
objects is ev.er rushing on the imagina-
tion, and occupying the senses and the
heart, what is not only absent from view,
but, by its nature, invisible, is apt to
vanish like a shadow. Hence it is given
as the charater of wicked men, in scrip-
ture, that they are ,without God in the
world. They deny not, perhaps, that he
does exifl ; but it is the fame to them as
though he did not: For having loft him

from

s E R M. froim their view, his exiflence has no ei-

IX.
'- _- fed: on their condu&t. If, at any time,

the idea of God rife in their mind, it
rites like a terrifying phantom which they
haften to expel; and which they gladly
fancy to be unreal, because they fee it
make so little impression on others around
them.

Let him who retires to serious medi-

tation, begin with impressing deeply on
his mind this important truth, That there
is undoubtedly aSupreme Governour, who
presides over the universe. But let him
not imagine, that to commune with his
heart concerning God, is to search into
the mysteries of the Divine Nature, or to
attempt a discovery of the whole plan of
Providence. Long enough he may be-
wilder himself in this maze, without
making any proficiency in the practical
knowledge of God. Shall he who knows
so little of his own nature, or of the na-
ture of the objects with which he is fur-
rounded, expect to comprehend the Be-
ing who made him ? To commune with

ourselves,

ourselves, to any useful purpose, onthis sub- s E R M.
jeet, is to bring home to our fouls the in- -v-
ternal, authoritative sense of God, as of a
Sovereign and a Father. It is not to fpecu-
late about what is myfierious in his essence,
but to contemplate what is displayed of his
perfeCtions. It is to realize the pretence
of the Supreme Being, so as to produce the
most profound veneration; and to awaken
the earnest desire of as near an approach as
our nature will permit, to that great Foun-
tain of happiness and life.

After this manner was that holy man

asseted, who uttered this ardent wish ',
O that I knew where I mightfind him, that
I might come even to his feat !--If with
such a frame of mind you seek after God,
be assured that he is not far from you;
and that, though you are not permitted
as yet to come to his feat, you may, at
least, reach the footstool of his throne, and
touch the robe that covers him. In the
midlt of your solitary amusements lift your
eyes, and behold all nature full of God.

* Job. xxii. 3.

Look

S E R M. Look up to the firmament, and admire

IX.
-v-~< his glory. Look round on the earth, and

observe his prefenc every where display-
ed. If the gay landscape or the fruitful
field, present themselves to your eye, be-
hold him frmiling upon his works. If the
mountain raise its lofty head, or the ex-
panfe of waters roll its tide before you,
contemplate in those great and solemn
objects, his power and majesty. Nature,
in all its diversities, is a varied manifefta-
tion of the Deity. If you were to take the
s.ings of the morning, and dwell in the ut-
termoJi parts of the Jea, even there you
would find him. For in him you live and
Pmove. He fills and animates all space. In
the barren wilderness, as in the peopled
region, you can trace his footsteps, and
in the deepest solitude, you may hear a
voice which teflifies of him.

Him, indeed, you are never to con-

found with the workmanship of his
hands. Nature, in its most awful or most
pleasing scenes, exhibits no more than
iifferent forms of inanimate matter. But

Ox'

on these dead forms is impressed the glory S E R M.
of a living Spirit. The beauty, or the
greatness, which appears in them, flows
from the fountain of all greatness and
beauty; in him it centers; of his perfec-
tion it reflects an image; and towards
him should lead your view.---In converf-
ing with a fellow-creature on earth, it is
not with his body we converse, though it
is his body only which we fee. From hi,
words and actions we conceive his mind;
with his mind, though invisible, we hold
correspondence, and direct towards this
Spiritual Effence,our affection and regard.
In like manner, though here we behold
no more of God than what his works dif-
play, yet, in those displays, we are capable
of perceiving the Universal Spirit, and of
holding correspondence with this unseen
Being, in veneration, gratitude, and love.

It is thus that a pious man, in his re-

tired meditations, viewing natural objects
with a spiritual eye, communes with his
heart concerning God. He walks among
she various scenes of Nature, as within

the

s E R M. Look up to the firmament, and admire

IX.
- --- his glory. Look round on the earth, and

observe his prefenje every where display-
ed. If the gay landscape or the fruitful
field, present themselves to your eye, be-
hold him smiling upon his works. If the
mountain raise its lofty head, or the ex-
panfe of waters roll its tide before you,
contemplate in those great and solemn
objeacs, his power and majesty. Nature,
in all its diversities, is a varied manifefta-
tion of the Deity. If you were to take the
iwings of the morning, and dwell in the ut -
term of parts of the sea, even there you
would find him. For in him you live and
move. He fills and animates all space. In
the barren wilderness, as in the peopled
region, you can trace his footsteps; and
in the deepest solitude, you may hear a
voice which teflifies of him.

Him, indeed, you are never to con-

found with the workmanship of his
hands. Nature, in its most awful or most
pleasing scenes, exhibits no more than
different forms of inanimate matter. But

QH.~

on these dead forms is impressed the glory $ ER M.
of a living Spirit. The beauty, or the --
greatness, which appears in them, flows
from the fountain of all greatness and
beauty; in him it centers; of his perfec-
tion it reflets an image; and towards
him should lead your view.---In converf-
ing with a fellow-creature on earth, it is
not with his body we converse, though it
is his body only which we fee. From his
words and actions we conceive his mind;
with his mind, though invisible, we hold
correspondence, and direct towards this
Spiritual Effence,our affeCion and regard.
In like manner, though here we behold
no more of God than what his works dif-
play, yet, in those displays, we are capable
of perceiving the Universal Spirit, and of
holding correspondence with this unseen
Being, in veneration, gratitude, and love.

It is thus that a pious man, in his re-

tired meditations, viewing natural objects
with a spiritual eye, communes with his
heart concerning God. He walks among
the various scenes of Nature, as within

the

s E R M. the precincs of a great temple, in the

Ix.
- ,---- habitual exercise of devotion. To those

discoveries of the Supreme Being in his
works, let him apply the comment of
his word. From the world of Nature, let
him follow God into the world of Grace.
When conduced from the outer courts,
into this inmost fanduary of the temple,
he shall feel himself brought still more
nigh to the Sacred Presence. In the great
plan of Divine Wisdom, for extirpating
the evils produced by fin, he shall receive
the interpretation of many of the hidden
myfieries of Nature. He shall discover in
Christ, the Deity made, in some degree,
visible to sense. In the beneficent works
which he performed, and the gracious
undertaking which he accomplished, he
ihall behold the brigrhnefs of the Father's
glory, and shall discern it to be full of
grace and truth.---From the sacred retreat,
wherein his thoughts have been thus
employed, he returns to the world like a
fipcriour being. He carries into active
life, those pure and elevating sentiments,

7 to

to which the giddy crowd are firangers. s E R M.
A certain odour of fandity remains upon A
his mind, which for a while at leafi, will
repel the contagion of the world.

II. COMMUNE with your heart, in the

season of retirement, concerning the world.
The world is the great deceiver, whose
fallacious arts it highly imports us to de-
tect. But in the midit of its pleasures and
pursuits, the detection is impossible. We
trade, as within an inchanted circle, where
nothing appears as it truly is. It is only
in retreat, that the charm can be broken.
Did men employ that retreat, not in car-
rying on the delusion which the world has
begun, not in forming plans of imaginary
bliss, but in fubjedcing the happiness which
the world affords to a firid difculTion,
the spell would dissolve; and in the room
of the unreal profpe6ts, which had long a-
mused them, the nakedness of the world
would appear.

Prepare yourselves, then, to encounter
the light of truth. Resolve rather to bear

the

S E R M. the disappointment of some flattering

ix.
'- hopes, than to wander for ever in the

paradise of fools. While others meditate
in secret on the means of attaining world-
ly success, let it be your employment to
scrutinize that success itself. Calculate
fairly to what it amounts; and whether
you are not losers on the whole, by your
apparent gain. Look back, for this pur-
pose (cn your past life. Trace it from
your earliest youth; and put the queflion
to yourselves, what have been its hap-
pieft periods? were they those of quiet
and innocence, or those of ambition and
intrigue ? Has your real enjoyment uni-
formly kept pace with what the world
calls prosperity ? As you advanced in
wealth or fiation, did you proportionally
advance in happiness ? Has success, al-
most in any one infiance, fulfilled your
expectations ? Where you reckoned upon
most enjoyment, have you not often found
least ? Wherever guilt entered into your
pleasures, did not its fling long remain,
after the gratification vsas pat ?-Such

7 queflion

quetfions as these, candidly answered, s E R M.

IX.

would in a great measure unmaik the
world. They would expose the vanity of
its pretensions; and convince you, that
there are other springs than those which
the world affords, to which you must apply
for happiness.

While you commune with your heart

concerning what the world now is, con-
fider also what it will one day appear to
be. Anticipate the awful moment of your
bidding it an eternal farewell. Think,
what reflections shall most probably arise,
when you are quitting the field, and look-
ing back on the scene of action. In what
light will your closing eyes contemplate
those vanities which now hine so bright,
and those interests which now swell into
such high importance? What part will
you then with to have acted? What shall
then appear momentous, what trifling
in human conduCt ?---Let the fober senti-
ments which such anticipations suggest,
temper now your misplaced ardour. Let
the last conclusions which you Ihall form,

enter

s E R M. enter into the present eflimate, which you

H'_, make of the world and of life.

Moreover, in communing with your-

selves concerning the world, contemplate
it as subjet6 to the Divine dominion. The
greater part of men behold nothing more
than the rotation of human affairs. They
fee a great crowd ever in motion; the
fortunes of men alternately rising and
falling; virtue often difireffed, and pro-
fperity appearing to be the purchase of
worldly wisdom. But this is only the
outside of things. Behind the curtain,
there is a far greater scene, which is be-
held by none but the retired, religious
lpedator. Lift up that curtain, when
vou are alone with God. View the world
with the eye of a Christian; and you
illall fee, that while man's heart devifeth
Mis wina, it is the Lord who direceth his
.,lps. You shall fee, that however men
appear to move and ad after their own
pleasure, they are, nevertheless, retained
in secret bonds by the Almighty, and all
their operations, rendered subservient to

the

the ends of his moral government. You s E R M.
shall behold him obliging the wrath of A
man to praire him; punishing the finner
by means of his own iniquities ; from
the trials of the righteous, bringing forth
their reward; and to a state of teeming
universal confusion, preparing the wisest
and most equitable issue. While the
faJhion of this world is passed fast away,
you thall discern the glory of another
rising to succeed it. You shall behold
all human events, our griefs and our
joys, our love and our hatred, our charac-
ter and memory, absorbed in the ocean
of eternity; and no trace of our present
existence left, except its being for ever well
with the righteous, and ill with the wzicked.
.--Such a view of the world, frequent-
ly presented to our minds, could not fail to
enforce those solemn conclusions; There is
no wisdom, nor counsel, againjl the Lord.
Fear God, and keep his commandments; for
this is the whole of man. Wlhat is a man pro-
fited, if he Jhall gain the whole world, and
lofl his own foul ?

S III. CoM-

S. E R M. 1il. COMMUNE -with your heart, corn-
^-»-v-- cerning yourselves, and your real charac-

ter. To acquire a thorough knowledge of
ourselves, is an attainment no less difficult
than important. For men are generally
unwilling to fee their own imperfections;
and when they are willing to enquire into
them, their felf-love imposes on their
judgment. Their intercourse with one
another assisis the delusion to which, of
themselves, they are prone. For the or-
dinary commerce of the world is a com-
merce of flattery and falsehood ; where
reciprocally they deceive, and are deceiv-
ed ; where every one appears under an as-
fumed form, professes esteem which he
does not feel, and beflows praise in order
to receive it. It is only in retreat, where
those false semblances disappear, and
those flattering voices are silent, - that a
man can learn to think soberly of .im'lf
and as he ought to think.

It has been said, that there are three

characters which every man sustains;
and these often extremely different from

one

one another: One, which he possesses in s E R M.
his own opinion ; another, which he car- - -
ries in the estimation of the world; and
athird, which he bears in the judgment
of God. It is only the lafi which afcer-
tains what he really is.---Whether the cha-
rader which the world forms of you, be
above or below the truth, it imports you
not much to know. But it is of eternal
consequence, that the character which you
possess in your own eyes, be formed up-
on that which you bear in the fight of
God. In order to try it by this great stand-
ard, you mutl lay aside, as much as poffi-
ble, all partiality to yourselves; and in
the season of retirement, explore your
heart with such accurate scrutiny, as may
bring your hidden defets to light.

Enquire for this purpose, whether you

be not conscious, that the fair opinion
which the world entertains of you, is
founded on their partial knowledge, both
of your abilities and your virtues ? Would
you be willing that all your actions should
be publickly canvassed ? Could you bear

S 2 to

s R RM. to have your thoughts laid open? Are

lx.
,--~ there no parts of your life which you

would be uneasy if an enemy could dif-
cover ? In what light, then, must there
appear to God ? When you have kept
free of vice, has your innocence proceed-
ed from purity of principle, or from
worldly motives ? Rifes there no envy or
malignity within you, when you compare
your own condition with that of others ?
Have you been as solicitous to regulate
your heart, as to preserve your manners
from reproach ? Professing yourselves to
be Christians, has the Spirit of Christ ap-
peared in your conduct? Declaring that
you hope for immortality, has that hope
surmounted undue attachments to the
present life ?

Such investigation as this, seriously pur-

sued, might produce to every man many
dicfoveries of himself; discoveries not
pleating, perhaps, to vanity, but salutary
and useful. For he can be only a flat-
terer, but no true friend to himself, who
a-ims not at knowing his own defedts, as

well

well as virtues. By imposing on the world, s El i.`
he may carry on some plan of fancied pro-
fit; but by imposing on his heart, what
can he propose to gain? He Jeedeth of
afJhes : A deceived heart bath turned him
njtide, that he cannot deliver his ijul, nor
fay, Is there not a lie in my right hand' ?

THUS I have set before you, rome of

those great objeCts, which ought to em-
ploy your meditation in religious retire-
ment. I have endeavoured to introduce
you into a proper intercourse with your
heart, concerning God, the world, and
your own chara6cer. Let this intercourse
terminate in fixing the principles of your
future conduct. Let it serve to introduce
consistency into your life. Nothing can
be more wavering and disjointed, than
the behaviour of those who are wholly
men of the world, and have never been
inured to commune with themselves.
Dissipation is a more frequent cause of
their ruin, than determined impiety. It

. Iia. xliv. o0.

iS

S E R M, is not so much because they have adopted

bad principles, as because they have never
attended to principles of any kind, that
their lives are so full of incoherence and
diforder.--You hover on the borders of fin
and duty. One day, you read the scrip-
tures, you hear religious discourses, and
form good resolutions. Next day, you
plunge into the world, and forget the fe-
rious impression, as if it had been never
made. The impression is again renewed,
and again effaced; and in this circle your
life revolves. is such conduct worthy of
creatures endowed with intelligent powers?
Shall the close of life overtake you, before
you have determined how to live? Shall
the day never come, that is to find you
tfeady in your views, decided in your
plans, and engaged in a course of action
which your mind approves ?---If you wish
that day ever to arrive, retirement and
meditation must first bring you home to
yourselves, from the dissipation in which
you are now scattered; must teach you
to fix such aims, and to lay down such

rules

rules of condud, as are suitable to rational s E R M.
and immortal beings. Then will your
character become uniform and refpeEtable.
Then you may hope, that your life will
proceed in such a train as shall prepare
you, when it is finished, for joining the
society of more exalted spirits.

SER-

# SERMON X. On DEVOTION. ACTS x. 2. Cornelius---- A devout man-----

[ 264 ]
SERMON X.

On D EVOTION

ACTS X. 2,

Cornelius----A devout man----.

SERM.
SaR. _ I. HAT religion is essential to the wel-

fare of man, can be proved by the most
convincing arguments. But these how
demonstrative soever, are insufficient to
support its authority over human con-
dud. For arguments may convince the
underfianding, when they cannot con-
quer the passions. Irrefitible they seem
in the calm hours of retreat; but, in
the season of ation, they often vanifl
into smoke. There are other and more
powerful springs, which influence the great

i movements

movements of the human frame. In or- S E R M.
der to operate with success on the a£ive -
powers, the heart must be gained. Sen-
timent and affeEtion must be brought to
the aid of reason. It is not enough that
men believe religion to be a wife and ra-
tional rule of conduct, unless they relish
it as agreeable, and find it to carry its
own reward. Happy is the man, who,
in the conflict of desire between God and
the world, can oppose, not only argu-
ment to argument, but pleasure to plea-
sure ; who, to the external allurements
of sense, can oppose the internal joys of
devotion and to the uncertain promises
of a flattering world, the certain experience
of that peace of God which palfeth under-
Jfanding, keeping his mind and heart.---Such
is the temper and spirit of a devout man.
Such was the character of Cornelius, that
good centurion, whose prayers and alms
are said to have come up in memorial be-
fore God. Of this characer I intend,
throughDivineafiiflance, to discourse; and
shall endeavour, I. To explain the nature

of

S E R M. of devotion; I.I To juflify, and recomn

X.
-<-, mend it; and, III. To rectify some mif-

takes concerning it.

1. DEVOTION is the lively exercise of

those affections, which we owe to the
Supreme Being. It comprehends several
emotions of the heart, which all termi-
nate on the fame great object. The chief
of them are, veneration, gratitude, desire,
and resignation.

It implies, first, profound veneration

of God. By veneration, I underffand an
affetion compounded of awe and love;
the affeCtion which, of all others, it belt
becomes creatures to bear towards their
infinitely perfect Creator. Awe is the
first sentiment that rites in the foul, at
the view of his greatness. But, in the
heart of a devout man, it is a solemn and
elevating, not a dejedting emotion; for
he glows, rather than trembles, in the
Divine presence. It is not the fuperfti-
tious dread of unknown power, but the
bonmage yielded by the heart to him who

is, at once, the greatest and the best of Be- s E R M.
ings. Omnipotence, viewed alone, would ,---
be a formidable objeCt. But, confidered
in conjunction with the moral perfeCtions
of the Divine Nature, it serves to heighten
devotion. Goodness affects the heart with
double energy, when residing in One so
exalted. The goodness which we adore
in him, is not like that which is common
among men, a weak, mutable, undifcern-
ing fondness, ill qualified to be the ground
of assured trust. It is the goodncfs of a
perfed Governour, acting upon a regu-
lar extensive plan ; a ftcady principle
of benevolence, conduted by wisdom
which, subjet to no qairiabllcnefs or fJa-
dow of turning, free from all partiality
and caprice, incapable of being either
Soothed by flattery, or ruffled by resent-
ment, resembles, in its calm and equal
lustre, the eternal serenity of the highest
heavens. Thy mercy, 0 Lord ! is in the bea-
'vens, and thy f£aithfzll7nzCs reacheth unto the
clouds. Tiy righteouJizefs is like the great
pzounftains, andthy judgments are a great depth.

Sucl

s E R M. Such are the conceptions of the great

X.
A-_- God, which fill with veneration the heart

of a devout man. His veneration is not
confined to ads of immediate worship.
It is the habitual temper of his foul. Not
only when engaged in prayer or praise,
but in the silence of retirement, and even
amidfi the occupations of the world, the
Divine Being dwells upon his thoughts.
No place, and no objeCt, appear to him
void of God. On the works of Nature,
he views the impression of his hand;
and in the actions of men, he traces
the operation of his Providence. What-
ever he beholds on earth, that is beau-
tiful or fair, that is great or good, he
refers to God, as to the supreme origin
of all the excellence which is scattered
throughout his works. From those effets
he rifes to the first cause. From those
fireams, he ascends to the fountain whence
they flow. By those rays, he is led to
that eternal source of light in which they
centre.

D)EVOTION

DEVOTION implies, secondly, sincere S E R M.

X.

devotion to God, for all his benefits. -v-
This is a warmer emotion than simple ve-
neration. Veneration looks up to the
Deity, as he is in himself; Gratitude re-
gards what he is towards us. When a
devout man surveys this vast universe,
where beauty and goodness are every
where predominant ; when he refleCts on
those numberless multitudes of creatures,
who, in their different fiations, enjoy the
blessings of exifience; and when at the
fame time he looks up to an Universal
Father, who hath thus filled creation with
life and happiness, his heart glows within
him. He adores that difinterefled good-
ness, which prompted the Almighty to
raise up so many orders of intelligent be-
ings, not that he might receive, but that
he might give and impart; that he might
pour forth himself, and communicate to
the spirits which he formed, some emana-
tions of his felicity.

The goodness of this Supreme Benefac-
tor he gratefully contemplates, as display-

ed

s E R M. ed in his own slate. He reviews the

X. '--- events of his life; and, in every com-

fort which has sweetened it, he discerns
the Divine hand. Does he remember
with aff6ciion the parents under whose
care he grew up, and the companions
with whom he passed his youthful life ?
Is he now happy, in his family riing
around him; in the spouse who loves
him, or in the children who give him
comfort and joy ? Into every tender re-
nembrance of the past, and every pleas-
ing enjoyment of the present, devotion
enters; for in all those beloved objects,
it recognizes God. The communication
of love from heart to heart, is an effusion,
of his goodness. From his inspiration,
descends all the friendship which ever
glowed on earth ; and therefore, to him it
justly returns in gratitude, and terminates
on him.

But this life, with all its interefis, is

but a small part of human existence. A
devout man looks forward to immortali-
ty, .aid difcpvers fiill higher subjects of

gratitude.

gratitude. He views himself as a guilty S E R M.

X.

creature, whom Divine benignity has re- r--.
ceived into grace ; whose forfeited hopes
it has restored; and to whom it has open-
ed the most glorious profpeds of future
felicity. Such generosity shown to the
fallen and miserable, is yet more asset-
ing to the heart, than favours conferred
on the innocent. He contemplates, with
astonishment, the labours of the Son of
God, in accomplishing redemption for men;
and his foul overflows with thankfulness
to him, who loved us, and cwaJfheth us from
our fins in his own blood. ---What Jfall I ren-
der to the Lord for all his benefits ? Bless
the Lord, 0 my foul ! and all that is within
me, bless his holy namez; who forgiveth all
thine iniquities, and healeth all thy difief/s;
-who redeemeth thy life from deflrztIioz, and
crowneth thee with loving kindness, and with
tender mercies.

DEVOTION implies, thirdly, the desire

of the foul after the favour of the Su-
preme Being, as its chief good, and final

7 reft.

SE RM. reft. To inferiour enjoyments, the devout

. ---- man allots inferiour and secondary attach-

ment. He disclaims not every earthly as-
fecion. He pretends not to renounce all
pleasure in the comforts of his present
state. Such an unnatural renunciation
humanity forbids, and religion cannot re-
quire. But from these he expects not
his supreme bliss. He discerns the vanity
which belongs to them all; and beyond
the circle of mutable objeEts which fur-
round him, he aspires after some prin-
ciple of more perfed felicity, which /hall
not be fubjeEt to change or decay. But
where is this complete and permanent
good to be found ? Ambition pursues
it in courts and palaces; and returns
from the pursuit, loaded with fortows.
Pleasure fceks it among sensual joys ;
and retires with the confession of difap-
pointment. The deep faith, it is not in me;
and the Ja fiaith, it is not with me. It
cannot be gotten for gold; neither Jhall flver
be wseigbed for the price thereof. Its place is
nat in the land of the living. True hap-

pinefe

piness dwells with God ; and from the s E R M.
light of his countenance, it beams upon the --V
devout man. His voice is, 1Whom have I
in heaven but thee ? and there is none upon
earth that I defre beside thee. After ex-
ploring heaven and earth for happiness,
they fcem to him a mighty void, a wil-
dernefs of shadows, where all would be
empty and unfubfiantial without God.
But in his favour and love, he finds what
supplies every defe~t of temporal objects;
and assures tranquillity to his heart, amidst
all the changes of his existence. CThou Jhtalt
guide me with thy counJil.; and thou Jhalt re-
ceive me to thy glory. My fe/3 and my
heart faileth ; but God is the Jlrength of my
heart, and my portion for ever.

FROM these sentiments and affections,

Devotion advances, fourthly, to an entire
resignation of the foul to God. It is the
consummation of trust and hope. It ba-
niflies anxious cares, and murmuring
thoughts. It reconciles us to every ap-
pointment of Divine Providence and re-

T solves

S E R M. solves every wish into the desire of pleas-

X.
'-- ing him, whom our hearts adore. Its ge-

nuine breathings are to this effect: " Con-
" dud me, 0 God ! in what path so-
" ever feemeth good to thee. In nothing
" shall I ever arraign thy sacred will.
"Dost thou require me to part with
" any worldly advantages, for the fake
"of virtue and a good conscience ? I
"give them up. Doit thou command
" me to relinquifl my friends, or my
"country ? At thy call I chearfully leave
"them. Dost thou summon me away
'C from this world? Lo ! I am ready to
"depart. Thou haft made, thou haft
" redeemed me, and I am thine. My-
" elf, and all that belongs to me, I fur-
"render to thy disposal. Let the men of
"' the world have their portio n

in this ifie.

" Be it mine, to behold thy face in righ-
" teozzJefsi and when I awacke, to be fatisfi-
"ed with thy likeneJf."

This, surely, is one of the noblest dds

of which the human mind is capable,
when thus, if we may be allowed the ex-

pression,

pression, it unites itself with God. Nor s E R M.

X.

can any devotion be genuine, which in- -,---
spires not sentiments of this nature. For
devotion is not to be confidered as a tran-
fient glow of affecion, occasioned by some
casual imprefions of Divine goodness,
which are suffered to remain unconnected
with the conduct of life. It is a power-
ful principle, which penetrates the foul;
which purifies the affections from debaf-
ing attachments ; and, by a fixed and
steady regard to God, subdues every fin-
ful passion, and forms the inclinations to
piety and virtue.

SUCH in general are the dispositions

that constitute devotion. It is the union
of veneration, gratitude, desire, and re-
fignation. It expresses, not so much the
performance of any particular duty, as
the spirit which must animate all religi-
ous duties. It stands opposed, not mere-
ly to downright vice; but to a heart
which is cold, and insensible to sacred
things; which, from compulsion perhaps,

T and

S E R M. and a sense of interest, preserves some

X.

-- regard to the divine commands, but o-

beys them without ardour, love, or joy.
I proceed,

II. To recommend this devout spirit

to your imitation. I begin with obferv-
ing. That it is of the utmost consequence
to guard against extremes of every kind
in religion. We must beware, left, by
seeking to avoid one rock, we split upon
anotiler. It has been long the fubjeEt of
remark, that superstition and enthusiasm
are two capital sources of delusion; fu-
perftition, on the one hand, attaching
men, with immoderate zeal, to the ritual
and external part of religion; and enthu-
fiafm, on the other, directing their whole
attention tointernal emotions, and myfti-
cal communications with the spiritual
world while neither the one, nor the
other, has paid sufficient regard to the
great moral duties of the Chriflian life.
But, running with intemperate eagerness
from these two great abuses of religion,

men

men have neglected to observe, that there s E R M.

X.

are extremes opposite to each of them, in-
to which they are in hazard of precipi-
tating themselves. Thus the horrour of
superstition has sometimes reached so far;
as to produce contempt for all external
institutions; as if it were possible for re-
ligion to subsist in the world, without
forms of worship, or public acknow-
ledgment of God. It has also happened,
that some who in the main are well as-
fedted to the cause of goodness, obferv-
ing that persons of a devout turn have
at times been carried, by warm affetions,
into unjustifiable excesses, have thence
hastily concluded, that all devotion was
akin to enthuiafm ; and, separating reli-
gion totally from the heart and affections,
have reduced it to a frigid observance of
what they call the rules of virtue. This
is the extreme which I purpose at present
to combat, by showing you, firit, That
true devotion is rational, and well found-
ed; next, That it is of the highest im-
portance to every other part of religion;

and

SER M. and virtue; and, lastly, That it is most

X.

- _
.--- conducive to our happiness.

IN the first place, True devotion is ra-

tional, and well founded. It takes its rife
from affections, which are essential to the
human frame. We are formed by Nature,
to admire what is great, and to love
what is amiable. Even inanimate objects
have power to excite those emotions.
The magnificent profpeds of the natural
world, fill the mind with reverential awe.
Its beautiful Scenes create delight. When
we survey the aCtions and behaviour of
our fellow-creatures, the affections glow
with greater ardour; and, if to be un-
moved, in the former cafe, argues a defec
of sensibility in our powers, it discovers,
in the latter, an odious hardness and de-
pravity in the heart. The tenderness of
an affetionate parent, the generosity of a
forgiving enemy, the public spirit of a
patriot or a hero, often fill the eyes with
tears, and swell the breast with emotions
too big for utterance, The object of those

affedtions

affecions is frequently raised above us, in s E R M.
condition and rank. Let us suppose him -
raised also above us, in nature. Let us
imagine, that an Angel, or any being of
fuperiour order, had condescended to be
our friend, our guide and patron; no
person, sure, would hold the exaltation of
his benefaCtor's character, to be an argu-
ment why he should love and revere him
lefs.---Strange ! that the attachment and
veneration, the warmth and overflowing
of heart, which excellence and goodness
on every other occasion command, should
begin to be accounted irrational, as soon
as the Supreme Being becomes their objec't
For what reason must human sensibility be
extinct towards him alone? Are all bene-
fits entitled to gratitude, except the highefl
and the best ? Shall goodness cease to be
amiable, only because it is perfect ?

It will, perhaps, be said, that an un-

known and invisible being, is not quali-
sied to raise affection in the human heart.
Wrapt up in the mysterious obscurity of-
his nature, he escapes our search, and as-

fords

S E R M. fords no determinate objet to our love or

X.__- desire. We go forward, but he is not there;

and backward, but we cannot perceive
him; on the left hand, where he work-
eth, but we cannot behold him: He hid-
eth himJn'f on the right hand, that we
cannot fee him . .-----Notwithilanding this
obscurity, is there any being in the uni-
verse more real and certain, than the Cre-
a-tor of the world, and the Supporter of
all existence ? Is he, in whom iwe live and
move, too ditfant from us to excite devo-
tion ? His form and essence, indeed,
we cannot fee; but to be unseen, and
imperfectly known, in many other in-
fiances, precludes neither gratitude nor
love. It is not the fight, so much as the
frong conception, or deep impression, of
an objec, which affects the paiflons. We
glow with admiration of personages, who
have lived in a ditfant age. Whole na-
tions have been transported with zeal and
affection, for the generous hero, or pub-
lic deliverer, whom they knew only by

* Job. xxxiii. 8, g.

fame.

fame. Nay, properly speaking, the diret s E R M-

X.

objec of our love, is, in every cafe, in- -
visible. For that on which aiseOcion is
placed, is the mind, the foul, the internal
characer of our fellow-creatures; which,
surely, is no less concealed, than the Di-
vine Nature itself is, from the view of
sense. From aCtions, we can only infer
the dispositions of men; from what we
fee of their behaviour, we collect what
is invisible ; but the conjeure which we
form, is, at best, imperfect; and when
their ations excite our love, much of
their heart remain still unknown. I ask
then, in what rcfped God is less qualified
than any other being, to he an objec of
affection ? Convinced that he exiils ; be-
holding his goodness spread abroad in his
works, exerted in the government of the
world, displayed in some measure to sense,
in the aAions of his Son Jesus Chriit ; are
we not furnished with every elTential re-
quifite which the heart demands, in order
to indulge the motR warm, and at the faume
time the rnot rational emotions ?

If

S ER M. If these considerations justify the rea-

X.
-- ' fonablenefs of devotion, as expressed in

veneration, love, and gratitude, the fame
train of thought will equally justify it,
when appearing in the forms of desire,
delight, or resignation. The latter are,
indeed, the consequence of the former.
For we cannot but desire some communi-
cation with what we love; and will na-
turally resign ourselves to one, on whom
we have placed the full confidence of
affection. The aspirations of a devout
man after the favour of God, are the
effects of that earnest wish for happiness,
which glows in every breast. All men
have somewhat that may be called the
object of their devotion ; reputation,
pleaftire, learning, riches, or whatever
apparent good has strongly attached their
heart. This becomes the centre of at,
trat1ion, which draws them towards it;
which quickens and regulates all their
motions. While the men of the world
are thus influenced by the objects which
they severally worship, shall he only who

7 directs

direts his devotion towards the Supreme s ER Mt
Being, be excluded from a place in the
system of rational conduct ? or be cenfur-
ed for having pafilons, whose sensibility
corresponds to the great catfe which moves
them ?---Having vindicated the reasonable-
ness of devotion, 1 come,

IN the second place, to ihow its ir-

portance, and the high place which it
possesses in the fyfiem of religion. I ad-
dress myself now to those, who, though
they rejeCt not devotion as irrational, yet
confider it as an unnecessary refinement;
an attainment which may be safely left to
recluse and sequestered persons, who aim
at uncommon fantity. The solid and
material duties of a good life, they hold
to be in a great meafire independentof
devout affection; and think them fdffi-
ciently supported, by their necessary con-
nection with our interest, both in this
and in a future world. They insist much
ppon religion being a calm, a fober, and
rational principle of conduc.----I admit

that

S E R M. that it is very laudable to have a rational

X.
_'v- religion. But I must admonish you, that

it is both reproachful' and criminal, to
have an insensible heart. If we reduce re-
ligion into so cool a state, as not to admit
love, affeCtion, and desire, we shall leave
it in pofleflion of small influence over
human life. Look abroad into the world,
and observe how few ad upon deliberate
and rational views of their true interest.
The bulk of mankind are impelled by
their feelings. They are attracted by ap-
pearances of good. Taste and inclination
rule their conduct. To diret their incli-
nation and taste towards the highest ob-
jects; to form a relish within them, for
virtuous and spiritual enjoyment ; to in-
troduce religion into the heart, is the pro-
vince of devotion; and hence arises its im-
portance to the intereits of goodness.

Agreeably to this doctrine, the great

Author of our religion, who well knew
ewhat was in man, laid the foundation of
his whole system in the regeneration of
the heart. The change which was to be

accomplished

accompliihed on his followers, he did not S E R M.
purpose to effedt, merely by regulating -r--o
their external condudt; but by forming
within them a new nature; by taking
away the heart of jlone, and giving themi
a heart of flejh, that is, a heart relenting
and tender, yielding to the Divine im-
pulse, and readily susceptible of devout
impreflions. '2hoou si alt love tlhe Lord thy
God, with all thy heart, and mind, andfoul,
and firength : This is the firsJ and great
commandment. My .son, give me thy heart,
is the call of God to each of us: And,
indeed, if the heart be with-held, it is
not easy to conceive what other offering
we can present, that will be acceptable to
him.

Of what nature must that man's religi-

on be, who professes to worship God,
and to believe in Christ; and yet raises
his thoughts towards God, and his Savi-
our, without any warmth of gratitude or
love ? I speak not of those occasional de-
cays of pious affetion, to which the best
are subjeCt, but of a total insensibility to

i this

S E M. this part of religion. Surely, let the out.-

X.
. .--. ward behaviour be ever so irreproachable,

there mutl be some essential defect in a
heart, which remains always unmoved at
the view of infinite goodness. The as-
fedions cannot, in this cafe, be deemed
to flow in their natural channel. Some
concealed malignity must have tainted
the inward frame. This is not the man
whom you would chute for your bosom-
friend; or whose heart you could expect
to answer, with reciprocal warmth, to
yours.: His virtue, if it deserves that
name, is not of the most amiable fort;
and may, with reason, receive the appel-
lation (often injudiciously betlowed) of
cold and dry morality. Such a person
muff, as yet, be far from the kingdom
of Heaven.

As devotion is thus essential to religion

in its principle, so it enters into the pro-
per discharge of all its duties. It diffuses
an auspicious influence over the whole
of virtue. The prevailing temper of the
mind is formed by its molt frequent em-

ployments.

ployments. Intercourse with Supreme per- s E R M.

X.

feaion cannot, therefore, but ennoble --
and improve it. The pure love of God,
naturally connects itself with the love of
man. Hence, devotion has been often
found a powerful infirument, in huma-
nizing the manners of men, and taming
their unruly passions. It smooths what
is tough, and softens what is fierce, in
our nature. It is the great purifier of
the affections. It inspires contempt of the
low gratifications belonging to animal
life. It promotes a humble and cheerfiul
Contentment with our lot; and subdues
that eager desire of riches and of power,
which has filled this unhappy world with
crimes and misery. Finally, it bestows
that enlargement of heart in the service
of God, which is the great principle,
both of perseverance, and of progress in
virtue. He who, unacquainted with de-
vout affections, sets himself to keep the
Divine commandments, will advance in
obedience with a flow and languid pace;
like one who, carrying a heavy burden,

toils

SE RM. toils to mount the hill. But he whf3c

---- heart devotion has warmed, will proceed

on his way, cheerful.and rejoiciag. The
one performs his duty, only because it is
commanded; the other, because he loves
it. The one is inclined to do no more
than neceflty requires; the other seeks
to excell. The one looks for his reward
in foimewhat betides religion; the other,
finds it in religion itself: It is his meat and
drink to do the will of that heavenly Father,
whom he loves and adores. Which of
these two are likely to make the greatest
improvement in goodness, is easily discern-
ed. Let us now confider,

IN the third place, the influence of de-

votion on the happiness of life. Whatever
promotes and strengthens virtue, what-
ever calms and regulates the temper, is a
source of happiness. Devotion, as I have
just now filown, produces those effets in
a remarkable degree. It inspires compo-
su.re of spirit, mildness, and benignity
weakens the painful, and cherishes the

pleating

pleating emotions; and, by these means, E R M.
carries on the life of a pious man in a -----
smooth and placid tenour.

Besides exerting this habitual influence

on the mind, devotion opens a field of
enjoyments, to which the vicious are en-
tire strangers; enjoyments the more valu-
able, as they peculiarly belong to retire-
ment when the world leaves us, and to
adversity when it becomes our foe. These
are the two seasons, for which every wife
man would moif wish to provide some
hidden store of comfort. For let him be
placed in the most favourable situation
which the human. slate admits, the world
can neither always amuse him, nor al-
ways shield him from diflrefs. There
will be many hours of vacuity, and
many of dejetion in his life. If he be
a franger to god, and to devotion, how
dreary will the gloom of solitude often
prove? With what oppreflive weight will
sickness, disappointment, or old age, fall
upon his spirits? But for those pensive
periods, the pious man has a relief pre-

U pared.

E R M. pared. From the tiresome repetition of
s-4-=.i the common vanities of life, or from the

painful corrosion of its cares and sorrows,
devotion transports him into a new re-
gion; and surrounds him there with such
objects, as are the molt fitted to cheer the
dejetion, to calm the tumults, and to
heal the wounds of his heart. If the
world has been empty and delusive, it
gladdens him with the profpet of a
higher and better order of things, about
to arise. If men have been ungrateful
and base, it displays before him the
faithfulness of that Supreme Being, who,
though every other friend fail, will never
forsake- him. Consult your experience,
and you will find, that the two greatest
sources of inward joy, are, the exercise of
love directed towards a deserving obje6t,
and the exercise of hope terminating on
tome high and aliured happiness. Both
these are fipplied by devotion; and
therefore iwe have no reason to be fur-
prifed, if on some occasions, it fill the
hearts of good men with a fatisfacdioa
not to be expressed.

The

'The refined pleasures of a pious mind, s E x M.

X.

are, in many refpeds, fuperiour to the - -
coarse gratifications of sense. They are
pleasures which belong to the highest
powers, and best affeEtions of the foul;
whereas, the gratifications of sense reside
in the lowest region of our nature. To
the one, the foul sloops below its native
dignity. The other, raise it above itself.
The one, leave always a comfortless, often
a mortifying, remembrance behind them.
The other, are reviewed with applause
and delight. The pleaiures of sense re-
femble a foaming torrent, which, after a
disorderly course, speedily runs out, and
leaves an empty and offensive channel.
but the pleasures of devotion resemble
the equable current of a pure river,
which enlivens the fields through which
it pafles, and diffuses verdure and ferti-
lity along its banks.---To thee, O Devo-
tion ! we owe the highest improvement of
our nature, and much of the enjoyment
of our life. Thou art the support of our
virtue, and the reft of our fouls, in this

U 2 turbulent

S E R M. turbulent world. Thou compofeft the

X. _'--. thoughts. Thou calmest the passions.

Thou exalteft the heart. Thy commu-
nications, and thine only, are imparted
to the low, no less than to the high; to
the poor, as well as to the rich. In thy
pretence, worldly diftindions cease; and
under thy influence, worldly sorrows are
forgotten. Thou art the balm of the
wounded mind. Thy sanCtuary is ever
open to the miserable; inaccessible only
to the unrighteous and impure. Thou
beginneft on earth, the temper of heaven.
In thee the hosts of angels and blessed
spirits eternally rejoice. It now remains,
*that,

111. I ENDEAVOUR to correct some

errors, into which men are apt to fall
concerning devotion. For it is but too
obvious that errors are often committed
in this part of religion. These frequently
disfigure its appearance before the world,
and subjea it to unjust reproach. Let us
therefore attend deliberately to its nature,

so

lo as to distinguish pure and rational de- s Ec R I.
votion, of which I have hitherto treated, -
from that which is, in any degree, fpuri-
ous and adulterated.

In the first place, It is an error to

place devotion in the mere performance
of any external ad of worship. Prayer
and praise, together with the ordinances
peculiar to the Christian religion, are the
appointed means of raising the heart to-
wards the Supreme Being. They are the
instituted signs of devotion ; the language
in which it naturally expresses itself. But
let us remember, that they are signs and
expreflions only i and we all know, that,
in various cafes, these may not correspond
to the things signified. It is in the difpo-
fition of the heart, not in the motion of
the lips, or in the posture of the body,
that devotion consists. The heart may
pray or praise, when no words are utter-
ed. But if the heart be unconcerned or
ill affected, all the words we can utter,
how properly framed soever, are no other
than empty and unacceptable founds in
the ear of the Almighty.

I IN

s E R M. IN the second place, It is an error to

X.
A_-,-. conceive the pleafisres and advantages of

devotion, to be indiscriminately open to
all. Devotion, like many parts of religi-
on, may in some lights be confidered as
a privilege, and in others as a duty. It
is the duty of all, to love God, and to re-
sign themselves to his will. But it is the
privilege of good men only, to rejoice in
God, and to confide in his friendship.
Hence a certain preparation is requisite,
for the enjoyment of devotion in its whole
extent. Not only must the life be re-
formed from gross enormities, but the
heart mull have undergone that change
which the Gospel demands. A competent
knowledge of God must be acquired. A
proper foundation must be laid in faith
and repentance, for intercourse with Hea?
ven.

They who would rush all at once from

the arms of the world, into the sacred
retreat of devotion; they who imagine
that retreat to fiand always ready for the
reception of such as betake themselves to

its

.it, for no reason, but because every other s E R M.
refuge excludes them, betray gross igno- -
rance of this part of religion. They bring
to it, faculties unqualified to taite its plea-
fures; and they grasp at hopes, to which
they are not entitled. By incorporating
with devotion cthe unnatural mixture of
their unfanctified passions, they defile and
corrupt it. Hence that gloom which has
often spread over it. Hence, those super-
flitious mortifications and auftcrities, by
*which the falsely devout hope to purchase
favour from God; haunted by the ter-
rours of a guilty conscience, and vainly
firuggling to fubflitute a servile and
cringing homage, in the room of the pure
affe.tions of a renewed heart. On such
altars, the hallowed fire of true devotion
cannot burn; nor can any incense ascend
from them, that shall be grateful to Hea-
ven. Bring no more vain oblations. Waaj7
ye, make you clean, put away the evil of
your doings from before mine eyes, faith the
Lord. Cease to do .evil .learn to do well.
Then draw nigh to God, and he will draw

nigh

SE RM. nigh to you.-----But though devotion re-
,--,- quires a pure heart, and a virtuous life,

and necessarily supposes the exercise of
frequent retirement, I must observe,

IN the third place, That it is an error

to conceive it is requiring an entire re-
treat from the world. Devotion, like
every other branch of religion, was in-
tended to fit us for discharging the duties
of life. We serve God, by being useful
to one another. It is evident from the
frame of our nature, and from our com-
mon necessities and wants, that we were
designed by Providence for an acive part
on this earth. The Gospel of Christ, ac-
cordingly confiders us as engaged in the
concerns of the world; and directs its
exhortations to men, in all the various re-
lations, charaCters, and employments of
civil life. Abftradtion from society, there-
fore, and total dedication of our time to
devout exercises, cannot be the most pro-
per method of acquiring the favour of
God.

I mean not, however, to throw any S E R M.

blame on those, who having loft all relish --
for the ordinary pursuits of life, in con-
sequence of revere wounds which they
have received from afflision; who, be-
ing left to fland alone, and discerning
their connedions with the world to be
in some measure broken off, choose to
seek tranquillity in a religious retirement,
and to consecrate their days entirely to
God. Situations sometimes occur, which
both justify a great degree of retreat from
the world, and entitle it to respect. But
with regard to the bulk of mankind,
Christian devotion neither requires nor
implies any such sequestration from the
affairs of men. Nay, for the most part,
it will be cultivated with greater success
by those who mingle it with the aEtive
employments of life. For the mind,
when entirely occupied by any one ob-
jed, is in hazard of viewing it at last
through a false medium. Objeds, efpe-
cially, so great and sublime as those of
devotion, when we attempt to fix upon

them

S E M. them unremitting attention, overftretch

X.
.-.V-. and disorder our feeble powers. The

mind, by being relaxed, returns to them
with more advantage. As none of our
organs can bear intense sensations without
injury; as the eye, when dazzled with
overpowering light, beholds imaginary co-
lours, and loses the real diftincion of ob-
jeCs; so the mind, when overheated by
perpetual contemplation of celeflial things,
has been sometimes found to miitake the
itrong impressions of fancy, for fuperna-
tural communications from above. To the
employments of devotion, as to all other
things, there are due limits. There is a
certain temperate fpherc, within which it
preserves longest its proper exertion, and
most successfully promotes the purposes
*for which it was designed.

IN the fourth place, it is an error to

imagine, that devotion enjoins a total
contempt of all the pleasures and amuse-
ments of human society. It checks, in-
deed, that spirit of dissipation which is

too

too prevalent. It not only prohibits plea- s E R M.

X.

fures which are unlawful, but likewise '
that unlawful degree of attachment to
pleasures in themselves innocent, which
withdraws the attention of man from
what is serious and important. But it
brings anlufement under due limitation,
without extirpating it. It forbids it as
the business. But permits it as the re-
laxation, of life. For there is nothing in
the spirit of true religion, which ishoffile
to a cheerful enjoyment of our situation
in the world.

They who look with a severe and in-

dignant eye, upon all the recreations by
which the cares of men are relieved, and
the union of society is cemented, arc, in
two respects, injurious to religion. First,
they exhibit it to others under a forbid-
ding form, by clothing it with the garb
of so much unnecessary auflerity. And
next, they deprive the world of the be-
nefit which their example might afford,
in drawing the line between innocent and
dangerous pleasures. By atempcrate par-

tici-

s E R M, ticipation of those which are innocent,
x-- ,they might successfully exert that autho-

rity, which a virtuous and refpeEtable cha-
rater always poffeifes, in restraining un-
due excess. They would Ihow the young
and unwary, at what point they ought
to stop. They would have it in their
power, to regulate, in some degree, the
public manners; to check extravagance,
to humble presumption, and put vice to
the blufli. But, through injudicious fe-
verity, they fall short of the good they
might perform. By an indiscriminate cen-
sure of all amusement, they detrat from
the weight of their reproof; when a-
mufement becomes undoubtedly sinful.
By totally withdrawing themselves from
the circle of cheerful life, they deliver up
the entertainments of society, into the
hands of the loose, and the corrupted;
and permit the blind [power of fashion,
uncontrouled, to establish its own fland-
ards, and to exercise its dangerous sway
over the world.

IN

IN the fifth place, it is an error to be- s E R M.

X.

lieve, that devotion nourishes a spirit of G_
severity, in judging of the manners and
characters of others. Under this re-
proach, indeed, it has so long suffered
in the world ; that, with too many, the
appellation of devout, suggests no other
character, but that of a four and recluse
bigot, who delights in censure. But the
reproach is unjust; for such a spirit is
entirely opposite to the nature of true de-
votion. The very first traces which it
imprints on the mind, are candour and
humility. Its principles are liberal. Its
genius is unassuming and mild. Severe
only to itself, it makes every allowance
for others which humanity can fuggefr.
It claims no privilege of looking into
their hearts, or of deciding with refped
to their eternal ftate.---If your supposed
devotion produce contrary effects; if it
infuse harshness into your sentiments, and
acrimony into your speech ; you may
conclude, that under a serious appear-
ance, carnal paflions lurk. And, if ever

it

S E R M. it fllall so far lift you up with felf-con-

X.
'-*---' ceit, as to make you etfablifh your own

opinions as an infallible flandard for the
whole christian world, and lead you to
consign to perdition, all who differ from
you, either in some doctrinal tenets, or in
the mode of expressing them ; you may
reit alfured, that to much pride you have
joined much ignorance, both of the na-
ture of devotion, and of the Gospel of
Christ. Finally,

IN the sixth place, It is an error to

think, that perpetual rapture and fpiri-
tual joy belong to devotion. Devout
feelings admit very different degrees of
warmth and exaltation. Some persons,
by the frame of their minds, are much
more susceptible than others, of the ten-
der emotions. They more readily relent
at the view of Divine goodness, glow with
a warmer ardour of love, and, by con-
sequence, rife to a higher elevation of
joy and hope. But, in the midst of still
and calm affeceions, devotion often dwells;

and,

and though it produce no transports in SE RM.

X.

the mind, diffuses over it a steady fe- --
renity. Devout sensations not only vary
in their degree according to the frame of
different tempers; but, even among the
best disposed, susser much interruption
*and decay. It were too much to expect,
that in the present slate of human frailty,
those happy feelings should be uniform
and constant. Oppression of worldly
cares, languor of spirits, and infirmities
of health, frequently indispose us for the
enjoyment of devout affections. Pious
men, on these occasions, are in hazard of
pafirng judgment on their own htate wvith
too much severity ; as if, for some great
iniquity, they were condemned by God
to final hardness of heart. Hence arises
that melancholy, which has been seen to
overcloud them; and which has given
occasion to many contemptuous scoffs of
ungodly men. But it is a melancholy
which deserves to be treated with tender-
ness, not with contempt. It is the excess
of virtuous and pious sensibility. It is

the

s E R M. the overflowing of a heart affeded; in an

x. extreme degree, with the humble sense

of its own failings, and with ardent con-
cern to attain the favour of God. A weak-
neTs, however, we admit it to be though
not a crime; and hold it to be perfectly
separable from the essence of devotion.
For contrition, though it may melt, ought
not to fink or overpower the heart of
a Chriflian. The tear of repentance brings
its own relief. Religion is a spring of
consolation, not of terrour, to every well-
informed mind, which, in a proper man-
ner, refts its hope on the infinite good-
ness of God, and the all-fuficient merit
of Christ.

To conclude, Let us remove from de-

votion, all those mistakes, to which the
corruptions of men, or their ignorance
and prejudices, have given rife. With us
let it be the worship of God, in spirit
and in truth; the elevation of the foul
towards him, in simplicity and love. Let
us pursue it as the principle of virtuous

conduct,

conduEt, and of inward peace. By fre- SE R M.

X.

quent and serious meditation on the great -
objects of religion, let us lay ourselves
open to its influence. By means of the
inftituticns of the Gospel, let us cherish
its impreffons. And, above all, let us
pray to God, that he may establish its pow-
er in our heart. For here, if any where,
his assistance is requisite. The spirit of
devotion is his gift. From his inspiration
it proceeds. Towards him it tends; and
in his pretence hereafter, it shall attain its
full perfection.

X SE R-

# SERMON XI. On the DUTIES of the YOUNG. TITUS ii. 6. Young men likewise exhort, to be sober-minded.

C 306 ]

S E R M N XI.
On the Du TIE s of the YO NG.

TITUS ii. 6.

Toung men likewise exhort, to befober-minded.

S E M. S 0 B R I E T Y of mind, is one of those
.-v-- virtues which the present condition of

human life frongly inculcates. The un-
certainty of its enjoyments, checks pre-
fumption; the multiplicity of its dan-
gers, demands perpetual caution. Mo-
deration, vigilance, and felf-government,
are duties incumbent on all ; but efpeci-
ally on such as are beginning the journey
of life. To them, therefore, the admo-
nition in the Text is, with great propriety,
directed; though there is reason to fear,
that by them 'it is in hazard of being

~~~~I ~lear

least regarded. Experience enforces the s E R M.

XI.

admonition on the most giddy, after they A-- -
have advanced in years. But the whole
slate of youthful views and passions, is
adverse to Ibbriety of mind. The scenes
which present themselves, at our entering
upon the world, are commonly flattering.
Whatever they be in themselves, the lively
spirits of the young gild every opening
profpea. The field of hope appears to
stretch wide before them. Pleasure seems
to put forth its blossoms on every fide.
Impelled by desire, forward they rush
with inconsiderate ardour. Prompt to
decide, and to choose averse to hesitate,
or to enquire; credulous, because un-
taught by experience 3 rash, because un-
acquainted with danger ; head-strong, be-
cause unfubdued by disappointment.
Hence arise the perils, of which it is my
design at present to warn them. I shall
take sobriety of mind, in its most compre-
henfive sense, as including the whole of
that discipline which religion and virtue
prescribe to youth. Though the words

X 2 of

S E R M. of the Text are diredly addressed to young

XI.
~-v--. men, yet, as the fame admonition is given

in a preceding verse to the other sex, the
inftrutions which arise from the Text are
to be confidered as common to both. I
intend first, to show them the importance
of beginning early to give serious attention
to their condud ; and, next, to point out
those virtues which they ought chiefly to
cultivate.

As soon as you are capable of reflec-

tion, you must perceive that there is a
right and a wrong, in human actions.
You fee, that those who are born with
the fame advantages of fortune, are not
all equally prosperous in the course of life.
While some of them, by wife and Rteady
conduct, attain diftincion in the world,
and pass their days with comfort and ho-
nour; others of the fame rank, by mean
and vicious behaviour, forfeit the advan-
tages. of their birth, involve themselves in
much misery, and end in being a dif-
grace to their friends, and a burden on

society.

society. Early, then, you may learn, that s E R M.

XI.

it is not on the external condition in
which you find yourselves placed, but on
the part which you are to ad, that your
welfare or unhappiness, your honour or
infamy, depend. Now, when beginning
to adt that part, what can be of greater
moment, than to regulate your plan of
conduct with the most serious attention,
before you have yet committed any fatal
or irretrievable errors ? If, inflead of
exerting reflection for this valuable pur-
pose, you deliver yourselves up, at so cri-
tical a time, tofloth and pleasure; if you
refuse to liften to any counsellor but hu-
mour, or to attend to any pursuit except
that of amusement; if you allow your-
selves to float loose and careless on the
tide of life, ready to receive any airec-
tion which the current of fashion may
£hance to give you; what can you expeCt
.to follow from such beginnings? While
so many around you are undergoing the
fad consequences of a like indiscretion,
for what reason shall not those confe-

quences

s E Rt M. quences extend to you ? Shall you only
<-v-' attain success without that preparation,

and escape dangers without that precau-
tion, which is required of others ? Shall
happiness grow up to you, of its own ac-
cord, and solicit your acceptance, when,
to the reft of mankind, it is the fruit of
long cultivation, and the acquisition of
labour and care ?--Deceive not v.'ur-
selves with such arrogant hopes. What-
ever be your rank, Providence will not
for your fake, reverse its eftablifhled or-
der. The Author of your being hath en-
joined you to take heed to your ways; to
ponder the paths of your feet; to remember
your Creator in the days of your youth. He
hath decreed, that they only wowo seek as-
ter wiJdom, shall find it; that fools Jhall
be affitied, becazfe of their tranzfgreffions;
and that whoso reffieth infJruaion, Jhall
destroy his own foul. By listening to there
admonitions, and tempering the vivacity
of youth with a proper mixture of serious
thought, you may ensure cheerfulness for
the reft of life; but by delivering your-

selves

selves up at present to giddiness and levi- S E R M,

XI.

ty, you lay the foundation of lafling hea- v---
viness of heart.

When you look forward to those plans

of life, which either your circumfiances
have fuggefled, or your friends have pro-
posed, you will not hesitate to acknow-
ledge, that in order to pursue them with
advantage, forne previous discipline is re-
quifite. Be assured, that whatever is to
be your profession, no education is more
necessary to your success, than the ac-
quirement of virtuous dispositions and
habits. This is the universal preparation
for every charader, and every station in
life. Bad as the world is, refpeat is al-
ways paid to virtue. In the ufualcourfe
of human affairs, it will be found, that
a plain understanding joined with ac-
knowledged worth, contributes more to
prosperity, than the brightest parts with-
out probity or honour. Whether science,
or business, or public life, be your aim,
virtue fiill enters, for a principal share,
.into all those great departments of society.

It

S I R M. It is conneced with eminence, in every li-
,X, beral art ; with reputation, in every branch

of fair and useful bulinefs; with diilinc-
tion, in every public fiation. The vigour
which it gives the mind, and the weight
which it adds to charaSer; the generous
sentiments which it breathes, the undcaurt-
ed spirit which it inspires, the ardour of
diligence which it quickens, the freedom
which it procures from pernicious ar-d
dishonourable avocations, are the founda-
tions of all that is high in fame, or great
in success, among men.

Whatever ornamental or engaging en-

dowments you now poilefs, virtue is a
necessary requisite, in order to their shin-
ing with proper lutlre. Feeble are the
attractions of the fairest form, if it be
fufpeded that nothing within, corref-
ponds to the pleating appearance without.
Short are the triumphs of wit, when it is
supposed to be the vehicle of malice. By
whatever arts you may at first attract the
attention, you can hold the esteem, and
secure the hearts of others, only by ami-

able

able dispositions, and the accomplishments s ER M.
of the mind. These are the qualities
whose influence will last, when the lufire
of all that once sparkled and dazzled has
passed away.

Let not then the season of youth be

barren of improvements, so essential to
yourfuture felicity and honour. Now is
the seed-time of life; and according to
what you sow, you Jhall reap. Your cha-
rader is now, under Divine assistance, of
your own forming; your fate is, in some
measure, put into your own hands. Your
nature is as yet pliant and soft. Habits
have not established their dominion. Pre-
judices have not pre-occupied your un-
derftanding. The world has not had time
to contract and debase your affedions.
All your powers are more vigorous, dif-
embarrassed, and free, than they will be
at any future period. Whatever impulse
you now give to your desires and passions,
the direction is likely to continue. It
will form the channel in which your life
is to run; nay, it may determine its ever-

lafling

s E R M. lasing issue. Confider then the employ-

Lv- ment of this important period,, as the

highest trust which shall ever be com-
mitted to you; as, in a great measure,
decisive of your happiness, in time, and
in eternity. As in the succession of the
ieafons, each, by the invariable laws of
Nature, affects the productions of what is
next in course; so, in human life, every
period of our age, according as it is well
or ill spent, influences the happiness of
that which is to follow. Virtuous youth
gradually brings forward accomplished and
flourishing manhood; and such man-
hood passes of itself, without uneasiness,
into refpedable and tranquil old age.
But when Nature is turned out of its
regular course, disorder takes place in the
moral, ju.st as in the vegetable world. If
the .Spring put forth no blofroms, in
Summer there will be no beauty,
and in Autumn no fruit. So, if youth
be trifled away without improvement,
manhood will be contemptible, and old.age
miserable. If the beginnings of life have

been

been vanity, its latter end can be no other s E R M.

Xl.
than vexation of spirit.

Having thus shown the importance of

beginning early to give serious attention to
conduct, I come, next, to point out the
virtues which are mot necessary to be cul-
tivated in youth. What I shall,

I. RECOMMEND, is piety to God. With

this 1 begin, both as the foundation of
good morals, and as a disposition parti-
cularly graceful and becoming in youth.
To be void of it, argues a cold heart, defti-
tute of some of the best affc-tions which
belong to that age. Youth is the season
of warm and generous emotions. The
heart hould then, spontaneously, rife
into the admiration of what is great,
glow with the love of what is fair and
excellent, and melt at the discovery of
tenderness and goodncfs. Where can any
objeC be found, so proper to kindle those
affetions, as the Father of the universe,
and the Author of all felicity ? Un-
moved by veneration, can you contem-

plate

s E R M. plate that grandeur and majesty, which

--- his works everywhere display ? Untouch-

ed by gratitude, can you view that
profusion of good, which, in this pleas-
ing season of life, his beneficent hand
pours around you ? Happy in the love
and affleion of those with whom you
are connected, look up to the Supreme
Being, as the inrpirer of all the friend-
ship which has ever been shown you by
others; himself, your best and your firfl
friend; formerly, the supporter of your
infancy, and the guide of your child-
hood; now, the guardian of your youth,
and the hope of your coming years.
View religious homage, as a natural ex-
pression of gratitude to him for all his
goodness. Confider it as the service of
the God of your fathers; of him, to whom
your parents devoted you; of him, whom
in former ages your ancestors honoured,
and by whom they are now rewarded, and
blessed in heaven. ConneCted with so
many tender sensibilities of foul, let re-
ligion be with you, not the cold and

-barren

barren offspring of fpcculation, but the S E R M.
warm and vigorous diCtate of the heart. _

But though piety chiefly belong to the

heart, yet the aid of the underftandingis
requisite, to give a proper direction to the
devout affections. You must endeavour,
therefore, to acquire just views, both of
the great principles of natural religion,
and of the peculiar doctrines of the gof-
pel. For this end, fludy the sacred scrip-
turcs. Consult the word of God, more
than the systems of men, if you would
know the truth in its native purity.
When, upon rational and fobcr enquiry,
you have eflablifhed your principles, sus-
ser them not to be shaken, by the scoffs
of the licentious, or the cavils of the fcep-
tical. Remember, that in the examination
of every great and comprehensive plan,
such as that of Christianity, difficulties may
be expected to occur; and that reasonable
evidence is not to be rejected, because the
nature of our present state allows us on-
ly to know in part, and to fee through a
glass, darkly.

Impress

E R M. Impress your minds with reverence for
'- - all that is sacred. Let no wantonness of

youthful spirits, no compliance with the
intemperate mirth of others, ever betray
you into profane rallies. Besides the guilt
which is thereby incurred, nothing gives
a more odious appearance of petulance
and presumption to youth, than the
affeiation of treating religion with levi-
ty. Instead of being an evidence of fupe-
riour underflanding, it discovers a pert
and shallow mind ; which, vain of the
first finatterings of knowledge, presumes to
make light of what the reft of mankind
revere.

At the fame time, you are not to ima-

gine, that when exhorted to be religious,
you are called upon, to become more for-
mal and solemn in your manners than
others of the fame years, or to ered your-
selves into supercilious reprovers of those
around you. The spirit of true religion
breathes gentleness and affability. It
gives a native, unaffected ease to the be-
haviour. It is social, kind, and cheer-

ful:

ful: far removed from that gloomy and s E R M.

XI.

illiberal superstition which clouds the '
brow, sharpens the temper, dejecas
the spirit, and teaches men to fit them-
selves for another world, by negleEting the
concerns of this. Let your religion, on
the contrary, connect preparation for hea-
ven, with an honourable discharge of the
duties of aclive life. Let it be affociat-
edin your imagination, with all that is
manly and useful; with whatsoever things
are true, are jzift, are pure, are lovely, are
of good report, wherever there is any vir-
tue, and wherever there is any praie. Of
such religion discover, on every proper oc-
caslon, that you are not ashamed; but
avoid making any unnecessary ostentation
of it before the world.

II. To piety, join modefly and docili-

ty, reverence of your parents, and sub-
mission to those who are your fuperiours.
in knowledge, in flation, and in years.
Dependance and obedience belong to.
youth. Modefly is one of its chief orna-

ments;

S E M. ments; and has ever been esteemed a pre-
^-4Uv., sage of rising nrerit. When entering on

the career of life, it is your part, not to
aflume the reins as yet into your hands;
but to commit yourselves to the guidance
of the more experienced, and to become
wife by the wisdom of those who have
gone before you.

Of all the follies incident to youth,

there are none which either deform its
present appearance, or blast the profped
of its future prosperity, more than self-
conceit, presumption, and obstinacy. By
checking its natural progress in improve-
ment, they fix it in long immaturity;
and frequently produce mischiefs, which
can never be repaired. Yet these are
vices too commonly found among the
young. Big with enterprise, and elated by
hope, they resolve to truit for success to
none but themselves. Full of their own
abilities, they deride the admonitions which
are given them by their friends, as the
timorous fuggeflions of age. Too wife
to leairn, too impatient to deliberate, too

forward
a,

forward to be refrained, they plunge, s E R M.

XI.

with precipitant indifcreton, into the A--
midst of all the dangers with which life
abounds. SeeIJ thou a young man wife in
his own conceit ? There is more hope of a
fool, than of him.---Pofitive as you now are
in your opinions, and confident in your
assertions, be afiured, that the time ap-
proaches, when both men and things will
appear to you in a different light. Many
characters which you now admire, will,
by and by, fink in your esteem; and
many opinions, of which you are at pre-
sent most tenacious, will alter as you ad-
vance in years. Distrust, therefore, that
glare of youthful presumption, which '
dazzles your eyes. Abound not in your
own sense. Put not yourfclves forward
with too much eagerness; nor imagine,.
that by the impetuosity of juvenile ar-
dour, you can overturn systems which
have been long established, and change
the face of the world. Learn not to think
more highly of yourselves than you oughlt to
think, but to thinkfoberly. By patient and

Y gradual

S E R M. gradual progreflion in improvement, you
'--,-. may in due time, command lasting etfeem.

But by assuming at present, a tone of
superiority, to which you have no title,
you will difgufl those whose approbation
it is most important to gain. Forward vi-
vacity may fit you to be the companions of
an idle hour. More solid qualities must re-
commend you to the wife, and mark you
out for importance and consideration in
subsequent life.

III. It is necessary to recommend to you,

sincerity and truth. This is the basis of
every virtue. That darkness of charac-
ter, where we can fee no heart; those
foldings of art, through which no native
affection is allowed to penetrate, present an
object, unamiable in every season of life
but particularly odious in youth. If, at
an age when the heart is warm, when the
emotions are strong, and when nature
is expeCted to shew itself free and open,
you can already smile and deceive, what
are we to look for, when you shall be lon-

ger

ger hackneyed in the ways of men; when s R M
interest shall have completed the obdurati-
on of your heart, and experience shall
'have improved you in all the arts of guile?
Dissimulation in youth, is the fore-runner
of perfidy in old age. Its first appearance,
is the fatal omen of growing depravity, and
future shame. It degrades parts and learn-
ing; obscures the lustre of every accom-
plifhment; and finks you into contempt
with God, and man.

As you value, therefore, the appro-

bation of Heaven, or the esteem of the
world, cultivate the love of truth. In all
your proceedings, be direct and consistent.
Ingenuity and candour possess the most
powerful charm; they bespeak universal
favour, and carry an apology for almost
every failing. The lip of truth, J/Jall be
eJfablijY7ed for ever; but a lying tongue, is
but for a moment . The path of truth, is a
plain and a safe path; that of falsehood,
is a perplexing maze. After the first de-
parture from sincerity, it is not in your

*Prov. xii. 19.

Y a power

EX R M. gradual progreflion in improvement, you

v-.-j may in due time, command lasting esteem.

But by aifuming at present, a tone of
superiority, to which you have no title,
you will disgust those whose approbation
it is most important to gain. Forward vi-
vacity may fit you to be the companions of
an idle hour. More solid qualities must re-
commend you to the wife, and mark you
out for importance and consideration in
subsequent life.

III. It is necessary to recommend to you,

sincerity and truth. This is the basis of
every virtue. That darkness of charac-
ter, where we can fee no heart; those
foldings of art, through which no native
affection is allowed to penetrate, present an
objeCt, unamiable in every season of life
but particularly odious in youth. If, at
an age when the heart is warm, when the
emotions are itrong, and when nature
is expected to shew itself free and open,
you can already smile and deceive, what
are we to look for, when you shall be lon-

ger

ger hackneyed in the ways of men; when S E R M
interest shall have completed the obdurati-
on of your heart, and experience shall
have improved you in all the arts of guile?
Difimulation in youth, is the fore-runner
of perfidy in old age. Its first appearance,
is the fatal omen of growing depravity, and
future liame. It degrades parts and learn-
ing; obscures the lustre of every accom-
pliihment; and finks you into contempt
with God, and man.

As you value, therefore, the appro-

bation of Heaven, or the esteem of the
world, cultivate the love of truth. In all
your proceedings, be direct and consistent.
Ingenuity and candour possess the most
powerful charm; they bespeak universal
favour, and carry an apology for almost
every failing. The lip of truth, Jfiall be
eflablijked for ever; but a lying tongue, is
but for a moment *. The path of truth, is a
plain and a safe path; that of faliehood,
is a perplexing maze. After the first de-
parture from sincerity, it is not in your

* Prov. xii. 19.

¥I' z power

S E R M. power to flop. One article unavoidably
L-.,-e - leads on to another; till as the intricacy

of the labyrinth increases, you are left
entangled in your own inare. Deceit dif-
covers a little mind, which flops at tem-
porary expedients, without rising to com-
prehenfive views of conduct. It betrays,
at the fame time, a dastardly spirit. It is
the resource of one, who wants courage
to avow his designs, or to reft upon him-
self. Whereas openness of character dif-
plays that generous boldness, which ought
to diflinguilh youth. To set out in the
world with no other principle than a
crafty attention to interest, betokens one
who is defined for creeping through the
inferiour walks of life. But to give an
early preference to honour above gain,
when they ifand in competition; to despise
every advantage, which cannot be attained
without dishonest arts; to brook no mean-
ness, and to stoop to no diflimulation; are
the indications of a great mind, the pre-
fages of future eminence and distinction in
life.

At

At the farnme time, this virtuous sincerity s E R M.

X[.

is perfectly consistent with the most pru- -
dent vigilence and caution. It is opposed
to Cunning, not to true wisdom. It is not
the simplicity of a weak and improvident,
but the candour of an enlarged and noble
mind; of one who scorns deceit, because
he accounts it both base and unprofitable;
and who iceksno disguise, because he needs
none to hide him. Lord! who Jhall abide
in thy tabernacle ? /P ho Jhall afnend into thy
holy hill? He that walkefh uprightly, and
worketh righteoifnefsi, and peaketh the truth
in his heart.

IV. YOUTH is the proper season of

cultivating the benevolent and humane
affections. As a great part of your hap.
piness is to depend on the connections
which you form with others, it is of high
importance that you acquire, betimes, the
temper and the manners which will ren-
der such connections comfortable. Let a
sense of justice be the foundation of all
your social qualities. In your most early

intercourse

S E R M intercourse with the world, and even in

XI.
'-L-- your youthful amusements, let no unfair-

ness be found. Engrave on your mind
that sacred rule, of doing in all things to o-
thers, according as you wiJ7 that they Jfould do
unto you. For this end, impress yourselves
with a deep sense of the original, and
natural, equality of men. Whatever ad-
vantages of birth and fortune you poffcfs,
never display them with an ostentatious
superiority. Leave the subordinations of
rank, to regulate the intercourse of more
advanced years. At present, it becomes
you to adt among your companions, as
man with man. Remember how unknown
to you are the vicissitudes of the world;
and how often they, on whom ignorant
and contemptuous young men once looked
down with scorn, have risen to be their fu-
periours in future years.

Compassion is an emotion, of which

you ought never to be ashamed. Grace-
ful in youth is the tear of sympathy, and
the heart that melts at the tale of woe.
Let not ease and indulgence contract your

affedions,

affections, and wrap you up in selfish en- s E R M.

XI.

joyment. But go sometimes to the houzf i ---
of mourning, as well as to the hozfe of feajl-
ing. Accustom yourselves to think of the
distresses of human life of the solitary
cottage, the dying parent, and the weep-
ing orphan. thou Jhalt not harden thy
heart, norfhut thy handfronz thy poor bro-
ther; but thou Jhalt firely give unto him in
the day of his need: And thine heart Jhall
not be grieved when thou giveft unto him ;
becaue that for this thing, the Lord thy God
Fnall bless thee in all thy works *. Never
sport with pain and distress, in any of
your amusements; nor treat even the
meanest infedt, with wanton cruelty.

In young minds, there is commonly a

strong propensity to particular intimacies
and friendships. Youth, indeed, is the
season when friendships are sometimes
formed, which not only continue through
succeeding life, but which glow to the
last, with a tenderness unknown to the
connections begun in cooler years. The
propensity therefore is not to be difcou-

f Deut. xv. 7. 1o.

raged,

i

S E R M. raged; though at the fame time it must

XI. Lzv' be regulated with much circumfpedion

and care. Too many of the pretended
friendflhips of youth, are mere combina-
tions in pleasure. They are often found-
ed on capricious likings; suddenly con-
tradted, and as suddenly dissolved. Some-
times they are the effect of interceted com-
plaifance and flattery on the one fide, and
of credulous fondness on the other. Be-
ware of such rash and dangerous connec-
tions, which may afterwards lold you
with dishonour. Remember that by the
character of those whom you choose for
your friends, your own is likely to be
formed, and will certainly be judged of
by the world. Be flow, therefore, and
cautious in contracting intimacy-; but
when a virtuous friendship is once efta-
blifhed, confider it as a sacred engagement.
Expose not yourselves to the reproach of
lightness and inconstancy, which always
bespeak, either a trifling, or a base mind.
Reveal none of the secrets of your friend.
Be faithful to his interests. Forsake him

I not

not in danger. Abhor the thought of ac- S ER M.
quiring any advantage by his prejudice or ,--_
hurt. There is a friend that loveth at all
times, and a brother that is born for adver-
frty. Thine own friend, and thy father's
friend, Jorfake not '.

Finally, on this head; in order to ren-

der yourselves amiable in society, correct
every appearance of harshness in behavi-
our. Let that courtesy distinguish your
demeanour, which springs, not so much
from studied politeness, as from a mild and
gentle heart. Follow the cutfoms of the
world in matters indifferent; but flop
when they become sinful. Let your man-
ners be simple and natural; and of course
they will be engaging. AffeQation is cer-
tain deformity. By forming themselves
on fantastic models, and vying with one
another in every reigning folly, the young
begin with being ridiculous, and end in be-
ing vicious and immoral.

V. LET me particularly exhort youth
to temperance in pleasure: Let me admo-

nifi
Prov. xvii. 17.---xxvii. 10o

s ER M. nifh them, to beware of that rock on

XI.
»-- which thousands, from race to race, con-

tinue to split. The love of pleasure, na-
turai to man in every period of his life,
glows at this age with excessive ardour.
Novelty adds fresh charms, as yet, to eve-
ry gratification. The world appears to
spread a continual feast; and health, vi-
gour, and high spirits, invite them to
partake of it without restraint. In vain
we warn them of latent dangers. Religi-
on is accused of insufferable severity, in
prohibiting enjoyment; and the old, when
they offer their admonitions, are up-
braided with having forgot that they
once were young.---And yet, my friends,
to what do the restraints of religion, and
the counsels of age, with refped to plea-
sure, amount? They may all be com-
prized in few words, not to hurt your-
selves, and not to hurt others, by your
pursuit of pleasure. Within these bounds,
pleasure is lawful; beyond them, it be-
comes criminal, because it is ruinous.
Are these restraints any other, than what

a wife

a wife man would choose to impose on S E R M.
himself ? We call you not to renounce v----
pleasure, but to enjoy it in safety. Inficad
of abridging it, we exhort you to pursue
it on an extensive plan. We propose mea-
fures for securing its possession, and for
prolonging its duration.

Consult your whole nature. Confider

yourselves not only as sensitive, but as ra-
tional beings; not only as rational, but
social; not only as social, but immortal.
Whatever violates your nature in any of
these refpeds, cannot afford true pleasure;
any more than that which undermines an
essential part of the vital fyfiem, can pro-
mote health. For the truth of this conclu-
sion, we appeal, not merely to the authori-
ty of religion, nor to the testimony of the
aged, but to yourselves and your own ex-
perience. We ask, Whether you have not
found, that in a course of criminal ex-
cess, your pleasure was more than com-
penfated by succeeding pain ? Whe-
ther, if not from every particular in-

fiance,

s E R M. fiance, yet from every habit, at least,

XI.
'----- of unlawful gratification, there did not

spring some thorn to wound you, there
did not arise some consequence to make
you repent of it in the issue ? How long
then, ye imp le ones ! will ye love Jimplicity ?
How long repeat the fame round of perni-
cious folly, and tamely expose yourselves
to be caught in the fame snare ? If you
have any consideration, or any firmness left,
avoid temptations, for which you have
found yourselves unequal, with as much
care, as you would shun pestilential insec-
tion. Break off all connections with the
loose and profligate.. When finners entice
thee, co7fent thou not. Look not on the wine
when it is red, when it giveth its colour in
the cup 3 for at the last, it biteth like a ser-
pent, and flingeth like an adder. Remove
thy way from the j range woman, and come
not near the door of her hose. Let not thine
heart decline to her ways ; for her house is the
.way to hell. 5thou goeJI after her as a bird
:hafieth to the fznare, and knoweth not that it
is for his liJf.

By

By these unhappy excesses of irregular S E R M.

XI.

pleasure in youth, how many amiable dif- -
positions are corrupted or deflroyed! How
many rising capacities and powers are sup-
pressed! How many flattering hopes of
parents and friends, are totally extinguish-
ed ! Who but muff drop a tear over hu-
man nature, when he beholds that morn-
ing which arose so bright, overcast with
such untimely darkncfs; that good hu-
mour which once captivated all hearts, that
vivacity which sparkled in every compa-
ny, those abilities which were fitted for
adorning the highest flation, all sacrificed
at the shrine of low sensuality; and one
who was formed for running the fair ca-
reer of life in the midst of public efieem,
cut off by his vices at the beginning of his
course, or funk, for the whole of it, into
insignificancy and contempt !---These, 0
sinful Pleasure ! are thy trophies. It is
thus that, co-operating with the foe of
God and man, thou degradeft human ho-
nour, and blafteft the opening profpets of
human felicity.

VI.

S R il. VI. DILIGENCE, indufiry, and proper

XI.
'-^-- improvement of time, are material duties

of the young. To no purpose are they
endowed with the best abilities, if they
want acivity for exerting them. Unavail-
ing, in this cafe, will be every direction
that can be given them, either for their
temporal or spiritual welfare. In youth,
the habits of induflry are mofi easily
acquired. In youth, the incentives to it
are strongest, from ambition and from
duty, from emulation and hope, from all
the profpets which the beginning of
life affords. If, dead to these calls, you
already languish in slothful inacion, what
will be able to quicken the more fluggifl
current of advancing years ?

Indufiry is not only the infiru-

ment of improvement, but the founda-
tion of pleasure. Nothing is so opposite
to the true enjoyment of life, as the re-
laxed and feeble state of an indolent mind.
He who is a firanger to industry, may
poisess, but he cannot enjoy. For it is

labour

labour only which gives the relish to plea- S R M.
sure. It is the appointed vehicle of eve- --
ry good to man. It is the indifpenfa-
ble condition of our possessing a found
mind, in a found body. Sloth is so in-
consistent with both, that it is hard to
determine whether it be a greater foe to
virtue, or to health and happiness. In-
astive as it is in itself, its effelts are
fatally powerful. Though it appear a
slowly flowing fiream, yet it undermines
all that is stable and flouriihing. It not
only saps the foundation of every virtue,
but pours upon you a deluge of crimes
and evils. It is like water which first
purifies by flagnation ; and then fends up
noxious vapours, and fills the atmof-
phere with death.
* Fly, therefore, from idleness as the
certain parent both of guilt and of ruin.
And under idleness I include, not mere
ination only, but all that circle of tri-
fling occupations, in which too many
saunter away their youth; perpetually
engaged in frivolous society, or public

amuse-

s E R M. amusements, in the labours of dress, or

XI.

,-- the ostentation of their perfons.---Is this

the foundation which you lay for future
usefulness and esteem ? By such accom-
plifhments, do you hope to recommend
yourselves to the thinking part of the
world, and to answer the expecations
of your friends, and your country ?---
Amusements, youth requires. It were
vain, it were cruel to prohibit them.
But though allowable as the relaxation,
they are most culpable as the business, of
the young. For they then become the
gulph of time, and the poison of the
mind. They foment bad paflions. They
weaken the manly powers. They fink
the native vigour of youth, into contemp.
tible effeminacy.

Redeeming your time from such dan-

gerous waste, seek to fill it with employ-
ments which you may review with satis-
faction. The acquisition of knowledge
is one of the moi honourable occupa-
tions of youth. The desire of it disco-
vers a liberal mind, and is conneced with

many

many accomplishments, and many virtues. s E R M.
But though your train of life should not '--
lead you to study, the course of educa-
tion always furnishes proper employments
to a well-difpofed mind. Whatever you
pursue, be emulous to excel. Generous
ambition, and sensibility to praise, arc, es-
pecially at your age, among the marks of
virtue. Think not, that any affluence of
fortune, or any elevation of rank, exempts
you from the duties of application and
industry. Industry is the law of our be-
ing; it is the demand of Nature, of
Reason, and of God. Remember always,
that the years which now pass over your
heads, leave permanent memorials behind
them. From your thoughtless minds they
may escape; but they remain in the re-
membrance of God. They form an im-
portant part of the register of your life.
They will hereafter bear testimony, either
for or against you, at that day, when, for
all your ations, but particularly for the
employments of youth, you must give an
account to God.

Z THus

s E R M. THUS I have set before you, some of

XI.
'-,--^ the chief qualifications which belong to

that fober mind, that virtuous and religi-
ous character, which the ApoRle in my
Text recommends to youth; piety, mo-
defly, truth, benevolence, temperance,
and indufiry. Whether your future
course is defiined to be long or short, after
this manner it should commence; and, if
it continue to be thus conduCted, its con-
clufion, at what time soever it arrives, will
not be inglorious or unhappy. For, ho-
nourable age is not that which Jlandeth in
length of time, or that which is meafuired
by number of years. Buit wiftdom is the
gray hair to man, and an unspotted life is
old age.

LET me finifhi the subjed, with recall-

ing your attention to that dependence on
the blessing of H-Iavcn, which, amidst all
your endeavours after improvement, you
ought continually to preserve. It is too
common with the young, even when they
resolve
' to tread the path of virtue and

honour,

honour, to set out with presumptuous con- s E R M.
fidence in themselves. Trufling to their 'v-,
own abilities for carrying them successful-
ly through life, they are careless of ap-
plying to God, or of deriving any assist-
ance from what they are apt to reckon
the gloomy discipline of religion. Alas !
how little do they know the dangers which
await them ? Neither human wisdom, nor
human virtue, unsupported by religion,
are equal for the trying situations which
often occur in life. By the shock of tempt-
ation, how frequently have the moil vir-
tuous intentions been overthrown ? Un-
der the pressure of difafRer, how often has
the greatest constancy funk? Euvery good
and every perfecf glift, is from above. Wis-
dom and virtue, as well as riches and ho-
nour, come Jrom God. Destitute of his fa-
vour, you are in no better situation, with
all your boasted abilities, than orphans
left to wander in a trackless desert, with-
out any guide to condut them, or any
shelter to cover them from the gathering
storm. Corret, then, this ill-founded ar-

Z 2 rogance.

S E R M. rogance. Exped not, that your happiness

XI.
---v- can be independent of him who made

youth. By faith and repentance, apply to
the Redeemer of the world. By piety
and prayer, leek the protection of the God
of heaven. I conclude with the solemn
words, in which a great Prince delivered
his dying charge to his son words, which
every young person ought to confider as
addrefied to himself, and to engrave deep-
ly on his heart. Thou Solomon, my Jon, know
thozu the God of thy fathers and serve him
with a perfecl heart, and with a willing
mind. For the Lord fearcheth all hearts,
and unzde;jiandeth all the imaginations of the
thoughts. If thou seek him, he will be found
of thee ; but if thou forsake him, he qwill
caji thee off for ever .

x Chron. xxviii. 9.'

S E A-

# SERMON. XII. On the DUTIES and CONSOLATIONS of the AGED. PROV. xvi. 31. The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.

L 34I 3

S E R M O N. XL.
On the DUTIES and CONSOLA-

TIONS of the AGED.

PRo v. xvi. 31.
The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be

found in the way of righteeofnzeJs.

T O fear God, and to keep his command- S R R M.
tlents, is the rule of our duty, in eve- ,_
ry period of life. But, as the light which
guides our steps, varies with the progress
of the day, so the rule of religious con-
duat is diversified in its application, by the
different stages of our present exiflence.
To every age, therebelongs a distinct pro-
priety of behaviour. There arises from it,
a series of duties peculiar to itself.

Of

S E R M. Of those which are incumbent on youth,

XII, ,-.vi-- I have treated in the preceding discourse.

As we advance from youth to middle
age, a new field of action opens, and a
different character is required. The flow
of gay and impetuous spirits begins to
subside. Life gradually aflumes a graver
cast ; the mind, a more sedate and thought-
ful turn. The attention is now trans-
ferred from pleasure to interest; that is,
to pleasure diffused over a wider extent,
and measured by a larger scale. Former..
ly, the enjoyment of the present moment
occupied the whole attention. Now, no
action terminates ultimately in itfclf, but
refers to some more distant aim. Wealth
and power, the instruments of lafling
gratification, are now coveted more than
any single pleasure. Prudence and fore-
fight lay their plans. Industry carries on
its patient efforts. ACivity pushes for-
ward; address winds around. Here, an
enemy is to be overcome; there a rival
to be displaced. Competitions warm ; and
the strife of the world thickens on every

fide,

fide, to guide men through this busy pe- s 1 Ml.
riod, without loss of integrity; to guard --.
them against the temptations which arise
from mistaken, or interfering, interests;
to call them from worldly pursuits, to fc-
rious thoughts of their spiritual concerns,
is the great office of religion.

But as this includes, in a great measure,

the whole compass of moral duty; as the
general strain of religious exhortation is
addressed to those who are in this season
of life; a delineation of the virtues, pro-
perly belonging to middle age, may ap-
pear unnecessary, 'and would lead us in-
to too wide a field. Let us therefore turn
our view to a bounded profpedt; and con-
template a period of life, the duties of
which are circumscribed within narrow-
er limits. Old age is a fiage of the hu-
man course, which every one hopes to
reach.; and therefore the consideration of
it, interests us all. It is a period juflly
entitled to general refpet:. Even its fail-
ings ought to be touched with a gentle
hand; and though the petulant, and the

vain,

s E R M. vain, may despise the hoary head, yet the

XII.
»-v wisest of men has asserted in the Text, that

when found in the way of righteozfineJs, it
is a crown of glory. I ihall, first, offer some
counsels, concerning the errors which are
most incident to the aged. Secondly, I
shall suggest the peculiar duties they ought
to praCtise ; and, thirdly, point out the
consolations they may enjoy.

I As the follies and vices of youth, are

chiefly derived from inexperience and pre-
fumption; so, almost all the errors of
age, may be traced up to the feebleness
and distress peculiar to that time of life.
Though, in every part of life, vexati-
ons occur, yet, in former years, either
business, or pleasure, served to obliterate
their impression, by supplying occupati-
on to the mind. Old age begins its advan-
ces, with disqualifying men for relishing
the one, and for taking an active part in
the other. While it withdraws their accuf-
tomed supports, it imposes, at the fame
time, the additional burden of growing

infirmities.

«..

infirmities. In the former Rfages of their s E :R M3.
journey, hope continued to flatter them
with many a fair and enticing profped.
But in proportion as old age increases,
those pleasing illusions vanish. Life is
contracted within a narrow and barren
circle. Year after year, steals somewhat
away from their store of comfort, deprives
them of tome of their ancient friends,
blunts some of their powers of fenfati-
on, or incapacitates them for some func-
tion of life.

Though, in the plan of Providence, it

is wifely ordered, that before we are call-
ed away from the world, our attach-
ment to it should be gradually loosened;
though it be fit in itself, that as in the
day of human life, there is a morning and
a noon, so there should be an evening
also, when the lengthening shadows shall
admonish us of approaching night; yet
we have no reason to be surpriscd, if
they who are arrived at this dejeting
season, feel and lament the change which
they fuifer. The complaints, therefore,

of

s E R M. of the aged, should meet with tenderness,

XII.
'---v rat';er than censure. The burden under

which they labour, ought to be viewed
with sympathy, by those who must bear
it in their turn, and who perhaps, here-
after, may complain of it as bitterly. At
the fame time, the old should confider,
that all the seasons of life have their fe-
veral trials allotted to them ; and that to
bear the infirmities of age with becoming
patience, is as much their duty, as it is
that of the young to refifi the temptations
of youthful pleasure. By calmly endur-
ing, for the short time that remains, what
Providence is pleated to inflic, they both
express a resignation most acceptable to
God, and recommend themselves to the
efleeml and affiflance of all who are around
them.

But though the querulous temper im-

puted to old age, is to be confidered as a
natural infirmity, rather than as a vice;
the fame apology cannot be made for that
peevish disgust at the manners, and that
malignant censure of the enjoyments, of

the

the young, which is sometimes found to S ER M.

XII.

accompany declining years. Nothing can ----
be more unjust, than to take offence at
others, on account of their partaking of
pleasures, which it is par your time to en-
joy. By indulging this fretful temper,
you both aggravate the uneasiness of age,
and you alienate those on whose afiedion
much of your comfort depends. In order
to make the two extremes of life unite in
amicable society, it is greatly to be wished,
that the young would look forward, and
confider that they fiall one day be old;
and that the old would look back, and re-
membering that they once were young,
make proper allowances for the temper and
the manners of youth.

But instead of this, it is too common

to find the aged at declared enmity with
the whole system of present customs and
manners; perpetually complaining of the
growing depravity of the world, and of
the astonishing vices and follies of the
rising generation. All things, according
to them, are ruihing fast into ruin. De-

cency

E R M. cency and good order have become extint,

- ever iince that happy discipline, under

which they spent their youth, has passed
away.--- Part, at least, of this dif-
pleasure, you may fairly impute to the
infirmity of age, which throws its own
gloom on every surrounding objec. Si-
milar lamentations were, in the days of
your youth, poured forth by your fathers
and they who are now young, ihall, when
it comes to their turn, inveigh, in the
like strain, againfi those who succeed
them. Great has been the corruption of
the world in every age. Sufficient ground
there is for the complaints made by feri-
ous observers, at all times, of abounding
iniquity and folly. But though particu-
lar modes of vice prevail in one age, more
than in others, it does not follow, that
on that age all iniquity is accumulated.
It is the form, perhaps, more than the
quantity of corruption, which makes the
diftinltion. In the worst of times, God
has aflured us, that there shall be always
a feed who fJ3all jerve him +. Say not thou,

* Phal. xxii. 30.

tJhJat

W/hat is the cazfe that the former days were s EXl M.
better than these ? for thou dost not enquire '-
wifely concerning this. Be not righteous over-
much; neither make thyself over-wife *:. For-
mer follies pass away, and are forgotten.
Those which are present, firike obferva-
tion, and sharpen censure. Had the de-
pravation of the world continued to in-
crease in proportion to those gloomy cal-
culations, which, for so many centuries
past, have estimated each race as worse
than the preceding; by this time, not one
ray of good sense, nor one spark of piety
and virtue, mutt have remained unextin-
guifhed among mankind.

One of the vices of old age, which ap-

pears the most unaccountable, is that co-
vetous attachment to worldly interefi, with
which it is often charged. But this too,
can naturally be deduced fromn the sense of
its feebleness and decay. In proportion as
the vigour both of body and mind declines,
timidity may be expeced to increase. With
anxious and fearful eye, the aged look for-

* Eccles. vii. 10. 16.

ward

s E R rii. ward to the evils which threaten theni,

XII.
-- ~-- and to the changes which may befall.

Hence, they are sometimes apt to over-
value riches, as the initrument of their
defence against these dangers, and as the
moil certain means of securing them a-
gainft solitude and difrefpet. But though
their apprehensions may justify a cautious

ugality, they can by no means excuse
a fordid avarice. It is no less absurd,
than it is culpable, in the old, from the
dread of uncertain futurity, to deny them-
selves the enjoyment of the present:;
and to increase in anxiety about their
journey, in proportion as it draws nearer
to its close. There are more effectual
methods of commanding refpeEt from the
world, than the mere possession of wealth.
Let them be charitable, and do good.
Let them mix beneficence to their friends,
with a cheerful enjoyment of the com-
forts which befit their slate. They will
then receive the returns of real respeCt
and love. Whereas, by their riches,
they procure no more than pretended

demon-

demonstrations of regard ; while their ill- s ER M.
judged parsimony occasions many secret ---
wishes for their death.

As increaiing years debilitate the bo-

dy, so cthey weaken the force, and dimi-
nihf the warmth of the affections. Chill-
ed by the hand of time, the heart loses
that tender feniibility, with which it once
entered into the concerns and sorrows of
others. It is, in truth, a merciful ap-
pointment of Providence, that as they
who fee many days, mufI behold many
a fad scene, the imprefions of grief upon
their heart ihould be blunted by being
often repeated ; and that, in proportion
as their power of advancing the profpe-
rity of others decrcafe, their partici-
pation of tle misfortunes of others
£hould also leilen. However, as in eve-
ry period of life, humanity and friend-
ship contribute to happiness, it is both
the duty and the interest of the aged, to
cheriih the remains of the kind assec-
tions; and, from the days of former
years, to recall such impreilons as may

tend

E R N. tend to soften their hearts. Let them
XII.
~i--v~ not, from having suffered much in the

course of their long pilgrimage, become
callous to the sufferings of others. But,
remembering that they flill are men, let
them fludy to keep their heart open to
the sense of human woe. Pradifed in
the ways of men, they are apt to be
suspicious of design and fraud; for the
knowledge, and the difiruft of mankind,
too often go together. Let not, how-
ever, that wary caution, which is the
fruit of their experience, degenerate into
craft. Experience ought also to have
taught them, that amidit all the falsehood
of men, integrity is the beit defence; and
that he who continueth to the end to walk
uprightly, shall continue to walk surely.
iaving thus offered some admonitions
concerning the errors moit incident to age,
I proceed,

II. To point out the duties which pecu-
liarly belong to it.

rI~
- The

The firfR which I shall mention, is, a s E R M.

XIL

timely retreat from the world. In every '
part of life, we are in hazard of being too
deeply immersed in its cares. But, during
its vigorous periods, the impulse of active
spirit, the necessary business of our ifation,
and the allowable endeavours to advance
our fortune by fair indufiry, render it dif-
ficult to observe due moderation. In old
age, all the motives of eager pursuit dimi-
nit. The voice of nature then calls you
to leave to others the bustle and contest of
the world; and gradually to disengage
yourselves from a burden which begins to
exceed your itrength. Having born your
share of the heat and labour of the day, let
the evening of life be passed in the cool and
quiet shade. It is only in the shade, that
the virtues of old age can flourish. There
its duties are discharged with molt success;
and there, its comforts are enjoyed with
greatest fatisfadion.

By the retreat of old age, however, I
do .not mean a total cessation from every

A a worldly

s ra R M4. worldly employment. There is an error
'~--.-- in this, as well as in the opposite extreme.

Persons who have been long harraffed with
business and care, sometimes imagine, that
when life declines, they cannot make their
retirement from the world too complete.
But where they expeted adelicious enjoy-
ment of leisure and ease, they have often
found a melancholy solitude. Few are able,
in any period of their days, to bear a total
abflraction from the world. There remains
a vacancy, which they cannot fill up.
Incapable of being always employed in
the exercises of religion, and often little
qualified for the entertainments of the
understanding, they are in hazard of be-
coming a burden to themselves, and to
all with whom they are conneted. It
is, therefore, the duty of the aged, not so
much to withdraw entirely from worldly
business, as to contract its circle; not so
much to break off, as to loosen their
communication with active life. Conti-
nuing that train of occupation to which

they

they have been most accustomed, let S E M.
them pursue it with less intenseness; re- *--
laxing their efforts, as their powers de-
cline; retiring more and more, from
public observation, to domestic scenes,
and serious thoughts; till as the decays
of life advance, the world shall of itself
withdraw to a greater distance from their
view; its objects ihall gradually yield
their place to others of more importance
and its tumults shall found in their ears,
only like a noise which is heard from
afar.

If it be the duty of the old, to retreat

betimes from the fatigue of worldly care,
it is fiill more incumbent on them, to
quit the pursuit of such pleasures as are
unsuitable to their years. Cheerfulness,
in old age, is graceful. It is the natural
concomitant of virtue. But the cheer-
fulness of age is widely different from the
levity of youth. Many things are allow-
able in that early period, which, in ma-
turer years, would deserve censure; but
which, in old age, both become ridiculous

A a 2 and

s E R M. and criminal. By awkwardly affejing
'- --, to imitate the manneis, and to mingle in

the vanities of the young, as the aged
depart from the dignity, so they forfeit
the privileges of gray hairs. But if, by
follies of this kind,- they are degraded,
they are expoied to much deeper blame,
by dedicending to vicious pleasure, and
contintiing to hoeitr round those sinful
gratifications to which they were once
addicted. Amuse-ment and relaxation the
aged require, and may enjoy. But let-
them confider well, that by every intem-
perate indulgence, they accelerate decay;
instead of enliveiling, they oppress, and
precipitate, their declining filte.. Ease,
safety, and respect, are the proper enjoy-
ments of age. Within -these bounds let it
remain, and not vainly attempt-to break
through .that 'barrier, by which nature
has separated the pleasures of youth, from
the comforts left to the concluding years
of life.

A material part of the duty of the
aged,. confifis, -in fiudying to- be useful

.... to

to the race who are to succeed them. s ERIM.
Here opens to them an extensive field --- -
in which they may so employ themselves
as co.ifiderably to advance the interef .of
religion, and the happiness of mankind.
To them it belongs, to impart to the
young the fruit of their long experience;
to inftrudt them in the proper conduct,
and to warn them of the various dangers,
of life; by wife counsel, to temper their
precipitate ardour; and both by precept
and example, to form them to piety and
virtue.

It is not by rigorous difeipline, and

unrelaxing aufserity, that they can main-
tain an ascendant over youthful minds.
The constraint which their pretence wvill
impose, and the aversion which their
manners will create, if the o:ne be con-
fiantly aweful, and the other fevcre, tend
to frustrate the effect of all their wisdom.
They must assume the spirit of the com-
panion, and the friend; and mix with
the authority of the age, a proper degree of
indulgence to the manners of the young.

I IInftead

s E R M. arld crhiinal. By awkwardly affecing
---^--t to imitate the mantnei1s and to mingle in

the vanities of the young, as the aged
depart from the dignity, so they forfeit
the privileges of gray hairs. But if, by
follies of this kind, they are degraded,
they are exposcd to much deeper blame,
by descending to vicious pleasure, and
continuing to hover round those sinful
gratifications to which they were once
addiEced. Amusement and relaxation the
aged require, and may enjoy. But let -
them confider well, that by every intemr
perate indulgence, they -accelerate decay;
.instead of enlivening, they oppress, and
precipitate, their declining state.- Ease,
safety, and refpet, are the proper enjoy-
ments of age. Within these bounds let it
remain, and not vainly attempt- to break
through .that -barrier, by which nature
has separated the pleasures of youth, from
-the comforts left to the concluding years
of life.

A. material part -of the duty of -the
aged,. confifis, -i-n 'ludyin:g to- be -feful

to

to the race who are to succeed them. s E IM.

XIH; :

Here opens to them an extensive field -
in which they may so employ themselves
as co .fiderably to advance the interef. of
religion, and the happiness of mankind.
To them it belongs, to impart to the
young the fruit of their long experience;
to inftruEt them in the proper condud,
and to warn them of the various dangers,
of life; by wife counsel, to temper their
precipitate ardour; and both by precept
and example, to form them to piety and
virtue.

It is not by rigorous discipline, and

unrelaxing austerity, that they can main-
tain an ascendant over youthful minds.
The constraint which their presence will
impose, and the aversion which their
manners will create, if the o.e be con-
ftantly aweful, and the other fevcre, tend
to frustrate the cffed of all their wisdom.
They must assume the spirit of the com-
panion, and the friend; and mix with
the authority of the age, a proper degree of
indulgence to the manners of the young.

1 Instead

S E RM. Instead of lessening the refped due to
A-_-=L their years by such condescension, they

take the surest method to increase it. Old
age never appears with greater dignity
than when tempered by mildness, and
enlivened with good humour, it adts as
the guide and the patron of youth. Reli-
gion displayed in such a charaCter, strikes
the beholders, as at once amiable and
venerable. They revere its power,. when
they fee it adding so much grace to the
decays of nature, and shedding so pleasing
a lustre over the evening of life. The
young wish to tread in the fame Rfeps,
and to arrive at the close of their days
with equal honour. They liften with at-
tention to counsels, which are mingled
with tenderness, and rendered refpedable
by gray hairs. For notwithstanding all
its presumption, youth naturally bends
before fuperiour knowledge and years.
Aged wisdom, when joined with acknow-
ledged virtue, exerts an authority over
the human mind, greater even than that
which arises from power and station. It

can

can check the mofi forward, abash the most s El R ^I
profligate, and strike with awe the most -v
giddy and unthinking.

In; the midtf of their endeavours to be

useful to others, let not the aged forget
those religious employments, which their
own slate particularly requires. The firit
of there, is reflecion on their past beha-
viour, with a view to discover the.errors
which they have committed; and, as far
as remaining life allows, to apply them-
selves to repentance and amendment.----
Long has the world bewildered you in its
maze, and imposed upon you by its arts.
The time is now come, when this great
seducer should mislead you no more.
From the calm station at which you are
arrived, sequestered from the crowd of
the deceiving and the deceived, review
your condu6t, with the eye of Christians
and immortal beings. After all the tu-
mult of life is over, what now remains to
afford you solid fatisfation? Have you
served God with fidelity, and discharged
your part to your fellow-creatures with

integrity

E R M. integrity and a good conscience? Can
r-y---- you look forward, without terrour, to

that day which is to dissolve your con-
nection with this world, and to bring
you into the presence of him who made
you, in order to give account of your
actions ?---The retrofped of life is seldom
wholly unattended by uneasiness and
shame. Though, to the good and the
bad, it presents a very different scene;
yet, to all men, it recalls much guilt
incurred, and much time mifpent. It
too much resembles the review, which a
traveller takes from some eminence, of a
barren country, through which he has
passed, where the heath and the defart
form the chief profpet; diversified only
by a few scattered spots of imperfet cul-
tivation.

Turn then your thoughts to the proper

methods of making your peace with God
through Jesus Christ; and implore, from
Divine grace, that new heart, and right
spirit, which will fit you for a better
world. Let devotion fill up many of

those

those hours, which are now vacant from s E I M.
worldly business and care. Let your as- -
fetions dwell among divine and immor-
tal objecs. In silent and thoughtful me-
ditation, walk as on the shore of that vast
ocean, upon which you are soon to em-
bark. Summon up all the confiderati-
ons, which should reconcile you to your
departure from life ; and which may pre-
pare you for going through its last scene,
with firmness and decency. Often let
your thanksgivings ascend to God, for
that watchful care with which he hath
hitherto conducted you, through the long
journey of life. Often let your pray-
ers be heard, that, in what remains of
your pilgrimage, he may not forsake you;
and that, when you enter into the val-
ley of the Jhadow of death, he may there
support you with his Jtff, and defend you
with his rod.---Amidft such thoughts and
cares, let old age find you employed; be-
taking yourselves to a prudent and timely
retreat; disengaged, both from the op-
preffive load of business, and from the

unfeafon-

s E R I. unseasonable pursuit of pleasure; apply.

XII.
--^- ing yourselves to form the succeeding race,

by your counlels to virtue and wisdom;
reviewing seriously your pati life; by re-
pentance and devotion, preparing your-
selves for a better; and,, with humble
and manly composure, expecting that hour,
which Nature cannot now long delay.. It
remains,

III. To suggest the consolations which

belong to old age, when thus found in the
way of righleoufizefs.

I muit introduce them with observing,

That nothing is more reasonable in itself,
than to submit patiently to those infirmi-
ties of Nature, which are, brought on by
the increase of years. You knew before-
hand what, you had to expea, when you
numbered the fucceflive Summers and
Winters which were parsing over your
heads. Old age did. not attack you by
surprise, nor- was it forced upon you
against your choice. Often, and earnest-
ly, did you wiifh to fee long. life, and many

dayss

days. When arrived at the desired period, s E R M.
have you any just cause to complain, on
account of enduring what the constitution
of bur being imposes on all? Did you ex-
pect, that, 'for your fake, Providence was
to alter its eftabliihed order ? Throughout
the whole vegetable, sensible, and rational
world, whatever makes progress towards
maturity, as soon as it has pasted that
- point, begins to verge towards decay. It
is as natural for old age to be frail, as for
the corn to bend under the ripened ear,
or for the autumnal leaf to change its
hue. To this law, all who went before
you, have submitted; and all who shall
come after you, must yield. After they
have flourished for a fcafon, they fliall
fade, like you, when the period of decline
arrives, and bow under the pressure of
years.

During the whole progress of the hu-

man course, the principal materials of
our comfort, or uneafincfs, lie within our-
selves. Every age will prove burdensome,
to those who have no fund of happiness

in

S E R M in their own breast. Preserve them, if you

XII.
a-_.-- could, from all infirmity of frame; beflow

upon them, if it were possible, perpetual
youth; still they would be refules and mi-
ferable, through the influence of ill-go-
verned pafiions. It is not surprising, that
such persons are peevish, and querulous,
when old. Unjufily they impute to their
time of life, that misery with which their
vices and follies embitter every age.
Whereas, to good men, no period of life
is unsupportable, because they draw their
chief happiness from sources which are in-
dependent of age or time. Wisdom, pie-
ty, and virtue, grow not old with our bo-
dies. They susser no decay from length of
days. To them only belongs unalterable
and unfading youth. IThofJ that he plant-
ed in the house of the Lord, Jhall flouriat in
the courts of our God. They Jhall Jfill bring
forth fruit in old age; they Jhall be fat and
flouriJting*.

You can now, it is true, no longer re-
liih many of those pleasures which once

* Pfal. xcii. 13, 14.

amus~ed

amused you. Your sensations are less s ER M.
quick than formerly; your days more --
languifling. But if you have quitted the
region of pleasure, in return, you poisess
that of tranquillity and repose. If you are
firangers to the vivacity of enjoymcnt,
you are free, at the fame time, from the
pain of violent and often disappointed
desire. Much fatigue, much vexation, as
well as vanity, attend that turbulence of
life, in which the younger part of man-
kind are engaged. Amidit those keen pur-
suits, and seeming pleasures, for which
you envy them, often they feel their own
misery, and look forward with awifhful
eye to the season of calmness and retreat.
For, on all fides of human life, the ba-
lance of happiness is adjusted with more
equality than at firfi appears; and if old
age throws some new diitreffes into the
scale, it lightens also the weight of others.
Many passions, which formerly disturb-
ed your tranquillity, have now subsided.
Many competitions, which long filled
your days with disquiet and firife, are now

at

s E R M. at an end. Many afflictions, which once

XI.

_-v--I rent your hearts with violent anguish, are

now softened into a tender emotion, on
the remembrance of pail woe. In the be-
ginnings of life, there was room for much
apprehension concerning what might be-
fall in its progress. Your security was
never untroubled. Your hopes were inter-
rupted by many anxieties and fears. Hav-
ing finished the career of labour and dan-
ger, your anxiety ought of course to lessen.
Ready to enter into the harbour, you can
look back, as from a secure Riation, upon
the perils you have escaped, upon the tem-
peit by which you was toffed, and upon
the multitudes who are flill engaged in con-
fliting with the florm.

If you have adced your part with in-

tegrity and honour, you are justly entitled
to refpet, and you will generally receive
it. For rarely, or never, is old age con-
temned, unless when, by vice or folly,
it renders itself contemptible. Though
length of time may have worn off super-
ficial ornaments, yet, what old age loses

in

in grace, it often gains in dignity. The s E l M.
veneration, as was before observed, which -----
gray hairs command, puts it in the power
of the aged, to maintain a very important
place in human society. They are so far
from being insignificant in the world, that
families long held together by their autho-
rity, and societies accustomed to be guided
by their counlels, have frequently had
cause to regret their loss, more than that of
the moil vigorous and young. To success
of every kind, the head which directs, is
no lefs-effential than the hand which exe-
cutes. Vain, nay, often dangerous, were
youthful enterprise, if not conduEted by
aged prudence. 1 said, Days Jhould J'peak,
and multituzde of years. Jhould teacbh wijdom
ITerefore, thou Jflalt rfiJ tup before the hoary
head, and honour the fawe of the old man,
and fear thy God 1-.

Though, in old age,. the circle of your

pleasures is more contracted than it has
formerly been; yet, within its limits,
many of those enjoyments remain, which

* Job xxiii. 7. t Lev. xix. 32.

are

s E R M. are mofi grateful to human nature. Temrn
'-^--. perate mirth, is not extinguished by ad-

vanced years. The mild pleasures of do-
meeflic life, still cheer the heart. The
entertainments of conversation, and social
intercourse, continue unimpaired. The
desire of knowledge, is not abated by
the frailty of the body; and the leisure
of old age, affords many opportunities
for gratifying that desire. The sphere of
your observation and reflecion, is so
much enlarged by long acquaintance with
the world, as to supply, within itself, a
wvide range of improving thought. To
recall the various revolutions which have
occurred since you began to aft your part
in life; to compare the characters of pail
and present times; to trace the hand of Pro-
vidence, in all the incidents of your own
lot; to contemplate, with thoughtful eye,
the successive new appearances which the
Nworld has assumed around you, in govern-
ment, education, opinions, cufloms, and
modes of living; these are employments,
nolefs entertaining, than infirudive to the
.mind. While

While you are engaged in such employ- S E R.M
ments, you are perhaps surrounded with <-
your families, who treat you with atten-
tion and refpedt; you are honoured by
your friends i your character is eftablifhl-
ed; you are placed beyond the reach of
clamour, and the /trife of tongues; and,
free from diflradcing cares, you can at-
tend calmly to your eternal interests. For
such comforts as these, have you not
cause mofi thankfully to acknowledge the
goodness of Heaven? Do they not as-
ford you ground to pass the remainder
of your days in resignation and peaoe;
disposing yourselves to rife in due time,
like satisfied guests, from the banquet
that has been set before you; and to
praise and bless, when you depart, the
great Master of the feast ? To a man that
is good in his Aiht, whether he be young
or old, God giveth wisdom, and knowledge,
and joy. For every season of life, the be-
nignity of his providence hath prepared
its own fatisfadtions, while his wisdom
hath appointed its peculiar trials. No

B b age

E R M. age is doomed to total infelicity; provid-
<-4-.- ed that we attempt not to do violence to

Nature, by seeking to extort from one age,
the pleasures of another; and to gather,
in the Winter of life, those flowers which
were destined to blossom, only in its Sum-
mer, or its Spring.

BUT perhaps it will be said, That I

have confidered old age, only in its first
stages, and in its most favourable point
of light; before the faculties are as yet
much impaired, and when disease or as-
fliction has laid no additional load on the
burden of years. Let us then view it,
with all its aggravations of difirefs. Let
us suppose it arrived at its utmost verge,
worn out with infirmities, and bow-
ed down by sickness and sorrow. Still
there remains this consolation, that it
is not long ere the weary JJ7all be at reft.
Having passed through so many. of the
toils of life, you may now, surely,
when your pilgrimage touches on its
close,. bear, without extreme impatience,

the

the hardships of its concluding ltage. S EXRM.
From the inestimable promises of the ---
Gospel, and from the gracious pretence
of God, the afflictions of old age cannot
seclude you. Though your heart Jhould
begin to faint, and your flejh to fail, there
is One, who can be the flrength of your
heart, and your portion for ever. Even to
your old age, faith the Lord, 1 am He; and
even to hoary hairs, will I carry you. I
have made, and I will bear; even I will car-
ry, and will deliver you *. Leave thy Jfther-
lefi children; I will preserve them alive;
and let thy widows trufJ in met.

There is undoubtedly a period, when

there ought to be a satiety of life, as
there is of all other things; and when
death should be viewed, as your merci-
ful dismission from a long warfare. To
come to the grave in a full age, like as a
Jhock of corn cometb in, in its season t, is
the natural termination of the human
course. Amidst multiplying infirmities,
to prolong life beyond its usual bounds,

* Ifa. xlvi. 4. t Jer. xlix. ii. t Job v. 26.

B b 2 and

E R M. and to draw out, your exifence here to
-^^ the last and:;.fouleft: dregs, ought not to

be the wish of any wife man. Is it de-
firable, to continue lingering on the bor-
ders of. the grave, after every tie which
connects you with life is broken; and to
be left a solitary individual, in the midst
of a- new generation, whose faces you
hardly know? The lhades of your de-
parted friends rife up before you, and
warn you, that .it is time to depart.
Nature and providence summon you, to
be gathered to your fathers. Reason. ad-
moniffies you, that as your predecessors
made way for.:you, it is juft.that you
should. yi'ed- your place to tho.se,, who.
hav'e arifei' to' fiiiceed you' on this busy
sage ;: who, for a while, .fiall fill it
with .-their actions and their sufferings,
their- virtues and their crimes; and. then'
ihall, 'in their turn, withdraw, and be
joined to the forgotten. multitudes of for-
mer ages. .

Could death indeed b - 'confidered in
no other view, than as the close of life,

I . it

it would afford only a melancholy re- s E R IM
treat. The total extintion of being, is
a thought which human nature, in its
mofi difirefed circumflances, cannot bear
without dejedion. But, blessed be God!
far other profpeas revive the spirits of
the aged, who have spent their life in
piety and virtue. To them, death is
not the extinction, but the renovation of
the living principle; its removal from
the earthly hozufe of this tabernacle, to the
house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens. Having "fought the good ight ;
having fTiJzJed their couife, and kept the
faith; there is laid zp for them the crown
of righteouizeJs. The Saviour of the
world hath not only brought immortality
to light, but placed it within the reach of
their hope and trust. By making atone-
ment for their guilt, he hath pre-
pared their way with in the veil; and fe-
cured to them, the possession of an in-
heritance, incorruptible and undejiled, re-
'erved in the heavens.-----Such are the
hopes and profpeds, which cheer the

sorrows

S E R M. sorrows of old age, and surmount the fear
-v--, 3 of death. Faith and piety are the only ade-

quate supports of human nature, in all its
great emergencies. After they have guided
us through the various trials of life, they
uphold us, at last, amidst the ruins of this
falling frame; and when the Jilver cord is
jufi ready to be loosed, and the golden bowl to
be broken; when the pitcher is broken at the
fountain, and the wheel broken at the cistern;
they enable us to fay, 0 Death where is
thy fling ? 0 Gravel where is thy vitory ?

FSER-

# SERMON XIII. On the POWER of CONSCIENCE. GENESIS xlii. 21, 22. And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us ; ...

[ 375 3

S E R M O N XII.
On the Po w ER f CONSCIENCE.

GENN s I s xii. 21, 22,
.And they said one to another, We are verily

guilty concerning our brother, in that we
Jw the angztii7J of his fozul, when he be-
btight us; and we woulod not hear: There-
fore is this distress come upon us. And
Reuben anJfwered them, faying, Spake I not
unto you, faying, Do. not fin againjl the
child; and ye would not hear? Therefore,
behold also his blood is required.

T H I S book of Genesis displays a more s E R M.
singular and interesting scene, than was xm[.
ever presented to the world, by any
other hiflorical record. It carries us back

to

s x. R M. to the beginning of time; and exhibits
-m-v-', mankind, in their infant and rising fate.

It Shows us human manners in their pri-
mitive simplicity, before the arts of refine-
ment had polished the behaviour, or dif-
guised the characters of men; when they
gave vent to their passions without ~diffi-
mulation, and spoke their sentiments
without reserve. Few great societies were,
as yet, formed on the earth. Men lived
in scattered tribes. The transaCtions of fa-
milies made the chief materials of history;
and they are related in this book, with that
beautiful simplicity, which, in thehigheft
degree, both delights the imagination, and
affects the heart.

Of all the patriarchal histories, that of

Joseph and his brethren is the most re-
markable, for the characers of the. actors,
the inflructive nature of the events, and
the surprising revolutions of worldly for-
tune. As far as relates to the Text, and
is necessary for explaining it, the flory is
to the following purpose.--- -Joseph, the
youngest, except one, of the sons of

Jacob,

Jacob, was distinguished by his father s E M-.

XIII.

with such marks of peculiar affection, as A
excited the envy of his brethren. Having
related to them, in the openness of his
heart, certain dreams which portended his
fulture advancement above them, their
jealousy rose to such a height, that they
unnaturally conspired his deftrudrion.
Seizing the opportunity of his being at
a distance from home, they first threw
him into a pit, and afterwards fold him
for a slave imposing on their father, by
a false relation of his death. When they
had thus gratified their resentment, they
loft all remembrance of their crime. 'he
family of Jacob was rich and powerful;
and several years pafied away, during
which they lived in prosperity without
being touched, as far as appears, with the
least remorse for the cruel deed which
they had committed.

Mean while Joseph was safely con-

duQed, by the hand of Providence,
through a variety of dangers, until,
from the lowest condition, he rose at

last

S E R M. last to be chief favourite of the King of

XIII
x,- Egypt, the most powerful monarch at

that time in the world. While he post
fefled this high dignity, a general famine
distressed all the neighbouring countries.
In Egypt alone, by means of his fore-
fight, and prudent adminifiration, plenty
still reigned. Compelled to have recourse
to that kingdom for supply of food, the
brethren of Joseph, upon this occasion,
appeared in his presence, and made their
humble application to him, for liberty to
purchafe-corn; little suspeCting the Go-
vernour of the land, before whom they
bowed down their fJzces to the earth, to be
him, whom, long ago, they had fold as a
slave to the Ishmaelites. But Joseph no
sooner saw, than he knew his brethren;
and, at this unexpeced meeting, his
heart melted within him. Fraternal ten-
dernefs arose, in all his warmth; and
totally effaced, from its generous breast,
the imprefion of their ancient cruelty.
Though, from that moment, he began to
prepare for them a furprize of joy; yet

he

he so far constrained himself, as to assume s E R M.
an appearance of great severity. By this
he intended, both to oblige them to bring
into Egypt his youngest and most beloved
brother, whose presence he instantly re-
quired 3 and also, to awaken within them,
a due sense of the crime which they had
formerly perpetrated. Accordingly, his
behaviour produced the designed effect.
For, while they were in this situation,
firangers in a foreign land, where they
had fallen, as they conceived, into ex-
treme distress; where they were thrown
into prison by the Governour, and treated
with rigour, for which they could assign
no cause; the reflection mentioned in
the Text arose in their minds. Con-
science brought to remembrance, their
former fins. It recalled, in particular
their long forgotten cruelty to Joseph;
and without hesitation, they interpreted
their present distress, to be a judgment,
for this crime, inflicted by Heaven. 'They
fJzid, one to another, We are verily guilty
concerning our brother, in that weJaw the

anguijh

s E R M. angliJh of his foul lwSen he besought its, and

we would nbt hear': therefore is this distress
come upon us.---Behold alo his blood is re-
quired.

From this infirueive passage of hifloO

ry, the following observations naturally
arise. I. That a sense of right and wrong
in condut, or of moral good and evil,
belongs to human nature. II. That it pro-
duces an apprehension of merited punish-
ment, when we have committed evil. IIL
That although this inward sentiment be
stifled during the season of prosperity, yet,
in adversity, it will revive. And, IV.
That when it revives, it determines-us to
confider every daifreTs 'which we uffer,
from what cause soever it has arisen, as an
actual inflictioni of punishment by Heaven.
The consideration of there particulars,
will lead us to a very serious view of the
nature of man, and of the government of
God.

I. THERE belongs to human nature, a
Ienfe of moral good and evil, or a fa-

culty

culty which diflinguifies right from wrong, s E RM.
in ahtion and conduEc. They said, one-o 40
another, lWe are vqerily guilty.---In an age
when the law was not yet given, when no
external revelation of the Divine will sub-
sifted, except what had been handed down
among the Patriarchs, from one genera-
tion to another; the brethren of Joseph
reasoned concerning their conduc, upon
the fame moral principles, and were affect-
ed by the fame feelings, of which we are
conscious at this day. Such sentiments
a,re coeval with human nature; for they
are the remains of a law, which was ori-
ginally written in our heart. In the darkefi
regions of the ,earth, and among the rudest
tribes of men, a diftin6tion has ever been
made, between just and unjufi, between a
duty and a crime. Throughout all the in-
tercourfe of human beings, these diftincti-
ons are supposed. They are the founda-
tion of the mutual trust, which the tranfac-
tions of life require; nay, the very enter-
tainments of society constantly appeal to
them. The Hiftorian,who fludies to mag-

nify

S ItR M. nify his hero, by representing him as just

c-- . and generous; the Poet, who seeks to in-

terest the world in his fidions, by engaging
the heart in behalf of distressed virtue; are
sufficient to confute the Sceptic, who denies
any natural perception of a diftinaion in
actions.

But though a sense of moral good and

evil be deeply impressed on the heart of
man, yet it is not offufficient power to re-
gulate his life. in his present corrupted
slate, it-is both too general to afford him
full direction in conduct, and too feeble to
withstand the opposition of contrary prin-
ciples in his nature. It is often perverted,
by ignorance and fuperflition; it is too easily
overcome, by passion and desire. Hence,
the importance of that Divine revelation,
which communicates both light and
strength; which by the infirudive difcove-»
ries it makes, and by the powerful afiiftance
it supplies, it raises man to a station infi-
nitely fuperiour to that which he poffeifes
under the mere light of Nature.

7 It

It is of consequence, however, to re- S E R M.

mark, That this revelation necessarily sup- v
poses an antecedent sense of right and
wrong to take place in the human mind.
It addresses itself to men, as possessed of
such a faculty; and, when it commands
them, in general terms, to pursue what-
soever things are true, whatsoever things
are honefl, whatfoeer things are jzft, pure,
lovely, or of good report, if there be any vir-
tue, and f there be any praise, it plainly
appeals to the native didates of their
heart. Nay, unless men were endowed
by Nature, with some sense of duty, or
of moral obligation, they could reap no
benefit from revelation; they would re-
main incapable of all religion whatever.
For, in vain were a system of duty pre-
fcribed to them by the word of God;
allegiance were in vain required towards
their Creator, or love and gratitude en-
joined towards their Redeemer; if, pre-
vioufly, there was no principle in their
nature, which made them feel the obli-
gations of duty, of allegiance, and of

gratitude.

E R M gratitude. They could have no ideas cor-
v -L responding to such terms; nor any con-

vidion, that, independently of fear or in-
.terest, they were bound to regard, either
him who made, or him who redeemed
them.---This, therefore, is to be held as a
principle fundamental to all religion, That
there is in human nature, an approving or
.condemning sense of conduct; by means
of which, they who have not the law, are a
law unto the/fellves *. They who, from a
mistaken zeal for the honour of Divine re-
velation, either deny the `existence, or vi-
lify. the authority, of natural religion, are
not aware, that, by disallowing the sense
of obligation, they undermine the founda-
tion, on which revelation builds its power
of commanding the heart.

The Text leads us to observe, That one

of the cafes in which the natural sense of
*good and evil operates most forcibly, is,
when men have been guilty of injustice
or inhumanity. We saw the anguish of
our brother's Jful when he besought us, and

* Rom. ii. i4.

qwe

we would not hear. An inward principle s E R M.
prompts us to do good to others; but --
with much greater authority, it checks
and condemns us, when we have done
them injuries. This part of the human
constitution deserves to be remarked, as a
signal proof of the wisdom of its Author,
and of the gracious provision which he
has made for the welfare of mankind.
We are all committed, in some measure,
to the care and afliftance of one another.
But our mutual influence reaches much
farther with refped to the evils, than
with refped to the enjoyments, of those
around us. To advance their prosperity,
is often beyond our ability; but to in-
flia injuries, is almost always within our
power: And, at the fame time, felf-in-
terest very frequently tempts us to commit
them. With the utmost propriety, there-
fore, we are so framed, that the influence
of the moral principle flould be most
authoritative, in cafes where its aid is
most needed; that to promote the hap-
piness of others, should appear to us as

C c praise-

S RI M. praise-worthy, indeed, and generous ; but

_'--' that, to abstain from injuring them, should

be felt as matter of the ftridieft duty.---
Amidst the distress which the Patriarchs
suffered in Egypt, had only this fuggefflon
occurred, " We saw our brother begin-
"ning to prosper, and we contributed not
"to his advancement," their minds would
have been more easily quieted. But, when
their reflection was, We saw his azngidz
when he besought us, and we would not hear,
then compunction turned upon them its
(harpefl edge. I proceed to observe,

II. THAT our natural sense of right

and wrong, produces an apprehension of
merited punishment when we have com-
mitted a crime. When it is employed in
surveying the behaviour of others, it dif-
tinguifhes some actions, as laudable and
excellent; and disapproves of others, as
evil and base. But when it is directed
upon our own conduct, it assumes
a higher office, and exercises the authority

.- . . . - of

of a judge. It is then properly termed, s EiR M.
Conscience; and the sentiments which -
it awakens, upon the perpetration of a
crime, are fiiled, Remorse. I/herefore, said
the brethren of Joseph, is this diJfrefs
come upon us; behold also his blood is re-
quired. They acknowledged, not only that
they had committed a wrong, but a
wrong for which they were juily doom-
ed to susser.

Did not conscience suggest this natural

relation between guilt and punishment,
the mere principle of approbation, or dif-
approbation, with respeCt to moral con-
duc, would prove of small efficacy. For
disapprobation attends, in some degree,
every conviction of impropriety or folly.
When one has acted unsuitably to his in-
terest, or has trespassed against the rules
of prudence or decorum, he reflects upon
his conduc with pain, and acknowledges
that he deserves blame. But the diffe-
rence between the sense of misconduct,
and the sense of guilt, consists in this,
That the latter penetrates much deeper

Cc e into

s E R M. into the heart. It makes the criminal feel,

XIII.
-- --that he is not only blameable, but justly

punishable, for the part which he has ad-
ed. With reference to this office of con-
science, the inspired writers frequently
speak of it, in terms borrowed from the
awful folemnities of judicial procedure;
as, bearing witness for or agailf us ; ac-
czfing or exczCfing, judging and condemning.
It will be found, that in the language of
most nations, terms of the fame import
are applied to the operations of conscience;
expreffiig the sense, which all mankind
have, of its passing sentence upon them,
and pronouncing rewards or punishments
to be due to their ations.

The sense of punishment merited, You

are further to observe, can never be fepa-
rated from the dread, that, at some time
or other, punishment thall be atually in-
flicted. This dread is not confined to the
vengeance of man. For, let the finner's
evil deeds be ever so thoroughly conceal-
ed from the knowledge of the world, his
inward alarms are not quieted by that

consideration.

consideration. Now, punishment is the s Il 4.
fandion of a law. Every law supposes '-
a rightful fuperiour: And therefore,
when conscience threatens punishment to
secret crimes, it manifefily recognizes a
supreme Governour, from whom nothing
is hidden. The belief our being account-
able to him, is what the most harden-
ed wickedness has never been able to
eradicate. It is a belief which arises, not
merely from reasoning, but from internal
sentiment. Conscience is felt to at as
the delegate of an invisible Ruler; both
anticipating his sentence, and foreboding
its execution.

Hence arise the terrours, which so of-

ten haunt guilt, and rife in proportion to
its atrocity. In the history of all nati-
ons, the Tyrant and the Oppressor, the
bloody and the flagitious, have been ever
pointed out, as fearful, unquiet, and reft-
less; subjeCt to alarms and apprehensions
of an unaccountable kind. And surely,
to live under such disquietude, from the
dread of merited punishment, is already

to

S E R M. to undergo one of the moit severe punish-

XIII.

ments which human nature can susser.
When the world threatens us with any
of its evils, we know the extent, and dif-
cern the limits of the danger. We fee the
quarter, on which we are exposed. to its
attack. We measure our own strength
with that of our adversary; and can take
precautions, either for making resistance,
or for contriving escape. But when an
awakened conscience places before the fin-
ner, the just vengeance of the Almighty,
the prospect is confounding, because the
danger is boundless. It is a dark unknown
which threatens him. The arm that is
tfretched over him, he can neither fee nor
resist. On every fide, he dreads it; and
on every objeCt which surrounds him, he
looks with terrour, because he is confci-
ous that every object can be employed
against him as an infirument of wrath.
No wonder that the lonesome solitude,
or the midnight hour, should strike him
with horrour. His troubled mind be-
holds forms, which other men fee not;

and

and hears voices, which found only in the s E M.
ear of guilt. A hand appears to come -
forth, and to write upon the wall over
againfl him; as it didos old, in the fight
of an impious monarch. He Jlall find no
cafe, nor refi. For the Lord Jh allgive him
a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and
sorrow of mind: And his life J/hall hang in
doubt before him; and he Jhall fear day and
night, and have none a/qiirance of his ijfe.
In the morning he Jfall fJy, Wtould to God it
were even; and at even be Jhall fay, Would
to God it were morning, jor the fear of his
heart wkerewith he Jhall fear, and for the
fight which his eyes Jhall fJe. Hi life Jhall
be grievous unto him*.---Adverfity! how
blunt are all the arrows of thy quiver, in
comparison with those of guilt !---But if
such be the power of conscience, whence,
it may be asked, comes it to pass, that its
influence is not more general, either in re-
firaining men from the commission of fin,
or in leading them to a timeiy repentance ?
This brings me to observe,

Deut. xxviii. 65, 66, 67. ICa. xv. 4.

III. THAT,

S E R M. III. THAT, during a course of profpe-
T'-v-' rity, the operations of conscience are of-

ten suspended; and that adversity is the
season which restores them to their pro-
per force. At the time when crimes are
committed, the mind is too much heated
by passion, and engrossed by the object of
its pursuit, to be capable of proper reflec-
tion. After this tumult of spirits has
subsided, if a train of new paflions be at
hand to employ its activity, or a fuccef-
sion of pleasurable objecs occur to en-
gage its attention, it may for a while re-
main, though not entirely free from in-
ward misgivings, yet unconscious of the
degree of its guilt. Dissipated among the
amusements of life, the finner escapes, in
rome measure, from his own view. If he
refleEts upon himself at all, the continu-
ance of prosperity seems to him a strong
justification of his condut. For it will
be found, that in the hearts of all men,
there is a natural propensity, to judge of
the favour of the Supreme Being, from
the course of external events. When they

are

are born with a finooth gale along the s r lM-
fiream of life, and behold every thing '--
proceeding according to their with, hard-
ly can they be brought to believe, that
Providence is their enemy. Balking in
the fun-ihine of prosperity, they suppose
themselves to enjoy the smile of indulgent
Heaven; and fondly conclude, that they
are on terms of friendship, with all above,
and with all below. Easy they find it,
then, to spread over the grossest crimes,
a covering, thin, indeed, and flight, yet
fuficient to conceal them from a super-
ficial view.

Of this we have a very remarkable in-

fiance, inthofe brethren of Joseph, whose
history we now confider. Not only from
the silence of the inspired writer, we have
ground to believe that their remorse was
flifled, while their prosperity remained;
but we are able to trace tome of the pre-
tences, by which, during that period, they
quieted their minds. For when they
were contriving the deftruQion of Joseph,
we find Judah faying to his brethren,

What

s E R M. What profit is it, if we flay our brother; and

XIII.
X-E-L conceal his blood? Let us fell him to the IJh-

maelites; and let not our hand be upon him;
Jor he is our brother, and our fleJh : And his
brethren were content *. Here you behold
them justifying their crime, by a fort of
pretended humanity; and making light of
felling their brother for a slave, because
they did not take away his life. How
firangely are the opinions of men altered,
by a change in their condition! How diffe-
rent is this sentiment of the Patriarchs,
from that which they afterwards enter-
tained of the fame action, when, as you
fee in the Text, the rernembrance of it
wrung their hearts with anguish ?

But men, in truth, differ as much from

themselves, in prosperity, and in adver-
fity, as if they were different creatures.
In prosperity, every thing tends to flatter
and deceive. In adversity the illusions of
life vaniffi. Its avocations, and its plea-
-fures, no longer afford the finner that
shelter he was wont to find from confci-

Gen. xxxvii. 26, 27.

ence.

ence. Formerly, he made a part of the s E R M.
crowd. He now feels himself a solitary '--v--
individual, left alone with God, and with
his own mind. His spirits are not support-
ed, as before, by fallacious views of the
favour of Heaven. The candle of the Lord
shines not on his head; his pride is hum-
bled; and his affetions are softened for
receiving every serious impression. In this
situation, a man's iniquity is fire to find
him out. Whatever has been notoriously
criminal in his former conduct, rites as a
fpedre, and places itself before him. The
increased sensibility of his mind, renders
him alive to feelings which lately were
faint; and wounds which had been ill heal-
ed, bleed afresh. When men take the tim-
brel and the harp, and rejoice at the found
C' the organ, they fay, What is the Almigh-
ty that we Jhould serve him ? But when they
are holden in the cords of afficlion, then he
f/ieweth them their work, and their trangrefi-
on, that they have exceeded. He openeth as-
so their ears to discipline; and commnandeth,
that they return from iniquity.

Hence,

s E R M. Hence, we may perceive the great use-

--L fulness, and propriety, of that inter-

change of conditions, which takes place
in human life. By prosperity, God gives
scope to our palfions, and makes trial of
our dispositions. By adversity, he revives
the serious principle within. Neither the
one, nor the other, could be born entire
and unmixed. Man, always prosperous,
would be giddy and insolent; always as-
slided, would be fullen and despondent.
Hopes and fears, joy and sorrow, are,
therefore, so blended in his life, as both
to give room for worldly pursuits, and to
recall, from time to time, the admoni-
tions of conscience. Of the proportion
in which they should be mixed for this
purpose, we are very incompetent judges.
From our ignorance of the degree of dif-
cipline, which the spiritual state of others
requires, we often censure Providence
unjustly, for its severity towards them:
And, from the vanity and rashness of
our wishes, we complain, without rea-
ion, of its rigour to ourselves. While

we

we consult nothing but our ease, God s E R M.
attends to our spiritual improvement. -v--,
When we seek what is pleating, he fends
what is useful. ' When, by drinking too
deep of worldly prosperity, we draw in a
secret poison, he mercifully infuses a me-
dicine, at the time that he troubles and
embitters the waters. It remains now to
observe,.

IV. THAT when conscience is tho-

roughly awakened, it determines the
finner, to confider every calamity which
he suffers, as a positive infliction of pu-
nifhment by Heaven. As it had before
alarmed him with threatenings of Di-
vine displeasure, it tells him, when he
falls under distress, that the threatened
day of account is come. Afflictions, on
some occasions, rife direaly out of our
fins. Thus, diseases are brought on by
intemperance; poverty springs from idle-
ness; and disgrace, from presumption.
In such cafes, the punishment is so
closely conineced with the crime, that

I it

SE R M. it is impossible to avoid discerning the rela-.

XIII.
v --' tion which the one bears to the other. But

the appointment of Providence, which
we now confider, reaches farther than
this. God has framed us so, that
distresses, which have no perceivable
connection with our former crimes, are,
nevertheless, interpreted by conscience,
to be inflicted on their account. They
force themselves upon our apprehension,
under this view. They are made to
carry, not only that degree of pain which
properly belongs to themselves, but that
additional torment also, which arises from
the belief of their being the vengeance of
the Almighty.

Let a man fall unexpectedly into some

deep calamity. Let that calamity be
brought upon him, either by means
which the world calls fortuitous; or by
a train of incidents, in which his own
mifcondut, or guilt, has apparently had
no part; yet one of the firit queiions,
which, in such a situation, he puts to
himself, is, What have I done to de-

serve

serve this.? His reflection is, almost in- s EI M.
ftindively, drawn back upon his former
life; and if, in the course of that retro-
fpedt, any flagrant guilty deed occur to
finite his conscience, on this he cannot
avoid refting with anxiety and terrour,
and conneding it in his imagination
with what he 1:ow suffers. He fees, or
thinks that he fees, a Divine arm lifted
up; and what, in other circumfiances,
he would have called a reverse of for-
tune, he now views as a judgment of
Heaven.

When the brethren of Joseph, confined

in the Egyptian prison, were bewailing
the ditlrefs into which they had fallen,
there was no circumitance which pointed
out any relation between their present
misfortune, and their former cruelty to
their brother. A long course of years had
intervened, during which they flourished
in wealth and ease. They were now far
from the scene of their crime; in a so-
reign land, where they believed them-
selves utterly unknown, and where they

had

S R M. it is imp0ffible to avoid discerning the rela-

XIII.
v-'- tion which the one bears to the other. But

the appointment of Providence, which
we now confider, reaches farther than
this. God has framed us so, that
distresses, which have no perceivable
conneacion with our former crimes, are,
nevertheless, interpreted by conscience,
to be inflicted on their account. They
force themselves upon our apprehension,
under this view. They are made to
carry, not only that degree of pain which
properly belongs to themselves, but that
additional torment also, which arises from
the belief of their being the vengeance of
the Almighty.

Let a man fall unexpectedly into some

deep calamity. Let that calamity be
brought upon him, either by means
which the world calls fortuitous; or by
a train of incidents, in which his own
mifcondu&t, or guilt, has apparently had
no part; yet one of the first queflions,
which, in such a situation, he puts to
himself, is, What have I done to de-

serve

serve this ? His refledion is, almost in- s E R M.
ftinEtively, drawn back upon his former -v
life i and if, in the course of that retro-
spect, any flagrant guilty deed occur to
finite his conscience, on this he cannot
avoid refting with anxiety and terrour,
and conneting it in his imagination
with what he row suffers. Hie fees, or
thinks that he fees, a Divine arm lifted
up; and what, in other circumstances,
he would have called a reverse of for-
tune, he now views as a judgment of
Heaven.

When the brethren of Joseph, confined

in the Egyptian prison, were bewailing
the distress into which they had fallen,
there was no circumstance which pointed
out any relation between their present
misfortune, and their former cruelty to
their brother. A long course of years had
intervened, during which they flourified
in wealth and ease. They were now far
from the scene of their crime; in a so-
reign land, where they believed them-
selves utterly unknown, and where they

had

s E t M. had done nothing to offend. But confci-

XIII.

ence formed a connecion between events,
which, according to the ordinary appre-
henfion of men, were entirely indepen-
dent of each other. It made them recol-
leEt, that they, who once had been deaf
to the supplications of a brother, were
now left friendless and forlorn, imploring
pity in vain from an unrelenting Gover-
nour; and that they who had first con-
spired to kill their brother, and afterwards
fold him for a slave, were themselves de-
prived of liberty, and threatened with an
ignominious death. How undefervedly
soever these evils befell them on the part
of men, they confessed them to be just on
the part of Providence. They concluded
the hour of retribution to be arrived; and,
in the person of the Governour of Egypt,
they beheld the Ruler of the world calling
them to account for guilt. Therefore is
this dijireJs come upon us. Behold ayl his
blood is required.

Similar

Similar sentiments, on like occasions, s E R M.

will be found not uncommon among '-----
mankind. Pious men, there is no doubt,
are at all times disposed to look up to
God, and to acknowledge his hand il
every event of life. But what I now
observe, is, That where no habitual ac-
knowledgment of God takes place; nay,
where a daring contempt of his autho-
rity has prevailed, conscience, neverthe-
less, confirains men, in the day of their
distress, to recognize God, under the most
awful of all characters, The avenger of
past guilt.

Herein the wisdom of God appears

in such a light, as jufily to claim our
highest admiration. The ordinary course
of his Providence, is carried on by hu-
man means. He has fettled a train of
events, which proceed in a regular fuc-
ceflion of causes and effcets, witho-it his
appearing to interpose, or to aQ. But
there, on proper occasions, are made to
affect the human mind, in the frme
manner as if he were beheld descend-

D d ing

s E R M. ing from his throne, to punish the finner

---- with his own hand. Were God to sus-

pend the laws of Nature, on occasion of
every great crime that was committed on
earth, and to govern the world by fre-
quent interpositions of a miraculous kind,
the whole order of human affairs would
be unhinged ; no plans of ation could
be formed; and no scope would be gi-
ven for the probation and trial of men.
On the other hand, were the operation
of second causes allowed to conceal a
Divine hand totally from view, all sense
of fiiperiour government would be loft;
the world would seem to be void of God;
the finner would perceive nothing but
chance and fortune, in the distresses
which he suffered. Whereas by its be-
ing so ordered, that several incidents
of life, fliall carry the fame force, and
firike the mind with the fame impref-
sion, as if they were supernatural
interpositions, the fear of God is kept
alive among men, and the order of hu-
man affairs is, at the fame time, pre-

ser ved

served unbroken. The finner fees his s E R I.
distress to be the immediate effect of --
human violence or oppression; and
is obliged, at the fame moment, to con-
fider it as a Divine judgment. His con-
science gives to an ordinary misfortune,
all the edge and the fling of a visitation
from Heaven.

FROM the train of thought which the

Text has suggested, several inferences na-
turally follow. But I shall confine my-
self to two, which claim your particular
attention.

The first is, the clear evidence which

the preceding observations afford, of a
Divine government now exercised over
mankind. This mofl important and aw-
ful of all truths, cannot be too often prco
sented to our view, or too strongly im-
pressed on our mind. To the imperfet
convicion of it, which obtains in the
world, must be acfribed, in a great mea-
fiure, the prevalence of fin. Did menr
firmly believe, that the Almighty Being,

D d 2 who

s E R M. who formed them, is carrying on a fyfiem

of adminifiration which will not leave
guilt unpunifed, it is impossible that
they could remain ob inattentive, as we
often behold them, to their moral con-
duCl. But the bulk of mankind are gid-
dy and thoughtless. Struck by the fu-
perficial appearances of pleasure, which
accompany licentiousness, they inquire no
farther; and deliver themselves, u.p to
their senses, and their paflions. Where-
as, were they to rcflect, but for a mo-
ment, upon that view which has now
been given of human nature, they might
soon be satisfied, that the moral govern-
ment of God is no matter of doubtful
difcufnion. It is a fact, no less obvious
and incontestable, than the government
exercied. by those earthly rulers, whom
we behold with the ensigns of their office
before our eyes.

To govern, is to require a certain

course of acion, or, to prescribe a law;
and to enforce that law,, by a suitable
cilfribution of rewards and punishments.

Now,

Now, God has not only invested confci- s Ejt1M.
ence, as we have reen, with authority
to promulgate, but endowed it alto with
power to enforce, his law. By placing in-
ward approbation and peace on the iide
of virtue, he gave it the fandion of re-
ward. But this was not cnough. Pain
is a more powerful principle, than plea-
sure. To escape misery, is a ftrongcr
motive for astion, than to obtain good.
God, therefore, fb framed human nature,
that the painful sense of ill-defert should
attend the commission of crimes ; that
this sense of ill-defert should necessarily
produce the dread of punishment 3 and
that this dread should so operate on the
mind, in the time of distress, as to make
the sinner conceive Providernce to be en-
gaged againfi him, and to be concerned
in infliCting the punishment which he
suffers. All these impressions he hath
stamped u'pon the heart with, his ouwn
hand. H-e hath ma'de them const-itue-nt
p'arts 6f our frame; on puipofe, that by
the union of so many strong and pungent

senti-

s E R M. Sentiments, he might enforce repentance

XIIJ.
'-v- and reformation, and publish to the hu-

man race his detefiation of fin. Were he
to speak to us from the clouds, his voice
could not be more decisive. What we
discern to be interwoven with the con-
texture. of human nature, and to pervade
the whole course of human affairs, carries
an evidence not to be refifed. We might
with as much reason, doubt whether the
fun was intended to enlighten the earth,
or the rain, to fertilize it; as whether he,
who thus framed the human mind, intend-
ed to announce righteousness to mankind,
as his law.

THiE second inference which I make

from the foregoing discourse, refpeQs the
intimate connection, which those opera-
tions of conscience have, with the pecu-
liar and difinguihing doctrines of the
Gospel of Chris. They will be found to
accord with them so remarkably, as to
furnish an answer to some of those ob-
jedtions, which superficial reasoners are

apt

apt to raise against the Chriflian revcla- s E R~ M.
tion. In particular, they coincide with --
that awful view which the Gospel gives
us, of the future consequences of guilt.
If the finner is now confitrained by con-
science, to view the Almighty as purfu-
ing him with evil for long-forgotten crimes,
how naturally muff he conclude, that,
in a subsequent period of exiftencc, the
Divine administration will proceed up-
on the fame plan, and complete what
has been left imperfed here ? If, during
this life, which is only the time of trial,
the displeasure of Providence at fin is
displayed by tokens so manifest, what
may be apprehended to follow, when
juflice, which at present only begins to
be executed, shall be carried to its con-
summation? What conscience forebodes,
revelation verifies; alfuring us, that a
day is appointed, when God will render
to every man according to his .works; to
them, who by patient continuance in well-do-
ing, seek for glory, honour, and immortali-
t)'; eternal liJf: But unto them that are

contentious,

S E R M. contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey

t - unrzghteoznefs indighnation and wrath, tri-

bulation and angzijh, upon every foul of
man that doth evil, of the Yew firJi, and
alo of the Gentile. For there is no refpeS
of persons with God. For as many as have
finned without the law, Jfrall alo periJh
without the law 3 and as many as have fin-
ned in the law, shall be judged by the
law :".

While the threatenings of conscience

thus firengthen the evidence of the scrip-
ture doctrine concerning future punish-
ments, they likewise pave the way for the
belief of what is revealed concerning the
method of our deliverance by Christ.
They fuggefi to the finner, some deep
and dark malignity contained in guilt,
which has drawn upon his head such high
displeasure from Heaven. They call forth
his most anxious efforts, to avert the es-
sects of that displeasure, and to propiti-
ate his offended judge. Some, atonement,
he is conscious, muff be made; and the

* Rom. ii. 7-- 3.

voice

voice of nature has, in every age, loudly s E R I.
demanded suffering, as the proper atone- --
ment for guilt. Hence mankind have con-
fiantly fled for refuge to such fubfiitutions,
as they could devise to place in the room
of the offender; and, as by general con-
sent, victims have every where been slain,
and expiatory sacrifices have been offered
up on innumerable altars. Whlerewith JSall
I come before the Lord, and bow iyzgfelf before
the most high God? Shall I come bebore him
with burnt offerings, and calves of a year
old ? Will the Lord be pleaJed with thoztfands
of rams, or with ten thozfand of rivers of
oil? Or, Jfall I give my JirJf-born for my
tranfgrejionz; the fruit of zmy body, for the
fin of my foul ? These perplexities and
agitations of a guilty conscience, may be
termed preludes, in some measure, to the
Gospel of Christ. They are the pointings
of unenlightened Nature, towards that
method of relief, which the grace of
God has provided. Nature felt its inabi-

* Micah vi. 6, 7.

lity

S E R M. contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey

XIIl.

_-C--' unrighteozinefs, indignation and wrath, tri-

blzation and anguish, upon every foul of
man that doth evil, of the Jew fir f, and
anso of the Gentile. For there is no refpes
of persons with God. For as many as have
finned without the law, fJhall alo periJh
without the law ; and as many as have fin-
zed in the law, JJall be judged by the
law.

While the threatenings of conscience

thus strengthen the evidence of the scrip-
ture dodrine concerning future punish-
ments, they likewise pave the way for the
belief of what is revealed concerning the
method of our deliverance by Christ.
They suggest to the finner, forne deep
and dark malignity contained in guilt,
which has drawn upon his head such high
displeasure from Heaven. They call forth
his most anxious efforts, to avert the es-
sects of that displeasure, and to propiti-
ate his offended judge. Some, atonement,
he is conscious, must be made; and the

Rom. ii. 7--3

voice

voice of nature has, in every age, loudly s E R M.I

X1II.

demanded suffering, as the proper atone- .----'
ment for guilt. Hence mankind have con-
ftantly fled for refuge to such substitutions,
as they could devise to place in the room
of the offender; and, as by general con-
sent, vitiiims have every where been slain,
and expiatory sacrifices have been offered
up on innumerable altars. Whleresewith frall
I cocne before the Lord, and how niyfclf before
the moJf high God? Shall I come before him
with burnt offerings, and calves of a year
old ? Will the Lord be pleased with thozfands
of rams, or wvith ten ihoifand of rivers of
oil? Or, /fall I give ry firfl-born for my
tranfgrejfon; the fruit of my bory, for the
fin of my foiul ? These perplexities and
agitations of a guilty conscience, may be
termed preludes, in some measure, to the
Gospel of Christ. They are the pointings
of unenlightened Nature, towards that
method of relief, which the grace of
God has provided. Nature felt its inabi-

* icah vi. 6, 7.

lity

s E R M. lity to extricate itself from the confequen-
- -v-- ces of guilt: The Gospel reveals the plan

of Divine interposition and aid. Nature
confessid some atonement to be necessary:
The Gospel discovers, that the necessary
atonement is made. The remedy is no
sooner presented, than its suitableness to
the disease appears; and the great myflery
of redemption, though it reaches, in its
full extent, beyond our comprehension,
yet, as far as it is revealed, holds a visible
congruity with the sentiments of Confci-
ence, and of Nature.

Natural and revealed religion proceed

from the fame Author and, of course,
are analogous and consistent. They are
parts of the fame plan of Providence.
They are connected measures of the fame
system of government. The serious be-
lief of the one, is the best preparation
for the reception of the other. Both con-
cur in imprefling our mind with a deep
sense of one most important truth which
is the result of this whole discourse,

That

That as we sow now, woe mzfl reap; that S E R M.
under the government of God,no one shall --
be permitted, with impunity, to gratify
his criminal passions, and to make light of
the great duties of life.

SE R-

# SERMON XIV. On the Mixture of JOY and FEAR in RELIGION. PSALM ii. 11. Rejoice with trembling.

[. 4i. 3

S E RM ON XIV.
On the Mixture of J o Y and FE AR in

RE L I G ION.

PSALM ii. II.

Rejoice with trembling.
S E R M. JO Y and Fear, are two great springs of

XI human action. The mixed condition of

this world, gives scope for both; and,
according as the one or the other pre-
dominates, it influences the general te-
nour. of our conduct. Each of them
possesses a proper place in religion. To
serve the Lord with gladness, is the ex-
hortation of the Pfalmifl David*. To
serve him with reverence and godly fear,
is the admonition of the Apoile Paul t.
But, under the present imperfetion of

* Pfal. c. 2. t Heb. xii. 28.

human

human nature, each of these principles s E R M.

XIV.

may be carried to a dangerous extreme.
When the whole of religion is placed in
joy, it is in hazard of rising into unwar-
rantable rapture. When it refis altoge-
ther on fear, it degenerates into fuperfti-
tious servility. The Text enjoins a due
mixture of both; and inculcates this im-
portant maxim, That joy, tempered with
fear, is the proper disposition of a good
man. In discoursing of this subjed, I
shall endeavour to flhow, first, That joy
is eflential to religion; and next, That,
for various reasons, this joy ought to be
mixed with fear; whence we shall be
able to ascertain the nature of that steady
and composed spirit, which is most suit-
able to our present condition, and moil
acceptable to God.

I. JoY is essential to religion, in two

refpeds; as religion inspires joy, and as
it requires it. In other words, To rejoice,
is both the privilege, and the duty, of
good men.

IN

S E R M. IN the firfi place, Religion inspires joy.

-- ~It affords just ground of gladness, to all

who firmly believe its doctrines, and fin-
cerely study to obey its laws: For it con-
sers on them, the two most material requi-
fites of joy; a favourable situation of
things without, and a proper disposition
of mind within, to relish that favourable
iituation.

When they examine their situation

without, they behold themselves placed
in a world, which is full of the influ-
ence of a gracious Providence; where
beauty and good are every where predo-
minant; where various comforts are be-
flowed; and where, if any be withheld,
they have reason to believe, that they are
withheld by parental wisdom. Among
the crowd that encompass them, they
may be at a loss to discern, who are their
friends, and who their enemies. But
it is sufficient to know that they are
under the protedion of an invisible Guar-
dian, whose power can keep them from
every evil. All the fleps of his con-

dut,

duC, they may be unable to trace. Events S El 1M.
may befall them, of which they can give --
no account. But as long as they are fa-
tisfied, that the fyflem of Divinegovern-
ment is founded on mercy, no present
occurrences are able to destroy their peace.
For he who spared not his own Son, but de-
livered him up for them, how Jhall he not
with him freely give them all things ? If
their nature is frail, Divine assistance is
promised to strengthen it. If their virtue
is imperfect, a dilpenfation is opened,
which gives them the hope of pardon. If
their external circumflances be in any re-
fpet unfavourable, it is because a higher
interest is consulted. All things, they are
assured, Jhall work together Jor their good.
On their prosperity refts, the blessing; on
their adversity, the fanclifying Spirit, of
the -Almighty. Old age may advance,
and life decay; but beyond those boun-
daries of Nature, faith opens the pro-
sped of their lasting felicity. Without
anxiety, they pass through the different
periods of their present exifience, because

they

S E R M. they know it to be no more than an intro-

xiv.
t-.*-^ dution to immortality.

As such a situation of things without,

lays a solid foundation for joy; so the
disposition which religion forms within,
promotes the reiifh of it. It is indeed
from within, that the chief sources of en-
joyment or trouble rife. The minds of
bad men are always disorderly; and hence
their lives are so generally uneasy. In
vain they take the timbrel and the harp,
and endeavour to rejoice at the found of the.
organ. Spleen and disgust pursue them,
through all the haunts of amusement.
Pride and ill humour torment them.
Oppressed with discontent, their spirits
flag; and their worn-out pleasures afford
them entertainment no more. But reli-
gion subdues those malignant paflions,
which are the troublers of human repose;
which either overcast the mind with the
gloom of peevishness, or disquiet it by
the violence of agitation. It infafes, in
their room, those mild and gentle difpofi-
tions, whose natural effed is to smooth

JI.~~ ~the

the-tehour of the foul. Benevolence and S E R M.
candour, moderation and temperance,--
wherever they reign, produce cheerful-
ness and serenity. The confcioufiiefs of
integrity, gives ease and freedom to the
mind. It enables good men to extract
from every obje@c, the whole fatisfaaion
which it is capable of yielding ; and adds
the flavour of innocence, to all their ex-
ternal pleasures.

IN the second place, As religion natu-

rally inspires joy i so, what it inspires, it
commands us to cherish. As a necessary
proof of our sincerity, it requires cheer-
fulness in the performance of our duty;
because, if this be wanting, our religion
discovers itself, not to be genuine in prin-
ciple, and in practice it cannot be stable.

Religious obedience, destitute of joy, is

not genuine in its principle. For, did ei-
ther faith or hope, the love of God, or
the love of goodness, rule the heart;
they could not fail to produce fatisfadion
in piety and virtue. All those causes of

E e joy

s E R M. joy which I have mentioned, would then

-v--operate; and their native effec on the

mind, would follow. The profpets which
religion opens, would gladden, and the as-
sections which it inspires, would sooth the
heart. We serve, with pleasure, the be-
nefactor whom we love. We rejoice in
every study and pursuit, to which we are
sincerely attached. If we serve not God
with pleasure, it is because we know him
not, or love him not. If we rejoice not
in virtue, it is because our affection is
alienated from it, and our inclinations are
depraved. We give too evident proof,
that either we believe not the principles of
religion, or that we feel not their power.
Exclude joy from religion; and you leave
no other motives to it, except compul-
lion and interest. But are these suitable
grounds, on which to reft the whole of
our obedience to the Supreme Being?
My foin, give me thy heart, is the call of
God. Surely if there be no pleasure in
fulfilling his commands, the heart is not

given

given him; and, in that cafe, the ;.ultitude S E R M.
of ficrifices, and burnt oferings, is brought .---
to his altar in vain.

As religion, destitute of joy, is imperfect

in its principle; so, in practice, it mult be
unflable. In vain you endeavour to fix
any man to the regular performance of
that, in which he finds no pleasure. Bind
him ever so fast by interest or fear, he will
contrive some method of eluding the obli-
gation. Ingenuity is never io fertile of eva.
lions, as where pleasure is all on the one
fide, and mere precept on the other. He
may fludy to save appearances. He may
dissemble and constrain himself. But his
heart revolts in secret; and the weight of
inclination will, in the end, draw the
pracice after it. If perseverance is not
to be expected, still less can zeal be looked
for, from.him, who, in his religious du-
ties, trembles without rejoicing. Every
attempt towards virtue which he forms,
will be feeble and awkward. I-1c applies
to itas a talk; he dreads the task-master;
but he will labour no more than necessity

E e a enjoins.

E R M. enjoins. To escape from punishment, is his
----- sole aim. He bargains for immunity, by

every duty which he performs; and all
beyond, he esteems superfluous toil.----
Such religion as this, can neither purify
the heart, nor prepare for heavenly bliss.
It is the refuge of an abjed mind.
It may form the ritual of the monk, or
prescribe the penance of the idolater; but
has no concern with the homage of him,
who worJf.ips the Father in _pirit and in
truth. His character is, that the joy of the
Lord is is s Jrengtb . It attaches his heart
to religion. It inspires his zeal. It sup-
ports his conflancy; and accelerates his
progress.

There is no man, but has some objeCt

to which he cleaves for enjoyment; some-
what that flatters him with distant hope,
or affords him present pleasure. Joy is
the end towards which all rational beings
tend. For the fake of it, they live; it
resembles the air they breathe, which is
necessary for the motion of the heart, and
all the vital functions. But as the breath-

Neh. viii. 1o.

ing

ing of infeEted air proves fatal to life; in s E RM.
the fame manner, joy drawn from a cor- --
rupted source, is deflrudive, both of virtue,
and of true happiness. When you have
no pleasure in goodness, you may with
certainty conclude the reason to be, that
your pleasure is all derived from an opposite
quarter. You have exhaufled your assec-
tion upon the world. You have drunk
too much of its poisoned waters, to have
any relish for a pure spring.

Estimate, therefore, the genuineness of

your religious principles; estimate the de-
gree of your stability in religious practice,
by the degree of your fatisfadtion in piety
and virtue. Be assured, that where your
treasure is, there will your delight be also.
The worldly man rejoices in his poffefi-
ons; the voluptuous, in his pleasures;
the social, in his friends and companions.
The truly good man rejoices in doing ji1-
ly, loving mercy, and walking humbly with
the Lord his God. He is happy, when em-
ployed in the regular discharge of the great
duties of life. Spontaneous they flow

from

s E R M. from the affeEtions of a pure heart. Not

XIV.

only from the keeping of the divine com-
mandments he expeOts, but in the keeping
of them, ie enjoys, a great reward.---Ac-
cordingly, in the sentiments of holy men
recorded in scripture, we find this spirit
every-where prevalent. Their language
was; thy statutes have I taken as mine he-
ritage for ever ; for they are the rejoicing of
my heart. They are my jongs in the hozje of
my pilgrimage. They are sweeter than honey,
and the honey-comb. Whom have I in heavenl
but thee ? And there is none zpon earth that
Idefire besides thee. They did not receive
the spirit of bondage, but the Jfirit of adop-
tion. They were filled with peace and joy in
believing. They rejoiced in hope of the glory
of God. As soon as the /thiopian eunuch
received from Philip the light of the Gof-
pel, that light revived and cheered his
heart. A new fan seemed to arise; a new
glory, to shine around him. Every object
brightened; and he went on his way rejoic-
ing . After the fame manner should every

* Ads viii. 39.

good

good man proceed in his journey through s E R M.
life, with a serene and cheerful spirit. Con- '---
fternation and dejedion let him leave to
the slaves of guilt, who have every thing
to dread, both from this world and the
next. If he appear before others with a
dispirited asped, he dishonours religion;
and affords ground for suspicion, that he is
either ignorant of its nature, or a stranger
to its power.

Thus I have shown joy to be essential

to religion. It is the spirit which it inspires,
and which it requires, in good men. But
in our present Rate, the belt principles may
be carried to 4 dangerous excess; and joy,
like other things, has its due limits. To
serve God with unmixed delight, belongs
to more advanced spirits in a happier
world. In this region of imnperfection,
dome infusions from a different cup, must
of necessity tincture our joy. Let us then,

II. TURN to the other fide of the argu-
ment, and confider the reasons which ren-

der

s E RM. der it proper, that when we rejoice, we
..--.. should rejoice with trezmbling.

In the first place, because all the objets

of religion, which afford ground for joy,
tend to inspire, at the fame time, reve-
rence and fear, We serve a Benefator,
it is true, in whom we have reason to de-
light; whose purposes are gracious; whose
law is the plan of our happiness. But this
Benefactor, is the King eternal, immortal,
and invisible; at whose presence, the
mountains shake, and Nature trembles.
Every good and every perfec gift, come down
from him. But the hand which confers
them, we cannot fee. Mysterious obfcu-
rity refts upon his essence. He dwelleth
in the secret place of thunder; and clouds
and darkness surround him. He is the
Hearer of prayer; but we lift our voice to
him from afar. Into his immediate pre-
fence no access is permitted. Our warmest
devotion admits no familiarity with him.
God is in heaven, and thou upon earth;
therefore, let thy words he few. If his omni-
science administers comfort in our secret

distress,

diflrefs, it likewise fills with awe the S R M.
heart that is conscious of guilt. For, if he --
knows our fraime, and remembers we are d@fl;
our iniqzuities, also, are ever before him;
our fecretfins, in the light of his countenance.

Throughout all his dispensations, great-

ness, in conjunction with goodness, fIrikes
our view ; and, wherever we behold the
Parent, we behold the Legislator aifo.
The death of Christ, in behalf of a guilty
world, is the chief ground of religious
hope and joy. But it is no less the ground
of reverence; when, in this high tranfac-
tion, we contemplate God, as at once
firia in juflice, and great in mercy. I
the Lord keep mercy for thozfiznds of them
that fear inc. I fJrgive their iniquity,
ta-nnfgrelionz, and fJin; but 1 will by 2no means
clear the guilty. When we open the book
of the Law, we find promises and threat-
enings mingled in the fame page. On the
one fide, we fee Heaven displayed in all
its glory: On the other, Hell opening its
terrours. In short, in whatever light we
view religion, it appears solemn and ve-

nerable.

S ER M. nerable. It is a temple full of majesty,

'XIV. to which the worshippers may approach

with comnfort, in the hope of obtaining
grace, and finding mercy; but where they
cannot enter, without being impressed
with awe. If we may be permitted to
compare spiritual with natural things, re-
ligion resembles not those scenes of na-
tural beauty, where every object smiles.
It cannot belikened to the gay landscape,
or the flowery field. It resembles more
the august and sublime appearances of Na-
ture; the lofty mountain, the expanded
ocean, and the starry firmament; at the
fight of which, the mind is at once over-
awed and delighted; and, from the union
of grandeur with beauty, derives a pleas?
ing, but a serious, emotion.

IN the second place, As joy, tempered

by fear, suits the nature of religion, so
it is requisite for the proper regulation of
the conduct of man. Let his joy flow
from the best and purest source; yet, if it
remain long unmixed, it is apt to become

dangerous

dangerous to virtue. As waters which are s E I.
never stirred, nor troubled, gather a fedi- '
ment, which putrifies them; so the undif-
turbed continuance of placid sensations
engenders disorders in the human foul. It
is wifely ordered in our present irate, that
joy and fear, hope and grief, should aEl
alternately, as checks and balances upon
each other, in order to prevent an excess
in any of them, which our nature could
not bear. If we were subjea to no alarms
of danger, the wisest would soon become
improvident; and the most humble, pre-
sumptuous. Man is a pilgrim on earth.
Were his path to be always smooth and
flowery, he would be tempted to relin-
quifh his guide, and to forget the purpose
of his journey. Caution and fear are the
shields of happiness. Unguarded joy be-
gets indolence; indolence produces fecu-
rity; security leads to rashness ; and rash-
ness ends in ruin. In order to rejoice
long, it is necessary that we rejoice with
trembling. Had our first parents observed
this rule, man might have been flill in pa-

radife.

S £ R M. radife. He who faith in his heart, My

XIv.

m'V ountailn Jands jlrong ; I Sall .never be
moved; may be assured, that his state al-
ready begins to totter. Religion, there-
fore, performs a kind office, in giving us
the admonition of the Text. It inspires
cheerfulness in the service of God. It
proposes joy, as our chief spring of aCti-
on. But it supports joy, by guarding it
with fear; not suppressing, but regulating
its indulgence; requiring us to rejoice, like
persons who have obtained a treasure,
which, through want of vigilance, they
are exposed to lose. Dependent beings
are formedfor submission; and to submit,
is to itand in awe. Because the Lord reign-
eth, let the earth be glad. We are the sub-
jeds of God; and therefore may jufily
rejoice. But still we are fubjeds ; and,
therefore, trembling mufi mix itself with
our joy.

IN the third place, The unstable condi-

tion of all human things, naturally inspires
fear in the midst of joy. The spirit to

which

which religion forms us, must undoubted- S tE R t
ly correspond to the state in which we are ---
placed, and to the part which is assigncd
us to ad. Now the first view under which
our present state appears, is that of fallen
creatures, who are undergoing, in this
world, probation and trial for their recove-
ry; and are commanded to work ozt their
alvatioon with fear and trembling. This
view of our condition infers not habitual
dejedion of mind. It requires not melan-
choly abfiraEtion from the affairs, or total
contempt of the amusements, of life. But
it inspires humility. It enforces depend-
ance on Divine aid; and calls forth the
voice of fipplication to Heaven. In a si-
tuation so critical, and where intercefs so
important are at a flake, every reasonable
person must confess, that seriousness ought
to temper rejoicing.

Were there in human life any fixed

point of stability and reft, attainable by
man; could we, at any one moment, assure
ourselves, that there remained no latent

~I~~ .tCCfource

E R M. source of danger, either to our temporal,
'-v, or our spiritual state ; then I admit, we

might lay trembling aside, and rejoice in
full security. But, alas! no such safe
station, no such moment of confidence,
is allowed to man during his warfare on
earth. Vicissitudes of good and evil, of
trials and consolations, fill up his life. The
belf intentioned are Sometimes betrayed
into crimes; the most prudent, over-
whelmed with misfortunes. The world is
like a wheel incessantly revolving, on
which human things alternately rife and
fall. What is pail of our life, has been a
chequered scene. On its remaining peri-
ods, uncertainty and darkness reit. Fu-
turity is an unknown region, into which
no man can look forward without awej
because he cannot tell what forms of dan-
ger or trial may meet him there. This we
know well, that in every period of our life,
the path of happiness shall be found sleep
and arduous, but swift and easy, the de-
scent to ruin. What, with much exertion
of care and vigilance, we had built up,

one

one unwary a£ion may, in an evil hour, s E RM:
overthrow. The props of human confi. '---
dence are, in general, insecure. The
sphere of human pleasures is narrow.
While we form schemes for ftrcngthening
the one, and for enlarging the other,
death, mean while, advances. Life, with
a swift, though insensible course glides
away; and, like a river which undermines
its banks, gradually impairs our slate.
Year after year steals something from us;
till the decaying fabric totter of itself,
and crumble at length into duff. So that,
whether we confider life or death, time or
eternity, all things appear to concur in
giving to man the admonition of the Text,
Rejoice with trembling.

I HAVE now shown, in what refpeds

religion both promotes joy, and inspires
seriousness. It places us in the most fa-
vourable situation, which human life as-
fords, for joy ; and it gives us every aflift-
ance, for relishing that joy. It renders
it our duty, to cultivate the fatisfadion

7 which

s E R M. which it yields. It demands a cheerful

---' spirit, in order to ascertain the sincerity

of our principles, and to confirm us in
good praQtice. At the fame time, the joy
which it inspires, is tempered with fear, by
the genius of religion itself; by the dan-
gers to which unguarded joy would expose
us; and by the impropriety of indulging
it, in a situation so mixed as the present.
The trembling which is here enjoined, is
not to be understood as signifying a pufilla-
nimous dejedion. It imports no more than
that caution and sobriety, which prudence
diklates, as belonging to our state. By con-
neding such trembling with our joy, re-
ligion means to recommend to us, a cheer-
ful, but a cornpofed, spirit, equally remote
from the humiliating deprefion of fear, and
the exulting levity of joy. Always to re-
joice, is to be a fool. Always to tremble,
is to be a slave. It is a modest cheerful-
ness, a chastened joy, a manly seriousness,
which becomes the servant of God.

BUT

BUT is this, it may perhaps be said, the s E R M.

whole amount of that boasted fatisfacion -v-
which religion bestows ? Is this all the
compensation which it makes, for those
sacrifices it exats ? Are not the terms
which vice holds out, far more enticing,
when it permits us to gratify every desire;
and, in return for our surmounting the ti-
morous scruples of conscience, promises
us a life of gaiety, feflivity, and unre-
strained joy ?---Such promises, vice may
indeed make; but, how far it fulfils them,
we may safely refer to the determination of
the greatest sensualist, when he has finish-
ed his career, and looks back on what he
has enjoyed. All him, Whether he would
recommend to his children, and his friends,
to hold the fame course; and whether,
with his dying breath, he dare assure them,
that the gratifications of licentiousness
afford the greatest enjoyment of life ?
Whatever hopes vice may at the begin-
ning inspire, yet, after the trial is made,
it has been always found, that criminal
pleasures are the bane of happiness; the

F f poison,

S ER M. poison, not the cordial, of our present

l ~ slate. They are pleasures, compensated

by an infinite overbalance of pain; mo-
ments of delight, succeeded by years of
regret; purchased at the expence of in-
jured reputation, broken health, and ruin-
ed peace. Even abftradting from their
pernicious consequences, they are, for most
part, in themselves treacherous pleasures;
unsound and disturbed in the moments of
enjoyment. In the midJi of such lazughter,
the heart is foriowfzld. Often is the smile
of gaiety assumed, while the heart akes
within: And though folly may laugh,
guilt will fling. Correeting this pernici-
ous phrenzy of pleasure, and reducing it to
a more fober and regulated slate, religion is,
in truth, no other than wisdom, introduc-
ing peace and order into the life of man.

While religion condemns such pleasures

as are immoral, it is chargeable with no
improper aifterity, in refped of those
which are of an innocent kind. Think
not, that by the cautious discipline which
it prescribes, it excludes you from all gay

enjoyment

enjoyment of life. Within the compass s E VM-.
of that sedate spirit, to which it forms -
you, all that is innocently pleating will be
found to lie. It is a mifiake to imagine,
that, in constant cffufions of giddy mirth,
or in that flutter of spirits which is excit-
ed by a round of diversions, the chief en-
joyment of our slate consists. Were this
the cafe, the vain and the frivolous would
be on better terms for happiness, than the
wife, the great, and the good. To ar-
range the plans of amusement, or to pre-
fide in the haunts of jollity, would be
more dcfirable, than to exert the highest
effort of mental powers for the benefit of
nations. A consequence so absurd, is sus-
ficient to explode the principle from which
it flows. To the amusements and lesser
joys of the world, religion assigns their
proper place. It admits them, as relaxa-
tions from care, as instruments of promot-
ing the union of men, and of enlivening
their social intercourse. But though, as
long as they are kept within due bounds,
it does not censure nor condemn them;

F f z neither

S E R M. neither does it propose them, as rewards

XIV.

_--- to the virtuous, or as the principal objets

of their pursuit. To such, it points out
nobler ends of action. Their felicity it
engages them to seek, in the discharge of
an useful, an upright, and honourable
part in life; and, as the habitual tenour
of their mind, it promotes cheerfulness,
and discourages levity.

Between these two there is a wide dif-

tintion; and the mind which is most open
to levity, is frequently a stranger to cheer-
fulness. It has been remarked, that tran-
sports of intemperate mirth, are often no
more than flashes from the dark cloud;
and that, in proportion to the violence of
the effulgence, is the succeeding gloom.
Levity may be the forced production of
folly or vice; cheerfulness is the natural
offspring of wisdom and virtue only. The
one is an occasional agitation; the other,
a permanent habit. The one degrades the
character; the other is perfectly consistent
with the dignity of reason, and the steady
and manly spirit of religion. To aim at a

constant

constant succession of high and vivid fen- s E R M.
fations of pleasure, is an idea of happiness .----
altogether chimerical. Calm and tempe-
rate enjoyment, is the utmost that is allot-
ted toman. Beyond this, we struggle in
vain to raise our state; and, in fact, de-
press our joys, by endeavouring to height-
en them. Instead of those fallacious hopes
of perpetual festivity, with which the
world would allure us, religion confers
upon us a cheerful tranquillity. Instead
of dazzling us with meteors of joy, which
sparkle and expire, it sheds around us, a
calm and fleady light. By mixing tremb-
ling with our joy, it renders that joy more
solid, more equal, and more lasting.

In this spirit, then, let us serve God,

andhold our course through life. Let us
approach to the Divine Being, as to- a so-
vereign of whom we stand in awe, and to
a father in whom we trust. In our con-
duet, let us be cautious and humble,
as those who have ground to fear; well
pleated and cheerful, as those who have
cause to rejoice. Let us show the world,

that

S R M. that a religious temper, is a temper, fe-
-IV--' date, not fad; that a religious behaviour,

is a behaviour, regulated, not fliff and.
formal. Thus we shall use the world, as
not abuzing it; we shall pass through its
various changes, with the least difcompo-
sure ; and we shall vindicate religion, from
the reproaches of those who would attri-
bute to it, either enthusiastic joys, or flav-
ifh terrours. We shall show, that it is a
rational rule of life, worthy of, the per-
section of God, and suited to the nature
and state of man.

SER-

# SERMON XV. On the Motives to CONSTANCY in VIRTUE. GALAT. vi. 9. And let us not be weary in well-doing ; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

[ 439 1

SERMON XV.
On the Motives to CONSTANCY in

VI RT U E.

G AL A T. Vi. 9.
And let us not be weary in well-doing i for

in due jeafon we Jhall reap, if we faint

not.
DJISCONTENT is the most general of s E R M.

xV.

all the evils which trouble the life of x
man. It is a disease, which every where
finds materials to feed itself; for, if
real difireffes be wanting, it substitutes
such as are imaginary in their place. It
converts even the good things of the
world, when they have been long enjoy-
ed, into occasions of disgust. In the
midst of prosperity, t disposes us to

complain;

S E R M. complain; and renders tranquillity tire-

xv.
'-=- ome, only because it is uniform. There

is no wonder, that this spirit of restless-
ness and diffatisfaaion, which corrupts
every terrefirial enjoyment, should have
sometimes penetrated into the region of
virtue. Good men are not without their
frailties; and the perverseness incident to
human nature, too readily leads us, who
become weary of all other things, to be
weary, also, in well-doing.

Let me put a cafe, which, perhaps, will

be found not unfrequent in ordinary life.
Suppose a person, after much commerce
with the world, to be convinced of its
vanity. He has seen its mos flattering
hopes to be fallacious. He has felt its
most boasted pleasures to be unfatisfaEo-
ry. He resolves, therefore, to place his
happiness in virtue; and, disregarding
all temptations from interest, to adhere to
what is right and honourable in conduCt.
He cultivates acquaintance with religion.
He performs, with seriousness, the offices
of devotion. He lays down to himself, a

rational

rational and useful plan of life; and, with s ER M.
fatisfaaion, holds on for a while in this -
reformed course. But, by degrees, dif-
couragements arise. The peace which he
hoped to enjoy, is interrupted, either by
his own frailties, or by the vices of others.
Passions, which had not been thorough-
ly subdued, struggle for their accustom-
ed gratification. The plealfre which he
expeded to find in devotion, sometimes
fails him; and the injuitice of the world
often fours and frets him. Friends prove
ungrateful; enemies misrepresent, rivals
supplant him: And part, at least, of the
mortifications which he suffers, he begins
to ascribe to virtue.----Is this all the
reward of my serving God, and renounc-
ing the pleasures of fin ? Verily, in vain
I have clhanfJd my heart, and .wajyed my
hands in innocency. Behold, the cungodly
prosper in the world, and have more than
heart can wiJhJ; while, all the day long, I
am plagued and chastened every morning.---
To such persons as there, and to all
who are in hazard of being inseted with

their

S E R iM. their spirit, I now address myself In re-

XV.

ply to their complaints, I purpose to show,
That in no state they can choose on earth,
by no plan of condut they can form, it
is possible for them to escape uneasiness
and disappointment ; that in a life of vir-
tue, they will susser less uneasiness, and
fewer disappointments, than in a course
of vice; they will poffcfs much higher
resources and advantages; and they will
be assured of compleat reward at the end.-
From there considerations, I hope to make
it appear, that there is no sufficient rea-
son for our being weary in well-doing;
and that, taking human life upon the
whole, Virtue is far the molt eligible por-
tion of man.

I. UNEASINESS and disappointment are

inseparable, in some degree, from every
tlate on earth. Were it in the power of
the world, to render those who attach
themselves to it, satisfied and happy, you
might then, I admit, have some title to
complain, if you found yourselves placed

upon

upon worse terms in the service of God. S £ R M.
But this is so far from being the cafe, that '--
among the multitudes who devote them-
selves to earthly pleasure, you will not
find a single person who has completely
attained his aim. Enquire into the con-
dition of the high and the low, of the
gay and the serious, of the men of bu-
finess and the men of pleasure, and you
shall behold them all occupied, in sup-
plying some want, or in removing some
difirefs. No man is pleased with being
precisely what he is. Every where there
is a void; generally, even in the most
prosperous life, there is some corner pof-
fefed by sorrow. He who is engaged in
business, pines for leisure. He who en-
joys leisure, languishes for want of em-
ployment. In a tingle itate, we envy the
comforts of a family. In conjugal life,
we are chagrined with domestic cares.
In a safe fiation, we regret the want
of objects for enterprise. In an enter-
prifing life, we lament the want of safe-
ty. It is the doom of man, that his

fly

S E K M. sky should never be free from all clouds.

X V.
x-vb-- He is, at present, in an exiled and fallen

fiate. The objects which surround him,
are beneath his native dignity. God has
tinged them all with vanity, on purpose to
make him feel, that this is not his reft;
that here he is not in his proper place, nor
arrived at his true home.

If, therefore, you aim at a condition

which shall be exempted from every dif-
quiet, you pursue a phantom; you in-
crease the vanity and vexation of life, by
engaging in a chace so fruitless. If you
complain of virtue, because there is inci-
dent to it a portion of that uneasiness
which is found in every other slate, your
complaint is most unreasonable. You
claim an immunity from evil, which be-
longs not to the lot of man. Reconcile
yourselves, then, to your condition; and,
instead of looking for perfect happiness
any where on earth, gladly embrace
that state which contains the fewest for-
rows.

II. THOUGH

II. THOUGH no condition of human s ER M-

XV.

life is free from uneasiness, I contend, ---
That the uneasiness belonging to a sinful
course, is far greater, than what attends
a course of well-doing. If you be weary
of thelabours of virtue, be assured, that
the world, whenever you try the ex-
change, will lay upon you a much heavier
load. It is the outside, only, of a li-
centious life, which is gay and smiling.
Within, it conceals toil, and trouble, and
deadly sorry. For vice poisons human
happiness in the spring, by introducing
disorder into the heart. Those passions
which it seems to indulge, it only feeds
with imperfect gratifications ; and thereby
ftrengthehs them for preying, in the end,
on their unhappy victims.

It is a great mistake to imagine, that

the pain of felf-denial is confined to vir-
tue. He who follows the world, as much
as he who follows Christ, must take up
his cross; and to him, assuredly, it will
prove a more oppressive burden. Vice
allows all our passions to range uncon-

trouled;

S E R M. trouled; and where each claims to be

xv.
*--vL fuperiour, it is impoflible to gratify all.

The predominant desire, can only be in-
dulged at the expence of its rival. No
mortifications which virtue exacts, are
more severe than those, which ambition
imposes upon the love of ease, pride upon
interefi, and covctoufnefs upon vanity.
Self-denial, therefore, belongs, in com-
mon, to vice and virtue; but with this
remarkable difference, that the paflions
which virtue requires us to mortify, it
tends to weaken; whereas, those which
vice obliges us to deny, it, at the fame
time, firengthens. The one diminishes
the pain of felf-denial, by moderating
the demand of pafiion; the other in-
creases it, by rendering those demands
imperious and violent.---Wlhat difireffes
that occur in the calm life of virtue, can
be compared to those tortures, which re-
morfc of conscience inflicts on the wicked;
to those severe humiliations, arising from
guilt combined with misfortunes, which
link them to the duftI to those violent

agitations
b

agitations of shame and disappointment, s tt M.
which sometimes drive them to the most A
fatal extremities, and make them abhor
their existence? How often, in.the midst
of those difafirous situations, into which
their crimes have brought them, have
they cursed the fedudions of vice; and,
with bitter regret, looked back to the
day on which they first forsook the path
of innocence!

But, perhaps, you imagine, that to

such miseries as these, great criminals
only are exposed; and that, by a wary
and cautious management, it is pofflble
to avoid them. Take vice and virtue,
then, in the most general point of view.
Compare God and the world as two maf-
ters, the one or other of whom you
must obey; and confider fairly, in whose
service there will be reason for your being
weary soonest, and repenting most fre-
quently. The world is both a hard, and
a capricious matler. To submit to a long
servitude, in the view of a recompense
from which they are excluded in the end,

is

s E R M. is known to be often the fate of those,

XV.
- > who are devoted to the world. They fa-

crifice their present ease, to their future
profpeats. They court the great, and
flatter the multitude. They prostitute
their conscience, and dishonour their cha-
racter: And, after all their efforts, how
uncertain is their success ! Competitors
juitle, and outstrip them. The more art-
ful deceive, the more violent overthrow
them. Fair prospects once finiled; but
clouds soon gather; the sky is darkened;
the scene changes; and that fickle world,
which, a moment before, had flattered,
the next moment, forgets them.

God is never mistaken in the character

of his servants ; for he feeth their hearts,
and judgeth according to the truth. But
the world is often deceived in those who
court its favour; and, of course, is un-
just in the distribution of its rewards.
Flattery gains the ear of power. Fraud
supplants innocence; and the pretending,
and afiuming, occupy the place of the
worthy and the modest. In vain you

j~~I ~claim

claim any merit with the world, on ac- s E R M-
count of your good intentions. The world ---
knows them not; regards them not. It
judges of you, solely by your ation;s;
and, what is worse, by the fuccefsi of your
adtions, which often depends not on your-
selves. But, in the fight of the Supreme
Being, good intentions supply tile place
of good deeds, which you had not the
opportunity of perfbrming. The well-
meant endeavours of the poor, find the
fame acceptance with him, as the gene-
rous aCions of the rich. The zwidow's
mite, is, in his eye, a cosily offering;
and even he who giveth to a dziciple a
cup of cold water, when he can give
him no more, goetb not without his re-
ward.

As the world is unjust in its judgments,

so it is ungrateful in its requitals. Time
speedily effaces the memory of the great-
eft services ; and when we can repeat
them no more, we are neglected, and
thrown aside. It was the faying of a
noted great man of the world, on the

G g fall

s E M. fall of his fortunes, " Had I served God

xv.
v---- '. as faithfully as I have done my King,

" he would not have cart me off in my
"old age." Unfaithfulness, and ingrati-
tude, are unknown to God. With him
no new favourites arise, to usurp the
place, or to bear off the rewards, of his
ancient servants. Even to your old age, I
am lie ; and even to hoary hairs, I will
carry you. I have made, and I will bear;
even I will carry, and will deliver you,
faith the Lord Almighty *.---Since, then,
in our several departments, we must la-
bour, What comparison is there, between
labouring for God, and for the world?
How unjufi are they, who become weary
so much sooner in the service of God,
than they do in that of the moit revere and
imperious of. all masters !

III. TH1 resources of virtue are much

greater than those of the world; the com-
penfations which it makes for our distresses,
far more valuable. Perpetual success be-
longs neither to the one nor the other.

* Ifa, xlvi. 4.

But

But under disappointments, when they s E M.

XV.

occur, virtue bears us up; the world al- -
lows us to fink. When the mind of a
good man is hurt by misfortunes, religion
administers the cordial, and infuses the
balm. Whereas the world infliCts wounds,
and then leaves them to fefier. It brings
sorrows, but it provides no consolation.
Consolation is entirely the province of re-
ligion. Supposing religion to be inferiour
to vice in external advantages, it mufft be
allowed to possess internal peace, in a
much higher degree. This is focertain,
that almost all men, at some period or
other of their life, look forward to it,
as to a desirable retreat. When the ends
of their present pursuit shall be accom-
plifhed, they propose to themselves much
satisfaCtion, in an honourable discharge
of the duties of their station, amidfit
those moderate passions, and temperate
pleasures, which innocence allows. That
which all men agree in holding to be fe-
cond in importance to the pursuit which
they follow, may be safely esteemed to be

G g the

S E R M. the firfl in real worth ; and it may be

xv. -.-- concluded, that if they were not blinded

by some prevailing paflion, they would
dificern and adopt it as such.

It is the peculiar effect of virtue, to

make a man's chief happiness arise from
himself and his own conduCt. A bad man
is wholly the creature of the world. He
hangs upon its favour, lives by its smiles,
and is happy or miserable, in proporti-
on to his success. But to a virtuous man,
success, in worldly undertakings, is but a
secondary object. To discharge his own
part with integrity and honour, is his
chief aim. If he has done properly what
was incumbent on him to do, his mind
is at reil ; to Providence he leaves the
event. His witness is in heaven, and his
record is on high. Satisfied with the ap-
probation of God, and the tefimrony of
a good conscience, he enjoys himself, and
despises the triumphs of guilt. In pro-
portion as such manly principles rule your
heart, you will become independent of
the world and will forbear complaining

of

of its discouragements. It is the imper- s Eilv.I.
section of your virtue, which occasions --
you to be weary in well-doing. It is be-
cause your hearts remain divided between
God and the world, that you are so often
discontented; partly wishing to discharge
your duty, and partly seeking your hap-
piness from somewhat that is repugnant to
your duty. Study to be more consistent
in principle, and more uniform in practice,
and your peace will be more unbroken.

Though virtue may appear at first fight

to contraCt the bounds of enjoyment, you
will find, upon reflection, that, in truth,
it enlarges them. If it restrains the excess
of some pleasures, it favours and incrcaces
others. It precludes you from none, but
such as are either fantaftick and irlagina-
ry, or pernicious and deftrudtive. What-
evcr is truly valuable in human enjoy-
ment, it allows to a good man, no less
than to others. It not only allows him
such pleasures, but heightens them, Iy
that grateful relish which a good confci-
ence gives to every pleasure. It not only

heighntens

S I.R M. heightens them, but adds to them, also,
-.. -..- the peculiar fatisfadions which flow from

virtuous sentiments, from devout affeCti-
ons, and religious hopes. On how much
worse terms is the finner placed, in the
midst of his boasted gratifications ? His
portion is confined to this world. His
good things are all of one fort only; he
has neither knowledge, nor relish, of any
thing beyond them. His enjoyment, there-
fore, refts on a much narrower basis, than
that of the servants of God. Enlarge, as
much as you please, the circle of world-
ly gratifications; yet, if nothing of the
mind and the heart, nothing of a refined
and moral nature, enter into that circle,
and vary the enjoyment, languor and
weariness soon succeed. Among whom
do you hear more peevish expressions of
discontent, or more frequent complaints of
low spirits, than among the professed vo-
taries of worldly pleasure?

Vice and virtue, in their progress, as

in every other refpedt, hold an opposite
course. The beginnings of vice are en-

ticing.

ticing. The irfi fieps of worldly ad- s E R

, I.

vancement, are flattering and pleasing. -- -
But the continuance of success blunts cn-
joyment, and flattens desire. Whereas
the beginnings of virtue arc laborious.
But, by perseverance, its labours dimi-
nifh, and its pleasures increase. As it ri-
pens into confirmed habit, it becomes
both smoother in pracice, and more com-
plete in its reward. In a worldly life, the
termination of our hopes always meets
our view. We fee a bouncary before us,
beyond which we cannot reach. But
the profpeEs of virtue arc growing, and
endless. The righteous J3all bold on in his
way ; and he that hath clean hands, Jihall wax
ltronger and Jironger. TIhe path of the jzul
is as the Jhininxg light, that JJinet7h more
and more unto the perfec7 d9ay. This brings
me to confider,

IV. THE assured hope, which good

men enjoy, of a full reward at lars. I
have endeavoured, by several confidera-
tions, to correct your impatience under

the

s ER I. the present discouragements of virtue. I

XV. '
c~-,-v have shown many high advantages, which

it already poffefies. But now, laying all
these aside supposing virtue to have
brought you no advantage, but to have
only engaged you in perpetual firuggles
with an evil world; the Text fuggefls
what is sufficient to answer every objefli-
on, and to silence every complaint In
due Jfafon you Jfall reap, if you faint not.
It is not a loose encouragement, or a du-
bious hope, which is held forth to us. A
direc and explicit declaration is made by
the Spirit of God, that piety and virtue,
how discouraged soever, or oppressed, they
may be for a while, shall not be fruftrat-
ed of their reward; but that in due sea-
son, when the period which is fixed by
the Divine decree shall come, all who have
not been weary in well-doing, though they
may have jfwn in tears, Jhall reap in joy.
As this great principle of faith is so effen-
tial to our present argument, and is in-
deed the foundation of all religion, it
will be proper that we now take a view
of the grounds on which it refis. By fix-

ing

ing our attention, both on the proofs s EXR M.
which reason suggests, and on the cisco-
veries which revelation has made, of a
state of future retribution, we shall take
an effecual method of confirming our ad-
herence to religion, and of baffling those
temptations which might lead us to be
weary in well-doing.

THE first, and molt obvious prefump-

tion, which reason affords in behalf of
future rewards to the righteous, arises
from the imperfec distribution of good
and evil in our present fiatc. Notwith-
fianding what I have advanced concern-
ing the pleasures and advantages of vir-
tue, it cannot be denied, that the happi-
ness of good men is often left incomplete.
The vicious possess advantages, to which
they have no right; while the confcien-
tious susser for the fake of virtue, and
groan under distresses which they have
not merited from the world. Indeed, were
the difiribution of good and evil, in this
life, altogether promiscuous; could it be

said,

S E R M. Laid, with truth, that the moral condition
--- of men had no influence whatever upon

their happiness or misery ; I admit, that
from such a state of things, no prefump-
tion would arise, of any future retribu-
tion being intended. They who delight
to aggravate the miseries of life, and the
distresses of virtue, do no service to the
argument in behalf of Providence. For,
if total disorder be found to prevail now,
suspicions may, too jufily, arise, of its
prevailing for ever. If he who rules the
universe, entirely neglects virtue here, the
probability mufl be small, of his reward-
ing it hereafter. But this is far from be-
ing the true slate of the fad. What hu-
man life presents to the view of an impar-
tial observer, is by no means a scene of
entire confusion ; but a state of order, be-
gun, and carried on acertain length. Virtue
is so far from being neglected by the Go-
vernour of the world, that from many evi-
dent marks, it appears to be a chief object
of his care. In the conflitution of human
nature, a foundation is laid, for comfort

to

to the righteous, and for internal punish- S ER -M.
ment to the wicked. Throughout the '---'
course of Divine government, tendencies
towards the happiness of the one, and the
misery of the other, cou:lnIatly appear.
They are so conspicuous, as not to have
escaped the notice of the rucefi nations.
Over the whole earth, they have diffused
the belief, that Providence is propitious
to virtue, and adverse to guilt. Yet these
tendencies are, sometimes, disappointed of
their effect; and that which Providence
visibly favours, is left, at present, with-
out an adequate reward.

From such an imperfect distribution of

happiness, what are we to conclude, but,
that this system is the beginning, not the
whole of things ; the opening only of a
more extensive plan, whose conrummination
reaches into a future world ? If God has
already fct his throne for judxgmcnt; if he
has visibly begun to reward and to pu-
nifh, in some degree, on earth, he can-
not mean to leave the cxercift of govern-
ment incomplete. Having laid the foun-

dation

S E R M. dation of a great and noble itru6ture, he

--.-~' will in due time rear it up to perfection.

The unfinished parts of the fabric evi-
dently fiow, that a future building is in-
tended. All his other works are confrut-
ed according to the moos full and exat
proportion. in the natural world, nothing
is deficient, nothing redundant. It is in
the moral world, only, that we discover
irregularity and defect. It falls short of
that order and perfection, which appear
in the reft of the creation. It exhibits
not, in its present slate, the fame features
of complete wisdom, justice, or goodness.
But can we believe, that, under the go-
vernment of the Supreme Being, those
apparent disorders shall not be rectified
at the lalt ? Or, that from his conduct
towards his rational creatures, the chief
of his works, the sole objecion against
his perfection shall be allowed to rife, and
shall continue unremoved for ever.

On the supposition of future rewards

and puniflhments, a satisfying account can
be given, of all the disorders which at

present

present take place on earth. Chrifiianity S ERI tM
explains their origin, and traces them to v-,
their issue. Man, fallen from his prima-
val felicity, is now undergoing probation
and discipline for his final slate. Divine
juitice remains, for a season, concealed;
and allows men to ad their parts with
freedom on this theatre, that their cha-
rac2ers may be formed and ascertained.
Amidst discouragements and afflictions,
the righteous give proof of their fidelity,
and acquire the habits of virtue. But, if
you suppose the events of this life to have
no reference to another, the whole state
of man becomes, not only inexplicable,
but contradictory, and inconsistent. The
powers of the inferiour animals are per-
fetly suited to their station. They know
nothing higher than their present condi-
tion. In gratifying their appetites, they
fulfil their detfiny, and pass away. Man,
alone, comes forth to act a part, which
carries no meaning, and tends to no end.
Endowed with capacities, which extend
far beyond his present sphere; fitted by

his

s E R M. his rational nature, for running the race

xv.
A- - of immortality, he is flopped short in the

very intrance of his course. He squanders
his ativity on pursuits, which he discerns
to be vain. He languishes for knowledge,
which is placed beyond his reach. He
thirsts after a happiness, which he is
doomed never to enjoy. He fees, and
laments the disasters of his itate; and
yet, upon this supposition, can find no-
thing to remedy them.---Has the eternal
God any pleasure in sporting himself with
such a scene of misery and folly, as this
life, if it had no connection with another,
muit exhibit to his eye ? Did he call into
exiflence this magnificent universe, adorn
it with so much beauty and splendour,
and surround it with those glorious lumi-
naries which we behold in the heavens,
only that some generations of mortal men
might arise to behold these wonders, and
then disappear for ever ? How unsuitable,
in this cafe, were the habitation to the
wretched inhabitant! How inconsistent
the commencement of his being, and the

mighty

mighty preparation of his powers and s E R M.

xv.

faculties, with his despicable end! How -
contradictory, in fine, were every thing
which concerns the state of man, to the
wisdom and perfection of his Maker !

Throughout all ages, and among all na-

tions, the persuasion of a future life has
prevailed. It sprung not from the refine-
ments of science, or the speculations of
philosophy; but from a deeper and strong-
er root, the natural sentiments of the hu-
man heart. Hence it is common to the
philosopher and the savage; and is found
in the most barbarous, as well as in the
most civilized regions. Even the belief of
the being of a God, is not more general
on the earth, than the belief of immorta-
lity. Dark, indeed, and confused, were
the notions which men entertained con-
cerning a future Rfate. Yet frill, in that
state, they looked for retribution, both to
the good, and the bad; and in the per-
feacion of such pleasures, as they knew
best, and valued mofI highly, they placed
the rewards of the virtuous. So univer-

fal

S 1 M. fal a conCent seems plainly to indicate, an

XV.
v-v--' original determination given to the foul by

its Creator. It flows this great truth, to
be native and congenial to man.

When we look into our own breasts,

we find various anticipations and presages
of future existence. MNoft of our great
and high paflions, extend beyond the li-
mits of this life. The ambitious and the
felf-denied, the great, the good, and the
wicked, all take interest, in what is to
happen after they shall have left the earth.
That pailion for fame, which inspires so
much of the a6divity of mankind, plainly
is animated by the persuasion, that con-
fcioufnefs is to survive the dissolution of
the body. The virtuous are supported by
the hope, the guilty tormented with the
dread, of what is to take place after
death. As death approaches, the hopes of
the one, and the fears of the other, are
found to redouble. The foul, when iifuing
hence, seems more clearly to discern its
future abode. All the operations of con-

I science,

science, proceed upon the belief of im- s Rt M.
mortality. The whole moral condut of --.
men refers to it. All legislators have sup-
posed it. All religions are built upon it.
It is so essential to the order of society,
that were it erased, human laws would
prove ineffectual refiraints from evil, and
a deluge of crimes and miseries would
overflow the earth. To suppose this uni-
versal and powerful belief to be without
foundation in truth, is to suppose, that
a principle of delusion was intcrwoven
with the nature of man ; is to suppose,
that his Creator was reduced to the necef-
fity of impressing his heart with a false-
hood, in order to make him answer the
purposes of his being.

BUT though there arguments be strong,

yet all arguments are liable to objection.
Perhaps this general belief, of which 1 have
spoken, has been owing to inclination and
desire, more than to evidence. Perhaps,
in our reasonings on this subjed from the
Divine perfections, we flatter ourselves

H h with

S E R M. with being of more consequence, than we

x,_ truly are, in the system of the universe.

Hence the great importance of a difcove-
ry proceeding from God himself, which
gives full authority to all that reason had
suggested, and places this capital truth be-
yond the reach of suspicion or difiruft.

The method which Christianity has ta-

ken to convey to us the evidence of a fu-
ture state, highly deserves our attention.
Had the Gospel been addressed, like a
fyfiem of philosophy, solely to the under-
standing of men; had it aimed only at
enlightening the fludious and reflciing, it
v'ould have confined itself to abftra&t
truth; it would have simply informed us,
that the righteous are hereafter to be re-
warded, and finners to be punished. Such
a declaration as that contained in the Text,
would have been sufficient: Be not weary
in well-doing; for in due season you J/iail
reap, if you fizint not. But the Gospel
has not flopped, at barely announcing life
and immortality to mankind. It was cal-
culated for popular edification. It was

intended

intended to be the religion not merely of s E R M.

xv.

the few, whose understanding was to be '---
informed; but of the many, also, whose
imagination was to be impressed, and
whose passions were to be awakened, in
order to give the truth its due influence
over them. Upon this account it not only
reveals the certainty of a future state, but,
in the person of the great Founder of our
religion, exhibits a series of fadts relating
to it; by means of which, our senses, our
imagination, and pafions, all become in-
terefled in this great objec.

The refurredtion of Christ from the

grave, was deigned to be a sensible evi-
dence, that death infers not a final extinc-
tion of the living principle. He role,
in order to show, that, in our name, he
had conquered deatl, and was become the
fifl fruits of them that Jleep. Nor did lie
only rife from the grave, but, by afccnd-
ing to heaven in a visible form, before
many witnelfes, gave an ocular specimen
of the transition from this world, into the
region of the bleited. The employments

H- h z which

S E R MI. which now occupy him there, are fully

xv. '-- declared. As our fore-runner, he hath en-

tered within the veil. He appears in the pre-
eJnce of God for us. He maketh perpetual
intercejion for his people. I go, faith he,
to nmy Father and your Father, to my God
and your God. In my Father's hoi0fe are ma-
ny maiions. I g-o to prepare a place for you.
I will come again, and receive you to m)felf
that .where I am, there ye may be also. The
circumstances of his coming again, are
diftinQly foretold. The founding of the
last trumpet, the refurredion of the dead,
the appearance of the Judge, and the
solemnity with which he shall discriminate
the good from the bad, are all described.
The very words in which he shall pro-
nounce the final sentence, are recited in
our hearing: Come, ye blefl,'d of my Father !
inherit the kingdoim prepared for you from
the foundation of the world. Then {hall
the holy and the just be caught up in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air. They
shall enter with him into the city of the
living God. They shall possess the new

earth

earth and new heavens, wherein dwelleth s ER M.

XV.

righteozfnefs. God Jhall wipe away all tears ---
from their eyes. They /hall behold his face
in righteoztfiefs, and be satisfied with his like-
ness for ever.---By recording such a train
of firiking circumstances and fads, the
Gospel familiarizes us in some measure
with a future state. By accommodating
this great discovery, in so useful a manner,
to the conceptions of men, it furnishes a
firong intrinsic evidence of its divine
origin.

THUS, upon the whole, whether you

consult your reason, or liften to the disco-
veries of revelation, you behold our argu-
ment confirmed; you behold a life of piety
and virtue, issuing in immortal felicity.
Of what worldly pursuit can it be pro-
nounced, that its reward is certain ? Look
every where around you, and you flall
fee, that the race is far from being always
to the swift, or the battle to the Jirong. The
most diligent, the most wife, the moit ac-
complifhed, may, after all their labours,

be

S E R M. be disappointed in the end; and be left to

XV.
-- r-, susser the regret, of having spent their

jlrexngthfor nought. But, for the righteous,
is laid up the crown of life. Their final
happiness is prepared in the eternal plan
of Providence, and secured by thelabours
and sufferings of the Saviour of the world.

Cease, then, from your unjufi complaints

against virtue and religion. Leave difcon-
tent, and pcevifhnefs, to worldly men. In
no period of difirefs, in no moment of dif-,
appointment, allow yourselves to fufpe&,
that piety and integrity are fruitless. In.
every frate of being, they lead to happi-
ness. If you enjoy not at present their
full rewards, it is because the season of
recompence is not yet come. For, in duc
Jeafon )yozz JalSl reap. There is a time which
is proper for reward; and there is a period
which belongs to trial. How long the one
should last, and when the other should ar-
rive, belongs not to you to determine.
It is fixed by the wife, though unknown,
decree of the Almighty. But, be assured,
that He that. comcth, jlhall come, and will not

7 tarry.

tarry. He shall come in due feafJn, to re- s R M.

XV.

store perfe~t order among his works ; to ----
bring reft to the weary, comfort to the as-
flicIed, and just retribution to all men.
Behold, faith the faithful and true IfPitnefi,
I come quickly, and my reward is w;ith me.
To him that overcometh, will I give to cat of
the tree of life, which is in the midJt of the
paradise of God. I willrgive hinm the morn-
ing flar. 1 will make him a pillar in my
temple. HIe Jhall be cloathed in white rai-
ment; and J7jall fit down with me, on my
throne .

? Rev. xxii. 2.-ii. 7, 28.-iii, 12, 5, 21.

F I N I S.
