I.

- 2' t,

- ~ ~ ,-

-1/ '\ 1/dJ~-'' ';

S E.R M O NP S.
SERMONS,

B Y

H U GH B LA IFR; D. D.
One of the MINISTERS of the HI GH: CHURC H,

-- ... N .i. -
PROFESSOR of RHETORICK and BELLES LETTRES

in the University, of Edinburgh.

/

/ '

EDI N B U RGH:
Printed for WILLIAM CREECH, Edinburgh; and

W. STRAHAN, and T. CADELL, London.

M, DCC, LXXVI I.

/

/ r.

IBRIT. CI

RIT T.x \

# THE CONTENTS.

THE
CO N T E N T S.

Page.

SERMON I.

On the Union of Piety and Morality.
ACTS x. 4. Thy prayers and thine

alms are come up for a memorial
before God.

S E R M O N II.
On the Influence of Religion upon

Adversity.
PSAL. xxvii. 5. I1 the rime of trou-

ble, he Jhall hide me in his pavi-
lion; in the secret of his tabernacle
flJall he hide me; be flall set mle up
lpon1 a rock. 25

SER-

Page.

SERMON III.
On the Influence of Religion upon

Prosperity.
PSAL. i. 3. He Jfall be like a tree

planted by the rivers of water, that
bringeth forth his fruit in his sea-
son; his leaf also JJall not wither,
and whatsoever he dothJhall prosper. 57

SERMON IV.
On our imperfect Knowledge of a

Future State.
I CORINTH. xiii. 12. For now we fee

through a glass, darkly- - 84

SERMON V.

On the Death of ChrifI.
JOHN xvii. I. Jesus lift itp his eyes

to heaven, and said, Father! the
holu is colme;- I 4

SER-

Page.
SERMON VI.

On Gentleness.

JAMES iii. 17. The wifiJom that is
fiom above, is-gentle- 144

S E RMON VII.

On the Disorders of the Paflions.
ESTHER V. 13. Yet all this availcth

me nothing, so long as IJfe Mordecai
the Jew fitting at the Iing's gate. 172

S E R M O N VIII.
On our Ignorance of Good and Evil

in this Life.
ECCLESIAST. vi. 12. Wlho knoweth

what is good for man in this life,
all the ldas of his vain life, which
he fpendeth as a Jfladow ? 203

SE R-

Page.

SERMON IX.

On religious Retirement.
PSAL. iv. 4. Comnmun7 e 'witJh your own

heart, upon your bed, and be Jfill. 233

SERMON X.

On Devotion.
ACTS X. 2. Corlnelius-a devout man. 263

SERMON XI.

On the Duties of the Young.
TITUS ii. 6. Younlg men1 likewifie ex-

hort to be fober-minled. 305

SERMON XII.
On the Duties and Consolations of

the Aged.
PROV. xvi. 31. The hoary head is a

crown of glory, if it be found in the
'a, oj' rig1htcoifniefs. 340

SE R-

Page.

SERMON XIII.

On the Power of Conscience.
GENESIS xlii. 2I, 21.. And theyfaid,

one to another, IVe are verily gu!ilty
concelrning our brother, in that we
saw the an1gusiJ of his foul, when
he be/fo!ght ius; anld we zouold not
hear: Therefore is this difrfifs come
utpon us. And Reiiben alfvwered
them, fiying, Spake I lot unto you,
fayintg, Do not fin agailfl the child;
and ye would 11t hear ? Thercfore,
behold also, his blood is requied. 374

SERMON XIV.
On the Mixture of Joy and Fear in

Religion.
PSAL. ii. I . Rejoice wvith trembling. 410

SE R-

Page.

SER MON XV.
On the Motives to Conitancy in

Virtue.
GALAT. vi. 9. And let us not be weary

in well-doing; for in due season we
Jfall reap, if we faint not. 437

SERMON I.

# SERMON I. On the Union of PIETY and MORALITY. ACTS x. 4. Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God.

ca * . ^ | . 0- t *t | ..'»*' S c§3

iT -
! i e i

SERMON I.
On the Union of PIETY and MORALITY.

ACTS x. 4.
Thy prayers and thine alms are come uzp so

a memorial beJore God.

r;-"*'+*" HE High and Lofty One who SERM.
'4 T * i1lhabiteth eternity, dwelleth also I
i ~-s^" with him that is of humble and

contrite heart. In the midst of

his glory, the Almighty is not inattentive
to the meanest of his fubjeCs. Neither
obscurity of flation, nor imperfection of
knowledge, fink those below his regard,
who worihip and obey him. Every prayer

A which

S E R M. which they fend up from their secret re-

tiremsnts, is listened to by him; and every
work of charity which they perform, how
unknown soever to the world, attracts his
notice. The text presents a signal instance
of this comfortab'l truth. In the city of
Cafarea, there d-celt a Roman centurion,
a military oficcr of inferior rank, a Gen-
tile, nehller by bh'th nor religion entitled
to the privileges of the Jewili nation. But
he was a devout and benevolent man;
who, according to his measure of religious
knowledge, studicd to perform his duty,
prayed to God anla;'s, and gave much allns
to the people. Such a character pasTed not
unobserved by God. So highly was it
honoured, that to this good centurion an
angel was sent from heaven, in order to
direct him to the means of full inifruCion
in the truth. The angel accosts him with
this salutation, Cornelius, lhy prayers and
thi;,e a/ims are comie up for a nmemorial before
God.

It is to the conjunction of pra'ers and
alms, that I purpose now to direcd your

thoughts,

thoughts, as delcribing the respectable s E R M.
and amiable character of a man, as form- 1
ing the honour and the bleflcdnefs of a
true Christian; piety joined with charity,
faith with good works, devotion with mo-
rality. These arc things which God hath
connected, and which it is impious in man
to separate. It is only when they remain
united, that they can come up as a grate-
ful memorinl before God. I Pnall firit endea-
vour to show you, That alms without
prayers, or prayers without alms, mora-
lity without devotion, or devotion without
morality, are extremely defective; and
then liall point out the happy eflcils of
their mutual union.

LET us begin with confidering the cafe

of alms without prayers; that is, of good
works without piety, or a proper fenie of
God and Religion. This is no rare nor
uncommon cafe. With many, Virtue is,
or at least is pretended to be, a rcfpecable
and an honoured name, while Piety
founds meanly in their ears. They are

A 2 mcn

SERM. men of the world, and they claim to be

men of honour. They reft upon their
humanity, their public spirit, their pro-
bity, and their truth. They arrogate to
themselves all the manly and the active
virtues. But devout affections and reli-
gious duties they treat with contempt, as
founded on shadowy speculations, and fit
to employ the attention only of weak and
superstitious minds. Now, in opposition
to such persons, I contend, that this ne-
glec of piety argues depravity of heart;
and that it infers an irregular discharge
of the duties of morality.

FIRST, It argues internal depravity; it

discovers a cold and a hard heart, which
can never be a good one. If there be any
impression which man is formed by na-
ture to receive, it is a sense of religion.
As soon as his mind opens to observation
and reflection, he discerns innumerable
marks of his dependent state. He finds
himself placed, by some superior power,
in a vast world, where the wisdom and

goodness

goodness of the Creator are conspicuous S E RM.
on every fide. The magnificence, the I

.

beauty and order of nature, excite him to
admire and adore. When he looks up
to that invisible hand which operates
throughout the universe, he is impressed
with reverence. When he receives blef-
sings which he cannot avoid ascribing to
divine goodness, he is prompted to grati-
tude. The expressions of those affections
under the various forms of religious wor-
lhip, are no other than native effusions of
the human heart. Ignorance may mif-
lead, and fuperitition corrupt them; but
their origin is derived from sentiments
that are essential to man.

Cast your eyes over the whole earth.

Explore the most remote quarters of the
east or the weft. You may discover tribes
of men without policy, or laws, or cities,
or any of the arts of life: But no where
ihall you find them without some form
of religion. In every region you behold
the prostrate worfllipper, the temple, and
the offering. Wherever men have existed,

they

S E R M. they have been sensible that some acknow-
Tv ledgment was due on their part, to the

Former of the world. If in their rudest
and moes ignorant state, this obligation
has been confessed, how much is it in-
creased by the improvements of human
knowledge, but especially by the great
discoveries of the Christian revelation
Whatever, either from reverence or from
gratitude, can excite men to the worihip of
God, is by this revelation placed in such
a light as one should think were sufficient
to over-awe the most thoughtless, and to
melt the most obdurate mind.

Canis thou, then, pretend to be a man

of reason, nay, a man of virtue, and yet
continue regardless of one of the first and
chief dictates of human nature ? Where
is thy sensibility to what is right and fit,
if that loud voice which calls all nations
throughout the earth to religious homage,
has never been heard by thee ? Or, if it
has been heard, by what strange and
false refinements haft thou ftified those
natural sentiments which it tends to a-

waken ?

wvaken ? Calling thyself a son, a citizen, sE R M.
a friend; claiming to be faithful and as- I
feclionate in thefi relations; haft thou
no ienfe of what thou owetl to thy firfl
Parent, thy highest Sovereign, thy great-
cft Benefactor ? Can it be confiflent with
true virtue or honour, to value thyself up-
on thy regard to inferior obligations, and
yet to violate that which is the most sacred
and the most ancient of all? When simple
instinct teaches the Tartar and the Indian,
together with his alms and good works
to join his prayers to that Power whom
he confiders as the source of good, lhall
it be no reproach, in the molt enlightened
state of human nature, and under the
purest dispensation of religion, to have
extinguiflled the sense of gratitude to Hea-
ven, and to flight all acknowledgment of
the great and the true God ? What does
such conduct imply, but either an entire
want, or a wilful suppression of some of
the best and most generous affections be-
longing to human nature ?-Surely, there
muit be an essential defect in that heart

which

SE R M. which remains cold and insensible, where

j it ought to be affecAed moit warmly.
Surely, such a degree of depravity muff
be lodged there, as is sufficient to taint
all the other lprings of pretended virtue.

BUT besides this, I must contend, in

the second place, That where religion is
neglected, there can be no regular nor
steady practice of the duties of morality,
The characer, will be often inconsistent;
and Virtue placed on a basis too narrow to
support it, will be always loose and tot-
tering. For such is the propensity of our
nature to vice, so numerous are the tempt-
ations to a relaxed and immoral conduct,
that stronger restraints than those of mere
reason are necessary to be imposed on
man. The sense of right and wrong, the
principle of honour, or the inftindt of be-
nevolence, are Larriers too feeble to with-
fland the strength of paflion. In the
tranquil seasons of life, there natural prin-
ciples may, perhaps, carry on the ordi-
nary course of social duties with some re-

~i ~ gularity,

gularity. But wait until some trying S E R M.
emergence come. Let the conflict of pas- V
lions arise. Let the heart be either wound-
ed by fore distress, or agitated by violent
emotions; and you shall preiently fee that
virtue without religion is inadequate to
the government of life. It is dcftitute of
its proper guard, of its finneft support,
of its chief encouragement. It will fink
under the weight of misfortune; or will
yield to the Iblicitation of guilt.

The great motives that produce con-

flancy and firmness of adion must be of
a palpable and striking kind : A Divine
Legislator uttering his voice from heaven;
: an Omniscient Witness beholding us in
all our retreats; an Almighty Governour
firetching forth his arm to punish or re-
.ward, disclosing the secrets of the invisible
"world, informing us of perpetual reft
prepared hereafter for the righteous, and
everlasting sorrows for the wicked: These
are the considerations which over-awe the
world, which support integrity and check
guilt. They add to virtue that solemnity

1 B which

SERbM. which should ever characerize it. To

the admonitions of conscience they give
the authority of a law. Co-operating
with all the good dispositions of a pious
man, they strengthen and insure their in-
fluence. On his alms you can have no
certain dependence, who thinks not of
God, nor has ever joined prayer to his
charitable deeds. But when humanity is
seconded by piety, the spring from which
it flows is rendered, of course, more re-
gular and conftant.-In short, withdraw
religion, and you ihake all the pillars of
morality. In every heart you weaken the
influence of virtue: And among the mul-
titude, the bulk of mankind, you over-
throw its power.

HAVING thus shewn that morality

without devotion is both defeAive and
unstable, I proceed to confider the other
extreme, of prayers without alms, devo-
tion without morality.

In every age the practice has prevailed,
of substituting certain appearances of piety

in

in the place of the great duties of huma- s E R M.
nity and mercy. Too many there have Li
always been who flatter themselves with
the hope of obtaining the friendflip of
their Creator, though they neglect to do
justice to their fellow-creatures. But such
persons may be assured, that their fuppof-
ed piety is altogether of a spurious kind.
It is an invention of their own, unknown
to reason, unknown in the word of God.
In scripture we are ever directed to try
our faith by our works, our love of God
Iby our love of men. We are directed to
.confider piety as a principle which rege-
nerates the heart, and forms it to good-
inefs. We are taught that in vain we ad-
idess any acts of homage to Christ, un-

ess we do the things which he faith; and
hat love, peace, gentleness, goodness, meek-
is and temperance, are not only the in-
juncions of his law, but the native fruits
of hisfpirit '. If therefore while piety seems
ardent, morality fliall decline, you have
full reason to believe that into that piety

B 2 some
Luke vi. 46. Gal. v. 22.

S E R M. some corrupting ingredients have entered.

And if ever your regard to morality shall
totally fail; if, while you make many
prayers, you give no alms; if, while you
appear to be zealous for God, you are
false or unjust to men; if you are hard or
contracted in heart, severe in your cen-
fures, and oppreffiye in your conduct;
then, conclude with certainty, that what
you had termed piety was no more than
an empty name. For as soon, according
to the scripture similitude, will bitter wa-
ters.flow from a sweet fountain, or thiffles
become the fruit of the vine, as such es-
sects be produced by genuine piety.

What you have called by that name,

resolves itself into one or other of three
things. Either it is a hypocritical form
of godliness, assumed in order to impose
on the world; or, which is the most fa-
vourable supposition, it is a transient im-
pression of seriousness, an accidental melt-
ing of the heart, which pases away like
the morning cloud and the earl' dew ; or,
which I am afraid is too often the cafe,

it

it is the deliberate refuge of a deluded and s E R M.
superstitious, but at the fame time a cor- I
rupted mind. For all men, even the most
depraved, are subject, more or less, to
compundions of conscience. It has never
been in their power to withdraw totally
beyond the reach of that warning voice,
which tells them that something is necef-
fary to be done, in order to make their
peace with the Ruler of the world. But,
backward at the ftme time to resign the
gains of dishonesty, or the pleasures of vice,
averse from submission to that sacred law
which enjoins righteousness in its whoie
extent, they have often attempted to make
a obrt of composition with Heaven; a com-
position, which, though they dare not a-
vow it words, lurks in secret, at the bot-
tpm of many a heart. If God will only
dispense with some articles of obedience,
they will repay him with abundant ho-
mage: If they fail in good practice, they
will study to be found in belief; and, by
the numbcr of their prayers, will atone,
in Iomc measure, for their deficiency in
charitable deeds.

But

S E RM. But the attempt is as vain, as it is im-
,,L^ pious. From the simplest and plainest

principles of reason it must appear, that
religious worship, disjoined from justice
and virtue, can upon no account what-
ever find acceptance with God. To what
purpose is the multitude of your facrjfices un-
to me ? faith the Lord. Bring no more vain
oblations. Incefe is an abomination unto me.
The new moons and sabbaths, the calling of
assemblies, I cannot away with; it is iniqui-
ty, even thefolemn meeting*.-Ceafe, foolish
and impious man! Cease to confider the
Almighty as a weak or vain-glorious be-
ing, who is to be appeased by thy devout
prostrations and thy humble words; or
to be gratified by the parade and oftenta-
tion of external worship. What is all thy
worship to him ? Will he eat the flef/J of
thy sacrifices, or drink the blood of offered
goats? Was worihip required of thee,
dost thou think, upon his account, that
thou mighteft bring any increase to his
glory and felicity by thy weak and infig-

nificant
*' Isa. i. II, 14,

nificant praises ? Sooner mighteft thou S E RM.
increase the splendor of the fun by a I
lighted taper, or add to the thunder by
thy voice. No: It is for the fake of man,
not of God, that worship and prayers are
required; not that God may be rendered
more glorious, but that man may be made
better; that he may be confirmed in a
proper seise of his dependent state, and
acquire those pious and virtuous difpofi-
tions by which he draws near to God.

Of-all the principles in religion, one

ihould take this to be the most evident;
and yet, frequent admonitions are needed
to renew the imprefion of it upon man-
kind. For what purpose did God place
- thee in this world, in the midst of human
i society, but that as a man among men

thou mighteft cultivate humanity; that
_each in his place might contribute to the
general welfare; that as a spouse, a bro-
ther, a son, or a friend, thou mighteft aa
thy part with an upright and a tender
heart; and thus aspire to resemble Him
who ever consults the good of his crea-

tures,

SE R M. tures, and whose tender mercies are over

a ll his works ? And dareft thou, who
haft been sacrificing unfufpicious inno-
cence to thy loose plcafures; thou, who
haft been dilturbing the repose of society
by thine ambition or craft; thou, who, to
increaif thy treasures, haft been making
the widow and the orphan weep; darcft
thou approach God with thy worhlip and
thy prayers, and entertain the hope that
upon thee he will look down in peace ?
Will the God of order and justice accept
filch poor compensation for his violated
lavs ? Will the God of love regard the
services of one who is an enemy to his
creatures? Shall a corrupter of the society
of men aspire to the habitations of God ?
-Believe it, He that fJith he loveth God,
;;zft love his brother a{l/. Cease to do evil;
L2arn to do well. Seek ju(dment ; relieve
the opprefed, judge the fatherlefi, pleadfor
th:e widow: And then, Draw nigh to God,
al: he will draw nigh to thee; call upon
himt in the day of trouble, and he will aiwtier
thee. Thy prayers and thine alms shall

then

then ascend, in joint memorial, before SE R M.
the Molt High. I.

I HAVE now shown the evil of maim-

ing and splitting religion; of dividing
asunder two things, which though in
theory they may be separated, yet in
practice must always co-exist if either of
them be real, Devotion to God, and Cha-
rity to men. Let us confider next the
happy effects of their union.

Their union forms the consistent, the

graceful, the refpedable character of the
real Christian, the man of true worth. If
you leave either of them out of your fy-
ftem, even though you excel in the other,
you can stand trial only in one point of
view. It is only on one fide your cha-
racer is fair; on the other, it will always
- be open to much reproach. And as you

diihonour yourselves, so you do great in-
justice to religion. For by dividing its
parts from one another, you never fail to
expose it to the censure of the world:
And perhaps, by this fort of partial and
| C divided

SE R M. divided goodness, religion has suffered

more in the esteem of mankind, than by
open profligacy. The unbeliever will
scoff at your piety, when he fees you ne-
gligent of moral duties. The bigot will
run down all morality, when he fees you
pretending to be a follower of virtue,
though you be a despiser of God. Where-
as he who fears God, and is at the fame
time just and beneficent to men, exhibits
religion to the world with full propriety.
It fihines in his conduct with its native
Iplendor; and its rays throw a glory
round him. His character is above re-
proach. It is at once amiable and vene-
rable. Malice itself is afraid to attack
him; and even the worit men respect
and honour him in their hearts.

Tlhis too is the man whose life will be

mot' peaceful and happy. He who fails
materially either in piety or in virtue, is
always obnoxious to the anguish of re-
morse. His partial goodness may flatter
him in the day of superficial observation;
but when solitude or distress awakens the

powers

powers of reflecion, he {hall be made to s E R M.
feel, that one part of duty performed .v
atones not for another which is neglecaed.
In the midst of his prayers the remem-
brance of injuffice will upbraid him with
hypocrisy; and in the distribution of his
alms, the prayers which the poor put up
for him will make him blush for his ne-
gle& of God. Conscience will supply the
place of the hand coming forth to write
over against him on the wall, Thout art
~weighed in the balance, and art found want-
ing *. Whereas he who holds faith and a
good colfcierce together, who attends equal-
ly to the discharge of his duty towards
God and towards man, enjoys, as far as
human imperfection allows, the sense of
fairness and consistency in conduct, of in-
tegrity and soundness of heart.

The man of mere morality is a stranger

to all the delicate and refined pleasures of
devotion. In works of beneficence and
mercy, he may enjoy satisfaction. But his
satisfaction is destitute of that glow of as-

C 2 fedioli
Dan. v. 27.

S E R M. section which enlivens the feelings of one

who lifts his heart at the fame time to
the Father of the universe, and confiders
himself as imitating God. The man a-
gain who refts solely on devotion, if that
devotion open not his heart to humanity,
not only remains a stranger to the plea-
fures of beneficence, but must often un-
dergo the pain arising from bad passions.
But unite together beneficence and devo-
tion, and you pour upon the man in
whom they are united, the full pleasures
of a good and pure heart. His alms con-
nea him with men; his prayers with
God. He looks without dismay on both
worlds. All nature has to him a benign
asped. If engaged in active life, he is the
friend of men; and he is happy in the
exertions of that friendship. If left in
retirement, he walks among the works of
nature, as with God. Every object is en-
livened to him by the sense of the divine
presence. Every where he traces the be-
neficent hand of the Author of nature;
and every where, with glowing heart,

he

he hears and answers his secret voice. s E r M.
When he looks up to heaven, he rejoices Am
in the thought that there dwells that God
whom he serves and honours; that Sa-
viour in whom he trusts; that Spirit of
grace from whose inspiration his piety and
his charity flow. When he looks around
him on the world, he is soothed with the
pleating remembrance of the good offices
which he has done, or at least has fludied
.to do, to many who dwell there. How
comfortable the reflection, that him no
poor man can upbraid for having with-
held his due; him no unfortunate man
can reproach for having seen and defpiied
his sorrows; but that on his head are de-
scending the prayers of the needy and the
aged; and that the hands of those whom
his protection has supported, or his boun-
ty has fed, arc lifted up in secret to bless
him !

Life passed under rhe influence of such

dispositions, naturally leads to a happy
end. It is not enough to fay, that faith
and piety, joined with active virtue, con-

ftitute

SE R M. ftitute the requisite preparation for hea-

ven. They in truth begin the enjoyment
of heaven. In every state of our existence
they form the chief ingredients of felicity.
Hence they are the great marks of Chri-
ftian regeneration. They are the figna-
ture of that Holy Spirit, by which good
men are said to be fealed unto the day of
redemption.-Of the eflimation in which
they are held by God, the text affords a
striking proof. Amidst that infinite va-
riety of human events which pass under
his eye, the prayers and the alms of Cor-
nelius attra(ced his particular notice. He
remarked the amiable dispositions which
rose in the heart of this good man. But
he saw that they were yet imperfec,
while he remained unenlightened by the
principles of the Christian religion. To
remove this obstruction to his rising
graces, and to bring him to the full
knowledge of that God whom he fought
to honour, he was favoured with a super-
natural message from heaven. While the
princes of the earth were left to aa by

the

the counsels of their own wisdom; while, s E R M.
without interposition from above, Ge- '.
nerals conquered or fell, according to the
vicissitude of human things; to this good
centurion an angel was commissioned
from the throne of God.

What then can I fay more or higher in

praise of this blessed characer, than that
it is what God delights to honour? Men
single out as the objects of distinction, the
'great, the brave, or the renowned. But he
'.whofeeth not as man eeth, pasing by those
qualities which often thine with false
splendor to human observation, looks to
the inward principles of action; to those
principles which form the essence of a
worthy character; and which, if called
forth, would give birth to whatever is
laudable or excellent in condut.-Is there
one, though in humble station or obscure
life, who feareth God and worketh righ-
teofilefs; wvhofe prayers and alms, pro-
ceeding in regular unaffeced tenour, be-
speak the upright, the tender, the devout
heart ?-Those alms and prayers come

.up

SERM. up in memorial before that God who is

IV no rejJeder of pefons. Him the Almighty

beholds from his throne with compla-
cency. Divine illumination is ready to
inftrud him. Angels minister to him.
They now mark him out on earth as their
fioture associate; and for him they make
ready in paradise the white robes, the
palms, and theiceptres of the just.

To this honour, to this blessedness, let

our hearts continually aspire; and through-
out the whole of life, let those solemn and
and sacred words, with which I conclude,
found in our ears, and be the great direc-
tory of our conduc: * He hath Jhewed
thee, 0 man, what is good; and what doth
the Lord thy God require of thee, but-to do
jlly, and love mercy-and to walk humbly
with thy God ?

* Micah vi. 8.

SER-
i

# SERMON II. On the Influence of Religion upon Adversity. PSALM xxvii. 5. In the time of trouble, he shall hide me in his pavilion ; in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me ; he shall set me up ...

SERMON II.

~n the Influence of Religion upon Adversity.
I

C^ PS A LM xxvii. 5.
§in the time of trouble, he Jlall hide me in

his pavilion ; in the ficret of his taber-
' nacle fJall he hide me; he JIallfet me

up upon a rock.
T HE life of man has always been a SERM.

very mixed tfate, full of uncertainty II

and vicifitude, of anxieties and fears. In
eyery religious audience, there are many
who fall under the denomination of the
unfortunate; and the reft are ignorant
how loon they may be called to join them.
For the prosperity of no man on earth is
stable and afiured. Dark clouds may soon
gather over the heads of thofc whose sky
is now most bright. In the midst of the

D deceitful

S E R M. deceitful calm which they enjoy, the storm

, that is to overwhelm them has perhaps

already begun to ferment. If a man live
nlany years, and rejoice in them all; yet let
him remember the days of darkness, for they
J7Jall be many '.

Hence, to a thoughtful mind, no fludy

can appear more important, than how to
be suitably prepared for the misfortunes
of life; so as to contemplate them in pro-
spect without difinay, and, if they must
befal, to bear them with the least dejection.
Throughout every age, the wisdom of the
wife, the treasures of the rich, and the
power of the mighty, have been employed
either in guarding their state against the
approach of distress, or in rendering them-
selves less vulnerable by its attacks. Power
has endeavoured to remove adversity to a
distance: Philosophy has studied, when it
drew nigh, to conquer.it by patience; and
Wealth has fought out every pleasure that
can compensate or alleviate pain.

While the wisdom of the world is thus
occupied, religion has been no less atten-

tive
Ecclcl. xi. 8.

tive to the fame important objeft. It in- SERM.
forms us in the text, of a pavilion which
God erecs to shelter his servants in the
time of trouble, of afecret place in his taber-
nacle into which he brings them, of a
rock on which he sets them zup; and else-
where it tells us of a J7ield and a buckler
which he spreads before them, to cover
them from tbe terror by night, and the ar-
irow that fieth by day. Now, of what na-
Jture are those instruments of defence
iwhich God is represented as providing
with such solicitous care for those who
fear him ? Has he reared up any bul-
warks, impregnable by misfortune, in
order to separate the pious and virtuous
from the reft of mankind, and to screen
them from the common disasters of life ?
No: To 'those disasters we behold them
liable no less than others. The defence
which religion provides, is altogether of
an internal kind. It is the heart, not the
outward state, which it professes to guard.
When the time of trouble comes, as come
it must to all, it places good men under

D 2 the

s E R M. the pavilion of the Almighty, by afford-

wI, ing them that security and peace which

arise from the belief of divine protetion.
It brings them into thefecret of his taber-
nacle, by opening to them sources of con-
folation which are hidden from others. By
that strength of mind with which it en-
dows them, it jets them up tpon a rock, a-
gainft which the tempest may violently
beat, but which it cannot flake.

How far the comforts proceeding from

religion merit those high titles under
which they are here figuratively defcrib-
ed, I ihall in this discourse endeavour to
{how. I hall for this end compare to-
gether the situation of bad men and that
of the good, when both are suffering the
misfortunes of life; and then make such
improvement as the subjea will naturally
suggest.

I. RELIGION prepares the mind for en-

countering with fortitude, the most revere
ihocks of adversity; whereas vice, by its
natiural influence on the temper, tends to

produce

produce dejetion under the slightest trials. s E t M.
While worldly men enlarge their poffle- "-
sions, and extend their connections, they
imagine that they are itrengthcning them-
selves against all the possible vicissitudes of
life. They fay in their hearts, My loun-
tain Jfandsfirong, and IJhall neuver be imov-
ned. But so fatal is their delusion, that in-
stead of strengthening, they are wcalen-
ing that which only can support them
vhen those vicissitudes come. It is their
'nind which muff then support them; and
their mind, by their sensual attachments,
they corrupt and weaken. Addic'ed with
intemperate fondness to the pleasures of
the world, they incur two great and cer-
tain evils; they both exclude themselves
from every resource except the world,
and they increase their sensibility to every
blow which comes upon them from that
quarter.

They have neither principles nor temper

which can stand' the assault of trouble.
They have no principles which lead them
to look beyond the ordinary rotation of

events;

SE R M. events; and therefore, when misfortunes

I. involve them, the prospect must be com-

fortlefs on every fide. Their crimes have
disqualified them for looking up to the
afliftance of any higher power than their
own ability, or for relying on any better
guide than their own wisdom. And as
from principle they can derive no sup-
port, so in a temper corrupted by prof-
perity they find no relief. They have
loft that moderation of mind which en-
ables a wife man to accommodate himself
to his situation. Long fed with false hopes,
they are exasperated and stung by every
disappointment. Luxurious and effemi-
nate, they can bear no uneasiness: Proud
and presumptuous, they can brook no
opposition. By nouriflling dispositions
whichfo little filit this uncertain slate,
they have infused a double portion of bit-
terneis into the cup of woe; they have
iharpened the edge of that sword which
is lifted up to finite them. Strangers to all
the temperate fatisfacdions of a good and
a pure mind; strangers to every pleasure

except

except what was seasoned by vice or va- SE R M.
nity, their adversity is to the last degree Rv
disconsolate. Flourishing health, and fa-
vourable fortune, were the two pillars on
which they refted. Shake either of them;
and down falls their whole edifice of hope
and comfort. Prostrate and forlorn, they
are left on the ground; obliged to join
with the man of Ephraim in his abject
lameritation, They have taken away n'y gods
. which I had omade, and what have I more e ?
-Such are the causes to which we must
ascribe the broken spirits, the peevish tem-
per, and impatient passions, that so often
attend the declining age, or falling for-
tunes of vicious men.

But how different is the condition of a

truly good man in those trying situations
of life! Religion had gradually prepared
his mind for all the events of this incon-
itant state. It had inftruced him in the
nature of true happiness. It had early
weaned him from the undue love of the
world, by discovering to him its vanity,
and by setting higher profpeds an his

view.
* Judges xviii. 24.

SE RM. view. Afflictions do not attack him by

n.> surprise, and therefore do not overwhelm

him. He was equipped for the storm, as
well as the calm, in this dubious naviga-
tion of life. Under those conditions he
knew himself to be brought hither, that
he was not to retain always the enjoyment
of what he loved: And therefore he is not
overcome by disappointment, when that
wlhich is mortal, dies; when that which
it mutable, begins to change; and that
which he knew to be traniient, passes
away.

All the principles which religion teaches,

and all the habits which it forms, are fa-
vourable to strength of mind. It will be
found, that whatever purifies, fortifies al-
so the heart. In the course of living righ-
teot/',' Jbberly and godly, a good man ac-
quires a Ready and well-governed spirit.
Trained, by God's grace, to enjoy with
moderation the advantages of the world,
neither lifted up by success, nor enervated
with sensuality, he meets the changes in
his lot without unmanly dejection: He is

I ~ ~ inured

inured to temperance and restraint. He has s E R MB
learned firmness and felf-command. He .V
is accustomed to look up to that Supreme
Providence which disposes of human as-
fairs, not with reverence only, but with
trust and hope.

The time of prosperity was to him not

merely a season of barren joy, but pro-
ductive of much useful improvement.
tiHe had properly cultivated his mind: He
had stored it with useful knowledge, with
good principles, and virtuous dispositions.
These resources remain entire, when the
, days of trouble come. They remain with
: him in sickness, as in health ; in poverty,

as in the midst of riches ; in his dark and
solitary hours, no less than when fur-
Irounded with friends and gay society.
llrom the glare of prosperity, he can,
without dejection, withdraw into the
ihade. Excluded from several advantages
of the world, he may be obliged to retreat
into a narrower circle; but within that
circle he will find many comforts left.
i His chief pleafiires were always of the

E calm,

S E R M. calm, innocent, and temperate kind; and

over these, the changes of the world have
the least power. His mind is a kingdom
to him; and he can still enjoy it. The
world did not beiRow upon him all his
enjoyments; and therefore it is not in the
power of the world, by its most cruel at-
tacks, to carry them all away.

II. THE difireffes of life are alleviated to

good men by reflections on their past con-
due ; while, by such reflections, they are
highly aggravated to the bad. During
the gay and active periods of life, finners
elude, in tome meiafre, the force of con-
science. Carried round in the whirl of as-
fairs and pleasures; intent on contrivance,
or eager in pursuit; amused by hope, or
elated by enjoyment, they are fleltered
by that croud of trifles which surrounds
them, from serious thought. But con-
science is too great a power to remain al-
ways suppressed. There is in every man's
life, a period when he liall be made to
stand forth as a real object to his own

view:

view: And when that period comes, Wo s E RM.
to him who is galled by tde fight! In the uI
dark and solitary hour of difrefs, with a
mind hurt and fore from some recent
wound of fortune, how fllall he bear to
have his character for the first time dif-
closed to him, in that humiliating light
under which guilt will necessarily present
it? Then, the recolledion of the past be-
icomes dreadful. It exhibits to him a life
thrown away on vanities and follies, or
consumed in flagitiousness and fin; no
station properly supported; no material
duties fulfilled. Crimes which once had
been easily palliated, rife before him in
their native deformity. The sense of guilt
mixes itself with all that has befallen him.
iHe beholds, or thinks that he beholds,
tthe hand of the God whom he hath of-
:fended, openly itretched out against him.
-At a season when a man stands most in
need of support, how intolerable is the
weight of this additional load, aggravat-
ing the deprcflion of disease, disappoint-
ment, or old age ! How miserable his

E 2 ftatc,

S E R M. state, who is condemned to endure at once

II. the pangs of guilt, and the vexations of

calamity! The spirit of a man may Jifnaiwr
his infirmities; but a wounded spirit, who
can bear ?

Whereas, he who is blessed with a clear

conscience, enjoys, in the worst conjunc-
tures of human life, a peace, a dignity, an
elevation of mind peculiar to virtue. The
testimony of a good conscience is indeed
to be always diftinguiflhed from that
presumptuous boast of innocence, which
every good Christian totally disclaims.
The better he is, he will be the more
humble, and sensible of his failings. But
though he acknowledge that he can claim
nothing from God, upon the footing of
desert, yet he can trust in his merciful
acceptance through Jesus Christ, accord-
ing to the terms of the gospel. He can
hope that his prayers and his alms have
come uvp in mnemorial before God. The piety
and virtue of his former life were as feeds
sown in his prosperous state, of which he
reaps the fruits in the season of adversity.

The

The riches, the pleasures, and the friends s E R M.
of the world, may have made wings to . 7
themjelves, and flown away. But the im-
provement which he made of those advan-
tages while they lasted, the temperate
spirit with which he enjoyed them, the
beneficent acions which he performed,
and the good example which he set to
others, remain behind. By the memory
i of there, he enjoys his prosperity a fe-
cond time in reflection; and perhaps this
second and reflected enjoyment is not in-
ferior to the firfl. It arrives at a more
critical and needful time. It affords him
the high satisfaction of having extracted
lasting pleasure from that which is short;
and of having fixed that which by its na-
ture was changing.-" If my race be
"now about to end, I have this comfort,
" that it has not been run in vain. I have
"fought the good fight ; I have kept the
" faith. My mind has no load. Futurity
" has no terrors. I have endeavoured to
"do my duty, and to make my peace
"' with God. I leave the reft to Heaven."

Thefc

SE R M. These are the reflections which to the ip-

right make light ariej in darkness; reflec-
tions, which clear the lonely house of vir-
tuous poverty, and attend the confcien-
tious sufferer into prison or exile; which
sooth the complaints of grief, lighten the
pressure of old age, and furnish to the
bed of sickness a cordial of more grateful
relish, and more sovereign virtue, than
any which the world can afford.

Look abroad into life, and you will

find the general sense of mankind bearing
witness to this important truth, that mind
is superior to fortune; that what one feels
within, is of much greater importance
than all that befals him without. Let a
man be brought into some fuich severe-ad
trying situation, as fixes the attention of
the public on his behaviour. The first
question which we put concerning him, is
not, What does he susser? but, How does
he bear it ? Has he a quiet mind ? or, Does
he appear to be unhappy within ? If we
judge him to be composed and firm, re-
signed to Providence, and supported by

conscious

conscious integrity, his character rifes, s E R IM
and his misery lessens in our view. We I
esteem and admire, rather than pity him.
Recollea what holy men have endured
for the fake of conscience, and with what
chearfulnefs they have suffered. On the
other hand, when conscience has concur-
red with outward misfortunes in diftref-
sing the guilty, think of the dreadful
consequences which have enfied. How
often, upon a reverse of fortune, after ab-
used prosperity; have they madly hurried
themselves over that precipice from which
there is no return; and, in what nature
most abhors, the voluntary extinction of
life, have fought relief from that torment
of reflection, which was become too great
for them to bear ?

Never then allow yourselves to imagine

that misfortunes alone form the chief mi-
fery of man. None but the guilty are
completely miserable. The misgiving and
distrust, the accusations and reproaches of
their minds, the sense of having drawn
down upon their heads the evils which

they

SERM. they susser, and the terrifying expecta-

II- tion of more and worse evils to come;

these are the essential ingredients of hu-
man misery. They not only whet the
edge, but they envenom the darts of as-
fliction, and add poison to the wound.
Whereas, when misfortunes assail a good
man, they carry no such fatal auxiliaries
in their train. They may tear the surface
of his foul; but there is a strength with-
in, which refills their farther impression.
The constitution 'of, his mind is found.
The world can inflict upon it no wounds,
but what admit of cure.

III. ILL men in the time of trouble can

look up to no Protector, while good men
commit themselves, with trust and hope,
to the care of Heaven. The human mind,
naturally feeble, is made to feel all its
weakness by the pressure of adversity.
Dejeced with evils which overpower its
strength, it relies no longer on itself. It
casts every where around a wihfing ex-
ploring eye, for some shelter to screen,

I fomc

ome power to uphold it; and if, when SE RM.
[abandoned by the world, it can find no-
Ithing to which it may fly in the room of
the world, its state is truly forlorn. Now,
whither should the ungodly, in this fitua-
Ition, turn for aid? After having contend-
ed with the itorms of adverse fortune till
their spirits are exhaufled, gladly would
they retreat at last to the fanduary of re-
ligion. But that fanftuary is shut against
them; nay, it is environed with terrors.
They behold there, oot' a Protecor to
whom they can fly, but a Judge whom
they dread; and in those moments when
they need his friendihip the most, they
are reduced to deprecate his wrath. If he
once called when they restsed, and firetch-
ed out his hands when they would not re-
gard, how much reason have they to fear,
that he will leave them now to eat the
fruit of their own ways, and to be filled with
their own devices; that he will laugh at
their calamity, and mock when their fear
cometh ?

F But

S E R M. But of all the thoughts which can enter

I. into the mind, in the season of distress,

the belief of an interest in his favour
who rules the world is the most soothing.
Every form of religion has afforded to
virtuous men some degree of this confo-
lation. But it was reserved for the Chri-
ftian revelation to carry it to its highest
point. For it is the direct scope of that
revelation, to accommodate itself to the
circumstances of man, under two main
views; as guilty in the fight of God, and
as itruggling with the evils of the world.
Under the former, it discovers to him a
Mediator and an atonement; under the
latter, it promises him the Spirit of grace
and consolation. It is a system of com-
plete relief, extending from our spiritual
to our temporal distresses. The fame hand
which holds out forgiveness to the peni-
tent, and assistance to the frail, dispenses
comfort and hope to the affliced.

It deserves your particular notice, in

this view, that there is no characer which
God more frequently assumes to himself

inl

in the sacred writings, than that of the pa- S E R M.
tron of the difreffed. Compaflion is that G
attribute of his nature which he has cho-
fen to place in the greatest variety of
lights, on purpose that he might accom-
modate his majesty to our weakness, and
provide a cordial for human griefs. He
is the hearer of all prayers; but with par-
ticular attention he is represented as lift-
ening to the ciy of the poor, and regard-
ilg the prayer of the dflitute. All his crea-
tures he governs with juilice and wisdom;
but he takes to himself, in a special man-
ner, the charge of executing judgment for
the opprefed, of protecting the firanger, of
delivering him who hath no helper firo the
hand of the spoiler. For the opprefion of the
poor, andfor thefighing of the needy, will I
aife, faith the Lord, tofet himi infafety from
him that pffeth at him. He is the Father
ofthe fiatherlefs, and the Judge of the wi-
dow in his holy habitation. He raifth 'up
them that are bowed down. He dwelleth
with the contrite. IHe healeth the broken in
heart. For h1e kioweth our frame; he re-

F 2 membiereth

SERM. memberetb that we are duft*.-If the

I. wwifdom of his providence saw it necessary

to place so many of his creatures in an
afflited fate, that state, however, he com-
miferates. He disdains not to point out
himself as the refuge of the virtuous and
pious; and to invite them, amidst all their
troubles, to pour out their hearts before
him. Those circumstances which estrange
others from them, interest him the more
in their situation. The neglect or scorn
of the world expose them not to any con-
tempt in his fight. No obscurity conceals
them from his notice; and though they
ihould be forgotten by every friend on
earth, they are remembered by the God
of heaven. That sigh, heaved from the
afflicted bosom, which is heard by no hu-
man ear, is listened to by him; and that
tear is remarked, which falls unnoticed
or despised by the world.

Such views of the Supreme Being im-
part the most sensible consolation to every

pious

* Pal. i. 8.-cii. X .-cxlvi. 7.lxviii. 5.-cxlii, 3.
cii. 14.--c,

pious heart. They present his adminiftra- S E R M.
tion under an afpetd so mild and benign, By
as in a great measure to disperse the gloom
which hangs over human life. A good
man ats with a vigour, and fuffcrs with
a patience more than human, when he
believes himself countenanced by the
Almighty. Injured or oppressed by the
world, he looks up to a Judge who
will vindicate his cause; he appeals to a
Witness who knows his integrity; he
commits himself to a Friend who will never
forsake him. When tired with the vexa-
tions of life, devotion opens to him its
quiet retreat, where the tumults of the
world are hushed, and its cares are loft in
happy oblivion; where the wicked ceaje
firom troubling, and the weary are at reft.
There his mind regains its serenity; the
agitation of passion is calmed; and a soft-
ening balm is infused into the wounds of
the spirit. Disclosing to an invisible Friend
those secret griefs which he has no encou-
ragement to make known to the world, his
heart is lightened. He does not feel him-

self

SE R M. self solitary or forsaken. He believes God

to be present with him, and the Holy
Ghost to be the inspirer of his confolati-
ons. From that secret place of the divine
tabernacle, into which the Text represents
him as admitted, he hears this voice issue,
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will
answer thee. Fear not; for I am with thee.
Be not dfinayed; for I am thy God. And as
he hears a voice which speaks to none but
the pure in heart, so he beholds a hand
which finners cannot fee. He beholds the
hand of Providence conducting all the
hidden springs and movements of the uni-
verse; and with a secret, but unerring ope-
ration, directing every event towards the
happiness of the righteous. Those afflicRi-
ons which appear to others the messengers
of the wrath of Heaven, appear to him the
ministers of fancification and wisdom.
W1 ere they discern nothing but the hor-
rors of the tempest which surrounds them,
his more enlightened eye beholds the an-
gel who rides in the whirlwind, and di-
reds the storm. Hence a peace keeping the

nmind

ind and heart, which is no where to be S E R ?.
ound but under the pavilion of the Al- II.
ighty.

IV. Good men are comforted under
heir troubles by the hope of heaven; while
ad men are not only deprived of this hope,
ut distressed with fears arising from a fu-
ure slate. The foul of man can never di-
eft itself wholly of anxiety about its fate
ereafter. There are hours when even to
he prosperous, in the midst of their plea-
fures, eternity is an awful thought. But
much more when those pleasures, one after
another, begin to withdraw; when life al-
ters its form, and becomes dark and chear-
less; when its changes warn the most in-
considerate, that what is so mutable will
soon pass entirely away; then, with pun-
gent earnestness comes home that question
to the heart, Into what world are we next
to go ?-How miserable the man, who, un-
der the diftrations of calamity, hangs
doubtful about an event which so nearly
concerns him; who, in the midst of doubts

and

SERM. and anxieties, approaching to that awful

n. boundary which separates this world from

the next, {hudders at the dark profpec
before him; wiflling to exist after death,
and yet afraid of that existence; catching
at every feeble hope which superstition can
afford him, and trembling, in the fame
moment, from reflection upon his crimes!

But blessed be God who hath brought

life and immoritality to light; who hath not
only brought them to light, but secured
them to good men; and by the death and
refurredion of Jesus Chrifl, hath begot-
ten them into the lively hope of an inheri-
tance incorruptible, undefiled, dad thatfadetb
not away. Jufly is this hope tiled in
icripture the anchor of the foul, both sure and
Jfedfatl. For what an anchor is to a ship
in a dark night, on an unknown coast, and
amidst a boisterous ocean, that is this hope
to the foul when distraCted by the confu-
sions of the world. In the midst of dan-
ger, itgives security; in the midst of gene-
ral fluctuation, it affords one fixed point
of reft. It is indeed the most eminent of

i-z~ . ailall

11 the advantages which religion now SER M
onfers. For, confider the mighty power of
hope over the human mind. It is the uni-
versal comforter. It is the spring of all hu-
man acivityi Upon futurity, men are con-
flantly suspended. From the profpeEt of
tome future good, they toil and susser
through the whole course of life; and it
is not so much what they are at present,
as what they hope to be in some after
time, that enlivens their motions; fixes
attention, and stimulates industry. Now,
if in the common affairs of life such is the
energy of hope, even when its objec is
neither very considerable, nor very cer-
tain; what effets may it not be expected
to produce, when it refts upon an object
so splendid, as a life of immortal felicity ?
Were this hope entertained with that full
persuasion which Christian faith demands,
it would, in truth, not merely alleviate,
but totally annihilate, all human miseries.
It would banish discontent, extinguish
grief, and suspend the very feeling of pain.

But allowing for the mixture of human
frailty; admitting those abatements which

G our

S E R M. our imperfecion makes upon the effect of

every religious principle, still you will find,
that in proportion to the degree in which
the hopeof Heaven operates upon good
men, they will be tranquil under susser-
ings; nay, they will be happy, in com-
parison of those who enjoy no such relief.
i*\ What indeed, in the course of human as-

fairs, is sufficient to distress, far less to over-
whelm the mind of that man, who can look
down on all human things from an eleva-
tion so much above them ? He is only a
passenger through this world. He is travel-
ling to a happier country. How disagree-
able soever the occurrences of his journey
may be, yet, at every stage of that jour-
ney, he receives the assurance that he is
drawing nearer and nearer to the period of
reft and felicity.-Endure, and thou 'halt
overcome. Persevere, and thou shalt be
successful. The time of trial haflens to a
close. Thy mansion is prepared. above;
thy reft remaineth among the people of
God. The disorders which vice has intro-
duced into the works of God, are about to

terminate;

terminate; and all tears are soon to be s E R M.
wiped away from the eyes of the just.- II.
:The firm assurance of this happy conclu-
sion to the vexations and the vanities of
ilife, works a greater efiecA on the sincere
i illiterate Christian, than all the refinements
of philosophy can work on the most learned
'infidel. These may gratify the mind that
is at cafe; may tooth the heart when only
discomposed in a flight degree; but when
Fit is fore and deeply torn, whe: bereaved
! of its best and most beloved comforts, the
only consolations that can then find access,
arise from the hope of a better world; where
those comforts fiall be again restored; and
all the virtuous ihall be aflembled, in the
presence of him who made them. Such
hopes banifli that black melancholy which
overwhelms, and leave only that tender
melancholy which softens the heart, and
often renders the whole character more
gentle and amiable.

Of this nature are the resources which
religion provides for good men. By its

G 2 previous

S E R M. previous discipline, it trains them to forti-

rv tude; by the reflections of a good confci-

ence it sooths, by the sense of divine fa-
vour it supports them; and when every
comfort fails them on earth, it chears them
with the hope of heaven. Diftinguifling
his servants with such advantages, God is
justly said to erect his pavilion over them
in the evil time. He not only spreads a talt
for them in the wilderneJi, but he tran[-
forms in some measure the state of nature
around them. To use the beautiful lan-
guage of antient prophecy; In the defarl,
the thirlty land, where no water is, he opel,
Springs. In/lead of the thorn, he makes tl)
fir-tree to come up; in/lead of the briar, the
myrtle to spring. In midjt of the habita-
tion of dragons, he makes green pafjures riji,
and Jill waters flow around his people.

THE improvement to be made of these

truths is as obvious, as it is important.
Let us study so to conduCt our lives, that
we may be qualified for deriving fucl
consolations from religion. To their rev

lithe

iity, and their importance, all mankind S E R M.
bear witless. For no sooner are they I:-
overtaken by distress, than to religion
they all fly. This, throughout every age,
has been the universal fllelter which the
young and the old, the high and the low,
the giddy and the serious, have fought to
gain, as soon as they found that reft could
be no where else procured for the weary
head, or the aching heart. But amidst
thoie multitudes that croud to religion for
relief, how few are entitled to approach
that sacred source of comfort ? On what
feeble props do their hopes and pretentions
reft ? How much superstition mingles
with that religion to which men are driven
by distress and fear ?-You muff first ap-
ply to it as the guide of life, before you
can have recourse to it as the refuge of
sorrow. You muff submit to its legislative
authority, and experience its renewing
influence, before you can look for its con-
folatory effect. You must secure the te-
Rimony of a good conscience, and peace
with God through Jesus Christ; otherwise,

twhen

S E R M. wheen thefloods J7all come, and the rains d&-

W scend, and the winds blow, the house which

you had proposed for your retreat, ihall
prove the holfie founded on the Jind, not on
the rock.

There are two plans, and there are but

two, on which any man can propose to
conduc himself through the dangers and
distresses of human life. The one is the plan
of worldly wisdom; the other, that of de-
termined adherence to conscience. He who
ads upon the former, lays principle aside,
and trusts his defence to his art and abi-
lity. He avails himself of every advantage
which his knowledge of the world fug-
gests. He attends to nothing but what he
confiders as his interest, and, unconfined
by conscience, pursues it by every course
which promises him success. This plan,
though too often adopted, will be found, on
trial, ineffectual and deceitful. For human
ability is an unequal match for the violent
and unforeseen viciflitudes of the world.
When these torrents rife in their might,
they sweep away in a moment the banks

which

Pwhich worldly wisdom had reared for de- s E R M.
fence, and overwhelm alike the crafty and I
the artless. In the mean time, persons of
this character condelnn themselves to live
a most unquiet life. They pass their days
I in perpetual anxiety, listening to every
motion; fIartled by every alarm; chan-
ging their ineafures on every new occur-
rcnce; and when distress breaks in over
all their defences, they are left under it,
hoplefs and disconsolate.

The plan which, in opposition to this,

religion recommends, as both more ho-
nourable in itself, and more effecual for
security, is, at all hazards, to do your
duty, and to leave the consequences to
God. Let him who would ad upon this
plan, adopt for the rule of his condut,
that maxim of the Psalmist's, T'ru il the
Lord, and do good¢. To firm integrity, let
him join a humble reliance on God. Let
his adherence to duty, encourage his reli-
gious trust. Let his religious trust, infpirc
him with fortitude in the performance of
his duty. Let him know no path but the

straight
Psal. xxxvii. 3.

SE RM. straight and direct one. In the most cri-

tical moments of action, let him ask no
further questions, than, What is the right,
the fit, the worthy part? How as a man,
and as a Christian, it becomes him to act!
Having received the decision of conscience,
let him commit his way unto the Lord. Let
him, without trepidation or wavering,
proceed in discharging his duty; resolved,
that though the world may make him
unfortunate, it shall never make him
base; and confiding, that in what God
and his conscience require him to aa or
susser, God and a good conscience will sup-
port him.-Such principles as these, are
the best preparation for the vicissitudes of
the human lot. They are the shield of
inward peace. He who thinks and ads
thus, shall be exposed to no wounds but
what religion can cure. He may feel the
blows of adversity; but ihall not knovn
the wounds of the heart.

SER-

# SERMON III. On the Influence of Religion upon Prosperity. PSALM i. 3. He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season ; his leaf also shall not ...

57

SERMON III.
n the Influence of Religion upon Prosperity.

|---sa-----

PSALM i. 3.
He J7nll be like a tree planted by the rivers

of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in
his JieaJn ; his leaf al.o Jhall not wither,
and whatsoever he dothJdallprofper.

HE happy influence of religion SE R M.
upon human life, in the time of ad- II

verfity, has been confidered in the pre-
ceeding discourse. Concerning this the
sentiments of men are more generally
agreed, than with refpet to some other
prerogatives which religion claims. They
very readily afiign to it the office of a
Comforter. But as long as their state is
prosperous, they are apt to account it an
unnecefiary guefl, perhaps an unwelcome

H intruder.

SE R M. intruder. Let us not be thus unjust to

i religion, nor confine its importance to

one period only in the life of man. It
was never intended to be merely the nurse
of sickness, and the staff of old age. I
purpose now to llow you, That it is no
less essential to the enjoyment of profpe-
rity, than to the comfort of adversity:
That prosperity is prosperous, if we may
be allowed the expression, to a good man
only; and that to every other person, it
will prove, notwithstanding its fair ap-
pearance, a barren and joyless state.

The Psalmist, in the Text, by an image

taken from one of the most beautiful ob-
jecs in nature, describes a man who
flourishes in full prosperity. But to whom
is the description limited ? To him, as the
preceding verses inform us, that walketh
v2ot in the couniel of the ungodly, nor fandetb
in the way of finners, nor fitteth in the feat
of the scornful, but hath his delight in the
law of God. He only is like the tree plant-
ed by the rivers of water; whilst the un-
godly, as he adds, are not Jo; but how

prosperous

prosperous soever they may appear to the s E R M.
world, are in truth but like the chaff which I
the wind driveth away. In confirmation
of this doctrine, I shall lay before you,
some of those circumstances which diftin-
guifll the prosperity of the good man be-
yond that of the finner; and shall con-
clude, with pointing out the dangers and
miseries, into which the latter is apt to be
betrayed, by his favourable situation in
the world.

I. PIETY, and gratitude to God, con-

tribute in a high degree to enliven prof-
perity. Gratitude is a pleasing emotion.
The sense of being distinguished by the
kindness of another, gladdens the heart,
warms it with reciprocal affection, and
gives to any possession which is agreeable
in itself, a double relifl, from its being
the gift of a friend. Favours conferred
by men, I acknowledge, may prove bur-
denfome. For human virtue is never per-
sect; and sometimes unreasonable expec-
tations on the one fide, sometimes a mor-

H 2 tifying

S E R M. tifying sense of dependence on the other,

Il. corrode in secret the pleasure of benefits,

and convert the obligations of friendship
into grounds ofjealoufy. But nothing of
this kind can affect the intercourse of gra-
titude with Heaven. Its favours are
wholly disinterested; and with a grati-
tude the most cordial and unfufpiciois,
a good man looks up to that Almighty
Benefador, who aims at no end but tlh
happiness of those whom he blesses, and
who desires no return from them, but
a devout and thankful heart. While
others can trace their prosperity to no
higher source than a series of worldly
causes, and, often, of mean or trifling in-
cidents, which occasionally favoured their
designs; with what superior fatisfiacion
does the servant of God remark the hand
of that gracious Power which hath raised
him up; which hath happily conduted
him through the various tfeps of life, and
crowned him with the most favourable
diftindion beyond his equals ?

Let

let us farther conlider, that not only S

x RI.

gratitude for the past, but a chearing IlT.
kinfe of God's favour at tile present, en-
ters into the pious emotion. Thcy are
only the virtuous, who in thcir proibcr-
ous days hear this voice addrcflied to
them: Go thy 'way, ezat thy bread with /jo',
and drink tly wine with a merry heart; /'or
God nlow accepteth thy, works :'. -He who
is the Author of their profperit-, gives
them a title to enjoy, with complacency,
his own gift. While bad men ilatch the
plcaihres of the world as by fiealth, ith-
out countenance from God the proprietor
of the world, the righteous fit openly
down to the feast of life, under the fiiile
of approving Heaven. No guilty fears
damp their joys. The blefling of God
refts upon all that they poifeis; his pro-
tection surrounds them; and hence, in the
ihbitations of the rglhtl,' s, is /bluid t.h1
voice of rejoicing and Jflvation. A luiire
unknown to others, inveirs, in their fight,
the whole face of nature. Their piety re-

flects
-* Eccles. ic. ,

SE R M. flecs a fun-fline from heaven upon the

I prosperity of the world; unites in one

point of view, the smiling aspea both of
the powers above, and of the objeas be-
low. Not only have they as full a relish
as others, of the innocent pleasures of
life, but, moreover, in these they hold
communion with God. In all that is
good or fair, they trace his hand. From
the beauties of nature, from the improve-
ments of art, from the enjoyments of so-
cial life, they raise their affection to the
source of all the happiness which fur-
rounds them; and thus widen the sphere
of their pleasures, by adding intellectual,
and spiritual, to earthly joys.

For illustration of what I have said on

this head, remark that chearful enjoy-
ment of a prosperous state which King
David had, when he wrote the twenty-
third Psalm; and venture, if you can, to
compare the highest pleasures of the
riotous finner, with the happy and satis-
sied spirit which breathes throughout that
Pfalm.-In the midst of the splendour of

royalty,

royalty, with what amiable simplicity of s E R A.
?gratitude does he look up to the Lord
as his Shepherd; happier in ascribing all
his success to divine favour, than to the
i policy of his counsels, or to the force of
his arms ! How many instances of divine
goodness arose before him, in pleasing re-
membrance, when with such relish he
speaks of the green paflares and Jill waters
becide which God had led him, of his cup
which he had made to overflow, and of the
table which he had prepared for him in
presence of his enemies! With what perfect
tranquillity does he look forward to the
time of his passing through the valley of
the fJadow of death; unappalled by that
Spectre, whose most distant appearance
blasts the prosperity of finners ! He fears
no evil, as long as the rod and the tass of
|his Divine Shepherd are with him; and
through all the unknown periods of this,
and of a future existence, commits him-
self to his guidance with secure and tri-
umphant hope. Surely goodness and mercy
/Iall follow me all the days of ny life; and

I

S E R M. I will dwell in the hoife of the Lord for
"l ever.--What a purified, sentimental cn-

joyment of prosperity, is here exhibited!
How different from that gross reliflh of
worldly pleasures, which belongs to thofc
who behold only the terrestrial fide of
things; whose views rife no higher than
the fucceifion of human contingencies,
and the weak efforts of human ability;
vwho have no protector or patron in the
heavens, to enliven their prosperity, or
to warm their hearts with gratitude and
trust!

II. RELIGION affords to good men a

peculiar security in the enjoyment of their
prosperity. One of the firit refletions
which must strike every thinking man,
after his situation in the world has become
agreeable, is the instability of that fitua-
tion. From a variety of caules, he lies
open to change. On many fides he fees
that he may be pierced; and the wider
his comforts extend, the broader is the
mark which he spreads to the arrows of

~I ~ ~ misfortune.

misfortune. Hence many a secret alarm S E R M.
to the reflecting mind; and to those who III
rejeCt all such alarms, the real danger in-
creases, in proportion to their improvi-
dent security.

By worldly assistance it is vain to think
of providing any effectual defence, feeing
the world's mutability is the very cause
of our terror. It is from a higher prin-
ciple, from a power superior to the world,
that relief must be fought, amidst such
disquietudes of the heart. He who in
his prosperity can look up to One who is
witness to his moderation, humanity, and
charity; he who can appeal to Heaven,
that he has not been elated by pride, nor
overcome by pleasure, but has studied to
employ its gifts to the honour of the giver;
this man, if there be any truth in reli-
gion, if there be any benignity or good-
ness in the administration of the universe,
has somewhat to reft upon for security
and hope. Not that an interest in God's
grace will perpetuate to a good man,
more than to others, a life of unruffled

I prosperity.

SERM. prosperity. Change and alteration form

MI the very essence of the world. But let the

world change around him at pleasure, he
has ground to hope that it shall not be able
to make him unhappy. Whatever may
change, God's providence is still the fame;
and his love to the righteous remains un-
altered. If it lhall be the divine will to
remove one comfort, he trusts that some
other ihall be given. Whatever is given,
whatever is taken away, he confides, that
in the last refiilt, all Jhall work for his
good.

Hence, he is not disturbed, like bad

men, by the instability of the world. Dan-
gers, which overcome others, shake not his
more steady mind. He enjoys the pleasures
of life pure and unallayed, because he en-
joys them, as long as they lafl, without
anxious terrors. They are not his all, his
only good. He welcomes them, when they
arrive; and when they pals away, he can
eye them, as they depart, without agony
or despair. His prosperity strikes a deep-
er and firmer root than that of the un-

godly.

'godly. And for this reason he is corn- s E R M.
pared, in the Text, to a Iree planted by the
rivers of water; a tree, whose branches
the tempest may indeed bend, but whose
roots it cannot touch; a tree, which may
occasionally be firipped of its leaves and
blossoms, but which still maintains its
place, and in due season flourihes anew.
Whereas the finner, in his prosperity, ac-
i cording to the allusion in the book of Job,

resembles the rtug that gro'wetb up in the
firei; a fiender reed, that may flourish
green for a while by the fide of the
brook, as long as it is cheriflied by the
ifn, and fanned by the breeze; till the
firl bitter blast breaks its feeble ftem, roots
it out from its bed, and lays it in the
dust. Lo ! such is the prosperity of them
that forget God; and tbus their hope Jhall
perifi.

III. RELIGION forms good men to the
most proper temper for the enjoyment of
profpcrity. A little reflection may satisfy

I z us,
l Job viii. n.

SE R M. us, that mere possession, even granting it
_IvI to be secure, does not constitute enjoy-

ment. Give a man all that is in the
power of the world to betlow surround
him with riches; crown him with ho-
nours; invest him, if you will, with ab-
solute dominion; but leave him at the
fame time under some secret oppression or
heaviness of heart; you bellow indeed the
materials of enjoyment, but you deprive
him of ability to extra& it. You set a
feast before him, but he wants the power
of tafting it. Hence prosperity is so often
an equivocal word, denoting merely as-
fluence of possession, but unjustly applied
to the miserable possessor.

We all know the effects which any

indisposition of the body, even though
flight, produces on external prosperity.
Visit the gayest and most fortunate man
on earth, only with sleepless nights; dif-
order any single organ of his senses; cor-
rode but one of his smallest nerves; and
you shall presently fee all his gaiety va-
nifh; you ihall hear him complain, that

he

he is a miserable creature, and express his s E R M.
envy of the peasant and the cottager.-- ItI
And can you believe, that a disease in the
foul is less fatal to enjoyment, than a
disease in the animal frame; or that a
found mind is not as essential, as a found
body to the prosperity of man ?-Let us
rate sensual gratifications as high as we
please, we lhall be made to feel that the
feat of enjoyment is in the foul. The cor-
rupted temper, and the guilty passions of
the bad, frustrate the effet of every ad-
vantage which the world confers on them.
The world may call them men of plea-
sure, but of all others they are the great-
eft foes to pleasure. From their eagerness
to grasp, they firangle and destroy it.
None but the temperate, the regular, and
the virtuous, know how to enjoy profperi-
ty. They bring to its comforts the manly
relifli of a found uncorrupted mind. They
flop at the proper point, before enjoy-
ment degenerates into disgust, and plea-
sure is converted into pain. They are
grangers to those complaints which flow

from

S E R M. from fpIeen, caprice, and all the fantaftica!
^^ diftrefes of a vitiated mind. While riot-

ous indulgence enervates both the body
and the mind, purity and virtue heighten
all the powers of human fruition. Mo-
derate and simple pleasures relish high
with the'temperate; in the midst of his
studied refinements, the voluptuary lan-
guifhes.

Wherever guilt mingles with profpe-

rity, a certain gloom and heaviness enter
along with it. Vitious intrigues never
fail to entangle and embarrass those who
engage in them. But innocence confers
ease and freedom on the mind; leaves it
open to every pleasing sensation; gives a
lightness to the spirits,, similar to the na-
tive gaiety of youth and health; ill imi-
tated, and ill supplied by that forced le-
vity of the vitious, which arises not from
the health, but from the drunkenness of
the mind.

Feeble are all pleasures in which the

heart has no part. The selfish gratifica-
tions of the bad, are both narrow in their

circle,

circle, and short in their duration. But S E R .
prosperity is redoubled to a good man, by II.
his generous use of it. It is reflected back
upon him from every one whom he makes
happy. In the intercourse of domestic as-
feclion, in the attachment of friends, the
gratitude of dependents, the esteem and
good will of all who know him, he fees
blessings multiplied round him on every
fide. When the ear heard me, then it blefed
me; and when the eyeJaw me, it gave wit-
feji to me: Becanfe I delivered the poor that
cried, thefatherlefs, nnd him that had none
to help him. The blefing of him that was
ready to peri/j7 came upon me, and I caused
the widow's heart to sing for joy. I was
eyes to the blind, andfeet was I to the lame:
I was a father to the poor; and the cauJf
which I knew not, Ifearched out ..-Thus,
whilst the righteous flouri/ajeth like a tree
planted by the rivers of water, he bring-
eth forth also his fruit in his season: And
that fruit, to pursue the allusion of the
Text, he brings forth not for himself
alone. He fiouriihes, not like a tree in

some
Job xxix. 11,-17.

SERM. some solitary defart, which scatters its

L blossoms to the wind, and communicates

neither fruit nor hiade to any living
thing: But like a tree in the midst of an
inhabited country, which to some affords
friendly shelter, to others, fruit; which
is not only admired by all for its beauty,
but blessed by the traveller for the lhade,
and by the hungry for the fuflenance it
hath given.

IV. RELIGION heightens the prosperity

of good men, by the profpe& which it as-
fords them of greater happiness to come
in another world. I showed, in the fore-
going discourse, the mighty effect of the
hope of heaven, in relieving the mind un-
der the troubles of life. And sure, if this
hope be able to support the falling, it
cannot but improve the flourishing state
of man; if it can dispel the thickest
gloom of adversity, it muit needs enliven
prosperity by the additional luitre which
it throws upon it. What is present, is
never sufficient to give us full fatifacion.

i '
To

To the present we must always join some s E R M.
agreeable anticipations of futurity, in or- V
der to complete our pleasure. What an
accession then must the prosperity of the
righteous man receive, when born with
a smooth and gentle gale along the cur-
rent of life, and looking round on all the
blefings of his state, he can confider these
as no more than an introduction to higher
scenes which are hereafter to open; he
can view his present life, as only the
porch through which he is to pass into
the palace of bliss; and his present joys,
as but a feeble stream, dispensed for his
occasional refreflment, until he arrive at
that river of life, which flows at God's
right hand?--Such profpe&s purify the
mind, at the fame time that they gladden
it. They prevent a good man from set-
ting too high a value on his present pof-
sessions; and thereby assist him in main-
taining, amidst the temptations of worldly
pleasure, that command of himself which
is so essential to the wife and temperate
enjoyment of prosperity.

K It

SERM. It is the fate of all human pleasures,

by continuance, to fade; of most of them,
to cloy. Hence, in the most prosperous
state, there are frequent intervals of lan-
guor, and even of dejedion. There are
vacuities in the happiest life, which it is
not in the power of the world to fill up.
What relief so adapted to those vacant or
dejeded periods, as the pleating hopes
which arise from immortality ? How bar-
ren and imperfect that prosperity, which
can have recourse to no such subsidiary
comfort, in oider to animate the flagna-
tion of vulgar life, and to iupply the in-
sufficiency of worldly pleasures !

Worldly prosperity declines with de-

cliinng life. In youth, its relish was
brisk and poignant. It becomes more
fober as life advances; and flattens as life
descends. He who lately overflowed with
gay lpirits and high hopes, begins to
look back with heaviness on the days of
former years. He thinks of his old com-
panions who are gone; and reviews past
scenes more agreeable than any which are

likely

kely to return. The acivity of pursuit s E R M.
s weakened. The vivacity of amusement II
s spent. The gratifications of sense lan-
guifll. When his accustomed pleasures,
ne after another, thus steal treacherously
way, what can he, who is an utter ftran-
rer to religion, and to the hope of Heaven,
iibftitite in their place ?-But even in
in tlat drooping period, the promises and

opes of religion support the spirits of a
good man till the latet hour. His leaf,
it is tfid in the Text, Jhall not wither.
It shall not be in the power of time to
blast his prosperity: But old age ihall re-
ceive him into a quiet retreaty where, if
vivid sensations fail, gentle pleasures re-
main to sooth him.. That hope of im-
mortality, which before improvedhis other
enjoyments, now in a great measure sip-
plies their absence. Its importance rifes,
in proportion as its objeEt draws near.
He is not forsaken by the world, but re-
tires , from it with dignity; reviewing
with a cal'm mind the part which he has
aied, and trlfting to the promifi of God,

K 2 for

SE RM. for an approaching reward. Such prof-

peas Ihed a pleating tranquillity over the
old age of the righteous man. They make
the evening of his days go down uncloud-
ed; and allow the stream of life, though
waxing low, to run clear to the last drop.

THU s I have shown, I hope, with full

evidence, what material ingredients re-
ligion and a good conscience are in the
prosperity of life. Separated from them,
prosperity, how fair soever it may flow
to the world, is insipid, nay, frequently
noxious to the possessor: United with
them, it rifes into a real blefling bestowed
by God upon man. God giveth to a man
that is good in his fight, wisdom, and know-
ledge, and joy ; but to theJinner he giveth
fore travel, to gather, and to heap up, that
he may give to him that is good before
God '.

ALLOW me now to conclude the sub,

jet, with representing to the prosperous
men of the world, those crimes and mi.

series
* Eccles. ii. 26.

series into which the abuse of their con- S E R M.
dition is likely to betray them, and call- b
ing upon them to beware of the dangers
with which they are threatened.

I Itis unfortunate for mankind, that those

situations which favour pleasure, are too
generally adverse to virtue. Virtue re-
quires internal government and difci-
pline; prosperity relaxes the mind, and
inflames the passions. Virtue is support-
ed by a regard to what is future; profpe-
rity attaches us wholly to what is present.
The charateriftics of virtue, are modesty
and humility; the most common attend-
ants of prosperity, are pride and pre-
fumption. One {hould think, that prof-
perity would prove the strongest incite-
ment to remember and to honour that
God who bestows it. Yet such is the
perverfenafs of human nature, that it
proves much oftener the motive to im-
piety. The changes of the world call the
attention of men to an Invisible Power.
But a train of events proceeding accord-
ing to their wish, leads them to nothing

beyond

S E RM. beyond what they fee. The Supreme

Giver is concealed from view by his own
gifts. This iriftance of success they ascribe
to a fortunate concurrence of worldly
causes ; that acquisition,. to their own'
skill and industry; unmindful of him
who; from the beginning,, arranged that
seies of caures, and who placed theim in
circumstances where their induitry could
operate with success. Prom forgetting
God, they too often proceed to despise
him. All that is light or giddy in their
minds, is set in motion by the gale of
prosperity. Arrogance and felf-ftafficiency
are lifted up;. and their state is confider-
ed, as secured by their own flrength.
Hence that pride of couwtteilance through
which the wicked in their prosperity, as
David observes, refife to seek after God.
They are described as fpeakig loftily, and
setting their mouth againfi the Heavens.
They take the timbrel and hiarp, and rejoice
at the Jound of the organ ; and they fay unlto
God, Depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of .thy ways. What is the Al-

might?,

nmighty, that we J7ould serve him? Or S E R.
what profit Jhould wve have, if'we pray un- II.
to him ?

T They nty o God, Depart from us.-
What an impious voice ! Could we have
elieved it possible, that worldly pleasures
hfould so far intoxicate any human heart ?
Wretched and infatuated men! Have you
ever confidered on what your confidence
refts ?-You have said in your hearts, Ybz

vhall never be noved; you fancy yourselves

placed on a mountain which JlandethJflrong.
Awake from those flattering dreams, and
behold how every thing totters around
you! You Rtand on the edge of a preci-
pice; and the ground is sliding away be-
low your feet. In your health, life, pof-
fefions, connections, pleasures, the feeds
of change are sown; principles of de-
fitruion work. The mine advances in
secret, which saps the foundations, while
you revel on the surface. No mighty es-
fort, no long preparation of events, is
needed to overturn your prosperity. By
flow degrees it rose. Long time, much

labour,

SE R M. labour, and the concurrence of many as-

fifling causes, were necessary to rear it up;
but one flight incident can reduce it to
nought. Suspicions are infused into the
patron or the prince on whom you de-
pend; and your disgrace ensues. Exer-
cife, or amusement, kindles a fever in
the veins of those whom you loved; and
you are robbed of your comforts and
hopes. A few grains of sand lodge them-
selves within you; and the reft of your
life is disease and misery. Ten thousand
contingencies ever float on the current of
life, the smallest of whicl, if it meet
your frail bark in the pafling, is sufficient
to dafl it in pieces.-Is this a place, is
this a time, to swell with fancied security,
to riot in unlawful pleasure, and, by
your disregard of moral and religious du-
ties, to brave the government of the Al-
mighty? He hath stamped every poflef-
sion of man with this inscription, Rejoice
with trembling. Throughout every age,
he hath pointed his peculiar displeasure
against the confidence of presumption,

i and

nd the arrogance of prosperity. He hath s E R L
ronounced, that w'hosbever exalteth him- III.
ls Jhall be abased. And ihall neither the
idmonitions which you receive from the
ifible inconstancy of the world, nor the
eclarations of the divine displeasure, be
ifficient to check your thoughtless career
Know, that by your impiety, you mul-
tiply the dangers which already threaten
you on every fide; you accelerate the
speed with which the changes of the world
advance to your deftruftion. The Al-
mighty touches with his rod that edifice
of dust, on which you stand, and boast of
your strength; and at that instant, it
crumbles to nothing.

As men then, bethink yourselves of hu-

man instability. As Christians, reverence
the awful government of God. Infire
your prosperity, by consecrating it to
religion and virtue. Be humble in your
elevation; be moderate in your views;
be submissive to him who hath raised and
distinguished you. Forget not, that on
his providence you are as dependent, and
to the obedience of his laws as much

L bound,

SERMt. bound, as the meanest of your fellow '

I.- creatures. Disgrace not your station, by

that grossness of sensuality, that levity of
dissipation, or that insolence of rank, which
bespeak a little mind. Let the affability
of your behaviour, show that you remem-
ber the natural equality of men. Let
your moderation in pleasure, your com-
mand of passion, and your fleady regard
to the great duties of life, show that you
possess a mind worthy of your fortune.
Establish your character on the basis of
esteem; not on the flattery of dependents,
or the praise of sycophants, but on the
refpeca of the wife and the good. Let in
nocence preside over your enjoyments. Let
usefulness and beneficence, not ostentation
and vanity, direct the train of your pur-
suits. Let your alms, together with your
prayers, come up inl lmemlorial before God.
So liall your prosperity, under the blef-
sing of Heaven, be as the J11ining light
whichl Jhineth more anid more unto the per-
sec7 day. So fliall it resemble those cele-
ftial fires which glow above with benefi-
cent, with regular, and permanent lustre;

and

and not prove that mirth offools, which S E R M.
by Solomon is compared to the crackling '
of thorns under a pot, a glittering and ser-
vent blaze, but speedily extin.c

On the whole, let this be our conclu-

sion, that both in prosperity and in ad-
verfity, religion is the safest guide of
human life. Conduted by its light, we
reap the pleasures, and at the fame time
escape the dangers, of a prosperous slate,
Sheltered under its protecion, we stand
tie flock of adversity with most intrepi-
dity, and susser least from the violence of
the storm. He that defireth life, and loveth
many days that he may fee good, let him keep
his tongule from evil, and his. lips from guile.
Let hinm depart from evil, and do good. Let
him feeek peace with God, and puiifie it.
Then, in his adversity, GodJJfall hide him
il his pavilion. In his prosperity, hefjall
flo.ur/Ji like a tree planted by the rivers of
water. The ungodly are znot Jo ; but are
like the chaff, light and vile, which the
the wind driveth awtay.

L ESER-

# SERMON IV. On our imperfect knowledge of a Future State. 1 CORINTH. xiii. 12. For now we see through a glass, darkly. 

84

S E R M O N IV.
On our imperfec knowledge of a Future State,

I CORINTH. Xiii. 12.

For now we fee through a glass, darkly.-
SERM. T HHE Apostle here describes the im-

v. T perfection of our knowledge with

relation to spiritual and eternal objects.
He employs two metaphors, to represent
more strongly the disadvantages under
which we lie: One, that we fee those ob-
jects through a glass, that is, through the
intervention of a medium which obscures
their glory; the other, that we fee them
in a riddle or enigma, which our tranfla-
tors have rendered by feeing them darkly,
that is, the truth in part discovered, in
part concealed, and placed beyond our
comprehension,

This

This description, however just and true, s E R M.

cannot fail to occasion some perplexity IV.
to an enquiring mind. For it may seem
strange, that so much darkness should be
left upon those celestial objects, towards
which we are at the fame time command-
ed to aspire. We are Strangers in the
universe of God. Confined to that spot
on which we dwell, we are permitted to
know nothing of what is tranfafting in
the regions above us and around us. By
much labour we acquire a superficial ac-
quaintance with a few sensible objects
which we find in our present habitation;
but we enter, and we depart, under a total
ignorance of the nature and laws of
the spiritual world. One subjed in par-
ticular, when our thoughts proceed in
this train, muff often recur upon the
mind with peculiar anxiety; that is, the
immortality of the foul, and the future
state of man. Exposed as we are at pre-
sent to such a variety of afflictions, and
fubjeced to so much disappointment in
all our pursuits of happiness, Why, it

may

SERM. may be said, has our gracious Creator

IV. denied us the consolation of a full disco-

very of our future existence, if indeed
such an existence be prepared for us ?-
Reason, it is true, suggests many argu-
ments in behalf of immortality; Revela-
tion gives full assurance of it. Yet even
that gospel which is said to have brought
life and immortality to light, allows us to
fee only through a glass, darkly. It doth
not yet appear what we Jhall be. Our
knowledge of a future world, is very im-
perfect; our ideas of it, are faint and con-
fused. It is not displayed in any such
manner, as to make an impression suited
to the importance of the object. The
faith even of the best men, is much infe-
rior, both in clearness and in force, to
the evidence of sense; and proves, on
many occasions, insufficient to counter-
balance the temptations of the present
world. Happy moments indeed there
sometimes are in the lives of pious men,
when sequestered from worldly cares, and
born up on the wings of divine contem-

plation,

i plation, they rife to a near and tranf- S E RM.

IV.

porting view of immortal glory. But , v
i such efforts of the mind are rare, and
I cannot be long supported. When the
liiirit of meditation subsides, this lively
fenie of a future Rate decays ; and though
the general belief of it remain, yet when
they return to the ordinary business and
cares of life, good men themselves seem
to rejoin the multitude, and to re-affume
the lime hopes, and fears, and interests,

lwhich influence the refit of the world.
From such reflections, no small difficulty
refpec'ing this important fubjeCS, either
arises, or seems to arise. Was such an
obscure and imperfect discovery of a fu-
ture state worthy to proceed from God ?
Does it not afford some ground, either to
tax his goodness, or to fufpeat the evi-
dence of its coming from him ?-This is
the point which we are now to confider;
and let us confider it with that close at-
tention which the subject merits. Let us
enquire, whether we have any reason, ei-
ther to complain of Providence, or to ob-
jed to the evidence of a future state, be-

cause

SE RM. cause that evidence is not of a more fen-

IV. iible and striking nature. Let us attempt

humbly to trace the reasons, why, though
permitted to know and to fee somewhat
of the eternal world, we are nevertheless
permitted only to know in part, and to fee
through a glass, darkly.

IT plainly appears to be the plan of the

Deity, in all his dispensations, to mix
light with darkness, evidence with uncer-
tainty. Whatever the reasons of this pro-
cedure be, the saC is undeniable. He is
described in the Old Testament, as a God
that hideth hinmflel*. Clouds and darkness
are said tofJirround him. His way is in the
sea, and his path in thegreat waters; hib
footJleps are not known. Both the work,
and the ways of God are full of mystery.
In the ordinary course of his government,
innumerable events occur which perplex
us to the utmost. There is a certain limit
to all our enquiries in religion, beyond
which'if we attempt to proceed, we are
loft in a maze of inextricable difficulties.

1i ~ Even
* Ifa. xlv. 15.

Even that revelation which affords such S E R M.
material inifrucion to' man, concerning ]V.
his duty and his happiness, leaves many
doubts unresolved. Why it was not given
sooner; why not to all men; why there
fliould be so many things in it hard to be
ndr/'flood, are difficulties not inconsiderable
in the midfl of that inconteflable evidence
by which it is supported. If, then, the
future slate of man be not placed in so
fill and clear a light as we desire, this is
no more than what the analogy of all re-
ligion, both natural and revealed, gave
us reason to expect.

But such a solution of the difficulty will

be thought imperfect. It may, perhaps,
not give much fatisfacion, to fliow that
all religion abounds with difficulties of a
like nature. Our situation, it will be said,
is so much the more to be lamented, that
not on one fide only we are confined in
our enquiries, but on all hands environed
with mysterious obfcurity.-Let us then,
if £o much dissatisfied with our condition,
give scope for once to Fancy, and confider

M how

SER M. how the plan of Providence might be

IV. reEtified to our wifli. Let us call upon the

Sceptic, and desire him to fay, what.mea-
sure of information would afford him en.
tire satisfaCtion.

This, he will tell us, requires not any

long or deep deliberation. He desires on-
ly to have his view enlarged beyond the
limits of this corporeal slate. Instead oi
refting upon evidence which requires dif-
cuffion, which must be Supported bymucd
reasoning, and which, after all, he alledges
yields very imperfect information, he de-
mands the everlasting mansions to be so dif-
played, if in truth such mansions there be,
as to place faith on a level with the evidence
of sense. What noble and happy effects, he
exclaims, would instantly follow, if ms
thus beheld his present and his fature
existence at once before him ! He would
then become worthy of his rank in the
creation. Instead of being the Lport, as
now, of degrading pafions and childish
attachments, he would adt olely on the
principles of immortality. His purfult

of

of virtue would be steady; his life would s E R M.
be undisturbed and happy. Superior to IV.
the attacks of distress, and to the folicita-
tions of pleasure, he would advance, by a
regular progress, towards those divine re-
wards and honours which were continu-
ally present to his view.- Thus Fancy,
with as much cafe and confidence as if it
were a perfect judge of creation, erecs a
new world to itself, and exults with ad-
miration of its own work. But let us
pause, and suspend this admiration, till
we coolly examine the consequences that
would follow from this supposed reform-
ation of the universe.

Confider the nature and state of man.

Introduced into the world in an indigent
condition, he is supported at first by the
care of others ; and, as soon as he begins
to act for himself, finds labour and indu-
flry to be necessary for sustaining his life,
and supplying his wants. Mutual defence
and interest give rife to society ; and so-
ciety, when formed, requires diftinclions
of property, diversity of conditions, fiub

M 2 ordination

SE R M. ordination of ranks, and a multiplicity
iV. of occupations, in order to advance the

general good. The services of the poor,
and the protection of the rich, become
reciprocally necessary. The governors, and
the governed, must co-operate for general
safety. Some arts muff be studied to cul-
tivate the mind, some to ward off the
evils, and some to provide the convenien-
cies of life. In a word, by the deflina-
tion of his Creator, and the necefities of
his nature, man commences, at once, an
active, not merely a contemplative being.
Religion assumes him as such. It sup-
poses him employed in this world, as on
a busy stage. It regulates, but does not
abolish, the enterprizes and cares of ordi-
nary life. It addresses itself to the vari-
ous ranks in fbciety ; to the rich and the
poor, to the magistrate and the subjecT
It rebukes tile slothful; directs the dili-
gent how to labour; and requires every
man to do his own bi3,nefs.

Suppose, now, that veil to be with-
drawn which conceals another world from

our

our view. Let all obscurity vanifl: Let S E R M.
us no longerfee darkly, as through a gl, fr ;
but let every man enjoy that intuitive
perception of divine and eternal objects,
which the Sceptic was supposed to defu'e.
The immediate effect of fiuch a discovery
would be, to annihilate in our eye all hu-
man objects, and to produce a total flag-
nation in the affairs of the world. Were
the glory of the celestial slate opened to
our admiring view; did the angelic har-
mony found continually in our enraptured
ears; what earthly concerns could have
the power of engaging our attention for
a single moment ? All the studies and pur-
suits, the arts and labours, which now
employ the activiry of man, which sup-
port the order, or promote the happiness
es society, would lie neglected and aban-
doned. Those desires and fears, those
hopes and interests by which we are at
present stimulated, would cease to operate.
Human life would present no objects sus-
ficient to rouse the mind; to kindle the
ipirit of enterprize, or to urge the hand

of

SERM. of indufiry. If the mere sense of duty

IV. engaged a good man to take some part in

the business of the world, the talk, when
submitted to, would prove distasteful.
Even the preservation of life would be
flighted, if he were not bound to it by
the authority of God. Impatient of his
confinement within this tabernacle of
dust, langnifhing for the happy day of
his translation to those glorious regions
which were displayed to his fight, he
would sojourn on earth as a melancholy
exile. Whatever Providence has prepared
for the entertainment of man, 'would be
viewed with contempt. Whatever is now
attractive in human society, would appear
insipid. In a word, he would be no
longer a fit inhabitant of this world, noi
be qualified for those exertions which are
allotted to him in his present sphere of
being. But, all his faculties being fubli-
mated beyond the state of mortality, lie
would be in the condition of some being
of superior order, who, obliged to reside
among men, would regard human pur-

suits

suits with inattention and scorn, as dreams, s E R M.
trifles, and puerile amusements of a day. IV.

But to this reasoning it may perhaps

. be replied, that such consequences as I
have now stated, supposing them to fol-
low, deserve not much regard.-For what
though the present arrangement of human
affairs were entirely changed, by a clearer
view, and stronger impression of our fu-
ture state ? Would not such a change
prove the highest blessing to man ? Is not
his attachment to worldly objeas the
great oburce both of his misery and his
guilt ? Employed in perpetual contempla-
tion of heavenly objecs, and in prepara-
tion for the enjoyment of them, would
he not become more virtuous, and of
course more happy, than the nature of his
present employments and attachments
permits him. to be ?-Allowing, for a
moment, the consequence to be such, this
much is yielded, that upon the supposition
which was made, man would not be the
creature which he now is, nor human life
the state which we now behold. How

far

SE R M. far the change would contribute to his

IV. improvement, comes to be confidered.

If there be any principle fully afcer-

tained by religion, it is, that this life
was intended for a state of trial and im-
provement to man. His preparation for
a better world required a gradual purifi-
cation, carried on by steps of progressive
improvement. The situation, therefore,
here assigned him, was filch as to answer
this design, by calling forth all his ac'ive
powers, by giving full scope to his moral
difpoiltions, and bringing to light his whole
charaAer. Hence it became proper, that
difficulty and temptation should arise in.
the course of his duty. Ample rewards
were promised to virtue'; but these re-
i. wards left, as yet, in obscurity and di,

ftant profpedt. The impreflipns of sense
were so balanced against the discoveries
of divine objects, as to allow a conflict
between faith and sense, between con-
science and desire, between present plea-
lire and future good. In this conflict,
the fouls of good men are tried, improved,

and

and strengthened. In this field, their ho- s E R M.
nours are reaped. Here are formed the Iv.
capital virtues of fortitude, temperance,
and felf-denial; moderation in prosperity,
patience in adversity, submission to the
will of God, and charity and forgiveness
to men, amidst the various competitions
of worldly interest.

Such is the plan of Divine Wisdom for
man's improvement. But put the cafe,
that the plan devised by human wisdom
were to take place, and that the rewards
of the just were to be now fully displayed
to view; the exercise of all those virtues
which I have mentioned, would be en-
tirely superseded. Their very names
would be 'unknown. Every temptation
being withdrawn, every worldly attach-
ment being subdued by the overpowering
discoveries of eternity, no trial of sincerity,
no discrimination of characters, would
remain; no opportunity would be as-
forded for those active exertions, which
are the mieans of purifying and perfecting
the good. On the competition between

N time

S E R M. time and eternity, depends the chief exer-

IVV cife of human virtue. The obscurity

which at present hangs over eternal ob-
jeAs, preserves the competition. Re-
move that obscurity, and you remove hu-
man virtue from its place: You render
human life no longer that state of difci-
pline, by which imperfect creatures are
gradually fitted for a more perfet state.

Where then do we land at last, but in

this concluflon, that the full displa)y
which was demanded, of a future state,
would be so far from improving the hu-
man foul, that it would abolish those vir-
tues and duties which are the great infiru-
ments of its improvement ? It would be
unsuitable to the character of man, in
every view, either as an active being, or
a moral agent. It would disqualify him
for taking part in the affairs of the world;
for relishing the pleasures, or for difchar-
ging the duties of life: In a word, would
entirely defeat the purpose of his being
placed on this earth. And the question,
Why the Almighty has been pleated to

leave

leave a spiritual world, and the future cx- s E R M.
iftence of man, under so much obscurity, ,I
resolves in the end into this, Why there
fliould be such a creature as man in the
universe of God ?-Such is the issue of
the improvements proposed to be made on
the plans of Providence. They add to
the discoveries of the superior wisdom of
God, and of the presumption and folly
of man.

FROM what has been said, it now ap-

pears, that no reasonable objection to the
belief of a future slate arises, from the
imperfeA discoveries of it which we en-
joy; from some difficulties that are min-
gled with its evidence, from our feilng as,
through a glass darkly, and being left to
walk by faith and not by fght. It cannot
be otherwise, it ought not to be other-
wife, in our present state. The evidence
which is afforded, is sufficient for the con-
viction of a candid mind, sufficient for a
rational ground of conduct; though noc
so striking as to withdraw our attention

N 2 from

SE RM. from the present world, or altogether to

IV. overcome the impression of sensible ob-

jeas. In such evidence it becomes us to
acquiesce, without indulging either doubts
or complaints, on account of our not re-
ceiving all the fatisfacion which we fond-
ly desire, but which our present imma-
turity of being allows not. For upon the
supposition of immortality, this life is no
other than the childhood of existence;
and the measures of our knowledge must
needs be proportioned to such a ltate.
To the successive stages of human life,
from infancy to old age, belong certain
peculiar attachments, certain cares, de-
fires, and interests; which open, not ab-
ruptly, but by gradual advances, on the
mind, as it becomes.fit to receive then,
and is prepared for acting the part to
which, in their order, they pertain.
Hence, in the education of a child, no
one thinks of inspiring him all at once
with the knowledge, the sentiments, and
views of a man, and with contempt for
the exercises and amusements of child-

hood,

hood. On the contrary, employments S E R M.
suited to his age are allowed to occupy Iv.
him. By these, his powers are gradually
unfolded; and advantage is taken of his
youthful pursuits, to improve and flrength-
en his mind; till, ftep by flep, he is led on
to higher profpets, and prepared for a
larger and more important scene of acion.

This analogy, which so happily illustrates
tie present conduI of the Deity towards
man, deserves attention the more, as it is
the very illuflration used by the Apostle,
when treating of this fubjeft in the con-
text. Now, fays he, we know in part-
but when that which is perfec7 is come, that
which is in part faall be done away. IWhen
I was a child, I spake as a child, I under-
Jlood as a child, I thought as a child; but
wshen I became a man, I put away childiJf
things. For now we fee through a glass,
darkly; but then, face to face: Now I know
in part; but then, IfJall know even as I am
known. Under the care of the Almighty,
our education is now going on, from a
mortal to an immortal state. As much

light

SERM. light is let in upon us, as we can bear

without injury. When the objects be-
come too splendid and dazzling for our
fight, the curtain is drawn. Exercised
in such a field of action, as suits the
ftrengthof our unripened powers, we are,
at the fame time, by proper profpecs and
hopes, prompted to aspire towards the
manhood of our nature, the time when
childijh thingsJhall be put away. But still,
betwixt those future profpets, and the
impression of present objects, such an ac-
curate proportion is eflablifhed, as on the
one hand flall not produce a total con-
tempt of earthly things, while we aspire
to those that are heavenly; and on the
other, mfall not encourage such a degree
of attachment to our present state, as
would render us unworthy of future ad-
vancement. In a word, the whole course
of things is so ordered, that we may nei-
ther by an irregular and precipitate edu-
cation, become men too toon; nor by a
a fond and trifling indulgence, be suffered
to continue children for ever.

LET

LET these reflections not only remove s E R M.

the doubts which may arise from our Iv.
obscure knowledge of immortality, but
likewise produce the highest admiration
of the wisdom of our Creator. The ftruc-
ture of the natural world affords innume-
rable infiances of profound design, which
no attentive fpedator can survey without
wonder. In the moral world, where the
Iworkmianflip is of much finer and more
delicate contexture, subjects of fill great-
er admiration open to view. But admi-
ration must rife to its highest point, when
those parts of the moral constitution which
at first were reputed blemishes, which car-
ried the appearance of objections, either
to the wisdom or the goodness of Provi-
dence, are discovered, on more accurate
inspection, to be adjusted with the most
exquisite propriety. We have now seen,
that the darkness of man's present slate is
no less essential to his well-being, than
the light which he enjoys. His internal
powers, and his external situation, appear
to be exactly fitted to each other. Those

complaints,

SE R M. complaints, which we are apt to make of

1V. our limited capacity and narrow views, of

our inability to penet.ate farther into the
future destination of man, are found, from
the foregoing observations, to be just as
unreafbnable, as the childish complaints
of our not being formed with a micro-
scopic eye, nor furnished with an eagle's
wing; that is, of not being endowed with
powers which would subvert the nature,
and counteract the laws of our present state.

In order to do justice to the subject, I

must observe, that the fame reasoning
which has been now employed witli
respect to our knowledge of immorta-
lity, is equally applicable to many other
branches of intellectual knowledge. Thus,
why we are permitted to know so little of
the nature of that Eternal Being who rules
the universe; why the manner in. which
he operates on the natural and moral
world, is wholly concealed; why we are
kept in such ignorance with refpe& to
the extent of his works, to the nature and
agency of spiritual beings, and even with

I respect

refped to the union between our own foul S E R M.
and body: To all these, and several other Iv.
enquiries of the fame kind, which often
employ the solicitous researches of fpe-
culative men, the answer is the fime that
was given to the interesting question which
made the fubjecd of our discourse. The
degree of knowledge defied, would prove
incompatible with the design, and the
proper business of human life. It would
raise us to a sphere too exalted; would
reveal objecs too great and striking for
our present faculties; would excite feel-
ings too strong for us to bear; in a word,
would unfit us for thinking or acting like
human creatures. It is therefore referred
for a more advanced period of our na-
ture; and the hand of Infinite Wisdom
hath in mercy drawn a veil over scenes
which would overpower the fight of
mortals.

One instance, in particular, of Divine

Wisdom, is so illustrious, and corresponds
so remarkably with our present subjet,
that I cannot pass over it without notice;

O that

S E R M. that is, the concealment under which Pro-

IV- vidence has placed the future events of

our life on earth. The desire of penetrat-
ing into this unknown region, has ever
been one of the most anxious passions of
men. It has often seized the wife as well
as the credulous, and given rife to many
vain and impious superstitions throughout
the whole earth. Burning with curiosity
at the approach of some critical event,
and impatient under the perplexity of
conjecture and doubt, how cruel is Pro-
vidence, we are apt to exclaim, in deny-
ing to man the power of fore-sight, and in
limiting him to the knowledge of the pre-
sent moment ? Were he permitted to look
forward into the course of destiny, how
much more suitably would he be prepared
for the various turns and changes in his
life ? With what moderation would he en-
joy his prosperity, under the fore-know-
ledge of an approaching reverse? And
with what eagerness be prompted to im-
prove the flying hours, by feeing the in-
evitable term draw nigh which was to
finiih his course ?

But

But while Fancy indulges such vain de- s E R M.

fires and criminal complaints, this covet- Iv
ed fore-knowledge mult clearly appear to
the eye of reason, to be the most fatal gift
which the Almighty could bellow. If in this
present mixed state, all the successive scenes
of diitrefs through which we are to pals,
were laid before us in one view, perpetual
sadness would overcast our life. Hardly
would any transient gleams of interven-
ing joy be able to force their way through
the cloud. Faint would be the relif of
pleasures, of which we foresaw the close:
Infipportable the burden of afflictions,
under which we were oppressed by the
load not only of present, but of antici-
pated sorrows. Friends would begin their
union, with lamenting the day which was
to dissolve it; and, with weeping eye, the
parent would every moment behold the
child whom he knew that he was to lose.
In ihort, as soon as that mysterious veil,
which now covers futurity, was lifted
up, all the gaiety of life would difap-
pear; its flattering hopes, its pleasing il-

0 2 lulions,

S E R M. lusions, would vanish; and nothing but

Iv. its vanity and sadness remain. The fore-

fight of the hour of death would interrupt
the whole course of human affairs; and
the overwhelming profped of the future,
instead of exciting men to proper activity,
would render them immoveable with con-
fternation and dismay.- How much
more friendly to man is that mixture of
knowledge and ignorance which is allotted
him in this tfate ! Ignorant of the events
which are to befall us, and of the precise
term which is to conclude our life, by
this ignorance our enjoyment of present
objects is favoured; and knowing that
death is certain, and that human affairs
are full of change, by this knowledge our
attachment to those objects is moderated,
Precisely in the fame manner as by the
mixture of evidence and obscurity which
remains on the profped of a future state,
a proper balance is preserved betwixt our
love of this life, and our desire of a better.

The longer that our thoughts dwell on
this subjet, the more we must be convin-

ced,

ced, that in nothing the Divine Wisdom s E R'1.
is more admirable, than in proportioning Iv.
knowledge to the necessities of man. In-
stead of lamenting our condition, that we
are permitted only toJfee as throlugh a gla/s
darkly, we have reafin to bless our Crea-
tor, no less for what he hath concealed,
than for what he hath allowed us to know.
He is wonderftl in counsel, as he is excellent
in working. He is wife in heart, and his
thoughts are deep. How ififcarchable are
the riches of the wiJilom and the knowledge
of God !

FROM the whole view which we have

taken of the fubjecl, this important in-
firuction arises, That the great design of
all the knowledge, and in particular of the
religious knowledge which God hath as-
forded us, is, to si. us for discharging the
duties of life. No useless discoveries are
made to us in religion: No discoveries
even of useful truths, beyond the precise
degree of information, which is subser-
vient to right conduct. To this great end

all

S E RM. all our information points. In this center

IV. all the lines of knowledge meet. Life and

immortality are brought to light in the goSpel;
yet not so displayed as to gratify the cu-
riofity of the world with an aftonithing
fpeeacle; but only so far made known,
as to assist and support us in the pracice
of our duty. If the discovery were more
imperfect, it would excite no desire of
immortality; if it were more full and
triking, it would render us careless of
life. On the firit supposition, no sufficient
motive to virtue would appear; on the
second, no proper trial of it would remain.
In the one cafe, we fmould think and as
like men who have their portion only il this
world; in the other cafe, like men who
have no concern with this world at all.
Whereas now, by the wife conffitution of
Heaven, we are placed in the most favour-
able situation for acting, with propriety,
our allotted part here; and for rising, in
due course, to higher honour and happi-
ness hereafter.

Let

Let us then second the kind intentions s E R M.

of Providence, and aa upon the plan Iv.
which it hath pointed out. Checking our
inquisitive solicitude about what the Al-
mighty hath concealed, let us diligently
improve what he hath made known. In-
habitants of the earth, we are at the fame
time candidates for heaven. Looking up-
on these as only different views of one
consistent charaAcer, let us carry on our
preparation for heaven, not by abstract-
ing ourselves from the concerns of this
world, but by fulfilling the duties and of-
sices of every station in life. Living Jo-
berl;r, righteozfly, and godly in the present
'world, let us look for that blefed hope, and
the glorious appearing of the great God, and
our Saviour Jesus Chrifl.

Before I conclude, it may be proper to

observe, that the reasonings in this dif-
course give no ground to apprehend any
danger of our being too much influenced
by the belief of a fiture state. I have
shown the hurtful effets which would
follow from too bright and full a disco-

very

SER M. very of the glory of that state; and in

IV. fihowi g this, I have justified the decree

of Providence, which permits no such dif-
covery. But as our nature is at present
conffituted, attached by so many strong
connexions to the world of sense, and en-
joying a communication so feeble and di-
ftant with the world of spirits; we need
fear no danger from cultivating inter-
course with the latter as much as possible.
On the contrary, from that intercourse
the chief security of our virtue is to be
fought. The biass of our nature leans so
much towards sense, that from this fid
the peril is to be dreaded, and on this
lide the defence to be provided.

Let us then walk by Jfith. Let us

strengthen this principle of aAion to the
utmost of our power. Let us implore the
Divine Grace, to strengthen it within us
more and more: That we may thence
derive an antidote against that subtle poi-
son, which inceflant commerce with the
objedts of sense diffuses through our fouls;
that we may thence acquire purity and

^~I ~ dignity

dignity of manners, ifited to our divine S E R M.
hopes; and, undefiled by the pleafires of Iv.
the world, unshaken by its terrors, may
preserve to the end one constant tenor of
integrity.' Till at last, having, under the
conduct of Christian faith, happily finiih-
ed the period of dilcipline, we enter on
that state where a far nobler scene ihall
open; where eternal objects llall ihine in
their native splendour; where, this twi-
light of mortal life being pafi, the Sim of

r;hteotjneJs ifhall rife ; and that which is

i perfect being come, that which is in parn
Tsall be done away.

P , E R -

# SERMON V. On the DEATH of CHRIST. Preached at the celebration of the Sacrament of the LORD'S SUPPER. JOHN xvii. 1. Jesus lift up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, The hour is come ; 

II4

S E R M ON V.

On the D E A T H of C H R I S T.
Preached at the celebration !of the Sacrament

of the LORD'S SUPPER.

JOHN xvii. I.
Jefits lift up his eyes to heaven, andfaid,

Father, The hour is come;
- E R M. T HESE were the words of our blessed

,^^v. - Lord on a memorable occasion. The

feast of the passover drew nigh, at which
he knew that he was to susser. The night
was arrived, wherein he was to be deliver-
ed into the hands of his enemies. He
had spent the evening in conference with
his disciples; like a dying father in the
midst of his family, mingling confola-
tions with his last inftrutions. When he

had

had ended his discourse to them, he lifted s E R M.
uip his eyes to heaven, and, with the words V.
which I have now read, began that solemn
interceflory prayer which closed his mi-
niftry. Immediately after, he went forth
with his disciples into the garden of
Gethsemane, and surrendered himself to
those who came to apprehend him.

Such was the situation of our Lord at
the time of his pronouncing these words.
| He fiw his miflion on the point of being
accomplished. He had the profpea full
before him, of all that he was about to
fuffer.-Father, the hour is come !-What
hour? An hour the most critical, the
most pregnant with great events, since
hours had begun to be numbered, since
time had begun to run. It was the hour
in which the Son of God was to termi-
nate the labours of his important life, by
a death fsill more important and illuftri-
ous; the hour of atoning, by his susser-
ings, for the guilt of mankind; the hour
of accomplishing prophecies, types, and
symbols, which had been carried on thro'

P 2 a

S E R M. a series of ages; the hour of concluding

v. the old, and introducing to the world the

new dispensation of religion; the hour
of his triumphing over the world, and
death, and hell; the hour of his erecting
that spiritual kingdom which is to last for
ever. Such is the hour, ifch are the
events which you are to commemorate
in the sacrament of our Lord's Supper.
I lhall attempt to set them before you as
proper fubjeds, at this time, of your
devout meditation. To display them, in
their genuine majesty, is beyond the abi-
lity of man.

I. T H I s was the hour in which Chris |

was glorified by his sufferings. The whol
of his life had discovered much real great
ness under a mean appearance. Througb.
the cloud of his humiliation, his natirve
lustre often broke forth ; but never did i!
shine so bright, as in this last, this trying
hour. It was indeed the hour of difiredi
and of blood. He knew it to be such; and(
when he uttered the words of the Tcsi,

he

he had before his eyes the executioner and s E R M.
the cross, the scourge, the nails, and the V.
spear. But by such profpeas his foul was
not to be overcome. It is distress which
ennobles every great character; and distress
was to glorify the Son of God. He was
now 'to teach all mankind, by his example,
how to susser and to die. He was to
stand forth before his enemies as the
faithful Witness of the truth; justifying
b his behaviour the character which he
allilmed, and fealing with his blood the
doctrine which he taught.

What magnanimity in all his words

and actions on this great occasion! The
court of Herod, the judgment-hall of
Pilate, the hill of Calvary, were so many
theatres prepared for his displaying all the
virtues of a confiant and a patient mind.
When led forth to susser, the first voice
which we hear from him, is a generous
lamentation over the fate of his un-
fortunate, though guilty, country; and
to the last moment of his life, we behold
him in possession of the fame gentle and

benevolent

S E R M. benevolent spirit. No upbraiding, no

v. complaining expreflion escaped from his

lips, during the long and painful ap-
proaches of a cruel death. He betrayed
no symptom of a weak or a vulgar, of a
discomposed or impatient mind. With
the utmost attention of filial teldernefs, he
committed his aged mother to the care of
his beloved disciple :. With all the dig-
nity of a Sovereign, he conferred pardon
on a penitent fellow-fufferer. With a
greatness of mind beyond example, he
spent his last moments in apologies and
prayers, for those who were shedding his
blood.

By wonders in heaven, and wonders

on earth, was this hour diftinguifhled.
All nature seemed to feel it; and the dead
and the living bore witness to its import-
ance. The veil of the temple was rent in
twain. The earth ihook. There was
darkness over all the land. The graves
were opened, and ltanty wvho Jlep arose anl
denlt into the Holy City. Nor were thes{

the
- See John xix. 26, 27.

the only prodigies of this awful hour. s E R M.
The most hardened hearts were subdued V.
and changed. The Judge, who in order
to gratify the multitude passed fcntence
against him, publickly attested his inno-
cence. The Roman centurion, who pre-
fided at the execution, glorified God, and
acknowledged the sufferer to be more
than man. After heJiw the thhings which
had pased, he fiaid, Certaintly this zwas a
righteous person ; truly, this was the Son of
God. The fewifh malefactor, who was
crucified with him, addressed him as a
King, and implored his favour. Even
the crowd of insensible fpeclators, who
had come forth as to a common spectacle,
and who began with clamours and in-
'fults, returned home, finiting their breqfts.
-Look back on the heroes, the philofo-
phers, the legislators of old. View them
in their last moments. Recall every cir-
cumftance which diftinguifled their de-
parture from the world. Where can you
find such an assemblage of high virtues,
and of great events, as concurred at the

death

SE R M. death of Christ? Where, so many tefti-

V. monies given to the dignity of the dying

person, by earth, and by heaven ?

I. T HI was the hour in which Chrilt

atoned for the fins of mankind, and ac-
complifhed our eternal redemption. It
was the hour when that great sacrifice
was offered up, the efficacy of which
reaches back to the first transgression of
man, and extends forward to the end of
time; the hour, when from the cross, as
from an high altar, that blood was flow-
ing, which wanied away the guilt of tile
nations.

This awful dispensation of the Almigh-

ty, contains mysteries which are beyond
the discovery of man. It is one of tholu
things into which the angels desire to loo.
What has been revealed to us, is, That
the death of Christ was the interposition
of Heaven for preventing the ruin of hu-
man kind. We know, that under the go-
vernment of God, misery is the natural
consequence of guilt. After rational crea-

i turles

tures had, by their criminal conduct in- s E R Ir.
troduccd disorder into the divine king-' v
dom, there was no ground to imagine,
that by their penitence and prayers alone,
they could prevent the deftrntion which
threatened them. The prevalence of pro-
pitiatory sacrifices throughout the earth,
proclaims it to be the general sense of
mankind, that mere repentance was not
of sufficient avail to expiate fin, or to hiop
its penal effects. By the constant allu-
sions which are carried on in the New
Testament to the sacrifices under the Law,
as pre-signifying a great atonement made
by Christ; and by the strong expressions
which are used in describing the effees of
his death, the sacred writers flhow, as
plainly as language allows, that there was
an efficacy in his sufferings, far beyond
that of mere example and instruCtion.
The nature and extent of that efficacy we
are unable, as yet, fully to trace. Part
we are capable of beholding; and the
wisdom of what we behold, we have rea-
son to adore. We discern, in this plan of

Q_^ redemption,

SE R M. redemption, the evil of fin strongly exhi-

V- bited; and the juflice of the divine go-

vernment awfully exemplified, in Christ
suffering for finners. But let us not ima-
gine, that our present discoveries unfold
the whole influence of the death of Christ.
It is connected with causes into which we
cannot penetrate. It produces confequen-
ces too extensive for us to explore. God's
thoughts are not as our thoughts. In all
things, we Jfe only in part; and here, if
any where, we fee also as through a glass,
darkly.

This, however, is fully manifest, that

redemption is one of the most glorious
works of the Almighty. If the hour of
the creation of the world was great and
illustrious; that hour, when from the
dark and formless mass, this fair system
of nature arose at the divine command;
when the morning Jlars fang together, and
all the sons of God Jhouted for joy ; ,l lcfs
illustrious is the hour of the restoration of
the world; the hour when from condemn-
ation and misery it emerged into happi-

uefs

ness and peace. With less external ma- s E RAM.
jefty it was attended; but is, on that ac- V.
count, the more wonderful, that under
an appearance so simple, such great events
were covered.

III. IN this hour, the long series of

prophecies, visions, types, and figures,
nas accomplifled. This was the center
in which they all met: This the point,
towards which they had tended and
verged, throughout the course of so
many generations. You behold the Law
and the Prophets standing, if we may
speak so, at the foot of the cross, and
doing homage. You behold Moses and
Aaron bearing the ark of the covenant;
David and Elijah presenting the oracle
of testimony. You behold all the priests
and sacrifices, all the rites and ordinan-
ces, all the types and symbols, assem-
bled together to receive their confum-
mation. Without the death of Christ, the
worship and ceremonies of the law would
have remained a pompous, but unmean-

Q2 ing

S E R M. ing institution. In the hour when he was

V. crucified, the book with thefevenfeals was

opened. Every rite arfumed its fignifi-
cancy; every prediction met its event;
every symbol displayed its correspond-
ence.

The dark, and seemingly ambiguous

method of conveying important difcove-
ries under figures and emblems, was not
peculiar to the sacred books. The Spirit
of God, in pre-signifying the death of
Chriit, adopted the fame plan, according
to which the whole knowledge of those
early ages was propagated through the
world. Under die veil of mysterious al-
lusion, all widlom was then concealed.
From the sensible world, images were
every where borrowed, to describe things
unseen. More was understood to be
meant, than was openly expressed. By
enigmatical rites, the Priest communica-
ted his doctrines; by parables and alle-
gories, the Philosopher infiruted his dif-
ciples; even the Legislator, by figurative
sayings, commanded the reverence of the

people,

people. Agreeably to this prevailing SE R M.
mode of instruction, the whole difpen- V.
fation of the Old Tefiament was so con-
ducted, as to be the shadow and the
figure of a spiritual system. Every re-
markable event, every diffinguified per-
fonage, under the Law, is interpreted in
the New Testament, as bearing some refe-
rence to the hour of which we treat. If
Isaac was laid upon the altar as an inno-
cent victim; if David was driven from
his throne by the wicked, and restored
by the hand of God; if the brazen ser-
pent was lifted up, to heal the people; if
the rock was initten by Moses, to furnifli
drink in the wilderness; all were types
of Christ, and alluded to his death.

In predicting the fame event, magni-

ficent, but seemingly contradictory, was
the language of ancient prophecy: For it
foretold a Messiah, who was to be at once
a sufferer and a conqueror. The Star was
to come out of Jacob, and the Branch to
spring fromn the Jsem of Jeje. The Angel of
the Covenant, the Desire of all Nations, was

to

SE R M. to come fiddenly to his temple; and to him

V. was to be the gathering of the people. Yet

at the fame time, he was to be defpjfd and
rejected of men; he was to be taken from
prfon, and from judgment; and to be led
as a lamb to theJiaughter. Though he was
a man offorrows, and acquainlted with grief,
yet the Gentiles were to come to his light,
and Kings to the brightness of his triing. In
the hour when Christ died, those prophe-
tical riddles were solved; those teeming
contradictions were reconciled. The ob-
fcurity of oracles, and the ambiguity of
types, vaniihed. The Sun of righteouJieJi
rose; and, together with the dawn of
religion, those ihadows passed away.

IV'. THis was the hour of the abolition

of the Law, and the introduction of the
Gospel; the hour of terminating the old,
and of beginning the new dispensation of
religious knowledge and worship. through-
out the earth. Viewed in this light, it
forms the most august aera which is to be
found in the history of mankind. When

Christ

Christ was fiffering on the cross, we are S E R M,
informed by one of the Evangelifis, that V.
he said, I thiji; and that they filled a
fpunge with vinegar, and put it to his
mouth. After he had tailed the vinegar,
knowing that all things were now accom-
pIhied, and the fciriptite fulilled, he J;id,
It is fin/led "; that is, This offered
draught of vinegar was the last circum-
stance predicted by an ancient Prophet t,
that remained to be fulfilled. The vision
and the prophecy are now fealed. The
Mosaic dispensation is closed. And he
bowed his head, and gave up the ghoJt.

It is finJhed-When he uttered these

words, he changed the tPate of the uni-
verse. At that moment, the Law ceased,
and the Gospel commenced. This was
the ever-memorable point of time, which
separated the old and the new world from
each other. On one fide of the point of
reparation, you behold the Law, with its
priefis, its sacrifices, and its rites, retiring
from fight. On the other fide, you behold

the
* Joho Xi. 28, 29) 30. - Pfal. Iix. 21.

S E R M. the Gospel, with its simple and venerable

V. institutions, coming forward into view.

In this hour, the veil of the temple was
rent; and the glory departed from be-
tween the cherubims. The legal High
Priest delivered up his Urim and his
Thiumim, his breast-plate, his robes,
and his incenfc: And CHRIST flood forth
as the Great High Priest of all succeeding
generations. By that one sacrifice which
he now offered, he abolifned sacrifices for
ever. Altars on which the fire had blazed
for ages, were now to finoke no more.
Vietims were no more to bleed. Not wit/h
tihe blood of bulls and goats, but with his
own blood, he now entered into the Hoy!
Place, there to appear in the presence of Glo
for ?.s.

This was the hour of airociation and

union to all the worshippers of God,
When Christ said, It is finijed, he threw
down the wall of partition which had so
long divided the Gentile from the Jew.
He gathered into one, all the faithful, out
of every kindred and people. He pro-

I claimed

claimed the hour to be come, when the S E RM.
knowledge of the true God should be no V.
longer confined to one nation, nor his
woorlhip to one temple; but over all the
earth, the worfiippers of the Father should
fiere bili inJJirit and in troth. From that
hour, they who dwelt in the uttermnoJ ends
of the earth, Jranslers to the covenant of
prioni/, began to be brozught nigh. In that
hour, the light of the Gospel dawned from
afar on the Britihf Islands.

During a long course of ages, Provi-
dence seemed to be occupied in prepar-
ing the world for this revolution. · The
'whole Jewifll oconomy was intended to
uther it in. The knowledge of God was
preserved unextinguifled in one corner of
the world, that from thence, in due time,
might issue forth the light which was to
overspread the earth. Successive revela-
tions gradually enlarged the views of
men beyond the narrow bounds of Judaa,
to a more extensive kingdom of God.
Signs and miracles awakened their ex-
pcCation, and direEted their eyes towards

R this

S E R . this great event. Whether God descend-

v. ed on the flaming mountain, or spoke by

the Prophet's voice; whether he scattered
his chosen people into captivity, or re-
assembled them in their own land; he was
frill carrying on a progreflive plan, which
was accomplished at the death of Christ.

Not only in the territories of Israel, but

over all the earth, the great dispensations
of Providence refpe¢led the approach of
this important hour. If empires rose or
fell; if war divided, or peace united the
nations; if learning civilized their man-
ners, or philosophy enlarged their views;
all was, by the secret decree of Heaven,
made to ripen the world for that fuilnej
of time, when Christ was to publilh the
whole counsel of God. The Persian, the
Macedonian, the Roman Conqueror, en-
tered upon the itage, each at his predic-
ed; period; and, though he meant not j',
neither did his heart think Jo, ministered
to this hour. The revolutions of power,
and the succession of monarchies, were so
arranged by Providence, as to facilitate

the

the progress of the Gospel through the SERM.
habitable world, after the day had arrived, v.
when the Jtone which was cut out of the
mountain, without hands, Jhould become a
great mountain, and fill the earth *. This
was the day, which Abraham Jaw afar of,
and was glad. This was the day, which
many' Prophets and Klings, and righteous men,
desired to fee, but could not ; the day for
which the earnest expectation of the crea-
ttre, long oppressed with ignorance, and
bewildered in {iiperftition, might be just-
ly said to wait.

V. TH Is was thle hour of Christ's tri-

umph over all the powers of darkness;
the hour in which he overthrew domi-
nions and thrones, led captivity captive,
i aid gave gifts unto men. The contest which
the kingdom of darkness had long car-
ried on against the kingdom of light, was
now brought to its crisis. The period
was come, when the feed of the woman
fiJould bruie the head of the Jfepent. For
many ages, the most gross fiiperftition had

R 2 filled
E Dan. ii. 34, 35

S E R M. filled the earth. The glory of the uncorruptl.

V. ible God was every where, except in the

land of Juda, changed into images made
like to corruptible zma, and to birds, ani
beaJts, and creeping things. The world,
which the Almighty created for himself,
seemed to have become a temple of idols.
Even to vices and passions, altars were
raised; and what was intitled Religion,
was in effect a discipline of impurity.
In the midst of this universal darkness,
Satan had ereced his throne; and the
learned and poliihed, as well as the fa-
vage nations, bowed down before him.
But at the hour when Christ appeared on
the cross, the signal of his defeat was
given. His kingdom suddenly departed
from him; the reign of idolatry pafled
away: He was beheld to fall like lightenir;
from heaven. In that hour, the founda-
tion of every Pagan temple flook. The
fatue of every false God tottered on its
base. The Priest fled from his falling
shrine; and the Heathen oracles became
dumb for ever.

As

As on the cross Christ triumphed over S E R M.
atan, so he overcame his auxiliary, the V.
world. Long had it aftiiled him with
ts temptations and discouragements. In
this hour of severe trial, he surmounted
them all. Formerly he had despiscd the
tleafures of the world. He now bafled
its terrors. Hence he is jufly said to have
crucified /he world. By his sufferings, he
ennobled distress; and he darkened the
lufire of the pomp and vanities of life.
He discovered to his followers, the path
which leads, through affliction, to glory
and to victory; and he imparted to them
the fame spirit which enabled him to
overcome. Mlly kingdomi is not of this 'vrlid.
1hI this zworld l e Jlhall have tribulation: But'
be of good cheer ; I have overcome the
world *

Death also, the last foe of man, was

the vicim of this hour. The formidable
appearance of the Speare remained ; but
his dart was taken away. For, in the
hour when Christ expiated guilt, he dif-

armed
' John xvi. 33.

S E RM. armed death, by securing the refurrctioni

V. o

of the just. When he said to his peni-
tent fellow-fufferer, To-day thou Jlalt be
with me in paradjfe, he announced to all
his followers the certainty of heavenly
bliss. He declared the cherubims to be
dismissed, and the flaming sword to be
sheathed, which had been appointed at
the fall, to keep from man the way of the
Tree of Life *. Faint, before this period,
had been the hope, indiftind the prolfpel,
which even good men enjoyed of the
heavenly kingdom. Life and immlortalit.
were now brought to light. From the hill
of Calvary, the first clear and certain
view was given to the world of the ever-
lasting mansions. Since that hour, they
have been the perpetual consolation of
believers in Christ. Under trouble, they
sooth their minds; amidst temptation,
they support their virtue; and, in their
dying moments, enable them to fay, 0
Death! where is thy ling? 0 Grave! iwhure
is th7y viiory ?

VI. Tils
' Gen. iii. 24.

VI. THIS was the hour when our Lord s E R I.
reced that spiritual kingdom which is v.
ever to end. How vain are the counsels
nd dcfigns of men ! How fllallow is the
oli'cy of the wicked ! How Ihort their
iumphing ! The enemies of Christ ima-
ined, that in this hour they had success-
lly accomplished their plan for his de-
rudtion. They believed, that they had
ntirely scattered the small party of his
llowers, and had extinguifled his name
nd his honour for ever. In derision, they
ddreffed him as a King. They cloath-
d him with purple robes; they crowned
im with a crown of thorns ; they put a
eed into his hand; and, with insulting
ockery, bowed the knee before him.
lind and impious men ! How little did
they know, that the Almighty was at that
moment setting him as Kino on the hill of
Sio; giving him the Heathen for his inheri-
tance, and the zitte1rmofJ parts of the earth for
his pogffion ! How little did they know,
that their badges of mock royalty were at
that moment converted into the signals of

absolute

S E R M. absolute dominion, and the instruments of

v. irrefiftable power! The reed which they

put into his hands,. became a rod of iron,
with which he was to break in pieces his
Cenemals; a sceptre, with which he was to
rule the universe in righteoufiefs. The
cross, which they thought was to stigma-
tize him with infamy, became the ensign
of his renown. Instead of being the
reproach of his followers, it was to be
their boast and their glory. The cross
was to fiine on palaces and churchec,
throughout the earth. It was to be as-
fumed as the ditinncion of the molt
powerful monarchs, and to wave in the
banner of victorious armies, when the
memory of Herod and Pilate should be
accursed ; when Jerusalem should be re-
duced to aihes, and lthe Jews be vaga-
bonds over all the world.

These were the triumphs whicl com-

menced at this hour. Our Lord' saw thel
already in their birth; helfiw of the tl,'
vail of Jis foII, a1 Twas fatisfiel. He be-
held the word of God going forth, co"l

I qucrilng,

quering, and to conquer; subduing to s R M.
the obedience of his laws, the subduers V.
of the world; carrying light into the re-
gions of darkness, and mildness into the
habitations of cruelty. He beheld the
Gentiles waiting below the cross, to re-
ceive the Gospel. He beheld Ethiopia
land the fIles Jflretchilj out their hands to
God; the defart beginning to rejoice, and to
blo/omi as the rose ; and the knowledge of the
Lord filling the earth, as the waters cover
thefea. Well pleased, he said, It is finjl /-
, ed. As a conquerbr, he retired from the
field, reviewing his triumphs: He bowed
his head, and gave up the ghof.- From
that hour, Christ was no longer a mortal
man, but Head over all things to the Church ;
the glorious King of men and angels,
of whose dominion there shall be no end.
His triumphs shall perpetually increase.
His nalef hall endlure for ever ; itfJiall laJf
as lonIg as/ the fin ; men J7hall be blefed in
him, and all nations Jfaall call him blefed.

S ,Sucil

SERM. SUCH were the tranfations, such the

V. effes of this ever-memorable hour. With

all those great events was the mhind of our
Lord filled, when he lifted up his eyes to
heaven, and said, Father, the hour is coime!

From the vicw which we have taken of

this subjet, permit me to suggest, what
ground it affords to confide in the mercy
of God for the pardon of fin, to trust
to his faithfulness for the accomplishment
of all his promises, and to approach to
him, with gratitude and devotion, in
acs of worship.

IN thefirf place, The death of Christ

affords us ground to confide in the divine
mercy, for the pardon of fin. All the
fleps of that high dispensation of Provi-
dence, which we have confidered, lead
directly to this conclusion, He that Spared
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us
all, howJhall he not with him also freely
give us all things ? This is the final result
of the discoveries of the Gospel. On this
refts that great system of consolation,

which
* Rom. viii. 32.

which it hath reared up for men. We S E R M.
are not left to dubious and intricate rea-

\Yv.

fonings, concerning the conduct which
God may be expecled to hold towards his
offending creatures. But we are led to the
view of important and illustrious fats,
which strike the mind with evidence irre-
fiffible. For, is it possible to believe, that
such great operations as I have endea-
voured to describe, were carried on by the
Almighty in vain ? Did he excite, in the
hearts of his creatures, such high hopes,
without any intention to fulfil them ?
After so long a preparation of goodness,
could he mean to deny forgiveness to the
penitent, and the humble ? When, over-
come by the sense or guilt, man looks up
with an astonished eye to the justice of his
Creator, let him recollect that hour of
which the Text speaks, and be com-
forted. The signals of divine mercy,
erected in- his view, are too conspicuous
to be either distrusted or mistaken.

IN the next place, the discoveries of
this hour, afford the highest reason to

S trust

SER M. trust in the divine faithfulness, for the

V. ,accomplishment of every promise which

remains yet unfulfilled. For this was the
hour of the completion of God's ancient
covenant. It was the perfoirance of the mercy
promised to the fathers. We behold the
consummation of a great plan, which,
throughout a course of ages, had been
uniformly pursued; and which, against
every human appearance, was, at the ap-
pointed moment, exactly fulfilled. No
word that is gone out of the mouth of the
Lord /jall fail. No length of time alters
his purpose. No obstacles can retard it.
Towards the ends accomplished in this
hour, the most repugnant instruments were
made to operate. We discern God bend-/
ing to his purpose, the jarring paflions,
the opposite interests, and even the vices
of men ; uniting seeming contrarieties in
his scheme; making the wrath of man to
praie him; obliging the ambition of
Princes, the prejudices of the Jews, the
malice of Satan, all to concur, either in
bringing forward this hour, or in com-

pleatihf

pleating its destined effects. With what sE RM.
entire confidence ought we to wait for V.
the fulfilment of all his other promises,
in their due time; even when events are
most embroiled, and the profpec is most
discouraging ? Although thou fayefl, Thou
canjl not fee him, yet jzudrglent is before
hin ; therefore trzui thou in him. Be at-
tentive only to perform thy duty; leave
the event to God; and be asSured, that
tnder the direction of his providence, all
things J7jall work together for a' happy
issue.

L A S T L Y, The consideration of this

whole subjeCt tends to excite gratitude
and devotion, when we approach to
God in acs of worship. The hour of
which I have discoursed, presents him to
us in the amiable light of the Deliverer
of mankind, the Restorer of our forfeited
hopes. We behold the greatness of the
Almighty, softencd by the mild radiance
of condescension and mercy. We behold
him diminishing the awful distance at

which

S E R M. which we stand from his presence, by ap-

V. v pointing for us a Mediator and Intercessor,

through whom the humble may, with-
out difinay, approach to Him who made
them. By such views of the Divine na-
ture, Christian faith lays the foundation
for a worship which lhall be at once ra-
tional and affectionate; a worihip, in
which the light of the underifanding ihall
concur with the devotion of the heart,
and the most profound reverence be unit-
ed with the most cordial love. Christian
faith is not a system of speculative truths.
It is not a lesson of moral instruction on-
ly. By a train of high discoveries which
it reveals, by a succession of interesting
objecs which it places in our view, it is
calculated to elevate the mind, to purify
the affeltions, and, by the assistance of
devotion, to confirm and encourage vir-
tue. Such, in particular, is the scope of
that divine institution, the Sacrament of
our Lord's Supper. To this happy pur-
pose let it conduce, by concentering, in
one striking point of light, all that the

Gospel

Gospel has displayed of what is most im- S E R I.
portant to man. Touched with just con- V.
trition for past offences, and filled with a
grateful sense cf divine goodness, let us
come to the altar of God; and, with a
humble faith in his infinite mercies, de-
vote ourselves to his service for ever.

SER-

# SERMON VI. On GENTLENESS. JAMES iii. 17. The wisdom that is from above, is  gentle 

144

SERMON VI.

On GENTLENESS.

JAMES iii. 17.

The wjflomr that is from above, is-gentle-
S E R M. TmO be wife in our own eyes, to be wife

v. in the opinion of the world, and

to be wife in the fight of God, are three
things so very different, as rarely to coin-
cide. One may often be wife in his own
eyes, who is far from being so in the
judgment of the world; and to be reputed
a very wife man by the world, is no fe-
curity for being accounted wife by God.
As there is a worldly happiness, which
God perceives to be no other than dif-
guised misery; as there are worldly ho-
nours, which in his estimation are re-

1 .I proach;

proach; so there is a worldly wisdom S E RM.
which isfoollihJnefs in his fight. Of this VI.
worldly wisdom the characters arc given
in the context, and placed in contrast
with those of the wifltom which is firom
above. The one is the wisdom of the
crafty; the other, that of the upright.
The one terminates in felfiflnefs; the
other, in charity. The one is full offlrif'e
and bitter env Linlgs ; the other, of mercy
and ofgoodfilits. One of the chief cha-
raAers by which the wisdom from above
is diftinguifled, is gentleness, of which I
am now to discourse. Of this there is the
greater occasion to discourse, because it is
too seldom viewed in a religious light;
and is more readily confidered by the
bulk of men, as a mere felicity of nature,
or an exterior accomplishment of man-
ners, than as a Christian virtue which
they are bound to cultivate. I fall first
explain the nature of this virtue; and
fliall then offer some arguments to re-
commend, and some directions to faci-
litate the practice of it.

T I

SERM. I BEGIN with distinguishing true gen-

VI. tlenefs from passive tameness of spirit,

and from unlimited compliance with the
manners of others. That passive tameness
which submits, without struggle, to every
incroachment of the violent and aftunm-
ing, forms no part of Chriflian duty;
but, on the contrary, is destruCtive of ge-
neral happiness and order. That unli-
mited complaisance, which, on every oc-
cafion, falls in with the opinions and
manners of others, is so far from being a
virtue, that it is in itself a vice, and
the parent of many vices. It overthrows
all steadiness of principle; and produces
that sinful conformity with the world,
which taints the whole character. In the
present corrupted state of human man-
ners, always to assent and to comply, is
the very worst maxim we can adopt. It
is impossible to support the purity and
dignity of Christian morals, without op-
posing the world on various occasions,
even though we should stand alone. That
gentleness therefore which belongs to vir-

tue,

tue, is to be carefully diflinguifhed from s E R.M.
the mean spirit of cowards, and the fawn- VI.
ing assent of sycophants. It renounces
no jufi right from fear. It gives up no
important truth from flattery. It is
indeed not only confifent with a firm
mind, but it necessarily requires a manly
spirit, and a fixed principle, in order to
give it any real value. Upon this solid
ground only, the polifli of gentlenets can
with advantage be iuperinduced.

It flands opposed, not to the most de-

termined regard for virtue and truth, but
to harshness and severity, to arrogance
and overbearing, to violence and oppref-
sion. It is, properly, that part of the
great virtue of charity, which makes us
unwilling to give pain to any of our
brethren. Compafnion prompts us to re-
lieve their wants. Forbearance prevents
us from retaliating their injuries. Meek-
ness restrains our angry paflions; can-
dour, our severe judgments. Gentleness
corrects whatever is offensive in our man-
ners; and, by a constant train of humane

T 2 attentions,

S E R M. attentions, studies to alleviate the burden

VI. of common misery. Its office, therefore,

is extensive. It is not, like some other
virtues, called forth only on peculiar
emergencies; but it is continually in ac-
tion, when we are engaged in intercourse
with men. It ought to form our address,
to regulate our speech, and to diffuse it-
self over our whole behaviour.

I must warn you, however, not to con-

found this gentle wfdom which is from
above, with that artificial courtesy, that
studied smoothness of manners, which is
learned in the school of the world. Such
accomplihments, the most frivolous and
empty may possess. Too often they are
employed by the artful as a snare; too
often affected by the hard and unfeeling,
as a cover to the baseness of their minds.
We cannot, at the fame time, avoid ob-
serving the homage, which, even in such
instances, the spirit of the world is con-
strained to pay to virtue. In order to
render society agreeable, it is found ne-
ceffary to assume somewhat, that may a

leafi

leafs carry its appearance. Virtue is the s E R ;i.
universal charm. Even its flladow is vI:
courted, when the substance is wanting.
The imitation of its form has been re-
duced into an art; and, in the commerce
of life, the first study of all who would
either gain the esteem, or win the hearts
of others, is to learn the speech, and to
adopt the manners, of candour, gentlene!s,
and humanity. But that gentlcnecf which
is the charaaeriflick of a good man, has,
like every other virtue, its feat in the
heart: And, let me add, nothing except
what flows from the heart, can render
even external manners truly pleasing. For
no assumed behaviour can at all times
hide the real character. In that unaffecr-
ed courtesy which springs fiom a gentle
mind, there is a charm infinitely more
powerful,. than in all the studied manners
of the most finised courtier.

True gentleness is founded on a fcnfe

of what we owe to the God who made us,
and to the common nature of which we
all share. It arises from reflection on our

oWl)

SERM. own failings and wants; and from just

VI- views of the condition, and the duty of

man. It is native feeling, heightened and
improved by principle. It is the heart
which easily relents; which feels for every
thing that is human; and is backward
and flow to inflict the least wound. It is
affable in its address, and mild in its de-
meanour; ever ready to oblige, and will-
ing to be obliged by others; breathing
habitual kindness towards friends, cour-
tefy to strangers, long-fuffering to ene-
xnies. It exercises authority with mode-
ration; administers reproof with tender-
ness; confers favours with ease and mo-
defty. It is unassuming in opinion, and
temperate in zeal. It contends not eager-
ly about trifles; flow to contradit, and
still flower to blame; but prompt to allay
dissention, and to restore peace. It neither
intermeddles unnecessarily with the affairs,
nor pries inquisitively into the secrets, of
others. It delights above all things to
alleviate distress, and, if it cannot dry up
the falling tear, to sooth, at least, the

grieving

grieving heart. Where it has not the E R.
power of being useful, it is never bur- VI.
denfome. It seeks to please, iather than
to ihine and dazzle; and conceals with
care, that superiority either of talents, or
of rank, which is oppressive to those who
are beneath it. In a word, it is that fpi-
rit, and that tenor of manners, which the
Gospel of Christ enjoins, when it com-
mands us to bear one another's burdens; to
rejoice with those who rejoice, and to weep
with those who weep; to please every one
his neighbour for his good; to be kind and
tender-hearted; to be pitifrl and courteous;
to filpport the weak, and to be patient to-
wards all men.

Having now sufficiently explained the

natuie of this amiable virtue, I proceed
to recommend it to your practice. Let
me, for this end, desire you to confider
the duty which you owe to God; to con-
fider the relation which you bear to one
another; to confider your own interest.

I. Confider the duty which you owe to
God. When you survey his works, no-

thing

SE R M. thing is so conspicuous, as his greatness

VI. and majcfty. When you consult his

word, nothing is more remarkable, than
his attention to soften that greatness, and
to place it in the. mildest and least op-
preffive light. He not only characterizes
himself as the God ofc cofolation, but, with
condescending gentleness, he particularly
accommodates hinifelf to the situation of
the unfortunate. He dwelleth with the
hmnble and contrite. He hideth not his face
when the afflic7ed cly. He healeth the broken
iln heart, and bindeth up their wounds.-
When his Son came to be the Saviour of
the world, he was eminent for the fame
attribute of mild and gentle goodness.
Long before his birth, it was prophesied
of him, that he fiould not Jfrive, nor cry,
nor canre his voice to be heard in the Jireets;
that the bruised reed he Jhould not break,
nor qzuencl the Jhioak;zg flax : And after
his death, this diftinguiihing feature in
his character, was so universally remem-
bered, that the Apoftie Paul, on occasion
of a request which he makes to the Co-

~i M,.rinthians,
I Matth. xii. 19, 20.

rinthians, uses those remarkable expref- ERM.
lions ", I beseech you by the meckneJs and VI
gentleness of ChrJif. During all his inter-
course with men, no harilnefs, or pride,
or flately distance, appeared in his demea-
nour. In his access, he was easy; in his
manners, simple; in his answers, mild;
in his whole behaviour, humble and ob-
liging. Learn of me, said he, for I am
meek and lowly in heart.-As the Son
of God is the pattern, fb the Holy Ghost
is the inspirer of gentleness. His name
is the Conmforter, the Spirit of grace and
peace. His fruits, or operations on the
human mind, are love, neeknefs, gentleness,
and long-fjffering t.- Thus, by every
discovery of the Godhead, honour is put
upon gentleness : It is held up to our
view, as peculiarly connected with Ce-
leftial Nature. And suitable to such dif-
coveries, is the whole strain of the Gospel.
It were unnecessary to appeal to any single
precept. You need only open the New
Testament, to find this virtue perpetually
inculcated. Charity, or love, is the ca-

U pital
* 2 Cor . x. t Gal. v. 22.

s ERM. pital figure ever presented to our view;

VI. and gentleness, forbearance, and forgive-

ness, are the founds ever recurring on
our ear.

So predominant, indeed, is this spirit

throughout the Christian dispensation,
that even the vices and corruptions of
men have not been able altogether to
defeat its tendency. Though that dif-
penfation is far from having hitherto
produced its full effect upon the world,
yet we can clearly trace its influence, in
humanizing the manners of men. Re-
markable, in this refpet, is the vicory
which it has gained over those powers of
violence and cruelty, which belong to the
infernal kingdom. Wherever Chriftia-
nity prevails, it has discouraged, and, in
some degree, abolished slavery. It has
rescued human nature from that ignomi-
nious yoke, under which, in former ages,
the one half of mankind groaned. It has
introduced more equality between the two
sexes, and rendered the conjugal union
more rational and happy. It has abated

the

the' ferocioufiiefs of war. It has miti- S E R M,
gated the rigour of defpotifin, mitigated Vv
the cruelty of puniihments; in a word, it
has reduced mankind, from their ancient
barbarity, into a more humane and gentle
itate.- Do we pretend refped and zeal
for this religion, and at the fame time al-
low ourselves in that harflnefs and feve-
rity, which are so contradictory to its ge-
nius ? Too plainly we mflow, that it has
no power over our hearts. We may re-
tain the Chriffian name; but we have
abandoned the Christian spirit.

II. Confider the relation which you

bear to one another. Man, as a solitary
individual, is a very wretched being. As
long as he stands detached from his kind,
he is potreffed, neither of happiness, nor
of itrength. We are formed by Nature
to unite; we are impelled towards each
other, by the compaflionate initinds in
our frame; we are linked by a thousand
connections, founded on common wants.
Gentleness, therefore, or, as it is very pro-

U 2 perly

' E R M. perly termed, humanity, is what man, as

v such, in every station, owes to'man. To be

inaccefible, contemptuous, and hard of
heart, is to revolt against our own nature;
is, in the laliguage of scripture, to hide
onlfglves ftrom our own fleJh. Accordingly,
as all feel the claim which they have to
mildness and humanity, so all are fen-
sibly hurt by the want of it in others.
On no fide are we more vulnerable. No
complaint is more feelingly made, than
that of the harih and rugged manners
of persons with whom we have inter-
corife. But how seldom do we transfer
the cafe to ourselves, or examine how far
we are guilty of inflicting on others,
whose sensibility is the fame with ours,
those very wounds of which we so loudly
complain ?

But, perhaps, it will be pleaded by

some, that this gentleness, on which we
now infilt, regards only those finaller of-
sices of life, which in their eye are not
effintial to religion and goodness. Ne-
gligentj they confess, of the government
! of

of their temper, or the regulation of their s E R M.
behaviour, on flight occasions; they are A',
attentive, as they pretend, to the great
duties of beneficence; and ready, when-
ever the opportunity presents, to perform
important services to their fellow-crea-
tures. But let such persons reifec, that
the occasions of performing thofr import-
ant good deeds, very rarely occur. Per-
haps their situation in life, or the nature
of their connections, may in a great mea-
sure exclude them from such opportuni-
ties. Great events give scope for great
virtues; but the main tenor of human
life, is composed of finall occurrences.
Within the round of theft, lie the mate-
rials of the happiness of most men; the
fubjets of their duty, and the trials of
their virtue. Virtue muff be formed and
supported, not by unfrequent acts, but
by daily and repeated exertions. In or-
der to its becoming either vigorous or
useful, it must be habitually active; not
breaking forth occasionally with a tran-
fient lustre, like the blaze of the comet;

but

SERM. but regular in its returns, like the light

vL. of day: Not like the aromatick gale, which

sometimes feasts the sense; but like the
ordinary breeze, which fans the air, and
renders it healthful.

Years may pass over our heads, with-

out affording any opportunity for acts
of high beneficence, or extensive utility.
Whereas not a day passes, buit, in the
common tranfacions of life, and efpe-
cially in the intercourse of domeftick so-
ciety, gentleness finds place for promot-
ing the happineis of others, and strength-
ening in ourselves the habit of virtue.
Nay, by seasonable discoveries of a hu-
mane spirit, Ave sometimes contribute
more materially to the advancement of
happiness, than by actions which are
seemingly more important. There are si-
tuations, not a few, in human life, where
the encouraging reception, the conde-
scending behaviour, and the look of sym-
pathy, bring greater relief to the heart,
than the most liberal supplies of bounty.
While, on the other fide, when the hand

of

of liberality is extended to bestow, the want s E R M.
of gentleness is sufficient to frustrate the vt.
intention of the benefit. We four those
whom we meant to oblige; and, by con-
ferring favours with ostentation and
harihnefs, we convert them into injuries.
Can any disposition then be held to pof-
fess a low place in the scale of virtue,
whose influence is so considerable on the
happiness of the world ?

Gentleness is, in truth, the great ave-

nue to mutual enjoyment. Amidst the
strife of interfering interests, it tempers
the violence of contention, and keeps alive
the feeds of harmory. It softens ani-
mofities; renews endearments; and ren-
ders the countenance of man, a refreflh-
ment to man. Banifli gentleness from the
earth; suppose the world to be filled with
none but harsh and contentious spirits;
and what fort of society would remain ?
The solitude of the desert were prefer-
able to it. The conflict of jarring ele-
nents in chaos; the cave, where fubterra-
neous winds contend and roar; the den,

where

SE t 11. where serpents hiss, and beasts of the

VI. forreft howl; would be the only proper

representations of such assemblies of men.
-- that I had wings like a dove ! for
then I woulld fly avay, and be at ref. Lo!
then, I vwould wander far off, and remainl
in the wilderness: I would halJen my efcapc
from the windy Jform and tempefl: For I
have feenL violence and frife in the city.
MIihiJef and sorrow are in the midJit of it:
Deceit and guile depart not from the frJee '.
-- Strange ! that where men have all
one common interest, they should so of-
ten, absurdly, concur in defeating it! Has
not. Nature already provided a ftifficient
quantity of unavoidable evils for the state
of man } As if we did not susser enough
from the storm which beats upon us with-
out, must we conspire also, in those focie-
ties where we assemble, to find a retreat
from that storm, to harass one another
-But if the sense of duty, and of com-
mon happiness, be insufficient to recom-
mend the virtue of which we treat, then
let me desire you,

I a~III. To[
* Pfal. Iv. 6, 7, 8.

III. To confider your own interest. SE R M.

Whatever ends a good man can be sup- VI.
posed to pursue, geritlenefi will be found
to favour them. It prepofleffes and wins
every heart. It perfuadcs, when every
other argument fails; often disarms the
fierce, and melts the stubborn: Where-
as harflnefs confirms the opposition it
would subdue; and, of an indifferent
person, creates an enemy. iHe who could
overlook an injury committed in the col-
lifion of intereffs, will long and severely
resent the flights of a contemptuous be-
haviour.- To the man of gentleness,
the world is generally disposed to ascribe
every other good quality. The higher
endowments of the mind we admire at
a distance; and when any impropriety osi
behaviour accompanies them, we admire
without love. They arc like some of the
distant stars, whose beneficial influence
reaches not to us. Whereas, of the in-
fluence of gentleness, all in some degree
partake, and therefore all love it. The
man of this character, rifes in the world

X without

SE R M. without firuggle, and flouriflies without

vI. envy. His misfortunes are universally

lamented; and his failings are easily for-
given.

But whatever may be the effec of this

virtue on our external condition, its in-
fluence on our internal enjoyment is cer-
tain and powerful. That inward tran-
quillity which it promotes, is the first re-
quifite to every pleasurable feeling. It
is the calm and clear atmosphere, the fe-
renity and sun-shine of the mind. When
benignity and gentleness reign within,
we are always least in hazard of being
ruffled from without; every person, and
every occurrence, are beheld in the most
favourable light. But let some clouds
of disgust and ill-humour gather on
the mind; and immediately the scene
changes; Nature seems transformed; and
the appearance of all things is blackened
to our view. The gentle mind is like the
smooth stream, which reflecs every ob-
jec in its just proportion, and in its fairest
colours. The violent spirit, like troubled

waters,

waters, renders back the images of things s E R M.
distorted and broken; and communicates VI
to them all, that disordered motion which
arises solely from its own agitation.

Ofences mif cone. As soon may the

waves of the sea cease to roll, as provo-
cations to arise from human corruption
and frailty. Attacked by great injuries,
the man of mild and gentle spirit will
feel what human nature feels; and will
defend and resent, as his duty allows him.
But to those flight provocations, and fri-
volous offences, which are the most fre-
quent causes of disquiet, he is happily
fuperiour. Hence his days flow in a far
more placid tenor than those of others;
exempted from the numberless difcompo-
ifres which agitate vulgar minds. In-
spired with higher sentiments ; taught to
regard, with indulgent eye, the frailties of
men, the omissions of the careless, the fol-
lies of the imprudent, and the levity of
the fickle, he retreats into the calmness of
his spirit, as into an undisturbed fan&u-
;iry;' and quietly allows the ufial current
of life to hold its course.

X 2 This

SE R M. This virtue has another, and still more

VI. important connection with our interest,

by means of that relation which our pre-
sent behaviour bears to our eternal state.
Heaven is the region of gentleness and
friendship; hell, of fierceness and animo-
fity. If then, as the Scripture inftruds us,
according to what we now Jow, we mjlIt
hereafter reap; it follows, that the cultiva-
tionof a gentle temper is necessary to pre-
pare us for future' felicity ; and that the
indulgence of harfi d(ispositions, is the
introduction to future misery. Men, I
am afraid, too often separate those articles
of their belief which relate to eternity,
from the ordinary affairs of the world.
They connect them with the seasons of
seriousness and gravity. They leave them,
with much refpel, as in a high region,
to which, only on great occasions, they
retort; and, when they descend into com-
mon life, confider themfclves as at liberty
to give free scope to their humours and
paflons.. Whereas, in fad, it is their be-
haviour in the daily.train of social inter-

course,

course, which, more than any other caufc, s F R M.

'1 . , . VI.

fixes and determines their fpirital cha- -,~
racler; gradually instilling those difpoli-
tions, and forming those habits, wh-icl
affect their everlasting condition. With
regard to trifles, perhaps, their malig-
nant difpofitious may chiefly be indulged.
But let them remember well, that those
trifles, by incrcafing the growth of pee-
vifimefs and pafilon, become pregnant
with the mofl fcrious michliefs; and may
fit them, before they are aware, for being
the future companions of infernal spirits
only.

I mean not to fay, that in order to our

preparation for Hearen, it is enough to
be mild and gentle; or that this virtue
alone, will cover all our fins. Through the
felicity of natural constitution, a certain
degree of this benignity may be poflefled
by some, whose hearts are in other re-
speds corrupt, and their lives irregular.
But what I mean to assert, is, that where
no attention is given to the government
of temper, meetnefs for Heaven is not

yert

S E R M. yet acquired, and the regenerating power

v of religion is as yet unknown. One of

the first works of the Spirit of God, is, to
infuse into every heart which it inhabits,
that gentle wiftlom which is from above.
They who are Chrji's, have crucfied the
JlAJA with its affecdions and hzils; but let
it not be forgotten, that among the.works
of the fleJ7, hatred, variance, emulations,
wrath, Jlrife, and envyings, are as expressly
enumerated, as uncleanness, murders, drunk-
enncfs, and revelling *. They who conti-
nue either in the one or'the other, IJall
not inherit, indeed can not inherit, the
kingdom of God.

Having thus shown the importance of

gentleness, both as a moral virtue, and
as a Christian grace, I shall conclude the
fibjec, with briefly suggesting some con-
fiderations which may be of -use to faci-
litate the practice of it.

FoR this end, let me advise you to view

your charac&er with an impartial eye;
and to learn, from your own failings, to

give
* Gal. v. 19, 20, 2i,

give that indulgence which in your turn S E R M.
you must claim. It is pride which fills VI.
the world with so much harfinces and
severity. In the fulness of felf-eftimation,
we forget what we are. We claim atten-
tions, to which we are not entitled. We
are rigorous to offences, as if we had ne-
ver offended ; unfeeling to distress, as if
we knew not what it was to susser. From
those airy regions of pride and folly, let
us descend to our proper level. Let us
survey the natural equality on which
Providence has placed man with man,
and reflect on the infirmities common to
all. If the reflecion on natural equa-
lity and mutual offences be insufficient to
prompt humanity, let us at least remem-
ber what we are in the fight of God.
Have we none of that forbearance to give
to one another, which we all so earnestly
intreat from Heaven ? Can we look for
clemency or gentleness from our Judge,
when we are so backward to ihow it to
our own brethren ?

Accustom

SE R M. Accustom yourselves, also, to reflect on

VI. the finall moment of those things which

are the ufial incentives to violence and
contention. In the ruffled and angry
hour, we view every appearance througl
a false medium. The most inconsiderable
point of interest, or honour, swells into t;
momentous objec; and the slightest at-
tack seems to threaten immediate ruin.
But after pafion or pride has subsidcd, we
look round in vain for the mighty mi-
chiefs we dreaded. The fabrick, which
our disturbcd imagination hiad reared, to-
tally disappears. But though the cause of
contention has dwindled away, its con-
sequences remain. We have alienated a
friend; we have embittered an enemy;
we have sown the feeds of future suspicion,
malevolence, or difguft.-Sul end your
violence, I beseech you, for a moment,
when cauSes of discord occur. Antici-
pate that period of coolness, which, of it-
self, will soon arrive. Allow yourselves
to reflec, how little you have any pro-
spect of gaining by fierce contention; but

x 1howr

how much of the true happiness of life S E R M.
you are certain of throwing away. Eali- V.
ly, and from the smallest chink, the bit-
ter waters of strife are let forth; but with
difficulty is their course restrained; and
when once they begin to flow, they never
fail to poison his cup who was the first to
give them passage.

But gentleness will, most of all, be pro-

rmoted by frequent views of those great
objects which our holy religion presents.
Let the prospects of immortality fill your
mihds. Look upon this world as a state of
passage. Confider yourselves as engaged in
the pursuit of higher interests; as acting
now, under the eye of God, an intro-
ductory part to a more important scene.
Elevated by such sentiments, your minds
will become calm and sedate. You will
look down, as from a fuperiour fiation,
on the petty disturbances of the world.
They are the selfish, the sensual, and the
vain, who are most fubje& to the impo-
tence of passion. They are linked lb
closely to the world; by so many fides

Y they

SERM. they touch every objec, and every per-

Vfon around them, that they are perpetu-

ally hurt, and perpetually hurting others.
But the spirit of true religion removes
us to a proper distance from the grating
objects of worldly contention. It leaves
us lffficiently connected with the world,
for acting our part in it with propriety;
but disengages us from it so far, as to
weaken its power of disturbing our tran-
quillity. It inspires magnanimity ; and
magnanimity always breathes gentleness.
It leads us to view the follies of men with
pity) not with rancour; and to treat, with
the mildness of a fuperiour nature, what
in little minds would call forth all the
bitterness of passion.

Aided by such considerations, let us

cultivate that gentle wisdom which is,
in so many refpeds, important both to
our duty and our happiness. Let us as-
fume it as the ornament of every age, and
of every station. Let it temper the petu-
lance of youth, and soften the morose-
ness of old age. Let it mitigate autho-

rity

:rity in those who rule, and promote de- s E R M.
ference among those who obey. I con- V,
elude with repeating the caution, not to
mistake for true gentleness, that flimzy
imitation of it, called polished manners,
which often, among the men of the
world, under a smooth appearance con-
ceals much asperity. Let yours be na-
tive gentleness of heart, flowing from the
love of God, and the love of man. Unite
this amiable spirit, with a proper zeal for
all that is right, and jull, and true. Let
piety be combined in your characecr
with humanity: Let determined integri-
ty dwell in a mild and gentle breast. A
characer thus supported, will command
more real refped, than can be procured
by the most shining accompliflhments,
when separated from virtue.

Y ESER-

# SERMON VII. On the DISORDERS of the PASSIONS. ESTHER v. 13. Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the King's gate.

172

S E R M ON VII.
On the DISORDERS of the PASSIONS.

ESTHER V. 13.
ret all this availeth me nothing, So long

as I fee Mordecai the Jew fitting at the
Kitng's gate.

SERM. r HESE are the words of one, who,
VII. though high in station and power,

confessed himself to be miserable. They
relate to a memorable occurrence in the
Persian history, under the reign of Aha-
fuerus, who is supposed to be the Prince ]
known among Greek historians by the
name of Artaxerxes.- Ahasuerus had ad-
vanced to the chief dignity in his king-
dom Haman an Amalekite, who inhe-
rited all the ancient enmity of his race to

the

the Jewish nation. He appears, fiom s E R i
what is recorded of him, to have been a VII
very wicked minister. Railed to greatncfs
without merit, he employed his power
solely for the gratification of his passions.
As the honours which he possessed were
next to royal, his pride was every (lay fed
with that servile homage which is pecu-
liar to Afiatick courts; and all the ser-
vants of the King proffrated themselves
before him. In the midst of this general
adulation, one person only fiooped not to
Haman. This was Mordecai the Jew;
who, knowing this Amalekite to be an
enemy to the people of God, and, with
virtuous indignation, despising that info-
lence of prosperity with which he Iaw
him lifted up, bowed lot, nor1 did him re-
vercnce. On this appearance of difirc-
fpe& from Mordecai, Haman woas fill of
wrath: But he thought Jcorn to lay hands
on Mordecai alone. Personal revenge was
not sufficient to satisfy him. So violent
and black were his paflions, that he re-
solved to exterminate the whole nation to

which

.SE RM. which Mordecai belonged. Abusing, fbr
VI,. this cruel purpose, the favour of his cre-

dulous Sovereign, he obtained a decree to
.be sent forth, that, against a certain day,
all the Jews throughout the Persian domi-
nions ihould be put to the sword. Mean
while, confident of success, and blind to
approaching ruin, he continued to exult
in his prosperity. Invited by Ahasuerus
to a royal banquet, which Esther the
Queen had prepared, he went forth that
day joyful, and with a glad heart. But be-
hold how flight an incident was fuffi-
cient to poison his joy! As he went forth,
he saw Mordecai in the King's gate; and
observed, that frill he refused to do him
homage: He flood not up, Mnr Vwas moved
Jbr him; although he well knew the for-
midable designs which HIaman was pre-
paring to execute. One private man, who
despised his greatness, and disdained sub-
mission, while a whole kingdom trembled
before him; one spirit, which the utmost
stretch of his power could neither subdue
-nor humble, blasted his triumphs. His

whole

whole foul was shaken with a storm of sE R M
passion. Wrath, pride, and desire of re- IvI.
venge, rose into fury. With difficulty he
restrained himself in publick; but as soon
as he came to his own house, he was
forced to disclose the agony of his mind.
He gathered together his friends and fa-
mily, with Zerefh his wife. He told thenz
of the glory of his riches, and the multitude
of his children, and all the things wherein
the King had promoted him, and how he had
advanced him above the princes and ser-
vants of the King. He Jaid, moreover, lea
EJlher the 9lieein did let no man come in
with the King, unto the banquet that Jibe
had eprepared, but mielf; and to-morrow
aso am I invited unto her with the King.
After all this preamble, what is the con-
clufion ?-Yet all this availeth me nothing,
so long as Ifee Mordecai the Jew fitting at
the King's gate.

The sequel of Haman's history I shall

not now pursue. It might afford matter
for much inftrution, by the conspicuous
juffice of God in his fall and punishment.

But,,

S E R M. But, contemplating only the singular situ-.
VI. ation in which the Text presents him, andt

the .violent agitation of his mind which
it displays, the following refletions na-
turally arise, which, together with tome
practical improvements, Shall make the
filbjed of this discourse. I. How miser-
able is vice, when one guilty passion cre-
ates so much torment II. How unavail-
ing is prosperity, when, in the height of
it, a 'ingle disappointment can defiroy the
relish of all its pleasures !III. How weak
is human nature, which, in the absence
of real, is thus prone to form to itself
imaginary woes !

I. How miserable is vice, when one

guilty pafion is capable of creating so
much torment ! When we discourse to
you of the internal misery of finners;
when we represent the pangs which they
susser from violent passions, and a corrupt-
ed heart; we are sometimes suspected of
chufing a theme for declamation, and of
heightening the picture which we draw,

1 by

by colours borrowed friom fancy. They S E R M
whoie minds are, by nature, haplily tran- VI
quil, or iwhofe situation in life removes
them from the difturbilc acnd ttumull of
passion, can hardly conceive, that, as long
as the body is at eafc, and the extcrnal on-i
dition proiperous, any thing which npaies
within the mind ihould cauie such exqul ite
woe. But, for the triut of our allertions,
we appeal to the hil:ory of mankind. We
might realbn fiom the constitution of the
rational frame; where the understanding
is appointed to be supreme, and the pas-
sions to be fibordinate ;. and where, if
this due arrangement of its parts be over-
thrown, mitry as necetlrily ensues, as
pain is coniequenc in the animal frame,
upon the diltortion of its members. But
laying fieculations of this kind afile, it
is lifficient to lead you to the view of
tifcs, the import of which can neither
be controverted, nor mifraken. This is,
indeed, the great advantage of history,
that it is a mirrour which holds up man-
kind to their own view. For, in all ages,

Z human

X E R M. human nature has been the fame. In the
VII. circle of worldly affairs, the fame charac-

ters and situations are perpetually return-
ing ; and in the follies and paflions, the
vices and crimes, of the generations that
are patl, we read those of the present.

Attend, then, to the instance now bc-

fore us; and conceive, if you can, a per-
son more thoroughly wretched, than one
reduced to make this humiliating consef-
sion, that, though surrounded with power,
opulence and pleasure, he was loft to all
happiness, through the fierceness of his re-
fentment; and was at that moment stung
by disappointment, and torn by rage, be-
yond what he could bear. All this avail-
eth me nothing, Jo long as Ifee Mordecai the
Jew fitting at the King's gate. Had this
been a soliloquy of Haman's with himself,
it would have been a sufficient discovery
of his misery. But when we confider it
as a confession which he makes to others,
it is a proof that his misery was be-
come insupportable. For such agitations
of the mind, every man firives to con-

ceal,

ceal, because he knows they difmonour s E R M.
him. Other griefs and sorrows, he can, VII
with freedom, pour out to a confident.
What he suffers from the injustice or ma-
lice of the world, he is not ashamed to
acknowledge. But when his filffering
arises from the bad dispositions of his own
heart; when, in the height of prosperity,
he is rendered miserable, solely by difap-
pointed pride, every ordinary motive for
communication ceases. Nothing but the
violence of anguith, can drive him to con-
fess a passion which renders him odious,
and a weakness which renders him def-
picable. To what extremity, in parti-
cular, must he be reduced, before he can
disclose to his own family the infamous
secret of his misery ? In the eye of his
family every man wishes to appear re-
fpectable, and to cover from their know-
ledge whatever may vilify or degrade
him. Attacked or reproached abroad, he
consoles himself with his importance at
home; and in domeftick attachment and
respect, seeks for some compensation for

Z 2 the

' E R Mr. human nature has been the fame. In the
VII. circle of worldly affairs, the fame charac-

ters and situations are perpetually return-
ing; and in the follies and paflions, the
vices and crimes, of the generations that
are past, we read those of the present.

Attend, then, to the instance now bc-

fore us; and conceive, if you can, a per-
son more thoroughly wretched, than one
reduced to make this humiliating consel-
sion, that, though surrounded with power,
opulence and pleasure, he was loft to all
happiness, through the fierceness of his re-
fentment; and was at that moment stung
by disappointment, and torn by rage, be-
yond what he could bear. ll this avail-
eth me nothing, so long as Ifee Mordecai the
Jew fitting at the Kfing's gate. Had this
been a soliloquy of Haman's with himself,
it would have been a sufficient discovery
of his misery. But when we confider it
as a confession which he makes to others,
it is a proof that his misery was be-
come insupportable. For such agitations
of the mind, every man strives to con-

ceal,

ceal, because he knows they dihflonour S E R M.
him. Other griefs and sorrows, he can, vT.
with freedom, pour out to a confident.
What he suffers from the injustice or ma-
lice of the world, he is not ashamed to
acknowledge. But when his uiffering
arises from the bad dilpofitions of his own
heart; when, in the height of prosperity,
he is rendered miserable, solely by difap-
pointed pride, every ordinary motive for
communication ceases. Nothing but the
violence of anguish, can drive him to con-
fess a passion which renders him odious,
and a weakness which renders him def-
picable. To what extremity, in parti-
cular, muff he be reduced, before he can
disclose to his own family the infamous
secret of his misery ? In the eye of his
family every man wiihes to appear re-
fpecable, and to cover from their know-
ledge whatever may vilify or degrade
him. Attacked or reproached abroad, he
confbles himself with his importance at
home; and in domeftick attachment and
refped, seeks for some compensation for

Z 2 the

SERM. the injustice of the world.-Judge, then,
vIi. of the degree of torment which Haman

, endured, by its breaking through all theic

reliraints, and forcing him to publifl his
fliame before those, fiom whom all men
seek most to hide it. How fcvere muit
have been the conflict which he under-
went within himself, before he called to-
gether his wife and all his friends for
this purpose ? How dreadful the agony
he fuficred at the moment of his consef-
sion, when, to the attoniihed company,
he laid open the caufc of his diftrcis ?

Assemble ail the evils which poverty,

disease, or violence can inflict, and their
stings will be found by far lels pungent,
than those which fich guilty pailions
dart into the heart. Amidst the ordi-
nary calamities of the world, the mind
can exert its powers, and flggeft relief:
And the mind is properly the man; the
sufferer, and his ihfferings, can be diftin-
guifhed. But those disorders of paflion,
by seizing diredily on the mind, attack
human nature in its strong hold, and

cut

cut off its last refiurce. They penetw ate s E Pr.
to the very feat of {ieniation; and convert II
all the powers of thought into initru-
ments of torture.

Let us remark, in the event that is now

before us, the awful hand of God; and
admire his justice, in thus making the
finner's oln wickckdneJf to 1reIrov!e hi, and
his backflidiugs to corre't himi. Scepticks
reason in vain againi the reality of a di-
vine government. It is not the flibjec
of dilpute. It is a fact which carries the
evidence of sense, and (liiplays itilif be-
fore our eyes. We iee the Almighty ma-
nifeftly piul;iing the frllnc w!ith evil. WJe
fee him connecding with every iiglnal de-
viation from duty, thof l wounds of tlhe
ifirit which occasion the nmoi cxquilite
torment. Ie hath not merely promul-
gated his laws now, and delayed the dif-
tribution of rewards and punihllments,
until a future period of being. But the
sanctions of his laws already take place
their effecas appear ; and with such infi-
nite wifdoom are they contrived, as to

require

S E R M. require no other executioners of justice
VII. against the finner, than his own guilty

paTions. God needs not come forth from
his secret place, in order to bring him to
punishment. He needs not call thunder
down from the heavens, nor rai{e any
minister of wrath from the abyss below.
He need only fay, Ephraim is joined to his
idols; let him alone: And, at that instant,
the finner becomes his own tormentor.
The infernal fire begins, of itself, to kindle
within him. The worm that never dies,
seizes on his heart.

Let us remark also, from this example,

how imperfectly we can judge from ex-
ternal appearances, concerning real hap-
piness or misery. All Persia, it is pro-
bable, envied Haman as the happiest per-
son in the empire; while yet, at the mo-
ment when we now confider him, there
was not within its bounds, one more
thoroughly wretched. We are reduced
and deceived, by that false glare which
prosperity Sometimes throws around bad
men. We a'e tempted to imitate their

crimes,

crimes, in order to partake of their ima- S E R M.
gined felicity. But remember Haman, vT.
and beware of the snare. Think not,
when you behold a pageant of grandeur
displayed to publick view, that you dif-
cern the ensign of certain happiness. In
order to form any just conclusion, you
muff follow the great man into the re-
tired apartment, where he lays aside his
difguiie. You muff not only be able to
penetrate into the interior of families,
but you mufft have a faculty by which
you can look into the inside of hearts.
Were you endowed with such a power,
you would mofft commonly behold good
men, in proportion to their goodness,
satisfied and easy.; you would behold
atrocious finners, always restless and un-
happy.

Unjufft are our complaints, of the pro-

mifcuous distribution made by Provi-
dence of its favours among men. From
superficial views such complaints arise.
The distribution of the goods of fortune,
indeed, may often be proniicuous; that

is,

s E R M. is, disproportioned to the moral charac-
5vr. ters of men; but the allotment of real

happilcfs is never so. For to the' wicked
there is no peace. T/he are like the tronblied
Jll I 'wh7el it cannot reft. Ihey travel with
pain all their days. Troouble and alngz!hii
prevail a7gaif them. bTerron's make them
nf1ai on eve:;y idie.

oA drefl Jolaund is

in their ears; and they are in , reat fear
wherle no fear is.--Hitherto we hare
confidered Haman under the character of
a very wicked man, tormented by crimi-
nal palfions. Let us now confider him,
merely as a child of fortune, a prosper-
ous man of the world; and proceed to
ob!rve,

II. How unavailing worldly prosperity

is, since, in the midst of it, a single dif-
appointment is fuficient to embitter all
its pleaftires. We might at first imagine,
that the natural effet of prosperity would
be, to difFlfe over the mind a prevailing
fatisfadclon, which the lesser evils of life
could not ruffle or disturb. We might

I expeD,

expect, that as one in the full glow of s E R r.
health, despises the inclemency of wea- VIL.
ther; so one in poffeifion of all the advan-
tages of high power and station, should
disregard flight injuries; and, at peri:et
ease within himself, ihould view, in the
moif favourable light, the behaviour of
others around him. Such effecds would
indeed follow, if worldly prosperity con-
tained in itself the true principles of hu-
man felicity. But as it poffelfes them
not, the very reverse of those confequen-
ces generally obtains., Prosperity debili-
tates, instead of strengthening the mind.
Its most common effect is, to create an
extreme sensibility to the slightest wound.
It foments impatient desires; and raises
expectations which no success can satisfy.
It softers a false delicacy, which sickens
in the midst of indulgence. By repeat-
ed gratification, it blunts the feelings of
men to what is pleasing; and leaves them
unhappily acute to whatever is uneasy.
Hence, the gale which another would
scarcely feel, is, to the profpcrous, a rude

A a tempest.

SE R M. tempest. Hence, the rofe-leaf doubled
vn. below them on the couch, as is told of

the effeminate Sybarite, breaks their reft.
Hence, the difrefped thown by Mordecai,
preyed with such violence on the heart of
Haman. Upon no principle of reason
can we assign a fuflicient cause for all the
distress which this incident occasioned to
him. The cause lay not in the external
incident. It lay within himself; it aroie
from a mind distempered by prosperity.

Let this example correct that blind

eagerness, with which we rush to the
chace of worldly greatness and honours.
I fay not, that it should altogether divert
us from pursuing them; since, when en-
joyed with temperance and wisdom, they
may doubtless both enlarge our utility,
and contribute to our comfort. But let it
teach us, not to over-rate them. Let it
convince us, that unless we add to them
the necessary correctives of piety and vir-
tue, they are, by themselves, more likely
to render us wretched, than to make us
happy.

Let

Let the memorable fate of Haman fug- s E R M.

geli to us alib, how often, besides cor- VI.
rupting the mind, and engendering in-
ternal misery, they lead us to precipices,
and involve us in ruin. At the moment
when Fortune seemed to finile upon him,
with the most serene and fettled aspect,
file was digging in secret the pit for his
fall; fle was weaving around his head
the web of deftrudion. Snccefs inflam-
ed his pride ; pride inspired him with
insatiable thirst of revenge ; the revenge
which, for the fake of one man, lic fought
to execute on a Lhole nation, inccenfed
the Queen; and he is doomed to fuffir
the fame death, which he had prepared
for Mordecai.---Had Haman remained
in a private station, he might have ar-
rived at a peaceable old age. He might
have been, I fliall not fay, a good or a
happy man, yet probably less guilty by
far, and less wretched, than when placed
at the head of tihe greatest empire in the

East. I'Jo

hk:rocth what is good for w.an

i: this tli, all the da's of his vain life,
which he ji.cldeth'as a Jarlow ?

A a An

SE R M. An extensive contemplation of human
VII. affairs, will incline us to this conclusion,

that among the different conditions and
ranks of men, the balance of happiness
is preserved in a great measure equal; and
that the high and the low, the rich and
the poor, approach, in point of real enjoy-
ment, much nearer to each other, than is
commonly imagined. In the lot of man,
mutual compensations, both of pleasure
and of pain, universally take place. Pro-
vidence never intended, that any state
here lhould be either completely happy,
or entirely miserable. If the feelings of
pleasure are more numerous, and more
lively, in the higher departments of life,
fich also are those of pain. If greatness
flatters our vanity, it multiplies our dan-
gers. If opulence increases our gratifi-
cations, it increases, in the fame propor-
tion, our desires and demands. If the
poor are confined to a more narrow cir-
cle, yet within that circle lie most of
those natural fatisfadions, which, after
all the refinements of art, are found to

be

be the mofr genuine and true.-- n a S E RM.
state, therefore, where there is ncither so , ,,
much to be coveted on the one hand, nor
to be dreaded on the other, as at fi;l ap-
pears, how fubmiflive ought we to be to
the difpof al of Providence! how temper-
ate in our desires and pursuits ! how
much more attentive to preserve our vir-
tue, and to improve our minds, than to
gain the doubtful and equivocal advan-
tages of worldly profperity!-But now,
laying aside the consideration of Hamnan's
great crimes; laying aside his high pro-
fpeiity; viewing him simply as a man,
let us observe from his history,

III. How weak human nature is, which,

in the absence of real, is thus prone to
create to itself imaginary woes, 11/ t:his
availeth me notlhing, J long as I fee l;o:''e-
cai the Jew fitting at the Kin1g's gae.-
What was it, 0 Haman! to thee, thoxluh
Mordecai had continued to fit there, aiil
neglected to do thee homage ? W\ould the
banquet have been on that account the

less

s E R M. less magnificent, thy palace less splendid,

or thy retinue less numerous? Could the
difrefpec[ of an obscure stranger dilho-
nour the favourite of a mighty King ? In
the midst of a thousand fubmiflive cour-
tiers, was one fullen countenance an ob-
jec worthy of drawing thy notice, or of
troubling thy repose ?-Alas ! in Haman
we behold too jlft a picture of what of-
ten passes within ourselves. We never
know what it is to be long at ease. Let
the world cease from changing around us.
Let external things keep that situation in
which we most wish them to remain; yet
somewhat from within shall soon arise, to
disturb our happiness. A ilirdcecai ap-
pears, or seems to appear, ftting at the
gate. Some vexation, which our fancy
has either entirely created, or at leafi has
unreasonably aggravated, corrodes us in
secret; and until that be removed, all
that we enjoy availeth us nothiJng. Thus,
while we are inceflantly complaining of
the vanity and the evils of human life,
we make that vanity, and we increase

those

those evils. Unskilled in the art of extract- s E R L\.
ing happiness from the object s around us, x

'.

our ingenuity folcly appears in convert-
ing them into misery.

Nor let it be thought that troubles of

this kind are incident only to the great
and the mighty. Though they, perhaps,
from the intemperance of their pafnfons,
are peculiarly exposed to them, yet the
difcaie ifc!lf belongs to human nature,
and spreads through all ranks. In the
humble, and seemingly quiet shade of
private life, difcontcnt broods over its
imaginary sorrows; preys upon the citi-
zen, no less than upon the courtier; and
often teems with paflions, equally malig-
nant in the cottage and in the palace.
Having once seized the mind, it tinges
with its own black colour every fur-
rounding object; it every where searches
out materials for itself; and in no directi-
on more frequently employs its unhappy
ac'ivity, than in creating divisions amongst
mankind, and in magnifying flight pro-
vocations into mortal injuries. Those self-

created

S E R M. created miseries, imaginary in the cause,
VII. but real in the ihffering, will be found to

form a proportion of human evils, not
inferiour, either in fevcrity or in number,
to all that we endure from the unavoid-
able calamities of life. In situations where
much comfort might be enjoyed, this
man's superiority, and that man's nc-
glecr, our jealousy of a-friend, our hatred
of a rival, an imagined affront, or a mif-
taken point of honour, allow us no re-
pose. Hence, discords in families, ani-
mofities among friends, and wars among
nations. Hence, Haman miserable in the
midlt of all that greatness could beftovw
Hence, multitudes in the most obscure
stations, for whom Providence seemed to
have prepared a quiet life, no less eager
in their petty broils, nor lets tormented by
their paflions, than if princely honours
were the prize for which they contended.

FRO a this train of observation, which

the Text has suggested, can we avoid re-
efleing upon the dilbrdcr in which hu-

I man

man nature plainly appears at prcent to S E rt a
lie? We have beheld, in Iaman, the pie- ,IJ-
ture of that misery which ariL's i"o; e il
patlionls; of that u:happincfs, which L,
incident to the highe 't

pri- i tn;lai

discontent, which is commcon to ev r7
late. Whether vw coniider lIim as a
bad man, a profprous man, or I:mr-
as a man, in every light ",, e e ,

: toli rea-

son too weal: for pali;on. iL.5 is tihe
source of the reignir evri; thi is the
root of the univerial cli. ;. T'e oray
of Haman only ihows us ;:lit hum!an
nature has, too ,enerall, aL.ari l to
be, in every age. Hence, vcn ; read
the hiflory of nat;on, v\ha do v:e re.ad
hut the hiftorv of th e

.ollis a.

of men ? We ma-y din,,if; thof rcccre:l
transactions, by calling te them the iL:-'!'?.s
of statesmen, and the explon s of cc..' r
ors ; but they are, in trLut, 0no c(;'i t:lan
the efforts of discontent to efcae fryc;- ;'i-
misery, and the fPrugges of cCnt' n
pafions among unlhappy mn. i -c i-
story of mankind has ever bei n a c:-'i;

PB 1h ;.:;d

S E R M. nued tragedy; the world, a great theatre
VII. exhibiting the fane repeated scene, of the

follies of men lhaoting forth into guilt,
and of their paflions fermenting, by a
quick proceis, inco misery.

But can we believe, that the nature of

man came sorihd in this state from the
hands of its gracious Creator ? Did he
frame this world, and store it with in-
habitants, solely that it might be re-
plenilhed witl crimes and misfortunes
-In the moral, as well as in the natural
world, we may plainly dicfern the signs
of fom-, violent convulsion, which has
siattered the original workmanship of the
Almighty. Amidst this wreck of human
nature, traces fiill remain which indicate
its Author. Those high powers of con-
science and reason, that capacity for hap-
piness, that ardour of enterprize, that
glow of afrfcdion, which often break
through the gloom of human vanity and
guilt, are like the fcattcrcd columns, the
broken archcs, and defaced sculptures of
some falen temple, whose ancient fplen-

dour

dour appears amidst its ruins. So coi- S E...
fpicuous in human nature are tlhoif cha- r
racters, both of a highl origin, and of a de-
graded (fate, that, by many rcligious fcds
throughout the earth, they have been i'cen
and confeled. A tradition seems to 1-ave
pervaded almofi all nations, that tle hu-
man race had eicher through Ibme of-
fence forfeited, or through iboe misfor-
tune loft, that station of prinev-al Ihoncur
which they once polleffii . But wv!ile,
from this dodrine, ill undceriood, and in-
volved in many flibulous tales, the nati-
ons wandering in Pagan dairnefi could
draw no confrcuences that were jul[;
while, totally igno-ant of thec nature of
the disease, they Ibught in vain ior the
remed ,; the -m: divine revclatio :n iici
has iniformed us in what manner cu;' apo-
ftacy arose, from the a.ufi of cur rational
powers, has ilnfrutlcd u also hovw wc. Inay
be refiored to virtue, and to hapli-;.:'.

LET us, thleefore, t.udy to ilmprove
the afliftance which this revelation ;,-

B b 2 for'ds

S E RI . fords, for the restoration of our nature,
Vn1. and the recovery of our felicity. With

humble and grateful minds, let us apply
to those medicinal springs which it hath
opened for curing the disorders of our
heart and pailions. In this view, let us,
with reverence, look up to that Divine
Personage, who descended into this world
on purpoif to be the light, and the life of
mren; who came, in the fulness of grace
and truth, to repair the dyblations of mat
generations, to reitore order among the
works of God, and to raise up a new
earth, and new heavens, wherein righteoiz-
1less /Jouhld ddwell for ever. Under his
tuition let us put ourselves; and, amidst
the storms of passion to which we are here
exposed, and the slippery paths vhich we
are left to tread, never trust prefumptu-
oufly to our own underfianding. Thank-
ful that a Heavenly Conductor vouchsafes
his aid, let us earnefily pray, that from
him may descend divine light to guide
our steps, and divine ftrergth to fortis3
our minds. Let us pray, that his grace

mayi

may keep us from all intemperate pas- S E RM.
sions, and mistaken pursuits of plcafure; VI
that, whether it {hall be his will to give
or to deny us earthly profricrity, he may
blefi us with a calm, a iund, and well
regulated mind; .may give us mo!dera-
tion in success, and fortitude under difap-
pointment; and may enable us lb to take
warning from the crimes and miserics of
others, as to escape the snares of guiit.

W H I L E we thus maintain a due de-

pendence on God, let us alib exert our-
selves with care in acting our own p:art.
Froin the whole of what hlas becn siid,
this great inrencth e hap-
piness of every man depends more upon
the slate of his own mind, than upon a;ny
one external chicumnfance; nlay, more than
upon all external things put together. V'e
have seen, that inordinate paiions are the
great disturbers of life ; and tlat, unlc's
we possess a good conf;ience, and a well-
governed mind, diicontent will blatl eve-
ry enjoyment, and the highest prosperity

wil

SE RM. will prove only disguised misery. Fix
VIi. then this conclusion in your minds, that

the deftruAtion of your virtue, is the de-
ftlruion of your peace. Ieep thy heart
*with all diligence ; govern it with the
greatest care; for ont of it arc the iJues
of life. -In no station, in no period, think
yourselves secure from the dangers which
spring from your pailions. Every age,
and every station, they beset; from youth
to grey hairs, and from the peafint to
the prince.

At your first setting out in life, efpe-

cially, when yet unacquainted with the
world and its lhares, when every pleasure
enchants with its finile, and every object
Ihines with the gloss of novelty; beware
of the seducing appearances which fur-
round you, and recollec what others
have fulfered from the power of head-
strong desire. If you allow any passion,
even though ranked among those which
are innocent, to acquire an abfo!ute as-
cendant, your inward peace will be im-
paired. But if any, which have the taint

of

of guilt, take early pofiefrion of your SE R M
mind, you may date fiom that moment
the ruin of your tranquillity. Nor with
the season. of youth does the peril end.
To the impetuosity of youthful dci-re,
succeed the more fober, but no leis dan-
gerous, attachments of advancing years;
when the paflions which are conneced
with -intercf, and ambition, begin their
rcign, and too frequently extend t;hir
malignant influence, een over thole pe-
riods of life which ought to be nmoc tran-
quil. From the first to the lait of rna s
abode on earth, the discipline mru l n-ever
be relaxed, of guarding the heart fi-r;o the
dominion of pallion. Eager pi"Tions, an" l
violent defuies, were not ma-de for mn:.;.
They exceed his sphere. They find .:o
adequate objects on earth ; and of couirf
can be productive of nothing but mifcry.
The certain confequcnce of induilgng
them is, that there Ilhall come an evil
day, when the anguifi of di.i-ppoint-
ment fliall drive us to ackpiowledge, that
all which we enjoy availeth us nothing.

You

S E R t,. You are not to imagine, that the warn-
RVII ings which I have given in this discourse,

are applicable only to the cafe of such
signal offenders as he was, of whom the
Text treats. Think not, as I ani afraid
too many do, that, because your paifi-
ons have not hurried you into atrocious
deeds, they have therefore wrought no
mischief, and have left no fling behind
them. By a continued series of loole,
though apparently trivial, gratifications,
the heart is often as thoroughly corrupt-
ed, as by tle commission of any one of
those enormous crimes which spring from
great ambition, or great revenge. Habit
gives the passions strength, while the ab-
fence of glaring guilt seemingly justifies
them ; and, unawakened by remorle, the
finner proceeds in his course, till he wax
bold in guilt, and become ripe for ruin.
For, by gradual and latent steps, the de-
ftrucion of our virtue advances. Did
the evil unvail itself at the beginning:
Did the florm which is to overthrow our
peace, discover, as it rose, all its horrours,

Iprcautidons

precautions would more frequently be s E .
taken against it. But we are impercep- -
tibly betrayed; and from one licentious
attachment, one criminal passion, are,
by a train of cornfequcnces, drawn on
to another, till the government of our
minds is irrecoverably loft. The enti-
cing and the odious passions are, in this
respect, similar in their process ; and,
though by different roads, conduct at
last to the fame issue. David, when he
first beheld Bathfhleba, did not plan the
death .of Uriah. Haman was not deli-
vered up all at once to the madners of
revenge. His pafions rose with the rif-
ing tide of prosperity; and pride com-
pleated what prosperity began. What
was originally no more than difpleafire
at Mordecai's difrefpcdc, increased with
every invitation le rccei-cd to the ban-
quet of the King; till it impelled him to
devise the ilaughlter of a whole nation,
and ended in a dcgree -of rage, which
confounded his reason, ?nd hurried him
to ruin. In this manner, cvery ,crimi-

C :

SERM. nal pafion, in its progress, swells and
VII. blackens; and what was at first a fmnall

cloud, such as the Prophet's servant saw,
no bigger than a man's hand, rising from the
Jea *, is soon found to carry the tempest
in its womb.

'* Kings wxiii. 44.

SER-

# SERMON VIII. On our IGNORANCE of GOOD and EVIL in this Life. ECCLES. vi. 12. Who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all the days of his vain life, which he spendeth as a shadow?

203

S E R M,O N VIII.
On our IGNORANCE of GOOD and

EVIL in this Life.

ECCLES. Vi. I2.
Who knoweth what is good for man in this

life, all the days of his vain life, which
he fpendeth as a Jhadow ?
T H E measure according to which s E RM.

knowledge is dispensed to man, as- VIII.

fords conspicuous proofs of divine wis-
dom. In many instances we clearly per-
ceive, that either more or less would have
proved detrimental to his state; that en-
tire ignorance would have deprived him
of proper motives to acion; and that
complete discovery would have raised
him to a sphere too high for his pre-

C c 2 sent

SERM, sent powers. He is, therefore, permitted

,VIII, to know only in putt, ;dnd to fee tlJ, ogb

a glafd, darkly. He is left in that fRate
of conjecture, and partial information,
which, though it may occasionally sub-
jed him to distress, yet, on the whole, con-
duces most to his improvement which
affords him knowledge fifficient for the
purposes of virtue, and of aAive life,
without disturbing the operations of his
mind, by a light too bright and daz-
Ainug. This evidently holds, with refpert
to that degree of concealment which now
covers the great laws of Nature, the de-
crees of the Supreme Being, the state of
the 'invisible world, the future events
of our own life, and the thoughts and
designs which pass within the breasts of
others *

SBu there is an ignorance of another

kind, with refpe& to which the applica-
tion of this remark may appear more du-
bious; the ignorance under which men
labour concerning their happiness in the
present life, and the means of attaining

it,
* Vil. Ser m. IV.

it. If there be foundation for Solomon's s E R r
complaint in the Text, whis knvlctletb w t IIIu.
is good far man ill tis life ? this confe-
quence may be thought inevitably to fol-
low, that the days oJ' bis li/,' mull be vain
in every sense; not only because they are
fleeting, but because they are empty too,
like the J73adow. For, to what purpoIi
are all his laboiurs in the puffuit of an
objec., which it is not in his power tb
discover or afcertain?-Let us then feri-
oufly enquire, what account can be given
of our present ignorance, refpecling whal.
is good for us in this life; whether no-
thing be left, but only to wander ili
uncertainty amidst this darkness, and to
lament it as the fad consequence of oui
fallen state; or whether such inftru&'-
ons may not be derived from it, as give
ground for acknowledging, that by this,
as by all its other appointments, the wis-
dom of Providence brings real good ott
of seeming evil. I lhall, in order to de-
termine this point, first endeavour to illu-
ftrate the doctrine of the Text, that we kno ly

noti

SERM. not, or at most know imperfectly, 'what
VI,. ;is good for us in this life : I {hall next

explain the causes to which this defect
in our knowledge is owing: And then,
shall {how the purposes which it was in-
tended to serve, and the effects which it
ought to produce on our conduct.

TH E whole history of mankind seems

a comment on the doctrine of the Text.
When we review the course of human
affairs, one of the firit objects which eve-
ry where attracts our notice is, the mif-
taken judgment of men concerning their
own interest. That fore evil, which So-
lomon long ago remarked with refpet to
riches, of their being kept by the owners
thereof to their hurt, takes place equally
with refpecd to dominion and power, and
all the splendid objects and high flati-
ons of life. We every day behold men
climbing, by painful fleps, to that co-
veted height, which, in the end, renders
their fall more severe, and their ruin
more conspicuous. But it is, not to high

ftationi

fations that the doArinc of the Text is s E R M.
limited. In the crimes by which too of- VI1.
ten these are gained, and in the misfor-
tunes which they afterwards bring forth,
the greater part of every audience may
think themselves little concerned. Leav-
ing such themes, therefore, to the poet
and the historian, let us come nearer to
ourselves, and survey the ordinary walk
of life.

Around us, we every where behold a

busy multitude. Relflefs and uneafv in
their present situation, they are incelihnt-
ly employed in accomplishing a change
of it; and, as soon as their winl is ful-
filled, we difccrn, by their behaviour, that
they are as diffltisfied as they CCere be-
fore. Where they cxpected to have found
a paradise, they find a desert. The man
of business pines for leifurc. The Icifure
for which he had longed, proves an irk-
some gloom; and, through want of em-
ployment, he languifles, sickens, and dies.
The man of retirement fancies no Rfate to
be so happy, as that of acive life. But

he

9E R M. lhe has not engaged long in the tumultt

VL and contests of the world, until he finds

caufc to look back with regret on the calm
hours of his former privacy and retreat,
,Beauty, wit, eloquence, and fame, are
eagerly coveted by men in every rank of
life. They are the parent's fondest wish for
his child; the ambition of the young, and
the admiration of the old. And yet, in what
munmberlefs instances have they proved,
to thlof who possessed them, no other than
fining frares; fedudions to vice, infti-
gations to folly, and, in the end, sources
of misery? Comfortably might their days.
have passed, had they been kefs coifpicu-
eus. But the diflinctions which brought
them forth to notice, conferred splendour,
·and withdrew happiness. Long life is,
of all others, the most general, and seem-
ingiy the tmxoft innocent, -objeat cf desire.
With refpe& to this too, -we so frequently
*err, that it would have Iecn .a blessing
t.o many to have had their wi'ih denied.
There was a period, -when they might
.ave quitted the lag-e with honour, :ar4

i .

in peace. But by living too long, they S E R M.
outlived their reputation; outlived their VII.
family, their friends, and comforts; and
reaped nothing from the continuance of
days, except to feel the pressure of age,
to taste the dregs of life, and to. behold a
wider compass of human misery.

Man walketh ill a vain Jiew. His fears
are often as vain as his wiflies. As what
flattered him in expectation, frequently
wounds him in possession; so the event
to which he looked forward with an
anxious and fearful eye, has often, when
it arrived, laid its terrours aside; nay,
has brought in its train unexpected blef-
sings. Both good and evil are beheld at
a distance, through a perfpetive which
deceives. The colours of objects when
nigh, are entirely different from what they
appeared when viewed in futurity.

THE fat then being undoubtedly cer-
tain, that it is common for men to be
deceived in their profpets of happiness,
let us next enquire into the causes of that

D d deception.

SE R M. deception. Let us attend to those peculiar
VITI. circmiftances in our iate, which render

us such incompetent judges of future good
or evil in this life.

Firit, We are not sufficiently acquainted

with ourselves, to foresee our future feel-
ings. We judge by the sensations of the
present moment; and, in the fervour of
desire, pronounce confidently concerning
the desired objea. But we reflect not,
that our minds, like our bodies, undergo
great alteration from the situations into
which they are thrown, and the progrcf-
five stages of life through which they
pals. Hence, concerning any condition
which is yet untried, we conjecture with
much uncertainty. In imagination, we
carry our present wants, inclinations, and
sentiments, into the ltate of life to which
we aspire. But no sooner have we entered
on it, than our sentiments and inclina-
tions change. New wants and desires
arise; new objects are required to gratify
them; and by consequence our old dif-
satisfaCtion returns; and the void, which

w as

was to have been filled, remains as great s E R M.
as it was before. VIII.

But, next, supposing our knowledge of

ourlelves fuificient to direc us in the
choice of happiness, yet still we are liable
to err, from our ignorance of the con-
necions which subsist between our own
condition and that of others. No indi-
vidual can be happy, unless the circum-
stances of tholf around him be so adj.ufed
as to conspire with his interest. For, in
human society, no happiness or misery
stands unconnected, and independent.
Our fortunes are interwoven by threads
innumerable. We touch one another on
all fides. One man's misfortune or fuc-
cess, his wisdom or his folly, often, by its
conlequences, reaches through multitudes.
Such a system is far too complicated for
our arrangement. It requires adjustments
beyond our flkll and power. It is a chaos
of events, into which our eye cannot pierce;
and is capable of regulation, only by him.
who perceives at one glance the relation
of each to all.

D d n Farther,

$E R M. Farther, As we are ignorant of the
VIII. events which will arise from the combi-

nation of our circumstances with those of
others, so we are equally ignorant of the
influence which the present incidents of
our life may have upon those which are
future. The important question is not,
What is good for a man one day; but
what is good for him all the days of his
life? Not, what will yield him a few scat-
tered pleasures; but what will render his
life happy on the whole amount? And is he
able to answer that question, who knoweth
not what one day may bring forth; who
cannot tell, whether the events of it may
not branch out into consequences, which
shall atfune a direction quite opposite to
that in which they set forth, and thall
spread themselves over all his life to come ?
There is not any present moment that is
unconneced with some future one. The
life of every man is a continued chain of
incidents, each link of which hangs upon
the former. The transition from cause to
effect, from event to event, is often car-

ried

ried on by secret steps, which our fore- sER .
fight cannot divine, and our sagacity is vIII.
unable to trace. Evil may, at iome fu-
ture period, bring forth good; and good
may bring forth evil, both equally unex-
pected. Had the Patriarch, Jofepih, con-
tinued to loiter under his father's fond
indulgence, he might have lived an ob-
fcure and insignificant life. From the pit
and the prison, arose the incidents which
made him the ruler of Egypt, and the lt-
viour of his father's house.

Lastly, Supposing every other incapa-

city to be removed, our ignorance of the
dangers to which our spiritual slate is
exposed, would disqualify us for judging
soundly concerning our true happineis.
Higher interests, than those of the present
world, are now depending. All that is
done or fiffered by us here, ultimately
refers to that immortal world, for which
good men are trained up, under the care
of an Almighty Parent. We are as in-
competent judges of the measures ne-
ceffary to be pursued for this end, as

children

SERM- children are, of the proper condua to be
vi1., held in their education. We foresee the

dangers of our spiritual, still less than
we do those of our natural fate; because
we are less attentive to trace them. \Ve
are still more exposed to vice than to mi-
fery; because the confidence which we
place in our virtue, is yet worse founded
than that which we place in our wisdom,
Can you esteen him prosperous, who.is
raised to a situation which flatters his pas-
sions, but which corrupts his principles,
disorders his temper, and, finally, overfcts
his virtue ? In the ardour of pursuit, how
little are thefe'effeds foreseen ? And yet,
how often are they accomplihed, by a
change of condition ? Latent corruptions
are called forth; feeds of guilt are quick-
ened into life; a growth of crimes arises,
which, had it not been for the fatal cul-
ture of prosperity, would never have seen
the light. How often is man, boastful as
he is of reason, merely the creature of his
fortune; formed, and moulded, by the in-
cidents of his life!-Hazael, when yet

a

a private man, detested the thoughts of E RM.
cruelty. Thou Jhalt flay the younz men V
with the sword, said the Prophet: Thou
fialt dafl the children, and rip up the wo-
len with child. Is thy servant a dog, repli-
ed Hazael, that heJiJould do these things?
But no sooner was he cloathed with the
coveted purple, than it seemed to taint
his nature. He committed the crimes of
which, at a diflance, he believed himself
incapable; and became the bloody ty-
rant, whose character his foul once ab-
horred '.

SUCH then at present is man; thus in-
capable of pronouncing with certainty
concerning his own good or evil. Of
futurity he discerns little; and even that
little he fees through a cloud. Ignorant
of the alteration which his sentiments
and defircs will undergo from new situ-
ations in life; ignorant of the confe-
quences which will follow from the com-
bination of his circumstances with those
of others around him; ignorant of the

influence
2 Kings viii. 12, 13.

SE R M. influence which the present. may have on
VIII. the future events of his life; ignorant

of the effect which a change of condition
may produce on his moral character, and
his eternal interests; How can he know
what is good for him all the rdays of his
vain life, which he fpendcth as a Jhladow?

Instead of only lamenting this ignc-

rance, let us, in the last place, confider how
it ought to be improved; what duties it
suggests, and what wife ends it was in-
tended by Providence to promote.

I. LET this doctrine teach us to pr6-

ceed with caution and circumfpec'ion,
through a world, where evil so frequent-
ly lurks under the form of good. To be
humble and modest in opinion, to be vi-
gilant and attentive in condud, to dif-
trust fair appearances, and to restrain rafl
desires, are inftruiEtons which the dark-
ness of our present state flould strongly
inculcate. God hath appointed our situ-
ation to be so ambiguous, in order botli
to call forth the exertion of thofc intelli-

2 gent

gent powers which he hath given us, and s E R M.
to enforce our dependance on his gracious VI.
aid. It is not in mai that iwalketh, to direct
his Jieps. Surrounded with so many be-
wildering paths, among whlich the witift
are ready to firay, how earnestly illould
w\e implore, and how thankfully ihould we
receive, that divine illumination, which is
promised in scripture to the pious and
the humble! The Jicret of the Lord is with
them that fear him. ItL will guide them
with his coulfel. IHe will teach t the th
way that they Jhould/ chzfi. But what
musts be the fate of him, who, amidst all
the dangers attending human conducl ,
neither looks up to Heaven for direction,
nor.propei'ly exerts that reaion which
Gcl hath given him ? If to the moil
diligent enquirer, it proves '! difficult a:
taifl to difftinguih true good from those
fallacious appearances with which it is
ever blended, how flould he discover it,
who brings neither patience nor attenti-
on to the search, who applies to no other
counsellor than present pleasure, and, with

F. e a

S E R M. a rafli and credulous mind, delivers him-
VII. iIelf up to every suggestion of desire?

This admonition I particularly direct

to those, who are in a period of life too
often characterized by forward prefump-
rion, and headlong pursuit. The felf-con-
ceit of the young, is the great source of
those dangers to which they are exposed;
and it is peculiarly unfortunate, that the
age which stands most in need of the
counsel of the wife, mhould be the mofi
prone to contemn it. Confident in the opi-
nions which they adopt, and in the mea-
lures which they pursue, they seem as if
they understood Solomon to fay, not,
VWh7o knoweth, but, Who is ignorant of
what is good for 1an all the days o'f his
life? The blils to be aimed at, is, in
their opinion, fully apparent. It is not
the danger of mistake, but the failure oi
filccefs, which they dread. Activity to
seize, not sagacity to discern, is the only
requisite which they value.- How long
flall it be, ere the fate of your predccel:
fors in the fame course, teach you ivil

donm

dom ? How long shall the experience of s E r. M.
all ages, continue to lift its voice to you VI
in vain ? Beholding the ocean on which
you are embarked, covered with wrecks,
are not those fatal signals itfficient to ad-
moniflh you of the hidden rock? If, in
Paradifc itself, there was a tree which
bare fruit fair to the eye, but mortal
in its effetas, how much more, in this
fallen state, may fuich deceiving appear-
ances be expeced to abound ? The whole
state of Nature, is now become a feene
of delusion to the fential mind. Hardily
any thing is what it appears to be : And
vhat flatters most, is always farthest froni
reality. There are voices which sing a-
round you; but whose strains allure to
ruin. There is a banquet spread, where
poison is in every diii. There is a couch
which invites you to rcpoie; but to fluin-
ber upon i;, is death. In fhch a fitua-
tion, be n,'t hJih mi)!b'd, tutt f./'.. Let
sobriety temper your unwary ardour.
Let modesty check your rallh prefump-
tion. Let wisdom be the ofoipring of

E e 2 rcflccion

SERM. reflecion now, rather than the fruit of
VIII. bitter experience hereafter.

II. LET our ignorance of what is good

or evil, correct anxiety about worldly fuc-
cess. As iafhnefs is the vice of youth, the
opposite extreme of immoderate care is
the vice of advancing years. The doc-
trine which I have illustrated, is equally
adapted for checking both. Since we are
so often betrayed into evil, by the mif-
taken pursuit of good, care and attention
are requisite, both in forming our choice,
and conducting our pursuit; but since
our attention and care are liable to be so
often frustrated, they should never rife
into trouble of mind.

The ignorance in which we are left con-

cerning good and evil, is not such as to
supersede prudence in conduct: For wis-
dom is still found to excelfolly, as far as
light excelletlh darkness. But it is that de-
gree of uncertainty which ought to render
us temperate in pursuit; which ought
to calm the perturbation of hope and fear,

and

and to cure the pain of anxiety. Anxiety s E R M.
isthe poison of human life. It is the pa- III.
rent of many fins, and of more miseries.
In a world where every thing is so doubt-
full; where you may succeed in your
wifih, and be miserable; where you may
be disappointed, and be blef through that
disappointment ; what means this rfcilefs
stir and commotion of mind ? Can your
follicitude alter the course, or unravel the
intricacy of human events ? Can your
curiosity pierce through the cloud which
God hath made impenetrable to mortal
eye ?-To provide againfr every apparent
danger, by the employment of the most
promising means, is the office of wiidom.
But at this point, wilfdom flops. It com-
mands you to retire, after you lhave done
all that was incumbent on you, and to
poffeis your mind in peace. By going be-
yond this point; by giving yourselves up
to immoderate concern about unknown
events, you can do nothing to advance
your success, and you do much to ruin
your peace. You plant within your breast

the

S E R M. the thorn which is long to gall you. To
VII. the vanity of life, you add a vexation of

spirit, which is wholly of your own crea-
tion, not of God's appointment. For the
dubious goods of this world were never
designed by God to raise such eager at-
tachment. They were given to man for
his occasional refrefllment, not for his
chief felicity. By setting an excessive va-
lue upon objects which were intended on-
ly for your secondary regard, you change
their nature. Seeking more satisfaction
from them than they are able to afford,
you receive less than they might give.
From a mistaken care to secure your hap-
piness, you bring upon yourselves certain
misery.

III. LET our ignorance of good and evil,
determine us to follow Providence, and to
resign ourselves to God. One of the most
important leflbns which can be given to
man, is resignation to his Maker; and no-
thing inculcates it more, than the experi-
ence of his own inability to guide him-

self.

-elf.-You know not what is good for s E R M.
you, in the future periods of life. Bunt l .
God perfeccly knows it; and if you faith-
fully serve him, you have reafbn to believe
that he will always consult it. Before
him lies the whole succession of events,
which are to fill up your existence. It is
in his power, to arrange and model them
at his pleasure; and so to adapt one thing
to another, as to fulfil his promise of mak-
ing them all work together for good to
thoJe who love him. Here then, amidPl
the agitations of desire, and the perplexi-
ties of doubt, is one fixed point of reft.
By this let us abide; and difiniis our
anxiety about things uncertain and un-
known. Acquaint youlrelves with God, and
be at peace. Secure the one thing mcCed-
si!. Study to acquire an interest in the
divine favour: And you may safely fur-
render yourselves to the divine admini-
ftration.

When tempted to repine at your con-

dition, reflet how uncertain it is, whether
you flould have been happier in any

other.

S E R M. other. Remembering the vanity of many
VIlI. of your former wishes, and the fallacy

which you have so often experienced in
your schemes of happiness, be thankful
that you are placed under a wiser direc-
tion than your own. Be not too parti-
cular inyour petitions to Heaven, concern-
ing your temporal interest. Suffer God
to govern the world according to his own
plan; and only pray, that he would be-
flow what his unerring wisdom fees to
be best for you on the whole. In a word,
Commit your way unto the Lord. Trnif il
him, and do good. Follow wherever his
Providence leads; comply with whatever
his will requires; and leave all the reft to
him.

IV. LET our ignorance of what is good

for us in this life, prevent our taking any
unlawful ftep, in order to compass our
most favourite designs. Were the finner
bribed with any certain and unqueftion-
able advantage; could the means which
he employs ensure his success, and could

I ~ ~
~ that

that success ensure his comfort; he might S E R M.
have somewhat to offer in apology for de- VIII
viating from the path of virtue. But the
doctrine which I have illustrated, deprives
him of every such excuse, and places his
folly in the most striking light. He climbs
the steep rock, and treads on the edge of
a precipice, in order to catch a shadow.
He has cause to dread, not only the un-
certainty of the event which he willes to
accomplish, but the nature also of that
event when accomplilhed. He is not only
liable to that disappointment of success,
which so often frustrates all the designs of
men; but liable to a disappointment still
more cruel, that of being successful and
miserable at once. Riches and pleas res
are the chief temptations to criminal deeds.
Yet those riches, when obtained, may very
possibly overwhelm him with unforeseen
miseries. Those pleasures may cut ihort
his health and life. And is it for such
doubtful and fallacious rewards, that the
deceiver fills his mouth with lies, the
friend betrays his benefacor, the apostate

F f renounces

S E R M. renounces his faith, and the assassin covers
VITo. himself with blood ?

Whoever commits a crime, incurs a

certain evil, for a most uncertain good.
What will turn to his advantage in the
course of this life, he cannot with any ai-
furance know. But this he may know, with
full certainty, that by breaking the divine
commandments, he will draw upon his
head that difpleafiire of the Almighty
which ihall crush him for ever. The ad-
vantages of this world, even when inno-
cently gained, are uncertain blessings;
when obtained by criminal means, they
carry a curie in their bosom. To the
virtuous, they are often no more than
chaff. To the guilty, they are always
poison.

V. LET our imperfect knowledge of

what is good or evil, attach us the more
to those few things, concerning which
there can be no doubt of their being tru-
ly good. Of temporal things, the cata-
logue of such as belong to this class, it

mufi

must be confefled, is iinall. Perhaps the SERM.
chief worldly good we flould wifll to VII.
enjoy, is a found mind in a found body.
Health and peace, a moderate fortune, and
a few friends, fum up all the undoubted
articles of temporal felicity. Wife was
the man who addcrfled this prayer to
God ; Remove far from me vanity and lies.
Give me neither poverty nor riches. Feed
me with food convenient for me. Left I be
full and deny thee, and fizy, who is the Lord?
or left I be poor and Jleal, ,and take the iname
of my God in vain . He whose wiflies, re-
ipecting the possessions of this world, are
the most reasonable and bounded, is like-
ly to lead the safest, and, for that reason,
the most desirable life. By aspiring too
high, we frequently miss the happiness,
which, by a less ambitious aim, we might
have gained. High happiness on earth, is
rather a piture which the imagination
forms, than a reality which is given to
the pofeffion of man.

But with regard to spiritual felicity, we
are not confined to such humble views.

F f Clear
e Prov. xxx.'8, 9.

S E R M. Clear and determinate objects are pro-
vmN. posed to our pursuit; and full scope is

given to the most ardent desire. The for-
givenefs of our fins, and the assistance of
God's holy grace, to guide our life; the
improvement of our minds, in knowledge
and wisdom, in piety and virtue; the
proteclion and favour of the great Father
of all, of the blessed Redeemer of man-
kind, and of the Spirit of fantification and
comfort; these are objecds, in the pursuit
of which there is no room for hesitation
and distrust, nor any ground for the que-
stion in my Text, Who knoweth what is
good for man ? Had Providence spread an
equal obscurity over happiness of every
kind, we might have had some reason to
complain of the vanity of our condition.
But we are not left to so hard a fate. The
Son of God hath descended from heaven,
to be the Light of the world. He hath re-
moved that veil which covered true bliss
from the search of wandering mortals,
and hath taught them the way which
leads. to life. Worldly enjoyments are

flionll

flown to be hollow and deceitful, with SERM.
an express intention to direct their assec- vm.
tions towards those which are spiritual.
The fame discoveries which diminish the
value of the one, serve to increase that of
the other. Finally,

VI. LET our ignorance of what is good
or evil here below, lead our thoughts and
desires to a better world. I have endea-
voured to vindicate the wisdom of Provi-
dence, by flowing the many useful pur-
poses which this ignorance at present pro-
motes. It serves to check presumption
and raflhnefs, and to enforce a diligent
exertion of our rational powers, joined
with a humble dependance on divine aid.
It moderates eager passions rcfpicting
worldly success. It inculcates resignation
to the disposal of a Providence which is
much wiser than man. It restrains us
from employing unlawful means in order
to compass our most favourite designs.
It tends to attach us more closely to those
things which are unqueflionably good.

t

S E R M. It is therefore such a degree of ignorance,
vIIV. as suits the present circumstances of man

better than more complete information
concerning good and evil.

At the fame time, the causes which

render this obscurity neccefary, too plain-
ly indicate a broken and corrupted state
of human nature. They flow this life to
be a state of trial. They suggest the ideas
of a land of pilgrimage, not of the house
of reft. Low minded and base is he, who
aspires to no higher portion; who could
be satisfied to spend his whole existence
in chafing those treacherous appearances
of good, which so often mock his pursuit.
What shadow can be more vain, than the
life of the greatest part of mankind ? Of
all that eager and bufiling crowd which
we behold on the earth, how few discover
the path of true happiness ? How few can
we find, whose activity has not been mif-
employed, and whose course terminates
not in confessions of disappointment ? Is
this the state, are these the habitations, to
which a rational spirit, with all its high

hopes,

hopes, and great capacities, is to be limited S E R M.
for ever ?-Let us bless that God who VII.
hath set higher profiects before us;
who, by the death and refurretion of his
Son Jesus Christ, hath begotten Its to the
lively hope of an ilheritance incorruptible,
wndefiled, and that fadeth not avway, re-
J'rved in the heavens. Let us show our-
selves worthy of such a hope, by fettiln
our affections 1upon the things above, not upon
things on the earth. Let us wvalk by Jtith,
and not byfight ; and, amidst the obfciri-
ty of this faint and dubious twi!ight,
console ourselves with the expectation of a
brighter day which is soon to open. This
earth is the land of Ihadows. But we hope
to pass into the, world of realities ; where
the proper objects of human desire shall
be displayed ; where the substance of that
bliss fiall be found, whose image only we
now pursue; where no fallacious hopes
shall any longer allure, no smiling ap-
pearances hfall betray, no insidious joys
ihall fting; but where truth flall be in-

separably

SE R M. separably united with pleasure; and the
VIII. mists which hang over this preliminary

state being dissipated, the perfet know-
ledge of good fliall lead to the full enjoy-
ment of it for ever.

~I SER-

# SERMON IX. On RELIGIOUS RETIREMENT. PSALM iv. 4. Commune with your own heart, upon your bed, and be still.

233

S E R M 0 N IX.
On RELIGIOUS RETIREMENT.

PSALM iv. 4.
Commune with your owtn heart, ulpon j'our

bed, and be jfill.

UCH communing with themselves SE R M.
there has always been among man- lx.

kind; though frequently, God knows, to
no purpose, or to a purpose worse than
none. Could we discover the employments
of men in retirement, how often lhould we
find their thoughts occupied with fubjecds,
which they would be ashamed to own ?
What a large share have ambition and
avarice, at some times the grQflift pas-
sions, and at other times the meancft
trifles, in their solitary musings ? They

G g carry

S E R M. carry the world, with all its vices, into

X their retreat; and may be said to dwell

in the midst of the world, even when
they fedm to be alone.

This, surely, is not that fort of commun-
ing which the PfalmiIt recommends. For
this is not properly communing with our
heart, but rather, holding secret intcr-
course with the world. What the Pfal-
miff means to recommend, is religious re-
collecion; that exercise of thought which
is. conilected with the precept given in the
precceeding words, to jand in awe, and fin
not. It is to commune with ourselves un-
der the charaaer of 1iiritual and immor-
tal beings; and to tpoder thoJf paths of our
sect which are leading us to eternity. I
ihall, in the firl place, ihow the advan-
tages of fitch serious retirement and me-
ditation; and shall, in the second place,
point out some of the principal fubjecós
wlich ought to employ us in our retreat.

The advantages of retiring from the

world, to com1mine with our heart, will be
found to be great, whether we regard our

happiness

happiness in this world, or our prcpara- S e ;
tion for the world to come. lx.

LET US confider them, fiirf, with re-

spect to our happiness in this world. It
will readily occur to you, that an entire
retreat from worldly affairs is not lwhat
religion requires; nor does it even enjoin
a great retreat from them. Some stations
of life would not permit this ; and there
are few stations which render it necefla-
ry. The chief field, both of the duty and
of the improvement of man, lies in active
life. By the graces and virtues which
he exercises amidst his fellow-creatures,
he is trained up for heaven. A total re-
treat from the world, is so far firom be-
ing, according to the doctrine of die Ro-
milh Church, the perfec'ion of religion,
that, some particular cafes excepted, it is
no other than the abuie of it.

But, though entire retreat would lay us
aside fiom the part for which Providence
chiefly intended us, it is certain, that
without occasional retceat, we nulln a1c

G g h that

SE RM. that part very ill. There will be neither

IX. consistency in the condud, nor dignity in

the charaCter, of one who sets apart no
ihare of his time for meditation and re-
fledion. In the heat and bustle of life,
while passion is every moment throwing
false colours on the objects around us,
nothing can be viewed in a just light.
If you wifl that Reason Ihould exert her
native power, you must ftep aside from
the crowd, into the cool and silent ihade.
It is there that, with fober adnd steady eye,
ihe examines what is good or ill, what is
wife or foolish, in human conduct; flhe
looks back on the past, she looks forward
to the future, and forms plans, not for the
present moment only, but for the whole
of life. How should that man discharge
any part of his duty aright, who never
suffers hEs passions to cool ? And how
should his passions cool, who is engaged,
without interruption, in the tumult of
the world ? This incessant stir may be
called, the perpetual drunkenness of life.
It. raises that eager fermentation of fpi-

rit,

rit, which will be ever fending forth the s r. ? a
dangerous fumes of rallnefs and folly. Ix-
Whereas he who mingles religious re-
treat with worldly affairs, remains calm,
and master of himself. He is not whirled
round, and rendered giddy, by the agita-
tion of the world; but, from that sacred
retirement, in which he has been convcr-
sant among higher objects, comes forth
into the world with manly tranquillity,
fortified by the principles which he has
formed, and prepared for every occur-
rence that may befall.

As he who is unacquainted with retreat

cannot sustain any character with pro-
priety, so neither can he enjoy the world
with any advantage. Of the two clafles
of men who are most apt to be negligent
of this duty, the men of pleafire, and the
men of bufines, it is hard to fay which,
susser most, in point of enjoyment, from
that neglet. To the former, every mo-
ment appears to be loft, which partakes
not of the vivacity of amusement. To
connca one plan of gaiety with another,

S E R M. is their sole study; till, in a very short
IX. time, nothing remain but to tread the

fame beaten round; to enjoy what they
have already enjoyed, and to fee what
they have often seen. Pleasures thus
drawn to the dregs, become vapid and
tasteless. What might have pleated long,
if enjoyed with temperance, and mingled
with retirement, being devoured with
such eager hafle, speedily fhrfeits and
disgusts. Hence, these are the persons,
who, after having run through a rapid
course of pleasure, after having glittered
for a few years in the foremost line of
publick amusements, are the most apt to
fly at last to a melancholy retreat; not
led by religion or reason, but driven by
disappointed hopes, and exhausted spirits,
to the pensive conclusion, that all is vanity
and vexation of J/pl t.

If uninterrupted intercourse with the

world wears out the man of pleasure, it
no less oppresses the man of business and
ambition. The strongest spirits must at
length fink under it. The happiest tem-

per

per must be foured by inceflant returns ER RM.
of the opposition, the inconftlaicy, and OX.
treachery of men. For he who lives al-
ways in the buille of the world, lives in
. perpetual warfare. Here, an enemy
encounters; there, a rival supplants him.
The ingratitude of a friend flings him,
this hour; and the pride of a ihperiour
wounds him, the next. In vain he flies
for relief, to trifling amufiments. These
may afford a temporary opiate to care;
but they communicate no strength to the
mind. On the contrary, they leave it
more soft and defenceless, when the dif-
turbances of life renew their attacks.

Let him who wifiles for an effectual

cure to all the wounds which the world
can inflict, retire from intercourse with
men, to intercourse with God. When
he enters into his closet, and ihnuts the
door, let him Ihut out, at the fame time,
all intrusion of worldly care; and dwell
among objects divine and immortal.
Those fair prospects of order and peace,
flall there open to his view, which form

the

SERM. the most perfect contrast to the confu-

X. sion and misery of this earth. The ce-

leftial inhabitants quarrel not; among
them there is neither ingratitude, nor
envy, nor tumult. Men may harass one
another; but in the kingdom of God,
concord and tranquillity reign for ever.
-From such objects, there beams upon
the mind of the pious man, a pure and
enlivening light; there is diffused over
his heart, a holy calm. His agitated fpi-
rit re-afiumes its firmness, and regains its
peace. The world finks in its import-
ance; and the load of mortality and mi-
fery loses almost all its weight. The green
pqflures open, and the Jtill waters flow
around him, beside which the Shepherd
of Ifiael guides his flock. The disturb-
ances and alarms, so formidable to those
who are engaged in the tumults of the
world, seem to him only like thunder
rolling afar off; like the noise of distant
waters, whose found he hears, whose
course he traces, but whose waves touch
him not.- As religious retirement is

I ~ ~
~ thus

thus evidently conducive to our happi- S E R M.
ness in this life, so, Ix.

IN the second place, it is absolutely ne-

ceffary in order to prepare us for the life
to come. He who lives always in publick,
cannot live to his own foul. The world
licth in wickedlnefs; and with good reason
the Christian is exhorted, not to be con-.
formed to it, but tra)nsformned by the rencw-
ing of his mind. Our conversation and
intercourse with the world, is, in several
refpeds, an education for vice. From
our earliest youth, we are accustomed to
hear riches and honours extolled as the
chief pofleffions of man; and proposed to
us, as the principal aim of our future pur-
suits. We are trained up to look with ad-
miration on the flattering marks of di-
ftincion which they bestow. In the pur-
suit of those coveted advantages, we fee
the multitude around us eager and ser-
vent. Principles of duty we may, per-
haps, hear sometimes inculcated; but we
seldom behold them brought into compe-

H I tition

14'
S E R M. tition with worldly profit. The soft names,

iX[. and plausible colours, under which deceit,

fenluality, and revenge, are presented to
us in common discourse, weaken, by de-
grees, our natural sense of the diftinclion
between good and evil. We often met
with crimes authorized by high examples,
and rewarded with the carefies and finiles
of the world. We discover perhaps, at
last, that those whom we were taught to
reverence, and to regard as our patterns
of conduc', ac upon principles no purer
than those of others.--Thus breathing
habitually a contagious air, how certain
is our ruin, unless we sometimes retreat
from this pestilential region, and fcek for
proper correclives of the disorders which
are contracted there? Religious retirement
both abates the disease, and furnifihes the
remedy. It lessens the corrupting influ-
ence of the world ; and it gives opportu-
nity for better principles to exert their
power. He who is accustomed to turn
aside, and commune with himself, will,
sometimes at least, hear of truths which

the

the multitude do not tell him. A more s E R ..
Ibund inftruclor will life his voice, and lx.
awaken within the heart those latent fug-
geftions, which the world had overpower-
ed and fipprefled.

The acts of prayer and devotion, the

exercises of faith and repentance, all the
great and peculiar duties of the religion
of Christ, neceflrily filppoie retirement
from the world. This was one chief end
of their intlitution, that they migh. be
the means of occasionally 'eql:ctering us
from that great Icene of vice and folly,
the continued pretence of which is L)
hurtful. Solitude is the hallowed ground
which religion hath, in every age, chosen
for her own. There, her inspiration il;
felt, and her sacred mysteries elevate the
foul. There, falls the tear of contritionl;
there, rifes towards heaven the sigh of the
heart; there, melts the ibul with all the
tenderness of devotion, and pouli i-tflf
ibrth, before him who made, and him
who redeemed it. How can any one, -.'o
iS unacquainted with such empiloymcnt

H h 2 of

s E R M. of mind, be fit for heaven ? If heaven be

IX. the habitation of pure affections, and of

intellectual joy, could such a state be re-
lilhed by him who is always immersed
among sensible objets, and has never ac-
quired any taste for the pleasures of the
understanding, and the heart?

The great and the worthy, the pious

and the virtuous, have ever been addicted
to serious retirement. It is the charac-
tereftick of little and frivolous minds, to
be wholly occupied with the vulgar ob-
jects of life. Thcfe fill up their desires,
and supply all the entertainment which
their coarse apprehensions can relish. But
a more refined and enlarged mind leaves
the world behind it, feels a call for higher
pleasures, and seeks them in retreat. The
man of publick spirit has recourse to it,
in order to form plans for general good;
the man of genius, in order to dwell on
his favourite themes; the philosopher, to
pursue his discoveries; the faint, to im-
prove himself in grace. Iaac wSent out to
7eeditate in the fields, at the evening tide,

David,

David, amidst all the splendour of royalty, s E R M.
often bears witness, both to the pleasure Ix.
which he received, and the benefit which
he reaped, from devout meditation. I
collmmunted with my own heart, and m1 spirit
made dilig'ent arch. I thouehbt on my wys,
and turned mly feet unto God's teJlilmonies. hI
the mlultitude of thouhts wvithi2n me, his
conmforts delight my Joil. Our blefled Sa-
viour himself, though of all who ever li-
ved on earth he needed least the afliftance
of religious retreat, yer, by his frequent
pracice, has done it signal honour. Often
were the garden, the mountain, and the
silence of the night, fought by him, for
intercourse with Heaven. TWhen he had

ient the multitude away, he went up into a
mountain, apart, to pray.

The advantages of religious retire-

ment will still more clearly appear, by
confidering, as was proposed, in the next
place, some of those great objects which
flould there employ our thoughts. I
fliall mention only three, which are of
the most plain and acknowledged im-

portance ;

SE R M. portance; God, the world, and our own

IX. chara&cer.

I. WHEN you retire from the world,

communie with your hearts concerning God.
Impressions of Deity, besides their being
the principle of what is firicly termed re-
ligion, are the great support of all moral
sentiment, and virtuous conduc among
men. But with what difficulty are they
preserved in any due degree of force,
amidst the affairs and avocations of the
world ? While the crowd of surrounding
objects is ever ruffing on the imagina-
tion, and occupying the senses and the
heart, what is not only absent from vicw,
but, by its nature, invisible, is apt to va-
nifh like a shadow. Hence it is given
as the character of wicked men, in scrip-
ture, that they are without God in the
world. They deny not, perhaps, that he
exists; but it is the fame to them as
though he did not: For having lofc him
from their view, his existence has no es-
sect on their conduct. If, at any time,

the

the idea of God rife in their mind, it S E R tM.
ri.es like a terrifying phantom which Ix
they haften to expell; and which they
gladly fancy to be an unreal appearance,
1,ecaufc they fee it make so little imprel-
sion on others around them.

Let him who retires to serious medita-

tion, begin with imprefling deeply on his
mind this important truth, that there is
undoubtedly a Supreme Governour, who
presides over the universe. But let him
not imagine, that to commune with his
heart concerning God, is to starch into
the mysteries of the Divine Nature, or to
attempt a difcovcry of the whole plan of
Providence. Long enough he may be-
wilder himself in this maze, without mak-
ing any proficiency in the pradical know-
ledge of God. Shall he who knows so lit-
tle of his ownv nature, or of the nature of
the objecs with which he is surrounded,
exe' to comprehend the Being who made
himn ? To commune with ourselves, to any
useful purpofc, on this subjed, is to bring
home to our fouls the internal, authorita-

tive

S E R M. tive sense of God, as of a Sovereign and

Ix. a Father. It is not to Speculate about

what is doubtful in his eifence, but to
contemplate what is certain in his perfec-
tions. It is to realize the presence of the
Supreme Being, so as to produce the moit
profound veneration; and to awaken the
earnest desire of as near an approach as
our nature will permit, to that great
Fountain of happiness and life.

After this manner was that holy man

affeede, who uttered this ardent wish '',
0 that I knew where I might find him, that
I might come even to his feat !-If with
such a frame of mind you seek after God,
be assured that he is not far from you;
and that, though you are not permitted
as yet to come to his feat, you may, at
least, reach the footstool of his throne, and
touch the robe that covers him. In the
midst of your solitary musings, lift your
eyes, and behold all nature full of God.
Look up to the firmament, and admire
his glory. Look round on the earth, and
observe his pretence every where displayed.

X

Job xxi. If
- Job xxiii. 3.

if the gay landscape, or the fruitful field, s E R M.
present themselves to your eye, behold Ix.
him smiling upon his works. If the
mountain raise its lofty head, or the ex-
panfe of waters roll its tides before you,
contemplate, in those great and solemn
objects, his power and majesty. Nature,
in all its diversities, is a varied mani-
feftation of God. If you were to take the
wings of the morningr, and dwell in the ut-
terimof parts of the fia, even there you
would find him. For in hitm you live and
move. He fills and animates all space. In
the barren wilderness, as in the peopled
region, you can trace his footsteps; and
in the deepest solitude, you may hear a
voice which testifies of him.

Him, indeed, you are never to confound
with the workmanflip of his hands. Na-
ture, in its most awful or most pleasing
scenes, exhibits no more than different
forms of inanimate matter. But on these
dead forms is impressed the glory of a
living Spirit. The beauty, or the great-
ness, which appears in them, flows from

Ii the

S E RM. the Fountain of all greatness and beauty;

I,. in him it centers ; of his perfedion it re-

fleds an image ; and towards him should
lead your view.-In converting with a
fellow-creature on earth, it is not with his
body we converse, though it is his bodl
only which we fee. From his words and
actions we conceive his mind ; with his
mind, though invisible, we hold corre-
fpondence, and direct towards this fpiri-
tual Essence, our affection and regard. In
like manner, though here we behold no
more of God than what his works dif-
play, yet, in those displays, we are cap-
able of perceiving the Universal Spirit, and
of holding correspondence with this un-
seen Being, in veneration, gratitude, and
love.

It is thus that a pious man, in his re-

tired meditations, viewing natural objecis
with a spiritual eye, communes with his
heart concerning God. He walks among
the various scenes of Nature, as within
the precincs of a great temple, in the
habitual exercise of devotion. To those

discoveries

(ifcoveries of the Supreme Being in his SE R M.
works, let him apply the comment of his Ix.
word. From the world of Nature, let him
follow God into the world of Grace. When
conducted from the outer courts, into this
inmost sanctuary of the temple, he shall
feel himself brought Rill more nigh to the
Sacred Presence. In the great plan of Di-
vine Wisdom, for extirpating the evils pro-
(luced by fin, he flall receive the intcrpre-
tation of many of the hidden mysteries of
Nature. He hlall discover in Christ, the
Deity made, in some degree, visible to
sense. In the beneficent works which lie
performed, and the gracious undertaking
which he accompliihed, he ilall behold
the brightzeJ of the Father's gl an', and
flall difccrn it to be fill of grace and
truth.-From the Iacred retreat, wherein
his thoughts have been thus employed,
he returns to the world like a fuperiour
bcing. He carries into adive life those
pure and elevating Ientiments, to which
the giddy crowd are strangers. A certain
odour of fandity remains upon his mind,

I i 2 which,

S E RM. which, for a while at least, will repell the

IX. contagion of the world.

II. COMMUNE with your heart, in the

season of retirement, concerning the world.
The world is the great deceiver, whose fal-
lacious arts it highly imports us to detec.
But in the midst of its pleasures and pur-
suits, the detection is impossible. We
tread, as within an inchanted circle, where
nothing appears as it truly is. It is only
in retreat, that the charm can be broken.
Did men employ that retreat, not in car-
rying on the delusion which the world has
begun, not in forming plans of imagi-
nary bliss, but in fabjecling the happi-
ness which the world affords to a ftrid
difcuflion, the spell would dissolve; and
in the room of the unreal profpecs, which
had long ainufed them, the nakedness of
the world would appear.

Prepare yourselves, then, to encounter

the light of truth. Resolve rather to bear
the disappointment of some flattering
hopes, than to wander for ever in the

paradise

paradise of fools. While others meditate E RM.
in secret on the means of attaining world- vx.
ly success, let it be your employment to
scrutinize that success itself. Calculate
fairly to what it amounts; and whether
you are not losers on the whole, by your
apparent gain. Look back, for this pur-
pose, on your past life. Trace it from
your earliest youth; and put the question
to yourselves, What have been its happiest
periods ? Were they those of quiet and
innocence, or those of ambition and in-
trigue ? Has your real enjoyment uni-
formly kept pace with what the world
calls prosperity ? As you advanced in
wealth or station, did you proportionably
advance in happiness? Has success, almost
in any one instance, fulfilled your expec-
ations ? Where you reckoned upon mofi
enjoyment, have you not often found
least ? Wherever guilt entered into your
pleasures, did not its fting long remain,
after the gratification was past ?-Such
questions as there, candidly answered,
wvould in a great measure unmask the

world,

SE RM. world. They would expose the vanity of

Ix. its pretensions; aild convince you that

there are other springs than those which
the world affords, to which yot must ap-
ply for happiness.

While you commune with your heart

concerning what the world now is, con-
fider also what it will one day appear
to be. Anticipate the awful moment
of your bidding it an eternal farewell.
Think, what refletions flall most pro-
bably arise, when you are quitting the
field, and looking back on the scene of
action. In what light will your cloting
eyes contemplate those vanities which
now shine so bright, and those interests
which now swell into such high import-
ance ? What part will you then wish to
have aled ? What shall then appear mo-
mentous, what trifling, in human con-
duc ?-Let the fober sentiments which
such anticipations suggest, temper now
your misplaced ardour. Let the last con-
clufions which you flall form, enter into
the present estimate which you make of
the world, and of life.

Moreover,

Moreover, in communing with your- SE R M.

selves concerning the world; contemplate IX.
it as subjed to the divine dominion. The
greater part of men behold nothing more
than the rotation of human affairs. They
fee a great crowd ever in motion; the for-
tunes of men alternately rising and fall-
ing; virtue often distressed, and profperi-
ty appearing to be the purchase of world-
ly abilities and wisdom. But this is only
the outside of things. Behind the cur-
tain, there is a far greater scene, which is
beheld only by the retired, religious spec-
tator. Lift up that curtain, when you are
alone with God. View the world with
the eye of a Christian; and you shall fee,
that while man's heart devijeth his way, it
is the Lord who diresleth his steps. You
ihall fee, that however men appear to
move and aft after their own pleasure,
they are, nevertheless, retained in secret
bonds by the Almighty, and all their
operations rendered subservient to the
ends of his moral government. You shall
fee him obliging the uwrath of man to

praifi

S E R M. prai e him; punishing the finner by means

Ix. of his own iniquities ; from the trials of

the righteous, bringing forth their reward;
and to a state of seeming universal con-
fusion, preparing the wisest and most equi-
table issue. While the faJhion of this world
is passing fast away, you shall discern the
glory of another, rising to succeed it. You
ihall behold all human events, our griefs
and our joys, our love and our hatred,
our character and memory, absorbed in
the ocean of eternity; and no trace of our
present existence left, except that it liall
be for ever well with the righteous, and
ill with the wicked.-Such a view of the
world, frequently presented to our minds,
could not fail to enforce those solemn con-
clufions ; There is no wifilo, nor counsel,
agaifl the Lord. Fear God, and keep his
commandments; for this is.the whole of man.
What is a man profited, if he J7lall gain the
whole world, and lose his own foul?

III. Co MMU NE with your heart, con-
cerning yourselves and your real charac-

I ter,

ter. To acquire a thorough knowledge of s E R M.
ourselves, is an attainment no less difficult IX.
than important. For men are generally
unwilling to fee their own imperfections;
and when they are willing to enquire in-
to them, their felf-love imposes on their
judgment. Their intercourse with one
another assists the delusion to which, of
themselves, they are prone. For the or-
dinary commerce of the world, is a com-
merce of flattery and falfhood; where re-
ciprocally they deceive, and are deceived;
where every one appears under an aflum-
ed form; professes eftcem which he does
not feel; and bestows praise in order to
receive it. It is only in retreat, where
those false semblances disappear, and those
flattering voices are silent, that a man
can learn to think soberly of hinfelf, and as
be ought to think.

It has been said, that there are three

characters which every man sustains; and
these often extremely different from one
another: One, which he poleffees in his
own opinion ; another, which he carries

i k in

£ R M. in the estimation of the world; and a
IX. third, which he bears in the judgment

of God. It is only the lait which afcer-
tains what he really is.-Whether the
character which the world forms of you,
be above or below the truth, imports you
not much to know. But it is of eternal
consequence, that the character which you
possess in your own eyes, be formed up-
on that which you bear in the fight of
God. In order to try it by this great
standard, you mull lay aside, as much as
possible, all partiality to yourielves; and,
in the season of retirement, explore your
heart with such accurate scrutiny, as may
bring your hidden defecs to light.

Enquire, for this purpose, whether you

be not conscious that the fair opinion
which the world entertains of you, is
founded on their partial knowledge both
of your abilities, and your virtues ? Would
you be willing that all your a&ions ihould
be publickly canvassed ? Could you bear
to have your thoughts laid open ? Are
there no parts of your life which you

would

would be uneasy if an enemy could dif- S E R M.
cover? In what light, then, must these x,
appear to God ? When you have kept
free of vice, has your innocence pro-
ceeded from purity of principle, or from
worldly motives ? Rifiis there no envy
or malignity within you, when you com-
pare your own condition with that of
others ? Have you been as fbllicitous to
regulate your heart, as to preserve your
manners from reproach ? Professing your-
selves to be Christians, has the Spirit of
Christ appeared in your condut ? Declar-
ring that you hope for immortality, has
that hope surmounted undue attachments
to the present life ?

Such inveffigation as this, seriously

pursued, might produce to every man
many discoveries of himself; discoveries,
not pleasing, perhaps, to vanity, but fa-
lutary and useful. For he can be only a
flatterer, but no true friend to himself,
who aims not at knowing his own de-
fecAs, as well as virtues. By imposing on
the world, he may carry on some plan of

K k 2 fancied

SE R M. fancied profit; but by imposing on his

Ix. own heart, what can he propose to gain?

He feedeth of ayj7es: A deceived heart
hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver
his foul, nor Jay, Is there not a lie in ny
right hand * ?

THUS I have set before you some of

those great objects, which ought to em-
ploy your meditation in religious retire-
ment. I have endeavoured to introduce
you into a proper intercourse with your
heart, concerning God, the world, and
your own character. Let this intercourse
terminate in fixing the principles of your
future conduct. Let it serve to introduce
consistency into your life. Nothing can
be more wavering and disjointed, than the
behaviour of those who are wholly men
of the world, and have never been inured
to commune with themselves. Diffipa-
tion is a more frequent cause of their
ruih, than determined impiety. It is
not so much because they have adopted
bad principles, as because they have ne-

ver

*Ifa. xliv. 20.
I

ver attended to principles of any kind, S E RM
that their lives are so full of incoherence Ix.
and diforder.-You hover on the borders
of fin and duty. One day, you read the
scriptures, you hear religious discourses,
and form good resolutions. Next day,
you plunge into the world, and forget
the serious impression, as if it had been
never made. The impression is again re-
called, and again effaced ; and in this
circle your life revolves. Is such condud
worthy of creatures endowed with intel-
ligent powers ? Shall the close of life
overtake you, before you have determin-
ed how to live ? Shall the day never
come, that is to find you steady in your
views, decided in your plans, and en-
gaged in a course of action which your
mind approves ?-If you wish that day
ever to arrive, retirement and meditation
must first bring you home to yourselves,
from the dissipation in which you are
now scattered; muff teach you to fix such
aims, and to lay down such rules of con-
duCt, as are suitable to rational and im-

mortal

S E R M. mortal beings. Then will your charaAcer

IX. become uniform and refpedable. Then,

you may hope that your life will proceed
in such a train, as fiall prepare you,
when it is finished, for joining the society
of more exalted spirits.

SER-

# SERMON X. On DEVOTION. ACTS x. 2. Cornelius  A devout man 

263
SERMON X.

On D E v o T I O N.

ACTS X. 2.

Cornelius-- A devout nian-----
T HAT religion is essential to the SE RM.

welfare of man, can be proved by x.

the most convincing arguments. But
these, how demonstrative soever, are in-
sufficient to support its authority over
human conduct. For arguments may
convince the understanding, when they
cannot conquer the passions. Irrefiftable
they seem in the calm hours of retreat;
but, in the season of aAion, they often
vanifl into smoke. There are other and
more powerful springs, which influence

the

SE RM. the great movements of the human frame.

X. In order to operate with fucceif on the

acive powers, the heart muit be gained.
Sentiment and affection must be brought
to the aid of reason. It is not enough
that men believe religion to be a wife and
rational rule of condut, unless they rc-
lifh it as agreeable, and find it to carry
its own reward. Happy is the man, who,
in the conflict of desire between God and
the world, can oppose, not only argument
to argument, but pleasure to pleasure
who, to the external allurements of sense,
can oppose the internal joys of devotion;
and to the uncertain promises of a flatter-
ing world, the certain experience of that
peace of God which paj-eth underJianding,
keeping his mnild and heart.-- Such is the
temper and spirit of a devout man. Such
was the character of Cornelius, that good
centurion, whose prayers and alns are said
to have come up in memorial before God.
Of this character I intend, through Divine
assistance, to discourse ; and llall endea-
vour, I. To explain the nature of devotion;

I ~ II. To

JI. To justify, and recommend it; and, SERM.
IlI. To recdify some mistakes concerning X.

it.

I. DEVOTION is the lively exercise

of those affedions, which we owe to the
Supreme Being. It comprehends several
emotions of the heart, which all termi-
nate on the fame great objeL. The chief
of them are, veneration, gratitude, desire,
andz resignation.

It implies,'firft, profound veneration of

God. By veneration, I understand a dif-
position, compounded of awe, and of love;
the disposition which, of all others, it best
becomes creatures to bear towards their
infinitely perfec' Creator. Awe is the
first sentiment which rifes in the foul, at
the view of his greatness. But, in the
heart of a devout man, it is a solemn
and elevating, not a dejecing, emotion;
for he glows, rather than trembles, in the
Divine presence. It is not the fuperfti-
tious dread of unknown power, but the
homage yielded by the heart to him who

L is,

S E R M. is, at once, the greatest and the best of Bc-
v ings. Omnipotence, viewed alone, would

be a formidable object But, confidtered
in conjunction with the moral perfecRions
of the Divine Nature, it serves to heighten
devotion. Goodness assets the heart with
double energy, when residing in one ib
exalted. The goodness which we adore
in him, is not like that which is common
among men, a weak, mutable, undif-
cerning fondness, ill qualified to be the
ground of assured trust. It is the good-
ness of a perfect Governour, acting upon a
regular, extensive plan ; a steady principle
of benevolence, conducted by wisdom;
which, subjec' to no variableness or J.ia-
dow of turning, free from all partiality and
caprice, incapable of being either toothed
by flattery, or ruffled by resentment, re-
fembles, in its calm and equal lustre, the
eternal serenity of the highest heavens.
Thy mercy, 0 Lord! is in the heavens, and
thy faithfilnzefs reacheth unto the clouds. Thy
righteoutgiefs is like the great mountains, and
thy judgments are a great depth.

Such

Such are the conceptions of the great S E RII.

God, which fill with veneration the heart X.

of a devout man. His veneration is not

confined to acts of immediate worihip.
It is the habitual temper of his foul. Not
only when engaged in prayer or praise,
but in the silence of retirement, and even
amidst the occupations of the world, the
Divine Being dwells upon his thoughts.
No place, and no object, appear to him
void of God. On the works of Nature,
he views the imprefiion of his hand; and
in the actions of men, he traces the ope-
ration of his Providence. Whatever he
beholds on earth, that is beautiful or fir,
that is great or good, he refers to God,
as to the supreme origin of all the ex-
cellence which is any where scatterec
through his works. From those cFeies,
he rifes to the first cause. From those
fireams, he ascends to the fountain whence
they flow. By those rays, he is led to
that eternal source of light in which they
centre.

I, 1 2 TEVOTION

SER M. DEVOTION implies, secondly, sincere

X_ gratitude to God, for all his benefits.

This is a warmer emotion than simple
veneration. Veneration looks up to the
Deity, as he is in himself: Gratitude re-
gards what he is towards us. When a de-
vout man surveys this vail universe, where
beauty and goodness are every-where pre-
dominant; when he reflects on those num-
berlefs multitudes of creatures, who, in
their different stations, enjoy the blef-
sings of existence; and when at the fune
time he looks up to an Universal Father,
who hath thus filled creation with life
and happiness, his heart glows within
him. He adores that disinterested good-
ness, which prompted the Almighty to
raise up so many orders of intelligent
beings, not that he might receive, but
that he might give and impart; that he
might pour forth himself, and communi-
cate to the spirits which he formed, some
emanations of his felicity.

The goodness of this Supreme Benefacor
he gratefully contemplates, as displayed in

his

his own state. He rcvicws the events of SE R IM.
his life; and, in every comfert which has X.
iifeetcncl it, he difterns the Divine hand.
Dues he remember with afcrion the pa-
rents under whose care he grew up, and
the companions with whom he p;lltd his
youthful life ? Is he now happy, in his
family rising around him; in the iLfoufi
who loves him, or in the children wvho
give him comfort and joy ? Into every ten-
der remembrance of the pafi, and every
pleasing enjoyment of the present, devo-
tion enters; for in all tholf beloved ob-
jects, it recognizes God. The comnmui-
cation of love from heart to heart, is an
cftilion of his goodnell. From his intii-
ration, (deicends all the friiendfhlip which
ever glowed on earth ; and therceore, to
him it jutly returns in gratitude, and ter-
minates on him.

But this life, with all its interests, is

but a finall part of human existence. A
devout man looks forward to immortali-
ty, and discovers higher fubjecs of grati-
tude to Heaven. He views himfelr as a

guilty

SE R M. guilty creature, whom Divine bcligiiicy

X. has received into grace; whose forfeited

hopes. it has restored; and to whom it
has opened the molt glorious profpecs of
future felicity. Such generosity 1hown
to the fallen and miserable, is frill more
affecing to the.heart, than favours con-
ferred on the innocent. He contemplates,
with astonishment, the labours of the Son
of God, in accomplifhling redemption for
men; and his foul overflows with thank-
fulness to him who loved us, and waffled
usfrom ourfins in his own blood.-iWhatJJall
I render to the Lord for all his benefits ? Bltef
the Lord, 0 my Jful ! and all that is within
me, bless his holy name ! who forgiveth
all thine iniquities, and healeth all thy di
cares; vwo redeeneth thy life fron deJtruc-
tion, and crouwneth thee with loving kind-
?icfs, and with tender mercies.

DEVOTION implies, thirdly, the desire

of the foul after the favour of the Supreme
Being, as its chief good, and final reft.
To inferiour enjoyments, the devout man

allots

allots inferiour anld lfcondary attach- SE l r.
ment. I-Ic difcaiams not every earthly as- -.
ficion. H-I pretends not to renounce all
pleasure in the friends, and the comforts,
of his prcfent state. Such an umnat'ral
renunciation humanity forbids, ard reli-
gion cannot require. But from these he
expects not his supreme bliss. He discerns
the vanity which belongs to them all;
and beyond the circle of mutable objecs
which surround him, he aspires after some
principle of more perfect felicity, which
ihall not be subjed to change or decay.
But where is this complete and perma-
nent good to be found ? Ambition pur-
sues it in courts and palaces; and returns
from the pursuit, loaded with sorrows.
Pleasure seeks it among sensual joys; and
retires with the confeflion ofdifappoint-
ment. The deepfaith, it is not in me; and the
Jsea sith, it is not with me. It cannot be gotten
for gold; neither JfallJilver be weighed for
the price thereof Its place is not in the land
of the living. True happiness dwells with
God; and from tbe light of his countenance,

it

S E R M. it beams upon the devout man. I-lis voice

xV is, W1%hom have I in heaven but thee? amid

there is non1e upont earth that I dlfre befitl
thee. After exploring heaven and earth
for happiness, they seem to him a mighty
void, a wilderness of fliadows, where all
would be empty and unsubstantial with-
out God. But in his favour and love, he
finds what supplies every defec of tem-
poral objecs; and assures tranquillity to
his heart, amidfl all the changes of his
existence. Thou Jfalt guide me with th'
colfel; and thou Jhalt receive me to tlhy
glor y. My fieJh and nmy heart faileth; blut
God is thefirentgth of my heart, and my por-
tion or ever.

FROM these sentiments and affedions,

Devotion advances, fourthly, to an en-
tire resignation of the foul to God. It is
the confinmmation of trust and hope. It
baniihes anxious cares, and murmuring
thoughts. It reconciles us to every ap-
pointment of Divine Providence ; and re-
solves every wist into the desire of pleas-

ing

ing him, whomi our hearts adore. Its S R M.
genuine breathings are to this effe : X.
"Conduct me, 0 God! in what path
" fever feemeth good to thee. In no-
" thing ihall I ever arraign thy sacred
"will. Dost thou require me to part
" with any worldly advantages, for the
"fake of virtue and a good conscience ?
"I give them up. Dost thou command
"me to relinquish my friends, or my
" country ? At thy call I chearfully
" leave them. Dost thou summon me
"away from this world ? Lo ! I am
"ready to depart. Thou haft made,
"thou haft redeemed me, and I am
"thine. Myself, and all that belongs to
" me, I surrender to thy disposal. Let
" the men of the world have their portion
" in this life, and be filled with its hidlden
"treafitres. Be it mine, to behold thy face
" in righteofniefs ; and when I awake, to
" befatisfed with thy likeness."

This, surely, is one of the noblest acs

of which the human mind is capable,
when thus, if we may be allowed the ex-

M m preflion,

S E R M. pression, it unites itself with God. Nor

X. can any devotion be genuine, which in-

spires not sentiments of this nature. For
devotion is not to be confidered as a
transient glow of affection, occasioned by
some cafial impreoions of Divine good-
ness, which are suffered to remain un-
connected with the conduc of life. It is
a powerful principle, which penetrates
the inoft foul; which purifies the as-
fetions from debasing attachments; and,
by a fixed and steady regard to God, sub-
dues every sinful passion, and forms the
inclinations to piety and virtue.

SucHI in general are the dispositions

that constitute devotion. It is the union
of veneration, gratitude, desire, and re-
fignation. It expresses, not so much the
performance of any particular duty, as
the spirit which must animate all religious
duties. It stands opposed, not merely to
downright vice; but to a heart which is
cold, and insensible to sacred things;
which, from compulsion perhaps, and a

sense

finfe of interest, preserves some regard to s E ; ,MI.
the Divine commands, but obeys them X.
without ardour, love, orjoy. I proceed,

II. To recommend this devout spirit

to your imitation. I begin with obferv-
ing, that it is of the utmost consequence
to guard against extremes of every kind
il religion. We mui beware, let, by
seeking to avoid one rock, we fpl!i upon
another. It has been long the fubjecl of
remark, that filperftition and enthusiasm
are two capital sources of delufioni; fu-
!erflition, on the one hand, attaching
men with immoderate zeal, to the ritual
and external part of religion; and entru-
iiafin, on the other, direding their whole
attention to internal emotions, and my-
flical communications with the spiritual
world; while neither the one, nor the
other, has paid sufficient regard to the
great moral duties of the Chriflian life.
But, running with intemperate eagerness,
from these two great abuses of religion,
men have neglected to observe, that there

M m 2 are

SERM. are extremes opposite to each of them,

x. into which they are in hazard of precipi-

tating themselves. Thus the horrourof fu-
perffition has sometimes reached so far, as
to produce contempt for all external infti-
tutions; as if it were possible for religion
to subsist in the world, without forms of
worship, or publick acknowledgment of
God. It has also happened, that some
who in the main arewell affeded to the
cause of goodness, observing that. persons
of a devout turn, have at times been car-
ried by warm affecions into unjuitifiable
excesses, have thence haffily concluded,
that all devotion was akin to enthufi-
afm; and, separating religion totally from
the heart and affefions, have reduced it
to a frigid observance of what they call
the rules of virtue. This is the extreme
which I purpose at present to combat, by
Showing you, first, That true devotion is
rational, and well founded; next, That it
is of the highest importance to every other
part of religion and virtue; and, lastly,
That it is most conducive to our happiness.

IN

IN the first place, True devotion is ra- s E R M.

tional, and well founded. It takes its rife X
from afircdions, which are etfential to the
human frame. We are formed byNature,
to admire what is great, and to love what
is amiable. Even inanimate objccts have
power to excite those emotions. The mag-
nificent prospects of the natural world, fill
the mind with reverential awe. its beau-
tiful scenes create delight. When we fur-
vey the actions and behaviour of our fel-
low-creatures, the affedions glow with
greater ardour; and, if to be unmoved,
in the former cafe, argues a defed of fen-
fibility in our powers, it discovers, in the
latter, an odious hardness and depravity
in the heart. The tenderness of an assec-
tionate parent, the generosity of a for-
giving enemy, the publick spirit of a pa-
triot or a hero, often fill the eyes with
tears, and swell the breafl with emotions
too big for utterance. The objec of those
affeclions is frequently railed above us, in
condition and rank. Let us suppose him
raised also above us, in nature. Let us

imagine,

SER M. imagine, that an angel, or any being of

X fuperiour order, had condescended to be

our friend, our guide, and patron; no
person, sure, would hold the exaltation of
his benefadtor's charader, to be an argu-
ment why he should love and revere him
lefs.--Strange! that the attachment and
veneration, the warmth and overflowing
of heart, which excellence and goodnef5
on every other occasion command, flould
begin to be accounted irrational, as soon as
the Supreme Being becomes their objec .
For what reason must human sensibility
be extinc towards him alone ? Are all
benefits entitled to gratitude, except the
highest and the belt ? Shall goodnesS
cease to be amiable, only because it is
perfect ?

It will, perhaps, be said, that an un-

known and invisible Being, is not quali-
sied to raise affetion in the human heart.
Wrapt up in the mysterious obscurity of
his nature, he escapes our search, and as-
fords no determinate objeA to our love
or desire. We go forward,, but .e is not

thee ;

there; and backward, bat we can7nt per- S E R M.
c ive himi ; on the left hand, uwhere he
worlkeith, bt we cannot behold himl: si
hidth hinjlJlf on the right hand, that rwe
cannot Jfe him '.--- Notwithtlanding this
obscurity, is there any being in the uni-
verse more real and certain, than the Cre-
ator of the world, and the Supporter of
all exiflence ? Is he, in whom we live and
n:ove, too distant from us, to excite de-
votion ? His form and essence, indeed,
we cannot fee; but to be unseen, and
imperfecly known, in many other in-
stances, precludes neither gratitude nor
love. It is not the fight, so much as the
flrong conception, or deep impression, of
an object, which affeds the passions. We
glow with admiration of personages, who
have lived in a distant age. Whole na-
tions have been transported with zeal and
affection, for the generous hero, or pu-
blick deliverer, whom they knew only by
fame. Nay, properly speaking, the dire&c
object of our love, is, in every cafe, invi-
fible. For that on which affecion is

placed,
* Job xxiii. 8. 9.

S E RM. placed, is the mind, the foul, the interna!

X. characer of our fellow-creatures; which,

surely, is no lets concealed, than the Di-
vine Nature itself is, from the view of
sense. From acdions, we can only infer
the dispositions of men; from what we fee
of their behaviour, we collec what is in-
visible; but the conjecture which we form,
is, at best, imperfect; and when their ac-
tions excite our love, much of their heart
remains still unknown. I ask then, in
what refpec God is lets qualified than
any other being, to be an objec of assec-
tion? Convinced that he exists; beholding
his goodness spread abroad in his works,
exerted in the government of the world,
displayed in tome measure to sense, in the
adions of his Son Jesus Christ; are we
not furnished with every efiential requi-
site which the: heart demands, in order
to indulge the most warm, and at the
fame time the most rational emotions ?

If these considerations justify the rea-

fonablenefs of devotion, as expressed in
veneration, love, and gratitude, the fame

~I ~ train

train of thought will equally justify it, S E R A.
when appearing in the forms of desire, x.
delight, or resignation. The latter arc, in-
deed, the confequcnce of the former. For
wve cannot but desire ofme communica-
tion with what we love ; and will natu-
rally resign ourselves to one, on whom we
have placed the fll confidence of assec-
tion. The aspirations of a devout man
after the favour of God, are the effects of
that earnest vwifl for happiness, which
glows in every breast. All men have some-
what that may be called the object of their
devotion; reputation, pleasure, learning,
riches, or whatever apparent good has
strongly attached their heart. This be-
comes the center of attraction, which ha-
bitually draws them towards it; which
quickens and regulates all their motions.
While the men of the world are thus
classed, and employed, according to the
objects which they severally worship, fiall
he only who directs his devotion towards
the Supreme Being, be excluded from a
place in the system of rational conduct ?

N n or

SE RM. or be allowed no passions, which, in the

X. course of their pursuit, may melt with

tenderness, or rite into fervour ?-Having
vindicated the reasonableness of devotion,
I come,

IN the second place, to show its im-

portance, and the high place which it
possesses in the system of religion. I ad-
dress myself now to those, who, though
they rejeCt not devotion as irrational, yet
confider it as an unnecessary refinement; an
attainment which may be safely left to re-
clufe and sequestered persons, who aim at
uncommon sanctity. The solid and ma-
terial duties of a good life, they hold to
be in a great measure independent of de-
vout affection; and think them sufficient-
Iy supported, by their necessary connec-
.tion with our interest, both in this and in
a future world. They insist much upon
religion being a calm, a fober, and ratio-
nal principle of conduc.-I admit that
it is very laudable to have a rational re-
ligion. But 1 mufl admonish you, that it

is

is both reproachful and criminal, to have SE RM.
an insensible heart. If we reduce religion X.
into so cool a state, as not to admit love,
affetion, and desire, we flall leave it in
pofreflion of finall influence over human
life. Look abroad into the world, and
observe how few act upon deliberate and
rational views of their true interest. The
bulk of mankind arc impelled by their
feelings. They are attracted by appear-
ances of good. Taste and inclination rule
their condud. To direct their inclination
and taste towards the highest objects; to
form a reliih within them, forvirtuous and
spiritual enjoyment; to introduce religion
into the heart, is the province of devotion;
and hence arises its importance to the in-
terefis of goodness.

Agreeably to this doctrine, the great

Author of our religion, who well tkew
what was in man, laid the -foundation of
his whole system in the regeneration of
the heart. The change which was to be
accompliihed on his followers, he did not
purpose to effec, merely by regulating

N n 2 their

SER M. their cxternal condua ; but by forming

x. within them a new nature; by takini

away the heart of /ione, and givin g them
a heart of fleJh, that is, a heart relenting
andl tender, yielding to the Divine im-
pulse, and readily susceptible of devout
impreflions. Thoul Jhalt love the Lord thy
God, with all thy heart, and mnind, andfllu,
and flrength: 7hiis is the 1filj and great
commandlment. Mly Jon, give me thy heat,
is the call of God to each of us: And, in-
deed, if the heart be withheld, it is not
easy to conceive, what other offering we
can present, that will be acceptable to
him.

Of what nature must that man's reli-

gion be, who professes to worship God,
and to believe in Christ, and yet raies
his thoughts towards God, and his Savi-
our, without any warmth of gratitude or
love? I speak not of those occasional de-
cays of pious affetion, to which the best
are fubje , but of a total insensibility to
this part of religion. Surely, let the out-
ward behaviour be ever so irreproachable,

there

there mufl be some efcTntal defect in a s £ R M.
heart, which remains always unmoved at ':'
the view of infinite goodness. The aff'c-
tions cannot, in this cafe, be deemed to
flow in their natural channel. Some con-
cealed malignity must have tainted the in-
ward frame. This is not the man whom
o would chufe for your boiom-friend;
or whose heart you could cxpec to an-
fwer, with reciprocal warmth, to yours.
His virtue, if it deserve that name, is
not of the most amiable fort; and may,
with reason, receive the appellation (often
injudiciously beflowed) of cold and dry
morality. Such a person must, as yet, be
far fron the kindomz of Jeaven.

As devotion is thus eflfntial to religion

in its principle, so it enters into the pro-
per diScharge of all its duties. It diffuses
an auspicious influence over the whole of
virtue. The prevailing temper of the-mind
is formed by its most fiequent employ-
ments. Intercourse with Supreme per-
section cannot, therefore, but ennoble and
improve it. The pure love of God, natu-

rally

S E R M. rally connelcs itself with the love of man.

x. Hence, devotion has been often found a

powerful instrument, in humanizing the
manners of men, and taming their unruly
passions. It smooths what is rough, and
softens what is fierce, in our nature. It is
the great purifier of the affections. It in-
spires contempt of the low gratifications
belonging to animal life. It promotes a
humble and chearful contentment with
our lot; and subdues that eager desire of
riches and of power, which has filled this
unhappy world with crimes and misery.
Finally, it bestows that enlargement of
heart in the service of God, which is the
great principle, both of perseverance, and
of progress, in virtue. He who, unac-
quainted with devout affections, lets him-
self to keep the Divine commandments,
will advance in obedience with a flow
and languid pace&; like one who, carrying
a heavy burden, toils to mount the hill.
But he whose heart devotion has warmed,
will proceed on his way, chearful and re-
joicing. The one performs his duty, only

because

because it is commanded; the other, be- s E R M.
cause he loves it. The one is inclined to X.
do no more. than necessity requires; the
other seeks to excell. The one looks for
his reward in somewhat betides religion;
the other finds it in religion itfclf: It is
his meat and drink to do the will of that
heavenly Father, whom he loves and adores.
Which of these two are likely to make the
greatest improverment in goodness, is eafi-
ly discerned. Let us now confider,

IN the third place, the influence of
devotion on the happiness of life. What-
ever promotes and strengthens virtue,
whatever calms and regulates the tem-
per, is a source of happiness. Devotion,
as I have just now shown, produces those
effects in a remarkable degree. It in-
spires composure of spirit, mildness, and
benignity; weakens the painful, and che-
rifhes the pleasing emotions; and, by these
means, carries on the life of a pious man
in a finooth and placid tenor.

Besides

S E R M. Besides exerting this habitual influence

. on the mind, devotion opens a field o'

enjoyments, to which the vitious are entire
strangers; enjoyments the more valuable,
as they peculiarly belong to retirement
when the world leaves us, and to adver-
fity when it becomes our foe. These are
the two seasons, for which every wife man
would most wiflh to provide some hidden
store of comfort. For let him be placed
in the most favourable situation which
the human. state admits, the world can
neither always amuse him, nor always
shield him from distress. There will be
many hours of vacuity, and many of de-
jetion, in his life. If he be a firanger to
God, and to devotion, how dreary will
the gloom of solitude often prove ? With
what oppressive weight will sickness, dif-
appointment, or old age, fall upon his
spirits ? But, for those pensive periods,
the pious man has a relief prepared. From
the tiresome repetition of the common va-
nities of life, or from the painful corrosion
of its cares and sorrows, devotion tranf-

I ports

ports him into a new region ; and fur- SE R M.
rounds him there with such objccts as are X.
the mofl fitted to chear the dejcclion, to
calm the tumults, and to heal the wounds
of his heart. If the world has been empty
and delusive, it gladdens him with the
lprofiped of a higher and better order of
things, about to arise. If men have been
ungrateful and base, it displays before him
the faithfulness of that Supreme Being',
who, though every other friend fail, will
never foralke him.-Conuilt your experi-
ence, and you will find that the two great-
elft sources of inward joy, are, the cxer-
cife of love directed towards a deserVing
object, and the exerciie of hope termi-
nating on some high and assurecd happi-
ness. Both these are fipplied by devo-
tion; and therefore we have no reason to
be surprised, if, on some occasions, it fill
the hearts of good men with a fatisfaccion
not to be expressed.

The refined pleasures of a pious mind,
are, in many respects, fuperiour to the

O o coarse

SE R M. coarle gratifications of sense. They are

x. pleasures which belong to the highest

powers, and best affections of the foul;
whereas, the gratifications of f-nfe retide
in the lowest region of our nature. To
the one, the foul stoops below its native
dignity. The other, raise it above it-
self. The one, leave always a comfortless,
often a mortifying remembrance behind
them. The other, are reviewed with ap-
plause and delight. The pleasures of
sense resemble a foaming torrent,, which,
after a disorderly course, speedily runs
out, and leaves an empty and offensive
channel. But the plcafures of devotion
resemble the equable current of a pure
river, which enlivens the fields through
which it passes, and diffuses verdure and
fertility along its banks.--To thee, 0
Devotion! we owe the highest improve-
ment of our nature, and much of the en-
joyment of our life. Thou art the fihp-
port of our virtue, and the reft of our
fouls in this turbulent world. Thou com-
pofeft the thoughts. Thou calmest the

paflions,

paflions. Thou exalteft the heart. Thy SE R M.
communications, and thine only, are im- x-
parted to the low, no lets than to the
high ; to the poor, as well as to the rich.
In thy pretence, worldly dililinAions ccafe;
and under thy influence, worldly sorrows
are forgotten. Thou art the balm of the
wounded mind. Thy fiilduary is ever
open to the miserable; inacccflible only
to the unrighteous and impure. Thou
beginneft on earth the temper of heaven.
In thee, the hoits of angels and blessed
spirits eternally rejoice.-It now remains,
that,

III. I ENDEAVOUR to correct some er-

rors, into which men are apt to fall con-
cerning devotion. For it is but too ob-
vious, that errors are often committed in
this part of religion. These frequently
disfigure its appearance before the world,
and subjec it to unjust reproach. Let us
therefore attend deliberately to its nature,
so as to diftinguifll pure and rational de-
votion, of which I have hitherto treated,

0 o 2 from

S E R M. from that which is, in any degree, fpuri-

ous and adulterated.

In the first place, It is an error to place

devotion in the mere performance of any
external ad of worlhip. Prayer and
praise, together with the ordinances pe-
culiar to Chriflian religion, are the ap-
pointed means of raising the heart towards
God. They are the inflituted signs of de-
votion; the language in which it natu-
rally expresses itself. But let us remem-
ber, that they are signs and expressions
only; and we all know, that, in various
cafes, these may not correfpond-to the
thing signified. It is in the disposition of
the heart, not in the motion of the lips,
or in the posture of the body, that devo-
tion consists. The heart may pray or
praise, when no words are uttered. But
if the heart be unconcerned or ill affected,
all the words we can utter, how properly
framed soever, are no other than empty
and unacceptable founds in the ear of the
Almighty.

IN

Ix the second place, It is an error to SER M.

conceive the plcafhres and advantages of '

i

devotion, to be indifcrimilnatcly open to
all. Devotion, like many parts of reli-
gion, may in omne lights be confidered as
a privilege, and in others, as a (iuty. It is
the duty of all, to love God, and to resign
themlfelvcs to his will. But it is the privi-
lege of good men only, to rejoice in God,
and to confide in his friendihip. Hence,
a certain preparation is requisite, for the
enjoyment of devotion in its whole extent.
Not only must the life be reformed from
gross enormities, but the heart must have
undergone that change which the Gofl)el
points out. A competent knowledge of
God must be acquired. A proper found-
ation must be laid in faith and repent-
ance, for intercourse with Heaven.

They who would rulh all at once from

the arms of the world, into the sacred
retreat of devotion; they who imagine
that retreat to stand alwvays ready for the
reception of such as betake themselves to
it, for no reason, but because every other

refuge

SERM. refuge excludes them, betray gross igno-

X. rance of this part of religion. They bring

to it, faculties unqualified to taste its plea-
fures; and they grasp at hopes to which
they are not entitled. By incorporating
with devotion the unnatural mixture of
their unfancRified passions, they defile and
corrupt it. Hence, that gloom which has
often spread over it. Hence, those super-
fitious mortifications and aufterities, by
which the falsely devout hope to purchase
favour from God; haunted by the terrours
of a guilty conscience, and vainly ftrug-
gling to substitute a servile and cringing
homage, in the room of the pure assec-
tions of a renewed heart. On such altars,
the hallowed fire of true devotion cannot
burn; nor can any incense ascend from
them, that shall be grateful to Heaven.
Bring no more vain oblations. Wafli ye, nmake
you clean, put away the evil of your doings
from before mine eyes, faith the Lord. Cease to
do evil; learn to do wuell. Then draw nigh
to God, and he will draw nigh to you.-
But though devotion requires a pure

heart,

heart, and a virtuous life, and necessarily sE RE.
filppofes the exercise of frequent retire- X.
ment, I must observe,

IN the third place, That it is an error

to conceive it as requiring an entire re-
treat from the world. Devotion, like eve-
ry other branch of religion, was intended
to fit us for discharging the duties of
life. We serve God, by being useful to
one another. It is evident from the frame
of our nature, and from our common nc-
ceffities and wants, that we were designed
by Providence for an active part on this
earth. The Gospel of Christ, accordingly,
confiders us as engaged in the concerns
of the world ; and directs its exhortations
to men in all the various relations, cha-
racters, and employments of civil life.
Abftradion from society, therefore, and
total dedication of our time to devout ex-
ercifes, cannot be the moit proper method
of acquiring the favour of God.

I mean not, however, to throw any
blame on those, who having loft all re-

lith

S E R M. lifh for the ordinary pursuits of life, in

VX *consequence of great and severe wounds

which they have ffifered from affliction;
who, feeling thcmfelves flanding alone,
and discerning their connec'ions with
the world to be in some measure broken
off, choose to seek tranquillity in a religi-
ous retirement, and to confccrate their
days entirely to God. Situations some-
times occur, which both justify a great
degree of retreat from the world, and en-
title it to relpec. But, with regard to the
bulk of mankind, Christian devotion in-
sers not, requires not, any such fequeftra-
tion from the affairs of men. Nay, for
the most part, it will be cultivated with
greater success by those who mingle it
with the active employments of life. For
the mind, when entirely occupied by any
one object, is in lazard of viewing it at
last through a false medium. Objects,
especially, so great and sublime as those
of devotion, when we attempt to fix upon
them unremitting attention, overftrerch
and disorder our feeble powers. The

1i llmind,

mind, by being relaxed, returns to them s E R1M.
with more advantage. As none of our X.
organs can bear intenid il'nfations, with-
out injury; as the eye, when dazzled
with overpowering light, beholds ima-
ginary colours, and loles the real di-
itincaion of objects; to the mind, when
over-heated by perpetual contemplation
of celestial things, has been sometimes
found to mistake the strong impreflions
of fancy, for supernatural communica-
tions from above. To the employments
of devotion, as to all other things, there
are due limits. There is a certain tem-
perate sphere, within which, it preserves
longest its proper exertion, and most sic-
cefsfully promotes the purposes for which
it was designed.

IN the fourth place, It is an error to

imagine, that devotion enjoins a total
contempt of all the pleasures and amuse-
ments of human society. It checks, in-
deed, that spirit of dissipation which is
too prevalent. It not only prohibits plea-

P p fures

S E R . fures which are unlawful, but likewicf

X. that unlawful degree of attachment to

pleasures in themselves innoccnt, which
withdraws the attention of men from
what is serious and important. But ic
brings amufemcnt under due limitation,
without extirpating it. It forbids it, as
the business; but permits it, as the relaxa-
tion, of life. For there is nothing in the
spirit of true religion, which is hoflile to
a chearful enjoyment of our situation in
the world.

They who look with a revere and in-

dignant eye, upon all the recreations by
which the cares of men are relieved, and
the union of society is cemented, are, in
two refpecs, injurious to religion. Firfi,
they exhibit it to others under a for-
bidding form, by cloathing it with the
garb of so much unnecessary austerity
And, next, they deprive the world of
the benefit which their example might
afford, in drawing the line between in-
nocent and dangerous pleasures. By a
temperate participation of those which

are

are innocent, they might iiccefsfully ex- s E R M.
crt that authority, which a virtuous and X.
reifectable character always pofleffes, in
reftraniing undue excess. They would
lhow the young and unwary, at what
point they ought to stop. They would
have it in their power, to regulate, in
some degree, the publick manners; to
check extravagance, to humble prefump-
tion, and put vice to the blush. But,
through injudicious severity, they fall
Shorr of the good they might perform.
By an indiscriminate censure of all a-
mufement, they detract from the weight
of their reproof, when amusement bc-
comes undoubtedly sinful. By totally
withdrawing themselves from the circle
of chearful life, they deliver up the en-
tertainments of society into the hands of
the loose, and the corrupted; and permit
the blind power of faihion, uncontroul-
cd, to eftablifll its own standards, and
to exercifc its dangerous sway over the
world.

Pp 2 I

S E RM. I N the fifth place, It is an error to

X. believe, that devotion nourishes a spirit

of severity, in judging of the manners
and characters of others. Under this re-
proach, indeed, it has so long faffered in
the world ; that, with too many, the ap-
pellation of devout, suggests no other cha-
racter, but that of a four and recluse
bigot, who delights in censure. But the
reproach is unjust; for such a spirit is
entirely opposite to the nature of true de-
votion. The very first traces which it
imprints on the mind, are candour and
humility. Its principles are liberal. Its
genius is unafiluming and mild. Severe
only to itself, it makes every allowance
for others which humanity can fuggefc.
It claims no privilege of looking into
their hearts, or of deciding with respect
to their eternal ftate.-If your supposed
devotion produce contrary effects; if it
infuse harshness into your sentiments,
and acrimony into your speech; you
may conclude, that, under a serious ap-
pearance, carnal pafiions lurk. And, if

ever

ever it fllall so far lift you up with self- SE RM.

x.

conceit, as to make you eftabliflh your j
own opinions as an infallible fIandard
for the whole Christian world, and lead
you to confignt to perdition all who diff;cr
fiom you, either in iome dodrinal tenets,
or in the mode of exprefling them; you
may reft assured, that to much pride you
have joined much ignorance, both of the
nature of devotion, and of the Gospel of
Christ. Finally,

IN the fixtlh place, It is an error to

think, that perpetual rapture and fbiriual
joy belong to devotion. Devout feelings
admit vcry different degrees of warmth
and exaltation. Some persons, by the
fiame of their minds, are much more
susceptible than others, of the tender
emotions. The)r more readily relent at
the view of Divine goodness, glow with
a warmer ardour of love, and, by confc-
quence, rife to a higher elevation of joy
and hope. But in the miift of still and
calm affetions, devotion often dwells;

anti

SER M. and though it produce no transports il,

X. the mind, difliies over it a steady terc-

nity. Devout sensations not only vary
in their degree, according to the frame
of different tempers; but, even among
the best disposed, susser much interrup-
tion and decay. It were too much to
cxpedt, that in the present state of human
frailty, those happy feelings flould be
uniform and constant. Oppression of
worldly cares, languor of spirits, and
infirmities of bodily health, frequently
indispose us for the enjoyment of devout
affecions. Pious men, on these occasions,
are in hazard of passing judgment on
their own state with too much severity;
as if, for some great iniquity, they were
condemned by God to final hardness of
heart. Hence arises that melancholy,
which has been seen to overcloud them;
and which has given occasion to many
contemptuous scoffs of ungodly men. But
it is a melancholy which deserves to be
treated with tenderness, not with con-
tempt. It is the excess of virtuous and

pious

pious sensibility. It is the overflowing of S E R M.
a heart affded, in an extreme degree, X.
with the humble sense of its own failings,
and with ardent concern to attain the fa-
vour of God. A weakness, however, we
admit it to be, though not a crime; and
hold it to be perfectly separable from
the essence of devotion. For contrition,
though it may melt, ought not to link
or overpower, the heart of a Christian.
The tear of repentance leads to its own
relief. Religion is a spring of confola-
tion, not of terrour, to every well inform-
ed mind, which, in a proper manner, refts
its hope on the infinite goodness of God,
and the all-fufficient merit of Christ.

To conclude, Let us remove from devo-
tion all those mistakes, to which the cor-
ruptions of men, or their ignorance and
prejudices, have given rife. With us, let
it be the worship of God itn spirit and in
truth; the elevation of the foul towards
him, in simplicity and love. Let us pursue
it as the principle of virtuous condud, and

of

SE R M. of inward peace. By frequent and fcriouls

x. meditation on the great objects of rcli-

gion, let us lay ourselves open to its in-
fluence. By means of the institutions of
the Gospel, let us cherish its impressions.
And, above all, let us pray to God, that
he may eftabliflh its power in our heart.
For here, if any where, his affifiance is
requisite. The spirit of devotion is his
gift. From his inspiration it proceeds.
Towards him it tends; and in his pre-
fence hereafter, it Shall attain its full per-
section.

I SER-

# SERMON XI. On the DUTIES of the YOUNG. TITUS ii. 6. Young men likewise exhort to be sober-minded.

305

S E R M ON XI.
On the D TIES of the Y o N G.

TITUS ii. 6.
ItYoung imen likewise exhort to befober-niinded.

OBRIETY of mind, is one of those SERM.

virtues-which the present condition XI.

of human life strongly inculcates. The
uncertainty of its enjoyments, checks pre-
fimption; the multiplicity of its dangers,
demands perpetual caution. Moderation,
vigilance, and felf-government, are duties
incumbent on all; but especially, on such
as are beginning the journey of life.
To them, therefore, the admonition in
the Text is, with great propriety, diret-
ed; though there is reason to fear, that

Qbq by

SER M. by them it is in hazard of being least

XI. regarded. Experience enforces the ad-

monition on the most giddy, after they
have advanced in .years. But the whole
slate of youthful views and passions, is
adverse to sobriety of mind. The 'cenes
which present themlelves, at our entering
upon the world, are commonly flattering.
Whatever they be in themselves, the lively
spirits of the young gild every opening
profpet. The field of hope appears to
stretch wide before them. Pleasure seems
to put forth its blossoms on every fide.
Impelled by desire, forward they ruhf
with inconsiderate ardour: Prompt to
decide, and to choose; averse to hesitate,
or to enquire; credulous, because un-
taught by experience , raih, because un-
acquainted with danger; head-strong,
because upfubdued by disappointment.
Hence arise the perils, of which it is my
design at present to warn them. I shall
take sobriety of mind, in its most compre-
henfive sense, as including the whole of
that discipline which religion and virtue

prescribe

prescribe to youth. Though the words S E R M.
of the Text are direcaly addressed to yomun XIl
1/en, yet, as the fame admonition is given
in a preceeding verse to the other fcx, the
inftrucions which arise from the Text, are
to be confidered as common to both. I
intend, firlt, to lhow them the importance
of beginning early to give lcrious atten-
tion to their conduct ; and, next, to point
out those virtues which they ought chief-
ly to cultivate.

As soon as you are capable of reflec-

tion, you mutt perceive that there is a
right and a wrong, in human actions.
You fee, that those who are born with
the fame advantages of fortune, are not
all equally prosperous in the course of life.
While some of them, by wikf and steady
condut, attain diftinclion in the world,
and pass their days with comfort and ho-
nour ; others of the fame rank, by mean
and vitious behaviour, forfeit the advan-
tages of their birth, involve themselves in
much misery, and end in being a dif-

Qq 2 grace

SERM. grace to their friends, and a burden on

.Xv ifociety. Early, then, you may learn, that

it is not on the external condition, in
which you find yourselves placed, but on
the part which you are to ad, that your
welfare or unhappiness, your honour or
infamy, depend. Now, when beginning
to aC that part, what can be of greater
moment, than to regulate your plan of
conduc with the most serious attention,
before you have yet committed any fatal
or irretrievable errors ? If, inflead of ex-
erting refletion for this valuable pur-
pose, you deliver yourselves up, at so cri-
tical a time, to sloth and pleasure; if you
refute to liften to any counfellour but
humour, or to attend to any pursuit, ex-
cept that of amusement; if you allow
yourselves to float loose and careless on
the tide of life, ready to receive any di-
redionr which the current of faihion may
chance to give you; what can you expect
to follow, from such beginnings ? While
so many around you are undergoing the
fad ,onfequences of a like indiscretion,

for what reason shall not those confe- s E R \M
quences extend to you ? Shall you only XL
attain success without that preparation,
and escape dangers without that precau-
tion, which is required of others ? Shall
happiness grow up to you, of its own ac-
cord, and fbllicit your acceptance, when,
to the reft of mankind, it is the fruit of
long cultivation, and the acquisition of
labour and care?- Deceivd not your-
selves with such arrogant hopes. \hat-
ever be your rank, Providence will not,
for your fake, reverse its eftablilhed or-
der. The Author of your being hath en-
joined you to take heed to your tz'js ; to
ponder the paths of your feet; to iremember
your Creator in the days of your youth. I-Ie
hath decreed, that they only who seek fl-
ter wzfdom J7hall find it ; that fools Jfall
be afficied, becairfe of their tranfrgefions;
and that whoso refJllfth iifltrucioi, fJhll
destroy his own foul. By listening to these
admonitions, and tempering the vivacity
of youth with a proper mixture of serious
thought, you may ensure chearfulnefs for

the

SE RM. the reft of life; but by delivering your-
X'. selves up at present to giddincfs and le-

vity, you lay the foundation of lasting
heaviness of heart.

When you look forward to those plans

of life, which either your circumstances
have suggested, or your friends have pro-
posed, you will not hesitate to acknow-
ledge, that in order to pursue them with
advantage, rome previous discipline is re-
quifite. Be assured, that whatever is to
be your profession, no education is more
necessary to your success, than the ac-
quirement of virtuous dispositions and
habits. This is the universal preparation
for every charater, and every station
in life. Bad as the world is, refpeca is
always paid to virtue. In the usual course
of human affairs, it will be found, that
a plain understanding joined with ac-
knowledged worth, contributes more to
prosperity, than the brightest parts with-
out probity or honour. Whether science,
or business, or publick life, be your aim,
virtue till enters, for a principal flare, in-

to

to all thofejgreat departments of human S E R M.
a&tion. It is connected with eminence XT
in every liberal art; with reputation in
every branch of fair and useful business;
with diitinction in every publick fiation.
The vigour which it gives the mind, and
the weight which it adds to charaaer;
the generous sentiments which it breathes,
the undaunted spirit which it inspires,
the ardour of diligence which it quickens,
the freedom which it procures from per-
nicious and dishonourable avocations, are
the foundations of all that is high in fame,
or great in success, among men.

Whatever ornamental or engaging en-
owments you now posess, virtue is a
necessary requisite, in order to their shin-
ing with proper lustre. Feeble are the
attracTions of the fairest form, if it be
fufpeacd that nothing within, corresponds
to the pleasing appearance without. Short
are the triumphs of wit, when it is sup-
posed to be the vehicle of malice. By
whatever arts you may at first attrac the
attention, you can hold the esteem, and

secure

E R M. secure the hearts of others, 0dly by ami-
VX.V able dispositions, and the improvements of

the mind. These are the qualities whose
influence will last, when the lustre of all
that once sparkled and dazzled, has passed
away.

Let not then the season of youth be

barren of improvements, so essential to
your future felicity and honour. Now is
the seed-time of life; and according to
'what you Jow, youJle all reap. Your cha-
rader is now, under divine assistance, of
your own forming; your fate is, in some
measure, put into your own hands. Your
nature is as yet pliant and f6ft. Habits
have not eftablilhed their dominion. Pre.
judices have not pre-occupied your un-
derftanding. The world has not had time
to contraSt and debase your affections.
All your powers are more vigorous, dif-
embaraffed and free, than they will be
at any future period. Whatever impulse
you now give to your desires and passions,
the direCtion is likely to continue. It
will form the channel in which your life

I is

i. to run; nay, it may dcetermine its ever- s E R MI.
lasting ifihe. Confider then the employ- xl
ment of this important period, as the
highest truit which ihall ever be com-
mitted to you; as, in a great measure,
decisive of your happiness, in time and
in eternity. As in the fucceflion of the
tiafons, each, by the invariable laws of
Nature, affects the productions of what
is next in course; so, in human life, every
period of our age, according as it is well
or ill spent, influences the happiness of
that which is to follow. Virtuous youth
gradually brings forward accomplilhed
and flouriihing manhood; and such man-
hood pafies of itself, without uneasiness,
into refpedable and tranquil old age.
But when nature is turned out of its re-
gular course, disorder takes place in the
moral, just as in the vegetable world. If
the Spring put forth no blossoms, in
Summer there will be no beauty, and
in Autumn, no fruit. So, if youth be
trifled away without improvement, man-
hood will be contemptible, and old age

R r miserable.

s E r M. miserable. If the beginnings of life lhave

XI. lbeen vanity, its latter end can be no other

than vexation Jj)Jilit.

Having thus lhown the importance of

beginning early to give kfrious attention
to conduct, I come, next, to point out the
virtues which are most necefTary to be cul-
tivated in youth. What I shall,

I. RECOMMEND, is piety to God. With

this I begin, both as the foundation of
good morals, and as a disposition particu-
larly graceful and becoming in youth. To
be void of it, argues a cold heart, defiitute
of some of the best affcctions which belong
to that age. Youth is the season of warm
and generous emotions. The heart flould
then, spontaneously, rife into the admira-
tion of what is great, glow with the love
of what is fair and excellent, and melt at
the discovery of tenderness and goodness.
Where can any objec be found so proper
to kindle those affecions, as the Father of
the universe, and the Author of all feli-
city ? Unmoved by veneration, can you

contemplate

contemplate that grandeur and majesty, SE PR I.
which his works evcry where dlitlay ? XI
Untouched by gratitude, can you view
that proflfion of good, which, in this
pleasing season of life, his beneficent hand
pours around you ? Happy in the love
and affection of thole with whom you
are connec'ed, look up to the Supreme
Being, as the inspirer of all the fricnd-
ship which has ever been ihown you by
others ; himself, your best and most an-
tient friend; formerly, the supporter of
y'our infancy, and the guide of your
childhood ; now, the guardian of your
youth, and the hope of your coming
years. View religious homage, as a na-
tural cxpreffion of gratitude to him for
all his goodness. Confider it as the ler-
vice of the God of yoTu fiJthers ; of him,
to whom your parents devoted you; of
him, whom in former ages your anceffors
honouredc ; and by whom they are now
rewarded, and blessed in heaven. Con-
neced with so many tender sensibilities
'of foul, let religion be with you, not the

R r 2 cold

S E R M. cold and barren offspring of speculation,

XI. but the warm and vigorous dicate of the

heart.

But though piety chiefly belong to the

heart, yet the aid of the underlianding is
requisite, to give a proper direcion to the
devout affeAions. You must endeavour,
therefore, to acquire just views, both of
the great principles of natural religion,
and of the peculiar doctrines of the gospel.
For this end, fludy the sacred scriptures.
Consult the word of God, more than the
fyflems of men, if you would know the
truth in its native purity. When, upon
rational and fober enquiry, you have efta-
bliflled your principles, susser them not
to be hlaken, by the scoffs of the licen-
tious, or the cavils of the sceptical. Re-
member, that in the examination of eve-
ry great and comprehensive plan, such as
that of Chritianity, difficulties may be ex-
pecded to occur; and that reasonable evi-
dence is not to be rejected, because the na-
ture of our present state allows us only to
*now in part, and tofee through a glass da'rkl'.

Impress

Ilmlprcs your minds with reverence for s E rM.

all that is sacred. Let no wantonncfs of XI
youthlful Iiirits, no compliance with the
intemperate mirth of others, ever bctray
you into fillies of profanity. Besides the
guilt which is thereby incurred, nothing
gives a more odious appearance of petu-
lance and presumption to youth, than the
afleclation of treating religion with levi-
ty. Instead of being an evidence of iil-
periour understanding, it betrays a pert
and fhallowv mind; which, vain of the
first finatterings of knowledge, prl'fnics
to make light of what the rct of mankind
irevere.

At the fame time, you are not to ima-

gine, that when exhorted to be religious,

! you are called upon, to become more for-
ie mal and solemn in your manners than

others of the fame years, or to erec your-
selves into supercilious reprovers of thiof
around you. The spirit of true rc!igicn
breathes gentleness and affibility. It gives
a native, unaffcced ease to the behaviour.
It is social, kind, and chlcarfil ; -ir re-

j moved~~~~~~~~~~~~~~..-
'!~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ll!ril

S E R M. moved from that gloomy and illiberal sI-

X.X perfition which clouds the brow, flarpens

the temper, dejects the fiirit, and teaches
men to fit themselves for another world,
by neglecting the concerns of this. Let
your religion, on the contrary, connedc
preparation for heaven, with an honour-
able discharge of the duties of active life.
Let it be associated in your imagination,
with all that is manly and useful; with
'whatJiover things are true, are jrt, are
pure, are lovely, are of good report; where-
ever there is any virtue, and wherever there
is any praise. Of such religion discover,
on every proper occasion, that you are not
afiamed; but avoid making any unnecef-
fary ostentation of it before the world.

II. To piety, join modesty and docility,
reverence of your parents, and fubmiflion
to those who are your fuperiours in know-
ledge, in station, and in years. Depend-
ance and obedience belong to youth.
Modesty is one of its chief ornaments;
and has ever been esteemcd a presage of

rising

riling merit. When entering on the ca- SE R M.
recr of life, it is your part, not to afliue XI
the reins as yet into your hands, but to
commit yourselves to the guidance of the
more experienced; and to become wilse by
the wielom of those who have gone be-
fore you.

Of all the follies incident to youth,

there are none hich either deform its
present appearance, or blast the profplec
of its future profpcrity, more than self-
conceit, presumption, and obilinacy. By
checking its natural progref' in improve-
ment, they fix it in long immaturity;
and frequently produce mischiefs, which
can never be repaired. Yet these are vices
too commonly found among the young.
Big with enterprifie, and elated by hope,
they resolve to trust for iLccefs to none
but themselves. Full of their own abili-
ties, they deride the admonitions which
are given them by their friends, as the
timorous suggestions of age. Too wife
to learn, too impatient. to deliberate, too
forward to be restraincd, they plunge,

wi.th

S E R .. with precipitant indiscretion, into th:

XI. midst of all the dangers with which life

abounds. SeeJf thou a young manl w/i in
his oWut conceit ? There is more hope of a
Jfoo, than of him.1. Positive as you nor
are in your opinions, and confident in
your assertions, be alfured, that the time
approaches, when both men and things
will appear to you in a different light.
Many characters which you now admire,
will, by and by, fink in your esteem; and
many opinions, of which you are at pre-
sent molt tenacious, will alter with ad-
vancing years. Distrust, therefore, that
glare of youthful presumption, which
dazzles your eyes. Abound not in your
own sense. Put not yourselves forward
with too much eagerness ; nor imagine,
that by the impetuosity of juvenile ar-
dour, you can overturn systems which
have been long established, and change
the face of the world. Learn not to think
more highly of yourselves than youz ought to
think, but to think Jbberly. By patient and
gradual progreflion in improvement, you

rI ~ may,

may, in due time, command lasting esteem. s E R M.
But by afflming, at present, a tone of fu- XI
periority, to which you have no title, you
will disgust those whole approbation it is
most important to gain. Forward viva-
city may fit you to be the companions of
an idle hour. More foiid qualities must
recommend you to the wife, and mark
you out for importance and confidera-
tion, in fiibfequent life.

Ill. IT is neceflary to recommend to

you, sincerity and truth. This is the basis
of every virtue. That darkness of charac-
ter, where we can fee no heart; those fold-
ings of art, through which no native as-
section is allowed to penetrate, present an
object, unamiable in every season of life,
but particularly odious in youth. If at
an age, when the heart is warm, when the
emotions are strong, and when nature is
expec'ed to {how itself free and open, you
can already finile and deceive, what are
we to look for, when you lhall be longer
hackneyed in the ways of men; when

S f interest

SE RM. interest lhall have compleatcd the obdu-

XI. ration of your heart, and experience shall

have improved you in all the arts of guile
Dissimulation in youth, is the fore-runner
of perfidy in old age. Its firit appearance
is the fatal omen of growing depravity,
and future flame. It degrades parts and
learning ; obscures the luifre of every ac-
compliihment; and finks you into con-
tempt with God, and man.

As you value, therefore, the approba-

tion of Heaven, or the eftecm of the world,
cultivate the love of truth. In all your pro-
ceedings, be dircca and confiltent. Inge-
nuity and candour poilefs the most power-
ful charm; they helpeak universal favour,
and carry an apology almost for every
failing. 7h e lip of tlth, Jhall be tJlabl/cld
for ever ; but a lying tongute, is but for a mo-
ment *. The path of truth, is a plain and
a safe path; that of falsehood, is a per-
plexing maze. After the first departure
from finccrity, it is not in your power to
flop. One artifice unavoidably leads on
to another; till, as the intricacy of the

labyrinthi
Prov. xii. TQ.

labyrinth thickens, you are left entangled s L K,.
in your own fiare. Deceit discovers a lit- XI.
tle mind, which stops at temporary expe-
dients, without sring to comprehensive
views of conduct. t betrays, at the fame
time, a datardly ipirit. It is the resource
of one, who wants courage to avow his
designs, or to reft upon hlimfelf. Whelreas,
openness of character displays that gene-
rous boldness, which ought to ditiinguifh
youth. To ;lt out in the world with no
other principle than a crafty attention to
interest, betokens one who is destined for
creeping through the inferiour walks of
life. But to give an early preference to
honour above gain, when they lfand in
competition; to deipife every advantage,
which cannot be attained without dif-
honest arts; to brook no meanness, and
to stoop to no difimulation ; are the in-
dications of a great mind, the presages of
future eminence and diftinic'on in life.

At the fame time, this virtuous since-

rity is perfetly consistent with the molt
prudent vigilance and caution. It is op-

S f 2 posed

SER M. posed to cunning, not to true wisdom,
XI. It is not the simplicity of a weak and im-

. provident, but the candour of an enlarged

and noble mind; of one, who scorns de-
ceit, because he accounts it both base and
unprofitable; and who seeks no difguifc,
because he needs none to hide him. Lord!
whoJhall abide in thy tabernacle ? WhoJfhall
nacend into thy holy hill? He that twalketh
uprightly, and worketh righteolujiefs, and
fpeaketh the truth in his heart.

IV. Y o u T H is the proper season of

cultivating the benevolent, and humane
affecions. As a great part of your hap-
piness is to depend on the connections
which you form with others, it is of high
importance that you acquire, betimes, the
temper and the manners which will ren-
der such connecions comfortable. Let a
sense of justice be the foundation of all
your social qualities. In your most early
intercourse with the world, and even in
your youthful amusements, let no unfair-
ness be found. Engrave on your mind

that

that sacred rule, of doi)l in all thilns to S RM.
others, according as you WiJJ that they XL
Jholli do unto you. For this end, impress
yourselves with a deep sense of the origi-
nal, and natural, equality of men. What-
ever advantages of birth or fortune you
possess, never display them with an often-
tatious superiority. Leave the fubordi-
nations of rank, to regulate the intercourse
of more advanced years. At present, it
becomes you to aa among your compa-
nions, as man with man. Remember how
unknown to you are the vicissitudes of
the world; and how often they, on whom
ignorant and contemptuous young men
once looked down with scorn, have risen
to be their fuperiours in future years.

Compaflion is an emotion, of which

you ought never to be alhamed. Grace-
ful in youth is the tear of sympathy, and
the heart that melts at the tale of woe.
Let not ease and. indulgence contract your
affections, and wrap you up in selfish en-
joyment. But go sometimes to the host
of mourning, as well as to the hose offeaft-

i2>,0

S E R M. inir. Accustom yourfclves to think of dth

. diftrefcs of human life; of the solitary

cottage, the dying parent, and the weep-
ing orphan. T17ou JJalt t iot hJrde t;!y
heart, zori' slut thly hand froml tilh poor bro-
ther ; but thozu J7JaltJilrely give lnto him; i;
the day of his 1need: A1nd thine heart Jhll
Inot be grieved zwhen thou givejf unto him,
becaufL that for this thing, the Lord thy Grol
/hall blefj thee inl all tly t)wo;rks :. Neyeer
sport with pain and distress, in any of
your amusements ; nor treat even the
meanest infect, with wanton cruelty.

In young minds, there is common-

ly a strong propensity to particular in-
timacies and friendflips. Youth, in-
deed, is the season when friendthips are
obmetimes formed, which not only con-
tinue through succeeding life, but which
glow to the last, with a tenderness un-
known to the connections begun in cooler
years. The propensity therefore is not to
bedifcouraged; though at the fame time it
must be regulated' with much circumfpec-
tion and care. Too many of the pretended

fricndfhips
' Deut. xv. 7, 0o.

friiendlhips of youth, are mere comlina- ER M.
tions in plelaire. Often they are foundl- X.
ed on capricious likings; suddenly con-
trafted, and as suddenly diflbivcd. Some-
times they are the effict of intereied com-
plaiafncc and flattery on the one fide, and
of credulous fondnetf on the ohr. Beware
of fchl raih and dangerous conne&ions,
which may afterwards load you with dif-
Ilonour. Reemeber, that by the charac-
ter of tlhof whom you chooui for your
friends, your own is likely to be sorned,
and will certainly be judged of by the
world. Be flow, therefore, and cautious
in contracting intimacy; but when a vir-
tuous friendihip is once established, con-
fider it as a sacred engagement. ExpoLf
not yourselves to the reproach of lightnelis
and inconstancy, which always befpea:,
either a trifling, or a base mind. Reveal
none of the Iecrets of your friend. Be
faithful to his interelis. Forsake him nor
in danger. Abhor the thought of ac-
quiring any advantage by his prejudice
cr hurt, Thc;e is a fiIend that lcveCt at

all

S E R M. all tnies, and a brother that is bornS for ad-

XI. verfity. Thine ownifriend, and thyfather's

friend, foifake not *.

Finally, on this head; in order to ren-

der yourselves amiable in society, subdue
all harflnefs of behaviour. Let that cour-
tefy appear in your demeanour, which
springs not so much from studied polite-
ness, as from a mild and gentle heart.
Follow the customs of the world in mat-
ters indifferent; but flop when they be-
come sinful. Let your manners be fim-
ple and natural; and of course they will
be engaging. Affecation is certain de-
formity. By forming themselves on fan-
taftick models, and vying with one ano-
ther in every reigning folly, the young
begin with being ridiculous, and end in
being vitious and immoral.

V. LET me particularly exhort youth,

to temperance in pleasure: Let me admo-
nifh them, to beware of that rock on which
thousands, from race to race, continue to
split. The love of pleasure, natural to

I man
* Prov. xvii. 17.-xxvii. Io.

man in every period of his life, glows at s E R M.
this age with excessive ardour. Novelty XL
adds fre{h charms, as yet, to every grati-
fication. The world appears to spread a
cJntlnual feast; and health, vigour, and
high spirits, invite them to partake of it
without restraint. In vain we warn them
of latent dangers. Religion is accused of
insufferable severity, in precluding enjoy-
ment; and the old, when they offer their
admonitions, are upbraided with having
forgot that they once were young.-And
yet, my friends, to what do the restraints
of religion, ,and the counsels of age, with
refped to pleasure, amount ? They may
all be comprized in two words, not to
hurt yourselves, and not to hurt others,
by your pursuit of pleasure. Within these
bounds, pleasure is lawful; beyond them,
it becomes criminal, because it is ruinous.
Are these restraints any other, than what
a wife man would choose to impose on
himielf? We call you not to renounce
pleasure, but to enjoy it in safety. In-
flead of abridging it, we exhort you to

T t purfie

S E R M. pursue it on an extensive plan. We pro-

XI. pose measures for securing its possession,

and prolonging its duration.

Consult your whole nature. Confider

yourselves not only as sensitive, but as
rational beings; not only as rational, but
social; not only as social, but immortal.
Whatever violates your nature in any of
these refpets, cannot afford true pleasure;
any more than that can promote health,
which undermines an essential part of the
vital system. For the truth of this con-
cluiion, we appeal not merely to the au-
thority of religion, nor to the testimony
of the aged, but to yourselves, and your
own experience. We ask, Whether you
have not found, that in a course of cri-
minal excess, your pleasure was more
than compensated by succeeding pain;
Whether, if not from every particular
instance, yet from every habit, at least,
of unlawful gratification, there (lid not
spring some thorn to wound you, there
did not arise some consequence to make
you repent of it in the issue ? How loln

then,

ihenl, yeJfijlple ones! rwil,' : p J;lticit y? s E R rM
How long repeat the fame r-.: cd of per- XI.
nicious folly, and tamely expose your-
selves to be caught in the fame fiare ? If
you have any consideration, or any firm-
ncfs left, avoid temptations, for which you
have found yourselves unequal, with as
much care, as you would ihun pestilential
infection. Break off all connciions with
the loose and profligate. eThenfilners entice
thee, cofenlt thou iot. Look not on the jine
when it is red, 'wh-' it giveth its color'l in
the cup; for at the !fjl, it biteth like afj'r-
pentt, ai nJliizgeth like an aldder. RemGve
thy way from the Jflrane woman, and come
not nigh the door o/ her boite. Let not thine
heart decline to her ways; for her hbolu is
the way to hell. Thou goeJ after her as a
bird hbfleth to the fitre, and knoweth not
that it is for his lif'.

How many amiable andpromifing qua-

lities in youth, are extinguished by the un-
happy excefles of irregular pleasure! How
many flattering hopes of parents, and
friends, are cruelly deflroyed ! Who but

T t 2 must

S E RM. must drop ; tCea, '.. er the ruins of human

XI, nature, T' letu !he beholds that morning

which a!:'iiw _l bright, setting in such
untimel) darkness; that good humour
which once captivated all hearts, that vi-
vacity which sparkled in every company,
those abilities which were fitted for shin-
ing in the highest station, all sacrificed at
the shrine of low sensuality; and one who
was formed for running the fair career of
life in the midst of public etleem, cut off
by his vices at the beginning of his
course, or funk, for the whole of it, in-
to insignificancy and contempt !--Tlhee,
0 sinful Pleasure! are thy trophies. It
is thus, that, co-operating with the foe of
God and man, thou degradeft human ho-
nour, and blafteft the opening profpecAs
of human felicity.

VI. DILIGENCE, industry, and proper

improvement of time, are material duties
of the young. To no purpose are they
endowed with the best abilities, if they
want ativity for exerting them. Un-

availing,

availing, in this cafe, will be every direc- S E R M.
tion that can be given them, either for Xl.
their temporal or spiritual welfare. In
youth, the habits of indufiry are most
easily acquired. In youth, the incentives
to it are ftrongcit, from ambition and fiom
duty, from emulation and hope, from all
the profpedts which the beginning of
life affords. If, dead to these calls, you
already languifli in fiothful inaction,
what will be able to quicken the more
lluggiih current of advancing years

Industry is not only the initrumcnt of

improvement, but the foundation of plea-
lure. Nothing is so opposite to the true
enjoyment of life, as the relaxed and
feeble state of an indolent mind. He
who is a ftrangerto industry, may possess,
but he cannot enjoy. For it is labour
only which gives the relifl to pleasure.
It is the appointed vehicle of every good
to man. It is the indifpenfible condition
of our poflefling a found mind, in a found
body. Sloth is so inconsistent with both,
that it is hard to determine whether it be

a

S E R M. a greater foe to virtue, or to health and

X., happiness. Inadtive as it is in itself, its

effets are fatally powerful. Though it
appear a slowly flowing tiream, yet it un-
dermines all that is stable and flourilhing.
It not only saps the foundation of every
virtue, but pours upon you a deluge of
crimes and evils. It is like water which
first putrifies by Stagnation; and then
fends up noxious vapours, and fills the
atmosphere with death.

Fly, therefore, from idleneis, as the

certain parent both of guilt and of ruin.
And under idleness I include, not mere
inaction only, but all that circle of trifl-
ing occupations, in which too many
saunter away their youth; perpetually
engaged in frivolous society, or public
amusements, in the labours of dress, or
the ostentation of their person.-- Is this
the foundation which you lay for future
ufefilnefs and esteem? By such accom-
plifhments, do you hope to recommend
yourselves to the thinking part of the
world, and to answer the expectations of

your

,our friends, and your country?-- A- SE I M.
muflumcnts, youth requires. It were vain, XI.
it were cruel, to prohibit them. But
though allowable as the relaxation, they
are most culpable as the business, of the
young. For, they then become the gulf
of time, and the poison of the mind. They
foment bad paflions. They weaken the
manly powers. They fink the native vigour
of youth into contemptible effeminacy.

Redeeming your time from such dan-

gerous waste, seek to fill it with em-
ployments which you may review with
iattisfacion. The acquisition of know-
ledge, is one of the most honourable occu-
pations of youth. The desire of it, dif-
covers a liberal mind, and is connected
with many accompliflhments, and many
virtues. But though your train of life
fliould not lead you to study, the course
of education always furnifies proper
employments to a well-difpofed mind.
Whatever you pursue, be emulous to ex-
cell. Generous ambition, and sensibility to
praise, are, especially at your age, among

the

SERM. the marks of virtue. Think not, tha:

xI. any affluence of fortune, or any clevation

of rank, exempts you from the duties of
application and induitry. Industry is the
law of our being; it is the demand of Na-
ture, of Reason, and of God. Remember
always, that the years which now pass
over your heads, leave permanent memo-
rials behind them. From your thought-
less minds they may escape ; but they re-
main in the remembrance of God. They
form an important part of the register of
your life. They will hereafter bear tefti-
mony, either for or against you, at that
day, when, for all your adions, but par-
ticularly for the employments of youth,
you must give an account to God.

THUS I have set before you, some of

the chief qualifications which belong to
that Sober mind, that virtuous and religi-
ous character, which the Apostle in my
Text recommends to youth; piety, mo-
defty, truth, benevolence, temperance, and
industry. Whether your future course is

~I ~ destined

destined to be long or fliort, after this S E R M.
manner it should commence; and, if it XI.
continue to be thus conducted, its con-
clufion, at, what time soever it arrives,
will not be inglorious or unhappy. For,
honourable age is not tt that whicJh Jilance i
lellyth of time, or that which is mnceficed by
miiber of years. But wvuflom is the gray
hair to mani, and an ulnf;-tted life is old age.

LET me finifhl the fubjeft, with recalling

your attention to that dependance on the
blessing of Heaven, which, amidst all your
endeavours after improvement, you ought
continually to preserve. It is too common
with the young, even when they resolve
to tread the path of virtue and honour, to
set out with presumptuous confidence in
themselves. Trusting to their own abilities
for carrying them successfully through
life, they are careless of applying to God,
or of deriving any assistance, from what
they are apt to reckon the gloomy difci-
pline of religion. Alas! how little do they
know the dangers which await them

U u Neither

S E R M. Neither human wisdom, nor human vir-

XI. tue, unsupported by religion, are equal

for the trying situations which often occur
in life. By the shock of temptation, how
frequently have the most virtuous inten-
tions been overthrown ? Under the pref-
sure of disaster, how often has the greatest
constancy funk ? Every good, and every
perfect gift, is from above. Wisdom and
virtue, as well as riches and honour, come
from God. Destitute of his favour, you
are in no better situation, with all your
boasted abilities, than orphans left to wan-
der in a tratlefs desert, without any guide
to conduct them, or any shelter to cover
them from the gathering storm. Corret,
then, this ill-founded arrogance. Expet
not, that your happiness can be indepen-
dent of him who made you. By faith
and repentance, apply to the Redeemer of
the world. By piety and prayer, leek the
protecion of the God of heaven. I con-
clude with the solemn words, in which a
great Prince delivered his dying charge to
his son; words, which every young perfbn

ought

ought to confider as addrefed to himself, S E R M.
and to engrave deeply on his heart. Thou XI
Solomon, mi1y jon, know thou the God of thy
fathers; andfbrve him? with a peij'ec heart,
and with a willillg mind. For the Lord
fearcheth all hearts, and underflandeth alll
the imaginations of the thoughts. If thou
sicek him, he will be found of thee; but if
thou joirfake him, he wivll cqnf thce off for
ever S:.

1 Clr'on. sxy.iii. 5.

Uu 2 SER-

# SERMON XII. On the DUTIES and CONSOLATIONS of the AGED. PROV. xvi. 31. The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.

340

S E R M ON XII.
On the DUTIES and CONSOLATIONS

of the AGED.

PROV. xvi. 31.
The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it

be found in the way of righteoifnefi.

SE RM. T 0 fear God, and to keep his command-
XIL. ments, is the rule of our duty, in

every period of life. But, as the light
which guides our steps, varies with the
progress of the day, so the rule of reli-
gious conduat is diversified in its appli-
cation, by the different stages of our pre-
sent existence. To every age, there be-
longs a diftint propriety of behaviour.
There arises from it, a series of duties pe-
culiar to itself.

Of

Of those which are incumbent on youth, s E R M.
I have treated in the preceeding difcourtf. x.
As we advance from youth to middle age,
a new field of action opens, and a dilFe-
rent character is required. The flow of
gay and impetuous spirits, begins to sub-
fide. Life gradually assumes a graver cast;
the mind, a more sedate and thoughtful
turn. The attention is now transferred
from pleasure to interest; that is, to plea-
flre diffused over a wider extent, and
measured by a larger scale. Formerly,
the enjoyment of the present moment
occupied the whole attention. Now, no
action terminates ultimately in itself, but
refers to some more distant aim. Wealth
and power, the instruments of lasting
gratification, are now coveted more than
any single pleasure. Prudence and fore-
fight lay their plans. Induffry carries
on its patient efforts. Activity pushes
forward; address winds around. Here,
an enemy is to be overcome; there, a ri-
val to be displaced. Competitions warm;
and the strife of the world thickens on

every

S E R M. every fide. To guide men through this
XLJ busy period, without loss of integrity; to

guard them against the temptations which
arise from mistaken, or interfering, inter-
efts; to recall them from worldly pur-
llits, to serious thoughts of their spiritual
concerns, is the great office of religion.

But as this includes, in a great mea-

sure, the whole compass of moral duty;
as the general strain of religious exhorta-
tion, is addressed to those who are in this
season of life; a delineatidn of the virtues,
properly belonging to middle age, may ap-
pear unneceflfry, and would lead us into
too wide a field. Let us therefore turn
our view to a bounded profpete; and
contemplate a period of life, the duties of
which are circumscribed within narrower
limits. Old age is a stage of the human
course, which every one hopes to reach;
and therefore the consideration of it, in-
terests us all. It is a period justly entitled
to general refped. Even its failings ought
to.be touched with a gentle hand ; and
though the petulant, and the vain, may

defpike

dcefpife the hoary head, yet the wisest of S E RM.
men has aflcrted in the Text, that when X
found in the way of rihteojizefs, it is a
crown of glory. I shall, firif, offer some
counsels, concerning the errors which are
most incident to the aged. Secondly, I
fliall suggest the peculiar duties they
ought to practise; and, thirdly, Point out
| the consolations they may enjoy.

I. As the follies and vices of youth,

are chiefly derived from inexperience and
presumption; so, almost all the errors of
age, may be traced up to the feebleness
and distress peculiar to that time of life.
Though, in every part of life, vexations
occur; yet, informer years, eitherbufinefs,
or pleasure, served to obliterate their im-
pression, by supplying occupation to the
mind. Old age begins its advances, with
disqualifying men for relinhing the one,
and for taking an active part in the other.
While it withdraws their accustomed sup-
ports, it imposes, at the fame time, the ad-
ditional burden of growing infirmities. In

the

E RM. the former stages of their journey, hope
XII. continued to flatter them with many a

fair and enticing profpecl. But in pro-
portion as old age increases, those pleasing
illusions vanish. Life is contracted with-
in a narrow and barren circle. Year after
year, steals somewhat away from their
fiore of comfort; deprives them of some
of their ancient friends, blunts some of
their powers of sensation, or incapacitates
them for some func'ion of life.

Though, in the plan of Providence, it

is wifely ordered, that before we are
called away from the world, our attach-
ment to it fliould be gradually loosened;
though it be fit in itself, that as in the
day of human life, there is a morning
and a noon, so there flould be an evening
also, when the lengthening fladows miall
admonish us of approaching night; yet
we have no reason to be furprized, if they
who are arrived at this dejecing season,
feel and lament the change which they
susser. The complaints therefore of the
aged, fiould meet with tenderness, rather

than

than censure. The burden under which s E R A.
they labour ought to be viewed with XIi.
sympathy, by those who must bear it in
their turn, and who perhaps, hereafter,
may complain of it as bitterly. At the
fame time, the old should confider, that all
the seasons of life have their several trials
allotted to them; and that to bear the in-
firmities of age with becoming patience,
is as much their duty, as it is that of the
young to resist the temptations of youth-
ful pleasure. By calmly enduring, for the
short time that remains, what Providence
is pleated to inflic, they both express a
resignation most acceptable to God, and
recommend themselves to the eiteem and
assistance of all who are around them.

But though the querulous temper im-

puted to old age, is to be confidered as a
natural infirmity, rather than as a vice;
the fame apology cannot be made for that
peevilh disgust at the manners, and that
malignant cenfurc of the enjoyments of
the young, which is sometimes found to
accompany advancing years. Nothing

X x can

SERM. can be more unjust, than to take offence
XIi. at others, on account of their partaking

of pleasures, which it is past your time to
enjoy. By indulging this fretful temper,
you both aggravate the uneafinces of age,
and you alienate those on whose affecion
much of your comfort depends. In order
to make the two extremes of life unite in
amicable society, it is greatly to be wilfh-
ed, that the young would look forward,
and confider that they {hall one day be
old ; and that the old would look back,
and remembering that they once were
young, make proper allowances for the
temper and the manners of youth.

But instead of this, it is too common

to find the aged, at declared enmity with
every thing that is present; perpetually
complaining of the growing depravity of
the world, and of the astonishing vices
and follies of the rising generation. All
'things, according to them, are ruthing
fast into ruin. Decency and good order
have become extinCt, ever since that hap-
py discipline, under which they spent

their

thcir youth, has passed away.-Part, at SER ,.R
least, of this difplcafure, you may fairly xIT.
impute to the infirmity of age, which
throws its own gloom on every surround-
ing objec. Similar lamentations were, in
the clays of your youth, poured forth by
your fathers; and they who are now
young, shall, when it comes to their turn,
inveigh, in the like firain, against those
who succeed them. Great has been the
corruption of the world in every age.
Sufficient ground there is for the com-
plaints made by serious obfervcrs, at all
times,- of abounding iniquity and folly.
But though particular modes of vice pre-
vail in one age, more than in others, it
does not follow, that on that age all in--
quity is accumulated. It is the form,
perhaps, more than the quantity of cor-
ruption, which makes the diftincion. In
tlhe worst of times, God has alrured us,
that there lhall be always a fJed whoJ Jall
jerve him ~. Say nzot thoit, lhat is the cau/e
that theJfornmer days were better than the/e ?

X x for
' Pfal. .xii. 30.

S E R M. for thou dofJ not enqtuire wisel' concerninlg
XII. this. Be not righteous over-much; lneither

make thyelf over-wri F. Former follies
pass away, and are forgotten. Those
which are present, strike observation, and
sharpen censure. Had the depravation of
the world continued to increase in propor-
tion to those gloomy calculations, which,
for so many centuries past, have eftimat-
ed each race as worse than the preceeding,
by this time, not one ray of good sense,
nor one !park of piety and virtue, must
have remained unextinguiflled among
mankind.

One of the vices of old age, which ap-

pears the most unaccountable, is that co-
vetous attachment to worldly intereit,
with which it is often charged. But
this too, can naturally be deduced from
the sense of its feebleness and decay.
In proportion as the vigour both of bo-
dy and mind declines, timidity may
be expected to increase. With anxious
and fearful eye, the aged look forward

to
* Eccles. vii. Ic, i6.

to the evils which threaten them, and s E R M.
to the changes which may befall. Hence; X1I.
they are sometimes apt to over-value
riches, as the infirumcit of their de-
fence against there dangers, and the most
certain means of securing them against
solitude and disrespect. But though their
appiehenfions may justify a cautious fru-
gality, they can by no means excuse a
forciid avarice. It is no less absurd,
than it is culpable, in the old, from the
dread of uncertain futurity, to deny them-
selves the enjoyment of the present; and
to increase in anxiety about their jour-
ney, in proportion as it draws nearer to
its close. There are more effeciual me-
thods of commanding repedt from the
world, than the mere potffiefio of wealth.
Let them be charitable, and do good.
Let them mix beneficence to their friends,
with a chearful enjoyment of the com-
forts which befit their lrate. They will
then receive the returns of real refped
and love. Whereas, by their riches,
they procure no more than pretended

demon-

S E R M. demonfirations of regard; while their ill..
XrL judged pariimony occasions many secret

wishes for their death.

As increasing years debilitate the bo-

dy, so they weaken the force, and dimi-
nifh the warmth of the affetions.. Chill-
ed by the hand of time, the heart lorcs
that tender sensibility, with which it once
entered into the concerns and sorrows of
others. It is, in truth, a merciful ap-
pointment of Providence, that as they
who fee many days, must behold many
a fad scene, the impressions of grief upon
their heart ihould be blunted by being
often repeated; and that, in proportion
as their power of advancing the pro-
fperity of others decreases, their parti-
cipation of the misfortunes of others
should also lessen. However, as, in eve-
ry period of life, humanity and friend-
ship contribute to happiness, it is both
the duty and the interest of the aged, to
cherish the remains of the kind assec-
tions; and, from the days of former
years, to recall such impressions as may

tend

tend to soften their hearts. Let them S E R M.
not, from having fuifered much in the XII.
course of their long pilgrimage, become
callous to the sufferings of others. But
remembering that they still are men, let
them study to keep their heart open to
the sense of human woe. Practised in
the ways of men, they are apt to be
iufpicious of design and fraud; for the
knowledge, and the diftrnut of mankind,
too often go together. Let not, how-
ever, that wary caution, which is the
fruit of their experience, degenerate into
craft. Experience ought also to have
taught them, that amidst all the false-
hood of men, integrity is the best de-
fence; and that he who continueth to
the end to walk upripghtly', Iall continue
to walki fJiely. Having thus offered
some admonitions concerning the errors
most incident to age, I proceed,

II. To point out the duties which pe-
culiarly belong to it.

The

SER M. The firfl, which I flall mention, is, a
XII. timely retreat from the world. In every

part of life, we are in hazard of being
too deeply immersed in its cares. But,
in former periods, the impulse of ative
spirit, the neceflary business of our fta-
tion, and the allowable endeavours to ad-
vance our fortune by fair industry, ren-
dered it difficult to observe due modera-
tion. In old age; all the motives of
eager pursuit diminish. The voice of
Nature then calls you, to leave to others
the bustle and contest of the world; and
gradually to disengage yourselves from
a burden, which begins to exceed your
strength. Having born your share of the
heat and labour of the day, let the even-
ing of life be passed in the cool and
quiet Ihade. It is only in the slade,
that the virtues of old age can flourifl.
There, its duties are discharged with
most success; and there, its comforts are
enjoyed with greatest fatisfadion.

By the retreat of old age, however, I
do not mean, a total cessation from every

I worldly

worldly employment. There is an error s E R M.
in this, as well as in the opposite ex- XII.
treme. Persons who have been long
harassed with business and care, some-
times imagine, that when life declines,
they cannot make their retirement from
the world too complete. But where
they expected a delicious enjoyment of
leisure and ease, they have often found
a melancholy solitude. Few are able,
in any period of their days, to bear a
total abftraaion from the world. There
remains a vacancy, which they cannot
fill up. Incapable of being always
employed in the exercises of religion,
and often little qualified for the en-
tertainments of the underfranding, they
are in hazard of becoming a burden to
themselves, and to all with whom they
are connected. It is, therefore, the duty
of the aged, not so much to withdraw
entirely from worldly business, as to con-
tract its circle; not so much to break
off, as to loosen, their communication
with active life. Continuing that train

Y y of

SE R M. of occupation to which they have been.
XIL. most accuflomed, let them pursue it with

less intenseness; relaxing their efforts, as
their powers decline; retiring more and
more, from publick observation, to dome-
stick scenes, and serious thoughts; till, as
the decays of life advance, the world shall
of itself withdraw to a greater distance
from their view; its objects ihall gradu-
ally yield their place to others of more
importance; and its tumults shall found
in their ears, only like a noise which is
heard from afar.

If it be the duty of the old, to retreat

betimes from the fatigue of worldly care,
it is still more incumbent on them, to
quit the pursuit of such pleasures as are
unsuitable to, their years. Chearfulnefs,
in old age, is graceful. It is the natural
concomitant of virtue. But the chear-
fulness of age, is widely different from
the levity of youth. Many things are
allowable in that early period, which, in
maturer years, would defcrve censure;
but which, in old age, become both ridi-

culous

culous and criminal. By aukwardly as- SE R M.
secting to imitate the manners, and to V, .
mingle in the vanities, of the young, as
the aged depart from the dignity, so they
forfeit the privileges of gray hairs. But
if, by follies of this kind, they are de-
graded, they are exposed to much deeper
blame, by descending to vitious pleasure,
and continuing to hover round those
sinful gratifications to which they were
once addicted. Amusement and relaxa-
tion the aged require, and. may enjoy.
But let them confider well, that by every
intemperate indulgence, they accelerate
decay; instead of enlivening, they op-
press, and precipitate, their declining state.
Ease, safety, and refpec, are the proper
enjoyments of age. Withil these bounds
let it remain, and not vainly attempt to
break through that barrier, by which Na-
ture has separatcd the pleasures of youth,
from the comforts left to the concluding
years of. life.

A material part of the duty of tle aged
consists, in fludying to be useful to the

Y y 2 race

SE R M. race who are to succeed them. Here
XII. opens to them an extensive field, in which

they may so employ themselves, as con-
fiderably to advance the interests of reli-
gion, and the happiness of mankind. To
them it belongs, to impart to the young
the fruit of their long experience; to in-
Itrut them in the proper conduct, and
to warn them of the various dangers, of
life; by wife counsel, to temper their pre-
cipitate ardour; and, both by precept and
example, to form them to piety and virtue.

It is not by' rigorous discipline, and

unrelaxing austerity, that they can main-
tain an ascendant over youthful minds.
The constraint which their pretence
will impose, and the aversion which
their manners will create, if the one be
conflantly awful, and the other severe,
tend to frufirate the effet of all their
wisdom. They mufi assume the spirit of
the companion, and the friend; and mix
,with the authority of age, a proper de-
gree of indulgence to the manners of
the young. Instead of lessening the re-

fpecl

Ipeca due to their years byfuch condefeen- s E R M.
sion, they take the furefl method to in- xI.
crease it. Old age never appears with
greater dignity, than, when tempered by
mildness, and enlivened with good hu-
mour, it als as the guide and the pa-
tron of youth. Religion difilayed in
such a character, strikes the beholders,
as at once amiable and venerable. They
revere its power, when they fee it adding
so much grace to the decays of nature,
and liedding so pleasing a luflre over
the evening of life. The young wilh to
tread in the fame steps, and to arrive at
the close of their days with equal ho-
nour. They liften with attention to
counsels, which are mingled with ten-
dernef, and rendered refpeclable by gray
hairs. . For, notwithstanding all its pre-
fumption, youth naturally bends before
fuperiour knowledge and years. Aged
wisdom, when joined with acknowledged
virtue, exerts an authority over the hu-
man mind, greater even than that which
arises from power and fation. It can

check

SERM. check the most forward, abash the moaf
XifL profligate, and firike with awe the moil

giddy and unthinking.

In the midst of their endeavours to be

useful to others, let not the aged forget
those religious employments, which their
own slate particularly requires. The first
of these, is, reflecion on their past beha-
vioir, with a view to discover the errors
which they have committed; and, as far
as remaining life allows, to amend and
repent.-Long has the world bewildered
you in its maze, and imposed upon you
by its arts. The time is now come, when
this great seducer should mislead you no
more. From the calm flation at which
you are arrived, fequefteled from the
crowd of the deceiving, and the deceiv-
ed, review your conduct, with the eye of
Christians and immortal beings. After
all the tumult of life is over, what now
remains to afford you solid fatisfation ?
Have you served God with fidelity, and
discharged your part to your fellow,
creatures with integrity and a good con-

science ?

science ? Can you look forward, without E R M.
terrour, to that day which is to dissolve x1I.
your connection with this world, and to
bring you into the pretence of him who
made you, in order to give account of
your actions ?-The retrofpec of life is
seldom wholly unattended by uneafmnefs
and flame. Though, to the good and the
bad, it presents a very different scene;
yet, to all men, it recalls much guilt in-
curred, and much time mifpent. It too
much refemblcs the review, which a tra-
veller takes from some eminence, of a bar-
ren country, through which he has pas-
fed, where the heath and the desert form
the chief prospect; diversified only by a
few scattered spots of imperfect cultiva-
tion.

Turn then your thoughts to the proper

methods of making your peace with God
through Jesus Christ; and implore, from
Divine grace, that nlew heart, and right
spirit, which will fit you for a better world.
Let devotion fill up many of those hours,
which are now vacant from worldly bu-

finess

S E R M. finess and care. Let your affetions dwell
XiL among divine and immortal objects. In

silent and thoughtful meditation, walk
as on the shore of that vast ocean, upon
which you are soon to embark. Summon
up all the considerations which should
reconcile you to your departure from life;
and which may prepare you for going
through its last scene, with firmness and
decency. Often let your thanksgivings
ascend to God, for that watchful care
with which he hath hitherto conducted
you, through the long journey of life.
Often let your prayers be heard, that, in
what remains of your pilgrimage, he may
not forsake you; and that, when you en-
ter into the valley of the J7fadow of death,
he may there support you with his Jlaf,
and defend you with his rod.- Amidst
such thoughts and cares, let old age find
you employed; betaking yourselves to a
prudent and timely retreat; disengaged,
both from the oppressive load of bufi-
ness, and from the unseasonable pursuit
of pleasure; applying yourselves to formi

the

the succeeding race, by your counsels to S E R M.
virtue and wisdom; reviewing ierioufly 7 ii.
your past life; by repentance and devo-
tion, preparing yourselves for a better;
and, with humble and manly composure,
expecing that hour, which Nature cannot
now long delay. It remains,

III. To suggest the consolations which

belong to old age, when thus found in the
away of righteolulJnes.

I must introduce them with observing,

that nothing is more reasonable in itself,
than to submit patiently to tliofe infirmi-
ties of Nature, which are brought on by
the increase of years. You knew before-
hand what you had to expet, when you
numbered the fucceflive Summers and
Winters, which were passing over your
heads.. Old age did not attack you by
furprize, nor was it forced upon you
against your choice. Often, and earnest-
ly, did you wiflh to fee long life, and many
days. When arrived at the desired period,
have you any just cause to complain, on

Z z account

SE R M. account of enduring what the conlitu-
XIL. tion of our being imposes on all Did

you expeEt, that, for your fake, Provi-
dence was to alter its established order?
Throughout the whole vegetable, sensible,
and rational world, whatever makes pro-
grefs towards maturity, as soon as it has
passed that point, begins to verge towards
decay. It is as natural for old age to be
frail, as for the corn to bend under the
ripened ear, or for the autumnal leaf to
change its hue. To this law, all who
went before you, have submitted; and
all who shall come after you, mufft yield.
After they have flourished for a season,
they llall fink, like you, into the vale of
life, and bow under the pressure of years.

During the whole progress of the hu-

man course, the principal materials of our
comfort or unealinefs, lie within ourselves.
Every age will prove burdensome, to those
who have no fund of happiness in their
own breafc. Preserve them, if you could,
from-all infirmity of frame. Bellow upon
them, if it were possible, perpetual youth;

frill

fill they would be restless and miserable, S E R M.
through the influence of ill-governed pas- XII.
sions. No wonder that such persons are
peevi{h and querulous, when old. Unjustly
they impute to their time of life, that mi-
fery with which their vices and follies em-
bitter every age. Whereas, to good men,
no period of life is unsupportable, because
they draw their chief happiness from
sources which are independent of age or
time. Wisdom, piety, and virtue, grow not
old with our bodies. They susser no decay
from length of days. To them only be-
longs unalterable and unfading youth.
Those that be planted in the jhoij of the
Lord, Jhall flouri/ in the courts of our
God. They flJall fill bbing forth fruit in old
age; they fJall be fat, and four7iJig .

You are now, it is true, past rclifing

many of those pleasures which once a-
mused you. Your sensations are less quick
than formerly; your days, more lan-
guiflhing. But if you have quitted the
region of pleasure, in return, you poflefs
that of tranquillity and repose. If you

Z z 3 arc
Pfal. xcii. 13, 14.

S E R M. are strangers to the vivacity of enjoyment,

wXIL you are free, at the fame time, from the pain

of violent and often disappointed desire.
Much fatigue, much vexation, as well as
vanity, attend that turbulence of life, in
which the younger part of mankind are
engaged. Amidst those keen pursuits,
and seeming pleasures, for which you en-
vy them, often they feel their own misery,
and look forward with a wiflful eye to
the season of calmness and retreat. For,
on all fides of human life, the balance of
happiness is adjusted with more equality
than at first appears; and if old age
throws some new distresses into the scale,
it lightens also the weight of others. Many
paflions, which formerly created you much
disturbance, have now subsided. Many
competitions, which long filled your days
with disquiet and strife, are now at an
end. Many afflictions, which once rent
your hearts with violent anguish, are now
softened into a tender emotion, on the
remembrance of past woe. In the begin-
nings of life, there was room for much

apprz-

apprehension concerning what might be- S E R M.
fall in its progress. Your security was XII.
never untroubled. Your hopes were dif-
turbed with many anxieties and fears.
Having finiflled the career of labour and
danger, your anxiety ought of course to
lessen. About to enter into the harbour,
vou can look back, as from a secure fta-
tion, upon the perils you have escaped,
upon the tempest by which you was tof-
fed, and upon the multitudes who are frill
conflicing with the florm.

If you have acted your part with inte-

grity and honour, you are juffly entitled
to relped, and you will generally receive
it. For rarely, or never, is old age con-
temned, unless when, by vice or folly,
it renders itself contemptible. Though
length of time may have worn off super-
ficial ornaments, yet, what old age loses
in grace, it often gains in dignity. The
veneration, as was before observed, which
gray hairs command, puts it ir. the power
of the aged, to maintain a very important
place in human society. They are so far

from

SE R M. from being insignificant in the world,
xI. that families long held together by their

authority, and societies accustomed to be
guided by their counsels, have frequently
had cause to regret their loss, more than
that of the most vigorous and young. To
success of every kind, the head which di-
recs, is no less essential, than the hand
which executes. Vain, nay, often dan-
gerous, were youthful enterprise, if not
conduced by aged prudence. Ifaid, Days
Jhould speak, and multitude of years JIJouhl
teach wisdom '. Therefore thou fJalt rife
up before the hoary head, and honour the
face of the old tan, and fear thy God t.

Though, in old age, the circle of your

pleasures is more contracted than it has
formerly been; yet, within its limits, ma-
ny of those enjoyments remain, which
are most grateful to human nature. Tem-
perate mirth, is not extinguished by ad-
vanced years. The mild pleasures of
domeftick life, still chear the heart. The
entertainments of conversation, and social
intercourse, continue unimpaired. The

desire
* Job xxiii. 7. t Lev. xix. 32.

desire of knowledge, is not abated by the S E R Nr.
frailty of the body; and the leisure of old XI".
age, affords many opportunities for grati-
fying that desire. The sphere of your
obfcrvation and reflection, is so much en-
larged by long acquaintance with the
world, as to uipply, within itself, a wide
range of improving thought. To recall
the various revolutions which have oc-
curred since you began to ad your part
in life; to compare the characters of past
and present times; to trace the hand of
Providence, in all the incidents of your
own lot; to contemplate with thoughtful
eye, the successive new appearances which
the world has assumed around you, in
government, education, opinions, cuf-
toms, and modes of living; these are
employments, no less entertaining, than
inftrudive to the mind.

While you are engaged in such em-

ployments, you are perhaps surrounded
with your families, who treat you with
attention and refpea ; you are honoured
by your friends; your charaCter is efta-

bliflied;

SE R M. blifled you are placed beyond the reach
xlr. of clamour, and theJlrife of tongues; and,

free from diftrading cares, you can at-
tend calmly to your eternal interests. For
such comforts as these, have you not
cause molt thankfully to acknowledge
the goodness of Heaven? Do they not as-
ford you ground, to pass the remainder of
your days in resignation and peace; dif-
posing yourselves to rife in due time, like
satisfied guests, from the banquet that
has been set before you; and to praise
and bless, when you depart, the great
Master of the feast ? To a man that is good
in his fight, whether he be young or old,
God giveth wij/lom, and knowle(dge, andjoy.
For every season of life, the benignity of
his providence hath prepared its own satis-
fadions, while his wisdom hath appointed
its peculiar trials. No age is doomed to
total infelicity; provided that we attempt
not to do violence to Nature, by seeking to
extort from one age, the pleasures of ano-
ther; and to gather, in the Winter of life,

/ x those

those flowers which were destined to blof- s E R M.
fom, only in its Summer or its Spring. XII.

BUT perhaps it will be said, that I

have confidered old age, only in its first
flages, and in its most favourable point of
light; before the faculties are as yet much
impaired, and when disease or affliction
has laid no additional load on the bur-
den of years. Let us then view it, with
all its aggravations of distress. Let us
lippofe it arrived at its utmost verge,
worn out with infirmities, and bowed
down by sickness and sorrow. Still there
remains this consolation, that it is not
long ere the weary shall be at reft. Having
passed through so many of the toils of lifc,
you may now, fnrely, when your pilgri-
mage touches on its close, bear, without
extreme impatience, the hardflips of its
concluding stage. From the ineitimable
promises of the Gospel, and from the gra-
cious pretence of God, the afflictions of
old age cannot seclude you. Though your
bcart jjonld begin to faint, and your fleJ/h to

3 A fail,

SE R M. fail, there is One, who can be theJtrength
XII. ofyour heart, andyour portionfor ever. Even

to your old age, faith the Lord, I am He;
and even to hoary hairs, will I carry you.
I have made, and I will bear; even I will
carry, and will deliver you A. Leave thy
fatherless children; I will preserve then
alive; and let thy widows trui in me -.

There is undoubtedly a period, when

there ought to be a satiety of life, as there
is of all other things; and when death
should be viewed, as your merciful dif-
mission from a long warfare. To come to
the grave in a full age, like as a Jhock of
corn cometh in, in its Jeafon i, is the na-
tural termination of the human course.
Amidst multiplying infirmities, to pro-
long life beyond its usual bounds, and to
draw out your existence here to the last
and foulest dregs, ought not to be the
wish of any wife man. Is it desirable, to
continue lingering on the borders of the
grave, after every tie which connects you
with life is broken; and to be left a fbli-

tar'
'* Ifa. xlvi. 4. t Jer. xlix. ii. t Job v. 36.

tary individual, in the midit of a new ge- s E R M.
neration, whose faces you hardly know ? XII.
The shades of your departed friends rife up
before you, and warn you, that it is time
to depart. Nature and Providence fum-
mon you, to be gathered to your fathers.
Reason admonishes you, that as your pre-
deceffors made way for you, it is just that
you lhould yield your place to those, who
have arisen to succeed you on this busy
itage; who, for a while, mhall fill it with
their actions and their sufferings, their
virtues and their crimes; and then shall,
in their turn, withdraw, and be joined to
the forgotten multitudes of former ages.

Could death indeed be confidered in no

other view, than as the close of life, it
would afford only a melancholy retreat.
The total extinction of being, is a thought
which human nature, in its molt diftref-
fed circumstances, cannot bear without
dejection. But, blessed be God! far other
profpeas revive the spirits of the aged,
who have spent their life in piety and vir-
tue. To them, death is not the extinction,

3 A 2 but

S E R M. but the renovation of the living principle;
XII. its removal from -the earthly house of this

tabernacle, to the honjle not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens. Having fought the
good fight; having finiJhed their cotife, and
kept thefaith; there is laid up for them, the
crown, of righteoitfneJf. The Saviour of the
world, hath not only brought immortality
to light, but placed it within the reach
of their hope and trust. By making
atonement for their guilt, he hath pre-
pared their way within the veil; and
secured to them, the possession of an iln-
heritance, incorruptible and undefiled, reServ-
ed in the heavens.-- Such are the hopes
and profpeas, which chear the sorrows
of old age, and surmount the fear of
death. Faith and piety ate the oily ade-
quate supports of human nature, in all
its great emergencies. After they have
guided us through the various trials of
life, they uphold us, at lafit amidit the
ruins of this falling frame; and when
the Jilver cord is jil ready to be loJoJd,

and

and the goldlen bowl to be broken ; whenz E R M.
the pitcher is broken at the foluntaint, and XI.
the wheel broken at the citern ; they en-
able us to fay, 0 DeathJ! where is thy
.flin ? 0 Grave! where is thy vic7or' ?

S E R-

# SERMON XIII. On the POWER of CONSCIENCE. GENESIS xlii. 21, 22. And they said, one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us ; ...

374

SERMON XIII.
On the POWER of CONSCIENCE.

GENESIS xlii. 21, 22.
And they said, one to another, We are verily

guilty concerning our brother, in that we
Jaw the angul/h of his foul, when he
besought us; and we would not hear:
Therefore is this djfrefs come upon us. And
Reuben answered them, faying, Spake I not
unto you, faying, Do not fin agaifl the
child; and ye would not hear? Therefore,
behold also, his blood is required.

S E R M. T HIS book of Generfs displays a more
XiII. xm .JL singular and interesting scene, than

was ever presented to the world, by any
other historical record. It carries us back
to the beginning of time; and exhibits
mankind, in their infant and riling state.

It

It shows us human manners in their pri- s E R M
mitive simplicity, before the arts of refine- XII.
ment had polished the behaviour, or dif-
guised the characers of men; when they
gave vent to their passions without dif-
simulation, and spoke their sentiments
without reserve. Few great societies were,
as yet, formed on the earth. Men lived in
scattered tribes. The tranfadtions of fa-
milies, made the chief materials of hifto-
ry; and they are related in this book,
with that beautiful simplicity, which, in
the highest degree, both delights the ima-
gination, and affeds the heart.

Of all the patriarchal histories, that of

Joseph and his brethren is the most re-
markable, for the characters of the acors,
the inftrudive nature of the events, and
the furprizing revolutions of worldly for-
tune. As far as relates to the Text, and
is necessary for explaining it, the story is
to the following purpose.- Joseph, the
youngest, except one, of the sons of Jacob,
was distinguished by his father with such
marks of peculiar affection, as excited the

envy

SERM. envy of his brethren. Having related to
_rvXI them, in the openness of his heart, cer-

tain dreams which portended his future
advancement above them, their jealousy
rose to such a height, that they unnatu-
rally conspired his deftrucion. Seizing
the opportunity of his being at a difIance
from home, they first threw him into a
pit, and afterwards fold him for a slave;
imposing on their father, by a false rela-
tion of his death. When they had thus
gratified their resentment, they loft all
remembrance of their crime. The fami-
ly of Jacob was rich,and powerful; and
several years pafled away, during which
they lived in prosperity; without being
touched, as far as appears, with the least
remorse for the cruel deed which they
had committed.

Mean-while, Joseph was safely condud-
ed, by the hand of Providence, through a
variety of dangers, untill, from the lowest
condition, he rose .at last to be chief fa-
vourite of the King of Egypt, the most
powerful monarch at that time in the

i world.

world. While he possesed this high dig- s E R M.
nity, a general famine diftrefred all the XIIe
neighbouring countries. In Egypt alone,
by means of his foresight, and prudent ad-
miniflration, plenty still reigned. Com-
pelled to have recourse to that kingdom
for supply of food, the brethren of Joseph,
upon this occasion, appeared in his pre-
ience, and made their humble application
to him, for liberty to purchase corn; lit-
tle fufpecling that the Governour of the
land, before whom they bowed down their
faces to the earth, was him, whom, long
ago, they had fold as a slave to the Ifli-
maelites. But Joseph no sooner law, than
he knew his brethren; and, on this un-
expeced meeting, his heart melted with-
in him. Fraternal tenderness arose, in all
its warmth; and totally effaced, from his
generous breast, the imprefiion of their
ancient cruelty. Though, from that mo-
ment, he began to prepare for them a fur-
prize ofjoy; yet, hefofarconftrained him-
self, as to assume an appearance of great
severity. By this he intended, both to ob-

3 B lige

S E R M. lige them to bring into Egypt his youngefr
XIII. and most beloved brother, whose presence

he inltantly required; and also, to awaken
within them, a due sense of the crime
which they had formerly perpetrated.
Accordingly, his behaviour produced the
designed effeE. For, while they were in
this situation, firangers in a foreign land,
where they had fallen, as they conceived,
into extreme distress; thrown into prison
by the Governour, and treated with ri-
gour for which they could assign no
cause; the refletion mentioned in the
Text arose in their minds. Conscience
brought to remembrance, their former
fins. It recalled, in particular, their long
forgotten cruelty to Joieph; and, with-
out hesitation, they interpreted their pre-
sent distress, to be a judgment, for this
crime, inflicted by Heaven. Theyfaid, one
to another, rWe are verily guilty concerning
our brother, in that we Jawv the aingutia of
hisfoul, when he befotght us; and we twould
not hear: Therefore is this difrefs cone upon
us.-Behold also, his blood is required.

From

From this inftruirive passage of hifto- SE R M.

ry, the following observations naturally XII .
arise. I. That a sense of right and wrong
in conduct, or of moral good and evil,
belongs to human nature. II. That it
produces an apprehension of merited pu-
niflment, when we have committed evil.
III. That although this inward senti-
ment be stifled during the season of
prosperity, yet, in adversity, it will re-
vive. And, IV. That when it revives,
it determines us to confider every distress
which we susser, from what cause soever
it has arisen, as an actual infliction of
punishment by Heaven. The confide-
ration of these particulars, will lead us
to a very serious view of the nature of
man, and of the government of God.

I. There belongs to human nature, a

sense of moral good and evil, or a fa-
culty which diftinguilies right from
wrong, in acion and conduct. They Jbid,
one to another, ire are verily guilty.-In
an age, when the law was not yet given,
when no external revelation of the Di-

3 B 2 vine

S E R M. vine will subsisted, except what had been
X"'. handed down among the Patriarchs, from

one generation to another; the brethren
of Joseph reasoned concerning their con-
ducd, upon the fame moral principles,
and were affected by the fame feelings,
of which we are conscious at this day.
Such sentiments are coeval with human
nature; for they are the remains of a
law, which was originally written in aour
heart. In the darkest regions of the
earth, and among the rudest tribes of
men, a difdindion has ever been made,
between just and unjust, between a duty
and a crime. Throughout all the inter-
course of human beings, these diftincions
are supposed. They are the foundation
of the mutual trust, which the tranfac-
tions of life require; nay, the very enter-
tainments of society constantly appeal to
them. The Historian, who fludies to
magnify his hero, by representing him as
just and generous; the Poet, who seeks
to interest the world in his fictions, by
engaging the heart in behalf of distressed

virtue,

avirtue, are fufficicnt to confute the Scep- SER M.
tick, who denies any natural perception xil
of a diflinaion in actions.

But though a sense of moral good and

evil be deeply imprefled on the heart of
man, yet it is not of sufficient power to
regulate his life. In his present corrupt-
ed state, it is both too general to afford
him full direction in conduct, and too
feeble to withstand the opposition of con-
trary principles in his nature. It is often
perverted, by ignorance and superstition:
It is too easily overcome, by passion and
desire. Hence, the importance of that
Divine revelation, which communicates
both light and strength; which, by the
instructive discoveries it makes, and by
the powerful assistance it supplies, raises
man to a station, infinitely fuperiour to
that which he possesses under the mere
light of Nature.

It is of consequence, however, to re-

mark, that this revelation necessarily sup-
poses, an antecedent sense of right and
wrong to take place in the human mind,

It

S E R M. It addresses itself to men, as possessed of
XIr,. such a faculty; and, when it commands

them, in general terms, to pursue what-
Joever things are true, whatsoever things
are honeI, whataoever things are jzfl, pure,
lovely, or of good report, if there be any vir-
tue, and if there be any praise, it plainly
appeals to the native dicates of their
heart. Nay, unless men were endowed
by Nature, with some sense of duty, or
of moral obligation, they could reap no
benefit from revelation; they would re-
main incapable of all religion whatever.
For, in vain were a system of duty pre-
fcribed to them by the word of God;
allegiance were in vain required towards
their Creator, or love and gratitude en-
joined towards their Redeemer; if, pre-
vioufly, there was no principle in their
nature, which made them feel the obliga-
tions of duty, of allegiance, and of gra-
titude. They could have no ideas cor-
responding to such terms; nor any con-
vidion, that, independently of fear or in-
terest, they were bound to regard, either

him

him who made, or him who redeemed S E R M.
them.-This, therefore, is to be held as a XIII.
principal fundamental to all religion, That
there is in human nature, an approving
or condemning sense of conduct; by
means of which, they who have not the
law, are a law unto thelfelves :. They,
who from a mistaken zeal for the honour
of Divine revelation, either deny the ex-
iftence, or vilify the authority, of natural
religion, are not aware, that, by disallow-
ing the sense of obligation, they under-
mine the foundation, on which revela-
tion builds its power of commanding
the heart.

The Text leads us to observe, that one

of the cafes in which the natural sense of
good and evil operates most forcibly, is,
when men have been guilty of injustice
or inhumanity. W'e Jaw the anguiJsh of
our brother's Jbul when he beJought us, and
we would not hear. An inward principle
prompts us to do good to others; but
with much greater authority, it checks

and
*Rom. ii. 14.

SERM. and condemns us, when we have done
,x-- them injuries. This part of the human

conlitrution deserves particular remark,
as a signal proof of the wisdom of its Au-
thor, and of the gracious provision which
he has made for the welfare of mankind.
We are all committed, in some measure,
to the care and afliftance of one another.
But our mutual influence reaches much
farther, with refped to the evils, than
with refpec' to the enjoyments, of thofic
around us. To advance their prosperity,
is often beyond our ability; but to in-
flict injuries, is almost always within our
power: And, at the fame time, felf-intc-
reft very frequently tempts us to commit
them. With the utmost propriety, there-
fore, we are so framed, that the influence
of the moral principle should be m'ost
authoritative, in cafes where its aid is most
needed; that to promote the happiness
of others, should appear to us as praifc-
worthy, indeed, and generous; but that,
to abstain from injuring them, ihould be
felt as matter of the ftriaeft duty.-

I ~ ~ Amidst

Amiidft the diltrefs which the Patriarchs s E R M.
fiiflered in Egypt, had only this fuggef- xII.
tion occurred, " We ahw our brother
" beginning to prosper, and we contri-
" buted not to his advancement," their
minds would have been more easily quiet-
ed. But, when their reflection was, 'We
J;aw his angiui/J when he befoJught us, and
we would 7ot hear, then, compunction
turned upon them its lharpeft edge. 1
proceed to observe,

II. THAT our natural sense of right

and wrong, produces an apprehension of
merited punishment, when we have com-
mitted a crime. When it is employed in
surveying the behaviour of others, it dif-
tinguiflles some actions, as laudable and
excellent; and disapproves of others, as
evil and bae&. But when it is directed
upon our own conduct, it aiTiumes a
higher office, and exercises the authority
of a judge. It is then properly termed,
Conscience; and the sentiments which it
awakens, upon the perpetration of a crime,

3 C arc

SERM. are filed, Remorse. Therefore, said the

X . brethren of Joseph, is this distress come

upon us; behold also, his blood is re-
quired. They acknowledged, not only
that they had committed a wrong, but a
wrong for which they were justly doom-
ed to susser.

Did not conscience suggest this natural

relation between guilt and punishment,
the mere principle of approbation, or dif-
approbation, with refped to moral con-
duc, would prove of finall efficacy. For
disapprobation attends, in some degree,
every convicion of impropriety or folly.
When one has acted unsuitably to his
interest, or has tiefpaffed against the rules
of prudence or decorum, he reflecs upon
his conduct with pain, and acknowledges
that he deserves blame. But the diffe-
rence between the sense of mifcondud,
and the sense of guilt, consists in this,
that the latter penetrates much deeper
into the heart. It makes the criminal
feel, that he is not only blameable, but
justly punishable, for the part which he

has

has acted. With reference to this office S E R M.
of conscience, the inspired writers fre- xrlr.
quently speak of it in terms borrowed
from the awful folemnities of judicial
procedure; as, bearing witlnef for or agaimfl
us; accitfing or excifiig, judging and con-
demninig. It will be found, that in the
the languages of most nations, terms of
the fame import are applied to the opera-
tions of conscience; expressing the sense,
which all mankind have, of its passing
sentence upon them, and pronouncing
rewards or punishments to be due to
their actions.

The sense of puniflment merited, you

are further to observe, can never be fe-
parated from the dread, that at some time,
and in some way or other, puniihment
shall be actually inflicted. This dread is
not confined to the vengeance of man.
For, let the finner's evil deeds be ever so
thoroughly concealed from the knowledge
of the world, his inward alarms are not
quieted upon that account. Now, punifl-
ment is the fancfion of a law. Every law

3 C 2 fppofes

S E R M. supposes a rightful fuperiour: And there-
xII. fore, when conscience threatens punilh-

ment to secret crimes, it manifestly recog-
nizes a supreme Governour, from whom
nothing is hidden. The belief of our be-
ing accountable to him, is what the most
hardened wickedness has never been able
to eradicate. It is a belief which arises,
not merely from reasoning, but from the
powerful impression of Nature. Con-
science is felt to acd as the delegate of an
invisible Ruler; both anticipating his
sentence, and foreboding its execution.

Hence arise the terrours, which so of-

ten haunt guilt, and rife in proportion to
its atrocity. In the history of all nati-
ons, the Tyrant and the Oppressor, the
bloody and the flagitious, have been ever
pointed out as fearful, unquiet, and reft-
less; subjed to alarms and apprehensions
of an unaccountable kind. And surely,
to live, under such disquietude, from the
dread of merited punishment, is already
to undergo one of the most severe punifl-
ments which human nature can susser.

When

When the world threatens us with any S E R M.
of its evils, we know the extent, and dif- XII.
cern the limits of the danger. We fee the
quarter, on which we are exposed to its
attack. We measure our own strength,
with that of our adversary; and can take
precautions, either for making resistance,
or for contriving escape. But when an
awakened conscience places before the
finner, the just vengeance of the Al-
mighty, the prospect is confounding, be-
cause the danger is boundless. It is a
dark unknown which threatens him. The
arm that is stretched over him, he can
neither fee nor refilt. On every fide, he
dreads it; and on every object which
surrounds him, he looks with terrour, be-
cause he is conscious it can be employed
against him as an inffrument of wrath.
No wonder that the lonesome solitude,
or the midnight hour, flould strike him
with horrour. His troubled mind be-
holds forms, which other men fee not;
and hears voices, which found only in
the ear of guilt. A hand appears to come

*forth,

SERM. forth, and to write upon the wall over
XIII. against him; as it did of old, in the fight

of an impious monarch. He fiJall find
no ease, nor ref. For the Lord Jhall give
him a trembling heart, and failing of eyes,
and orrow of mind: And his lifefljall hang
in doubt before him; and he flJall fear day
and night, and have none aurance of his life.
In the morning he Jhall fay, Would to God it
were even; and at even he shall fay, Would
to God it were morning, for the fear of his
heart wherewith he Jfiall fear, and for
the fight which his eyes Jhall fee. His
life Jhall be grievous unto him *.-Adver-
fity ! how blunt are all the arrows of
thy quiver, in comparison with those of
guilt !- But if such be the power of
conscience, whence, it may be asked,
comes it to pass, that its influence is not
more general, either in restraining men
from the commission of fin, or in lead-
ing them to a timely repentance ? This
brings me to observe,

III. THAT,
a Deut. xxviii. 65, 66, 67. Ifa. xv. 4.

III. THAT, during a course of profpe- SER lI.

rity, the operations of conscience are of- XIII
ten suspended; and that adveriity is the
season which restores them to their proper
force. At the time when crimes are com-
mitted, the mind is too much heated by
paflion, and engrofled by the objeA of its
pursuit, to be capable of proper reflec-
tion. After this tumult of spirits has
subsided, if a train of new pafoions be at
hand to employ its activity, or a fuccef-
sion of pleasurable objects occur to en-
gage its attention, it may for a while re-
main, though not entirely free from in-
ward misgivings, yet unconscious of the
degree of its guilt. Dissipated among the
amusements of life, the finner escapes, in
some measure, from his own view. If he
reflecs upon himself at all, the continu-
ance of prosperity seems to him a strong
justification of his conduct. For it will
be found, that in the hearts of all men,
there is a natural propensity, to judge of
the favour of the Supreme Being, from
the course of external events. When they

are

SE R M. are born with a smooth gale along the
Xt fitream of life, and behold every thing

proceeding according to their with, hard-
ly can they be brought to believe, that
Providence is their enemy. Basking in
the sun-shine of prosperity, they suppose
themselves to enjoy the smile of indul-
gent Heaven; and fondly conclude, that
they are on terms of fiiendfhip, with all
above, and with all below. Easy they
find it, then, to spread over the grossest
crimes, a covering, thin, indeed, and
flight, yet sufficient to conceal them from
a superficial view.

Of this we have a very remarkable in-

stance, in those brethren of Joseph, whose
history we now confider. Not oily the
silence of the irnipired writer, gives us
ground to conclude, that their remorse
was stifled until the present period ; but,
at a former one, when, in the time of
their prosperity, they were contriving the
deftruaion of Joseph, we find Judah fay-
ing to his brethren, 71What profit is it, if
we flay our brother, and conceal his blood ?

Let

Let us fell him to the J7Jmaelites ; and let S E R M.
not our hand be upon himl; for he is our bro- XII.
ther and our fleJ3: Alnd his brethren zvcre
content :. Here you behold them juiti-
fying their crime, by a fort of pretended
humanity; and making light of felling
their brother for a slave, because they did
not take away his life. How itrangely
are the opinions of men altered, by a
change in their condition ! How different
is this sentiment of the Patriarchs, from
that which they afterwards entertained of
the fame action, when, as you fee in the
Text, the remembrance of it wrung their
hearts with anguish !

But men, in truth, differ as much from

themselves, in prosperity, and in adversity,
as if they were different creatures. In pro-
fperity, every thing tends to flatter and
deceive. In adveriity, the illusions of life
vanihf. Its avocations, and its pleasures,
no longer afford the finner that shelter
he was wont to find from conscience.
Formerly, he made a part of the crowd.
iHe now feels himself a solitary individual,

3D left
* Gen. xxxvii. 26, 27.

SERM. left alone with God, and with his own
XIIr. mind. His spirits are not supported, as

before, by fallacious views of the favour
of Heaven. The candle of the Lord lhines
not on his head ; his pride is humbled;
and his affetions are softened, for receiv-
ing every serious impression. In this situ-
ation, a man's iniquity is Jire to find him
out. Whatever has been notoriously cri-
minal in his former conduct, rifes as a
fpedrc, and places itself before him. The
increased sensibility of his mind, renders
him alive to feelings which lately were
faint; and wounds which had been ill
healed, bleed. afresh. When men take the
timbrel and the harp, and rejoice at the folnd
of the organ, they fiy, Whlat is the Almighty
that weJiouiildferve him ? But when they
are holden in the cords of affiicion, then he
jsheweth them their work, and their tranf-
grefion, that they have exceeded. He open-
eth also their ears to diJcipline; and com-
mandcth, that they return from iniquity.

Hence, we may perceive the great use-
fulness, and propriety, of that interchange

of

of conditions, which takes place in hu- s E R M,
man life. By prosperity, God gives XII.
scope to our pafilons, and makes trial of
our dispositions. By adversity, he revives
the serious principle within. Neither the
one, nor the other, could be born entire
and unmixed. Man, always prosperous,
would be giddy and insolent; always as-
flicted, would be fullen and despondent.
Hopes and fears, joy and sorrow, are,
therefore, so blended in his life, as both
to give room for worldly pursuits, and
to recall, from time to time, the admo-
nitions of conscience. Of the proportion
in which they should be mixed for this
purpose, we are very incompetent judges.
From our ignorance of the degree of dif-
cipline, which the spiritual state of others
requires, we often tax Providence un-
justly, for its severity towards them:
And, from the vanity and rafinefs of
our wiihes, we complain, without rea-
Ibn, of its rigour to ourselves. While
we consult nothing but our ease, God
attends to our spiritual improvement.

3 D 2 When

SE R M. When we seek what is pleating, he fends
XIII. what is useful. When, by drinking too

deep of worldly prosperity, we draw in a
secret poison, he mercifully infuses a me-
dicine, when he troubles and embitters
the waters. It remains now to observe,

IV. That when conscience is tho-

roughly awakened, it determines the fin-
ner, to confider every calamity which he
suffers, as a positive inflicion of punifl-
ment by Heaven. As it had before
alarmed him with threatenings of Di-
vine displeasure, it tells him, when he
falls under distress, that the threatened
day of account is come. Afflitions, on
tome occasions, rife directly out of our
fins. Thus, diseases are brought on by
intemperance; poverty springs from idle-
nes ; and disgrace, from presumption.
In such cafes, the punishment is so close-
ly connected with the crime, that it is
impossible to avoid discerning the rela-
tion which the one bears to the other.
But the appointment of Providence,

which

which we now confidcr, reaches farther s E R M.
than this. God has framed us fb, that XII
difti-refes, which have no perceivable
connection with our former crimes, are,
nevertheless, interpreted by conscience, to
be infliced on their account. They
force themselves upon our apprehension,
under this view. They are made to car-
ry, not only that degree of pain which
properly belongs to themselves, but that
additional torment allb, which arises
from the belief of their being the ven-
geance of the Almighty.

Let a man fall unexpectedly into fbme

deep calamity. Let that calamity be
brought upon him, either by means
which the world calls fortuitous; or by a
train of incidents, in which his own
misconduct, or guilt, has apparently had
no part; yet one of the first quellions,
which, in such a situation, he puts to
himself, is, What have I done to deserve
this ? His reflecion is, almost jftinc-
tively, drawn back upon his former life;
and if, in the course of that retrofpec,

any

SERM. any flagrant guilty deed occur to fminit
XI,. his conscience, on this he cannot avoid

refting with anxiety and terrour, and
connecting it in his imagination with
what he now suffers. He fees, or thinks
that he fees, a Divine arm lifted up; and
what, in other circumstances, he would
have called a reverse of fortune, he now
views as a judgment of Heaven.

When the brethren of Joseph, confined

in the Egyptian prison, were bewailing
the distress into which they had fallen,
there was no circumstance which point-
ed out any relation between their prelent
misfortune, and their former cruelty to
their brother. A long course of years had
intervened, during which they flourifl-
ed in wealth and ease. They were now
far from the scene of their crime; in a
foreign land, where they believed them-
selves utterly unknown, and where they
had done nothing to offend. But con-
science formed a connection between
events, which, to the ordinary apprehen-
sion of men, had none. It made them

recolldc,

recollet, that they, who once had been s E R M.
deaf to the supplications of a brother, XIIl
were now left friendless and forlorn, im-
ploring pity in vain from an unrelenting
Governour; and that they who had firit
conspired to kill their brother, and after-
wards fold him for a slave, were them-
selves deprived of liberty, and threatened
with an ignominious death. How unde-
fcrvedly soever these evils befell them on
the part of men, they confefred them to
be just on the part of Providence. They
concluded the hour of retribution to be
arrived ; and, in the person of the Go-
I vernour of Egypt, they beheld the Ruler
of the world calling them to account for
guilt. TJherefore is this dIf/refJ come upo01
us. Behold also, his blood is required.

Similar sentiments, on like occasions,

¶ will be found not uncommon among
, mankind. Pious men, there is no doubt,

are at all times disposed to look up to
God, and to acknowledge his hand in

A every event of life. But what I now ob-
| serve, is, that where no habitual acknow-

I ~ ~~~
~~ledgment

s E R M. ledgment of God takes place; nay, where
XII. a daring contempt of his authority has

prevailed, conscience, nevertheless, con-
strains men, in the day.of their diflrefs,
to recognize God, under the most awful
of all characters, The avenger of pall
guilt.

Herein the wisdom of God appears in

such a light, as justly to claim our highest
admiration. The ordinary course of his
Providence, is carried on by human means.
He has fettled a train of events, which
proceed in a regular fucceflion of causes
and effets, without his appearing to in-
terpofe, or to ad. But these, on proper
occasions, are made to assec the human
mind, in the fame manner as if he were
beheld descending from his throne, to
punifl the finner with his own hand.
Were God to suspend the laws of Nature,
on occasion of every great crime that was
committed on earth, and to govern the
world by frequent interpositions of a mi-
raculous kind, the whole order of human
affairs would be unhinged; no plans of

I ~ ataion

acion could be formed; and no scope S E R M.
would be given for the probation and XnL.
trial of men. On the other hand, were
the operation of second causes allowed
to conceal a Divine hand totally from
view, all sense of fuperiour government
would be loft ; the world would ieem to
be void of God; the finner would per-
ceive nothing but chance and fortune, in
the distresses which he suffered. Whereas,
by its being so ordered, that several in-
cidents of life, ihall carry the fame force,
and strike the mind with the fame im-
pression, as if they were supernatural in-
terpofitions, the fear of God is kept alive
among men, and the order of human as-
fairs is, at the fume time, preserved un-
broken. The finner fees his distress to
be the immediate effect of human vio-
lence or oppression; and is obliged, at
the fame moment, to confider it as a Di-
vine judgment. His conscience gives to
an ordinary misfortune, all the edge and
the ifing, of a visitation from Heaven.

3 E FROM

SE R M. FROM the train of thought which the
XlII. Text has suggested, several inferences na-

turally follow. But I shall confine myself
to two, which claim your particular at-
tention.

The first is, the clear evidence which

the preceeding observations afford, of a
Divine government, now exercised over
mankind. This most important and aw-
ful of all truths, cannot be too often pre-
sented to our view, or too strongly im-
pressed on our mind. To the imperfet
convicion of it, which obtains in the
world, must be ascribed, in a great mea-
sure, the prevalence of fin. Did men
firmly believe, that the Almighty Being,
who formed them, is carrying on a fy-
ftem of administration which will not
leave guilt unpuhifhed, it is impossible
that they could remain so inattentive, as
we often behold them, to their moral
conduct. But the bulk of mankind are
giddy and thoughtless. Struck by the
superficial appearances of pleasure, which
accompany licentiousness, they enquire

no

no farther; and deliver themselves up to s E R M.
their senses, and their passions. Where- XIII.
as, were they to reflect, but for a mo-
ment, upon that view which has now
been given of human nature, they might
soon be satisfied, that the moral govern-
ment of God is no matter of doubtful
difcuflion. It is a faA, no less obvious
and incontestable, than the government
exercised by those earthly rulers, whom
we behold with the ensigns of their of-
fice, before our eyes.

To govern, is to require a certain

course of action, or, to prescribe a law;
and to enforce that law, by a suitable
distribution of rewards and punishments.
Now, God has not only inverted con-
science, as we have seen, with authority
to promulgate, but endowed it also with
power to enforce, his law. By placing
inward approbation and peace on the fide
of virtue, he gave it the fanation of re-
ward. But this was not enough. Pain
is a more powerful principle, than plea-
sure. To escape misery, is a stronger mo-

3 E 2 tive

S E R M. tive for action, than to obtain good. God.
XIII. therefore, so framed human nature, that

the painful sense of ill-defert fliould at-
tend the commission of crimes; that this
sense of ill-defert mhould necessarily pro-
duce the dread of punishment; and that
this dread should so operate on the mind,
in the time of distress, as to make the
finner conceive Providence to be engaged
against him, and to be concerned in in-
fliting the punishment which he suffers.
All these impressions he hath stamped
upon the heart with his own hand. He
hath made them constituent parts of oui
frame; on purpose, that by the union of
so many firong and pungent sentiments,
he might enforce repentance and refor-
mation, and publihi to the human race
his detestation of fin. Were he to speak
to us from the clouds, his voice could not
be more decisive. What we discern to
be interwoven with the contexture of
human nature, and to pervade the whole
course of human affairs, carries an evi-
dence not to be resifted, We might, with

as

as much reason, doubt whether the fun S E R M.
was intended to enlighten the earth, or XI.
the rain, to fertilize it; as whether he,
who thus framed the human mind, in-
tended to announce righteousness to man-
kind, as his law.

T I E second inference which I make

from the foregoing difcourfc, refpeCs the
intimate connection, which those opera-
tions of conscience have, with the pecu-
liar and diftinguifling doftrines of the
Gospel of Christ. They will be found to
accord with them so remarkably, as to
furnifli an answer to obme of those ob-
jections, which fupcrficial reasoners are
apt to raise against the Christian revela-
tion. In particular, they coincide with
that awful view which the Gospel gives
us, of the future consequences of guilt.
If the finner is now constrained by con-
science, to view the Almighty as pur-
suing him with evil for long-forgotten
crimes, how naturally must he conclude,
that, in a subsequent period of existence,

the

SERM. the Divine administration will proceed
XII. upon the fame plan, and complete what

has been left imperfect here ? If, during
this life, which is only.the time of trial,
the .dfpleafure of Providence at fin is
displayed by tokens so manifest, what
may be apprehended to follow, when ju-
fiice, which at present only begins to be
executed, flhall be carried to its confum-
mation? What conscience forebodes, reve-
lation verifies; afluring us, that a day is
appointed, when God will render to every
man according to his works; to them, who
by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for
glory, honour, and immortality; eternal life:
But unto them that are contentious, and obey
not the truth, but obey unrighteoufniefs; in-
dignation and wrath, tribulation and an-
guijh, upon every foul of man that doth evil,
of the JewfirJt, and alo of theGentile. For
there is no refpet of persons with God. For
as many as have finned without the law,
shall also perlji without the law; and as
many as have finned in the law, Jhall be
judged by the law *.

While
*Rom. ii. 7,-_3.

While the threatenings of conscience s E R M.

thus strengthen the evidence of the scrip- XI,
ture doctrine concerning future punilh-
ments, they likewise pave the way for
the belief of what is revealed concerning
the method of our deliverance by ChriPc.
They suggest to the fimner, tome deep
and dark malignity contained in guilt,
which has drawn upon his head such
high displeasure from Heaven. They
call forth his most anxious efforts, to avert
the effecs of that displeasure, and to pro-
pitiate his offended judge. Some atone-
ment, he is conscious, must be made;
and the voice of Nature has, in every age,
loudly demanded suffering, as the proper
atonement for guilt. Hence, mankind
have constantly fled for refuge to such
substitutions, as they could devise to place
in the room of the offender; and, as by
general consent, victims have every where
been slain, and expiatory sacrifices have
been offered up on innumerable altars.
lTherewith JhJall I come before the Lord,
and bozw mvfelf before the zfo/i high God ?

Shall

SERM. Shall I come before him with burnt os'r-
xIH. inls, and calves of a year old ? Will the

Lord be pleased with thoufawls of rams,
or with ten thozftand of rivers of oil ? Or,
flJall I give my fiji born for my tranf
gref/ion; the fruit of nly body, for the flt
of ny foul*? These perplexities, and agi-
tations of a guilty conscience, may be
termed preludes, in some measure, to the
Gospel of Christ. They are the pointings
of unenlightened Nature, towards that
method of relief, which the grace of God
has provided. Nature felt its inability
to extricate itself from the consequences
of guilt: The Gospel, reveals the plan of
Divine interposition and aid. Nature
confessed some atonement to be necef-
fary: The Gospel, discovers that the ne-
ceffary atonement is made. The remedy
is no sooner presented, than its suitable-
ness to the disease appears; and the great
mystery of redemption, though it reaches,
in its full extent, beyond our comprehen-
sion, yet, as far as it is revealed, holds a

I visible
: Micah vi. 6, 7.

visible congruity with the fcntiments of SE R ,L

XIII.
conscience, and of nature. LY>>

Natural and revealed religion proceed

from the fame Author; and, of course,
are analogous and consistent. They are
parts of the fame plan of Providence.
They are connected measures of the fame
fyflem of government. The serious be-
lief of the one, is the belt preparation for
the reception of the other. Both concur
in impressing our mind with a deep sense
of one moit important truth, which is
the result of this whole discourse, that as
we sow now, we m11j reap; that under
the government of God, no one shall be
permitted, with impunity, to gratify his
criminal passions, and to make light of
the great duties of life.

3 F SER-

# SERMON XIV. On the Mixture of JOY and FEAR in RELIGION. PSALM ii. 11. Rejoice with trembling.

410

S E R M O N XIV.
On the Mixture of J o and SI A R inl

RELIGI ON.

PSALM ii. II.

Rejoice with trembling.

SERM. OY and Fear, are two great springs
XIV. Jos human action. The mixed con-

dition of this world, gives scope for
both; and, according as either predo-
minates, it influences the general tenour
of our conduc2. Each of'them possesses
a proper place in religion. To serve thl
Lord with gladness, is the exhortation of
the Psalmist David . To serve him witl.
reverence and godly fear, is the admoni-
tion of the Apostle Paul l. But, under
the present imperfeAtion of human na-

ture
i Pfal. c. 2. + Heb. xii. 2S.

ture, each of these principles may be car- s E R M.
ried to a dangerous extreme. When the iXv.
whole of religion is placed in joy, it is
in hazard of rising into unwarrantable
rapture. When it res altogether on
fear, it degenerates into fuperfrtious ser-
vility. The Text enjoins a due mixture
of both; and inculcates this important
maxim, That joy, tempered with fear, is
the proper disposition of a good man.
In discoursing of this subjed, I thall
endeavour to flow, first, That joy is
essential to religion; and next, That, for
for various reasons, this joy ought to be
mixed with fear; whence, we ihall be
able to ascertain the nature of that steady
and composed spirit, which is most suit-
able to our present condition, and most
acceptable to the God whom we serve.

I. JoY is eflential to religion in two

refpelts; as religion inspires joy, and as
it requires it. In other words; To rejoice,
is both the privilege, and the duty, of
good men.

3F 3 Ix

SE R M. IN the first place, religion inspires joy.
XIV. It affords just ground of gladness, to all

who firmly believe its doctrines, and fin-
cerely study to obey its laws: For it con-
sers on them, the two most material re-
quifites of joy; a favourable situation of
things without, and a proper disposition
of mind within, to reliih that favourable
situation.

When they examine their situation

without, they behold themselves placed
in a world, which is full of the influence
of a gracious Providence; where beauty
and good are every where predominant;
where various comforts are bestowed;
and where, if any be with-held, they have
reason to believe, that they are with-held
by parental Wisdom. Among the crowd
that encompass them, they may be at a
loss to discern, who are their friends, and
who their enemies. But it is sufficient to
know, that they are under the protecion
of an invisible Guardian, whose power
can keep them from every evil. All the
iteps of his conducl, they may be unable

tq

to trace. Events may befall them, of S ERM.
which they can give no account. But as Xiv
long as they are satisfied, that the fyflem of
Divine govcrnment is founded on mercy,
no present occurrences are able to destroy
their peace. For he uwhoJpuared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for them, how
fiall he 1nt 'with him, fireely give them all
things ? If their nature is frail, Divine
assistance is promised to strengthen it. If
their virtue is imperfect, a dispensation is
opened, which gives them the hope of
pardon. If their external circumstances
be in any rcfpe& unfavourable, it is be-
cause a higher interest is consulted. ll
thilgs, they are assured, Jhall work tore-
ther for their good. On their prosperity
refts, the blessing; on their adversity, the
fanclifying spirit, of the Almighty. Old
age may advance, and life decay; but
beyond those boundaries of Nature, faith
opens the profpe& of their lasting felicity.
Without' anxiety, they pass through the
different periods of their present existence,

because

s E R I. because they know it to be no more thart

an introduclion to immortality.

As such a lituation of things without,

lays a solid foundation for joy, bo the dif-
position which religion forms within, pro-
motes the reliih of it. It is indeed from
within, that the chief sources of enjoy-
ment or trouble rife. The minds of bad
men are always disorderly; and hence
their lives are so generally uneasy. In vain
they take the timbrel and the harp, and en-
deavour to rejoice at the found of the organ.
Spleen and disgust pursue them, through
all the haunts of amusement. Pride and
ill humour torment them. Oppressed
with discontent, their spirits flag; and
their worn-out pleasures, afford them en-
tertainment no more. But religion sub-
dues those malignant passions, which are
the troublers of human repose; which
either overcast the mind with the gloom of
peevishness, or diftluiet it by the violence
of agitation. It infuses, in their room,
those mild and gentle dispositions, whole
natural effect is to smooth the tenour of

the

the foul. Benevolence and candour, mo- S E R ;M.
leration and temperance, wherever they XIV.
reign, produce chearfulnefs and serenity.
The conlcioufilefs of integrity, gives cafe
and freedom to the mind. It enables
good men to extracd from every object,
the whole fatisfacion which it is capable
of yielding ; and adds the flavour of in-
nocence, to all their external pleasures.

IN the second place, As religion natu-

rally inspires joy, so, what it inspires, it
commands us to cherish. As a neceflary
proof of our sincerity, it requires chear-
fulness in the performance of our duty;
because, if this be wanting, our religion
discovers itself not to be genuine in prin-
ciple, and in practice it cannot be stable.

Religious obedience, deftitutc of joy, is

not genuine in its principle. For did
either faith or hope, the love of God, or
the love of goodness, rule the heart; they
could not fail to produce fatisfaclion in
piety and virtue. All those calfes of joy
which I have mentioned, would then ope-

rate;

E R M. rate; and their native effeC on the mind,
XIV. would follow. The profpets which re-

ligion opens, would gladden, and the as-
fecions which it inspires, would sooth
the heart. We serve with pleasure, the
benefactor whom we love. We rejoice
in every study and pursuit, to which we
are sincerely attached. If we serve not
God with pleasure, it is because we know
him not, or love him not. If we rejoice
not in virtue, it is because our affetion
is alienated from it, and our inclinations
are depraved. We give too evident proof,
that either we believe not the principles
of religion, or that we feel not their
power. Exclude joy from religion; and
you leave no other motives to it, except
compulsion and interest. But are these
suitable grounds, on which to reft the
whole of our obedience to the Supreme
Being ? My Joil give me thy heart, is the
call of God. Surely if there be no plea-
sure in fulfilling his commands, the heart
is not given to him; and, in that cafe,

I the

the multitude of sacrifices, ad birn t oSJer- SERM-
iligs, is brought to his altar in vain. XIV.

As religioni, defRitute of joy, is imperfect

in its principle, so, in practice, it muff be
unstable. In vain you endeavour to fix
any man to the regular performance of
that, in which he finds no pleasure. Bind
him ever so fast by interest or fear, he
will contrive some method of eluding the
obligation. Ingenuity is never so fertile
of evasions, as where pleasure is all on
the one fide, and mere precept on the
other. He may fludy to save appearances.
He may dissemble and constrain himself.
But his heart revolts in secret; and the
weight of inclination, will, in the end,
draw the praaice after it, If perseverance
is not to be expected, still less can zeal
be looked for, from him, who, in his re-
ligious duties, trembles without rejoicing.
Every attempt towards virtue which he
forms, will be feeble and awkward. He
applies to 'it as a task; he dreads the talk-
master; but he will labour no more, than
necefity enjoins. To escape from punifil-

G Cr Illment,

SE R M. ment, is his sole aim. He bargains for
XIV. immunity, by every duty which he per-

forms; and all beyond, he esteems fu-
perfluous toil.-Such religion as this, can
neither purify the heart, nor prepare for
heavenly bliss. It is the refuge of an ab-
jea mind. It may form the ritual of the
monk, or prescribe the penance of the
idolater; but has no concern with the ho-
mage of him, who worJl7ips the Father in
spirit and in truth. His character is, that
the joy of the Lord is his irezngth '. It at-
taches his heart to religion. It inspires his
zeal. It supports his contfancy; and ac-
celerates his progre's.

There is no man, but has some objec

to which he cleaves for enjoyment; some-
what that flatters him with distant hope,
or affords him present pleasure. Joy is
the end towards which all rational beings
tend. For the fake of it, they live; it re-
fembles the air they breath, which is ne-
ceffary for the motion of the heart, and
all the vital functions. But as the breath-
ing of infeCted air proves fatal to life; in

the

*' XTh 1 ii

' I
.

the fame manner, joy drawn froml a cor- s E R i;i.
rupted source, is deftruive, both of vir- XIV.
tue, and of true happiness. When you
have no pleasure in goodncfs, you may
with certainty conclude the reason to be,
that your pleasure is all derived from an
opposite quarter. You have exhausted
your affeion upon the world. You have
drunk too much of its poisoned waters,
to have any relilh for a pure spring.

Estimate, therefore, the genuineness of

your religious principles, efRimate the de-
gree of your liability in religious prac-
tice, by the degree of your fatisfadiion in
piety and virtue. Be aflurcd, that where
your treaiure is, there will your delight
be also. The worldly nman rejoices in his
poeffefions; the voluptuous, in hIis plea-
fures; the social, in his friends and com-
panions. The truly good man, rejoices in
doing jzfl/y, loving- mercy, and walking
humbly with the Lord his God. He is hap-
py, when employed in the regular dif-
charge of the great duties of life. Spon-
taneous and chearful, they flow from the

3G 2 affections

6 E R M. affections of a pure heart. Not only
XIV. from the keeping of the Divine com-

mandments he expects, but in the keeping
of thenm, he enjoys, a great reward.-Ac-
cordingly, in the sentiments of holy men
recorded in scripture, we find this spirit
every-where prevalent. Their language
was; ThyJiatutes have I taken as mine he-
ritage for ever; for they are the rejoicing of
my heart. They are my songs in the hoife of
my pilgrimage. They are sweeter than honey,
and the honey comb. Wrhom have I in hea-
ven but thee ? And there is none upon earth
that I deftre besides thee. They did not re-
ceive theJpirit of bondage, but the Jpirit of
adoption. They were filled with peace and
joy in believing. The rejoiced in hope of the
glory of God. As soon as the Ethiopian
eunuch received from Philip the light of
the Gospel, that light revived and chear-
ed- his heart. A new fun seemed to arise;
a new glory, to shine around him. Every
objet brightened; and he went on his
way rejoicing :. After the fame manner

fhlould
'" Acs viii. 39,

fiould every good man proceed in his s E R .
journey through life, with a fercne and x..
chearful spirit. Conifernation and de-
jetion let him leave to the slaves of guilt,
who have every thing to dread, both fiom
this world, and the next. If he appeal
before others with a diflirited aspect, he
dishonours religion; and affords ground
for fuificion, that he is either ignorant
of its nature, or a firanger to its power.

Thus I have ihown joy to be efential

to religion. It is the spirit which it in-
spires, and which it requires, in good
men. But in our present state, the best
principles may be carried to a dangerous
excess ; and joy, like other things, has
its due limits. To serve God with un-
mixed delight, belongs to more advan-
ced spirits in a happier world. In this
region of imperfection, some infusions
from a different cup, must of neceflity
tincure our joy. Let us then,

II. TURN to the other fide of the ar-
gument, and confider the reasons which

rcnc:icr

SERM. render it proper, that when we rejoice,
XIV. we flould rejoice with trembling.

In the first place, because all the ob-

jeds of religion, which afford ground
for joy, tend to inspire, at the fame time,
reverence and fear. We serve a Bene-
factor, it is true, in whom we have rea-
son to delight; whose purposes are gra-
cious; whose law is the plan of our
happiness. But this Benefacdor, is the
King eternal, immortal, and invisible; at
whose pretence, the mountains shake,
and Nature trembles. Every good, and
every peifedt gift come down from him.
But the hand which confers them, we
cannot fee. Mysterious obscurity refts
upon his essence. He dwelleth in the fe-
cret place of thunder; and clouds and
darkness surround him. He is the
Hearer of prayer ; but we lift our voice
to him from afar. Into his immediate
pretence no access is permitted. Our
warmest devotion admits no familiarity
with him. God is in heaven, and thon
upon earth; therefore, let thy words be

f'ew.

few. If his omniscience administers com- s E R M.
fort in our secret distress, it likewise fills XIV.
with awe, the heart that is conscious of
guilt. For, if he knows our frame, and
remembers we are dift; our2 inliquities, also,
are ever before him; our secret Jins, in the
light of his countenance.

Throughout all his dispensations, great-

ness, in conjuncion with goodness, strikes
our view; and, wherever we behold the
Parent, we behold the Legislator also. The
death of Christ, in the behalf of a guilty
world, is the chief ground of religious
hope and joy. But it is no less the
ground of reverence; when, in this high
tranfadion, we contemplate God, as at
once ftrit in justice, and great in mercy.
I the Lord keep mercy for thofands of them
that fear me. Ifoirive their iniquity, tranf-
greif on, and fin; but I will by no means
clear the guilty. When we open the book
of the Law, we find promises and threat-
enings mingled in the fame page. On
the one fide, we fee Heaven displayed
in all its glory: On the other, Hell

opening

SE R M. opening its terrours. In short, in what-
XIV. ever light we view religion, it appears

solemn and venerable. It is a temple
full of majesty, to which the worshippers
may approach with comfort, in the hope
of obtaining grace, and finding mercy; but
wvhere they cannot enter, without being
impressed with awe. If we may be per-
mitted to compare spiritual with natural
things, religion resembles not those scenes
of natural beauty, where every object
finiles. It cannot be likened to the gay
landscape, or the flowery field. It re-
fembles more the august and sublime ap-
pearances of Nature; the lofty mountain,
the expanded ocean, and the flarry firma-
ment; at the fight of which, the mind
is at once over-awed and delighted; and,
from the union of grandeur with beau-
ty, derives a pleasing, but a serious, emo-
tion.

IN the second place, As joy, tempered

by fear, suits the nature of religion, so,
it is requisite for the proper regulation of

~~~i .the

the conduEt of man. Let his joy flow SERM.
from the best and purest fource;-yet, if it XIV.
remain long unmixed, it is apt to become
dangerous to virtue. As waters which
are never stirred, nor troubled, gather a
sediment, which putrifies them; so, the
undisturbed continuance of placid sensa-
tions, engenders disorders in the human
foul. It is wifely ordered in our present
tate, that joy and fear, hope and grief,
fiSould aa alternately, as checks and ba-
lances upon each other, in order to pre-
vent an excess in any of them, which
our nature could not bear. If we were
subjet to no alarms of danger, the
wisest would soon become improvident;
and the most humble, presumptuous.
Man is a pilgrim on earth. Were his
path to be always smooth and flowery,
he would be tempted to relinquiih his
guide, and to forget the purpose of his
journey. Caution and fear, are the
shields of happiness. Unguarded joy
begets indolence; indolence produces fe-
curity; security leads to rashness; and

3 H rashness

SE RM. raflmefs ends in ruin. In order to re-
XIV. joice long, it is necessary that we rejoice

with trembling. Had our first parents
observed this rule, man might have been
still in Paradise. He who faith in his
heart, My mountain Jlands Jirong; I flall
never be moved; may be assured that his
state already begins to totter. Religion,
therefore, performs a kind office, in giv-
ing us the admonition of the Text. It
inspires chearfulnefs in the service of
God. It proposes joy, as our chief spring
of action. But it supports joy, by guard-
ing it with fear; not suppressing, but
regulating its indulgence; requiring us
to rejoice, like persons who have obtained
a treasure, which, through want of vigi-
lance, they are exposed to lose. De-
pendent beings are formed for fubmif-
sion; and, to submit, is to stand in awe.
Because the Lord reigneth, let the earth be
glad. We are the fubjeds of God; and
therefore may justly rejoice. But still we
are fubjeds; and, therefore; trembling
must mix with our joy.

IN

IN the third place, the unstable condi- s E R M,

tion of all human things, naturally in- XIV.
spires fear in the midst of joy. The
spirit to which 'religion forms us, must
undoubtedly° corrcfpond to the state in
which we are placed, and to the part
which is assigned us to at. Now, the
first view under which our present state
appears, is that of fallen creatures, who
are undergoing, in this world, probation
and trial for their recovery; and are com-
manded to work out their salvation wiith
fear and trembling. This view of our
condition, infers not habitual dejecion
of mind. It requires not melancholy
abftradion from the affairs, or total con-
tempt of the amusements, of life. But it
inspires humility. It enforces dependance
on Divine aid; and calls forth the voice
of supplication to Heaven. In a situation
so critical, and where interests so import-
ant are at flake, every reasonable person
must confers, that ferioufniefs ought to
temper rejoicing.

3 H Were

SE RM. Were there in human life any fixed
XIV. point of stability and reft, attainable by

man; could we, at any one moment, as-
sure ourselves, that there remained no la-
tent source of danger, either to our tem-
poral, or our spiritual state; then, I ad-
mit, we might lay trembling aside, and
rejoice in full security. But, alas ! no
such safe station, no such moment of
confidence, is allowed to man during his
warfare on earth. Vicissitudes of good
and evil, of trials and consolations, fill
up his life. The best intentioned, are
sometimes betrayed into crimes; the mofi
prudent, overwhelmed with misfortunes.
The world is like a wheel incessantly re-
volving, on which human things alter-
nately rife and fall. What is past of our
life, has been a checquered scene. On its
remaining periods, uncertainty and dark-
ness reft. Futurity is an unknown re-
gion, into which no man can look for-
ward without awe, because he cannot tell
what forms of danger, or trial, may meet
him there. This we know well, that, in

ever'

every period of our life, the path of hap- S E RIM.
piness ihall be found steep and arduous; XIV.
but swift and easy, the descent to ruin.
What, with much exertion of care and
vigilance, we had built up, one unwary
action may, in an evil hour, overthrow.
The props of human confidence are, in
general, insecure. The sphere of human
pleasures is narrow. While we form
schemes, for strengthening the one, and
for enlarging the other, death, in the
mean-while, advances. Life, with a swift,
though insensible course, glides away;
and, like a river which undermines its
banks, gradually impairs our fiate. Year
after year, steals something from us; till
the decaying fabrick totter of itself, and
crumble at length into dust. So that,
whether we confider life or death, time
or eternity, all things appear to concur
in giving to man the admonition of the
Text, Rejoice with trembling.

I HA v E now hlown, in what refpeds
religion both promotes joy, and ins'pires

ferioufiefs.

SE R M. seriousness. It places us in the most fa-
xIv. vourable situation, which human life as-

fords, for joy; and it gives us every as-
fiftance, for relithing that joy. It renders
it our duty, to cultivate the fatisfaion
which it yields. It demands a chearful
ipirit, in order to ascertain the sincerity
of our principles, and to confirm us in
good pracice. At the fame time, the
joy which it inspires, is tempered with
fear, by the genius of religion itself,
by the dangers to which unguarded joy
would expose us, and by the impropriety
of indulging it, in a situation so mixed as
the present. The trembling which is here
enjoined, is not to be underRfood as fig-
nifying a pusillanimous dejeation. It im-
ports no more than that caution and fb-
briety, which prudence dicates, as be-
longing to our state. By connecting such
trembling with our joy, religion means
to recommend to us, a chearful, but a
composed, spirit; equally remote from
the humiliating depression of fear, and
the exulting levity of joy. Always to re-

joice,

joice, is to be a fool. Always to tremble, S E R lv.
is to be a slave. It is a modest chearful- XIV.
ness, a chastened joy, a manly seriousness,
whici becomes the servant of God.

B u T is this, it may perhaps be said,

the whole amount of that boasted satis-
faclion which religion bestows ? Is this
all the compensation which it makes, for
those sacrifices it exats ? Are not the
terms which vice holds out, far more.
enticing, when it permits us to gratify
every desire; and, in return for our fur-
mounting the timorous scruples of con-
science, promises us a life of gaiety, fe-
flivity, and unrestrained joy ?- Such
promises, vice may indeed make; but,
how far it fulfils them, we may safely
refer to the determination of the greatest
sensualist, when he has finifled his ca-
reer, and looks back on what he has en-
joyed. Afl him, Whether he would re-
commend to his children, and his friends,
to hold the fame course; and whether,
with his dying breath, he dare assure

them,

SERM. them, that the gratifications of licenti-
XIV. oufnefs afford the greatest enjoyment of

life ? Whatever hopes vice may at the
beginning inspire, yet, after the trial is
made, it has been always found, that
criminal pleafiires are the bane of happi-
ness; the poison, not the cordial, of our
present ltate. They are pleasures, com-
penfated by an infinite overbalance of
pain; moments of delight, succeeded by
.years of regret; purchased at the expence
of injured reputation, broken health, and
ruined peace. Even abftraaing from
their pernicious consequences, they are,
for most part, in themselves treacherous
pleasures; unsound, and disturbed in the
moments of enjoyment. In the nmid/ of
such laughter, the heart is sorrowful. Of-
ten is the smile of gaiety assumed, while
the heart akes within: And though folly
laughs, guilt will fting. CorreAing this
pernicious phrenzy of pleasure, and re-
ducing it to a more fober and regulated
ltate, religion is, in truth, no other than
wisdom, introducing peace and order into
the life of man.

}l ~ ~While

While religion condemns such plea- S R M.

lures as are immoral, it is chargeable XIV.
with no improper auntcrity, in reipec of
those. which are of an innocent kind.
Think not, that by the cautious difci-
pline which it prescribes, it excludes you
from all gay enjoyment of life. With-
in the compass of that sedate spirit, to
which it forms you, all that is innocent-
ly pleasing will be found to lie. It is a
mistake to imagine, that, in constant es-
fusions of giddy mirth, or in that slut-
ter of spirits which is excited by a round
of diversions, the chief enjoyment of our
itate consists. WTere this the cafe, the
vain and the frivolous would be on bet-
ter terms for happiness, than the wife,
the great, and the good. To arrange
the plans of amusement, or to preside in
the haunts of jollity, would be more de-
firable, than to exert the highest effort of
mental powers for the benefit of na-
tions. A consequence so absurd, is fuffi-
cient to explode the principle from which
it flows. To the amusements and lesser

3 I joys
I~~~~

SE R M. joys of the world, religion afligns their
XIV. proper place. It admits of them, as relax-

ations from care, as instruments of pro-
moting the union of men, and of enliven-
ing their social intercourse. But though,
as long as they are kept within due bounds,
it does not censure nor condemn them;
neither does it propose them, as rewards
to the virtuous, or as the principal ob-
jects of their pursuit. To such, it points
out nobler ends of ac2ion. Their felicity
it engages them to seek, in the discharge
of an useful, an upright, and honourable
part in life; and, as the habitual tenour
of their mind, it promotes chearfulnefs,
and discourages levity.

Between these two, there is a wide di-

ftindion; and the mind which is most
open to levity, is frequently a firanger to
chearfulnefs. It has been remarked, that
transports of intemperate mirth, are of-
ten no more than flashes from the dark
cloud; and that, in proportion to the vio-
lence of the effulgence, such is the fuc-
eeding gloom. Levity, may be the for-

ced.

ced production of folly or vice; chear- S E R .
fiunefs, is the natural offspring of wis- XIV
dom and virtue only. The one is an oc-
cafional agitation; the other, a perma-
nent habit. The one degrades the cha-
rafter; the other, is perfectly consistent
with the dignity of reason, and the
steady and manly spirit of religion. To
aim at a constant fucceflion of high and
vivid sensations of pleasure, is an idea of
happiness altogether chimerical. Calm
and temperate enjoyment, is the utmost
that is allotted to man. Beyond this, we
struggle in vain to raise our slate; and, in
fad, depress our joys, by endeavouring
to heighten them. Instead of those vain
hopes of perpetual festivity, with which
the world would allure us, religion con-
sers upon us, a chearful tranquillity. In-
stead of dazzling us with meteors of joy,
*which sparkle and expire, it sheds around
us, a calm and fleady light. By mixing
tremblling with ou' joy, it renders that
joy more solid, more equal, and more
lasting.

3 I 2 In

SER I. In this spirit, then, let us serve God,
XIV. and hold our course through life. Let

us approach to the Divine Being, as to
a sovereign of whom we stand in awe,
and to a father in whom we trust. In
our conduct, let us be cautious and hum-
ble, as those who have ground to fear;
well pleased and chearful, as those who
have cause to rejoice. Let us flhow the
world, that a religious temper, is a tem-
per, sedate, not fad; that a religious be-
haviour, is a behaviour, regulated, not
stiff and formal. Thus, we ihall ife the
world, as not abfing it; we ihall pass
through its various changes, with the
least discomposure; and we lhall vindi-
cate religion, from the reproaches of those
who would attribute to it, either enthufi-
aftick joys, or flaviflh terrours. We shall
flow, that it is a rational rule of life,
worthy of the perfection of God, and
suited to the nature and state of man:

SER-

# SERMON XV. On the Motives to CONSTANCY in VIRTUE. GALAT. vi. 9. And let us not be weary in well-doing ; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

437

SERMON XV.
On the Motives to C oNST ANCY in

VIRTUE.

GALAT. vi. 9.

And let us not be weary in well-doing;

for in due season we Jfiall reap, if we
faint not.

ISCONTENT is the most general of s E R M.
all the evils which trouble the life xv.

of man. It is a disease, which every-
where finds materials to feed itself; for,
if real distresses be wanting, it fubflitutes
such as are imaginary in their place. It
converts even the good things of the
world, when they have been long enjoy-
ed, into occasions of disgust. In the
midst of prosperity, it disposes us to com-
plain; and renders tranquillity tiresome,

only

S E R M. only because it is uniform. There is no
XV. wonder, that this spirit of restlessness and

diffatisfaaion, which corrupts every ter-
reftrial enjoyment, should have sometimes
.penetrated into the region of virtue.
Good men are not without their frailties;
and the perverseness incident to human
nature, too readily leads us, who weary
of all other things, to weariy, also, inl
.well-doing.

Let me put a cafe, which, perhaps,

will be found not unfrequent in ordinary
life. Suppose a person, after much com-
merce with the world, to be convinced of
its vanity. He has seen its most flat-
tering hopes to be fallacious. He has felt
its most boasted pleasures to be unEa-
tisfactory. He resolves, therefore, to
place his happiness in virtue; and, dif-
regarding all temptations from interest,
to adhere to what is right and honouir-
able in condu&. He cultivates acquaint-
ance with religion. He performs, with
seriousness, the offices of devotion. He
lays down to himself, a rational and

useful

uieful plan of life; and, with fatisfac- S E R M.
tion, holds on for a while in this reform- Xv
ed course. But, by degrees, discourage-
ments arise.- The peace which he hoped
to enjoy, is interrupted, either by his
own frailties, or by the vices of others.
Paflions, which had not been thoroughly
subdued, struggle for their accustomed
gratification. The pleasure which he ex-
peted to find in devotion, sometimes
fails him; and the injustice of the world,
often fours.and frets him. Friends prove
ungrateful; enemies misrepresent, rivals
supplant him: And part, at least, of the
mortifications which he suffers, he begins
to ascribe to virtue.-Is this all the re-
ward of my serving God, and renouncing
the pleasures of fin ? Veriy, in vain, I
have clea/fed my heart, and wvajl/ed my
hands in innocency. Behold, the ungodly
prosper in the world, and have more than
heart can wiJ/h; while, all the day long,
I am plagued and chaJfened every morning.-
To such persons as there, and to all who
are in hazard of being infeAed with their

spirit,

S E RM. spirit, I now address myself. In reply to

XV. their complaints, I purpose to show, That

in no state they can choofe.on earth, by
no plan of conduct they can form, is it
possible for them to escape uneasiness and
disappointment ; that in a life of virtue,
they will susser less uneasiness and fewer
disappointments, than in a course of vice;
they will possess much higher resources
and advantages; and they will be as-
fured of complete reward at the end.
From these considerations, I hope to make
it appear, that there is no sufficient rea-
son for our weatying in well-doing; and
that, taking human life upon the whole,
virtue is by far the most eligible portion
of man.

I. Uneasiness and disappointment, are

inseparable, in some degree, from every
state on earth. Were it in the power of
the world, to render those who attach
themselves to it, satisfied and happy, you
might then, I admit, have some title to
complain, if you found yourselves placed

I ~. upon

Ypon worse terms in the service of God. S E R M.
But this is so far from being the cafe, xv.
that, among the multitudes who devote
themselves to earthly pleasure, you will
not find a single perfbn who has com-
pletely attained his aim. Enquire into
the condition of the high and the low,
of the gay and the ifrious, of the men of
business and the men of pleasure, and
you shall behold them all occupied, in
supplying fbme want, or in removing
some distress. No man is pleated with
being precisely what he is. Every-where
there is a void; generally, even in the
most prosperous life, there is some corner
possessed by sorrow. He who is engaged in
business, pines for leisure. He who en-
joys leisure, languishes for want of em-
ployment. In a single Ifate, we envy the
comforts of a family. In conjugal life,
we are chagrined with domeftick cares.
In a safe station, we regret the want of
objeds for enterpri{e. In an enterprizing
life, we lament the want of safety. It is
the doom of man, that his fly ihould

3 K never

SE RM. never be free from all clouds. He is, at
xv. present, in an exiled and fallen state.

The objecs which surround him, are be-
neath his native dignity. God has tin-
ged them all with vanity, on purpose to
make him feel, that this is not his reft;
that here he is not in his proper place,
nor arrived at his true home.

If, therefore, you aim at a condition

which ihall be exempted from every dif-
quiet, you pursue a phantom; you in-
crease the vanity and vexation of life, by
engaging in a chace so fruitless. If you
complain of virtue, because there is inci-
dent to it a portion of that uneasiness
which is found in every other Rtate, your
complaint is most unreasonable. You
claim an immunity from evil, which be-
longs not to the lot of man. Recon-
cile yourselves, then, to your condition;
and, instead of looking for perfect hap-
piness any where on earth, gladly embrace
that state which contains the fewest for-
rows.

II. THOUG1

II. TIOUGH no condition of human SERM.

life is free from uneasiness, I contend, xv.
that the uneasiness belonging to a sinful
course, is far greater, than what attends a
course of well-doing. If you weary of
the labours of virtue, be assured that the
world, whenever you try the exchange,
will lay upon you a much heavier load. It
is the outside, only, of a licentious life,
which is gay and finiling. Within, it con-
ceals toil, and trouble, and deadly sorrow.
For, vice poisons human happiness in the
spring, by introducing disorder into the
heart. Those pafiions which it seems to
indulge, it only feeds with imperfec
gratifications; and thereby strengthens
them for preying, in the end, on their
unhappy vitims.

It is a great mistake to imagine, that

the pain of felf-denial is confined to vir-
tue. He who follows the world, as much
as he who follows Chrifl, must take up his
cross; and to him, assuredly, it will prove
a more oppressive burden. Vice allows all
our passions to range uncontrouled; and

3 K 2 where

S E R M. where each claims to be fiperiour, it is
xv. impossible to gratify all. The predomi-

nant desire, can only be indulged at the
expence of its rival. No mortifications
which virtue exacts, are more severe than
those, which ambition. imposes upon the
love of ease, pride upon interest, and
covetousness upon vanity. Self-denial,
therefore, belongs, in common, to vice
and virtue; but with this remarkable
difference, that the passions which virtue
requires us to mortify, it tends to wea-
ken; whereas, those which vice obliges
us to deny, it, at the fame rime, strength-
ens. The one diminishes the pain of
felf-denial, by moderating the demands
of passion; the other increases it, by ren-
dering those demands imperious and vier
lent.-What distresses, that occur in the
calm life of virtue, can be compared to
those tortures, which remorse of confci-
ence inflics on the wicked; to thoie
severe humiliations, arising from guilt
combined with misfortunes, which. fink
them to the dust; to those violent agitar

ions

tions of shame and disappointment, S E R
wlhich {bmetimes drive them to the mofi XV.
fatal extremities, and make them abhor
their existence? How often, in the midst
of those disastrous situations, into which
their crimes have brought them, have
they cursed the seductions of vice ; and,
with bitter regret, looked back to the day
on which they first forsook the path of
innocence!

But, perhaps, you imagine, that to such

miseries as these, great criminals only are
exposed; and that, by a wary and cautious
management, it is possible to avoid them.
Take vice and virtue, then, in the most
general point of view. Compare God and
the world as two mailers, the one or other
of whom you mufft obey; and confider
fairly, in whose service there will be rea-
son for your wearying soonest, and repent-
ing most frequently. The world is both
a hard, and a capricious malter. To sub-
mit to a long servitude, in the view of a
recompense from which they are excluded
in the end, is known to be often the fate

of

ER M. of those, who are devoted to the world.
XS v They sacrifice their present ease, to their

future profpecls. They court the great,
and flatter the multitude. They profti-
tute their conscience, and diflonour their
character: And, after all their efforts, how
uncertain is their success ! Competitors
justle, and outstrip them. The more art-
ful deceive, the more violent overthrow
them. Fair prospects once finiled; but
clouds soon gather; the Iky is darkened;
the scene changes; and that fickle world,
which, a moment before, had flattered,
the next moment, forgets them.

God is never mistaken in the charadei

of his servants; for he feeth their hearts,
and judgeth according to the. truth. But
the world is often deceived in those whc
court its favour; and, of course, is unjufi
in the distribution of its rewards. Flatter)
gains the ear of power. Fraud supplants
innocence; and the pretending and as-
fuming, occupy the place of the worthy
and the modest. In vain you claim any
merit with the world, on account of you

good

good intentions. The world, knows them S E R .
not; regards them not. It judges of you, xv.
solely by your aCtions; and, what is
worse, by the success of your actions,
which often depends not on yourselves.
But, in the fight of the Supreme Being,
good intentions supply the place of good
deeds, which you had not the opportu-
nity of performing. The well-meant en-
deavours of the poor, find the fame ac-
ceptance with him, as the generous ac-
tions of the rich. The widow's mite is,
in his eye, a costly offering; and even he
who giveth to a disciple a cup of cold water,
when he can give him no more, goeth not
without his reward.

As the world is unjust in its judgments,

so it is ungrateful in its requitals. Time
speedily effaces the memory of the greatest
services; and when we can repeat them
no more, we are neglected, and thrown
aside. It was the faying of a noted great
man of the world, on the fall of his
fortunes, " Had I served God, as faith-

fully as I have done my King, he

" would

S E RI . " would not have cast me off in my old

Xv. " age." Unfaithfulness, and ingratitude,

are unknown to God. With him, no
new favourites arise, to usurp the place, or
to bear off the rewards of his antient ser-
vants. Even to your old age, I am He; and
even to hoary hairs, I will carry you. I have
made, and I will bear; even I will carry,
and will deliver 'you, faith the Lord Al-
mlighty *.-Since, then, in our several de-
partments, we muff labour, What com-
parison is there, between labouring for
God, and for the world ? How unjust are
they, who weary so much sooner in the
service of God, than they do in that of the
most revere, and imperious of all mailers !

III. THE resources of virtue, are much

greater, than those of the world; the com-
penfations which it makes for our diftref-
fes; far more valuable. Perpetual success
belongs neither to the one, nor the other.
But under disappointments, when they
occur, virtue bears us up; the world al-
lows us to fink. When the mind of a

I i good
* La. r lvi. 4.

good man is hurt by misfortunes, reli- E R M.
gion adminiflers the cordial, and infuses xv.
the balm. Whereas, the world inflicts
wounds, and then leaves them to fester.
It brings sorrows, but it provides no con-
folation. Consolation is entirely the pro-
vince of religion. Supposing religion to
be inferiour to vice in external advan-
tages, it must be allowed to possess inter-
nal peace, in a much higher degree. This
is so certain, that almost all men, at some
period or other of their life, look forward
to it, as to a desirable retreat. When the
ends of their present pursuit shall be
accomplished, they propose to themselves
much fatisfacAion in an honourable dif-
charge of the duties of their fation,
amidst those moderate passions, and tem-
perate pleasures, which innocence allows.
That which all men agree in holding to
be second in importance to the pursuit
which they follow, may be safely esteem-
ed to be the first in real worth; and it
may be concluded, that if they were not

3 L blinded

SE R M. blinded by some prevailing paflion, they

xv. would discern and adopt it as such.

It is the peculiar eltec of virtue, to

make a man's chief happincfs arise from
himself, and his own conduct A.bad
man is wholly the creature of the world.
He hangs upon its favour, lives by its
iniles, and is happy or miserable, in pro-
portion to his success. But to a virtuous
man, success in worldly undertakings is
but a secondary object. To discharge his
own part with integrity and honour, is
his chief aim. If he has done properly
what was incumbent on him to do, his
mind is at reft; to Providence he leaves
the event. His vitnefs is iin heaven, and,
his record is on high. Satisfied with the
approbation of God, and the testimony
of a good conscience, he enjoys himself,
and despises the triumphs of guilt. In
proportion as such manly principles rule
your heart, you will become independent
of the world ; and will forbear complain-
ing of its difcouragcments. It is the im-
perfeAion of your virtue, which occasions

you

oui to 'eajy i'; Iv'i!l-:'oi!a'. It is bccaufe S E rn r.

your hearts remain divided between God xv.
and the world, that you arc so often dif-
contented ; partly wifiing to dilchlarge
your duty, and partly seeking )our happi-
ness from fo:newhat that is repugnant to
your duty. Study to be more confiilent in
principle, and more uniform in practice,
anid your peace will be more unbroken.

Though virtue may appear at first fight

to contractI the bounds of enjoyment, you
will find, upon refleclion, that, in truth, it
enlarges them. If it reltrains the cxccfs
of fomc pleasures, it favours and increaecs
others. It precludes you from none, but
fich as arc either fantaflick and ima-
ginary, or pernicious and deflrudive.
Whatever is truly valuable in human en-
joyment, it allows to a good man, no less
than to others. It not only allows him
such pleasures, but heightens them, by
that grateful relilh which a good con-
icience gives to every pleasure. It not
only heightens them, but adds to them
ilfo the peculiar fatisfadions which flow

3 I, 2 fiom

S E R M. from virtuous sentiments, from devour
XV. affections, and religious hopes. On how

much worse terms is the finner placed,
in the midst of his boasted gratifications?
His portion is confined to this world.
His good things are all of one fort only;
he has neither knowledge, nor relish, of
any thing beyond them. His enjoyment,
therefore, refts on a much narrower basis,
than that of the servants of God. En-
large, as much as you please, the circle of
worldly gratifications; yet, if nothing of
the mind and the heart, nothing of a re-
fined and moral nature, enter into that
circle, and vary the enjoyment, languor
and weariness soon succeed. Among
whom do you hear more peevifli expref-
sions of discontent, or more frequent
complaints of low spirits, than among
the professed votaries of worldly pleasure ?

Vice and virtue, in their progress, as in

every other refpef, hold an opposite
course. The beginnings of vice are en-
ticing. The first fleps of worldly ad-
vancement, are flattering and pleating,

But

But the continuance of success, blunts E R .
enjoyment, and flattens desire. Whereas, XV.
the beginnings of virtue are laborious.
But, by perseverance its labours dimi-
niih, and its pleasures increase. As it
ripens into confirmed habit, it becomes
both fioother in practice, and more com-
piete in its reward. In a worldly life, the
termination of our hopes always meets our
view. We fee a boundary before us, be-
yond which we cannot reach. But the
prolipeds of virtue, are growing, and
endless. The righteous shall hold on in his
way; and he that hath clean hands, J7all
wvax Jironger and Jironger. The path of the
jitfl is as the fJi1,inlg light, that Jhinetb
more and more unto the peifec7 day. This
brings me to confider,

IV. THE assured hope, which good

men enjoy, of a full reward at last. I
have endeavoured, by several confidera-
tions, to correet your impatience under
the present discouragements of virtue.
I have fliown many high advantages,

which

ER M. which it already pofilTes. But now,
XV . laying all these aside; supposing virtue to

have brought you no advantage, but to
have only engaged you in perpetual
struggles with an evil world; the Text
iiggefts what is sufficient to anfwcr eve-
ry objection, and to silence every com-
plaint ; in dee Jfrj'on yoit Janll reca, 1'
you faint not. It is not a loose encourage-
ment, or a dubious hope, which is held
forth to us. A direCt and explicit decla-
ration is made by the Spirit of God, that
piety and virtue, how diifouraged soever,
or opprefled, they may be for a while,
shall not be frustrated of their reward;
but, that in due fc/aon, when the period
which is fixed by the Divine decree lhall
come, all who -eaLy not in 'cell-doing,
though they may have Joivn in tears, J7tll
reap in joy. As this great principle of
faith, is so essential to our present argu-
ment, and is indeed the foundation of
all religion, it will be proper that we
now take a view of the grounds on which

it

it refts. By fixig' our attention, both SERM;
on the proofs which reason fuggeffs, and vi.
the discoveries which revelation has made,
of a slate of future rewards, we ihall take
an effecdual mctlod of confirming our
adherence to religion; and of baffling
those temptations which might lead us
to wevar} inll zvel-doi,.

TIIE first, and most obvious prefump-'

tion, which reason affords in behalf of
future rewards to the righteous, arifcs
from the imperfec' diflribution of good
and evil in our prefcnt tfate. Notwith-
flanding what I have advanced con-
cerning the pleasures and advantages cf
virtue, it cannot be denied, that the hap-
piness of good men is often left incom -
plete. The vitious poflefs advantages, to
which they have no right; while the
conscientious fiiter for the fake of virtue,
and groan under ditlfreffs which they
have not merited fiom the world. In-
deed, were the distribution of good and
cvil, in this life, altogether promiscuous;

could

SERM. could it be said, with truth, that the

XV. moral condition of men had no influence

whatever upon their happiness or misery;
I admit, that from such a state of things,
no presumption would arise, of any future
retribution being intended. They who
delight to aggravate the miseries of life,
and the diitreffes of virtue, do no service
to the argument in behalf of Providence.
For, if total disorder be found to prevail
now, suspicions may, too justly, arise, of
its prevailing for ever. If he who rules
the universe, entirely neglects virtue here,
the probability must be small, of his re-
warding it hereafter. But this is far
from being the true state of the fact
What human life presents to the view
of an impartial observer, is by no means
a scene of entire confusion; but a Rate of
order, begun, and carried on a certain
length. Virtue is so far from being ne-
gleCted by the Governour of the world,
that from many evident marks, it ap-
pears to be a chief object of his care.
In the constitution of human nature, a

foundation

foundation is laid, for comfort to the s E R M.
righteous, and for internal punishment to V

.

the wicked. Throughout the course of
the Divine government, tendencies to-
wards the happiness of the one, and the
misery of the other, constantly appear.
They are so conspicuous, as not to have
escaped the notice of the rudest nations.
Over the whole earth, they have diffused
the belief, that Providence is propitious
to virtue, and adverse to guilt. Yet these
tendencies are, sometimes, disappointed
of their effet ; and that which Provi-
dence visibly favours, is left, at present,
without an adequate reward.

From such an imperfect distribution of

happiness, what are we to conclude, but
that this system is the beginning, not the
whole of things; the opening only of a
more extensive plan, whose confumma-
tion reaches into a future world? If God
has already fit his throne for judgment;
if he has visibly begun to reward and
to punish, in some degree, on earth, he
cannot mean to leave the exercise of go-

3 M vernment

SERM. vernment incomplete. Having laid the
XV. foundation of a great and noble ftruc-

ture, he will in due time rear it up to
perfection. The unfinished parts of the
fabrick, evidently m{ow, that a future
building is intended. All his other works
are conftruced according to the most full
and exac proportion. In the natural
world, nothing is deficient, nothing re-
dundant. It is in the moral world, only,
that we discover irregularity and defect.
It falls flort of that order and perfection
which appear in the reft of the creation.
It exhibits not, in its present state, the
fame features of complete wisdom, jus-
tice, or goodness. But can we believe,
that under the government of the Supreme
Being, those apparent disorders shall not
be rectified at the last? Or, that from
his conduct towards his rational creatures,
the chief of his works, the sole objec-
tion against his perfection Ihall rife, and
-be allowed to subsist for ever?

On the supposition of future rewards
and punishments, a satisfying account

can

can be given, of all the disorders which s E R M.
at present take place on earth. Chriftia- .JL
nity explains their origin, and traces
them to their iffiue. Man, fallen from
his primaval felicity, is now undergoing
probation and discipline for his final
tate. Divine justice remains, for a sea-
son, concealed; and allows men to ac
their parts with freedom on this theatre,
that their characters may be formed and
ascertained. Amidst discouragements and
afflictions, the righteous give proof of
their fidelity, and acquire the habits of
virtue. But, if you suppose the events
of this life to have no reference to an-
other, the whole state of man becomes,
not only inexplicable, but contradictory,
and inconsistent. The powers of the in-
feriour animals, are perfectly suited to their
station. They know nothing higher than
their present condition. In gratifying
their appetites, they fulfill their destiny,
and pass away. Man, alone, comes forth
to act a part, which carries no meaning,
and tends to no end. Endowed with ca-

3 M 2 pacities,

SER M. pacities, which extend far beyond his
XV. present sphere; fitted by his rational na-

ture, for running the race of immorta-
lity, he is flopped flort in the very en-
trance of his course. He squanders his
activity on pursuits, which he discerns to
be vain. He larlguifhes for knowledge,
which is placed beyond his reach. He
thirsts after a happiness, which he is
doomed never to enjoy. He fees, and
laments, the disasters of his slate; and
yet, upon this supposition, can find no-
thing to remedy them.-Has the eternal
God any pleasure in sporting himself
with such a scene of misery and folly, as
this life, if it had no connexion with an-
other, must exhibit to his eye ? Did he
call into existence this magnificent uni-
verse, adorn it with so much beauty and
splendour, and surround it with those
glorious luminaries which we behold in
the heavens, only that some generations of
mortal men might arise to behold these
wonders, and then disappear for ever?
How unsuitable, in this cafe, were the

habitation

habitation to the wretched inhabitant ? SE R M.
I-ow inconsistent the commencement of xv.
his being, and the mighty preparation of
his powers and faculties, with his defpi-
cable end? How contradictory, in fine,
were every thing which concerns the
Rtate of man, to the wisdom and perfec-
tion of his Maker ?

Throughout all ages, and among all

nations, the persuasion of a future life
has prevailed. It sprung not from the
refinements of science, or the fpecula-
tions of philosophy; but from a deeper
and stronger root, the natural sentiments
of the human heart. Hence it is common
to the philosopher, and the savage; and is
found in the most barbarous, as well as
in the most civilized, regions. Even the
belief of the being of a God, is not more
general on the earth, than the belief of
immortality. Dark indeed, and confuted,
were the notions which men entertained
concernirig a future sPate. Yet still, in
that state, they looked for retribution,
both to the good, and the bad ; and in

the

SERM. the perfection of such pleasures, as they
Xv. knew best, and valued most highly, they

placed the rewards of the virtuous. So
universal a consent seems plainly to in-
dicate, an original determination given
to the foul by its Creator. It ihows this
great truth, to be native and congenial
to man.

When we look into our own breasts,

we find various anticipations and pre-
fages of future existence. Most of our
great and high passions, extend beyond
the limits of this life. The ambitious and
the felf-denied, the great, the good, and
the wicked, all take interest, in what is
to happen after they shall have left the
earth. That passion for fame, which in-
spires so much of the activity of mankind,
plainly is animated by the perifafion,
that consciousness is to survive the dif-
solution of the body. The virtuous are
supported by the hope, the guilty tor-
mented with the dread, of what is to take
place after death. As death approaches,
the hopes of the one, and the fears of the

other,

other, are found to redouble. The foul, SER M.
when issuing hence, seems more clearly X
to discern its future abode. All the
operations of conscience, proceed upon
the belief of immortality. The whole
moral conduct of men refers to it. All
legislators have supposed it. All religions
are built upon it. It is so essential to
the order of society, that were it eras-
ed, human laws would prove ineffectual
restraints from evil, and a deluge of
crimes and miseries would overflow the
the earth. To suppose this universal and
powerful belief to be without foundation
in truth, is to suppose, that a principle
of delusion was interwoven with the
nature of man; is to suppose, that his
Creator was reduced to the necessity of
impressing his heart with a falsehood, in
order to make him answer the purposes of
his being.

BUT though there arguments be itrong,

yet all arguments are liable to objection.
Perhaps this general belief, of which I have

spoken,

S E R . spoken, has been owing to inclination

XV. and desire, more than to evidence. Per-

haps, in our reasonings on this subjec'
from the Divine perfections, we flatter
ourselves with being of more confe-
quence than we truly are, in the system
of the universe. Hence the great impor-
tance of a discovery proceeding from
God himself, which gives full authority
to all that reason had suggested, and
places this capital truth beyond the reach
of suspicion or diflruft.

The method which Christianity has

taken, to convey to us the evidence of a
future slate, highly deserves our atten-
tion. Had the Gospel been addressed, like
a system of philosophy, solely to the un-
derifanding of men; had it aimed only at
enlightening the studious and reflecing,
it would have confined itself to abftraa
truth; it would have simply informed us,!
that the righteous are hereafter to be re-
warded, and finners to be puniihed. Such
a declaration as that contained in the
Text, would have been sufficient: Be nli

'i wePii)'

c(iWler)' izn wzell-lohin ; for in rld(e fJajoi: you S E RJ M.
fJall reap, if 'o/ jafilt nof. But the Goi:- xv
pel has not ilopped, at barely announcing
life and immortality to mankind. It was
calculated for popular edification. It was
intended to be the religion, not merely of
the few, whose underllanding was to be
informed; but of the many, also, wholf
imagination was to be imhpreflel, and
wlhofe paflions were to be awakened, in
order to give the truth its due influence
over them. Upon this account, it not
only reveals the certainty of a future
slate, but, in the person of the great
Founder of our religion, exhibits a leries
of sacs relating to it; by means of whlich,
our fcnfes, our imagination, and passions,
all become intcrel'ed in this great object.

The rcfurreeion of Christ from the

grave, was de'ignedl to be a i1iifible evi-
dence, that death infers not a final ex-
tinedion of the living principle. He rofc,
in order to flow, that, in our name, he
had conquered cdeath, and was bec;nie the
J}s/ fenits of Ith/nat Jlir'i. Nor did he

N only

SE R M. only rife from the grave, but, by ascend-
xv. ing to heaven in a visible form, before

many witnesses, gave an ocular fpeci-
men of the transition from this world,
into the region'of the blessed. The em-
ployments which now occupy him there,
are fully declared. As our fore-runner,
he hath entered within the veil. He ap-
pears in the presence of God for us. He
maketh perpetual interceiion for his peo-
ple. I go, said he, to my Father and your
Father, to my God and your God. In my
Father's hose are many mansions. I go to
prepare a place for you. I will come again,
and receive you to myJelf, that where Iam,
there ye may be also, The circumstances
of his coming again, are diftinaly fore-
told. The founding of the last trumpet,
the refurreAion of the dead, the appear-
ance of the Judge, and the solemnity
with which he ihall discriminate the good
from the bad, are all described. The very
words in which he shall pronounce the
final sentence, arc recited in our hearing:
Come, ye bljjed of my Father! inherit thb

kingdo.'

kingdom prepared for you, from 'the folunda- s E R M.
tion of the wuorld. Then shall the holy and xV.
the just be caught up in the clouds, to meet
the Lord in the air. They fliall enter Avith
him into the city of the living God. They
fliall possess the new earth, and new hta-
vens, wherein dwelleth righteoinfiefs. God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.
They Jfiall behold his face in righteozinefi,
and befatisfied with his likenefsfor ever.-
By recording such a train of striking cir-
cumftances and sacs, the Gospel fami-
liarizes us in some mieafure with a future
fiate. By accommodating this great dif-
covery, in so useful a manner, to the
conceptions of men, it furniflies a firong
intrinfick evidence of its divine origin.

THUS, upon the whole, whether you

consult your reason, or liften to the dif-
coveries of revelation, you behold our ar-
gument confirmed; you behold a life of
piety and virtue, iTifing in immortal fe-
licity. Of what worldly pursuit can it be
pronounced, that its reward is certain ?

3 N - Look

SE R M. Look every where around you, and you
xv. {hall fee, that the race is far from being

always to the swift, or the battle to the
Jfrong. The most diligent, the most wife,
the most accompliflied, may, after all
their labours, be disappointed in the end;
and be left to susser the regret, of having
spent their Jirelnth for lought. But, for
the righteous, is laid up the crown of life.
Their final happiness is prepared in the
eternal plan of Providence, and secured
by the labours and sufferings of the
Saviour of the world.

Cease, then, from your unjust com-

plaints against virtue and religion. Leave
discontent, and peevifmefi, to worldly
men. In no period of distress, in no mo-
ment of disappointment, allow yourselves
to fufpedt, that piety and integrity are
fruitless. In every state of being, they
lead to happiness. If you enjoy not
at present their full rewards, it is, because
the season of recompence is not yet come.
For, in due season, you fJlall reap. There is
a time which is proper for reward; and

there

there is a period which belongs to trial. SERIM.
How long the one ihould last, and when xv'
the other should arrive, beloigs not to
you to determine. It is fixed by the
wife, though unknown, decree of the Al-
mighty. But, be asured that 1He that
comietl, Jhall come, and will not tarny. He
{hall come, in rlue letion, to restore perfect
order among his works; to bring rellt to
the weary, comfort to the afflicted, and juin
retribution to all men. Behold, Jiith the
flitlbfidl and true 'MitneJs, I comie qluickl',
and ;my reward is with me. To him; that
overcomteth, will I give to eat of the tree of
life, which is in the 1mi/d of the parad(i/ of
God. I will give him the mornig Jiar. I
will make him a pillar in nmy temple. IHe
fiJall be cloathed in wLhite raimlent ; aid
Jhall fit down with me on my throne-.

' Rev. xxii. 12.-ii. 7, 2S.-iii. 12, 5, 21.

F I N I S.
