A

CRITICAL
DISSERTATION

ON THE
POEMS of OSSIAN.

THE
SON of FINGAL.

THE THIRD EDITION.

To Ahich is added,

An APPENDIX, containing a Variety of undoubted
TEST TIMO N I ES efaablifhing their Authenticity.

By HUGH BLAIR ). D.
One of the MiniiRers of the High Church, and

Professor of Rhetorick and Belles-Lettres, in

the University of Edinburgh.

D U B L I N:
Printed for P E T E R W I L s o k, in Dame-fireet.

M,DCC,LXV.

# Advertisement.

Advertisement.
SINCE the printing of the fecondEdition, Do&or

Warner, published a pamphlet, entitled, Re-

marks on the HiJiory of Fingal and other Poems of
Offan. TheDoEor it appears, iscompiling a gene-
;ral hiffory of Ireland, and is of opinion that Ossian,
and the heroes he celebrates, were natives of that
country. As he has advanced no argument to
support so singular an opinion, I should have passed
over his pamphlet in silence, had he not too preci-
pitately accused me of a false quotation from O'Fla-
herty. I had said, in a note, on one of the lesser
poems of Ossian, that Fingal is celebrated by the
ri/bh biJlorians, for his 'wijdom in making laws, his
poetical genius, and hisfore-knowledge of events, and
that O'Flahertygoes Jo faras to Jay, thatFingal's
laws were extant,- when be (Q'Flaberty) wrote his
Ogygia. The Dotor denies that there is any such
thing in O'Flaherty; and modeftlyquotesa passage
from the fame Author, which he supposes, I have
misrepresented. I shall here give the whole para-
graph, and the world. will judge whether theDotor
has not been too hafly in his assertions. Finnius ex
Morniafilia Thaddeci, filius Cuballi, jurifprudentia,
super qua fcripta ejus hafenus extant, carminibus
patriis, & ut quidam ferunt, prophetiis celeberrimus,
qui ob egregia fua, s militie fuee, facinora uber-
rimam vulgo, & poetis comminifcendi materiem re-
linquens, a nullaeetate reticebitur. Ogyg. p. 338.

As the Dotor.founds his claim of Ossian and his

heroes, on the authority of fomeobfcure passages in
Keating and. O'Flaherty, what he fays on the sub-
jee& sands felf-confuted. These writers neither
meet with, nor deserve credit. Credulous and par-
tial, they have altogether disgraced the antiquities
they meant to establish. Without producing-records
or even following the ancient traditions of their

coun-

country, they formed an ideal fyflem of antiquity,
from legends of modern invention. Sir James
Ware, who was indefatigable in his researches, as-
ter the monuments of the Irish hitfory, and had
colleced all the real, andpretendedly ancient manu-
scripts concerning the antiquity of his nation, rejets
as mere fiction and romance, all that is said concern-
ing the times before Saint Patrick, and the reign
of Leogaire, in the fifth century. I shall transcribe
the passage, for the benefit of those who are com-
piling the hifRory of Ireland from the earliest ages,
and at thefame time, caution them, not to look
upon the antiquities of that country, through the
false mediums of Keating and O'Flaherty, Per exi-
guam fuperefe notitiam rerum in Hibernia geifarum
ante exortam ibi evangelii auroram liquido conflat.
Neque me latet a viris nonnullis dodis pleraque quae
de antiquioribus illis temporibus ante S. Patricii in
Hyberniam adventur traduntur, tanquam figmenta
eTe explofa. Notandum quidem descriptiones fere
,mnium qua de illis temporibus (antiquioribus dico)
extant, opera effe pofleriorum feculorum.

Wareus de antiq. Pref. p. i.

I muRl observe that the Doctor's claiming Ofli-

an's poems (p. 8.) informa pauperis, not only inva-
lidates his cause, but is also no very genteel com-
pliment to the Irish nation. I am far from being
of his opinion, that, that nation can produce no
monument of' genius, but the works of Oflian,
ihould these be tacitlyceded to them. On the con-
trary, I am convinced that Ireland has produced
men of great and distinguished abilities, which, not-
withstanding the Docor's present opinion, I hope,
will appear from his own hiflory, even though he,
confessedly, does not underfland the language, or
ancient records of that country.

A CRITICAL
DISSERTATION

ON THE
POEMS OF OSSIAN,

THE

SON OF SING AL.

AM ON G the monuments remaining of the
.L Lantient ilate of nations, few are more
valuable than their poems or songs. History,
when it treats of remote and dark ages, is seldom
very inftru&ive. The beginnings of society, in
every country, are involved in fabulous confusion;
and though they were not, they would furnish few
events worth recording. But, in every period of
society, human manners are a curious fpetacle;
and the most natural pi&ures of antient manners
are exhibited in the antient poems of nations.
These present to us, what is much more valuable
than the history of such tranfacions as a rude age
can afford, The history of human imagination and
pafflon. They make us acquainted with the no-
tions and feelings of our fellow-creatures in the
most artless ages; discovering what objeas they
admired, and what pleasures they pursued, before
those refinements of society had taken place, which
enlarge indeed, and diversify the tranfaicons, but
disguise the manners of mankind.

Besides this merit, which ancient poems have
with philosophical observers of human nature, they

A have

:a-;e another with pcrfons of tatle. They Fromife
frme of the -highel: beauties of poetical writing.
Trregular and u:npc!i:hed we may cxpect the pro-
ductions of u.ncukivatcd ages to be; but abound-
ing, at the fame time, with that enthufiafim, that
vehemence and fire, which are the foul of poetry.
Fcr many circumilan.ces of those times which we
call barbarous, are favourable to the poetical spirit.
That slate, in which human nature shoots wild and
free, though unfit for other improvements, cer-
tainly encourages the high exertions of fancy and
patfi.cn.

In the infancy of societies, men live scattered

and dispersed, in the midif of solitary rural scenes,
wshere the beauties of nature are their chief enter-
tainment. They meet with many objects, to them
pew and Rirange; their wonderand furprize are fre-
quently excited; and bythe sudden changes of for-,
tune occurring in their unsettled itate of life,, their
passions are raised to the utmost. Their paflions
have nothing to refirain them: their imagination .
has nothing to check it. They display themselves
to one another without disguise: and converse and
at in the uncovered simplicity of nature. As.
their feelings are strong, so theirlanguage, of it-
fel, afiumes a:poetical turn. Prone to exaggerate,
they describe every thing in the ltrongeft colours;
5which of course renders their speech pi&urefque
and figurative. Figurative language owes its rife
chiefly to two causes; to the want of proper names
for obje&s, and to the influence of imagination
and passion over the form of expression. Both
these causes concur in the infancy of society.
Figures are commonly confidered as artificial modes
of speech, devised by orators and poets, after the
world had advanced to a refined ltate. The con-
trary of this is the truth. Men never have used so

masn}

many figures of ftylc, as in thoee rude ages, )when,
betides the power of a warm iraginaticn to fug-
get lively images, the want of proper and preci:e
terms for the ideas they would express, obliged
them to have recourse to circumlocuticn, iteta-
phor, comparison,- and all those substituted fcrn.s
of cxprefion, which give a poetical air tolanguage.

An American chief,- at this day, haranguts

at the head of his tribe, in a more bold rme-
taphorical style, than a modern Eurcpean \;c.Ild
adventure to uife in an Epic poem.

In the progress of fcciety, the genius rad man-

pers of men undergo a change. more favcurab'c to
accuracy than to fprightixines, and fiblmr.iy. As
the world advances, the underftandngaigains grc urd
upon the imagination; the undertanding is mere
eercifed; the imagination; les.. Foyer cLiects
occur that are new or-furpriing. Men apply
ihem.elves to trace the caufcscf tirngs; taey cer-
re& and refine one another; they fuldue or dif-.
guise their pallions; they form their cxteicr r mn-
ners. upon one uniform Ctanidrd cf politepefs znd
civility. Human nature is pruned accrdir.g to
method and rule. Language zuvances frcm
fierility to copiousness, and at the fa-ine time,
from fervour and enthufiafr, to corrtfinpefs nd
precision. Style lbcomes mere chafle; 'ut le.s
animated. The progress of the wc.rld in. t!is re-
,fpe.t resembles the progress of age in.rr. n. The
powers of imagination are molf vigorcs end pre-
dominant in youth; those of tle uLderlandinrg
ripenmoreflowly, and often attain not their na-
turity, till the imagination begins to fiag. 'Hence,
poetry, which is the child of imagination, is fre-,
quently most glowing and anirmated in te first
ages of society. As the ideas of our youth .are
remembered with a peculiar Fleafure cn account

.: A 3 o
-A

of their !iveliness and vivacity: -so the most ancient
poems have often proved the greatest favourites of
nations.

Poetry has been said to be more ancient than

prose: and however paradoxical such an assertion
may seem, yet, in a qualified sense, it is true.
x.ien certainly never conversed with one another
in regular numbers; but even their ordinary lan-
guage would, in ancient times, for the reasons be-
fore agligned, approach to a poetical flyle; and
the first compositions transmitted to pofserity, be-
vond doubt, were in a literal sense, poems; that
is, compositions in which imagination had the
chief hand, formed into some kind of numbers,
.rnd pronounced with a musical modulation or
tone. Mufick or songs has been found cotval
vith society among the most barbarous nations.
The only fubjecs which could prompt men, in
their firfi rude state to utter their thoughts in
ccrpofitions of any length, were such as naturally
assumed the tone of poetry; praises of their gods,
cr of their ancestors; commemorations of their
c. n warlike exploits; or lamentations over their
.isfocrtunes. And before writing was invented, no
c-her comnpofiticns, except songs or poems, could
t ke such hold of the imagination and memory,
;:s to be preserved by oral tradition, and handed
down from one race to another.

Hence we may expeO to find poems among the

antiquities of all nations. It is probable too,
that an extensive search would discover a certain
degree of resemblance among all the most ancient
poetical producions, from whatever country they
have proceeded. In a similar state of manners,
similar objefs and paflions operating upon the
imaginations of men, will samp their productions
with the fame general characer. Some diversity

will,

will, no doubt, be occasioned by climate and
genius. But mankind never bear such resembling
features, as they do in the beginnings of society.
Its subsequent revolutions give rife to the prin-
cipal diftin&ions among nations; and divert, into
channels widely separated, that current of human
genius and manners, which descends originally
from one spring. What we have been long
accustomed to call the oriental vein of poetry, be-
cause some of the earliest poetical produ&ions have
come to us from the East, is probably no more
oriental than occidental; it is charaEeriftical of
an age rather than a country; and belongs, in
some meafute, to all nations at a certain period.
Of this the works of Ossian seem to furnish a re-
markable proof.

Our present fubje& leads us to investigate the

ancient poetical remains, not so much of the east,
or of the Greeks and Romans; as of the northern
nations; in order to discover whether the Gothic
poetry has any resemblance to the Celtic or Galic,
which we were about to confider. Though the
Goths, under which name we usually comprehend
all the Scandinavian tribes, were a people alto-
gether fierce and martial, and noted, to a proverb,
for their ignorance of the liberal arts, yet they
too, from the earliest times, had their poets and
their songs. Their poets were distinguished by the
title of Scalders, and their songs were termed Vyfes.*

A 4 Saxo

* Olaus Wormius, in the appendix to his Treatise de

Literatura Runica, has given a particular account of the
Gothic poetry, commonly called Runic, from Runes,
which signifies the Gothic letters. He informs us that
there were no fewer than 136 different kinds of meafilre
or verse used in their yf5es; and tho' we are accustomed
to call rhyme a Gothic invention, he fays exprefly, that

among

Caxo Grammaticus, a Danish Historian, of con-
iderable note, --ho flourished in the thirteenth

cen-

among all these measures, rhyme, or correspondence of
final syllables, was never employed. He analyses the
firu&ure of one of there kinds of verse, that in which the
poem of Lodbrog, afterwards quoted, is written; which
exhibits a very singular species of harmony, if it can be
allowed that name, depending neither upon rhyme nor
upon metrical feet, or quantity of syllables, but chiefly
upon the number of the syllable, and the disposition of
the letters. In every stanza was an equal number of lines:.
in every line fix syllables. In each-diftich, it was recqifite
that three words-fhould begin with the fame letter; two
of the corresponding. words placed in the first line of the
distich, the third in the second line. In each line were
also required' two syllables, but never the final ones,
formed either of the fame consonants, or fame vowels.
As an example of this mesfure, Olans gives us these two
Latin lines conflru&fed exa&ly according to the above
rules of Runic verse.

Chriftus caput nostrum
Coronet te bonis.

The initial letters of Chritns, Caput and Coronet;
make the three eorrefpondii.g letters of the distich. In
the firfi line, the first syllables of Chriflus and of nostrum;
in the second line, the on in coronet and in bonis make
the requisite correspondence of syllables. Frequent in-
verfons and transpositions were permitted in this poetry;
which would naturally follow from such laborious at-
tention to the collocation of words.

The curious on this fubje& may consult likewise Dr.

Hicks's Thesaurus Linguaram Septentrionalium; particu-
larly the z3d chapter of his Grammatica Anglo Saxonica
et Mzfo Gothica; where they will find a full account of
the frun&ure of the Anglo Saxon verse, which nearly re-
fembled the Gothic. They will find also some specimens
both of Gothic and Saxon poetry. An extrat, which
Dr. Hicks has given from the work of one of the Danili
Scalders, entitled, Hervarer Saga, containing an evoca-
tion from the dead, may be found in the 6th volume of
Miscellany Poems, publilhed by Mr. Dryden.

sentury, -infori.s us th at very many cf these
songs, containlnr tie ancicnt tradit'inary ftcries
cf the. ccuntry, vere found engraven upon rocks
in the cld. Runic character; fIveri;L cf wl.ich le
has tran.{ited into Latin, and infcsted into his
Hiircry.' But .Lis v-rfions are plainly so prar.-
phrafhcal, and forced into such an imitation of th'i
fiyle and the mea'ures of the roman poets, that cne
can fcrmn no judgmelt fro m them of the natiye fpi-
it of the origina. .A mcre curious monumcnt of
t'e true -Gthic poetry is preservcd by Olaus Wcr-
mius in 'his book de Literatu.ra Runica. It is awt
Epicedium, or funeral fIcng, composed by Regncr'
Lodbrog; and tranfiated by CO.us, word ser. woc',
fronm the criir.aL. This Lcdbrog .was a king cf
Denmark, \' hGo lived in the eighth century, famnous.
for h.is wars and vicories ; and at tie fame time an,
eminent Scaldcr cr poet. It was i;is misscrtune to
fall at last into the hands of cne of his enemies, by
whom he was throwvn into prison, and condemned
to be destroyed by serpents.. In this situation he
solaced himself with rehearsing all the exploits cf
his life. The poem is divided into twenty-nine-
alanzas, of ten lines each; arid every stanza be--
gins with these words, .Pugnavimus Enfibus, We
have fought with our fwvords. Olaus's. version is.
in many places so obscure as . to bie hardly
intelligible. I have subjoined the whole below,.
/ exa&ly as he has published it; and 1riall tanflate as.
much as may give the English reader: an idea of
the spirit and flrain of this kind of poetry.':

" We have fought with our fwords.---I as.
4 young, when, towards the east, in the bay of

A 5 '- Oreon,

I.

Pugnavimus Enlibus
-Iaud pofi lcnglm temnpus - Cuny.:

" Oreon, we made torrents of blood flow, to
' gorge the ravenous beaf of prey, and the

yellow-footed bird. There resounded the hard

" feel upon the lofty helmets of men. The whole
" ocean was one wound. The crow waded in

" the

Cum in Gotlandia acceflimus
An ferpentis immenfi necem
Tune impetravimus Thoram
Ex hoc vocarunt me virum
Quod serpentem transfodi
Hirfutam braccam ob illam cedem
Cufpide i&um intuli in colubrum
Ferro lucidorum Itipendiorum.

2.

Multum juvenis fui quando acquifivimus:
Orientem versus in Oreonico freto
Vulnerum amnes avida: ferae
Et flavipedi avi
Accepimus ibidem fonuerunt
Ad sublimes galeas
Dura serra magnam efcam
Omnis erat oceanus vulnus
Vadavit corvus in sanguine Caeforum,

3-

Alte tulimus tune lanceas
Quando viginti annos numeravimus
Et celebrem laudem comparavimus pafnmm
Vicimus oto barones
In oriente ante Dimini portum
Aquila impetravimus tune sufficientem
Hofpitii fumptum in illa firage
Sudor decidit in vulnerum
Oceano perdidit exercitus statem.

4.

Pugne faaa copia
Cum Helfingianos poftulavimus

* ^

" the blood of the slain. When we had num,

bered twenty years, we lifted our spears on
"high, and every where spread our renown.

Eight barons we overcame in the east be-
" fore the port of Dimliniur; and plentifully

we feasted the eagle in that slaughter. The

w" arm

Ad aulam Odini
Naves direximus in otlium Vistula
Mucro potuit tur mordere
Omnis erat vulnus unda
Terra rubefacta Calido
Frendebat gladius in loricas
Gladius findebat Clypeos.

5.

Memini neminem tunc fugiffe
Priufquam in navibus
Heraudus in bello caderet
Non findit navibus
Alius baro preftantior
Mare ad portum
In navibus longis pofi illum
Sic attulit princeps passim
Alacre in bellum cor.

6.

Exercitus abjecit clypeos
Cum hafta volavit
Ardua ad virorum pe&ora
Momordit Scarforum cautes
Gladius in pugna
Sanguineus erat Clypeus
Antequam Rafno rex caderet
Fluxit ex virorum capitibus
Calidus in loricas sudor.

7. t;

Habere potueruht turn corvi
Ante Indirorum infulas.

Sufl;-

w.varm fiream cf wounds ran into the ocean.
" The arny fell before us. When we tfeered our

f hips into t'e mcuth of the Vistula, we sent the
Helfingians to the Hall of Odin. Then did

" the sword bite. The waters were all one wound.
" The earth was dyed red with the warm stream.

"The

Sufficientem prsdam diianiandam
Acquifivimus feris carnivoris
Plenum prandium unico aru
Difficile erat unius facere rnentionem
Oriente sole
Spicula vidi pungere
Propulerent arcus ex fe serra.

8.

Altum mugierunt enses
Antequam in Laneo campo
Eifinus rex cecidit
Proceflimus auro ditati
Ad terram proftratorum dimicandum
Gladius fecuit Clvpeorum
Pituras in galearum conventu
Cervicum muftum ex vulneribus
Diffufum per cerebrum fiffum.

9-

Tenuimus Clypeos in sanguine
Cum haftam unximus
Ante Boring holmum
Telorum nubes difrumpunt clypeurm
Extrufit arcus ex fe metallum
Volnir cecidit in confliau
Non erat illo rex major
Cefi difperfi late per littora
Ser$ ample&ebantur efcam.

10.

Pugna manifefte crefcebat
Antequam Freyr rex caderet

In

" The sword rung upon the coats of mail, and
" clove the bucklers in twain. None fled on
" that day, till among his ships Heraudus fell.
" Than him no braver baron cleaves the sea with
" ships; a chearful heart did he ever bring to the
" combat. Then the host threw away their

" hiields,.

In Flandrorum terra
Cxepit caeruleus ad incidendum
Sanguine ilitus in auream
Loricam in pugna
Durus armorum mucro olim
Virgo deploravit matutinam lanienan.
Multa praeda dabatur feris.

11.

Centies centenos vidi jacere
In navibus
Ubi .Englanes vocatur
Navigavimus ad pugnam
Per sex dies antequam exercitus caderet
Tranfegimus mucronum mifRam
In exortu solis
Coa&us eft pro nofiris gladiis
Valdiofur in bello occumbere.

I2.

Ruit pluvia fanguinis de gladiis
Praceps in Bardafyrde
Pallidum corpus pro accipitribus
Murmuravit arcus ubi mucro
Acriter mordebat Loricas
In conflitu
Odini Pileus Galea
Cucurrit arcus ad vulnus
Venenate acutus confperfus fudore fanguineo.

13.

Tenuimus magica scuta.
Alte in pugnxe ludo

Ante

shields, when the uplifted spear flew at the

c brealls of heroes. The sword bit the Scarfian
" rocks; bloody was the shield in battle, until
· Rafno the king was slain. From the heads of
" warriors the warm sweat streamed down their
" armour. The crows around the Indirian islands

" had

Ante Hiadningum finum
Videre licuit turn viros
Qui gladiis lacerarunt Clypeos
In gladiatorio murmure
Gales attrite virorum
Erat ficut fplendidam virginem
In le&o juxta fe collocare.

14.

Dura venit tempeftas Clypeis
Cadaver cecidit in terram
In Nortumbria
Erat circa matutinum tempus
Hominibus neceffum erat fugere
Ex pralio ubi acute
Caffidis campos mordebant gladii
Erat hoc veluti Juvenem viduam
In primaria fede ofculari.

5I.

Herthiofe evafit fortunatus
In Auftralibus Orcadibus ipfe
Vi&oria in nofiris hominibus
Cogebatur in armorum nimbo
Rogvaldus occumbere
Ifte venit fummus super accipitres:
Lu&us in gladiorum ludo
Strenue ja&abat concuffor
Galea: fanguinis teli.

16.

Quilibet jacebat tranfverlim fnpra alium
Gaudebat pugna Ietus

Ac-

" had an ample prey. It were difficult to single
"' out one among so many deaths. At the rising
" of the fun I beheld the spears piercing the bo-
'c dies of foes, and the bows throwing forth their

" Qeel-

Accipiter ob gladiorum ludum
Non fecit aquilam aut aprum
Qui Irlandiam gubernavit
Conventus fiebat ferri et Clypei
Marftanus rex jejunis
Fiebat in vedra finu,
Preda data corvis.

I7.

Bellatorem multum vidi cadere
Mane ante machaeram
Virum in -hucronum diffidio
Filio meo incidit mature
Gladius juxta cor
Egillus fecit Agnerum fpoliatum
Imperterritum virum vita
Sonuit lancea prope Hamdi
Grifeam loricam fplendebant vexilla.

i8.

Verborum tenaces vidi diffecare
Haud minutim pro lupis
. Endili maris enfibus

Erat per Hebdomada fpacium
Quasi mulieres vinum apportarent:
Rubefa&ae erant naves
Valde in firepitu armorum
Sciffa erat lorica
In Scioldungorum prelio.

19.

Pulchricomum vidi crepufculafcere
Virginis amatorem circa matutinum
Et confabulationis amicum viduarum
Erat ficut calidum balneum

Vinei

, fteel-pointed arrows.. Loud roared the swords
" in the plains cf Lano.---The virgin long be-
(, waled the slaughter of that morning."---In this
firain the poet continues to describe sever:al other

military

Vinei vafis nympha portaret
Nos in Ils freto
Antiquam Orn rex caderet
Sanguineum Clypeum vidi ruptum.
Hoc invertit virorum vitam.

20.

Egimus gladiorum ad c-denr .
Ludum in Lindis infu'la .
Cum regibus tribus
Pauci potuerunt inde. letari
Cecidit mukus in ri&um fefarum
Accipiter dilaniavit carnem cum lupo
Ut fatur inde difcederet
Hybernorum fanguis in oceanum
Copiofe decidit per mar ationis tempus,

2r.

Alte gladius mordebat Clypeos
Tunc cum aurei coloris
Hafta fricabat loricas
Videre licuit in Onlugs infula.
Per fecula multum post
Ibi suit ad gladiorum ludos-
Reges procefferunt
Rubicundum erat circa infulim
Ar volans Draco vulnerum.

22.

Quid eft viro forti morte certius'
Etfi ipfe in armorum nimbo
Adverfus collocatus fit.
Sepe deplorat etatem-
Qui nunquam premitur
Malum ferunt timidum incitare-:

Aquilan

nilitary exploits. The images are not much va-
led; the noise of arms, the fireaming of blood,
nd the feasting the birds of prey, often recurring.
He mentions the death of two of his sons in battle;
md the lamentation he describes as made for one

of

Aquilam ad gladiorum ludum
Meticulofus venit nufpiam
Cordi suo ufui.

23.

Hoc numero zequum ut procedat
In contaau gladiorum
Juvenis unus contra alterum
Non retrocedat vir a viro.
Hoc fult viri fortis nobilitas diu
Semper debet amoris amicus virginurm
Audax effe in fremitu armorum.

24.

Hoc videtur mihi re vera
Quod fata fequimur
Rarus tranfgreditur fata Parcarurr
Non deftinavi Elle
De vitae exitu meae
Cum ego fanguinem femimortuus tegerem
Et naves in aquas protrufi
Paflim impetravimus turn feris
Efcam in Scotie finubus.

25.

Hoc ridere me facit semper
Quod Balderi patris fcamna
Parata fcio in aula
Bibemus cerevifiam brevi
Ex concavis crateribus craniorum
Non gemit vir fortis contra mortem
Magnifici in Odinidomibus
Non venio defperabundis
Verbis ad Odini aulam.

Hic

of them is very singular. A Grecian or Roman
poet would have introduced the virgins or nymphs
of the wood, bewailing the untimely fall of a
young hero. But, fays our Gothic poet, " when
" Rogvaldus was slain, for him mourned all the
" hawks of heaven," as lamenting a benefa&or who
had so liberally supplied them with prey; " for

boldly,"

26.

Hic vellent nunc omnes
Filii Aflauga gladiis
Amarum bellum excitare
Si exa&e fcirent
Calamitates nofiras
Quem non pauci angues
Venenati me difcerpunt
Matrem accepi meis
Filiis ita ut corda valeant.

27.

Valde inclinatur ad hxereditatem
Crudele ftat nocumentum a vipera
Anguis inhabitat aulam cordis
Speramus alterius ad Othini
Virgam in Ella sanguine
Filiis meis livefcet
Sua ira rubefcet
Non acres juvenes
Sessionem tranquillam facient.

28.

Habeo quinquagies
Prelia sub fignis fa&a
Ex belli invitatione et femel
Minime putavi hominum
Quod me futurus effet
Juvenis didici mucronem rnbefacere
Alius rex prastantior

Nos_

" boldly," as he adds, " in the strife of swords,
" did the breaker of helmets throw the spear of
" blood."

The poems conclude with sentiments of the

highest bravery and contempt of Death. " What
" is more certain to the brave man than death,

though amidst the torm of swords, he tand al-

" ways ready to oppose it? He only regrets this
" life who hath never known distress. The-timo-
' rous man allures the devouring eagle to the
" field of battle. The coward, wherever he
( comes, is useless to himself, This I efleem
( honourable, that the youth lhould advance to
" the combat fairly matched one against another;
" nor man retreat from man. Long was this the
,, warrior's highest glory. He who aspires to the
" love of virgins, ought always to be foremost in
" the roar of arms. It appears to me of truth,
" that we are led by the Fates. Seldom can any
( overcome the appointment of destiny. Little
( did I foresee that Ella * was to have my life in
" his hands, in that day, when fainting I conceal-
" ed my blood, and pushed forth my ships into

" the

Nos Afae invitabunt
Non eft lugenda mors.

29.

Fert animus finire
Invitant me Dyfme
Quas ex Othini Aula
Othinus mihi mifit
Letus cerevifiam cum Afis
In summa fede bibam
Vitae elapse funt horas
Ridens moriar.

· This was the name of his enemy who had con-
demned him to death

" the waves; after we had spread a repass for the
" beasts of prey throughout the Scottish bays. But
"c this makes me always rejoice that in the halls of
" our father Balder 'lot Odin] I know there are
'' feats-prepared, where, in a short time, we shall
" be drinking ale out of the hollow skulls of oul
" enemies. Ii the'houfe of the mighty Odiny
{ no brave man laments death. I come not with
" the voice of despair to Odin's hall. How eager-
" ly would all the sons of Aflauga now rush to
" war, did they know the distress of their father,
" whom a multitude of venomous serpents tear!
" I hive given to my children a mother who hath
" filled their hearts withvalour. I am fast ap-
" proaching to my end. A cruel death. awaits me
" from the viper's bite. A snake dwells in the
" idft of my heart. I hope that the sword of

some of my sons fall yet be frained with the

" blood of Ella. The valiant youths will.wax red
' with anger, and will not fit in peace. Fifty and
" one times have I reared the fiandard in battle.-
" In my youth I learned to dye the sword in blood::

my. hope was then, that no king -among men

" would be more renowned than I. The god-
" defies of death will now soon call med; I muf not
-" mourn my death. Now I end'my 'song. The
" goddesses invite me away; they whom Odin has -
" sent to me from his hall. .I will fit upon a lofty
" feat, and drink ale joyfully with the goddefles of
" death. The hours'of my life are rqn out. I
" will smile when I die."

This is such poetry. as we might expeEt from . '-

barbarous nation. It breathes a most ferocious
spirit. It is. wild, harsh and irregular; but at the
fame time animated and firong; the ltyley in the
original, full of inversions, and, as we learn' from

some-

ome of Olaus's notes, highly metaphorical and
igured.

But when we open the works'of Ossian, a very

Jifferent scene presents itfslf. There we find thie.
fire'and the'enthufiafm of the moft:early times,
combined 'with an amazing degree of regularity
and art.: We find tenderness, and even delicacy
of sentiment, greatly predominant over. fierceness
and Barbarity. Our hearts are. imelted :with the
fofteft.feelings, andat the fame time elevated,witlh
the highest ideas of magnanimity, generosity, and
true heroism When we turn from ithe poetry of
Lodbrog to that of Ossian, it is like pasing 'from
a'favage'.defart, into a fertile and cultivated.coun-
try. How is this to be accounted 'for ? 'Or -by
what means to be reconciled with the remote'anti-
quity attributed to these poems ? This is a curious
point; and.reqiires to be illufirated.

'That the ancient Scots were of Celtic original,
is palt all doubt. Their conformity with the Cel-
tic nations in language, manners and. religion,
proves it to a full..demonflratioir . The..,Celt;e
a great', and mighty people, altogether -diftin&
from the Goths and Teutones, once extended their
dominion over all the weft of Europe ;, but feemi
to have'had their most full and ccmpleatieftablifli-
rhentin Gaul.- Wherever the Celt/e or Gauls are
"mieitioned by ancient writers, we fefdomnfail to
hear of their Druids and their Bards;. the iftita-
tion of which two orders, was the capital diftinc-
tion of their manners' and policy. ,The Druids
were their philosophers. and priefis;' the'Bards,
'theirpoets and recorders of heroic ations.- And
both'thefe orders of men, seem to have fubfidfi'd
amongthem, as chief. members of the state, from

time

time immemorial*. We muff not therefore ima-
gine the Ceita to have been altogether a gross
and rude nation. They possessed from very remote
ages a formed system of discipline and manners,
which appears to have had a deep and lasting in-
fluence. Ammianus Marcellinus gives them this
express testimony, that there flourished among
them the fludy of the most laudable arts, introduced
by the Bards, whose office it was to sing in heroic
verse, the gallant acions of illuftrous men; and
by the Druids, who lived together in colleges or
societies, after the Pythagorean manner, and phi-
lofophizing upon the highefl fubjeas, asserted the
immortality of the human soult. Though Julius
Cafar in his account of Gaul, does not exprefy
mention the Bards, yet it is plain'that under the
title of Druids, he comprehends that whole college
or order; of which the Bards, who, it is probable,

were

* Ti' SVAn T2Y TIyAvEuY iEpWS £4f. EPSJog

Tc xi st4 TW, F

a,0fdl. BitJ\ //£P v"TMai 6

ironTrei. Strabo lib. 4.
E'iai `ep iV7To 01u eiroT o t7i. pA0wv, g3 lwj

t ovOfld-

,I~lv. STo SP0 yt.y oJ5w¢vYT uvfats olot1wv, us W.
uYIv[ivt, 1{ dJS 3Ae¢nsL.'. Diodor. Sicul. 1. 5.

Tac '.

¢.xws'J 7Cr i

evT, v ,IOfYv c1 xttA.yo. liocol. ,

t rTeu S1

J" Vr

Vro Tvfyv yLT ss~ T ;r cvJ A yoYvTf.
Pofidonins ap. Athenrnm, 1. 6.

t Per hec loca (speaking of Gaul) hominibus paulatim

excultis, 'viguere fludia laudabilium doarinarum ; inchoata
per Bardos et Euhages et Druidas. Et Bardi quidem for-
ia virorum illuftrium fa&a heroicis compofita verfibus
cum dulcibus lyre modulis cantitarunt. Euhages vero
fcrutantes feriem et fublimia nature pandere conabantur.
Inter hos, Druida ingeniis celfiores, ut auaoritas Pytha-
gore decrevit, fodalitiis adftri&i confortiis, qumftionibus
altarum occultarumque rerum ereci funt; et defpectantes
humana pronuntiarunt animas immortales. Anmm. Mar-
cllinus, 1. 15. cap. 9.

were the disciples of the Druids undoubtedly
made a part. It deserves remark, that according
to his account, the Druidical infiitution firit took
rife in Britain, and passed from thence into Gaul;
so that they who aspired to be thorough mailers of
that learning were wont to resort to Britain. He
adds too, that such as were to be initiated among
the Druids, were obliged to commit to their me-
mory a great number of verses, insomuch that
some employed twenty years in this course of edu-
cation; and that they did not think it lawful to re-
cord these poems in writing, but sacredly handed
them down by tradition from race to race*.

So strong was the attachment of the Celtic na-

tions to their poetry and their Bards, that amidfl
all the changes of their governments and manners,
even long after the order of the Druids was extin&,
and the national religion altered, the Bards con-
tinued to flourish; not as a set of firoling song-
flers, like the Greek Ao4.oi or Rhapsodists, in
Homer's time, but as an order of men highly re-
spe&ed in the ifate, and supported by a public
ellablifhment. We find them according to the
testimonies of Strabo and Diodorus, before the
age of Auguflus Cefar; and we find them remain-
ing under the fame name, and exercising the fame
fun&ions as of old, in Ireland and in the north of
Scotland, almofl down to our own times. It is
well known that in both these countries, every
Regulus or chief had his own Bard, who was con-
fidered as an officer of rank in his court; and had
lands afligned him, which descended :to his family,
Of the honour in which the Bards were held, many
inflances occur in Ossian's poems. On all impor-
tant occasions, they were the ambassadors between
contending chiefs; and their persons were held

sacred
* Vid, Cfar de bello Gall. lib. 6.

sacred. " Cairbar feared to firetch his sword to
" the bards, though his foul was dark.---Loofe
" the bards, said his brother Cathmor, they are
( the sons of other times. Their voice flall be

heard in other ages, when the kings of Temora
" have failed*."

From all this, the Celtic tribes clearly appear to

have been addicted in so high a degree to poetry,
and to have made it so much their study from the
earliest times, as may remove our wonder at meet-
ing with a vein of higher poetical refinement
among them, than was at first fight to have been
expeced among nations, whom we are accustomed
to call barbarous. Barbarity, I mufl observe, is
a very equivocal term; it admits of many different
forms and degrees; and though, in -all of them,
it exclude polished manners, it is however, not
inconsistent with generous sentiments and tender
affetionst. What degrees of friendship, love
and heroism, may possibly be found to prevail in
a rude state of society, no one can fay. Aflonifh-
ing inRtances of them we know from history,
have sometimes appeared: and a few chara&ers
distinguished by those high qualities, might lay a
foundation for a set of manners being introduced
into the songs of the Bards, more refined, it
is probable, and exalted, according to the usual
poetical licence, than the real manners of the

coun-

Vol. i. p. 263.

t Surely among the wild Laplanders, if any where;

barbarity is in its most perfet state. Yet their love songs
which Scheffer has given us in his Lapponia, are a proof
thar natural tenderness of sentiment may be found in a
country, into which the least glimmering of science has
never penetrated. To most English readers these songs
are well known by the elegant translations of them in the
Specator, Ns. 366 and 465 I shall subjoin Scheffer's

Latin

country. In particular, with refpct to heroism;
the great employment of the Celtic bards, was to
delineate the characters, and sing the praises of
heroes. So Lucan:

Vos quoque qui fortes animos, belloque per-

emptos,

Laudibus in longum vates diffunditis avum
Plurima fecuri fudiflis carmina Bardi.

Pbarf 1. 1.

Now when we confider a college or order of men,

who, cultivating poetry throughout a long series of
ages, had their imaginations continually employed
on the ideas of heroism; who had all the poems
and panegyricks, which were composed by their
predecessors handed down to them with care;
who rivalled and endeavoured to outstrip those who
had gone before them, each in th% celebration of

B his

Latin version of one of them! which has the appearance
of being ftrifly literal.

Sol, clariffimum emitte lumen in paludem Orra. Si

enifus in summa picearum cacumina fcirem me vifurum
Orrapaludem, in eanitererr, ut viderem inter quos amica,
mea eflet flores; omnes fufcinderem frutices ibi enatos,
omnes ramos prefecarem hos virentes ramos. Curfum
nubium esem fecutus,qum iter funm infiituunt versus pilu-
dem Orra, si ad te volare poflem alis, cornicum alis. Sed
mihi defunt, als, ala, querquedule, pedefque, anferum
pedes plantsve bons, qua, deferre mevaleantad te. Satis
expee&afli din; per tot dies, tot dies tuos optimos, oculis
tuisjucundiflimis corde tuo amiciflimo. Quod si longif-
fime velles effugere, cito tamen te confequerer. Quid
firmius validiufve efe poteftquam contorti nervi, cateneve
ferrem, qua duriffime ligant ? Sic amor contorquet caput
nostrum, mutat cogitationes et sententias. Paerorum vo-
luntas, voluntas venti; juvenum cogitationes, lorige co-
gitationes. Qnos si audirem omnes, a via, a via jufta
declinarem. Unum eft confilium qunod capiam ; its fcio
viam re&iorem me reperturum. Schefferi Lapponia,
Cap. 25.

his particular hero; is itnor natural to think, that
at length the character of a hero would appear in
their longs w-ithe higheti lufire, and be adorned
with qualities traul nob!l ? Some of the qualities
indeed, which diftinguif a Fingal, modera-
tion, humanity, and clemency, would not proba-
-;bi be the frii ideas of heroifin occuring.to a bar-
barotus people: .But no sooner had such ideas be-
gun to dawn on'the minds of poets, than as the
.human'mind easily opens to the native reprefenta-
tions of:human .perfetion, they would be seized
and embraced; they would enter into their pane-
gyricks, they would afford materials for succeed-
ing bards to work upon, and improve; they would
contribute not a-little to exalt thepublic manners.
For such songs as these, familiar to the Celtic
warriors from their childhood, and throughout
their whole life, both in war and in peace, their
.principal entertainment, must have had a .very
considerable influence in propagating among :them
real manners nearly approaching to the poetical,'
and in forming even such a -hero as Fingal. Efpe-
cially when we confider that among their limited
obj.&s of ambition, among the few advantages
which in a savage (late, man could' obtain over
man, the chief was Fame, and that Immortality
which they expeced to receive from their virtues
and exploits, in the songs of bards*.
' Having made there remarks on the Celtic
poetry and Bards in general, I shall next confider

the

* When Edward I. conquered Wales, he put to death

all the Welch bards. This cruel policy plainly shews,
how great-an influence he imagined the songs of there
bards to have over the minds of the people; and of what
nature he judged that influence to be. The Welch lirds
were of the faaie Celtic race with the Scottill ,ad
Irish.
z

the particular, advantages which Ossian possessed
He appears clearly to have lived in a period which
enjoyed all the benefit I just now mentioned of
traditionary poetry. The exploits of Trathal,
Trenmor, and the other anceflors of Fingal, are
spoken of as familiarly known. Ancient bards are
frequently alluded to. In one remarkable passage,
Ossian describes himself as living in a fort of claf-
fical age, enlightened by the memorials of former
times, which were conveyed in the longs of bards;
and points at a period of darkness and ignorance
which lay beyond the reach of tradition. " His
- words," fays he, " came only by halves to our
c' ears; they were dark as the tales of other-times,

" before the light of the song arose." Oflian,
himself, appears to have been endowed by nature
with an exquisite sensibility of heart; prone to
that tender melancholy which is so often an atten-
dant on great genius; and susceptible equally of
-firong and of soft emotions. He was not only a
profefed bard, educated with care, as we may
easily believe, to all the poetical art then'known,
and connected, as he shews us himself, in intimate
friendship with the other contemporary bards, bu-
a warrior also; and the son of the molt renowned
hero and prince of his age. This formed a con-
juntion of circumstances, uncommonly favour-
able towards exalting the imagination of a poet.
He relates expeditions in which he had been en-
gaged; he sings of battles in which he had fought
and overcome; he had beheld the most illustrious
scenes which that age could exhibit, both of
heroism in war, and magnificence in peace. For
however rude the magnificence of those times may
seem to us, we mult remember that all ideas of

B 2 magni-

rc-.nficence are comparative; and that the age
c.f 'Fingl .-as an xra of diflinguifhed fplendorin
thit part of the world. Fingal reigned over a
cor-iiiderable territory; he was enriched with the
noils of the Roman province; he was ennobled
by his victories and great a&ions; and was in all
refpe&s a personage of much higher dignity than
any of the chieftains, or heads of Clans, who
lived in the fame country, after a more extensive
monarchy was efablifhed.

The manners of Ofian's age, so far as we can

gather them from his writings, were abundantly
favourable to a poetical genius. The two dif-
piriting vices, to which Longinus imputes the
decline of poetry, covetousness and effeminacy,
were as yet unknown. The cares of men were
few. They lived a roving indolent life; hunting
and war their principal employments; and their
chief amusements, the mufick of bards and " the
si feast of shells." The great objec pursued by
heroic spirits was " to receive their fame," that
is, to become worthy of' being celebrated in the
songs of bards; and " to have their name on
s, the four grey flones." To die unlamented by a
bard, was deemed so great a misfortune, as even
to disturb their ghosts in another state. " They
." wander in thick mills beside the reedy lake; but
" never shall they rife, without the song, to
c( the dwelling of winds." After death, they
expe&ed to follow employments of the fame na-
ture with those which had amused them on earth;
to flywith their friends on clouds, to pursue airy
deer, and to lifen to their praise in the mouths of
bards. In such times as these, in a country where
poetry had been so long cultivated, and so highly
honoured, is it any wonder that among the race
and fuccefion of bards, one Homer should arise;

a man

a man, who, endowed with a natural happy genius,
favoured by peculiar advantages of birth and
condition, and meeting in the course of his life,
with a variety of incidents proper to fire his imagi-
nation, and to touch his heart, should attain a
degree of'eminence in poetry, worthy to draw
the admiration of more refined ages ?

The compositions of Ossian are so firongly

marked with charaters of antiquity, that although
there were no external proof to support that anti-
quity, hardly any reader of judgment- and 'tafe,
could hesitate in referring them to a very remote
sera. There are four great Itages through which
men fucceflively pars in the progress of fociet.
The first and earliest is the life of hunters; pa'tu-
rage fueceeds to this, as the ideas of property be-
gin to take root; next agriculture ; and lastly,
commerce. Throughout Ossian's poems, we
plainly find ourselves in the first of these periods
of society; during which, hunting was the chief
employment of men, and the principal method of
their procuring subsistence. Pasturage was not
indeed wholly unknown; for we hear of dividing
the herd in the cafe of a divorce; but the allu-
sions to herds and to cattle are not many; and of
agriculture, we find no traces. No cities appear
to have been built in the territories of Fingal. -No
arts are mentioned except that of navigation and
of working in iron t. Every thing presents to

B 3 us

t Their lkill in navigation need not at all filrprize ns.-

Living in the western islands, along the coalt, or in' a
country which is every where interfeAed with arms of
the sea, one of the first obje&s of their attention, from
the earliest time, mnft have been how-to traverse the
waters. Hence that knowledge of the stars, so neceffa-
ry for guiding them by night, of which we find several.

traces

.:s the rr.t firmple and unimproved manners. At
Their feafcs, the heroes prepared their own repaiR;
*ie', fat round the light of the burning oak; the
wind lifted their lccks, and whifrled through their
rpen halls. Whatever was beyond the necessaries'
*-i ire, vwas known to them only as the spoil of
;'le Roman province; " the gold of the stranger;
' the lights of the firanger; the feeds of the
* frranger, the children of the rein."

This representation of Ossian's times, must

-rike us the more, as genuine and authenticky
when it is compared with a poem of later date,
which Mr. Macpherson has preserved in one of his
notes. It is that wherein five bards are represented
;-s passing the evening in the house of a chief,
and each of them separately giving his description
of the night. The night scenery is 'beautiful;
rnd the author has plainly imitated the ltyle and
manner of Ossian: But he has allowed some ima-
ges to appear which betray a later period of society

For

traces in Ossian's works; particularly in the beautifun
description of Cathmor's Ihield, in the 7th book of
Temora. Among all the northern maritime nations,
navigatior' was very early fludied. Piratical incursions
were the chief means they employed for acquiring boo-
ty; and were among the first exploits which distinguished
them in the world. Even the savage Americans were
at their first discovery found to possess the most furpriz-
ing fcill and dexterity in navigating their immense
lakes and rivers.

The description of Cuchllin's chariot, in the ift

book of Fingal, has been objected to by some, as re-
presenting greater magnificence thar .is confident with
the fuppoed poverty of that age. But this chariot is
plainly only a horfe-litter; and the gems mentioned in
the description, are.no other than the shining ftnnes or
pebbles, known to be freqncn-ly found along the western
coast of Scotland.

For we meet with windows clapping, the herds of
goats and cowss eeking {helter, the shepherd wan-
dering, corn on the plain, and the wakeful hind
rebuilding the shocks of corn wvhikh had been
overturned by the tempefl. Whereas in Offan's
works, from beginning to end, a.ll is confiffent;
no modern allusion drops from him; but every
where, the fame face of rude nature appears; a
country wholly uncultivated, thinly inhabitec,
and recently peopled. T1:e grass of the rock, the
flower of the heath, the thifile with its beard, are
the chief ornaments of his landscapes. " the defart,"
fays Fingal, ." is enoughto me, with all its wocds
{ and deer."

The circdl of ideas aind tranfa&ions, is no wider

than suits filch an age: Nor any greater diversity
introduced into chara&ers, than the events of that
period would naturally display. Valour and bodi-
ly strength are the admired qualities. Contentions
arine, as is usual among savage nations, from the
slightest causes. To be affronted at a tournament,
or to be omitted in the invitation to a feast, kin-
dles a war. Women are often carried away by
force; and the whole tribe, as in the Homeric
times, rife to avenge the wrong. The heroes shew
refinement of sentiment indeed on several occasions,
but none of manners. Theyfpeak of their past
ations with freedom, boast of their exploits, and
sing their own praise. In their battles, it is evi-
dent that drums, trumpets, or bagpipes, were
not known or used. They had no expedient
for giving the military alarms but firiking a shield,
or raising a loud cry: And hence the loud and
terrible voice of Fingal is often mentioned, as a
necessary qualification cf a great general; like
the pov yae,'c MrPwAt5 of Homer. Of military

4 dif-

discipline or ikill, they appear to have been en-
tirely destitute. Their armies seem not to have been
numerous; their battles were disorderly ; and ter-
minated, for the moll part, by a personal combat, or
wrefiling of the two chiefs ; after which, " the
" bard sung the song of peace, and the battle
1c ceased along the field."

The manner of composition bears all the marks

of the greatest antiquity. No artful transitions;
nor full and extended connetion of parts; such as
we find among the poets of later times, when order
and regularity of composition were more studied and
known; but a flyle always rapid and vehement;
in narration concise even to abruptness, and leav-
ing several circumfiances to be fupptied by the
reader's imagination. The language has all that
figurative cast, which, as I before shewed, partly
a glowing and undisciplined imagination, partly the
irerility of language and the want of proper terms,
have always introduced into the early speech of
nations; and in several refpe&s, it carries a re-
markable resemblance to the style of the Old:
Teflament. It deserves particular notice, as one
of the most genuine and decisive characers of an-
tiquity, that very few general terms or abflra&
ideas, are to be met with in the whole collecion
of Ossian's works. The ideas, of men, at firit,
were all particular. They had not words to ex-
press general conceptions. - These were the confe-
quence of more profound refletion and longer
acquaintance with the arts of thought and of
speech. Ofian, accordingly, almost never ex-
presses himself in the abftrat. His ideas ex-
tended little farther than to the objects he saw
around him. A public, a community, the uni-
verse, were conceptions beyond his sphere. Even
a mountain, a sea, or a lake, which he has occa-

fi.o

sion to mention, though only in a simile, are for
the most part particularised; it is the hill of Cromla
the storm of the feaof Malmor, or the reeds of
the lake of Lego. A mode of expression, which.
whillt it is characeriftical of ancient ages, is at
the fame time highly favourable to descriptive po-
etry. For the fame reasons, personification is a
poetical figure not very common with Ofisan. Ina-
nimate objeas, such as winds, trees, flowers, he
sometimes personifies with great beauty. But the
personifications which are so familiar to later poets
of Fame, Time, Terrcr, Virtue, and the reft of
that class, were unknown to our Celtic bard.
These were modes of conception, too abflrat fcr
his age.

All these are marks so undoubted, and rome of

them too, so nice and delicate, of the mofl early-
times, as put the high antiquity of these poems.
out of quellion. Especially when we conrider,
that if there had been any imposture in this cafe,
it must have been contrived and executed in the
Highlands, of Scotland, two or three centuries
ago; as up to this period, both by manuscripts,
and by the testimony of a multitude of living
witnesses, concerning the uncontrovertible tradition
of these poems, they can clearly be traced. Now
this is a period when that country enjoyed no ad-
vantages fora composition of this kind, which it
may not be supposed to have enjoyed in as great,
if not in a greater degree, a thousand years befcre-
To suppose that two or three hundred years ago,
when we well know the Highlands to.have been it'
a state of gross ignorance and barbarity, there
should have arisen in that country a poet, of such
exquisite genius, and of such deep knowledge of
mankind, and of history, as to divest himself of
the ideas and manners of his own age, and to give

B 5 t

!s jutl and natral pi&ture of a slate c( fcciety
nck ntrer .- a t; ou.F..id yea.rs; c e who could sup-
port this counterfeitedi a.n.:quiiy through such a
iarge colle.ion of poemrs, withcut the least incon-
itle-nc)-; and who offeffid of all this genius and
art, had at the f.ame time the felf-denial of con-
cealing himself, and of ascribing his own works
to' n anti uated L; d, ' ithout tle impcfture be-
ing detected; is ? fippotftion that transcends all
bounds of credil`iity.

There are, betfide, tw.-o other circumfl.aRces to

be attended to, if:li or greater -cight, if priTible,
.. ainf this hypothl sis. One is the total absence
of religious ideas from this work; for vhich the
tr.r.iator has, in his preface, given a very pro-
:-.'ale account, on tlhe'footing of its being the work
cf Oflian. The druidical iuperftition was, in the
cays of Oiian, on the point of its final cxtincion;
r.nd '.-r particu.lar reasons, cdious to the family of
Tingal; whiifi the christian faith was not yet clla-
blifned. But had it been the work of cne, to
vl-ccml the ideas of christianity were familiar from
kis infa-.c ; and who had superadded to them also
'ie oictted fuperfition of a dark age and country;
it is i:npofle but in some passage or other, the
traces ci them would have appeared. The other
circim;itarncs is, the entire filerce which reigns with
refpec to all the great clans or families, which are
r.cw eftblifhld in the Highlands. The origin of
these several clars is known to be very ancient:
An. it is as well known, that-there is no panilon
by which a native Highlander is more distinguished,
than by attachment to his clan, andjealoufy for
its honour. That a highland bard in forging a
work relating to the antiquities of his country,
fnould have inserted no circumfince which pointed
out the rife of his own clan which ascertained its

anti-

antiquity, or incrcafed its glory, is of all fuppo-
fitions that can be formed, the most improbable;
and the silence on this head, amounts to a demon-
ftration that the author lived before any of the
present great clans were formed or known.

Assuming it then, as we well may, for certain,

that the poems now under consideration, are ge-
nuine venerable monuments of very remote anti-
quity; I proceed to make some remarks upon
their general fpirlt and frain. The twvo great
charaderiftics of Ossian's poetry, are, tenderness
and sublimity. It breathes nothing of the gay
and chearful kind; an air of solemnity and teri-
ou'nefs is diffused over the whole. Ossian is per-
haps the only poet who never relaxes, or let's him-
felfdown into the light and amusing firain; which
I readily admit to be no small disadvantage to hirr,
with the bulk of readers. I-e moves perpetually
in.the high region of the grand and the pathetick.
One key note is flruck at the beginning, and sup-
ported to the end; nor is any ornament introduced,
but what is perfe&ly concordant with the general
tone or melody. The events recorded, are all fe-
rious and grave; the scenery throughout, wild ar.d
romantic. The extended heath by the fea-flore;
the mountain nladed with mist; the torrent rushing-
through a solitary valley; the scattered oaks, and
the tombs of warriors overgrown with moss; all
produce a solemn attention in the mind, and pre-
pare it for great and extraordinary events. We
find not in Oflian, an imagination that sports itself,
and dresses out gay trifles to please the fancy. His
poetry, more perhaps than that of any other wri-
ter, deserves to be filed, The Poetry of the Heart.
It is a heart penetrated with noble sentiments, and
with sublime and tender pafilons; a heart that
glows, and kindles the fancy; a heart that is full,
and pours itself forth. Ossian did not write, like

rro-

modern poets, to pleaie readers and critics. He
sung from the love of poetry and song. His de-
li-iht i;s to tnink of the heroes among whom he
had flourishcd; to recall the affe&ing incidents of
his life; to dwell upon his past wars and loves
and friendfnips; till, as he expresses it himself,
" there comes a voice to Ossian and awakes his
" !oul. It is the voice of years that are gone;

they roll before me with all their deeds;" and

under this true poetic inspiration, giving vent to
his genius, no wonder we should so often hear,
and acknowledge in his strains, the powerful and
ever-pleafing voice of nature.

-------Arte, natura potentior omni.----
Eft Deus in nobis, agitante calefcimus illo.

It is necessary here to observe, that the beauties

of Oflian's writings cannot be felt by those who
have given them only a single or a hafly perusal.
His manner is so different from that of the poets,
to whom we are mod accustomed; his Rfyle is
so concise, and so much crowded with imagery;
the mind is kept at such a firetch in accompanying
the author; that an ordinary reader is at firfi apt
to be dazzled and fatigued rather than pleated.
His poems require to be taken up at intervals, and
to be frequently reviewed; and then it is. impoffi-
ble but his beauties muff open to every reader who is
capable of sensibility. Those who have the
highefi degree of it, will relish them the mod.

As Homer is of all the great poets, the one

whose manner, and whose times come the nearest
to Ossian's, we are naturally led to run a parallel
in some instances, between the Greek and the
Celtic bard. For though Homer lived more than
a thousand years before Ossian, it is not from the
age of the world, but from the fate of society, that
we are to judge of resembling times. The Greek

has

has, in several points, a manifest superiority. He
introduces a greater variety of incidents; he
poifeffes a larger compass of ideas; has more
diversity in his'chara&ers; and a much deeper
knowledge of human nature. It was not to be
expected, that in any of these particulars, Oflian
could equal Homer. For Homer lived in a coun-
try where society was much farther advanced;
he had beheld many more obje&s; cities built
and flourishing; laws instituted; order, discipline,
and arts begun. His field of observation was
much larger and more splendid; his knowledge,
of course, more extensive; his mind also, it shall-
be granted, more penetrating. But if Ossian's
ideas and obje&s be less diversified than those of
Homer, they are all, however, of the kind fittest
for poetry: The bravery and generosity of heroes,
the tenderness of lovers, the attachments of friends,
parents, and children. In a rude age and country,
though the events that happen be few, the undiffi-
pated mind broods over them more; they strike the
imagination, and fire the passions in a higher de-
gree; and of consequence become happier materials
to a poetical genius, than the fame events when
scattered through the wide circle of more varied
acion, and cultivated life.

Homer is a more chearful and sprightly poet

than Oflian. You discern in him all the Greek
vivacity; whereas Ossian uniformly maintains the
gravity and solemnity of a Celtic hero. This too
is in a great measure to be accounted for from the
different situations in which they lived, partly per-
fonal, and partly national. Oflian had survived all
his friends, and was disposed to melancholy by the
incidents of his life. But besides this, chearfulnefs
is one of the many blessings which we owe to
formed society. The solitary wild fate is always a

fe-

fercus one. Bating the sudden and violent burlh
cL mirth, which sometimes break forth at their
dances and fealts; the savage American tribes
have been noted by all travellers for their gravity
and taciturnity. Somewhat of this taciturnity
may be also remarked in Ossian. On all occasions
he is frugal of his words; and never gives you more
of an image or a description, than is just fuflicient
to place it before you in one clear point of view.
It is a blaze of lightning, which flafies and. va-
nifhes. Homer is more extended in his descriptions;.
and fills them up with a greater variety of circum-
stances. Both the poets are dramatick; that is,
they introduce their personages frequently speak-
ing before us. But Oflian is concise and rapid in
his speeches, as he is ih every other thing. Homer,
with the Greek vivacity, had atfo some portionr
of the Greek loquacity. His speeches indeed are
highly characeriftical; and-to them we are much,
indebted for that admirable difpfay he has given of
human nature. Yet if he be tedious any where,
it is in these; some of them trifling; and some of
them plainly unseasonable. Both poets are emi-
nently sublime; but a difference may be remarked'
in the species of their sublimity. Homer's sub-
limity is accompanied with more impetuosity and
fire; Ossian's with more of a solemn and awful
grandeur. Homer hurries you along; Ossian ele-
vates, and fixes you in aflonifhment. Homer is
most sublime in actions and battles; Ossian, in
description and feritiment. In the pathetick, Ho-
mer, when he chutes to exert it, has great power;
but Oflian exerts that power much oftener, and
has the chara&er of tenderness far more deeply im-
printed on his works. No poet knew better how
to seize and melt the heart. With regard to dig-
nity of sentiment, the pre-eminence muff clearly
be given to Ossian. This is indeed a surprising

cir-

circumflance, that in point of humanity, magna-
nimity, virtuous feelings of every kind, our rude
Celtic bard should be distinguished to such a de-
gree, that not only the heroes of Homer, but even
those of the polite and refined Virgil, are left far
behind by those of Ossian.

After there general observations on the genius

and spirit of our author, I now proceed to a nearer
view, and more accurate examination of his
works: and as Fingal is the first great poem in
this collection, It is proper to begin with it. To
refuse the title of an epic poem to Fingal, because
it is not in every little particular, exatly confor-
mable to the practice of Homer and Virgil, were
the mere squeamishness and pedantry of criticism.
Examined even according to Aristotle's rules, it
will be found to have all the essential requisites of
a true and regular epic; and to have several of
them in so high a degree, as at first view to raise
our astonishment on finding Oflian's composition to
agreeable to rules of which he was entirely igno-
rant. But our aflonifhment will cease, -when we
confider from what source Aristotle drew those
rules. Homer knew no more of the laws of cri-
ticism than Ossian. But guided by nature, he
composed in verse a regular story, founded on
heroic acions, which all posterity admired. Ari-
ftotle, with great sagacity and penetration, traced
the causes of this general admiration. He obferV-
ed what it was in Homer's composition, and in the
condut of his story, which gave it such power to
please; from this observation he deduced the rules
which poets ought to follow, who would write and
please like Homer; and to a composition formed
according to such rules, he gave the name of an
epic poem. ' Hence his whole system arose. Ari-
fotle studied nature in Homer. Homer and Of-

sians

fian both wrote from nature. No wonder that
among all the three, there should be such agree-
ment and conformity.

The fundamental rules delivered by AriRtotle

concerning an epic poem, are these: That the
ation which is the ground work of the poem,
should be one, compleat, and great; that it should
be feigned, not merely historical; that it should
be enlivened with characters and manners; and
heightened by the marvellous.

But before entering on any of these, it may

perhaps be asked, what is the moral of Fingal ?
For, according to M. Boffu, an epic poem is no
other than an allegory contrived to illufirate some
moral truth. The poet, fays the critic, must be-
gin with fixing on some maxim, or inftrucion,
which he intends to inculcate on mankind. He
next forms a fable, like one of LEfop's, wholly with
a view to the moral; and having thus fettled and ar-
ranged his plan, he then looks into traditionary his-
tory for names and incidents, to give his fable some
air of probability. Never did 'a more frigid, pedan-
tic notion enter into the mind of a critic. We may
safely pronounce, that he who ihould compose an
epic poem after this manner, who should firit lay
.down a moral and contrive a plan, before he had
thought of his personages and ators, might de-
liver indeed very found inffru&ion, but would find
few readers. There cannot be the least doubt
that the first obje& which ffrikes an epic poet,
which fires his genius, and gives him any idea of
his work, is the a&ion or fubje& he is to celebrate.
Hardly is there any tale, any subjet a poet can
chufe for such a work, but will afford some general
moral inftrucion. An epic poem is by its nature
one of the most moral of all poetical compositions
But its moral tendency is by no means to be limit-

ed

ed to some common-place maxim, which may be
gathered from the story. It arises from the ad-
miration of heroic actions, which such a compofi-
tion is peculiarly calculated to produce; from the
virtuous emotions which the characers and in-
cidents raise, whilst we read it; from the happy im-
preflion which all the parts separately, as well as
the whole taken together, leave upon the mind.
However, if a general moral be still infitled on,
Fingal obviously furnishes one, not inferior to
that of any other poet, viz. That Wisdom and
Bravery always triumph over brutal force; or an-
other nobler still; That the most compleat vi&ory
over an enemy is obtained by that moderation and
generosity which convert him into a friend.

The unity of the Epic ation, which, of all

Ariflotle's rules, is the chief and most material, is
so firi&ly preserved in Fingal, that it must be per-
ceived by every reader. It is a more compleat
unity than what arises from relating the acions of
one man, which the Greek critic jufily censures as
imperfect; it is the unity of one enterprize, the
deliverance of Ireland from the invasion of Swa-
ran: An enterprize, which has surely the full
Heroic dignity. All the incidents recorded bear a
constant reference to the end; no double plot is
carried on; but the parts unite into a regular
whole: And as the a&ion is one and great, so it is
an entire or compleat acion. For we find, as the
Critic farther requires, a beginning, a middle, and
an end a Nodus, or intrigue in the Poem; Dif-
ficulties occurring through Cuchullin's rashness and
bad success; those difficulties gradually surmount-
ed; and at lafi the work conducted to that happy
conclusion which is held essential to Epic Poetry.
Unity is indeed observed with greater exaanefs in
Fingal, than in almost any other Epic composition.

For

For not only is unity of subjea maintained, but,

that of time and place also. The Autumn is
clearly pointed out as the season of the ation; and
from beginning to end the scene is' never shifted,
from the heath of Lena, along the sea-shore. The
duration of the acion in Fingal, is much fhortcr
than in the Iliad or ]Eneid. But sure, there may,
be shorter as well as longer Heroic poems; and if:
the authority of Ariifotle be also required for this,.
he fays exprefly that the Epic composition is in-
definite as to the time of its duration. Ac-
acordingly the A&ion of the Iliad lasts only forty-
seven days, whiliR that of the Eneid is continued-
for more than a year.

Throughout the whole of Fingal, there reigns

that grandeur of sentiment, flyle, and imagery,
which ought ever to diftinguifl this high species of
poetry. The story is conduced with no small
art. The poet goes not back to a tedious recital-
of the beginning of the war with Swaran; but
haflening to the main acion, he falls in exafly,
by a most happy coincidence of thought, with the:
rule of Horace.

Semper ad eventum feltinat, et in medias rest,
Non fecus ac notas, auditorem rapit----
Nec gemio bellum Trojanum orditur ab ovo.

De Arte Poet.

le invokes no muse, for he acknowledged

none;- but his occasional addresses to Malvina,
have a. finer effe& than the invocation of any muse.
He sets out with no formal propofitiorf of his sub-
jec; but the fnbje& naturally and easily unfolds
- tfelf; the poenm opening in an animated manner,

with the situation of Cuchullin, and the arrival of
a scout who informs him of Swaran's landing.
Mention is presently made of Fingal, and of the
expe&ed afiftlance from the ships of the lonely ile,

ill

in order to give further light to the subjec. For
the poet often shews his address in gradually pre-
paring us for the events he is to introduce; and
in particular the preparation for the appearance of
Fingal, the previous expe&ations that are raised,
and the extreme magnificence fully answering these
expecations, with which the hero is at length pre-
sented to us, are all worked up with such skilful
conduc as would do honour to any poet ds the
moR refined times. Homer's art in magnifying
the characer of Achilles has been universally
admired. Ossian certainly shews no less art in
aggrandizing Fingal. Nothing could be more
happily imagined for this purpose than the whole
management of the last battle, wherein Gaul the
son of Morni, had besought Fingal to retire, and
to leave to him and his other chiefs the honour of
the day. The generosity of the king in agreeing
to this proposal; the majesty with which he retreats
to the hill, from whence he was to behold the en-
gagement, attended by his Bards, and waving the
lightning of his sword; his perceiving the chiefs
overpowered by numbers, but from unwillingness
-to deprive them of the glory of vicory by coming
in person to their afilftance, first fending Ullin, the
Bard to animate their courage; and at last, when
the danger becomes more pressing, his rising in his
might, and interposing, like a divinity, to decide
the doubtful fate of the day; ,are all circumstances
contrived with so much art, as plainly discover the
Celtic Bards to have been not unpratifed in Heroic
poetry.

The flory which is the foundation of the Iliad

is in itself as simple as that of Fingal. A quarrel
arises between Achilles and Agamemnon concern-
ing a female slave; on which, Achilles, apprehend-
ing himself to be injured, withdraws his aliftance

from

from the reft of the Greeks. The Greeks fall in:
to great distress, and beseech him to be reconciled
to them. He refuses to fight for them in person,
but fends his friend Patroclus; and upon his be-
ing slain, goes forth to revenge his death, and
kills Heaor. The subjef of Fingal is this;
Swaran comes to invade Ireland: Cuchullin, the
guardian of the young King, had applied for affif-
tance to Fingal, who reigned in the opposite coafl
of Scotland. But before Fingal's arrival, he is
hurried by raih counsel to encounter Swaran. He
is defeated; he retreats; and desponds. Fingal ar-
rives in this conjuncture. The battle is for some
time dubious; but in the end he conquers Swaran;
and the remembrance of Swaran's-being the bro-
ther of Agandecca, who had once saved his life,'
makes him dismiss him honourably. Homer it is
true has filled up his story with a much greater va-
riety of particulars than Oflian; and in this has
ihewn a compass of invention superior to that of the
other poet. But it muff not be forgotten, thaf
though Homer be more circumitantial, his inci-
dents however are less diversified in kind than those
of Ofian. War and bloodshed reign throughout
the Iliad; and notwithilanding all the fertility of
Homer's invention, there is so much uniformity
in his fubjeas, that there are few readers, who be-
fore the close, are not tired of perpetual fighting.
Whereas in Ossian, the mind is relieved by a more
agreeable diversity. There is a finer mixture of
war and heroism, with love and friendship, of
martial, with tender scenes, than is to be met with,
perhaps, in any other poet. The Episodes too,
have great propriety; as natural, and proper to that
agC and country: consisting of the songs of Bards,
which are known to have been the great entertain-
ment of theCeltic heroes in war,as well as in peace.

These

Thete songs are not introduced at random; if you
except the Episode of Duchommar and Morna, in
the first book, which though beautiful, is more
unartful, than any of the reft; they have always
tome particular relation to the acor who is interest-
ed, or to the events which are going on; and,
whilst they vary the scene, they preserve a fuffi-
cient connecion with the main subjec, by the
fitness and propriety of their introdution.

As Fingal's love to Agandecca, influences some

circumitances of the Poem,, particularly the
honourable difmiflion of Swaran at the end; it
was necessary that we ihould be let into this part
of the hero's story. But as it lay without the
compass of the present a&ion, it could be regular-
ly introduced no where, except in an Episode.
Accordingly the poet, with as much propriety,
as if Aristotle himself had direted the plan, has
contrived an Episode for this purpose in the song
of Carril, at the beginning of the third book.

The conclusion of the poem is ftri&ly accord-

ing to rule; and is every way noble and pleasing.
The reconciliation of the contending heroes, the
consolation of Cuchullin, and the general felicity
that crowns the acion, tooth the mind in a very
agreeable manner, and form that passage from
agitation and trouble, to perfec quiet and repose,
which critics require as the proper termination of
the Epic work. " Thus they passed the night in
, song, and brought back the morning with joy.
" Fingal arose on the heath; and {hook his
" glittering spear in his hand. He moved first to-
" wards the plains of Lena; and we followed like
" a ridge of fire. Spread the fail, said the King of
" Morven, and catch the winds that pour from
" Lena.---We rose on the wave with songs; and
"rushed with joy through the foam of the ocean."

---So

----So much for the unity and general condu& of
the Epic action in Fingal.

With regard to that propertyof the subject which

Aristotle requires that it should be feigned not his-
torical, he muff not be underflood so firictly, as if
he meant to exclude all fubjets which have any
foundation in truth. For such exclusion would
both be unreasonable in itself; and, what is more,
would be contrary to the pracice of sHomer, who
is known to have founded his Iliad on historical
facts concerning the war of Troy, which was fa-
mons throughout all Greece. Aristotle means no
more than that it is the business of a poet not to
be amere annalist of Fads, but to embellish truth
with beautiful, probable, and useful fiEtions; to
copy nature, as he himself explains it, like pain-
ters, who preserve a likeness, but exhibit their
objeats more grand and beautiful than they are in
reality. That Offlan has followed this course, and
buildng upon true history, has sufficiently adorned
it with poetical fiction for aggrandizing his charac-
ters and fads, will not, I believe, be questioned by
most readers. At the fame time, the foundation
which those faas andchara&ershad in truth, and the
ihare which the poet himfelfhad in the tranfations
which he records, must be confidered as no small
advantage to his work. For truth makes an iap-
pression on the mind far beyond any fition; ana
no man, let his imagination be ever so strong, re-
lates any events so feelingly as those in which he
has been interested; paints any scene so naturally as
one which he has seen; or draws any charaiters in
such firong colours as those which he has.perfonal-
ly known. It is confidered as an advantage of
the Epic subjed to be taken from a period so dif-
tant, as by being involved in the darkness of tra-
dition, may give licence to fable. Though

Oflian's

.Ossian's subjea may at first view appear unfavour-
.able in this refpecE, as being taker from his.own
times, yet when we.refle& that he lived to an ex-
.treme old age; that he relates what had been
.tranfated in another country, at the distance ot
many years, and after all that race of men who had
been the.,a&ors were gone off the stage; we shall
find the objedion in a great measure obviated. In
so rude an age, when no ;written records were
known, when tradition was'loofe, and accuracy of
;any kind little attended to, what was great and
:heroic in one generation, easily ripened into the
marvellous in the next.

The naturalirep.refentation of human.charaEers

in an Epic Poem is highly essential to.its merit:
And in refpe& of this there can be -no doubt of
.Homer's. excelling all the heroic poets who have
.ever wrote. But though Ossian be much inferior
. to Homer in this article, he -will be found to be
..equal at.lea.ft, if notfuperior, to Virgil; and has
indeed given all .the display of human nature
.which the simple occurrences of his times could
be expected to furniih. No dead uniformity of
.character prevails in.Fingal; ,but on the contrary
the principal characters are not only clearly difiin-
guifhed, but sometimes artfully contrasted so as
:to illustrate each other. Ossian's ,heroes are like
*'Homer's, all brave; -but their bravery.like those of
Homer's too, is.os different kinds. For instance;
the prudent, the sedate, the modest. and circuni-
fpet Connal, is finely opposed to the presumptuous,
rash, overbearing, but gallant and generous Cal-
-mar. Calmar hurries Cuchullin into a&ion by his
temerity; and when he fees the.bad effeet of his
counrels, he will not survive the disgrace. :Connal,
likea;obther Ulysses, attends Cuchullin to his re-
triea:aounfels, and comforts him under his roisfor-

tne.

tune. The fierce the proud, and high spirited
Swaran is admirably contratfed with the calm, the
moderate, and generous Fingal. The character
of Oscar is a favourite one throughout the whole
Poems. The amiable warmth of the young war-
rior; his eager impetuosity in the day of ation;
his paflion for fame; his submission to his father;
his tenderness for Malvina; are the strokes of
a masterly pencil; the strokes are few; but it is the
hand of nature, and attrats the heart. Oflian's
own chara&er, the old man, the hero, and the
bard, all in one, presents to us through the whole
work a most refpecable and venerable figure,
which we always contemplate with pleasure.
Cuchullin is a hero of the highest class; daring,
magnanimous, and exquisitely sensible to honour.
We become attached to his interest, and are deeply
touched with his distress; and after the admiration
raised for him in the first part of the Poem, -it is a
firong proof of Ossian's masterly genius that he
durst adventure to produce to us another hero,
compared with whom, even the great Cuchullin,
1hould be only an inferior personage; and who
should rife as far above him, as Cuchullin rifes
above the reft. i

Here indeed, in the charaaer and description of

Fingal, Ossian triumphs almost unrivalled: For
we may boldly defy all antiquity to shew us any
hero equal to Fingal. Homer's He&or possesses
several great and amiable qualities; but He&or is
a secondary personage in the Iliad, not the hero of
the work. We fee him only occasionally; we
know much less of him than we do of Fingal; who
not only in this Epic Poem, but in Temora, and
throughout the reft of Ossian's works, is presented
in all that variety of lights, which give the full
display of a charater. And though Hecor faith-

fully

fully discharges his duty to his country, his friends,
and his family, he is tinctured, however, with a
d(-ree of the fame savage ferocity, vwhich prevails
iamong all the Homeric heroes. For we find him
inlillting over the fallen Patroclus, with the mos
cruel taunts, and telling him when he lies in the
agony of death, that Achilles cannot help him now;
and that in a ihort time his body, stripped nak-
ed, and deprived of funeral honours, shall be de-
voured by the vulturs*. Whereas in the charac-
ter of Fingal, concur almost all the qualities that
can ennoble human nature; that can either make
us admire the hero, or love the man. He is not
only unconquerable in war, but he inakes his peo-
.ple happy by his wisdom in the days of peace.
He is truly the father of his people. He is known
by the epithet of-" Fingal of the mildest look ;"'
and diiinguifled on every occasion, by humanity
and generosity. He is'merciful to his foest; full
of affetion to his children;' full of concern about
his friends; and never mentions Agandecca, his
first love, without the utinoft tendcrnefs. He is
the universal protector of the distressed; " None
"( ever went fad from Fingal ."--" O Oscar!
" bend the firong in arms; but spare the feeble

C "' hand.

* Iliad 16.830. I. 17. 127.
t When he commands his sons, after Swaran is taken

prisoner, to " pursue the reft of Lochlin, over the heath
"of Lena; that no vessel may hereafter bound on the
"dark-rolling waves of Iniftore; he means not assured-
ly, as rome have misrepresented him, to order a general
laugnhter of the foes; and to prevent their saving them-
selves by flight; but, like a wifegeneral, he commands his
chiefs to render the vicorv cornpleat, by a total rout of
the enemy; that they might adventure no more for the
future, to fit out any fleet against him or his allies.

( hand. Be thou a fiream of many tides against

the fees of thy people: but like the gale that
" moves the grass, to those who ask thine aid.

So Tremmor lived; such Trathal was; and
' such has Fingal been. My arm was the support

of the injured; the weak refted behind the light-
ning of my lteel."---Thefe were the maxims of

true heroism, to which he formed his grandson.
His fame is represented as every where spread; the
greatest heroes acknowledge his superiority; his
enemies tremble at his name; and the highest en-
comium that can be beflowed on one whom the
poet would moit exalt, is to fay, that his foul was
like the foul of Fingal.

To do justice to the poet's merit, in supporting

such a charater as this, I mult observe what is
not commonly attended to, that there is no part
of poetical execution more difficult, than to draw
a perfet chara&er in such a manner, as to render
it diflin&c and affeaing to the mind. Some strokes
of human imperfe&ion and frailty, are what usual-
ly give us the mocl clear view, and the molt fen-
fible impression of a character; because they pre-
sent to us a man, such as we have seen; they re-
call known features of human nature. When poets
attempt to go beyond this range, and describe a
faultless hero, they, for the molt part, set before
us a fort of vague undiftinguifhable chara&er, such
as the imagination cannot lay hold of, or realize
to itself, as the objet of affe&ion. We know
how much Virgil has failed in this particular.
His perfeE hero, Eneas, is an unanimated, in-
sipid personage, whom we may pretend to admire,
but whom no one can heartily love. But what
Virgil. has failed in, Ossian, to-our astonishment,

has

has successfully executed. His Fingal, though
exhibited without any of the common human fail-
ings, is neverthdefs a real man; a character which
touches and interests every reader. To this it has
much contributed, that the poet has represented
him as an old man; and by this has gained the ad-
vantage of throwing around him a great many
circunmfances, peculiar to that age, which paint
him to the fancy in a more diftind light. He is
surrounded with his family; he inftruts his child-
ren in the principles of virtue,;: he is narrative of
his phft. exploits; he is venerable with the grey
locks of age; he is frequently disposed to moralize,
like. an old man, on human vanity and the prof-
pectof 'death. There is more art, at least more
felicity, in this, than may at firif be imagined.
For youth and old age, are the two flates of hu-
man life, capable of being placed in the molt
picurefque lights. Middle age is more general
and vague ;'and has fewer circumiances peculiar
to the idea of it. And when any objeta is in a
situation, that admits.it to-be rendered particular,
and to be cloathed with a variety of circumfiances,
it always flands oat more clear and full in poetical
description.

Besides human-peffonages, divine or fupernatu-

ral agents Care often introduced into epic poetry;
forming what is called the machinery of it; which
moit critics hold to be an essential part. The
marvellous, it must be admitted, has always a
great charm for the bulk of readers. It gratifies
the imagination, and affords room for firiking and
sublime description. No wonder therefore, that
all poets should have a ftronrgpropenfity towards
it. But I mufl observe3 that nothing is more
difficult, than to adjust properly the marvellous

C 2 with

with the probable. If a poet sacrifice probability,
and fill his work with extravagant supernatural
scenes, he spreads over it an appearance of ro-
mance and childish fidtion; he transports his rea-
ders from this world, into a phantaftick, visionary
region; and loses that weight and dignity which
fnould reign in epic poetry. No work, from
which probability is altogether banished, can make
a lating or deep imprefflon. Human actions and
manners, are always the most interesting objets
which can be presented to a human mind. All
machinery, therefore, is faulty, which withdraws
these too much from view; or obscures them un-
der a cloud of incredible ficions. Besides being
temperately employed, machinery ought always to
have some foundation in popular belief. A poet
is by no means at liberty to invent what system of
the marvellous he pleases: He must avail himself
either of the religious faith, or the superstitious
credulity of the country wherein he lives; so as
to give an air of probability to events which are
moDt contrary to the common course of nature.

In these refpe&s, Ofllan appears to me to have

been remarkably happy. He has indeed followed
the fame course with Homer. For it is perfectly
absurd to imagine, as some critics have done, that
Homer's mythology was invented by him, in con-
sequence of profound refletions on the benefit it
would yield to poetry. Homer was no such resin-
ing genius. He found the traditionary stories on
which he built his Iliad, mingled with popular le-
gends, concerning the intervention of the gods; and
he adopted these, because they amused the fancy.
Oflian, in like manner, found the tales of his coun-
try full of ghosts and spirits : It is likely he believ'ed
them bimfelf; ani he introduced them, because

they

they gave his.poems that solemn and marvellous
cast, which suited his genius. This was the only
machinery he could employ with propriety; because
it was the only intervention of supernatural beings,
which agreed with the common belief of the coun-
try. It was happy ; because it did not interfere
in the lealf, with the proper-difplay of human
characers and actions; because it had less of the
incredible, than most other kinds of poetical ma.
chinery; and because it served to diversify the
scene, and to heighten the subjea by an, awful
grandeur, which is the great design of machinery.

As Ossian's mythology is peculiar to himfelt

and makes a considerable figure in his other poer.s,
aswellasin Fingal.,it.may .be proper to:.make
fQme :obfervations-on it,: independent of its subser-
viency.to epic coripofitiori.:; It turns for the most
part on the appearances. of.departed spirits. These,
consonantly to the notions of every rude age, are
represented not as purely immaterial, but as thin
airy forms, which can be visible or invisible at plea-
sure; ,theirvoice is- feeble.; their arm is.weak; but
they are endowed with knowledge more than hu-
man. . In a separate ftatei they retain.the fame.dif-
positions which animated them in this life. They
ride on the wiind; they bend their airy bows; and
pursue deer formed of clouds. The ghofis of
departed bards continue to sing. The ghofis of
departed heroes frequent the fields of their, former
fame. -," They reft together in their caves, .nd
"' talk of mortal men. Their songs are of other
" worlds; They come sometimes to the ear of ref-,
{" and raise their.feeble voice." . All this prefen'.
to us much the fame set of ideas, concerning spirits,
as we find in the eleventh book of the Odyffev,
where Ulysses visits the regions of the dead: And

C3 in

in the twenty-third book of the Iliad, the ghost of
Patroclus, after appearing to Achilles, vanilhes
precisely like one of Ossian's, emitting a shrill,
iee!le cry, and melting away like smoke.

But though Homer's and Ofian's ideas concern-

ing ghoits were of the fame nature, we cannot but
nbfer-e, that 'Ozfan's ghosts are drawn with much
itrcnZer and livelier colours than those of Homer.
Offlan describes ghosts with all the particularity of
one who had seen and converted with them, and
whose imagination was full of the impreflion they
had left upon it. He calls up those awful and tre-
mendous ideas which the

---Simulacra modis pallentia miris,

are fitted to raise in-the humiian.nid; and which,
in Shalkfpear's flteti hafr-' up the -foul.'
trugalt' ghost, in partkiar;', i' the beginning of
the Recond book of Fimgal, may vie with any ap-
pearance of this kind, described by any epic. or
tragic poet whatever. Mos poets would have
contented themselves with telling us, that he re-
fembled, in every particular,:the-living Crugal,
that his form and dress were the fame, only his
face more pale and fad ; and that he boiie the mark
of the wound-by which he fell. But Ossian sets
before our eyes a spirit from the invisible world,
distinguished by all those features, which a ifrong
aflonifhed imagination would give to a ghof.. " A
i dark-red stream of fire comes down from the hill.
-' Crugal fat upon the beam; he that lately felt by
" the hand of Swaran, Driving in the battleof he-
" roes. Hisfaceis likethebeam of the:fetting
"moon. His robes are of the clouds;of::the hill.
' His eyes are like two decaying flames. Dark
' is the wound of his breaft.-----The itars dim-
" twinkled throur-h his form; and his voice was like

"the

" the foundof a diftantftream." The circumstance
of the stars being beheld, " dim-twinkling through
, his form," is wonderfully picurefque; and con-
veys the most lively imprefion of his thin and
shadowy fubitance. The attitude in which he is
afterwards placed, and the speech put into L:is
mouth, are full of that solemn and awful sub.
limity, which suits the subjet. " Dim, and in
" tears, he flood and firetched his pale hand ever
( the hero. Faintly he raised his feeble voice,
"f like the gale of the reedy Lego.---My ghost,
" O Connal! is on my native hills; but my corse
" is on the sands of Ullin. Thou shalt never
" talk with Crugal, or find his lone Qeps in the
" heath. I am light as the blast of Cromla.; and
" I move like the Shadow of milt. Connal, son
" of Colgar ! I fee the dark cloud of death. It
*' hovers over the plains of Lena. The fops of
«" green Erin shall fall. Remove from the field of
" ghofts.---Like the darkened moon he retired in
" the midst of the whitling blast."

Several other appearances of spirits might be

pointed out, as among the moil sublime passages
of Oflian's poetry. The circurmfances of them
are considerably diversified; and the scenery always
suited to the occasion. " Oscar slowly ascends
" the hill. The meteors of night set on the heath
' before him. A distant torrent faintly roars.

Unfrequent llafts rush through aged oaks.

" The half-enlightened moon finks dim and red
" behind her hill. Feeble voices are heard on
" the heath. 0Qar drew his fword."----No-
thing can prepare the fancy more happily for
the awful scene that is to follow. " Trenmor
" came from'his hill, at the voice of his mighty
" son. A cloud, like the fleed of thie firanger,
" supported his airy limbs. His robe is of the misc

C 4 "of

" of Lano, that brings death to the people. His
"' is\ord is a green meteor, half-extinguifhed.
" His face is without form, and dark. He sigh-
" ed thrice over the hero: And thrice, the winds
" of the night roared around. Many were his

wocrds to Ofcar----He slowly vanished, like a

; mist that melts on the funny hill." To appear-
ances of this kind, we can find no parallel among
the Greek or Roman poets. They bring to mind
that noble deicription in the book of Job: " In
(( thoughts from the visions of the night, when
" deep sleep falleth on men, fear came upon me,
s( and trembling, which made all my bones to
' ikake. ;Then a spirit passed before my face.
" The hair of my flesh flood up. , It flood still;

but I could not discern the form thereof. An

" image was before mine eyes. There was si-
< lence; and I heard a voice---Shall mortal man
" be more just than Gods ?"

As Oflian's supernatural beings are described

with a furprizing force of imagination, so they are
introduced with propriety. We have only three
ghosts in Fingal: That of Crugal, which comes
to warn the hoti of impending deftru&ion, and
to advise them to save themselves by retreat; that
of Eviralin, the spouse of Ossian, which. calls
him to rife and rescue their son from danger; and
that of Agandecca, which just before the last en-
gagement with Swaran, moves Fingal to pity, by
mourning for the approaching deftruaion of her
kinsmen and people. In the other poems, ghosts
fomnetimes anpear when invoked to Ioretel futu-
rity ; frequently, according to the notions of there
times, they come as fore-runners of misfortune or
death to those whom the,; visit; sometimes they
inform thir friends at a diflance, 'of their own

di.ath;
Jobiy. i .-

death; and sometimes they are introduced to
heighten the scenery on some gre.t and solemn
occasion. " A hundred oaks burm to the wind;
, and faint light gleams over the heath. The
, ghosts of Ardven pass through the beam; and
( fhewv their dim and difiant forms. Comala
" is half-unfeen on her meteor; and Hidallan is
c fullen and dim."----" The awfulfades of -
c other times, looked from the clouds of-Cro-
" na."---" Fercuth! I saw the ghost of
' night. Silent he flood on that bank; his robe
c of mifl flew on the wind. I could behold his
, tears. An aged man: he seemed, and, full of
" thought."

The ghosts of strangers mingle not with those

of the natives. " She is seen; but not like the
" daughters of the hill. Her robes are from the
" firangers land; and she is still alone." When
the ghost of one whom we had formerly known i>
introduced, the propriety of the living characer
is fill preserved. This is remarkable in the appear-
ance of Calmar's ghoil, in the poem entitled The
Death of Cuchullin. He seems to forebode Cuch-
ullin's death, and to Leckon him to his cave.
Cuchullin reproaches hima for supposing that he
could be intimidated by foch prognoilics. " Why

, dost thou bend: thy:dark eyes on me, ghost of
.the. car-borne Calmar ! Would'st thou frighten
me, O Matha's son! from the battles of Cor-

" mac ?..Thy hand was not feeble in war; neither
" was tbhy voice for peace. How art thou chang-
( ,ed, .hief of Lara!. if. now thou doff advise to
'" {y-i-'Retire, thou to; thy cave: Thou art not
' ,Calnr's- ghost,: . He.delighted in battle; and
.. -"his arm was ilke the thunder of heaven." Cal-
mar makes no return to this seeming reproach:

C 5 . But,

But, " He retired in his blast with joy; for he
" had heard the voice of his praise." This is
precisely the ghost of Achilles in Homer; who,
notxvithfianding all tie diffatisacdtion he expresses
with his slate in the region of the dead, as soon
as he had heard his son Neoptolemnus praised for
his gallant behaviour, 1trode away with filent.joy
to rejoin the refi of the shades*.

It is a great advantage of Ossian's mythology,

that it is not local and temporary, like that of
mo't other ancient poets; which of course is apt.
to seem ridiculous, after the superstitions have
passed away on which it was founded. Ossian's
mythology is, to speak so, the mythology of hu-
mannature; for it is founded on what has been
the popular belief, in all ages and countries, and
under all forms of religion, concerning the ap-
pearances of departed spirits. Homer's machine-
ry is always lively and amusing; but far from be-
ing always supported with proper dignity. The
indecent squabbles among his gods, surely do no
honour to epic poetry. Whereas Oflian's machine-
ry has dignity upon all occasions. It is indeed a
dignity of the dark and awful kind; but this is
proper; because coincident with the strain and
ipirit of the poetry. A light and gay mythology,
like Homer's, would have been perfetly unfuit-
?.ble to the fubjets on which Ossian's genius was
employed. But though his machinery be always
solemn, it is not, however, always dreary or dif-
mal: it is enlivened, as much as the fubje& would
permit, by those pleasant and beautiful appearances,
which he sometimes introduces, of the spirits of
the hill. These are gentle spirits; descending on

fun-
Odyf.Li. i2 .

sun-beams; fair-moving on the plain; their forms
white and bright; their voices sweet; and their
visits to men propitious. The greatefi plaife th.at
can be given, to the beauty of a living woman, is
to fay, " She is fair as the ghost of the hill; when
" it moves in a sun-beam at noon, over the silence
" of Morven."----" The hunter shall hear my
" voice from his booth. He shall fear but love
" my voice. For sweet shall my voice be for my
- friends; for pleasant were they to mre."

Besides ghosts, or the spirits of departed men,

we find in Ofian some instances of other kinds of
machinery. Spirits of a superior nature to ghofls
are sometimes alluded to, which have power to
embroil the deep; to call forth winds and florms,
and pour them on the land of the stranger; to
overturn forefis, and to fend death among the
people. We have prodigies too; a fliower of
blood; and when some difiter is befalling at a dif-
tance, the found of death heard on the strings of
Ossian's harp: all perfecly ccnfonant, not only
to the peculiar ideas of northern nations, but to
the general current of a fuperftitiousimragination
in all countries. The description of Fingal's airy
hall, in the poem called LBrathon, and cf the as-
cent of Malvira into it, deserves particular notice,
as remarkably noble and magnificent. But above
all, the engagement of Fingal with the spirit of
Loda, in Carric-thura, cannot be mentioned with-
out admiration. I forbear transcribing tlie pas-
sage, as it muif have drawn the attention of every
one who has read the.works of Oflian. The un-
daunted courage of Fingal, opposed to all the ter-
rors of the Scandinavian God; the appearance and
the speech of that awful spirit; the wound which
he receives, and the shriek which he fends forth,

" as

" as ro!!ed into himself he role upon the wind i"
arc uill of the rmot ama-.zing and terrible majeftl;
I know no patT-ge more fuLlime in the writings of
any -uninspired author. I he fi&ion is calculated
to aggrandize the hero; which it does to a high
degree; nor is it so unnatural or wild a fition, as
might at firil be thought. According to the no-
tions of those times, supernatural beings were
material, and consequently, vulnerable. The
spirit of Loda was not acknowledged as a deity by
Fingal; he did not worship at the. rfone of his
power; he plainly confidered him as the God of
his enemies only; as a local deity, whose domi-
nion extended no farther than to the regions where
he was worshipped; who had, therefore;no title to
threaten him, and no claim to his fubmillion.

WVe know there are poetical precedents of great

authority, for fidions fully as extravagant ;and if
Homer be forgiven for making Diomed attack and
wound in battle, the gods whom that chief him-
self worshipped, Oflian surely is pardonable for
making his hero superior to the god of a foreign
territory*.

Not-

' The scene of this encounter of Fingal with the spirit

of Loda is laid in Iniftore, or the ifands of Orkney ; and
in the description of Fingal's landing there, it is said,
" A rock bends along the coast wirh all its ecchoing
"wood. On the top is the circle of Loda, with the
'* mofy stone of power." In confirmation of Ossian's
topography, it is proper to acquaint the reader that in
these ifands, as I have been well informed, there are
many pillars, and circles of sones, fill remaining;
known by the name of the sones and circles of Loda,
or Lodcn;' to which rome degree of fuperfitious regard
is annexed to this day. These islands, until the year
1468, made a part of the Danilh dominions. Their

ancient

Notwithstanding the poetical advantages which

I have ascribed to Ossian's machinery, I acknow-
ledge it would have been inuch more beautiful
and perfet, had the author discovered rome know-
ledge of a supreme Being. Although his silence
on this head has been accounted for by the learn-
cd and ingenious traiflator in a ery probable man-
ner, yet still it must be held a considerable difad-
vantage to the poetry. For the mofi august and
lofty ideas that can embellish poetry, are derived
from the belief of a divine adminifiration of the
universe: And hence the invocation of a supreme
Being, -or at least of some superior powers who are
conceived as presiding over human affairs, the so-
lemnities of religious worihip, prayers preferred,
and assistance implored on critical occasions, appear
with great dignity in the works of almost all poets
as chief ornaments of their compositions. The ab-
fence of all such religious ideas from Oflian'spoetry,
is a sensible blanik in it; the more to be regretted, as
we can easily imagine what an illustrious figure
they would have made under the management of
such a genius as his; and how finely they would
have been adapted to many situations which occur
in his works.

After

ancient language, of which there are yet rome remains
among the natives, is calledthe Norse; and is a diale&;
not of the Celtic, but of the Scandinavian tongue.
The manners and the superstitions of the -inhabitants,
are quite diftin& from those of the Highlands and weft-
ern ifies f cotland. Their ancient songs too, ite of i
different frain and character, turning upon magical
incantations and evocations fromthe dead, which were
the favourite fubjecs of the old Runic poetry. They
have many traditions among them of wars in former
times with the inhabitants of the western islands.

After so particular an examination of Fingal, it

were needless to enter into as full a discussion of
the conduc of Tenbra, the other Epic Poem.
Many of the fame observations, especially with re-
gard to the great charaaeriftics of heroic poetry,
apply to both. The high merit, however, of Te-
mora, requires that we thould not pass it by with-
out some remarks.

The scene of Temora, as of Fingal, is laid in

Ireland ; and the ation is of a posterior date. The
fubje& is, an expedition of the hero, to dethrone
and punish a bloody usurper, and to restore the
possession of the kingdom to the posterity of the
lawful prince; an undertaking worthy of thejuftice
and heroism of the great Fingal. The action is
one, and compleat. The poem opens with the
descent of Fingal on the coaff, and the confulta-
tion held among the chiefs of the enemy. The
murder of the young prince Cormac, which was
the cause of. the war, being antecedent to the epic
acion, is introduced with great propriety as an
episode in the firt book. In the progress of the
poem, three battles are defcribedy which rife in
their importance above one another; the success is
various, and the issue for some time doubtful; till
atlafi, Fingal brought intodiftrefs, by the wound
of his great general Gaul, and the death of his
son Fillan, assumes the command hinifelf, and' hav-
ig-flain the Iril'king in.fingle combat, reffores
the rightful' leir to his throne.

Temora has perhaps less fire than-the other epic

poem; but iii-return it has more variety, more
tedemefs, and more magnificence. The: reign-
ing idea;y (o often presented to us of --.Fingal ini
c tlie laifof his fields," irvenerable and effeinlg;
Wsr could anydmore noble conclusion! be thought
of, thantfre aged: hero, after so many successful

at-

atchievenments, taking his leave of battles, and with
all the folemnities of those times resigning his spear
to his son. The events are less. crouded in Te.
mora than in Fingal; ations and characters are
more partiularly displ'ayed; we are let into the
tranfarions of both hosts; and informed of the ad-
ventures of the night as well as of the day. The
fill pathetic, and the romantic scenery of several
of the night adventures, so remarkably suited to
Ossian's genius, occasion, a fine diversity in the
poem; and are happily conrafted: with the mili-
tary operations of the day.

In-most of our author's poems, the horrors of

war are softened by intermixed scenes of love and
friendship. In Fingal, these are introduced as
episodes; in Temora, we have an incident of this
nature. wrought ito' the body. of the piece; in the
adventure of Cathmor and: Sulmalla. This forms
one. of the most conspicuous 'beauties of that poem.
The dilfrefs of Sulmalla,2:difguifed and unknown
among firangers, her tender and: anxious: concern
for the safety of Cathmor, her dream, and her
melting remembrance of the land-of her fathers;
Cathmor's emotion when he firfl discovers her, his
itruggles to'conceal and suppress. his palion, left
if fliould unman him in the midit of war, though
4' his-roult poured forth in- secret, when he bet-
"- held her fearful eye ;" and the last interview be-
tweenthem, when overcome by her tendernesss
he lets her know e lehad:difcovered:her,- and con-
fefles his paflion; are all wrought up with the most
exquisite sensibility and delicacy.

Besides the charaaers which appeared ii FTinga,

several new, ones are ihere!intrtodtied:; and thugh,
as they are all the chara&er.s of warriors,- hravery
is the predominant feature, they are ntvertlielefs
diverffied in a sensible and striking- manner. SOt

dath, -

dath, for inflance, the general of Cathmor, ex-
hibits the perfect picure of a savage chieftain:
Bold -and daring, but presumptuous, cruel, and
overbearing. He is diffinguifhed, on his first ap-
pearance, as the friend of the tyrant Cairbar;
" Hisftride is haughty, his red eye rolls in wrath."
In his person and whole deportment, he is con-
trafted with the mild and wife Hidalla, another
leader of the fame army, on whose humanity and
gentleness he looks with great contempt. He pro-
feffedly delights in ltrife and blood. He insults
over the fallen. He is imperious in his counsels,
and facious when they are not-followed. He is
unrelenting in all his schemes of revenge, even ta
the length of denying. the funeral song to the dead;
which, from the injury. thereby done to their
ghosts, was in thofe.days confidered as the greatest
barbarity. Fierceto thelaftl .he: comforts hirmfelf
in his dying moments with, thinking that his ghost
shall often leave its blaftt. rejoice oyer-the'graves
of those he had fain.- Yet Oflian, ever prone to
the pathetic, has contrived to throw into his ac-
count of the death, even of this man, some tender
drcumftances; by the moving defcriptionof his
daughter. Dardulena, the lat. 'of his rage.:, ,

The characaer .of. Foldath tend ..much. to exalt

that of Cathmor, the chief- cormmander; which.is
distinguished by the molt humaneq virtues,.; :He
abhors all fraud and cruelty, is famous for his hof-
pitality to itrangers: open to.every generous fen-
timent, and to every soft and compassionate feel.
ing. He is so amiable as to divide the reader's ag-
tachment between himand the hero of; te poem;
though our author has- artfully mganged it .f, as
to make. Cathmor himself indire&tly aclnol5pdge
FingaPs superiority, and to appear, somewhat -ap-
prebenfive of the event, after the death of Fillan,

which

which he knew would call forth Fingal in all his
might. It is very remarkable, that although Ossian
has introduced into his poems three compleat
heroes,. Cuchullin, Cathmor, and Fingal, he has,
however, sensibly distinguished each of their cha-
raters. Cuchullin is particularly honourable;
Cathmor particularly amiable; Fingal wife and
great, retaining an ascendant peculiar to himself
in whatever light he is viewed.

But the favourite figure in Temora, and the one

,most highly finiihed, is Fillan. His charater is
of that fort, for which Ossian thews a particular
fondness; an eager, fervent young warrior, fired
with all the impatient enthusiasm for military glory,
peculiar to that time of life. He had fietched
this in the description of his own son Oscar; but
as he has extended it more fully in Fillan, and as
the charater is so consonant to the epic firain,
though so far as I remember, not placed infuch a
conspicuous light by any other epic poet, it may
be worth while to attend a little lo Oflian's manage-
ment of it in this instance.

Fillan was the youngest of all the sons of Fin-

gal; younger, it is plain, than his nephew Oscar,
by whose fame and great deeds in war, we may
naturally suppose his ambition to have been highly
Simulated. Withal, as he is younger, he is de-
fcribed as more rash and fiery. His firfi appearance
is foonafterOfcar's death, when he was employed to
watch the motions of the foe by night. In a con-
verfation with his brother Oflian, on that occasion,
we learn that it was not. long since he began to lift
the spear. " Few are the marks of my sword in
" battle; but my foul is fire." He is with some
difficulty restrained by Ossian from going to attack
the enemy; and complains to him, that his father
had never allowed him any opportunity of figna-

lizing

lizing his valour. " The king hath not remarked
" my sword; I go forth with the croud; I return
(; without my fame." Soon after, when Fingal
according to custom was to appoint one of his
chiefs to command the army, and each was fland.
ing forth, end putting in his claim to this honour,
Fillan is presented in the following most pieu.
refque and natural attitude. " On his spear flood
"' the son of Clatho, in the wandering of his locks.
" Thrice he raised his eyes to Fingal: his voice
sc thrice failed him as he fpoke---Fillan could not
cc boast of battles---at once he firode away. Bent
cc over a diflant fiream he flood; the tear hung in
{c his eye. He firuck at times, the thistle's head,
" with his inverted spear." No less. natural and
beautiful is the description of Fingal's paternal
emotion on this occasion. " Nor is he unseen of
{, Fingal. Side-long he beheld his son. He be-
cc held him with burfling joy. He hid the big
cc tear with his locks, and turned amidit his
"c crouded fouL" The command for that day,
being given to Gaul, Fi}lan ruffes amidst the
thickest of the foe, saves Gaul's life, who is wound-
ed by a random arrow, and diflinguifhes himself si
in battle, that " the days of old return on Fingal's
" mind, as he beholds the renown of his son. ( As
" the fun rejoices from the cloud, over the tree
"( his beams have raised, whilst it shakes its lonely
"' head on the heath, so joyful is the king over
{c Fillan." Sedate however, and wife, he mixes
the praise which he bestows on him with some re-
prehension of his ralhnefs. " My son, I saw thy
" deeds, and my foul was glad. Thou art brave,
- sion of Clatho, but headlong in the strife. So
," did not Fingal advance, tho' he never feared

- a foe.

,' a foe. Let thy people be a ridge behind thee;
, they are thy strength in the field. Then shalt
" thou be long renowned, and behold the tombs
" of thy fathers."

On the next day, the greatest and the lafi of Fil-

lan's life, the charge is committed to him of lead-
ing on the host to battle. Fingal's speech to his
troops on this occasion is full of noble sentiment;
and where he recommends his son to their care,
extremely touching. " A young beam is before
" you; few are his iteps to war. They are few,
' but he is valiant; defend my dark-haired son.
" Bring him back with joy; hereafter he may stand
" alone. His form is like his fathers; his foul is
" a flame of their fire." When the battle be,
gins, the poet puts forth his firength to describe
the exploits of the young hero; who, at last en-
countering and killing with his own.hand Foldath
the opposite general, attains the pinacle of glory.
In what follows, when the fate of Fillan is draw-
ing near, Oflian, if any where, excells himself.
Foldath being slain, and a general rout begun,
there was no resource left to the enemy but in the
great Cathmor himself, who in this extremity de-
scends fromthe hill, where, according to the cuflom
of those princes, he surveyed the battle. Observe
how this critical event is wrought up by the poet.
"( Wide spreading over echoing Lubar, the flight
'< of Bolga is rolled along. Fillan hung forward
" on their fieps; and itrewed the heath with dead.
"Fingal rejoiced over his fon--Blue-fiielded
" Cathmor.rofe.--Son of Alpin, bring the harp !

Y

Give Fillan's praise to the wind; raise high his

"praise in my hall, while yet he shines in war.
"Leave, blue-eyed Clatho! leave thy hall; be-
"hold that early beam of thine! The host is
:' withered in its course. No farther look---it is

" dark

, dark---light-trembling from the harp, strike,
( virgins! firike the found." The sudden in-
terruption, and suspense of the narration on Cath-
mor's rising from his hill, the abrupt burltisg into
the praise of Fillan, and the paflionate apoirophe
to his mother Clatho, are admirable efforts of poe-
tical art, in order to interest us in Fillan's danger;
and the whole is heightened by the immediately
following simile, one of the most magnificent and
fvblime that is to be met with in any poet, and
which if it had been found in Homer, would have
been the frequent fubje& of admiration'to critics;
" Fillan is like a spirit of heaven, that descends
" from the skirt of his blast. The troubled ocean
a" feels his fieps, as he firides from wave to wave.
" His path kindles behind him: islands shake
"' their heads on the heaving seas.".

But the poet's art is not yet exhausted. The fall

of this noble young warrior, or, in Ossian's itile,
the extinction of this beam-of heaven, could not
be rendered too interesting and affeaing. Our at-
tention is naturally drawn towards Fingal. He be-
holds from his hill the rising of Cathmor, and the
danger of his son. But what ihall he:do ?.:" .Shall
"Fingal rife to his aid, and take the sword of
" Luno ? What then Ihould become of thy fame,
C' son of white-bofomed Clatho ? Turn not thine
" eyes from Fingal, daughter of Iniftore I I ihall
"not quench thy early beam---No cloud of mine
" shall rife, my son, upon thy foul of: fire."
Struggling between concern for:the fame, and fear
for the safety of his son, he withdraws, from. the
fight of the engagement; and difpatches,01ian in
hafle to the field, with this affectionate and deli-
cate injun&ion. "' Father of Ocar!" addrefling
him by a title which- on this occasion has the

highest

highest propriety, " Father of Oscar! lift the

spear; defend the young in arms. But conceal
thy steps from Fillan's eyes: He must not know

" that I doubt his steel."--. Ossian arrived too
late.---3ut unwilling.to describe Fillan vanquished,
the poet suppresses all the circumstances of the-
combat with Cathnmor; and only shews us the.
dying hero. We fee him animated to the end
with the fame martial and ardent spirit; breathing
his last in bitter regret for being so early cut off.
from the field of glory. " Ossian, lay me.in that
" hollow rock. Raise no flone above me; least
" one thould ask about my fame. - I am fallen in

the fift.of my fields; fallen without renown.

"Let thy voice alone, fend joy to my flying foul.
" Why should the bard know where dwells the.
" early-fallen Fillan ?"--

.. He who after tracing

the circumstances of this flory, ihall deny that our
bard is possessed of high sentiment and high art,
must ibe - strangely prejudiced indeed. Let him
read the story ,of Pallas in Virgil, which is of a. si-
milar kind; and after all the praise he may jufily
bestow on the elegant and finished description of
that amiable author, let him fay, which of the two
poets unfolds mo. of the human foul.---I wave
infifting.on:any more of the particulars in Temora;
as my aim is rather to .ead the reader into: the
genius!and spirit of .Ofian's poetry, than to dwell
.on all his beauties;

The judgment and art discovered in conducing

works of such length as Fingal and Temora, dif-
tinguifh them from the other poems in this collec-
tion. The smaller pieces, 'however, contain par-
ticular beauties no less eminent. They are hiftori-
cal:poenms, generally. of the elegiac kind; and
plainly- discover themselves to be the work of the
fame author. One consistent face of manners is

every

every where presented to us; one spirit of poetry
reigns; the masterly hand of Ossian appears through-
out; the fame rapid and animated style; the fame
irong colouring of imagination, and the fame glow-
ing sensibility of heart. Besides the unitywhich
belongs to the compositions of one man, there is
moreover a certain unity of subjea which very
happily conne&s all these poems. They form the
poetical hiflory of the age of Fingal. The fame
race of heroes whom we had met with in the grea-
ter poems, Cuchullin, Oscar, Connal and Gaul
return again upon the fiage; and Fingal himself
is always the principal figure, presented on every
occasion, with equal magnificence, nay rising upon
us to the last. The circumstances of Ossian's old
age and blindness, his furviving-all -his friends,
and his relating their great exploits to Malvina,
the fponfe or mifirefs of his beloved son Oscar,
furnish the finefi poetical situations that fancy
could devise for that tender pathetic which reigns
in Ossian's poetry.

On each of these poems, there might be room

for separate observations, with regard to the con-
dut and difpofition.of the incidents, as well as to
the beauty of the deferiptions and sentiments. Car-
thou is a regular and highly fiiiflied piece. fthe
main story is veyf properly introduced by Cleffam-
mor's relation of the adventure of his youth; and
this introduction is finely heightened by Firgal's
song of mourning over Moina; in which Oflian, ever
fond of doing honour to his father, has contrived
to diffinguifh him, for being at emine-i- poet, as
weft as warrior. Fingal's song upon this occasion,
when " his thousand Bards leaned fbtwards from
" their feats, to hear the voice of the King," is
inferior- ono passage in the whole book; and with

great

great judgment put in his mouth, as the serious-
ness, no less than the sublimity of the firain, is
peculiarly suited to the Hero's charater. In Dar-
thula, are assembled almost all the tender images
that can touch the heart of man; friendship, love,
the affecions of parents, sons, and brothers, the
distress of the aged, and the unavailing bravery of
the young. The beautiful address to the moon,
with which the poem opens, and the transition
from thence to the subject, most happily prepare
the mind for that train of affecing events that is to
follow. The story is regular, dramatic, interesting
to the last. He who can read it without emotion
may congratulate himself, if he pleases, upon be-
ing completely armed against sympathetic sorrow.
As Fingal had no occasion of appearing in the ac-
tion of this poem, Offlian makes a very artful tran-
fition from his narration, to what was pafling in
the halls of Selma. The found heard there on
the firings of his harp, the concern which Fingal
shews on hearing it, and the invocation of the
ghosts of their fathers, to receive the Heroes fall-
ing in a diltant land, are introduced with great
beauty of imagination to increase the folemniity,
and to diversify the scenery of the poem.

Carric-thura is full of the molt sublime dignity;

and has this advantage of being more chearful in
the subjet, and more happy in the catafirophe
than most of the other poems: Though tempered
at the fame time with episodes in that firain of ten-
der aMelancholy, which seems to have been the
great delight of Ossian and the Bards of his age.
Lathmon is peculiarly distinguished. by high ge-
nerofity of sentiment. This is carried so far, par-
ticularly in the refusal of Gaul, on one fide, to
take the advantage of a sleeping foe; and of
Lathmon, on the other, to overpower by numbers

the

the two young warriors, as to recall into one's
mind the manners of Chivalry; tome resemblance
to which may perhaps be suggested by other inci-
dents in this colle&ion of Poems. Chivalry, how-
ever, took rife in an age and country too remote
from those of Ossian, to admit the suspicion that
the one could have borrowed any thing from
the other. So far as Chivalry had any real exif-
tence, the fame military enthusiasm, which gave
birth to it in the feudal times, might, in the days
of Oflian, that is, in the infancy of a rising state,
through the operation of the fame cause,. very
naturally produce effects of the fame kind on the
minds and manners of men. -So far as Chivalry
was an ideal system existing only in romance, it
will not be thought furprizing, when We reflect on
the account before given of the Celtic Bards, that
this imaginary refinement of heroic manners should
be found among them, as much at leafi, as
among the Trobadores, or firolling Provenral Bards,
in the Ioth or i th century; whose songs, it is
said, first gave rife to those romantic ideas of hero-
ism, which for so long a time enchanted Europe*.
Oflian's heroes have all the gallantry and generofi-
ty of those fabulous knights, without their extra-
vagance; and his' love scenes have native tender-
ness, without any mixture of: those forced and un-
natural conceits which abound in the old roman-
ces. The adventures related by our poet which re-
femble the molt those of romance, concern women
who follow their lovers to war disguised in thl ar-
mour of men; and'thefe.are so managed as to
produce, in the discovery, several of the: mot in-
teresting situations; one beautiful inflance of which
may be seen in Carric-thura, and another in Cal-
thon and Colmal.

Oithona
* Vid. Huetius de origine fabularum Romanenfinm.

Oithona .presents a situation of a different na-

ture. In the abfence.of her lover Gaul, she had
.been carried.off and ravithed by Dunrommath.
.Gaul discovers the place where the is kept con,
.cealed,.andcomes to revenge her. The meeting
.of the two.lovers, the sentiments and the beh.a-
viour of Oithpra on that occasion, are described
with such tender and exquisite propriety, as does
the greatest honour, both to the art and to the de-
.licacy..of our author: and would have been ad-
mired in .any poet of the most refined age. The
condu" of Croma must firike every reader as re-
markably judicious and beautiful. We are to be
prepared for the death of Malvina, which is re-
lated in the succeeding Poem. She is therefore
introduced in person; " she has heard a voice ia
" a dream; she feels the fluttering of her foul;"
andin. a 'mo.moving lamentation addressed to her
beloved Oscar, she sings' her 'own D.eath Song.
Nothing could be calculated with more art to
sooth, and, comfort her, than the story which
Oflian relates. In the; yung and brave Fovar-
.gormo, another Oscar is introduced; his praises
are sung; and the happiness is set before her of
those who die in their youth, . when their re-
' npo.wn is around them; before the feeble behold
"them in the hall, and smile at their trembling
":hands.' -

But no where does Ossian's, genius appear to

greater. advantage, than in Berrathon, which is
reckoned the conclusion of. his songs, " The last
' found of the Voice. of Cona."
: Qalis olor notopofiturus'littore vitam,
Ingentit, et mcefsis mulcensconfentibus auras
.Pr/efago queritur venientia. funera cantu.
The,whole train of ideas is admirably'fuited to
the subjeC.. Every thing is full of- that invifibl.

: ' ' D ' wcrll,

w-crid, into which the aged Bard believes himself
now ready to enter. The airy hall ofFingal pre-
-:ets itself to his view; " he fees the cloud'that
, shall receive his ghost ; he beholds the mist that

f hall form his robe when he appears on hishbill;"

and all the natural objecs around him seem to carry
the presages of death. '" The thifile faakes its
( beard to the wind. The flower hangs its heavy
" head---it seems to fay, I am covered with the
" drops of heaven; the time of my departure is
" near, and the blast that shall scatter my leaves."
Malvina's death is hinted to hini in the moss de-
licate manner by tlie son of Alpin. His' lamenta-
tion over her, her apotheosis, or ascent to the
habitation of heroes, and the introdution to the
flory which follows, from the mention which Offi-
an supposes the father of Malvina to make of him
in the hall of Fingal, are all in the highet spirit of
Poetry. " And dost thou remember Oflian, Q
." Tofcar son of Comloch? The battles of our
-;" yopth were many; our flvords went together
· to the field.----Nothing could be more proper
than to end his songs with recording an exploit
of the father of that Malvina, of whom his heart
was now so full; and who, from first to last, had
been such a favourite obj'et& throughout all his
poems.

The scene of moll of Ossian's poems is laid in

Scotland, or in the coiaf of Ireland opposite to
the territories of'Fingal. When 'the scene is in
ireland; we perceive no change of manners fromn
those of Offlan's native country. For as Ireland
was urdoubteily peopled with Celtic tribes, the
language, customs, ':nd religion' of b6th' iations
were the fame. They had been ifeparated' from
one another by migration, 'obhiy a few generations,
as'it'flioldd'ffeem 'B-efore'our poet's age; and they

ill

fill. mainuained a close and frequent intercourse,
Bjut when the poet relates the expeditions of any
of his-heroes to the Scandinavian coaff, or to the
iflafidAs oF-'Orkney; which were then part of the
*Scandiiiiaiit territory, -as he does in Caric-thura,
Sulimaitt of Lfimbn, anidCathloda, the cafe isquite
altered. ,Thfe' countries were inihabited by 'na-
tions of the Teutonic descent, who in their man-
ners and religious rites differed Widely from the
Celta:; and it is curious and remarkable, to find
this lifference clearly pointed out in the'poems of
Offiari. EHis descriptions bear the native marks
of oone who was present in the expeditioinrs',hich
he relates, and 'who-defciibes whait he *had'feen
with his own eyes. No sooner are we carried to
Lochlin, or the islands of Iniftore,- than'we"'per-
ceive that we are in a foreign region;ii -New ob-
jeE's begin to a/ppear. We 'imeetee'ry 'Wihete with
the'ftones and cir.clie of. Ldda hthaiis, 'Odin,; the
great Scandinavian deity. We fmeet witlhithe di-
vinationsanid enchantments,for f-which if:is:'well
known thole northern nations:were early famous.
"' There, mixed with the murmtur 'of waters, rbfe
fC the voice of aged men, who called-the forms of

night to aid them in theijiwar ;"t'w'ilft the

Caledonian'chiefs who afiftled'them', are dfcribed
as fftadinig'ait a'.difance, heedless of theii rites.
That ferocity of manners which' diiinguiifhidd:thofe
natioin's, 'aT 'becomes corirpicuous.' - In the com-
bats of their chiefs there is a peculiar savageness;
even-their women- are bloody-and'fierce. The
~spirit! : lad -'the 'very ideas; of Regner Lodbrog,
that northern Scalder whom I formerly quoted, oc-
cur :to. a'i.'igal. ".:. The:hawlks," Oflian miakes
'oiel'f' the Scaindiiia'viriat ciefay, '" ruh from all
" their 'winds they are wont to trace my courie,

D 2 --

A, ---We rejoiced three days above the dead, aMn

called the hawks of heaven. They came from
s all their winds, top feast on the foes of Apnir.i

Difmifing now the separate consideration of any

of our authors works, .proceed to make some
observations on his manner of writing, under the
general heads of Pefcription, Imagery, and Sen.
timent.

A poet of original genius is alwAy.s distinguished

by his talent for description*. A second rate
writer discerns nothing new or peculiar in the ob-
je& he means to defcribt. -f conceptions of it
are vague and loose i his exprefi&ns feeble; and of
course the objet is presented to us indiftin&y and
as through a cloud. But a true Poet makes 's
imagine that we fee it before our'eyes': he catches
the distinguishing features; ie gives it the colours
of life and reality; he places it in such a light that
a painter could copy after him 'This happy talept
is chiefly owing to a lively imagination, which
firt receives a itrong impression of thenobje&; and
then, by a proper selection of capital pijurefque
circunmiancs .employed in describing it, t'anfmits
that impreflion in its full force to the imaginations
,of others. That Offiap possesses this descriptive
power in ahigh degreet, ve have a cle.ar proof
from the effea which his descriptions produce uppn
the imaginations of those whp read him with any
,degree of attention and tafle. Few poets ase more
interesting. We contrat an intimate acquaintance
with his principal heroes. The characers, the
manners, the face of the country become familiar;

J See the rules of poetical deccription. excellently. illp

trated by lord Kaims, in his Elements of Criticism, yol
ii. chap. zr. Of narration a defcrition.

,ye

We eveni ihink we could draw the figure of his
ghosts: Ii a wordd,' whilst reading him, we are
tradfported as idti' a niew region, inid dwell amdng
his objects as if they were all real.

It were easy to point out several instances of-

exqdifite painting id the works of our author.
Such, fdt ififtance, as the fcefiery with- which Te-
mora op'ens; fd the attitude'in' ivhich Cairbar is
there presented to us, the description of the
young prince Corrmac, 'ii the fame book; and
the ruins of Balclutha in Carthon. " I have
' seen the walls of Balclutha, but they were de-
,t solate. The fire had resounded in the halls;
" and the voice of the people is heard no more.
' The stream of Clutha was removed from' its
,, place by the fall of the walls. The 'hifile
,, shook there its lonely head: The moss whitled
"to the wind. The fox looked out from the
. windows; the rank grass of the wall waved
" round his head. Desolate is the dwelling of
". Moina; silence is in the house of her fathers."
Nothing also can be more natural and lively than
the mainner in which Carthon afterwards describes
how the conflagration of his city asseted him when
a child: " Have I not seen the fallen Baltlutha ?
" And shall I feast with Cornhal's son ? Comhal!
" who threw his fire in the midst of my father's
" hall! I was young, and knew not the cause'
" why the virgins wept. The columns of smoke
" pleased mine eye, when they rose above my
" walls: I often looked back with gladness, when'
" my friends fled above the hill. But when the
"years of my youth came on, I beheld the rnofs

of my fallen walls. My sigh arose with themorn-
ing; and my tears descended with night. Shall

" I not fight, I said to my foul, againIt the chil-
" dren of my foes ? And I will fight, O Bard t

D 3 "I feel

" I feel the strength of my foul." In the fame
poem, the assembling of the chiefs round Fingal,
who had been warned of some impending danger
by the appearance of a prodigy, is- described
with so many pihurefque circumflances, that one
imagines himself present in the assembly. " The

king alone beheld the terrible fight, and he fore,

,c saw the death of his people. He came in si-
" lence to his hall, and took his father's spear; the
' mail rattled on his breast. The heroes rose
" around. They looked in silence on each other,
" marking the eyes of Fingal. They saw the

battle in his sace,-----A thousand ihields are

', placed at once on their arms; and they drew a
· thousand swords. The hall of Selma brighten,
" ed around. Theclang of arms ascends. The
" grey dogs howl in their place. No word is
" among the mighty chiefs. Each marked the
' eyes of the King; and half assumed his spear."
It has been objeted to Oflian, that his defcrip-

tions of military aftions are imperfet, and much
less diversified by circumstances than thofe.of Ho-
mer. This is in some measure true. The amaz-
ing fertility of Homer's invention is no where
so much displayed as in the incidents of his battles,
and in the little hiftory'pieces he gives of the per-
sons slain. Nor indeed, with regard to the talent
of description, can too much be said in praise of
Homer. Every thing is alive in his writings.
The colours with which he paints are those of na-
ture. But Ossian's genius was of a different kind
from Homer's. It led him to hurry towards grand
objects rather than to amuse himself with particu-
lars of less importance. He could dwell on the
death of a favourite hero: but that of a private
man seldom flopped his rapid course. Homer's
genius was more comprehensive than Ossian's. It

iriclud-

included a wider circle of obieas.; and could work
up an. incideit into dfctption. Ossian's' was
more. Iimiited: but: the region within vii hich it
chiefly exerted itself was the highest of all, the re-
gion of the pathetic and sublime.

We mui not. imagine, h.owever, that Offlan's

battles chnfift aoly of general indiftin& description.
Such b.eutifu, incidents arefoinetimes initroduced,
and the: ciicuniflancis 6f tie erifons flain'fo mich
diverfiiied, as fhiew that,4be could haye embellished
his military scenes with ,ati. abundant variety of
particulais, if his genius had;.led him to dwell
upon them.. Ohe man ' is stretched in the dust
' of, his native.land; he fell i, here often ie b.ad
',iread 'the feast, :and' ftei .raied the ;voice of
<' the,harp."a The imaid, q' Iniftore jIs,I itrsd i-
ced; in -a; moving aporopheg,a, a weepig' for an-
other ' anid .a third,,' ,talled: in-the. duiighe
" lifted his faint eyes to tthe king," is rimember-
ed and moiirned by .Finga.4 as. the 'frin; of
Agandcca,'. .The. .ood ',gpo i frnp ,;:the
PwQv

i * o£f, one !w.ho. is!i,,sla .jh ,^ t,

<is, hard

{hji'ng jn . tthe. h a w'l

f

, e , ich

ha b h; ,,l4 in1le, :sO: m

gy . , _rt !.~4D.okh

cibming;a tree tq gfcape froriiiSoe, is pierced
by his. spear from behind; ", .hrieking, panting
" he fell; whilfl mrofsand witlered branche.s pur-
*' fue:his.fajl, and stre\w. the.blue.arms of G'ul."
Never was a finer pidure drawn of.. the ajdoir of
twoiyouthful warriors than thefollowin I f aw

t Gaiul.in his armour, and my foul. was mixed

, with his: For. the fire of the battle was in his
" .eyes; he looked to the foe with joy. We Tcoke
" the wordsof friendlhip in secret; and te lisht-
" ening of our fwords..poured together. We
'- drew them behind the wocd, and tried the
" #rength of our arms on the e-;pty air."

D 4 OChan

Ossian is alhays concise in his descriptions,

which adds much to their beauty and force:. For
it is a great rmifake to imagine, thaf a cr6ud' of
particulars, cr a very full and extended ilyle, is
of advantage to !efcriptioir. On the contrary,
fiuch a diffuse manner for'thei mofl part weakens it.
Any cne redundant circnliftance is'a nuifaice. It
:n:cumbets and loads the fancy, and renders the
main image indiftinc& " Obftat," as Quiw'tilian
fays with regard to R .ye, " quicquid ion aditivat."
To be concifein description, is one thing; and to
be general, is another. No description' that refts
in gencrals can possibly be good; it canr convey no'
lively idea; for it is of particulars only' that we
have a diftint conception. But at the-ame time,
no strong imagination dwells lon ariy one
particular; or heaps together a mass of trivial
ones. By the happy choice of some one, or 'of a
few that are molt striking, it presents the image
more compleat, ihews us more at one glance,
than a feeble imagination is able to do, by'tufnting
its objet round and round'into a 'variety of lights.
Tacitus is of all prose writers the nioft 'c6cife.
He has even a degree of abiuptiefs refenibtiig our
author: Yet no writer is more eminientfor'lively
description. When Fingal, after having conquer-
ed the haughty Swaran, proposes to dismiss him
with honour: " Raise to-morrow thy white fails

to the wind, thou brother of Agandecca!"

he conveys, by thus addrefling his' enemy, d
£:ronger impression of the emotions then pasing
within his mind, than if whole paragaph's had
been spent in describing the conflia between re-
fentment againf Swaran and the tender remnem-
brance of his ancient love. No amplification is
needed to give us the naofif -Tf idea of a haird

veteran:

veteran, after the few following words: ", His
's shield is marked with the strokes of battle; his
( red eye despises danger." When Oscar, left
alone, was surrounded by foes, " he flood," it is
said, " growing in his place, like the flood of the
" narrow vale; " a happy representation of one,
who, by daring intrepidity in the midit of danger,
seems to increase in his appearance, and becomes
more formidable every moment, like the fadden
rising of the torrent hemmed in by the valley.
And a whole croud of ideas, concerning the cir-
cumfiances of domestic sorrow occasioned by a
young warrior's firit going forth to battle, is poured
upon the mind by there words: " Calmar leaned
" on his father's spear; that spear which he brought
: from Lara's hall, when the foul of his mother
: was fad."

The conciseness of Ossian's descriptions is the:

more proper on account of his fubjees. ' Defcrip-
tions of gay and smiling scenes may, without
any disadvantage, be amplified and prolonged.
Force is not the predominant quality expeced in
these. The description may be weakened by be-
ing diffuse, yet notwithstanding, may be beauti-
fulitill. Whereas, with refpea to grand, solemn
and'pathetic subje&s, which are Ossian's chief field,
the cafe is very different. In there, energy is
above all things required. The imagination must
be seized at once, or not at all; and is far more
deeply impressed by one firong and ardent image,
than by.the anxious minuteness of laboured illus-
tration.
- But Oflian's genius, though chiefly' turned to-
wards the sublime and pathetic, was not confined
to it: In subje&s also of grace and delicacy, he
discovers the hand of a matler. Take for an ex-
ample the following elegant description of Agan-

D 5 decca,

decca, wherein the tenderness of Tibullus seems
united with the majefdy of Virgil. " The daughter

of the snow overheard, and left the hall of her

" secret sigh. She came in all her beauty; like
" the moon from the cloud of the East. Love-

liness was around her as light. Her steps were

" like the music of songs. She saw the youth
" and loved him. He was the ltolen sigh of her
" foul. Her blue eyes rolled on him in.fecret:
" And she blest the chief of Morven." Several
other imftances might be produced of the feelings
of love and friendship painted by our author with
a most natural and happy delicacy.

The simplicity of Ossian's manner adds. great

beauty to his descriptions, and indeed to his whole
Poetry. We meet with no affeced orniaments; no
forced refinement; no marks either in ltyle or
thought of a studied endeavour to ihine and sparkle.
Oflian appears every where to be prompted by
his feelings; and to speak from the abundanceof
his heart. I remember no more than one infiance'
of what can be called a quaint thought in this whole
colletion of his works. It is in the first book
of Fingal, where from the tombs of two lovers
two lonely yews are mentioned to have fprupg,
a" whose branches wished to meet on high."
This sympathy of the trees with the lovers, may
be reckoned to border on- an Italian conceit; . and
it is somewhat curious to find this single instance
of that fort of wit in our Celtic poetry.

The "( joy of grief," is. one of Oflian's remark-

able expreflions, several times repeated. If any one
shall think that it needs to be jultified' by a prece-
dent, he may find it twice used by Hbmer: in the
Iliad, when Achilles is visited by the ghost of
Patroclus; and in the Odyssey, when Ulysses
meets his mother in the ihades. On both these

occa-

occasions, the heroes, melted with.tendernefs, la-
ment their not having it in their' power.:to throw
their arms.round the ghost, " that wemight," fay
they, in a mutual embrace, enjoy the delight of

grief."

--X spuiopt 7£'etspn iasd5 yvoi *'

But in truth the expression tands in need of no

defence from authority; for it is a natural and just
expression.; and conveys a clear idea of that gra-
tification, which a virtuous heart often feels in the
indulgence of a tender melancholy. ''Ossian makes
a very proper diftin&ion between this gratification,
and the deftrucive effe& of overpowering grief."

There is a joy in grief, when peace dwells in

" the breats of the fad. But sorrow waftes the
"mournful, O daughter, of Tofcar, and their
"-days are.sew."..; To "' give the'joy of: 'rief"
generally signifies to raise the: irain of fest and
grave mufick ;-.and 4fiely chhraderires the tafle of
Ossian's age and country." 'In those days, when
the'fongs .of bards: were the great delight of heroes,
the tragic muse was.held in chief honour; gallant
a.cfions., and-virtuous sufferings, were the chosen
therme; preferably to that light and. trifling firain,
of poetry indnimfic,.which promotes light and tris-
ling manners,-.and'ferves to emasculate the mind.
a' Strike the harp. in, my hall," 'aid. the great Fin-
gal, in 'the midf of youth and vi&ory, " Strike'
( :the harp in my hall, and-let Fingal hear the song.
" Pleaiapt.is the jy of grief! it is like the stower
'" .of fptingi when it softens the branch of -the oaki,'
" and theiydnrig-leaf lifts its: green ,head.' Sing:
" oni, O bards 1. ,To-morrov! we-lift- the fail."

P Perfoial epithets have been imuch used by all
the poets of the moif ancient-ages: and when well

.... , -' .

-

dy I ;. .. . - 1 cho-
* l<Od&Yffi. 12 z!i. Iliad z3, 98.

Chosen, not general and unmeaning, they contri-
bute not a little to render the flyle descriptive and
animated. Besides epithets founded on.bodily dif-
tintions, akin to many of Homer's, we find in Of-
fian several which are remarkably beautiful and po-
etical. Such as, Oscar of the future fights, Fin-
gal of the mildefi look, Carril of other times, ihe
mildly blushing Evirallin; Bragela, the lonely
iun-beam of Dunfcaich; a. Culdee, the son of-thle
!ecret cell. * . :

But of all the ornaments employed in defcrip-

tive poetry, comparisons or similes are.the most
splendid. These chiefly form what is called the
imagery of a poem: And as they abound so much
in the works of Oflian, and are commonly among
the favourite passages of all poets, it may be ex-
peced that I should be somewhat particular in my
remarks upon them. .

A poetical simile always supposes two .obje&s:

brought together, between which there is some'
near relation or connecion in the-fancy. What
that relation cught to be, cannot be precifelyde-
fined. For various, almioft numberless, are:the
analogies formed among objeasi..by a sprightly
imagination. The relation: of atrualrfimilitude,
or likeness of appearanoe, is far from being the
only foundation of poetical comparison. Some-
times a resemblance in the effect produced by two
objeds, is made the conne&ing principle: Some-
times a resemblance in one diftinguilhing property
or circumfiance. Very often two obje&s are
brought together'in a simile, though they.refemble
one another, firicly speaking, in nothing, only, be-
cause they.raife in the mind a train of similar, and
what may be called, concordant ideas; so that the
remembrance of the one, when recalled, serves to
-quicken and heighten the impreflion made by the

/other.

other. ThtlS, to give an instance from our poet,
the pleasure with which an old -man looks back on
the exploits of his youth, has certainly no dire&
resemblance to the beauty of a fine evening; far-
tier than that both agree in producing a certain
calm, placid joy. Yet Oflian has founded uporr
this, one of the most beautiful comparisons that is
to be met with in any poet. '" Wilt thou not

liften, son of the rock, to the song of OssIan ?

," My foul is full of other times; the joy of my
, youth returns. Thus; the fun appears in the
" weft, after the fleps of his brightness have moved
" behind a form. The green hills lift their dewy
" heads. The blue ireams rejoice in the vale.
" The aged hero comes forth on his flaff; and his
" grey hair glitters in the beam." Never was
there a finer group of obje8s. It raises a Rtrbng
conception of the old man's joy and elation of heart,
by displaying' a scene, which produces in every
fpet&ator, a corresponding train of pleafing'emo-
tions; -the declining fun looking forth'in his bright-
ness after a storm; the chearful face of all nature;
and theftill.life finely animated by the circunmllance
of, the agedheto, with his faff andhis-greylocks';
a circumstance both extremely piuiirefque in itself,
and peculiarly fuiited to the main objet'of : the
omiparifon. Such analogies and associations of
ideas as there, are highly pleasing to the fancy;
They give opportunity for introducing many a
fine poetical pi&ure. They diversify the scene;
they aggrandize the subje&t; they keep the imagi-'
Ration awake and sprightly. For as the -judgment
is ' principally exercised in .diftinguiflhing objets,
and remarking the differences.ainong those' which
seem like; so the higheit amusement of the imagi-
nation is to trace likenesses and agreements among
those which seem different,

i;- - -The

The principal rules which respect poetical com-

parisons are, that they be introduced on proper oc-
caficns, when the mind is disposed to relish them;
and not in the midfl of some revere and agitating
paflion, which cannot admit this play of fancy;
that they be founded on a resemblance neither too
near and obvious, so as to give little amusement to
the imagination in tracing it, nor too faint and re-
mote, so as to be apprehended with difficulty; that
they serve either to illustrate the principal object,
and to render the conception of it, more clear and
diftinc ; or at ieafl to heighten and embellilh it,
by a suitable association of irnages.

Every country ha; a scenery peculiar to itself;

and the imagery of a good poet will exhibit it,
For as he copies after nature, his aliufions will of
course be taken from those objets w-hich he fees
around him, and w-hich have often struck his fancy.
For this realon, in order to judge of the propriety
of poetical imagery, we ought to be in some
measure, acquainted with the natural history of
the country where the scene of the poem is laid.
The introdu&ion of foreign images betrays a poet,
copying not from nature, but from other writers.
Hence so many Lions, and Tygers, and Eagles
and Serpents, which we meet with in the similes of
modern poets; as if these animals had acquired.
some right to a place in poetical comparisons for
ever, because employed by ancient authors. They
employed them w-ith propriety, as objects generally
known in their country; but they are abftirdly used
for illufration by us, v-ho know them only at fe-
coni. hand, or by description. To noft readers of
moeern poetry, it were more to the purrofe to de-
scribe Lions or Tygers by similes taken from men'
than to compare men to Lions. Oilian is very cor-

re&;
Se Elements of Critiifim, ch. 19. vol. ,.

re& in this particular. His imagery is, without
exception, copied from that face of nature, which
he saw before his eyes ; and by consequence may
be expe&ed to be lively. We meet with no Gre-
cian or Italian scenery; but with the mills, and
clouds, and storms of a northern mountainous re-
gion.

No poet abounds more in similes than Oflian.

There are in this collection as many, at least, as
in the whole Iliad and Odyssey of Homer. I am
indeed inclined to think, that the works of both
poets are too much crouded with them. Similes
are sparkling ornaments ana like all things' that
sparkle, are apt to dazzle and tire us by their
lultre. But if Ofian's similes be too frequent,
they have this advantage of being commonly
shorter than Homer's; they interrupt his narration
less; he just glances aside to Come resembling
obje&, and instantly returns to his former track.
Homer's similes include a wider range of objes,.
But in return, Ossian's are, without exception,
taken from obje&s of dignity, which cannot be
said for all those which Homer employs. The Sun,
the Moon, and the Stars, Clouds and Meteors,
Lightning and Thunder, Seas and Whales, Ri-
vers, Torrents, Winds, Ice, Rain, Snow, Dews,
Mist, Fire and Smoke, Trees and Forests, Heath
and Grass and Flowers, Rocks and Mountains,
Music and Songs, Light and Darkness, Spirits and
Ghosts; these form the circle, within which Of-
sian's comparisons generally run. Some, not many,
are taken from Birds and Beasts; as Eagles, Sea
Fowl, the Horse, the Deer, and the Mountain
Bee; and a very few from such operations of art
as were then known. Homer has divcrfified his
imagery by many more allusions to the animal
world; to Lions, Bulls, Goats, Herds of Cattle,

Ser-

Serpents, Infecs; and to the various occupations
of rural and pastoral life. Ossian's defe&t in this
article, is plainly owing to the desert, unculti-
vated state of his country, which suggested to him
few images beyond natural inanimate objets, in
their rudest form. The birds and animals of the
country were probably not numerous; and his ac-
quaintance with them was slender, as they were
little fubje&ed to the uses of man.

The great objection made to Ofiar's imagery,

is its uniformity, and the too frequent repetition
of the fame comparisons, In a work so thick
sown with firiles, one could not but expe& to find
images of the fame kind sometimes suggested to
the poet by resembling objets; efpeciasly to a.poet
like Ossian, who wrote from the immediate im-
pulse of poetical enthusiasm and. without much
preparation of study or .labour. Fertile as Ho-
mer's imagination is acknowledged to be,,who.
does not know how often his Lions and Bulls and
Flocks of Sheep, recur with little or no variation;
nay, sometimes in the very fame words? The objec-
tion made to Ossian, is, however founded, in a great
measure, upon a mitake. .It has been supposed
by inattentive readers, that wherever the Moon,
the Cloudy or the Thunder,: returns in a frmile, itis
the fame simile, and the fame Moon or Cloud, or
Thunder which they had met with a few pages
before Whereas very often the fnniles are wide-
ly different. The object whence they are taken,
is indeed in fiublance the fame; but .the image is,
new; for the appearance of the obje&is changed;
it is presented to the fancy in another attitude; and
cloathed with new circumstances, to make it fui'.
the different illuflration for which it is employed
In this, lies 'Ossian's great art; in so happily vary-
ing the form of the few natural appearances with

·.~. *~--~ ~which

which he was acquainted, as to make them cor-
respond to a great many different obje&s.

Let us take for one instance the Moon, which'

i§ very frequently introduced into his comparisons;
as in northerti climates, where the nights are long,
the Moon is a greater objec of attention, than in
the climate of Homer ;: and let us.vieW hoWmuch'
our poet has diversified its appearance. .The;hibeld:
of a warrior is like" (the darkened moon when it'
" moves a dun circle through the- heavens."';
The face of a ghoR wan and pale, 'is - like "'the'
,, beam of the setting. m'oon." Anrid a different
appearance of a ghost, thin and indiftina& is like'
" the new moon seen throdgh the gaathered ;iilR,'
' when the DIy pours dOiwn itsflaky snow, ;and'
"' the world is filert and. dark;" or'inia differ-'
ent form lill, it is like "'the watery beam of' the'
" moon, when it rufies from between twoo clouds,-
c and the midnight hfower is on the field." Ai
very opposite use is made of the moon in the de-'
scription of Agandecca: She came in all her'
t 'beauty, like the moon from the cloud of' the'
" Eafi." Hope, succeeded. by disappointment;
is "joy- rifingt on her face, and sorrow returning'
".again, like a thin cloud on the moon." But
when Swarai, after his defeat, is cheared by Fin-
gal's generosity, ," His face brightened like the
' full moon of. heaven,: when the clouds vanish
"' away, and leave her: calm and broad in the
" midit f theilky." Venvela is " bright as the
" moon when it trembles o'er the wetern wave.:"'
but the foul of 'the guilty Uthal is " 'dark as the'
" troubled face of the moon, when- it foretels the
" fltrm." And by a very fanciful and uncom-
mon allusion, it is said of Cormac, who was to die
in- his early years, " Nor. long shalt thou lift, the

-
' " spear,

"spear, mildly ihining beam of youth! Death
( ifands dim behind thee, like the darkened half
,, of the moon behind its growing light."

Another instance of the fame nature may be

taken from mist, which, as being a very familiar
appearance in the country of Ossian, he applies to
a variety of purposes, and pursues through a great
many forms. Sometimes, which one would hard-
ly expet, he employs it to heighten the appear-
ance of a beautiful objea. The hair of Morna is
', like the mist of Cromla, when it curls-e the
" rock, and hines to the beam of the *eft.'----
«" The song comes with its mufick to melt and
" please the ear. It is like soft miff, that rising.
,t from a lake pours on the. fileqt vale. The
". green flowers are filled withdew. The fuj're-:

- turns in its firength, and the rpif: is gonet."--.
But for the molf part, mist ip- emply ey a a
similitude of some disagreeable or terrible objet.
" The foul of Najosg Was fad, like thefin ipn the
' day of mist, when his facis. watry anilddim.-"
"' The darkness 9f.old age.con.sile .tlb. ,oifb
" of-the desert." The fae:,of a.gjlol is'-4'pale'
" as- the -rsiit f: CGw la.'" The gqlof;h ;batr:

,,5, . -. !; [,: '

,5'tlv

There is a remarkable propriety in' this conm-

parison. It is intended to explain the eff;&tof soft.and
mournful mufick. Armin appears diftlhrbedat a perfor-
mance of this kind. Carmor fays to hinm,;" Why burst»
" the sigh of Armin ? Is there a cause to moMrn-? The
"song comes with ifs mufik to mneitnd please the ear.

It is like soft mist, &c." that is, fuci mournfui songs

have a happy effea to {often the heart, and'to improve
it by tender emotions, as' the moilftre:of the miift rc
fiefies and noirifles the fiowers; whilst the:fadnefs
they occasion is onry- trafiiiert; and: fooi dipelled by-the'
succeeding occupations and amusements of life. " The
" fun returns in it firength, and the mnift is gonc.,

it tie is rolled along as miff that is poured on the
, valley, when storms invade the silent sun-shine
" of heaven." Fame suddenly. departing, is
likened to " mist that flies away before the rust-
," ling wind of the vale." A ghost, slowly va-
niihing, to ', miff that melts by degrees on the
, funny hill." Cairbar, after his treacherous
assassination of Oscar, is compared to a pestilential
fog. " I love a foe like Cathmor," fay. Fingal;
". his foul is great; his arm is ftFrng; his battle.
" are full of fame, But the little fouI. is like: a
" vapour that hovers round the m.arfy lake. It
" never rifes on the green hill,left the winds mee
" it there. Its dwelling. is .j:the. ce; and; it
" fends forth the dar:t ,of-.deth..! TSrh is

r

a,

simile highly finiihed. But thee i il.thier-jwliih
is still more firiking, founded also, eoriifti . irin:e-
4th book of Temora. Two faEtie u-ciefs_ are,.
contending; Cathmor the king interposes, rebukes:
and silences them. The poet intends to give us
the highest idea of Cathmor's superiority; and
most efifeually accomuplilies his intention by the,
following happy image. " They funk from the
" king on either fide; like two columnsmof morn-
" ing mist, when the fun rifes between them, on
" his glittering rocks. Dark is their rolling on
" either fide; each towards its reedy pool."
·These inftancep may fufufciently shew with what
richness of imagination Offian'scomparifons ahound,
and at the fame time, with. what propriety of
judgment they are employed. If his field was
narrow, it mnuf be admitted to:have heenias:well
cultivated as its extent would allov. .

As it is usual to judge of poets from a compari-

son of their firniles more than of other passages, it
will perhaps be agreeable to the reader to fee how
Homer and Ofliatn. have condu&edfoine images of

the

the fame kind. This might befhewfvin many in-
fiances. For as the great objeds of nature are
common to the poets of all nations, and make the
general flore-houfe of all imagefy, the ground-
work of their comparisons mudl of cou'fe be fre-
quently the fame. I shall felea only a few the
most considerable from both poets. Mr. Pope's
translation of Homer can be of no use to us here.'
The parallel is altogether unfair between prose,
and the imposing harmony of flowing numbers.
It is only by viewing Homer in the simplicity of a
prose translation, that we can form any comparison'
between the two bards.

The flock of two encountering armies, the'

poise and the tumult of battle, afford orne of the
most grand and awful fubjecas of description ; o
which all epic poets have exerted their firength.
Let us firfl hear Homer. The following defcrip-
tion is a favourite one, for we find ittwice repeated
in the fame words*. ,, When now the conflicing
4' hosts joined in the field of battle, then were
s1 mutually opposed shields and swords, and
i" the strength of armed men. The bossy bucklers
" were dalhed againll each other. The uniVersal
", tumult rose. There were mingled the friu'm-
' phant lhouts and the dying groans of the vic-
" tors and the vanquished. The earth streamed
" with blood. As when winter torrents, rushing
" from the mountains, pour into a narrow valley,
" their violent waters. They iffuefrom a thou-
"' sand springs, and mix in the hollowed channel.
( The diflant shepherd hears on the mountain,
" their roar from afar. Such was the terror and the

shout of the engaging armies." In another pas-
" sage, the poet, much in the manner of Ofliani

* Iliad iv. 446. and 11 viii. 66,

heaps

heaps simile on simile, to express the vastness of
the idea, wvith which his imagination seems to la-
bour. " With a mighty shout the hosts engage.
-" NQt so loud roars the wave. of ocean, when dri-
" ven against the shore by the whole force of the
" boiftercus north; not so loud in the woods of
,' the mountain, the noise of the flame, when
"rising in its fury to consume the forest; not so
" leud the wind among the lofty oaks, when the
" wrath of the storm rages; as was the clamour
" of the Greeks and Trojans, when roaring
" terrible, they rushed againp each other*,"

To these descriptions and similes, we may oppose

the following from Cflian, and leave the reader
to judge between them. He will find images
.of the.fame kind employed; commonly less ex-
tended; but thrown forth with a glowing rapidity
which charaterifes our poet. "' As autumn's dark
." forms pour from two echoing hills, towards
" each ,other, approached the heroes. As two
" dark {freams from high rocks meet, and mix, and
.' roar en the plain; loud, rough, and'dark in bat-
." tie, meet Lochlin and Inisfail. Chief mixed his
;s ftrokes.with chief, and man, with man. Steel
/' clanging, founded on feel. Helmets are cleft

on high; blood burfis and fmoaks around.------

*" As the troubled noise of the ocean, when roll
" the .waves on high; as. the last p.eal of the thun-
" der of heaven, such is the noise of battle.------
" As roll a thousand waves to the rock, so Swa-
" ran's host came on; as meets a rock a thousand
" waves, so Inisfail met Swaran. Death raises
" all his voices around, and mixes with:the found
's of fhields.--The.field echoes from wing to wing,

as .a hundred hammers that rife by turns on the
?' red fpn of the furnace*.----As a hundred

" winds
> Iliad xiv. 393.

- winds on Morven; as the fireams of a hundred
" hills; as clouds fly successive over heaven; or
"- as the dark ocean assaults the shore of the defart;
" o roaring, so vast, so terrible, the armies mix-
" ed on Lena's echoing heath." In several of
these images, there is a remarkable similarity to
Homer's; but what follows is superior to any com-
parison that Homer uses on this iubjec'. " The
" groan of the people spread over the hills; it
(a waslike the thunder of night, when the cloud
· burtis on Cona ; and a thousand ghosts shriek at
" once on the hollow wind." Never was an
image of more awful sublimity employed to
heighten the terror of battle.

Both poets compare the appearance of an army

approaching, to the gathering of dark clouds.
' As when a shepherd," fays Homer, " beholds
" from the rock a cloud borne along the sea by the
" wefiern wind ; black as pitch it appears from

,afar, failing over the ocean, and carrying the

" dreadful storm. He shrinks at the fight, and
" drives his flock into the cave: Such, under the
·' Aiaces, moved on, the dark, the thickened
" phalanx to the war*."---" They came," fays
Ofllan, " over the desert like stormy clouds, when
" the winds roll them over the heath; their edges
,, are tinged with lightening; and the echoing
" groves foresee the storm." The edges of the
cloud tinged with lightning, is a sublime idea; but
the shepherd and his flock, render Homer's fimili
more pi&urefque. This is frequently the differ-
ence between the two poets. Ossian gives nc
more than the main image, firong and full. Ho
mer adds circumfiances and appendages, which
amuse the fancy by enlivening the scenery.

Iliadiv. 275.

Ho

Homer compares the regular appearance of an

army, to " clouds that are fettled on the moun-
" tain top, in the day of calmness, when the

iftrength of the north wind sleeps.*" Cffian,

with full as much propriety, compares the ap-
pearatce of a disordered army, to " the moun-
:" tain cloud, when the blafi hath entered its
' womb; and scatters the curling gloom on every
" fide." Ofian's clouds assume a great many
forms; and, as we might expeca from his climate,
are a fertile sou.rce of imagery to him. " The
" warriors followed their chiefs, like the gather-
, ing of the rainy clouds, behind the red meteors
" of heaven." An army retreating without
coming to ation, is likened to " clouds; that
." having long threatened rain, retire slowly behind
" the hills." The picture of Oithona, after
she had determined to die, is lively and delicate,
" Her foul was resolved, arid the tear was dried
." from her wildly-looking eye. A troubled joy rose

on her mind, like the red path of the lightning

" on a itormy cloud." The image also of the
gloomy Cairbar, meditating, in silence, the aflafli-
nation of Oscar, until the moment came when his
designs were ripe for execution, is extremely noble,
and comnpleat in all its parts. {" Cairbar heard
" their words in silence, like the'cloud of a shower;
" it hands dark on Cromla, till the lightningburfts
" its fide. The valley gleams with red light;
" the spirits of the ltorm rejoice. So flood the
" silent king of Temora; at length his words are
" heard."

Homer's comparison of Achilles to the Dog-

Star, is very sublime. "Priam beheld himr rush-
" ing aloig the plain, shining in his armour, like

" the
Iliad, v. szzi

i the liar of autumn4 bright are its beams, dif-
-- tinguifthed amidi the multitude of liars in the
" dark hour of night. It rifes in its splendor;
" but its splendor is fatal; betokening to miserable
" men, the destroying heat.*" The firil ap-
pearance of Fingal, is, in like manner, compared
by OlT;an, to a flar or meteor. ", Fingal, tall in
:( his ship, stretched his bright lance before him.
.t Terrible was the gleam of his feel; it was like
" the green meteor of death, setting in the heath
4" of Malmor, when the traveller is alone, and the
- broad moon is darkened in heaven." The
hero's appearance in Homer, is more magnificent;
in Oflian, more terrible.

A tree cut down, or overthrown by a ftorn, ii

a similitude frequent among poets for describing
the fall of a warrior in battle. Homer employs ii
often. But the mofe beautiful, by far, of his
comparisons, founded on this objeEt, indeed one
of the most beautiful in the whole Iliad, is that
on the death of Euphorbus. " As the young
<( and verdant olive, which a man hath reared
( with care in a lonely field, where the springs of
" water bubble around it; it is fair and flourishing;
( it is fanned by the breath of all the Winds, and
; loaded with white blossoms; when the sudden
" blast of a whirlwind descending, roots it' out
" from its bed, and firetches it on the duff'."
To this, elegant asit is, we may oppose the fol-
lowing simile of Ossian's, relating to the death of
the three (ons of Ufnoth, " They fell, like
" three young oaks which flood alone on the hill.
" The traveller saw the lovely trees, and won-

dered how they grew so lonely. The blaf of the
" desert came by night, and laid their green heads

" low,
Iliad, xiii. 26. t Iiad, xvii. ;3.

low. Next day he returned ; but they were
.' withered, and It lc hcadh vas l:are." Malvina's
allusion to -he tii ,e ohje&, in Iher la:reniaticn over
Cg. ar, i i ', C.qu':i; teitcr, that I cannot forbear
;,ivng it t1- l iCnll. " I v'.s a lovdly tree in thy

?rrc:r.nc-, O!i;'r i! xvith al nmv blranches round

" Ime. ;iut tily death cane, like a bla' from the
:, de!art, al'n laid mn green head low. The spring
" rcte'rncu w;th its {Ilowers, but no leaf of mine
" :.roi." Sever,;l of Oflian's fla-i:Cs taken frem
t;-cc, arc r.enamka'ulv beautiful and diversified
u'it: v.'ll cliofen circumitances ; such as that upon
t:c death of Reno andl Orla: They have fallen
" like t oak of tih dtart i

wlhen it lies acrors a

"l;ream, and withers in the wind cL the moun-
tains :" Or that which OfiT:.n pjplies to hin-
fll:; I, like an ancient oakl in Mcrven, moul-

der alone in my place ; the Lif; hath loipped
" my branches away; and I tremble at the wings

of the north."
As Homer exalts his heroes by corTarinr tihernl

to cl'.s, OlTian makes the fame ule of comparisons
taken from spirits and rhofls. Swar.n " roared

in battle, like the filr;l 1pirit of a rorm that fits

"dim cn the clouds of Gormal, and enjoys the
" death of the mariner." HIs people gathered
around F.rragon, " like florms arcund the ghofc

of night, when he calls them from tle top of

" orve:n, and prepares to pour them on the land
",f the stranger."--" They feil before my
" 'on, like groves in the defart, when an angry
' ghotl rulhes through nighlt, and takes their
' green heads in his hand." In fuich images,
GClian appears in his ftrngth; for very seldom
have iupernatural beings been painted with so much
sublimity, and such force of imagination, as by
this pcet. Even Honmr, great as he is, mut.

~~~E "~yield

--icld to him in similes formed upon there. Take,
for inflance, the following, which is the most r-.
mrkable of this kind in the Iliad. " Meriones
- followed Idomeneus to battle, like Mars the
: defrroyer of men, when he ruffes to war.
i Terror, his beloved son, strong and fierce, at.
" tends him who fills with dismay, the most
" valiant hero. They come froin Thrace, armed
c against the Ephyrins and Phiegyans; nor do
· they regard the prayers of either; but dispose of
· success at their will*." The idea here, is un-
doubtedly noble: but observe what a figure Oflian
sets before the astonished imagination, and with
what sublimely terrible circumitances he has
heightened it. " He rushed in the found of his
, arms, like the dreadful spirit of Loda, when
" he comes in the roar of a thousand florms, and
" scatters battles from his eyes. He fits on a cloud
" over Lochlin's seas. His mighty hand is on
" his sword. Thie winds lift his flaming locks,
" So terrible was Cuchullin in the day of his
" fame."

Homer's comparisons relate chiefly to martial

subje&s, to the appearances and motions of armies,
the engagement and death of heroes, and the va-
rious incidents of war. In Ossian, we find a grea-
ter variety of other fubjedcs illufrated by similes;
particularly, the songs of bards, the beauty ot
women, the different circumltances of old age,
sorrow, and private distress; which give occasion
to much beautiful imagery. What, for instance,
can be more delicate and moving, than the fol-
lowing simile of Oithon'as, in her lamentation
over the dishonour. he had suffered ? " Chief of
i Strumon, replied the sighing maid, why didf
" thou come over the dark blue wave to Nuath's

" mourn-
Iliad, xiii. 298.

i mournful daughter? Why did not I pass away in
", secret, like the flowerof the rock, that liftsitsfair
" head unleen, and itrews its withered leaves on
" the blast?" The mufick of bards, a favourite
objet- with Ossian, is illuitrated by a variety of
the most beautiful appearances that are to be found
in nature. It is compared to the calm shower of
spring; to the dews of the morning on the hill of
roes; to the face of the blue and still lake. Two
similes on this subjec, I shall quote, because they
would do honour to any of the most celebrated
classics. The one is, " Sit thou on the heath, 0
- bard! and let us hear thy voice; it is pleasant
"as the gale of the spring that sighs on the hun-
" ter's ear, when he wakens from dreams of joy,
" and has heard the music of the spirits of the hill."
The other contains a short, but exquisitely tender
image, accompanied with the finest poetical paint-
ing. " The music of Carryl was like the memory
, of joys that are past, pleasant and mournful to the
' foul. The ghoits of departed bards heard it from
" Slimora'sfide. Soft founds spread along the
" wood; and the silent valleys of night rejoice."
What a figure would such imagery and such scenery
have made, had they been presented to us, adorned
with the sweetness and harmony of the Virgiliari
numbers !

I have chosen all along to compare Oflian with

Homer, rather than Virgil, for an obvious reason,
There is a much nearer correfpbndence between the
times and manners of the two former poets. Both
wrote in an early period of society; both are ori-
ginals; both are dilfinguifhed by simplicity, sub-
limity and fire. The correct elegance of Virgil,
his artful imitation of Homer, the Roman slate-
liness which he every where maintains, admit no
parallel with the abrupt boldness and enthufiaflick

E 2 warmth

:-v2rmt'l of the Celtic bard. In one article, in.
deed, ihcrc is a resemblance. Vir-il is more tena
ear ;"?.n Homer; and thereby agrees more with
O:ln ; wwith this difference, that the feelings oi
the one are more gentle and polished, those of the
cther mere firong; the tenderness of Virgil softens,
that of OfTian dissolves and overcomes the heart.

A refenmblanc may be sometimes observed be.

tween O..an's cempari.fons, and those employed
by the sacr.d writers. They abound much in this
fi.-ure, and they use it with the utmoti propriety'.
'lhe imaier;- of Scripture cxhibits a foil and cli-
mate altocether different from those of Oflian: a
warmer counwr;, a mnre fmirnriil ce of nature, ti.e
arts of agriculutre and o!' rural lite much farthcr
advanced. The wine pres, and the thre-hing
floor, are orten presented to us, the Cedar and
the Palm-tree, the l-agrance of perfinmes, the
voice of the Turtle, and the beds of Lilies. The
similes are, like Oflian's, generally short, touch-
ing on one point of resemblance, rather than spread
out into-little episodes. In the following example
may be perceived what inexprefTible grandeur
poetry receives from the intervention of th Deity.
" The nations shall ruth like the rushings of many

waters; but God fiall rebuke them, and they

, shall fly far off, ..nd fn-all be chased asthe chaff
" of the mountains before the wind, and like

the down of :he thifile before the whirlwindf."
Besides formal comparisons, the poetry of Oflian

is embellished with many beautiful metaphors:
Such as that remarkably fine one applied to Deu-
gala: " She was covered with the light of beauty;
."' but her heart was the house of pride." This
mode of expreflion, which fuppreifes the mark ot

s S;e Dr. Lowth de Sacra Poefi Hcbreorum.

t.Ifaiah xvii. 3.

com-

tomparifon, and substitutes a figured description
in room of the objec describcd, is a great enli-
vener of rtyle. It denotes that glow and rapidity
of fancy, which without pausing to form a regu-
lar firrmile, paints the objec at one f-roke. "T Thou
" art to me the beam of the east, riing in a land
i unknown."---" In peace, thou art the gale of
" spring; in war, the mountain storm."-------
, Pleafani be thy refr, O lovely beam, soon haft
"thou set on our hills ! The fleps of thy depar-
" turewere flately, like the moon on the blue
| trembling wave. But thou hail left us in dark-
" ness, first of the maids of Lutha !-----Scon haft
" thou 'et Malvina ! but thou rifeft, like the beam
" of the east, among the spirits of thy friends,
" where they fit in their rtormy halls, the chanm-
(c bers of the thunder." This is corret and
finely supported. But in the following instance,
the metaphor, though very beautiful at the begin-
ning, becomes imperfe& before it closes, by being
improperly mixed with the literal sense. " Trathal
" went forth with the dream of his people; but
' they met a rock Firtgal flood unmoved ; bro-

ken they rolled back from his fide. Nor did
they roll in safety; the spear of the king pur-
' sued their flight."

The hyperbole is a figure which we might ex-

pe& to find often employed by Ossian; as the un-
disciplined imagination of early ages generally
prompts exaggeration, and carries its objecs to ex-
cess; whereas longer experience, and farther pro-
grefs in the arts of life, chasten mens ideas and
expreflions. Yet Ossian's hyperbcles appe.r not
to me, either so frequent cr so harsh as might at
first have been looked for ; .n advantage c.ving
no doubt to the mere cultivated slate, in which,
as was before shewn, poetry fuififed among the

E 3 a-

zrcient Celta, than among most other barbarous
nations. One of the mods exaggerated descriptions
in the whole work, is what meets us at the begin-
ning of Fingal, where the scout makes his report
to Cuchullin of the landing of the foe. But this
is so far from deserving censure that it merits praise,
as being, on that occasion, natural and proper,
The scout arrives, trembling and full of fears;
and it is well known, that no pafion disposes men
to hyperbolize more than terror. It both annihi-
lates themselves in their own apprehension, and
magnifies every obje& which they view through
the medium of a troubled imagination. Hence
all those indiftin& images of formidable greatness,
the natural marks of a disturbed and confused
mind, which occur in Moran's description of Swa-
ran's appearance, and in his relation of the confe-
rence which they held together; not. unlike the re-
port, which the affighted Jewish spies made to their
leader of the land of Canaan. Ft The land through
" which we have gone to search it, is a land that
" eateth up the inhabitants thereof; alnd all the
cc people that we saw in it, are men of a great fla-
" ture: and there saw we giants, the sons of Anak,
·" which come of the giants; and we were in our
i' own fight as grasshoppers, and so were we in
"' their fight*."

With regard to personifications, I formerly ob-

served that Ossian was sparing, and I accounted for
his being so. Allegorical personages he has none;
and their absence is not to be regretted. For the
intermixture of those ihadowy Beings, which have
not the support even of mythological or legendary
belief, with human aCtors, seldom produces a good
effea. The fiaion becomes too visible and phan-
taftick; and overthrows that impression of reality,
which the probable recital of human acions is cal-

+ Numbers xiii. 32. 33. culated

tulated to make upon the mind. In the serious
and pathetic scenes of Ofilan especially, allego-
rical characers would have been as much out of
place, as in Tragedy ; serving only unfeafonabty
to amuse the fancy, whilst they flopped the current,
and weakened the force of paffioir.

With apofrrophes, or addresses to persons absent

or dead, which have been, in all ages, the lan-
guage of passion, our poet abounds; and they are
among his highest beauties. Witness the apoi-
trophe, in the firtl book of Fingali to the maid
of Iniftore, whose iover had fallen iin battle; and
that inimitably fine one of Cuchullin to Bragela at
the conclusion of the fame book. He commands
the harp to be struck in her praise; and the
mention of Bragela's name, immediately suggest-
ing to him a crowd of tender ideas; " Deft thou
"c raise thy fair face from the rocks," he exclaims
c to find the fails of Cuchullin ? The sea is rolling
" far distant, and its white foam shall deceive thee
" for my fails." And now his imagination being
jWirought up to conceive her as, at that moment,
really in this situation, he becomes afraid of the
harm ihe may receive from the inclemency of the
night; and with an enthusiasm, happy and asset-
ing, though beyond the cautious firain of modern
poetry, t' Retire," he proceeds, " retire, for itis
, night, my love, and the dark winds sigh in thy
" hair. Retire to the hall of my feasts, and think
" of the times that are past; for I will not return
" till the tform of war has ceased. O Connal, speak
" of wars and arms, and fend her from my mind;
" for lovely with her raven hair is the white-

bosomed daughter of Sorglan." This breathes
all the native spirit of passion and tenderness.

The addresses to the fun, to the moon, and
to the evening star, must draw the attention of

E 4 every

every- reader of tafe, as among the mofi splendid
ornaments of this collection. The beauties of
eich are too great, and too obvious to need an)
particular comment. In one pafTage only of
the address to the moon, there appears some ob-
'curit¥. "( MWhither Goft thou retire from thy
' coure, when the darkness of thy countenance
" grows ? Had thou thy hall like Ossian ? Dwelleft
" thou in the shadow of grief? Have thy fillers fal-
" len from heaven ? Are they who rejoiced with
' thee at night, no more ? Yes, they have fallen,
' fair light ! and thou dost often retire to mourn."
We may be at a loss to comprehend, at first view,
the ground of these speculations of Oflian, con-
cerning the moon; but when all the circumstances
:re attended to, they will appear to flow naturally
from the present situation of his mind. A mind
under the dominion of any strong pafiion, tinc.
tures with its own disposition, every obje& which
it beholds. The old bard, with his heart bleeding
for the loss of all his friends, is meditating on the
different phases of the moon. Her waning and
darkness, presents to his melancholy imagination,
the image of sorrow; and presently the idea arises,
and is indulged, that, like himself, the retires to
mourn over the loss of other moons, or of stars,
whom he calls her fillers, and fancies to have once
rejoiced with her at night, now fallen from heaven.
Darkness suggested the idea of mourning, and
mourning suggested nothing so naturally to Oflian,
as the death of beloved friends. An inftince pre-
cifely similar of this influence of paflion; may be
seen in a paflage which has always been admired of
Chakefpear's KingLear. The old man on the point
of diffraction, through the inhumanity of his.
daughters, fees Edg.r nppear disguised like a beg-
gar and a maina'r,.

Lear:

Lear. Didft thou give all to thy daugh:ters And

art thou ccme to this ?
Couldest thou leave ncthing ? Didf: thou grve them

all ?

Kent. H-e lath no daughters, Sir.
Lear. Death, traitor! nothing could have sub-

dued nature,
To such a lowness, but his unkind daughters.

King Lear, Act 3. Scene 5.

The apoffrophe to the winds, in the opening of

Darthula, is in the highefl spirit of poetry. " But
" the winds deceive thee, O Darthula : and deny

the woody Etha to thy fails. These are not thy

" mountains, Nathos, nor is that the roar of thy
" climbing waves. The halls of Cairbar are near,
" and the towers of the foe lift their head----
' 7Where have ye been, ye southern winds ; when
" the sons of my love were deceived? But ye
" have been sporting on plains, and pursuing
( the thistle's beard. O that ye had been rult-
:' ling in the fails of Nathos, till the hills of Etha -
" rose,! till they rose in their clouds, and saw their
"coming chief." This passage is remarkable
for the resemblance it bears to an expostulation
with the wood nymphs, on their absence at a
critical time; which, as a favourite poetical idea,
Virgil has copied from Theocritus, and Milton has
very happily imitated from both.

Where were ye, nymphs! when the remorseless

deep

Clos'd o'er the head of your lov'd Lycidas ?
For neither were ye playing on the sleep
Where yourold bards, the famous Druids, lye:

E5 'Nc.

Nor on the shaggy top of Mona, high,
Nor yet where Deva spreads her wizard fiream*
Having now treated fully of Oflian's talents,

with refpea to description and imagery, it only re-
mains to make some observations on his sentiments.
No sentiments can be beautiful without being pro-
per; that is, suited to the character and situation
of those who utter them. In this respect, Ossian
is as corret as mofi writers. His characers, as
above observed, are in general well supported;
which could not have been the cafe, had the fen-
timents been unnatural or out of place. A variety
of personages of different ages, sexes, and con-
ditions are introduced into his poems; and they
speak and act with a propriety of sentiment and
behaviour, which it is furprizing to find in so rude
an age. Let the poem of Darthula, throughout,
be taken as an example.

But it is not enough that sentiments be natural

and proper. In order to acquire any high degree
of poetical merit, they muff also be sublime and
pathetick.

The sublime is not confined to sentiment alone.

It belongs to description also; and whether in de-
scription or in sentiment, imports such ideas pre-
sented to the mind, as raise it towan uncommon
degree of elevation, and fill it with admiration and
aflonifhment. This is the highert effec either of
eloquence or poetry: and to produce this effet,
requires a genius glowing with the strongest and
warmef conception of some objea awful, great
or magnificent. That this character of genius be-
longs to Oflian, may, I think, sufficiently appear

from

*: Milton's Lycidas. See Theocrit. Idyll. I.
nsioi dirn' ocitAe lTtTOt; irToxt,NuV#P,&C

And Virg. Eclog. io.
Qnu ncmora, ant qui vos fattu habucre, puclla, &c.

from many of' the passages I have already had oc-
cafion to quote. To produce more Inflances, were
superfluous. If the engagement of Fingal with
the spirit of Loda, in Carric-thura; if the encoun-
ters of the armies in Fingal; if the address to the
fun, in Carthon; if the similes founded up-
on ghosts and spirits of the night, all formerly
mentioned, be not admitted as examples, and il-
luitrious ones'tob, of the true poetical sublime, I
confess myself entirely ignorant of this quality in
writing.

All the circumftanees, indeed, of Ossian's com-

position, are favourable to the sublime, more per-
haps than to any other species of beauty. Accu-
racy and corretnefs; artfully conneced narration;
exa& method and proportion of parts, we may
look for in polished times. The gay and the beau-
tiful, will appear to more advantage in the midst
of smiling scenery and pleasurable themes. But
amidit the rude scene of nature, amidst rocks
and torrents and whirlwinds and battles, dwells
the fuilime. It is the thunder and the lightningof
genius. It is the offspring of nature not of art.
It is negligent of all theleffer graces, and perfealy
confifent with a certain noble disorder. It affoci-
ates naturally with that grave and solemn spirit,
which .difihguifhes.our author. For the sublime,
is an awful and serious emotion; and is heightened
by all the imiag-es of Trouble,- and Terror, and
Darkness;

lpfe pater, iiedia nitmborum in noae, cornfca
iulmi'na mopliur dextra; quo maxima motu
Terra.tremit; fugere ferae; et mortalia corda
Per gentes, humilis ftravit pavor; ille, flagranti
Aut Atho, aut Rhodopen, aut alta Ceraunia telo
Dejicit.--- VIRG. Georg. I.
Simplicity and conciseness, ate never-failing

cha-

characeritlics oi the stile of a sublime writer.
lie refts on the majef-y of his sentiments, not on
the pcmp of his exprefions. . The main secret of
-ir.g fbltnme, is to fa; great things in few, and;
in piain words: For every :uperfluops decoration
degrades a iublime idea. .The mind rfies and fvells,.
whtn a lofty delcription cr sentiment is presented
to it in its native form. But no fopner does: the
poet attempt to spread out.this fentirmnt or 'de-
icription, and to deck it round and r.und.wit
glittering ornaments, than the mind begins to fall,
from its high elevation ; the transport. is. oyer;
the beautiful may remain, but the sublime is gone.
Hence the concise and simple style oT Ossian gives
great advantage to his sublime conceptions; and
affitRs them in seizing the imagination with full
power.*

Sublimity as belonging to sentiment, coincides
in a great measure with magnanimity, heroism,

and

* The noted faying of Julius Cxfar, to the pilot in a

storm "Q Quid times? Csqarem vehis; is magnanimous
and sublime. Lucan, not satisfied with this fimplecoincife-
ness, refolv'd to amplify and improve the thought. Ob-
serve, how every rime he twists it round, it departs far-
ther from the sublime, till, at last, it ends in tumid
declamation. : :

Sperrie miar., inquit, Pelagi, ventoque'furenti
Trade:finum. Italiam, si ccelo anutore, recufas,
Me, pute. Sola tibi caufa haec eftjufta timori.
Ve&orem non nose tuum ; quem numina nunquarn
Deftituunt; de quo male tRqic fortuna meretur,
Cum post vota venit; medias perrtimpe procellas
Tutela fccnre mra; Coe"dfte fretiue, '
-Non puppis nofrir, labor eft. 'Hanc Cifare'p*rfamn
Afludu defendit ons. . '; '
-- Quidianta ftrage paratnr, '
Ignoras? Qierit pclagi celique tumnltn ''
Quid praftet fortuna mihi. ...

PHARSAI V. 578.

and generosity of sentiment. Whatever discovers
human nature. in its greatest elevation; whatever
beipeaks a high effort of foul; or ihews a mind fu-
perior to plealures, to dangers, and to death, forms
what may be called the moral or sentimental sub-
lime. For this, Oflian is eminently'diftinguifihed.
No poet maintains a higher tone of viituous and
noble sentiment, throughout all his works. Par-
ticularly in all the sentiments of Fingal, there is a
grandeur; and loftiness proper to swell: the mind
with the highest ideas of human perfection.
Wherever. he appears, we behold the hero. -The
objeEts which he pursues, are always truly'great;
to bend the proud; to protect the injured; to de-
fend his friends; to overcome his enemies by gene-
rofity more than by force. A portion of the fame
spirit acuates all the other heroes. Valour reigns;
but it is a generous valour, void.of cruelty, ani-
mated by honour, not: by hatred. We behold
no debasing pailions .among Fingal's. wariiors; no
spirit of avarice or of insult but'a perpetual con-
tention for fame; a desire of being distinguished
and remembered for gallant.acions; a love of jus-
tice; and a zealous attachment to thejr friends and-'
their country. Such is the' frai of fentiie.rit in
the works of Ossian. ; '. ..

:-'

I But the.fublimity of' moral feiitiments, 'if'th(ey¢
wanted the Softening of the tender, 'would be in
hazard of giving a hard and siss air' to poetry. ..It
is :not enough to admire. Admiration is a cold
feeling in comparison of that deep interest, which
the heart takes in. tender an'd pathetick. fenes;
whereby a mysterious attachment to the objeas of
cpnpaaon,. we are pleaed and delighted,' even
yVfiilt we mourn. 'Wittsi fie(sfj this kind, Of-
fianlabounds; and his highimerit in these, is inco-
te¢fable.. He may be blamed 'for drawing tears too

often

often from our eyes; but that he has the power
of commanding them, I- believe no man, who- has
the lead sensibility, will queitoir. The general
chara&er of his- poetry, is the heroic mixed- with
the elegiac strain ; admiration tempered with-pity.
Ever fond of giving, as he expresses it, {" the joy
" of grief," it is visible, that on all' moving sub-
je&s, he delights to exert his genius; and accord-
ingly, never were there finer pathetick situations,'
than what-his works present, His great art in ma-
naging them lies- in giving vent to the simple andr
natural emotions of the heart. We meet with no
exaggerated declamation; no subtle refinements on
sorrow; no- fubftitntion- of description in place of
passion. Oflian felt strongly himself; and the heart
when utrering its native language never fails, by
powerful sympathy to affe& the heart. A great:va-
rietyof examples might be produced. We need on-
ly open the book to find them every where. What,
for instance, can be more moving, than the lamen-
tations of Oithona, after her misfortune ? Gaul, the
son of Morni, her lover, ignorant of what she had
suffered, comes to her rescue. Their meeting is
tender in-the highei-degree. He proposes to en-
gage her foe, in single combat, and gives her in
charge what fie is to do, if he himself lhall fal.
,, And shall the daughter of Nuith live, she replied
"t with a burflingK sigh ? Shall I live in Tromathon
" and the son of Morni low? My heart is not of
4, that rock; nor myfoul careless as that sea, which
ir lfts its blue waves to every wini, and rolls be-
cc neath the ormi.. The blafi, which- hall lay thee
cc low, fliall fread' the braicles' of Oithona on
" earth. We ffiall wither together, ffn of car-

h borne Morni ! Then arrow horse is:pleafant io:
" me; and the grey frie- of the dead; for never

" more

,, more will I leave thy rocks, fea-furrounded
, Tromathon!----Chief of Strumon, why cam-

es eft thou over the waves to Nuaith's mournful

- daughter ? Why did not I pass away in secret,
," like the flower of the rock, that lifts its fair
" head unseen, and firews its withered leaves on
, the blast ? Why didit thou come, 0 Gaul ! to
" hear my departing sigh ?----- had I dwelt at

Duvranna, in the bright beamS of my fame!

" Then had my years come on with joy; and the
" virgins would bless my fieps. Blut I fall in youth,
" son of Morni, and my father ihall blufi in his
" hall."

Oithona mourns like a woman; in Cuchullin's

expreflions of grief after his defeat, we behold the
sentiments of a hero, generous but desponding.
The situation is remarkably fine. Cuchullin, rouz-
ed from his cave, by the noise of battle, fees Fingal
vitorious in the field. He is defcribed:as kindling.
at the fight. " His hand is on the sword of his

fathers; his red-rolling eyes on the foe. He

" thrice attempted to ruli to battle; and thrice
" did Corinal flop him ;" fuggefling, that Fin-
gal was routing the foe; and that. he ougit not,
by the fiow of fuperffuous aid, to deprive the
king of any part of the honour of a vitory,
which was owing to him alone. Cuchullin yields
to this generous sentiment; but we fee it Ringing.
him to the heart with the sense of his. own dif-
grace. " Then, Carrie go, replied the chief,
" and greet the king of Morven. When Lochlin
" falls away like a stream after rain, and the noise
"of the battle is over, then ie thy voice sweet in
" his ear, to praise the King: of swords. Give him
" the sword of Caithbat; for Cuchullin is worthy
" no more to lift the arms of his fathers. But,
" O ye ghosts of the lonely Cromla! ye fouls of

" chiefs

'" chiefs that are no more ! Be ye the companions
" of Cuchuflin, and talk to him in the cave of his
' sorrow. For never more shall I be renowned

among the mighty in the land. I am like a

r beam that has shone: Like a mifr that has fled
" away; when the blast of the morning came,
" and brightened the shaggy fide of the hill.
" Connal! talk of arms no more: Departed is.
, my fame. My sighs shall be on Cromla's wind ;
" till my footlfeps cease to be seen. And thou,
,( white-bofomed Bragela! mourn over the fall of

y
my fame; for vanquished, I will never return
" to thee, thou sun-beam of Dunfcaich !"

--------------IEfiuat Ingens

Uno in corde pudor, luaufque, et confcia virtus..
Besides such extended pathetick scenes, Ossian

frequently pierces the heart by a single unexpe&ed
ffroke. When Oscar fell in battle, C" No father
'c mourned his son slain in youth; no brother, his-
" brother of love; they fell without tears, for the
" chief of the people was low." In the admi-
rable interview of Hector with Andromache, in
the sixth Iliad, the circumstance of the child in his
nurse's arms, has often been remarked, as adding
much to the tenderness of the scene. In the follow-
ing passage relating to the death of Cuchullin, we
find a circumffance that must firike the imagination
with fill greater force. " And is the son of Semo
"c fallen ? said Carril with a sigh. Mournful are
c Tura's walls, and sorrow dwells at Dunfcaich.
" Thy fponfe is left alone in her youth; the son
"c of thy love is alone. He illall come to Bragela,
' and aik her why fie weeps. He shall lift his eyes.
" to the wall, and fee his father's sword. Whose
,'sword is that-? he will fay; and the foul of his.
_" mother is fad." Soon after Fingal had ihewn,

all.

1 the grief of a father's heart for Ryno, one of
his sons, fallen in battle, he is calling after his
accultomed manner, his sons to the chafe. "' Call,"
fays he, " Fillan and Ryno----But he is not here---
" My son refts on the bed of death."------This
unexpected start of anguish, is worthy of the
highefR tragic poet,

If (he come in, (he'll sure speak to my wife---
My wife !---my wife---What wife !--I have no

wife---
Oh insupportable! Oh heavy hour I

Othello, Aa 5. Scene 7.

The contrivance of the incident in both poets

is similar; but the circumRfances are varied with
judgment. Othello dwells upon the name of wife,
when it had fallen from him, with the confusion
and horror of one tortured with guilt. Fingal,
with the dignity of a hero, corrects himself, and
suppresses his rising grief.

The contrast which Oflian frequently makes; be-

tween his present and his. former state, diffuses over
his whole poetry,. a solemn pathetick air, which
cannot fail to make imprefiion on every heart. The
conclusion of the songs of Selmo, is particularly
calculated for this purpose. Nothing canbe more
poetical and tender, or can leave upon the mind,
a stronger, and more asseting idea of the vene-
rable aged bard.- ( Such were the words of the
"bards.in, the days of the fang; when,the.king
" heard the mnfic of harps, and the tales of other:-
" times. The chiefs gathered from all their hills,
" and heard the lovely found. They praised the
" voice of Cona*; the firfi among a thousand bards,
" But age is now on my tongue, and my foul has
"failed. I hear, sometimes, the ghosts of bards
" and learn their pleasant song. But memory fails

* on
* Ofian himself is poetically called the voice of Cona.

" on my mind; I hear the call of years.. They
" fay, as they pass along; Why does Offiarn sing?
" Soon shall he lie in the narrow house, and no
" bard (hall raise his fame. Roll on, ye dark-brown
( years ! for ye bring no joy in your course. Let
" the tomb open to Ossian, for his strength has
" failed. The sons of the song are gone to reft,
" My voice remains, like a blafi, that roars lonely
" on a fea-furrounded rock, after the winds are
" laid. The dark moSs whistles there, and the
" diltant mariner fees the waving trees."

Upon the whole; if to feel strongly, and to de-

scribe naturally, be the two chief ingredients in
poetical genius, Ossian muff, after fair examination,
be held to possess that genius in a high degree.
The question is not, whether a few improprieties
may be pointed out in his works; whether this, or
that passage, might not have been worked up with-
more art and skill, by some writer'of fiappier times?
A thousand such cold-and frivolous erificifms,- are
artogether indecisive as-tohis genuine merit. But,
has he the spirit, the fire, the inspiration of a poet?
Does he utter the voice of nature? Does he elevate'
by his sentiments ? Does he interest by his defcrip-
tions ? Does he paint to the heart as well as to the'
fancy ? Does he make his readers glow, and trem--
ble, and weep? These are the great eharateriftics
of true poetry. Where these are found, he muff
be a minute critic indeed, who can dwell upon
flight defets. A few beauties of this high kind,
transcend whole volumes of faultless mediocrity.
Uncouth and abrupt, Ofian may Sometimes appear
by reason of his conciseness. But he is sublime,
he is pathetick, in an eminent degree. If he has
not the extensive knowledge, the regular dignity
of narration, the furness and accuracy of defcrip-
tion, which we find in Homer and Virgil, yet in

strength

strength of imagination, in grandeur of sentiment,
in native majesty of pafflon, he is fully their equal.
If he flows not always like a clear stream, yet he
breaks forth often. like a torrent of fire. Of art
too, he is far from being deflitute; and his imagi-
nation is remarkable for delicacy as well as strength.
Seldom or never is he either trifling ortedious;
and if he be thought too melancholy, yet he is
always moral. Though his merit were in other
refpets much less than it is, this alone ought to
entitle him to high regard, that his writings are
remarkably favourable to virtue. They awake the
tendereft fmpathies, and inspire the mofi, generous
emotions. No reader can rife from him, without-
being warmed with the fentimenrts of hlimaaity,
virtue and honour.

Though unacquainted with the original language,

there is no one but must judge the translation to
deserve the highest praise, on account of its beau-
ty and elegance. Of its faithfulness and accuracy,
I have been assured by persons skilled in the Galic
tongue, who, from their youth, were acquainted
with many of these poems of Ossian. To transfuse
such spirited and fervid ideas from one language
into another; to translate literally, and yet with
such a glow of poetry; to keep alive so much
palfion, and support so much dignity throughout,
is one of the most difficult works of genius, and
proves the translator to have been animated with
no small portion of Ossian's spirit.

The measured prose which he has employed,

possesses considerable advantages above any fort of
versification he could have chosen. Whilst it
pleases and fills the ear with a variety of harmoni-
ous cadences, being, at the fame time, freer from
confiraint in the choice and arrangement of words,
it allows the spirit of the original to be exhibited

with

with more juflnefs, force and simplicity. Elegant
however, and masterly as Mlr. Macphcrfon's tranf-
lation is, we mufi never forget, whilif we read it,
that we are putting the merit of the original to a
revere test. For, we are examining a poet firip-
ped of his native dress: diverted of the harmony
of his own numbers. We know how much grace
and energy the works of the Greek and Latin pioets
receive from the charm of versification in their
original languages. If then, defitute of this ad-
vantage, exhibited ir a literal version, Ossian still
has power to please as a poet; and not to please
only, but often to command, to transport, to melt
the heart; we may very safely infer, that his pro-
ductions are the offspring of true and uncommon-
genius; and we may boldly assign him a place
among those, whose works are to last for ages.

A P PEND I X.

# APPENDIX.

APP E N D I X.
T H E fubD.ance of the preceding Dissertation

was originally delivered, soon after the frft

publication ;of -Fingal, in the course of my lec-
tures in the university :of Edinburgh; and, at the
dcfire.of' fevral oi the hearers, was afterwards
enlarged and given to the publick.

As the degree of antiquity belonging to the

poems of Cfian, appeared to be a point which
might bear di'pute, I endeavoured, from internal
evidence, to show that these poems must be re-
ferred to a very remote period.; without pretend-
ing to ascertain precisely the date of their compo-
fition. I had not the least suspicion, when this
Differtatiop was.firft publ;ihcd, that there was any
occasion for supporting their authenticity, as ge-
nuine producions of the Highlands of Scotland,
as translations from the Galic language; nor for-
geries of a supposed translator. In Scotland, their
authenticity w;as never called in quetlion. I my-
self had particular reasons to be fully satisfied con-
cerning it. My knowledge of Mr. Macpherson's
personal honour and integrity, gave me full affu-
rance of his being incapable of putting such a
grc s in:,pofition, first, upon his friends, and then
.upon the public; and if this had not been fuffi-
cient, I knew, besides, that the manner in which
lhefe poems were brought to light, was intirely in-
confifent with any fraud. An accidental conver-
faticn with a gentleman distinguished in the literary
world, gave occasion to Mr. Macpherson's tranf-

lating

lating lterally one or two small pieces of the old
Galic poetry. These being shewn to me and :ome
others, rendered us very desirous of becoming more
acquainted with that poetry. Mr. Macphcrfcn,
afraid of not doing justice to compositions which
he admired in the original, was very backward to
undertake the task of translating; and the publi,
cation of The fragments of ancient poems, was with
no small importunity extorted from him. The
high reputation which these presently acquired,
made it, he thought, unjust that the world ihould
be deprived of the poffeieion of more, if more of
the fame kind could be recovered: And Mr. Mac-
pherfon was warmly urged by several gentlemen
of rank and tafle, to disengage himself from other
occupations, and to undertake a journey through
the Highlands and Islands, on purpose to make g
collection of those curious remains of ancient ge.
nius. He complied with their desire, and spent fe-.
veral months in visiting those remote parts of the
country; during which time he corresponded fre-
quently with his friends in Edinburgh, informed
them of his progress, of the applications which he
made in different quarters, and of the success which
he met with; several letters of his, and of those who
assisted him in making discoveries passed through
my hands; his undertaking was the objeEt of con-
fiderable attention; and returning at last, fraught
with the poetical treasures of the north, he set him-
self to trantlate under the eye of some who were
acquainted with the Galic language, and looked
into his manuscripts: and by a large publication
made an appeal to all the natives of the Highlands
and Islands of Scotland, whether he had been faith-
ful to his charge, and done justice to their well
known and favourite poems.

-Such

Such a trarifahion certainly did not afford any
favourable opportunity for carrying on an impof-
ture. Yet in England, it seems, an opinion has
prevailed with some, that an imposture has been
carried on; that the poems which have been given
to the world, are not translations of the works of
any old Galic Bard, but modern compositions,
formed, as it is said, upon a higher plan of poetry
and sentiment than could belong to an age and a
country reputed barbarous: And I have been called
aupon and urged to produce some evidence for
satisfying the world, that they are not the compofi-
tions of Mr. Macpherson himself, under the bor-
rowed name of Ossian.

If the question had been concerning manuscripts

brought from some distant or unknown region,
with which we had no intercourse; or concerning
translations from an Asiatic or American language
which scarce any body understood, suspicions might
naturally have arisen, and an author's assertions
have been anxiously and scrupulously weighed.
But in the cafe of a literal translation, professed to
be given of old traditionary poems of our own
country: of poems asserted to beknown in the
'original to many thousand inhabitants of Great
Britain, and illustrated too by many of their cur-
rent tales and flories concerning them, such ex-
treme scepticism is altogether out of place. For
who would have been either so hardy or so flupid,
as to attempt a forgery which could not have failed
of being immediately deteced? Either the author
mufl haye -had the influence to engage, as confe-
derates in the fraud, all the natives of the High-
lands andflands, dispersed as they are throughout
every corner of the British dominions; or, we
should, long ere this time, have heard their united
voice exclaiming, " These are not our poems, nor

what

, what we were ever accuffomed to hear from our

bards or our fathers." Such remonfirances

would, at ieafl, have reached those who dwell in
a part of the country which is adjacent to the
Highlands: and muff have come loud to the ears
of luch, especially, as were known to be the pro-
moters of Mr. Macpherson's undertaking. The
silence of a whole country in this cafe, and of a
country, whole inhabitants, are well known to be
attached, in a remarkable degree, to all their own
antiquities, is of as much weight as a thousand
positive teltirnonies. And surely, no person of
common undcrftanding would have adventured,
as Mr. Macpherson has done in his dissertation on
Temora, to engage in a controversy with the whole
Irish nation concerning these poems, and to infil
upon the honour of them being due to Scotland,
if they had been mere forgeries of his own; which
the Scots, in place of supporting so ridiculous a
claim, muff have instantly rejeced.

But as reasoning alone is apt not to make much

impression, where suspicions have been entertained
concerning a matter of fa&, it was thought pro-
per to have recourse to express testimonies. I
have accordingly applied to several persons of cre-
dit and honour, both gentlemen of fortune, and
clergymen of the established church, who are na-
tives of the Highlands or Islands of Scotland, and
well acquainted with the language of the country,
desiring to know their real opinion of the tranfla-
tions published by Mr. Macpherson. Their ori-
ginal letters to me, in return, are in my possession.
I shall give a fair and faithful account of the result
of their teffimony: And I have full authority to
use the names of those gentlemen for what I now
advance.

I must

I muff begin with affirming, that though

among those with whom I have corresponded,
some have had it in their power to be more par-
ticular and explicit in their testimony than others;
there is not, however, one person, who insinuates
the most remote suspicion that Mr. Macpherson
has either forged, or adulterated any one of the
Poems he has publilhed. If they make any com-
plaints of him, it is on account of his having
omitted other poems which they think of equal
merit with any which he has published. They all,
,without exception, concur in holding his tranfla-
tions to be genuine, and proceed upon their au-
thenticity as a fat acknowledged throughout all
those Northern Provinces; assuring me that any
one would be exposed to ridicule among them,
who should call it in quetlion. I must observe
that I had no motive to direct my choice of the
persons to whom I applied for information prefera-
bly to others, except, their being pointed out to
me, as the persons in their different counties who
were most likely to give light on this head.

With regard to the manner in which the origi-

nals of these poems have been preserved and tranf-
mitted, which has been represented as so myfteri-
ous and inexplicable, I have received the following
plain account: That until the present century, al-
most every great family in the Highlands had their
own bard, to whose office it belonged to be mafier
of all the poems and songs of the country; that
among these poems the works of Ossian are easily
distinguished from those of later bards by several
peculiarities in his ityle and manner; that Ossian
has been always reputed the Homer of the High-
lands, and all his compositions held in singular

F eiteern

esteem and veneration; that the whole country i;
full of traditionary flories derived from his poems,
concerning Fingal and his race of heroes, of whom
there is not a child but has heard, and not a difiri&
in which there are not places pointed out famous for
being the icene of 'ome of their feats of arms;
that it was wont to be the great entertainment of
the Highlanders, to pass the winter evenings in
discoursing of the times of Fingal, and rehearsing
these old poems, of which they have been all along
enthusiastically fond; that when assembled at their
festivals, or on any of their publick occasions,
wagers were often laid who could repeat most of
them, and to have store of them in their memo-
ries, was both an honourable and aprofitable ac-
quifition, as it procured them accefsinto the fami-
lies of their great men; that with regard to
their antiquity, they are beyond all memory or
tradition; insomuch that there is a word common-
ly used in the Highlands to this day, when they
would express any thing which is of the most re-
mote or'unknown antiquity, importing, that it be-
longs to the age of Fingal.

I am farther informed, that after the use of let-

ters was introduced into that part of the country,
the bards and others began early to commit feve-
ral of these poems to writing; that old manuscripts
of them, many of which are now destroyed or loft,
are known and attef£ed to have been in the posses-
sion of some great families; that the most valua-
ble of those which remained, werecolle&ed by Mr.
iMacpherfcn during his journey through that coun-
try; that though the poems of Ossian, so far as
they were handed down by oral tradition, were no
doubt liable to be interpolated, and to have their
parts disjoined and put out of their natural order,

yet

yet by comparing together the different oral edi-
tions of them (if we may use that phrase) in dif-
ferent corners of the country, and by comparing.
these also with the manuscripts which he obtained,
Mr. Macpherson had it in his power to ascertain,
in a great measure, the genuine original, to restore
the parts to their proper order, and to give the
whole to the public in that degree of corre&nefs,
in which it now appears.

I am also acquainted, that if enquiries had been

made fifty or threescore years ago, many more par-
ticulars concerning these poems might have been
learned, and many more living witnesses have been
produced for attesting their authenticity; but that
the manners of the inhabitants of the Highland
counties have of late undergone a great change.
Agriculture, trades, and manufacures, begin to
take place of hunting, and the shepherd's life.
The introdu&ion of the busy and laborious arts
has considerably abated that poetical enthusiasm
which is better suited to a vacant-and indolent
state. The fondness of reciting their old poems
decays; the custom of teaching them to their
children is fallen into desuetude; and few are
now to be found, except old men, who can
rehearse from memory any considerable parts of
them.

For these particulars, concerning the Rlate of the

Highlands and the transmission of Oflian's poems,
I am indebted to the reverend and very learned
and ingenious Mr. John Macpherson, minister of
Slate in the Island of Sky, and to the reverend Mr.
Donald Macqueen minister of Kilmuir in Sky,
Mr. Donald Macleod minister of Glenelg in Inver-
nefsfhire, Mr. Lewis Grant minister of Duthelin
Invernefsfhire, Mr. Angus Macneil minister of the
Island of South Uift, Mr. Neil lazleod miDriter of

F a Ross,

Ro's, in the Island of Mull, and Mr. Alexander
MAacaulay chaplain to the 88th Regiment.

The honourable colonel Hugh Mackay of Big-

hcufe in the Shire of Sutherland, Donald Camp-
bell of Airds in Argylethire, Efq; ]Eneas Mack-
intofn of Mackintoflh in Invernefsfhire, Efq; and
Ronald MIacdonnell of Keappoch in Lochaber, Efq;
captain in the 87th regiment commanded by
colonel Fraser, all concur in teflifying that Mr.
Macpherson's collection conflts of genuine High-
land poems; known to them to be such, both
from the general report of the country where they
live, and from their own remembrance of the ori-
ginals. Colonel Mackay alferts very positively,
upon personal knowledge, that many of the poems
published by Mr. Macpherson are true and faithful
translations. Mr. Campbell declares that he has
heard many of them, and captain Macdonnell, that
he has heard parts of every one. of them recited
in the original language.

James Grant of Rothiemurchus, Efq; and Alex-

ander Grant, of Delrachny, Efq; both in the Shire
of Inverness, desired to be named as vouchers for
the poem of Fingal in particular. They remem-
ber to have heard it often in their younger days,
and are positive that Mr. Macpherson has given a
just translation of it.

Lauchlan Macpherson of Strathmafhie in In-

vernefsflire, Efq; gives a very full and explicit
teffimony, from particular knowledge, in the fol-
lowing words: that in the year 1760, he accom-
panied Mr. Macpherson during some part of his
journey through the Highlands in search of the
poems of Offilian; that he aflifted him in collecting
them; that he took down from oral tradition, and
transcribed from old manuscripts by far the great-
efl part of those pieces Mr. Macpherson has pub-

lifhed;

liflied; that since the publication he has carefully
compared the translation with the copies of the cri-
ginals in his hands; and that he finds it amazingly
literal, even to such a degree as often to preserve
the cadence of the Galic verfificaticn. He affirms,
that among the manuscripts which were at that
time in Mr. Macpherson's poffefiion,. he saw cne
of as old a date as the year 1410.

Sir James Macdonald of Macdonald,. in the

Island of Sky, Baronet, assured me, that after hav--
ing made, at my d-fire, all the enquiries he could
in his part of the country, he entertained no doubt
that Mr. Macpherson's collction consisted entirely
of authentic Highland poems; that he had lately
heard several parts of them repeated in the origi-
nal, in the Island. of Sky, with some variations
from the printed translation, such as might natu-
rally be expected from the circumfiances of cral
tradition; and tome parts, in particular the episode
of Fainafollis in the third book of Fingal, which
agree literally with the translation ; and added,
that he has heard recitations of other poems not
translated by MA.r. Macpherson, but generally re-
puted to be of Ossian's composition, which were cf
thefamefpirit and frain with fuchas are t:arilated,.
and which he efleemed not inferior to any of them
in sublimity of description, dignity of sentiment,
or any other of the beauties of poetry. This lafr
particular must have great weight; as it is welt
known how much the judgment of Sir James Mac-
donald deserves to be relied upon, in every thing:
that relates to literature and taste.

The late reverend Mr; Alexander Macfarlane,.

minister of Arrachar in Dumbartonfhire, who was
remarkably eminent for his profound knowledge
in aGlic learning and antiquities, wrote to me soon
after the publication of Mr. Macph.crfon's work,

F 3 terming

terming it, a masterly tranflaticn; informing me
that he hau often heard several of there poems in
the original, and remarked many pafliges so par-
ticularly firiking beyond any thing he had ever
read in any human composition, that he never ex-
peted to fee a strength of genius able to do them
that justice in a translation, which Mr. Macpher-
'fen has done.

Norman Macleod of Macleod, in the Island of

Sky, Efq; Walter Macfarlane of Miacfarlane in
Dumbartonfhire, Efq; Mr. Alexander Macmillan,
deputy keeper of his Majesty's signet, Mr. Adam
Ferguffon, professer of moral philosophy in the
University of Edinburgh, and many other gentle-
men natives of the Highland counties,-whom I
had occasion to converse with upon this fubje&,
declare, that though they cannot now repeat from
memory any of there poems in the original, yet
from what they have heard in their youth, and
from the impression of the fubje& still remaining
on their minds, they firmly believe those which
Mr. Macpherson has published, to be the old
poems of Oflian current in the country.

Desirous, however, to have this translation par-

ticularly compared with the oral editions of any
who had parts of the original diftinfly on their
memory, I applied to several clergymen to make
enquiry in their refpe&ive pariihes concerning such
persons; and to compare what they rehearsed with
the printed version. Accordingly, from the reve-
rend Mr. John Macpherson minister of Slate in
Sky, Mr. Neil Macleod minister of Ross in Mull,
Mr. Angus Macneil minifier of South Uift,
Mr. Donald Macqueen minister of Kilmuir in
Sky, and Mr. Donald Macleod minifler of Gle-
nelg, I have had reports on this head, containing
diftin& and explicit teflimonies to almost the whole

epic

epic poem of Fingal, from beginning to end, and
to several also of the lesser poems, as rehearsed in
the original, in their presence, by perfdns whose
names and places of abode they mention, and
compared by themselves with the printed tranfla-
tion. They affirm that in many places, what was
rehearsed in their presence agreed literally and ex-
acly with the translation. In some places they
found variations from it, and variations even
among different rehearsers of the fame poem in
the original; as words and stanzas omitted by some
which others repeated, and the order and connec-
tion in some places changed. But they remark,
that these variations are on the whole not very
material; and that Mr. Macpherson seemed to
them to follow the mol just and authentic copy of
the sense of his author. Some of these clergymen,
particularly Mr. Neil Macleod, can themselves re-
peat from memory several passages of Fingal; the
translation of which they assure me is exat. Mr.
Donald Macleod acquaints me, that it was in his
house Mr. Macpherson had the description of
Cuchullin's horses and chariot, in the firfi book of
Fingal, given him by Allan Macalkill school-
master. Mr. Angus Macneil writes, that Mr.
Macdonald, a parilhioner of his, declares, that he
has often seen and read a great part of an ancient
manuscript, once in the poffeflion of the family of
Clanronald, and afterwards carried to Ireland, con-
taining many of there poems, and that he rehearsed
before him several passages out of Fingal, which
agreed exatly with Mr. Macpherson's translation;
that Neil Macmurrich, whose predecessors had for
many generations been bards to the family of Clan-
ronald, declared also in his presence, that he had
often seen and read the fame old manuscript; that
he himself, gave to Mr. Macpherson a manuscript

con-

containing some of the poems which are now trarf-
lated and published, and rehearsed before Mr.
Macneil in the original, the whole of the poem
entitled Dar-thula, with very little variation from
the printed trantlation. I have received the fame
testimony concerning this poem, Dar-thula, from
Mr. hMacpherfon minister of Slate; and in a letter
communicated to me from Lieutenant Duncan
Macnicol, of the 88th regiment, informing me of
its being recited in the original, in their pretence,
from beginning to end: On which I lay the more
stress, as any person of tafle who turns to that
poem will fee, that it is one of the moR highly
finished in the whole collection, and moll diftin-
guifhed for poetical and sentimental beauties; info-
much, that whatever genius could produce Dar-thu-
la, must be judged fully equal to any performance
contained in Mr. Macpherson's publication. I must
add here, that though they who have compared
the translation with what they have heard rehearsed
of the original, bellow high praises both upon Mr.
Macpherson's genius and his fidelity; yet 1 find it
to be their general opinion, that in many places he
has not been able to attain to the flrength and sub-
limity of the original which he copied.

I have authority to fay, in the name of Lieut

tenant Colonel Archibald Macnab of the 88th
regiment,. or regiment of Highland Voluntiers
commanded by colonel Campbell, that he has un-
doubted evidence of Mr. Macpherson's collecion
being genuine, both from what he well remembers
to have heard in his youth, and from Bis-having
heard very lately a considerable part of the poem
of Temora rehearsed in the originali which agreed
exa&tly vith the-pfinted version.

By the reverend Mr. Alexander Pbpe riiniffer
of Reay, ia-the-ihe of Gaithnefsj ami infotiied,.

that

that twenty-four years ago, he had begun to make a
collecion of some of the old poems current in his
part of the country; on comparing which, with
Mr. Macpherson's work, he found in his collection
the poem intitled, the battle of Lora, some parts of
Lathmon, and the account of the death of Oscar.
From the above mentioned Lieutenant Duncan
Macnicol, testimonies have been also received to a
great part of Fingal, to part of Temora, and Car-
ric-thura, as well as to the whole of Dar-thula, as
recited in his presence in the original; compared,
and found to agree with the translation.

Imyfelf read over the greatest part of theEnglifh

version of the fix books of Fingal, to Mr. Keneth
Macpherson of Stornoway in the Island of Lewis,
merchant, in presence of the reverend Mr. Alexan-
der Macaulay chaplain to the 88th regiment. In go-
ing along Mr. Macpherson vouched what was read
to be well known to him in the original, both the
descriptions and the sentiments. In some places,
though he remembered the itory, hedid not remem-
ber the words of the original; in other places, he
remembered and repeated the Galic lines them-
selves, which, being interpreted to me by Mr. Ma-
caulay, were found, upon comparison, to agree
often literally with the printed version, and some-
times with flight variations of a word or an epithet.
This testimony carried to me, and must have car-
ried to any other who had been present, the highest
convicion; being precisely a testimony of that
nature which an Englishman well acquainted
with Milton, or any favourite author, would give
to a foreigner, who ihewed him a version of this
author into his own language, and wanted to be
satisfied from what the Englishman could recollect
of the original, whether it was really a translation
of Paradise Loft, or a spurious work under that
title which had been put into his hands. The

The above-menticned Mr. Alexander Macaulavi

Mlr. Adam Ferguffon professor of moral philoio-
phy, and Mr. Alexander Fraser, governor to
Francis Stuart, Efq; inform me, that at several. dif-
ferent times they were with Mr. Macpherson, after
he had returned from his journey through the
Highlands, and whilst he was employed in the work
of translating; that they looked into his manu-
scripts, several of which had the appearance of
being old; that they were fully satisfied of their
being genuine Highland poems; that they. com-
pared the translation in many places with the ori-
ginal; and they attest it to be very jufR and faith,
ful, and 'remarkably literal.

It has been thought worth while to beilow this

attention on establishing the authenticity of the
works of Oflian, now in poffeflion of the public:
Because whatever rank they are allowed to hold
as works of genius; whatever different opinions
may be entertainedconcerfing thieir-poetical:merit.
they are unquestionably valuable in another view;
as monuments of the taste and manners of an an-
cient age, as useful materials for enlarging our
knowledge of the human mind and characer;
and mufl, beyond all dispute, be held, as at least,
·one of the greatest curiosities, which have at any
time enriched the republick of letters. More tef-
timonies to them might have been produced by a
more enlarged correspondence with the Highland
counties: But I apprehend,' if any apology is ne-
cefsary, it is for producing To many names in a
question, where the consenting silence of a whole
country, was to every unprejudiced person, the
firongeRf proof, that spurious compositions, in the
name of that country, had not been obtruded
upon the world.-

F I N I Ss4i.vvg

*.* '
