SERMONS,

BY

HUGH BLAIR, D.D. F.R.S.Ed.
One of the MINISTERS of the HIGH CHURCH,

AND
PRoFEssoR of RHETORIC and BELLES LETTRES

in the UNIVERSITY, of EDINBURGH.

IN FIVE VOLUMES.

VOL. V.

TO wXEICn IS NNlIIND,
A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE AND CEARACTER

OF THE AUTHOR,
By JAMES FINLAYSON, D.D.

LONDON;

Prited y A. Sirtaan, Priintlt-Sreet;
For T. CIDELL jun. and W. DAVIES, in the Strand;

and W. CIEECH, Edinburgh.

MDCCC

iJI cA:"I

l\ SE\'
KRITA \
^NICT Mj

# TO THE READER.

TO THE READER.
AFTER the very favourable reception

which the Four former Volumes of

my Sermons have met with, both at home
and abroad, I had resolved not to presume
on offering any more to the Publick. To
this publication of another Volume, my
present situation gave rife. Being now, by
the infirmity of very advanced age, laid
aside from all the labours of the pulpit,
and poffeffitg, of course, more retirement
and leisure than formerly, it occurred to
me, sometimes, to look back into Sermons,
most of which had been composcd a great
many years ago, with a view to observe
how far they agreed in the firain of
thought with those which I had written

A2 at

[ iv ]

at a later period. In reviewing them,
passages sometimes appeared which I ima-
gined might be serviceable, either for ad-
monition or consolation to various classes
of persons; and the thought began to arise
in my mind, that by employing my present
leisure, aslongashealth allowed, in preparing
some of thofeDifcourfesfor the prels,it might
be in my power to be still of some use in
the world. Encouraged by this idea, I
went on to revise arid correct one Sermon
after another, often making alterations and
additions, till the present Volume arose.

THOUGH the fubjeas of these Sermons

be different from those which I formerly
publihed, some of the fame sentiments and
expressions may occasionally be found to be
repeated in them. This is apt to happen,
partly from that similarity of thought and
style which will run through all the com-
positions of an Author who is not copying

others,

[ ]

others, but writing from his own reflections
and partly, from the coincidence of some
general topicks and allusions which recur
frequently in serious discourses of the prac-
tical kind. Where any instances of this
nature presented themselves to my me-
mory, I found, that without altering the
firain of the Sermon, I could not altogether
suppress and omit them; and as it is not
often they occur, I did not think it requisite
that they should be omitted. 'If the fcnti-
ment, where first introduced, was in any
degree ufcful or important, the renewal of
it, when brought forth under some different
form, enlarged perhaps, or abridged, or
placed in conneaion with some other
topick, may be thought to strengthen and
confirm the impression of it.- With re-
gard to errors or inaccuracies of any other
kind, the Author must trust to the indul-
gence of the candid Reader.

HUGH BLAIR.

# THE CONTENTS.

THE
CONTENTS,

SERMON I.

On Hopes and Disappointments.
PROVERBS, x. 28. The Iloe of te Rig

teour fihall be gladnefl; bnt the exeNe ation
of thc l1'icZedJiall per' Page r

SERMON II.
On the proper Disposition of the Heart

towards God.
ACTS, xvii. 28. In Him we live, and

move, and have our bein. 25

SERMON IIT.

On the Moral Charaaer of Christ.
ACTS, . 3. J3. of Nazarethb-uo

went aout doing good.
. 8

SERMON IV.

On the Wounds of the Hcart.
PROVERBS, xviii. 14. The pirit of a man

will fi/lain hiis ifirmity; but a wounded
spirit who can bar ? - Page 71

SERMON V.
On all Things working together for Good

to the Righteous.
ROMANS, viii. 28. We know that all

Things work together for Good to them
that love God, to them who are the Called
according to his purpose. - 94

SERMON VI.

On the Love of our Country.

rPreachcd iSth April 1793, on the day of a National Fast-

apipoiitcl by Government, on occasion of the War vith
tli French Rcpublic.]

PSALM. cxxii. 6, 7, 8, 9. Pray for the

peace of ycrufalem; they Jhall prosper that
love thee. Peace be within thy walls,
and prosperity witbin thy palaces. For

my

rmy rethren and companions'fake, I will
now fizl, Pace be within thee. Bocau/e
of the hoife of the Lord our God, I will
seek thy good. - - Page 124

SERMON VII.
On a Contented Mind.
2 KISGS, iv. 13. Say nowunto her, "Be-

" bold thou haft baeen careful for us w'ith

all thbi care; wbat is to be done for

" thee? WouldsI thou be fp5kcn for to ihe

King, or to the Captain of the Hul"

And she answered, "I dwell among mine
"own peop." 152

SERMON VIII.
On drawing near to God.
[Prcached at the celehration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.]
PSALM lxxiii. 28. It is good for me to

draw near to God. -73

SERMON IX.

On Wisdom in Religious Conduft.
PSALM ci. 2. I will behave nryff uwely

in a perfed way. - )95
VOL. V. a

SERMON X.
On the Immortality of the Soul, and a

future State.
2 CORINTIIIANS, v. I. For wue know, that

f our earthly horife of this tabernacle were
diolved, we have a builling of Cod, an
houfc not made withb hands, eternal in the
heavens. - - Page 219

SERMON XI.

On overcoming Evil with Good.
ROMANS, xii. 21. Pe not overcome of evil;

but overcome evil with good. - 246

S E R M0 N XII.

On a Life of Iifiiation and Pleafurc.
P'RoVErns, xlv. In. Even in laughter the

heart is farrodful; and the end of that
mirth is heavinefi. - 266

SERMON XIII.

(Cn the Conscience void of Offence.
ACTS, xxiv. 16. lierein do Iexercife m)felf,

to have always a confcicnce void of offence
toward God and toward mnn. 290

9

SERMON XIV.

On the Ascension of Chris.
[Preached in tl, een;,,g after the celcbration of the

Sacrament of the Lord's Suppec.]

LUKEI; v,

xxiv .
51. nd he led thm out

as far as to Bethany; and he lft up his
hands and blc/d them: And it came to
pass while /e l/s'jd them, he was parted
frcm them and carried up into Heaven.

Page 311

SERMON XV.

On a peaceable Disposition.
ROMANS, Xii. 18. If it be pofible, as mncb

as lieth in you, live peaceably with all
Wen.... - - 337

SERMON XVI.
On Religious Joy, as giving Strength and

Support to Virtue.
NEHEMIAII, viii. Io. -- The joy of the

Lord is your Jlrcngtb. . 364

SERMON XVII.

On the Folly of the Wisdom of the World.
I CORINTH. iii. 19. he wifdome of this

world isfooli/JinJi with God. Page 385

SERMON XVIIL
On the Government of Human Affairs by

Providence.
PROVERBS, xvi. 9. A man's heart devllth

his way; but the Lord dircegethb biscps.

407
SERMON XIX.

On Prayer.
PSALM Ixv. 2. 0 Thou that hearef prayer,

unto Tbeejhall all sieh come! - 429

SERMON XX.

On the Last Judgment.

2 CORINTH. v. 10. For we mufi all op.

pear before the judgment-fcat of Chriji,
that every one may receive the things done
in bis body, according to that he bath done,
whebher it be good or bad. . 460

# SERMON I. On HOPES and DISAPPOINTMENTS. PROVERBS, x. 28. The hope of the Righteous shall be gladness; but the expectation of the Wicked shall perish.

* *.- **x, 4X

SERMON I.
On HOPES and DISAPPOINTMENTS.

PROVERBS, X. 28.

The hope of the RigbteousJhall be gladness;
but the expetation of the Wicked ball
perIh.

I'~A TTACHMENT to futurity has sERM.

J A y a remarkable influence on the _.

IJjF operations of the human mind.
The present, whatever it be, seldom en-
gages our attention lo much as what is to
come. Remembrance of the past may
sometimes occupy our thoughts; but what
for the most part fills them, is the antici-

VOL. V. B pation

SE RM. pation of the future. The present is apt

to be confidered as an evanescent fccne, jut
about to pass away; and in the midt of
wilhes and defircs, of hopes and fear.,
which all relped futurity, we may be said
to dwell. As rn theic the life of man is
lo much fupL)cnded, it becomes a very ma-
lerial part both of wvifdom and of duty to
autciid to any regulations by which they
may be properly conduded. For if ex-
pclaaiona and hopes on one hand, and
tears and alarms on the other, are suffered
to arise with groundlcfs precipitancy, and
to acquire an undue ascendant, it is evi-
dcnt that they will produce much delusion
in conduct, and often will engender much
vice and guilt. As there is abhopc of the
RigLteous which Jhall be gladnefl, so there
is an expeCLation of the lIicked which fJall
pcrri'. The anticipations of the former,
conducted by prudence and regulated by
piety, mislead him not from his duty, and
afford him fatisfadion in the end. While
the expetations of the latter, ariling from
fantastic imaginary prcfpeds, delude him

I for

for a while with vanity, and terminate in SE R M.
misery. It will therefore be an useful sub- I
ject of meditation, to confider, in a few
instances, of what we may, and of what we
may not, reasonably expec 'from the world,
when we look forward to what is most
likely to happen, in the ordinary course of
human affairs.

I. WE are not to expect the uninter-

rupted continuance of any measure of
health, prosperity, or comfort which we
now enjoy. There is the greater reason
for beginning with this admonition, as there
is a strong propensity in human nature to
imagine that what we at present possess
is always to remain. When no warnings
of any approaching change appear, we are
all inclined to look forward to futurity
with a smile; and to indulge the hope that
to-morrow Jball be as this day and even
more abundantly. Hence, in the lives of
thoughtless men, there breaks forth so much
folly and presumption, so much pride and
levity, and often so much-impiety and con-

B 2 .tempt

S E R M. tempt of religion. What is the Aligbty tbat

_ we Jhould jerve him? Or what profitJball

we have, if we pray unto him f Our moun-
tain fland flrong; and fall never be moved.

On the lot of some men Providence is

pleated to bestow a longer continuance of
prosperity than on that of others. But,
as the term of that continuance is hidden
from us, all flattering and confident ex-
peaations are without foundation. At
one period or another, it is certain that the
calm is to be troubled, and the dark cloud
is to arise; and how soon that period is to
come, you cannot tell. In your health, or
your fortune, or among your connecions
and friends, be assured that some trial
awaits you. For human life never lfands
fill for any long time. It is by no means
a fixed and steady object, like the mountain
or the rock which you always find in the
fame situation; it is a river continually
moving and flowing. Neither is it the fill
and smooth fream which glides along with
the fame constant tenor; but a river which
for a time may hold a regular course

within

within its banks, till, being interrupted by s ER M.
rocks, it foams into a torrent, or, fwoln by
foreign currents, it lays wafe the neigh-
bouring plains. Amidst such viciflitudes
of time and life, who has any title to
reckon upon the future ?-To faults, all are
subje't; to troubles, all are exposed. As
that man is the molt virtuous who can be
charged with the fewest faults, so that life
is the happiest which suffers the fewest
troubles. To look for entire exemption
from them is to court disappointment.

At the fame time, I do not mean to hold

it forth as any precept of religion or wis-
dom, that we ought always to fadden the
present hour by dwelling on the thoughts
of future disappointment. What is given
us, let us chearfully enjoy, and render thanks
to Him who beltows it. Virtue, con-
joined with prudence, may reasonably as-
ford the prolpe& of good days to come.
For Godgivetb to a man that is good in his
ihgl, wuifdom, and knowldge, andjoy*. Such

* Eccles. ii. .6.

B 3 a prof-

S E R M. a profpet therefore he may innocently in-
,. dulge, if he preserve always that temper-

ance and moderation, that modesty and
humility, which become one who knows
that his slate is ever in hazard of changing.
But I mean to warn those who, giving
way to the elation of giddy hopes, lose the
command of themselves, that by this in-
toxication of mind they are preparing the
way for an alteration of state; they are
puihing forward the wheels of advancing
change; they are accelerating their own
downfall. To them belongs that admoni-
tion of the wife man, would they seriously
liften to it; If a man live many years and
rejoice in them all, ret let him remember the
days of darkness, for they f:all be man):
all that cometh is v.nity *.

II. WV arc not to cxpeAt, from our in-

tercourfe with others, all that fatisfiaioii
which we fondly wish. What the indi-
viduAl either enjoys or fulffrs by himself,

E-clef. xi. 8.

cxhibits

exhibits only an imperfec view of his SE R M.
condition. In the present slate of human _,
affairs, we are all Io closely interwoven
with one another, that a very material part
of our happineis or misery arifcs from the
connections which we have with those who
are around us, and the relations in which
we Rand to them. These, therefore, open
a field within which our wishes and expec-
tations find an ample range. One of the
first objets of wish to every one, is to main-
tain a proper place and rank in society;
not to fall behind his equals; but rather,
if he can, to filrpals them, so as to com-
mand consideration and refped from his
neighbours. This, among the vain and
ambitious, is always the favourite aim.
With them it arises to immoderate expeca-
tions, founded on their supposed talents
and imagined merits. But perhaps, in the
hearts of all men, lome wish of this nature
lurks; some wish not to be overlooked in
the crowd, but to attain that degree of
diflindion which they conceive they might
realonably claim.

B 4 W'ith

S B R U. With refpe to claims of this fort it is
_.,_ to be apprehended that, among persons of

all characters and descriptions, many an
expeatlion mufl peri/h, and many a difap-
pointment be endured. For such is the
power which the sophistry of felf-love
exercises over us, that almost every one
may be assured that he measures himself
by a deceitful scale; that he places the
point of his own merit at a higher degree
than others will admit that it reaches. All
are jealous of the high pretensions of others.
He who fufpefs a rival in his neighbour,
will fludy every method of bringing him
down to what he takes to be his proper
level; nay, often of depreciating him be-
low it. Hence the endless mortifications
which the vain and felf-conceited susser.
Hence the spleen and resentment which is
so often breaking forth, diflurbing the peace
of society, and involving it in crimes and
miseries. Were expectations more mo-
derate, they would be more favourably re-
ceived. Did we more rarely attempt to
push ourfelvcs into notice the world would

more

more readily allow us, nay-fometimes aflift SERM.
us, to come forward. Were we content
sometimes to remain in the Ihade, we
would with more advantage come forth
into funlhine, and find the brightness in-
terrupted by fewer clouds.

In the closer connexions which men

form of intimate friendlsip and domestic
life, there is still more reason for due mo-
deration in our expecations and hopes.
For the nearer that men approach to each
other, the more numerous the points of
contac are in which they touch, the greater
indeed will be the pleasure of perfet sym-
phony and agreements of feelings; but, at
the fame time, if any harsh and repulsive
sensations take place, the more grating and
pungent will be the pain.-If you look for
a friend, or a partner of your life, in whose
temper there is not to be found the least
inequality, who upon no occasion is to be
hurt or offended by any frailties you dif-
cover, whose feelings are to harmonize in
every trifle with yours, whose countenance
is always to reflec the image of your own,
you look for a pleating phantom, which is

never,

S E R M. never, or, at molt, very rarely, to be found;

,_
.. and if disappointment four your mind, you

have your own folly to blame. You
ought to have confidered that you live in
a region of human infirmity, where every
one has imperfeccions and failings. You
afluredly have your own. What reaoln had
you to imagine, that the person whom
you love and efleem was to be the only
exception from the common fate ? Here,
if any where, it becomes you to overlook
and forbear; and never to allow finall fail-
ings to dwell on your attention so much as
t - to deface the whole of an amiable cha-

rafter. From trifling mifunderltandings
arising from the most frivolous causes,
springs much of the misery of social and
domestic life. Hence is bla[ted many a
plcafing blossom of hope; and many an
e:xpieation, which once promised unbroken
harmony, is left to peryh. I flSall only
mention,

III. ANOTHER inflance of what we are

not to expect in the ordinary course of
huma:n affairs; that is, conflant gratitude

from

from those whom we have most obliged S E R M.
and served. I am far from laying that -
gratitude is an unknown, or even a rare
virtue among mankind; I think not to
ill of human nature. On the contrary, it
is my belief, that grateful sensations for
favours received are very generally felt; and,
when no itrong passion counterads tioli:
sensations, that grateful returns are gene-
rally intended, and often are actually made.
But then, our expetations of proper re-
turns must be kept within moderate
bounds. We rmuf not carry them so far
as to imagine, that gratitude is to produce
unlimited compliance with every desire
which we chule to indulge ; or that they
whom we have obliged will altogether
desert their own interest for the fake of
their benefadors. Many circumstances, it
is to be remembered, tend to cool the grate-
ful emotion. Time always deadens the
memory of benefits. Sometimes they are
confidered as having been fully rccom-
pensed, and the debt of gratitude repaid,
As bcuclits conferred are often under-rated

by

SERM. by those who receive them, so they are

. sometimes over-valued by those who con-

ser them. On persons of light and careless
minds, no moral sentiment maakes any deep
impreflion; with such, the remembrance
of both benefit and benefacor is apt to
pars speedily away. With the proud spirit,
which claims every thing as its due, gra-
titude is in a great measure incompatible.
From persons of this characer, we are
never to expect it; and indeed from per-
sons of any charater we are not to be
surprised, if, in the present state of the
world, it rites not so high as we thought
we had reason to hope.

HAVING thus (hown in some material

instances what we have no reason to ex-
peCt in the ordinary course of human as-
fairs, I turn next to the brighter fide of
the subjed, and shall show what a wife
and good man may reasonably expea from
human life. His hopejhall be gladness, al-
though the expetation offooll hallperi/b.

4 1. WIIAT-

I. WHATEVER course the affairs of the SERM.

world take, he may justly hope to enjoy I
peace of mind. I am sensible that by the
sceptic and the profligate, this will be held
as a very inconsiderable objec of expeda-
tion or hope. To them every enjoyment
which is of mental and intellecual nature
appears of small value. Give them as-
fluent fortune and flourilhing health, and
they account themselves sure of felicity.
But to these very persons I appeal, whe-
ther there have not been many occasions,
when the want of a peaceful and self-
approving mind has not blasted all the en-
joyments they possessed ? In the midst of
the pomp and luxuries of life, have they
never experienced the pangs of a wounded
pirit? Have they never felt what it was
to be tormented by the sense of pafl follies,
and to be flung with the reproaches of an
angry conscience? Dare they fay that in
the midst of those feelings they were happy ?
Will they not be constrained to own, that
in such moments of inward pain, they
would willingly have exchanged conditions

with

S E R M. with an innocent peasant? Let them then
~^, learn the value of that ohje2 of hope

which they affect to contemn, by recol-
lecting what they have suffered from the
want of it.-Affiircdly, the peace of an
approving conlcicncc is one of the chief
ingredients of human happincfs; one of
the most grateful of all sensations to -the
heart of man: provided always that this
felf-approbation reft upon proper grounds;
that it be tempered with due humility, and
regulated by Chriflian faith; that it never
swell into an arrogant opinion of our vir-
tue, or into confidence in our own merits,
as if they were sufficient, without any
higher intervention, to render us acceptable
to God.

He, whose fludy it is to prcferce a con-

science void of offence towards God and
man, who upon just principles can be fa-
tisfied that he is walking in the path which
was appointed by God, will have, in every
slate of fortune, a ground of hope which
may justly be denominated gladness; for
peace of mind will not forsake him. Let

the

the world vibrate around him as it will, SERM.
and repeat all its vicissitudes, he will not _,,
be shaken by them. He has always some-
what to reft upon for comfort. Wrapped
up in his own integrity, he remains found
and entire within himself; and with a
firm mind awaits the coming storm. He
is not afraid of evil tidiing; for his heart
is fixed, trufling in the Lord'*. As he can
look up to a Supreme Power with good
hope, so he can look every man in the face
without uneasiness, when he is conscious
that no man can reproach him with having
entrenched upon his neighbour's rights, or
having caufclefsly provoked and attacked
him. Hence, a calm mind by day, and
undillurbed slumbers by night. H:nce,
the hope of that continued protecion of
Heaven which watches over the righteous.
In the time of troubl e Jhall hide me in
his pavilion; in the secret of bis tabernacle
lSIall be hide me; He fJall fit me upon a
rock 1. Betides this expecation of internal
peace,

* P. CXii. . t .P'. xlvii. 5.

II. A

E R M. II. A GOOD man has ground to expec
*_,» tthat any external condition into which, in

the course of human affairs, he may pass,
liall, by means of virtue and wisdom, be
rendered, if not perfecly agreeable, yet
tolerably easy to him. That diftreffe of
various kinds are Icattered through the life
of every mortal man, there can be no
doubt. But it is also to be remembered,
that to many distresses there are remedies
- which it is in our power to apply; and

that with all sorrows some comforts are
mixed. So many loud complaints we hear
of the inequalities of fortune in the world,
that one would imagine the rich and the
great to be the only persons who had the
privilege of being happy; and that the
mean and the poor were doomed, without
exception, to be miserable. Be assured,
my friends, that the inequality of real
happiness is not to be measured by the in-
equality of outward etlate. When you
fee the peasant chearful in his cottage, and
the labourer singing in the fields, you may
discern that there is some power in the

mind

mind fuperiour to external condition; that S E R M.
more depends on the man himself, than on .
the situation in which the world has placed
him. Would you estimate justly the fum
of happiness that he enjoys, or the degree
of unhappiness that he feels? The quef-
tions you are to put, if the man be in prof-
perity, are not, How much wealth does such
a man possess? but, How does he enjoy it?
If he be in adversity, not, What is his dif-
trefs ? but, How does he bear it ?

Hence arises the hope to a wife and good

man of either finding, or making his slate
tolerable to himself. If he be not wanting
to himself, he is never left without re-
sources to aflift those exertions which he
makes in his own behalf. Roses indeed
are not always strewed in his path; but
from fields that are seemingly wafle, flowers
may be gathered by those who look care-
fully around them. Seldom or never do
all good things forsake, and all evils beset
a man, at once. In some corner of our
lot there are always comforts that may be
found, if we be not so foolish as to over-

VOL. V. C look

S ER M . look them. Even in the intervals of sick-

nets and pain, fatisfaclions may be enjoyed.
Returns of relief are often felt with a more
lively ferifation of pleasure, than what we
talte in unbroken health. It has been often
observed that what is very severe of any
kind, seldom lasts long; and the uneasiness
which lalts, we become accustomed to bear.
Time and continuance reconcile us gra-
dually to many things that were at first
believed to be insupportable. Providence
has in mercy provided this gentle opiate
to aflTage various Iorrows of human life.
\What we behold others around us bearing,
we learn to think may also be borne by us.
7he spirit of man will long fuJfain bis in-
firmtlies: From the treasures of his own
mind in reflecion and meditation, much
relief will arise to the virtuous; and at the
bottom of the mol dcifconfolate estate, there
lies always a secret hope that better days may
come.-From such circumflances as these,
the expetation of passing through life
with some measure of co:mfort, may rea-
fonably be entertained by such as are not

~~2 ~ wanting

wanting to themselves in propriety of SERM.
conduct. In looking forward to futurity, l
the profped we are to take of the world
is not that which is sometimes gloomily
indulged, of a for orn region where nothing
is to be beheld but dreary and inhospitable
watfes, and no objects are to be met with
but serpents that hist, and wild beafds that
devour. The profpet is rather that of a
mixed region, where indeed rugged rocks
are seen, and deserts extend, over which
the tempest sometimes scowls; but where
also many peaceful habitations and fruitful
fields occur to rcfrefh the fight. Once
more,

111. We have ground to expcEt from

the ordinary course of human affairs, that
if we persevere in fludying to do our duty
towards God and man, we shall meet with
the efeem, the love, and confidence of those
who are around us. I before observed, that
in our expectations of receiving what we
think due refpea and consideration from
the world, we shall be often disappointed.

C2 But

ER M. But that obfcrvation was applied to the
i.' claims we make on others, on account of

talents, abilities, and fuperiour merits. To
such claims the world is seldom disposed
to give a favourable reception. We live
amidst rivals and competitors whose self-
eflimation prompts them to depreciate us,
and of course fubjeds us to many a morti-
fication. The cale is different with refped
to moral qualifications. There the world
is more ready to do justice to charater.
No man is hurt, at least few are so, by
hearing hi3 neighbour esteemed a worthy
and honourable man. This praise will be
bestowed without grudging, by many who
value themselves on the poffieflon of quali-
tics, which they conceive to be of fuperiour
importance in the judgment of the world.

But whatever they may think, it is cer-

tain that the basis of all lafling reputation
is laid in moral worth. Great parts and en-
dowments may sparkle for a while in the
public eye. The world looks up to them
with wonder, as to an extraordinary comet,
or a blazing fiar. Diftinguified virtue and

3 worth

worth create less aftoni(hment; but, like SERM.
the fixed luminaries of heaven, they shine ~
with more hfeady and permanent lustre.
Unaffeded piety conjoined with inviolable
uprightness and integrity in conduc, com-
mand a degree ofrefped which approaches
to veneration. Candour and fairness never
fail to attract esteem and trust. Kindness
and benevolence conciliate love, and create
warm friendfhips.-The best charafter may
indeed for a time be accidentally obscured
and misunderstood. But the world com-
monly judges roundly in the end. After
a man has aAed his part for a while among
his fellows, he is known upon trial to be
what he is; and if his worth be real and
genuine, his righteoufiefs comes forth as the
light, and his judgment as the noon day.

This is what a good man has always

ground to look for, even in evil times;
and surely, there are few things which he
can more desire than the profped of being
valued and esteemed by those among whom
he lives. This counterbalances many a
disadvantage of outward fortune, and puts

C 3 into

S E R M. into his hand many opportunities of satis-
>,.~ facion and comfort. He is likely to pof-

fess many friends and well-wilhers, and to
have few enemies. The more he is known,
the more will the favour of those who fur-
round him grow; and the profped is before
him of having his hoary head crowned with
honour.

THUS, in several instances, I have briefly

pointed out what may, or may not, be ex-
peAed from the world, when we look for-
ward to the ordinary courle of human as-
fairs: Not an uninterrupted enjoyment of
all the comforts of prosperity; not undif-
turbed satisfaCtion in our various inter-
courses with society; not grateful returns
from all whom we have obliged or served;
But what we may expea, if we keep a
good conscience and tudly to do our duty,
is peace of mind; a tolerably ealy and
comfortable state, amidlt the vicifnitudes of
life; and the love and ellecm of those with
whom we are conneced.--hbe hope of the
rightcoisJhall be glatnefs.

TiE

THE present 1ilbjil has led me to con- SERM.

fider only what the riglt-Ž,!i)s man has to
hope for in the ordinary c'-irfe of the
world. But I have now to oblerve, that
he has before him a much higih.! object
of hope than any which I have yet men-
tioned; a hope which ariles not from
the ordinary course of human affairs, hut
from an extraordinary interpolition of
divine grace and mercy conveyed to us
by the gospel; even the hope whlich is
laid upfor bim in heaven; the assured ex-
pecation of a better life, in a higher and
better world. Put the cafe of the lervant
of God being overwhelmed with all the
disappointments which the world can bring
upon him, here is an expectation which will
be always gladness; with which he can
perpetually solace himself. Through the
present slate of existence he is no more
than a pafelnger. If he can render it in
any degree tolerable and easy to himself,
it is well; it ir all that he expects. His
home, his place of reft is in those habita-
tions to which, through the' merits of his

C 4 Redeemer,

SER M. Redeemer, he is taught and encouraged to
^i~ aspire. He knows that in due season, he

fJall reap if be faint not *. That when
the earthly house ofti t tabernacle is difolved,
be bhall have a building of God, an bouse
not made with hands, eternal in the heavenr t;
for to them who, by patient continuance in
well-doing, jcek for glory, honour, and im-
mortality, God will render eternal life .
Hence, whether you confider him in this
life, or confider him as looking forward to
another, his hope is perpetual gladness,
while the expetfations of the wicked Jall
perih.

GAlt.»i. 9. t 2 Corinth.v. i. 4 Rom.ii. 7.

# SERMON II. On the proper DISPOSITION of the HEART towards GOD. ACTS, xvii. 28. In Him we live, and move, and have our Being.

[ 25 i

SERMON II.
On the proper DISPOSITION of the

HEART towards GOD.

ACTS, xvii. 28.
In Him we live, and move, and have our

Being.
THERE is nothing which all nature SERM.

more loudly proclaims, than that some

Supreme Being has framed and rules this
universe. Day uttereth speech of it to day,
and night Jflewetb knowledge of it to night.
Our birth and our life, our sensations and
our aacions, the obje'ts which we behold,
and the pleasures which we enjoy, all con-
spire to testify that some wonderful intelli-
gence has disposed and arranged, and still

supports

s R M. supports and animates the whole frame of
t, I nature. This is what scarcely any man of

fober mind ever called in question. It
was the ditate of nature to the most fa-
vage and barbarous, as well as to the molt
civilized nations. The American and the
Indian in his desert, as well as the Grecian
sage and the Roman conqueror, adored,
each after his own mode, a Sovereign of the
Univerfe.-The Pfalmifl observes, that* the
fool bathfaid in his heart the;e is no God.
Among the follies, however, with which
the human race is chargeable, this is one
which, in the course of ages, seemed to
have made the finalleft progress. It was
reserved for modern times and evil days,
to engender, in one region of the earth, a
fyltem of false philosophy which should
revive the exploded principles of atheism,
and study to pour forth their poison among
the nations, not only to the extinCion of
religion, but to the subversion of established
governments, and of good order among
mankind,

* Pr. liv. i.

Pifmifling

Dismissing all delusions of this nature SE R M.

as unworthy the attention of any reasonable
unperverted mind; holding it for certain
that nothing can be more real than the
exifence of a Supreme Divinity, it follows
of course from this belief, that there arc
dispositions correspondent to Him which
ought to be found in every human mind,
among the young and the old, among the
high and the low, the rich and the poor.
It is absurd to suppose, that while the re-
lations in which we stand to our fellow-
creatures, whether as equal:b, fuperiours, or
inferiours, naturally call forth certain fcn-
timents and affeaions, there flould be none
which properly correspond to the first and
grcateft of all Beings; to Him, whom,
though we fee him not, we all recognise;
to Him, in whom, as it is beautifully ex-
pressed in my text, we live, and move, and
have our being.

THE proper disposition of mind with

refped to God, is generally exprefled by
the term of Love to him. This is veryjuftly

founded

SERM. founded on the solemn injunction of our

_,-. blefled Lord*. Thou .flalt love bhe Lord

thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
foul, and with all thy mind; this is thefirft
andgreat commandment. Hence, it is com-
mon among religious writers to include
the whole of pious affedions towards God
in Love. But when this term is applied
to the Almighty, we must be careful to
understand aright what it imports. We
all know what it is to love any of our
fellow-creatures; but such an affeCion as
we bear to them, cannot in a literal sense
be transferred to God. Among them it
is sometimes connected with the fervency
of paflion; it commonly imports some fimi.
larity of nature, and some degree of fond
and intimate attachment; all which it were
highly improper in us to assec towards
the Supreme Being, whose ways are not as
our ways, nor his thoughts as our thoughts.
I am afraid that the application of Love
in a ftrid sense, and sometimes in too ser-

' Mtthn. xxii. 37.

vent

vent and pallionate a strain towards God, SER M.
has, among some serious and well disposed
minds, given rife to no little enthusiasm in
religion.

When therefore we treat of Love as

applied to God, it must be analysed or
resolved into those sentiments which are
proper and suitable for us to encourage
towards the God whom we adore. That love
of him which religion requires, and which
our Saviour has so solemnly enjoined, is a
compounded affection, and the dispositions
which it includes are principally three;
reverence, gratitude, submission. Of the
nature and foundation of each of these I
am to treat in the sequel of this discourse,
and shall endeavour to illustrate them as
forming that temper and disposition of
mind which we ought always to preserve
towards the Great Author of our existence.

I. THE foundation of every proper difpo-

fition towards God must be laid in Reve-
rence, that is, admiration mixed with awe;
what, in its lower-degrees among men, is

called

ER M. called Refped; but carried to its highest
....» point with relation to God, may be termed

profound veneration. In this disposition
towards Him we ought habitually to be
found, not only in the exercises of imme-
diate devotion, but amidst the ordinary oc-
currences of life. Every thing indeed that
we fee around us gives perpetual occasion
for it. We find ourselves in an immense
universe, where it is impossible for us,
without astonishment and awe, to contem-
plate the glory and the power of Him who
hath created it. From the greatest to the
lean object tha we behold, from the flar
that glitters in the heavens to the inset
that creeps upon the ground, from the
thunder that rolls in the skies to the flower
that blossoms in the fields, all things testify
a profound and mysterious wisdom, a
mighty and all powerful hand, before
which we muff tremble and adore. Nei-
ther the causes nor the issues of the events
which we behold, is it in our power to
trace: neither how we came into this
world, nor whither we go when we retire

from

from it, are we able of ourselves to tell; SERM.
but in the meantime find ourselves fur- i.
rounded with astonishing magnificence on
every hand. We walk through the earth,
as through the apartments of a vast palace,
which fill every attentive fpetator with
wonder. All the works which our power
can ered, all the ornaments which our
art can contrive, are feeble and trifling in
comparison with those glories which nature
every where presents to our view. The
immense arch of the heavens, the splendor
of the fun in his meridian brightness, or
the beauty of his rising and setting hours,
the rich landscape of the fields, and the
boundless expanse of the ocean, are scenes
which mock every rival attempt of human
skill or labour. Nor is it only in the splendid
appearances of nature, but amidst its rudest
forms, that we trace the hand of the Divi-
nity. In the solitary desert, and the high
mountain, in the hanging precipice, the
roaring torrent, and the aged forest, though
there be nothing to cheer, there is much
to frike the mind with awe, to give rife to

those

SERM. those solemn and sublime sensations which

elevate the heart to an Almighty, all
Creating Power.

In lhort, we can no where call our eyes

around us without meeting what is fuffi-
cient to awaken reverence of the Deity.
This reverence becomes the more profound
that the great Being who is the object of
it, is to us inviible and unknown. We
may seek to discover him, but he hides him-
self from us; his footfieps we clearly trace,
but his face we can never behold. We go
forward, but be is not there, and backward,
but we cannot perceive him; on the left hand
where he workelb, but we cannot behold him;
be hideth himself on the right hand that we
cannot fee him *. We know that he is not
far from every one of us; yet he shrouds
himself in the darkness of his pavilion; be
anfweretb from the fcret place of thunder t.
Before this incomprehensible Being, this
God terrible and strong, we become in a
manner annihilated; we are sensible that

* Job, lxiii. 8, 9. t Ps. Ixxxi. 7.

in

in his fight we are only as the drop of the SERM.
bucket and the imall drtq in the balance; and

.

in his pretence can only rejoice with trem-
bling. For we know that the mighty arm
which upholds the universe, and which
surrounds us with wonders on every fide,
can in a moment crush us to the duff, if
we become objecs of displeasure to heaven.
Awful are the operations of the Divine
Power which we are constantly beholding
in the moral as well as in the natural world.
The Almighty rules among the nations,
as well as over individuals: on his pleasure
depend all the great revolutions of the
earth; the interpositions of his Providence
are frequently apparent to the world, in
bringing down the mighty, and raising up
the fallen. In the books of the law and
the prophets, we hear his threatenings
against rebellious finners denounced with
a tremendous voice; and in the dispensation
of the gospel, a most friking instance is
exhibited to us of the stria justice of his
government, in the expiation that was re-
quired for the apoftacy of a guilty world.

VOL. V. D So

s . R b'. So that both the law and the gospel, the
*/^j works of nature and the conduA of Provi-

dence, unite in uttering that solemn voice
which ought oftento resound in our ears: Be
Jlill, and know that I am God. I will be
exalted among the heatben; I will be exalted
in tbe eartb. Fear before him, all ye nations:
Give unto the Iord the glory due unto bit
name. For bhnour and majeJy are befoJ e
him; Jlrengtb and beauty are in bis fanfuary.
He alone dotb great things and unfarchbable;
marvellous things without number*.

On this head of discourse I have infited

the more, because I apprehend that such
sentiments as I have now been inculcating
occur too rarely among many profefled
Christians. Did an awful reverence for the
Supreme Being dwell on all our minds
with a properly impreflive sense, its effecds
would oftener appear in conduc. On
many occasions it would check a wanton
levity of spirits. It would infuse more so-
lemnity into our religious ads. It would

Ps. xlvi. o. Ps. »ci. E-S. Job, v. 9.

inspire

inspire greater refpeat for the temples of sE R M.
God, and for all the forms of sacred wor-
ship. It would banish that profanation of
the name of God which we so often hear
from unhallowed lips.-Let it be remem-
bered that the fear of God is, throughout
much of the scripture, employed as the
term descriptive of the whole of religion.
It is not the fear which saves are con-
frained to feel for a tyrant, but the reve-
rence which children have for the best
parent, or fubjeds for the best sovereign;
the veneration which necessarily enters into
the love we bear to a Being of fuperiour
order: it is to fear bhe Lord and bis good-
neff, as it is emphatically expressed by one
of the prophets*. This fear of God,
therefore, is not only confifent with the
love of him, but forms a material part ps
it. The pretended love of God disjoined
from reverence of him, would no longer
be genuine loye, but would rife into ar-
rogant presumption. I proceed to obferye,

* Hosea, iii. .

D It . THAT

SER M. II. THAT gratitude forms an essential
_^..-._ part of that diltlofition which we ought to

bear towards God. This implies an as-
fcetionate fc:lif of God upon the mind,
and enctrs (iredly into love, underflood
in its mlnft ctmrnoll acceptation. It were
a grnfrs iflikke to imagine that the reve-
rcice of which I have dilcourfed has any
tendrncy to check gratitude: on the con-
trary it heigh:tens it, by uniting the sense
of our bcncfadtor's condescension with the
benefits which he conveys. The more
eminent the tialitics of a benefactor are,
and the higher the rank is in which he
hands, our hearts arc warmed the more by
the feeling of his gnodnefs.

It is impossible to think of God at all, with-

ott conceiving him as the bcnefadorof man-
kind. Myflerious as this world is in many,
of its appiarances, it nevertllelefs carries,
on the whole, a strongly marked charac-
ter of gnodnrcfs a.!d benignity in its author.
We behuld a vast fvfem obviously con-
trived to provide, not food and nourish-
ment o:nly, b)ut conifoit alhu and enjoyment

to

to an infinite number of inhabitants. The s E ,. M.
more that philosophy has enlarged our -~
views of nature, the more it has been dif-
covered that, throughout the wide extent
of creation, there is no ufclefs profusion of
magnificence, but that every thing has been
rendered subservient to the welfare of the
rational or sensible world ; nay, that many
objets, which were once confidered as not
only superfluous but noxious, hold an use-
ful place in the general system. Such pro-
vision has been made for our entertainment
on this earth, such care has been taken to
(lore the world with a variety of pleasures
to cheer our senses and enliven our ima-
gination, that he whose eye opens on all
the beauty of nature, muff be oft infenlible
heart indeed if he feels no gratitude to that
Being who has brought himn forth to enjoy
this wonderful scene.

But the gratitude of a good man will

naturally go farther than this. He will
think not only of the benifits which he
enjoys in common with the reft of his
fellow-creatures, but of thole which are

D 3 - appro.

s E R M. appropriated particularly to himfelf.-Who

is there amongst us, my brethren, but in
fairly reviewing the events of his life from
infancy to this day, in thinking of the com-
forts he enjoys, and recollecing the dangers
from which he has been delivered who
is there, I fay, that has not cause to ac-
knowledge an invisible guardian, who has
all along watched over his frail estate, has
proteced and blessed him ?-Perhaps of
the blessings which you enjoy, or the de-
liverances you have received, you are more
disposed to trace some human cause; one
favourable diftindion you ascribe to your
birth, your parents, or your education; for
some other happy circumstance you think
yourself solely indebted to the kindness of
an earthly friend, or you refer it to the
exertions of your own dexterity and ta-
lents. -Thoughtlels and inconsiderate man!
Have you forgotten that there is a first
Cause of all, a Supreme Lord, who, from
the beginning, has arranged and prepared
the whole series of causes and effefs, of
whose destination and agency men are no

more

more than the secondary instruments ? To s E R M.
what but to the original plan of his good- ,._
ness, do you owe the favourable circum-
ltances of your birth or your education,
the kindness which he ordained to spring
up in the breast of your friend, or the ta-
lents and abilities which he implanted
within you, in order to favour your success?

But an exhortation to gratitude you per-

haps confider as coming unseasonably in
your present situation. The time was,
when the light of the divine countenance
shone upon you, and looking up to a Bene-
facor in heaven, with a grateful heart you
acknowledged your blessings to be derived
from Him; but that time is now past; you
are left desolate and forsaken, bereaved of
the chief comforts on which you had set
your hearts.-And, because many of the
favours of heaven are pas, ought they to
be gone from your remembrance? Are
there not still iorne others remailing for
which you have reason to give thanks?
Have you forgotten all the blessings you
have continued to enjoy ever since the day

D 4 that

6 ER M. that you came forth a helpless infant into

the world ? Be assured that a gratitude of
that fort, which dies away as soon as it
ceases to be fed by the usual fiream of be-
nefits, which has regard to present favours
only, and none to those that are past, is not
true gratitude, but the symptom of a selfish
and mercenary Ipirit. If you be difiofed
to thank God only when he is giving you
all the desires of your hearts, what praise
have ye? Do not publicans and finners
the fame? men who have little either
of religion or sensibility of heart. But
when Providence shrouds itself in a dark
cloud, and some of your favourite enjoy-
ments are carried away, if fill, with calm
and patient mind, you continue to bless
the name of the Lord, and itill retain a
thankful sense of the hleffings you have so
long, and so far beyond your deserts, been
permitted to enjoy; this is to be truly
grateful; this is to show yourselves the du-
tiful children of a Father in Heaven.

In reviewing thle grotunds which we
have for gratitude to God, it becomes us

I to

to attend, not only to those blessings which s E R M.
appertain individually to each of us, but to --
those also which we enjoy in common with
others of our brethren. How much reason
have we, for instance, to blels God for
having cast our lot in a land where we
enjoy all the advantages of mild and equal
government, and all the comforts of tran-
quillity and peace, while many a nation
around us is oppressed by the hand of
tyrannical power, disturbed with the alarms
and terrors of war, or suffering from the
ravages of the hostile spoiler? What higher
reason fill to be grateful for having our
lot cast where the joyful found of the gof-
pel is heard, where the glad tidings of
peace upon earth and good will to the fonls
of men are announced to us by the Son
of God, who came to bring pardon and
salvation to a guilty world? What ever-
lalting ground of thankfulness is afforded
by the blessed hope that is given us of life
immortal; of a borfie not made w ith bands
eternal in the heavens, when tec earthly
hotc of this tabernacle Jhall be djolved;

of

E R M. of an inheritance, incorruptible, undlfled, and
,_s thbatlfadetb not away, ascertained to all good

men by the death and the refurreaion of
our blessed Redeemer! Blef the Lord, 0
myfoul ! and all that is within me, bless bit
boly name, and forget not all hit benefits;
who forgiveth all thine iniquitie ; who
bealctb all bhy diseases; who redeemetb thy
life from defrution; who crownetb thee
uith loving kindness and tender mercies*.
Let us now add,

II. ENTIRE and profound fubmiflion

as a disposition modl necessary to be pre-
served on our part towards God. This in.
cludes fubmiflion of the understanding to
the discoveries which God has been pleased
to make; fubmiflion of the inclinations to
the laws which he has promulgated for our
conduct; fubmiflon of the will to the dif-
penfations of his Providence, as they assei
the events of our life. It is not fubmiflion
confirained merely by a power againit

*Pr, i.I, ,3.

2 which

which we know that it is in vain to SERM.
struggle; it is fubmiflfon arising from re- . -
verence compounded with gratitude; sub.
mission to One whose supreme perfetion
entitles Him to absolute obedience, whose
experienced goodnefi affords ground for
implicit trust.

In the present imperfec slate of human

nature, there will be often found no small
relutance to that entire resignation to God
which religion requires. The pride of
human underltanding will sometimes revolt
against the discoveries which God has
made in his word, as deficient and unfatif-
fadory; the struggles of palfion will fre-
quently rife against the refiraints imposed
on us by his laws, and the severities in-
fli&ed by his Providence. But in the heart
of a pious man all such opposition is
checked anJ borne down, by a steady faith
that, under the administration of the Al-
mighty, all is ordered for the heft, though
for several fleps of that high administration
we are unable at prcfent to account.
Hence that calm tranquillity he preserves,

and

F. R M. and that resolute and magnanimous fubmif-

,
- finon he maintains, amidst the most unpro-

mifiig circumflanccs. He knows that in
this flupcndous univcrfe there mufl be
many things that lie beyond our comprc-
henlion.-As yet thou {ceft no more than
the rile of the divine government, the be-
ginnings of a great plan which is not to be
completed until the course of ages alall
end. Meanwhile darkness must Ie allowed,
for wile reasons, to remain upon many
things; revere reflraints mult be imposed
on conducl, and occasional sufferings must
be endured. if thou fufflreft, sigh, and be
silent: wait, and be patient. Presume not
to exalt thy weak realbn againll the reve-
lations of heaven, nor to give vent to thy
impatient complaints againfl the ordinations
of thy Supreme Govcrnour. Think with
awe, and speak with caution, of what is so
much above thee. Wait till thy being
liall be unfolded; till it /hall have parsed
through the necessary steps that shall gra-
duAvly prepare thee for beholding the fe-
crcts of the univil;c; for underltanding

tile

the counfcls of the God who made it. In SE R .
the mean time, be content to submit and
to adore. Lct no otlier voice be heard
from thee but tlii; " Thou haft made me,
" GO od ! and I am thiec, for in the: llive,
"and m'vc, naJ l ave i;.L i: bg. \ Vhere-

ever tlihen coimm andtft mnc to go, I ful-

" low. Whatevcr thou appointet me to
" fufler, I l;car without murmur. It is my
"part to ,ci-;:vcre in my duty; all the

reft I leave to lI The; to 'hee, wliofe
wildoml I revere, shole goodnels I have
so often cxpericnced; in whom therefore

" I repole implicit trust that all fllall end
" well, and the righteous be made finally

happy."-CGGd is the word which the

Lnrd hath Jp,;kl. Not my will, but Iiis be
done. Cehold hc'e I am. Let him du to
his servant as fciieth good to him *.

Such are the principal dispositions hliich

it becomes us to preserve towardb God ; to
prelerve towards Him at all times; not in
the solemn hours of devotion only, but

a K2log%, x. 19. Luke, xxii. 4. 2 Sam. xv. 26.

when

E R M. when we ad in the busy world, or when
I'. we walk in retirement amidst the scenes of

nature. If this union of reverence, gra-
titude, and fubmiflion, habitually poflef our
minds, they will of course (hoot forth into
what is termed deligbting ourfelve in
Cod; thinking of him with peculiar com-
placency and warmth of affection; and
elevating us sometimes into a sacred tranf-
port when we draw nigh to him in ads of
immediate worlhip, in prayer and praise.
Then is the season when the fulness of the
foul gives rife to those filblime and pathetic
effusions of piety which are recorded of
faints in former times: My ful thirJfbthfor
God; for the living God: when Jball I
come and appear before him ? I will lfst up
my bands in thy name; my foulJhall befatii-
fled as with marrow and withfatnefS, when
I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate
on thee in the night watches. Blcd is the
man whom thou cboofeJ, and cauftJl to ap-
proacb unto thee. 0 that I incw where to
find him, that I might come even to his fiat *

* Ps. l i. 2. Ps2 Ixii ,

6. Ps. II.
4. Job, xZiii. 3

When

When such sentiments as these, of ardent SE R M.
affedion towards God, chastened by re- ,~
verence and submission, as well as warmed
by gratitude, predominate in our hearts,
and when they exert their proper influence
in purifying and regulating our life, we
may then be truly said to love the Lord
our God, with all our heart, and foul, and
lrcngtb, and mnid.

# SERMON III. On the Moral Character of Christ. ACTS, x. 30. Jesus of Nazareth — who went about doing good.

[ 48 ]

SERMON UI.
On the Moral Charader of Christ.

ACTS, X. 30.
Jesus of Nazareth-who went about doing

good.
SP.RM. T'JHERE are two great afpeds under

which we may contemplate the appear-

ance of our Blessed Lord on the earth. One
is, his coming into the world in order to
make expiation to divine justice, by his
sufferings and death for the guilt of the
human race. The other is, his coming to
ad as the enlightener and reformer of the
world, by his doctrine and his life. The
first of those views is the molt sublime; as

on

on the atonement which he made for us, SER M.
depend all our hopes of the pardon of fin, ,-
and of life eternal. In the other view, it
is allb of high importance that all chris-
tiaos flould frequently confider him, in
order to the proper regulation of their
conduc a the observation of his example
is no less neceflary for this purpose, than
attention to his dotrine; as by his doc-
trine he taught us what we are bound to
do, so in his etample he showed us what
we ought to be.

Hence the example of our Blefled Lord

has been ever held up by serious writers
to christians for their inflruaion and imi-
tation. It obviously possesses many ad-
vantages above any other Randard of con-
dut. It carries peculiar obligations from
gratitude, interest, and duty, to enforce the
imitation of it; and it is the only example,
in following which, we are certain never
to err. It has also another peculiar ad-
vantage attending it, which is not so com-
monly thought of; that is, the universality
of its use. It evidently appears that our

VOL. V. E Lord

SERM. Lord himself had this benefit to his fol-

lowers in view from the train of living
which he chose to adopt. Had he pitched
upon any one station of life, the influence
of his example would have been much
more limited. The integrity, for instance,
of Samuel as a judge, the devotion of
David on the throne, the fortitude of Daniel
in the midst of a corrupt court, hold forth
indeed splendid instances of virtue, but
they hold them out only to a few:
whereas when Christ appeared on earth,
he confined himself to no one state of for-
tune or lineof life; he did not addict himself
to any particular calling; be did not even
fix his residence in one place, but he gives
us opportunity of viewing him in different
places and situations, in all that variety of
lights which indiscriminately regard the
bulk of mankind: his life was divided be-
tween the contemplative and the aaive;
devotion and business equally shared it.
We behold him in private life among his
disciples, like a father in the midst of his
family. We behold him in public life,

acing

a&ing with authority in the discharge of sE R M.
his high commiflion, assuming the dignity II
which belonged to his office, and boldly
reproving the great and the powerful.
We fee him sometimes in poverty and ob.
fcurity, contemned and persecuted. We
fee him at other times elevated into public
favour, followed by applauding crowds,
and entering Jerusalem in triumph. We
can challenge all history sacred or profane,
to ihow us any eminent personage, faint,
philosopher, or hero, whose characer was
so thoroughly tried, and so fully exhibited
to admiration, as that of our Saviour. What
adds greatly to the lustre of his example,
it was marked by no affected singularities
nor peculiar aufterities. He did not seclude
himself from ordinary society, but con-
versed among men with that fort of modes
piety and virtue which suits itself to the
level of human infirmity, and is con(pi-
cuous for the discharge of the plain and
fublantial duties of a good life.

It is not my intention at present to at-
tempt a full survey of all the graces and

E a virtues

s I: RM. virtues which diflinguifhed our Lord's life,

t1., and ennobled his filfferings and death; as

this would lead into a field too extensive
for one discourse: I mean to confine my-
self to the manner in which he fulfilled the
social duties, and exercised his benevolence
as a man among men. This will afford an
infiruntive view of what may be termed
the moral characer of Christ in his ordi-
nary intercourse with the world, and will
point out a proper model of our behaviour
towards oc; another. The molt tudied
and laboured encomiums never drew a
more amiable character than what is con-
tained in the few and plain words of the
t"xt; frfis of NszaJrc!h went about, doing
gros'. Let us confidLr in what manner He
fultilled this charaetcr.

I. WVE are to attend to his afliduity and

alacrity in fccking otit and embracing every
opportunity of doing good: this is the
mofl substantial part of the great virtue of
charity. There is a fort of negative good-
ness with which most men are ready to be

satisfied;

fatibfied; thcy applaid tlicmftifvcs if they s i.: M.
have kept their hands free from unjust Ii.
deeds, and no man can reproach them for
working inifclicf to their necighbour; but
with reflpec to his welfare they arc totally
indifferent. They remain in a fort cf
torpid apathy about the conccris of (.licr%,
without cither rejoicing in their proflcrity,
or being affeded with their diarefles: this
is far below what is required of a good
man. We were all dcfigned by cur Creatcor
to b2 parts of one body, members of one
great society, where every one was to con-
tribute his part towards the common be-
nefit, and to be made happy by fludying
to make others so. In proportion indeed
as our ability and influence extend, the
obligation to be extensively beneficial'alfo
grows; but hardly is there any sphere so
narrow and circumscribed, as not to afford
some opportunities of being ufeful.-In
thy humble and obscure station, thou
art apt to think thyself entirely infig-
nificant and loft to the world. To thee,
indeed, it may not belong to heal the dif-

E 3 -eased,

S E R M. eased, to raise the fallen, to supply the in-
_YL., digent, or to bring forward the dcferving.

But is there none whose spirit thou canst
cheer, or whose infirmities thou cans help
to lighten ? Haft thou no parent, no child,
no brother, no friend, to whom thou canst
speak the words of comfort in the hour of
sorrow, whose mifiakes thou canst rectify,
or whose erring fleps thou canst turn into
the right path ?

Here let the example of Chrifi, as far

as thy sphere admits it, be before thine
eyes to quicken thine aftivity and ani-
mate thy zeal. The whole history of his
life is the hiflory of afive and diffu-
five benignity. Wherever he was pre-
sent, we find him employed in doing
good; either relieving men from their dif-
tresses, or making them wife and happy
by his inflruCions. The whole country
around him seemed to be his family, and if
in a literal sense he had been the father of
them all, they could not have exercised his
care, or shared his bounty more. The hun-
gry were fed, and the sick were cured, the

7 blind

blind saw, and the lame walked, whereverhe s E R M.
came. His miracles never were mere often- l
tations of power, but always exprefions of
goodness. Often he prevented the fuppli-
cations of the distressed, and, unasked, con-
ferred his favours; but never did any person
apply to him for aid and relief without
receiving it, whether he was Jew or Hea-
then, friend or foe. What is especially re-
markable in his beneficence is, that it was
continued and pcrfevering in the midll of
ingratitude. This is one of the hardest trials
of virtue, not to be foured by the perversity
of men, and which persons even of generous
spirits find it the most difficult to bear. But
though Christ had to deal with a most un-
toward and flubborn generation, whom no
evidence could convince, and no goodness
could mollify; though of all the great num-
bers, who had been objecs of his benefi-
cence, we read of few who thankfully ac-
knowledged his kindness, fewer who be-
came his followers, and none who rose up
to aflet his cause when borne down by
unjust persecution; yet, seeking to do good

E 4 only

s E R M. only for its own fake, he persevered to the

, last in unwearied beneficence. He overcame

evil with good: it had been his principle,
and, it would appear, a noted faying of his,
which his disciples remembered and quoted
after his death; it is more blied to give,
tban to receive*.

II. WE ought to propose for imitation

that humanity of manners, that gentleness
and affability which a i eared in the whole
of our LJord's behaviour. This relates to
the manner of conferring benefits, which
is often as material as the benefits them-
selves are. These arc sometimes conferred
so ungraciously, as to carry the air of insults
rather than benefits; whereas, when they
bear the marks of proceeding from real
kindness, their value is heightened, and
they are received with double plealure.
There are numberless occasions, when the
discovery of a humane temper, and the lesser
offices of obliging and courteous behaviour,

Aal, xx. 35.

contribute

contribute effertially to the happiness of SERM.
others, and supply The place of greater be- -
nefits, which may not be in our power to
beftow.-For this amiable spirit our Lord
was remarkablydiftinguifhed. He was open
and affable to all, and easier of i :rss than
his own disciples. On different e cllions
we find him checking his difcipic , wlhen
they restrained the forwardness of tile mul-
titude who pressed upon him, seeking reli f.
Nay, he rebuked them for forbidding little
children to come to him, whom the fond-
ness of the parents fought to introduce to
his presence. He took the children into his
arms and blefled them, and propounded
them to his disciples as emblems of that
innocence and simplicity which are requisite
for our entering into the kingdom of
heaven*.-He converted familiarly with
all forts of people, and readily answered
the quellions they put to him. He had
nothing of that haughty and distant reserve
which we so often fee maintained by men

* Mrk, x, 14.

of

SIRM. of the world, and which prevents them
»,¥,_ from holding intercourse with any whom

they confidcr as their inferiours in repu-
tation or in rank. On the contrary, as our
Lord was ready to do good to all, so he
diidained not to receive kindness from
others; complying chearfu!ly with the de-
firc of those who invited him to their
houses, and accepting in good part the
proffered tokens of their well-intended re-
sped. For such initances of courtesy he
was reproached by the Jews as one who
wanted that external severity of manners
which they imagined to belong to a pro-
fffred reformer of the world. But He,
who knew what was in the heart of man,
fiw that gentleness and condescension were
more effedtual methods of gaining men
over to goodncfs, than harlhnefs and aufle-
rity; and therefore did not decline all con-
verfation with men of doubtful or ble-
miflhd lives, as long as there was any hope
of making them better. It was indeed
true that he was, as they reproached him,
afriend to publicans andfinners; for he was

a friend

a friend to every one to whom he could S ER M.
do good.-At the fame time, it is of im-
portance to remark, that this benignity of
our Lord's manners never betrayed him
into the opposite extreme, never degene-
rated into that easiness of good nature,
which too often leads men to slide into the
manners and habits of those with whom
they converse, though they cannot ap-
prove of them. Wherever the interests of
virtue were concerned, our Saviour was
inflexibly firm. He boldly lifted up his
voice, and testified against vice and cor-
ruption wherever he beheld them. He
freely reproved the greatest men of the
nation for their hypocritical and assumed
shews of fanflity; and the civility, with
which he was entertained in the house of
a Pharisee, did not prevent him from in.
veighing severely against the vices of that
fed in their own presence *.

III. WE are to confider our Lord in the
light of a faithful and affeclionate friend,

* Lukr;xi.-37.

and

SER M. and his example as the pattern of all the

_.-... moffices thnt belong to virtuous friendlhip.

The Apoflles whom fie chore for his inti-
mate companions and friends, were men
of honcft and candid minds, and of great
plainness and finplicity of chara&er; men
who, from real eftccm, and from convicion
of the truth of his mission, had become his
followers, and who, notwithstanding the
disadvantages of his fortune in the world,
continued to follow him to the lat. At the
lame time, together with thole essential
principles of worth, they had alfl great
defets. They were molt of them of timid
and fearful difpofirion, of flow underfland-
ing, backward to apprehend spiritual things,
and still prepossessed with the favourite
prejudice of their nation, that the promised
Mefliah was to be a great conqueror, who
was to rescue their country from foreign
fubjedion, and raise it to empire and gran-
deur.-Among there men our Lord passed
all the hours of his private life, ading
every part of an affeaionate and faithful
friend, commending, advising, and reprov-

ing

Ing with great sincerity, and at the fame s E R M.
time with great tenderness. In his manner _
of living he put himself perfcdly on a Ievel
with them. Some of them he honoured
with greater intimacy than others; but like
a prudent father in his family, he allowed
none of them to affect superiority over the
reft, and checked all that tended to rivalry
among them. IHe never flattered them in
their failings. He never soothed them with
vain hopes. He never concealed the difa-
grecable consequences that would follow
from adherence to his cause. Again and
again he inculcated what they were back-
ward and unwilling to believe concerning
himself; and though the questions they put
often discovered a degree of gross ignorance,
he answered them all without palfion or
impatience, training them up by degrees
to the events that were to happen after his
decease, and to the high part they were def-
tined then to aa in the world.

How happy would it be for mankind if

more attention were given to this noble pat-
tern of fidelity and complacency which

3 ought

E R M. ought to prevail among friends, and of the in-
__.. ddulgence due to the failings of thofc who are,

in their general character, worthy and eftil
mable persons! This amiable indulgence he
carried so far, that in one of the most critical
seasons of his life, during his agony in the
garden, when he had left his disciples for
a Ihort time, with a striCt charge to watch
till he should return, but upon his return-
ing found them asleep, all the reproof which
their negligence at so important a juncure
drew from him, was no more than this,
What, could ye not watch with me for one
bour*?-Of the tenderness of our Lord's
affections, and the constancy of his friend-
hip, we have a very memorable instance,
in that mixture of friendship and filial
piety which he discovered during the
cruelty of his lalt sufferings. It is recorded
that when he hung upon the cross, behold-
ing John his beloved disciple, and Mary
his mother, flanding as fpestators below,
he said to John, Behold thy mother; and
to Mary, Behold thyo/on; thus, committing

* Math, xxvi. 4o.

his

his forlorn mother to the charge of his SERU.
friend John, as the mos sacrcd and honour- 1
able pledge he could lcave him of their
antient friendship. The heart of his friend
melted; and from that hour, we are told,
be took her home ,i/ih him to bir own bouft.
It is John hiinfelf ho has recorded to us
this honourable testimony of his master's
friendlhip *.

IV. THE example of Christ holds forth

for our imitation his steady command of
temper amidlt the highelt provocations,
and his ready forgivcnefs of injuries.
Though he had revenge always in his
power, he constantly declined it. On one
occasion when his difciplcs wi/hed him to
call down fire from heaven to punish the
inhospitality of the Samaritans, e turned
and rebuked them, faying, ye know not what
manner of spirit ye are of; for the Son of
Man is not come to defroy men's lives, but
to jave them t. When he was rviled, be

John, xix. a6, 17. t Luke, ix. SS.

rreiled

8 ERM. reviled not again; when he fitered, be

. Ib threatened not. The insults, which he often

received from a brutal multitude, had no
power to alter the meekness and generosity
of his disposition: he continued to beseech
and intreat them, when they fought to
chafe him away from amongst them. When
they accused him of being in confederacy
with evil spirits, he answered their injurious
defamation only with mild and calm rea-
soning, that if he by means of Satan did
cafi out Satan, his kingdom muff be divided
againJt itflf, and could not Jland. At his
trial before the High Pried, when he was
molt injuriously treated, and contrary to all
law was, in face of the court, firuck by one
of the High Priest's officers, what could
be spoken more meekly and reasonably
than his return to this usage, at a time
when all circumstances concurred to exaf-
perate the spirit of an innocent man; if I
have spoken evil, bear witnefi of the evil;
but if well, wvbyfmiteJI thou me *?-Whcn

John, xviii. z7.

his

his enemies were completing the laft'fcene E R M.
of their cruelty in putting him to death, _
all their barbarous usage and scurrilous
taunts on that occasion, provoked not one
revengeful thought in his breast, nor drew
from his lips one misbecoming expreflion;
but, on the contrary, the last accents of his
expiring breath went forth in that assec-
tionate prayer for their forgiveness; Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they
do !-Shall we, my friends, who have before
our eyes such an example of generous
magnanimity, of continued felf-command
amidst the most trying situations, not be
ashamed of giving vent to paflion on every
trifling provocation, and fiercely demand-
ing reparation for the fmallcfl injury; we,
who, from the remembrance of our own
failings, have so many motives for mutual
forbearance and forgiveness; while He,
on the other hand, had done no wrong,
had never given offence to any, but had
the jutefl title to expec friendflip.from
every human being?

VOL. V. F V. LET

SE R M. V. LET us attend to the sympathy and
,.,.~ compassion which our Lord discovered for

the sufferings of mankind. It was not with
a cold unfeeling disposition that he per-
formed the office of relieving the distressed.
His manner of bestowing relief clearly
showed with what fcnfibility he entered
into the sorrows of others. How asseting,
for instance, is the account of his restoring
to life the son of the widow of Nain, as it
is related in the beautiful simplicity of the
evangelical historian? When be came nigh
to the gate of the city, behold there was a
dead man carried out, the only son of bit
mother; and Jhe was a widow; and much
people of the city was with -her. All the
circumfiances in this incident are moving
and affeaing; and it presently appeared
with what tender sensibility our Lord was
touched at the fight of so mournful a pro-
cession. And when the Lord saw her, be
bad cempajfon on her, and aid unto her,
Wee not; and be came and touched the
bier, (and they that bare him flood flill,)
and be said, Toung man, I ay unto thee,

#rife.

arifr. And be that was dead, fat up and SE M.
began to Jieal; and be delivered bim to bit '-.
mother*. The whole scene of raising La-
zarus from the grave, places our Saviour's
sympathy in the strongest light. As soon
as he came among the mourning friends,
although he knew the cause of their
mourning was speedily to be removed,
he could not forbear partaking of their
sorrow; He groaned, and was troubled in
pbirit; and when surrounded by a crowd
in tears, he approached to the grave of his
deceased friend, it is expressly recorded, to
the eternal honour of his feelings, Jesus
wept; and the Jews said, Behold bow he
loved bimt !-In like manner, when, for
the last time, he was about to enter into
Jerusalem, though the certain knowledge
of all the cruelties which were prepared
for him there, would have filled the breast
of any ordinary person with indignation
and hatred, instead of such emotions, the

* Luke, vii. a-1,6. t Joh, ii. 3;.

F 2 foresight

S F. M forelight of the direful calamitics which
-. hung over that dcvoted city melted his

heart; and wlcn i he drew near to it and
beheld it, be wript; pouring forth that pa-
thetic lamncttation; 0 crrofdlrm, Jetifdilem,
tho! thI. kilrfl the l'rpbcts andr Jlonrl
them el 'at are /ct ! unto tier, hotw o/en would
[bhave pal/ercri l/ chilrcen lreth3r r, as a
hen !t .ih gatlhcr her brood nirlr lIcr tvirl's,
ntndr ye wol r,! IJo ' ! thon hafi known,
at ailfl i;n ,iis thy day, the Ithing. i whit-b
heltonrr untl tly pzc,:, bat now thcy are
hid fronIm thbinc 'rys .' Tls, as a man, he
indulged all the a:niablc feelings of
our nature, tcalhingi us that it is our duty
to regulate our laffions, not to extirpate
thelm.

Suc I was Jc'iis of Nazareth, the founder

of our rcligion. A part only of his cha-
raflcr 1 have now attemln;cd to dclileatc:
many other of his eminent graces and vir-

*Luke, xiii 3 . Luke, xix. 42.

tucs

tnes have becn left in tlhe liade. B;ut in s R 1.
what we have now contemplated of his jll
behaviour as a man among men, we behold
a perf'cC model of the condudc we ought
to hold in thc ordinary interccurfe of so-
cicty with one another. We have seen
hiin attentive to every ollportunity of beinig
beneficent and ufiful; in his behaviour to
all men, afs.tlle and obliging; to his friends,
faithful an(l indulgent; to ihis cnemics,
generous and forgiving; to the difircefed,
full ofteindernels and compalnion. I might
also have dwelt upon the peaceable spirit he
dilfplaycd on all occasions ; his rcfpct, as
a fubljel, to the civil laws and government
of his country; dilcouraging a factions and
mutinous Ipirit; paying tribute when de-
mandced; exhorting his followers to render
unto Cefar the things which are Cefar's,
a; unto Cod those which are God's.
EInough has been said to (how what a
blefflng it would prove to the world, if
this ililfrious example were generally fol-
lowed. Ien would then become happy

F 3 - in

SE R M. in all their connexions with one another.

^i_
. This world would be a blessed dwelling;

and the society of human beings on earth,
would approach to the joy and peace of the
Societies of the jufi in heaven.

# SERMON IV. On the Wounds of the Heart. PROVERBS, xviii. 14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear?

[ 71'

SERMON IV.
On the Wounds of the Heart.

PROVERBS, xviii. 14.
Zhefjirit of a man will fijfain bis infirmity;

but a woundedfpirit who can bear?
T HERE are two clafres of goods and SERM.

evils belonging to man; those which lv.

refpea his corporeal, and those which re-
fpea his spiritual state. Whatever is of an
external nature, is sufficiently the object of
attention to all men. In the health and vi-
gour of the body, and in the flourilhing
fiate of worldly fortune, all rejoice; and
whatever diminishes the one or the other,
is immediately felt and lamented. These

F 4- are

SEIRM. are visible and itriking objcats, on which

I-.- our senses and imagination are accuflomed

to dwell. But to procure an equal atten-
tion to what is inward and spiritual, is much
more difficult. It is not cafy to convince
men that the foul hath intcrefts of its own,
quite diftind from those of the body, and
is liable to difcafes and wounds as real as
any which the body fufliers, and often much
more grievous. What paffis within the
hearts of men, is always invisible to the
public eye. If it be of the pleasing and
fatisfatory kind, they have no occasion to
disclose it; and if it be of a painful nature,
it is often their intent to conceal it. In the
mean time, the heart klcnweth its owin bit.
ternefs: and from its being secreted from
public observation and concentrated within
the breast, it is felt the more deeply.-72Te
spirit of a man will fi/fain his infirmity;
the natural vigour and courage of his mind
may enable him to surmount the ordinary
distresses of life; to bear with patience
poverty, sickness, or pain, as long as he is
conscious that all is right and found within.

But

But if within him, the disease rankles in SERM.
his mind and his heart; if lhat which v
should sustain him serves only to gall and
torment him; to what quarter can lie then
look for relief, or to what mcdicine aplly,
when that which should have cured is oilier
wounds is itfclf di:c.ifed and w(cunded?
A ioundcd spirit uwho c an beal,

Tni spirit or foul of rna:i is wounded

chiefly by tlrec causes; by Folly, by
I'fiollJ, by Guilt.

1. IT is woundcd by Folly; that is, by

\ain, light, and improper piurfiits; by a
conduc, which though it lI,.nld not be
immediately criminal, yet is unilhitable to
one's age, charader, or condlitict in the
world. Good sense is no less requiiite in
our religious and moral behaviour, than it
is in our worldly affairs. Whoever de-
parts far from the plain track of fober and
reasonable condud, flall, looncr or later,
undergo the confequenccs of a dil;alid and
wounded fpirit.-It often happens, that
under the notion of innocent p)eailre and
anmulnccunt, of only following their hu-

mour

SERM. mour and indulging their taste, while, as

they fay, they hurt no man, and violate no
material duty, many go on, for a time, in
a course of the most egregious follies, and
all along conceive themselves to be, if not
very virtuous, at leapt very inoffensive men.
The cafe is the fame with the diseases of
the mind, as with the diseases of the
body. They lurk for a time unperceived.
The feeds of them may be working
within, while the person affeded imagines
himfeif to be in perfect health: but at
length a crisis comes, which brings the
secret venom forth, and makes all its ma-
lignity be felt.

In this age of diflipation and luxury in

which we live, how many avenues are con-
ftantly open that lead to the Temple of
Folly ? To how many temptations are all,
but especially the young and the gay, ex-
posed, to squander their whole time amidst
the circles of levity, and haunts of pleasure?
By idleness and extravagance, and the vain
ambition of emulating others in the splendid
show of life, multitudes run into expence
beyond their fortune. The time which

fiould

flould be employed in training them for SER M.
future significance in the world, they lose Iv
in frivolous amusements and pursuits; or,
in the midst of these, bury the fruits of any
good education they had already received.
Idle associates are ever at hand to aid them
in inventing new plans of destroying the
time. If that fatal engine of mischief, the
gaming table, then attracts and ensnares
them, their career of folly will soon be com-
pleted; the gulph of deltrution opens,
and ruin is at hand.

Supposing some incident to befal, as

befal at some time it must, which fiall
awaken persons of this description from their
dreams of vanity; which shall open their
eyes to the time that they have mifpent,
and the follies which they have committed;
then, alas! what mortifying and disquieting
views of themselves will arise? How many
galling remembrances will crowd upon
their minds? They fee their youth thrown
away in dishonourable or trivial pursuits;
those valuable opportunities which they
pnce enjoyed, of coming forward with dif-

tinaion

S . R M. tinaion in the world, now irretrievably loft;
L.. .. their charaaers tarnilhed and funk in the

public eye; and the fortune, perhaps,
which they had inherited from their an-
celtors, wafted among idle companions.
They behold around them the countenances
of their friends, angry and dililcafed. To
the grave and the respectable, they dare
not look up. They, with whom they once
flarted in the race of life as their equals,
have now got far before them; they are
obliged to refpca them as their fuperiours,
and with shame to view themselves left be-
hind, disgraced and diflhonoured.-Can any
situation be more humbling and mortifying
than this? Is not this to susser in a high
degree the misery of a wounded spirit,
when a man fees that by mere thoughtless-
ness and folly, he has exposed and degraded
himself; beholds his character, his health,
his interest, finking in the world; and is
sensible that with his own hands, and by
his own blind and ill-judged condut, he
has brought this ruin on himfelf?-Con-
science now begins to exert its authority,

14 and

and lift its fcoure. At every froke it in- SE R M.
slids, the wounds of the heart open and _V
bleed: and though it exercise not the fame
dread severity as when it upbraids us with
notorious crimes, yet still it is the voice
of God within, rebuking and punishing
reasonable creatures for folly as well as
for guilt; nor indeed are follies of such a
kind as have been described, ever free from
many stains of guilt.

II. IF by Folly the spirit is thus liable to

be wounded, it is exposed by Pafion to
wounds flill more revere. Passions are those
flrong emotions of the mind which impel
it to desire, and to at, with vehemence.
When directcd towards proper objeCts, and
kept within jult bounds, they possess an
urefiil place in our frame; they add vigour
and energy to the mind, and enable it, on
great occasions, to aft with uncommon
force and success; but they always require
the government and reitraint of reason.
It is in the mind, just as it is in the body.

Every

ERM. Every member of the body is useful, and
IV. serves some good purpose. But if any one

swell to an enormous size, it presently be-
comes a disease. Thus, when a man's pas-
sions go on in a calm and moderate train,
and no object has taken an inordinate
hold of any of them, his spirit is in this part
found, and his life proceeds with tranquil-
lity. But if any of them have been so far
indulged, and left without refiraint, as to
run into excess; a dangerous blow will then
be given to the heart.-Suppofing, for in-
stance, that some passion, even of the nature
of those which are reckoned innocent, shall
so far fcize a man as to conquer and over-
power him, his tranquillity will be de-
firoyed. The balance of his foul is loft
he is no longer his own malter, nor is
capable of attending properly to the offices
of life which are incumbent on him, or of
turning his thoughts into any other direc-
tion than what passion points out. He may
be sensible of the wound. He feels the dart
that is fixed in his breast, but is unable to
extra&t it.

But

But the cafe becomes infinitely worse, SERMI

1V.

if the passion which has seized a man be _
of the vicious and malignant kind. Let him
be placed in the most prosperous situation of
life; give him external ease and affluence to
the full; and let his characlcr be high, and
applauded by the world: yet, if into the
heart of this man there has flolen some
dark jealous suspicion, some rankling envy,
some pining discontent, that inflant his
temper is foured, and poison is scattered
over all his joys. He dwells in secret upon
his vexations and cares, and while the
crowd admires his prosperity, he envies
the more peaceful condition of the peasant
and the hind. If his passions chance to be
of the more fierce and outrageous nature,
the painful feelings they produce will be
still more intense and acute. By violent
pafllons the heart is not only wounded, but
torn and rent. As long as a man is under
the workings of raging ambition, difap-
pointed pride, and keen thirst for revenge,
he remains under immediate torment. Over
his dark and scowling mind, gloomy ideas

8 continually

S ERM. continually brood. IIis tranficnt fits of

_-v- ncmrriment and joy, are like beams of light

breakinL, occasionally, from the black cloud
thit carrits the thunder.-- Vhat greatly
aggravatcs the milcry of fluch perlons is,
that they d ire make no cc('p!aits. When
the body is icatl rr i :'!cd, to c'ir
friends v.e naitrally fly; and from their
sympathy or aflfifta.:e expet relief. lut
the woundl given to the heart by ill-go-
verned paflions, aic ot an opprobrious na-
ture, and must be ftiftd in lecret. The slave
of paflion can unbosom !iimllf to no friend;
and, inficad of fympatliy, dreads meeting
with rid'i:!c or coittcnpl:.-H- ow intoler-
ably wretchd mnuni the coirn'iion of Himan
have heen, when, before all his assemblcd
friends, he was reduced to make this
hiinibling conlcfiion of his slate; that, in
the hcipiht of royal favour, and in the
midst ot the urmoft magnificence and gran-
deur, "all availed him notling, so long as;
" he Iaw his rival, Mordecai the Jew, fit-
" ting at the King's gate!"

III. Tnr

III. THE wounds which the heart re- SE R .

IV.

ceives from guilt, are produtive of till V
greater pain and misery, than any which
have been already mentioned. If beyond
being minled by folly, or overcome by pas-
sion, a man be conscious to himself of hav-
ing deliberately committed deeds of in-
justice or cruelty; of having, perhaps, by
wicked arts, seduced the innocent and un-
wary, to fall the miserable vidims of his li-
centious pleasures; of having ruined, by his
difionefty, the unfufpicdou trusting friend;
of having amassed wealth to himself, by
fraud and oppreflion, from the spoils of
the industrious: in such and similar cafes,
deep and lading is the fling which is feat
into the heart.

I am aware of the arts which have been

devised by criminal men to Ihdter them-
selves from the attacks of conscience; of
the sceptical principles to which they have
recourse; and of the felf-deceiving opinions
with which they flatter themselves concern-
ing their own charater, concerning the
goodness of God, and the allowances which

Vo., V. G they

SERM. they hope will be male for human in-

v firmity and strong temptations. But all

those palliatives of guilt are no other to
the foul, than the empirick medicines that
are applied to the dilcafes of the body;
which disguise the dileafe, without removing
it; which procure a little temporary ease,
and conceal from the patient the danger
of his state; but drive the distemper to the
vitals, and make it break forth in the end
with redoubled force. Thus may those
dangerous opiates of conscience soothe a
man for a while, in the days of his prof-
perity. Amidst the bufle of active life,
and as long as the fluster of gay and youth-
ful spirits .afts, he may go on in the com-
mission of many crimes with smoothness
and teeming peace. But let the fober and
serious hour come, which, sooner or later,
must come to all; let the amusements of
life be withdrawn, and the man be left
alone to his own refletions; the power of
truth will soon prove too itrong for all that
is opposed to it, and pierce into his heart.

- The voice of nature, of conscience,

and

and of Cnd, will make itself be heard SERM.
within him. He will feel that he is a _..
wretch. He txill become dcfpicable in his
own fight. He will become ienfible that
all good men have reason to hate him, and
that the just governor of the world has
reafln to punifl him. Conlcience, bring-
ing to remembrance all his secret crimes,
will held thecm up to his view with this
fearful inscription written upon them, God
will bri-.g c-ery work into judrment.--
Hence the haggard look, and the restless
couch, days never free from bitterness, and
nights given up to remorse.

This remorse will prey the deeper on

the bad man's heart, if it shall happen, as
it sometimes does, that there was a period
in his life when he was a different man;
when, having been educated by virtuous
parents in fober and religious principles,
and being as yet uncorrupted by the world,
he passed his days without reproach or
blame. The recollection of what he then
felt, compared with the fate into which
he has now brought himself by forfeited

G 2 integrity

s ER M. integrity and honour, will wring his heart
IV. v.«,, with fad remembrance. "Once I knew

" what it was to enjoy all the comforts of
"innocence, and to take pleasure in the
"thoughts of heaven, when my hands
" were unstained and my mind was pure.
" Then I was ever cheerful, easy, and free.
" Heaven and earth seemed to smile upon
"me. My nights were peaceful, and my
"days were pleasant. Innocent joys and
"comfortable hopes were ever at hand to
"entertain my solitary hours.--Where now
"are these gone? Why am I thus so al-
"tered and changed from what I was, and
" so uneasy to myself? What, alas have I
"gained by those worldly pursuits and am-
" bitious plans which seduced me from
" the plain and safe paths of integrity and
"virtue!"

SucH are the wounds of the spirit, occa-

sioned either by folly, by paflion, or by guilt,
and too often by a complication of all the
three together. For though they be of fepa-
rate consideration, and each of them may be

felt

felt in a different degree, yet they are seldom s E R M.

IV.

parted wholly asunder from one another. I..
Folly gives rife to unrestrained and dif-
orderly pafions. These betray men into
atrocious crimes; and the wretched finner
is flung as by a three-headed snake; at
once, reproached by reason for his folly,
agitated by some firong passion, a.d tor-
tured with a conlcious sense of guilt.-
When thclc disorders of the mind arise to
their height, they are, of all miseries, the most
dreadful. The vulgar misfortunes of life,
poverty, sickness, or the loss of friends, in
comparilbn with them,. are trivial evils.
Under such misfortunes, a man of tolerable
spirit, or of a moderate Share of virtue, will
be able to find some consolation. But
under the other, he can find none. What
is but too decisive as to the degree in which
they surpass all external evils, they are
those wounds of the spirit, the flhame of
folly, the violence of paflion, and the re-
morse for guilt, which have so frequently
produced that fatal crime, so much the re-
proach of our age and our country; which

G 3 have

SE R M. have driven men to the most abhorred of

IV.
.- ., all evils, to death by their own hand, in

order to l:ck relief from a life too embit-
tered to be endured.-Far from each of
us be fIch dclperate calamities!-But, if
it be the certain tendency of those
wounds of the heart, to introduce the
greatclf dilquietude and misery into the
life of man, then, from what has been said,
let us be taught,

IN the firlt place, to give the molt

serious and vigilant attention to the go-
vernment of our hearts. It may be
thought by forne, that the formidable re-
presentation I have given of the miserable
effcts of a wounded spirit, attaches only
to them who have gone to the utmost
lengths in folly or pafion; but that, by
tome more temperate regulation of con-
dut, indulgence may be given, without
harm, to the free gratification of certain
favourite defires.-Be assured, my brethren,
that, under ideas of this kind, there lies
much felf-deception. Supposing it in your

power

power to stop at some given point without s E R M.

IV.

rulhing into the greatelt disorders, fill you _
would susser from the licence you had taken
to drop the government of your hearts.
The lesser criminal never elcapes without
his flhare of punilhment. In proportion
to the quantity you have drunk out of the
poisoned cup of pleasure, you will feel
your inward health and soundness im-
paired; or, to follow the metaphor of the
text, not by a deep wound only, but
by every flighter hurt given to the heart,
you will susser in that peace and tranquil-
lity which makes the comfort of life.

But besides this conlideration, strict at-

tention is the more requilite to the govern-
mcnt of the hcatt, as the first introduction
to those disorders which fprcad their confe-
quences so deep and wide,is forthe most part
gradual and infenlible, and made by latent
steps. Did all the evil clearly fliow itself
at the beginning, the danger would be less.
But we are imperceptibly betrayed, and
from one incautious attachment drawn on
to another, till the government of our hearts

G 4 be

SB RM. be at last utterly loft; and wounds in-
'-y./ fliided there, which are not to be healed

without much shame, penitence, and re-
morfe.-How much does this call for the
attention of youth in particular, whose
raw and unexperienced minds are so apt
to be caught by every new and enticing
object that is held forth to their paflions?
How much does it concern them to be-
ware of the commencements of evil, and
to liften to the admonitions of the grave
and the wife, who have gone through
those dangerous paths on which they are
beginning to enter ? Let them never give
up their hearts profusely to any attachment,
without the countenance of reason and
religion. Let them (hut their ears to the
fedudions of folly and vice, and look with
wary eye to those rocks on which so many
others have fplit.-Nor is it only to youth
that this admonition belongs. To the
levities and paflions of youth lucceed the
more fober follies of advancing years;
which, under a graver appearance, are no
less liable to seize and wound the heart.

S From

From the first to the ift of man's abode SERM.
on earth, the difiplin is perpetually rc- Iv.,
quifite of keeping the heart with all dili-
gence; guarding it from whatever would
annoy its healthy and found estate; as
out of the heart are e

the ifr either of Lifi
or Deatb.

IN the second place, it clearly appears,

from what has been said, how much reason
we all have to join prayer to Almighty
God, in addition to our own endeavours
of guarding and governing our spirits;
beseeching Him who made the heart, and
who knows all its errors and wanderings,
to aid and prosper us by his grace in this
difficult undertaking. Well mutt he who
knows any thing of himself at all, know
how greatly divine assistance is needed
here, and how little we can depend upon
ourselves without it. For deceitful, as well
as desperately Wicked, are our hearts; and
after all our pretences to ability and wis-
dom, how often, by the fedudtions of folly
and of paflon, have the wife, the learned,

and

SERM. and the admired, been flamefuilly carried

IV.
V --, away ?-Molt earnestly to be desired is

that blefing promised in the Gospel, of a
new heart and a new spirit, which Ihall
render us liuperiour to the attacks of vanity
prld vice. Who can uniefilanl bit errors?
Cleantf me, 0 God, from jcrct fu/lts: Create
in me a clean heart, anrd renew a right
Spirit witbin me. That which I fee not,
tCacb thou me; and lead me in thy way
cverlajliig.

IN the laR place, all that has been said

on the fbibjed tends to impress us with a
sense of this awful truth, that the Great
God hath already begun to punilh bad
men for their fins and vices. You fee his
hand clearly marked in all that they are
made to fiffer by the Wounded Spirit.
You fee that he has not delayed all retri-
bution to another world; but liath in this
world begun to ad as a Governour and a
Judge; showing, by an eltablilhed order
of things, that while he loves the righteous,
he hateth all the workers of iniquity. With

a wisdom

a wisdom peculiar to himself, he hath made SE R M.
the puniflments due to finners to arise di- .-.L
reCly from their own behaviour, and to be
infliced by their own hands. lie hath no
occasion to fend forth destroying angels
against them; the thunder which is ever
in his hands, needs not be pointed at the
heads of the guilty. He need only leave
them to themlelves; and presently their
wickedness be gins to reprove themi, and their
backflidings to correSf thcm, till thcy fully fee
and feel what an evil thing an, bitter it
was, to depart Jrom t .!' Lrd, tli;r God.
Conscious, while their hc;:lts are bleeding
within them, that they are only reaping
the fruit of their own dwnls, the llC ns of
deserving what they susser, both aggravatcs
the suffering, and forces them to acknow-
ledge the jultice of it.

When we behold such plain marks of

wife and jult government taking place
among men, who (hall take upon him to
fay that all things come alike to all men,
and that there is no more than a promif-
cuous distribution of good and evil by Pro-

14 vidence

SE R M. vidence on earth? However it may seem

,v.. in appearance, it is far from being so in

reality. We look to the outside of things.
We are dazzled with that tinsel glare which
prosperity sometimes throws around the
wortllefs and the wicked. But what is
that to true happincfs and felf-enjoyment?
often, how little connesecd with it? Could
you Inck into the hearts of men, another
scene would open. You would fee many
a heart wounded and bleeding in secret,
from a guilty conlc'ience and remembered
crimes, while gay looks were affe&edly put
on before he world. Comparing this
galled and diltreffcd Rate of mind, with
the free and easy, the light and difencum-
bered spirit of a worthy and virtuous man,
even under the preflures of life, you would
forbear to charge Providence, and would
readily acknowledge, that though the exter-
nal diflribution of the world's goods be pro-
mifcuous, the internal allotment of happiness
is meafilred by the real charaders of men.
- On the whole, let us hold fai: by this
great truth, and by it govern our lives,

that

that every man's real happiness or misery s E R M.
is made, by the appointment of the Creator,
to depend more on himfclf, and on the
proper government of his mind and heart,
than upon any extcrnal thing, or than
upon all external things put together; that
for those who serve God, and Rudy to keep
their conscience clear from guilt, God hath
provided peace and comfort on earth, as
well as rewards hereafter; but, faith my
God, there ii no peace to the wicked.

# SERMON V. On all Things working together for Good to the Righteous. ROMANS, viii. 38. We know that all Things work together for Good to them that love God, to them who are the Called according to his ...

[ 94 ]

SER MO N V.
On all Things working together for Good

to the Rightcous.

ROMANS, viii. 38.
IVc know that all 7hings work together fr

Good to them thatl Avc God, to them zwho
are the CallcJ according to his pirpre.
SS RM. AMONG many anticnt philofophcrs it

was a favouritc tenet, that all fceming

difordcrs in the world arc rcndcred sub-
servient to the order and pcrfcdion of the
universe; or, that all things work to-
gether for the good of the whole: But to
this good of the whole, they conceived the
intcrelt of individuals to be oft.times

obliged

obliged to yield. The revelation of the SERM.

V.

Gospel has opened to us a higher and more _.-
comfortable profpel. For it assures us not
only of the direct tendency of all things to
general order, but to the consummate hap-
piness of every individual who loves and
fcrves God. While the Deity is ever car-
rying on the general fylemn of things to its
proper perfetion, the interest of no one
good man is facriticed in any point to pro-
mote this end ; but his life is, at the fame
time, a fvftem complcte within itself, where
all things are made to conspire for bringing
about his felicity. We know, fays the
ApoRfle in my text, that is, we are assured,
not by doubtful reasonings with regard to
which the wisest might be perplexed, but
bv a divine promise on which the simple
can firmly rely, that all things work together
for good to them that love God, to them wbo
are the called according to his purpofc.-
This is that capital encouragement of re-
ligion, which virtually contains in itself all
the other promises made in Scripture to
the righteous, and, like a full and exuberant

fountain,

S ER M. fountain, divides itself into a thousand

V.
V fireams to refrelh the life of man with con-

folation and joy. It will therefore deserve
our very full and p rticular consideration,
both as to the extent of encouragement
given, and the evidence on which our as-
furancc of it refs.

THE first thing which should here draw

our attention is, the character of those to
whom the enccuragement of the text is
appropriated. For it is evidently not given
indifcriminatcly to all, but limited to such
as love God, and are the called according to
hir purp e'; that is, chosen by him to eternal
life. But lelt tlhe latter part of this dc-
scription lhould appear too secret and myf-
terious to afford the encouragement in-
tended, it is cleared up by the first and ex-
planatory charater, them that love God.
Here is something plain and fatisfadory on
which we can reft. We need not fay, Who
Ih.ll alcend into heaven in order to bring us
down from thence any information, whe-
ther our names be written in the book of

life?

life ? It is sufficient to look into ourfilves, s E R M.
and the state of our heart. 7ThJ2 .rd is v,
very Ligh unto thee, in thy niilth and in thy
heart, ltht tbou maycil den it'. They that
love God, and they who are the called ac-
cording to bis puirpofe, are the fame. Di-
vine love is tle sacred charactcr which
marks those who are fealcd neto the day
of redemption.-This love of God is not to
be understood as signifying merely some
occasional ardour of affecion: it imports
that steady principle of goodocfs which
becomes the spring of a pure and virtuous
life. The fame charater is here meant,
which is described in other pafllaes of
scripture, byfearing and jlrving GCd. They
who truly love God, are they who love and
imitate the divine perfections; they who
love and obey the divine laws; they who
love and pursue the divine approbation,
as the great aim of their life.-- Keeping
this important article ever in view as a
necessary limitation of the gracious decla-

* Dca. xxx. i,.
VOL. V. II ration

;E I M. ration in the text, let us proceed to exa-

mine the fuill extent of that encourage-
ment which it affords.

\VW begin with confidering what the

o9,il is, for which it is here said that all
things work in favour of the righteous.
It is a term lulceptille of very different
acceptations. For many things appear good
to fomc, which do not appear so to others;
nay, the hnie things which have appeared
to oir!clvcs good at one time, have been
far from appearing good at another. As-
Iuredly that goodi which God promises as
the reward of his servants, muff be some-
what worthy of God to bestow; some-
what that depends not on the flutuation
of fancy and opinion, and that is not liable
to change with the change of times. It
mu(t be some good of a fixed and perma-
nent nature, which will be felt as such in
every lituation and period of our existence.
But it is evident that such characters are
not applicable to the external advantages
of the world, riches, fame, and honours.

These

These may occafionallv be desirable, and at S E R M.
some times confer fatisfaaion on thc pof -.-
feffor. But besides their uncertain and tran-
fient duration, they are far fiom conferring
fatisfadion at all times, even when they last.
On the contrary, it is a certain fat, and ma-
nifeRt to general observation, that a man may
possess all the external advantages of fortune,
and lead withal a very miserable life. Sup-
poCe him to be disquieted in his own mind
by envy, jealousy, revenge, or other violent
paflions, and harassed with a guilty con-
Icience, such a man cannot be laid to have
attained what is good. Would it have been
worthy of the Supreme Being to have
flattered his servants with the hope only
of a good so fallacious, that in certain cir-
cumfrances it might be coinitent with the
greatef misery ?-No: that good, for the
iake of which he makes all things work to
tlofe that love him, must be founded in
the improvement and perfection of their na-
ture in wisdom, grace, and virtue; in their
good confidered as rational and immortal
beings; produclive of a fel'iciv which is
within them, and shall abide with them

11 2 for

? MI. for ever. While we look only to a pre-
..._ sent momentary fatisfaCion, the Divine

Being, in consulting our welfare, provides
for the whole of our existence in time and
eternity; conneas the present with the
future; and by his beneficent decree, ordains
for each of his servants, that which, upon
the whole, is the bef.--While to thefinner
be givethfore travel, to gather and to heap
up; be giveth to a man that is good in his
fJgbt, w$i/dom, and knowledge, and joy*.

HAVING ascertained the sense in which

we are to understand thegood for which God
maketh all things to work, we proceed to
confider what is included in the extent of
the expression, of all things working for this
rood. In general, it includes all that hap-
pens to good men in this world; every
station and condition in which they are
placed; every circumfiance in their lot,
from the beginning to the end of their
lives. Nothing befals them fortuitously,
nothing happens in vain or without a

* Eccles. ii. 26.

meaning;

meaning; but every event pofTcfels its SERM.
proper and dcftined place, and forms a link -_,
in that great chain of causes which is ap-
pointed to carry on their improvement
and felicity. As all the rivers upon the
face of the globe, however circuitous they
may be in their progress, and however
opposite in their course, yet meet at last in
the ocean, and there contribute to increase
the mats of waters; so all the seemingly
dilcordant events in the life of a good mar.
are made to prcfirve, upon the whole, an
unerring tendency to his good, and to
concur and conspire for promoting it at the
last. What a noble and sublime view does
this present of the supreme dominion of
Providence, and of its care cxercifed over
every righteous man !

When we descend to a more particular

examination of what is included in the ex-
pression here used, of all things, we may
observe, first, that it includes a fiate of
worldly prosperity. For sometimes this is
appointed to fall to the share of God's ser-
vants; nay, their worth and virtue have

H- 3 often

s iF P M. often becn the means of bringing it about.
..,- But it is not o':c of thofi things which

are good in their own nature, till God
makes it work ftr that purpole. What
numbers of men has it poisoned and de-
llroyed, clhrifhing the giowth of wanton-
nels and f;)lly; and impilantiiln in thcir
breafis the Ieeds of thole bad p.iflions whlich
fjpring up into many a crime ! rol-rn such
evils, the prosperity of good m n is guarded
by God. The poison is extrated from
it, and the salutary part only left. It is
rendered to them a co:nfortable and uleful
enjoyment of life, affording opportunity for
the exercilc of many virtues, which other-
wife would not have come within their
lpherc.

But, among all things that uorkfr good,

it is probable that the evils of this life were
particularly designed to be included, as
what we might have least expetled to be
fublcrvient to that purpose. It is never-
thelefs certain, that from the discipline of
adversity, the molf salutary improvements
of human nature have been often derived.

In

In that revere fcllool the predominant cr:ors S F. M.
(f the mind have becn corrcded, the in- _-
temperance of the giddy Ipirit has been
allayed and reformedl, and that manly fc-
rioufiiefs acqluired which is tlhe foundation
of true wildom. By the fSi,icJI of the
countenance, tce heart of tle fuffcrer bas
been made better; he has been trained up to
fortitude of mind, improved in humanity
to men, and formed to the habits of de-
votion and relignation to God.

At the fame time, it is only if need be,

as the Apofile I'ctr lipeaks*, that the
righteous are left fir a firafn in Ievincfi.
If it be certain that all things work for their
good, it follows of courle, that there is no
fupcrfltous severity, no needlcls or unne-
ceffary trouble to them, in the conflitution
of things. Their afflidions never befal
without a cause, nor are lent but upon a
proper errand. Thecfc lorms are nevcr al-
lowed to rife, but in order to dijp l some
noxious vapours, and to restore salubrity

' IPet.i.6.

1 4 to

s I R M. to the mnral atmofr[lcre.-- erein ap-
_,.---. peals, if wve may he allowed so to speak,

the won(!drftil .irt and skill of the Supreme
Artificer, the roftunm;d depth of the divine
wifdonl, in extracding, from diftrcffes and
sorrows, the materials cf peace and fclicity.
Nor are only tle external calamities of
good men ful)frvicnt to this purpole ; but
their internal inlirnities, their very failings
and errc',.a, are made, by the powerful in-
flucncc of God's grace, to contribute ulti-
mately to their good. They are thereby
inflruced in the knowledge of thenifelvcs;
thlicy are lrropcrly humbled by the disco-
very of their own weakness; and trained
to tht hccoming spirit of contrition and
returning repentancc, which is reprcbfnted
as givilng jo to tlie angels in heaven. He
who malkclh lte wrath rif man lo praif him, is
not (dcfciorlt in v ildoni and power, to make
even the failings of his servants, in this im-
picrfccl flat of human nature, redound at
last to his own glory, and to their good.

It mull not cfcape oblervation, that the
text l-igcefls, not nerely that all things

piove

prove good in the ifiuc, or cventually turn s E R M.
out to t:, benefit of the righteous, but that _
they :'or/ j;r ;l. This cxpreilcn carries
particular energy. It ii:,o:rts that all
tbin:s are lb formed by (;cl, :;a to become
acaive c.tafcs of hapilnefs to thoie who
love hlim. Iis inlinite \;iiJom n' ives to
things in themielvcs moll unapt, an apti-
tude anld Iitiints to fulfl hi, o'vn1 great
ends; diliotls anJ prepares lthem ior their
proper efifds; and makes td.ncrs l:;;d evils
his inftrumcnts for accomplifiing the fe-
icity of his Ifrvants. Thcrc i; a certain
operation and prcccis always goi; i on, by
which, though ve are inlcinfibl (Tf it, all
things are constantly advancing towards a
haply illue. In the fame mamirilr as the
operation of natural caufcs, though flow
and unperccived, is sure; as the feed
which is sown in the ground is every mo-
ment unfolding itself; and though no eye
can trace the ftcps of its progrels, yet, with
a silent growth, is ripening and Ihooting
forth its ftaiks; so in the moral world,
throghout all the dilpcnfations of Provi-

dcnce,

S ER M.

R dece, there is the fame latent, but certain
-.-. prorcs ot the 1 cois of virtue and holiness,

tending toward:; pelfcctioti in the end.
l.irrdt is funi fir the rightcrts, as the
I'lilmift h)catiful!y employs this metaphor,
iingIIlazdnfs f',r th,' ::prIht in heart '.

It is said in the text, not only that all

things thus work, but that they cwork loge-
ther frr godi; intimatil tlhat they are
made to conspire and concur with one
another, fcr bringing about what is best
on the whole. Taken fitmgly and indivi-
dually, it mighlt be difficult to conceive
how cacil event wrought for good. They
must be viewed in their conilequences and
ffcTels; conlidered in all their dependencies
and connecions, as links hanging together
to form one extcnCive chain. It is by
adjifting into rnce confilent whole, the
various events that fill up human life;
arranging in the happiest fucceflion all the
occurrences of that complicated fcenc ; and
bending to his own purpose things which

Pr. xcvii. 1.

appear

appear modt opposite and contrary, that the s E R M.

V.

Almighty accomplifhcs his great plan in . ~
behalf of those who love him, anid are the
,alled accordintg to his purpofc.

Sucll is that great edifice of encourage-

nient and hope, which the goipcl of Christ
hath reared for the consolation of those
who fincercly love and serve God. It re-
mains now that we examine what the pil-
lars are on which 1b mighty an edifice relts.
The Apofle speaks, you lee, in a strain of
tull assurance. iec does not fay, we be-
lieve, or we hope, but we biow, that all
things work together for good.-- Let us
confider,

IN the first place, the evidence in sup-

port of this doarine, which arises from
the perfeaions of the divine nature. In
general, that God is good to all, and that
his goodnels is especially exerted in behaif
of the righteous, is a principle of religion,
which none will dispute. The cnly qucf-
tion is, how far that goodncfs cxtends,

and

S R M, and whether we can conceive it as ex-

tending to all that is implied in the text.
Something, it must be confcffed, there is
aflonilhing, and on first view almost incre-
dible in the illcrtion, that anidft that in-
finite combination ot events which carry on
the general order of the univerle, nothing
ihall ever happen hut what advances the hap-
pinels of each good man; and which shall
tend to his private interest, as much as if his
exiftcnce had formed a system by itself.
But how altlniflsing soever this may seem
to us, let us fil it refie&, that this supposes
no effort beycnd the power of Him who
is Almighty, or beyond the flitll of Him
who is infinite in wisdom. We must not
mcalurc divine operations by the feeble
energies of man. God is the first cause of
all that exist and acs. All events are, at
every moment, in his hands. Nothing
can make any resistance to his purpose,
or fall out in any wvay beside, or beyond
his plan. At one glance he perceives how
all things arc going on throughout his uni-
vcrfe. Not thl minutect olbjec is ovcr-

locked

looked by H-im. No multiplicity of affairs s E t iM.
diftrats Him: fcr to the lupremc initelli- .
gencc, all things are prelent at once; and to
the concerns of every good 3man, his ob-
servation and attention reach as fully as if
there were no other objetl under his go-
vernment.

As there is nothin, therefore, in the pro-

mise of the text, which divine power and
wildom cannot effect, ;b ncitlir is there
any thing in it but what divine goodness
gives us reafin to believe fiall be fullilled.
The goodncfs of the Supreme Being is
very different from that of men. Among
them, it is a principle occalionally operating,
but always limited, and always fubjedt to
alteration and change. Their benefits,
though liberally bestowed at one time, will
at another time be flopped by tlhe inter-
vention of contrary paflions. Their bene-
volence decays; Ilfiflinels and indifference
succeed. But in tile nature of the Deity,
there is no Ipinciple which can produce
alteration or change in his benevlent pur-
pose once formed. I;'itt.iis ar.:,l.:/rs Cr

3 .w

S ER M. fladow q' turning, whom he hath once

V.
'-- loved be lovcth to the en(. The gifs and

calling of CG; I are without rejentance*.
His goodnecs therefore confirt., not in a
mere temporary efuflion of blefmirg, hut
is permanent and fteuady; leading him, not
simply to !:cftow fminc things that arc
good, arid then to fltp, but to carry his
gracious pirpole to the utmofl; in every
instance to do what is hiet for his flrvants
on the whole, or in tl.c words of the tcxt,
to make all t win.
; work fr their g,,d.

Let us now confidcr what it wvould im-

port, if any tingle occurrence vere to
happen in the course of human alfairs,
which had not a good design; which did
not, in one form or other, promote the
benefit of the righteous. What would it
imlporr, but that in suc'h an inslance, cithcr
the divine power and wisdom had fallen
short of their cffct, or the divine goodnels
had ncgledted and forlfken the virtuous ?
It were blasphemous to suppose that the

* John, .'iii, . Re.m, xi. :9.

nature

nature of the Deity was changed ; or that S E R M.
there were, in hih government of the _.,
world, some vacant fpaccs, cr neglccted in-
tervals, in which he fullered the reins of
administration to drop out of hii hands,
and rome evil principle to coiitcr:,ct his
general system. But as all lt'ch fuppfi-
tions are manifefily inconfiftcnt with the
nature of that (God in nxhm Chriflians
believe, there appears to fosLw, from the
conlideration rs his pcrfc icnsi, evidcnce
next to demonfiration, f(r the truth of that
dodtrine which the text contains.

BUT that we may not rcRI its evidence

on our own rcalbloings oily, let us next
conlider what dilcovcry ft his high deligns
God hath been pIeafed to make in the K.-
velation of the Gospel. Here it is amply
fiifficient to have recourse to one l;^nal dil-
penfation of his govern -ent, the redemp-
tion of the world by Jeius Cirift. Hence
ariles an argument which carries the molt
convincing force; and which accordingly,
in a few vcrfes after the text, is employed

14 by

S ER M. by the Apofile in support of that doaqrine
,_^ I have been illulrating. lie that f/.ared

not his owvn 1S, ,It

dliivere,! hinm ,' for

us all, how J7,/l he not rwith hin n//o, freely
give us all things? -Can we lm any in-
stance diflrult Hlim who hath given us
this highelt proof of his love? If he
scrupled not to hIfftow this heft gift, is
there any other hlclling lie will he inclined
to withhold ? Haiing already done so much,
will he leave incomplete his own great
work?-By the death of Christ, we arc
taught in Icripture, that atonement was
made for fin. He underwent in his sus-
ferings the puniihmcnt due to us.. He is
said to have brcn woinmclrd fr o/r tranf-
gre/fons,sand lrni;t d/sr our iniquities; to have
borne our fins in his own body on the tree.
From this view of tile doctrine of redemp.
tion, it naturally follows, that Chfilf having
purchased for his followers the pardon of
their fins, the affiiiions they now undergo
are not properly to he confidcred as punish-
ments, but as chastisements intended for
their good.-Add to this, that it is the pe-

culiar

enliar province of our Lord in his prcfcnt s E RM.
exalted slate, to adminiftkr all things for _-.
the good of his church. For this end his
regal power is employed. To this end
his mediation and intercession arc directed;
and either these must in some cafes prove
ineffectual, or it must follow that all things
work for the good of them who love him.
As much evidence then as we have for
those capital truths on which the whole of
Christianity refts, the fame we have for that
high encouragement afforded by the text.

It remains to take notice, in the las

place, of the express and multiplied pro-
mises of the sacred Scripture to the fame
purpose with that in the text. Though
the text alone might have appeared sus-
ficient for our encouragement; yet, as re-
peated assurances of the fame thing come
home with greater weight to the mind,
it hath pleased God to make this full pro-
vilion for confirming the trust and hope
of his servants: and there can be no doubt
that the plain and explicit words of the di-
vine promires have had the molf comfort-

VOL. V. I able

SE R M. able influence cn many who could not

V.

lo well have ftipported thcmfelvcs under
the trials of life, cither by rcalfnings taken
from the divine peitcfctions, or by infer-
ences drawn from the dodrinc of redcmp-
tion. Accordingly, we are not left merely
to reason or to infer, but are in express
terms told by God himself, that godlincfs
//i.'at lc ,;rfjitabl unto all things; that God
the Lr-d is afin and a Jhicld, iving grace
ard glAry, andi withholding no good thing
l/rim Ithem tbat walk uprightly; that no evil
.//all halppe to Ihej:/lt; Jfr the Lsor is their
l.cper, whou never Jlumbers nor lce/ps; that
his eyes are ever on the rihlcous ; that
wC'Lhe'L't I pafi through the waters, he
will be with them, rnd throri b the rivers
they J7all not overfow thenm; and in fine
that all his paths arc mercy and truth to
fulch as Jfar him,, and ketp his covenant'.
'Ihefe promifcs, and many more to tle
fame cfi:cd, with which the Scripture
abounds, plainly cxprcfs a particular care

I Tim. iv. 9, Ps. Ixx .iv. I 1. c'f. Cixi. 3, 4, &c.

of

of Heaven exerciled about every single SER M.
good man; they signify as real an interpo-
fition of Providence, as if the laws of nature
had been suspended on his account.

The opinion entertained by some, that

the Providence of God extonds no farther
than to a general fuperintendance of the
laws of nature, without interposing in the
particular concerns of individuals, is con-
trary both to reason and to scripture. It
renders the government of the Almighty
altogether loose and contingent, and would
leave no ground for reposing any trust
under its protcaion. For the majority of
human affairs would then be allowed to
fluctuate in a fortuitous course, vwithout
moving in any regular direcion, and
without tending to any one fcopc. The
uniform doclrine of the sacred writings is,
that throughout the universe nothing hap.
pens without God; that his hand is ever
adive, and his decree or permission inter-
venes in all; that nothing is too great or
unwieldy for his management, and nothing
so minute and inconsiderable as to be below

I 1 his

S E R . his ilicpeaicn and care. While he is
_,._ guiding thc 1lun anmi the moon in their

courle throutgh the Hicavens; while in tlis
infcriour world lie is ruling amlong empires,
Jlilli,;, rlc r,iings of sthe waters and thl

lllumuls J., Ite l/iC/e, he is at the fame time
watching over the Ilmiinle good man, who,
in tlc Ai,,;:uriy of his cottage, is serving
;;(ld w( rilljping Ilirn. In order to ex-
prci, tl:i. vigilance of Providence in the
lrt(iI.'il tcrms, our Saviour hinlielf has
Iflil, that t!:c very hairs oJ our bead are all
r','.:,'irci yI; G(d; and that while two spar-
r.^<ls ,r: f/Il ifr a farthing, not one o}
t/NI ./j:lls / th/e 7gr tmd wit/out his plea-
.irc. 'Ihle conlolation which this afolrd&,
he applics to his dililples in what follows:
I'car ye nolt lthce/ire, ye are of n:re value
i.,", Iiany I/,arrows '. It is on this doc-
ti:iue of a special and particular Providence
he grounds that exhortation against worldly
iblicitude and anxiety, which accords so
fully with the argument we have been

' Ma:h. x. 30, p3i.

pursuing .

pursuing; yourr lHevenly Fati,-r inowcr l s r RM.
iwht things ye hLie u,'1 / of; ta/r le!ir-rfire
no ithought j or ite n;,rrow; b/t /i. frj?.
t11 kingdom of God, anl i.r rikbhtol/fizps; .a;j
till the/f thins fll I c a.led iuntso , .

Tilus it has been (hown en what

grounds our aliured hclief refts of the de-
claration in the text, that all tlinlgs are
made to work for the good of the righteous.
It is not a promise which adlmitr o( amini-
guity, and which we minht he afraid to
interpret to its full extent. It is on every
tide confirmed by the mos. fober rcafonings
we can form from the divine pcrfedions;
by the whole tenour of the dispensation of
redemption; by many repeated assurances
given us in the sacred writings.

THE great objection, I am aware, that

will be started by many againfl the whole
of what has been advanced in this dicfourfe,
is founded on the seeming prevalence of

Math. vi. 33.

13 evil

S ER M. evil and disorder in the world. This, it
_>_^ will be said, is so conspicuous, as to be

inconfiltent with the representation that
has been given of a Supreme Being, who
attends, in every instance, to the welfare
of every good man. The present state of
the world may be fufpeeted to carry more
the appearance of a conflic between two
opposite principles of good and evil, who
divide the empire of the world, and of
course create a mixture of some good things
with more that are evil. How often, it
will be said, are the belt men insensible of
any filch gradual improvement, or any such
tendency in the general course of things,
as has been represented, to promote their
interest; but on the contrary, left comfort-
less and forlorn, in the midst of surround.
ing prosperous vice, to mourn over difap-
pointed hopes and bitter sorrows, without
receiving the least mark of favourable in-
tentions from Heaven? Hence the excla-
mations they have often uttered; "Where
' is the Lord, and where the sceptre of
i righteoufiiefs and truth ? Doth God in.

" deed

" deed fee, and is there knowledge in the S F R M.
"Most High ? Or hath He forgctten to be V.
"gracious, and in anger fiut up blis tender
" merciess

Now, in answer to such objetions, let us

confider how much rcafon there is for
ascribing those dark and doubtful appear-
ances, to the narrow and confined views
which our iate allows us to take. The
designs of the Almighty are enlarged and
vast. They comprehend not only the
whole of our prefcnt existence, but they
include worlds unknown, and itretch for-
wards into eternity. Hence much dark-
ness and mystery muit of course reft at
present on the administration of God; and
we, who fee only so small a portion of a
great and complicated fyfiem, must be
very inadequate judges, both of the ten-
dency of each part, and of the issue of the
whole. We behold no more than the out-
fide of things. Our views glide over the
surface; and even along that surface, they
extend but a short way. But under the fur-
face there lie hidden springs, that arc set

4 in

S IR,. in motion by a fuperiour hand, and are
~,~ bringing forwards revolutions unforeseen

by us. There are whcelr moving wibtin
wheels, as the prophet Ezckiel beheld in
mysterious vision ..--We, measuring all
things by the fihortclfs of our own dura-
tion, are constantly accelerating our de-
signs to their period. We are eager in
advancing rapidly towards the completion
of our withes. But it is not so with God.
In his light, a thou/nd years are as one Jay:
and while his infinitely wile plans are con-
tinually advancing with sure progress, that
progrcfs to our impatience appears flow.
Let us have patience for a while, and
these plans fiall in due time be developed,
and will explain themifelves. His language
to us is, IVllat I di thou know/jl not now;
but tif lalt knoiw herecfiLcr t.

Let us attend to the analogy of Nature.

We shall find it to hold very generally,
both in the moral and natural world, that
nothing arises fuddcdly to the pcrfedtion

* Ezk. x. . Joh, xiii. 7.

<ji

of its slate; that all imp:ovc:: cin ij can:ied sI;. M.

V.

on by leilurely grada:iocs; and that inoft _,
frequently it is through lha:i! and ui:iro-
mifing bctinning', thing: ar* hrouiiit t:) a
favour:il)e coic;!ilicn. ]1 s ! 't i' i-
lufirated by mi:mv cxam;nlcs.--'i .c, obr
one inftaiice, the prnorelf of the fialbns.
AWho that for the firtl time 'hleld the
earth, in midll of winter, bcund up with
frost, or drenched in f:oods of rain, or
covered with snow, would havc imagined
that Nature, in this dreary and torpid lrate,
was working towards its own renovation
in the spring? Yet we by experience know
that those viciflitudes of winter arc necef-
lary for fertilizing the earth; and that
under wintry rains and finows lie concealed
the f'eeds of those roses that arc to blossom
in the spring; of those fruits that are to
ripen in fhiminer; and of the corn and
wine, which arc, in h3rvcft, to make glad
the heart of man. We perhaps relifli not
such difagrceal,le commencements of the
pleasing calfbn. It would be mere agree-

able

S . R M. able to us, to be always entertained with a

a,. fair and clear atmofpherc, with cloudlets

skies, and perpetual lunfiinc: while yet,
in such climates as we have most know-
ledge of, the earth, wcre it always to re-
main in such a' late, xould refuse to yield
its fruits; and in the midit of our imagined
fcencs of beauty, the flarved inhabitants
would pcrifh for want of food.-Let us
therefore quietly submit to Nature and to
Providence. Let us conceive this life, of
whose evils we so often complain, to be
the winter of our exiltencc. Then the
rains must fall, and the winds muff roar
around us. But, heltering ourfelvcs, as we
can, under a good conscience, and under
faith and trult in God, let us wait till the
spring arrive. For a spring, an eternal
spring, awaits the people of God. In the
new heavens and the new earth no forms
Ihall any more arise, nor any unpleafing
vicissitudes of season return. It &hall then
at last appear how former sufferings have
produced their proper cffeCt; how the

tempests

tempests of life have tended to bring on an S ER M.
everlasting calm; in fine, how all things V.
bave wrot/glt together for good to them
that love God, and who are the called ac-
cording to his purpofi.

# SERMON VI. On the Love of our Country. [Preached 18th April 1793, on the day of a National Fast appointed by Government, on occasion of the War with the French Republic.] PSALM cxxii. 6, 7, 8, 9. Pray ...

[ 1-4 ]

S E R 1i O N VI.

O1 the ,L,\v of cur C(:i:irv.

[Prcachcd i?:h April 1-93, en the (Idyrf a Nri'nal Fait

appoincid by GCvcrnme.:, on occasion cf the \War ui:h
the French Republic.]

'sAI.x I cxxii. 6, 7, 8, 9.

Prayj f,r the peace r J criflcm; ihey fJall

prr/jier that lov. th,. Peace be withJin
thy walls, and pro/erity within tht pa-
laces. F'or m! brethren and companions'
Jfik, I w:ill nrs far, Peace be within tbee.
Bcca niif of the Jhrife of the Lorj our God,
I wiillJfLc t y pJcace.
F R M. TT is one of the infirmities belonging to

~v 1 human nature, that continued enjoy-
ment of the highest biclfings is apt to de-

preciate

predate them in our efleem. This un- SER M.
happy weaknesss fiows itiif, not only with . ,
respect to the light of the fun, and the
beauties of nature, which m e have been long
accustomed to behold, but also with re-
fpeEt to health, peace, religion, andi liberty.
Let any one of tholf bleflings have been
long familiar to us; let a tract of time
have effaced the remembrance of the dif-
trefs which we flifficrd from the want of
it; and it is lurpriling how lightly men
are ready to prize the degree of happiness
which they continue to polfTfs.-In midlt
of that peaceful and fccure lrate which the
inhabitants of this land have long enjoyed;
surrounded with the chief blciiings that
render life comfortable, how few have any
just lense of the gratitude :hey owe to
Heaven for such singular felicity? Nay,
is it not much to be lamented that there
should have sprung up among us an unac-
countable spirit of difcontcnt and difaf-
fedtion, feeding itself with ideal grievances
and vilionary projedts of reformation, till
it has gone nigh to light up the torch of

8 sedition?

SE R M. sedition ?- When government has now,

for wife and proper relfons, called us to-
gether in a religious assembly, our thoughts
cannot be more suitably employed than in
reviewing the grounds on which, as good
Christians and faithful citizens, we have
reason to entertain the warmnft affection
for our native country, and to put a jtift
value on that conflitution of government,
civil and sacred, under which it is placed.
- In the words of the text, you fee with
what zeal the heart of the pious lfalmift
glowed for the prosperity of his country.
By the accumulation of expressions which
he employs, and the variety of topics he
suggests, you fee the fervour with which
this subject animated his heart.-It will be
proper to confider, first, the grounds on
which love for our country refts; and next,
the duties to which this affection naturally
gives rife.

BUT, before entering on any of those

topics, it may be proper to take notice of
the speculations of some pretended philo.

fophers,

fophers, iho reprlc!int thc love of our SE RM.

v].

country .,s hardly c;nli :d to any place _.
among the virtues. They asscd to con-
!ider it as a imere prcj;idicc of cducation;
a narrow a'tchrnent, which tends to ope-
rate again!t more enlargcd interefis. We
ought, fay they, to vicv ourfelvcs as citi-
zens of the world, and extend our benevo-
lence, clually, to all nations and all man-
kind.-Nothing can be more empty and
futile than such reafoings. The wisdom
of our Creator hath linked us by the ties
of natural affetion, first to our families
and children; next to our brothers, rela-
tions, and friends; then to our acquaint-
ance, and to the fevcral societics and com-
munities to which we belong. By inflinds
implanted in our nature, He has furmed
eur hearts to enter readily into their
interests; and has thus direCted our
benevolence to at primarily vrithin that
sphere, where its exertions can he most
powerful and molt useful. It i evident,
that by acting on th!is plan, the general
welfare is promoted in a much higher de-

gree,

SER M. gree, than if our social affetions had nc

VI .
V,.l, particular dirccticn ;iven them, but were

to t'oat, as it were, in empty space, with-
out any more determined objedt on which
to ad than the whole human race, where
they never could at with any efl:Et. He
who contend!s that he is not bound to have
any more cn.cc;rn for the intcrefis of Great
Britain, than ior those of Frnlce, or any
other country, ou(tht to hold, on the fame
grounds, that !ce is undcr no obligation to
conliilt the welfare of his children and
family, his brothers and fricnJs, more than
that of the n: ilt distant fIranger; heing
equally connected. as ie holld, with all, by
the common brotherhood of the human
race. It is much to be fulf)eedd, that this
wonderful extenlive philanthropy is only
the langiuage of tlofe who have no assec-
tions at ail; or perhaps, that it is the
languige allilred by fomc, who, bearing
in their hearts a Iccrct preference to
the intcrlfts of another country above
their own, but a preference which they
choose not to avow, affect to cover it

under

under this disguise, of a liberal, enlarged s E .R.
spirit.

Let us, my friends, dirclaiming all such

refinements of falte philosophy, and fol-
lowing the dictates of plain good sense, and
natural affetion, relolve to love our native
country, and in every proper way to show
our attachment to it. This was the spirit
which so honourably distinguished patriots,
heroes, and legifators of old, and has tranf-
mitted their names with veneration to pof-
terity; while they, who felt no affection
for the country to which they belonged, or
who were treacherous to its interests, have
been stigmatized with infamy among
all civilized nations. I admit that there
have been occasions, on which attachment
to a particular country has been pursued
to a very unjuflifiable length. Wherever
it has led the natives of one country to
state themselves as enemies to the reft of
mankind, and to endeavour at aggrandizing
themselves by ruininng all around them, the
pretended love of their country is then be-
come no other than' a conspiracy against all

VOL. V. K other

s E R N. other nations, and inftcad of being a virtue is
^L X the offspring of ambition, pride, and vanity.

I proceed now to (how the just grounds

on which it becomes us to be zealous for
the welfare of that happy island, to which
we have the honour and the blefling to
belong. Let us confider our native coun-
try in three lights; as the feat of private
enjoyment and happiness; as the feat of
true religion; as the feat of laws, liberty,
and good government.

I. As the feat of all our belt enjoyments

in private life. There, my brethren, after
we first drew breath, was our tender in-
fancy reared with care; there, our inno-
cent childhood sported; there, our careless
youth grew up amidst companions and
friends; there, our dearest connexions were
formed; there, after having passed the
happiest years of our life, we look forward
for our old age to reft in peace.-Thefe
are circumitances which endear, and ought
to endear a home, a native land, to every
human heart. If there be any names

x known

known among men that awaken tender SER M.
fentinments in the breast, the names of fa- Vi
ther, mother, ipoune, child, brother, lifcr,
or friend, thele all recall our thoughts to
our native land, and cannot, even in idea,
be separated trom it. When we name our
own country, we name the lipe't of the
earth within which all that is imolt dear
to us lies. To be long ablent from it, is
a circumstance of diflrcfs; but to be ex-
cluded from the hope of ever returning to
it, links the spirits of the worthy and the
brave into extreme deprellion. Its very
dust appears to them to be precious. Its
well-known fields, and mountains, and
rivers, become, in their eyes, a fort ofcon-
fccrated ground; the remembrance of
which often touches the heart with sensa-
tions of more tender joy, than can be railed
by scenes more rich, and objects more
fplcndid, in any foreign land.

These are feelings, which nature, or ra-

ther the God of nature, has implanted in
the mind of man; and baIe and vile is lie
who tfudies to craze them, intimately con-

K z necqed

sE R M. neted as they are with our very best as-
VL. feaions.-Can we think, my friends, how

long we have fat under our vine and our
fig-tree, in peace and joy, encircled by our
families and friends, in that happy land we
possess; and, with this pleasing remembrance
dwelling on our minds, can we think with
indifference of any danger which threatens
the welfare of that country which has been
the mother, the nurse, the guardian of us
all? Can we think without horror, of so-
reign invasion laying waste our fruitful
and smiling fields, or of lawless anarchy
and tumultuary mobs attacking our peace-
ful habitations?-No! Peace be wbeitbin tbh
walls, and prjpcrity within thy palaces, will
ever be the earnest prayer of every vir-
tuous man; for my brethren and compa-
nions' fake, I will ever fay, Peac e

be itbin
thee '

II. WE love our country as the feat

of true religion. Freed from the domi-
nion of Popilh superstition and darkness
which so long overspread the earth, here

the

the light of the blcffed reformation con- SERM.
tinues :o thine in its greatef splendour.
Here the forms of religions worIhip are
encumbered with no pageantry of vain
rites; but, agieeably to God's word, are
plain and simple, yet solemn and venerable.
Religion has among us neither been the
engine of ecclesiastical tyranny, nor the
instrument of princely despotism. It has
maintained a proper alliance with the re-
gular government of the state, and the
order of public tranquillity. The church
that has been established by law, in the
two separate divisions of the island, is suited
to the genius and dispositions of the people
in each. While to the established church
is given that protection and support from
government, which both the iuterefts of
religion and the welfare of the state render
proper and due; yet no rigid conformity
to it is exaded. All persecution for con-
science fake, is unknown. They who, in
their modes of thinking, or in their religious
forms, differ from the eflablifhed church,
are at full liberty, without reproach, to

K 3 worship

s F R M. wgrfhilp God according to their own opi-
c,_ nions and the rites of their fathers, as long

as they infringe not the public tranquillity,
nor disturb the slate.

I now alk, what cftablifhment of religion

more friendly to public happinesss could
be desired or framed ? How zealous ought
we to be for its preservation? How much
on our guard against every danger which
threatens to trouble or overthrow it?-
Can there be any among us so infatuated
as to with to exchange it for that new
form of things which has produced such
fatal effects on a neighbouring land ? Were
it ever to be introduced among us, it is
not the return of antient filperfltition, it is
not the bondage of the church of Rome
we would have to dread; evils great in
themselves, but small in comparison of what
such a revolution would produce. As soon
as under the guise of philosophy, and with
the pretence of unlimited toleration, the
eftablilhed forms of religion were demo-
lifhed in France, the flood-gates were
opened to pour a torrent of avowed in,

fidelity,

fidelity, atheism, and all the grossest im- SER M.

VI.

moralities, over that devoted country. We .,~
have beheld the throne and the altar over-
thrown together; and nothing but a
wretched ruin left, where once a flately
fabric I*-. ''. ,: '. en the venerable
mi:.:'i.,, iALii.:l.g , iirirlJLu of their sub-
fillciic, torn from their churches, driven
from their homes, and forced to wander
as exiles, and beg their bread in a foreign
land.--We have Icen the last consolation
of the wretched destroyed, and the grave
fealed against their hope, by the public de-
claration that death is an eternal sleep.--
Such have been the blessed fruits of that new
order of things which boafled of being to
restore happiness to all the nations. Such
are the consequences we have to expect
among ourselves, if ever the like dangerous
opinions ihall prevail in Britain.-With
horror let us turn away from the thought.
With earnestness let us prayfor the peace
Gs our 7cr:.ilcm; and for the bouse of the
Lord our God, let us zcaloifly fe:k its good.

K 4 III. WE

SEBR M. III. WE love our country as the feat of

liberty and laws; a mild, wile, and happy
government. This opens a nmuch wider
field of difcourie than the bounds of a
sermon admit. But on this part of the
fubjeet being happily anticipated by so
many excellent publications which have
lately appeared, I Ihall cc;ntent myself with
making a few leading observations.- The
ends for which men unite in society and
submit to governnient are, to enjoy security
to their property, and freedom to their
persons from all injultice or violence. The
more completely thofl ends are obtained,
with the least diminution of personal li-
berty, the nearer such government ap-
proaches to perfelion: 1 fay, approaches
to it; for a perfect government is a mere
chimera. Before we can expec it to take
place, we mufl wait till we fee any one
thing whatever arrive at perfedion on
earth. The two extremes to be guarded
against are, despotism, where all are slaves;
and anarchy, where all would rule, and
none obey.

The

The British government may appear at s ER M.

different periods to have inclined loimeimes v_
to the one, and bometimes to the other of
those extremes. In its present slate, it may
jufly be accounted to be removed to an
equal distance from either of thole evils;
and( rhtiefore tj have approached nearer
to the perfection (!' social order, than any
other government, antient or modern. To
this p( int it has arrived in the progress of
ages, not in consequence of theories formed
by speculative men, such as our modern
reformers, but in consequence of experi-
ments made, and trials undergone. Expe-
rience, that great parent of all, but efpe-
cially of political, wisdom, taught a brave,
generous, and high-fpirited people, how to
corret, by degrees, preceding evils, and
to form the wisest plan for liberty and fe-
curity. In this itate we now find the
Britilh conflitution. It stands among the
nations of the earth, like an antient oak in
the wood, which, after having overcome
many a blast, overtops the other trees of
the forefl, and commands refpea and vene-

ration.

S E R M. ration. All foreigners look to it with

VI.
_..- wonder, and with envy, as the happiest

system that ever was devised for uniting
dignity in the magistrate and liberty in the
subjeC, with protedtion and security to all.
Justly may we challenge thole who attempt
to criticise it, to produce, from the annals
of history, any example of luch a multitude
of men as the British fubljeds, held together
in the bonds of civil society, under so few
reflraints, and with luch full enjoyment of
freedom as we possess: blessed too for a
whole century past with a fucceflion of
princes, who made the laws of the land the
rule of their government; blessed now with
a Sovereign at the head of the empire, to
whom facion itself cannot impute, through-
out his long reign, any ads of tyranny,
crrelt,, or oppreflion; whose personal vir-
tues and whose domestic conduC hold forth
to the nation such a high example of piety,
decency, and good order, as, if generally fol-
lowed, would render all his fubjecs happy.

In opposition to such sentiments as I
have now delivered in favour of the con-

ftitution

ftitution of our country, we are called SERM.
upon, by a certain let of men, to look to a
republic as the glory of all governments.
There, we are told, every man comes forth
to adt his part with vigour; and by the
exertion of his talents, has opportunities of
rising to the highest diftincfion and power.
-In reply to this, let it be olferved, first,
that there are no advantages claimed by a
republic, but what under the British con-
ftitution are enjoyed to the full. On the
exertion of any laudable and honourable
talent whatever, no restraint is laid; no
odious distinctions take place between the
nobility and the people; no severe ex-
clufive privileges are poffefled by the former
to the prejudice of the latter; but merit
in every rank has the freest scope, and
examples abound of persons rising by their
talents from ordinary rank and humble
birth to high diftintion in the slate.

But next, it may be boldly asserted, that

of all the forms of government which have
been eftablifled on the earth, the republican
is attended with- the greatest disadvantages

to

S.RM. to thole who live under it. In a finall

VI.
>-j slate, where the people releinllc tle in-

habitants of one family, the management
of their concerns can Inore latelv be carried
on by their own joint counlcls, without
any supreme magiftraer. But if govern-
mcnt be extended over a large territory,
and over numerous inllabitants of different
orders and tfrtunes, it has ever been found
impolfible to prcllrvc any well-regulated
balance of power unlder a republican con-
flitution. It has ever bee, and never
can be, any other, than a perpetual con-
test between oligarchy and democracy;
between the rich andl the poor; between
a few popular leaders who aspire to the
chief influence, and the unruly violence of
a turbulent multitude. In fuich llates an
internal warfare of this kind has been al-
ntolt always carried on, with fitch vio-
lent convullions and party aninofities, as
have given rile to more iniferies than have
been suffered under any other form of go-
vernment whatever.-- To no purpose are
quoted to us the heroes of Greece and

Rome.

Rome. Amidst the agitations of popular S EM.
government, occafio:s will ifomctimcs be , .L
afforded for eminent abilities to brcak forth
with peculiar luftrc. iBut while public agi.
tations allow a few individuals to be un-
commonly diltinguiiihed, tlhe cneral con.
dition of the people remains calamitous
and wretched. lUnder delpotic govern-
ments, miflrable ilndcd is the condition of
thiole who are niear tle throne. IBut while
they arc often tlle Irt, and tlie 'viims
of capricious cruelty, the oldinary mass of
the people, at a diitance from tle thunder
of power, are kit, for the mos part, in
their inferiour litiittions, unmolested.
Wherea%, under a multitude of popular
govcrnours, opprcdlion is more extcnfively
felt. It penetrates into tie interiour of
families ; and by republican tyranny the
hlumble and oblcurc arc liable to be as
much harassld and vexed as the great and
the wealthy.

If any one doubt of those fals, let him

look at the prcleint hate of the republic
eftablified in that country to which we

have

SE R M. have so often been unfortunately obliged to
,_ ... allude. He will there behold a memorable

example set forth to the world; hut an
example, not for imitation, but for inflruc-
tion and caution; an example, not of ex-
ploits to be copied, or of advantages to be
gained,but of all the evils against which men,
joined in society, ought to laand on their
guard. He will behold the republican
halls hung round with monuments of pro-
scriptions, massacres, imprisonment<, rcqui-
fitions, domiciliary searches, and such other
trophies of the glorious vicory of repub-
licanifm over monarchical power. ( my
foul, come not thou into their fecrct; into their
affmbly, mine honour, be not thou united;
for their anger was Jifrce, and their wratb
was crudl .

FNoUoH has now been said to convince

every reasonable subject of the Britilh go-
vernment, that lie has good grounds for
loving and refpeling his country. It re-

Genesis, xlix. 6, 7.

mains

mains to point out the duties to which the SE R M.
love of our country gives rife. Though Vl
these branch out into many particulars,
they may be comprised under two general
heads; the duties which are required of us
in our characer as private men, and thole
which belong to us in a political capacity
as fubjecds and citizens.

FIRST, as private men and Chrillians,

let us cultivate those virtues which are es-
fential to the prosperity of our country.
The foundation of all public happiness
mutl be laid in the good conduct of indi-
viduals; in their industry, fobricty, jutice,
and regular attention to the duties of their
several ltations. Such virtues are the
sinews and strength of the state; they are
the supports of its prosperity at home, and
of its reputation abroad; while luxury,
corruption, venality, and idlcnefs, unnerve
the public vigour, disgrace the public cha-
racter, and pave the way to general ruin.
Every vice, however fafhionablc, that be-
comes prevalent, is the infusion of so much

poison

s E R M. poison into the public cup; and in propor-
.V'/ tion to the degree of its prevalence, will the

health and flrength of the nation be impaired.
Few of us by our arms, and fewer fill by our
counsels, can have influence in promoting
that welfare of our country which all pro-
fess to desire. But there is one sphere in
which all of us can ad as benefators to
it; by setting a good example, each in his
own line, and performing a worthy and
honourable part. Rigbhteufnefs will ever
exalt a nation; and wickednefi will he, first,
the reproach, and then the ruin rs every
people.

Among those virtues to which the love

of our country calls us, let us not forget
piety to God. Without a proper sense of
religion, and a due acknowledgment of that
supreme Power which rules among the
kingdoms, no nation was ever found to
prosper long. Let those sophistical rea-
foners, who would teach us that philosophy
ought now to fuiperfede the antient prcju-
dices of Religion, look to the history of
those republics which tlicy so highly

1i,§~ ?admire,

admire, especially to the history of the SERM.
Romans. They will there find, that, ....
during the frees and most flourishing
periods of the republic, the Romans were
the molt religious of all nations. The
Senate at no time assembled, no Consul
entered on his office, no great public mea-
sure was ever undertaken, without previous
religious services, without prayers and fa-
crifice. After every vi&ory, solemn thanks.
givings were offered to the gods; and upon
any defeat that was sustained, public hu-
miliations and processions were decreed, in
order to deprecate the displeasure of
Heaven. That much fuperftitioh and
folly entered into what they called reli-
gion, will be readily admitted; but still it
implied reverence to a supreme Power in
Heaven, which ruled all the affairs of men,
and was entitled to their homage. Hence
that sacred refpeat to an oath, as an in-
violable obligation, which long diftin-
guilhed the Romans; and hiflorians have
remarked, that when the reverence for an
oath began to be diminished, and the loose

VOL. V. L epicurean

S E R M. epicurean fyflem which discarded the belief

of Providence to be introduced, the Ro-
man honour and prosperity from that
period began to decline.- These are
things that belong to our admonition, on
whom the ends of the world are come.

IN the second place, as we would show

our love to our country, let us join to the
virtues of private men, those which belong
to us in a political capacity as fubjeds and
citizens. These must appear in loyalty to
our fovcreign, in fubmifflon to the autho-
rity of rulers and magiflrates, and in rea-
diness to support the measures that are
taken for public welfare and defence.
Without regard to such duties as these, it is
evident, not only that the state cannot
flourish, but even that it cannot subsist.
Accordingly they are firongly bound upon
us by the authority of scripture. Let every
fou! be fjrbjea to the higher powers; who-
Joever reJifleth the power, refifletb the ordi-
nance of God. For rulers are not a terror
to good works, but to the evil. Wherefore

ye

ye must needs be fubje,, not only for wrath, S E R M.
but aso for conscience fae *. Such passages J ,.
as there, there is little danger of our mifun-
derflanding at present, as if they enjoined
a slavish fubmiflion to authority in things
unlawful. This is by no means the ex-
treme to which the spirit of the times
points, or to which the nature of our civil
constitution leads. The full opportunity
that is given for the voice of the people
being at all times heard, the freedom of
discussion on all political matters that is al-
lowed both in discourse and writing, is a
sufficient guard against all approaches to
unwarrantable firetchcs of power in the
ruler, and to unlimited fubmifhion in the
subjea.

But while we duly value this high ad-

vantage of the liberty of the press and the
freedom of political discussion, and when
we behold it perpetually ating as a cen-
forial check on all who are in power, let us
beware, left, abusing our liberty, we susser it

' Rom.xiu. iii 6.

L2 to

SERM. to degenerate into licentioufiicfs. The

VI.

multitude, we well know, are always prone
to find fault with thole who are let over
them, and to arraign their conduct; and
too often this spirit appears when public
dangers ought to filcnce the voice of dif-
content, and to unite every heart and hand
in the common caufe.--The management
of a great empire, cfpccially in difficult
times, is the conduct of an unwieldy and
intricate machine, in directing the move-
ments of which, where is the hand so lteady
as never to err ? InRead of the violent cen-
fures which the giddy and presumptuous
are so ready to pour forth, moderation in
discussing matters of which they are very
incompetent judges, would be much more
wife and becoming. The art of govern-
ment and Icgiflltion is undoubtedly the
most nice and difficult of all the arts in
which the human mind can be engaged;
and where the greatest preparation of know-
ledge, experience, and ability are abfo-
lutely requisite to qualify men for the talk.
gut in times when legifation is confidered

as

as a trade whlih every man i. qualried to s R M.

VI.

take up; when the manufacturcr :cuits his --
loom, and the artisan lays down hi- tools,
in order to contrive plans for reforming
the Ltate, and to constitute societies for car-
rying his plans into execution; what can
be expeced to follow from such a spirit, if
it were to become prevalent, but the most
direful confulion ?-Were the rafinefs of
some, whose intentions are innocent, the
only evil to be dreaded, the danger would
be less. But it is always to be apprehended
that the operations of fucl persons are di-
reced by men who have deeper designs in
view; who seek to embroil the slate in
order to bring forward themselves; whose
aim it is to rife into eminence, though it
were on the ruins of public tranquillity and
order. Let such men, if any such there
be, confider well what the confcquences
may be of fomenting the spirit of prefump-
tuous innovation. It is a dangerous wea-
pon which they attempt to wield. By the
agitation which they raise among a blind
multitude, they are giving impulse to the

L 3 motions

SE R M. motions of a violent engine, which often
vieI discharges its explosions on the heads of

those who sirs touched its springs.

UrON the whole, let us, my brethren, be

thankful that ourgroundsof discontent, whe-
ther founded on realor imaginary grievances,
are so few; and that for so great a number
of public blefings, we have reason to bless
the God of Heaven. We live in a land
of pure religion, of liberty, and laws, and
under a jut and mild government. How-
ever the opinions of men may differ about
this or that political measure adopted by
government, it may with confidence be
laid, that we have much reason to refpe&
those rulers, under whose administration
the empire, though engaged in a hazardous
and expensive war, has all along continued
to hold a high rank among the nations of
Europe, and has attained to that flou-
rifhing Rate of commerce, opulence, and
safety, in which we behold it at this day:
insomuch that perhaps the greatest dangers
we have to apprehend, arise from the jea-

lousy

lousy with which rival nations behold our s F RM.

V!

superiority at sea, and our sweiath and _.
firength at home.-Let our praecrs ascend
frequently to IHeaven for the coritinnnnce
of those bleflings; for the prae of our J.:-
rufalem; for peace witLin her walls, and
prosperity within her palaces; and let the
admonition of Icripture never be forgotten;
Myfon, fear thu( God; honour te king;
and meddle not with telm that are given to
cbange *.

* Pror. xxiv,. 1. I Peter, ii. 17.

L 4

# SERMON VII. On a Contented Mind. 2 KINGS, iv. 13. Say now unto her, "Behold thou hast been careful for us with all this care; what is to be done for thee? Wouldst thou be spoken for to the Kings, or ...

[ 15 J

SERMON VII.
On a Contented Mind.

2 KINGS, iv. 13.
Say now unto her, " Behold tbou haft been

"carefulfor us with all this care; wbat
" i to be done for thee? WouldJI thou be
"fpokenfor to the King, or to the Captain
" of the HoJI " And Jhe answered, "I
" dwell among mine own people."

SE RM. A Pous and refpedable woman of
v1, Shunem had exercised great hofpita-

lity to the prophet Elitha. In order to ac-
commodate him in his various journeyings,
she had caused a chamber to be built for
him, adjacent to her bouse, where he might

be

be furnilhed with all that, according to the BERM.

VII.

simplicity of those times, was wanted for
his entertainment. In the text, the pro-
phet, by his servant Gehazi, acknowledges
the obligations he lay under to this good
woman for her care and attention; and
being at that time in favour with the king of
Israel, desires to know, whether, in return
for her kindness, he should apply to the
king, or the captain of the host, in her be-
half, and procure advancement to her in
rank and fortune. Her answer bespeaks all
the modesty of one who was fatitfi I and
contented with her present lot. Without
any affectation of uncommon virtue, or
any haughty contempt of the prophet's
offers, (he mildly replies, "I dwell among
" mine own people." " I dwell in the con-
" dition to which I was born; in my native
"land; among my original connections,
"and persons of my own rank; and living
"there in peace, I have no desires of afpir-
"ing to a higher rank."

The temper of this worthy Shunamite,
who could so properly set bounds to her de-

fires,

SB R M. fircs, ann cliy hcr pIrcrcnt condition with
VII.

conctntilinl, is what 1 novw pripole to your
inlitation. It fl.iltls illn ppJoliion to that
reficlis and dilcolitentcd Ipirit which so
often fcts ncll at vari;ncc with their
conditioin in thce world, makes thecm
look with contciit oll that flatc of life
and fphcrc of adlion which 'rovidcnce
has allotted thcm; and cncouraging every
real or fioppofcd dilf:ouragemciit to prey
upon their minds, makes themn pinc for
fomc change of fortune.

It is proper, however, to obfcrvc, that

this moderation of spirit which I am now
recommending, is not inconfiltent with our
having a tinl'f of what is uncafy or dif-
trcging in our lot, and endeavouring, by
fair means, to render our condition more
agreeable. Entirc apathy, or pafive indif-
ference to all the circumfiances of our
external state, is required by no precept
of religion. What a virtuous degree of
contentment requires and supposes, is, that
with a mind free from repining anxiety,
we make the best of our condition whatever

it

it is; enjoying fitch good things as God SERM.

VII.

is pleased to below upon us, with a thank-
ful and cheerful heart; without envy at
thole who appear more prosperous than us;
without any attempt to alter our condition
by unfair means; and without any mur-
muring against tie Providcnce of Ileaven.
- " In that fate in which it pleafedGod
" to place me at my birth, I am ready to
"remain, as long as it thall be his pleasure
" to continue me there. lie has placed me
"among my equals. Such comforts as he
" saw meet for me to poflefs, he has be-
s flowed. These I (hall study to improve;
"and by his kind Providence favouring
" my induflry and application, I may hope
"they will be increased. In the mean time,
" I reft atisfied; and complain not. I
" dwell among mine own people."

But if this acquiescence in our condition

is to be confidered as belonging to that
contentment which religion requires, what
becomes, it will be said, of that laudable
ambition, which has prompted many boldly
to aspire with honour and success far be-

yond

I R R M. yond their original (late of life ?-I rca.dily

_cv admit, that on fIme amnong the lons of men,

filch high talents are bcftowed, as mark
them out by the hand of (:od for fpecriour
elevation; by riling to which, many, both
in antient aud inodcrn tinms, have hadl the
opportlnity of dliniiluifhlig thllemlflvcs as
benefatorrs to thcir country and to man-
kind. Blut there arc only a few fcattcred
flars that shine in a wide hcmiljhhcre; such
rare cxamples afford no mondcl for general
conduft.-lt is not to perlbns of this dcfcrip-
tion, that I now fjlcak. I addrcfs myself
to the multitude ; to the great body of men'
in all the various walks of ordinary life.
Them I warn of the danger of being milled,
hy vanity and fclf-conceit, to think them-
felvcs defcrving of a much higher fRation
than they polfcfs. I warn them, not to
nourifl alijiring desires for objets beyond
their power of attaining, or capacity of
enjoying; and thereby to render themcllves
unhappy in their present condition, and
diflatisfied with all that belongs to it.-By
this rcnlleis discontentcd temper, I shall pro.

cecd

cced to snow that they incur rmuch guilt, SS. RM.
and involve tlhcmnclvcs in great fully and
mifcry.

FIRST, difcontcnt carries in its nature

much gumlt and fin. With this confidera-
tion I begin, becaufc I am afraid that dif-
contcntmeiit is commonly treated, in a reli-
gious view, more slightly than it dcfcrves.
A contcnted tcmpcr, we are apt to fay, is a
great hal,pincfn to tliolf who have it; and
a dilcontcnecd one, we call an unlucky turn
of mind; as if we were speaking of a
good or bad constitution of body, of some-
thing that depcndcd not at all on ourfclves,
but was merely the gift of Nature.-
Ought this to hb the kcitiment, cither of a
realbnabie man, ora Cilrifnian; of one who
knows himself to be endowed with powers
for governing hisown spirit, or who believes
in God and in a world to come ? What, I
befcech you, do all the risings of difeontent
within you import, but so much concealed
rebellion aganift the government of that
fuipremc Ecing, who hath appointed your

place

BERM. place in the world ? When you repine at

VII.
i_, your fate, as below what you deserved, do

you not inwardly tax Him with injustice
and partiality, for conferring his favours on
others more unworthy of them, and leav-
ing you ncglaced and humbled? By treat-
ing with contempt the bleflings he allows
to your ltate, do you not, in effect, tell him
that his blessings are not worthy of being
enjoyed, and merit no thanks, because he
does not give you more ?- The outward
expreflions of such lentiments, you may
fupprcfs. You may afifet to appear reli-
gious, by flows of reverence and homage;
but such appearances deceive not God.
Every habitually dilcontented person is, and
must be, ill aflrdcd towards Him: nay,
though he would vwih to conceal it from
himself, he is a secret blasphemer of the
Almighty.

Besides impiety, discontent carries along

with it, as its inseparable concomitants,
fcveral other sinful palfions. It implies
pride; or an unreasonable ef.imation of
our own merit, in comparison with others.

It

It implies covetousness, or an inordinate SERM.

VII.

desire for the advantages of external for- v
tune, as the only real goods. It implies,
and always engenders, envy, or ill nature,
and hatred towards all whom we fee rising
above us in the world. Dare we treat that
as a flight infirmity, or a conflitiitional
weakness merely, which imports fume of
the worst difpolitions and passions of the
human heart ?-The difcontcnted man
is never found without a great share of
malignity. His fplcen irritates and fours
his temper, and leads him to discharge its
venom on all with whom he stands con-
neAed. He can aft his part well, in no
relation of life. In public affairs, and in
private bufincfs, he is always given to fret-
fulnels and complaint. While the man of
contented mind, easy and happy in himself,
is disposed for living well with others, and
rpreads around him that cheerfulness which
he possesses; the restless discontented person
is always a troubler of the world; neither
a good friend, nor a good neighbour, nor
a good fubje& or citizen.

7 IN

8BKM. IN the second place, as this disposition

L infers much fin, so it argues great folly, and

involves men in many miseries. If there
be any firll principle of wisdom, it is un-
doubtedly this: the diflrefTes that are re-
moveable, endeavour to remove; those
which cannot be removed, bear with as
little disquiet as you can: in every situation
of life therc are comforts; find them out
and enjoy them. But this maxim, in all
its parts, is disregarded by the man of dif-
content. He is employed in aggravating
his own evils; while he neglets all his
own comforts.-- What is it to you,though
others are supposed to be happier? Very
poflibly they are not so; for wide is the
difference between being what the world
calls prosperous, and being happy. You
fee no more than the imposing outside of
glittering fortune; while, under that gaudy
cover, there may be lurking many a bittel
forrow.-But supposing others to be in
truth as happy as they teem to be, is there
any reason, except mere viciousness of dif-
position, why their happiness flould be a

3 cause

aaufe of your discontent and misery? Cannot S E R M.
you be at your ease in the shade, because .
others are balking in the fun? What is this
but the unhappy art of extracting from
objeds that ought to be indifferent to you,
materials for your own torment ?

Such reasonings as these," fivs one,

"may be specious and plausible; but what
"avail reasonings to set me at eafc, who
"every day feel myself hurt and fore from
" the scorn of those above me; who am
"condemned to behold them fllining in all
"the pomp and splendour of life; while I,

through the injustice of the world, am

" left in obscurity to toil for a scanty sub-
" fifence ?"- Accuse not the world, my
brother. Imagine not, that it is entirely
the injufiice of the world which produces
your unhappineRf. The difcafe lies within
yourself. It originates from your pride
and felf-conceit, joined with the false opi-
nions you have allowed yourself to enter-
tain of the diftindions of fortune. Those
diftindions must take place in every eftab-
lilhed society. There must be inequality

VOL, V. AM of

SE R M. of ranks; and of courle a diversity of

outward appearance among men. But it
is in the outward appearance that tile diver-
fity lies, far more than in what is intrinlic
to happinels and well-beilg. -Ycu (udll
among your own pio/ili. In that rank where
Providence had placed you, you are living
among your friends and equals; and pur-
suing that train of life to which you have
been bred. But you are eager and rcftlefs,
till from this quiet obscurity you can rile
to lome higher elevation, to which you
fancy yourself cntitlctl.-.re you aware of
the dangers and troubles that would await
you there ? Suppo!ting you to ie in l(bme
degree tlcccltful, yct, with your newV rank
of life would not new burdens bcgin to
opprcls ycu, and new and unknown cares
to vcx yo u ? How m.ylli rivals would you
have to encounter ? how many llanderers to
decry you ? how many eniLmies to conlbine
in oppofig6 you? \Vhat iortiication nould
you endure on every difalppointmelt you
met with? and on every small ftcp of ad-
vancement, what envy would flill remain

in

in looking up to those who continued above s E R M.
you ? till at last, tired with the vexations of _
competition, you should be forced to regret
the day when discontent drove you away
from dwcllingr among your o'wnc preile.-
Awake then, in time, from the dreams of
ambition and vanity. Inltead of aspiring
beyond your proper level, bring down your
mind to your state; left, by aiming tor,
high, you iePend your life in a train of
fruitless pursuits, and bring yourielf at last
to a state of entire infigniticance and con-
tempt.

Let it be farther confidered, in order to

show the folly of a dilcontented temper,
that the more it is indulged, it difqualities
you the more from being freed from the
grounds of your discontent. Firlt, you
have reason to apprehend that it will turn
the displeasure of God against you, and
make him your enemy. For what have
you to expec from that Providence towards
which you are so fullen and unthankful;
from that God, whose perfeaions you in-
jure by your repining and accusing

M 2 thoughts!

s F R M. thoughts? How much is it in his power to
VII.

a render you ten times more unhappy than

you are at present, by taking away those
remaining comforts, which, by your con-
tempt of them, you (how yourself unworthy
to enjoy ?--Next, by your fplcen and
discontent, you are certain of bringing your-
self into variance with the world as well as
with God. Such a temper is likely to
create enemies; it can procure you no
friends. Proud, jealous, and dissatisfied
with those around you, you will, in return,
be avoided, disliked, and looked upon by
them with an evil eye; the discouragements
from the world, of which you complain,
will daily increase; while the humble, the
cheerful, and contented, will, on every oc-
cafion, get before you, and attrac the good-
will of all who can afilt them.

Sucii being the mischiefs, such the guilt

and the folly of indulging a discontented
spirit, I shall now suggest some confidera-
tions which may affilt us in checking it, and
in reconciling our minds to the state in

7 which

which it has pleased Providence to place us. s E R M
Let us, for this purpose, attend to three great v' .
objects; to God, to ourlelves, and to the
world around us.

Firlt, Let us speak of God, of his per-

fecions, and government of the world;
from which, to every person of reflection
who believes in God at all, there cannot
but arise some cure to the dicfontents and
griefs of the heart. For had it been left to
ourselves what to devise or wilh, in order
to secure peace to us in every state, what
could we have invented so effectual as the
assurance of being under the government of
an Almighty Ruler, whole conduCt to his
creatures can have no other objeC but their
good and welfare ?- Above all, and inde-
pendent of all, He can have no temptation
to injustice or partiality. Neither jealousy
nor envy can dwell with the Supreme
Being. He is a rival to none, he is an
enemy to none, except to such as, by re-
bellion againti his laws, seek enmity with
him. He is equally above envying the

M 3 greatest,

SE P M greatest, or despising the meanest, of his
_ fCfuhbjdis.-llis dilpcnfations, it is true, are

often dark and unaccountable to uel; hut
we know the rcafon of this to he, that we
fee only a part (f them, and are not yet
able to comprehend thie whole. This we well
know, that we ourselves arc often the very
worfi jiudtes of what is good or ill for us
in this life. We grafpl at the prelcnt, withl
otA due regard to conlIquencce-; and whe-
ther lthee conft(quence are to carry the
advantages we had promifn d ourrelves, or
be pregnant w ith fiture evil,, is hliat we
cannot foresee. I-xperience has taught us
a tholiland tiinme, that (od judges betier
for u%, than we judge for nut llvcs. Often
hive we seen that whit we confidered at the
time a; a fore (ifappointment, has proved
in the iffi e to e a merciful providence;
and that, if what we rnce eagerly Ywifhed
for had been ohtained, it w(culd have been
so far from making is happy, that it would
have produced cur ruin.-The reflexion
of Solomon. w no kncwctb ;wbat ir goid for
man i tbis l fe, all the days cf his vain life,

wbicb

whbic le/ijendtlb as afadowu . should often SE R M.
occur to every one who is given to dillon- -.-
tent. Placed as we are, in the midst of so
much ignorance with refi'ec to the means
of happincfs, and at the fame time under
the government of a wife and gracious
Being, who alone is able to effect our hap-
piness, acquiescence in his disposal of our
lot, is the only disposition that becomes us
as rational creatures. To fret and repine
at every disappointment of our wihes, is
to discover the temper of froward children,
not of men, far less of christians. Chris-
tians, amidst all their grievances, have ever
thefc promises to comfort them ; that if they
cafl their carciupon God, he uwillca, efir them;
that out of evil, he bringeth forth good;
nay, that at lalt be Jhall make all things
work together Jfr good to tbem who I ve
him.

IN the second place, in order to correct
discontent, let us attend to ourselves and our

' Eccles. i. 12.

M 4 own

S R M. own slate. Let us confider two things
_,.^.. there; how little we deserve, and how much

we enjoy. As to deserving, in the fight of
God, the Great Disposer of our lot, we
know that we have no claim. We are all
linners; who are so far from having a title
to challenge favours as our due, that we
mutt acknowledge it to be of God's mercies
that we arc not consumed. As to deserving
from the world, we are apt indeed fomec-
times to make high and unrcafonable pre-
tcnfions; yet, surely, very conceited we
must be, if we be not disposed to admit,
that there are many of at least equal merit
with us, whose condition in the world is
1no better, perhaps much worse than ours;
who yet make no complaints, whole dif-
contents are not heard. How much fplen-
did genius is buried in forgotten negleat
and ob!curity ? How much real worth and
merit is driven forth to susser all the hard-
ships of a flormy life, while we dwell among
our own peoplc ?- Look into your slate,
my brethren, and, before you give vent to
pccvlilmncfs, make a fair and jult eflimate

of

of all the blefflngs you enjoy, in comparison s R M.

V11.

with others. You would willingly, I know, L
exchange your condition, in part, with
many. You would gladly have the wealth
of tlis man; you would have the high re-
putation and honour of another; the health
perhaps, and firm vigour of a third. But
I ask, Who is there with whom you would
wish to make a total exchange ? to forego
altogether your present klf; and to be jut
what he is, in mind, and in body, as well
as in outward estate ? If this be an exchange,
which few, I apprehend, are willing to
make, does not this argue, that each man,
on the whole, is sufficiently pleased with
himself; that there are, in every situation,
certain comforts, and certain grounds of
felf-complacency and fatisfaaion, which
ought in reaoln to be employed as remedies
against discontent ?

IN the last place, confider the late of the

world around you.--You are not happy.
You dwell, you admit, among your own
people. But there, fay you, "How many

" vexations

SE R M. " vexations do I occasionally experience?

VII.
~N_ "Sometimes dillreffed for want of health;

sometimes disappointed in my plans, and

" straitened in my circumefances; at other
"times, aflliited with doneftic troubles:
" so that I am far from being as I would
" wish to be."-- Pray, my brother, who
is there that lives in every refpedt just as he
would with to live? Firit, find out such
a person; look through all conditions and
ranks, and try if you can discover one who
will tell you that he has no complaint or
uneasiness whatever, before you allow your-
self to repine at your present situation.
Do you presume to indulge discontent,
merely because you are included in the
common lot; because you are not exempted
from bearing your ihare of the common
burden ? What is human life to all, but a
mixture of some scattered joys and plea-
fures, with various cares and troubles ?

You have, perhaps, set your heart on

some one thing, which, if you could attain
it, you inifit, would put an end to all your
complaints, and give you full contentment.

-Vain

-Vain man! will no experience teach you s FR M.
willoin ? Have not you had the fame opi- _,
nion before thin, of some other object of
your desire; and did you not find that you
was deceived in the enjoyment ? Will you
not lthen at last be perfladed that all which
onictb, like all that is past, is vanity --
Vanity, believe it, is the indelible character
imprinted on all human things. As far as
happincfs is to be found on earth, you must
look for it, not in the world or the things
of the world, but within yourfdeves, in
your temper, and your heart. Let the
world change into one form or another as
it will, it wi 1 be a vain world to the end;
and you, to the end, will be discontented.
It cannot give you what you seek. The
fia Jfitl, it is not in me; and the earth fJith,
it is not in me. Silver and gold are to no
purprl weigheI fjtr the price of it. The
decree of the Alnighty iath pall, and can-
rot he reveri'td, that man should find his
true contentri cr, under every condition,
c.nlv in a goo(i confcicnce and a wll re-
gultced mind, i1i a lholy life, and the hope

? of

SRRM . of Ilcavecl.-- You call yonrllfdla chrilt-
_s,» iart. 1)Dcs not that n1lmc import that you

conl;idr yi Ii.li'lf as a lpilgri and a paficn-
ger on e.ntll; iclated in your expcdtarioin
ani Iiolios to a bcitcr wolll ? Arc yoe not
alhanicd to betray, by your diloiitcnt, a
Ijpirit lb inconliftciit wiitth lilc IInOcs alid
expreeations, and at the time when you
profecls to be looking towards tile end of
your journey, to fllow lo much iicalinncf
about all the little circmiiraiccc of accoin-
modatiol by the way ?-- Iivc by faith,
my brethren, and yout will live above this
world and its dilfcouragcnmcnt.. I)well with
God, and with tilngs divine and immortal,
and yeu shall dwell with true wifdoni.
You will find nothing so great in worldly
events, as either to elate or dtecat you.
Refing upon a principle fupcriour to the
world, you will poufltl your spirits in peace,
ana will learn that great leflon of heavenly
pliilofophy, in whateversJlaicr oru ar, tirre-
with to be content.

# SERMON VIII. On drawing near to God. [Preached at the celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.] PSALM lxxiii. 28. It is good for me to draw near to God. —

[ 173 ]

SERMON VIII.

On drawing near to Godl.
jl'rcachtd at the celebratinn of thr sacramen; of the

I,rr(:'. uppcr.

I'SALM I xxiii. 2,.

It is good for me to draw cnar to God.-
IN this psalm the pious author dcfcribes s r a
M.

himself as suffering a great ctllia within v,..

his mind. ilis observation of tlic course
of Providence, did not prefcnt to him such
an order of things as was to have been
expeced from the juflice and goodness of
Heaven. The wicked appeared flourilhing
and triumphant, while the worthy were
deltitute and oppressed; and much disorder

and

s R M. and darkness seemed to prevail in the course

c..-. of human affairs. Hence his mind flutuated

for a while amidst doubts and fears. His
truss in the divine adminiltration was even
so far shaken as to create a fulpicion, that
in vain be had cleansed his heart, and waphed
his bands in innocency: till at lalt he went
into the fanfuary of God, and was there
taught to view the hate of human things
in a juftcr and truer light. He then saw
the vanity of that earthly prosperity which
bad men appear to enjoy; and the happy
ilfue of all things at the laRt to the pious
and good. IIc saw the divine presence
ever surrounding them, and though with
invisible guidance, yet with unerring hand,
bringing them, in the end, to glory. His
mind returned to tranquillity; and, Ptruck
with compuntion for his past errors, he
rose into those high and memorable ex-
pressions of devotion, which we find in the
verses preceding the text. Thou /halt guiile
me with tly counsel, and afterward receive
me to glory. Whom have I in heaven but
thee? and there is none on earth that I

f/ffit,

drfire bfdtr thee. lMy fl./f and m1v lart S R M.
fallckt; but (;l dis tlre Jirentlb /f ry /lart, ,_
and ,i),' portiM 1 r :'7-c. I is fixed prin-
ciple and rclolution, upon the whole, he
declares in the words of the text, It is good
fur mnr to draw near to God; words which
wilt immediatcly occur to you as particu-
larly suited to the solemn service in which
we are to be engaged this day. In dif-
courting from them, I lhall endeavour to
show what is implied in drawing near to
God; and what reason we have, to agree
with the Pfalmilt in judging this to be good
Jir us.

To draw near to 0Gd, is an exprefflon of

awful and mysterious import; in explain-
ing which, we hase much realon to be
fober and modest, and to guard with care
aglinft every enthuliallic excels; remem-
bering always, that rile as high as we can,
an i;lmiealurable and inlinite distance must
ever remain between us and the Supreme
lcing. There are two senses in which
we may be said to draw near, in luich a de-
gree as mortality adiit,, to God: either iy

the

SERM. the general course of a pious and virtuous
^vII life; or in solemn ads of immediate de-

votion.

I. BY the practice of holiness and virtue

throughout the general tenor of life, we
may be said to draw near to God; for it is
such an approach as we can make to
the resemblance of his moral perfecions.
After the image of God, man was created.
That image was defaced by our fin and
apoftacy. By a return to God and our
duty, that image, through the intervention
of our Saviour, is renewed upon the foul;
man is said to be regenerated or born
again, and is in some degree reflored to
that connexion with God which blessed
his primaval fatc. He who lives in the
exercise of good affetions, and in the re-
gular discharge of the offices of virtue and
piety, maintains, as far as his infirmity al-
lows, conformity with the nature of that per-
sea Being, whose benevolence, whose purity
and rectitude, arc conspicuous, both in his
works and his ways.--Worldly and corrupt

men,

men, on the contrary, estrange themselves S.ERM.
from all that is divine. They degrade vll.,
their nature by unworthy pursuits, and
are perpetually finking in the scale of being.
By sensuality, they descend to the rank
of the brute creation; by malignity, envy,
and other bad passions, they conned them-
selves with devils and infernal spirits.
Hence they are said in Scripture, to be
alienatedfrom the life of God; to be without
God in the world. Though in one sense,
God is ever near them, as he surrounds
and encompasses them on all hands; yet,
in a spiritual sense, they are farther removed
from himn than any distance of place can
separate bodies from one another.--
Whereas a virtudus man, whose pleasure
it is to do good, and his study to preserve
himself upright and pure, is in the course
of constant approach towards celestial na-
ture. He is the lover of order, the fol-
lower of that righteousness of which God
is the author and inspirer. He accords
with the great laws of the universe, and
seconds the designs of its Almighty Go-

VOL. V. N vernour.

sER NI. vernour. He is, if we may so speak, in
2-.~ unison with God. Hence piety and virtue

arc described in Scripture as friendflip with
God, as introducing us into his family,
and rendering us members of his bourehold.
Strong expressions are used on this fubje&
by the sacred writers. A good man is said
to dwell in God, and God in him*. If a man
love me, fays our Lord, he will keep my
words; and my Father will love him; and
we will come, and make our abode with him t.

Thelc high and magnificent views of re-

ligion, as an approach to God, may easily
satisfy us how much it muff be goodfor us
to draw near to God, in this sense of the ex-
pression. It is viibly the honour and dig-
nity of man to rcfemble his Creator; and
surely his chief happiness will be ever found
to lie, where his highest dignity and honour
are found. With God is the fountain of lif.
With him reside complete beatitude and per-
feaion; and from him are derived all the

* I Jon, iii. 24.- v. 13. t John, xiv. 23.

portions

portions of happiness and comfort, which are E R M.

VIII.

any where to be found among the creatures _-
he has made. In exaCt proportion, there-
fore, as they approach to, or deviate from
him, must the happiness or misery of all
rational creatures be. As light and heat
flow from the fun as their centre, so bliss
and joy flow from the Deity; and as with
our distance from that glorious luminary,
darkness and cold increafc; so, according as
by alienation of nature we are removed
from God, ruin and misery advance in the
fame degree upon the foul.

Now confider, my brethren, that there is

one or other course which you mult pursue.
If it be not your study to draw near to God
by a religious and virtuous life, be assured
that you are departing from him; for there
is no middle course between fin and right-
eoufnefs; and let every thinking being
seriously reflect what is included in this
state of being far from God, and cut off
from every kindly influence that descends
from heaven. With shadows of pleasure,
pcrfons in this unhappy situation may be

N 2 surrounded

s vS R rrnm. rrc;;d a.:d : fllled; but shadows only,
. .-.. and not realities, the) mufl be, as long as

men have no comiiilion with Him who is
the origin of all good.' Can the itream
ccntinue to flow when it is cut off from the
tbuntain? Can the branch flourish when
torn away from the flock which gave it nou-
rilhment ? No more can dependent spirits
be happy, when parted from all union with
the Father of Spirits and the Fountain of
Happiness.

A good man, who is always Qndeavouring

to draw near to God, lives under the smiles
of the Almighty. He knows that he is
under the protection of that God towards
whom he aspires. HIe can look up to him
with pleasing hope; and trust that he shall
receive illumination and aid in his progress
to perfection. His virtues may as yet be
imperfec, and attended with many failings;
but his approach towards God is begun.
The fleps by which he draws near to him
may be flow; but that progress is com-
menced, which in a future state ihall be
more successfully carried on, and which

shall

lhall continue to advance through all eter- SE R M.
nity. They go on, fays the Psalmist, fiom
frength to flrengil,; cvrry s

oe of them ap-

peareth before Go.in Zion s. Hence, by a
very beautiful and inflruaivc metaphor, the
paltb f fthe just, is described in Scripture to be
as the Jsining light, that /hinrtbh mre and
more unto the perfec day -'. It is the dawn
of a glorious morning, which increases by
degrees to meridian Iplendour; and as the
morning dawn, though dim and feeble, is
neverthclefs a ray of the fame light which
forms the brightness of noon-day, we are
hereby taught to conceive, that the piety and
virtue of good men now, is a degree of ce-
leftial nature already imparted to their fouls,
and differs from its perfedion in a higher
world, only as the twilight is inferiour to
noon. The path of the wicked man, is
direcly the reverse of all this. Degraded
by his vices, he is constantly declining more
and more in a downward course. His path,
instead of being as the Shining light, is the

* Pr. Ixxxiv:,. t Pro,. iv. is.

N3 dusk

a

t

' lufk ofcvenilin begun: that darknell, of the

infunil Iegions t, which his nature is tend-
ing, increases upon him gradually, till the
shadows of night clole upon his head at afl,
with endlecs and impenetrable gloom.-
Thus fully is verified what the Psalmist had
aflerted in the verse preceding the text, Lod
they bhat nrcfar from tIeejrtalperi/h; while
his own fixed sentiment he immediately de-
clares-but it is good for me to drqwo near It
-od,-- proceed

II. To Confider the other sense in which

we may be said to draw near to God; thai
is, in ads of immediate devotion.

There are two *ways by which there con-

tribute to bring qs near to God. The firfi
is, by their Itrengthening in the foul thai
power of vital godlipef? and virtue, in which
confits our chief referblance to God: foi
it is never to bq forgotten that all our devo,
tional excrcises are fubftrvient t, this greai
end. Herein cqnfifls their, whole virtut
and efficacy, that they purify and improvi
the foul, raise it above.low paflions, ant

therelh

VIII.

l:llllc tiiwnardl thi;r liilc. \Vhrel titlv rr' _r

. ,

tritillt ml IrrclV ;rI: r'\lr)l

h . Ir\ i vr4 \hlirh

vr .nr l i ril tI l)rn1 I ,

' hl tI vhli we

.nil(lrrCl (iiinllv';, willl (il-l :nMil i a kwml
lihctl.; i~i wlln 11 ilrlh w ,l, nH;'tiO'i-n wlich
llry r\iilr i' incmrly nilinrtitnty niil ;loon
fi)rt'l toll , tliry t"ienilt hr lrld t,, have

l c ny

iniil rn,- r ill hiti .|iii. ' I'1 .rn 11i (;(ld. It is

lonly wlrhn they air thr frrvice ol tir hrart,

whirit lhley ;ier llr cilmiinl vl'icc ift li\e l ll
ti) (;.l, wnlll tiry Irrvc to kilnllr tilole

riercd ;alliir.tiuiiii which contiinue to hlri.thl

throuitihoii tlh rrfl ot lirf, that thry allis
tiu inl lfin towardt hetavCIe and alliatnce
\'illi (. (1d.

WVhlri our nlCs of dcvotill arc of thii

n.atuTr, thry fortn the other IcniI in which
(hir wort(.d of thc rKxt arc to hIe utiderftoud.
Wc thercin li/raiw nrar to CGod, as we enter
intol the molt imnnmediate intrrcourle with
Ihim, which the nature of our slate admits.
In one fenl'e, we cannot be iaid to he nearer
to (God at any onr. time than another; as at
all timnc his presence equally furrounde us;

N4 in

SER M. in the fields, as in the temple; in the midst

of the world, as much as in the retirement
of the closet. But when with serious and
devout affefdions we address ourselves to
God, in prayer, and praise, and solemn wor-
ship, we then bring home that divine pre-
fence to our feelings, and formally place
ourlelves in it. We may then be truly said
to draw near to God; approaching to him
through a great Mediator and Intercefor;
fending up thofc prayers to which we are
encouraged to believe that the Almighty is
lending a gracious ear; resigning ourselves
to his conduc, and offering up ,ur fouls to
him; exercising, in short, all those acts of
faith, love, and trust, which become de-
pendent creatures towards their Sovereign
and Father.

This intellectual correspondence of the

heart with our Maker and Redeemer, is
termed, in the language of divines, com-
munion with God. And, if there he truth
in religion at all; if a Supreme Being exist,
who is in any degree accessible to his
creatures, and who is gracious to the good,

it

it must be admitted to have a foundation S. RM.
in reason and truth. Thre ruot be juflt ,
ground to think, that the vorfhip of pure
and holy hearts is acceptable to him; and
the gospel gives us full reason to believe,
that the energy of his spirit is concerned in
stirring up within them the sentiments of
devotion.

At the fame time it is incumbent on me

to warn vcu, that the fatiifadion whiich on
such occasions we feel, nrift not be grounded
merely on a belief which we allow our-
selves to entertain, of some communication
which we had received diredlv from God.
In the warn. and tranlporting moments of
devotion, there is always a hazard of our
miltaking the exalted efforts of our own
imigination, for supernatural i rpreflions
from Heaven. It is much safer to judge
of the acceptance of our services, by an in-
ference which we can warrantably draw
from the slate ot our hearts and life, com-
pared to God's written word. 7o the law
andil tile tftirmony we must ;lvwas have re-
course in judging of our ltate; and then

only

SERMa. only the teJlimony of God's spirit witne/eth

- with our spirits that we are the children of

God, when we can dilicrn in ourselves
those declared fruits f the Spirit, which are
love, jo, peace, long-fiu/ring, gcntlines,
goodness fit, it meekness, temperance*.

Carrying along with us this caution, it

will be found that, on many accounts, it
will be good fr us, to draw near to God
in exercises of solemn devotion.

First, it is evidently good fr us, to dif-

charge those duties of worlhip, and to give.
proof of those pious affetions, which are
unqueflionably due from us to our Heaven-
ly Father. If we be wanting in there, we
are clearly deficient in one essential part of
religion. Morality without piety, confti-
tutes a very imperfc& charater. It is
neither stable in its foundation, nor uni-
verlal in its influence; and gives us no
ground to look for the rewards of those,
whose prayers, together witb their alns, come
up in memorial before God.

Galat. v. 21.

But,

But, besides the obligations from duty SERM.

which we are laid under to such religious ex- '
erciles, it can clearly be shewn that they are
in themlelves good for us, on account of the
improvement, the fitisfaiion, and comfort,
they enable us to erjoy,in a devout elevation
Ds the heart towardsGod and celeltial objects.

When we reflect on the languor that

attends the ordinarv circulation of the little
occupations of lite; on the insipidity of
many of its amulements;' and the depref-
sion of spirits that follows after them; we
cannot but be fenlible that occasional inter-
course with God and divine things, must
furnish a comfortable relief to the mind.
It is not, indeed, an intercourse for which we
are at all times equal; but neither was the
human mind formed to grovel at all times
among low cares and objects. It has a
demand for something higher and greater,
than what the common round of the world
affords. Hence the extravagant and eccen-
tric pursuits into which we fornetimes deviate.
We attempt some higher bliss, than what we
find here. But the attempt which is made

by

s F. R M. by folly, can only be fuccefsfullyexecuted by

l a wife and good man, in the elevation of his

foul towards God. Some, indeed, are funk
so low in worldly gratifications, that no-
thing has any rclifh with them, but what
either breathes the air of giddy dissipation, or
taftcs of the impure fiream of fenlual plea-
sure. But this vitiated taste, contracted
by long corrupt habits, is unnatural in
itself, and by proper dilcipline can be cor-
reded and reformed. Let the mind be
reflored to its found and natural slate, and
its relish for what is more great and noble,
will return.

Besides the impcrfetion and emptiness of

the ordinary plealures of the world, many
pains and difireffes are always mingled with
them. No mqre effeCtual relief from them can
be found, tian that which may be enjoyed in
drawing near to God. Paflions corrode the
mind. Cares and anxieties feftcr in it. We
are fietted by the ingratitude of friends;
toured by the calumnies of enemies;
harassed with the competition of rivals.
The very bufile and agitation of the world,

wear

wear out and oppress the mind that longs SS. RM.
for tranquillity. In religious retirement, -.l
and in those exercises of devotion that
bring us near to God, we attain a pleafigl'
region of calm and repose. There, worldly
paffionsare silent; worldly cares are hushed
and forgotten. The mind retires as withlin
itself; and remains alone with God. It
is only as afar off that the noise and disturb-
ance of the world is heard, like the found
of a diflant tumult.

By the perplexity of our worldly concerns,
we may have been involved in trouble. By
the death of our dearell friends, we may
have been overwhelmed with sorrow. By
the situation of public affairs, we may be
alarmed with dangers that threaten our
country. In all such situations, is there
any consolation equal to that which the
devout man enjoys in drawing near to
God? He looks up to a Father and a
Friend, in whom he can place his trult in
every time of necd. He hears a voice issuing
from the divine fantuary, which iays,
Call upon me in the day of !';role, as'J1 I cill

celiver

S E R M. delver thee. Fear not, for lam with thee;

_ be not dfmayed, for I am thy God. Com-

forted by such words, his mind regains
tranquillity. Refting on the hope that the
God whom he serves will never forsake
him, he can dismiss from his thoughts
the fears, the troubles, and wickedness of
men, and compose his spirit to dwell among
celeflial things. Looking up to that blessed
world where he expecs to find his repose,
he beholds no objects but what he can con-
template with delight, as great, peaceful,
and serene. There, he beholds none of the
agitations and turmoils of men; no tumults,
nor factions, nor wars; no friends, who
die and leave us; no ambitious men, who
afpirc to opprcfs; nor violent men, who
attempt to defiroy; nor fraudulent brethren,
who, with a fmniing countenance, cheat
and deceive. In perfect contrast to the
confusion of the earth, he beholds all things
above, proceeding in the fame perfet order
with the heavenly bodies, which move in
their orbs with smooth and steady course.
He fees the river of life flowing continually

7 from

from before the throne of God; and dif- SERM.
fusing among the blessed inhabitants,fJiul/efs
cfjoy, and pleasures for evermore.

From such devout contemplations and

hopes, arose that great deliglt which holy
men cf antient times describe tlhemielvcs
to have felt in drawing near to God, and
which they have exprefled in language so
vivid and glowing. Lle'.1, 0 Lord, is ith
man whomn thou choCfT, ax:. cm.,?j to ap-
proach utio tlee ; tlnat he may dwn ll in thy
ccurts, and be fJ7ti:rfid with the gccdiifs of
thy bouif, and of thy holyl place.-O God,
thou art my God, earl' will IfJek trce. Be-
cause thy loving k'indnrfs is better than life,
my lips Jlall prase thec. I will lift up my
hands in tkr nmne. Mly fciul all lcfJtisjfed
as i:tb marrow and fatnfS ; and my moulb
./ball praf te th ith jrjfl lips, hbcn I re-
member thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee
i th nt ac. m ae in

the night atc. m ave in ea

ven, but thee ? and there is none upon earth
that I defirr, besides thee*. When such

* P. li;ii. 3.-6.- P. Ixr. 4. PC. Ix\l:. 2j.

language

l R M. languagc as t!ti cxrilt.'s thc native senti-
.--, . mcnits of nur hu'rta, we join oirkl:vw. in

fomec mcalie uc thl angeli,.il choir abovc,
and anticipate the cmplloymncuits of the
blesscd.

Sme mavy lhliaps imagine, that what

has been lfil of the inportince and thle ad-
vantages of drawin, near lo (,l, approaclhes,
in lomc (&grece, to iyfticilin and cnihu-
fiafm. 1 admit, that ifreligion werc rcpre-
sented as consisting wholly of internal dcvout
emotions, the rcprefentation of it would be
imperfed and fallc. It is designed to be
an active principle, regulating the conduct
oflife, and exerting itfelfin good works. But
very ignorant he must be of human nature,
who perceives nut, that in order to pro-
duce fucli effeds, it is of high importance
to engage the affections and the heart on
the fide of virtue. It is not by reasonings
addrefled solely to the underfianding, that
men's charaCters are formed, or their
general condu&t aCuated. If you wili to
work any considerable effect on their life,

14 you

you must bring over the affections and SERM
inclinations to your fide. You mufl not -
only shew them what is right and true, but
make them feel what is desirable and good.
If you attempt to make religion so very
calm and rational, as to exclude from it all
warmth of sentiment, all affeaionate and
devotional feelings, you will leave it in pof-
session of finall influence on conduA. My
son, give me thy heart, is the voice of God;
and the voice of reason is, that according
as the heart is affeced and disposed, such
will be the general characer and conduut.

The application of the whole subjet to

the holy sacrament which we are now to
celebrate, is natural and obvious. No more
solemn opportunity can be afforded us of
drawing near to God, than what we there
enjoy. All that is encouraging and com-
forting in Chriflian faith is set before us,
in this most effteual proof of God's mercy
to mankind, giving up his son to the death
as a sacrifice for our fins. In celebrating
the memorial of this great event, we are

V4o. V. 0 placed

S F R M. placed as under the immediate brightncfs
_,-~ of heavenly light, and under the warmef

ray of divine love. If there be any confla-
lio n in C1jrii, .an filloujlip of the Spirit,
any plealing hope of eternal life and joy, it
ought on inch an occalion to he drawn forth,
and deeply felt. Let us endeavour to kindle,
at the altar of the Lord, that sacred fire,
which fl ll continue to difll'lc its vivifying
influence over our heaits, when we go
abroad into the iorld, and mingle again in
the ordinary concerns of life. W'e are now
to draw ncalr to God. Let us draw near
to him as our F.;thcr; but with that reve-
rence and humility which becomes us on
approaching to a lather uwo is in Heaven.
Let us draw near through that great Media-
tor, by whole merits and interceffi ,n alone
our services find acceptance at the divine
throne. No man comrcl untmo he Falther but
through him; and nonec who conmctb unta God
by him, will be caji/ Glt.

# SERMON IX. On WISDOM in RELIGIOUS CONDUCT. PSALM ci. 2. I will behave myself wisely in a perfect way.

[ 195 3

SERMON IX.
On WISDOM in RELIGIOUS CONDUCT.

PSALM Ci. 2.

I will behavc miflf wifly in a perfcL' way.
WJI SDOM,, fays Solomon, excellctbfolly, as sE R M.

far as ligbt excelleth darlnefs*. In our l

present state, there is no situation in which
we can, confildently with safety to ourselves,
aEt thoughtlelsly and at random. In what-
ever enterprise we engage, consideration and
prudent thought are requisite to bring it to
a good issue. On every occasion, there is a
right and a wrong in conduct; there is one
line of action which is likely to terminate

* cclce. ii. ,3.

0 2 according

S E R M. according as we wifl; and another which,

Ix.
~_.. for- certain, will land us in disappointment.

If, in the ordinary tranfadions of life, we
cannot prosper without a due exercise of
wildom and prudence, a higher degree of it
is certainly necefllry in those momentous
parts of condu& which regard our everlaft-
ing welfare.,

It is indeed confccffd, that in religious

conduct the fu:idamental and most im-
portant article is finccrity of heart, and
goodnels of intention. At the fame time,
let the intentions be ever so pure and fin-
cere, they will be in hazard of falling into
some wrong dire&tion, unlels they be pro-
perly guided by wildom. Too many in-
stances have appeared,ofperfons, who, setting
out in life with fair and virtuous purposes,
have been so far bewildered by mistaken
forms of goodness, as to be betrayed, first
into errors, and then into vices and crimes.
In order to at our parts with propriety and
fleadinefs, there must be a due proportion
of light in the underfianding, as well as of
warmth and goodncfs in the heart. The

Psalmist

Psalmist was sensible of this when he de- SS RM.
dares in the text his resolution, of not only _
walking in a perfed, or upright, way, but
of behaving himfJlf wifly in that perfea
way. Of the wisdom or prudence which
is necessary to guide and support virtue, t
purpole to treat in this discourse. I ihall
adventure, with great plainness and fimpli-
city of language, to propose some pra&ical
rules and directions for that purpose; which
may be of service to persons, who, with
good dispositions and intentions, are begin-
ning the career of life; and which may, per-
haps, deserve attention from persons in every
period of age.-I begin by observing,

I. That it is moot necessary to lay down

principles on which we are to form our
general condua. If we set out without
principles of any kind, there can be no re-
gular plan of life, nor any firmness in con-
duct. No person can know where they
are to find us; nor on what behaviour of
ours they are to depend. If the principles
which we pitch upon for determining our

0 3 course,

s ER M. courfc, be of a variable nature; such, for

IX.
^-- inflance, as popular olinion, reputation, or

worldly interefl; as thelf are often shifting
ant changing, they can impart no letadi-
nels or conflRcncy to conduit. Other
principles there are, which lome affedt to
adopt, founded on a lense of honour, on
the beauty anld excellency ot virtue, and
the dignity of human nrture. But, how-
ever fair thele may be in applearance, they
will be found ineffclual in mnany trying
situations; utn.!,le to repress the virlence of
contending aafllons, r to luupport the heart
under m.ny dilcouliaements and lurrows.

The only lure plinciplcs we can lay

down fUr rc til.itinlg our condua, mult
be founded on the Chriflian religion,
taken in its whcle compass; not confined
to the cxerciles of devotion, nor to the
mere morality of social behaviour; but ex-
tending to the whole direcion of our con-
dud towards God and towards man. The
foundation is to be laid in faith in Chrifl
as the Saviour of the world, through whose
merits only we can look for final accept.

4 ance

ance with Gcd. We must evince the S ERM.

IX.

finccritv of nur faith b, good works; that -.
is, by a faithful diliharge cf all the duties
incumbent upon us in our several fations
of life: continually looking up to divine
grace for afli!tance in the p.rt aligned
us to aC ; and trulitiug to that recompence
of our prelcnt labour,, which is promised to
the virtuous in a future and better world.
-Suppoling, that iaving laid the found-
'ation in such p)iniiiile,, we set forth to ad
a worthy and virtuous part; rcl(lvcl, that
whatever may betal us, till we die, we wzill
not remove our inlotgri ./;m ur ; tlsIt our
lear/s fJall not rrepoach us jo lyng as ue
live*. I proceed to advile,

1I. That we begin with reforming what-

ever has b( ni ru(ng in ;ur former be-
haviour. This counl.J is the more im-
portant, becaule too nany, in their endca-
yours towards reformation, begin with
attempting foine of the higheit viltues, or

* J., xli. ,6.

0 4 aspiring

SE R 1. aspiring to the mol sublime performances

Ix.
»v- of devotion, while they susser their former

accustomed evil habits to remain just as
they were. This, I apprehend, is begin-
ning at the wrong end. We muff first,
as the prophet has exhorted, put away the
evil of our doings from before God's eyes; we
muff cease to do evil, before we learn to do
well*. All attempts at reformation of
manners are vain, where this is not fludied.
Let us remember, that as long as the weeds
and tares are allowed to remain in the
ground, the foil is vitiated by their roots
spreading deep and wide; and no good
grain will have room to spring up.-
Every man who infpets his own character,
may learn that there are certain failings,
to which, from conllituti,'n, circumltances,
or long habit, he is prone; termed in
Scripture the fins that moJl easily betft us.
To discover these, muf be his first care; and
his firfi purpose, if he in truth wi(hes to be-
come a good man, must be graduallyto check,

·* |a;th, i. 16.

and

and finally to extirpate them,ofwhatever na- S ERM.
ture they are; whether, perhaps, habits of _
intemperance, unlawful indulgences of plea.
sue, indirec methods of acquiring gain,
or propenfions to malice, resentment, or
envy. To overcome those evils when they
have become inveterate, to pluck up those
thorns by the roots, is perhaps the most
difficult part of reformation, and therefore
what we are generally the most backward
to undertake. At the fame time it is cer.
tain, that as long as, by this tender indul-
gence to favourite vices, men remain in a
divided state between good reoblutions and
evil habits ,they are so far from behaving
wisey in a perfetf way, that they can
scarcely be accounted to have entered on
that perfecW way; irresolution will be spread
over their conduc, and incoherence will
mark their charader -In order to facilitate
so necessary a siep in the progress towards
virtue, let me advise you,

III. To ihut up, as much as possible,
the avenues Which lead to the return of

former

SF.R M. former evil habits. Here is required that
a_.. exercile of vigilance, felf-diltrult, and self-

denial, which is io often recommended to us
in Icripture. T'here is always some one
fide on which each ot us is more vulnerable
than on another. T'here are places, there
are times, there are circunflances, which
every man who knows any thing of himself
at all, muff know will prove the occasions
of calling forth his latent frailties, and
brinr ing him into lome fatal Inare. Then
ought that caution of the apofile to
foiund in his ears; Let him that tbinketh
be Jflanlib, take heed left he jall*. Let
him not only walk circumfpetlly, but rather
altogether fly the dangerous ground; aware
of the viper which lurks under the grass,
ready to fling. But presumption to flatter
ourlelves, and to think that we are able
to withftaiid every danger, is a weakness
inherent in man. It is on a moderate
and humble eflimation of our abilities,
that wilfdom direcs us to form our

* i Lcointh, . iI.

conduat.

condut. As in civil and political life, he S ERM.
who believes himiell equal to every task, _-,
and on all occasions comes forward with
rails audacity, is likely to meet with many
a humiliation and rcpul!e; lo, in moral
behaviour, he who, trunii;;g to the fircngth
of his virtuous resolutions, expofcs himlelf
inconsidcrately to every occasion of tempta-
tion, is lure ot Icirg often betrayed into evil.

All the various and dangerous avenues to

vice, with which, in great cities cipecially,
modern life abounds, it cannot be expcded
that I am here to poiit out. Wealth, lux-
ury, and idlenels, are the great inourilhers of
every frailty; the great fomenters of every
bad inclination and paflion. To the children
of Idleness, the haunts of Dissipation open
many a wide and inviting gate by night
and by day. When within those gates they
carelessly enter, surrounded with loose com-
panions, how often does it happen, that
from the halls of pleasure and houles of
gaming, they come forth, as from caverns
cf deflruciion, overwhelmed with losses and
miserics, and pining with bitter remorle?-

Much

S E R M. Much does it concern every one who seeks

to walk wifly in a perfed way, to be parti-
cularly guarded in the choice of his afro-
ciates and companions. How often among
the gay and the giddy will he meet with
those who smile and betray! He only who
walkethb aith wie men, Jhall be wife: while
the companion of foot Jhall be deflroyed*. Ob-
serve the attention which, in the verses im-
mediately following the text, King David
declares himself to have given to this rule
of conduct; I wills t no wicked thing before
mine eyes; I will not know a wicked person.
Mine eyes Jhall be on the faithfal of the land.
He that worketb deceit, Jball not dwell within
my bouse. Ie that telletb lics,Jball not tarry
in my presence. Such was the wildom that
assisted him to continue in a perfea way.-
'his wisdom requires farther,

IV. THAT consistency and uniformity be

preserved in charatler; that not by pieces
and corners only we study goodness, but
that we carry one line of regular virtue

*Prov. xiii. zao

7 through

through our whole conduct. Without this s E R M.

Ix.

extensive regulation of behaviour, we can
never hold on successfully in a perfect way.
Almost all men, even the loose and prcfli-
gate, lay claim to some one virtue or other,
and value themselves on some good moral
disposition, which they boast of possessing.
It is in vain, therefore, that we reft our
characer on one or a few eflimable quali-
ties, which we imagine ourselves to possess
in a high degree, while in other points of
virtue we are relaxed and deficient. True
virtue must form one complete and entire
system. All its parts are connected; piety
with morality, charity with justice, bene-
volence with temperance and fortitude. If
any of these parts be wanting, the fabric
becomes disjointed; the adverse parts of
chara&er correspond not to each other, nor
form into one whole. It is only when we
have refelf unto all God's commandmentt, as
the Psalmist speaks, that we have reason not
to be afbamed.

The apology for many of those breaches
of consistency is always at hand, that the

tranf-

SF.RM. tranfgreflion is small, and can easily be

IX.
,_.. repaired on a future occasion; and lfmall

lins, we inmagire, may be compellated by
great anid diltiiigulfhedl virtues. But no
ieduluion is more dangerous, than this dif-
tinclion which menc are li rcadv to make
between gre.it and finall ilis. Nothing is
more dillicull, than to draw the line of this
diftindion with any warrantable precision.
Wherever inclinati, ) gives a firong bias to
any indulgence, we may be aflured that we
flall be always mifei d in measuring the
quantity of guilt. No fin is to be ac-
counted small, by which the dictate of con-
science is counteraded, and its authority is
weakened and impaired. It may loon draw
conlequenccs after it, which will assed our
whole conducl. Supposing the matter of
these tranlgrtniolns to be ever lb fimall in its
own nature, yet the moral characters of
men become flaied and bloated by their
frequent accumulations; jult as many small
ulcers, when allowed to form arid Ipread,
will grow by degrees into a great disease.
- At the lame time, when I thus advise

you

you to fudy entire and confident virtue, s E R M.
and to guard firicly against finall tranfgref- x'
sions, let me warn you,

V. AGAINST unnecessary austerity, as

forming any part of religious wisdom. This
is the meaning of the precept of Solo-
mon, Be not rightenrs overmuch; neither
make thiv f e

over ul/e; lwhy Ji6oudjl thou

djlroy thiy/lfJ ? Too fIrid and scrupulous,
indeed, we cannot be in our adherence to
what is matter of clear duty. Every dic-
tate of conlfcieuce is to be held sacred, and
to be obeyed without reserve. But wis-
dom requires that we fludy to have con-
science properly enlightened with refped to
what really belongs to duty, or infers fin.
We mull diaiingiifi with care the evcrlaft-
ing commandments of God, from the super-
ftitious fancies and dictates of men. We
must never overload conscience with what
is frivolous and unnecel'ary, nor exhaust on
trifles, that zeal which ought to be reserved

Ectlef. vi;. 16.

for

s E R M. for the weightier matters of the law. In all

a ages, it has been the great charaaeriftic of

false pretenders to piety and religion, to
arrogate to themselves uncommon fandity,
by affected firidnefs and severity of man-
ners; paying tithes, like the Pharisees of
old, of mint, anise, and cummin, while
they overlook righteousness, judgment, and
mercy. That religion which is conneted
with true wisdom, leads to a very different
spirit. It will teach us to be neither rigid
in trifles, nor relaxed in essentials; not to
aim at impracticable heights, nor to fall
below the standard of attainable duty;
never to make ostentation of our righteous-
nefe, nor to set ourselves up as patterns and
flandards to others, but to be gentle and
unassuming; without harlhnefs in our
manners, or severity in our censures, when
others depart in some particulars from our
mode of thinking on religious fubjeds.

At the fame time, we are to remember

that, in order to avoid austerity, it by no
means follows that we should run into an
unlimited compliance with the manners of

others

others around us. This is a danger to SERM.

lx.

which they are often exposed, whose tem- *
pers are mild, and whose manners are con.
decending. In that mixed and various
intercourse, which the present state of
society forces upon us, few things, indeed,
are more difficult, than to ascertain the
precise degree of compliance with the world
which virtue allows. To preserve a just
medium between a formal austerity on the
one hand, and that weak and tame facility
on the other, which betrays men into many
vices, is one of the most important and
arduous exercises of religious wisdom. A
manly steadiness of conduct, is the objec
which we are always to keep in view;
studying to unite gentleness of manners
with firmness of principle, affable beha-
viour with untainted integrity.

VI. In order to walk wifely in a perfec

way, it is of importance that we fludy pro.
priety in our aCtions and general behaviour.
There are few precise rules of condud that
can be applied alike to all men. In some

VOL. V. P of

S B R M. of the fundamental virtues, indeed, no cir-
,._ cumftanccs can admit the leaf variation.

There are no situations, for infiance, in
which truth, justice, and humanity, are
not required equally from all. But, in a
great number of the duties of life, the
manner of difclarging them must vary,
according to the different ages, charac-
ters, and fortunes of men. To suit our
behaviour to each of these; to judge of
the conduC which is most decent and
becoming in our situation, is a material
part of wisdom. Without this attention
to propriety, virtue will lose much of
its grace and efficacy; nay, good dif-
positions may degenerate into mere weak-
nelres and follies. The behaviour, for
inltance, which would be engaging in
youth, is unsuitable to advanced years,
What is innocent gaiety in the one, be-
comes culpable levity in the other; and to
assume in youth that authority and dignity
to which years only give any title, is im-
pertinent affecation. In like manner, to
the different ranks of men in society, there

8 .belohgs

belongs a different strain of manners. SE R M.
Whatever is either above or below that I
line of life in which Providence has placed
us, hurts every impartial observer, and
suits not the propriety of virtue. What
is proper dignity in one station, may, in
another, be presumptuous arrogance; and
while suitable dependance belongs to
those of inferiour rank, it ought not to
fink into a degrading servility. With a
change in the situation of our fortunes,
our duties obviously change. What was
commendable frugality in one condition,
may become fordid parsimony as our estate
rifes; and the generosity required of the
affluent, turns into extravagance and injuf-
tice when our circumstances are impaired.
-In all those attentions to propriety, some
regard will, of course, be had to the opi-
nions which the world forms of us. No
man has a title to despise altogether what
the world thinks, and what it expets from
him. But this regard to the sentiments
of others, mufl never go so far as to en-
croach on what a man's own conscience

P 2 tells

S E R M. tells him, it is his duty either to do, or to

_ forbear doing. In the scale by which we

measure the propriety of our condut, the
opinion of the world must never be the
preponderating weight.-Let me recom-
mend,

VII. THE observance of order and

regularity in the whole of conduct*.
This may, at first appearance, seem an ar-
tice of inferiour importance, and hardly dec
serving to be ranked among moral duties.
But I am persuaded that it is more nearly
connected with virtue than many persons
imagine; and that it maintains an import-
ant place in that wisdom which direas a
perfec way. If ever you mean to carry a
confiflent line of virtue throughout your
condut, you mull allot to every tranfa&ion
its place and its season. Hurry and tumult,
disorder and confusion, are both the cha-
rateriftics of vice and the parents of it.
I.et your time be regularly distributed, and

Vide on this fubje&, Vol. ii, Sermon I.

all

all your affairs be arranged with propriety, s E R M.
in method and train. Thus, and thus L,.
only, can you be mailers of yourselves;
your time and your life will be your own;
and what is serious and important, will not
be juftled out of its place, by that crowd
of inferiour cares, which are for ever press-
ing on the disorderly, and frustrating the
plans which they had formed for the wife
and proper regulation of life.-Confider
too, that if order be not studied, there can
be no prudent economy in the manage-
ment of your fortune and worldly affairs;
and ceconory, be allured, is a great guar-
dian of all the private and domestic virtues.
When order and economy are neglected,
you are in hazard of being first involved
indiftreffes, and then inveigled into crimes
whereas, under the direction of regular
conduc, both your worldly and your re-
ligious concerns will be more in the course
of prospering.-- have UQW only to add,

VIII. THAT we ihould give attention
to all the auxiliary means which religion

P 3 offers

S E R M. offers for aflifling and guiding us to walk
IX.

v-^ iwifely in a perfeA way. These open a

large field to the care of every good man.
We must always remember that virtue is
not a plant which will spontaneously grow
up and flourish in the human heart. The
foil is far from being so favourable to it;
many shoots of an adverse nature are ever
springing up, and much preparation and
culture are required for cherilhing the
good feed, and raising it to full maturity.-
Among the means for this purpose, let me
first mention the serious reading of the holy
Scripture. That sacred book, as the stand-
ard of our belief and pracice, claims, or
every account, our frequent perusal. In
the New TeRament, the brightest display
of our Lord's energetic example, joined
with his simple, affecting, and inftrutivc
discourses, illuflrated by the writings of
his inspired followers; ip the Old Testa-
ment, the variety of matter, the ardent
glow of devotion in some parts, and the
mysterious sublimity of others; all oonfpire
to assea the mind with serious and solemn

emotions.

emotions. Paflages impressed on the me- SE M:
moryfrom those lacred volumes, have often, I-
from their recurrence, had a happy effec.
In our early years, most of us were accuf-
tomed to look with refped upon those ve-
nerable records; and woe be to them, who,
looking back upon the days of their father's
house, can trample with scorn on the me-
mory of those, whose pious cares were em-
ployed in forming them to good principles,
and teaching them to reverence the word
of God! Let me next recommend a
serious regard to all the etlablifhed means
of religious inftruaion; such as, attending
regularly the preaching of the word, par-
taking frequently of the holy sacrament, and
preserving a sacred reverence for the Lord's
day. Whenever all regard to the Lord's
day becomes abolished; when on it we are
allowed to mingle without any diftinCion
in our common affairs, and even in our
ordinary diversions and amusements, we
may account this a certain symptom of
declining virtue, and of approaching ge-
neral immorality. We have beheld in a

P 4 neighbour-

S E R M. neighbouring kingdom,how fatally it proved
__- the forerunner of an entire dissolution both

of moral and civil order in society. What-
ever disregard certain modern refiners of
morality may attempt to throw on all the
inltituted means of public religion, as-
furedly they must, in their lowest view,
be confidered as the outguards and fences
of virtuous conduct; and even in this view,
must deserve the esteem and refpedt of
all good men. We know, and are often
enough told, that theform ofgodlinefs may
subsist without the power of it. But de-
pend upon it, wherever theform ofgodlinef
is entirely gone, the ruin of its power is
not far off. Whoever has studied the
human mind may soon be satisfied of this
truth.

Besides attention to the public means

of religious improvement, much will de-
pend on our own private exercises of devo-
tion and serious thought. Prayer, in par-
ticular, operates to our high advantage, both
by the immediate alliltance which we may
hope it will procure from Him who is the

authour

authour and inspirer of virtue, and by its SE RM.

Ix.

native influence in softening, purifying, and ?,..
exalting the heart. In vain would he at-
tempt to behave himself wifely in a perfect
way, who looks not frequently up to God
for grace and aid; and who would pre-
sumptuously attempt to separate moral virtue
from devotion, its natural and original ally.
Besides the exercises of religious worflip
both public and private, seasonable returns of
retirement from the world, of calm recol-
letion and serious thought, are most im-
portant auxiliaries to virtue. He who is
without intermiflion engaged in the bufle
of society and worldly occupation, becomes
incapable of exercising that discipline over
himself, and giving that attention to his
temper and character which virtue requires.
Commune witb your own hearts on your
bed, and be Jlill. Ofer the facrjFces of
righteoufnef, andput your trufl in the Lord'.

BY the observance of such rules and
maxims as have been now pointed out, it may

* Pfglm is. 4, ;.

be

s e R M. be hoped that, through divine grace, we may
%.-_ be enabled to behave ourselves wiely in a

perfet way, until, in the end, we receive
the reward of such behaviour. The wis-
dom here spoken of as conjoined with
virtue, is that wildom from above, which
is appointed by God to enlighten and guide
the courle of integrity. It opens to us
that path of the just, which is now as the
Jhining light, and which will Jhine more and
more until the perfec7 day.

# SERMON X. On the Immortality of the Soul, and a future State. 2 CORINTHIANS, v. 1. For we know, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not ...

[ 219 1

SERMON X.
On the Immortality of the Soul, and a

future State.
o

2 CORINTHIANS, V. I.
For we know, that if our earthly bouif of

bis tabernacle were rdiolved, we have
a building of God, an boufi not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens.
T nls passage presents to us in one view SERM.

the nature of our present earthly state, X.

and the future objet of theChriftian's hope.
The style is figurative; but the figures
employed are both obvious and expreflive.
The body is reprelented as a house in-
habited by the foul, or the thinking part

of

S E R M. of man. But it is an earthly borc, a taber-

nacle ere&ed only for passing accommo-
dation, and to be dfijlved; to which is to
succeed the future dwelling of the jul in
a building of God, an hoizfe not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens. Here then
are three great objeCts presented to our
consideration. First, the nature of our
present condition. Secondly, that succeed-
ing fate which is the objec of good men's
hope. Thirdly, the certain foundation of
their hope; we know, that if our earthly
botif be dtiolved, we have a building of
God.

I. THE text gives a full description of

our present embodied flare; as an earthly
bouse, an earthly horse of this tabernacle,
and a tabernacle which is to be difolved.

We dwell in an earthly hoirf. Within

this cottage of earth is lodged that spiritual,
immortal fublfance into which God breathed
the breath of life. So we are elsewhere
said in Scripture, to have our foundation in
the diiu, and to dwell in hoifes of clay.

During

During its continuance in this humble ER M.
abode, the foul may be justly confidered as X
confined and imprisoned. It is refrained
from the full exertion of its powers by
many obftrutions. It can perceive and aa
only by very imperfeCt organs. It looks
abroad as through the windows of the
senses; and beholds truth as througb aglafi
darkly. It is beset with a numerous train
of temptations to evil, which arise from
bodily appetites. It is obliged to fympa-
thize with the body in its wants; and is
depressed with infirmities not its own. For
it suffers from the frailty of those materials
of which its earthly house is compaded.
It languilhes and droops, along with the
body; is wounded by its pains; and the
slightest discomposure of bodily organs is
sufficient to derange some of the highest
operations of the foul.

All there circumstances bear the marks

of a fallen and degraded state of human
nature. The mansion in which the foul is
lodged, corresponds so little with the powers
and capacities of a rational immortal spirit,

as

SERM. as gives us reason to think that the fouls of

x. good men were not deligned to remain

always thus confined. Such a state was
calculated for answering the ends proposed
by our condition of trial and probation in
this life; but was not intended to be last-
ing and final. Accordingly the Apostle, in
his description, calls it the earthly house of
this tabernacle; alluding to a wayfaring or
lojourning state, where tabernacles or tents
are occasionally ereced for the accommo-
dation of passengers. The fame metaphor
is here made use of, which is employed
in several other passages of Scripture, where
we are said to be flrangers and f/journers
on earth before God, as were all ourfathers.
This earth may be compared to a wide
field spread with tents, where troops of
pilgrims appear in succession and pass away.
They enter for a little into the tents pre-
pared for them; and remain there to un-
dergo their appointed probation. When
that is finilhed, their tents are taken down,
and they retire, to make way for others,
who come forward in their allotted order.

Thus

Thus one generation pafelb away, and ano- S E R M.
ther generation cometh; and the earthly borfe
is to all no other than the bouse of their
pilgrimage *.

The earthly bhof of this tabernacle, the

Apofile, proceeding in his description, tells
us, is to be diolved. Close as the union
between the foul and body now appears
to be, it is no more than a temporary
union. It subsists only during the con-
tinuance of a tabernacle of dust, which, by
its nature, is tending towards ruin. The
dufi muf soon return to the dulf, and the
spirit to God who gave it.- The diffo-
lution of the earthly hotfi of tbis tabernacle,
is an event full of dismay to wicked men.
Beyond that period they fee nothing but
a dark unknown, which, as far as they
can discern, is peopled with objeds full
of terrour; even to the just, this diffo-
lution is a serious and awful event. Pro-
vidence has wifely appointed, that burdened
as our present state is, with various ills and

Psalm cxix. 54.

frailties,

s BR M. frailties, we should, however, be naturally

x. c^_ attached to it. Its final close is always at-

tended with fevcral melancholy ideas.-
Thou who now flourifheft most in health
and firength, must then have thy head laid
low. From thy closing eyes the light of
the fun (hall disappear for ever. That light
shall continue to shine, the seasons to re-
turn, and the earth to flourish; but to thee
no more, separated from the dwellings of
men, and cut off from all thou wert accuf-
tomed to love, as though thou hadfl never
been.-Such is the fate of man confidered
merely as mortal; as dwelling in an earthly
house which is about to be dilfolved. The
conlblatory correcive of those humbling
ideas, the ray that is to dissipate this gloom,
we behold in the subsequent part of the text;
that when this earthly houle is dissolved,
there is prepared for the righteous a build-
ing of God, an bouse not made with bands.
But before proceeding to this part of the
subjed, let us pause for a little, and make
some refletions on what has been already
laid.

a LET

LET the diftin&ion between the foul and s E R M.

X.

the body, which is so clearly marked in X
the text, be deeply imprinted on our minds.
Few things in religion or morals are en-
titled to make a stronger impreflon than
this diftintion; and yet, with the bulk of
men, the impreflion it makes appears to
be flight. They seem to think and at as
if they consisted of no more than mere
flelh and blood, and had no other concerns
than what respect their embodied state. If
their health be firm, if their senses be gra.
tified, and their appetites indulged, all is
well with them. Is not this to forget that
the body is no more than an earthly houfc
or tabernacle of the foul \ The foul, that
thinking part which they feel within them,
and which it is impossible for them to con-
found with their fleh or their bones, is
certainly far nobler than the tenement of
clay which it inhabits. The foul is the
principle of all life, and knowledge, and
action. The body is no more than its in-
firument, or organ; and as much nobler as is
the part which belongs to him who employs

VL. V. Q an

SzERY, an instrument, than to the instrument

x.
Av- which is employed, so much is the foul of

greater dignity than the body. The one
is only a frail and perishable machine; the
other survives its ruin, and lives for ever.
- During the time that the union con-
tinues between those two very different
parts of our frame, I by no means fay that
it is incumbent upon us to disregard all
that relates to the body. It is not pofible,
nor though it were possible, would it be
tequifite or. fit, for man to ad as if he were
pure immaterial spirit. This is what the
condition and laws of our nature pcrmit
not.-But must not the greatest sensualist
admit, that if the foul be the chief part of
man, it mutl have interests of its own,
which require to be carefully attended to?
Can he imagine that he truly consults either
his interest or his pleasure, if he employs
the thinking part of his nature only to
serve, and to minister to the bodily part ?
Must not this infer, not merely a degra-
dation of the fuperiour part, but an entire
peverfion of that whok conltitution of

nature

nature which our Maker hath given us? S R M.
Be assured, my brethren, that the foul hath x.
a health and a sickness, hath pleasures and
pains of its own, quite diftint from those
of the body, and which have a powerful
influence on the happiness or misery of
man. He who pays no attention to these,
and negleEts all care of preserving the
health and soundness of his foul, is not
only preparing final milery for himlelf when
he liall enter into a disembodied estate,
but is laying, even for his present state,
the foundation of many a bitter distress.
By folly and guilt he is wounding bisfpirit.
Its wounds will often bleed when his body
appears found, and will give rife to inward
pangs which ilo animal comforts (hall be
able to assuage or heal.

When we impress our minds with a

sense of this important diftintion between
the body and the foul, let us not forget,
that closely united as they now are in our
frame, their union is loon to terminate.
The earthly ocufe of this tabernacle is to
be diolved; but the foul which inhabits

Q2 it

S ERIM. it remains. Let us therefore dwell in our
_> __ earthly houfc with the sentiments of those

who know they are about to dislodge.
The endowments and improvements of
the foul are the only poffeflions on which
we can reckon as continuing to he our
own. On every possession which belongs
to our bodily eitate, we ought to view this
inscription as written by God; " This is

art earthly house which is tottering to its

" fall; This is a tabernacle which is about
"to be taken down."- Let us with plea-
flre turn our thoughts towards those higher
profpeds that are set before us, when
this change shall have taken place in the
human condition; which naturally brings
us to the

lid lHead of difcourfc,-the great cbje&

of the hope of good men in a fuccceding
state. The earthly house is contrafled by
the Apotile with a 'u ildiig f Goi; an hors'
not made wit ih ands ; and Ihe tab-rn:c/e
t.v'ilc isr to be 'i'c' ,/ with a hbife cternal
in the lc;:'cus.

The

The expreflions here employed to signify s E R M.

what is promilcd to the righteous, a build- x,
ing of God, an hoitif not mlade with bands,
are expreffious of a myflerious import.
They ilggelt to us things which we cannot
now conceive, far lels describe. Into that
houei: which is above, thole habitations
of eternity, no living man has entered, to
explore them, and to report to us tidings
of what he there beheld. A sacred veil
conceals the mansions of glory. But, in
general, these expreiiions of the text plainly
import that the spirits of good men shall,
upon death, be translated from an im-
perfct to a glorious Htate. Whether we
explain the building of God, the bouft not
mtade with i.un:s, to signify the incor-
ruptible bodies which thejuft (hall animate
at the relurredion, or the habitations of
celestial glory into which they enter, they are
terms which convey ideas of high magnifi-
cence and felicity. This earth on which we
dwell, is no more than an exteriour region
of the great kingdom of God. It is but an
entrance, through which, after suitable pre.

Q.3 paration,

SE RM. paration, we pass into the palace of an
_,_j Almighty Sovereign. Admitted there, we

may hope to behold far greater objects
than we now can behold; and to enjoy
in perfection those pleasures which we
here view from afar, and pursue in vain.
Such degrees of pleasure are allowed us at
present as our state admits. But a state of
trial required that pains should be inter-
mixed with our pleasures, and that infir-
mity and distress should often be felt. The
remains of our fall appear every where in
our condition. The ruins of human na-
ture present themselves on all hands. But
when that which is perses is come, that
whichi is in part fall be done away. With
the fall of the earthly house, all its rotten
and corruptible materials shall disappear.
It is fawn in corruption, fays the Apostle,
speaking of the happy change made upon
good men at the refurretion, it is raifd
in incor, uption; it is sown in dihonour, it
is raied in glory; it is sown in weakness, it
is raied in power; it is sown a natural, it
is raifd a spiritual body:-for this corrup-

tible

tible _hall put on incorruption, and this mortal, s E R M.

x.

put on immortality *.-- Into that bourt not
made with hands, that building of God,
we have every reason to believe that
there will be no room for 'uch guests
to intrude as care or sorrow. Nothing
can be admitted to enter there, but what
contributes to the felicity of those whom
the Almighty hath allowed to dwell in
his presence, and to behold bis face in
rigbteoufne/.

Besides the glory and perfection of this

future state, the text fuggelts its perma-
nency. This house not made with hands,
is a boue eternal in the heavens. The ta-
bernacle which we now inhabit is every
moment liable to fall: above, is the fixed
mansion, the feat of perpetual re:t. Be-
yond doubt, the certain proiped of death
renders every thing inconlideranle which
we here polfffs. Every enjoynmcnt is fad-
dened, when we think of its end a;,proach-
ing. We become fteni')le that we are

* Corinlh xv. 42-53.

Q.4 always

SUMt . always building on sand, never on a rock.

. ' Fluduation and change charaCerife all

that is around us; and at the moment
when our attachment to any persons or
objects is become the strongest, they are
beginning to slide away from our hold.
But in the mansions above, alteration and
decay are unknown. Every thing there
continues in a steady course. No schemes
are there begun, and left unfinished; no
pleasing connexions jus formed, and then
broken off. The treasures possessed there
lhall never be diminished; the friends we
enjoy there shall never die, and leave us to
mourn. In those celestial regions, {hines
the fun that never sets; the calm reigns,
which is never disturbed; the river of life
flows with a fream, which is always un-
ruffled in its course.

Such are the profpeds, imperfecly as

we can now conceive them, which are set
forth to good men in a future world. But
how, it may be asked, shall we be satisfied
that such profpeds are not mere illusions
with which our fancy flatters us. Upon

2 what

what foundations relts this mighty edifice SERM.

x.

of hope, which the Apoltle here rears up _
for the consolation of Christians, and of
which he speaks so confidently as to fay,
lW know that if our earthly house of
ibis tabernacle were diolvc.t, we have a
building of God?-To enquire into this
was the

Illd prcpofed Head of discourse, to which

we now proceed. And as the fiihjec is in
itself so important, and so pleasing to all
good men, 1 (hall take a view of the dif-
ferent kinds of evidence, upon. which our
faith of a happy immortality is grounded.

We muat observe, in the first place, that

the dissolution of the earthly tabernacle at
death, affords no ground for thinking that
the foul at the fame time peri(hes, or is ex-
tingnuifled. I begin with this observation,
hecaufe the firongeft prejudices against the
foul's immortality, arise from what is some-
times found to happen at that period. Tho
foul and the body are at present united by
the closest sympathy. When one suffers,

the

SERM. the other is affeced. Both seem to grow

\ up together to the maturity of their powers;

and together both seem often to decay.
Such a Ihock is apparently suffered by the
foul at death, as at firlt view might lead
us to fufpet that it was sharing the fame
fate with the body. Notwithstanding this,
there are clear proofs that the body and the
foul, though at present closely conneted by
divine appointment with one another, are,
however, fuhftanccs of different and diffi-
milar natures. Matter, of which the body
is composed, is a substance altogether dead
and passive, and cannot be put in motion
without tome external impulse. Whereas
the foul hath within itself a principle of
motion, activity and life. Between the
laws of matter, and the action of thought,
there is so little resemblance, or rather so
much oppofitionl, that mankind in general
have agreed in holding the foul to be an
immaterial fubfiance; that is, a fubltance
the nature of which we cannot explain or
define further than that it is a substance
quite diltina from matter. This being

4 OIICC

once admitted, it clearly follows, that since S E RM.
thought depends not on matter, from the ..
dissolution of the material part we have no
ground to infer the deifrudion of the think-
ing part of man. As long as by the ordi-
nation of the Creator these different fuh-
ftanccs remain united, there is no wonder
that the one fliouid susser from the disorder
or indisposition of the other.

It is so far from following that the foul

must cease to aft on the dissolution of the
body, that it seems rather to follow, that it
will then ad in a more perfed manner.
In its present habitation, it is plainly limited
and confined in its operations. When it is
let loose from that earthly house, it is
brought forth into greater liberty. To
illustrate this by an instance which may be
conceived as analogous; let us fuppole a
person shut up in an apartment, where he
saw light only through some finall windows.
If these windows were foul or dimmed, he
would lee less; if they were altogether
darkened, he could fee none at all. But
were he let out from this confinement into

the

SE R M. the open air, he would be so far from being
_X. deprived of light, that though at first over-

powered by a sudden glare, he would soon
fee around him much more completely
than before. The senses are as so many
windows or apertures, through which the
J'ul at present exerciles its powers of per-
ception. If the fenles are disordered, the
powers of the foul will be obftruded. But
once separated from its earthly tenement,
the foul will then exercise its powers with-
out obftruAion; will ad with greater liberty,
and in a wider sphere.- 1 admit this ar-
gument only goes as far as to show, that
although the body perish, there remains
with the foul a capacity for separate ex-
iltence. Whether that exifence shall be
actually continued to it after death, muif
depend ln the will of Him who gave
it life, and who certainly at his pleasure
can take that life away. It is necessary,
therefore, to enquire into what, we have
any reaotn to believe, may be the in-
tention of our Creator concerning a future
life.

I argue

I argue then, in the next place, that if SERM.

X.

the foul were to perish when the body dies, -.
the slate of man would be altogether un-
filitable to the wisdom and perfeCtion of the
Author of his being. Man would be the
only creature that would seem to have been
made in vain. All the other works of God
are contrived to anlver exactly the pur-
poses for which they were made. They
are either inrapble of knowledge at all;
or, they know nothing higher than the
state in which they are placed. Their
powers are perfectly suited and adjuRftd to
their condition. But it is not so with man.
He has every appearance of being framed
for something higher and greater than what
he here attains. He fees the narrow bounds
within which he is here confined; knows
and laments all the imperfections of his
present state. His thirst for knowledge,
his desires of happiness, all stretch beyond
his earthly flation. He fcarches in vain for
adequate objets to gratify him. His nature
is perpetually tending and alpiring towards
the enjoyment of some more complete fcli-

city

E R M. city than this world can afford. In the
x.

, midll of all his learches and aspirations, he

is suddenly cut off. He is but of yesterday,
and to-morrow is gone. Often in the
entrance, often in ili bloom of life, when
he had i!.: begun to ad his part, and to
expar! 1is powers, darkiiei, is made to
cove; him.-Cdii we believe, that when
this period is come, all is finally over with
the belt and the wurtlhiect of mankind?
Endowed .-ith 1l noble an apparatus of
rational power, taught to form high views
and enlarged delires, were they brought forth
for no other purpole, than to breathe this
grols and impure air for a Ihort Ipace, and
then to be cut off from all exillence? All
his other works, God hath made in weight,
number, and mca/ie; the hand of the Al.
mighty artificer every where appears. But
on man, his chicf work here below, he
would, upon this fuppolition, appear to
have bestowed no attention; and after
having erected a fiately palace in this
universe, framed with so much magnifi-
cence, and decorated with so much beauty,

to

to have introduced man, in the guise ofa seRM.
neglc&ed wanderer, to become its inhabitant. .._.,

Let us farther confider the confused and

promiscuous distribution of good and evil
in this life. The enjoyments of the world,
such as they are, are far from being always
beflowed on the virtuous and the worthy.
On the contrary, the bitterest portion is
often their lot. In the midst of infirmities,
diseases, and sorrows, they are left to drag
their life, while eale and affluence are
allowed to the ungodly.-I must alk, if
such an arrangement of things, owing to
the ordination, or, at least, to the permif-
sion of Providence, be consonant to any
ideas we can form of the wisdom and good-
ness of a Supreme Ruler, on the supposition
of there being no future Rate ?-But as
soon as the immortality of the foul, and a
fate of future retribution are established, all
difficulties vanishi; the mystery is unra-
velled; supreme wildom, juftic, and good-
ness, are discovered to be only concealed
for a little while behind the curtain. If
that curtain were never to be withdrawn,

and

SERM. and immortality never to appear, the ways

X. >y«. of God would be utterty inexplicable to

man. We would be obliged to conclude
that either a God did not exilt; or though
he exifled, that he was not poflffed of such
perfetions as we now ascribe to him, if
when a worthy and pious man had spent
his whole life in virtuous deeds, and perhaps
had died a martyr to the cauce of religion
and truth; he should, after long and severe
sufferings, perilh finally, unrewarded and
forgotten; no attention shown to him by
the Almighty; io building of Go.i ere&ed
for him; no hbofi ctcrnal prepared in the
Heavens!

TIFSE rcafonings are much firengthened

by the belief that has ever prevailed among
all mankind, of the foul's immortality. It is
not an opinion that took its rife from the
thin ipun Ipeculations of some abstraCt phi-
lofophers. Never has any nation been dif-
covered on the face of the earth so rude
and barbarous, that in midtt of their wildest
fupcrtitions there was not cherifllcd among

themr

them some expecation of a state after death, s E R M.
in which the virtuous were to enjoy happi-
ness. So universal a content in this belief,
affords just ground to ascribe it to some
innate principle implanted by God in the
human breast. Had it no foundation in
truth, we must suppose that the Creator
found it necessary, for the purposes of his
government, to carry on a principle of
universal deception among his rational sub-
jeds. Many of the strongest pafions of
our nature are made to have a clear re-
ference to the future existence of the foul.
The love of fame, the ardent concern which
so often prevails about futurity, all allude to
somewhat in which men suppose themselves
to be personally concerned, after death.
The consciences, both of the good and the
bad, bear witness to a world that is to
come. Seldom do men leave this world
without some fears or hopes refpeaing it;
some secret anticipations and presages of
what is hereafter to befal them.

But though the reasonings which have
been adduced to prove the immortality of

VoL. V. R the

S E R M the foul and a future Rate, are certainly of
,... great weight, yet reasonings fill they are,

and no more; and in every human reason-
ing, suspicions may arile of lome fallacy or
error. In a point so momentous to us, as
our existence after death, we never could,
wvith ablolute ccrtainty and full latisfadion,
have relied on any evidence except what
vw.s confirmed by the declaration of God
hinUiclf.-For many and high blefTings we
are inicbted to the Christian revelation;
for none more than for its having brought
liJ' a.dtI immortality to light. The re-
velations made by God to the world in
carly a;cs, gave the litlt openings to this
grcat article of faith and hope. In fu-
ture periods, the light dawned more and
more; but it was not until the fun of
rightcourfnefs arose by the appearance of
Chrill on earth, that the great discovery
was completed. Then, indeed, wcre made
known the ciOy of the living God, the new
ycrufilCnm above, the manlions prepared for
the pirits of jufl men malde pefcc . Nor
was a state of future felicity only proclaimed

by

by Christ and his apofiles to good men, SE RM.

X.

but was represented as purchased for them _,
by the death of their Redeemer. Igive,
he was authoriled to fay, unto mly Jheep
eternal life. In my father's house are many
man/ions. Igo to prepare a place for you *.
Accordingly, he lay down in the grave;
role as the firl fruits of them that Jlept;
and ascending into Heaven, entered there
within the veil, as the forerunner of his
followers, to allure them of all being
friendly and well-difpofed towards them in
those upper regions. All therefore who
live and die in the faith and obedience of
Jesus, are entitled to fay with the Apostle,
we know; not only we hope and we rea-
son, but we know, that f our earthly hotfe of
this taberuaclc were di lved, we have a
building of God, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens.

THE first and most natural improvement
of all that has been said, is to produce in

John, x. IS.-xiv. z.

R 2 our

S R M. our hearts the most lasting gratitude, love,
....x and reverence, towards that great benefactor

of mankind, who not only hath made
known and published the bleflings of a
future state to the righteous, but by his
great undertaking for their redemption
hath ereded in their behalf the bouse eternal
in the heavens.- The next improvement
we lhould make, is to condudt our own life
and behaviour as becomes those who have
an interest in this happiness and this hope.
From such perfoms assuredly is to be ex-
peaed a pure, corret, and dignified beha-
viour in every situation; not a contempt of
the employments, nor a renunciation of all
the comforts of their present life. Opinions
that produce such effects are connected
only with the spirit of fuperlltition and false
religion. But to them it belongs, in midst
of the affairs, enticements, and temptations
of the world, to regulate their conduct
as becomes the heirs of a divine inherit-
ance; never debasing themselves among
what is mean, nor defiling themselves with
what is corrupt in the present state; but

serving

serving God with that fidelity, and behav- s E R M.
ing to men with that steady magnanimity x
of virtue, that generous beneficence and
humanity, which suits immortal beings,
who are aspiring to rife in a future state to
the perfecion of their nature, in the pre-
fence of God.

R3

# SERMON XI. On overcoming Evil with Good. ROMANS, xii. 21. Be not overcome of evil; but overcome evil with good.

[ 246 ]

SERMON XI.
On overcoming Evil with Good.

ROMANS, xii. 21.
Be not overcome of evil; but overcome evil

with good.
S ERM. IN this world, we all know that we mufr

. reckon up)nl a mixture of goods and

evils. Some of the evils are owing to the
appointment of Providence in this fate of
trial; many of them are the fruits of our
own guilt and mifcoiidut. The goods
and the c ils of our slate are so blended, as
often to rentier the whole of human life a
firugglc between them. We have to con-
tend both with the evils of fortune, and

with

with the evils of our own depravity; and SE R M.
it is only he who can in lome nicafure x.
overcome both, that is to be clieemed the
wife, the virtuous, and( the happy man.
At the fame time, amidst the evils of dif-
ferent kinds which afflult ut, there is a
principle of good, derived from Heaven,
by which we may hope to acquire flrength,
and throuth dixine afliflance he enabled to
overcome the evils of our slate. This is the
subjed of the exhortation in the text, Bc
not rv,;rcome riJof ci!: bIt overcome evil with
good. Taken in its most extenfivc lenle,
as relpeEting the different kinds of evil
which we have to overcome, the exhorta-
tion may he underllood to comprile the
three following particula s. In the firfl
p!ace, Be not overcome by the iniuiics you
meet wvith in the world, so as to purtie
revenge. Secondly, Be not overcone by
the dilafiers of the world, so as to fink into
d(clfair. Thirdly, Be not overcome hy the
tvil examples of the world, so as to follow
them into lin. But in all those cafes,
6e'vrcome evil wcith good. Overcome in-

R 4 juries,

S e R M. juries, by forgiveness. Overcome disasters,

x-f by fortitude. Overcome evil examples, by

firmness of principle.

I. BE not overcome by the injuries you

meet with in the world, so as to purlue
revenge. It appears from the context, that
this was the primary object which the
Apotle had in his view in this exhortation.
He refers to the injuries which the pri-
mitive Christians were conftautly suffering
from their persecutors. Inflead of being
Ib much overcome by these as to be intent
on revenge, his exhortation in the verles
preceding the text is, Dearly beloved,
avenge not you/'lves, but rather give place
unto wrath; for it is written, vengeance is
mine, I will repay, faith the Lord. There-
fore, if thine enemy hunger, Jeed him; if be
tbirfl, give him drink; f/r in so doing thou
Jha't heap coals of fire on bis bead. Be not
overcome of evil; but overcome evil with
good. But it is not in times only of per-
Jecution and general diftrels, that this ex-
hortation is needful. We must in every

slate

Itate of society reckon upon meeting with SERM.
unreasonable men, and encountering their xl.
bad uflge. This is one of the evils infe-
parable from our prelent ltate. No Itation
is so high, no worth lo distinguished, no
innocence so inoffensive, as to secure us
entirely against it. Sonietimes the violence
of enemies, sometimes the ingratitude of
friends, will ruffle our spirits. Where we
think that we have merited praise, we will
be in hazard of meeting reproach. Envy
will rile unprovoked; and calumny, from its
secret place, will dart its envenomed shafts
against the most deserving. Such is the
conlequence of the present depravity of
our nature, and of the disordered slate in
which human affairs lie.- The fondness
of fclf-love is always apt to amuse us with
too flattering prorpeds of what life is to
produce for us, beyond what it produces
for others. Hence our impatience and
irritation upon every injury we fufler; as
if lome new and unlihard-of thing had
befallen us; and as if we alone were pri-
vileged to pals through the world, un-

touched

SERM. touched by any wrong. Whereas, if we

XI.

,._ were disciplined to think of the world, and

of the tempers of thole around us, as a wife
man ought to think, the edge of this im-
patience would be taken off. When we
engage in any undertaking, we ought to
fay to onrfclves, thlt in the courle of it we
will have to do, more or Icfs, with felfilh,
crafty, unprincipled men. These men
will natuially act as their evil nature
pronmpts^ them. Thcv are the thorns and
brambles that we muff exped to encumbcr
and to gall us in many ot the paths of life.
We mull not 'ope to rcap raprsC of thorns,
nor firs of tbiJilcJ. Wild dogs will naturally
bark; and beasts of prey naturally 'eek to
devour.

Now, when thus situated, how are we to

ad for overcoming the evils we have al-
ready endured, or are in hazard of still
farthcr end(lrinll from othlrs? To provide
for latety and defence, i, unqueiticnably al-
lowab!e and w;l;. But are we allo to lay
plans for fitture revenge ?-Were this the
course to be follo.ved, what would the

,4 ce nfelq.ience

consequence be, but to render the life of S r. R M.
man a ltate of co:;ftant hofilitv, hxxre X.l
provocations and rcfrntments, injuries and
retaliations, would luccecd one anotlicr
without end; till the world became like
a den of wild beaits, perpetually attack-
ing and devourin. one another? No,
fiys the Apoflle, (.vcrc:iie (c-il 'cilh g9,jd.
Dilarm and overcome your enemies, by
foigivenefs and generolitv. This is the
principle of good, which you are to oppose
to their cvil. Teach them thereby, if no;
to love, at leait to honour and rcfped
you. While you take proper precau-
tions for pretent safety, provide for the
future, not by fludied plans of revenge,
but by fortitude of mind, by prudent be-
haviour, and lupcriour virtuc. I!erein you
thow no unmanly tamentfs or coward-
ice. Religion means not to suppress the
proper feelings of honour, nor the sense
which every man ought to have of dig-
nity of characer, and the rights which
belong to him. These may be supported
to the full, withcut a mean thirfl for re-

venge,

sE . venge, and a fierce desire of returning evil

_ for evil.

By the magnanimity of forgiveness, you

gain an important victory in overcoming,
not perhaps your enemy, but your own
wrathful and violent passions. Whereas
he, who in such conjunctures knows no
other method of proceeding but that of
gratifying resentment, is, in truth, the per-
son who is overcome. For he has put it
in the power of his enemy to overthrow
his repose, and to gall and embitter his
mind. By forgiving and despising injuries,
you afflime a superiority over your adver-
fary, which he will be obliged to feel.
Whercas, if you allow his provocations to
blow you up into fierce revenge, you have
given limn tlhe advantage. You confers
vourfclf hurt and fore. His evil has over.
come your good. Hc has fixed a dart
viithin you, which in vain you endeavour
to pull out; and by the attempts you
mn!:c, you only exafpcrate and inflame
the fore. Seldom is there any punishment
which rcvcngc can inflift, more feverc than

i.

is suffered by him who infiits it. The SERM.

XI.

bitterness of spirit, the boilings of fierce ,-
pafions, joined with all the black ideas
which the cruel plans of revenge excite,
produce more acute fenlations of torment,
than any that are occasioned by bodily
pain.- When bad men have behaved
injuriously towards us, let us leave them
to themselves, and they will be sufficiently
punished by their own vices. Their
wickedness is no reason why we should
render ourselves unhappy, or afford them
the gratification of having it in their power
to deprive us of peace.-I ilIall only add
farther on this head, that a passion for
revenge has been always held to be the
charaderiftic of a little and mean mind.
Never was any man distinguished as a hero,
or recorded in the annals of history as a
great man, to whom this quality of gene-
rous forgiveness of evil did not confpi-
cuoufly belong. We know how eminently
it shone in the charaCter of Him whom
we justly venerate as the model of all
perfection; whose dying breath was em-

9 rloyed

s E R M. ployed in apologising and praying for those

who *were shedding his blood.

II. BE not overcome by the misfortunes

of life, so as to link into despair. This is
another view of that evil which we are
called upon to overcome by good; and is the
fcnfe in which evil is nolt generally un-
derflood, and is molt dreaded by men.
Although by inoffenlive and hlainclefs be-
haviour we should eicape, in a great degree,
from the iju;ies of lad men; yet, to eicape
altogether from the ltroke of misfortune
and diftrcfi, is what none of us can expet.
In one way or other, in our person, or
fortune, or families and friends, it is the
doom of all, more or lels, to susser. From
what caufcs this appointment of Providence
ariles, and to what purpofcs it is rendered
subservient, it belongs not to our fubjeat
at present to inquire; the fad is too cer-
tain and obvious.- The principle of
good which we must oppose to those evils
of our lot, and by means of which we may
hope to overcome them, is inward forti-

tude,

tude, grounded on religion and trust in SERM.
God; forming that fate of mind, which, , .
refing on itself, and the witness of a good
conscience, rifes fuperiour to the trials of
the world.

When the sky begins to lour around

thee; when thy gay prollpeEs begin to
dilappear, thy triends to fail, or thy for-
tune to decline; or when, as years ad-
vance, the chicf comforts on which thy
heart was set, and on which thou hadll
conceived thy happiness to depend, are
unexpectedly cut off; fay not then wilhin
thyself, " The evil time has now over-
" taken me; the gates of hope aie all
" shut; the days are come wherein I flall
"have no ple.furc; enjoyment is fled;
"nothing remains for me now, but to
"close my days in melancholy, to depair,
"and to die."---This is to he overcome of
evil indeed. He who thus allows himself
to fink under the misfortunes of life, dif-
honours the charnaer of a man, flill more
that of a chrilfian. He shows that what-
ever plaulibl appcarauces he may at former

times

SE . M. times have made before the world, at

XL.
_-. .- bottom he not only wanted strength and

firmness of mind, but was deficient also in
religious faith and principle. For it is
impossible that he who allows himself to
be so entirely overcome by the evils of the
world, can entertain just notions of God,
and of his government of the world. He
hath cast alide all reliance on Providence,
and set at nought the promises of the
gospel. He may suppress all outward cx-
prellions of impious discontent; he may
even assec the language of resignation;
but hi3 heart in secret will murmur and
repine againIt the Lord.

Thele, therefore, are the occasions when

it particularly behoves us to call to mind
all those principles which should assist us
lo to possess our minds in patience, as to
overcome evil with good.-- Recall, my
brethren, all the former experience you
have had of the goodness of the Almighty,
and the ground which this affords for trust
and hope in him now. Recall to remem-
brance all the promises he has made to

good

gpod men; as the words of Him who SERM.

X.

changes not; who is not a man that lheflorld
lie, nor the jon of man that befioruld repent.
Recolled the general tenour of that Pro-
vidence, whose course it has ever been, since
the creation of the world, so to chequer
the life of men with unforeseen vicifitudes,
as often to make unexpe&ed goods fuc-
ceed evils; nay, to make them spring from
evils. Recoiled, that whatever fortune
may rob you of, it cannot take away what
is most valuable, the peace of a good con-
science, the pleasing sense of having aded
honourably and done your duty, and the
cheering profpe&t of a happy conclusion to
all the trials of life in a better world. Con-
fider, that as long as virtue remains, there
are always, even in the mot unfavourable
situations, some comforts still left open,
did we not overlook them. For it is seldom
or never that all good things forsake a
man at once, and all evils overtake him
together. If he is bereaved of some friends
whom he tenderly loved, there are others
yet remaining to whom he may look for

Vol. V. S comfort.

E R M. comfort. If, by infirmity, or old age, he
^xl be excluded from the enjoyments of aaive

life, the gratifications which leisure and
repose afford, are fill left to him. If his
fortune be (hattered, and poverty threaten
to beset him, yet, even in very straitened
circumstances, many of the simple and best
pleasures of nature, and many of the satis-
faaions of social life, can fill be enjoyed.
Nay, the mind of a good man can fill be
a kingdom to itself; and though confined
in a prison, or firetched on a lick-bed, peace-
ful and pleasing thoughts will occasionally
arile to him, and fair profpets of futurity
will present themselves to his view.

Assisted by such considerations as these,

let us enliven faith, strengthen patience, and
animate hope, till we be enabled to over-
come evil with good: always looking for-
ward to better days; nourishing trust in the
gracious government of the universe; and
lilfening to Him who hath said of old, and
who still fays to all his servants, Fear not,
f]r lam rwitb thee; be not afraidfor I am
thy God. Call 1t1/11 me in the day of trouble,

and

and I will answer thee; wait on the Lord, s E R M.
be of good courage; and he Jball jlrengtben
your hearts, all e that wait upon the Lord.

III. BE not overcome by the evil ex-

amples of the world, so as to follow them
into fin. This undoubtedly is one of the
most dangerous evils which good men are
called to overcome; and where it is most
difficult to gain the vicory. He who, in
the former instances that have been men-
tioned, can overcome evil with good; who
can generously forgive injuries, and mag-
nanimoufly bear up under misfortunes,
will be often in hazard of being overcome
by evil, under this form. After having
maintained his ground against many a
rough blast, he may be in danger of being
betrayed by a flattering gale, in the days
of his ease and prosperity; of being insen-
sibly carried down the stream by that mul-
ftude of evil-doers who surround and de-
ceive him. For the charater of the world
too certainly is, that it lieth in wickedness.
Fahlions of vice may change with the

S 2 times.

SERM. times. In one age, one set of corrupt ha-
_X-., bits may prevail; and in another, the pas-

sions of men may take a different turn.
But, in every age, the multitude of men
will be prone to indulge vicious desires.
On the surface of behaviour, vice may be
disguised under a plausible and poliihed ap-
pearance, while at bottom there lies the
poisoned root of evil. Plcfiure will ever
captivate the young and unthinking.
Riches and advancement ensnare the more
fober and flayed. Attached to their dif-
ferent pursuits, and connecting with them
the ideas of wisdom and importance, the
multitude will ridicule those who go not
along with them, as formal and precise,
as raw, uneducated, and ignorant of the
world. Assailed by such reproaches, the
timid become afraid; the rnodeft arc
abascd d; the complaisant and good-natured
submit to their filppofcd friends. They
begin to imagine that the general opinion
of the world cannot but have fame reason
un its fdc; and, half lfduced by persuasion,
half comilelcd by ridicule, they surrender

their

their former convidions, and content to SERM.
live as they fee others around them living. xl

Such are the evils which we muff study

to overcome by good, if we with to be
esteemed either honourable men, or faithful
christians. And how are we to overcome
them ? Thi is the viaory, fays the Apotlle
John, that overcomret the world, even our
faith*. It is the ffeadinefs of firm and
rooted principle, of belief in God and
Chriss, of belief in the everlaflting import-
ance of religion and .virtue, which you are
to oppose to the hoff of evil-doers.--
Confider, I beseech you, that no falhions
nor opinions of men can assed that unalter-
able law of God, which refts on the eternal
bails of recitude and truth. Men, if they
please, may call evil, good, and good, evil;
but as they cannot change the nature of
things, their voice gives no fandion to any
plan of condut as right and wife t. Sofar
are you from having any chance of hold-

* John, v. 4.
t See this subjea sally difcoised in Sermon XIX. of
Vol. ir,

S 3 ing

SRMU. ing either a wife or a safe course by going

XI.
~l-. along with the multitude, that he who

implicitly follows them may be juRly
presumed to be in the path of error and
of danger. For in every age the multitude
have enquired superficially, have judged
ra(hly, and aced inconsiderately. Con-
currence with general practice, neither as-
fords justification of cendua, nor promiles
impunity in what is evil. The Righteous
Lord of all will never susser his laws to be
subjected to the capricious fancies of his
creatures. Transgressors will neither be
'creened by their numbers, nor escape by
being hidden in a crowd.

In times, therefore, when corruption is

prevalent, when vice under any of its modes
is falhionable, we are particularly called
upon to show that We have within us a
good, which we can oppose to this evil; to
show that we have fixed principles of our
own, which we will surrender to no man,
but upon which we will as, and will
itand by them to the last. It ought to be
no part of our charater, that we seek to

diftinguilh

ditinguifh ourselves by affeded austerity, SER M.
and a marked singularity in frivolous XL.
and insignificant matters. Our diftinc-
tion must reft upon a Ready adhe-
rence to rational religion and the uncon-
trovertible rules of virtue, when the mul-
titude around as, whether the high or the
low, are deviating into licentious and cri-
minal condud. Depend upon it you may,
that even that multitude, though they may
attempt to turn you into ridicule, honour
you at the bottom of their hearts. They
will be compelled to acknowledge, or at
least to feel, whether they acknowledge it
or not, that your unshaken firmnefe in what
you esteem to be honourable and worthy,
must proceed from fame principle within,
of a higher nature than that from which
they at. At any rate, by thus maintain-
ing, in every situation, the cause of religion
and truth, and thereby overcoming evil
with your good, you shall obtain honour
from the great Judge of the earth, and
your reward all be great in Heaven.

S4 THUS,

I EM. THUs, in several important instances, I

have shown how the exhortation in the
text is to be complied with, and .in what
manner our good should overcome enil;
overcoming injuries by-generous forgive.
ness; overcoming misfortunes by patience
and resignation; overcoming the-temptau
tionuof evil examples.by teadyadherence
to conscience and duty. In many of.thefo
cafe,- the ccnfli& we are called to.maintain
may.be ardu us and difficult; inclined, as
we t6o often are, by the bent of our.nature
to the evil fide. But, if we wish and :de
fire to do well, let us not be discouraged,
not despair of vi&ory. Weak in our-
selves, we have ground to be firog in
the Lord, and in the power of bit tgbt.
For the principle of good, feeble though
it may be at present in huroan nature,
is never left unbeffiended by God., It is a
principle derived from Heaven, and par.
takes of heavenly efficacy. If it. once take
root in the foul, it:will be made to arise
and grow from small beginnings into gra-
dual maturity, under his prote&ion and

influence

influence from whom its origin came. To SE R M.

Xl.

them who have no rnight, it is written, x
he increafetb Jlrengtb *. The contest be-
tween fin and righteousness, which at present
takes place in the world, is a firuggle be-
tween God and Belial, between the powers
of light and the kingdom of darkness; and
in this state of things we must easily dif-
cern to which fide the final victory will
belong. Let us endeavour to do our duty,
and God will be with us. Let us sincerely
study to overcome evil with good, and we
hIall overcome it. Our feeble powers shall
be aided by divine might, and our im-
perfea services crowned with divine re-
wards. They that wait upon the Lordfxall
renet their Jircngtb; thie Jball mount up
with wtings as eagles; they Jall run and
not be weary; tbc Jhoall walk, and not
faint t.

a *isih, xl. 29. - atiab,I. j3.

# SERMON XII. On a Life of Dissipation and Pleasure. PROVERBS, xiv. 13. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; and the end of that mirth is heaviness.

[ 266 ]

SERMON XII.
On a Life of Dissipation and Pleasure.

PROVERBS, xiv. 13.
Even in laughter the beart is sorrowful;

and the end of that mirth is beavinefs.
SEMl. pAINS and sorrows occur so frequently

X -L in human life, that it is not surprising

that the multitude of men should eagerly
court scenes of pleasure and joy. It is
natural to seek relief from our cares, by
whatever promises to substitute hours of
gladness in the place of anxiety and trouble.
But we have much reason to beware, left
a rash and unwary pursuit of pleasure de-
feat its end, left the attempt to carry plea-

sure

sure too far, tend, in the issue, to fink us s F. R M.
into misery. There is a way, fays the wife Xl-
man in the verse preceding the text, which
feemetb right unto a man; blt the end thereof
are the ways of death. There is a certain
course of life which a man may have chosen
to adopt, as leading to gladness and en-
joyment; but which he shall find at last
to be deftruaive of his happiness: for all
is not real gladness, which has the appear.
ance of being such. There is a laughter,
in the mid#i of which the heart is for-
rowful; and a mirth, the end whereof it
beavinefi.

From serious admonitions of this kind

given in Scripture, it would be very unjust
to infer, that religion is an enemy to all
mirth and gaiety. It circumscribes our en-
joyments, indeed, within the bounds of
temperance; but as far as this sacred limit
permits, it gives free scope to all the grati-
fications of life. It even heightens their
relinh to a virtuous man. It enlivens his
cheerfulnef, and allows him to enjoy with
fatisfaaion all that prosperity affords him.

The

S i R M. Thc text is applicable only to that fct of

. men to whom temperance is no restraint;

who propose to themselves the unlimited
enjoyment of amusement and pleasure in
all their forms, as the sole objet and bu-
liness of life.

Such persons, too frequently to be met

with in the age wherein we live, have
utterly mistaken the nature and condition
of man. From the participation of plea-
sure, as I just now observed, he is far from
being excluded. But let, him remember
that a mediocrity only of enjoyment is
allowed him, for his portion on earth.
He is placed in a world, where, whatever
his rank or station be, a certain part is
allotted him to ad; there are duties
which are required of him; there are fe-
rious cares which must employ his mind,
how to perform properly the various offices
of life, and to fill up the place which be-
longs to him in fociety.-He who, laying
aside all thoughts and cares of this kind,
finding himself in the poffeflion of easy or
affluent fortune, and in the bloom of life,

3 savs

fays within hirnlelf, " What have I to do, sE R M.
" but to seek out every pleasure and amuse- Xl.'
"ment which the world can afford me?
" Let others toil in the common walks of
" life, who have to make their fortunes by
" fober and dull application. ,ut to me
" labour is superfluous, the world is open.
" Wherever amusement invites, or pleasure
" calls, there I go. By pafliig my days
"and nights in whatever can entertain
" my fancy or gratify my senses, life ihall,
"to me, be rendered delightful."-He, I
fay, who thinks thus, vainly endeavours to
counteract the intention of nature, and the
decree of Providence. He attempts to
render his state on earth, what it was never
designed to he. He might as well exped
that the physical laws of nature flould be
altered on his account; and that, inflcad of
being confined to walk like ordinary men
on the ground, he should obtain the pri-
vile-e of treading on the air, as exp-Kt to
enjoy a state of perpetual pleasure, by de-
voting himself to pleasure wholly, and set-
ting aside all the serious cares and duties

c,f

S E R M. of life. Troubles, he may be well assured,

XII.
_,~y .are prepared for him, and await him.

Where he expeced fatisfaaion, he (hall
meet with disappointment; and in him
ihall be verified the faying in the text,
that even in laughter the heart it Jorrowful,
and the end of that mirth is beavinefi.-
But left, to persons of this description, such
general reasoning, from the eftablilhed con-
tfitution of Providence, may not be satis-
fa&ory, I proceed to show them how clearly
it is confirmed by fa&s. For this purpose
let us observe,

IN the first place, the obvious confe-

quences of a life of pleasure and diflipation,
to health, fortune, and characer. To each
of these, it is an enemy, precisely according
to the degree to which it is carried.-
Charader is soon affected by it. As the
man of dissipation often makes his appear-
ance in public, his course is marked, and
his charater is quickly decided by general
opinion, according to the line which he is
observed to pursue. By frivolity and levity,

2 he

he dwindles into insignificance. By vicious S ER M.
excesses, or criminal pleasures, he incurs dif- -
approbation or contempt. The fair profpeds
which his friends had once entertained of
him die away, in proportion as his idleness
or extravagance grows; and the only hope
which remains is, that some fortunate in-
cident may occur to check his career, and
reclaim him to a better mind. In the
mean time, the refpeaable and the grave
smile at his follies, and avoid his company.
In the midst of some fashionable assemblies
he may shine; by some of his fellows he
may be admired; but in the world he is
of no significance or consequence, any
more than the little animals that sport
around him.- Health, the most valuable
of all temporal bleflings, is known to be
preserved by temperance and a regular
life. But by the men of dissipation, it is
readily sacrificed at the flrine of pleasure.
To years of health and soundness, they are
often so foolilh as to prefer a few hours
of sensual gratification. Supposing that no
extravagant excesses, or vicious pleasures,

cut

SE R M. cut flort their health and life, yet what

XII.
_^/- constitution can stand the irregular hours,

the diolrderly living, the careless indul-
gence, into which the love of pleasure
draws those who devote themselves to it?
Hence the shattered and debilitated body,
and the premature old age. The native
vigour and sprightliness of youth, is melted
down by effeminacy and fenfualty. The
spirits are weakened and enervated, if not
funk and loft for ever.-- The fate of
their fortune .may, for a while, enable
them to indulge their pleasures, and to
maintain the figure they wish to keep up
in the world; but let fortune be ever so
affluent, in the poflifion of such persons,
it is in the high road to decay. For to
them, attention to bufincfs, or to the mna-
nagement of their affairs, becomesa burdens
which they fiudioufly flun. Prudent ceco.
nomy is didiained, as a mean attention,
belonging only to vulgar and narrow
minds. Their habits of licentioufiefs re-
quireunlimited indulgence. The demands
of paflion must be immediately supplied,

whatever

whatever the consequences be. Hence de- SE R M.

I I.

livering themselves up to those who can fur- ,
nilh supply for their expence, or whopretend
to take charge of their affairs, they become
the prey of the crafty, who fatten on their
spoils: till at last, in the midst of thoughtless
extravagance, and of general wafle and
fusion, they fee nothing remaining to them,
but the ruins of a broken fortune.

Such are some of the miseries attending

habits of diffipation,and the intemperate love
of pleasure. We fee them daily exemplified
in the world, throughout all the stages
of this charaCter, from the frivolous and
the giddy, up to the rake and the profligate;
in some stages, only impairing health and
fortune; in others, entirely overthrowing
them; in their beginnings, casting a shade on
the characters of men; in their completion,
exposing them to disgrace and misery.-
Even abstraCting from those ultimate con-
sequences in which irregular pleasures ter-
minate, the gratification which, in the mean
time, they beflow, is dearly paid for. A
temporary fatisfadion, it is admitted, they

VOL.V. T afford.

SE R M. afford. They raise the spirits to a degree

xlW.
wv of elevation above their usual tone, but in

that forced elevation they can never long
remain; and in proportion to the elevation
to which they were raised, is the degree of
depression to which they subside. Expe-
rience has shown, that no sensual pleasure,
except what is regulated by temperance, can
be lasting. Every pleasure that is carried
beyond it, is no more than a momentary
explosion; a transient gush; a torrent that
comes down impctuoufy, sparkling and
foaming in its course, but that soon runs
out, and leaves a muddy and polluted
channel. Who knows not the languor and
dejeaion that f)llow every excessive indul-
gence of ple.;tre, or a long continuation
of amufemen: of any kind ? From whom
do we hear such frequent complaints of
low spirits, as from thoft who spend most
of their time in the circles of dissipation
and gaiety, or in the revelry of the world ?
To whatwretched and pernicious resources
are they obliged to fly, in order to recruit
their spirits, and restore some life to their

deadened

deadened sensations ? What melancholy spec- s E R M.

XII.

tacles do they at length exhibit of a worn-
out frame, and an exhausted mind ? So well
founded is the assertion in the text, that
there is a mirth, the end of whicb is beavincfi.

LET us confider, in the second place,

the ruin which a life of pleasure and diffi-
pation brings upon the moral state and
characer of men, as well as on their
external condition. This deserves the
more attention, as the pursuit of pleasure
sometimes sets out at the beginning with
a fair and innocent appearance. It pro-
mises to bestow fatisfadions unknown to a
duller race of mortals; and, at the fame
time, to allow virtue and honour to remain.
With a great part of mankind, especially
with those who are most likely to run the
race of pleasure, such as are well born, and
have been regularly educated, some attach-
ment to good principles at first is found.
They cannot as yet bear the reproach of any
thing that is diflionourable or base. Re-
gard to their word, generosity of sentiment,

T 2 attachi

S E R M. attachment to their friends, and compassion
^XLI for the unhappy, prevail for a while in

their hearts.--But, alas! as the love of
plealure gains ground, with what insidious
fieps does it advance towards the abolition
of all virtuous principles? It has been ever
found, that without the affiitance of re-
flelion, and of lerious thought, virtue
cannot long subsist in the human mind.
But to reflection and serious thoughts, the
men of dissipation are firangers. Absorbed,
as they are, in the whirlpool of fashionable
life, and hurried along by a rapid fuc-
cefiion of amusements, refledion is loft, and
good impressions gradually decay. No-
thing is regarded but present enjoyment,
and plans of improving on that enjoyment
in future. As their tafle, and their ac-
quired habits, carry them into the society
of licentious company, they must fullow
the more trained votaries of pleasure who
naturally take the lead. They become as-
fimilated to the manners of their loose as-
fociates; and, without perceiving it them-
selves, their whole character by degrees

4 is

is changed. Former restraints are now laid S E R M.
aside; and in order to prefcrve the rank .~
of equality with their companions in every
expence, prodigality is the necessary con-
sequence. Prodigality presently opens a
way to the worst vices. They become both
coverous and profuse; profuse in spending,
but covctous to acquire. In order to carry
on the splendour of life, and to indulge
their inclinations to the full, they now sub-
mit to what, at their firlt outset in life, they
would have rejeted as mean and base.
Now is the creditor defrauded; the tenant
racked and oppressed; the tradefrnan fruf-
trated of the reward of his honest industry;
and friends and relations, on whom any
impreflion can be made, are plundered
without mercy.-In this manner all the
bland and smiling appearances which
mirth and gaiety once carried, are tranf-
formed into the blackelt fhapts of vice;
and from a characer originally stamped
only with giddiness and levity, Ihoots
forth a charader compounded of dif-
honefly, injustice, oppression, and cruelty.

T3 Is

S F R M. Is there any one who will deny, that the
a__ intemperate pursuit of pleasure leads fre-

quently into all the vices now mentioned,
and that some of them it'carrics always in
its train ? I hall not dwell on certain
crimes, which none but the most atrocious
devotees of'pleafure will pretend to juflify,
though all who partake of that chara&er
make too light of them; such as, the vio-
lation of the marriage-bcd, the seduCtion
of the innocent, and the introduction of
misery into families once happy and flou-
rifhing. Thcfe are crimes that require
the interposition of the lawgiver and the
judge, more than the admonition of the
preacher.-Let us only think for a little of
that reproach of modern times, that gulph
of time and fortune, the passion for gaming,
which is so often the refuge of the idle
sons of pleasure, and often also the last
resource of the ruined. To how many
bad passions, to how many base arts, does
it give rife? What violent agitations of the
mind, sometimes burfling into rage and
frenzy, does it occasion? What a flameful

traffick

traffick of gain does it form among persons, SERM.
whom their rank in life, and their connec- _,_
tions in Ibciety, ought to have raised above
the thoughts of enriching themselves by
such dishonourable meat;s? How many
friendships has it broken ? How many
families has it ruined? In what deadly
catastrophes has it often terminated ? The
gamceler fits down at the fatal table with
eager spirits and mighty hopes. Behold
him when he rifes,-a wretch, haggard and
forlorn, cursing his fate, and, from despair
of retrieving his ruined fortune, driven
perhaps to entertain the horrid thought of
ending his own exifence!- Difmifing
so melancholy a theme, let us,

IN the third place, attend to the dif-

quieting sensations which are apt to intrude
upon the men of pleasure, even in the
midst of their enjoyments. Not only is
the end of their mirth beavinefi, but ir
laughter, as it is exprenfed in the text, the
beart is furrouful. Often is laughter as-
feted, -when the heart is galled within.

T 4 A ihow

SE M. A flow of mirth is put on to cover some
XII.

secret disquiet. When you enter into a
gay and leftive assembly, you behold every
appearance of sparkling felicity. Alas!
could you look into the breasts of this
fceniingly happy comnpany, how inconfider-
able would the proportion be found of
those who were truly happy ! how great
the proportion of those who, either in their
minds, were entirely vacant and languid;
or who fled to icenes of gaiety in order to
fly from themselves, f'om domestic uneafi-
nees, or corroding cares, and in the tumult
of company and forced mirth, to drown
their sorrows !- At the best, the flashes
of joy, which burit from the dissipated and
careleli, are of a transient and broken kind,
interrupted by reflections which they cannot
altogether avoid. For at the bottom of
the hearts of most men, even amidst an
irregular life, there lies a secret feeling of
propriety, a lense of right and wrong in
condudt. This inward sense is frequently
so much borne down by appetites and pas-
sions, as to lose its power of guiding men

tQ

to what is right, while yet it retains as SERM
much influence as to make thenm Icfible ,
that they have been doing wrong; that
they have not aded that part in life which
they ought to have aaed, and which their
friends, and the world, had a title to ex-
ped from them. Though conlcience be
not firong enough to guide, it fill has
strength to dart a fling.-Together with
this consciousness of ill delert, there will be
at some times joined a humbling sense of
their own insignificancy, when they behold
others meeting with eftecm and honour for
having aced a manly and v;orthy part in
life. Their superiority they are obliged
to acknowledge, and to look up to them
with refpea; while the retrolpe& of their
own life affords nothing but Ihame, and
the bitter remembrance of time they have
mifpent, and opportunities they have
thrown away.-In the midst too of mor-
tifying reflecions of this kind, it will not
be in their power to escape altogether from
a dread of certain consequences which are
in hazard of befalling from their careless

condu&t.

SERM. conduct. Scarcely is any fortune so stable

l,'., as to be beyond the reach of accidents that

will dimrinilh it. To none so readily as to
the men of pleasure, are such accidents likely
to happen; and fond as they are of their
present superb train of living, the dread
that it may not be in their power always
to continue it, will, in spite of all their en-
deavours to avoid such thoughts, occa-
Iionally force itself upon them, and call a
cloud over many a scene of projected mer.
riment.

Can you reckon that to be sincere joy,

which is liable to be interrupted and mingled
with folb many leifations of the most difa-
greeable nature ? In the cup of intemper-
ance, or in the tumult of loose society, the
man of pleasure fludies to drown them.
But of;tn his efforts are vain. When he
- pussies to the utmoll his scenes of criminal
revelry, they will carry the resemblance of
Belshazzar's feast; at which, while the im-
pious monarch was drinking amongst his
lords and concubines, he beheld the fingers
of a man's hand-writing in unknown cha-

raflers

raders on the wail over against him; and SERM.
bis countenance changed, and his beart funk XI
within him *. Thus, in the midst of riot,
imagined fpecdres have been known to
haunt the man of guilty pleasure. He fees
hands coming forth to write on the wall
against him. The very portraits of his
ancestors whiih hang in his hall, appear to
him to look with frowning aspea, and to
upbraid him with wafting in licentious
pleasures the fortune which their honour-
able labours or virtuous indufiry had ac-
quircd.-Of all the clafes of finners, it has
been found, that none are so liable, in some
period of their lives, or at least when life
is drawing to its cldoe, to be finitten with
severe remorse, as those who have facri.
siced to pleasure all the calls of conscience
and of duty.

LrT us confider, in the las place, how un-

suitable a life of dissipation and pleasure is to
the condition of man in this world, and how

9 Daniel, v. 5.

injurious

SERM. injurious to the interests of flcieiy. In the
x, . world, we are surroundcd with lenes of dif-

trefs. We behold the greatest part of the
human race doo.med toh.ird labour and penu-
rious fubfiflcnce. \Ve healr the cries of indi-
gence. We know that every day' tloufandls
are yielding ul, their hrcath, aid thoulands
are attending their d! in^ friend.. Our own
lives arc flecting tatl away. Flourilhing as
our hilte may at prefel.t seem, we know
there is hut a flep between us and death.
The Yo)ungenf and the healthicll cannot tell
whetler they m ny not, within the [pace of
a few d.v, be called to undergo the judg-
ment of (;Gd.-- l I this a lime, is this a
place, where no other thing is to be pur-
sued bht idldy .,inmumenit and perpetual
pleasure ?-- lave you, my friends, who
are t!)pr:ini youlr days in this wanton abule
of proli crity, no feile of the unfuital)lenefs
of filch c(ndluC to the conuition of mortal
matn Do you fee nothing in the Itate of
human life to chasten and temper your
mirth; to bring lerious reflexions home to
your bufom; to admonilh you that it is

better

better to go sometimes to the ho/ife of S FR M.

X!.

mourning, than to dwell always in the botie -
offtcyig ?-- Do you feel no compunc-
tion at the thought that, by your luxury
and extravagance, you are adding to the
scenes of fbrrow which already abound in
this afflitIed world ? For you, and your fol-
lies, the aged parent, or the relccaable re-
lation, mourn. To supply the oppressive
demands of your pleasures, families are
driven from their habitations, and left to
poverty and want. Your mirth forces the
widow and the fatherlels to weep.- At
the fame time, you are scattering poison in
society around you. You are corrupting
the public manners by the life which you
lead. You a e propag iting follies and
vices; and bv the example which you let,
are enfuiariii manny to fol!ow you into ruin.
- Conlider with how much dil-ritent
and indignation the poorer classes of men,
all the while, behold vou. Especially, if in
times of icarcity and of war, fucl as those
in which I npv. write, they lee you in-
dulging in wafietulnels and thoughtlei pro-

fuliuu,

SP.RM. fusion, when they and their families, are
X L' . not able to earn their bread. As long as

wealth is properly employed, persons in
low situation naturally look up to their
fuperiours with refpet. They reft con-
tented in their flation. They are even
disposed to bless the hand which fur-
nilhes them with employment on rea-
fonable terms, and occasionally dispenses
seasonable relief. But if they feel them-
selves oppressed merely that a few may
be enabled to squander at pleasure, and
to revel in wasteful excess, their discontents
are not easily fupprefled. With fullen
murmurs they issue from their impo-
verilhed habitations, prepared for every evil
work.

Sucu are some of the consequences

which flow from dissipation and the in-
temperate love of pleasure. Let not the
effect of wlat has been said be frufirated
by this evasion, that although the defcrip.
tions which have been given be just and
true, yet they are applicable only to such

as

as have carried their pulifuit of pleasure to S E R M.
the most criminal excess; a class, in which __L
few, if any, will admit that they deserve
to be ranked.-Thev who are only begin-
ning the course of vicious pleasure, and who
fin within prescribed bounds, may reckon
with certainty on their bearing a (hare of
the evils and miseries which I have de-
fcribed. Not only so, but having once
entered on an irregular course, they cannot
tell where they are to stop. They have
drunk from the cup of the enchantress; and
being fairly brought within th$ magic circle,
their powers of reflection are laid asleep,
and to make an escape may not be in their
power.

To rome, it may perhaps appear, that

the whole strain of this discourse refers
only to the rich and the great; and that
persons of moderate fortune, and of the
middle ranks of life, who form the great
body of society, have little or no concern
in it. But this is entirely a mistake. Splen-
did fortune, and high birth or rank, afford,
beyond doubt, the firongeft and most fre-

quent

SERM. quent temptations to the loose indulgence
J1.. of every enjoyment. But throughout all

ranks the danger extends of being misled
by pleasure in some of its forms. In this
country, where wealth and abundance are
Co much dift'ul-d over all fations; where
it is well known that the inferiour orders
or men arc perpetually pressing upon those
who are above them, and following them
in their manners, a life of dissipation is
perhaps not less frequent among the mid-
dle than among the higher classes of so-
ciety. The modes of amusement may not
be so relined. The entertainments and
pleasures may be of a grosser kind. But
in many an inferiour circle, there prevails
as much love of pomp and show, as much
proportional extravagance in expence, as
much rivalry in the competition of pafflons
and pleasures, as in the most fashionable and
courtly aflemblies. Sober refletions are as
much laid aside; the gratification of vanity,
and the indulgence of pleasure, are pur-
sied with equal eagernefs.-Let us there-
fore, my brethren, in whatever rank of

life

life we are placed, proceed upon this as SERM.

XII.

our great principle, that to serve God, to >
attend to the serious cares of life, and to
discharge faithfully the duties of our station,
ought to be the first concern of every man
who wiffes to be wife and happy; that
amusement and pleasure are to be con;
fidered as the relaxation, not the business, of
life; and that if from those sentiments we
depart, and give ourselves up to pleasure as
our only obje&, even in laughter the heart
Jhall beforrowful, and the end of our mirth
Jhal be beavinefc.

VL. V. U

# SERMON XIII. On the Conscience void of Offence. ACTS, xxiv. 16. Herein do I exercise myself, to have always a conscience void of offence toward God and toward men.

[ 290 ]

SERMON XIII.
On the Conscience void of Offence.

ACTS, xxiv. I6.
l]ercin do I exercif m/elf, to have always

a conscience void of ofence toward God
and toward men.

SS M.

R . T words were spoken by the
X<illl. ApoRle Paul, in the course of that

manly and spirited defence which he made
for himself, when accused of sedition and
impiety before Felix, the Roman Gover-
nour. He vindicates himself from the
charges brought against him; but boldly
avows his principles, conceals no part he
had aCed, gives up no doarine he had

taught,

taught, and, with the firm consciousness of s ER M.
innocence, appeals to his enemies them- , xl-
selves for the unblemished integrity of his
life and charader.

To maintain always a conscience void of

jfsence toward God and toward men, is a
degree of virtue, to which, in its full extent,
none can lay claim. For who is there
among the sons of men that can pretend,
on every occasion, throughout his whole
life, to have preserved a faultless conduct ?
tow few days, indeed, go over our heads
wherein something does not pars, in which
our behaviour has not been altogether cor-
red, or free from every offence ? In the
present imbecility and fallen state of human
nature, he is the worthiest person who is
guilty of the fewest offences towards God
or towards man. But though the characer
referred to in the text be not attainable
by us in a complete degree, it is the cha-
rader to which we must all fludy to ap-
proach; to come as near to it as the weak-
ness of our nature admits; so that neither
in piety towards God, nor in social duties

U 2 towards

SE R M. towards men, we may be found remarkably

deficient.- You will observe, that this
great Apotle does not boalt of having
fully attained to a confiicnce void of every
offence. His words arc, that herein Je
cxcrcifi, himfilf; that is, this was his object
and his study, to this he formed and trained
himself, to have al:ca!rs a cocficnce void
cf 1ocnce lteCards GCdl and mcn.- As-
furedly, there is nothing in human life
more amiable and refpcctable than such a
charafcr. \Vhcrever it appears, it com-
mands univerlal reverence in every flation,
..hethcr l;igh or low. It is indeed what
all men would wilh to gain; at lea2t, they
wifl that others should believe them to
pcefsl it. Even the most corrupted look
to it, from afar, with a sigh; and however
obliged to condemn themselves for having
fallen short of it, cannot help esteeming
and rclipceing others who are dignified by
the attainment of it.--Let us then con-
fider, filft, what is implied in cxcrci/ing
or forming ourselves to maintain the con-
science void of offence; and next, what the

cffects

efcects will be of having, in some degree, SE R M.
attained it. Xl.

I. IN cxcrc;.g: ourfclves for this purpose,

our first care mull be to have our conscience
well informed, or properly inftruted, as to
what is, or is not, real ground of offence to-
wards God or towards men. Conscience is
the guide, or the enlightening and directing
principle of conduLt; and as our Saviour
has wvarned us, f tbc light whi;j is in, thee
i: d-'.r:;:fs, how great uill tbn,! drlrknlef
be' . If that which should guide us be
itlclf miicd, how widely must we wander
allr.;ly-Therc arc two extremes here, to
each o' which, diiTcrellt sets of men are
apt erronocufly tn incline. One set of men
are apt to bc minlutely fcr;;pulous about
mattcrs of finailkr impcltance; titking, as
the Scripturi djlcribcs them, mint, anfe,
anid c.'i:;i, uc ,i/ tl i

: ncgl/.' the we ightir

n2atters r( tl,' /aLw. 'unctual in their ob-
fervance cf all tle forms and ceremonies

M* atth. vi. 23.

U3 of

s R M. of religion, they hope by this means to

XIII.
xi-- compensate for allowing themselves in

unlawful pleasures or unrighteous gains.
Another, and perhaps a more numerous
set of men, err from loose cafui(try in
matters of moral duty. They admit the
obligation they are under to virtuous prac-
tice; but they lay the whole stress of virtue
on tome particular good dispositions to
which their temper inclines them. On
these they highly value themselves; but
breaches of other parts of duty, they are
apt to confider as small and venial tranf-
greffions. They have balances of their
own, in which they weigh every tranf-
grefflon; and if any of the offences they
have committed, either against God or their
neighbour, weigh light in the scale of
falhion or general pracice, they appear to
them as scarcely any offences at all.-Both
these extremes we mult carefully guard
against; and study to regulate our conduct
by the pure unfophiflicated laws of God;
refling our character neither on a stria
obfcrvance merely of the external forms of

religion,

religion, nor on a partial regard to its moral s . R M.
duties; but attending to all that God has ._
required from us as men and Chriflians--
The truth is, such errors as I have pointed
out, always have their source in rome corrup-
tion of the heart. It is not from inability
to discover what they ought to do, that men
err in practice. It is from some oblique
regard to their interelts or their pleasures,
to their reputation or their gain, that they
deviate into by-paths, while they affect to
assume some appearance of principle. Fair-
ness and uprightness of mind are the chief
rcquifites for directing our conscience how
to avoid offences towards God or man.
He who, with an honest intention, seeks
in every cafe to know what it is his duty
to do, will seldom or never be at a loss to
discover it.

IN the next place, it belongs to every one

who fludies to attain to a conscience void
of offence, to make reparation for whatever
wrong he is conscious of having formerly
done. This ;s the molt difficult, but at

U4 the

S ERM. the fame time the most fatisfadory tcif,
XII.l of cur sincerity in dtfiring to have a clear

conscience before God and man. IHow
can he be sincere in this desire, who allows
himfclf to remain quiet, while loaded with
the sense that all he sow enjoys has been
obtained by injufi . . 1 fraud ? If he con-
tinues, without rcniorle, to fatten upon the
gains of unrighteoufnels; to feast on the
spoils of the industrious; to revel in luxu-
ries purchased by opprefflon or treachery;
dare he hold up his face, and utter the
name of Conscience ? ifoe to him that build-
eth his borfr in unrightcouflefi, and his
chambers by wrong*. In the midfl of his
stately habitation, tbcJlone, in the expressive
language of Scripture, Jhall cry out of the
wall againJI him; and the beam out of the
timber Jball atnfwcr it t. It may not be
always in a man's power to make exaCt
reflitution of every unlawful gain he has
acquired; but to make reparation to the
utmost of his power, for every wrong he

Jercm. xii. 13. 1 II, bI ii. Il.

7 has

has done to others, is the duty of every SERM.
one who lays any claim to principle or _
honefly. If this be entirely negleCded, it
is the mark of a conscience that is become
dead to all Jenfe of 'ight. and wrong. In
vain we pretend t' clear our confcicnce,
by affeding to co, 'ate for fraud or
cruelty, either by adts of ifriF religious
homage towards God, or by some partial
virtues and ffows of ucnerofity towards
men. With rcipea to men, we ought to
learn that we must begin with being jift,
before we can attempt to be generous.
With refi'cc to God, we know that he
delights in mcrrcy 7jore thI i facrifte; and
rejects with contempt the hypocritical
worshipper. 1 will come near to you in
judgment, faith the Lord; and I will be a
fu'ift witness agaifl thi / that opprcfs the
hireling, the widow, and the fatherfli; and
bhat turn aside the tranger from his right.-
The Lord will plead their cause, and spoil
(befoitl of thfe tbatjfoiled them *.

Mlaichi, iii, 5.A

AFTER

s F. R M. AFTER making reparation for the wrongs
< 'L. he has committed, the next study of every

one who is exercising him/rlf to have the
colfcience void of o'cfn'e, should be to
guard againfl those particular snares which
have formerly led him into evil.-If, for
intance, covetousness has on many oc-
cafions tempted him to defraud or oppress,
that he might increase his worldly flore,
it ought to be his first care to correct in
future this inordinate passion for wealth,
by bringing down in his estimation the
acquisitions of fortune to their proper
value; so that he may remain satisfied with
a moderate share of the world's goods, and
become sensible of what small importance
great riches are to real happiness. If am-
bition has impelled him to rife into con-
fideration by crooked policy and intrigues,
let him impress his mind with all the con-
fiderations that will show him the emptiness
and vanity of worldly honours. If a loose
and careless life has brought him into
habits of dissipation, and led him to neglect
those religious duties which he owed to

his

his Maker, let him return to the regular S ER .
worlhip of God; and nourish an awful a~l_
fear and reverence of that Almighty Being,
on whom his all depends in time and eter-
nity.--In this manner it must be his
care to begin, by eradicating those cor-
ruptions which, on different occasions, have
tempted him to violate conscience. This
fIudy to reform all known errors in former
life, will be one of the mos satisfying marks
of a sincere design to preserve in future a
conscience void of offence. For if any of
the old vitiated parts of the disposition be
allowed to remain in their former fiate,
in vain will any man apply himself to a
thorough reformation of characer. The
favourite ruling paflion, if it be foffered to
keep its ascendant, will not fail to drag the
life after it.

IN the las place, in order to carry on

this discipline which I have been recom-
mending for obtaining a good conscience,
it will be highly necessary, that we fre-
qucntly examine ourselves, and bring our

conduct

SE R M. conduct under review. No day ought to
_,, pass over our lical, without some exercifc

of this kind. Every evening before we
go to reft, we iliould fubjc" to scrutiny
the tranfadions in which we have been
engaged. " What have I done this day,
"by vhicih I may either have juflly of-

fcnlded any man, or have ihown neglect

"of God ? What duty have I transgressed ?
" Wherein have I omitted to aa the part
" which my Maker, or my fellow-creatures,
" had a title to expea from me?"-Be
assurcd, my friends, that only by thus pre-
serving conscience in the frequent exercise
es its natural jurifdition, you can support
its rights. If you do not lead it in this
manner often to assume its due fiation, its
authority will gradually decline. There
will)e no accuracy in your moral conduct.
(:orn u;tions will grow upon you unawares.
You will forget tlat you are creatures ac-
countable for your acions, to a higher tri-
bunal than that of the world.- It is a
careless train of living, that is the general
ruin of mankind. It is not so much from

~~, ~ having

having adopted evil principles that men S F R M.
become wicked, as from having adopted x.
no principles at all. They fellow their
inclinations, without examining; weheter
there be any principles which they ought
to form for regulating their condudt. The
chief corrctive cf this inifihlief is that
which has been suggested; by bringing
confcicuce into a frequent cxercife of its
power, and thereby awakening its authority
over our life.-Bitterly it may at times re-
prove us for our fins and follies. Sharply
it may fling. But those reproofs and thole
flings are salutary in their effecd; and
tend to prevent us from proceeding head-
long in a downward course. If ever con-
science become altogether dead and trill,
the symptom is ominous of our having
contracted from hardened vice that mortal
lethargy, from which we are only to be
awakened at the day of judgment.

II. IIAvING thus suggested some of the

particulars which appear most essential in
e.vrrcfing or forming our!fves to attain to

a con-

S E R M. a conscience void of ofence towards God and
_,, men, I come next to recommend this dif.

cipline by Ihowing the happy effects it will
produce. These happy effects are mani-
fold; to avoid prolixity, I (hall comprise
them under two general heads. Such a
clear conscience sets us free from the ter-
rors of another world; it exempts us from
a multitude of disquietudes in this.

Firlt, the conscience void of offence tends

to procure freedom from the terrors of
another world. Many, I know, in the
gaiety of thcir hearts, pretend to make
light of terrors of this kind ; yet nothing
is more certain, than that they are capable
of assailing and dismaying the flouteft heart.
Conscience is too great a power in the nature
of man to be altogether subdued. It may
for a time be repressed and kept dormant.
But conjunctures there are in human life
which awaken it; and when once awakened,
it flashes on the finner's mind with all the
horrors of an invisible Ruler and a future
judgment. It has been so ordered by Pro-

vidence,

vidence, that it is always in the evil day, SE RM.
at the season when men stand most in xnl.
need of consolation and support, that con-
science exerts its vengeance on the guilty.
I might mention what is fuffeted in the
lonely hours of solitude and silence, when
the finner's mind is humbled and deprefTed
by some recent disgrace, or some difap-
pointment ia his criminal pursuits. But
let me only lead your thoughts to what
must await us all, when we shall have ar-
rived at the decline of life; when we feel
the hand of death upon us, and cannot any
more flatter ourselves that it will long
delay giving the fatal stroke. Sufficient,
and more than sufficient, for that day will
be the evil thereof, even supposing that no-
thing within (hall alarm us with dark fore-
bodings of what is to follow. But if at the
time when we are oppressed with sickness
or pain upon our bed, distressed perhaps
with the situation of our family and worldly
affairs, and just about to take the last fare-
well of our friends and of all we have
ever loved on earth; if, in the midst of

~~~2 ~this

S ER M. th s scene of distress, we shall be also tor-

L mented with the thought of what is to

become of us in that next world which is
just opening to our view; if we depart
from life, conscious that we deserve punish-
ment for the manner in which we have
lived; and dreading that the hour of our
being to receive that punishment is at hand;
such a slate of complicated misery who
can endure ? The jiirit thus wounded and
bleeding, when it is going forth from the
body, who can bear ?

I by no means fay, that he, who during

his life has taken the greatest care to pre-
serve his confciencc void of offence, can
upon that plea reft with confidence; or
upon this ground alone leave this life with-
out uneasiness or fear. No man's con-
science was ever entirely clear from all
reproach. We daily offend; and the best
have much reason to implore mercy and
forgiveness from their Judge. The whole
firain of the Gospel tends to humble and
depress those who vainly trust to their own
imperfet righteousness. It teaches us that

the

the ultimate ground on which we arc to s ER M
rcftfor acceptance with God, isthe righteous- xl.
ness and merit of our great Redeemer.-
But this I fay, and testify to you, that
the most fatisfalory evidence you can
possess, of having an interefi in the Re-
deemer's merits, and being finally accepted
through him, mull arise from the testimony
of a conscience, which you have studied to
keep void of offencc towards God and to-
wards men. This will be the belt proof
of your belonging to the number of the
sons of God. It will be the witness of the
divine spirit within you; the day-flar
ariling in your hearts, and preparing the
approach of a more perfect day.-Without
the fludy of attaining a good conscience,
be assured, that all other grounds of hope
will prove fallacious: not the mol fervent
zeal, nor the highest pretences to intercourse
with God, will be of any avail. They will
have no more liability than the house built
on the sand, which, in the day of trial, falls
to the ground. He only whose conscience
bears witness to his faithfulness, his integrity,
and sincerity, in discharging all the duties

Vor,. V. X of

S r R M. of life, can, with a steady mind, and a firm
Xltt. but humble trust in his Saviour, look for-

ward to all tint awaits him in a future
unknown world.

I; the next place, while the conscience

void of offence thus delivers us, in a great
degree, from tle terrors of a future life, it
keeps us free, at the lame time, from in-
numerable difqlietudcs in this life. All
the offences for vwhich conscience condemns
us, become, in o!'e way or other, sources
of vexation. Never did any man long for-
fake the straight and upright path, without
having canis to repent of it. Whether it
be pleasure, cr intcrct, or ambition, that
leads himn alr;ay, !he is always made to pay
dear for any fuil'pocd advantage he gains.
Warily and cautioutly he may at firt set
out, and 1hy many rcilraints on himfefl
againrt procccdi:,g too far. But having
once forfakcn confeicnce as his guide, his
paiion and iaclinnatiqnR soon take the lead
of his co dr.c , aini push him forward
rashly. One had Itep betrays him into
another; till, in the end, he is overtaken,

if

if not by poverty and dii.ac, at least by S ERM.
difionour :id Iliame, by the lol( of fri ends, ,.
and the forfeiture of general eftccm. He

wh wiiidll.h utprig6hlly, has bccn always

lfund to ll Jfurcl l: while in the dark
and crooked paths of fraud, difhonctfv, or
ignoble pleafurc, a thoualnd formsof trouble
and dilafter arise to meet us. In the niacn
time, to a bad man, conilicncc will be al-
ways an unealy companion. In the miitl
of his amusements, it will frequently break
in upon him with reproach. At night,
when he would go to reft, holding up to
him the deeds of the former day, putting
him in mind of what he has loft and what
he has incurred, it will make him often
ashamed, often afraid.- Cowardice and
bafcnefs of mind are never failing conco-
mitants of a guilty conscience. He who
is haunted by it, dares never fland forth to
the world, and appear in his own character.
He is reduced to be constantly fludying
concealment, and living in dilguile. He
miuft put on the smiling and open look,
when dark designs are brooding in his

X 2 mind.

SP.RM. mind. Conscious of his own bad pur-

X[1t.
_i-, poles, he looks with diltrult on all who are

around him, and shrinks from the scrutiny
of every piercing eye. He fees, or fancies
that he feet, fifpicion in many a counte-
nance; and reads uphbraidings in looks
where no upbraiding was meant. Often
he i.f in grejit jfar, whcre noca fr is.

Very different from this, is the state of

the mir.n whofl conscience is void of offence.
He is manly and intrepid in every fitua-
tion. lie has never seduccd the innocent
by guilty art.. Tcl hasdeluded no one with
faife promises. Ile has ensnarcd no man
to trust him by a deceitful account of his
affairs; nor taken any advantage of the dif-
tresses of others to enrich himself. With-
out uneafincfs he can look every man
boldly in the face; and fay with the good
l'rophet Samuel; Belolhd, here I am; wit-
nJIc agaifl nc. WIIh'jr ox hav;ee I taken ?
or, wh si aj17 hacv I taken ? or, whom
have I defJraiiied ? iWhom have I op-
prtrfd ? ('f uwhlj hand have I received
any bribe ?5 Declare, a7nd I will restore it to

2 y'O.

you *. He who can thus take God and the s E R M.
world to witness for his integrity, may de- _..
fpife popular acculation or reproach. Those
censures and rumours which are conllantly
disquieting the man of guilty conscience,
pass by him unheeded. His witlefr is in
heaven; and his record is on high. Inno-
cence and uprightness form a tenfold flsield,
against which the darts of the world are
aimed in vain. Of neither God as his
Judge, nor of men as his companions, is
such a man afraid. With no unquiet nor
terrifying slumbers will his couch be
haunted. I will b&th la, me down in peace,
andJeep ; for the Lord mialct me dwell in
safety.

LET those considerations which have

been now briefly suggested, contribute to
render the character in the text, of a con-
science void of ffnce towards God and man,
amiable and eltimable in our eyes. If in its
fullest extent we cannot attain to it, let us

Samuel, xii. 3.
X3 at

S F R M. at least endeavour to approach to it, and

XII!1
_cv« herein with the great Apoflle exercise our-

selves. We may reft assured, that the more
we partake of this charafter, the happier
and more honourable shall our life be on
earth, and the nearer (hall it bring us to
Heaven. Conscious of our innumerable
frailties, let it be our daily prayer to God,
that by his powerful spirit he would rectify
what is corrupted in our nature; would
guard us by his grace againfi the tempta-
tions that surround us; keep us from the
path of the deJfroyer, and lead us in his way
cterlaufing.

# SERMON XIV. On the Ascension of Christ. [Preached in the evening after the celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.] LUKE, xxiv. 50, 51. And he led them out as far as to Bethany; and he lift ...

[ 311 ]

SERMON XIV.

On the Ascension of Christ.
[Preached in the evrning after the celebration of the

Saciament of the Lord's Supper.]

LUKE, xxiv. 50, 51.
And he led them out as far as to Betbany;

and be lift up his bands and bleed them:
And it came to pais whlil e

be bcd them,

he was parted from them and carried up
into Heaven.
T E sacred Scriptures not only set before s E R M.

usa complete rule of life, but give weight XIV.

and authority to the precepts they deliver,
by the information they communicate of
certain great and important faCts, in which

X4 all

sER M. all the human race have a deep concern.
XJ.v Of those sacs one of the most illustrious

is the ascension of our Saviour to Heaven,
after having completed the work of our
redemption. This is a fuhjed on which
it is at all times pleasing to a Christian to
meditate; but efpccially after the cele-
bration of that solemn ordinance in which
we were this day engaged. We there re-
newed the memorial of our Saviour susser-
ing and dying in the cause of mankind.
Let us now take part in his succeeding
triumphs. Let us with pleasure behold
him rising from the grave, as the conqueror
of death and hell, and ascending into
heaven, there to reign in glory, and to
aft as the protecor and guardian of his
people, to the end of time.- It will be
proper to begin with taking a particular
view of all the circumstances that attend-
ed this memorable event in the history
of our Saviour's life; as they are related
in the text, compared with the accounts
of other Evangelists. The circumstances
will all be found to be both beautiful

and

and fublimc in themlelves, and inftruaive SE R M.
to us. XIV.

WE are informed, * that it was not until

forty days after his rcfurreaion from the
grave, that this event took place. During
this space he had s.own him/rlf alive after
bit pafion, by man, infallible proofs, being
often /een by his difiples, and converfng
with them o' things pertainin;"g to the king-
dom (f God. All being now concluded
which he had to do on earth; the guilt of
mankind having been expiated by his death,
and his Apofiles fully inftruced in the
part they were henceforth to act, and the
charatecr they were to assume; one day, we
are told, he led them out of the city as far as
to Bethany.-With the utmost propriety
was this place feleded for the scene of his
ascension. Near Bethany was the Mount
of Olives, to which our Lord was wont so
often to retire for the exercise of private
devotion; and there also was the garden

* Aah, i. 3.

of

S F R M. of Gethfeimane, where his sufferings com-
,.. nicncced with that agnny in wliioh his foul

wlrs exceeding forr',ill even unto death.
At tl:e spot where hii generous sufferings
on our account began, there also was his
glory to ccmmcnce ; and tlihe fields which
ob long had been his tavcurite retreat, and
Io often had been consecrated by him to
meditation and prayer, were now to be
dignified with his lait and parting steps
towards heaven ; a fort of symbol, of devo-
tion and virtuous sufferings being fleps that
prepare for afccnt to heaven.- There, we
are told, Hle I/i up his hands, and blfed
his fdii/'les; and whilbe e bled them,
he was parted Jrom them. How beautiful
is this attitude of our departing Lord! How
well did such a conclusion suit the rcf
of. his life! Iaving loved his own whicb
were in the world, be loved them to the end.
While he lived, he went about doing good:
He died, pra)ing for his enemies; and
when he alcended into heaven, it was in
the aa of lifting up his hands and blessing
his friends; like a dying parent giving his

la!t

last bencdiaion to his children and family. S ERM.
A worthy pattern is here set before us, of XV
the manner in which every good man
should wish to spend his last moments, in
acs of devotion to God, and expressions
of kindness and affe&ion to his friends.-
While our Saviour was thus employed, he
was parted from/ is difciplcs; a cloud, it is
said, receivcd him cut of their fight*, and be
was carried up into hcaven. IHere were no
whirlwinds, no thunders, no chariots of
fire. Supernatural appearances of old, had
been accompanied with mnijefty of a terrible
kind. The law was given in the midst
of lightnings and thunders. Elijah was
caught up into heaven in a fiery chariot.
But the Saviour of the world was gently
received up in a cloud; with that fort of meek
and calm magnificence, which bespeaks the
peaceful geniusof the Gospel and its Author.
- Angels likewise assisted at this so-
lemnity, as in every dispensation friendly
to mankind there benevolent spirits are re-

* Aas, i. 9.

presented

SE R M. presented as taking part. At the creation

XIV.
I,_r L of the world, the morning Jlars, it is said,

fang together, and all the sons of GcdJhoutc,
for joy*. At the birth of our Lord, we
hear of their songs of praise and joy; we
find them present at his refurretion from
the dead; and now again at his ascension
into heaven. While his di/iples lookedfled-
fajfly towards heaven, as he went up, behold,
two men /lood by them in white apparel;
which alofiaid, re men of alilee, why fland
ye gazing up into heaven ? This fame efius
which is taken up from you into heaven,
fJall so come in like manner as ye have tfen
him go into heaven t.

SUCH were the circumfiances which

accompanied that great and signal event
of Christ's ascension into heaven; all of
them very solemn and striking, and calcu-
lated to leave a deep impreflion on the
minds of his disciples.- Let us now pro-
ceed to confider the ends and purposes of

Job, xxxviii. 7. ' Aas ,i. o0, 11.

our

our Saviour's ascension, as far as they are SE R M.

XIV.

revealed and made known to us; and, to- x
gether with them, the effecs which ought
thereby to be produced on our minds.

IN the first place, by our Saviour's afcen-

sion into heaven, it was made to appear
that the great design for which he de-
scended to the earth was completely ful-
filled. A solemn attestation was thus given
by God, to the virtue and efficacy of that
great sacrifice which he offered by his
death for the fins of the world: It was de-
clared that, in consideration of the high
merits and generous sufferings of the Son
of God, pardon and grace were to be
extended to the fallen race of men. There-
fore, God ra!ed blim up from the dead, and
gave him glory, that ourfailt and hope might
/land in God.

Hence, the ascension of our Lord is to be

confidered as a display from heaven of the
olive branch to mankind. It is a most au-
gust ratification of that covenant of grace,
on which are founded all our hopes of

acceptance

SERM. acceptance with God. We lay under the

YIV.
XIV. sentence of condemnation as an offending

guilty race, till Chrilt undertook our cause,
and by his rclrirredion and ascension proved
that he lucceeded in what he had undcr-
taken. As soon as he was received up
into heaven, and fat down at the right
hand of God, the terrors of the law were
withdrawn. Antient prophecies were
fullilled, which rcprefcnted the coming of
the Mefliah as the renovation of the world,
as the rera of dcc'arcd grace and peace to
mankind. The afcenlion of Christ was the
lignal of his triumph over all the powers
of darknels. Iong they had meditated
our rini, and m;iiitained the reign of
idolatry among the nations. But the pe-
riod was now come when their power was
to be overthrown. When Christ, as it
was lredicted of old by the inspired
Pfalmili, nafended tip wi bigh, he led cap-
tivity catti. e, and g.ve /ij l unto men. lie
then Ipoiled prinlifalitics and powers .

' Co'c! il. 1i;. .

IHe

lie deflro red him that had the pow;er of S : R M.
death, that is the devil '; and the gits JV
which, as tokens of victory, he bcftowed
among his followers, were no lets than
peace, pardon, and eternal life.----Vhile
our Lord's ascension thus serves to eflablifl
our faith in the Gospel,

IT is, in the next place, to be viewed

by us, with ref)pct to Christ himself, as.
a merited reforation to hisoriginal felicity.
As the Son of God, all glory belonged to
him for ever. The divine nature could
neither susser any real depreflion, nor re-
ceive any additional advancement. But
it was as a man, that he appeared andl acted
on earth; that he suffered and died. \Vhat
he had done in that character, entiitd l:;m,
as a man, to the highest rewards. Ac-
cordingly it is in this view of imerltci re-
compence, that his ascension and exa!tation
at the right hand of God, is ;.!vays fct
forth in Scripture. Because he ma.iJ, him-
f// of no reputation, and t '.l i:,J l,:m L/.t

* ' ,.ii. l .

j'irm

SE R M. form of afervant; and being found ins !/hjbi

XIV.
.,x.. as a man, he humbled himfeif, and became

obedient unto death, even the death of the
croft; therefore God hath highly exalted him,
and given him a name which is above every
name; that at the name of Jesus every knee
Jhould bow-and every tongue confess that
JCefiJ Chrfl is Lord, to the glory of God
the Father ".-In this constitution of Pro-
vidence, an illufrious testimony was de-
signed to be given of God's regard and
love to eminent rightcoulhefs. IW'feejefus,
as the Apofle speaks, for the fiifering of
death crowned with glory and honour t.
We fee signal pre-cminence made the re-
ward of signal condcfcenfion for the fake
of mankind; and felf-abafement and hu-
miliation made the road to glory. We
are taught, in this great instance, that God
never deserts the cause that is his own, nor
leaves worth and piety to be finally op-
pressed; though for a while he may allow
trials and hardflips to be undergone by the
bcft men. No person could appear more

I'hil ; , &. ;i.
,, c. 1 Itcb. ii. 9.

ncglcacd

neglected and forsaken by God, than our SERM.
Saviour was, for a season, when in the _,
hands of his foes. Important purposes of
Providence were, during that season, carried
on; but as soon as those purposes were
accomplished, God came forth in support
of righteousness and truth, and by the
high honours bestowed on Christ, eftablilhed
his eternal triumph over all his foes.

While we thus view our Saviour's as-

cenfion as a glorification justly merited on
his own account, we cannot but on our
part highly rejoice in it from a sense of
the obligations we lie under to him. De-
void of every just and honourable senti-
ment must he be, who partakes not with
cordial fatisfaaion in the success and
triumph of a generous benefactor, who,
for his fake, had exposed himself to much
difrefs arid danger.-In that holy Sacrament
which we this day celebrated, we beheld our
blefled Saviour despised and rejected of
men; we saw him treated as the vilest of
malefaEtors, led to the hill of Golgotha
with scorn and contempt, and there under-

VOL. V. Y going

S E R N. going all that thecruelty of his enemies could

contrive to inflict. All this we beheld him
patiently and cheerfuilly enduring forour fake,
in order to accomplish our redemption.--
Now, when at his next appearance we be-
hold such a glorious revolution; when we
behold him rising from the dead, ascending
into the highef heavens, fitting down there
at the right hand of God, and all things
in heaven and earth made to bow before
him, (hall not we, my brethren, with
thankful and devout hearts, partake joyfully
in his exaltation and felicity ?-Thou,
O divine Benefacor! 0 illustrious Re-
ftorer of the loft hopes and happiness of
mankind! Thou art moll worthy to be
thus raised above all beings. Our sorrows
once were thine. For our tranfgrec/ons
btou wert brujcd; and for our iniquitie,
wounded. Now, in thy joy we rejoice;
and in thine honours we triumph. We
with lifted hands will ever bless thee. Prof-
trate at thy feet, we will join with all the
heavenly hots in celebrating thy praises;
in ascribing to Him that loved us, andi

2 wa/lcd

waJ/ed us from our ins in bis own blood, all s E R M.
power, and glory, and dominion for ever! xlv

IN the third place, Christ ascended into

heaven that he might ad there, in the
presence of God, as our High Priest and
Intercessor. This office which he per-
forms, was pre-fignified under the Jewilh
dispensation, by the high priest entering
once every year, on the great day of atone-
ment, into the holieft place in the temple,
and there sprinkling the blood of the fa-
crifice before the mercy-feat. Bit Cbrif
being come, an Iigh Priell of good things
to come, by a greater and more perfet ta-
bernacle not made with bands, neither by
the blood of goats and calves, but by his own
blood, he entered in once into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemptionfor us; be
is not entered into the boly places made with
bands, wbich are the figures of the true; but
into heaven ifelf, now to appear in the pre-
fence of Gqd for us.-'here, we are told, be
ever liveth to make intercejFon for bit
people*.-By his appearing in the human

Heb. i. 1, II. z4 H. H ii. i. .

Y 2 nature,

SERM. nature, while he is aping as intercessor

Xly.
,__ for mankind, an everlafsing memorial is

presented to the Almighty of the Re-
deemer's love to men. That sacrifice which
was offered on Mount Calvary, still con-
tinues to ascend before the throne; and
that blood which was h(ed on the cross,
flows for ever in the fight of God.

CONCERNING the nature of this inter-

cession, which our Saviour is represented
as making in heaven, and his continuing to
appear in the human nature for that purpose,
1 am aware that difficulties and objetions
may be raised by some. I readily admit, that
the whole doatine revealed to us in Scrip-
ture relating to the incarnation of Christ,
the atonement tade by his death, and the
nature of his interceflion for us in heaven,
is of a mysterious kind. It is what we
'an comprehend in a very imperfet man-
ner; and when we attempt too particularly
to explain or discuss any of these dotrines,
we are apt to darken cor/nf/l by words
witbhut knowledge*.-Let us not however

* )ob, xxlYiii. 2.

imagine

imagine that the myflerious nature of those SE R M.

XIV.

dodrines furnishes anyjuft objecion against _
the truth of the chriflian revelation. It
must be confidered, that this revelation pro-
fesses to give us such a discovery of the
Spiritual invisible world, and of the admi-
nifiration of the divine government, as was
proper to be at present communicated to us.
In such a revelation of things invisible and
divine, and which stretch far beyond the
reach of human knowledge or capacity,
it was naturally to be expecled that matters
would occur which should be mysterious,
and incomprehensible by us. Indeed, it
would have been strange and incredible if
it had been otherwise; if nothing had ap-
peared on such fubjeds, but what was level
to our apprehenfion.-In the present ma-
terial fyftelr, in midst of which we live,
and where the objects that surround us are
continually exposed to the examination of
our senses, how many things occur that are
mysterious and unaccountable? The philo-
fopher, age after age, has continued his
researches into matter. After all his re-

Y 3 searches,

FR M. fearcies, will he, at this day, refuse to ac-
>^_» knowledge, that, in material substances, qua-

lities have been discovered, powers and
properties have been found, which it is
beyond his power to reconcile to the com-
monly received laws and operations of mat-
ter, and which he cannot bring within the
compass of any eflablifled system and
theory ? Shall this philosopher then, who
finds himself so often baffled in his en-
quiries, by meeting with wonders in matter
which he cannot explain, presume to reject
a religious system, merely because in treating
of an invilible world, and the admini-
firation ot government there carried on
by the Father of Spirits, particulars occur
which appear incomprehensible to him ?-
Mv brethren, let us be a little more humble
and loher in our attempts to philosophise.
Let us be thankful, that having received a
revelation, which, upon rational grounds,
fiands well attefled and confirmed, the
inylterious docitrnes which ocLur in it are
all of them such as to be perfecly recon-
Cilable with godliners and virtue; nay,

fucl

such as have a diret tendency to promote SE R M.

xWv.

the moral influence of virtue on the lives X
of men; and to bring powerful consolation
to them under many troubles.

TIlrs is remarkably exemplified in that

doctrine of which we are now treating, of
the office performed by our Lord upon his
ascension into heaven. A mediator and
intercessor with God, is what most nations
and religions have anxiously fought to ob-
tain. It has been at all times the favourite
with and hope of men; and from their
earnestness to have this with gratified, they
contrived some form or other of mediation
and intercefion, on which theyrelied; some
favourite hero, or faint, or tutelary fubor-
dinate god, through whose intervention
they fought to obtain favour from the Su-
preme Governour of the universe. This
is an idea which we find prevailing under
most of the modes of Pagan worship. Men
were generally sensible that they were
guilty of offences against the Deity; that
their own services were insufficient to ap-

Y 4 pease

SE R M. pease him; and that therefore they had no
XIV. x.._ title to expe& his favour, unless some me-

diator of high merit was to espouse their
interest and plead their cause. -This re-
lief, which the bewildered nations fought
after in vain, is fully afforded us by the
gospel of Christ. A real mediator is there
revealed, invested with such charaaers as
give encouragement and fatisfaaion to
every pious worshipper. The divine nature
of which he is pofleffed, gives infinite merit
and efficacy to every cause which he under-
takes; and his ponfeffing, at the fame time,
the human nature, gives us the jufteft
ground to trust, that with companion and
tenderness he undertakes the cause of man-
kind.

The discovery therefore of Christ's aaing

as our Interceflbr in heaven, is in the
highest degree favourable to religion and
virtue. It is so far from being a doarine
repugnant to the realbn or to the natural
ideas and notions of mankind, that it ac-
cords, as has been observed, in the general
view of it, with what has ever been their

wish

wish and their hope; and the evangelical S E R M.

XlV.

discovery of the true Mediator, while it x..
baniihes all the superstition and idolatry
which heathen ignorance had attached to
a mediatory worlhip, fulfils to Christians
every purpose both of encouragement and
consolation. It encourages the humble vir-
tuous man, who might be apt to look up
with difiruft to the awful Majesty of
Heaven. It brings consolation to the pe-
nitent returning finner, from the belief that,
unworthy as he is ?n himself, Christ the
Saviour is worthy, by his powerful inter-
ceflion, to procure his falvation.---What
plan of religion could have been given more
suited than this to the circumstances of
man, in his present tate of weaknels and
infirmity ? What more animating to every
.sincere worfhipper?-Let us fludy to do
our best; and if our endeavours be faithful,
and our hearts be upright, we have an
advocate with the Father in heaven, on
whose interceflion we can rely; One who
is able to save to the uttermofi, all who come
unto God througb him. We have not an
high prietj which cannot be touched with the

5 fCeling

SERM. feeling of our itfirmities; but who was

. in all points tempted like as we are, yet

withlout fin. Let us therefore come boldly
to the throne of grace, that we may oltain
mercy, and find grace to help in time of
need *.

IN the last place, our Saviour afccnded

into heaven in order to exercise there the
office of our King, as well as of our High
Priest and Intercessor. His ascension was
a solemn investiture in that royal authority
with which he was to ad as Head of the
Church, till the end of time. All power
in heaven and earth was committed to
him. In token of his being the Sovereign
of both worlds, in triumph he rose from
his earthly grave, and in triumph ascended
into heaven. Therefore let all the house of
IPrael know a/furedly, that God hath made
him both Lord and Chris t. I have set my
king upon my holy hillof Zion. I will give
him the heathen for his inheritance, and the
uttermoflparts of the eartbfor bis pofffion $.

* Hcb. vii. 2z.-iv. ij, i6. t As1, ii. 36.
! Psalm ii. 6. 8.

This

This view of our Lord's ascension and s E R M.

exaltation obviously commands, from all xtV.
Chriflians, the most profound reverence
and submission. No longer let the humble
appearance he made on earth, vilify him to
our appreherfion. Never let the confider-
ation of his grace and goodness as our In-
terceffor in heaven, be separated from the
thoughts of that awful majesty with which
his ascension clothes him. With impunity
none can offend him. If all 'the heavenly
hosts adore him, if the whole universe obey
him, what mull be the fate of those, who,
being of all creatures the mofl highly in-
debted to his goodness, revolt against his
government, and refute obedience to his
laws?

But while with awe and reverence the

ascension and regal charader of our Saviour
is fitted to inspire us, it communicates also
the highest fatisfaaion and comfort to our
hearts. Let the children of Zion be joyful
in their king*. They have a Sovereign to

* Prfal ctlix. 2.

whose

S E R M. whose proteaion they can, with firm trust,

X , commit all their interests in life and death.

There is no temptation, under which his
grace cannot be sufficient for them; no dif-
trefs, from which it is not in his power to
deliver them; no darkness, but he can en-
lighten by a ray sent down from his eternal
throne. Lo! I am with you always, even
to te endofthe world*. From that eminence
of celeltial glory in which he resides, he
beholds and remarks whatever is carried
on throughout all his dominions. No secret
conspiracy can escape his view; no fraud
of wicked men or evil spirits can baffle his
designs. The beatben may rage, and the
people imagine a vain thing. Kings of the
earth may set themselves, and the rulers take
counsel. together againl/ the Lord and his
anointed. But he that fiteth in the heavens
jball laugh; the Lord shall have them in
derision. As his watchful eye is ever open
to obfarve, so his almighty arm is ever
extended to guard, his church and people.

Matrh. xxviii. to.

The

- The fame charaters of wisdom and SERM.
power, of juflice and mercy, which we XIV
ascribe to the providence and dominion of
God the Father, belong, in their fulleR
extent, to the kingdom and government of
Christ the Son of God. This peculiar satis-
faCion his government affords us, that in
the midf of sovereign authority, we know
that he fill retains the fame mild and com-
passionate spirit which he showed as our
High Priest. The meanest of his fubjeas
is not overlooked by him. The inhabitant
of the molt obscure cottage, equally as the
possessor of the most splendid palace, dwells
under his protetion. He listens to the
prayer of the poor, and despises not the
services they yield him. The widow's
mite is in his fight an acceptable offering;
and even a cup of cold water given to a
difiiple in his name, pafles not without its
reward.--Hence the characers of his
regal administration cannot be better de-
fcribed than in the beautiful language of
the prophetical Pfalmif: HeJhall judge te
people with rigbtcorfnefi and the poor with

judgmtnt.

SE R M. judgment. Tbe righteous /hall flouri/h in
x.i.v- bit days. He hallfave the children of tbe

needy, and break in pieces thbc opprer. He
Jball deliver the needy when be crietb; the
poor also, and him that balk no helper. His
name ball endurefor ever. It fall be con-
tinued as long as the fun. Men Jhall be
blejfed in him; and all nations Jhall call him
bliejd*.

WE have now under several views con-

fidered the afcenlion of Christ, and the
important purposes which were answered
by it. In going along, I have pointed out
some of the chief effeds which ought to
be produced on us by this objea of our
faith. Much more might be said on this
subjed, did the bounds of a discourse permit
it. One improvement of the fubje&
which the sacred writers often point out,
must not be forgotten. If ye rien with
CbriJf, jeek tbore things which are above,
where Cbriffittetb on the ribht band of God.
Set your affelions on things above, and not

* Prflm xii.

on

,n things on the earth *. A certain con- s E R M.
formity with Christ, their great leader, in all Xl.
the circumstances of his history, is in Scrip-
ture exa&ed from Christians. As they
must die with him to fin, they must ryi
with him unto newnei of life; and with him
afccnd in heart to heaven, and dwell in
their affeaions where he is. The elevated
hopes which Christ, by his refurretion and
ascension, has set before us, ought to inspire
Christians with suitable elevation of senti-
ment above this present world.-As Christ
is in you the hope of glory, let every one who
bath this hope in him, purify bimielf as
Chrifl is pure t. Let not the corrupt plea-
fures of this world debase you. Let not
its terrors dtjeC you. But in your whole
condut, let that dignity and equanimity
appear, which belongs to those who have
such high conne&ions. Christ, as your
fererunner, hath entered into the highest
heavens; Him, it is your part to follow,
in the paths of piety and virtue. In those

*ColofT. iii. I, . John, iii. 3.

paths

sE R M. paths proceed with perseverance and con-

xIV.
x^ fiancy, animated by those words of your

departing Redeemer, which ought ever to
dwell in your remembrance: Go to my
brethren, and ay to them, I afeend unto my
Father and your Father; to my God and
your God. In my Father's house are many
manJions. I go to prepare a place for you.
I will come again and receive you to m fllf,
that where I am, there ye may be alo *.

*JOhG, Ix. 17. xiv. t, 3.

# SERMON XV. On a peaceable Disposition. ROMANS, xii. 18. If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men.

[ 337 ]

SERMON XV.
On a peaceable Disposition.

ROMANS, xii. 18.
if it be poffble, as much as lieb in you,

live peaceably with all men.

TT cannot but occur to every one who S ER .

has read the New Testament, even in x-v

a cursory manner, that there is nothing
more warmly and more frequently incul-
cated in it, than peace and love, union and

- underltanding among men. Were a

person to form to himself an idea of the
slate of the chriflian world, merely fiom
reading our sacred books, and thence in-
ferring how they would live who believed

VOL. V. Z those

S E R M. those books to be divine, he would draw,

Xv.
_,-. in his fancy, the fairest picture of a happy

society: he would expet to meet with
nothing but concord, harmony, and order;
and to find the vcice of clamour and con-
tention for ever fi!ent. But were such a
person, fond to be himself a witness and a
partaker of such a blissful state, to come
amongst us from afar, how miserably,
alas! would he be dilappointed, when in
the actual conduct of Christians he disco-
vered so little correspondence with the mild
and peaceful genius of their professed re-
ligion ; when he saw the fierce spirit of
contcntion often raging unrestrained in
publick; and in private, the intercourse of
men embittered, and society disordered and
convulsed with quarrels about trifles ! Too
jufly might he carry away with him this
opprobrious report, that surely those Chris-
tians have no belief in that religion they
profess to hold sacred, feeing their praaice
so openly contradics it.

In order to prevent, as much as we can,
this reproach from attaching to us, let us

now

now set ourselves to confider ferioufy the sE R M.

xv.

importance and the advantages of living ..
peaceably with all mcn.- This duty may
be thought by some to poflefs a low rank
among the christian virtues, and the phrase
a peaceable man to express no more than a
very inferiour character. I admit that gen-
tlenefs, candour, sensibility, and friendship*,
express a higher degree of refinement and
improvement in the disposition; and that
a good Christian ought to be distinguished
by acive benevolence, and zeal for reme-
dying the miseries and promoting the fe-
licity of others. But let it be remembered,
that the love of peace is the foundation
of all those virtues. It is the first article
in the great christian docfrinc of charity;
and its obligation is ftrid, in proportion as
its importance is obvious. Blfied are the
peace-makers; fir they Jhall be called the
children of Godt.-1 fihall first show what
is included in the precept of living peaceably

* Vide Dircourfes on these virtue# in the Freceding

Volumes.
t hMatb. r. 9.

Z 2 witb

SERM. with all men; and next, what arguments

xv.
_, recommend our obedience to this precept.

I. THIS precept implies, in the first place,

a sacred regard to the rules of justice, in
rendering to every man what is his due.
Without this first principle, there can be
no friendly commerce among mankind.
Justice is the basis on which all society
refts. Throw down its obligation, and at
that instant you banish peace from the
earth; you let rapine loose, and involve
all the tribes of men in perpetual hostility
and war. To live peaceably, therefore,
requires, as its first condition, that we con-
tent ourselves with what is our own, and
never seek to encroach on the just rights
of our neighbour; that in our dealings,
we take no unfair advantage; but con-
fcientioufly adhere to the great rule of
doing to others, according as we wish they
should do to us. It supposes that we never
knowingly abet a wrong cause, nor espouse
an unjust fide, but always give our coun-
tenance to what is fair and equal. We

arc

are never to disturb any man in the en- SE R M.
joyment of his lawful pleasure; nor to XV.
hinder him from advancing his lawful pro-
fit. But under a sense of our natural
equality, and of that mutual relation which
connets us together as men, we are to
carry on our private interest in confifltency
with what is requisite for general order and
good. Rentier tribute to whom tribute is
due; feair to whom fear; honour to whom
honour. Covet not what is thy brother's.
Owe no man any thing, but to love one
another.

IN the second place, the duty of living

peaceably, not only prohibits all ads of
open injuflice, but requires us carefully to
avoid giving unnecessary provocation or
offence to others. When we confider from
what small beginnings discord often arises,
and to what aftonifling heights from such
beginnings it will grow, we will fee much
cause to watch with care over our words
and actions, in our intercourse with the
world. It ought to be an object of atten-

Z 3 tion

Sl R 1M. tion so to behave as never needlersly tq
XV. i--- exasperate the passions of others. In par-

ticular, we are to guard against all improper
liberties of speech, and contumelious re-
fletions on pcrfons and charaters.-
The man of peace is mild in his demeanour,
and inoffcnfive in his diicourfe. lie ap-
pears to delp)ile no man. He is not fond
of contradicting and opposing, and is always
aveife to cenlure and to blame. He never
erces hiriiflf into the character of a dic-
tator in fuceity. He never oflicioully seeks
to interinmc(ilc in the affairs of others, nor
to pry into their fccrcts; and avoids every
occasion of dillurbilg the good will which
men appear to bear to one another.--
Oppolite to this, stands the character of the
man of unpeaccable and quarrellbme spirit;
who, himlelf easily provoked by every
trifle, is continually offending and pro-
voking others by the har(hncfs of his be-
laviour. He is loud in his censures, po-
fitive in his opinions, and impatient of all
contradiction. He is a busy body in other
rcn's mjtllrs; descants en their chara.ters,

enquires

enquires into their conduct, and on the S FR M.
authority of his own full)!cioris, afflgns _,
what motives he pleases to their actions.
Into the violence of party-fpirit he never
fails to enter deeply; and confidently as-
cribes the worfi principles to all who differ
from him in opinion.- Such persons are
the pets of society, and the troublers of all
good order in human life. Let every man
Jliid to be quiet, fays the Apostle, and to do
his 6wn ibuinefs. Ilho art tbhu thatjudgefl
,:noljcr mans't firvant? To his own mafler
hJlianditbl or jlleth *.

IN the third place, the fludy of peace

requires, that on some occasions we scruple
not to give up our own opinion, or even
to depart from our frid right, for the fake of
peace.-At the fame time, for preventing
mistakes on this subjed, it is proper to
ol)ferve, that a tame fubmiflion to violence
and wrongs, is not required by religion.
We are not to imagine that the love of

* I Thrft. iv. 11. Rom. xiv. 4.

Z 4 peace

SE RM. peace is only another name for cowardice;
,_~.- or that it suppresses every proper exertion

of a manly spirit. The expreflions em-
ployed in the text, /f it be poible, as much
as libth in you, plainly insinuate, that there
are cafes in which it may not be in our
power to live peaceably with all men.
Every man is allowed to feel what is due
to himself and his own character, and is
entitled to support properly his own rights.
In many cafes the welfare of society re-
quires that the attacks of the violent be
checked and refifted.-What belongs to a
good and a wile man is, to look forward
coolly to the effets that are likely to follow
the rigorous prosecution of any private
rights of his own. If these appear to be
pregnant with mischiefs to the society with
which he is conneded, in a much greater
proportion than any advantage they can
bring to himself, it then becomes his duty
rather quietly to susser wrong, than to
kindle the flames of lasting dilcord. But
how many arc there, who, haviig once
begun a claim, clpioufcd a fide, or cngaged

in

in a controvcrfy, are determined to pursue S E R M.

xv.

it to the last, let the consequences be what
they will? False notions of honour are
brought in to jufify their paflions Pride
will not allow them to yielJ, or to make
the Icaft concession, when the true point
of honour would have led to generous ac-
knowledgnents and condefceiiiot). They
never make the first advances to returning
reconciliation and peace. They are haughty
in their claims, and require great fubmllion
before they can be appcaled.- The
lover of peace, on the other hand, looks
upon men and manners in a milder and
softer light. He views them with a philo-
fophick, or rather a chriltian eye. Con-
fcious that he himself has been often in
the wrong; fenlible that offence is fre-
quently thought to be given, where no
injury was intended; knowing that all men
are liable to be misled by false reports into
unjust suspicions of their neighbours; he
can pass over many things without disturb-
ance or emotion, which, in more com-
buflible tempers, would kindle a flame.

In

SF.RM. In all publick mattcrs in which he is en-
,.x. gaged, he will not bc pertiiiacinufly adhelive

to every ncalure which lie has once pro-
posed, as if his honour were necessarily
engaged to carry it through. If he fee
the paflions of mcn beginning to rife and
fivell, he will endeavour to allay the grow-
ing storm. lie will give up his favourite
tfhemcs, he will yield to an opponent,
rather than become the cause of violent
embroilments; and, next to religion and
a good conscience, the cause of peace and
union will be to him most sacred and dear.

IN the fourth place, our fIudy of peace,

in order to be effeatual, must be of an ex-
tensive nature. It muff not be limited to
thole with whom by intertcd, by good
opinion, or by equality of Rtation, we arc
connected. Live peaceably with all men,
lays the Apofile. No man is to be con-
temned because he is mean, or to be treated
with incivility because he is one in whom
we have no concern. Even to these whom
we account bad men, the obligation of liv-

ing

ing at peace extends. This is not incon- SERM.
fiftent with that just indignation which we
ought to bear against their crimes. Without
entering into any clole connetion with
them, without admitting them to be our
friends and companions, it is certainly pof-
fible to live amongst them in a peaceable
manner. Human lociety is at present corn-
posed of a confused mixture of good and
evil men; and from our imperfec know-
ledge of characters, it is often not easy to dil.
tinguilh the one class of men from the other.
VWe are commonly prejudiced in favour
of thole who concur with us in our modes
of thinking; and are prone to look with
an evil eyc on those who differ from us
in fubhjc s of importance. But if all the
supposed blemilhes of those with whom we
differ in opinion ; if the heretical doctrines
which we ascribe to them, or the bad prin-
ciples with which we charge them, were
iilFicient to jutify the breach of peace,
very little harmonious correspondence would
remain among men. Appearances of re-
ligious zeal have been too often employed

9 to

SE RM. to ccver the pride and ill-nature of turbu-
_-. lent pcrfons.- The man of peace will

bear with many whose opinions or praacices
he dislikes, without an open and violent
rupture. He will confider it as his duty
to gain upon them by mildneli, and to
reclaim them as far as lie can from what
is evil, by calm perfualion; rather than to
attempt reforming them by acrimony and
censure.- Neither indeed is it every
man's office to let up for a reformer of
the world. Every man, it is true, is bound
to promote reformation by his personal
example. But if he assume a superiority
to which he has no title; and with rude
and indiscreet zeal, administer reproofs, and
thrust himself forward into the concerns
of others, he is likely to do much more
hurt than good; to break the peace of the
world, without doing service to the cause of
true religion.

If it thus appears to be our 'duty to ex-

tend our fludy of peace throughout the
wide ilhere of all who are around us, it
will naturally occur that there is a certain

5 narrower

narrower sphere within which this study SERM.
ought to be particularly cultivated; to- ,X_
wards all those, I mean, with whom Nature
or Providence has joined us in close union,
whether by bonds of friend(hip, kindred,
and relation, or by the nearer ties of do-
meftick and family connecion. There, it
most highly concerns every one to put in
pracice all the parts of that peaceable and
amicable behaviour which I before have
delcribed; to guard against every occasion
of provocation and offence; to overlook
accidental starts of ill-humour; to put the
most favourable interpretation on words
and actions. The closer that men are
brought together, they must unavoidably
rub, at times, the more on one another.
The molt delicate attentions are requisite,
of course, for preventing tempers being
ruffled, and peace being broken, by thole
flight failings from which none are exempt.
It is within the circle of domeftick life, that
the charaaer of the man of peace will be
particularly disinguilhed as amiable r and
where he will most comfortably enjoy the
fruits of his happy disposition.

HAVING

SF.R M. HIAVING now explained the preccpt ini
xv. the text, and shown what is included in

living peaceably with all men, I come next to
fuggef some considerations for recommend-
ing this peaceable disposition.

LET us recolle8, in the first place, as a

bond of union and peace, the natural re-
lation which subsists among us all as men,
sprung from one father, connected by one
common nature, and by fellowship in the
fame common necessities and wants; con-
ncted as Christians closer still, by acknow-
ledgment of the fame Lord, and partici-
pation of the fame divine hopes. Ought
lesser differences altogether to divide and
estrange those from one another, whom such
ancient and sacred bonds unite? In all
other cafes, the remembrance of kindred,
or brotherhood, of a common pirent, and
common family, tends to soften the barfher
feelings, and often has influence, when
feuds arise, to melt and overcome the heart.
Why should not a remembrance of the
fame kind, have rome effec with refpea
tothe great brotherhood of mankind?-

How

How unnatural and fliocking is it, if, on sF.M.
occasion of omne angry expreflion or trifling -
affront, to which sudden paflion or mif-
taken report has given rife, a man shall de-
liberately go forth with the barbarous pur-
pose of plunging his sword into his brother's
breadt? What a reproach to reason and hu-
manity, that a ridiculous idea of honour, de-
rived from times of Gothick groffeefs and
ignorance, should stain the annals of modern
life with so many tragical scenes of horror !

Let the sentiment of our natural con-

netion with each other as men, difpole
us the more to peace, from a reflecion on
our common failings, and the mutual al-
lowances which those failings oblige us to
make. A sense of equity should here arise, to
prompt forbearance and forgiveness. Were
there any man who could fay that he had
never, in the course of his life, suffered
himself to be transported by paflion, or
given just ground of offence to any one,
such a man might have some plea for im-
patience, when he received from others un-
reasonable treatment. But if no such per-

fccly

SE R M. fedly unexceptionable characers are to be
xv, found, how unjust is it not to give to others

those allowances which we, in our turn, must
claim from them ?-To our own failings
we are always blind. Our pride and self-
conceit render us quarrelsome and conten-
tious, by nourishing a weak and childish
sensibility to every fancied point of our
own honour or interest, while they shut up
all regard to the honour or interest of our
brethren. From the high region of ima-
ginary felf-eftimation, let us descend to
our own just and proper level. Let us
calmly reflea on the place we hold in so-
ciety, and on the justice that is due to
others. From such refledions we will learn
to be more humble in our claims, and more
moderate in our pretensions; and many of
the causes of animosity and contention will
die away.

LET us confider, in the next place, how

trifling and inconsiderable, for the most
part, the causes are of contention and dif-
eord among mankind, and how much they

deserve

defcrve to be overlooked by the wife and sE R M.
the good. When we view the eagerness xv,
with which contests are agitated in society,
and look to the bitterness and wrath they
so oft occasion, one would think that all
were at flake, and that there could be no
life, no happiness on earth, unless to him
who was victorious in the contelft And
yet, in how few instances has there been
any just ground for this mighty ferment
of fpirits?-You have been flighted, per-
haps, by a fuperiour; you have been un-
gratefully treated by a friend; a rival has
over-reached you by fraud; or overcome
you by more powerful interest. Amidst
the bustle of life, amidst the interfering and
crofling of various pursuits and intereflis
are not fuich incidents to be expected by
every one? Ought you not to have been
prepared for encountering them without
passion or violence, as evils belonging to
the common lot of humanity? As light
bodies are shaken and torn by every breath
of wind, while those that are solid resist
the blast; so it is only the little and mean

VOL. V. A a mind

S . RM. mind that lofls poffcffion of itself on every
_._, trifling provocation; while a great and

firm spirit keeps its place, and refts on a
basis of its own, unfliaken by the common
disturbances of life.--Of what finall mo-
ment to your real happiness, are many of
those injuries which draw forth your re-
fentment ? They may affect in tome de-
gree your worldly interests; but can they
affect your true honour as a man? Can
they deprive you of peace of conscience,
of the Iftisfadion of having acted a right
part, of the pleasing sense of being esteemed
by men, and the hope of being rewarded
by God, for your generolity and forgive-
nels?-In the moments of eager contention,
all is magnified and dilojrted in its appear-
ance. A faile light is thrown on every
object. Nothing appears to be .what it
really is. But let the hour of violence pass
over; let the courfc of time bring for-
ward rec!llection and calmnets, and you will
wonder at your former violence. Objects
which once were so formidable, will then
have diappearcd. A new scene has taken

place;

place; and the grounds of former conten- SE RM.

x¥.

tion will seem as dreams of the night, which xv
have pafied away.-Aft then now the part
of a man, by anticipating that period of
coolness, which time will certainly bring.
You will then cease to break the peace of
society with your angry contentions. You
will show that magnanimity which belongs
to those who depend not for their hap-
piness merely on the occurrences of the'
world. Ae that is J7lw to anger, is better
than tbe mighty; and he that ruleth his pirit,
thanl he that taketb a city '.

LET us now confider the different con-

sequences of a contentious spirit, and of a
peaceable disposition, with refped to our
happiness and enjoyment. The founda-
tion of happiness must certainly be laid
within our breasts. If one be pained and
uneasy there, external circumflances, how
flourishing soever, avail him nothing: And
what feelings are more uneasy and painful

Prov. xhi. 3z.

A a 2 than

S E R M. than the workings of four and angry pas-

xx.
_ fiolns? Great and manifold as the natural

and unavoidable diftrcffes of our present
slate are, they are small in comparison of
the evils which men bring upon them-
selves, and bring upon one another, by
variance and dilcord. I speak not now of
public calamities, of facsian and ambition
raging through the world, and hoflile
armies laying waftc the earth with defola-
tion and bloodlhed. Confining our views
Iblcly to private life, how milerably is all
its comfort and order destroyed by tholi
jealoulies, feuds, and anitnofities, that so
often break the peace of families, tear
asunder the bonds of friendflilp, and poilon
all that social intcrcourfe which men were
formed to entcrtain with one another
irom a small chink, which some rude
hand has opcned, the bitter vaters of strife
easily flow. But of this we may be at-
fured, that a full portion of their bitterness
fliall be tafted by him who has let them
forth. Never was any man acaive in dif-
quieting others, who did not at the fame

time

time difquict himself. While tihe tempest S E RM.
which he has railed may be bursting on ...
his neighbour, he will he obliged to feel
the hurricane raging in his own breaf:
and from his reftlcfilels, impatience, and
eagerness, joined with anxious trepidations
and fears, will often susser more than all
that he can inflict on his adversary.

From such painful sensations the man of

peace is free. A mild, unruffled, felf-pof-
lcling mind is a blefling more important
to real felicity, than all that can be gained
by the triumphant ifue of Ibme violent
contest. Never was a truer axiom pro-
nounced by any mouth, than what was
uttered by the wife man of old; Better is
a dinner of herlbs werre love is, than a
flalled ox an,l hatred therewith *. With a
scanty provision of the good things ot this
world, a wife man may be contented and
happy; but without peace, all the luxuries
of the rich lose their relilh.- While
among the sons of strife all is tempefluous

P proy. xv. 17.

A a 3 and

SE RU I. and loud; the smooth fiream, the serene

xv.
_,v atmosphere, the mild zephyr, are the proper

emblems of a gentle temper, and a peace-
able life. Nor is this merely a poetical
allusion. The ordinary language of dil-
course, where the terms are so often em-
ployed of a storm of passion, a calm mind,
a rough or a fiery temper, pliinly show
that all men are sensible of some analogy
between a peaceable dilpofition, and thlke
scenes of external nature that are uni-
vcrfally agreeable and pleasant. The con-
lition of thole who are living in unity
with their brethrcn, is likened by the
pfalmill David lo the rdew of Hern.,n ; the
dew that deftended on the mountains of
Zion, where the Lord commanded the bljf-
izug, even lifi Jr evermore *.

While the man of this disposition is

happy within himself, let it not be for-
gotten, that he is at the fame time gaining
on all around him. From the quarrelsome
and rude, all men naturally recoil; and,

* Pflm c.xxiii. 3.

except

except when necessity obliges them, avoid SERM.

xv.

their intercourse. But the lover of peace _.~
conciliates generl good-will; and is both
refpeted and beloved. Though no abob-
lute security can be deviscd againit the
malice and injustice of the world, yet, for
the molt part, it will be found that there is
no more effteual guard againlt violence,
no furer rdad to a safe enjoyment of life,
than an eftablilhcd character for benignity
and regard to peace. The man of this
character, if unjultly attacked, will have
many to defend him and take his part. In
his prosperity he will be unenvied, and his
misfortunes will be alleviated by general
sympathy.

LET us confider, in the last place, how

itrongly the precept in the text is enforced
by the mot sacred religious obligations.
You all know what a high place charity,
under all its forms of meekness, forbearance,
and forgiveness, pofefles in the ChriRian
system. To bring authorities in fuiport
of this, were to recite a great part At the

\ a 4 'n ;'

S E R Mi. New Tcfamcnt before you.-The God

xv.
x. whom we worllhip, is known by the title

of the God J' Peace. That evil spirit who
is oppolite to him, is delcrihed with all
the characers which express malignity;
tbe cnenyi', the accif'r, bc eliar, the dcjlroyer.
WVhen C luilt came into the world as our
Saviour, he is flyled the Prince of Peace.
The bleflings which were proclaimed at
his birth were, peace iiron earth, and good-
zuill towards men. The whole of his life
was one continued exemplification of all
the virlues that claraicrize the meek, the
peaceable, and forgiving spirit. Never was
any one's temper tried by so many and lb
great pronvcations; never did any one
retain, under thclc provocations, such a
calm and unruffled tcnour of mind; info-
mnuch that the Apfile Paul, on an occasion
of carncft intreaty to the Corinthians, be-
.ciches them by the me.tknefs and gentleness
ifChrijl, as the mofi noted and well-known
parts of his character *. What can be said

. x

ctlnin: . ig.
I.

higher

higher of any virtue than that it is the qua- s E R M.

xv.

lity, under the denomination of which, X
the Son of God chose to be known when
he dwelt on earth ? Let us add, that it is
also the diftinguifling charalcr of God's
own spirit. The Holy Ghost is called the
Spirit of Peace. Meeknefi, gentleness, and
kng fitjrinig, are expreisly denominated
his fniis; and on a certain memorable
occasion, his appearance was marked with
signals that express the mild and quiet
spirit as distinguished from violence. When
Elijah the great prophet was called to go
forth and stand before the Lord, Iold a
great and jirong wind rent iLe mounainis,
but the Lord was not in the wina ; and after
the wind an earthquake, but the Lord was
net in the earthquake; and after the earth-
quake a fire, but the Lord was not in the
fire. After that, there came forth a Jfill
fimall voice. When l.jab beard it, he
knew the symbol of God's spirit; he
wrapped is face in bis mantle, and wor-
~hipped *.

I King:, ix. 1z,3. i.

AFTER

S E R M. AFTER so many teflimonies given by the
JXV. sacred writings to the high importance of

a meek and peaceable spirit, what shall we
think of those, who, in their system of
religion, make flight account of this virtue;
who are ready to quarrel with others on the
most trifling occasions; who are conti-
nually disquieting their families by pecvifh-
ness and ill-humour; and by malignant
reports, rIiiing diffefion among friends
and neighbours ? Can any claims to found
belief, or any supposed attainments of
grace, fuipply the defcta of so cardinal a
virtue as charity and love ?--Let such
persons particularly bethink themselves how
little the spirit which they possess, fits them
for the kingdom of heaven, or rather how
far it removes them from the just hope of
ever entering into it. Hell is the proper
region of enmity and firife. There dwell
unpeaceable and fiery spirits, in the midst
of mutual hatred, wrath, and tumult. But
the kingdom of heaven is the kingdom
of peace. There, cbarit' never fJailll,.
There, rcigneth the God cf Love; and

I in

in his presence, all the blcffcd inhabit- SE R M.

XV.

ants are of one heart and one loul. No ,.
firing can ever be beard to jar in tbat ce-
leftial harmony; and therefore the con-
tentious and violent are, both by tlhir own
nature and by God's decree, for ever ex-
cluded from the hcavcrilv tfcictv.-As tle
heft preparation for therei IefTcd marfiorn',
let us ever keep in viewv that lircqloll
given by an Apoftll; ,;c,: icacc with all
men, aJ holi;ii.fi, withiut -which no man
fJall fie bte Lord*. To the cultivation of
amity and peace in all our social intercourse,
let us join holiness; that is, piety and active
virtue: and thus we fliall pass our days com-
fortably and honourably on earth, and at
the conclusion of our days, be admitted to
dwell among faints and angels, and to fee
the L,;rd.

# SERMON XVI. On Religious Joy, as giving Strength and Support to Virtue. NEHEMIAH, viii. 10. — The joy of the Lord is your strength.

[ 364 1

SERMON XVI.
On Religious Joy, as giving Strength and

Support to Virtue.

NEHEMIAH, viii. 10.

-- hejoy of the Lord is yiorJlrengtb.

SERM. X EHEMIAII, the Governour of Jeru-
XVI. - falem, having assembled the people

of Israel immediately after their return
from the captivity of Babylon, made the
book of the law be brought forth and read
before them. On hearing the words of the
book of the law, we are informed that all
the people wept; humbled and car down
by the sense of their present weak and
forlorn condition, compared with the flou-

riffling

rifhing fate of their ancestors. Nehcmiah SE R M,
fought to raise their spirits from this de- XV-I
jecion; and exhorts them to prepare them-
selves for serving the God of their fathers
with a cheerful mind; fir, fays he, thejoy
of the Lord is your Jlrcr.gth.

Abflraaed from the occasion on which

the words were spoken, they contain an
important truth, which I now purpose to
illufirate; that to the nature of true re-
ligion there belongs an inward joy, which
animates, flrengthens, and supports virtue.
The illufiration of this position will require
that I fliould show, in the firfl place, that
in the praaice of religious duties there is
found an inward joy, here styled the joy
of the Lcrd; and in the next place, that
this joy is juflly denominated thesirength
of the righteous.

I. JoY is a word of various signification.

By men of the world, it is often used to
express those flashes of mirth which arise
from irregular indulgences of social plea-
sure; and of which it is said by the wife

man,

SR M. man, that iln fuclil [laigl,/ r /,!,, beart is f/r.
XVI. -,_ roirfidl, an1zi t/ end (f that miirth is hea-

vinefi *. It will be cafily undcrflood that
thc joy hcre mentioned partakcs of nothing
akin to this; hut figniies a tranquil and
placid joy, an inward compnlacency and la-
tisfaaicn, accompanying tihc pra&.ice of
virtue, and the dilliarge of evcry part of
cur duty, A joy of this kind is what we
aflirt to belong to every part of religion;
to charadcrife rcligion wherever it is ge-
nuine, and to hie effcntial to its naturc.-In
order to alccrtain this, let us conlider the
disposition of a good man with refpe& to
God; with relped to his neighbours; and
with rclpcat to the government of his
own mind.

WHr.N we confidcr in what manner re-

ligion requires that a good man should
sand affected towards God, it will pre-
fently appear that rational enlightened piety
opens such views of him as mull commu-

Prov, xiv. 13.

nicate

nicatc joy. It presents him, not as an SE R M.

.3~~ ~XVI.

awful unknown Sovereign, but as the _-
Iathcr of the universe, the Lover and Pro-
tecor of righteoulnelf, under whole go-
vernment all the interefs of the virtuous
are. safe. \ith delight the good man
traces the Creator throughout all his works,
and bchclds them every where refleCting
some image of his fnprcme perfection. In
the morning dawn, the noontide glory, and
the evening shade; in the fields, the moun-
tains, and the flood, where worldly men
behold nothing but a dead, uninteresting
scene; every objedt is enlivened and ani-
mated to him by the presence of God.
Amidst that divine presence he dwells with
reverence, but vithout terror. Con'cious
of the uprightness of his own intentions,
and of the fidelity of his heart to God, he
confiders himself, by night and by day, as
under the proteaion of an invisible guar-
dian. He lifts up bis eyrs to the bills from
whence cormetb his aid; and commits him-
self without ditruft to the Keeper of frael,
uabh never Jluinbcr nor fleept. He liflens

to

S ER M. to the gracious promises of his word. With
XVI, comfort he receives the declarations of his

mercy to mankind through a Great Re-
deemer; in virtue of whose atonement pro,
vision is made for pardon to human infir-
mities, and for our reception in the end
into a happier world. All the various de-
votional exercises of faith and trust in God,
all the cordial effusions of love and gratitude
to this Supreme Benefaaor in the als of
prayer and praise, afford scope to those
emotions of the heart which are of the
mofl pleasing kind; and which diffuse a
gentle and softening tenderness over the as-
fetions. In a word, a truly pious man,
who has always before him an ohjea so
sublime and interesting as this great Father
of the universe, on whom his thoughts can
dwell with fatisfadion, may be truly said
to partake highly in thejoy of the Lord.

But it may here be objefted, are there

no mortifications and griefs that particu-
larly belong to piety ? What shall we fay
to the tear of repentance, and to that hu-
miliation of confeflion and remorse, which

2 may

may, at times, be incumbent on the molt SERM.
pious, in this Itate of human infirmity ?- -X
To this I reply, first, that although there
may be seasons of grief and dcjedion in
a course of piety, yet this is not inconsistent
with the joy of the Lord, being, on the
whole, the predominant character of a
good man's slate; as it is impossible that,
during this life, perpetual brightness can
remain in any quarter, without some dark
cloud. But I mull observe next, that even
the penitential sorrows and relentings of a
pious heart, are not without their own
fatisfadions. A certain degree of pleasure
is mingled with the tears which the return-
ing offender (heds, in the hours of com-
pundion; the ingenuous contrition that he
feels, relieves his heart, at the lame time
that it gives it pain. If we attend to the
workings of human nature on other oc-
cafions, we shall find that it is no unusual
thing for a secret mysterious pleature to be
mixed with painful feelings. This we all
know to be the cafe in those exercises of
pity and commiseration to whieh we are

VOL. V. B b led

, R M. led hy sympathy with the afflided. We

XVI.
,. .. igrieve and are pained for their distress;

yet we chufe to indulge that grief; satis-
faction is felt in tl;e indulgence; and we
are unxillingly fcparated from the object
whlich his occasioned this painful, but
tender sympathy. A mixture somewhat
limilar, of pleasure and pain, takes place in
the fentinients of penitential sorrow, which
good men fometires feel. In the midst
of their distress, they are soothed by an
internal consciousness, that they are affedted
as it becomes them to be; that they feel
as they ought to feel; and they are gra-
dually relieved by the hope rising in their
breafi, of finding mercy and acceptance with
their Creator and Redeemer. Where the
mind is properly inflrudcd in religion, it
will not long be left in a fiate of over-
whelming dejcdion, but will return to
tranquillity, and repossess again the joy rs
Ibc Lord.

WX IEN we confider, next, the disposition
of a good man towards his fellow-creatures,

we

*e Shall find here the joy of the Lord s c R M.

XwI.

exerting its influence fully. That mild and
benevolent temper to which he is formed
by virtue and piety; a temper that is free
from envious and malignant passions, and
that can look with the eye of candour and
humanity on surrounding characers, is a
conflant spring of cheerfulness and serenity.
Indeed, if there be joy at all in human life,
it is, perhaps, in this slate of the mind that it
is most sensibly felt, and felt with the least
check or allay. It is truly said, to the wicked
there is no peace. In proportion as any
one of the bad passions predominates in the
breast, it never fails, in the fame proportion,
to corrode the heart, and to ihed over all
the comforts of life a poisonous and bane-
ful influence. Whereas all those exercises
of friendlhip, compassion, and generosity,
which are essential to the disposition of a
virtuous man, are to him lively enjoyments
of pleasure in themselves, and increase the
fatisfacion which he taftes in all the other
innocent pleafiures of life. He knows that
he enjoys them along with the good-will

Bb 2 and

S R M. and the bleflings of all to whom he has
, --I fludied to do good. When he can cheer

the dejeded or gladden the sorrowful, he
is cheered and gladdened hirnfelf. If his
circumstances allow him not to do all the
good he wilhes to have done, yet in the
confcioulhefs of good intentions there is
always an inward latisfadion; and in those
lesser offices of kindness and humanity
which are within the sphere of every man
to perform, he enjoys innumerable oc-
calions of being pleased and happy.

WITH rcfpeeQ to that part of religion

which confills in the government of a man's
own mind, of his paflions and deftres, it
may be thought that much joy is not to be
expecled. I'or there religion appears to
lay on a severe and restraining hand. Strict
temperance and felf-dcnial are often requi-
site; and much is on some occasions
abridged, of what is apt to be reckoned the
full and free enjoyment of life. Yet, here
also it will be found, that thejoy of the Lord
takes place. To a person just reclaimed

4 from

from the excesses of senSual indulgence, the SERM.

xvI.

restraints imposed by virtue 'ill, at ffrf, x
appear uncouth and mortifying. But let
him begin to be accustomed to a regular
life, and his taste will lbon he red sied, and
his feelings will change. In purity, tem-
perance, and felf-government, there is
found a fatisfacion in the mind, Iimilar to
what relults from the enjoyment of perfect
health in the body. A man is then con-
fcious that all is found within. There is
nothing that gnaws his spirit; that makes
him ashamed of himself; or discomposes
his calm and orderly enjoyment of life.
His conscience teflifies that he is aaing
honourably. He enjoys the fatisfadion of
being master of himl-lf. He feels that
no man can accuse him of degrading his
chara&lcr by base pleasures or low pursuits;
and knows that he will be honoured and
elteemed by those whose honour and es-
teem he would most desire; all which are
sensations mofl pleasing and gratifying to
every human heart.

B b 3 FROM

S E R M. FROM this night sketch it plainly appears,

v!., that there is an inward satisfaction, justly

termed the jvy of the Lord, which runs
through all the parts of religion. This is
a very different view of religion from what
is entertained by those who confider it as
a state of perpetual penance; to which its
votaries unwillingly submit, merely from
the dread of punilhment in hell; and who
bargain for the rewards of another world,
by a renunciation of all that is agreeable
or comfortable to man in this world. Such
conceptions of religion are contradifed by
the experience of every truly virtuous man,
and are direaly opposite to the views of
religion given us in the word of God;
wherein its wavs are termed 'was ,f' plea-
fantnerf aln patsr of peace; anl where we
are afftrcd that in the keeping ?f oGd's com-
mands, there is an immediate great reward.

But what it concerns us at present to

remark is, that tome experience of thi;
iy of the Lord which I have described,
enters as an clecntial part into the character
of every good man. In proportion to the

e d ~degree

degree of his goodness, to his improvement s E R M.

XVi.

and progress in virtue, will be the degree ,_-
of his participation in the pleasure and joy
of religion. But .herever such plcalure
is entirely unknown ; wherever there is no
satisfaction and delight in the discharge of
virtuous duties, there we are cbliged to
conclude, that religion does not subsist in
its genuine slate. It is either a fancdimo-
nious (how merely; a forced appearance
of piety and virtue, tincured, perhaps,
with tbme deep shades of fillerfliticn; or,
at best, it is religion in its most weak and
imperfect tate. It is deficient in the re-
generation of the heart. The man himself
is in a divided and hovering slate, between
two oppolitc principles of actinn ; partly
aflecing to be obedient to God's com-
mands, and partly a slave to the world.
The truth and importance of this obferv-
ation will more filly appear, when we pro-
ceed to what was propoled for the

lid Head of difcourfe,-to show in what

refpets the joy of the .nrd is jullly said
to be tbh frcgib s ti;c r1ighl'" r.

Bb4 IN

S P. R M. IN the first place, it is the animating
^xVI. 'principle of virtue; it fulpports its influence,

and assists it in becoming both persevering
and progressive. Experience may teach us
that few undertakings are lasting or fuc-
cclsftil, which are accompanied with no
pleature. If a man's religion be confidered
merely as a talk prescribed to him, which
lie feels burdensome and oppressive, it' is
not likely that he will long confiraii him-
self to aa against the bent of inclination.
It is not until he feels somewhat within
him which attracs him to his duty, that
he can be cxpeaed to be conflant and
zealous in the performance of it. Was it
ever found that a perlon advanced far in
any art or study, whether of the liberal or
mechanical kind, in which he had no plea-
sure, to which he had no heart, hut which,
from motives merely of interest or fear,
he was compelled to undertake? Is it then to
be thought that religion will prove the only
exception to what holds so generally, and
will continue an actuating principle of con-
dut, whether we love it for its own fake,
or not? It is true, that a sense of duty may

fomctimes

sometimes exercise its authority, though SE R M.
there be no sensations of pleasure to aflift 1
it. Belief of those religious principles in
which we were educated, and dliead of
future puniihment, will, in cafes where no
firong temptation assails us, reftr.in from
the commission of atrocious crime%, and
produce rome decent regularity of external
conduct. But on occasions when incli-
nation or interest prompt to some tranf-
greffion of virtue, which safety or lecrecy
encourages, and which the example of the
world leems to countenance; when the
present advantage or pleasure apealrs to be
all on one fide, and no fatisfadion arises
to counterbalance it on the other; is it to
be thought that conscience will then stand
its ground, with one who never was at-
tached to virtue on its own account, and
never experienced any joy in following its
dicates?--But thele are the occasions
when the joy of the Lord proves the frengjt
of the righteour man. Accustomcd to take
pleasure in doing his duty; accustomed to
look up to God with delight and com-

placency,

s l. R M. p!accncy, and to feel himself happy in all
, _..c the oflices of ki:ndnifs and humantyv to men

around him; accusto!mcd to reioice in a
clear coilcience, in a pure heart, and' the
hope of heaveily bils; he cannot think of
parting with such latislacions for the fake
of any worldly bribe. There is Iomething
within his heart, that pleads for religion
and virtue. lie has leen their beauty; he
has tafted their fwectnefs: and having such
plealsrcs within himlelf, to oppole to all the
plealures of lin, he is enabled to maintain
his integrity inviolate; or if in any degree
lie has deviat(d from it, fpieedy remorse is
awakened, and he cannot be fttisfied with
himlklf till he returns back to the right
path. Thus, through thejoy f,' the L(rd,
rcligion becomes in him the /iirit 'f Ilve,
ii,l power, and oif acjl d minld*. It is the
peace (' God, whicb p,!//ith undcrJ7an'ing,
keeping bis mind and heart t. It is the
pilh oj'lhe]jq/, which is as the ligh/t,jlining
miore and more unto the perferi day.

* 2 Tim. i '. ti
Philipp. iv. 7.

IN

IN the next place, the joy of the Lord SE R M.

is thej lrctb of the righteous, as it is their XJI.
great support under the discouragements
and trials of life. In the days of their
ease and prosperity, it guards them, as has
been shown, againlf the temptations of
vice; and in the general tenor of con-
duit, attaches them to the lide of virtue:
and when the evil days come, wherein
they shall have no pleasure from the
world, it supples them with pleasures of
another kind, to preserve them from im-
proper defptndc(ncy, or from entering into
evil courses for the lake of relief.-A
good man's friends may forsake him; or
may die, and leave him to mourn. His
fortune may fail, or his health decay. Ca-
lnmny and reproach may unjustly attack
his character. In circumstances of this
kind, where worldly men become peevilh,
dilpirited, and fretful, he who is acquainted
with the plcafures,cf religion and virtue,
can poflefs himself calm and undifiirbed.
He has refourccs within unknown to the
world, whence light arifs to him in dark-

ncfi.

SE R M. nief. From the gloomn or turbulence of ex-

XVI.
,,_, tternal evils he can retreat to the enioyment

of his own mind. In the exercilcs of
devotion, his heart is elevated, and the
cares of the world are forgotten. In his
regular discharge of all the social duties of
life, he finds cheerfulnels and pleasure.
Hence his temper is not foured. He ac-
cufes neither God nor man for the un-
avoidable misfortunes of life. He lubmits
with patience to the common lot; looking
forward with good hope to better days;
retaining always honourable thoughts of
God's providence, and sentiments of can-
dour towards men.-In this manner, his
experience of the joy of the Lord becomes
his lrcenghb; as infuling into his mind a
principle of firmness and flability, and
enabling him, in every situation of fortune,
to continue the lame.

FROM the view which we have now

taken of the fulbjed, it must clearly appear,
that to every one who willes to poffeis
the spirit, and to support the character of

genuine

genuine goodness and virtue, it is an objet S F R M.
most drfirable and important, to acquire a
prevailing rclifh for the pleafurcs of reli-
gion. As this is a moil important object,
so all; it is an attainable one by every man
whole intentions are sincerely upright. For
let it be remembered, that the joy of the
Lord, which I have described as theflrengtb
of the rihteous, is not to be underflood as
a privilege belonging only to faints of the
highest order, who can assuredly trust to
their being the chosen of God. It is not
to be understood of high raptures, and
traniports of religious fervour. It is not
even confined to the lble pleasures of inter-
course with God in devotion; though as-
firedly thele conflitute one great part of
the joy of the Lord, and are auxiliary to
its cxcrcile on every other occasion. The
joy of the Lord is to be underflood of that
joy, which accompanies the whole of reli-
gious and virtuous practice; that fatisfac-
tion, which a good man feels in the dif-
charge of his duty, which accompanies the
performance of all the offices which be-

long

S ER M. long to the station of life in which lie iS
_~,_ placed; whether thele be of a publick na-

ture or private; social and domeflick, or
relating particularly to the exercises of re-
ligious worhip and devotion.

To attain this fririt, of confidering the

discharge (.f our tl.lty as our pleaftre and
happinei}, is certain y tiot ituc.npatil'e
with our prefint ll.te f iniir!nitv. It is
no more than what goed imnr . h ,avc ot.
attained and have iefiflicd of it; that their
delighJt uas in the lJat of (f/'C.; th'_t hlis
flatlu es were fiwcct the /ir lfe c; that they
bad taken them as an heritage f, r eter, Jbr
they were the rejoici r, of tlhtr heart. I
delight to do thy will, 0 my God; thy law is
within my heart *.-According to the pro-
ficiency which men have made in virtue,
will be the degree of fatisftacion which
they receive from the petformance of it:
but where no pleasures or fatisfaaions of
this kind are known, men have much
ground to diftrnft their pretensions to god-
liness or chriflianity.

rs x. . cxix. inI.

It

It is therefore of high importance, that s R M.

.1l proper means be employed to form our _.,
internal tallc to a proper reiifh for this joy
of the Lord. For it is not to b1 (His-
fembled, that much is against us in our
endeavours to have our ditiofition for¢med
for rclilhing virtuous pleafurcs. We hre.,thc
in this world a fort cf vitiated air, very
unfriendly to the health and foundncfs of
all our moral feelings. From our carlieflt
youth we are bred up in admiration ( f the
external advantages of foitune; and are
accuflomed to hear them extolled as the
only real and libflantial goods. We muff
therefore begin by fludying to correct
there false ideas, and persuading ourselves
that there are other things betides riches,
honours, and sensual pleasures, that are
good for man; that there are joys of a
spiritual and intellecual nature, which di-
rectly affect the mind and heart, and
which confer a fatisfaflion both more
refincd and more lasting than any worldly
circumstances can confer. In order to have
a fair trial of the value and effectl of those

f!iritua!

SER M. spiritual etjoyments, we must forbear pol-
XVI. ,- luting ourlelves with gross and guilty plea-

fures; we must even refrain from indulg-
ing worldly pleasures that appear innocent,
in a profute and intemperate degree, left
they Icnfualize and debase our feelings.
By prelerving a wife and manly temper-
ance in lower pleasures and pursuits, we
will then allow thole of a higher kind to
occupy their proper place; and flhall be in
a situation fairly to compare the pure fen-
fations of pleasure which arise from the
consciousness of discharging our duty, with
the transient and turbid gratifications of
fin and the world. To such endeavours
of our own, for recifying and improving
our taste of pleasure, let us join frequent
and fervent prayer to God, that he may
enlighten and reform our hearts; and by
his spirit communicate that joy to our
fouls, which descends from him, and which
he has annexed to every part of religion
and virtue as theJlrengib of the righteous.

# SERMON XVII. On the Folly of the Wisdom of the World. 1 CORINTH. iii. 19. The wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. —

[ 385 ]

SERMON XVII.
On the Folly of the Wisdom of the World.

l CORINTH. iii. 19.
hbe wisdom of this world i fooli/bneJ with

God.-
T H E judgment which we form of our- s E R M.

selves, often differs widely from that XVI.

which is formed of us by God, whose
judgment alone is always conformable to
the truth. In our opinion of the abilities
which we imagine ourselves to poflefs,
there is always much felf-flattery; and in
the happiness which we expe&t to enjoy in
this world, there is always much deceit.
As there is a worldly happiness, which God

VOL. V. C c perceives

SS R M. perceives to he no other than concealed
J.YvL misery; as there is a worldly honour,

which ii his eftitlation is reproach; so, as
the text informs us, there is a wiJ/otm of
tbis world, which is fJoli/lnfs r' ith C'al.
Assuredly there is nothing in which it im-
ports us more that our judgment ihould
agree with the truth, than in what relates
to wildom. It is the qualification upon
which every man is inclined to value him-
self, more than on any other. They who
can with patience ilffcr imputations on
other parts of their charaAer, are ready to
lofl their temper, and to feel fore and hurt
when they are attacked for deficiency in
prudence and judgment. Wisdom is jufily
confidered as the guide of conduc. If
any capital error shall take place reflipeing
it; if one shall mistake that for wisdom
which at bottom is mere folly, such a
mistake will pervert the first principles of
condudt, and be perpetually misleading a
man through the whole of life.-As the
text plainly intimates that this mistake does
often take place in the world, and as it

materially

materially concern' us all to be on our SE RM.
guard againlt so great a danger, I shall XlI.
endeavour to fliow, si 11t, what the nature
and Ipirit of that wiJdoni of the world is,
which is here condemned ; and next, in
what fenfc and on what account it is flyled
foOlfzlefs w1itb GCod.

I. LET us confider the nature of that

wisdom which is reprobated in the text as
foolilhncfs with God. It is flyled the
wijdom of this world; that is, the wildom
which is most current, and most prized in
this world; the wisdom which particularly
distinguishes the character of those who
are commonly known by the name of men
of the world. Its first and most noted dif-
tinetion is, that its pursuits are confined
entirely to the tenmporal advantages of the
world. Spiritual bleflings, or moral im-
provements, the man of this spirit rejecs as
a fort of airy unsubstantial enjoyments,
which he leaves to the speculative and the
simple; attaching himlelf wholly to what
he reckons the only solid goods, the pof-

C c 2 session

SE R M. fefficn of riches and infiuence, of reputa-
XVILI. x-. tion and power, toecthcr with all the con-

venicncics and plealures which opulent
rank or flation can procure.

In purft'it of thcfe favourite ends he is

not in tie least scrupulous aa to his choice
of means. If he prefer those which are
the faireli, it is not because they are fair,
hut hecaufe they fccm to him molt likely
to [rove luccefsful. He is sensible that it
is for his interest to preserve decorums,
and to land well in the publick opinion.
Hence lie is Ic dom an openly profligate
man, or marked by any glaring enormities
of condult. In this refpeat, his character
differs from that of those who are com-
monly called men rs pleafiur. Them he
confiders as a thoughtlcfs giddy herd, who
are the vialims of passion and momentary
impulse. The thorough-bred man of the
world is more fieadv and regular in his
pursuits. I le is, ti.r the molt part, composed
in his manner,, a;1d decent in his vices.
He will often find it expedient to be es-
tcemed by the world as northy and good.

t~5 ^But

But to be thought good, answers his pur- SE R M.

XVII.

pose much better than fuhje&ing himself .L-
to become really such; and what he can
conceal from the weCld, lie conceives to be
the fame as if it had never been. -Let
me here remark in pafling, that the cha-
rader which I am now describing, is one
lels like!, to be reclaimed and reformed, than
that of those whom I mentioned above as
the men of plealure. \Vith thein, vice
breaks forth in occasional fits and flarts;
with the other, it grows up into a hardened
and confirmed principle. In the midf of
the grols irregularities of plcafure, circum-
fiances often force remoile on the linner's
mind. Moments of compundion arise,
which may be flcceededl y conviicion and
reformation. But the cool and temperate
plan of in;iquity, on which the man of
worldly wiliJom proceeds, allows the voice
of conlcience to be long(r silent. The
alarm which it gives, is not to loul and
violent as to awaken him at once from his
evil courses, and iiinantly to prepare him
for a better mind.

C c 3 The

&sERM. The man of the world is always a man
XV-JI offelfifh and contracted disposition. Friends,

country, duty, honour, all disappear from
his view, when his own intercft is in quef-
tion. Hle is of a hard heart; he choofes
indeed to be so, left at any time the un-
guarded effusions of kind affctions should
carry him beyond the line of worldly wis-
dom. The more thoroughly that the spirit
of the worl.l has tken poffitficni of him,
the circle of his affections becomes always
the narrower. Ilis family will perhaps
find place, as connected with his own im-
portance, and with his plans either of power
or wealth; but all beyond that circle are
excluded from any particular regard. It
is his great principle never to embark fe-
riouly in any undertaking, from which
he forclces no benefit likely to redound to
himfeif. Publick spirit he confiders either
as a mere chimera created by the simple,
or a pretence employed by the artful for
their own purpose. Judging of the reft
of the world by what he feels within him-
self, he proceeds on the luppofition that

4 all

all men are carrying on i;terefted designs SF.RM.

XVII.

of their own, anld of course is ever on his x.
guard against thcm. Ilence, to the cor-
dialities of friendflip ihc is an entire
firanger; too much wr;pt up in lii:nfelf,
indeed, to be a friend to any one; and if
his prudence refirains him fro:n being an
open and violent enemy, yet he is always
an unforgiving one.

Candour, openinil, and simplicity of

manners, are ridiculed by the man of this
description, as implying mere ignorance of
the world. Art and address are the qua-
lities on vhil hie values himself. For
the molt part, he would choose to supplant
a rival hy intrigue, rather than to overcome
him by fair opprslition. Indeed, what men
call policy and knowledge of the world, is
commonly no other thing than difiimulation
and inlinccrity. The world is a great shool,
where deceit in all its terms is one of the
lessons that is firi. learned, and molt eagerly
caught by inlch as alpire to be proficients
in worldly wildom. A man of the world,
in Ihort, is one, who, upon any- call of in-

C( c 4 tcreft,

SS. RM. terest, flatters and deceives you; who can
XVII.
i,
x in smile in your face, while he is contriving

plans for your ruin; who, upon no oc-
cafion, thinks of what is right, or fit, or
honourable; but only of what is expedient
and useful to himlelf.

I iI.xvE dwelt the mnrc f;:lly on the

delineation of this charaitcr, that each of
us might learn whether thlerc be any sea-
ture in it that applits to tin!cif; as it is a
charater too frequently met with in the
world, and not always fli Icverely repro-
bated as it ought to be. Let me rnow ask,
whether such a chara&er as I have de-
fcribed be in any refpee an amiable one ?
Is the man of the world, polished, and
plausible, and courtly, as in his behaviour
he may be, one whom you would choose
for a companion and bofom-friend ? Would
you wilh him for a ion, a brother, or a
husband ? \Vould you reckon yourself fife
in contidinv your interests to him, or en-
trussing him witi your lecrets ? Nay, let
me ask, it he be one whom in your hearts

you

you refpec and honour? His flrewdnefs SER M.

XVII.

and abilities you may perhaps admire; x.v
fland in awe of him you may; and for
the lake of advantage, may wih him to be
on your fide. But could you honour him
as a parent, or venerate him as a magif-
trate; or would you wish to live under
him as a fovereig, ? Of what real value
then, let me ask, is that boasted willdom of
the world, which can neither conciliate
love, nor produce trust, nor command in-
ward relped ?- -At the fame time, I
admit that the man of the world may be a
man of very considerable abilities. He
may dilplay talents of many different forts.
Betides art and fagacitv, he m.yi poflefs
genius and learning ; he may be diftin-
guilhed for eloquence in fuppoiting his
own cause; he may have valour and cou-
rage to defend himlelf against his enemies.
- But observe, I entreat you, a confe-
quence that follows. You fee in this in.
lfance, that the molf distinguished human
abilities, when they are separated from
virtue and moral worth, lose their chief

eminence

S ERM. eminence and lustre, and arc deprived of
XVII
.._. all valuable efficacy. They dwindle into

delpicable talents, which have no power to
command the hearts, nor to ensure tile re-
fpea and honour of mankind. Let it be
carefully obl'rved, and always remembered,
that integrity, prolity, and mural worth,
are elrintially rcl';fi;e to give the flamp
of real excellence to any powers or
abilities which the human mind can pof-
fefs.-Having now confidered the nature
and effc&t of worldly wildom with refped
to men, let us enquire,

II. How it flands v. Hi rcfpe to God.

It is said in the text, to heJow/linesi e'ith
God. It is so in three refpeds: It is con-
temptible in Gnti's fight; it is baffled in its
attempts by (;d ; or, when its attempts
are lucccfsfll, they are allowed to produce
nothing but diljlapioiitinent and vanity.

FIRST, it i, contemptible in God's fight.

Pleased and itislied as the wife man of
the wu:ld may be with himself, and ho-

noured

noured as he may fancy himself to be by S E R M.
the multitude, let him be mortified with xvn.
reflecting that, in the eye of him who is the
Supreme Judge of all worth, his character
is mean and wretched. That which God
declares himself to love and honour, is
truth in tie inward parts; the fair, sincere,
and candid mind. He who walletl up-
rightly and weorircth righteorfuicJf, is the per-
son who shall abide in bis tabernacle, and
dwell in Lis holy hill. When our bicffed
Lord designed to mark one of his followers
with peculiar diltindion and honour, he
said of him, Behold an Jfiaelite indeed, in
whom there is no guile*; a charader so di-
retly the reverse of worldly wisdom, that
from this circumstance alone you may
judge in what rank that wildom flood with
him.

But it is not only from the declarations

of the Scripture, but from the whole course
of Providence, that we learn the contempt
in which God holds the wisdom of the

John, i. 47.

world.

SE R Mr. world. Who were thev on whom he con.
XVII. >^y ferred the highest marks of distinCtion

which ever honoured mankind; whom he
singled out to be the companions cf Christ,
the workcrs cf mira'let, the publilhers of
cverlafting happii:c!s to mankind? Were
they the wile ,ncn of tlic w(rld, the refined,
and the :o!i;:i.;, wl;o Vc: c mployed as
the infirumc:.ts of God on this great oc-
cafion? No: he cloic a few plain, simple,
undesigning men, in order to make foolish
the wisiomn of tIe vorltl, and by their means
to overthrow the ellablifihments of the
artful, the learned, and the mighty.-
To this day, God in the course of his
Providence bellows those external advan-
tages which the men of the world so ear-
neflly pursue, with apparent disregard of
worldly wisdom. He allows no fixed nor
regular connexion to fuhiill between an
artful political conduc, and riches, repu-
tation, or honours; he allows them not
this mark of value; he does not always
give the race to the swift, nor the battle
to the strong, nor riches to men of under-

fianding

ftandin ; but, on the contrary, scatters the s E R M.
advantages es fortune with a promiqcuous XVt
hand; and often allows them to be attained
by the vilest and loweQf of men, who nei-
ther by worldly wifdm, nor any other ta-
lent whatever, hd the finallel title to de-
serve them.-Judkte then, ye wife men of
this world, whether your chirralcrs and
pursuits be not mcft c-ntemptible in God's
fight, lhcn y-; 1 behold thnrfc fpiiitual bless-
ings which he csccns, withlhld ficm you,
and hcflowed oi:ly on t';- rod and the
pious; and th.ce .orldlIv ie'nrs which
you covet, when at any time they are al-
lowed to you, yet a!o'.cdi o:iy as a portion
in common to you with the refuse of man-
kind, with many ch-raclcrs lo infamous
that you yourlelves del'pil: them ?

IN the feconld place, the i',dom of the

world if footlitn/sc5 ith God, because it is
baffled by him. Some triumphs he has oc-
cafionally allowed it to gain, in order to carry
on some special purpose that his Providence
had in view. Hence a fplcndid conqueror,

cr

E R M. or a successful conspirator, dazzle at times
XVII.
,_ , the publick eye, and attract imitators of

their characters and exploits. But, if you
extcnfively consult hiflorical annals, and
much more, if you will attentively confider
what is known to happen in private life,
you will find the examples to be few and
rare, of niicked, unprincipled men attaining
fully the accomplishment of their crafty de-
figns.-It is true, that the justice of Heaven
is not, in the present slate, fully manifested,
by rendering to every man according to
his deeds. But I believe it will be found
by attentive obfcrvcrs, that there are two
cafes in wlich, perhaps more than in any
other, the divirne ggcvernment has, through-
out all ages, rcndcred itlclf apparent and
sensible to men. These are, humbling the
high imaginations of the proud, and taking
the wife in their owvl crattinelh. By many
signal inllances of the intervention of Pro-
vidence in both these calcs, God hath deep-
ly marked the traces of an awful govern-
ment, even in this introductory slate; and
forced a reverence of his justice upon the

minds

minds of men. As he will not permit any S E R M.

XVIIl

greatness to lift itfrf up against his power, _.-
lo neither will he permit any art to prevail
against his counlels. While the crafty pro-
jed many a distant plan, and wind their
way most warily and cunningly, as they
think, to fucccfs; how often does the Al-
mighty, by means of some flight and
seemingly contingent event, flop the wheel
at once from farther motion, and leave
them to the bittcrnefs of humbling diiap-
pointment ? lie that fi/telh in the heavens
Jhall laugh; tLe Lord jIalli have thsem in ac-
ri/on. Then, it is immediately added, Jfal
bespeak to them in wrath, an: vex them in
/re dii/plerfire *. The edifice of crooked
policy nhich they had erectcd againfl his
decree, was an edilice of duf : no focner
does hc blow upon it with the breath of
his mouth, than it falls to the ground. 7,ec
wicked are snared in their own devices.
Trhe are caught in the pit awhich their hands
bad digged. This is the purpoe that is pur.

Pfal. ii. +, .

po fd

SF.R M. Posed upon the whole earth; and this is the
Jxv"i band that isfiretched out upon all the nations *

IN the third place, the wisdom of the

world is foo/li/Jnef with God; because,
though it Ihould be allowed by Providence
to run, without diflirhancc, its fullest ca-
reer, and to compass flccelifully whatever
it had projected, yet it can produce nothing
in the issue, worthy of the pursuit of a truly
wife man. It is a wildom which over-
reaches and counterats itlelf; and in-
flead of expected happiness, ends in mi-
fery.-If the exiflcnce of another world
be admitted, can he be accounted wifes
who frames his conduc solely with a view
to this world, and beyond it has nothing
to look for but punilhment ? Is he a wife
man, who exchanges that which is eternal,
for that which is temporary; and though
it were to gain the whole v. orld, exposes
himself to lose his own foul ?-But laying
another world out of the question, taking
things on the footing of this life only, till

* Isaiah, xiv. 26.

it

it can be clearly shown, that the crooked E R M.
wisdom of the world is no better than fool- xX
iflnefs. For what is the amount of all that
this wife man hath gained, or can gain,
after all the toil he has undergone, and all
the sacrifices he has made, in order to at-
tain success ? He has supplanted a rival;
he has defeated an enemy; he has ob-
tained, perhaps, a splendid eltabliflment
for himself and his family. But how is
all this success enjoyed ? with a mind often
ill at ease; with a character dubious at the
belt, fufpe&ed by the world in general,
seen through by the judicious and discern-
ing. For the man of the world flatters
himself in vain, if he imagines that by the
plausible appearances of his behavicur, he
can thoroughly conceal from the world
what he is, and keep them ignorant of the
hollow principles upon which he has acted.
For a short time the world may be deceiv-
ed; but after a man has continued for a
while to a& his part upon the publick
stage, and has been tried by the different
occurrences of life, his real character never

VOL. V. D d fails

SE RM. fails to he discovered. The judgment of
xvl, the publick on the character of men, as to

their worth, probity, and honour, seldom
errs. In the mean time, the advantages of
fortune or Ration, which the man of the
world has gained, after having been en-
joyed for a while, become insipid to him ;
their first relish is gone, and he has little
more to expect. He finds himself em-
barraffed with cares and fears. He is fen-
fible that by many he is envied and hated;
and though surrounded by low flatterers,
is conscious that he is destitute of real
friends. As he advances in years, all the
enjoyments of his troubled prosperity are
diminilhed more and more, and with many
apprehensions he looks forward to the de-
cline of life.

Compute now, 0 wife man, as thou

art! what thou haft acquired by all thy
lelfifh and intricate wisdom, by all thy re-
fined and double conduc, thy dark and
designing policy ? Canit thou fay that thy
mind is satisfied with thy past tenour of
conduct ? Has thy real happioeif kept pace,

in

in any degree, with the success of thy SERM.
worldly plans, or the advancement of thy ,- ,
fortune ? Are thy days more cheerful and
gay, or are thy nights more calm and free
of care, than those of the plain and upright
man, whom thou haft so often treated with
scorn ? To thine own conscience I appeal,
whether thou daret fay, that ought which
thou haft gained by the wisdom of the
world, be a sufficient compensation for in-
curring the displeasure of thy Creator, for
forfeiting felf-approbation within thy breaf,
for losing the esteem of the wifelf and
worthiest part of mankind around thee ?-
How long, yejinplc ones, willye love fimpli.
city, and ibe Jcorners delight in their scorn-
ing, and fools hate knowledge ? low long
will ye love vanity, and feck after lies ?

FROM what has been said of the nature

and the effects of worldly wilidom, you
will now judge how justly it is termed
fool!i7nefs with God, and how much it
merits the revere epithets which are given
it in Scripture, of earthly, sensual, and de-

Dd2 vilit.

SE M. vilii7.'. Oppolite to it stands the wfdom
x ,_L that isfrcri above, which is,' fcribed by an

apofile, as pure, pcaceabl, g'ntle, and easy
to be entreated, full rs mercy and good fruits,
without partiality, and withou ipocrify*.-
This, and this only, is th *al wildom,
which it is both our duty and our interest
to cultivate. It carries every charader of
being far superior to the wisdom of the
world. It is masculine and generous; it
is magnanimous and brave; it is uniform
and consistent. The wife man of the
world is obliged to shape and form his
course according to the changing occur-
rences of the world; he is unsteady and
perplexed; he trembles at every possible
consequence, and is ever looking to fu-
turity with a troubled mind. But the wife
man in God's fight, moves in a higher
sphere. His integrity dirccts his course
without perplexity or trouble. He en-
quires only what is right, becoming, and
honourable for him to do. Being satisfied

* James, ;ii. i. 17.

7 as

as to this, he asks no farther qucflions. SERM.
The issue it ic not in his power to direct; XV ,
but the part which is afligned to him,
he will a ; secure, that come what will,
in life and ( ath, the Providence of that
God whor.. .,e serves, will effectually
guard all his great intertfts. At the fame
time, tl;e spirit of this wisdom is per-
fectiy consistent with proper foresight,
and vigilant attention. It is opi',ed to
art and cunninrg, not to prudence and
caution. It i, the mark, not of a weak
and improvident, but of a great and noble
mind ; which will in no event take re-
fuge in falsehood and diflimulation ; which
scorns deceit, becauie it holds it to be
mean and balf; and flcks no disguise,
because it needs none to hide it.-Such
a character is both amiable and vene-
rable. While it ennoblcs the magitrate
and the judge, and adds honour and
dignity to the most exalted stations, it
commands refpedt in every rank of life.
When the memory of artful and crooked

D d 3 policy

SE R M. policy speedily finks, and is extinguiflh
.vlL ed, this true wisdom shall long preserve

an honourable memorial among men,
and from God shall receive everlaftiing
glory.

# SERMON XVIII. On the GOVERNMENT of HUMAN AFFAIRS by PROVIDENCE. PROVERBS, xvi. 9. A man's heart deviseth his way; but the Lord directeth his steps.

[ 4°7 ]

S E R M 0 N XVIII.
On the GOVERNMENT of HUMAN

AFFAIRS by PROVIDENCE.

PROVERBS, xvi. 9.
A man's heart deviftbeh his way; but the

Lord dirdleth hbi Jlebr.

A N Y devices there are, and much SERM.
exercise of thought and counsel ever XVIII

going on among mankind. When we look
abroad into the world, we behold a very
bury and acive scene; a great multitude
always in motion, acuated by a variety of
paflions, and engaged in the prosecution
of many different designs, where they

D d 4 commonly

S R M. commonly flatter themnifves with the

- profped of fLicccfs. But, much of this

labour we behold at the fame time falling
to the ground. Tbhe race is fr from being
aluwl, to the fio'it, or the battle to the
Jfrong, or ricIJhcr to men of underf7lading.
It plainly appears, that the efforts of our
activity, how great soever they may be, are
fuije't to the control of a fuperiour in-
visible powcr; to that Providence of Heaven
which works by secret and imperceptible,
but irresistible means. Higher counfcls than
ours, are concerned in the issues of human
conduct. Deeper and more extenlive plans,
of which nothing is known to us, are car-
ried on above. The line is let out, to al-
low us to run a certain length; but by that
line we are all the while invisibly held, and
are recalled and checked at the pleasure of
Heaven.-Such being now the condition
of man on earth, let us confider what in-
ftrution this state of things is fitted to afford
us. I (hall first illustrate a little farther the
pofi;ion in the text, that though a an's heart
may dcvifcl is way, it is thcLord wbodirefeth

his

birs jepr; and then point out the praQical sE R M,
improvement to be made of this dotrine. xvill

AMONG all who admit the existence of a

Deity, it has been a general belief that he
exercifcs some government over human
affairs. It appeared alrogethTer contrary to
reason, to fuppole that at'er God had erect-
ed this flupendous fihrik of the universe,
had beautified it with ob nuch ornament,
and peopled it with such a multitude of ra-
tional beings, he should then have thrown
it out from his care, as a despised, neglected
offspring, and allowed its affairs to float
about at random. There was indeed one set
of ancient philosophers who adopted this
ahfurd opinion; but though they nominally
allowed the existence of lome beings whom
they called gods, yet as they altribed to
them neither the creation nor the govern-
ment of the world, they were held to be in
reality Atheifis.

In what manner Providence interposes in

human affairs; by what means it influences
the thoughts and counsels of men, and,

notwith-

R M. notwithstanding the influence it exerts,
XVIll leaves to them the freedom of will and

choice, are fubjeats of dark and myfle-
rious nature, and which have given occa-
sion to many an intricate controversy. Let
us remember, that the manner in which
God influences the motion of all the hea-
venly bodies, the nature of that secret
power by which he is ever dire&ing the fun
and the moon, the planets, liars, and comets,
in their course through the heavens, while
they appear to move themselves. in a free
course, are matters no less inexplicable to
us, than the manner in which he influences
the counsels of men. But though the
mode of divine operation remains un-
known, the faa of an overruling influence
is equally certain in the moral, as it is in the
natural world. In cafes where the faa is
clearly authenticated, we are not at liberty
to call its truth in question, merely because
we understand not the manner in which it
is brought about. Nothing can be more
clear from the teflimony of Scripture, than
that God takes part in all that happens

6 among

among mankind; direding and overruling SERM.
the whole course of events so as to make _
every one of them answer the designs of
his wife and righteous government. This
is diftinaly and explicitly asserted in the
text. Throughout all the sacred writings,
God is reprelentvd as on every occalion,
by various dilpenfations of his Providence,
rewarding the righteous, or chastening
them according as his wisdom requires,
and punishing the wicked. We cannot
indeed conceive God aCing as the gover-
nor of the world at all, unless his govern-
ment were to extend to all the events that
happen. It is upon the supposition of a
particular Providence, that our worlhip
and prayers to him are founded. All his
perfecions would be utterly insignificant to
us, if they were not exercised on every oc-
cafion, according as the circumitances of
his creatures required. The Almighty
would then be no more than an uncon-
cerned fpeaator of the behaviour of his
fubjeds, regarding the obedient and the re-
bellious with an equal eye.

It

S E R M. It were needlers to prorecute any farthei
xvlt. the argument in favour ofa particular Provi-

dence. The experience of every one must,
more or lels, bear testimony to it. We
need not for this purpose have recourse to
those sudden and uuexpeled vicissitudes,
which have fonictimes aflonifhed whole na-
tions, and drawn their attention to the con-
lpicuous hand of Hcaven. We need not
appeal to the hiflory of the ftatcfman and
the warrior; of the ambitious and the en-
terprizing. We confine our observation
to those whose lives have been most plain
and simple, and who had no desire to de-
part from the ordinary train of condua.-
In how many instances, my friends, have
you found, that you are held in fubjeaion
to a higher Power, on whom depends the
accomplifiment of your wifhcs and de-
signs ? Fondly you had projeced some fa-
vourite plan. You thought that you had
forecast, and provided for all that might
happen. You had taken your measures
with such vigilant prudence, that on every
fide you seemed to yourself perfedly guarded

and

and fccure. But, lo! some little event SE R M.
hath come about, unforcfeen by you, and Xvll.
in its confct(ucilzcs, at the firti icermingly
inconfiderab!c, wh:.h yet l:l:!: t':rned the
whole course of th ngs into a nc' direc-
tion, and blasted all your hopes. At other
timcs, your co fis.C!S and plans have been
permitted to fuccccd. You then ar plauded
your own wi,'lom, and fat doviil to feast
on the happiness you had attained. To
your surprise you found, that happlnefs was
not there; and that Goo's decree had ap-
pointed it to be only vanity. We labour
for prosperity; and obtain it not. Unex-
peted, it is sometimes made to drop upon
us, as of its own accord. The happiness
of man depends on secret fpringN, too nice
and delicate to be adjusted by human art.
It requires a favourable combination of
external circumstances wih the state of his
own mind, To accomplish on every oc-
cafion such a combination, is far beyond
his power; but it is what God can at all
times effect; as the whole series of exter-
nal causes are arranged according to his

pleasure,

S ER M. pleasure, and the hearts of all men are in
_v-I his hands, to turn them wherefocver he wills,

as rivers of water. From the imperfedion
of our knowledge to ascertain what is
good for us, and from the defect of our
power to bring about that good when
known, arise all those disappointments
which continually tefif&:, that the way es
lman is not in hi:'/i/f; that he is not the
malter of his own lot, that though he
nmay ccs, it it - GC.d who d;ri.r; God,
who can make the Imalleft incident an es-
feCtnal inftrumcnt of his Providence for
ovcrturning the molt laboured plans of
nlen.

Accident, and chance, and fortune, are

words which we oten hear mentioned,
and much is ascribcd to them in the life of
man. But they arc words without mean-
ing; or, as far as they have any figni-
fication, they are no other than names for
the unknown operations of Providence.
For it is certain, that in God's universe
nothing comes to pals caufelefsly, or in
vain. Every event has its own determined

direlion.

diretion. That chaos of human affairs SE R M.
and intrigues, where we can fee no light; XVII!.
that mass of disorder and confusion which
they often present to our view, is all clear-
ness and order in the fight of Him who is
governing and direacing all, and bringing
forward every event in its due time and
place. The Lord filttb oa the flood. The
Lord maketh the wrathl of man to praie
him, as he maketh the bail and the rain
obey his word. Ie bath prepared his throne
in the heavens; and his kingdom ruleth over
all. 1 man's heart deviith his way, but the
Lord direletb hbis jeps.

HAVING illufirated the doctrine of the

text, I proceed to (how how it is to be
improved by us. I must begin with warn-
ing you, that the doctrine I have illus-
trated has no tendency to illperfede coun-
fel, design, or a proper exertion of the
adive powers of man. Because Providence
is fuperiour to us, it does not follow that
therefore man has no part to ad ; or be-
cause our industry is sometimes disappoint-

ed,

SE R M. ed, that therefore it is always vain. It is
XVIII.
«.-, by the use of ordinary means, that Provi-

dence, for the most part, accomplishes its
designs. Man dev ilng his own way, and
carrying on his own plans, has a place in
the order of means which Providence em-
ploys. To exertions therefore of his own,
he is called by God. His Maker framed
him for a&ion; and then only he is happy,
when in acion he is properly employed.
To supine idlencrs, to a vain and prefump-
tuous trust in Providence, while we neglec
what is incumbent on us to perform, no
encouragement is given in Scripture , on
the contrary, threatenings are denounced
against it. But the doArine of the text is to
be improved,

IN the first place, for correcing anxious

and immoderate care about the future
events of our life. This anxiety is the
source of much fin, and therefore is often
rebuked in Scripture, as alienating the mind
from God, and from the higher objeAs of
virtue and religion, and filling the heart

with

with passions which both annoy and cor- SERM.

XVIII.

rnpt it. If it be the parent of much fin,
it is certainly also the offspring of great
folly. For in such a itate as human life
has just now been represented to be, what
means this mighty bustle and stir, this reft-
less perturbation of thought and care, as if
all the issues of futurity refted wholly on
our conduA ?- Something depends upon
thyself; and there is reason, upon this ac-
count, for aacing thy part with prudence
and attention. But upon a hand unfcen it
depends, either to overturn all thy projects,
or to crown them with success; and thcre-
fore, when the isSue is so uncertain, thine
attention should never run into immoderate
care. By dilquieting thyself so much
about futurity, thou takes upon thy flioul-
ders a load which is nct thine, and which
indeed thou art unable to bear.

The folly of such anxiety is aggravated

by this consideration, that all events are
under a much better and wiser direction
than we could place them. Perhaps that
evil which we have dreaded so much in

VOL. V. E e profpea,

SER M. profped, may never be suffered to arrive.
XVlll. Providence may either have turned into a

quite different course, that black cloud
which appeared to carry the storm; or be-
fore the storm burfl, our heads may be
laid so low as to be out of its reach. Per-
haps, also, the storm may be permitted to
come upon us, and yet under its dark wings
may bring to us some secret and unexpeced
good. Who knowetb what is good for man
all the days of his vain life, which be spend-
ethb a aJhadow ? Who knoweth this, my
brethren, except God ? And who consult-
eth it so effetually as He, who by his in-
finite wisdom makelb all things work toge-
ther for good to hbem who love him Is it
not, then, our greatest happiness, that when
man devifetb, God diretetb ? Is it not far
ter for us than if the cafe were reversed;
if the all wife God were only ineffe&ually
to devise, and man, blind, and ignorant,
and raih as he is, were to have the full di-
recion of his own Rfeps ?-Wherefore vex
not thyself in vain. To the unavoidable
evils of life, add not this evil of thine own

procuring,

procuring, a tormenting anxiety about the SE R M.
fuccels of thy designs. The great rule vIL
both of religion and wisdom is, Do thy
duty, and leave the ifflle to Heaven.
Commit thy way unto the Lord. AA thy
part fairly, and as wifely as thou canst, for
thine apparent interest: and then, with a
steady and untroubled mind, wait for what
God shall fee meet to appoint. This is
wisdom: all beyond this is vanity and folly.

IN the second place, the doctrine of the

text is calculated not only to repress anx-
iety, but to enforce moderation of mind
in every fate; it humbles the pride of
prosperity, and prevents that despair which
is incident to adverfity.-The presumption
of prosperity is the source both of vices
and mischiefs innumerable. It renders
men forgetful of God and religion. It in-
toxicates them with the love, and immerses
them in the indulgence of pleasure. It
hardens their hearts to the diltreiTes of their
brethren. Now, confider, how little ground
the real situation of the most prolperous

E e man

S-E R M. man affords for this vain elation of mind.
XVil. He is dependent every moment on the

pleasure of a fuperiour; and knows not, but
Providence may be just preparing for him
the molt unforefcen reverses. Shall he boa/i
bimf/lf of to-morrow, who knowetb not
what a day may bringforth Z He bath per-
haps said in his heart, my morntain lands
Prong; I shall never be moved. But God
needeth only to hide kis face, and presently
/c is troubled. That little eminence on
which be flood, and from which he fur-
veyed with pride his fellow creatures below
him, was no more than an eminence of
tuft. The Almighty blows upon it with
the breath of his mouth, and it is scattered.
Belongs it to him whose tenure of prof-
perity is so insecure, to utter the voice of
contempt, or to lift the rod of oppreffioa
over his fellows, when over his own head
is firetched that high arm of Heaven, which
levels, at one touch, the mighty with the
low ?

The government of God is accompanied
with this signal advantage, that at once it

8 humble#

humbles the proud, and revives the dillreff- s E R M.

xVII .

ed. As long as we believe in one higher xv,
than the highest, to whom all mult look up,
the greatest man is t..uht to be modest,
and to feel his dependence; and the lowell
man has an objeat of continual relource
and hope. Injured by men, he can fly to
that righteous governour who rules the
earth, and, from his interpolition, hope for
better days. Providence is the great lanc-
tuary to the affliaed vho maintain their
integrity. Consolation they always find in
the belief of it; and often there has issued
from this fanduary the moll seasonable re-
lief. There issues from it, at all times, this
voice of comfort; Trfl in the Lord and do
good; andfo thou flialt dwell in the Land, and
verily thou Jlialt be fJi *. Thine enemies
may conspire; the Htiithen maiy rage, and the
people imam'ine a vain thiii. ilut he that
rttetb in the heavens JlJall laughl ; the Lord
Jhall bold them in dcriricn. lFor the L'.rd is
the keeper of I]rael; he is the jield of the

Psalm xxxs;i. 3.
E e 3 righteous.

S E R M. rilhteoru. As the mountains are roundaLoat
xV[ J3erufalmc, so the Lord is round about his

peoplefrom benccJorth and or ever *.

IN the third place, the docrine that has

been illustrated of the interpofal of Provi-
dence in all human affairs, places the vanity
and folly of all sinful plans in a very firong
light.-All fin, in every view of it, mull
be attended with danger. He who em-
barks in any unjust or criminal enterprize,
besides the manifest peril to his own loul,
incurs the rifque of his charaaer being di-
covered, and of meeting with hatred, con-
tempt, and jufl resentment from the world.
One would think that when the confe-
quences on one fide are so dangerous, the
bribe on the other fide must be very higli,
and the profped of success very fair and
promising. Now, confider how this mat-
ter truly (lands. The finner hath against
him, first, that general uncertainty which I
before fiewed to take place in all the de-

Palm cxxv. i.

signs

signs and projects formed by men. Could SER M.

XVIII.

the molt artful and belt devised means al- x
ways ensure success to the end we fought to
obtain, some apology might then be made
for departing occalionally from the path of
rectitude. But it is far from being true,
that any such road to sure success can, on
any occasion, be found. On the contrary,
we every day fee the most plausible and
heft concerted plans baffled and thrown to
the ground; and there is nothing which
on many occalions has been more remarked,
than Providence teeming to make sport of
the wilsdom of man.

This view of things alone were sufficient

to Ihow to the finner the insecurity and
danger of the fyllemn on which he ads.
But there is much more against him than
this. For he, by his guilty plans, hath en-
gaged against himself one certain and most
formidable enemy, to whom he hath great
reason to look up with terror. He cannot
possibly believe that the righteous Gover-
nour of the universe, beholds with an equal
eye the designs of the virtuous who honour

E e 4 him,

s R M. him, and the designs of the guilty who dc-
X.l., fpife his laws, and do injustice to his ser-

vants. No; against these latter, Providence
hath pointed its darts, hath bent its bow
in the heavens; the J!ce of the Lord is
againjq them that do evil*. Other designs
may fail; but those of the wicked, God is
concerned in overthrowing. It is true, that
this life is not the season of rendering to
every man according to his works. But
though retribution does not on every occa-
lion take place at prelent, yet neither is the
exercise of divine jnflice always delayed.
The history of the world is continually fur-
niflhing us with examples of the wicked
taken in their own idvice.r; of the crafty
Snared in the works of their own hands; of
finners falling into the pit which tberfelves
bad digged. How often when signal crimes
were ready to be perpetrated, hath'God re-
markably interpoled; hath spread his lhield
before the jufl, unnerved the arm of the
assassin, or struck a sudden damp into his

Psalm Xxxiv. 16.

mind

mind at the critical moment ?-Obnoxious sER .
then as the finner is to so many dangers; XVI
exposed perpetually to the disappointment
of his designs by the uncertainty of human
events; expoled, over and above, to the-
avenging interposition of Heaven; what
firange infatuation has tempted him to de-
part from the plain and safe path of inte-
grity ?

IN the lafi place, from all that has been

said on this subjed, we clearly fee how
much it concerns us to perform those duties
which a proper regard to Providence re-
quires, and to obtain protedion from that
power which diredeth and difpofeth all.
A more incontrovertihle axiom there can-
not be than this, that if man only devifeth
his way, while God overrules his devices
and direts his fleps, an interest in God's
favour is far more important than all the
wisdom and aiility of man. Without his
favour, the wisest will be disappointed and
baffled; under his protection and guid-
ance, the simple are led in a plain and sure

path.

SERM. path.-In vain would the giddy and pro-
XVli. fane, throw Providence out of their

thoughts, and affe& to think and ac, as
if all depended on themselves. This bold-
ness of felf-fufficiency is affecation, and
no more. For, moments there are, when
the man of stoutest heart feels the firong
fubjedion under which he is held, and
would gladly grasp at the aid of Heaven.
As long as human affairs proceed in a
smooth train, without any alarming pre-
fages of change or danger, the man of the
world may remain pleased with himself,
and be fillly confident in his own powers.
But whose life continues long so undif-
turbed ? Let any uncommon violence (hake
the elements around him, and threaten him
with defirucion; let the aspec of publick
affairs be so lowering as to forebode some
great calamity; or in his private concerns,
let some sudden change arrive to (hatter his
fortune, or let sickness, and the harbingers
of approaching death, (how him his frailty;
and how ready will he then be to fend up
prayers from the heart, that Providence

would

would befriend and relieve him ? Religion, sE R M.
my friends, is not a matter of theory and _
doubt. Its foundations are laid deep in the
nature and condition of man. It lays hold
of every man's feelings. In every man's
heart and conicience it has many witnesses
to its importance and reality.

Let us then neglet no means which may

be of avail for procuring the grace and fa-
vour of that divine Providence on which
so much depends. Let no duties he over-
looked which belong to us as fulbjeas of
God; devout worship, and grateful praises
for all his blessings; humble trust in his
goodncfs, and implicit luhn:iffion to his
will; and constant and cheerful obtdience
to his laws. Let us be thankful that God
llath clearly made known all that he requires
of us in order to be accepted in his fight;
and that not only he has revealed the rule
of duty, but also hath pointed out to us in
the gospel, the direct method of reconci-
liation with him, through faith in the Lord
Jelus Chrilt. Providence hath condescend-
ed to become our inftrulor in this great

article;

SXERLI. article; hath taught us in what way our
,-,«' fins may be forgiven, our imperfect feivices

be accepted, and an interest in the divine
grace be attained by means of our Re-
deemer. Inexcufalle we muff be, if all this
offered grace we shall wantonly throw at our
feet. In a world so full of vicissitudes and
uncertainty, let us take pains to secure to our-
selves one refling place ; one habitation that
cannot be moved. By piety aind prayer, by
faith, repentance, and a good life,let us seek
the fricndfhip ofthe Most High; so shall he
who diretletb the flcps f man now, condud
our path in such a course as shall bring us
in the end to himself.

# SERMON XIX. On PRAYER. PSALM, lxv. 2. O Thou that hearest prayer, unto Thee shall all flesh come!

[ 429 ]
SERMON XIX.

On PRAYER.

PSALM, Ixv. 2.
0 Thou that bearefl prayer, wrnl Tbrc

/hall all fj/h com !
T HE Supreme Being is represented under s E R M.

many amiable charaters in the sacred XIX.

writings; as the Father of Mcrcits, the
God of Love, the Autbhr of every good and
per/ec gift. But there is no characer
which carries more comfort, or which ren-
ders God so properly the object of con-
fidence and trust, as this, of his being the
Heari of Prayer. This view of the Al-
mighty accommodates his perfetions to

our

s R M. our neceffltles and wants, and in our pre-
XIX. x... sent frail and distressed state affords a con-

slant refuge to which we can fly. Unto

bheehall all lefh come. To Thee, (hall an
indigent world look up for the supply of
their wants; to Thee, (hall the proudest
finner, ,t some time or other, be compelled
to bow; to Thee, (hall the distressed and
affliQed have recourse, as to their last
relief and hope.

Prayer is a duty efrential to natural re-

ligion. Wherever the light of nature taught
men to acknowledge the being of a God,
to that God also it direted them to pray.
In the Chriiflan revelation great stress ia
laid upon this duty, and great encourage-
ment given to it. Our blessed Saviour not
only set the example hlimfelf, and enjoined
the pracice to his followers, but thought it
worthy his express inftruaion to teach them
in what manner to pray, and even to put
words in their mouth. We are assured
that prayers are not in vain; but tat as
the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteouss
so bis cart are open to their cry; that if we

aftk

aflr aright, we Jhall receive; if we fJe, we S R a.
Jall find; if we knok, it Jhall be opened to Xlx-
us. It is, indeed, hard to fay, whether
prayer is to be most properly confidered
as a duty incumbent on all, or as a privilege
allowed to them. But a blessed circum-
stance it is, that our duty and our privilege
thus concur in one; that we are com-
manded to do what our wants naturally
dicate to be done; even to ask what is
good from God, who giveth to all men li-
berally, and upbraidetb not.-In treating of
this subject, it will be proper to confider'
firRt, the nature and the fuhjedts of prayer;
next, its proper qualifications; and lastly,
the advantages and blessings which at-
tend it.

I. THE Nature of Prayer supposes, in

the firfi place, that we have a just sense
of our own wants and miseries, and of
our dependence on God for relief. To
be suitably impressed with this sense, we
need only think what our present fituaticn
is. We live in a world where every

thing

SERM. thing around us is dark and uncertain.

XIX.
XsX When we look back on the past, we

must remember that there we have met
with much disappointment and vanity.
When we look forward to the future, all
is unknown. We are liable there to many
dangers which we cannot foresee; and to
many which we foresee approaching, yet
know not how to defend ourselves against
them. We are often ignorant what course
we can Rfeer with safety; nay, so imperfect
is our own wisdom, and so great the dark-
uefs which covers futurity, that while we
imagine that we are in the road to pro-
fperity, we are often rulhing blindly into
the most fatal evils. Betides these con-
tingencies of life, which make us feel so
deeply the necessity of looking up to rome
more powerful Guide and Protecor, there
are other circumstances in our fate which
lead to refletions still more alarming.
We know that we are the subjects of a
supreme righteous Governour, to whom
we are accountable for our conduct. We
were sent into this world by his appoint-

ment,

meat, and we are removed from it at his SER M.
decree. How soon the call for our removal xlx
may be given, none of us know'; but this
we profess to believe, that upon our going
hence we are to be brought into new and
unknown habitations, suitable to our beha-
viour here. Who amongst us can fay that
he is pelfedly ready to appear before his
Creator and Judge, and to give an account
to him for all the aaions of his life ? How
much do the best of us stand in need of
mercy and forgivcnels for our oflenc-: past,
and ofdirecion and assistance from IIeaven
to guide us in our future way? What
reason to dread that if we be left entirely
to ourselves, we will be in the utmost dan-
ger of departing from virtue and from hap-
piness, and of leaving life under the dif-
pleasure of Him who is to judge us?-
While with this flnic of our imperfections,
our dangers, and our guilt, we come to the
Hearer of prayer, we mufi, in the nest
place,

Pray to God, in the belief that with
him there is power which can give us relief,

VOL. V. F f and

s FR M. and goodness which will incline him to

XIX.
x.x give it. Prayer supposes a full persuasion

that his Providence rules and governs all;
that through all futurity his eye penetrates;
that there are no events of our life in which
he interposes not; that he knows the molt
secret motions of our hearts; and that to the
hearts of all men he has access, by avenues
unknown to us, and can turn them accord-
ing to his plealure. It supposes, at the fame
time, a firm confidence in the declarations
he has made in his word, that a plan is
established for dispensing grace to fallen
and guilty mankind, through a great Re-
deemcr. It supposes a humble hope that,
as he knows our frame and remembers we
are dlsZ, he will not rejet the fiupplications
of the penitent returning finner; that he
is one who hath no pleasure in our for-
rows and difrcfs, but desires the happiness
of his creatures, and beholds with compla-
cency the humble and sincere worshipper.

Now these things being supposed, this

just sense of our own imperfections and
guilt, and this proper impreflion of the

divine

divine nature, when the foul is in this pof- s E R M.
ture of devotion, breathing forth its for- XX
rows and its wants before its Creator, and
imploring from him protecion and aid,
it cannot but give vent to the high con-
ceptions with which it will then be affected,
of God's supreme perfection. This of
course becomes the foundation of that part
of devotion which is fIyled adoration or
praife.-As it is the experience of pat
goodness which warms the heart of the
worshipper, and encourages his present
supplication, he will naturally be led to
a grateful celebration of the mercies of
Heaven; whence thanksgiving becomes an
essential part of his devotion.-As he cannot
put up petitions without acknowledging
his wants, and as his wants are closely con-
neced with his frailty and ill-deferving,
hence the most humble confeflion of guilt
must necessarily enter into prayer. - If
there be any terms on which we may ex-
pect the Deity to be most propitious; if
there be any meritorious Intercessor through
whom we may prefer our request to him,

Fs 2 this

S . R M. this assuredly iiil be the method which the
XIX. _.. pious worshipper will choose for addrefling

the Almighty; and this will be the ground
of his praying in the name of Christ, fend-
ing up his petitions to God through his be-
loved Son, whom he hearcth always.

Thus it appears that there is a just found-

ation for prayer in all its parts, naturally
laid in the prefcnt circumstances of man,
and in the relation in which he stands to
God. But a. petition is the chief and
most diqfinguitling part of prayer, it will
be requifitc tint we confider particularly
what thote reqiuefs are, which are proper
to be offered up to God. These mrsay all
he classed under three heads: first, requests
for temporal bleflings; next, for spiritual
mercies; and lastly, interceflions for the
welfare of others.

WVIT regard to temporal blefllng,

though men may lay a restraint upon them-
fclves in the expreflions which they utter in
prayer, yet it is much to be suspeCted, that
the inward wilhes of their hearts for lich

blellings

blessings are often the melt fervent of any. s E R M.

XIX.

To with and pray for the ,dvantages of x-
life, is not forbidden. Our S:iiour hath
so far countcnanced it, as to command
us to pray that Cod would give us our
daily bread; that is, as his words have
been always underflood, that he would
befRor what is necessary fur the fifftenance
and comfort of life. Yet the very found
of the words retrenches every filperfluous
and extravagant wih. Not for riches and
honours, for great advancement or long
life, or for Pamerous and flourishing fa-
milies, has he given us any encourage-
ment to pray. Foreign are filcti things to
the real improvement, foreign very often
to the true happincfs of man. Foolilhly
they may be xwi(hed for, when the with
accomplished would prove our ruin. Let
health and peace, contentment and tran-
quillity, bound the humble prayer which
we fend up to Heaven; that God may feed
us witb food convenient for us; that what-
ever our outward circumstances are, they
may be blessed to us by him, and accom-

F f 3 panied

s RM. panied with a quiet mind. Even health

xlx.
XX al, and peace themfUves may not always prove

blessings. Sweet and defirahle as they
seem, God may, at certain times, foresee
their tendency to corrupt our hearts, and
may, in mercy, rejct a prayer for them,
which, on our part, may be allowably put
up. For the nature of all temporal things
is such, that they have not one fixed and
flable characer, but may be convertible on
different occasions either into good or ill;
and therefore, foine reserve in our wifli
mull always be maintained; and to the
wiser judgment of God, it must be left to
determine what is fit to be hellowed, and
what to be withheld.- But this we may
lawfully pray, that, as far as to God seems
meet, lie would make our fiate comfortable,
and our days easy and tranquil; that he
would save us from falling into any severe
and extreme diltrefs; that he would pre-
serve to us the enjoyment of those friends
and comforts that we most love; or if he
bereave us of any of them, that he would
.in mercy aflift and support us under the

loss;

loss; in fine, that he would so order our S.R M.
lot, that we may be kept as free from pain, xlx.
trouble, and anguish, as shall be confifent
with the higher improvements of our fouls,
in piety, virtue, and wisdom.

IN the next place, with regard to fpi-

ritual mercies, we are unquefltionahly al-
lowed to be more fervent and explicit in
our requests at the throne of grace. God
can never be difplealed in hearing us im-
plore from him those graces and endow-
ments of the foul, that beautify us in his
fight, that are good for all men, good at
all times, indeed the only certain and im-
mutable goods; and therefore to these only
pertains that earnestness, that urgency of
prayer, which is reprelented as acceptable
to the Almighty.- Our petitions of this
nature, our Saviour has ranked under the
two great heads, of forgivenels for past
offences, and deliverance from fiture tempt-
ations. It is chiefly for these important
bleflings, that we are to prftrate ourselves
before our Father in Heaven; begging of

1' f . him,

SERM. him, who knows our heart with all its
x^ix- frailties, that he would accept our sincere

repentance, and pardon our errors for the
fake of Jclus Christ. We muff earnefily
pray, that he would firengthen us by his
grace to refill the temptations that here-
after may afrault us; and whatever he
appoint to befal us without, may enable
us to preserve a good conscience within;
that he may teach us to know ourselves,
and affill us to control and govern our
paflions; that he may endow us with
tcmpcrance in prolperity, and rcfination
under adverity ; that in no situation of life
we Imay) hc alowed to forget what we owe
to our IMaker and Rcdtemer; and that
after havir.n di!charged the duties of life,
through tile afihlance of Divine grace,
with Iboie me;flurc of integrity and ho-
nour, vc mlay be prepared for going
through the lafl fcere of life without dif-
may; and when we have made a decent
and peaceful retreat from this world, we
may then find ourfc!ves in some better and
h;:ppier fate.

I.;

IN the last place, it is to be remembered S ERM.

that intercefiions for the welfare of others XlX.
form a material part of prayer. The
sincere worshipper is not to confider him-
self as a single and separate being, con-
fining his concern wholly to himself. Our
Saviour has initiated us into a more noble
and enlarged spirit of devotion, when he
taught us to begin with praying that the
kingdom of God may be advanced over
all, and that mankind may be rendered as
happy by doing his will, as the angels are
in Heaven. When we bow our knee to
the common Father, let it he like assec-
tionate members of his family, desiring the
prosperity of all our brethren. In parti-
cular, the happiness of our friends and re-
lations, of those whom we love, and by
whom we are loved, ought then to be near
our heart; praying that the Almighty may
be our God, and the God of our friends
and family, for ever; that he may watch
over them, and bless them; and may make
us long happy in mutual comfort and
affection. We ought to remember our

benefactors

s HRM. benefactors before God, and pray for a
Xlx' return of divine blefings on their head.

The dillrefrd and afsided ought to share
our sympathy; remembering them who
fulfer adversity, as being ourfelveJ in the
boAd; and shedding the friendly tear at the
thought of human woe. Our enemies
themtllves ought not to be forgotten in
our prayers: in fine, our prayers ought to
be an exercise of extensive benevolence of
heart; a Iclcmn teflimony offered up to
the God of Love, of our kind and charit-
able affection to all men.

BUT now, after what has been suggested

concerning the proper fubjets of prayer,
I am aware that it may be said by some,
To what purpose is all this detail ?--Do
we propose, by our prayers, to give to the
Supreme Being any new information, re-
garding ( ur lituation, of which be is not
poflefled ? Does HIe not already know all
our wants anid difreffes; and will He not
be prompted by his goodness and wildom to
do for us in such circumltances, whatever

is

is fit and proper to be done? Do we SERM.
imagine that, by the importunity of our xx...
solicitations and requefis, He can be pre-
vailed upon to alter his purpose, or depart
from his system in the government of the
world, in order to gratify our desires ?--
Such objecions against the reasonableness
of prayer, have been often urged with all
the parade of scepticism. Though, on the
first view, they may carry some appearance
of speciousness, yet on a flight discussion
they fall to the ground; for they all reft
on a mistaken idea of the nature and
design of prayer. No man in his fober
senses could ever believe that, by lifting his
feeble voice to Heaven, he could convey to
the ear of the Almighty any new know-
ledge or information. None but the most
ignorant could imagine, that, by his prayers
he could raise any new emotions in the
unchangeable Sovereign of the universe,
and prevail upon him to alter his decrees
in coufequence of his requefts.--The
efficacy of prayer lies, not in working a
change upon God, but in working a

change

SRLM. change upon ourselves; in begetting or
>XJI improving right dilpofitions of hea.r, and

thereby making us fit fiibjets of the Di-
vine mercy. It is not for the fake of our
alking, that God grants the requefis we
prefer in prayer; but as our asking, with
proper dispositions, produces that frame of
mind which qualifies us to receive.-
Hence prayer has been appointed by God
as an instrument for improving our nature,
and is required on our part as a condition
tf receiving his favours. Thus, when
upon a certain occasion he had by his
Prophet prediced and promised circum-
itarnte of prosperity to the Jewish nation,
ihe Prophet was direcled to add, Thus faith
lie Lord Ged; I wll yetfor this be enquired
of by the boufi of Israel to do itfor them '.

' Is there any one who wiR fay, that it

is not incurhmbnt on all rational creatures
to feel their dependence on the God who
has formed thetm; and to refer to him all
the bieffingg which they either enjWy or

. Ezekik!, '.wxi. 37.

11opc

hope to receive ? Would not the want of s E R f.
such becoming sentiments be altogether xIx.
unworthy and linful? And if they are
such sentiments as ought to be entertained,
must it not be proper to exprels them by
words in prayer, and thereby to strengthen
the impreflion of them on our minds?

But in truth there is no occasion for

entering into any long difcullion of argu-
ment in order to evince the rcafonablenefs
of prayer. It is the natural dictate of the
human heart. Though in the days of
profpcrity and cafe it may, like other du-
ties, have been neglected and forgotten,
yet on all great and trying occasions, men
are prompted by an irresistible impulse to
lift their eyes, and addrels their voice to
Heaven. Who iq there, for inflance, that
feeling himself cruilly opprefed by injuf-
tice and violence, without any prolped of
procuring rcdrcf, can forbear appealing to
a Power that rulc; ahovc, and invoking
Divine intcrprf:icn to vindicate his in-
noccnce, and avenge his .:rongs? Who
that i'. fPanding h.- the death-bed of a be-

3 loved

SE RM. loved friend, of a spouse, a brother, or a
XIM. x.~L son, and fees them firuggling with the last

agonies, but finds himself impelled to look
up to Heaven, and to pray from the heart,
that where men can give no aid, God
would in his mercy support the dying
man? Was there ever a finner so hardened,
that when he finds himself leaving the
world, and standing on the brink of an
unknown eternity, is not disposed with
earnest and trembling voice to pray that
God would forgive his errors, and receive
in peace his departing spirit ? In such fitua-
lions as these, man feels what he truly is,
and speaks the native unadulterated lan-
guage of the heart.--Accordingly,
throughout all ages and nations, the ob-
ligation to prayer as a duty has been re-
cognised, and its propriety has been felt.
Over all the world, even among the most
savage tribes, temples have been built,
worshippers have aifembled in crowds;
and the wildest fuperflition has, by the
various forms of homage which it adopted,
borne testimony to this truth, that there is

fonce

some God, towhom, as the hearer of prayer, S E R M.
allflejbjhould come. x
.

IN order that prayer may produce its

proper effect, there are certain qualifications
necessarily belonging to it, which come next
to be considercd.

One of the first and chief of these is fe-

rioufncls, or an attcnirve and solemn frame
of mind, in opposition to thoughts that
wander, and to words that drop forth un-
meaning from the lips. One would think
it unneceflary to mention such a qualifica-
tion to be rcquifite, when we are to be em-
ployed in so solemn an a& as an immediate
address to our Maker. Yet there is ground
to apprehend, that an admonition of this
nature is necessary to be given to many
profeffedChriltians. Men from their child-
hood have been so oft accustomed to repeat
certain expressions, which they call, faying
prayers, with little understanding, and less
attention to what they fay, that the habit
of it is apt to be continued throughout life;
as if the mere uttering of words, or pre-

6 efnting

s E R M. renting themselves, at set times, in a certain

xlx.
XI_ polttue bcfore God, had some charm in it

to attr.it the bleflin;g of Heaven. -My
brethren, this is trltiing with one of the
most inlloritant exercises in which the
human mind can bc employed; it is turn-
ing dlc,'i;ioi into childifi folly. Let us
never forget that it is the heart which muff
pray. The heart may pray, when no words
are uttered. But if the heart be not en-
gaged in prayer, all the words we can utter
are no better than rude offensive founds in
the ear of the Almighty.-Colled then thy
mind within itself, before thou preferreft a
lingle petition; nay, before thou pro-
nouncel' the name of God in prayer. Be
alone with him, and thine own foul; under
the fame impression as if thou wert just
about to appear before the judgment-feat
of that God, to whom thou prayet.

To Icrioufnefs, we must join affetion

in prayer; I mean that devotion of the heart
which is inspired by gratitude and love, in
difiniCtion from forced prayer; or what is
unwillingly preferred from servile fear, or

mere

mere regard to decency. We mul come E R M.
into the presence of God, as to a Father in _~
heaven; not to a hard and oppreflive
master, to whom we are obliged to pay
obeisance to prevent him from destroying
us.- Profound humility is perfectly con-
fiRent with this affedionate spirit in prayer.
No presumptuous familiarity muff enter into
our addresses to God. We are enjoined to
serve him with reverence and godly fear.
Our devotion will be most fervent and
affecionate, when we entertain the humblest
thoughts of ourselves, joined with the motl
exalted conceptions of that God to whom
we pray. Remember that God is in heaven,
and thou art on earth; therefore let tbh
words besew'.

Faith is a qualification of prayer ex-

prefsly required in Scripture. He that
prayeth, fays the Apostle James, let him
afj in faith, nothing wavering t.-By faith
in prayer, two things are meant; first, a
general persuasion that God is a Being of

* Ecltf,. T. . t JAme, i. 6. n
VOL. V. . G g infinite

SE R M. infinite goodness and mercy; to whonm
XIX.

, therefore, the prayers of his creatures are

not put up in vain. He that cometb unto
God musl believe, not only that he is, but
that he is a reuarder of them that diligently
seek him *: without some belief of this kind,
prayers were altogether superfluous. For
who would fend up supplications to a God
who was believed to be inacceflible to his
creatures, and to have no regard to their
circumstances and wants ?- At the fame
time, much ground we have to be conscious
of our own unworthiness, and to tremble
at the remembrance of it, when we address
ourselves to Heaven; and therefore, secondly,
to pray in faith is, in the scripture sense of
it, to pray in the name of Christ; that is,
in the faith that it is through his merits and
mediation only we can find acceptance
with God. We acknowledge our guilt;
we disclaim all trust in our own righteous-
ness; and implore grace from God on ac-
count of what his Son has done and suffered

Heb. xi. 6.

for

for us. This is the clear and express doc- SE R M.

XWX.

trine of the New Teftamcnt. le have ave
boldness to enter into the holieAl br the blood
of Jesus. (Ie have this new and living
way which he bath con/ecrated for us within
the veil. Having this hligh Pric/ over the
bouse of God, let us draw near with a true
heart in full aqrurance of Faith *.

HAVING thus pointed out the chief and

most essential qualifications of prayer, it
remains that I lay some considerations be-
fore you, to thow the importance and ad-
vantages of it.

IN the firfl place, prayer is one of the most

powerful means of recalling our minds
from the vanities of life to ferions thoughts;
to a proper sense of God, and our duty;
and to all the high objets with which we
are intimately connected as rational and
immortal beings. Surrounded, as we are,
with the objects and plealures of the world;
busied with its avocations, and continually

* leb. x. 19-2z.

C g 2 immersed

seRM. immersed in its pursuits, man would be-

come altogether the victim of sense, and a
prey to its temptations; if there were not
some fated occasions which brought him
home to himself, and to the thoughts of
another world. Prayer has a much more
impreflive effet for this purpose, than can
be expectcd from simple meditation. An
immediate and solemn address to an omni-
fcient Being, in whose presence we confider
ourselves as then particularly sifted, tends
to produce a higher degree of serious and
awful recollection, than would arise from
a mere soliloquy of the mind with itself.
In prayer, the foul approaches to the bor-
ders of an invisible world, and ads as a
spirit holding intercourse with the Father
of Spirits. It drops for a time the remem-
brance of its earthly eonnetions, to dwell
among everlasting objecs. Prayer, by this
means, both composes and purifies the
heart; it gives the foul its proper elevation
towards God, and has a happy effed to
counterwork the dangerous impressions
made by the corruptions of the world
around us.

IN

IN the next place, Prayer is useful, not s E R M

XlX.

only as a corrective of our natural levity _
and forgetfulness of God, but as an aitual
exercise of the best affTcions of our na-
ture, which are thereby confirmed and
strengthened. As far as prayer is not a
mere emiflfion of empty words, but speaks,
as it ought to do, the language of the heart,
it is an assemblage of all the affefions
which constitute piety. It implies the
highest sentiments of reverence and ado-
ration, of love and gratitude to God, of
trust in his mercy, and of faith in our blehfed
Redeemer, all animating the heart. What-
ever nourishes such affetions as these in
the foul, gives strength and support at the
fame time to aaive virtue; and thereby
prepares and afifts us for every duty of
life.-With refped to ourselves, the view
which prayer gives, of our necefities and
wants, of our fins and offences against God,
and of the dangers which we have thereby
incurred, produces becoming humility of
mind. Prostrate before that Great Being
whom we have so much offended, 1ll the

G g 3 pride

SERM. pride of man is laid in the dufl. He is

impresscd with a sense of what he truly is,
and taught how far removed from what he
ought to be. By the prayers he puts up
for being affifled to repent of pafl follies,
and to make improvements for the future
in virtue, the dcfire of virtue is cherished,
and the pursuit of it excited; and if this
desire after virtue which is expresscd in
prayer he genuine, i is a dcgree of good-
ness already in foime rr.e.ti're begun within
the heart.-- Prvlyer iq, at the fame time,
an exercise of blnrvolence towards men,
as well as of piety towards Cod; when,
as was before obfirved, not merely as indi-
viduals, but as members of the great family
of God, we come before our heavenly
Father, and express our affectionate withes
for all our brethren.-While prayer in this
manner gives exertion to many of the
highest parts of goodncls, it is attended
inoreovei with this great advantage, that it
tends to fortify the worshipper in the prac-
tice of all his duties. For it impresses him
with a sense of God as the great friend and

9 protector

protedor of righteousness in the world; to s ER M.

XIX.

whom, therefore, all righteous men may xM
look up with contidence and hope; whose
strength is more than fuflicient for their
weakness; whoie gracious aid none that
served him ever implored in vain.

IN the last place, Prayer is important,

not only as a means of high improvement
in religion, but as an instrument of confo-
lation and relief under the distresses of life.
How many situations are found in the
world, where men have no resource left to
them but prayer to God? How forlorn
would the persecuted and afflited, the fad
and the sorrowful be, if even this last fanc-
tuary were ihut against them; if they had
no 'rotetor in heaven to whom they could
look up in the hours of anguiflh?-We all
know what a relief it is to be able to un-
bosom our griefs to some friend whom we
believe compafflonate and kind, even though
it be not in his power to give us any es-
feaual aid. In our Heavenly Father we
can look up not only to One in whom com-

G g 4 pai1iins

S E R M. paions flow, who knows ourframe, remenm-

ber we are dffl, and pities us as a father
pitietb bis children; but to One whose arm
is all-powerful, either to support us under
our diftrfs, or, if to his wisdom it seem
meet, to relieve us altogether from it.-
Hence, Prayer is so often the last retreat
of the miserable. Where men can give them
no aid, God is their present help. To him
they can pour forth thole secret griefs, which
to men they sometimes cannot disclose. He
hears those groans of the labouring heart,
which no words can utter; and circum-
Itances which would expose our requests to
be despised by tie world, prevent not our
prayers from finding acceptance with God.
It is his character to bear the cry of the
poor, and to regard the prayer of the defti-
lute: He is the helper of them who have no
help of man.- Hence, prayer may be
termed the Temple of Tranquillity to the
unhappy; where their minds are soothed,
and their cares and sorrows are, for a time,
hushed and forgotten. It may justly be
said, that there only, on this fide of the

grave,

grave, the wicked cease from troubling, and s E R M.
the weary are at reft. There, the prisoners
reft together; they hear no more the voice of
the opprejror. The /mall and the great are
there; and the frrvant is free from hit
majler #.

THE reasonableness of prayer as a duty,

and the advantages attending it, being such
as I have now endeavoured briefly to set
forth, there is no wonder that so many re-
peated recommendations of it occur in the
sacred writings; and that we are enjoined
to be fervent in prayer, to be inflant in
prayer; nay, to pray without ceafingt.-By
such precepts I do not underhand that we
are bound to frequent repetitions of long
and tedious prayers. Our Saviour, in his
excellent discourse on this subjed& , has sus-
ficiently cautioned us against the hypocrisy
of those who use vain repetitions, and think
thatey h. jhall be beard for their much
fpetaing. But besides the stated times of
· Job, iii. 17-19. t I Them v. 17. t Matth. vi.

6 both

s E R M. both public and private prayer which we
_,, ought devou.ly to c';l rve, therc is a habit

of devotion, il oc.;,lional elevations of the
foul towards (Gol, which highly deserves
to be cultivated. A thoulmnd occurrences
which happen vwhcn we are engaged in the
affairs of the world, and a thousand objecs
which pretent themselves to our view in
the earth and the heavens when we are
solitary and alone, may suggest matter of
devout ejaculation towards God. By che-
rilhing such a habit, we preserve on our
minds the native spirit of prayer. We
correct those evil dilpofitions which intcr-
course with the world is always apt to in-
troduce; we improve our contemplation
of the objects which surround us, into an
aa of devotion; and either from the
crowded city, or the solitary field, can fend
up to Heaven that homage of the heart,
which is no less acceptable to the Almighty,
than if it arose in vocal form from the midst
of the temple. In this sense I underfland
the injunction given to pray without ceasing.
--And surely, my brethren, when we

confidcr

confider the high value of those blessings SERM.

XIX.

for which we depend on Ieaven, it mulftl
appear to every reflecing mind, that we
cannot be too carneft in our supplications to
obtain them. To what purpose tend all
our present solicitude and care; all the ap-
plication of the thoughtful, and all the in-
duftry of the active and diligent ? Is it not
in order to pass through life, contented,
easy, and happy ? But can you pass through
life with contentment and happiness, unless
you enjoy peace within, a good conscience,
and a comfortable hope of a future exist-
ence? Are not all these things directly and
immediately the gifts of God, imparted by
him to the fouls of men? And can you
exped to receive such gifts, unless you con-
fess your dependance on Him who bestows
them, and implore them from that gracious
God, who giveth to all men liberally,, and
upbraideth nt ?

# SERMON XX. On the Last Judgment. 2 CORINTHIANS, v. 10. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath ...

[ 460 ]

SERMON XX.

On the Last Judgment.

2 CORINTHIANS, V. 10.

For wt mull all appear before the judgment-

feat of CbriJt, that every one may receive
the thingR done in bis body, according to
that he bath done, whether it be good
or bad.

ER M. T P E SE words present to our view the
. _xxs " great event which is to determine the

fate of all mankind. No article of Chris-
tian faith is more clearly ascertained in
Scripture, is of greater importance in itself,
and more worthy to dwell upon our minds
than this, of the final Judgment of God.

It

It adds solemnity to every part of religion; s E R a.
it introduces an awful seriousness into our XX.
thoughts, by placing in the most firiking
light, the close connexion between our
present behaviour and our everlasting
happiness or misery. In the Gospel, it is
described with so many circumstances of
awe and terror, as may, to many, render
the consideration of this subjet dark and
disagreeable. But we must remember, that
though religion be often employed to soothe
and comfort the diltreffed, and though this
be one of its most salutary effets, yet this is
not the only purpose to which it is to be
applied by ministers of the Gospel. In
the midst of that levity and dissipation
with which the world abounds, it is necef-
fary to awaken the giddy and unthinking,
by fitting before them, in full view, all the
dangers they incur by their conduc.-
Knouing the terror of the Lord, adds the
Apostle in the verse immediately following
the text, ve perfade men.- In treating
of this subjed, I shall, in the first place,
Rfate the arguments which reason affords

for

E R M. for the belief of a judgment to come; and
xx. ... flhall next show the improvements which

we ought to make of the particular dif-
coveries the Gospel hath made to us con-
cerning it.

I. BY taking a view of the arguments

which rcafon affords for the belief of a
general judgment, out faith in the dif-
coveries of the Gospel will receive' con-
firmation, from discerning their consonance
with the natural sentiments of the human
heart.

IN the first place, and as the foundation

of all, I begin with observing, that there is
in the nature of things a real and eternal
difference between right and wrong, be-
tween a virtuous and an immoral conduct;
a difference which all men discern of them-
felvce, and which leads them unavoidably
to think of some ations as deserving blame
and puniihmenet, and of others as worthy
of praifte and reward. If all ations were
conceived as indifferent in their nature, no

idea

idea of ju[tice and retribution would be SERM.

xx.

found among men; they would not con- xx,
fider themselves as in any view accountable
for their ations to any fuperiour. But
this is far from being the cafe. Every man
feels himjelf under a law; the law of his
being, which he cannot violate without
being felf-condemned. The molf ignorant
heathen knows and feels, that when he has
committed an unjust or cruel action, he
has committed a crime, and deserves
puniihment. Never was there a nation on
the face of the earth, among whom there
did not prevail a consciousness that, by in-
humanity and fraud, they juflly exposed
themselves to the hatred of those around
them, and to the displeasure of any secret
invisible power that ruled the world. This,
therefore, may be assumed as an incontro-
vertible principle, that the difference of
good and evil in acions, is not founded on
arbitrary opinions or inflitutions, but in
the nature of things, and the nature of
roan; and accords with the universal fenle
of the human kind. This being the cale,
it is certainly reasonable,

IN

SERM. IN the second place, to think that the

xx.
- . Ruler of the world will make some dif-

tinaion among his creatures according to
their a&ions; and if this diflindion be not
made, or only imperfecly made in this
life, there will be some future state of
exiflence in which he will openly reward
and punish. To suppose God to be a
mere indifferent fpetator of the conduc
of his creatures, regarding with an equal
eye the evil and the good, is in effec to
annihilate his exifence; as it contradias
every notion which mankind have enter-
tained of a Supreme Being as just and
good. It would represent him as inferiour
in charader to many of his creatures on
earth; as there is no man of tolerable
virtue and humanity who is not shocked at
the commission of atrocious crimes, and
who does not desire to fee the guilty
punished, the innocent proteded, and the
virtuous rewarded.- If there exist at all
a God who governs the world, (and what
nation has not acknowledged him to exist?)
as a governour he undoubtedly will ad;
and as such, will, somewhere, and at fomc

period

period or other, reward and punish, accord. sE R M.

xx.

ing as his creatures obey, or violate, that y
law which he originally implanted in their
heatts.--Whether this be completely
done in the present world, is not a point
that requites long difcuflion. The expe-
rience of all ages has shown, that pain and
pleasure, prosperity and adversity, are not
at present distributed by Providence exadtly
according to the measure of men's probity
and worth, but are apparently scattered
with a promiscuous hand. Hence the
anrient complaint, that all things come alike
it all men; that there is one event to the
rigbhtecu and the wicked; that to poverty
and disappointment the righteous are often
left, while the tabernacles of robbers prosper.
--An inference from hence might at
firrt view arise not favourable to the doc.
trine we now support; but we have to
observe,

IN the third place, that although full

retribution be not as yet made to the good
and to the evil, yet plain marks appear of

VOL. V. H h a govern-

SERM. a government already begun and carried
xx.

on by God in the universe, though not
fully completed; marks of his favouring
and taking part with virtue, and of his
providing punishments for vice. This ob-
servation deserves to be particularly attend-
ed to, as it is one of the chief arguments
for a future judgment.- In the present
fyilem of things, had the righteous been
uniformly happy, and the wicked at all
times miserable, future judgment might
have appeared unnecessary, as justice had
already taken place. On the other hand,
had no diftinfion whatever taken place in
the present system between the righteous
and the wicked as to happiness and misery,
there might have been ground to fufpe&t
that, since universal disorder at present
prevailed, disorder would ever continue,
and never be rectified by any future judg-
ment. But neither of these suppositions
is founded in faa. The present state of
the moral world is neither a state of com-
plete justice and order, nor of absolute
disorder, but a state of order and justice

begun

begun and carried to a certain length, s ERM.
though left as yet imperfet.--Obferve, v-'
my brethren, that in the whole ftrucdure
and constitution of things, God hath lhown
himself to be favourable to virtue, and
inimical to vice and guilt. He hath made
a fixed provision for happiness to virtue,
by the powerful recommendation which it
carries to universal esteem and love; by the
manifold benefits which it procures to so-
ciety; by the health, peace, and comfort of
mind which it brings to the virtuous man.
At the fame time, from the crimes of the
wicked, a multitude of miseries is made in-
fallibly to spring; loss of character and
esteem, and of confidence and regard in
society; health always impaired by vice;
and all comfortable enjoyment of life dif-
turbed by an uneasy companion, which the
finner carries about with him in his own
conscience, upbraiding him for his crimes,
and threatening him with the displeasure of
the Almighty.

These are not things of casual or acci-
dental occurrence, but of universal expe-

H hh rience,

S E R M. rience, taking their rife from the conflitu-

x tion of our nature, and from the fixed laws

which regulate human events. They (how
us what the direct tendency of virtue and
vice is appointed by Providence to be; and
if this tendency be not, in every inftancc,
carried into efctd, owing to circumstances
which belong to our prelent state of proba-
tion and dilcipliie, yet such an eftablilhed
natural tendency carries a sufficient intima-
tion of the will and pleasure of our Creator.
We fee his throne alreadycfetforjudgment.
By his beginning in this world both to
reward and to punish, we clearly behold
him ating as a governour and a judge,
and are led to prognosticate what course he
will hereafter hold. By the constitution
of things which he has fixed here, he has
as plainly lignified that he favours the vir-
tuous and is displeased with the wicked, as
if he had declared it to us by a voice from
the clouds.-Although the present fate of
mankind requires that the just should some-
times susser, and the finner be allowed to
prosper, the strongest presumption still re-

3 mains

mains that there is a period to come, when SERM.

XX.

God will complete his righlteoun govern- x
ment by making the one fully blell, and
rendering the other as milerable as they de.
serve to be; lpecially as ' e can observe,

IN the fourth place, that a fatisfaAory

account may be given why judgment is at
present pofiponed, and complete retribution
not made, citl er to the good rr the bad.
We are to take notice, that even among
men, the wildom and jnflice of government
do not confill in irnmedia;cly rewarding
and punififing on every occasion, but in
exerciling those ads of government pub-
lickly, at such times and with such circum-
flances as may have the most powerful
effe.t for the benefit of society. A similar
consideration perfedly accounts for the full
execution of jjltice being delayed by God in
this world; for rewards and punifliments
being only begun here, but left unfinilhed.
Were they completed in this world to their
full extent, all the purpoles of a slate of trial
and discipline would be defeated. No

I h 3 room

seRM. room would be left for exercise and im-

xx
,_v provement to the good in many virtues,

if they were never to under o any trials;
if they felt full reward immediately con-
ferred on every righteous action they per-
formed, and saw the wicked instantly cut
off, as soon as a crime was committed.
For salutary discipline, therefore, to the
good, in order to improve their virtues; and
from patience to the bad, in order to give
them room for repentance, it was fit and
wife that final judgment Ihould at present
be pofiponed. Divine juflice sands for a
while, as behind the veil, and leaves men
at full scope to aCt according to their dif-
ferent dispositions, that their real characters
may be fully displayed; the fidelity of the
upright be tried and proved, and the obfti-
nately wicked left without excuse.- The
delay of judgment, therefore, and the seem-
ing inequality that now takes place in the
ways of Providence, is so far from forming
any ground of suspicion that judgment
will never come, that, on the contrary, it is
an argument of the wisdom of the divine

govern-

government, and neceflarily enters into the S E RM.
plans it is now carrying forward.

Such are the presumptions which reason

furnishes, for rendering it more than pro-
bable that, at the conclusion of human things,
God will render to every one according to
bis works. They may serve to strengthen
our faith; but on mere reasonings our
faith refs not. God in his mercy has given
us furer light in an article of so great im-
portance. To the consideration, therefore,
of the discoveries which the gospel of Christ
hath made to us, we now proceed.

II. You all know how often we are

assured in the New Testament, that God
hath appointed a day in which be willjudge
the world in rigbteou/nief; a day and an
hour which no man knoweth, but which
is fixed in the counlels of Heaven. In the
sacred writings a very particular account is
given us of the whole procedure of that
solemn day, accompanied with an aflem-
blage of circumstances of the most awful
and terrifick nature. The scene is such as

H h 4 forbids

S E R M. forbids all attempts to heighten, or even to

, do it justice by human description. Be-

neath such a fuhjcd all imagination finks.
The efforts of the declaimer or the poet
are here alike in vain.- -We are in-
formed that the last day Ihall be ushered in
byfigns in Ie fun, and sign in the moon and
jlars; upon the earth, di/irfi of nations with
perplexity; thefea and the waves roaring;
men's hearts .ailing them for far, and J r'
looking afr e ing which are coming on
tbe earth, for the powers of Heaven Jhll be
Jhaken. The found of a trurmpet flall be
heard, at which the deadJhall rie out of
their graves. The sign of the Son of Man
Jhall appear. HeJhall come in a cloud with
power and great glory, and all the holy An-
gels with him. A great white throne Jhall
betet, and HJe fldlfit thereon in bis glory.
Before Hlim Jhall be gathered all nations.
Books flall be opened, and the deadjball be
judged out of the things which are found
written in the books. HeJhall separate the
righteous from the wicked as a Jbepherd
dividttb the Jhepfrom tbe goals; and bhehall

ft

fd the righteous o,, his right hand, and the S E R M.
wicied on his fft ! ' ie, a' all he fiy to them XX.
on bis right hand, Come, e bie/rd of my
Father, inherit the kingdom preparedfor you
from the foundation of the wr d,,. To them
on his left hand befi.allfl, Depart rorn me,
ye cursid, into everlaJfing fire, prepared for
the Devil and his angels; and tAeJjhall go
into everlafling puni/hment, but the righteous
into li/e eternal*.-. .Whether every one
of the circumstances here let forth is to be
understood in a ftridly literal lense, or with
rome meaCure of mystical and allegorical
interpretation, it is not easy to determine,
nor is it essential for us to know. Regard
must be had to the figurative flyle fre-
quently employed by the sacred writers, of
which we find so many examples in the
prophetical writings and the Book of Re-
velations, wherein those spiritual divine
things which are above our conception,
are set forth under Ifuch representations of
sensible objects and appearances as are most

Luke, ixi. 25. Danie, vii. 9. Mttni. x.v. p.

calculated

s R M. calculated to firike and impress our minds.
xx. x. The circumfiance, for inflance, of books

being opened before the Judge, as contain-
ing a regifier of every man's aEtions, and
of the dead being judged from what had
been written in those books, is plainly a
metaphorical allusion to what is pratifed
among men; designed merely to convey
the firongeft impression of God's firid and
accurate observation of the minutes par-
ticulars of men's behaviour on earth. It
is sufficient for us to be satisfied, that what-
ever tremendous grandeur may attend the
judgment of the lift day, it will he con-
duded in such a manner as ihall be per-
sealy suitable to the perfections of the
Almighty.- Refting on such faas as are
plainly and explicitly revealed on this sub-
je&, let us confider,

IN the first place, the Person who is to

ac as Judge, even the eternal Son of God.
We must all, fays the text, appear before
the judgment-feat of Cbrjl. This is re-
peated in many passages of the New Tef-

3 tament.

tament. The day of judgment is termed SERM.

XL

the day of the Son of Man. The Father,
we are told, juagetb no man, but bath com-
mitted alljudgment to the Son *.-This con-
flitution of Providence is, in many re-
spects, wife, fit, and gracious. It was
highly proper that He who once, in the
cause of God and mankind, flood as a
criminal before impious judges on earth,
should be thus signally vindicated and ho-
noured, by appearing in the illufirious
charader of the Judge of all the earth. It
was fit that the character of Judge and
Sovereign mnould be made known, as added
to the other charaters he bore, of Priest
and Prophet, in order to give weight and
authority to all his precepts, from the
awful consideration that on our obedience
to him depends our everlasting fate.--
But the most firiking and important circum-
stance in this appointment of Providence is,
the assurance which it affords us of the
perse& equity of this final judgment. For

' Jehn, v. 2.

here

SER M. here we behold a Judge who is taken, as

XX.
.._., we may fay, from among ourselves. He

dwelt amongst us on earth, and did not
disdain to call us brethren. IHe knows ex-
perimentally what human paflions and hu-
man frailties are; and what the Apnftle to
the Hebrews fays of him as a Priedr, may
be as fully applied to him as a Judge. We
have not a mudge who cannot be tcuched
with the feeling of our infirmitics; but One
.bwo was in all points tempted like as we arc,
yet without fin. The infinite majesty of
the Supreme Being is an ohjet at all times
overwhelming to the mind. In the fitua-
tion of a Judge particularly, it might fill
us with dismay. But in the person of our
blefled Rcdecmer, that majesty is placed in
a milder light. The attribute of mercy
comes forward in so conspicuous a manner,
as to allay the dread we would otherwise
entertain. To the obstinate and hardened
finner, the judgment of our Saviour may
indeed jufily occasion terror. Well may
they be afraid of appearing before the judg-
ment. feat of Chrilt, who have scorned and

defplifed

despised him and his religion. But to the SERM.

XX.

pious and the humble, no consideration can ..
carry more comfort than that they are to
appear in judgment before him who so
loved the human race as to die for them;
and from whom, therefore, may be ex-
peded every favourable allowance which
their cafe will admit.-From the contem-
plation of the Judge, let us

IN the feconu place, turn our thoughts

towards the pcrfons who are to be judged.
Thelf, we are again and again informed,
(hall be all mankind; both the quick and
the dead; those who (hall then he found
upon the earth; and all the past generations
who have finished their course, and been
long ago gathered unto their fathers. 11 '
mrti all, I;'s the texr, aPcar before .ice
judgment-feat f Chrifl.-No privilege (hall
exempt the great, no obscurity shelter the
low from the judgment of God. All the
frivolous diatinlions which fashion and
vanity had introduced among men, shall at
that day be annihilated. No longer shall

we

sI M. we then appear under the personated cha-
xx., raaers of high and low, of rich and poor.-

Under the simple character of men and
fubjets of God, we ihall be brought forth
to be judged according to our works. In
the one great difsinction of good and bad,
of righteous or wicked, all other diftincions
lhall then be eternally loft.-Let the fore-
fight of this humble the pride of the often-
tatious and the great. Thou who now car-
riet thy head so high, (halt, upon the fame
footing with thy lowest dependent, stand
before the tribunal of the Almighty. Thou
who now oppreffeft thy weak brother with
impunity, (halt then tremble for thine own
safety as much, perhaps more than he.
For there is no rebeft of persons with God.
- The last day is justly fyled the day of
the revelation of the fJcrets of all hearts.
Stripped of all disguise, the chara&er of
every man (hall be unveiled to public view.
Then (hall the false friend be detected, the
concealed slanderer be exposed, the secret
adulterer, the treacherous enemy, the hypo-
critical pretender, be all brought to light.-

What

What a check Ihould the thoughts of this dif- S ER M.

xx.

covery give to the arts of dissimulation and ,
falsehood ? What avails it thee,Owife man of
the world! to pass for a (hort time with fair
colours before the eye of men, if by the
eye of God thou art already discovered, and
ihalt, at last, he discovered to the view of
all mankind ? If now thou art so solicitous
to conceal thy real character from the world,
and canst not bear that the designs and
intrigues which have passed through thy
mind in the courle of but one day Ihould
be all made known, dost thou not tremble
at the thought of the whole machinations
of thy life being brought forth and pro-
claimed before assembled men and angels?
--At this great day too, when secret
vice is made known in order to be pu-
nilhed, secret virtue shall be discloscd and
rewarded. The humble good man, who
pafled unnoticed through the obscurity of
private life; whose days, if not marked by
any splendid deeds, were ennobled by vir-
tuous actions, shall then be singled out
from the crowd, and brought forward as
the friend of God and Heaven.-The an-

guifl

S R M. guiih of the wicked, upon the discovery
xx- and comparilon of the life of such a person

with their own, is thus beautifully described
by one of the Apocryphal writers; Tbid
was he whom we bad jimretimes in ie/riion,
and a proverb of reproach. W fools ac-
counted bis li/ madnefi, and his end to be
without honour. Now he is numbered among
the Lhildren of God, and his lot is among the
faints. But we wearied ourselves in the
way of deflruc7ion. W'hat hath pride pro-
fited us ? Or what good bath riches with
our vaunting brought mr ? All tho thing.r
are pased away like aJhalow, and as a poJt
that haoled by. But the righteous live for
evermore. Their reward a/so is with the
Lord; and the care of them with the Alof
Higb *.-- From this view of the persons
who are to appear before the judgment-feat
of Christ, let us

IN the third place, go on to the con-

fideration of the things for which they are
to be judged. These, we are told in the
text, are all the things done in the body,

Wildom of Solomon, v. 3- ;.

wbetber

whether they be good or bad. This is the S E R M.

XX.

conltant tenor of Scripture, that men are

.

to be judged according to their afJlirs. It
is not said that men are to be finally judged
according to their principles or belief, but
according to their works. This docs not
lead to any concluion that principles or
belief are not essential in forming a cha-
rater. Without good principles it cannot
be expeted there can be any regular tenor
of good actions. But actions are the tcft
of principles. Whatever we may pretend
as to our belief, it is the firain of our
actions that muff show whether our prin-
ciples have been good or bad; and sup-
posing them ever so good, whether we
have allowed them to exert a proper in-
fluence on our conduct. The conflant
doctrine of the Gospel is, by their fruits ye
Jhall know them. Not every one that jfith
unto me, Lord, Lord, but he bhat doeth the
will of my Father fiall enter into the ling-
dom of heaven *.--Of all the actions we

* Malh. vii. 21.
VoL, V. I i have

S E R M. have done, it is rcprefcnted that, in the day

x.^ of judgment flriA examination shall be

taken. Not our public conduA only, and
what we reckon the momentous parts of
our life, but the indulgence of our private
picafures, the amusements of our secret
thoughts and idle hours, shall be brought
into account. According to that emble-
matical representation given in the Gospel,
which I before mentioned as an expressive
figure, there is an invisible pen always
writing over our heads, and making
an exa& regifier of all the tranfaAions of
our life.-How careful and circumfped
ought this to render us over every part of
our behaviour ? If any of our adions were
of a transient and fugitive nature; if they
were to die with us, and to be forgotten
as soon as we are gone, there might be
some excuse for a loose and inconsiderate
condua. But we know the cafe to be
widely different; and that what we are
doing now,. we do for eternity. None of
our acions perish and are forgotten. They
will all accompany us to the tribunal of

God.

God. They will there testify, either for, SERM.

XX.

or against us; and howvever mnuh we a..
might wi(h to difclim fomne of them, they
may be confidered a- ::'tig up their voic2s
and fa)ing, " We are thine, for thou haft
" done us; we arc thy works and we will
"follow thee!"

It will now be said, if so revere a scrutiny

mufl be undergone for all we have done
and thought, who shall be able to stand
before God in judgment? How far from
innocence shall the best of us be found at
that day?-The thought is undoubtedly
alarming. But let us not despond; we are
aflured, there is bforgivenef with God, that
be may be feared. He is not extreme to mark
iniquity; for be knous our frame and re-
members wu are ardil. Powerful is the atone-
ment of our blefled Redeemer to procure
pardon for the greatest (inner who has been
penitent. We have all reason to believe,
that amidst numbcrlefs infirmities which
attend humanity, what the great Judge will
chiefly regard, is the habitual prevailing
turn of our heart and life; how far we

I i ha"

S F. P M. have been atuated by a sincere delre to

xx.
x.,M do our duty. This we know for certain,

that all the meafircs of this judeinent shall
be condudcd with lmoft perfct equity.
God will not exaat from any man what he
had never given him. He will judge him
according to the degree of light that wai
afforded him, according to the means of
kno:lcdge and improvement that were
put into his hands. Ilence, many a vir-
tuous heathen ihall be preferred before
miny mere professors of Christian faith.
They Jhall comc fioem tIe eaq and the weft,
the nrtlh an:.! t!L /i:tb, and ft down inl
lte kiRfld.n O' (o 9d; wuSen tbc children of
the kligiomn are c,/I oul '. For, as the
Apoltle to the Romans hath taught us,
thcy who finned without the law, that
is, without knowledge of the written
law, Jsoall pcrfi, shall be judged, without
Ihe law; Jfr uwhen the Gentiles whichb bave
not the law, do, by nature, the things
co(.'lain;ed in the law, tLiefc having nmt

* Luke, ziii 2). Mmth. viii. ,.

thl

l,'c lZaw, are a iw Iunto tl'o tlvs
1 .- S F R RM.

XX.

In the account given by our Lord of the , -.
procedure of the lafI judgment, in the 25j!i
chapter of the Gofpcl of Mattliew, par'i-
cular flre's is laid upon works of benefi-
cence and mercy; on the hungry being fed,
the naked being cloathed, and the tick
being vilited by the righteous. But though,
in that parable, no virtues of any other
kind are particularizedl, we are certa;ily
not to infer any exclusion of other parts
of duty; of pictv, jliftice, temperance, and
purity; as requi ite to the charater of the
man, who, at the last day will be accepted
by God. The scope of the parable was to
impress that covetous and fctifil nation of
the Jews, to whom the parable was ad-
dressed, with a deep lenle of the iinpoit-
ance of those virtues in which they were
remarkably deficient, and which are, in
themselves so essential, compafion and hu-
manity to their brethrcn.-It now only
remains,

Romi. i 1. 214.

I 3 IN

SE R M. IN the last place to fix our attention on
XX, that final definitive sentence which is to

dole the whole procedure of t'.e lal: day,
and to terminate for ever the hopes and
fears of the human race. The righteous
arc by the Great Judge called to eternal
life and happiness; andi the wicked ap-
pointed to go into evi,,flting puninilnent.
-Into thrfe future habitations of the good
and the bad, it is not ours to penetrate.
All that we know is, that after the Judge
hath pronounced the righteous to be the
ldfcd of his Father, they shall be caught up
in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and j3
tbheyJall be ever with the Lord *; received
into mansions where all the inhabitants shall
be blest; hut where we are taught there

ihall be different degrees of exaltation and
felicity, according to the advancement
which men had made in holiness and
virtue; one glory of the fun, and anotherglory
of the moon, and another glory of the flars,
and one iar dfferingfrom another in gloryt.

* X ThT. iv. 17. t I Corinth. xv. 41.

II On

On the misery prepared for the reprobate, SE RM.

XX.

it would be flocking to dwell; and in a _
high degree improper and presumptuous
in us to descant on the degree and duration
of those punishments which infinite justice
and wisdom may fee cause to inflic on the
incurably wicked. - The whole great
scheme of Providence being now completed,
and its ways fully jutfified to all rational
beings, well may universal acclamations of
praise arise from all the heavenly hofls;
Hallelujab to him that fittetb on the throne,
and to the lamb of God, for ever and ever!
Great and marvellous are all thy works,
Lord God Almighty; jus and true are all
thy ways, thou King of Saint !- This
earth which had been so long the theatre
of human actions and human glory, having
now accomplished the purpose for which,
as a temporary structure, it was erected,
lhall, at this consummation of things, finally
disappear from the universe. The heavens
Jhall pafi away with a great ,noie; the
elements Jhall melt with fervent beat; the
eartb and the works that are therein ball

Ii 4 be

SS. RM. be burnt p a*; and its place lJall know it
xx.

1 no more.

Ler u hbear the concelitn of the cwhole

matter; l'eZarGC'.l da,/ chi bis commandments,
Jor thi s istc iewhlJu of man; the whole of
his duty, his iintrct, and his happiness.
It is the road to a comfortable life, to a
peaceful death, to a happy eternity. For
God, addeth the wife man, flall bring every
*work into judgment, with everyJccret tling,
wbsthebr it be good or whether it be evil.-
Let the prospect of this judgment so dwell
on our minds as to produce that degree
of ferioufncfs which, in this vain and
changing world, becomes us as Chriflians,
becomes us as men. If it be our care
to preserve a good conscience, and to do
the things that are right, that judgment
will not be to us an object of dismay. On
the contrary, amidst the many discourage-
ments which our virtuous endeavours meet
with at present, it will be a comfort to
think that verily there is ajufl God to judge

* z Pet. iii. 10,

the

ihe earth, who shall in the end male all SERM.
crooked things jlrlil.t, and fully recom- X
penie his Icrva:its tr tihe hardihbps they
may now susser hv lpe, levering in the path
of integrity.-This is the itafon, not of
reaping, but of fow:in-; not of reft and
enjoyment, but of labour and combat.
You are now running the race; hereafter
you (hall receive the prize. You are now
approving your fidelity, in the midil of
trials; at the last day you (hall receive the
crown of the faithful. Be patient, therefore,
flablifh your hearts; for the coming of the
Lord drawetb nigh. The Judge is at
Sand; and his rceward is uith him.

# A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE and CHARACTER OF DR. HUGH BLAIR.

A
SHORT ACCOUNT

OF THE
LIFE and CHARACTER

OF

DR. HUGH BLAIR.
DR. HUGH BLAIR was born in Edin.

burgh, on the 7th day of April, 1718.

His father, John Blair, a refpedable merchant
in that city, was a descendant of the ancient
family of Blair, in Ayrlhire, and grandson of
the famous Mr. Robert Blair, Minister of St.
Andrew's, Chaplain to Charles I. and one
of the most zealous and dillinguifhed clergy.
men of the period in which he lived. This
worthy man, though firmly attached to the
cause of freedom, and to the Presbyterian form
of church government, and though actively en-

gaged
!

gaged in all the measures adopted for their sup.
port; yet, by his h:cady, t(mpcrte coridutt,
commailded the rcfprlct even of is oi)pponenlts.
In preference to all the olier ecclefianical
leaders of the co:cnaniili pairty, hIe v.as I'llctcd
by the King hiinlclf to fill an oflice which, from
the circumtlances of the time, gave frequent
access to the Royal Person ; " because," said
his Majelty, " that man is pious, prudent,
' learned, and of a meek and moderate calm
" temper."-IIis talents fecm to have descended
as an inheritance to his potferity. For, of the
two sons who survived him, David, the eldest,
was a clergyman of eminence in Edinburgh,
sither to Mr. Robert Blair, Minister of Athel.
flonford, the celebrated author of the poem
intitlcd The Grave; and grandfather to his
Mlajefy's Solicitor General for Scotland, whose
malculine eloquence and profound knowledge
of law have, in the public estimation, placed
him indil'rutably at the head of the Scottilh bar.
F'rom his youngest son lHugh, who engaged in
buifinfs as a merchant, and had the honour to
fill a high flation in the magistracy of Edinburgh,
sprung the learned clergyman, who is the sub-
jdg of this narrative.

9 1inl

THE views of Dr. Blair, from his earliest

youth, were turned towards the Church, and
his education received a suitable direction.
After the usual gram:natical course at school;
he entered the IIuma!nity Class in the University
of Edinburgh, in October 1730, and spent
eleven years at that celebrated seminary, affidu.
oufly employed in the literary and scientific
fludies prescribed by the Church of Scotland to
all who are to bcco;"e candidates for her licence
to preach the Gospel. During this important
period, he was diftinguifled among his com.
panions both for diligence and proficiency; and
obtained from the Professors under whom he
fludied, repeated testimonies of approbation.
One of them deserves to be mentioned particu-
larly, because in his own opinion, it determined
the bent of his genius towards polite literature.
An essay, nr':, G; xa U, or, On the Beautiful,
written by him when a student of logic in the
usual course of academical exercises, had the
good fortune to attract the notice of Professor
Stevenson, and, with circumRances honourable
to the author, was appointed to be read in public
at the conclusion of the Seflion. This mark

of

of diftinAion made a deep impreflion on his
mind; and the essay which merited it, he ever
after recolleced with partial affeicion, and pre.
served to the day of his death as the first earnest
of his fame.

AT this time Dr. Blair commenced a method

of Rudy which contributed much to the ac-
curacy and extent of his knowledge, and which
he continued to pratife occasionally even after
his reputation was fully eltablilhed. It consisted
in making abftra&s of the most important works
which he read, and in digesting them according
to the train of his own thoughts. History, in
particular, he resolved to fludy in this manner;
and, in concert with ofme of his youthful affo.
ciates, he confiruted a very comprehensive
rcheme of chronological tables, for receiving into
its proper place every important fa& that Ihould
occur. The scheme devised by this young
tfudent for his own private use was afterwards
Improved, filled up, and given to the Public by
his learned friend Dr. John Blair, Prebendary of
WeltminRler, in his valuable work, "The
K Chronology and History of the World."

IN the year 1739, Dr. Blair took his degree

of A. M. On that occasion he printed and de-
fended a thesis De Fundamentis et Obligatione
Legis Nature, which contains a short, but maf-
terly discussion of this important subjea, and
exhibits in elegant Latin an outline of the moral
principles, which have been since more fully
unfolded and illuflrated in his Sermons.

THE University of Edinburgh, about this

period, numbered among her pupils many young
men who were soon to make a distinguished
figure in the civil, the ecclefialtical, and the
literary history of their country. With moll
of them Dr. Blair entered into habits of intimate
connecion, which no future competition or jea-
lousy occurred to interrupt, which held them
united through life in their views of public good,
and which had the most beneficial influence on
their own improvement, on the progress of ele.
gance and taste among their cotemporaries, and
on the general interests of the community to
which they belonged.

ON the completion of his academical course,
he underwent the customary trials before the

Prefby.

Presbytery of Edinburgh, and received from thai
venerable body a licence to preach the Gospel, on
the 21si of October 1741. Hiis public life now
commenced with very favourable profpecs.
The reputation which he brought from the
University was fully jufified by his firfl appear-
ances in the pulpit; and, in a few months, the
fame of his eloquence procured for him a pre-
fentation to the parish of Coleffie in Fife, where
he was ordained to the office of the holy minis-
try, on the 23d of Septecmber 1742. But he
was not permitted to renmai long in this rural
retreat. A vacancy in the fccend charge of the
Canongate of Edinburgh luiunlhed to his friends
an opportunity of recalling him to a station
more suited to his talents. And, though one
of the molt popular and eloquent clergymen in
the Church was placed in competition with him,
a great majority of the cle&ors decided in favour
of this yodng orator, and rcftored him in July
1743 to the bounds of his native city.

IN this flation Dr. Blair continued eleven

years, discharging with great fidelity and fuc-
cess the various duties of the pastoral office;

His

His discourses from the pulpit in particular at.
trased universal admiration. They were com-
posed with uncommon care; and, occupying a
middle place between the dry metaphysical dif-
cuflion of one class of preachers, and the loose
incoherent declamation of another, they blended
together, in the happiefl manner, the light of
argument with the warmth of exhortation, and
exhibited captivating specimens of what had
hitherto been rarely heard in Scotland, the po.
lifhed, well.compacBed, and regular didatic
oration.

IN consequence of a call from the Town-

Council and General-Seflion of Edinburgh, he
was translated from the Canongate to Lady
Yester's, one of the city churches, on the 1ith
of Ofober 1754: and on the i5th day of June
1758, he was promoted to the High Church of
Edinburgh, the most important ecclesiastical
charge in the kingdom. To this charge he was
raised at the request of the Lords of Council and
Sellion, and of the other dltinguifhed official
characers who have their feats in that church.
And the uniform prudence, ability and success
VOL. V. K k which,

which, for a period of more than forty years,
accompanied all his miniflerial labours in that
conspicuous and difficult fiation, sufficiently
evince the wisdom of their choice.

IIITHIERTO his attention seems to have been

devoted almost exclusively to the attainment
of professional excellence; and to the regular
discharge of his parochial duties. No produAqion
of his pen had yet been given to the world by him-
self, except two sermons preached on particular
occasions, some translations, in verse, of passages
of Scripture for the Psalmody of the Church, and
a few articles in the Edinburgh Review; a pub-
lication begun in 1755, and conduced for a
Ihort time by some of the ablest men in the
kingdom. But flanding as he now did at the
head of his profeflion, and released by the labour
of former years from the drudgery of weekly
preparation for the pulpit, he began to think
lerioufly on a plan for teaching to others that
art which had contributed so much to the efla.
blilhment of his own fame. With this view, he
communicated to his friends a scheme of Lec-
tures on Composition; and, having obtained the

approbation

approbation of the University, he began to
read them in the College on the l1th of De-
cember 1759. To this undertaking he brought
all the qualifications requisite for executin, it
well; and along with them a weight of repu-
tation, which could not fail to give effect to the
lefons he should deliver. For, besides the tef-
timony given to his talents by his fucceflive pro-
motions in the Church, the University of St.
Andrew's, moved chiefly by the merit of his
eloquence, had in June 1757 conferred on him
the degree of D. D. a literary honour which, at
that time, was very rare in Scotland. Accord.
ingly his first Course of Letures was well at.
tended, and received with great applause. The
patrons of the University, convinced that they
would form a valuable addition to the fyflem of
education, agreed in the following fummcr to
inltitute a rhetorical class, under his dircEtion, as
a permanent part of their academical eflablifh.
ment: and, on the 7th of April 1762, his Ma-
jefly was graciously pleated " To erec and en-
"dow a Professorship of Rhetoric and Belles
"Lettres in the University of Edinburgh, and
"to appoint Dr. Blair, in consideration of his

K k 2 " approved

" approved qualifications, Regius Professor there-
" of, with a salary of L. 7o." These Letures
he publified in 1783, when he retired from the
labours of tile office; and the general voice of
the Public has pronounced them to be a most
judicious, elegant, and comprehensive system of
rules for forming the flyle and cultivating the
talle of youth.

ABouTr the time in which he was occupied

in laying the foundations of this useful institution,
he had an opportunity of conferring another im-
portant obligation on the literary world, by the
part which he acted in rescuing from oblivion
the poems of Cflian. It was by the solicitation
of Dr. Blair and Mr. John Home that Mr. Mac.
pherfon was induced to publish his Fragments
of Ancient Poctry; and their patronage was of
tffential service in procuring the subscription
which enabled him to undertake his tour through
the Highlands for colleEing the materials of
Fingal, and of those other delightful produc-
tions which bear the name of Offlan. To there
productions Dr. Blair applied the tell of genuine
criticism, and soon after their publication gave

an

an efltimate of their merits in a Diertatiwn,
which, for beauty of language, delicacy of tafle,
and acuteness of critical investigation, has few
parallels. It was printed in 1763, and spread
the reputation of its author throughout Europe.

THE great objecs of his literary ambition

being now attained, his talents were for many
years consecrated solely to the important and
peculiar employments of his station. It was not
till the year 1777 that he could be induced to
favour the world with a volume of the Sermons
which had so long furnished inftrulion and de-
light to his own congregation. But this volume
being well received, the public approbation en-
couraged him to proceed: three other volumes
followed at different intervals; and all of them
experienced a degree of success of which few
publications can boast. They circulated rapidly
and widely wherever the English tongue ex-
tends; they were soon translated into almost all
the languages of Europe; and his present Ma-
jefy, with that wife attention to the interests of
religion and literature which diflinguifhes his
reign, was graciously pleased to judge them

K k 3 worthy

worthy of a public reward. By a royal mandate
to the Exchequer in Scotland, dated July 25th,
178o, a pension of £. 200 a-year was conferred
on their author, which continued unaltered till
his death.

Tut motives which gave rife to the present

volume are sufficiently explained by himself in
his Address to the Reader. The Sermons which
it contains were composcd at very different periods
of his life ; but they were all written out anew in
his own hand, and in many parts re-compofed,
during the course of last summer, after he had
completed his eighty-fecond year. They were
delivered to the publilhers about fix weeks before
his death, in the formi and order in which they
now appear. Alid it may gratify his readers to
know, that the lalt of them which he composed,
though not the lall in the order adopted for pub-
lication, was the Sermon on a Life of Djipation
andPlcafiire-a sermon written with great dignity
and eloquence, and wliich should be regarded as
his folemnn parting admonition to a class of
nmen, whole conduct is highly important to
the community, and whose reformation and

virtue

virtue he had long laboured mol zealoufy to
promote.

THE Sermons which he has given to the

world are univcrfally admitted to be models in
their kind; and they will long remain durable
monuments of the piety, the genius, and found
judgment of their author. But they formed
only a small part of the Difcourfcs he prepared
for the pulpit. The remainder, modesty led him
to think unfit for the press; and, influenced by
an excusable solicitude for his reputation, he left
behind him an explicit injuncion that his nu-
merous manuscripts should be destroyed. The
greatness of their number was creditable to his
profeflional character, and exhibited a convincing
proof that his fame as a public teacher had been
honourably purchased, by the mofd unwearied
application to the private and unseen labours of
his office. It refted on the uniform intrinsic
excellence of his Discourses, in point of matter
and composition, rather than on foreign attrac-
tions; for his delivery, though distinct, serious,
and imprclfive, was not remarkably distinguished
by that magic charm of voice and adtion which

Kk 4 capti;atc;

captivates the senses and imagination, and which,
in the ellimation of superficial hearers, conflitutes
the chief merit of a preacher.

IN that department of his professional duty

which regarded the government of the church,
Dr. Blair was steadily attached to the cause of
moderation. From diffidence, and perhaps from
a certain degree of inaptitude for extemporary
speaking, he took a less public part in the con-
tefls of ecclesiastical politics than some of his
cotemporaries; and, from the fame causes, he
never would content to become Moderator of the
General Assembly of the Church of Scotland.
But his influence among his brethren was ex-
tensive: his opinion, guided by that found up-
rightnees of judgment, which formed the pre-
dominant feature of his intelletual characfer,
'had been always held in high refped by the

friends with whom he acted; and, for many of
the last years of his life, it was received by them
almost as a law. The great leading principle
in which they cordially concurred with him, and
which directed all their measures, was to pre-

serve

serve the church, on the one fide, from a slavish,
corrupting dependance on the civil powe ; and,
on the other, from a greater infusion of demo.
cratical influence than is compatible with good
order, and the eltablilhed conflitution of the
country.

TtHE reputation which he acquired in the

discharge of his public duties, was well fultained
by the great refpedability of his private charader.
Deriving from family associations a srong sense
of clerical decorum, feeling on his heart deep
impreflions of religious and moral obligation, and
guided in his intercourse with the world by the
fame corree and delicate taste which appeared
in his writings, he was eminently diftinguilhed
through life by the prudence, purity, and dig-
nified propriety of his condud. His mind, by
constitution and culture, was admirably formed
for enjoying happiness. Well-balanced in itself
by the nice proportion and adjustment of its
faculties, it did not incline him to any of those ex-
centricities, either of opinion or of aftion, which
are too often the lot of genius :-free from all

tincture

tinlure of envy, it delighted cordially in the
prosperity and fame of his companions: sensible
to the efimation in which he himself was held,
it disposed him to dwell at times on the thought
of his success with a fatisfa&ion which he did
not assec to conceal: inacceflible alike to gloomy
and to peevilh imprellions, it was always master
of its own movements, and ready, in an uncom-
mon degree, to take an active and pleasing in.
terell inevery thing, whether important or trifling,
that happened to become for the moment the
objea of his attention. This habit of mind,
tempered with the molt unfufpeting simplicity,
and united to eminent talents and inflexible in-
tegrity, while it secured to the last his own relilh
of life, was wonderfully calculated to endear
him to his friends, and to render him an invalu-
able member of any society to which he be-
longed. Accordingly there have been few men
more universally refpeded by those who knew
him, more sincerely efeemed in the circle of his
acquaintance, or more tenderly beloved by those
who enjoyed the blelling of his private and do.
meftic connecion.

I h

IN April 1748, he married his cousin Katharine

Bannatine, daughter of the Rev. James Banna-
tine, one of the liniflters of Edinburgh. By
her he had a son who died in infancy, and a
daughter, who lived to her twenty-firlt year,
the pride of her parents, and adorned with all
the accomplilhments that became her age and
sex. Mrs. Blair herself, a woman of great good
sense and spirit, was also taken from him a few
years before his death, after she had shared with
the tenderct aflieion in all his fortunes, and
contributed near half a century to his happiness
and comfort.

DR. BLAIR had been naturally of a feeble

conflitution of body; but as he grew up his
conflitution acquired greater firmness and vigour.
Though liable to occasional attacks from some
of the fharpe. and most painful diseases that
afflia the human frame, he enjoyed a general
slate of good health; and, through habitual
cheerfulness, temperance, and care, survived the
usual term of human life.-For some years he
had felt himself unequal to the fatigue of inftrut-
ing his very large congregation from the pulpit;

and,

and, under the imprefllion which this feeling
produced, he has been heard at times to fay
with a sigh, " that he was left almost the lall
" of his cotemporaries." Yet he continued to
the end in the regular discharge of all his other
official duties, and particularly in giving advice
to the afflied, who, from different quarters of
the kingdom, solicited his correspondence. His
lafd summer u'as devoted to the preparation of
this volume of Sermons; and, in the course of
it, he exhibited a vigour of underflanding and
capacity of exertion equal to that of his belt days.
He began the winter pleased with himself on
account of the completion of this work; and his
friends were flattered with the hope that he
might live to enjoy the acceflion of emolument
and fame which he expe&ed it would bring.
But the feeds of a mortal disease were lurking
unperceived within him. On the 24th of De-
cember 180o, he complained of a pain in his
bowels,which, during that and the following day,
gave him but little uneasiness; and he received
as usual the visits of his friends. On the after-
noon of the 26th, the symptoms became violent
and alarming :-he felt that he was approaching

the

the end of his appointed course: and retaining
to the last moment the full poffefion of his
mental faculties, he expired on the morning of
the 27th, with the composure and hope which
become a Christian pastor.

THIE lamentation for his death was uni-

versal and deep through the city which he
had so long inflrufted and adorned. Its Magif.
trates, participating in the general grief. ap-
pointed his church to be put in mourning; and
his colleague in it, the writer of this Narrative,
who had often experienced the inestimable value
of his counsel and friendship, delivered on the
Sabbath after his funeral a discourse to his con-
gregation, with an extrad from which this ac-
count shall be closed. It is inserted here at the
particular request of that very refpefable body
of men who composed his Kirk Seflion, and who,
by their public approbation of this tribute to his
memory, are desirous of transmitting, with his
Sermons, to posterity a memorial of the vene.
ration and eRteem with which his conduc had
inspired them.-After exhorting to contemplate
and follow the patriarchs and faints of former

4 ages,

ages, who, through faith and patience, inherit ti.
promnfes, the Preacher thus proceeded:

" IN this competition for virtuous attainment

" it may be often useful to bring down your
" eye, from contemplating the departed worthies
' of distant times and countries, towards pat-
" terns of imitation that are endeared to you by
" more tender ties. If, in the relations of life,
" you have had a connecion,-if, in the circle
" of your own family, you have had a father,

a hulband, or a brother, who discharged with

" exemplary fidelity the duties of his station,
" whom every tongue blessed as the friend of
" God and man, and who died as he lived, full

of faith and hope, place him before you as
' the model of your conduc,-conceive him
" bending from his feat in the fldes, pleased with
" your attachment, deeply interested in your
" success, and cheering you in your labours of
"love. Ilis image will be as a guardian angel,
"to admonilh you when dangers approach, to
"rouse within you every principle of virtuous

exertion, and to inspire you with strength to
"overcome.

" OUR

" OUR hearts, Chrillians, have been deeply

" pierced with the loss of a most valuable con-
" neion, of a venerable pallor, who watched

long for our fouls, and, with the most un.

"wearied fidelity, pointed out to us the path
" of happiness. To you, and to the general
" interests of pure religion, he was attached by
"many powerful obligations. A native of this
"city, and descended from a family which, in
" former times, had given fcveral bright orna.
" ments to the Church of Scotland, he felt the

warmedt tendencies of nature co-operating

" with the principles of duty, to call forth all
' his powers in the sacred service to which he
"was devoted. And, by the blefling of God
" on his industry, he rose to an eminence in
"professional merit, which has reflected dif-
"tinguilhed honour on the city, on the church,
" and on the country which produced him.

" IT was the fortune of Dr. Blair to appear

"at a period when the literature of his country
"was just beginning to receive polish and an
" useful dire&tion; and when it was emulously
" cultivated by a bright conltellation of young

9 " men

" men who were destined to carry it to high
" perfeOion. In concert with them he applied
" himself with diligence and assiduity to all
" those branches of study which could con-
" tribute to form him for the eloquence of the
" pulpit. This was the department in which he

chose to excel; to which all the force of his
genius was direced; and in which he soon
s felt that his efforts were to be successful. For
" from the very commencement of his theolo-
" gical fludies, he gave presages of his future
, attainments; and, in the societies of his

youthful companions, laid the foundations of

" that splendid reputation which, through a long
" life of meritorious service, continued to in-

crease; and which has procured for him as a

" religious instructor, access to the underRand-
" ings and the hearts of all the molt cultivated
" inhabitants of the Christian world.

1" To you, my brethren, who have long en-
joyed the ineltimable blefling of his immediate
" infirufion, it will not be necetfary to describe

the qualities of that luminous, fascinating elo-
" quence, with which he was acculfomed to

" warm

' warm, and ravish, and amend your hearts.

You may have heard others who equal-

"led, or cvcn excelled him in fomie of the
" rcquifites of pulpit oratory, in occasional pro-
"soundness of thought, in vivid flalies of ima-
"gination, or in pathetic addrclfes to the heart.
" But there never was a public teacher in
" whom all there requisites were combined
"in julfer proportions, placed under the di-
" rcclion of a more exquisite sense of propriety,
"and employed with more uniform fucccfs to
" convey ufcful and practical infruaion. Stand-
" ing on the foundation of the Apofltcl and
"Prophets, he exhibited the docerincs ,f (:hl if
" in their genuine purity, fepara:cd fioln the
"dross offuperllitin, and traced wvilt ininm;.i. le
" elegance, tlrough all their beneficial infucnce
"on the consolation, on the or&dr, and on the
" irtue both of public and privatc life. Ilc;ice

his discourses, uniting in the mofl perfect lornt

" the attracioni of utility and beaut), gave a
"new and better tone to the tlyle of inftruc ion
"from the pulpit; and contributed in a rctnal!-
' able degrec to coirec' and refine the religiou,,
, the moral, and the literary tafle of the times
"in which he lived.

VOL. V. L 1 " T;i

" TItt universal admiration which attended
"his minilterial labours, was some recompence

to him for the exertions they had colt. But
his chief recompence arose from the con-
fcioufnefs of having contributed so eminently

"to edify the Church of Christ, and from the
"improving influence which his labours had flied

on his own heart. For he was at home and
"in himself the perfec image of that meekness,

simplicity, gcntlencfs, and contentment, which
"his writings recommend. He was long happy

in his domeflic relations; and, though doomed
at last to fed!, through their loss in fucceflion,

"the heaviest flrokes of afflicion; yet his mind,
" frtified by religious habits, and buoyed up

by his native tendency to contentment, sus-

" ained itself on God, and enabled him to per.
" revere to the end in the acive and cheer-
" fl discharge of the duties of his Ilation; pre-

paring for the world the blessings of elegant
" inftrulion; tendering to the mourner the

lessons of divine consolation; guiding the
young by his counlcl ; aiding the meritorious

" with his influence; and supporting, by his
"voice and by his conduct, the civil and eccle.
" firaical irititutioni of his Country.

3 " TXTIT- .

" WITH such dispositions and habits it was

" natural that he should enjoy a diltinguifhed
"portion of felicity. And perhaps there never
"was a man who experienced more completely
"that the ways of uifdomr are ways ofpleafantnejr,
" and that all her paths are peace. His Country
"was proud of his merits, and at different times
"conferred on him, through the hands of the
"Sovereign, the most honourable and fubftan.
"tial proofs of her approbation: foreign lands
"learned from him the way of salvation: he

saw marks of deference and refpe& wherever

" he appeared: and he felt within himself the
"gratulations of a good conscience, and the

hope of immortality. It was peculiarly de.

" lightful to fee him in the latefl period of his
' life, at the venerable age of eighty-two, look-
" ing back on almost threescore years spent in
" the public service of his God, pleated with the
"recollecions which it gave, poffefling a mind
" fill vigorous and clear, the delight of his
" friends, sensible to the attentions which they
"paid to him, burning with zeal for the good of
"the Church, and, with all the ardour of youth-
" ful ambition, preparing the materials of a new
" claim to the gratitude and admiration of pofte-

L 1 " rity.

"rity. In this adive slate of preparation, with
" the lamp of life still clear and bright, he was
"found by the Great Lord of all when he came
"to fay ' It is enough ;' and, after a single
" night of pain, to call him gently to his reft.

" IH has gone to give an account of his
" ftewardfhip.-The Church mourns in him the

loss of her brightest ornament.-Let us sub-

" mit to the firoke with resignation and rever-
" ence; and, as the most acceptable proof of
" refpet to his memory, let us learn to pracife
" the lessons which he taught."

J. FINLAYSON.
Matcb hih, Ito: .

B RTA
F I N I S.
