OBSERVATIONS UPON A PAMPHLET, INTITLED, An Analysis of the Moral and Religious Sentiments contained in the Writings OF SOPHO, and DAVID HUME, Esq; &c.
EDINBURGH: Printed in the Year M,D,CC,LV.

OBSERVATIONS
UPON
A Pamphlet, intitled, An Analysis of the Moral and Religious Sentiments
contained in the Writings of S OPHO , and D AVID H UME , Esq; &c.
A P AMPHLET having made its appearance lately, intitled, An Analysis
of the Moral and Religious Sentiments contained in the Writings of S OPHO ,
and D AVID H UME , Esq, Addressed to the consideration of the Reverend and
Honourable Members of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland; a
few observations, which have occurred upon it, are here submitted to the
public. The author’s zeal for religion would deserve the highest commen-
dation, if, in some instances, it did not seem to be misguided, in others to
exceed the bounds of true piety.
T HE freedom of inquiry and debate, tho’ it may have published some
errors to the world, has undoubtedly been the source from whence many
blessings have flowed upon mankind. As free inquiry alone could at <1–2>
first have been made for Christianity, and have borne down the opposi-
tion of synagogues, senates and schools; it is to the same noble principle
we owe the Reformation, and are enabled to set at defiance the tyrannical
decisions of Popes and Councils. By means of free inquiry, the church of
Scotland was originally established. In this country, therefore, all attempts
to infringe so valuable a privilege in cases where the peace of society is
not concerned, must ever be regarded with concern by all reasonable men.
The proper objects of censure and reproof are not freedom of thought, but
licentiousness of action; not erroneous speculations, but crimes pernicious
to society. Against these ought the Clergy to exert their utmost efforts; and
by such a conduct they will more advance the cause of religion, than by
engaging in metaphysical disputes, which may perplex the understandings,
but never can impair the morals of men.
T HE intention of the following observations is by no means to enter into
any controversy, but solely to examine, whether the Author of the Analysis
has not, in many instances, misrepresented the meaning, and quoted unfairly
the words of those books he would expose to censure. It will be admitted
without dispute, that, to cite one part of a paragraph, and omit the other,
which de- <2–3> clares or explains the meaning of the author, is no less
culpable than to falsify the words.
T HE first Proposition of the Analysis is,—
There is no necessary relation betwixt cause and effect.
T O prove this to be the doctrine of the Author of the Essays on the
Principles of Morality, several passages are adduced; two from p. 274. and
275. and one from p. 296. These passages, tho’ they do not directly prove
the proposition, yet it must be owned, that, as they stand in the Analysis,
they have a great tendency towards it; but when those which immediately
follow them are added, the direct contrary proposition appears evidently to
be maintained. Thus the Analysis quotes, p. 5. “When a new thing or quality
“is produced, when in general any change is brought about, it is extremely
“doubtful, whether by any process of reasoning, we can conclude it to be an
“effect, so as necessarily to require a cause of its existence.” (Follows directly)
“That we do conclude it to be an effect, is most certain. But that we
“can draw any such conclusion, merely from reason, I don’t clearly see.
“What <3–4> leads me, I confess, to this way of thinking, is, that men
“of the greatest genius have been unsuccessful, in attempting to prove,
“that everything which begins to exist, must have a cause of its existence.
“[Whatever is produced, says Mr. Locke, without any cause, is produced by
“nothing; or, in other words, has nothing for its cause. But nothing can never
“be a cause, no more than it can be something.] This is obviously begging
“the question. To affirm that nothing is the cause, is taking for granted that
“a cause is necessary; which is the very point undertaken to be made out.
“Doctor Clarke’s argument labours under the same defect. [Every thing, he
“says, must have a cause; for if any thing wanted a cause, it would produce
“itself; that is, exist before it existed, which is impossible].” (Follows,) “But
“sense and “feeling afford me a conviction, that nothing begins to exist
“without a cause, tho’ reason cannot afford me a demonstration of it.”
T HE last citation is so unfairly culled from a page where both what goes
before, and what follows it, contradict the proposition of the Analysis, that
it is but fair to transcribe it entire. “Further, the perception we have of any
“object, as an effect, includes in it the feeling of a cause proportioned to the
“<4–5> effect. If the object be an effect properly adapted to some end, the
“perception of it necessarily includes an intelligent designing cause. If the
“effect be some good end brought about by proper means, the perception
“necessarily includes a designing and benevolent cause. Nor is it in our
“power, by any sort of constraint, to vary these feelings, or to give them
“a different modification from what they have by nature. It may be in our
“power to conceive, but it is not in our power to believe, that a fine piece
“of painting, a well wrote poem, or a beautiful piece of architecture, can
“ever be the effect of chance, or of blind fatality. The supposition, indeed,
“so far as we can discover, does not involve any inconsistency in the nature
“of things. It may be possible, for any reason we have to the contrary, that
“a blind and undesigning cause may be productive of excellent effects. But
“our senses discover, what reason does not, that every object, which appears
“beautiful as adapted to an end or purpose, is the effect of a designing cause;
“and that every object, which appears beautiful as fitted to a good end or
“purpose, is the effect of a designing and benevolent cause. We are so
“constituted, that we can entertain no doubt of this, if we would. And, so far
“as we gather from experience, we are not deceiv’d.” <5–6>
The second proposition of the Analysis is—
Matter is possessed of a power of self-motion.
H AD the Analysis said endued instead of possessed, the proposition had
been fairly stated, or if citation from p. 12. of the Essay on motion had been
continued, and those sentences in the middle which are purposely omitted,
inserted; the doctrine would have appeared to be the same in this point
with that which is maintained by the best and most orthodox philosophers.
The paragraph immediately following the quotation is p. 14. “It is suggested
“above, that to endue matter with a power of acting according to general
“and invariable laws, exhibits a more beautiful and compleat system, than
“to leave it absolutely inert, to require a continued interposition of the
“Deity. To illustrate this point, I chuse to borrow the honourable Mr. Boyle’s
“sentiment, whose piety was not inferior to his knowledge. [It seems
“manifest enough, that whatsoever is done in the world, at least where the
“rational soul intervenes not, is really effected by corporeal cases and
“agents, according to the laws settled by the omniscient author of things.]
“<6–7> * And he observes, [That as it more recommends the skill of an
“engineer to contrive an elaborate engine, so as that there need nothing
“to reach his ends in it, but the contrivance of parts void of understanding;
“than if it were necessary that, ever and anon, a discreet servant should
“be employed to concur notably to the operations of this or that part,
“or to hinder the engine from being out or order: so, it more sets off the
“wisdom of God, in the fabric of the universe, that he can make so vast a
“machine perform all those many things which he designed it should, by
“the mere contrivance of brute-matter, managed by certain laws of motion,
“and upheld by his ordinary and general concourse; than if he employed,
“from time to time, an intelligent overseer to regulate and controul the
“motion of the parts † .] What may be the opinion of others, I cannot say; but
“to me this argument is perfectly conclusive. Considering this universe as a
“great machine, the workmanship of an intelligent cause; I cannot avoid
“thinking it is more compleat, the less mending or interposition it requires.
“The perfection of every piece of workmanship, human and
“divine, consists in its answering the de- <7–8> signed purpose, without
“bestowing further labor upon it. And therefore, upon the whole, as we
“have no foundation, either in reason or experience, to deny activity to
“matter; I conclude, that the doctrine of absolute inertness of matter, is not
“only repugnant to truth, but tends in an indirect manner, to arraign the
“Deity of want of power or of wisdom, or of both.[”]
The third proposition of the Analysis is —
Nothing appears from reason that can induce us to think that the world is
not eternal.
N OTHING can be more remote from the doctrine of the Essays than the
eternity of the world. The context of the three citations from p. 317, 318,
and 319. which is purposely omitted, would sufficiently prove this to any
man of candour. But the passage in p. 344. must remove all dispute upon
this point.
“Therefore, an eternal succession of beings, is not a more natural
“supposition, than one eternal self-existent Being. And taking it in a different
“light, it will appear a supposition much less natural, or rather altogether
“unnatural. Succession in existence, implying the successive annihilation of
“particulars, is indeed a very natural con- <8–9> ception. But then, it is
“intimately connected with frail and dependent beings, and cannot, without
“the utmost violence to the conception, be applied to the Maker of all
“things, to whom, we naturally ascribe, perpetual existence, and every other
“perfection. And therefore, as this hypothesis of a perpetual succession,
“when applied to the Deity, is destitute of any support from reason or
“experience, and is contradicted by every one of our natural feelings, there
“can be no ground for adopting it.”
T O follow the Analysis thro’ every article, would be tedious and dis-
agreeable: one other instance shall only be adduced of this species of false
quotation. The 5th Proposition is,
The perfections of God are either such as we cannot prove, or cannot
comprehend.
T HE first citation is picked out from the midst of a paragraph, where the
preceding and following passages are in direct contradiction to the propo-
sition. The whole stands thus: “The Deity, is too grand an object, to be
“comprehended, in any perfect manner, by the human mind. We have not
“words nor ideas, which any way correspond to the manner of his existence.
“<9–10> Should some good angel undertake to be our instructor, we should
“still be at a loss, to form a distinct conception of it. Power, intelligence, and
“goodness, are attributes which we can comprehend. But with regard to the
“nature of the Deity in general, and the manner of his existence, we must
“be satisfied, in this mortal state, to remain much in the dark.” Then comes
the passage cited in the Analysis. “The attribute of Unity, is what, of all, we
“can have the least certainty about by the light of nature. It is not consistent,
“that there should be two or more beings of the very highest order, whose
“essence and actions are so regulated by the nature of the beings themselves,
“as to be altogether concordant and harmonious. In truth, the nature of the
“Divine Being is so far out of our reach, that we must be absolutely at a loss
“to apply to it unity or multiplicity. This property applies to numbers, and to
“individual things; but we know not that it will apply to the Deity.” Follows:
“At the same time, if we may venture to judge of a matter so remote from
“common apprehension, we ought to conclude in favours of the attribute of
“unity. We perceive the necessity of admitting one eternal Being; and it is
“sufficient, that there is not the smallest foundation from sense or reason, to
“suppose more than one.” <10–11>
I imagine it will scarcely be denied, that to quote thus, is to quote
falsely, since, by the same method, any author might be made to speak
things the most opposite to his sentiment. But, should there be any hesitation
upon this point, it is undoubted, That when a treatise professes to give “The
“very expression of the author, that if, in stating the proposition, his meaning
“should happen to be misunderstood, the words subjoined may do him
“justice.”
I F there should be found passages which are neither the words, nor
the meaning of the author, the falsehood cannot be palliated, nor excused.
An instance of this method of citation occurs in p. 23. Art. 5. of the Analysis.
The words quoted are, “The moral sense is not sufficient to influence the
“vulgar and illiterate.” The page cited is the 140. of the Essays. In all that
page there is no such sentence, neither is there any such sentiment to be
found. The passage from the beginning in p. 139, is as follows.
“I T may be observed, in the next place, that the rude and illiterate
“are governed by their appetites and passions, more than by general
“principles. We have our first impressions from particular objects. ’Tis
“by education and practice that we acquire a facility in forming complex
“ideas, and ab- <11–12> stract propositions. The ideas of a common
“interest, of a country, of a people, of a society under government, of
“public good, are complex, and not soon acquired even by the thinking
“part of mankind. They are scarce ever to be acquired by the rude and
“illiterate; and consequently do not readily become the object of any of
“their affections. One’s own interest, considered in general, is too
“complex an object for the bulk of mankind; and therefore it is, that the
“particular appetites and passions are stronger motives to action with the
“ignorant and unthinking, than the principle of self-love, or even than of
“self-preservation, when it is not incited by some particular object which
“threatens danger. And the same must hold more strongly with regard to the
“affections of benevolence, charity, and such like, when there is no particular
“object in view, but only in general the good of others.”
T HAT the words quoted in the Analysis are not to be found here is
evident; it is almost as clear, that the sentiment contained in them is very
different from the passage in the Essays. A very common observation is there
advanced, viz. That the vulgar are more swayed by passion than principle,
and not much influenced by general ideas. No man of candour can <12–13>
imagine this to be synonymous to the sentence quoted in the Analysis.
A NOTHER instance of the same kind occurs in p. 15. of the Analysis. The
words quoted are, “Let us examine to what this liberty amounts. If motives
“have any influence, as they are allowed, they may be so combined as
“to leave little freedom to the mind, or rather none at all. Nay, in some
“instances, natural and moral necessity may so far coincide, as scarcely to
“be distinguished.”
T HE page from which they are cited is the 164. The passage is no where
to be found in the page. It must indeed be acknowledged, that in the 7th line
of the page, the 1st sentence of this passage is to be found. Some imperfect
traces of the 2d sentence may be observed in the 20th line of the same page,
and in the 8th line of the subsequent one, something like the last sentence
may also be discovered.
A ND I here ask, If it be candid or honest to cite an author in this manner,
and to aver that the very expressions are quoted? To glean disunited sen-
tences, to patch them together arbitrarily, to omit the limitations or remarks
with which a proposition is delivered; can this be stiled exhibiting the senti-
ments of an author? I hope I shall not be thought to de- <13–14> viate into
anything ludicrous, when I refer the Reader to a well known treatise of the
Dean of St. Patrick’s, in which the inquisitorial method of interpretation used
in the church of Rome is by so just and so severe raillery rendered detestable.
Si non totidemsententiis, asttotidemverbis; si non totidemverbis, asttotidem-
syllabis, si non totidemsyllabis, asttotidemliteris. This is the genuine logic of
persecution. From arts such as these have the unhappy divisions which so
long distracted the church been derived. At a period when mankind are
fully sensible of the blessings they enjoy, and liberty both civil and eccle-
siastical is become the dearest possession of the people, and the favourite
care of the Prince; what sentiments ought the revival of those insidious and
Jesuitical principles to excite in every sincere friend to our present consti-
tution in Church and State! Most of the members of the Church of Scotland
are, I dare say, animated with a fervent zeal for religion: But, knowing that
the perfection of religion is the spirit of moderation, they prize too highly
the good of the church to give ear to the counsels of a violent and unchris-
tian zeal, which, by adopting the arts, may justly be thought to pursue the
ends of persecution. More has perhaps been said upon those instances of
(what must be called) direct falsehood in the author of the Analysis, than
was at first proposed. But it cannot be surprising, <14–15> that they should
excite some indignation. To affect a zeal against heresy, and at the same
time to disregard truth, must appear to every one highly culpable and very
unchristian.
I T now only remains to quote those passages in which the Author of
the Analysis seems to have wilfully mistaken the meaning of the Essays. It is
but fair to suppose, that he has read the whole of the book before he would
pretend to censure it. The only proof therefore of his misrepresentations
shall be to cite those passages, which, upon this supposition, he could not
be ignorant of.
The fourth Proposition of the Analysis is,
The powers of reason can give us no satisfying evidence of the being of a God.
T HE misrepresentation here consists chiefly in the query subjoined,
which would induce us to believe, that the Author of the Essays disputed
the Being of a God. The falsehood of this will appear from the follow-
ing passages, p. 320. Ess. “Being therefore little sollicitous about arguments
“a priori, for the existence of a Deity, which are not proportioned to
“the capacity of man, I apply myself with zeal and cheerfulness to search
“for the Deity in his works; for by these we must discover him, if he has
“thought pro- <15–16> per to make himself known. And the better to
“manage the inquiry, I shall endeavor to make out three propositions; 1st,
“That if there is a being who is the maker and governor of the world, it is
“agreeable to any notions we can form of his government, that he
“should make some discovery of himself to his intelligent creatures. 2dly,
“That in fact he has done so. And 3dly, That he has done so in a manner
“agreeable to the nature of man, and analogous to his other operations”.
P. 327. “Attend but to the anatomy of the meanest plant: so much of
“art and of curious mechanism is discovered in it, that it must be
“the production of some cause, far surpassing the power and intelligence
“of man. The scene opens more and more, when, passing from plants to
“animals, we come to man, the most wonderful of all the works of nature.
“And when, at last, we take in, at one view, the natural and moral world, full
“of harmony, order and beauty; happily adjusted in all its parts to answer
“great and glorious purposes; there is, in this grand production, necessarily
“involved, the perception of a cause, unbounded in power, intelligence, and
“goodness.”
P. 328. “The Deity has not left his existence to be gathered from slippery
“and far- <16–17> fetched arguments. We have but to open our eyes, to
“receive impressions of him almost from every thing we perceive.
“We discover his being and attributes, in the same manner that we
“discover external objects. We have but to appeal to our own
“perceptions; and none of those, who are so stubbornly hypothetical,
“as to deny the existence of matter, against the evidence of their senses, can,
“seriously and deliberately, deny the existence of the Deity.”
The sixth Proposition of the Analysis is,
It is whimsical and absurd to pretend, that the material world is subject to
the providence of God.
T HE passages already quoted from Mr. Boyle are sufficient to set this in its
true light.
T HE 7th Proposition being obviously true, if fairly understood, needs no
comment.
The eighth Proposition deserves some more attention. It is,
Man is a mere machine, under an irresistible necessity in all his actions.
<17–18>
I T is clear, from many passages in the Essays, that the Author no where
meant to inculcate physical necessity. p. 172. “For moral necessity, being
“that sort of necessity which affects the mind, and physical necessity that
“which affects matter, it is plain, that, in all reasonings concerning human
“liberty, moral necessity, and no other, is meant to be established.”
I T is clear also from the passage preceding that which is cited in the
Analysis, from p. 163. that it is not a blind fatal necessity that is argued for,
but a necessity derived from the will of the Deity.
I F we insert into this quotation the sentence which is omitted in the
Analysis, we shall have a very compleat instance of the unfair proceedings
of its author: after he has a power of beginning motion, these words are
omitted; “Which is subject to no mechanical law, and therefore he is not
“under what is called physical necessity. He has appetites, &c.”
T HAT man is under a moral necessity arising from the will of the Deity,
is therefore the position of the Essays. It will scarcely be denied, that the doc-
trine of this church is the same, and that Calvin, Beza, Turretin, <18–19>
have all maintained it in their several systems. This subject is fully treated
in the accurate Treatise lately published by the Reverend Mr. Edwards of
New-England.
T HE 9th and 10th Propositions may be considered together, since unfair-
ness of the Analysis here consists of imputing to an Author consequences
which he refuses to admit.
T HE opinion of deceitful feelings we may justly call new and singular.
We may hold it to be unphilosophical, or deny it to be true. But, I confess, I
do not see how it can be stated as heretical, with regard to the consequence
attempted to be deduced from it, “That this deceitful feeling is the only
“foundation of virtue.” Let the Author’s own words subjoined to those cited
in the Analysis prove his opinion.
Analysis, p. 21. cites a passage from p. 209. of the Essays: the sen-
tence which begins the paragraph is as follows, “It will now be proper to
“answer some objections, which may be urged against the doctrine we have
“advanced. One, which at first, may seem of considerable weight, is, that
“we found virtue altogether upon a deceitful feeling of liberty, which, it may
“be alledged, is <19–20> neither a secure nor an honourable foundation.
“But, in the first place, I deny that we have founded it altogether upon a
“deceitful feeling. For, independent of the deceitful feeling of liberty, there
“is in the nature of man a firm foundation for virtue. The citation is, Ideas
“of moral obligation, of remorse, of merit, and all that is connected with
“this way of thinking, arise from what may be called a wise delusion in our
“nature concerning liberty:” (What follows is,) “but, as this affects only a
“certain modification of our ideas of virtue and vice, there is nothing in it, to
“render the foundation of virtue, either unsecure or dishonourable. Unsecure
“it does not render it, because, as now observed, virtue partly stands firm
“upon a separate foundation, independent of these feelings.[”]
I N p. 20th of the Analysis, the passage cited from p. 63. of the Essays is,
“The authority lies in this circumstance, that we feel and perceive the action
“to be our duty, and what we are indispensibly bound to perform. (What
follows is,) “It is in this manner, that the moral sense, with regard to some
“actions, plainly bears upon it the marks of authority over all our appetites
“and affections. It is the voice of God within us which commands our
“<20–21> strictest obedience, just as much as when his will is declared
“by express revelation.[”]
The eleventh Proposition is—
That since man is thus necessarily determined in all his actions, and can
have nothing more than a deceitful feeling of liberty, it follows as a necessary
consequence, that there can be no sin or moral evil in the world.
A passage, which could not have escaped the observation of the author
of the Analysis, will best explain this proposition. It is a note on p. 182. “As to
“an objection of making God the author of sin, which may seem to arise from
“our system, it is rather popular than philosophical. Sin, or moral turpitude,
“lyes in the evil intention of him who commits it: it consists in some wrong
“or depraved affection supposed to be in the sinner. Now the intention of
“the Deity is unerringly good. The end proposed by him is order and general
“happiness: and there is the greatest reason to believe, that all events are so
“directed by him, as to work toward this end. In the present system of things,
“some moral disorders are indeed included. No doubt, it is a considerable
“difficulty, how evil comes to be in the world, if God is perfectly good. But
“this difficulty is not pe- <21–22> culiar to our doctrine; but recurs upon
“us at last with equal force, whatever hypothesis we embrace. For moral
“evil cannot exist, without being, at least, permitted by the Deity. And, with
“regard to a first cause, permitting is the same thing with causing; since,
“against his will, nothing can possibly happen. All the schemes that have
“been contrived for answering this objection, are but the tortoise introduced
“to support the elephant. They put the difficulty a step further off but never
“remove it.”
W ERE the author of the Analysis to meet with no greater degree of
candour than he has shewn to others; it were not unnatural to conclude,
from his extracts from Mr. H UME , that his zeal for religion was more affected
than real. Every fair reader must admit, and regret, that there are to be found
in the writings of this elegant Author some principles by no means consistent
with sound doctrine. There was therefore no necessity for ascribing to him
positions which he does not advance, in order to support the charge of
irreligion against him. This conduct of the author of the Analysis can scarcely
be accounted for; as it manifestly leads to do harm rather than good to the
cause he pretends to support. But as it is more charitable <22–23> to impute
it to error than to evil intention, a very few observations upon it will suffice.
T HE first Proposition of the Analysis is,—
All distinction betwixt virtue and vice is merely imaginary.
E VERY one who has the most superficial knowledge of Mr. H UME ’s
writings must know, that he is very far from denying the reality of moral dis-
tinctions. The passages quoted by no means prove the proposition, neither
are they fairly cited.
T HE first citation from p. 239. is the conclusion of a paragraph; the
beginning of which is as follows; “According to this short and imperfect
“sketch of human life, the happiest disposition of mind is the virtuous;
“or, in other words, that which leads to action and employment, renders
“us sensible to the social passions, steels the heart against the assaults
“of fortune, reduces the affections to a just moderation, makes our own
“thoughts an entertainment to us, and inclines us rather to the pleasures of
“society and conversation, than to those of the senses. This, in the mean
“<23–24> time, must be obvious to the most careless reasoner, that all
“dispositions of mind are not alike favourable to happiness, and that one
“passion or humour may be extremely desirable, while another is equally
“disagreeable. And indeed, all the difference betwixt the conditions of life
“depends upon the mind; nor is there any one situation of affairs, in itself,
“preferable to another.”
T HE second citation from p. 235. is as unfairly stated. The words which
follow those quoted are; “This doctrine, however, takes off no more from the
“reality of the latter qualities, than from that of the former; nor need it give
“any umbrage either to critics or moralists. Tho’ colours were allowed to lie
“only in the eye, would dyers or painters ever be less regarded or esteem’d?
“There is sufficient uniformity in the senses and feelings of mankind, to
“make all these qualities the objects of art and reasoning, and to have the
“greatest influence on life and manners. And as ’tis certain, that the discovery
“above-mentioned’d in natural philosophy, makes no alteration on action
“and conduct; why should a like discovery in moral philosophy make any
“alteration?” <24–25>
T HE third citation from p. 99. v. 2. ought to have been explained by
what went before it, which is, “The great advantage of the mathematical
“sciences above the moral consists in this, that the ideas of the former,
“being sensible, are always clear and determinate; the smallest distinction
“betwixt them is immediately perceptible, and the same terms are still
“expressive of the same ideas, without ambiguity or variation. An oval is
“never taken for a circle, nor an hyperbola for an ellipsis.”
I T is by no means candid in the author of the Analysis to quote the
passage from p. 29. v. 4. ‡ singly; because, as it stands in the Essay, it makes
part of a reasoning, the tendency of which is by no means immoral, as the
passage going before it clearly shews. “We come now to the second position
“which we propos’d to illustrate, viz. that as innocent luxury, or a
“refinement in pleasure is advantageous to the public; so wherever luxury
“ceases to be innocent, it also ceases to be beneficial; and when carried to
“a degree farther, begins to be a quality pernicious, tho’, perhaps, not the
“most pernicious to political society.” <25–26>
I N p. 31. of the Analysis, we find the following sentence cited from
the Essays, v. I . p. 163. “Chance, therefore, or secret and unknown causes,
“must have a great influence on the rise and progress of all refined arts.” This
passage, which must be sought for in p. 162. is followed by “But there is a
“reason, which induces me not to ascribe the matter altogether to chance,
“Tho’ the persons, who cultivate the sciences with such astonishing success,
“as to attract the admiration of posterity, be always few, in all nations and
“all ages; ’tis impossible but a share of the same spirit and genius must be
“antecedently diffus’d thro’ the people among whom they arise, in order
“to produce, form, and cultivate, from the earliest infancy, the taste and
“judgment of those most eminent writers. The mass cannot be altogether
“insipid, from which such refin’d spirits are extracted.” And in p. 163. we
find the conclusion in these words, “The question therefore, concerning
“the rise and progress of the arts and sciences, is not altogether a question
“concerning the taste, genius, and spirit of a few; but concerning those of a
“whole people, and may therefore be accounted for, in some measure, by
“general causes and principles.” <26–27>
W ITH regard to the other propositions, it is sufficient to observe, that Mr.
HUME ’ S writings, to any candid reader, exhibit no defence of adultery; and
are very far from containing any principles of licentiousness. Justice demands
this acknowledgment as due to an elegant and agreeable writer, even though
a Free-Thinker; and it must at the same time be observed, that it appears
very like a contradiction to accuse a man in one page of scepticism and
infidelity, and in the following page to tax him with an attachment to Popery
and superstition.
FROM the whole survey of this Analysis, the misrepresentations and
false quotations contained in it are evident. It may now, therefore, be not
improper to inquire a little into the scope of it.
A number of the most horrible propositions are published in large
letters, as extracted from the writings of two Gentlemen; and mangled per-
verted passages are produced, in order to prove so dreadful a charge. Many
persons, it may be thought, will never go farther than the Propositions them-
selves, which are certainly sufficient to excite detestation in every sober
Christian. Very few, it may be presumed, will look beyond the passages by
which the Propositions seem to be supported, or consult the books from
which these passages <27–28> are extracted: and still fewer are capable of
discernment on so delicate a subject. By arts such as these, are the char-
acters of two Gentlemen attacked and defamed. The public will judge with
how little justice, and how little candour this attack has been carried on. It is
unnecessary to add any thing further. The Observations have been confined
mostly to matters of fact. All reflexions upon the author of the Analysis, even
after so full a detection, have, it is hoped, been avoided. As in common life,
the habit of a clergyman ought to secure a regard to the wearer, even though
it should happen to cover envy, malice, and falsehood; so ought a zeal for
religion, whether real or affected, to be always treated with proper respect.
FINIS