"INSTITUTES OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY."
"For the use of Students in the College of EDINBURGH."
"By ADAM FERGUSON, LL "
"The SECOND EDITION."
"REVISED and CORRECTED."
"CONTENTS."
"INTRODUCTION."
"I. Of knowledge in general, 2. Of cience, - - 2"
"3. Of the laws of nature, - 4"
"4. Of theory, - - 7"
"5. Of the canles that have retard the progrefi of science, 9"
"6. Of the maxims of reason to be followed in Jpeculation, as well as in common lie, IO"
"7. Of moral philoJophy, - I"
"8. Of pneumatics, - - 12"
"PART I."
"The natural hiflory of Man."
"History of the species."
"i. General arrangement, - i5"
"2.  the form and afpecf of man, 16"
"3. Manl residence, and manner of JitbfJienct, - - 18"
"a 4. Varieties 4. Varieties of the humann race, 9"
"5. Period of human life, - 20"
"6. Dfpofition of man to society, 2I"
"7. Of Population, - - 23"
"8. Varieties of choice andpurfiuit, 26"
"9. Arts and commerce, - 27"
"o1. Di)parity and rank, - 36"
"1 . Of political eftablihments, 39"
"12. Language and literature, 43"
"History of the individual."
"I. General arrangement, - 46"
"2. Of co7fcioIfiefs, - - 47"
"3. Animalfenfe and perception, 48"
"4. ObfJrvation, - - 58"
"5. Memo:ry - - - 59"
"6. Ilnagination, -ib, 7. Abftration, - - 6"
"8. Refloning, - - 63"
"9. Foresight, 65"
"10. Propefity, - ib."
"I 1. Sentiment, - - 68"
"I 2. ire and aversion, - 73"
"13. Volition, - - 75"
"PART"
"PART "
"Theory of Mind."
"General observations, - 76"
"Enumeration of physical laws."
"I. Laws of the unde;lfandlin, 8r 2. Laws of the will, - 85"
"The foregoing laws applied,  "
"i. To Ittereft, - 2. Emulation, - - 93"
"3. Pride, - 96"
"4. Vanity, - 98"
"5. Probity, - - 99"
"6. Moral approbation in general, i 7. The objeS of moral approba  - - 04"
"a 2 8. The 8. The principle of moral appro bation, - - - os0"
"Of the nature and future profpeCs of the human foul."
"i. Of the immateriality of the foul, - - - II"
"2. Of the immortality of thefoul, II2"
"P A III."
"Of the knowledge of God, A  I."
"Of the being of God."
"I. Of the universality of this be lief, - - - 114"
"2. Of thefoundations of this be lief, - - 6"
"C A  "
"Of the attributes of God."
". Of these attributes in general, I 19"
"2. Of 2. Of the unity of God, - I9"
"3. power, - - 120"
"4. wifdoom, - - 12"
"5. goodnef, - - ib."
"6. jqfice, - - I27"
"Of a future state, - - 28"
"PART "
"Of Moral Laws, and their most general applications."
"Definitions, - - - 30"
"Of good and evil in general."
"i. General application of these terms, - - - I34; "
"2. Of ejokyments and fijfe'rizgs, 135"
"3. Of pelrfcTions and defecs, 136"
"4. Of oji'eriy and adveifty, ib."
"a 3 5. lariety 5. Variety offyftems in the appli cation of the terms good and evil .- - 137"
"6. The comparative moment of good and evil in their different acceptations, - 139"
"Of the fundamental law of morali ty,  "
"I. The law, - ' 49"
"2. Application to the mind, 150"
"3. Of the degrees of happiness, and the actual attainments of men, - - - 152"
"4. Of opinions produftive of mi fery, or that hinder improvement, - - 154"
"5. Of opinions, or circunmfan ces, productive of happi?ness, or that lead to improvement, - - - 157"
"6. Application to external ac tions, - - I59"
"7. Diverjfty of opinions concern the morality of external adions, - - I6"
"8. Caifes 8. Canses of this diversity, i62"
"9. Difference of the cafe, 163"
"Io. Diference of choice, - 64"
"II. Diference of interpretation, 165"
"12. Fundamental lawsof external action, -. ..- 168"
"I3. Diferent fanflions under 'which external afions are required,   - 69"
"14. Parties to whot laws apply, i7o PART "
"Of Jurisprudence."
"The foundations of compulsory law, - - I72"
"The rights of men in general, 174"
"Laws of defence in general, I75"
"Difference of rights."
"i. General diviion, - 176"
"2. Rights perJonal, - ib."
"3. Rights. real, - - 177"
"4. Original rights, - - 178"
"5. Adventitious rights, - I79"
"Laws of acquisition in general, I80"
"Law of occupancy, - 181"
"Law of acquisition by labour, 182"
"Law of acquisition by contrac."
"i. The obligations of contrad, I84"
"2. Laws of contras7 in general, I85"
"3. Contrals of different denomi nations, - - 188"
"4. The 4. The exceptions to contra1s in general, - - 189"
"5. Exceptions peculiar to condi tional and reciprocal contracs, - - - I94"
"Law of acquisition by forfei ture, - - 196"
"Of the law of acquisition as appli cable to particular rights."
"i. Of pofe/ion, - - 97"
"2. Of property, - - ib."
"3. Of command or service, 199"
"Of the law of defence."
"i. Of the means of defence in general, - - 203"
"2. The cafe of parties Jirangers to each other, - - 204"
"3. Cafe of fellow-citizens, 2o6"
"4. Cafe of nations, 209"
"5. Colclhfion 5. Conzclhfion of jlrifprudence, 212"
"PART "
"Of Cafuifry."
"Of the fanaion of duty in ge neral, - - 213"
"Of the fantion of religion, 215"
"Of the fanaions of public re pute, - - 217"
"Of the fantion of conscience, 219"
"Of the tendency of virtue in external actions, . Of I. Of the different brannches of virtue, - - - 220"
"2. Duties referred to probity, 223"
"3. Duties referred to prudence, 230"
"4. Duties referred to temperance, 2-33"
"5. Duties referred tofortitude, 234"
"6. Uses of cafu il  - 235"
"7. Of merit and demerit, 237"
"PART "
"Of Politics."
"Introduftion, - - 239"
"Of public ceconomy."
"I. Of national resources in ge neral, - - 242"
"2. Of popilofilfefs, - 243"
"3. Of riches, - - 246"
"4. Of revenue, - - 255"
"Of political law."
"I. Of this law in general, 260"
"M. Of the safety of the people, 262"
"3. Of the happiness of the people, 267"
"4. Of the fitness of the iilitu to the people, - 268"
"5. The distribution of office fitted to the coa1itution, 8 281"
"6. Importance of political itJli tutions, - - - 292"
"INSTI"
"INSTITUTES"
"o F"
"MORAL PHILOSOPHY."
"INTRODUCTION."
"Of ICnowledge in gelneral ':."
"A LL knowledge is either that of particular facts, or that of general rules."
"The knowledge of fads is prior to that of rules; and is the first requifite in the pracice of arts, and in the conduc of affairs."
"* Bacon Novum organum, A A"
"A general rule is the exprefrion of what is common, or is required to be common, in a number of particular cafes."
"General rules are the result of ob servation, or will; and consequently are derived from mind."
"Pratice, or condudc of any fort, though regulated by general rules, has a continual reference to particulars."
"In speculation, we endeavour to eftablifn general rules."
"In practice, we study particular cafes, or apply general rules to regulate our conduct."
"0 Science."
"Collection of fads, in .. scription or narration, conftii tutes history."
"General General rules, and their applica tions, to regulate or to explain rticulars, constitute science."
"Any general rule, exprefiing what is ffacI, or what is right, is termed a lav of lnature. "
"A general rule, when applied to cxplaiin or regulate particulars, is termed a piincipie; and explanations or injunfions from principle, are termed theory, orfiflem. The particulars to be explained are termed phenomena."
"Method in science is of two kinds; analytic, and fynthctic."
"Analytic method, is that by whiichl we proceed from observation of fat&, or right, in particular cafes, to efabblifli general rules."
"Synthetic method, is that by which we proceed from general rules to their particular applications."
"The first is the method of inveftigation."
"A 2 The The second of communication, or of the enlargement of science."
"Argument is of two kinds: i priore, and a poJferiore."
"By an argument a priore, the fat is proved from the law."
"By an argument a pofleiore, the law is proved from the fat."
"Of tJhe laws of Irature."
"J-1  laws of nature are either  physical, or moral."
"A physical law is any general ex pression of a natural operation, as exemplified in a number of particular cafes."
"In every operation, men are by nature disposcd to apprehend an operating powver or cause."
"Causes are of two kinds: Efficient, and final."
"The Tile efficient cause, is the energy or power producing an effec."
"The final cause, is the end or purpose for which an effect is .produced."
"In supposing final causes, we suppose the existence of mind."
"Physical science, is the know ledge and application of physical laws, or of efficient causes, to explain and account for appearances."
"A moral law, is any general ex pression of what is good; and therefore fit to determine the choice of intelligent beings."
"A physical law exists so far only as it is the sac'."
"A moral law exifis in being obligatory."
"The fibjecd from which physical laws are collected, may be classcd under four principal heads: Mechanifin, vegetation, animal life, and intelligence."
"A 3 IS"
"It has not hitherto been made ap pear, although sometimes attempted, that these operations can be comprehended under the fame phyfical laws."
"The phenomena of vegetation are not comprehended under any known law of mechanifin, much less those of animal life or intelligence."
"The fubjets of moral science are, any matters of choice, together with the nature and actions of free and voluntary agents."
"The immediate use of physical laws, is theory."
"The immediate uses of moral law, nre choice, practice, and condut."
"Of Theory."
" §Heory consists in referring  particular operations to the principles, or general laws, under which they are comprehended; or in referring particular effects to the causes from which they proceed.

To investigate or to point out any general rule or law of nature, in wl ich any particular fad- is comprehended, is to account for that fad.

Thus Sir Isaac Newton accounted for the planetary revolutions, by showing that they were comprehended in the laws of motion and gravitation.

To pretend to explain phenome na, by fliowing that they may be comprehended in a supposition or hypothesis, hypothesis, or by applying to them, metaphorically, the language proper to any other subjeA, is illusory in science.

Thus the vortex of Descartes, be a mere supposition, could not explain the planetary motions: and the terms, idea, image, or picture, of things, being terms merely metaphorical, cannot explain human knowledge or thought.

All phenomena, though not com prehended under any known law, are proper materials of natural hiflory.

All facts that cannot be explain by any rule previouly known, or better known than the fa themselves, may be termed ultimate sac7s.

It is evident, that all theory muff reft on ultimate sacs.

To require proof a priore for very fad, were to fuppo Fe, that human knowledge requires an infinite ferics series of fads and explanations; whicli is impofible.

Glfes that have retarded the progress of Science.
 -I neceflary avocations of JL human life.
The love of fyflem, and impa tience of delay, in the study of particulars.

Emulation of speculative men, and desire to supplant each other as founders of secs.

Prejudice, national or personal.
The difficulty of penetrating ap pearances, to discover what operations are like, what different.

Affeitation of acuteness or no velty in contefing the evidence of ultimate fads.

Vain desire of accounting for ultimate fads.

axims of Reason, to be followed in Jpeculation, as zwell as in common life.

.iHat nothing be assigned as A. a law of nature, until it be known as a faa in nature: That fadcs uniform as far as our knowledge of the subjed extends, be deemed universal laws of nature refpeing fiich fubjecl.

That partial laws be not extended beyond the conditions and limitations under which they are known to take place.

That like phenomena be referred to the fame laws.

That no proof or explanation be required of ultimate fads.

Of Moral PhiloJoply.
 ~Oral philosophy is the know-, ledge of what ought to be, or the application of rules that ought to determine the choice of voluntary agents.

Before we cal ascertain rules of morality fitted to any particular nature, the fad relating to that nature should be known.

Before we can ascertain rules of morality for mankind, the history of man nature, his dispositions, his specific enjoyments and fufierings, his condition and future profpeets, flould be known.

Pneumatics, or the physical hifto ry of mind, is the foundation of moral philosophy.
 Pneaumatics.
 Neumatics treat physically of EL 'mind or £pirit.

This science consists of two parts.
The first treats of man; the fecond, of God.

That part which treats of man, may contain the history of man nature, and an explanation or theory of the principal phenomena of human life.

That which treats of God, con tains the proofs of his existence, attributes, and government.

The history of man contains ei ther such sacs as occur on a general view of the species, or such as occur to the individual, in recolleAing what pases in his own mind.

Tihe The first may be termed, the hi fJoly of the species ; the second, that of the individual.

In the theory of human nature are solved questions relating to the characters of men, to the nature and future prospects of the human foul, INSTI



INSTITUTES
 MORAL PHILOSOPHY.

PART I.
The natural hifiory of Man*.


History of the Species.

General arrangemlent. HHE history of the human species contains the following articles.
I. The form and aspcd of man.

* See Buffon Natural History.
 2 2. His ##   Of the form and aspect of Man.

2. His residence, and manner of fuibfifLence.

3. The varieties of his race.
4. The period of his life.
5. His disposition to society.
6. Population, ortl gencrations and numbecrs of mankild.

7. aricies of oice and cpur,..

8. Arts ,nd commnrce.
9. Di{parities of rank and eftimation.

io. Political eftablifliments.
i . Language and literature.

Of the form and afpe? of Maln. HE human form is eret, fur niflied with articulations and muscles, fitted to retain this pofture, and to move in it with ease and safety.

The hand and the arm of man, is is an infrrument and a weapon, not a prop or support to his body.

His form and posture are well fitted to observation, to the use of reason, and to the practice of arts.

His aipef is expressive of his thoughts, sentiments, and intentions. It is calm or agitated; mild or fierce; languid or ardent; doubtful or decided; timid or intrepid.

His natural expressions consist of adions, gestures, finiles, frowns, tears, looks, together with changes of colour; and exhibit, on the whole, a variety, and a grace, which either do not take place, or are not observed, in other animals.

He is naked and unarmed; but by his invention qualified to fipply these defects.

The final cause appears to be, that his talent for invention lhould be employed.

B3  

an residence, and manner of fiGb fjlence.
OTher animals have their ran ges on the. earth, beyond which they do not willingly stray, or beyond which they are not qualified to subsist.

Some fubfii only in the hot cli mates, others in the cold or the temperate; but man resides equally in every climate, and can subsist on great varieties of food, both animal and vegetable.

He either accommodates himself to the inconveniencies of his fituation, or learns to surmount them.


Varieties of the human race. Nder the general form and a fpe of mankind, there are ,considerable varieties of the race.

Men being dispersed over the face of the earth, receive the influences of climate, situation, and foil.

The animal and rational tempe rament, is comparatively phlegmatic and dull in cold climates; is more ardent and quick in warm climates; but has always possessed a diftinguifhed superiority in the temperate.

Apart from these diflinCions, the diversities of race are marked by a difference of flature, features, and complexion.

Mankind may be referred to fix different races.

The ##   Period of human life.

The European, the Samoeide, the Tartar, the Hindoo, the Negro, and the American *.

Period of humanl life.
EeVery species of animal is pre served by succession.

The death of one generation is as much a part in the order of nature, as the birth and fucceflion of another.

In the human species, according to some obfcrvations, half the numbers that are born die before the Seventeenth, the seventh, or even the third year of their age is expired.

Long life  in all climates, con * Buffon of the varieties of the human race.
 Buffon Natural hitory. Halley Tables.

Lowthorp Abridgement of the Philofoplical Traliaaions,  3.  669.

iltS


fills of between seventy and a hundred years.

It appears from the annual regi gifter of deaths where the numbers of people are known, That about one in thirty dies each year: That of twenty-feven or twentyeight, one is born: TLat about a fourth of the whole number are males. between eighteen and fifty-fix, able to carry arms.

Dfpofitioni of man ito focety *.
A Nimals have been distinguished into two classes; the solitary, and the social.

Animals of prey, for the most part, are solitary.

* Essay on the History of Civil Society, part i. set. 3.

Other Other animals are, for the most part, associating.

The associating may be farther subdivided into two kinds: I. Those which assemble in flocks or herds, merely for company or safety: 2. Those who unite their labours for some common purpose, and diftribute the burdens of the community according to some rule of inftinct or of reason.

The latter are associating and po litical. Man, though an animal of prey, and from necessity or sport addiced to hunting or war, is neverthelefs, in the highest degree, associating and political.

Societies may be referred to four general classes: families, companies, nations, and empires.

Families are united by affecion; 
companies by the desire of society; nations by the desire of security; and empires by force.

Men, ##   Of Population †.

Men, by their confederacy, as well as by their artifice, are enabled to subdue every other species of animal, to subsist by their spoil, and to employ the strength of other animals, though superior to their own.

Separate societies are, for the most part, rivals or enemies *.

Of Population  EN exist in greater numbers than any other species of the larger animals.

In some cafes they are found to * Essay on the History of Civil Society, part 1. fed. 4.
 Essay on the History of Civil Society, part3. set. 4. Wallace Numbers of mankind. Hume Populousness of ancient nations.

increase, increase, in others to decrease, in their numbers.

The quick or flow increase of a nimals in general, depend on the laws of propagation, on the fecurity, and the means of subsistence they enjoy.

The first relate to the age at which the parent becomes prolific; to the time that elapses in pregnancy; to the frequency of breeding; to the numbers of each brood; and to the period during which the parent continues prolific.

The laws of propagation deter mine the numbers that may spring from any single pair, and the numbers of generations that may subsist together.

These laws, in every species of a nimals, are, in favourable circunstances, sufficient to its increase.

Men, in every secure situation, people up to their resources; and the aid of government is required, not not to improve on the laws of propagation, but to befcow security and plenty.

Animals of prey have most difficulty in procuring their food.

Animals which are made a prey are least secure.

The security and subsistence of men, are malft impaired by their own mutual hoffilities and opprefsions.

The laws of propagation, as well as the means of fibfiftence, are supposed molt favourable to population in the warmer climates. To this it is imputed that nations in though climates are populous, even under great defects of government.
  ##   Varieties of choice and pursuit.

arieties of choice and puifiut.

EN have not, like the other animals, a fixed and deter minate choice of external objedts and pursuits.

Nations are frequently, by the difference of their manners and customs, mutual objects of wonder and censure, of contempt and aversion.

Even of two men placed in the fame or like circumstances, one acquiefces, or is pleated; the other complains.

They differ in refpe& to the means which they employ for the attainment of the fame, or of fimilar ends.


Arts and Commerce ."
"EN are employed chiefly in 1M lprocuring the means of safety, fiubfifencc, accommodation, and ornament."
"They pracife a variety of arts, or inventions, for these purposes; and are more or lefg successful in proportion as they have multiplied, divided, and completed their arts."
"They appropriate the fruits of their flill and industry, and endeavour to accumulate wealth."
"The arts which they praCtise for safety, are, the inventions of arms, places of retreat, and defence."
"The earliest weapons appear to have been, the club, the fling, and * Harris on Coins."
"C 2 the the bow: to there succeeded, in process of time, the spear and the sword, joined to the buckler or shield; "
"Fire-arms, cannon, and then mul.fketry."
"The desire of retreats has givcn rife to the art of fortification."
"The art of war, in every age, mulf be accommodated to the fpecies of arms, engines, and methods  art  -.. - . ifa Tle allu.Lts vilch men praie for Thre arts hich men pradire for _____...ns~'!-^^ _ -TC"
"'sl I- nnl- seldom appropriated to the individual."
"Nations that have observed the method, and the advantage, of breeding herds, betake themselves to pasturage."
"They at firtf, generally, migrate, or wander, with their herds."
"The individual acquires an im mediate property in cattle, but not in land."
"N1 it is LAthat are actrbAst11 raLi X"
"the uife of herbs, fruits, and grain, -. 1,: ..A- -- "
"_"
"_.-  "
"Varieties of choice and purfiuit."
" EN have not, like the other - animals, a fixed and deter minate choice of external objets and pursuits."
"Nations are frequently, by the difference of their manners and cutfoms, mutual objects of wonder and censure, of contempt and averlion."
"Even of two men placed in the fame or like circumstances, one acquiefces, or is pleated; the other complains."
"They differ in refpet to the means. which they employ for the attainment of the fame, or of fimilar ends."
"Arts and Com)merce .

MSPEN are employed chiefly in MV .procuring the means of safety, fibfiftence, accommodation, and ornament.

They practise a variety of arts, or inventions, for these purposes; and are more or lefT successful in proportion as they have multiplied, divided, and completed their arts.

They appropriate the fruits of their flill and industry, and endeavour to accumulate wealth.

The arts which they practise for safety, are, the inventions of arms, places of retreat, and defence.

The earliest weapons appear to have been, the club, the fling, and * Harris on Coins.
 2 the the bow: to these succeeded, in process of time, the spear and the sword, joined to the buckler or ihield ; 
Fire-arms, cannon, and then ruflsetry The desire of retreats has given rife to the art of fortification.

The art' of war, in every age, must be accommodated to the fpecies of arms, engines, and methods of fortification, in use.

The arts which men practise for fubificence, are, ifliing, hunting, pasturage,, and agriculture.

Nations that know least of the rmeans of fibfiftence, have recourse to hunting and fishing; or rely on the £pontancous growth of the.field in herbs or fruit.

In the result of these arts, the hunting-ground, the lak thee. river, or the bay, may be appropriated to the society; but the game is seldom seldom appropriated to the individual.

Nations that have observed the method, and the advantage, of breeding herds, betake themselves to pasturage.

They at first, generally, migrate, or wander, with their herds.

The individual acquires an im mediate property in cattle, but not in land.

Nations that are acquainted with the use of herbs, fruits, and grain, which do not grow spontaneously, or do not grow in sufficient quantities, betake themselves to agriculture.

The culture of land, to a certain degree, may precede property, as it did among the ancient Germans ', and among the nations of Nortl America..

* Vide Cx   4 cap. ; and  6.
cap. 22. Charlcvoix History of Canada.
 3 Agri Agriculture, where the object is.

the temporary produce of land, is compatible with migration: where the objec is the improvement of foil, and perpetual fertility, agriculture requires settlement, and the property of land.

As the property of land excites to invention in agriculture, it likewife excites to invention in other arts.

They who have no land, betake thlemfelves to manufacture, that they may have wherewith to buy the produce of land.

By manufacure, men are fur nifled with the means of accommodation and ornament.

The means of accommodation are, cloaths, houses, furniture,, utensils, equipage.

Men, in different ages, are un equally furnished with these articles; they even subsist without them .but, in the ruder climates, under under such inconveniencies, as diminiih the numbers of the species, or prevent their increase.

The means of decoration are fich things as please the fancy, without being neceflary or useful.

Men, in all ages, are fond of coration; they combine ornament with the means of subsistence and accommodation: but they may subsift, and enjoy every conveniency, without regard to, ornament.

Ornaments are principally made of rare materials; as gems, precious metals,  

Riches conilft in the abundance of things that conduce to safety, fiubfiftence, accommodation, and ornament.

Riches are the result, of arts and industry.

Whatever ingenuity men exert in the practice of arts, their success will depend' on a proper diftribution of their employments, and on their their making a separate business of each.

In making this distribution, the parties trust, that they may be able to exchange what they have to spare for what they want.

The progress of arts, as well as the casual distribution of commodities, depending on situation, climate, and foil, render commerce expedient, or even necessary.

Commerce, in the simplest form, consists of barter, without any standard of valuation, or medium of exchange: each party gives what he has to spare of one kind, for what he wants of another.

To extend trade, money, com munication, and the interposition of merchants, are required.

The first money, or medium of exchange, was generally some staple commodity, as corn, cattle,  

These were things of uncertain value, value, of inconvenient bulk, periffling or expensive in the keeping, and not easily divided, without making a change of value.

To avoid these several inconveni encies, the precious metals have been admitted in every trading nation as the medium of exchange.

They are, for the greater conve niency, employed in the form of coin.

The pound, or other ascertained weight or quantity of the precious metals, was employed as the standard of valuation.

The coin of all nations has un dergone considerable changes, both in refped to fineness and weight.

The present standard for silver in England, is 1 oz. 2 dw. fine, to I dw. allay.

For gold, 22 carats fine, to 2 carats allay.

The pound of standard silver is cut into 62 shillings.

That That of gold, into 42, guineas.
The pound of silver was original ly cut into 20 flillings: hence 20
shillings are still the nominal pound in money.

In the reign of Edward  the standard of silver was greatly debased, and the coin greatly diminified: The standard consisted of three parts of fine to nine of allay; and the pound of this debased metal was cut into 72 flillings.

The standard and weight of the coin have, since the reign of Elifabeth, remained the fame.

.Operations on the coin embarrass trade, by perplexing tranfadions, and by alarming the interest of debtors and creditors.

If, in debating coin, the interest of the creditor is not guarded, he must be defrauded.

In raising the value of the coin, the debtor would be defrauded.

Most Most operations on coin have been of the former kind.

The use of coin, and acual pay ments in money, are not necessary in every commercial transaction.

In the transfer of great fums, ven the precious metals would be cumbersome and inconvenient.

To avoid this inconvenience, the practice of circulating bills has been adopted.

This pracice is founded in credit, and tends to extend it.

Commerce employs a number of separate professions; the manufacturer, the factor, the carrier, the merchant, the retailer.

The price of commodities in trade is as their scarcity combined with their demand.

Articles, in the production of which, labour, time, and flill, are required, continue to multiply, while the price is sufficient to maintain the labourer during the time he ##   Disparity and Rank.

he is employed, to reimburse his apprenticeihip, and other expences, and to furnifhi an adequate reward.

When the price falls below this measure, the manufacure is difcontinued, until the.fcarcity brings up the price.

Disparity and Rank. EN are diversified, in refpe&

to their personal qualities and conditions.

The diftindion of personal qua lities arise from unequal strength and capacity, unequal knowledge, resolution, and courage, unlike difpositions of benevolence or malice.

These differences constitute either relations of dependence and power, or comparative degrees of eftimation.

The The strong, the knowing, the brave, are powerful; the weak, the ignorant, the fearful, are dependent.

The benevolent are engaging; the malicious offensive.

The knowing, the generous, and the brave, are esteemed ; the ignorant, the ungenerous, and the cowardly, are contemned: and all the qualities of human nature being referred to the -predicaments of excellence and defed, one man is held to be more, another less worthy.

Men differ in their predilection of qualities confidered as the conftituents -of excellence.

They prefer qualities the moif neceflary in their own situations, and the most eminent in their own way.

In dangerous situations, and in warlile ages, they chiefly admire valour.

In learned societies, they admire knowledge and ingenuity.
 In In trading nations, they admire industry, punctuality, and fair dealing.

But there being some circum stances common in the situation and disposition of all mankind; such as, their being united in society, -and concerned in what relates to their fellow-creatures; men universally admire qualities which constitute or procure the good of mankind; as, wisdom, justice, courage, and temperance.

Such qualities are generally comprehended under the title of Virtue.

Opposite qualities, under the title of Vice.

The external conditions of men are sometimes .confounded with perfonal qualities, and appear to have the fame effcts.

The rich are powerful, the poor are dependent.

Riches, birth, equipage, and finery, are esteemed: Poverty, obfcu rity, ##  XI. Of Political Establishments *.

rity, and plainness, are contemned.

Disparities are found in every state of society; they are greateIt where riches, power, and education, are most unequally distributed.

Of Political EJtabl/Jhmenlts ."
"W;W7Here men associate from as fecion and choice, and with little sense of private or of separate interest, they have been known to subsist without rule or political eftabliflment."
"Even where they associate from a sense of expediency or necessity, they follow, without rule, the fuggeftion of every particular occasion."
"* Efprit Loix,  2. Eflay on the Hi flory of Civil Society, part i. fee, io. "
"part 3; fed. 2."
"D 2 But But in maintaining an union which has arisen from casual coalitions, or force, Societies have been obliged to, adopt, and to submit to, government."
"Where the coalition was casual, or forced, individuals felt separate interests, and wished for rules to adjust their disputes."
"Some fuffcred themselves to be governed, and others pretended to government, on the footing of cafual dependency and superiority."
"The abuses of casual fibordina have led men to think of pofitive institutions."
"Positive institutions have con firmed, altered, or restrained, the powers which arise from casual subordination."
"All the political institutions of men may be reduced to two, general classes: The simple, and the mixed."
"Under the simple institutions, the supreme supreme power is committed to a single person, or to a single assembly or body of men."
"In mixed institutions, the supreme authority is exercised by a plurality of collateral powers."
"Simple institutions are, democra cy, aristocracy, monarchy, and defpotiim."
"Democracy is the supreme power of the collective body."
"This institution is calculated to correct, or to remove, the effects of adventitious dependency and subordination, and to reconcile equality with order.; ' : Aristocracy is the fipreme power of a particular rank ordlafs of'men.

This class of meii hais, in foie cafes, been elecive; in others,I hereditary. ..; ,, .

The institution itself, though cal culated to. confirm the fuperioritv of one rank, and the dependence of the other, may, notwithflanding, 3 preserve preserve equality among the members of each class.

Monarchy is the supreme power of a single person, who, placed at the head of many subordinate dignities, has an authority- defined by laws.

This institution is calculated to confirm adventitious dependency and subordination.

Extensive and perpetual military arrangements have led to monarchical fibordination.

Despotism is the supreme power of a single person, assumed and maintained by force, on the ruin of every other pretension to rank.

Defpotifin has arisen from conquest, or military usurpation.

Mixed institutions are, either mixed republics, or mixed monarchies.

In mixed republics, the supreme power has been liared between the collective ##  XII. Language and Literature.

collective body, and a senate or convention of nobles.

In mixed monarchies, the fil preme power has been .flared, between a king and nobles, or between a king, nobles, and people.
 Anguage, in the most general 4 sense, comprehends all: the external signs of thought, sentiment, or will.

Signs are, either original, or conventional -.

Original signs are such as men are led by inftind to employ, and to interpret.

Such are, tones of the voice, change of features, and gestures..

* See Reid Inquiry into the human mind.

Conventional Conventional signs are such as men have agreed upon, or rendered customary.

Conventional signs may be ranged under the three following heads.

i. Mute signs.
2. Speech.
3. Written chara&ers.
Where men are forbid the use of speech, or are defective in the organs of hearing, or of pronunciation, they have recourse to mute signs; and attain, in a confiderable degree, the purposes of language.

Nations employ unequal mea fures of action, and of mute signs, together.with speech.

Speech is universal to mankind, and peculiar to the human species..

Every separate nation, or tribe, for the most part, has had a separate language, or different dialed.

The theory of speech, whether universal universal or particular, is the science of grammar ."
"Written charaters are the signs of words, or of-articulate founds."
"They are either verbal, or alphabetical."
"Verbal characters are the signs of entire words."
"Alphabetical characers the signs of elementary founds, or modulations; which being combined, conftitute words."
"Writing preserves the memory of past tranfa&ions, of observation, and experience. It preserves literary productions, and tends to improve and to extend the use of speech."
"See Harris Hermes."
"Hi-ory of the Individual."
"General Arrangemlent."
"HE history of the individual contains the following articles."
"I. Consciousness."
"2. Animal fenfe'and perception."
"3. Observation."
"4. Memory."
"5. Imagination."
"6. Abftradion."
"7. Reasoning."
"8. Foresight."
"9. Propensity."
"o1. Sentiment."
"i i. Desire."
"12. Volition, The ##   Of Consciousness."
"The first eight articles are com monly referred to the understanding; the remainder to the will."
"Of Cofcioflnefs."
"T HE mind is-confcious of it self, as acting or suffering, in all its operations and feelings."
"It is conscious of the laws of thought or reason, which are termed the metaphyJical or geometrical axioms."
"These axioms are the conditions on which all thought proceeds, and which need not be expressed, but for the fake of order or method."
"Animial Seens and Perception *."
"The organs of sense are commonly reduced to five heads: Touch, Taste, Smell, Hearing, and Seeing."
"T  "
"The whole animal frame is inr some degree an organ of touch."
"The fnfations of touch, or feel* See Reid Inquiry into the human mind."
"ing,  are either pleasant, painful, or indifferent."
"The interior or subcutaneous parts, are sensible only to the pains which arise from hurts or disorders."
"The final cause appears to be, that in their ordinary, and found state, they should require no attention; but in cafe of disorders, that they should give the alarm."
"On the exterior surface of the body, harmless sensations are indifferent, but whatever hurts is painful."
"Indifferent sensations are the indi cations of the mere contact of innocent bodies."
"Painful sensations are indications of hurts or wounds."
"Pleafint sensations are the sign of relief from what hurts or wounds; as of moderate warmth succeeding to great cold, or tie converie."
"Many indifferent sensations, in particular parts of the body, as in the the hands, the tongue,   are indications of the intimate properties, and nice diftintions, of bodies; as ps their figure, polifih, hardness, softness, as well as comparative heat or cold."
"The perceptions of this sense are, in some instances, original; in others, acquired."
"The figure, hardness, softness, heat, and cold, of bodies, are matter of original perception."
"Many of their salutary or perni cious qualities are learned by experience, and are matter of acquired perception."
"In some cafes we perceive the na ture, as well as the existence, of qualities; as of figure, hardness, softness."
"In others, we perceive the exist ence of the quality, but not its na-, ture; as of heat and cold."
"The first have been termed pri mary, many, the other, secondary, qualities of bodies."
"The sensations by means of which we perceive primary qualities, are, for the most part, indifferent, and have no name."
"The sensations by which we per ceive secondary qualities, are, for the most part, either pleasant or painful; are confidered apart from the perception they bring; and frequently usurp the name of the quality perceived, so as to occasion a considerable ambiguity in language."
"Thus heat or cold, which are the names of certain unknown properties in bodies, are Sometimes underftood of animal sensation or feeling."
"The animal sensation can, in no cafe, have any resemblance to the fubjecd or quality perceived."
"Its informations, therefore, are not like that we receive from the infpetion of a picture or image; "
"E 2 but but like that we receive by means of language, or other arbitrary signs."
"In original perception, the sign is affixed by nature, and the interpretation instinctive."
"Our sensations are not fitted to furnish us with the means of inveftigation, and of proof, but with perceptions which precede all inveftigation or proof."
"The sceptic, who affects to dif believe the informations of sense, has the fame perception with the dogmatist, who professes to believe."
"T A "
"The organ of taste is placed in the tongue and palate."
"Its sensations are, for the molt part, either pleasant or painful."
"The qualities of bodies perceived by by it are secondary, as already explained *."
"The sensations of taste become, after some experience, the indications, or signs, of what is pernicious or salutary in food,  "
"But the fame subjea is frequent ly known by sensations which difser greatly in refped to pleafire or pain."
"The fcnfation is sometimes plea sant, at other times painful, or indifferent, while the fame objec is tfill perceived."
"Thus under the influence of ap petite, the tafle of food is pleasant; when the appetite is cloyed, the taste is disgusting or painful."
"It is likewise oft-times not in any considerable degree either pleasant or painful, or it is indifferent; yet in all those cafes the objeA is still * See  o5. & Si."
"E 3 perceived, AI. IjlUiI *i**LrI  * 1  -thers, acquired."
"Th fig.ur. hardne, nef, heat, and cold, of bodies, are matter of original perception."
"Many of their salutary or perni cious qualities are learned by experience, and are matter of acquired perception."
"In some cafes we perceive the na ture, as well as the existence, of qualities; as of figure, hardness, softness."
"In others, we perceive the exist ence of the quality, but not its nature; as of heat and cold."
"The first have been termed pri 111ay', ^^^^ ·HB'^^^ Lt~IIIC5 ior cne mcfl art, either pleasant or painful; a.re confidered aparit from the perception they bring; and frequently usurp the name of the quality perceived, so as to occasion *a considerable ambiguity in language."
"Thus heat or cold, which are the names of certain unknown properties in bodies, are sometimes underftood of animal sensation or feeling."
"The animal sensation can, in no cafe, have any resemblance to the ftibje& or quality perceived."
"Its informations, therefore, are not like that we receive from the infpeaion of a picture or image; "
"E 2 but but like that we receive by means of language, or other arbitrary signs."
"In original perception, the sign is affixed by nature, and the interpretation inftinclive."
"Our sensations are not fitted to furnish us with the means of inveftigation, and of proof, but with perceptions which precede all inveftigation or proof."
"The sceptic, who affeds to dif believe the informations of sense, has the fame perception with the dogmatist, who professes to believe."
"T A "
"The organ of taste is placed in the tongue and palate."
"Its sensations are, for the most part, either pleasant or painful."
"The qualities of bodies perceived by by it are secondary, as already explained *."
"The sensations of tafle become, after some experience, the indications, or signs, of what is pernicious or salutary in food,  "
"But the fame subjea is frequent ly known by sensations which difser greatly in refpedt to pleasure or pain."
"The sensation is sometimes plea sant, at other times painful, or indifferent, while the fame objec is still perceived."
"Thus under the influence of ap petite, the taRe of food is pleasant; when the appetite is cloyed, the taite is disgusting or painful."
"It is likewise oft-times not in any considerable degree either pleasant or painful, or it is indifferent; yet in all those cafes the objeL is Rill * See  50.  "
"E 3 perceived, perceived, and its qualities nicely diftinguiihed."
"S L."
"The organ of smell is placed with in the nostrils, near to the paflage of the air in respiration."
"There is a greater analogy be tween the sensations of fiell and taste, than between those of any other two of our senses."
"They agree in giving a perception of secondary qualities; in enabling us, by the help of experience, to distinguish external subjeCts, and to recognise the fame fibject by the iledia of sensations that vary from pleasant to painful or indifferent."
"H A R"
"H A I "
"The organ of hearing is placed in the interior part of the ear."
"The sensations of found, whether single, or multiplied, and variously combined, are either pleasant, painful, or indifferent."
"The quality perceived is fecon dary, found, by investigation, to be pulses of the air, occaiioned by explosions, or by the tremors of tense and elastic matter of any fort."
"Sounds are diversified by their intensity and mulical tone."
"Tones being a natural language of sentiment, are, by certain combinations, easily rendered pathetic."
"Different founds are, by expe rience, learned to be the signs or indications of different fubjeds, and of different movements."
"S I "
"S I "
"The organ of fight is placed in the eye."
"Its sensations are Sometimes plea sant or painful, but for the most part indifferent."
"Of the qualities perceived by means of there sensations, some are primary, others secondary."
"The original perception obtained by fight, is that of the visible appearance of things external. This appearance includes superficial extension and figure, apparent magnitude, illumination, shade, and colour."
"The acquired perception is that of the real dimensions, figures, and distances of bodies."
"In the use of this organ, there is a series of signs and interpretations."
"I. The I. The visible appearance is perceived by means of light."
"2. Objects are perceived by the intervention of this appearance."
"The fame obje& is perceived un der great varieties in the visible appearance."
"The solid dimensions of bodies are underitood from the disposition of light and fliade on the visible surface."
"The distances of known bodies are inferred from their apparent magnitude and diftindcnefs."
"The real magnitudes of bodies at a known distance, are inferred from their apparent magnitudes."
"This discernment of objects from their visible appearance, is the result of observation. Where we have no measure of the distance of bodies, we cannot from their apparent magnitude ascertain their real magnitude: or where we have no measure of the real magnitudes of bodies, we cannot ##   Observation."
"cannot from their apparent magnitudes ascertain their distance."
"The perceptions of sense are com municated to others by information or testimony."
"Obfiervation."
"OBservation is, the attention specially paid to things remarkable."
"Things become remarkable by their reference to ourselves, or by their comparison, similitude, or contrast, with each other."
"Collections of observations, or of fads, constitute history, either defcriptive or narrative."
"Descriptive history is the detail of coexistent circumstances and qualities."
"Narrative history is the detail of successive events."
"S "
"Memo7y."
"Emory is the recolledion of fubjeds past."
"It is casual, or intentional."
"It is casual, when fubjeds or thoughts, by any connection of their own, recur to the mind."
"It is intentional, when the mind, from design, recalls any subjed or thought."
"Ilatgiination."
"Magination is the stating of objeds as inveRfed with all their qualities and circumstances, real or fioitious."
"Objeds imagined may be defcri bed, bed, may excite sentiment and passion, and lead our desires and aversions."
"Hence imagination is the chief faculty employed in description, invention, and persuasion, and in determining our choice of pursuits."
"Different nations, ages, and men, are under the influence of different imaginations or opinions."
"Such imaginations, when fortifi by habit, do not give way to reason or conviction."
"ObjeEts are imagined separately or jointly."
"In the separate images of things, -are confidered their real or possible qualities and circumstances."
"In their joint images are confider their similitude, analogy, or opposition."
"Similitude consists in the likeness of parts."
"Analogy confifs in the fimilari ty ##   Of Abstraction."
"ty of relation and proportion of parts."
"Opposition consists in the contra riety of qualities, and proportions, or relations."
"Similitude leads to arrangement, and the clasi'ng of objecs together."
"Analogy leads to the rhetorical figures of finile, metaphor, and allegory."
"Opposition leads to cdifintions, .antithlies, and contrafl."
"S  "
"O A?:i;acTio?."
"A, ft:a&ion is the stating of quaI hlities a.i circumIftances apart from. i5bjcls, qualities, or circumfiaincs, to which they arc atually joi:' in nature."
"'ihlms, in arithmertc and geome try, number and ciantity are Ithted apiart fiom any hltbec."
"L;'"
"."
"In abftrad terms, qualities are stated apart from their fubjeds."
"In mechanics, motion is stated apart from resistance or friction."
"In generic names, qualities in which individuals agree, are stated apart from those that distinguish them."
"Abftradion: is in a great measure arbitrary; hence! the various methods of classification followed in natural history."
"Abftration is the reverse of i magination:; it, ,is the foundation of general and comprehensive reasoning, not :of description or passion."
"Men are sometimes the dupes of their own, abftradions, and confider them as separate, and independent existences."
"Abftraation tends to disqualify men for affairs. It is the habit of cbnfidering circumstances apart; while in affairs all circumstances come ##   Of Reasoning."
"come together, and mufft be kept in view at once."
"Of Reasoning."
"RT Eafoning comprehends claflifi cation of particular fubjecs, investigation, and application of general rules, together with demonftration or proof."
"In classification we refer particu lars to certain predicaments, fixed or arbitrary."
"In investigation we observe what is common, or ought to be common, in many particular operations."
"In the application of rules we show the particulars which are comprehended under them."
"In this science consists."
"In demonfi'ation, or proof, we employ testimony, or argument."
"F 2 Argument Argument is taken, either a priore, or a poftciiore."
"Argument a priore, proves or dif proves the fat, from the law, or the efieca from the cause."
"Every argument of this fort may be reduced to a perse& fyllogimin, consisting of:itlrce propofitiqns: of which one announces the law, either negative or .pofiive ; anot-her ccmpares the law writh the facc to be proved; and the third affrmi or denies the sac&, from its conformity with or opposition to- the law."
"Arguamcnt a, pofJriore, proves or difpro.es the rule,, from the enurneration of particulars."
"Every such argument may be re duced to a fyllogifin conifting of two propositions: one is indutdion, or enumeration of fads ; the other afflrms or denies the law, from the concurrence, or want of concurrence, in the particulars brought to cifablilh it."
"Of Foresight."
"Orefight is the faculty of conjeAuring what is to follow from the past or present."
"It requires penetration and saga city: the first, to comprehend all the circumstances of the cafe in question; the second, to perceive what is likely to follow from those circumftances."
"Penetration and sagacity are the foundations of good conduct, art, and skill."
"Of Pr-opefity."
"M EN, like the other animals, are active, from original choice, and propensity."
"F 3 They They delight in freedom and ex ercii'; they pine under refiraint, or in the absence of objects fit to excite them."
"The activity of man nature con filPs in propenlity, sentiment, defire, and volition."
"Propensities have their effect prior to the experience of pleasure or pain."
"They are either animal or rational."
"The animal propensities are the appetites to food, sleep, and the propagation of the fpecics."
"These appetites are periodical or occasional, and are internsitted when their ends are obtained."
"The rational propensities lead to felf-prefervation, to the care of our children, to the union of the sexes, to society, and to excel."
"These, like animal appetites, give a direcdion to human nature prior to to any experience of their gratifications."
"But, contrary to the analogy of animal appetites and gratifications, they may continueto occupy habitually, without satiety or disgust."
"All affedions of kindness are, in their own nature, pleaaint."
"Having there natural propenfi ties, we tate objecs under the predicaments of good or of evil as they are supposed conducive or opposite to the purposes of our propensities."
"Whatever is thought conducive to preservation, is reckoned good."
"Whatever is thought pernicious, is reckoned evil."
"Whatever promotes the welfare of society, or of any objec beloved, is therefore supposed good."
"What. is pernicious, is supposed."
"evil."
"Whatever is thought in itself to constitute a perfecion, or to give eminence, is supposed good."
"Whatever ##  XI. Of Sentiment *."
"Whatever is thought to conffitute imperfecion, or to fink our comparative value, is supposed evil."
"Hence the great influence of pinion on the external pursuits of men."
"Of Sentiment '."
"Sentiments are pleasant or painful."
"The sentiment arising from a sup posed good attained, is pleasant; from a supposed good miffed or forfeited, is painful."
"A supposed evil avoided, is pleasant; incurred, is painful."
"The pleafire in both these cafes is termed Joy."
"See Theory of agreeable sentiments."
"The The pain is terried Sorrow, or Grief."
"A supposed good in expectation of being gained, is pleasant; in expedation of being loft, is painful."
"The pleasure in either of there two cafes is termed Hope."
"The pain is termed Fear."
"Thus all our sentiments, or pas sions, may be referred to four general heads: Joy, Grief, Hope, and Fear."
"But there is a great variety in the sentiments of joy and grief, of hope and fear, corresponding to the nature of the supposed good or evil, and of the propensity by which we are direcded towards it."
"The sentiments of those who are occupied chiefly in their own preservation, are, the sense of safety and success, or of danger and difappointment."
"The first may comprehend fecurity, exultation, and insolence; the second, second, jealousy, terror, and defpair."
"The most painful sentiments of those who are occupied chiefly by their regard to mankind, are alleviated by the pleasures of affeaion, confidence, and good-will."
"The sentiments of thote who are occupied chiefly with the confideration of excellencies or defecs in themselves, or in others, are, on the one hand, refpeCing thiemfelves, and their own absolute perfections or defedts, felf-approbation, and elevation of mind; on the other hand, shame, remorse, and dejection."
"In refped to comparative advan tages, and superiority to other men, their sentiments are, exultation, vain-glory, insolence, and contempt."
"The sentiments of men refpeaing real excellencies in others, are, eiteem, refped, and veneration."
"Esteem Esteem is a sentiment of approbation tending to confidence."
"Respect is a sentiment of approbation tending to submission."
"Veneration is a high degree of refpet."
"The sentiments of men refpet defecs are, contempt, ridicule, indignation, and rage."
"Contempt is a sentiment of dif approbation, tending to indifference or neglect."
"Ridicule is a sentiment of difap probation, mixed with mirth or pleasantry."
"Satire and Raillery consist in exposing what is ridiculous."
"Buffoonery consists in assuming it."
"As the sentiment of difapproba predominates, ridicule approaches to scorn."
"As the sentiment of pleasantry predominates, it approaches to mirth, mirth, and may even be mixed with tenderness."
"The scornful are rarely fufceptible of admiration or love."
"Indignation is a sentiment of dif approbation, mixed with resentment."
"Rage is a sentiment of difapprobation, mixed with hatred."
"The sentiments of men refped comparative advantages in others, differ according to the state of their affecions, and according as they ftace a comparison with themselves, or with other men."
"The superiority of those they love, compared to themselves, produces deference and refpet. "
"The superiority of those they hate, so compared, excites envy; of those who are indifferent, excites humiliation, or is a mortification."
"The superiority of those they love, compared to others, excites exulta ##  XII. Desire and Aversion."
"tion; of those they hate, compared to others, excites animosity and regret."
"Desire and Aveifon."
"*Efire and aversion arise from opinion, founded in experience or fancy."
"Mens desires and aversions are various as their opinions."
"The most remarkable examples of fcttled or habitual desire, are, feniuality, avarice, ambition, public li)irit, greatness of mind, or tenacity of what is noble and juit."
"These desires, though in fomle in flances they carry us far beyond the scope of our original propeniities, have a foundation in rfoe natural propensity, and lead to the objeds which, in our opinion, tend to fulfil its purpose."
"G Selnfaiity Sensuality is founded in animal appetites; and implies a purpose of enjoyment even during the intermiffions of appetite."
"Avarice is founded in the care of felf-prefervation; but limits it to the desire of riches, or the means of subsistence."
"Ambition is the desire of fuiperi ority, supposed to consist in the poffeflion of power or command."
"Public spirit is founded in the propensity to society, enlarged into zeal for the rights of a country or of mankind."
"Greatness of mind is founded in the propensity to excel, limited to personal qualities and real perfections."
"Of Volition."
"T Olition is the at of will in free determinations."
"The determination is free whereever it is voluntary."
"The motives from which we chufe, do not destroy our freedom; for to from motives in the manner we ourselves approve of, to be willing, voluntary, and free, in any action, are synonymous terms."
"G 2 INSTI"
"INSTITUTES"
"O F"
"MORAL PHILOSOPHIY."
"PART "
"Theory of Mind."
"General Olfervations."
"ir'HE theory of mind is the I kinowvledge of physical laws, colleced from faet, and applicable to explain appearances."
"The intclleCual ,fftem, as well as the material, hath its laws; but it is apprehended that the laws of the intelletual intelledual system are not equally well observed *."
"Tlhis apprehension comes from our not confidering the diftincion of laws, as well as of subje "
"The term law is ambiguous."
"It sometimes signifies the uniformity of a fat in nature."
"In this sense it is employed by natural philosophers 1-."
"In this sense chiefly the material system is said to have its laws."
"And in this sense every law must be ftritly observed; because it is law only so far as it is observed."
"Gravitation is a law only so far as bodies acually gravitate."
"But in this sense, too, the intel lecual system hath its laws; for in the operations of mind some fads are uniform."
"*Spirit of Laws, book I."
"t See Laws of Nature, in the IntrcduiUoa to every system of mechanics."
"G 3 In In this sense, therefore, the laws of the intellectual system are equally well oblerved with those of the material."
"The term law, however, has a farther signification, and means a rule of choice, which we desire to have uniformly observed."
"In this fenit it is employed commonly by moralists and civilians."
"In this sense most commonly it is meant, that the intellecual fyflem hath its laws."
"And in this sense the law may fubfi  without being ftritly obferved: for it is law in consequence of its rectitude, or of the authority from which it proceeds; not in consequence of its being the fact."
"But although the more impor tant laws of this fort relate to the intelledual system, yet there are laws of the fame kind relating to the material system."
"Such are the expressions of what is is required to elegance, beauty, or utility, in natural fubjeds; or of what is required to perfecion in works of art."
"In such refpeds material as well as ilitelledtual fubjeds, may deviate from the law."
"In the vegetable and animal king doms there are deformities, diftortions, and diseases; as there are in the intelledual kingdom follies, abfurdities, and crimes."
"To avoid, as much as poflible, these ambiguities, laws of the first fort, whether relating to mind or matter, have been termed physical laws; and laws of the second fort, moral laws *."
"Common use will authorise this interpretation; although the use of these terms is by no means determined and precise: for frequently, whatever relates to matter, is said to * See Introdution."
"be be physical; whatever relates to mind, is said to be moral."
"In consequence of this vague use of the term lmoral, any theoretical question relating to mind has been fubifituted for moral philosophy; and speculations of little moment have fipplanted the study of what men ought to be, and of what they ought-to wish, for themselves, for their country, and for mankind."
"Enumeration of Phifical Laws."
"Laws of the Undejylanding."
"TH history of the understand may furnish three principal rules,- or physical laws."
"The first relates to the consciousness of ourselves."
"The second to the perception of other things."
"The third to the comprehenlion of subjects of which we are conicious, or which we perceive."
"FIRST LAw."
"We are conscious of our existence, operation, and will."
"Perception is obtained by the in tervention of media, no way refembling the subjeA of such perception: I. The medium of fenfltion."
"2. The medium of signs."
"The sensation by means of which we naturally perceive the existence of external fubjeds, has no refemblance to those fubjets."
"The signs by which we naturally perceive the existence and meaning of other minds, have no refemblance to the things signified."
"Fron this law may be explained the effed of rites in religion; of manners, as well as language, in common life; of title, fortune, and fashion, as grounds of esteem."
"Rites indicate devotion."
"Manners indicate social difpofitions."
"Language Language indicates meaning."
"Title and fortune indicate comparative excellence."
"Fafllion indicates condition and rank."
"Many signs having no refem blance to, nor connection with the things they indicate, may vary in different countries, and change in tihe fame country, while the things they denote continue thefame."
"THIRD LAW."
"To comprehend any particular fubjecI, is to know some general predicament or class to which it may be referred."
"Thus to comprehend the nature of any particular being or quality, is to be able to refer it to tome known species or class."
"To comprehend any operation or phenomenon, is to be able to refer it it to some eftabliflied rule, or known law of nature."
"Thus we comprehend all the phenomena that can be referred to the laws of gravitation, cohesion, elecricity, and so forth."
"From this law may be explained all the phenomena of science, the uses of claffication,: -investigation, and experiment, of hyp6thefis, theory, and system."
"To make a new discovery, is ei ther to investigate some law, or to point out' some new application."
"Thus Sir Ifaa'i Nittot discover the'law of refra&ioii,' and applied it to the rainbow, and to the colours of natural bodies."
"Dr Franklin applied the laws of electricity to lightning, and to the aurora bore{lis."
"The laws of nature are the gene ra and species under which particular fadts are ranged, or the pre dicaments ##   Laws of the Will."
"dicaments to which they are referred."
"Some predicaments have their ge neric names in every language, have been universally admitted, and are coeval with human thought."
"Such are, substance, quality, quantity, number, perfection, defed, good, evil, time, place,  "
"Others are more arbitrary, and chosen to render human knowledge methodical and comprehensive."
"Such are the clafles and orders of being employed in the method of different natural hifiorians."
"Laws of the tIill."
"T HE history of the human will may furnifll the three folloiing general rules."
"H FIRST"
"FIRST LAW."
"Men are disposed to preserve themselves."
"Hence danger alarms, and safety pleases; what is hurtful, repels; what is useful, attracs."
"Under this last title men desire the means of subsistence, health, strength, beauty, parts, temper, resolution,  "
"This is commonly termed the law of felf-pr efervation: but so great is the variety of mens opinions, and such the caprice of their passions, that the melancholy and froward seem to be at variance with themselves, and appear to desire what is deftrunive."
"Men are disposed to society."
"They take part with their fellow creatures, and confider general calamities as matter of regret, general welfare as matter of joy."
"This may be termed the rlaw of society ; and is that which qualifies the individual to be the member of a community, inclines him to contribute to the general good, and intitles him to partake in it."
"The reality of this law has been disputed: i. Because all the acions of men are not beneficial to society."
"2. Because even beneficial actions may be accounted for from other motives."
"The actions of men are regulated, not by this law only, but by this combined with every other law of their nature."
"H 2 If If the law of felf-prefervation, for the most part, prevail, it does not follow, that the law of society has no effed."
"The external efflec, or tendency, of every law, is diversified in different circumstances."
"The general tendency of the law of gravitation is, to caufie bodies to approach to each other; as the tendency of the law of society is, to cause men to produce public good, or to abflain from public harm."
"But the external result is opposite in opposite circumstances."
"Heavy bodies are not always fall  nor social natures always ating for the common good."
"When bodies are falling, gravi tation accelerates; when placed on a support at reft, it is a pressure; when they are thrown upwards, it is a retardation; when they are moved obliquely, it is a continual change of direction,  "
"The The analogy of- this law may fully illufirate the law of society."
"This law, in some cafes, excites to beneficence; in other cafes, only retards mischief. It increases our ardour in aAions beneficial to our fellow-creatures; it refrains or diminifies our ardour in adions hurtful; it gives fatisfadion in one cafe, and remorse in another. And thus the operation of the law of focietv like that of gravitation itself, is always real, though the external refult is not always the fame."
"As to the motives from which adions beneficial to mankind proceed, these may be various in various instances; but no person can know, except in his own cafe, that there are no sincere affceions of benevolence and good-will."
"H 3 TIIIRD"
"THIRD LAW."
"Men are disposed to better themselves."
"They distinguish perfecions from defects: they admire and contemn."
"This may be termed the law of ejliaation, or of progrefion: it is an ultimate faa in the nature of man, and not to be explained by any thing that is previously or better known. 1kDOWll."
"Excellency, whether absolute or comparative, is the supreme objec of human desire."
"Riches, power, and even pleasure, are coveted with extreme ardour, only when they are confidered as the marks of eminence or rank."
"The foregoing laws applied hi explail the phenomena of hItere  Emulation, Pride, Vanity, Probity, and Moral Approbation."
"Of Interef."
"TNtereftednefs appears in Solicitude about our situation and future profpecss: when in extreme it stifles affecion, and leads to the commission of frauds and of crimes."
"This passion is comprehended in the law of felf-prefervation, and is a partial application of that law, founded in an opinion of the great consequence of external things."
"Opinions, and their consequences, are more or less prevalent, in pro portion portion to the prevalence of circumftances by which men are led to entertain such opinions."
"For this reason intereftednefs is very prevalent."
"The opinion on which it is found  arises from the following circumftances."
"I. The inftincive desire of life."
"2. The early prepossession in fa vour of sensual objedts, because they first ingrofs our attention."
"3. The continued care of estate or fortune that is necefary whereever property is eftablifled."
"4. The rank which riches are supposed to bestow."
"From this last consideration, the law of estimation comes to be combined with the law of felf-prefervation, in accounting for the interested paflions of men."
"The intercifed consist of two clafies; the prodigal, and the avaricious."
"The ##   Theory of Emulation."
"The prodigal are commonly most rapacious, being urged by the defire of enjoyment."
"The avaricious are more cau tious, being restrained by the fear of want."
"Interest and felfifhnefs are some times employed as synonymous terms: but the sensual, the proud, the ambitious, the vain-glorious, are not less selfish than the interefted."
"And the fault of the interested, consists not in the meafire of care bestowed on themselves, but in the mistake of their own principal concerns."
"Theory of Emulation."
"EMulation appears in competi tions, heart-burning, and variance."
"It It arises mostly in the pursuit of things of mere comparative value."
"Such are, riches, renown, power, or rank."
"The value of riches is compara tive; for it consists, not in any absolute measure of wealth, but in poffessing more than other men."
"Renown consists in being more talked of than others."
"Power confits in being able to command other men; and rank, in being of superior station."
"They who desire what cannot be affedted by comparison, such as real happiness, and real virtue, apart from the reputation of either, are not addicted to emulation."
"Emulation may be directed to useful actions, and have effects serviceable to mankind; but is itself an unhappy disposition, a source of envy, jealousy, and malice."
"The emulous are not satisfied with any attainment, while others possess possess an equal, or a superior, measure, of the fame advantage."
"The objed of Cxfar desire was not greatness, or goodness; but to be the first in refped to those articles which the vulgar admired; the first in a village, rather than the fecond at Rome."
"The emulous are enemies to each other, and to men of superior reputation. They are, for the most part, vigilant, courageous, and vehement; indulgent to those who are confessedly inferior, but malicious to those who, in point of confideration, are equal or superior to themselves."
"They commonly prefer mean company in which they can assume a fiperiority, to better in which they must submit to equality."
"Emulation is comprehended in the law of estimation, and arises from an opinion that excellence consists in fupcriority."
"S "
"S EC  III."
"Of Pride."
"Ride: appears in neglea, inattention, contempt, and arrogance."
"It is foiunded: therefore in a mean opinion of 6ther meti.: It is comprehended in the law of estimation; for it is in consequence of this law that men either admire or contemn."
"Pride, or contemptuouffefs, is in consistent with affetion, candour, or any regard to the rights of mankind."
"The desire of perfection, and ven the love of virtue, have been confounded with pride."
"This abuse sometimes proceeds from inattention to propriety of language: Sometimes from affeetation of si gurative gurative speech; as when we fay, decent pride, noble pride, the pride of doing well,   Here it implies contempt; but, in a good sense, the contempt of what is unworthy."
"At other times this confifion of words is affected, in order to favour a system; as when we would depreciate.virtue, or disprove its reality, by speaking of it in terms which are commonly taken in a bad sense *."
"Pride results from the law of esli mation, as an abuse of it,' or an improper contempt of other men."
"It is ridiculous to attempt con founding the love of virtue with pride: their tendencies are opposite."
"Virtue is a refped for the rights of men, and eileem of what tends to the good of mankind."
"Pride is a difrcifeAt for the rights of men, and contempt of mankind.."
"* Mandciille works."
"I SEC "
"'   "
"Of Vaity."
"5V AAnity appears in affectation and ostentation."
"The vain affeCt what they think will captivate the attention and merit tihe praise of others."
"They are ostentatious of what they suppose constitutes their importance, as of their persons, fortune, equipage, talents, and adventures."
"They are gratified by the admiration of others."
"Vanity is comprehended in the law of estimation; for it supposes the diftincion of admirable and contemptible, however mifunderflood."
"It is thereverfe of pride, over rating the value of other people opinions, which pride condemns."
"The ##   Of Probity."
"The vain are capable of great efforts of courage and resolution, when supported by public opinion, and when ating in public view; but without this support, are feeble and irresolute."
"The attention they pay to other men not proceeding from the heart, but from the desire of consequence and applause, they always fail where the fruits or effedts of real affedtion are expeced,  V"
"Of Probity."
"P Robity appears in ads of justice Pt and beneficence."
"Men: who regard the rights, and feel for the fullierings, of others; who are ever ready to do adts of kindness ; who are faithful and true to the expedations they raise,- are said to have probity."
"I 2 Probity Probity implies the love of man kind, founded in a temper that is compafionate, caldid, and liberal."
"It is comprehended therefore in the law of society."
"Probity may be understood to constitute an excellency, but cannot be the foundation of pride or contemptuoufinefs."
"It may be understood to merit applause, but is direted by assection, not by the desire of admiration or attention."
"Men of probity prefer integrity to any other kind of supposed excellency ; but frequently have a modest opinion of their own merits."
"Of AMoral llpprobation in general."
"M Oral approbation is the judge ment formed of characters and actions, as being excellent or jufr."
"It is opposed to disapprobation or blame."
"The apprehension of excellence; "
"or defect, in other subjects, as of beauty or deformity in merely animal or material natures, is accompanied with simple emotions of admiration or contempt: but the apprehension of excellence or defedt in ourfclves, is accompanied with elation of mind, hflame, and remorse; in others, with complacency, veneration, love, pity, indignation, and'"
"'scorn."
"Men fond of paradox, have queflioned the reality of moral iftinc I 3 tions;S"
"tions: but expreffidns of praise and blame in every language, the importance of mens acions to mankind, the opposite nature of difpofitions that form the characers of men, the most vehement sentiments of the human heart, which refer to this {ubjec,-filow, that the diftindion of moral good and evil is real, and universally acknowledged."
"In treating of moral approbation, four questions may be ieparate flated."
"I. What do men, for the most part, approve or blame ?"
"2. By what principle, or confide ration, are they direced, in particular cafes, to bestow their approbations or censures ?"
"3. What is the proper fubjedt of approbation or censure ?"
"4. What is the rule or principle by which men ought to judge of moral characters ?"
"The two first questions are phy fical, fical, and belong to this place,; the two last are moral, and their answer will be comprehended in the.firft or noft general laws of morality."
"The subjed of morality has. been greatly perplexed by the blending of these questions together."
"The actual errors and corruptions of men, have been muLfered up as so many proofs, that there is nothing which men ought to esteem or desire."
"In physical questions, we attend to the sac; in moral questions, to what is good or evil. The fat, however well eftabliflied, and however universal, does not preclude us fi-om conceiving and chifing what is better."
"If all men were acuated by in tercft, emulation, pride, or vanity, it would not follow, that probity is no object of esteem or desire. When we are told, therefore, that candour and benevolence are hypocrisy; that courage ##   Of the Object of Moral Approbation."
"courage is anger; elevation of mind is. pride; and temperance formality, or affectation,-- we may afl,. whether these allegations are meant as a itate of fads merely, or as examples of what men ought to be ?"
"The fads may be true; but to chue' a pattern confessedly bad, would be absurd."
"Of ths Object of Moral Approbatiobt."
"T HE objec of moral approba-  is either some disposition of the mind, or some external action."
"Probity is the most approved dif position; and the external exprefsions of probity, the most approved acions."
"These constitute the whole, or the most essential part, of virtue."
"Other ##   Of the Principle of Moral Approbation."
"Other fubjeds may be admired or contemned, but these alone arc the fibjecs of moral approbation."
"S  "
"Of the Principle of Moral Approba "
"M Oral approbation is compre hended in the law of eftima  and is indeed the principal fa from which we infer the reality of this law; as the vertical pressure and fall of bodies are the principal fads from which, in mechanics, we infer the law of gravitation."
"Other desires or affections may lead us variously to bellow our efleem or contempt, but none other will accdiurit for our having esteem and contempt to bestow."
"According to this law, men refer the qualities and exertions of their own nature, together with many other other particulars, to .the opposite predicaments of excellency and dese "
"Yet in this they are not led by any inftindiive or invariable rule: they differ in their choice of characters, and bestow their esteem on different fibjecds."
"One man admired Cato; another admired Cafar.."
"The affecions and desires of men, though different from approbation or esteem, yet warp their judgements, and determine their opinions."
"The ambitious and interested fel dom admire what is adverse to their own designs."
"·Caesar wrote an invective against the memory of Cato; and though."
"this, by others, was thought ridiculous *, yet it is probable that he himself was sincere, and really felt * Vid, Cicero Epift. to Atticus, book 12."
"ep. 45."
"the the zeal of Cato for the preservation of the republic, as matter of differvice and demerit to himself."
"'Men are led, by the prepofTcffions of custom, or by superstition, to approve or condemn mere external rites and observances."
"They are led by interest, or am bition, to approve of ations favourable to their own designs."
"They are led by their situations to admire particular qualities, as the military .or pacific virtues."
"They are led by benevolence to approve of qualities that fit men to procure the good of mankind."
"So far as the merit, or moral ex cellence, of a man, consists in such qualities, we may venture to affirm, that benevolence, or the law of soeiety, combined with the law of eftimation; is the principle of moral approbation*; and that to beflow * Vid. Lord Shaftelbury Inquiry into Virtue."
"our our esteem on virtue, is to love mankind. ."
"Systems have differed chiefly by deriving our choice of acions and characters, tome from the law of felf-prefervation, and others from the law of society -': but the fad is, that the laws of felf-prefervation, aiind society, when well underftood, coincide in all their tendencies and applications."
"Man is by nature a member of society; his safety, and his enjoyment, require that he should be preserved what he is by nature; his perfecion consists in the excellency or measure of his natural abilities and dispositions, or, in other words, it consists in his being an excellent part of the system to which he belongs. So that the effect to mankind flould be the fame, whether See Smith Theory of Moral Sentiments."
"the the individual means to preserve himself, or to preserve his community: with either intention he must cherish the love of mankind, as the most valuable part of his characer."
"As this is the foundation of probity, it is that which leads men to give to probity, as such, the preference to every other disposition or habit of mind '."
"* Efay on the History of Civil Society, part i. Iet. 6."
" TCHT AP"
",CH IA  , Of nare at fre pr ofpets of the' Humai' Soil."
"Of the Immateriality of the Soul *."
"T'HE nature of man has been I universally confidered as mixed, or composed of an animal and intelletual part, of body and mind."
"The functions which are re ferred to corporeal organs, belong to the animal nature; those which are not referred to any corporeal organ, belong to -the intellectual nature."
"* See Baxter on the Immateriality of the Soul."
"Man, Man, in the result of his animal nature, differs from the brutes only in the degree or maniier of what he exhibits; but in that of his intellectual nature, he diners totally, and in kind."
"Being decined to from obfer vation and experience, not from special inftint, he is, when ignorant, apparently inferior in artifice and power to the other animals; but when knowing, greatly 'fuperior."
"That by which he excels other a nimals, is termed his mind, and has been universally distinguished from body."
"The properties of mind have no analogy to those of matter: properties of the one are even opposite and contradictory to properties of the other."
"Matter is divisible and inert; mind is indivilible and adive."
"K 2 What ##   Of the Immortality of the Soul."
"What! are.called facultics of mind, are its acdive powers."
"They. are not diftindt parts of a complicated nature, but..abftractions, under, which the operations of mind are classed."
"W Very question relating to a fu. Ljture state, must be solved, from the nature of the foul, from the state of the fad at death, or from principles of religion."
"The nature of the foul being in divisible, or not fiubjed. to a diflolution of parts, and annihilation being unknown in the order of nature, it follows, that the foul is physically immortal."
"The fat at death is, that the body ceases to be animated, or to give signs of the presence of mind: but but mind being of a different nature, may exist apart.: No argument can be drawn from principles of religion, until these principles be confidered., :."
"K 3 INS TI"
"I STITUTES"
"0 "
"MORAL PH LQSOPHY."
"P A RT III."
"Of the Knowledge of God."
"Of the Beinlg of God .

Of the Universality of this Belief.
, HE belief of the existence of God has been univerfal.

The cavils of sceptics do not * See Ray Wisdom of God in the creation.
Sermons at Boyle Lefures.

rogate rogate from the univerfalityof this belief, no more than like cavils derogate from the universality of the perception men have of the exilten'ice of matter; for flis'/ilkeSife has been questioned.

This belief does not imply any adequate notion of the Shpreme Being-' Men, for the mioft part, have entertained notions on this subject, unworthy even of human reason.

But the belief that an artist, or author,. exifis, is consistent with mean and improper notions of .his capacity and intentions.

The belief that Homer composed the Iliad, is compatible with inadequate notions of that poet genius.

The belief that books read at school were composed by men,' is'
coniftent'witih'a notion,' that: even the classics were written 'for the use of children.
  
 tlh Foundations of this Belief.

HE belief of God being universal, cannot depend on cir cumftance' peculiar to any age or nation, but'fiiiuft be 'the result of human nature', or'the fuggetion' of circunftances 'that occur in every place and age.

In the: nattire of man, there is a perception of caiifes from the appearance of effects, and of design from the concurrence of means to an end.

Sceptics have not denied the rea lity of these perceptions; they have rather'complained of them,' as the foundation of- general 'and 'lar errors.

But our knowledge in'ever 'fibjea is founded. in some such natu ral ral perception, as in the cafe of what we.know from sensation, from testimony, -and from interpretation.

In any of these cafes, we can as sign no reason for our belief, but that we are by nature made to perceive.

No argument is required to prove, nor can argumenthave any effec to refute, where nature has determined that we fiall continue to believe.

No one can refrain believing, that the eye was made to fee, the ear to hear; that the wing was made for the air, the fin for the water, the foot for the ground; and so forth.

The perception of an end or in tention in the works of men, comprehends the belief of an artist.
The perception of end or intention in the works of nature, comprehends the belief of God, Nature Nature presents final causes whereever our knowledge: extends.

Final causes may; be confidered as the language in which the exiftence of God is revealed to man.

In this language the sign is natu ral, and the interpretation inftinctive.






'i ' :~'' : ..:.. . -.."
"'   Of the Attributes of God."
"S  I."
"Of these Attributes in general."
"T HE attributes of God are cha radCers of the Supreme Being fuggefled by his works."
"They may be referred to five heads; Unity, Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and Juflice."
"The Unity of God."
"T HE perception of final causes implies the belief only of one God, The ##  III. Of Power."
"The notion of a plurality of gods is a corruption."
"Different nations separately form their notions of the.. Deity. On comparing these notions, they did not endeavour to reconcile them to the belief of one supreme being; they formed a lift composed of many gods, having their different attributes and separate. provinces in nature."
"S  'III."
"Of Power."
"POwer is the attribute of the first cause; and in the creator of all things, cannot be circumscribed."
"Of zdoim."
"W Rlfdom is the attribute of in telligence; and the belief of ivifdom in the author of nature, is implied in the belief of final causes."
"The vwifdom- of God comprehends the knowledge of every nature, of the mutual relations and dependencies of different natures, and of what is best for each, and for the whole."
"The Goodngf of God."
"T His is the attribute of the creator and preserver of all things."
"The proofs of goodness are, . The i. The creating of sensitive and rational beings."
"3. The measures of good which they are made to enjoy."
"3. The order established for their preservation."
"Without the firif, there would be no object on which goodness could exert itself."
"And the numbers of such objects, as well as the enjoyments they are made to receive, are proofs of goodness in the firfc cause."
"2. What their numbers or enjoy ments are, cannot be known to us; but the order and tendency of what we know, leads to the belief of universal good."
"The lot of man is mixed, but his nature likewise is fitted to a mixcd scene."
"He complains of evil in his exter nal circumitances, or in his own nature and conduct."
"The firl subjec of complaint is termed termed pk7lfical evil; the second, moral, Physical evil is the dissonance of things to man desires."
"Without fncli diflonance there would be no place for active exertions."
"Man complaints, therefore, of physical evil are not fmptoms of ablblute evil in nature, but the fyimptoms of an active nature in himself properly placed, and having proper excitements to exert its power."
"A scene in which there were no apparent evils to be corrected, or, what is equivalent, no accefiion of good to be gained, would be a scene of inaction, adverse to the nature of lln."
"Or, in other words, a being that perceived no evil, or had no want, could have no principle of activity."
"Man, by being employed as an active power in the order of nature, 2 is is not made to forego his own happineis."
"His happiness does not depend on edie measure of conveniency he enjoys, but on the part he ads; not on his Eafety, but on the degree of courage he poffefies; not on what he gains for himself or others, but on the degree of ardour and assection he exerts."
"Moral evil is the dissonance of man nature to his conception of perfetion."
"Complaints of moral evil are the symptoms of a progrefilive or improving nature."
"A being that perceived no moral evil, or no defect, could have no principle of improvement."
"To remove the complaints of mo ral evil, it is necessary that men were either freed from all imperfections, or rendered insensible of the imperfecions they have."
"The sirs. is impossible: Men must have have the imperfections of created nature."
"We know not what is the least possible measure of thefeimperfections."
"To be insensible of the imperfec tions he has, would be a blemili in man nature."
"This pungent sense of his own errors and defers, is the source of his complaints, and of his improvements, and is a beauty in his nature."
"He is a voluntary agent, destined to under the following wife refiraint: That his hurtful dispositions are painful to himself, and his beneficial dispositions are pleasant."
"The fuifering, as well as the en joyment, in this cafe, is a proof of beneficence in the power that iniliis it."
"3. Every part, in the order of na I ture, ture, is calculated for the prefervation of the whole."
"Things the most remote, are made to concur to the fame salutary purposes."
"The order of the planetary system is calculated for the preservation of every being that occupies any part of this system."
"The pains, as well as the plea fures, of living and sensitive creatures, tend to their preservation."
"The order of nature is preserved by succession, not by perpetuity of life: and whilst the individual is periihing, the species of every animal is safe, and the system of nature is secured from decay."
"Of the Jyftice of God."
"Uftice is the result of wisdom 1 and goodness."
"Justice is goodness impartial and universal; rendering every part subservient to the good of the whole, and calculating the whole for the preservation of its parts; but precluding every part from any enjoyment in what is pernicious to the whole."
"The pains and pleasures incident to man nature, are distributed agreeably to this rule ofjuftice."
"For to fum up the whole, Bene volence is always pleasant, malice is always painful."
"Of a Future State."
"COntrary to the appaarances at death, the human foul has been generally supposed to survive its separation from the body, and to be reserved to a future state of rewards and punishments."
"This apprehension is agreeable to the most rational notions of the goodness and justice of God."
"That goodness which disposed the Almighty to create, may likewise difipofe him for ever to preserve his intelligent creatures."
"There is a continual creation of rational as well as animal natures."
"But animal natures are certainly extinguished; why not rational?"
"The first is necessary. The world would be overstocked with animals, if generations did not die to make way for each other."
"But the world of spirits may, without inconvenience, increase for ever."
"The desire of immortality is in flinaive, and is a reasonable intimation of what is intended by the author of this desire."
"The progress of man intelligent nature may be continued beyond the attainments of this life."
"The government of God is righ teous; but man inftintive desire of distributive justice is not fulfillcd in this life. Hence the univerfal belief, that wicked men are to receive additional punishments, and good men additional rewards, in afuture state."
" Diverfo itinere, malos a bonis loca tetra, inculta, fmEda, atque  formidolofa, habere *.
* Cato. in Saluft Hilt. Cat. conspiracy.

INSTI


I NS I 
0 MORAL PHIILOSOPIY.

PART 

Of Moral Laws, and their most general Applications.



Definitions. ORAL law, as diftinguiihed firomi physical law, is any general expression of what ought to be.

In this sense, the rules of art, the canons of beauty and propriety, re lating lating to any fubjedc whatever, are to be classed with moral laws '.

Moral law, as referred to intelli gent natures, is any general exprefsion of what ought to be chosen or done.

Mechanical operations proceed without object or opinion.

Animal operations are determined by infiinC.

Rational actions by opinion of what is good.

Hence good, where-ever appre hended or expressed, implies an obligation to determine the choice of every rational being to which it resers.

Moral laws may be confidered under different aspe  and diftinguified by different titles.

Confidered in refped to their source, they may be dilfinguifiled 4 See Hutchefon of the Ideas of Beauty and Virtue.

as as original, or natural, and adventitious, or conventional.

Confidered in respect to their sub jets, they may be diftinguifsled by denominations taken from those fubjeds; as laws of religion, or of society; as laws of peace, or of war; as laws political, civil, or criminal.

Confidered in refped to the per sons to whom they are applicable, they are laws of nations, or the laws of particular tates.

Moral philosophy is the know ledge of moral laws refpeding their sources and their applications.

The obligation of every law, whether original or adventitious, general or partial, may be rcfolved into an obligation of the law of nature.

The firif or fundamental law of nature, relative to mankind, is an expreflion expression of the greatest good competent to man nature.

Subsequent laws are branches and applications of this.

AM A 





Of Good and Evil.

eneral application of these terms.

HE terms good and evil are applied to enjoyment and sus fering, perfecion and defect, profperity and adversity.

Enjoyment and suffering are op pofite conditions of a sentient nature.

Perfertion and defe are the op pofite conditions of an improveable or progrcffive nature.

Prosperity and adversity are the opposite circumftances.of an aciive being related to external objecs.

  If.

Of Eljoyments and Uerings.
/ HE enjoyments and susser ings comllpetnt to man na ture, arc either animal or intellectual.

The firit are mere animal sensa dons of pleafire and pain, or the gratifications and the wants of appetite.

The second are exercise, or pa stime, and languor, affecion and hatred, joy and hope, or grief and fear.
 2 

.



Of Perfeieions and Deserts.
MT- HE principal perfections of  man nature are, the love of mankind, wisdom, and force of mind.

The principal defects are, ma lice, folly, sensuality, and cowardice.

This confraft is commonly exprelfed in the terms Virtue and Vice.

Of Prosperity and Adversity.
 circumstances relative to man nature that constitute prosperity, are, health, education, security, fortune, and long life.

The ##   Variety of Systems in the application of the terms good and evil.

The opposite circumfiances, of verfity, are, diieafe, neglect, thraldom, poverty, and death.

ariety of ylemzs in the application of the terms good and evil.

Yftems refpeding the applica of thefc terms, may be reduced to three; the Epiczurean, the Peripatetic, and the Stoic.

The Epicureans limited the terms good and evil to enjoyments and sufferings.

They maintained, that animal sense was the primary source of enjoyment; and that intellectual enjoyment is the remembrance or contemplation of this.

The Peripatetics complied with common use in the application of the termsgood and evil. They com 3 prehended prehended under the first, enjoyment, perfection, and prosperity; under the second, suffering, defect, and adversity. But they held perfetion and defect to be of the greateft moment.

The Stoics limited the terms good and evil to virtue and vice.

They preferred pleasure to pain, and the constituents of prosperity to- those of adversity: but they maintained, that good and evil consifted not in the presence or absence of either, but in the proper habit and disposition of the mind relating to them.

The tenets of the Epicureans and the Stoics, were extremes, and, in the common use of language, equally paradoxical.

The Peripatetics were supported by common opinion.

The Epicureans were fippofed to promote felfilinefs, and indifference to ##   The comparative moment of Good and Evil in their different acceptations.

to mankind, and to fink the pretensions of human nature too low.

The Peripatetics were supposed to promote integrity and moderation.

The Stoics were supposed to pro mote heroism, and the love of mankind; but to raise the pretensions of human nature too high .

The controversy between those schools related to the classification of objects.

It is of more moment to diftin guifl among things, however classed, what is the greatest good or greatest evil.

he comparative mloment of Good and Evil in their diferent acceptations.
A Nimal enjoyments are occafio nal and transitory; they pall on the sense, or must wait the returns of appetite, Sensuality, They occupy, therefore,, but a small portion of human life.

Sensuality, or the attempt to ren der them continual, impairs the power of enjoyment, and produces fottiflmeis.

Sensuality is a distemper of the imagination, whose disgusts, or languor, need to be soothed by a round of amusements and pastime.

The sense of animal pleasure seems destined to excite to action, and to direct man to what is falutary; but not to constitute the enjoyment of human life. Bodily pain is occasional, but not always transient.

It appears destined to. direc men in ihunning what is pernicious.

It is prolonged to a greater mea sure than any bodily pleasure, and Sometimes actually ends only in death.

Suitably to its final cause, the pain remains while the attack on a nimal nimal life continues; and it increases as the danger approaches.

In human life, for the most part, bodily pains are but slightly experienced.

The continued enjoyments of men in human life, arise from their active engagements, their affetions, joys, and hopes.

Men are best amused with exer cifes that engage them most, that awaken their affections, and occupy their talents.

For this reason the more serious and urgent. occupations are to be preferred to the more flight and apparently pleasant.

Men of business have more enjoyment than men of dissipation.

The reverse of amusement is inoccupation and languor.

Affections are pleasant, in pro portion as they are ardent, diffused, and extensive.

Malice is painful, in proportion as as it is diffused, rancorous, and implacable.

Joy and hope are intense and permanent, in proportion as they are founded in just opinions of things.

False opinions lead to transient joy and to disappointment.

Grief, andfear, and disappoint ment, are most frequent, where men most mistake the moment or value of things.

Vehement affection, a&ive en gagement, or passion, suspend the sense of bodily pleasure or pain.

Intellectual enjoyments, in gene ral, are preferable to the animal, as they may be rendered continual, or occupy the greater part of human life.

It appears, upon the whole, that serious engagements, benevolent asfecions, and just opinions, are the preferable source of enjoyments in human life.

It It has been observed, that one of the strongest propensities in human nature is that which tends to persection, or the bettering ourselves.

The phenomena of this propen fity are, emulation, pride, vanity,and moral approbation, magnanimity, and elevation of mind.

Under the influence of this pro penfity, men forego any pleasure, or incur any pain.

Benevolence, or the love of man kind, is the greatest perfection; it is likewise the source of greatest enjoyment.

Wisdom, or a just estimation of things, is the best security against disappointment, despair, and all the wretched paflions.

Temperance is the proper use of enjoyments of every fort.

Fortitude is an antidote to dejec and fear, the best security in danger, and the best alleviation of unavoidable sufferings.

The The higher animal pleasure is ra ted, the more temperance, or the proper use of them, must be valued.

The more animal pain appears of moment, the more fortitude, that enables men, with presence of mind, to avoid, or with patience to endure them, is to be valued.

The greatest defects, as well as sufferings, of men, are malice and cowardice, or result from intemperance and folly.

In human nature, therefore, the slate of greatest enjoyment, and least suffering, coincides with the fiate of greatest perfection.

Prosperity is actually valued, on account of its supposed tendency to constitute enjoyment, or to better our state.

Health enables us to attain to the preferable enjoyments and accomplifhments of human life; but is not an absolute security for either.

The The proper use of health is good, the abuse is evil.

Good education is calculated to promote good dispositions, and to bestow valuable accomplishments.

Negle6t has an opposite tendency But neither the best nor the worst education necessarily produce any precise effect.

Security or liberty is best attained under wife political establishments.
It is the result of prevailing juffice, and tends to promote the love of mankind.

This effea, and all the proper uses of liberty, are good.

The abu is evil.
Thraldom is in all refpeds the reverse of freedom or security.

Competency of fortune is fufi cient to all the purposes of animal life.

Increase of wealth does not proportionally increase enjoyment.
 It It' often ileads, to sensuality, dif fipation, sloth; pride, and: difdain.; , -. .
'  Man is formed for mixed fortune; 
difficulties-; and dangers call forth powers, in the exercise of which his greatest. perfections and his greatest enjoyments consist.
..Mere: life is to him an opportunityl to avail';himfelf ,of the good, and.likewife.to incur the evil, of which his nature is susceptible.
.; The proper use of it is good, the abuse is evil.
:: The value of prosperity in general, depends on the proper use of it.

The proper use of 'things, is a perfecion of human. nature.
. The.defire of perfection, therefore; well.underftood, appears to be the surest guide to enjoyment, ,and to all the advantages of prosperity.

All our enjoyments, besides those of sense, arise from: our -having some pursuit or affecion, to which pleasure pleasure is not the objed, but an acceflion. Thus the pleasures of hunting arise from eagerness to seize the prey; the pleasures of occupation arise from the ardour with which we pursue our object; the pleasures of affection arise from the regard we have for other men; and the pleasure of good actions arises from the esteem of virtue. If pleasure be our sole object, we must forego it in all those instances.

The measure of good which any one possesses, is to be estimated from his personal charater, not from his circumstances, or external means of enjoyment.

In the different denominations of good and evil, it appears that virtue and vice are of the greatest moment.

The first is itself the greatest vantage, the fecureft possession, and that which enables men best to em 2 ploy possessions.

The sec6nd is wretched in itself, and turns every other circumstance into a curse.




 A  III.
Of the fildament law of 'Morali ty, and the fJtbje(ts to 7Which it is applicable,  I.

The Law.
THE great foundation of virtue in the human foul, is probity; 
and the greatest good competent to man nature, is the love of mankind.

This law may be applied to mind, and to external actions.

In its application to mind, it is a direcion to the attainment of happiness.

In its application to external ac tions, it is a direcion to just and proper conduct.

N3 

 CT. 
.Of the application of the la7vs of Morality to Mind; or of Happiiefs.
BAppinefs is the possession of the greatest good, or the pof session of. a mind benevolent, wife, and courageous.

It is a diftinfion of the personal qualities of men, not of their fituations.

The foundation ofhappinefs, is an affection determinate in its nature, but indefinite in refpea to its ob-, jea.

Among its objecs God is fupreme.

This affeAion being an active principle, requires, or inspires, all the qualities which are requisite to attain its end.

Among Among these qualities wisdom occupies the principal place.

An extensive and just understand leads to piety, benevolence, and candour.

Good intentions have not the corresponding effecs, if not properly conduded.

Good intentions, when misled or abused, end in diiguft, or in, a diftaste to virtue.

This disposition requires courage and fortitude; for weak minds are too much occupied with. their own safety to entertain any sincere or vigorous affection.

It requires temperance; for men addicted to fenfuiality or diflipation, are not capable of continued or ferious attachments.

This affecion, when sincere and ardent, naturally occupies the mind .to the exclusion of inferior pleafiures, of personal anxieties, and fears; and is ##  III. Of the degrees of Happiness, and the actual attainments of men.

is therefore a principle of temperance and fortitude.

  III.
Of the degrees of Happinefi, and the antual attaiinments of men.

HE definitions of perfec happiness, and of perfect virtue, are the fame: Universal benevolence, unerring wisdom, a force and elevation of mind, which inferior pleasures cannot seduce, and which blameless fufiferings cannot depress.

Men conceive perfedion, but are capable only of improvement.

The conception of perfeAcion is a light to dire& their progress.

'The objec of moral philosophy is, to ascertain this conception.

Philosophers cannot avoid recommending a perfeacion above human nature, nature, unlefsthey submit to recommend defects."
"The dispositions of men are va rious, and their forces unequal: it is impossible to ascertain 'the limits of their progress."
"They havefailedin ,the diredion they have taken, not in the force with which every. iman,,-afpires to better himse.lf."
"One man improves his fortune, or advances .in, rani; another extends his. fame:: it would be easier to improve in the accomplifliments of a.juft and vigorous i ind. "
"f Opinions productive of AMifery, or that hinder Ihnpriovement '."
"T is unhappy to lay the pretensions of human nature so low as to check its exertions."
"It is unhappy to entertain notions of what men actually are, so high, as upon trial to incur disappointment, disgust, or despair of virtue."
"It is unhappy to reft our own choice of good qualities on the supposition that we are to meet with such qualities in other men."
"It is unhappy to confider perfec as the standard by which we are to censure others, not as the rule by which we are to conduc ourselves."
"* See Epi&etus by Arrian, and Antoninus Meditations."
"It It is a wretched opinion, that happiness consists in a freedom from trouble, or in having nothing to do."
"In consequence of this opinion, men complain of what might employ them agreeably."
"By declining every duty, and very ac'tive engagement, they render life a burden, and they complain that it is so."
"By preferring amusement to bu finess, they reject what is fitted to occupy them, and search in vain for something else. to remove their languor."
"It is unhappy to entertain an opi nion, that any thing can amuse us better,. than the duties of our ftation, nor than that which we are in the present moment called upon to do. ."
"It is an unhappy opinion, that beneficence is an effort of felf-denial, or that we lay. our fellow creatures creatures under great obligations by the kindness we do:them."
"It is an unhappy opinion, that any thing whatever is preferable to .happiness."
"The vulgar, as well as the' learn  have their paradoxes: They frequently prefer interest, fame, and power, to acknowledged happiness."
"They prefer consideration, or the imputation of worth, to worth itielf."
"It is wretched to rely for happiness on what we cannot command."
"It is wretched to have an opi nion of good in things which we might forego with indifference, or of evil in things which we might endure with patience."
"It is an error to employ terms of admiration or contempt loosely, and without attention to their proper meaning."
"We vulgarly fay, that a mlan is the ##   Of Opinions, or Circumstances, productive of Happiness, or that lead to Improvement."
"the better or the worse, when we mean only that something has happened to his fortune."
"Such phrases, we suppose, may be undertfood; but, like many others of the fame kind, they slur over a very absurd apprehension, that confounds external circumflances with personal qualities, and what does not belong to a man with what does."
"f Opinions, or Circu.,nfanccs, pro dtip ive of IlT7apilnef, or that lead to Impl'roveilent."
"T is happy to value personal qualities above every other con fideration; . and to state perfedion as a guide to ourselves, not as a rule )by which to censure others."
"It is happy to rely only on rwhat is in our own power; to value the engagements engagements of a worthy and ftrenuous mind as our sole good, and the debasements of a malicious and cowardly nature as our sole evil., It is happy to have continually in view, that we are members of society, and of the community of mankind;: that we are instruments in the,hand of God for the good of his creatures; that if we are ill members of society, or unwilling instruments in the hand of God, we do our utmost to counteract our nature, to quit our station, and to undo ourselves."
"I am in the flation whuich God has qftguned   fays Epictetus. With this reflection, a man may be happy in every station; without it, he cannot be happy in any. Is not the appointment of God sufficient to outweigh every other confideration ? This rendered the condition of a slave agreeable to Epifetus, and that of a monarch to Antoni n1ls."
"nus. This confideratiodh renders any situation agreeable to a rational nature, which delights not in partial interests, but ini iiiverfal good.: Whoever poflefFes good personal qualities, holds them in dependence only upon Cod: but the circumflances in which men' are placed; the policy or government of their country; their education, knowledge, and habits, - have great influence in forming their characters."
"pplication of the Laws of Morality to External Aflions in general."
"E Xternal actions, confidered a part from affection or inten of mind, are mere movements of the body, constituting neither 0 2 enjoyment enjoyment nor suffering, good nor evil."
"But affecion or intention being .good or evil, it follows, that the fame law of morality which requires or forbids the affection, must likewise require or forbid the ex.ternal condut that is supposed to result from it., The law which requires the love of mankind, supported by wisdom, courage, and temperance, likewise requires every external action that is fiited to this affecdion, and to there qualifications."
"The law that prohibits malice, remissness, cowardice, or intemperance,. prohibits likewise every external effect of these charaders.."
"ivefity of Opitions concernilg the Morality of External AClios."
"THE difference of moral good and evil cannot be ascertained in the description of mere external actions."
"Adtions materially the fame, are in one cafe morally good, in another cafe morally evil. Men are not universally agreed concerning the actions which they require or prohibit in any cafe whatever. What is reckoned innocent or praife-worthy in one country, is reckoned a heinous offence in another. The definitions of theft, murder, or treason, are different in the laws of different countries."
"The terms expressing the external duties of men in one language, 03 have ##   Cause of this Diversity."
"have not a precise equivalent in another."
"Caifes of this Diveifty."
"T His diversity does not arise from any difference of opi nion, or experience, concerning any of the charateriftics of human nature."
"All mankind are agreed, thatbe nevolence and courage are good, that malice and cowardice are evil; and if it should be alledged, that any number of men are of contrary opinions, yet every person may, from his own experience, corret the error."
"This diversity proceeds from three different causes: I. The difference of the cafe."
"2. The different choice of the par ties ##  IX. Difference of the Case."
"ties who, are asseted by the external adions."
"3. The different interpretation of actions."
"S  IX."
"Difference of the Cafe."
"C Ases change with the perfoni, and with circumflances."
"An adion materially the fame is permitted to one person, and forbidden to another: It is the duty of a magistrate to put the guilty to death; this would be criminal in a private party."
"A person may kill in his own fence, but not in different circumstances."
"Cafes are varied indefinitely; and rules of adion being general, cannot provide for all the peculiarities of any cafe whatever."
"The ##   Difference of Choice."
"The only direction on which men can rely in every particular cafe, is the discernment of a wife and benevolent mind."
"Diference of Choice."
"THE different choice of parties interested in the effec of any atiQn, arises from opinion."
"One person believes that to be good, for himself, which another person believes to be evil. In their requisition of beneficent adions, they differ accordingly: One man requires as a favour what another would resent as an injury."
"There is no external effecA of which men may not entertain contradidory opinions, even of life and of death."
"The father among the Efquiimax requires, at a certain age, that his own ##  XI. Difference of Interpretation."
"own .children flhould put! 'him to death."
"The widow in Europe edesires to have a good settlement made!by her deceased husband: in India, file desires to be burnt on his funeral pile."
"In every cafe, assions are requi red as the effects or exprefflons of kindness and regard,. ! , SEC  XI."
"Difference of hInterpretation."
" many instances, external ac tions are, in their own nature, indifferent, or of no effect; but are the established signs and expressions of neglet or attention, of good or of ill will, or of foime affection or disposition."
"Such are many religious rites in every country, and many ceremonies observed in common life. E"
"ven ven actions of more consequence, are frequently more regarded on account of their meaning, thai on account of any other effect."
"So far as actions are mere expref sions, the choice of them, like that of words, is perfectly arbitrary; and nations may differ from each other in their external observances, as they do in their speech,, without any inconvenience whatever. One nation commends what another condemns, merely because they interpret the fame, or a like acion, differently."
"The diversities of manners arising from difference of choice or interpretation, render it difficult to judge of the merits or personal qualities of men, in ages or nations remote from each other."
"The vulgar are able to interpret only the manners of their own condition and country; they common ly ly miflake those of a different rank, or of foreigners."
"There is in fadt nothing in exter nal manners/which opinion may not render agreeable or disagreeable; and the opinion of one country is not the rule or flandard by which to judge of the manners of another."
"The definitions of crimes vary in the law of different countries; because different overt ads are fpecifled as the marks of guilt."
"Terms of praise or blame, have not their precise equivalent in different languages; because men combine variously, under different terms, the circumstances from which they infer merit or demerit."
"This is consistent with a perfedt agreement of opinion concerning any of those circumnftances apart."
"Funldamental Laws of External A2lion."
".. matters indifferent, we ought I to observe the manners of our country, as we speak its language, or wear its dress."
"2. In matters of importance, we ought to chufe what is for the good of mankind, in opposition to opinion and custom."
"Thus we ought to do whatever tends to promote virtue, to prevent corruption, and to secure the rights of mankind; and to avoid whatever tends to corrupt or to reduce, and whatever tends to make way for oppression."
"When the habits or affections of men change for the better or the worse, they improve or degenerate."
"When their customs change from what is innocent, or beneficial to mankind, ##  XIII. Of the different Sanctions under which External Actions are required or prohibited."
"mankind, to what is pernicious, they are said not to undergo a change of manners merely, but to be depraved."
"If they should be ignorant of the tendency of their own pernicious customs and manners, even this ignorance would be an article of depravity."
"S  XIII."
"Of the different Siincions uZder which Exterial Alfiolns are reqluied or prohibited."
"T HE fanAion of aiiy lavw, is the good or ill annexed to the obfervance, or to the negleDt, of it."
"The general fandtion of moral 1iw is, that the observance of it is happiness, and the negleft mifery."
"This fandion is variously modifled in the cafe of external action, by ##  XIV. Of parties to whom the Laws of Morality refer."
"by lconfiderations of force, ..or of propriety.' Hence, ."
"-I. The fanAcion of compulsory law!:i '. ' '
.! ' 'i ..i ,Tle ,fanftion of duty. .
The.fanations of compulsory law are, any: forcible means employed by men to vindicate. their own rights, or.thole of others.
. :The faiftions. of duty: are, any considerations that determine men, from choice, to at properly.
 parties to whom the Laws of Mo rality refer. HE laws of morality may be referred to the conduct of single parties, or to that of collective, bodies.

The conduc of single parties is required, or prohibited, under the special special fandions of compulsory law, or under the fanmtions of duty.

Conduct required or prohibited under the fanaion of compulsory law, is the fubje& of jutifpruidence.

Conduft required or prohibited under the fandion of duty, is the subjet of cafuiitry.

Condu&' prohibited: or required of men in what affecs the; itate and form of: their community, is the subjea of politics. , Communities stated in their re lation to each other, are to be confidered as single parties.

P2 INSTI


/
IN, IT TE 
0 MORAL PIJILOSOPHY.

PART 
Of Jurisprudence.

THn SHE first application of the fundamental law of morality to the acoions of men, is prohibitory, and forbids the commission of wrongs.
Every person being intitled to defend himiclf and his fellow-crea tures, tures, wrongs may be repelled by force; and the prohibition of wrongs is the first compulsory law of nature.

Any article in the state of a man which may be maintained by force or otherwise, is termed his right.

Jurisprudence consists of two parts.

The firit relates to the rights; the second, to the defences of men, P3 



Of the Rights of Men in general.

Right is the relation of a person to a thing, in which no al teration ought to be made without his own consent.

Things are the constituents of the person, or the constituents of his state.

The regard to rights is compre hended in the law of felf-prefervation, combined with the law of society; or, in other words, it arises from our disposition to preserve ourselves, and our fellow-creatures.

Wrong is a violation of right.

The sentiment arising from a sense of wrongin our own cafe is resentment; in that of others, is indignation.

No one can have a right to what is not possible, or not real.

The right of one man is exclusive of the right of another, 



The Law of'Defence in general.
A Right may be maintained by any means that. are effecual and neceflary.

This law of defence includes three clauses: I. That a wrong apprehended may be prevented.

2. That a wrong offered ,may be repelled.

3. That a damage done fliould be repaired.






Diference of Rghts.

General Div/ion.

Ights may be confidered in refpe& to their subjea, or in refpee to their source.

In the first refped, they are said to be personal, or real.

In the second, they are said to be original, or adventitious.

Of Rights Personal.
nErfonal rights subsist in the per son, and are the constituents of his nature.

Persons ##  III. Of Rights Real.

Persons are said to be natural or artificial.

Persons 'natural are single men.
Persons artificial are corporations or states.' "
"'"
"The rights of ,natural persons subsist in the limbs and members of the body, in the faculties and talents of the mind, and the uses of both."
"The rights of artificial persons fibfift in their constituent members, their forms, and their laws."
"S EC  III."
"Of Rigbhts Real."
"R Eal rights fubrift in things of which any person may have the exclurive nfe."
"Real rights may be referred to three principal heads: Poffeffin, 'Property, and Command."
"PoifefTion ##   Of Original Rights."
"Possession constitutes right only while a thing is in actual use."
"Property constitutes a' continual right .- ."
"No one can have a right of posession to the property of another."
"Command is a -right to the services or obedience of other: men."
"Of Original Rights."
"ORiginal rights are the univer -fal..appurtenances of man nature, and coeval with his being."
"The personal rights of men are original."
"The right, of the parent to: com mand the infant child is original; but in every other instance, no man has an original right to force the obedience of another, except in obliging him to abRtain or desist from wrongs."
"E CT. "
"Of Adventitious Rights."
"ADventitious rights are such as accrue variously to men in the course of human life."
"Original rights are recognised on being mentioned."
"Adventitious rights are matter of discussion, and recognised only so far as they are proved."
"In treating of adventitious rights, we mufl not only enumerate their subjects, but likewise the means by which they may be acquired."
"Possession, property, and command; are adventitious rights."
"The adventitious diftintions in society are founded, for the molt part, on property and command, "
"Of the Laws of Acqtuiition in general."
"0 rigl can be acquired by injufftice; or, in other words, by any deed pernicious to mankind."
"The means of acquiring any right may be referred to four principal heads: Occupancy, Labour, Convention, and Forfeiture."
"Law of Occuipancy."
"O Ccupancy is such a relation of a person to a thing, that no other can use the fame thing, without detriment or molestation to the occupier."
"In this manner, a person may oc cupy the ground on which he lies, the water he drinks, the air he breathes; the light that shines upon him, the trat of the sea on which he fails ; but no one can occupy the earth, the paiing stream, the atmorphere, or the ocean."
"Q  #   The Law of Acquisition by Labour."
"The Law of Acquiition by Labour."
"L Abour is any effort by which a person may, for his own use, fabricate, procure, or improve, any unappropriated subjea."
"'The 'right acquired to the fruits of labour, is implied in the:original right all men have to the use of their talents or faculties."
"Prior to convention, men do not acquire rights by the observance of any form or ceremony that is of no effecA; for the right acquired is only to the use of what is produced."
"Mere accession, or what is not the effet of any care and labour, if there be no convention to the contrary, falls to the first occupier."
"The increase of a man flocks or herds, being the fruits of his care, is his property; but the acceflion of of new lands, or islands, contiguous to his, falls to the first occupier."
"A man, by labouring on another property, cannot annul the other right; on the contrary, the fruit of his labour, if it cannot be removed without damage to the principal subjet, falls to the proprietor of that fubjecd."
"But a person who happens bona to employ his labour on the subjeat of another, may remove or enjoy the fruit of his labour; if this can be done without detriment or inconveniency to the other."
"Civil conventions accommodate the effects of accession or of labour to the conveniency of parties, and to the policy of particular Rtates."
"Q2 A "
"The Law of iAcqzluition by Contracf."
"The Obligations of Contra, 5 Contraa: is the engagement of JA parties to perform what is supposed to be in their power."
"Engagements are made by promiles."
"Men by nature rely on the promises of others."
"The object of a promise or en gagement becdmes part of a man state; breach of faith is an injury, and he is intitled to repel it by force."
"Here the compulsory law, which in its original form is prohibitory, or negative, becomes positive, re quiring, ##   Laws of Contract in general."
"quiring, that every just engagement should be fulfilled."
"Laws of Contrat in general."
"I. source of conventional obligation, is the right of one party to exac a performance upon which another has made him rely."
"2. Contrads, therefore, create right only to what depends on the will of contracting parties."
"3. To constitute a contract, mu tual promises, or a promise and acceptance, are necessary between parties, acting freely, and poffeiied of the use of their reason."
"Although one party has promi fed, if the other has not accepted, the last cannot pretend to have an expectation raised."
"fit 2But But mutual promise implies acceptance."
"Men who are known not to voluntarily, or rationally, cannot raise any reasonable expedtation."
"4. A party may ftipu!lte in per son, or by his agent, or melienger, in words, aciions, or signs, that are understood."
"5. A person is bound by the fti pulations of a servant, or mefenger, to whom he has given credentials, or whom he has authorised by repeated acknowledgements of his trust."
"6. Words are to be interpreted in their most ordinary sense, or in the sense in which it appears from other signs that they were intended to be uifed."
"7. An acion of any kind, per formed with a view to raise expectation, or by which it is known that expectations are naturally rai fed, fed, is ftfficient to constitute a contrat."
"8. Cuflom is a reasonable ground of expectation ; and therefore is binding on all parties."
"Great part of the civil conven tions of men are confrituted by tlie received cultoms of their country."
"A practice introduced by force, may become a legal cuflom: for being such as men are reconcileable to, after they are reconciled, and continue to observe it voluntarily, it becomes a matter of convention."
"But practices,-or sufferings, to which men are not reconcileable, and with which they are made to comply by force, can never, on the foot of coniuetude, be confidered as matter of convention, but ufurpapation."
"S  ##  III. Contracts of different denominations."
"ContraEs of diferent denominations."
"COntrats may be diftinguiihed as absolute, or conditional; and as single, or reciprocal."
"Absolute contracts are conftitu ted by a simple promise and acceptance."
"Conditional contracts express pro mise and acceptance under a condition."
"Single contracs consist in the promise of one party, and acceptance of the other."
"Here one party is stipulating, the other accepting."
"Reciprocal contracs consist of mutual promises, and mutual acceptance."
"Here each party is both ftipulating and accepting."
"f the Exceptions to Cozntrals in ge neral."
"A NY promise given is rendered void, by the exceptions of force, .fraud, injustice, or impoffibilitv ... .."
"FIRST EXCEPTION."
"Force is constituted by aiual vio lence, or menaces, employed by (the accepting party."
"This exception is valid, I. Because a person extorting a promise by force, cannot have a reasonable expectation of its performance being intended."
"2. Because the party offering force commits an injury; and instead of acquiring a right, may be prevented, prevented, repelled, or obliged to make reparation."
"N.  This exception does not extend to the cafe of contracts entered into with one party, on account of the violence offered by another."
"Nor is this exception admitted by the praLtice of nations in the cafe of any surrender at war, or military capitulation."
"Fraud is constituted by the deceit which a party employs to obtain a promise."
"This exception is valid, i. Because a party who is known to be deceived concerning what he promises, cannot raise an expecation that he will perform when un-eceived."
"2. Because deceit, or imposition, is an injury, and gives a title to reparation."
"N.  This exception does not invalidate the promise made to an innocent party in consequence of the misinformation of another."
"Nor does it invalidate any mili tary capitulation, though obtained by stratagem."
"THIRD EXCEPTION."
"Injustice consists in the wrong which a third party would susser from the performance of a contrat."
"There are four different cafes in which this exception may be offered: Cafe I. When neither of the con tracting parties, at the time of ftipulating, was aware of the wrong."
"In this cafe the contract is simply void."
"Cafe 2. When only the party accepting was aware of the wrong."
"In In this cafe, the contract is void; "
"and the party accepting has committed an injury against the party stipulating, as well as against the third party, who, if the contrast had takeneffec, was likely to have suffered."
"Cafe 3. When only the party ftipulating was aware of the wrong."
"If he stipulated with intention to perform, he is injurious to the third party concerned."
"If- he stipulated with intention to plead the exception, he is injurious to the party accepting."
"Cafe4. When both parties were aware of the injustice."
"Both are injurious to the third party concerned."
"FOURTH EXCEPTION."
"Impossibility extends to every cafe that cannot, in the nature of things, take place; to every article that ex ceeds cecds the power, or that does not depend on the will, of the parties."
"This exception, like the forme may be offered in four cafes."
"Cafe I. When neither contract party was aware of the impofiibility; The contract is simply void."
"Cafe 2. WVhen only the party ac cepting was aware of the impoflibility."
"This ccnduct is either irrational, or may be injurious to the flipulating party, by drawing hinr into fa:res and fruLtlefs attempts."
"Cati 3. When only the party fdipulating was aware of the impofli It is injurious to the accepting party, by creating vain expedations."
"The 4th cafe, Supposing both parties aware of the impossibility, is altogether irrational and absurd."
"R "
"xceptions peculiar to Conditional and Reciprocal ContralIs."
"L conditional contracts are A void, if the condition has failed, or is found to be unjust or impossible."
"The condition may be a mere contingency, or it may depend on the will of either party."
"If a contingency, the parties may be allowed to interpose, as they do in games of skill and dex- '"
"terity."
"Or. they may not be allowed to interpose, as in games of chance."
"If the condition depend on the will of the stipulating party, he becomes bound to perform one aftion only in consequence of having performed another."
"if If it depend on the will of the accepting party, he acquires a right only in cafe of having performed his condition."
"In mutual contracts, a party failing on his part, has no title to exa& performance on the other part."
"R 2  #  IX. Of the Law of Acquisition by Forfeiture."
"Of the Law of Acqi7itioilJ by Foifei titre."
"W,'-7Hoever has done an injury, is bound to repair it. In this manner, the injurious person may have forfeited to another what was formerly his own right."
"No man can forfeit by ations casual and involuntary. Such actions, when prejudicial to others, are misfortunes, not injuries."
"Of the Law of Acquisition, as appli cable to particular rights,  I."
"Of Poefi on."
"THis is acquired by occupancy alone."
"Of Property."
"hT His is acquired, to any fubje&"
"formerly unappropriated, by labour alone."
"The effeCt of prescription in civil society, results from convention, not from occupancy."
"R 3 Property Property may be transferred by convention or forfeiture."
"A convention transferring property, is a conveyance."
"A conveyance consists of consent and delivery."
"A party who has obtained con sent Vwithout delivery, may defend, or occupy, the iubject, in right of the former proprietor, not in his own."
"Hence it is argued, that the mere consent of a party deceased, without delivery, cannot convey property; because the party deceased having no right, the fubjeat fills to the first occupier."
"The force of last wills is an effec of convention among the living, not of right furvivnmg the dead."
"f the Right to Conmmand, or Service."
"T HE right to command is ac quired by contract or forfeiture."
"The contracS between the master and hired servant is a reciprocal contract."
"The terms are such as they mu tually flipulate, or such as known cufloms eflablifl."
"The civil contract or convention between the magistrate and subjea, or sovereign and people, is likewise reciprocal."
"The terms' are such as the par ties stipulate in express charters and Statutes, or such as may be afcertained from known customs."
"The social compact, from which, according to some writers, the mutual duties of men in society are to be be deduced, is a mere fition in theory, resembling the fidion in law, by which a plea which arises from one source, is sustained as coming from another."
"Thus mutual pleas of guardian and ward, which arose from equity, were sustained in the Roman law as arising from contract."
"There never was in reality any contract prior to the eftabliihment of society. Customs, charters, and statutes, which constitute or express the civil conventions of men, are all posterior to the establishment of society."
"Fictions of law may be conve nient in arranging civil acions, but are of no use in explaining the laws - of nature; for by the law of nature, every right, and every obligation, is admitted only where it is real, and can receive no confirmation from any fiEtion whatever."
"The original rights or men, a- ied founded in humanity, and in the title of every person to defend himself, are so far from gaining force by being referred to a supposed convention, that they are actually weakened."
"Men are equally sensible of their obligation to abstain from wrong of any kind, as from breach of faith. The last is atually comprehended in the first, or is founded upon it."
"A right to command is sometimes acquired by forfeiture, when a person who has done a wrong, becomes bound to repair it by his services."
"No contrac or forfeiture can prive a man of all his rights, or render him the property of another."
"No one is born a slave ; because every one is born with all his original rights."
"No one can become a slave; because no one, from being a person, can, can, in the language of the Roman law, become a thing, or subjea of property."
"The supposed property of the master in the slave, therefore, is matter of usurpation, not of right, "
"Of the Law of Defence."
"Of the lleans of Defence in general."
"BY the law of defence, a person may maintain his right against any other person who wrongs, or is likely to wrong him, by any means that are necessary for that purpose."
"The means of defence may be referred to three principal heads: Persuasion, Artifice, and Force."
"The law of defence does not au thorife the use of any means that are unnecessarily hurtful to the party against whom they are employed."
"A man is intitled only to pre serve ##   The case of Single Parties Strangers to each other, and unconnected."
"'serve his own right: whatever harm he does beyond what is neceffary for this purpose, is an injury."
"The law of defence may be ap plied to persons in three different cafes: i. That of single parties supposed firangers, and unconnected."
"2. That of fellow-citizens."
"3. That of nations."
"he cafe. of Single Parties Strage to each othcr, and ziiconnecictl."
"T His cafe is commonly treated of under the title of the fiate of nature; and in tlis state every man is fippofed unconneded with all men."
"It is absurd to intitle that tl fiate of nature to which men are not naturally dilfpofed, and in wlhicli which they most certainly never were known."
"It is a mere supposition, under which certain applications of the law of nature may be abftracyly confidered."
"Writers have not recollected, that it was sufficient for the purpose of their reasonings, to suppose any two or more parties unconnecded with each other, though not unconneced with all mankind."
"Such parties are pofl'efed of their original rights; but having no convention, can have none of those rights, and none of those obligations, which arise from convention alone."
"If either party shall commit an injury againit the other, the injured is intitled to his defence."
"It is vain to ask, who is to judge between them ? for all reference to judges is excluded by the lippofition."
"S They ##  III. The case of Fellow-Citizens."
"They. must ac and judge for themselves; and where persuasion and artifice have failed, or are not likely to succeed, may employ force."
"The cafe of Fellow-Citizens."
"Ellow-citizens are conneded by civil and political conventions; "
"on which are founded a variety of adventitious obligations and rights."
"The obligations of fellow-citizens are either though of fellow-fubjeits, or of magistrate and subject."
"Fellow-fubjects have tipulated, to refer their differences to the judgement of courts, and to employ, in their defence, the power of the magistrate."
"This law admits of the following exceptions: I. Where the judgement of courts cannot be had, nor the power of the magistrate magiltrate interposed, to prevent an injury."
"2. Where the relief by civil suit cannot be adequate to the injury apprehended."
"Judges have tipulated to decide according to law and justice."
"Magistrates have Stipulated to defend the rights of the subjet."
"The.magiftrate, as acing in fence of the state, and of its subjecds, is intitled to repress crimes by restraints and punishments."
"He is diredced, in the application of rerraints and punifhiments, by the law of nature, and of convention."
"The law of nature, where there is no convention to the contrary, limits the power of the magistrate to what is neceflary to defend the innocent. All restraints or feverities employed beyond these limits, are unlawful."
"It is not always expedient in civil 2 society, society, to carry punifllment to the utmost rigour even of natural law."
"The laws of convention are va rious in different states; in some nations permitting arbitrary imprifonment, unlimited severities, and tortures, for every crime, at the diicretion of the magifirate."
"Powers of this fort are frequent ly usurpations on the part of the niagiftrate, not his rights."
"The rights of the subjec are in danger, when the magistrate either adopts a rule that is uhjuft, or when his decisions are irregular and arbitrary."
"S-  ##   The case of Nations."
"The cafe of Nations."
"AMong nations, the of the sovereign, or of those employ by the sovereign, is confidered as the adt of the nation."
"The of any private person is not the adt of the itate, except so far as, in his adtion, he is protedted or acknowledged by the ilate."
"A nation may receive an injury in the person of any of its members."
"A nation injured, may make re prifals on the persons and effeds of aly, or all, the fubjeds of the offending nation."
"Nations who maintain contro verted rights by artifice, or by force, are said to be in a state of war."
"War is just only on the fippo 3 fitio fition of injuries apprehended, ofsered, or perpetrated."
"Remonstrances and declarations, where-ever they can be safely employed, fiouald precede hostilities."
"The inmmediate objea of war is ,vicory."
"The laws of war previous to victory are, 1. Such hoflliities only are law ful as arc necessary to obtain the vicory."
"2. Where-ever it is safe to grant an enemy quarter; it is not lawful to refuse it."
"3. Breach of faith is exploded in the practice of nations at war, and would be ruinous to mankind."
"4. Any party may assist the in jured; but whoever assists the injurious, may be treated as an enemy."
"5. The person or effeds of an enemy, where-eve. found, may be seized, seized, if this can be done without detriment to any innocent party."
"6. The effeds of a friend going to an enemy, if they would enable him better to carry on the war, may be seized."
"7. Captives may be detained while the war continues, and until fatisfadion and security be obtained."
"Laws. of war after victory: i. The conqueror may avail him self of his power to preserve his rights, and obtain reparation of a wrong that has been done him."
"2. Success in war does not con ftitute a right,; but d1amages. and suffering incurred in war, give a title to indemnification."
"3. The conqueror may takefuach precautions, by disabling .his enemy, as give him a proper degree of security for the future."
"4. Nations do not acquire a property in the persons of their cap tives, ##   Conclusion of Jurisprudence."
"tives, 'as they do in effeas lawfully 'eized."
"Conclfion of YJurjiprtidence."
"Y the maxims of compulsory law, a person may, on every occasion, maintain his right: but from considerations of duty, he is, on many occasions, obliged to forego it."
"A person is more concerned to maintain and to exercise the assections of a beneficent mind, than he is to preserve his condition in any other refpe&."
"The conventional laws of society, in some inflances, as well as the law of humanity, admit, that the extreme necessity of one party may supersede the right of another."
"INS TI"
"I TI S"
"0 F"
"MORAL PHILOSOPHY."
"PART "
"Of Cafuifry."
"Of the Sanlaions of Duty in general A . LAW of duty is an expref sion of what a person ought to do from choice; and in doing which, he is said to have merit; or in doing the contrary, to have demerit."
"The first application of the fun damental law of morality is prolibitory, forbidding the commiifion of wrongs."
"The The second is positive, requiring every external effeEt of virtue, or of good-will to mankind."
"But adc of good-will or beneficence cannot be extorted by force."
"The object of compulsory law, is the preservation of parties exposcd to 'wrongs ; who, in defending themselves, may, even by force, oblige others to desist from injuries."
"The object of morality, in what relates to the duties of men, is the virtue of those who at."
"Compulfiqn would alienate the affeAions of men."
"Favours extorted by force would be robberies."
"Whoever employs deception or force, except in his: own defence, or in that of,,his fellow-creatures, commits an injury."
"The fancions of duty, are. those of religion, of public repute, and of conscience."
"Of the Sanction of Religion."
"REligion is :the sentiment of the mind relating to God."
"The fandion of religion is its tendency to influence mens condue."
"This tendency is of two kinds."
"The first is, to make men love wisdom and beneficence, as being the characderiftics of the supreme being, whom they adore; and to make them love their situations, and their duties, as being appointed by providence."
"The second is, to make them hope for rewards, and to fear punifhments."
"The religious doctrine of rewards and punishments, is a species of compulsory law, extending to all the the thoughts and inclinations, as well as the aaions, of men."
"This law, in all its extent, can be safely applied by every peribn only to himself."
"When magistrates think them selves armed with the fancion of religion, and intitled to restrain thoughts as well as ations, they attempt what is placed beyond the reach of their power."
"Superffition, or the abuse of reli gion, has been accompanied with very fatal effecs: With a misapplication of moral esteem, and the substitution of frivolous rites for moral duties; with cruel animofities of party, and a false apprehension of fancity in any ads of injustice and horror that proceed from a supposed religious zeal."
"The Sanizcions of Pitblicl Repuite."
"r-Hefe 'fantions include the in fluence of prevailing opinions and examples, together with'the commendations and censures men beltow on the actions that please or offend them."
"The' influence of prevailing opi nions and examples, arises from the social nature of man; and is one condition by which men are fitted to at in companies and obcieties."
"The tendency of this influence is good or evil, according to the nature of the opinions or examples that prevail."
"Nothing diftinguilhes men of a happy nature more, than that force with which they are fomeimcs able to correct false opinions, and with wiich which they are always able to refill their contagion."
"It is part in the social nature of man, to desire praise, and to shun blame."
"This puts it in the power of every person to reward ations agreeable, and.to punifli acions disagreeable, to himself: but as commendation and censure are frequently ill diftributed, it is a great weakness to be guided chiefly by such confiderations."
"Of the Sanlclonl of Cofcience."
"T His fantion is constituted by the fatisfacdion men have in doing right, and the ihame or remorse which arises from having done wrong."
"Men being desirous of personal excellencies, and averse to personal defecs, have satisfaction in actions that tend to the purposes of virtue."
"They feel remorse or fllame for actions that tend to the purposes of vice."
"The sentiments of conscience are frequently blended with those of superstition or custom,. and, like them, are subjec to error."
"It is the object of cafuiffry to pre vent, or to correct, fich errors, by pointing out the real tendencies of virtue and of vice in external actions."
"T 2 HAP."
"Of the tendelzcy of Virtue in External Afc7ions '."
"Of the diferent branches of Virtue.."
"IT has been observed, that a fool can neither come into company, nor go out of it, can neither fit, ftiaiid, nor walk, like a man of sense -. It may be said likewise, that a knave can do nothing like a man of probity."
"The law of external aciion is so essential to rlorality, that men very frecquently confine the whole of morality to this law."
"* Cicero officiis,  I."
"j- I1axTims of Bruyere."
"But But virtue is in reality a qualifi cation of the mind; allhough the term equivalent to viirue, in every language, implies all the required effecds and appearances of this qualification."
"Its conifituents are, Difpofitior, Skill, Application, and Force."
"Corresponding to the number of these constituents, virtue has been divided into four capital branches, called the Cardinal Virtues."
"These are, JIice or Probity, Prudence, Telmperance, and Fortitude JYtice, or Probity, is the regard ihown to the rights and happiness, of mankind."
"Those effects of juflice which nmere innocence implies, are requi * This, dilv:i is fo'natural, that it has al ways preler i : self when we have treated of the felicit) . cellence competent to man nature."
"T 3 red red under the fantion of compulfory law."
"Thole that constitute beneficence, are required under the fanfions of duty only."
"Prudelce is that discernment by which men diftinguiflh the value of ends, and the fitness of means to obtain them."
"Without this qualification, men are not fitted to with any measure of steadiness, confiflency, or good effed."
"Temperance is abstinence from in ferior pleasures, or amusements, that mislead our pursuits."
"No one can apply himself effec tually to any worthy purpose, who is liable to the interruption of mean pleaifres or amusements, that occupy an improper part of his time, that fifle his affecions, or impair his talents."
"The maxim of temperance is, That a person having once afcer tained ##   Of Duties referred to Probity or Justice."
"tained what his bell and happiest engagements are, fliould count every moment loft, that, without neceflity, is otherwise employed."
"Fortitude is the power.to with fland opposition, difficulty, and danger."
"All the good qualifications of men have a reference to some effect to be produced, and to some difficulty that is to be overcome. Hence difpositions and capacities of any fort are of no avail, without resolution, and force of mind."
"Of Duties referred to Probity or J7uJice."
"Uties referred to probity, are either private or public."
"THE private duties are, 1nzocence, Candozur, Piety, Frieen/Jip, Gra titude, fitude, Liberality, Charity, Civility, and Politeness."
"Innocence has been observed to be the object of compulsory law, and is the most indispensable charateriftic of probity."
"It implies, betide other effets,."
"Veracity and Faithfulness: the firftv opposed to deceit; the second, to perfidy."
"Candour is the just allowance gi ven to the pretensions or merits of other men, in opposition to prejudice, or to the suggestions of intereft. "
"Piety is the exercise of venera and love; first, towards God; next, towards those who by nature or choice are proper objecs of our respeCt and affedion."
"The expressions of piety to God are either fixed or arbitrary."
"Its fixed expressions are ats of beneficence, which concur with the providence providence of God in promoting the good of his creatures."
"Its arbitrary expressions are the different rites eftablified in different countries."
"Frienldfip is the beneficence of private parties, proceeding from motives of particular esteem and attachment."
"This includes the reciprocal du ties of parent and child, of husband and wife, and of all other private relations."
"The duties of the parent are, to maintain, to protect, to educate, his child; and, as far as he is able, to eflablifl and to secure his state or condition."
"The duties of the child are, obedience, deference, and gratitude."
"Many of the duties of husband and wife are conventional; and, as such, are matter of strict law; but the observance of them muff proceed from the heart."
"Consanguinity Consanguinity is a natural tie."
"The fortunes of men are commonly involved in those of their family; and relations are, on account of this connecion, among the first or nearest objecs of beneficence."
"Gratitude is the return made for favours received."
"Men of probity are neither un grateful, nor jealous of ingratitude in others."
"To require a base ation under the title of gratitude, is to forfeit the title of benefacor."
"The returns due from the grate ful, cannot be ascertained by any precise measure, nor can they be exaded by force."
"The intention of the benefacor is more to be regarded, than the value of his benefit."
"Were it established, that returns could be exaced by force, it would follow, that benefits could not be diifinguifhed from fees, nor the es fcct fees of gratitude from those of conftraint."
"The ingratitude of mankind is sometimes alledged as an excuse for neglecting good offices; but it is the business of a man to perform his own part, not to answer for the returns which others may, or may not, be disposed to make."
"Liberality is the free communi cation of what is ours, to oblige others."
"Charity is the free communication of what is ours, to relieve the diftressed."
"Undiftinguifing charity is pernicious in trading nations."
"It is a wife maxim in trading na tions, That no person able to earn his bread lhould be maintained gratuitously."
"But charity to those who have no bread, and are unable to earn any, is a duty of the strongest obligation, and and a very important. objec of public concern."
"Civility is a guarded behaviour in the ordinary intercourse of society, to avoid giving offence."
"Politeness is a behaviour intended to please, or to oblige."
"Civility and politeness are com prehended in the general character of good breeding."
"To be well:bred, a man must possess discernment, candour, and good will; at least a sincere aversion to offend. The effets of asfetation or design are easily diftinguifhed."
"Ill-bred men sometimes affect great politeness; but they ihock and mortify tliofe they pretend to oblige."
"Flattery, excessive or insincere profeflions, are vicious."
"The sentiments of the heart some times evaporate in words-; and great professions are, even without any intent on intention to deceive, put in place of benefits."
"THE public duties of probity are, Allegiance on the part of the subject, Protection on the part of the magiitrate, and Public. Spirit in all parties."
"The A:legianee of the subjet, is the fidelity, deference, and fubmifsion, he owes to the magifirate."
"The Protclion due from the ma giftrate, is the interposition of 1power to preserve the peace, and to fccure the subjcd in the possession of all his rights."
"The Public Spirit due from every member of any community is, i. A faithful discharge of any office intrusted for the public good."
"2. A continual preference of pu blic safety, and public good, to feparate interests, or partial confiderations."
"U "
"S  III."
"Duties referred to Prudence."
"IT is the object of prhdence, to dire& a man in what he is to wilh for himfeif, for his friend, for his country, and for mankiind."
"In this sense,. pudence is the guide or directory in every duty: but in its more limited acceptation, it refers more particularly to the duties which affect a man slate or condition."
"These duties may be referred to the following heads: Decency, Propriety, ModeJly, OEconormy, Decision, and Caution."
"Decency is the agreeableness of a person appearance and carriage to the sense and opinion of other men."
"The rules of decency are prohibitory, and forbid whatever would offend, offend, in nudity, filth, or obfcenity."
"Propriety is the suitableness of a person behaviour to his nature, his age, his flation, and 'rnk."
"There is in all the external effets of virtue, as being suitable to man nature, a propriety that may be confidered apart 'from tleir other recommendations. ."
"Diffidence, and a cautious ap proach to the manners and pretenlions of manhood, are proper to youth. ."
"Resolution is proper to manlood."
".Calnzefs and Deliberation to age..Dignity and' Refer;ie, without contemptuousness d6 petulance, are proper to men of high station."
"Deferencee, without servility, is proper to men of inferior rank."
"ModeJ is' a proper reserve on every fubjeEt of felf-eftimation."
"It forbids ostentation of what we 2 poflefs, possess, of what we have done, or of what we have suffered."
"OEconomzy is the proper adjustment of a person expence to.his fortune."
"Where fortune conrtitutes rank and power, ceconomy is required to preserve independence and freedom. , Senfiality and gaming are.advcrfe to good oeconomy.."
"Decision is a seasonable and refo lute choice of what a person ought to do."
"In some cafes, hesitation is equal to a total purpoe of, finaoftion.- Every opportunity is loft, and.every measure comes roo.late."
"Caution consists in:a proper atten to. all the. difficulties, that. may occur in what a person undertakes."
"The great objedts of caution are, not to engage in what is above our strength, nor to commit ourselves to persons that mislead or deceive."
"Duties referred to Temperance."
"1 Uties referred to temperance may be comprehended under the heads of Sobriety and Application."
"Sobriety is the moderate use of food, and of other animal gratifications."
"The general tendency of fenfia lity, is to beget habits of sloth, and neglec of affairs."
"The immodeiate use of intoxica ting drugs, or liquors, have these effects in a high degree. It reconciles men, otherwise of an adtive disposition, to inoccupation and idleness."
"The debauch of the sexes being sometimes joined with paflion, may occasion a continued or habitual negled of affairs."
"Application is the preference of business to amusement."
"Bflinefs is supposed to terminate in some serious purpose; amusement in mere pastime."
"D)ipation is a weakness of the mind, disabling it from chufing or prosecuting the occupations that would engage it most effeeually, and with mioft advantage."
"Duties referred to Fortitude."
"r HE duties referred to forti1 tude are, Patience, Intrepidity, and Col.ancy."
"Patience is the calm and deliberate suffering of any trouble or pain that occurs in human life."
"Peeviflhnefs, the reverse of pa tience, tends to realize imaginary evils, and to increase what is real."
"Intrepidity is, firmness, and pre fence ##   Uses of Casuistry."
"fence of mind, in the midst of dangers."
"Intrepidity is frequently the greateft security in danger ."
"ColJIancp is perseverance in all pursuits or engagements properly chosen."
"The wavering are seldom capable of executing any purpose."
"rUes of Cafiifliy."
"T HE rules of cafuiflry cannot supersede the judgement and good disposition of a virtuous mind."
"Attempts to give casuistry this consequence, have proceeded from superstition, and tended to confirm the most slavish superstition, by multiplying external observances, that mislead the attention, from qualities qualities of the heart, to matters of form."
"Good disposition is necessary to the happiness of mankind; and dutiful condut naturally results from good disposition."
"It is however of moment to anti cipate, in general rules, the external effecs of virtue."
"These rules render the defcrip of virtue itself more particular, and more complete. Being supported by the sanCtions of religion, and of public repute, the rules of duty may procure to society the benefit of useful adions, even where they do not procure to the person adting the happiness of a virtuous heart."
"Of Merit and Demecrit."
"A Ctions are asid to have merit or demerit, according to the na ture and degree of the moral quality they express."
"Adtions that express good-will to mankind in the highest degree, have the highest merit."
"Hence beneficent actions per formed in the face of dangers, difficulties, and personal sufferings, are allowed to have the liigheft merit."
"Actions that express malice, and give examples of mischiefs done without inducement or provocation, are of the highest demerit."
"We express our sense of demerit in the different degrees of crimes, offences, and faults."
"A crime is an injury done from malice, jealousy, revenge, avarice, or some other passion that sets mankind at variance."
"An offence is a wrong done in the gratification of some passion in its own nature consistent with amity."
"A fault is a wrong done from inattention or ignorance."
"Faults of inattention are culpa ble in proportion to the moment and importance of the subjet."
"Faults of ignorance are more or less culpable, as the defea of knowledge argues neglec and inattention."
"It is a general maxim, That ig norance of the fact may be admitted as a plea of innocence; but not ignorance of the law."
"Ignorance of natural law, or of duty, would be one of the greatest defecs of a rational nature."
"INSTI"
"INSTITUTES"
"O F"
"MORAL PHILOSOPHY."
"P A "
"Of Politics."
"Introduction."
"T appears from the history of mankind, that men have always aced in troops and companies; "
"that they have apprehended a good of the community, as well as of the individual; that while they practife arts, each for his own prefervation, they institute political forms, and and unite their forces, for common safety."
"It may be proved, that most of the opinions, habits, and pursuits, of men, reiilt from the state of their society; that men are happy in proportion as they love mankind; that their rights and their duties are relative to each other; and, therefore, that their most important concerns are to be found in their mutual relations, and in the state of their communities."
"A nation is any independent company or society of men afting under a common direction."
"The united force of numbers, and the diredtion under which they adt, is termed the flare."
"Nations are happy who are composed of happy men."
"Nations are wretched who are composed of unhappy men."
"Nations may be confidered in re fpeA"
"'sped to their resources, or in refped to their institutions."
"National resources, are the objets of public ceconomy."
"National institutions are the objects of political law."
"X "
"Of public OEcotnomy."
"f National RefSorces in general."
"Ational resources include every .LN article that tends to confti,tute the strength of a nation, or that may be employed for its prefervation, Such articles may be referred to three principal heads; People, Wealth, and Revenue."
"Of Populolfnes."
"r HE value of numbers is pro portioned to their union and character."
"Numbers without union or virtue, do not constitute strength."
"A people, in consequence of their numbers, sometimes become disunited and corrupted."
"If they inhabit a large and exten five territory, they are disunited, and lose fight of their community."
"A few ingrofs the management of public affairs, and with-hold from the many every subjea of public zeal, or political occupation. The greater part are thrown into a state of languor and obscurity, and fidfer themselves to be governed at difcretion."
"Human nature, in states of a 2 moderate moderate extent, has prospered and excelled; but in fiates overgrown, has generally declined and degenerated."
"If great numbers be crouded in to narrow diftrias, or cities, they are exposed to corruption; become profligate, licentious, seditious, and incapable of public affedtions."
"The union of a people depends on the arrangements or dispositions by which their forces may be combined for the service of the slate."
"The union of the people in repu blics, arises more from their assection to the community, than from the power eftabliftfed to enforce their services."
"In monarchies, it arises from the love of personal dignities, to which individuals aspire in serving the state."
"In despotism, it arises entirely from the power that is prepared to enforce the services of the people."
"The The charadcer of a people, con fidered as a national resource, is to be estimated from their fitness to reap, and to preserve, or to improve, the advantages of their conititution, and to support their country in pursuit of its objects."
"Different characers are required under different forms of government."
"Under republics of every fort, high degrees of probity are required; under monarchy, less; and under despotism, least of all."
"The principal objecs in every state, next to the political conftituton, are war or commerce."
"In warlike nations, men are to be estimated by their hardiness, courage, and discipline."
"In commercial nations, men are to be estimated by their industry, and by their fiill in profitable arts."
"Commercial nations may value acceflions of art, as the surest means 3 of ##  III. Of Riches or Wealth."
"of gaining accessions of people; for in circumstances otherwise favourable, population keeps pace with the arts, and means of subsistence."
"Inlitutions that, by securing property, and by preventing oppression, encourage the Settlement of families, ,and facilitate the rearing of children, are the most favourable to population."
"Of Riches or Wlealth."
"EN are supposed rich in pofI fessing the means of defence, subsistence, accommodation, andornament."
"Wealth is a national resource, because it may be employed in maintaining ufefil or serviceable men, and in supplying the exigencies of tate."
"The constituents of wealth may be be confidered in refpeet to their value, and in refpec to their price."
"As the use of wealth is to main tain and accommodate men, articles or commodities are valuable in proportion to the numbers they maintain and accommodate."
"The means of subsistence are neceffary."
"The means of accommodation which contribute to the prefervatioh of men, and to the increase of theii vigour and health, are next in value to the necessaries of life."
"But articles of mere ornament are of no value at all."
"The luxury of a people is to be estimated from their consumption of mere ornaments."
"The price of a commodity is mea fured by the quantity of any other commodity that is commonly, or occasionally, given in exchange for it."
"Price is most commonly expressed, and paid, in money."
"Hence Hence money is confidered as the equivalent of all commodities, and the constituent of wealth."
"But commodities are no less the equivalents of money; and abundance in any one species, whether of money or other commodity, will buy a participation in the whole."
"The price of commodities flutu ate; and keep pace with the quantity of money in circulation, with the scarcity of the commodity, with the demand, and with the riches of those who consume it."
"Articles of ornament are frequently of the greatest price."
"Commodities that are the work of labour, time, and ikill, cannot continue to be fold for less than will maintain the workman, and pay the whole of his advance."
"As the value of commodities is measured by the numbers they may maintain, so the cost of a commo dity dity may be estimated by the ntimbers and time employed in producing it."
"The wealth of any country is proportioned to its natural advantages, to the industry and 'fill ds its inhabitants, and to the profit ds its trade."
"Natural advantages are, good cli mate, fertile foil, and useful materials."
"Industry and skill coinprehend all ufeftil arts, agriculture, a manufature, in all their branches."
"The profit of trade is the profit either of the consumer, of the producer, of the merchant; or of the slate."
"The profit of the cbnfuimer con sifts in being supplied with necessary or useful commodities; The profit of the producer, in the vent of superfluities; The profit of the merchant, in the balance remaining, after he has paid colt and expences; The The profit of the Rate, in the in crease of wealth, or the accumulation of commodities in the possession of its members."
"Commerce, by accommodating all parties with what they want in exchange for what they can spare, enables and encourages them to increase their produce."
"Commerce respecting the state, is either internal or foreign."
"Internal commerce is, the ex change of commodities between fubjeds of the fame state."
"Foreign commerce is the exchange of commodities between fubjeas of different Rates."
"In states of considerable extent, the internal commerce is of more consequence than the foreign commerce."
"The importance of foreign com merce, diminishes as the tate extends."
"Commerce between nations, may be be confidered in refpet to the balance of price, or the balance of value."
"The balance of price commonly stands for the difference fiippofed to remain due by one nation to another, after appretiating the whole goods that have passed in exchange between them."
"The balance of value is the dif ference of real value in the whole goods that have passed in exchange."
"The profits of commerce are termined by the balance of value, not by the balance of price."
"The nation that has the balance of price against it, may have the balance of value in its favour. It may have received the means of improving its land, and of extending its trade,  "
"The nation that owes the balance of price, will be obliged to part with its money, or some other com modity, modity,. in order to pay. that balance,.."
"A trade in which a balance of priceis. incurred, cannot be continued, unless. there be a continual."
"'supply of money,, or other commodcty, bywhich the balance.may be The produce of landis! a, conti nual, and may, be made. an increasing supply., The produce of. mines, or. the importation of.nmoey, may be.continual.."
"Nations who carry on any.part of their internal trade by credit and. bills, need proportionally less supplies of money."
"The..ufe of bills..in circulation tends to extend credit."
"Credit is useful or pernicious,."
"according to the use that is made of it."
"It is useful to an industrious and thriving people. It It is pernicious to the spendthrift and the prodigal."
"The expence of remitting money from one country to another, assets the exchange of their coins."
"That nation which has occasion to remit most money, must pay this expence, and is said to have the exchange against it."
"But as money may be remitted to make profit, it does not .follow from the state of exchange, that a nation is either gainer or loser by trade."
"The profits of trade are either mutual or partial."
"They are mutual so far as com merce accommodates all parties with what they want, in exchange for what they can spare; and enables each to improve his peculiar materials, and to pursue his peculiar art; and procures to the merchant and carrier an adequate reward for their trouble."
"Y In In commerce mutually beneficial, that party gains most who receives the more useful commodity; and who receives the produce of much land, time, and labour, for the produce of less; and who, in conduting his trade, is employed in the more healthful and least corrupting occupations."
"The profit of trade is partial, when things of value are exchanged for things of no value."
"The following are laws of com merce founded in the preceding considerations."
"i. That where profits are mu tual, commerce should not be reItrained by either party."
"3. That a trade which terminates in giving the means of accommodation and subsistence in exchange for mere ornaments, may be rained by the losing party."
"3. That monopolies are pernicious to commerce."
"4. That ##   Of Revenue."
"4. That the state of a nation wealth is not to be estimatcd from the slate of its coffers, granaries, or wrarehoufes, at any particular time; but from the fertility of its lands, from the numbers, - frugality, induftry, and skill, of its people."
"Of Revenllc."
"T Hat part of national wealth which is allotted for purposes of state, is the public revenue."
"The public revenue may arise from demesne and unappropriated fubjeds, -or from taxes."
"The first is the earliest species of revenue in rude nations; and is suited to their indolence, and ignorance of lucrative arts."
"The second is better suited to the indufrty and skill of commercial nations."
"Y It It is not the interest of commer cial nations, that any fubjeat should remain unappropriated. While a fabje& remains unappropriated, it is commonly neglected."
"Revenue arising from taxation, may increase together with the numbers, wealth, and frugality, of the people."
"In judging of the absolute or comparative expediency of different taxes, the following axioms may be admitted."
"1, That the exigencies of the Rate must be provided for at any hazard or expence to the fubje&."
"2. That in levying taxes, no subjea be unnecessarily burdened."
"3. That the security of the sub jed, or that of his property, be not impaired."
"* 4. That no useful branch of trade be unnecessarily burdened."
"5. That taxes leaft'felt. as grievances be preferred."
"6. That 6. That -the leat - burdensome method of collecing taxes be chofen."
"N.  The method of farm ap pears, from experience, to be more burdensome than that of revenueoffice."
"Taxes may be referred to four general heads: Capitation, AfTeffinent, Customs, and Excise."
"Capitation is a tax on the person, and falling equally on the poor and the rich.'"
"Capitation may be oppressive to the poor, without levying from the rich what they are able to furnifi to the state."
"Capitation is. a symptom of dcfpotic and oppressive government..."
"Affefmient is a tax on riches, and is proportioned to the estate affeflcd."
"Assessments may fall equitably, when property is unequally difiributed, 3 Land Land-eftate being most easily as certained and valued, is the propereft subjet of affeflment."
"The stock of the merchant is fluduating; and 'attempts to afcertain it might give occasion to frauds, or improperly disclose the secrets of trade."
"Customs are taxes imposed on goods in commerce, and advanced by the merchant."
"Customs imposed on the necelfa ries of life, are a tax on the poor, and have the effecs of capitation."
"Customs imposed on: matters of ornament, or costly accommodation, are a tax on the prodigal, or the rich."
"Such taxes are most agreeable to humanity and justice.: Customs are an incumbrance on trade, and may amount to a prohibition of particular articles."
"Customs, though advanced by the merchant, fall on the consumer; "
"but but being involved in the price of the commodity, are not commonly felt as a tax."
"As the merchant muff not only be reimbursed, but have profit on all his advance, it follows, that the earlier in trade cuitoms are paid for any commodity, the heavier they muff fall on the consumer."
"Excise is a tax on commodities in ife, and paid by the consumer."
"Excise may be rendered a tax, either on the rich or the poor feparately, or on both proportionally."
"Excise is less burdensome to the consumer, than an equivalent raifed in customs; but is more likely to be felt as a grievance, and to create more animosity in the subjea against the state."
"C A  III."
"Of Political Law -."
"Of this Law in gelneral."
"W 7Here nations have occurred in the preceding parts of this system, they have been confidercd only in refpea to the history of their eftabliflments, or in refpe& to the foundations of civil rights, and of civil obligations: In this place they are to be confidered in refpedt to what is expedient in political efcablifhments, or civil conventions."
"Political law in any particular community, is the fiatute, custom, * See Inftruaions of the Empress of Ruflfa."
"L'Efprit Loix, torn. i."
"or or other convention, on which the institutions of that community are founded."
"Political law of nature, is that branch of moral law which expresses what is beneficial in the civil inftitutions of men."
"The following are fundamental laws of nature relating to political inititutions."
"i. That political institutions are beneficial, in proportion as they contribute to the safety and happiness. of the people."
"2. That political inflitutions pro cure the safety of the people, in proportion as they are adapted to the circumstances and charater of the people."
"3. That the distribution of office is beneficial, in proportion as it is adapted to the constitution."
"4. That political establishments are the most important articles in the external condition of men."
"Of the Safety of the People."
"Y the people is to be underfood, not any separate clais, but all the members of the community, the magistrate as well as the subje "
"The safety of the people consists in the secure enjoyment of their rights."
"- That the rights of men may be secure, -it is necessary, either that there {hould be no one to invade, or that there fiould be a sufficient power to defend."
"The first is not to be expeted in human affairs; the second is the principal object of political eftablifhments."
"It has been the object, or the for tune, of some communities, to pofl fess members who might be intrusted with any powers."
"At It has been the object of other communities, to grant such powers only as might be intrusted with any men."
"These several cafes, real or sup posed, may be intitled, The government of Innocence, of Virtue, and of Law."
"Under the goverment of inno cence, or of virtue, matters of form are easily adjusted."
"Under the government of law, it is necessary, that the rights and obligations of men flould be clearly expressed."
"This is the objed of conventional law."
"In every convention is supposed the consent of parties given in person, or by others properly authorifed."
"The sovereign is authorised to enaf laws."
"Laws relate to the constitution, to civil rights, or to crimes."
"The The most perfect laws relating to the constitution, are such as confer on the magistrate power to restrain crimes, and to defend the community; but under limitations fufficient to prevent the abuse of this power."
"The most perfet laws relating to civil rights, are such as effecually secure every person in his state."
"It is the maxim of civil law, That every person should remain in his possession, until a better title be undoubtedly proved."
"Laws relating to crimes, pre scribe the form of trials, and point out the overt ads for which certain punishments are appointed."
"The following are maxims of natural law relating to prosecutions."
"I. That every person is to be deemed innocent until he is proved to be guilty."
"2. That no one thall be obliged to give give evidence that may asset him iclf."
"3. That no one shall be tortured into confessions or discoveries of any fort."
"4. That no one shall be punished, unless he shall have committed some action in itself pernicious, or fpecially declared by the law to be criminal."
"5. That it is better the guilty escape, than that the innocent fussier, 6. That the objec of punifliment be to corred the guilty, 'and to deter others."
"7. That the punifliment be not such as would fliock humanity, or disorder ibciety lmore than the crime."
"To secure legal rights, it is necef fary that the laws should be fridly interpreted and applied."
"Under the government of law, discretionary powers are not safely intrusted, except to judges named by by the parties; or to juries purged by the challenge of parties, and interested equally to protec the innocent and to punifl the guilty."
"In the security of rights consists civil and political liberty."
"Liberty is opposed to injustice, not to restraint; for liberty cannot subsist without the supposition of every just restraint."
"Natural liberty is not impaired, as sometimes fippofed, by political institutions; but owes its existence to political inititutions, and is impaired only -by usurpations and 'wrongs."
"The laws of different communi ties'beftow unequal privileges on their members; but liberty consists the secure pofeffion of what the law bestows."
"Those are the most salutary laws which distribute the benefits and the burdens of civil society in the most equitable manner to all its members."
"Of the Ilappizcfs of a People."
" HE happiness of a peoplecon fills in the love of their coun try, and in that distribution of rank and station which is best suited to their merits and capacities."
"Men who have least private in terest, are best disposed to love their country."
"Men who have the fewest adven titious distinctions, of birth or fortune, are most likely to be clafled according to their merits, to be employed suitably to their abilities, and to find the flations in which they are most likely to cultivate their talents, and their virtues."
"That a community may be loved in the highest degree, its members flould be relieved of peribnal an 2 xieties, ##   Of the Fitness of the Institution to the People."
"xieties, and occupied in what relates to the public."
"They fiould be made to confider the state as the equal parent of all, distributing equal benefits, and requiring equal services."
"Where-ever the state confines po litical consideration to a particular order, who sacrifice the rights of others to their own interest or fancyi it cannot be loved."
"The reason and the heart of man are best cultivated in arduous situations, and in the exercise of public duties... ."
"f the FitiLjfs of the-lnftitztionl to the People."
"EN of speculation have in vain endeavoured to fix a mo del of government equally adapted to all mankind."
"One One people is unfit to govern, or to be governed, in the fame manner with another."
"Nations differ in refpec to charadter, and to circumstances."
"The character of a people refers to their degree of virtue, or of other principle, on which the state may rely for the discharge of social and political duties."
"The circumitances of a people are determined chiefly by their cafual subordination, and by the extent of their country."
"Casual subordination is founded in diftintions, original or adventitious."
"Original diftindions are, the dil ferences of capacity, disposition, and force."
"Adventitious diftindions arise from fortune and birth."
"Questions relating to the proprie ty of any political inflitution, can be solved only hypothetically."
"Z 3 Such Such questions may be put on four different suppositions."
"FIRST SUPPOSITION."
"The supposition of a people per fedtly virtuous, distinguished from each other only by their original differences, and forming states of finall extent."
"Such a people are fitted to govern themselves."
"They may stipulate to be govern by the majority of their own number, or occasionally by single men; but to oblige such men by force to resign the sense of their own minds, and to follow that of another, were, by the supposition, to substitute vice for virtue."
"Being perfectly virtuous, every one will be willing to bear his {hare of the public burdens, and will receive, in his turn, that confidence and and trust for which he is by his capacity and experience qualified."
"They have no adventitious dif tinctions to mar the effed of their personal qualities."
"Being of finall extent, the whole may be occasionally or periodically assembled."
"They need no precaution against the commiflion of crimes, or the abuses of power."
"The sole objec of government is, to assemble, and to direc their force for national purposes."
"This, however, is a mere fuppo lition; for no entire nation was ever known to be perfectly virtuous."
"A people in whom the virtuous and the vicious are mixed; who admit adventitious distinctions in different different degrees, and form states of various extent."
"This is not mere supposition, it is fae, and the most general description of mankind."
"If there be no great reparation or diftintion of rank and condition; "
"If virtue greatly prevail over vice; "
"If the state be of small extent; Such a people are fit for democracy."
"Their numbers admit of being assembled in collecive bodies."
"Their virtues and their inftitu tions may prevent crimes, and abuses of power."
"They may reap the advantages of democracy, in a manner that will more than compensate its inconveniencies."
"If such a people be separated into different orders or classes, they are are fitted to aristocracy, mixed republic, or mixed monarchy."
"If in two clafTes, one is diffin glifhed from the other by a confiderable superiority, 'they are fit for aristocracy."
"Commercial nations of a finall extent are, in the result of diftinctions that arise from the practice of arts, and the unequal diftributionr of property, best fitted to ariftocratical government, or to mixed republic."
"The inferior class, if not greatly debated or corrupted, may have a thare in the government, either by a negative on the' determinations of the aristocracy, or by being intrusted,_ not with' an adive part in the government,' ,but only with the choice of those who are to for them."
"The fame supposition applied'to states of a greater extent, and to a people among whom a greater va riety riety of rank is eftabliffied, will justify the preference of mixed monarchy."
"It were happy for mankind, if, together with changes of circumstances, they could always make suitable changes in government."
"Where changes of circumstance are gradual, corresponding changes of government take place; but fudden innovations of any fort, precipitate men into situations in which they are not qualified to at."
"THI  SUPPOSITIO "
":A people on whose vanity, and sense of personal importance, rather than virtue, the .Rate must rely for,. the discharge of the social .and political duties; a people amongst whom a continual adventitious subordination takes place, without any example, or any desire, of equality."
"Such Such a people are not fit to govern themselves."
"Their subordination muff terminate in a prince or monarch."
"They require monarchy as a bond of union, and as a source of honour."
"While every one attends to what concerns himself, the monarch, for the preservation of his own person and dignities, muff attend to the public safety, and public order."
"The Subordinate ranks will court his favour, and consult their own dignity, by actions, either splendid in themselves, or useful to the slate, whilst they are Serviceable to the king."
"The members of the state are drawnh together, and moved in a body, not by their love to the community, or to mankind, but by their veneration for their common fuperior, and by their expectations from their their common source of preferment and honour."
"The maxims of honour are not susceptible of sudden changes; and the dignities of family, though for the most part conferred by the prince, are hereditary, and therefore independent."
"Both these circumstances .oblige the prince ,to govern according to fixed and determinate laws."
"FOURTH SUPPOSITION."
"A people perfeUtly vicious, with out sense of honour, .or hereditary distinCtions."
"Such a people must be refrained by force. : Every constitution, even that which confides most in the virtue of the subjed, must employ force to repress crimes."
"If the whole people be.inclined to commit crimes, and be refirain ed only by fear, the profped of prompt and terrifying puniflhments must be continually placed in their view."
"This supposition may be employed as an apology for defpotifin."
"Where every person is disposed to commit crimes, the fewer that have power, so much the better."
"When all power is committed to one person, even supposing himself to be a criminal, it is his interest, for the most part, to restrain the crimes of others."
"His severities, or cruelties, by the supposition, can no where affli& the innocent."
"His dominions, though, like a prison, committed to the keeping of vile and merciless men, is nevertheless the only fit place to receive those. who cannot be otherwise reitrained fiom injuflice."
"But this cafe, like that which was firfl fiated, of a people pcrfed A a ly ly virtuous, is a mere supposition, and never was realised in the characer of any people."
"Men are generally as far from the extreme of perfel vice, as they are from that of perfect virtue."
"They who contend, that defpo-, tical government is in fadc the best for mankind, proceed upon four suppositions, all equally violent and false."
"i. That all men would commit crimes if they durst."
"2. That crimes cannot be restrained without discretionary powers."
"3. That a person to whom dif cretionary powers are committed, will employ them to repress the crimes of others, but not to commit crimes of his own."
"4. That the sole object of govern -ment is, to controul the actions, never to cultivate the nature or form the charaters of men."
"These These suppositions are contrary to reason and to experience."
"The fad is, that the manners of men are various; and that the fame penal laws, and forms ofjufiice, by which a people may be successfully governed in a virtuous age, will not always be fhfficient to restrain them in ages corrupted."
"When the criminal paflions in crease in violence and boldness, it may be necessary to increase the measure of punifllments."
"When crimes:multiply, and cri minals are 'enabled, to employ. the forms of law aslthe Subterfuges of iniquity, it may be necessary to alter such defective forms: but it nover can be neceflary to deprive the innocent of all the defences of reason and justice; for the fame reason and justice which protec the innocent, may condemn the guilty."
"In times of occasional tumult, popular frenzy, or rebellion, it may Aa 2 be be necessary to treat those who commit such crimes, not as subjeas amenable to the laws, but as enemies, who, by invading the public peace, have deprived every citizen of his safety, and who therefore cannot have the benefit of laws until the public has recovered its security."
"Such domestic disorders, like so reign wars, render discretionary power occasionally necefary: but this neceflity is only temporary."
"For the most part, even in cor rupte ftates, it.is as much the interest of the fubjeac as of the magifirate, to keep. the peace, and to reprefs-crimes."
"Continual defpotifin is never a necessary nor an useful expedient; it is an usurpation, and a national misfortune."
"It tends to produce that extremity of vice to which it is fippofed to. be adapted as a remedy."
"The ##   Of the Distribution of Office fitted to the Constitution."
"The objed of defpotical govern ment, is not to secure the subjed in the possession of his rights, but to make him a property; not to suppress vice, but to suppress the higheft and noblest virtues of the heart, public spirit, independence, and courage."
"f the Djitribultion of Office fSted to the Coiflitution."
"N free governments of every denomination, where law is ne ceffary, the law must be enacted, interpreted, and executed. Hence the offices or functions of state are, legislation, jurifdicion; and execution."
"Legislation, under every confti tution of government, is the immediate of the sovereign power; "
"A a 3 and and cannot be delegated without transferring the sovereignty."
";This rule does not exclude the concurrence of councils, nor the observance of forms suited to the constitution."
"Under democracies, the legifla is exercised by the collective body; but it is not necessary that the collecive body fliould deliberate, as well as decide."
"The collective body may name ienates, or feled councils, to prepare queflions of legislation."
"They may vary the form of col ledcing the votes, or of promulgating the law."
"They may fix, at discretion, what numbers are required to conffitute a legal assembly, and what proportion of those present will decide any question in the affirmative."
"Under ariftocracies, the collective body of those who govern, whether by by elective or hereditary title, must exercise the legislature."
"They may at, notwitiftanding, under the fame forms and limitations that have been mentioned as compatible with the sovereignty of the whole people."
"Under monarchy, the legislature is excrcifed by the king."
"The king stands in need of coun cils; and his legislative power may be qualified by the forms of regiftration, or promulgation, required to give the force of law to his edidts."
"In mixed government of any fort, the legislature must be excrcifid by the concurrence of all the collateral powers."
"If a law could be enated with out the concurrence of any single power, that power might be suppressed by the others."
".:If the supposed collateral powers were to assemble, and decide que fIions stions of legislation by the majority, any way defined, the government would cease to be mixed."
"The sovereignty of collateral powers is compatible with a variety of forms relating to the proposing and the enacting of laws."
"Sovereigns of any denomination, who have suffered courts of justice to follow custom as a rule of decision, are to be understood as having eftablifled that custom into law."
"Jurifdidion, or the office of judge, is, to interpret the law, and to apply it in particular cafes."
"This office, under every confti tution, flould be disjoined from that of legislation."
"The sovereign, being accustomed to will, or to command, cannot submit merely to interprets or to follow a rule."
"Particular cafes are modified by circumfiances that create prejudice, or excicC pafiion."
"The The sovereign, having no fipe rior, may follow prejudice or passion at discretion."
"The sovereign having enacted the law, would, under the influence of special motives, make free to difpenfe with it."
"Popular or numerous assemblies would be swayed by fadtion."
"Princes would be swayed by their passions, and by solicitation."
"Two qiueftions may be put relating to judicature: I. Who ought to judge ?"
"2. Of what. numbers; are courts of juifice bes composed ?"
"i. Where-ever ws are greatly multiplied, the knowlcdge of law becomes a profession."
"- No judgement, can be safely gin, ven without' the counsel of those who are knowing in the law."
"The office for which counsel is necessary, is that of pointing out the the law, and the whole law, in any particular cafe, Persons who are not lawyers by profession, may interpret and apply a law which is pointed out to them; in the manner of the judges at Rome, and of the juries in Great Britain."
"Beside the counsel employed by parties, the public may employ counsel for justice and law. .This is the nature of official judges in Great Britain."
"Jurifdidion committed entirely to official judges,';: attended with the following iinconveniencies."
"The official judge being a con tinual magistrate, may entertain the prejudices of the magistrate against the subject , The peculiar prejudices and par tialities of the official judge, if he has any, may be known."
"They who enjoy his favour, are tempted to trespass in hopes of im punity, punity, or to commence vexatious suits in hopes of success."
"They who apprehend his difplea sure, do not feel themselves secure even in possession of innocence."
"These inconveniencies are remo ved, in a great measure, by the eftabliflhment :of judicatures in the Roman form, or in that of juries."
"The juryman is equally interested to protec the innocent, and to condemn the guilty."
"Juries may therefore be intrusted with some measures of discretionary power, to mitigate the rigours of law, or to supply its defe "
"Where a people are divided into a number of separate orders and classes, as those of Patrician, Equeftrian, and Plebeian, Lords and Commons, the rights of one order are not safely intrusted to the judgement of another; and it would be expedient, that every party were judged by his peers."
"2. Under 2. Under popular or republican governments of any fort, courts of jultice are best composed of few members."
"Courts cornpofed of many mem bers carry popular fac'ion and party into the judgement-feat. The individual hopes to screen himself even in judging falsely, under the authority and credit of the whole body."
"No one is accountable; no one is conspicuous; all are tempted to humour their party, and to judge at discretion."
"Under moinarchy, courts of juftice are belt composed of many."
"Here the influence of the crown is more to be dreaded, than the saction of the people."
"This influence can less overawe or corrupt numerous bodies, than single men, or a few."
"Numerous bodies, in their deli berations, admit of the zeal and ar:;.5 dour dour that animate popular alPmblies; and even whilst they do not judge more impartially than single men would do, they judge with more independence."
"The spirit of faction, that in re public is the greatest corruption, in monarchy tends to prevent a greater, servility to those in power."
"The office of the executive is, to apply the force of the state for national purposes: i. To give effect to the laws, 2. To defend the community againft foreign enemies."
"Occasions on which the executive must be exerted, are either continual or casual; and in cafe of danger from abroad, require secrecy and dispatch."
"The sovereign in republican go vernments, consisting of the whole people, or of numerous bodies, cannot exercise the executive."
"B Such Such bodies cannot be continual ly aflembled, nor ready to afiemble at all times."
"The resolutions of the executive require more secrecy and dispatch than can be had in any numerous or popular aflemblies."
"Affairs that come in course, or that admit of delay, may be committed to senates, or to fele councils. Such are the mnanagement of public revenue, negotiations, and treaties."
"Affairs that may come fortui toufly, and by fuirprife, that will not admit of delay, must be corn* mitted to single men; as to the ma gifirate, or offcer who has the keeping of the peace, and the leading of armies."
"Under monarchy, whether pure or mixed, the king is capable of every branch of the executive."
"But he ought to delegate what ever ever tends to render his power terrible or odious; "
"To reserve what renders it an objet of reIpecd or alieclion."
"The abuses of the executive power are variously relrained under diffrent conlitui-ions."
"In rcpublics, they are refriained by the liort dur: of ilicc in tlhe person of any inlividual, by tlhe vigilance and emulation of his competitors, if not by his own virtue and moderation."
"Those were the happiest repu blics, who educated virtuous citizens, to whom any powers might be safely intrusted."
"Some of the most important powers, both in Sparta and at Rome, were discretionary."
"In monarchy, the abuses of the executive are restrained by the forms of law, and by the privileges of subordinate ranks."
"In all constitutions, they may be b 2 restrained ##   The Importance of Political Institutions."
"refrained by having magistrates and ministers accountable, By the integrity of those who contitute the force committed to irecion of the executive."
"When the armed force is part of the people, it is their interelf, as well as their duty, to refrain from abuse."
"he Importance of Political .lfiitu tiolss."
" political' infitutions, rights   are preserved or invaded, men are placed in the relation of equals or of maftenri:al;p4flave, their crimes are autt4oried-, or reprefied, and ,their manners improved or corrupted."
"Political institutions tend to aug ment the good or the evil with -which they are fraught."
"Human Human affairs,' in some instances, tend to improvement; iii others, to corruption."
"The inftitutioris of 'ien,'in'one cafe, promote; tlieiir'imp-rovemelit; in the other, haften their corruption."
"Inflitutions that preserve equali ty, that engage the minds of citizens in public duties, that teach them to estimate rank by the measure of personal qualities, tend to preserve and to cultivate virtue."
"On :the contrary, institutions by which men are stripped of their rights, or by which they are made to hold their possessions at difcretion, under which:they are fuppofed governable only by force, and by tIe fear of' puniiihent, tend to beget tyranny and- insolence in'"
"the sovereign,' servility' and vileness in the subjed; to cover every vijage with paleness *, and.ito fill * Vid. Efprit Loix,  6,  ', ;: ."
"every every heart with jealousy or dejection."
"The greatest and most extensive benefit which ingle men can bestow, is the eftablillhment or prefervation of wife institutions."
"The greateR injury that wickled men can commit, is the overthrow or corruption of such inflitutions."
"THE END."
"Books printed for A. KINCAID"
"&  CREECH, and JOHN"
"BE L, Edinburgh."
"An Essay on the History of Civil Society. By Adam Ferguson, L. "
"Profefibr of Moral Philofbphy in the university of Edinburgh. Edit. 4. 8vo."
"6s."
"The iame book elegantly printed in 4t0. 15s."
"An Inquiry into the Human Mind, on the principles of Common Sense."
"By Dr Reid. Edit. 3.' 8vo. 5s."
"An Appeal to Common Scnfe in be half of Religion. By Dr Oswald."
"2 vols. Svo. Io "
"A Diflertation on Miracles: con taining, An examination of the principles advanced by David Hume, Efq; Py Dr Campbell, Edit. 2. Izmo."
"3S."
"An Efhay on the Nature and Im mutability of Truth, in opposition to Sophiflry and Scepticifin. By Dr Beattie. Edit. 4. 8vo. 6s."
"1k1
 ]i 1 he Minstrel; or, The Progress of Genius, a poem. By the fame author. 4to. Is. 6 

Essays on several fubjedts. By David Hume, Efq; 2 vols. 8vo. i2 

Elements of Criticifin, 2 vols. 8vo.
By Lord Kames. Edit. 4. 2 

An Introduction to the Art of Thinking. By the fame author. Edit. 2. 3 

Essays on British Antiquities. By the fame author. I2mo. 2  6 

Heads of Letures on Rhetoric and the Belles Lettres. By Dr Blair.

The Theory of Moral Sentiments.

To which is added a Dissertation on the Origin of Language. By Dr Smith. 6 

Fables: By Dr Wilkie. Embellifled with beautiful cuts. 4 

An Eflay on the Englifl Conftitution. By Dr Gilbert Stuart. 5 

An Essay on Taste. By Dr Gerard. I2mo. 3 

A Dissertation on the Evidences of Christianity. By the fame author.
6s.
"
