                            NUMB. XV.
                                
                  Lamentations, Chap. 2. v. 19.
			
			Arise, cry out in the Night: in the beginning
          of the Watches, pour out thine Heart like
          Water, before the Face of the Lord: lift up thy
          Hands towards him, for the Life of thy Young
          Children that faint for Hungar, in the Top of
          every Street.
			 
I Do remember to have Read an Account, that an Ode which Pindar
Writ, in honour to the Island Delos, was Inscribed in the Temple of
Minerva, at Athens, in large Letters of Gold; A publick and very
laudable acknowledgment for the Poet's Ingenuity, and for no more
than a bare Compliment! Such was the encouragement given by the
great, and publick Spirited Athenians. Had the same Poet, inspired
by a Noble and Heroick Ardor, by another Ode, awakened and rouzed
their whole State against an invading Enemy; or opened their Eyes
against any Secret and Wicked Contrivers of their Destruction, they
would have erected him a Statue at least. But Alass that Spirit is
fled from the World! and, long since neglected. Virtue is become her
own Pay-master. My Country-men, I hope, will forgive me, if I
complain there has been so little Notice taken of a small, but most
excellent Pamphlet, Written by the DRAPIER. It is Intitled, A SHORT
VIEW OF THE STATE OF IRELAND. There never was any Treatise yet
published, with a Zeal more generous for the Universal good of a
Nation, or a design more seasonable, considering our present
lamentable Condition, yet we listen not to the Voice of the Charmer.
Whereas it should have been Inscribed in Capital Letters (as
Glorious as those of the Poet) in the most publick part of every
Corporation-town, through this whole Kingdom, that People might
behold the several unprovoked causes of their Poverty, our Offences
towards Heaven excepted. Nay, I will proceed farther, and say, that
every Head of every Family, ought to instruct the Children so far in
this most incomparable Pamphlet, that they should not only
understand, but be able, to repeat by Heart every single Paragraph,
through the Whole. This was the Method laid down by the wisest Law-
giver, that ever the World produced; To gain the Hearts of the
People, by working upon their Memories.
		Deut. chap. 6. v. 7. And thou shalt Teach them diligently unto
thy Children, and shalt talk of them, when thou sittest in thine
House, and when thou walkest by the Way, and when thou liest down,
and when thou risest up.
		8. And thou shalt bind them for a Sign upon thine Hand, and
they shall be as frontlets between thine Eyes.
		9. And thou shalt Write them upon the Posts of thy House, and
on thy Gates.
		And, where would be the great Trouble, since we have little
else to do, if every Man would read a Lecture of the Short View
every Day in his Family, after Reading Prayers? Nor do I think the
expence would be extravagant, if he should have every Page of it Re-
printed, to be hung up in Frames, in every Chamber of his House.
That it might be as evident, as, the Hand Writing on the Wall.
		And, since I have ventured thus far, to praise and recommend
this most inimitable Piece, let me Speak a few Words in favour of
it's AUTHOR.
		I would propose to My Country-men, before all their MONY goes
off, (it is going as fast as possible) to convert it into a few
Statues to the DRAPIER, in those Memorable parts of this Kingdom,
where our Heroes have shone with the greatest Lustre, in Defence of
our Liberty, and the PROTESTANT RELIGION over all Europe. At DERRY,
at ENNISKILLEN, at BOYN, at AUGHRIM. Nor would it be amiss, to set
up a few more about our Metropolis, with that Glorious Inscription
Libertas et Natale Solum.
		If our MONY were metamorphosed upon such a good occasion, as
this, it would not be in the Power of any * Cypselus,
\note begins\  
	* Cypselus, A Governor of Corinth, who Contrived a Tax, which
    brought all the Mony of that State to himself in ten Years Time.
    vid. Aristot. polit.
	\note ends\ 
to get it into his own Coffers, and it would be the only method, to
prevent it's being carry'd off, except our Vice-roys should Act like
the Roman Prefects, and Run away with our very Statues.

		Courteous READER, Mark well what follows.

I Am assured that it hath for some time been practised as a method
of making Men's Court, when they are asked about the Rate of Lands,
the Abilities of Tenants, the State of Trade and Manufacture in this
Kingdom, and how their Rents are payed; to Answer, That in their
Neighbourhood all things are in a flourishing Condition, the Rent
and Purchase of Land every Day encreasing. And if a Gentleman
happens to be a little more sincere in his Representations, besides
being looked on as not well affected, he is sure to have a Dozen
Contradictors at his Elbow. I think it is no manner of Secret why
these Questions are so cordially asked, or so obligingly Answered.
		But since with Regard to the Affairs of this Kingdom, I have
been using all Endeavours to subdue my Indignation, to which indeed
I am not provoked by any Personal Interest, being not the Owner of
one Spot of Ground in the whole Island, I shall only enumerate by
Rules generally known, and never Contradicted, what are the true
Causes of any Countries flourishing and growing Rich, and then
examine what Effects arise from those Causes in the Kingdom of
Ireland.
		The first Cause of a Kindgom's thriving is the Fruitfulness of
the Soyl, to produce the Necessaries and Conveniencies of Life, not
only sufficient for the Inhabitants, but for Exportation into other
Countries.
		The Second, is the Industry of the People in Working up all
their Native Commodities to the last degree of Manufacture.
		The Third, is the Conveniency of safe Ports and Havens, to
Carry out their own Goods, as much manufactured, and bring in those
of others, as little manufactured, as the Nature of mutual Commerce
will allow.
		The Fourth, is, That the Natives should as much as possible,
Export and Import their Goods in Vessels of their own Timber, made
in their own Country.
		The Fifth, is the Liberty of a free Trade in all Foreign
Countries which will permit them, except to those who are in War
with their own Prince or State.
		The Sixth, is, by being Governed only by Laws made with their
own Consent, for otherwise they are not a free People. And therefore
all Appeals for Justice, or Applications for Favour or Preferment to
another Country, are so many grievous Impoverishments.
		The Seventh, is, by Improvement of Land, encouragement of
Agriculture, and thereby encreasing the Number of their People,
without which any Country, however Blessed by Nature, must continue
Poor.
		The Eighth, is the Residence of the Prince, or Chief
Administrator of the Civil Power.
		The Ninth, is the Concourse of Foreigners for Education,
Curiosity or Pleasure, or as to a general Mart of Trade.
		The Tenth, is by disposing all Offices of Honour, Profit or
Trust, only to the Natives, or at least with very few Exceptions,
where Strangers have long Inhabited the Country, and are supposed to
Understand, and regard the Interest of it as their own.
		The Eleventh is, when the Rents of Lands, and Profits of
Employments, are spent in the Country which produced them, and not
in another, the former of which will certainly happen, where the
Love of our Native Country prevails.
		The Twelfth, is by the publick Revenues being all Spent and
Employed at Home, except on the Occasions of a Foreign War.
		The Thirteenth, is, where the People are not obliged, unless
they find it for their own Interest, or Conveniency, to receive any
Monies, except of their own Coynage by a publick Mint, after the
manner of all Civilized Nations.
		The Fourteenth, is a Disposition of the People of a Country to
wear their own Manufactures, and Import as few Incitements to
Luxury, either in Cloaths, Furniture, Food or Drink, as they
possibly can live conveniently without.
		There are many other Causes of a Nation's thriving, which I
cannot at present recollect; but without Advantage from at least
some of these, after turning my Thoughts a long time, I am not able
to discover from whence our Wealth proceeds, and therefore would
gladly be better informed. In the mean time, I will here examine
what share falls to Ireland of these Causes, or of the Effects and
Consequences.
		It is not my Intention to complain, but barely to relate Facts,
and the matter is not of small Importance. For it is allowed, that a
Man who lives in a Solitary House far from help, is not Wise in
endeavouring to acquire in the Neighbourhood, the Reputation of
being Rich, because those who come for Gold, will go off with Pewter
and Brass, rather than return empty; and in the common Practice of
the World, those who possess most Wealth, make the least Parade,
which they leave to others, who have nothing else to bear them out,
in shewing their Faces on the Exchange.
		As to the first Cause of a Nation's Riches, being the Fertility
of the Soyl, as well as Temperature of Clymate, we have no Reason to
complain; for although the Quantity of unprofitable Land in this
Kingdom, reckoning Bog, and Rock, and barren Mountain, be double in
Proportion to what it is in England, yet the Native Productions
which both Kingdoms deal in, are very near on equality in point of
Goodness, and might with the same Encouragement be as well
manufactured. I except Mines and Minerals, in some of which however
we are only defective in point of Skill and Industry.
		In the Second, which is the Industry of the People, our
misfortune is not altogether owing to our own Fault, but to a
million of Discouragements.
		The conveniency of Ports and Havens which Nature bestowed us so
liberally is of no more use to us, than a beautiful Prospect to a
Man shut up in a Dungeon.
		As to Shipping of it's own, this Kingdom is so utterly
unprovided, that of all the excellent Timber cut down within these
fifty or sixty Years, it can hardly be said that the Nation hath
received the Benefit of one valuable House to dwell in, or one Ship
to Trade with.
		Ireland is the only Kingdom I ever heard or read of, either in
ancient or modern Story, which was denyed the Liberty of exporting
their native Commodities and Manufactures wherever they pleased,
except to Countries at War with their own Prince or State, yet this
by the Superiority of meer Power is refused us in the most momentous
parts of Commerce, besides an Act of Navigation to which we never
consented, pinned down upon us, and rigorously executed, and a
thousand other unexampled Circumstances as grievous as they are
invidious to mention. To go unto the Rest.
		It is too well known that we are forced to obey some Laws we
never consented to, which is a Condition I must not call by it's
true uncontroverted Name, for fear of my LÄÄ CÄÄ JÄÄ WÄÄ's Ghost
with his LIBERTAS ET NATALE SOLUM, written as a Motto on his Coach,
as it stood at the Door of the Court, while he was Perjuring himself
to betray both. Thus, we are in the Condition of Patients who have
Physick sent them by Doctors at a Distance, Strangers to their
Constitution, and the nature of their Disease: And thus, we are
forced to pay five hundred per Cent to decide our Properties, in all
which we have likewise the Honour to be distinguished from the whole
Race of Mankind.
		As to improvement of Land, those few who attempt that or
Planting, through Covetousness or want of Skill, generally leave
things worse than they were, neither succeeding in Trees nor Hedges,
and by running into the fancy of Grazing after the manner of the
Scythians, are every Day depopulating the Country.
		We are so far from having a King to reside among us, that even
the Viceroy is generally absent four Fifths of his time in the
Government.
		No Strangers from other Countries make this a part of their
Travels, where they can expect to see nothing but Scenes of Misery
and Desolation.
		Those who have the Misfortune to be born here, have the least
Title to any considerable Employment, to which they are seldom
preferred, but upon a Political Consideration.
		One third part of the Rents of Ireland is spent in England,
which with the Profit of Employments, Pensions, Appeals, Journeys of
Pleasure or Health, Education at the Inns of Court, and both
Universities, Remittances at Pleasure, the Pay of all Superior
Officers in the Army and other Incidents, will amount to a full half
of the Income of the whole Kingdom, all clear profit to England.
		We are denyed the Liberty of Coining Gold, Silver, or even
Copper. In the Isle of Man, they Coin their own Silver; every petty
Prince, Vassal to the Emperor can Coin what Money he pleaseth. And
in this as in most of the Articles already mentioned, we are an
exception to all other States or Monarchies that were ever known in
the World.
		As to the last, or Fourteenth Article, we take special Care to
Act diametrically contrary to it in the whole Course of our Lives.
Both Sexes, but especially the Women despise and abhor to wear any
of their own Manufactures, even those which are better made than in
other Countries, particularly a sort of Silk Plad, through which the
Workmen are forced to run a sort of Gold-thread that it may pass for
Indian. Even Ale and Potatoes in great quantity are Imported from
England as well as Corn, and our foreign Trade is little more than
Importation of French Wine, for which I am told we pay ready Money.
		Now if all this be true, upon which I could easily enlarge, I
would be glad to know by what secret method it is that we grow a
Rich and Flourishing People, without Liberty, Trade, Manufactures,
Inhabitants, Money, or the privilege of Coining; without Industry,
Labour or Improvement of Lands, and with more than half of the Rent
and Profits of the whole Kingdom, Annually exported, for which we
receive not a single Farthing: And to make up all this, nothing
worth mentioning, except the Linnen of the North, a Trade casual,
corrupted and at Mercy, and some Butter from Cork. If we do
flourish, it must be against every Law of Nature and Reason, like
the Thorn at Glassenbury, that blossoms in the midst of Winter.
		Let the worthy CÄÄÄÄÄÄrs who come from England ride round the
Kingdom, and observe the face of Nature, or the faces of the
Natives, the Improvement of the Land, the thriving numerous
Plantations, the noble Woods, the abundance and vicinity of Country-
Seats, the commodious Farmers-Houses and Barns, the Towns and
Villages, where every body is busy and thriving with all kind of
Manufactures, the Shops full of Goods wrought to Perfection, and
filled with Customers, the comfortable Dyet and Dress, and Dwellings
of the People, the vast Numbers of Ships in our Harbours and Docks,
and Shipwrights in our Seaport-Towns, the Roads crouded with
Carryers laden with rich Manufactures, the perpetual Concourse to
and fro of pompous Equipages.
		With what Envy and Admiration would these Gentlemen return from
so delightful a Progress? What glorious Reports would they make when
they went back to England?
		But my Heart is too heavy to continue this Irony longer, for it
is manifest that whatever Stranger took such a Journey, would be apt
to think himself travelling in Lapland or Ysland, rather than in a
Country so favoured by Nature as Ours, both in Fruitfulness of Soyl,
and Temperature of Climate. The miserable Dress, and Dyet, and
Dwelling of the People. The general Desolation in most parts of the
Kingdom. The old Seats of the Nobility and Gentry all in Ruins, and
no new Ones in their stead. The Families of Farmers who pay great
Rents, living in Filth and Nastiness upon Butter-milk and Potatoes,
without a Shoe or Stocking to their Feet, or a House so convenient
as an English Hog-sty to receive them. These indeed may be
comfortable sights to an English Spectator, who comes for a short
time only to learn the Language, and returns back to his own
Country, whither he finds all our Wealth transmitted.
		                  Nostrƒ miseriƒ magnus es.
		There is not one Argument used to prove the Riches of Ireland,
which is not a logical Demonstration of it's Poverty. The Rise of
our Rents is squeesed out of the very Blood and Vitals, and Cloaths,
and Dwellings of the Tenants, who live worse than English Beggars.
The lowness of Interest, in all other Countries a sign of Wealth, is
in us a proof of misery, there being no Trade to employ any
Borrower. Hence alone comes the Dearness of Land, since the Savers
have no other way to lay out their Money. Hence the Dearness of
Necessaries for Life, because the Tenants cannot afford to pay such
extravagant Rates for Land (which they must take, or go a begging)
without raising the Price of Cattle, and of Corn, although
themselves should live upon Chaff. Hence our encrease of Buildings
in this City, because Workmen have nothing to do but employ one
another, and one half of them are infallibly undone. Hence the daily
encrease of Bankers, who may be a necessary Evil in a Trading-
Country, but so ruinous in Ours, who for their private Advantage
have sent away all our Silver, and one third of our Gold; so that
within three Years past, the running Cash of the Nation, which was
about Five hundred thousand Pounds, is now less than two, and must
daily diminish unless we have Liberty to Coin, as well as that
important Kingdom the Isle of Man, and the meanest Prince in the
German Empire, as I before observed.
		I have sometimes thought, that this Paradox of the Kingdom
growing Rich, is chiefly owing to those worthy Gentlemen the
BANKERS, who, except some Custom-house Officers, Birds of Passage,
oppressive thrifty 'Squires, and a few others that shall be
Nameless, are the only thriving People among us: And I have often
wished that a Law were enacted to hang up half a Dozen Bankers every
Year, and thereby interpose at least some short Delay, to the
further Ruin of Ireland.
		Ye are idle, ye are idle, answered Pharoah to the Isr‘lites,
when they complained to his MAJESTY, that they were forced to make
Bricks without Straw.
		England enjoys every one of these Advantages for enriching a
Nation, which I have above enumerated, and into the Bargain, a good
Million returned to them every Year without Labour or Hazard, or one
Farthing value received on our side. But how long we shall be able
to continue the payment, I am not under the least Concern. One thing
I know, that when the Hen is starved to Death, there will be no more
Golden Eggs.
		I think it a little unhospitable, and others may call it a
subtil piece of Malice, that, because there may be a Dozen Families
in this Town able to entertain their English Friends in a generous
manner at their Tables, their Guests upon their Return to England,
shall report that we wallow in Riches and Luxury.
		Yet I confess I have known an Hospital, where all the
Household-Officers grew Rich, while the Poor for whose sake it was
built, were almost starving for want of Food and Raiment.
		To Conclude. If Ireland be a rich and flourishing Kingdom, it's
Wealth and Prosperity must be owing to certain Causes, that are yet
concealed from the whole Race of Mankind, and the Effects are
equally Invisible. We need not wonder at Strangers when they deliver
such Paradoxes, but a Native and Inhabitant of this Kingdom, who
gives the same Verdict, must be either ignorant to Stupidity, or a
Man-pleaser at the Expence of all Honour, Conscience and Truth.
		