 NUMB. III
                                
                  Ipse per Omnes ibit Personas,
                    Et turbam reddet in uno. 

THE Players having now almost done with the Comedy, called the
Beggars Opera, for this Season, it may be no unpleasant Speculation,
to reflect a little upon this Dramatick Piece, so singular in the
Subject, and the manner, so much an Original, and which hath
frequently given so very agreeable an Entertainment.
		Although an evil Tast be very apt to prevail, both here, and in
London, yet there is a point which whoever can rightly Touch, will
never fail of pleasing a very great Majority; so great, that the
Dislikers, out of Dulness or Affectation will be silent, and forced
to fall in with the Herd; the point I mean, is what we call Humour,
which in its Perfection is allowed to be much preferable to Wit, if
it be not rather the most useful, and agreeable Species of it.
		I agree with Sir William Temple, that the Word is peculiar to
our English Tongue, but I differ from him in the Opinion, that the
thing it self is peculiar to the English Nation, because the
contrary may be found in many Spanish, Italian, and French
Productions, and particularly, whoever hath a Tast for True Humour,
will find a Hundred Instances of it in those Volumes Printed in
France, under the Name of Le Theatre Italien, to say nothing of
Rabelais, Cervantes, and many others.
		Now I take the Comedy or Farce, (or whatever Name the Criticks
will allow it) called the Beggars Opera; to excell in this Article
of Humour. And, upon that Merit, to have met with such prodigious
success both here, and in England.
		As to Poetry, Eloquence, and Musick, which are said to have
most Power over the minds of Men, it is certain that very few have a
Tast or Judgment of the Excellencies of the two former, and if a Man
succeeds in either, it is upon the Authority of those few Judges,
that lend their Taste to the bulk of Readers, who have none of their
own. I am told there are as few good Judges in Musick, and that
among those who Crowd the Operas, Nine in Ten go thither meerly out
of Curiosity, Fashion, or Affectation.
		But a Taste for Humour is in some manner fixed to the very
Nature of Man, and generally Obvious to the Vulgar, except upon
Subjects too refined, and Superior to their Understanding.
		And as this Taste of Humour is purely Natural, so is Humour it
self, neither is it a Talent confined to Men of Wit, or Learning;
for we observe it sometimes among common Servants, and the meanest
of the People, while the very Owners are often Ignorant of the Gift
they possess.
		I know very well, that this happy Talent is contemptibly
Treated by Criticks, under the Name of low Humour, or low Comedy;
but I know likewise, that the Spaniards and Italians, who are
allowed to have the most Wit of any Nation in Europe, do most excell
in it, and do most esteem it.
		By what Disposition of the mind, what Influence of the Stars,
or what Situation of the Clymate this endowment is bestowed upon
Mankind, may be a Question fit for Philosophers to Discuss. It is
certainly the best Ingredient towards that kind of Satyr, which is
most useful, and gives the least Offence; which instead of lashing,
Laughs Men out of their Follies, and Vices, and is the Character
which gives Horace the Preference to Juvenal.
		And although some things are too Serious, Solemn, or Sacred to
be turned into Ridicule, yet the Abuses of them are certainly not,
since it is allowed that Corruption in Religion, Politicks, and Law,
may be proper Topicks for this kind of Satyr.
		There are two ends that Men propose in Writing Satyr, one of
them less Noble than the other, as regarding nothing further than
personal Satisfaction, and pleasure of the Writer; but without any
View towards Personal Malice; The other is a Publick Spirit,
prompting Men of Genius and Virtue, to mend the World as far as they
are able. And as both these ends are innocent, so the latter is
highly commendable. With Regard to the former, I demand whether I
have not as good a Title to Laugh, as Men have to be Ridiculous, and
to expose Vice, as another hath to be Vicious. If I Ridicule the
Follies and Corruptions of a Court, a Ministry, or a Senate; are
they not amply payed by Pensions, Titles, and Power, while I expect
and desire no other Reward, than that of Laughing with a few Friends
in a Corner. Yet, if those, who take Offence, think me in the Wrong,
I am ready to Change the Scene with them, whenever they please.
		But if my Design be to make Mankind better, then I think it is
my Duty, at least I am sure it is the Interest of those very Courts
and Ministers, whose Follies or Vices I Ridicule, to reward me for
my good Intentions; For, if it be reckoned an high point of Wisdom
to get the Laughers on our side, it is much more easy, as well as
Wise to get those on our side, who can make Millions Laugh when they
please.
		My Reason for mentioning Courts, and Ministers, (whom I never
think on, but with the most profound Veneration) is because an
Opinion obtains, that in the Beggars Opera there appears to be some
Reflections upon Courtiers and States-Men, whereof I am by no means
a Judge.
		It is true indeed that Mr. GAY, the Author of this Piece, hath
been somewhat singular in the Course of his Fortunes, for it hath
happened, that after Fourteen Years attending the Court, with a
large Stock of real Merit, a Modest, and Agreeable Conversation, a
Hundred Promises, and five Hundred Friends, he hath failed of
Preferment, and upon a very Weighty Reason. He lay under the
Suspicion of having Written a Libel, or Lampoon against a great
MÄÄÄÄÄÄ It is true that great MÄÄÄÄÄÄ was demonstratively convinced,
and publickly owned his Conviction, that Mr. Gay was not the Author;
but having lain under the Suspicion, it seemed very just, that he
should suffer the Punishment; because in this most reformed Age, the
Virtues of a great MÄÄÄÄÄÄ are no more to be suspected, than the
Chastity of C‘sar's Wife.
		It must be allowed, That the Beggars-Opera is not the first of
Mr. Gay's Works, wherein he hath been faulty, with regard to
Courtiers and States-Men. For, to omit his other Pieces, even in his
Fables, published within two Years past, and Dedicated to the D. of
Cumberland, for which he was PROMISED a Reward; he hath been thought
somewhat too bold upon Courtiers. And although it is highly
probable, he meant only the Courtiers of former times, yet he acted
unwarily, by not considering, that the Malignity of some people
might misinterpret what he said to the disadvantage of present
Persons, and Affairs.
		But I have now done with Mr. Gay as a Politician, and shall
consider him henceforward only as Author of the Beggars Opera,
wherein he hath by a turn of Humor, entirely New, placed Vices of
all Kinds in the strongest and most odious Light; and thereby done
eminent Service, both to Religion and Morality. This appears from
the unparallel'd Success he hath met with. All Ranks, Parties and
Denominations of Men, either crowding to see his Opera, or reading
it with delight in their Closets, even Ministers of State, whom he
is thought to have most offended (next to those whom the Actors more
immediately represent) appearing frequently at the Theatre, from a
consciousness of their own Innocence, and to convince the World how
unjust a Parallel, Malice, Envy, and Disaffection to the Government
have made.
		I am assured that several worthy Clergy-Men in this City, went
privately to see the Beggars-Opera represented; and that the
fleering Coxcombs in the Pit, amused themselves with making
Discoveries, and spreading the Names of those Gentlemen round the
Audience.
		I shall not pretend to vindicate a Clergy-Man, who would appear
openly in his Habit at a Theatre, among such a vicious Crew, as
would probably stand round him, and at such lewd Comedies, and
prophane Tragedies as are often represented. Besides I know very
well, that Persons of their Function are bound to avoid the
appearance of Evil, or of giving cause of Offence. But when the
Lords Chancellors, who are Keepers of the King's Conscience, when
the Judges of the Land, whose Title is Reverend, when Ladies, who
are bound by the Rules of their Sex, to the strictest Decency,
appear in the Theatre without Censure, I cannot understand, why a
young Clergy-man who goes concealed out of Curiosity to see an
innocent and moral Play, should be so highly condemned; nor do I
much approve the Rigor of a great PÄÄÄÄte who said, he hoped none of
his Clergy were there. I am glad to hear there are no weightier
Objections against that Reverend Body, planted in this City, and I
wish there never may. But I should be very sorry that any of them
should be so weak, as to imitate a COURT-CHAPLAIN in England, who
preached against the Beggars-Opera, which will probably do more good
than a thousand Sermons of so stupid, so injudicious, and so
prostitute a Divine.
		In this happy Performance of Mr. Gay, all the Characters are
just, and none of them carried beyond Nature, or hardly beyond
Practice.  It discovers the whole System of that Common-Wealth, or
that Imperium in Imperio of Iniquity, established among us, by which
neither our Lives, nor our Properties are secure, either in the
High-ways, or in publick Assemblies, or even in our own Houses. It
shews the miserable Lives, and the constant Fate of those abandoned
Wretches; for how little they sell their Lives and Souls; betrayed
by their Whores; their Comrades; and the Receivers and Purchasers of
these Thefts and Robberies. This Comedy contains likewise a Satyr,
which, although it doth by no means affect the present Age, yet
might have been useful in the former and may possibly be so in Ages
to come. I mean where the Author takes occasion of comparing those
common Robbers to Robbers of the Publick; and their several
Stratagems of betraying, undermining, and hanging each other, to the
several Arts of Politicians in times of Corruption.
		This Comedy likewise exposeth with great Justice, that
unnatural Taste for Italian Musick among us, which is wholly
unsuitable to our Northern Climat, and the genius of the People,
whereby we are over-run with Italian-Effeminacy, and Italian
Nonsence. An old Gentleman said to me, that many Years ago, when the
practice of an unnatural Vice grew so frequent in London, that many
were Prosecuted for it, he was sure it would be a Fore-runner of
Italian-Opera's, and Singers; and then we should want nothing but
Stabbing or Poysoning, to make us perfect Italians.
		Upon the Whole, I deliver my Judgment, That nothing but servile
Attachment to a Party, affectation of Singularity, lamentable
Dullness, mistaken Zeal, or studied Hypocrisy, can have the least
reasonable Objection against this excellent Moral-performance of the
CELEBRATED MR. GAY.