
                           NUMB. XIX.

		  	Having on the 12th of October last, receiv'd a LETTER Sign'd
     Andrew Dealer, and Patrick Pennyless; I believe the following
     PAPER, just come to my Hands, will be a sufficient Answer to
     it.
		
		  	        Sic vos non vobis vellera fertis oves.
								Virg.
		SIR,
I Am a Country Gentleman, and a Member of Parliament, with an Estate
of about 1400 l. a Year, which as a Northern Landlord, I receive
from above two Hundred Tenants, and my Lands having been Let, near
twenty Years ago, the Rents, till very lately, were esteemed to be
not above half Value; yet by the intolerable Scarcity of Silver, I
lye under the greatest Difficulties in receiving them, as well as in
paying my Labourers, or buying any thing necessary for my Family
from Tradesmen, who are not able to be long out of their Money. But
the sufferings of me, and those of my Rank, are Trifles in
Comparison, of what the meaner sort undergo; such as the Buyers and
Sellers, at Fairs, and Markets; The Shop-keepers in every Town, the
Farmers in general. All those who Travel with Fish, Poultry,
Pedlary-Ware, and other Conveniencies to sell: But more especially
Handy-crafts-men, who Work for us by the Day, and common Labourers,
whom I have already mentioned. Both these kinds of People, I am
forced to employ, till their Wages amount to a Double Pistole, or a
Moydore, (for we hardly have any Gold of lower Value left among us)
to divide it among themselves as they can; and this is generally
done at an Ale-house or Brandy shop; where, besides the cost of
getting Drunk, (which is usually the Case) they must pay ten pence
or a Shilling, for changing their Piece into Silver, to some
Huckstering-fellow, who follows that Trade. But what is infinitely
worse, those Poor Men for want of due Payment, are forced to take up
their Oat-meal, and other Necessaries of Life, at almost double
Value, and consequently are not able, to discharge half their score,
especially under the scarceness of Corn, for two Years past, and the
Melancholy disappointment of the present Crop. 
		The Causes of this, and a thousand other Evils, are clear and
manifest to you and all other Thinking Men, though hidden from the
Vulgar: These indeed complain of hard Times, the Dearth of Corn, the
want of Money, the badness of Seasons; that their Goods bear no
Price, and the poor cannot find Work; but their weak reasonings
never carry them to the Hatred, and Contempt, born us by our
Neighbours, and Brethren, without the least grounds of Provocation,
who rejoice at our Sufferings, although sometimes to their own
Disadvantage; of the dead Weight upon every beneficial Branch of our
Trade; of half our Revenues sent annually to England, and many other
Grievances peculiar to this unhappy Kingdom, excepted for our Sins,
which keeps us from enjoying the common Benefits of Mankind, as you
and some other Lovers of their Country, have so often observed, with
such good Inclinations, and so little Effect. 
		It is true indeed, that under our Circumstances in general,
this Complaint for the want of Silver, may appear as Ridiculous, as
for a Man to be impatient, about a Cut Finger, when he is struck
with the Plague, and yet a poor Fellow going to the Gallows, may be
allow'd to feel the smart of Wasps, while he is upon Tyburn Road.
This misfortune is too urging, and vexatious in every kind of small
Traffick, and so hourly pressing upon all Persons in the Country
whatsoever, that a hundred inconveniences, of perhaps greater Moment
in themselves, have been timely submitted to, with far less
disquietude and murmurs. And the Case seems yet the harder, if it be
true, what many skilfull Men assert, that nothing is more easy, than
a Remedy; and, that the Want of Silver, in proportion to the little
Gold remaining among us, is altogether as unnecessary, as it is
inconvenient. A Person of Distinction assured me very lately, that,
in discoursing with the Lord Lieutenant, before his last Return to
England, His Excellency said, He had pressed the matter often, in
proper Time and Place, and to proper Persons; and could not see any
difficulty of the least Moment, that could prevent us from being
easy upon that Article. 
		Whoever carrys to England, twenty seven English Shillings, and
brings back one Moydore, of full Weight, is a gainer of nine pence
Irish; In a Guinea, the Advantage is three pence, and two pence in a
Pistole. The BANKERS, who are generally Masters of all our Gold, and
Silver, with this Advantage, have sent over as much of the latter,
as came into their Hands. The Value of one thousand Moydores in
Silver, would thus amount in clear profit, to 37 l. 10 s. The Shop-
keepers, and other Traders, who go to London to buy Goods, followed
the same Practice, by which we have been driven into this
insupportable Distress. 
		To a common Thinker, it should seem, that nothing would be more
easy, than for the Government to Redress this Evil, at any time they
shall please. When the value of Guineas was lowred in England, from
21 s. 6 d. to only 21 s. the Consequences to this Kingdom, were
obvious, and manifest to us all; and a sober Man, may be allowed at
least to wonder, though he dare not complain, why a new Regulation
of Coin among us, was not then made; much more, why it hath never
been since. It would surely require no very profound skill in
Algebra, to reduce the difference of nine Pence in thirty Shillings,
or three Pence in a Guinea, to less than a Farthing; And so small a
Fraction could be no Temptation, either to Bankers, to hazard their
Silver at Sea, or Tradesmen to load themselves with it, in their
Journeys to England. In my humble Opinion, it would be no
unseasonable Condescension, if the Government would Graciously
please, to signify to the poor loyal Protestant Subjects of Ireland,
either that this miserable want of Silver, is not possible to be
remedy'd in any degree, by the nicest skill in Arithmetick; or else,
that it doth not stand with the good pleasure of England, to suffer
any Silver at all among us. In the former Case, it would be madness,
to expect Impossibilities: And in the other, we must submit: For,
Lives, and Fortunes are, always at the Mercy of the CONQUEROR. 
		The Question hath been often put in printed Papers, by the
DRAPIER, and others, or perhaps by the same WRITER, under different
Styles, why this Kingdom should not be permitted to have a Mint of
its own, for the Coinage of Gold, Silver, and Copper, which is a
Power exercised by many Bishops, and every petty Prince in Germany.
But this Question hath never been answered, nor the least
Application that I have heard of, made to the Crown from hence, for
the grant of a Publick Mint, although it stands upon Record, that
several Cities, and Corporations here, had the Liberty of Coining
Silver. I can see no Reasons, why we alone of all Nations, are thus
restrained, but such as I dare not mention; only thus far, I may
venture, that Ireland is the first Imperial Kingdom, since Nimrod,
which ever wanted Power, to Coin their own Money. 
		I know very well, that in England it is lawful for any Subject,
to Petition either the Prince, or the Parliament, provided it be
done in a dutiful, and regular Manner; But what is lawful for a
Subject of Ireland, I profess I cannot determine; nor will
undertake, that your Printer shall not be prosecuted, in a Court of
Justice, for publishing my Wishes, that a poor Shop-keeper might be
able to change a Guinea, or a Moydore, when a Customer comes for a
Crown's worth of Goods. I have known less Crimes punished with the
utmost Severity, under the Title of Disaffection: And, I cannot but
approve the Wisdom of the Antients, who, after Astrea had fled from
the Earth, at least took care to provide three upright Judges for
Hell. Men's Ears among us, are indeed grown so nice, that whoever
happens to think out of Fashion, in what relates to the Welfare of
this Kingdom, dare not so much as complain of the Tooth-ach, lest
our weak and busy Dablers in politick should be ready to swear
against him for Disaffection. 
		There was a Method practiced by Sir Ambrose Crawley, the great
Dealer in Iron-works, which I wonder the Gentlemen of our Country,
under this great Exigence, have not thought fit to imitate. In the
several Towns, and Villages, where he dealt, and many Miles round,
he gave Notes, instead of Money, from two Pence, to twenty
Shillings, which passed currant in all Shops, and Markets, as well
as in Houses, where Meat, or Drink was Sold. I see no Reason, why
the like Practice, may not be introduced among us, with some degree
of Success, or at least may not serve, as a poor Expedient, in this,
our blessed age of Paper, which, as it Dischargeth all our greatest
Payments, may be equally useful in the Smaller, and may just keep us
alive, till an English Act of Parliament shall forbid it. 
		I have been told, that among some of our poorest American
Colonies, upon the Continent, the People enjoy the Liberty of
cutting the little Money among them into halves, and quarters, for
the conveniences of small Traffick. How happy should we be in
Comparison of our present Condition, if the like Priviledge, were
granted to us, of employing the Sheers, for want of a Mint, upon our
foreign Gold; by clipping it into half Crowns, and shillings, and
even lower Denominations; For Beggars must be content to live upon
scraps; And it would be our Felicity, that these scraps would never
be exported to other Countries, while any thing better was left. 
		If neither of these Projects will avail, I see nothing left us,
but to truck and barter our Goods, like the wild Indians, with each
other, or with our too powerful Neighbours; only with this
disadvantage on our side, that the Indians enjoy the Product of
their own Land, whereas the better half of ours is sent away without
so much as a recompence in Bugles, or Glass, in return. 
		It must needs be a very comfortable Circumstance, in the
present juncture, that some thousand Families are gone, or going, or
preparing to go, from hence, and settle themselves in America. The
poorer Sort, for want of Work, the Farmers, whose beneficial
Bargains are now become a Rack-rent, too hard to be born. And those
who have any ready Money, or can purchase any, by the Sale of their
Goods, or Leases; because they find their Fortunes hourly decaying;
that their Goods will bear no Price, and that few or none, have any
Money to buy the very necessaries of Life, are hastening to follow
their departed Neighbours. It is true, Corn among us, carries a very
high price; but it is for the same reason, that Rats, and Cats, and
Dead Horses, have been often bought for Gold, in a Town besieged. 
		There is a Person of Quality in my Neighbourhood, who twenty
Years ago, when he was just come to age, being unexperienced, and of
a generous Temper, let his lands, even as times went then, at a low
Rate, to able Tenants, and consequently by the rise of Land since
that time, looked upon his Estate, to be set at half value. But
Numbers of these Tenants, or their Descendants are now Offering to
sell their Leases by Cant, even those which were for Lives, some of
them renewable for ever, and some Fee-farms, which the Landlord
himself, hath bought in, at half the Price they would have yielded
seven Years ago. And some Leases Let at the same time, for Lives,
have been given up to him, without any Consideration at all. 
		This is the most favourable face of things at present among us,
I say, among us of the North, who are esteemed the onely thriving
people of the Kingdom: And how far, and how soon, this Misery, and
Desolation may spread, is easy to foresee. 
		The vast Sums of Money daily carryed off, by our numerous
Adventurers to America, have deprived us of our Gold in these Parts,
almost as much as of our Silver. 
		And the good Wives who come to our Houses, offer us their
Pieces of Linnen, upon which their whole Dependence lyes, for so
little profit, that it can neither half pay their Rents, nor half
support their Families. 
		It is remarkable, that this Enthusiasm spread among our
Northern People, of sheltring them selves in the Continent of
America, hath no other foundation, than their present insupportable
Condition at home. I have made all possible inquiries, to learn what
Encouragement our People have met with, by any Intelligence from
those Plantations, sufficient to make them undertake, so tedious,
and hazardous a Voyage, in all seasons of the Year; and so ill
accommodated in their Ships, that many of them have Dyed miserably
in their Passage; But, could never get one satisfactory Answer. Some
body, they know not who, had Written a Letter to his Friend, or
Cousin, from thence, inviting him by all means, to come over; that
it was a fine fruitfull Country, and to be held for ever, at a Penny
an Acre. But the Truth of the Fact is this, The English established
in those Colonies, are in great want of Men to inhabit that Tract of
Ground, which lyes between them, and the Wild Indians, who are not
reduced under their Dominion. We Read of some barbarous People, whom
the Romans placed in their Armies, for no other service, than to
blunt their Enemies Swords, and afterwards to fill up Trenches with
their dead Bodies. And thus our People who Transport themselves, are
settled in those interjacent Tracts, as a screen against the Insults
of the Savages and may have as much Land, as they can clear from the
Woods, at a very reasonable Rate, if they can afford to pay about a
hundred years Purchase by their Labour. Now besides the Fox's
reasons, which inclines all those, who have already ventured
thither, to represent every thing, in a false light, as well for
justifying their own Conduct, as for getting Companions, in their
misery; so, the Governing People in those Plantations, have Wisely
provided, that no Letters shall be suffered to pass from thence
hither, without being first viewed by the Council, by which our
People here, are wholly deceived in the Opinions, they have of the
happy condition of their Friends, gone before them. This was
accidentally discovered some months ago, by an honest Man who having
transported himself, and family thither, and finding all things
directly contrary to his hope, had the luck to convey a private
Note, by a faithful hand, to his Relation here, entreating him, not
to think of such a Voyage, and to discourage all his friends from
attempting it. Yet this, although it be a Truth well known, hath
produced very little effects; which is no manner of wonder; For as
it is natural to a Man in a Fever to turn often, although without
any hope of Ease, or when he is pursued to leap down a Precipice, to
avoid an Enemy just at his back; so, Men in the extremest degree of
Misery, and Want, will naturally fly to the first apperance of
Relief, let it be ever so vain, or visionary. 
		You may observe, that I have very superficially touched the
subject I began with, and with the utmost Caution: For I know how
Criminal the least Complaint hath been thought, however seasonable
or just, or honestly intended, which hath forced me to offer up my
Daily Prayers, that it may never, at least in my time, be
Interpreted by innuendo's as a false, scandalous, seditious, and
disaffected action, for a Man to roar under an acute fit of the
Gout, which beside the loss, and the danger, would be very
inconvenient to one of my Age, so severely Afflicted with that
Distemper. 
		I wish you good success, but I can promise you little, in an
ungrateful Office you have taken up, without the least view, either
to Reputation, or Profit. Perhaps your Comfort is, that none but
Villians, and Betrayers of their Country, can be your Enemies. Upon
which, I have little to say, having not the honour, to be acquainted
with many of that sort, and therefore, as you easily may believe, am
compelled to lead a very retired Life. 
			I am Sir,
			Your most Obedient,
				Humble Servant,
					A. NORTH. 
County of Down.   \2}\
		Dec. 2d. 1728.