 NUMB. VIII.
                                
                       Par coeatque pari.

HAVING lately had an Account, that a certain Person of some
Distinction swore in a publick Coffee-house, that Party should never
Dye while he lived (although it has been the Endeavour of the best
and wisest among us, to Abolish the Ridiculous Appellations of Whig
and Tory, and entirely to turn our thoughts to the good of our
Prince and Constitution in Church and State) I hope those, who are
well-wishers to our Country, will think my Labour not ill bestowed
in giving this Gentleman's Principles the proper Embellishments
which they deserve, and since mad Mullinix is the only Tory now
remaining, who dares own himself to be so, I desire I may not be
Censured by those who are of his Party, for making him hold a
Dialogue with one of less Consequence on 'tother side.  I shall not
venture so far, as to give the Christian Nick-name of the Person
chiefly concerned, lest I should give offence, for which reason, I
shall call him Timothy, and leave the rest to the Conjecture of the
World.
                           
               MAD MULLINIX and TIMOTHY.

M. I Own 'tis not my Bread and Butter,
But prithee Tim, why all this Clutter?
Why ever in these raging Fits,
Damning to Hell the Jacobits?
When, if you search the Kingdom round,                
There's hardly twenty to be found;
No, not among the Priests and Fryers.
  T.  'Twixt you and me GÄÄÄÄ Damn the Lyers.
  M.  The Tories are gone ev'ry Man over
To our Illustrious House of Hanover.                 
From all their Conduct this is plain,
And thenÄÄ  T. GÄÄÄÄ Damn the Lyars again.
Did not an Earl but lately Vote
To bring in (I could Cut his Throat)
Our whole Accounts of publick Debts?                 
  M.  Lord, how this Frothy Coxcomb frets! (aside)
  T.  Did not an able Statesman
This dang'rous horrid motion Dish up?
As Popish Craft?  Did he not rail on't?
Shew Fire and Faggot in the Tail on't?               
Proving the Earl a grand Offender,
And in a Plot for the Pretender?
Whose Fleet, 'tis all our Friends Opinion,
Was then embarking at Avignion.
  M.  In every AÄÄÄÄ you run your Snout              
To find this Damn'd Pretender out,
While all the silly Wretch can do
Is but to frisk about like you.
But Tim Convinc't by your Perswasion,
I yield there might be an Invasion,                  
And you who ever FÄÄÄÄ in vain,
Can FÄÄÄÄ his Navy back again.
  T.  ZÄÄÄÄds Sir.  M.  But to be short and serious;
For long disputes will only weary us.
These brangling jars of Whig and Tory,               
Are Stale, and Worn as Troy-Town Story.
The Wrong, 'tis certain, you were both in,
And now you find you fought for nothing.
Your Faction, when their Game was new,
Might want such noisy Fools as you;                  
But you when all the Show is past
Resolve to stand it out the last;
Like Martin Marrall, gaping on,
Not minding when the Song was done.
When all the Bees are gone to settle,                
You Clatter still your Brazen Kettle.
The Leaders whom you listed under,
Have dropt their Arms, and seiz'd the Plunder.
And when the War is past, you come
To rattle in their Ears your Drum.                   
And, as that hateful hideous Grecian
Thersites (he was your Relation)
Was more abhor'd, and scorn'd by those
With whom he serv'd, than by his Foes,
So thou art grown the Detestation                    
Of all thy Party through the Nation.
Thy peevish and perpetual teizing,
With Plots, and Jacobites and Treason;
Thy busy, never-meaning Face;
Thy Screw'd up front; thy State Grimace;             
Thy formal Nods; important Sneres;
Thy Whisp'rings foisted in all Ears;
(Which are, whatever you may think,
But Nonsence wrapt up in a Stink)
Have made thy Presence, in a true Sence,             
To thy own Side so Damn'd a Nuisance,
That when they have you in their Eye,
As if the Devil drove, they fly.
  T.  My good Friend Mullinix, forbear.
I vow to GÄÄÄÄ you're too severe.                    
If it could ever yet be known
I took Advice except my own,
It shou'd be yours.  But DÄÄÄÄ my Blood,
I must pursue the publick Good.
The Faction, (is it not Notorious?)                  
Keck at the Memory of Glorious.
'Tis true, nor need I to be told,
My quondam Friends are grown so Cold,
That scarce a Creature can be found,
To Prance with me the Statue round.                  
The publick Safety, I foresee,
Henceforth depends alone on me.
And while this Vital Breath I blow,
Or from above, or from below,
I'll Sputter, Swagger, Curse and Rail,               
The Tories Terror, Scourge and Flail.
  M.  Tim, you mistake the matter quite,
The Tories! you are their Delight.
And should you act a diff'rent Part,
Be grave and wise, 'twou'd break their Heart.        
Why, Tim, you have a Taste I know,
And often see a Puppet-show.
Observe, the Audience is in Pain,
While Punch is hid behind the Scene,
But when they hear his rusty Voice,                  
With what Impatience they rejoice.
And then they value not two Straws,
How Solomon decides the Cause,
Which the true Mother, which Pretender,
Nor listen to the Witch of Endor;                   
Shou'd Faustus, with the Devil behind him,
Enter the Stage they never mind him;
If Punch, to spur their fancy, shews
In at the door his monstrous Nose,
Then sudden draws it back again,                    
O what a pleasure mixt with pain!
You ev'ry moment think an Age,
Till he appears upon the Stage.
And first his Bum you see him clap
Upon the Queen of Sheba's lap.                      
The Duke of Lorrain drew his Sword,
Punch roaring ran, and running roar'd.
Reviles all People in his Jargon,
And sells the King of Spain a Bargain.
St. George himself he plays the wag on,             
And mounts astride upon the Dragon.
He gets a thousand Thumps and Kicks,
Yet cannot leave his roguish Tricks;
In every Action thrusts his Nose,
The reason why, no Mortal knows.                    
In doleful Scenes, that break our heart,
Punch comes, like you, and lets a FÄÄÄÄt.
There's not a Puppet made of Wood;
But what wou'd hang him if they cou'd.
While teizing all, by all he's teiz'd,              
How well are the Spectators pleas'd!
Who in the motion have no share;
But purely come to hear, and stare;
Have no concern for Sabra's sake,
Which gets the better, Saint, or Snake.             
Provided Punch (for there's the Jest)
Be soundly mawl'd, and plagues the rest.
  Thus Tim, Philosophers suppose,
The World consists of Puppet-shows;
Where petulant, conceited Fellows                   
Perform the part of Punchinelloes;
So at this Booth, which we call Dublin,
Tim thour't the Punch to stir up trouble in;
You Wrigle, Fidge, and make a Rout,
Put all your Brother Puppets out,                   
Run on in a perpetual Round,
To Teize, Perplex, Disturb, Confound,
Intrude with Monkey grin, and clatter,
To interrupt all serious Matter,
Are grown the Nuissance of your Clan,               
Who hate and scorn you, to a Man;
But then the Lookers on, the Tories
You still divert with merry Stories;
They wou'd Consent, that all the Crew
Were hanged, before they'd part with you.           
  But tell me, Tim, upon the spot,
By all this Coyl what hast thou got?
If Tories must have all the sport,
I fear you'll be disgrac'd at Court.
  T. Got? DÄÄÄÄ my Blood I frank my Letters,        
Walk by my place, before my Betters,
And simple as I now stand here,
Expect in time to be a PÄÄÄÄ
Got? DÄÄÄÄ me, why I got my will!
Ne're hold my peace, and ne'er stand still.         
I FÄÄÄÄt with twenty Ladies by;
They call me Beast, and what Care I?
I bravely call the Tories Jacks,
And Sons of WhoresÄÄbehind their Backs.
But cou'd you bring me once to think,               
That when I strut, and stare, and stink,
Revile, and slander, fume and storm,
Betray, make Oath, impeach, inform,
With such a constant, Loyal Zeal,
To serve my self, and Common-weal,                  
And fret the Tories Souls to Death,
I did but lose my precious Breath,
And when I damn my Soul to plague 'em,
Am, as you tell me, but their may-game,
Consume my Vitals! they shall know,                 
I am not to be treated so;
I'd rather hang my self by half,
Than give those Rascals cause to laugh.
  But how, my Friend, can I endure
Once so renown'd to Live obscure?                   
No little Boys and Girls to cry
There's Nimble Tim a passing by.
No more my dear Delightful way tread,
Of keeping up a party hatred.
Will none the Tory Dogs pursue,                     
When thro' the streets I cry holloo?
Must all my DÄÄmee's, BlÄÄs and WÄÄds
Pass only now for empty sounds?
Shall Tory Rascals be Elected,
Although I swear them Disaffected?                  
And when I roar a Plot, a Plot,
Will our own Party mind me not?
So qualify'd to Swear and Lye,
Will they not trust me for a Spy?
Dear Mullinix, your good Advice                     
I beg, you see the Case is nice.
O, were I equal in Renown,
Like thee, to please this thankless Town!
Or blest with such engaging Parts,
To win the Truant School-Boys Hearts!               
Thy Vertues meet their just Reward,
Attended by the Sable-guard,
Charm'd by thy voice the 'Prentice drops
The Snow-ball destin'd at thy Chops;
Thy graceful Steps, and Coll'nell's Air             
Allure the Cinder-picking Fair.
  M.  No moreÄÄIn mark of true Affection
I take thee under my Protection.
Your Parts are good, 'tis not deny'd,
I wish they had been well apply'd.                  
But now observe my Counsel (viz)
Adapt your Habit to your Phiz.
You must no longer thus equip 'ye
As Horace says, Optat ephippia.
There's Latin too that you may see                  
How I improv'd by Dr. ÄÄÄÄ
I have a Coat at home, that you may try,
'Tis just like this, which hangs by Geometry.
My Hat has much the nicer air,
Your Block will fit it to a hair.                   
That Wig, I wou'd not for the world
Have it so formal, and so Curl'd,
'Twill be so oyly, and so sleek
When I have lain in it a Week!
You'll find it well prepar'd to take                
The figure of Toope and Snake.
Thus drest alike from Top to Toe,
That which is which, 'tis hard to know.
When first in publick we appear,
I'll lead the Van, keep you the Rear.               
Be careful, as you walk behind,
Use all the Talents of your mind.
Be studious well to imitate
My portly Motion, Mien, and Gate.
Mark my Address, and learn my Style,                
When to look Scornful, when to Smile,
Nor sputter out your Oaths so fast,
But keep your Swearing to the last.
Then at our leisure we'll be witty,
And in the Streets divert the City:                 
The Ladies from the Windows gaping,
The Children all our motions Aping.
Your Conversation to refine,
I'll take you to some Friends of mine;
Choice Spirits, who employ their Parts,             
To mend the World by useful Arts.
Some cleansing hollow Tubes, to spy
Direct the Zenith of the Sky;
Some have the City in their Care,
From noxious Steams to purge the Air;               
Some teach us in these dang'rous Days,
How to walk upright in our ways;
Some whose reforming Hands engage,
To lash the Lewdness of the Age;
Some, for the publick Service go,                   
Perpetual Envoys to and fro;
Whose able Heads support the Weight,
Of twenty MÄÄÄÄrs of State.
We scorn, for want of talk, to jabber
Of Parties o're our Bonny-Clabber.                  
Nor are we studious to enquire,
Who votes for Manners, who for Hire.
Our Care is to improve the mind,
With what concerns all human kind;
The various Scenes of mortal Life,                  
Who beats her Husband, who his Wife;
Or how the Bulley at a stroke
Knockt down the Boy, the Lanthorn broke;
One tells the Rise of Cheese, and Oat-meal,
Another when he got a hot Meal;                     
One gives Advice in Proverbs Old,
Instructs us how to tame a Scold;
One shows how bravely Audoin Dy'd,
And at the Gallows all deny'd;
How by the Almanack 'tis clear,                     
That Herrings will be cheap this Year.
  T.  Dear Mullinix, I now lament
My precious Time, so long mispent,
By nature meant for nobler Ends,
O, introduce me to your Friends!                    
For whom, by Birth, I was design'd,
'Till Politicks debas'd my mind.
I give my self intire to you,
GÄÄÄÄ dÄÄÄÄ the Whigs and Tories too.