		                            NUMB. V.
                                
			Describ'd it's thus: Defin'd would you it have?
			Then the World's honest Man's an errant Knave.
								BEN. JOHNSON
								     
THERE is no Talent so useful towards rising in the World, or which
puts Men more out of the reach of Fortune, than that Quality
generally possessed by the Dullest sort of People, and in common
Speech, called Discretion, a species of lower Prudence, by the
assistance of which, People of the meanest Intellectuals, without
any other Qualification, pass through the World in great
Tranquility, and with Universal good Treatment, neither giving nor
taking Offence. Courts are seldom unprovided of Persons under this
Character, on whom, if they happen to be of great Quality, most
Employments, even the greatest naturally fall, when Competitors will
not agree; and in such Promotions, no Body rejoyces or grieves. The
Truth of this I could prove by several Instances, within my own
Memory (for I say nothing of present Times.)
		And indeed as Regularity and Forms are of great use in carrying
on the Business of the World, so it is very convenient, that Persons
endued with this kind of Discretion, should have that share which is
proper to their Talents in the Conduct of Affairs, but by no means
to meddle in matters which require Genius, Learning, strong
Comprehension, quickness of Conception, Magnanimity, Generosity,
Sagacity, or any other superior Gift of Human minds. Because this
sort of Discretion, is usually attended with a strong desire of
Money, and few Scruples about the way of obtaining it, with servile
Flattery and Submission, with a Want of all publick Spirit or
Principle, with a perpetual wrong Judgment when the Owners come into
Power, and High Place, how to dispose of Favour and Preferment,
having no measure for Merit, and Virtue in others, but those very
Steps by which themselves ascended; Nor the least Intention of doing
Good or Hurt to the Publick, further than Either one or t'other, is
likely to be subservient to their own Security or Interest. Thus
being void of all Friendship and Enmity, they never complain nor
find Fault with the Times, and indeed never have reason to do so.
		Men of eminent Parts and Abilities as well as Virtues do
sometimes rise in Courts, sometimes in the Law, and sometimes even
in the Church. Such were the Lord Bacon, the Earl of Strafford,
Arch-bishop Laud in the Reign of King Charles I. and others in our
own times whom I shall not Name: But these and many more under
different Princes, and in different Kingdoms, were Disgraced or
Banished, or suffered Death, meerely in Envy to their Virtues and
Superior Genius, which emboldned them in great Exigencies and
distresses of State (wanting a reasonable Infusion of this
Aldermanly Discretion) to attempt the Service of their Prince and
Country out of the common Forms.
		This evil Fortune, which generally attends extraordinary Men in
the Management of great Affairs, hath been imputed to divers Causes,
that need not be here set down, when so obvious a One occurs. For,
if what a certain Writer observes, be true, that, when a great
Genius appears in the World, the Dunces are all in Confederacy
against him: And thus although he imploys his Talents wholly in his
Closet, without interfaring with any Man's Ambition or Avarice; what
must he expect when he ventures out to seek for Preferment in a
Court, but Universal Opposition, when he is mounting the Ladder, and
every hand ready to turn him off, when he is at the Top? And in this
point Fortune generally Acts directly contrary to Nature, For in
Nature we find, that Bodies full of Life and Spirit mount easily,
and are hard to fall, whereas heavy Bodies are hard to rise, and
come down with greater Velocity, in Proportion to their weight. But
we find Fortune every Day Acting just the reverse of this.
		This Talent of Discretion, as I have described it in it's
several Adjuncts and Circumstances, is no where so serviceable as to
the Clergy, to whose Preferment, nothing is so fatal as the
Character of Wit, Politeness in Reading, or Manners, or that kind of
Behaviour which we contract, by having too much Conversed with
Persons of high Stations and Eminency, these Qualifications being
reckoned by the Vulgar of all Ranks to be marks of Levity, which is
the last Crime the World will pardon in a Clergy-Man. To this I may
add a free manner of speaking in mixt Company, and too frequent an
Appearance in places of much resort, which are equally Noxious to
Spiritual Promotions.
		I have known indeed a few Exceptions to some parts of these
Regulations. I have seen some of the Dullest Men alive aiming at
Witt, and others with as little Pretensions, affecting Politeness in
Manners and Discourse, but never being able to persuade the World of
their Guilt, they grew into considerable Stations, upon the firm
Assurance which all People had of their Discretion, because they
were a Size too low to deceive the World to their own Disadvantage.
But this I confess is a Tryal too dangerous often to engage in.
		There is a known Story of a Clergy-Man, who was recommended for
a Preferment by some great Man at Court, to A.B.C.T. His Grace said,
he had heard that the Clergy-Man used to play at Whisk and Swobbers,
that as to playing now and then a Sober Game at Whisk for pastime,
it might be pardoned, but he could not digest those wicked Swobbers,
and it was with some pains that my Lord SÄÄÄÄrs could undeceive him.
I ask, by what Talents we may suppose that great PrÄÄÄÄ ascended so
high, or what sort of Qualifications he would expect in those whom
he took into his Patronage, or would probably recommend to Court for
the government of Distant Churches.
		Two Clergy-Men in my Memory stood Candidates for a small Free-
School in ÄÄÄÄShire, where a Gentleman of Quality and Interest in
the Country, who happened to have a better understanding than his
Neighbours, procured the place for him who was the better Schollar,
and more Gentlemanly Person of the two, very much to the Regret of
all the Parish; The other being disappointed, came up to London,
where he became the greatest Pattern of this lower Discretion, that
I have known and possessed with as heavy Intellectuals, which
together with the coldness of his Temper, and gravity of his
Deportment, carried him safe through many Difficulties, and he lived
and dyed in a great Station, while his Competitor is too obscure for
Fame to tell us what became of him.
		This Species of Discretion which I so much celebrate, and do
most heartly recommend, hath one Advantage not yet mentioned, that
it will carry a Man safe through all the Malice and Variety of
Parties, so far, that whatever Faction happen to be uppermost, his
Claim is usually allowed for a share of what is going. And the thing
seems to be highly reasonable. For in all great Changes, the
prevailing side is usually so Tempestuous, that it wants the balast
of those whom the World calls moderate Men and I call Men of
Discretion, whom People in Power may with little Ceremony load as
heavy as they please, drive them through the hardest and deepest
Roads without danger of Foundring, or breaking their Backs, and will
be sure to find them neither Resty nor Vicious.
		In some following Paper, I will give the Reader a short History
of two Clergy-Men in England, the Characters of each, and the
Progress of their Fortunes in the World. By which the force of
worldly Discretion and the bad Consequences from the want of that
Virtue will strongly appear.