
                            NUMB. X.
                                
                     Magnas Componere lites.
                                
                                 Lucass's Coffee-house, July 4th.

		Mr. Intelligencer,
		
I Am desired to return you the Thanks of this House, for that
Seasonable Dialogue between Timothy and Mullinix. You have intirely
reconciled them both by it, and thereby given the finishing stroke
to a Party, which gives universal Joy and Satisfaction to all well-
wishers of our Constitution.  It was very much lamented, that Men of
their extraordinary Talents, (and who might by their united Interest
contribute very much to the good of our Country) should not have a
better understanding between them; because the perpetual Feuds and
Animosities which they raised, had like to have proved of the most
fatal ill Consequence to this unfortunate, poor, divided Nation. 
Now the Clouds which hung over us, are dispelled; Things begin to
clear up; and we have the best reason to think, by this Union, that
we shall be a Great and a Flourishing People. We are now in a
profound Peace, Trade flourishes.ÄÄPlenty, which fled from hence to
Scotland, is returned.ÄÄYou see Joy and Fatness in every
Countenance, especially in those of the Natives.ÄÄThe younger Sons
of Gentlemen, who languished, loitering at Home, for want of
Business, are now in a fair way of Employment. Arts and Sciences
begin to revive in our University; that great Nursery of the best
Education! which Annually supplies the Pulpit, Bench and Bar, and
every other useful Office.  All our Nobility and Gentry, who fled to
Great-Brittain, to avoid the Civil Broils occasioned by Tim C‘sar,
and Mullinix Pompey, are now returning, to live quietly at Home, and
to bring a Blessing to their Native Soil, by residing in it; which
will be a means to keep our Money at Home; to encourage Agriculture,
especially Tillage; and then, Sing O be Joyful, we shall all wallow
in Wealth, because by this we shall have nine hundred thousand
Pounds a Year more in this Nation. These and numberless Advantages
beside, we owe to your excellent Paper, which Tim himself allows to
be written with a very good Intention, although it places him in a
ludicrous Light, but he is a Man of such excellent Taste and Temper,
that a Jest, when it is finely Couched, never gives him the least
Offence.  This encourages me to let you know, he is very angry at
Mr. Gay; for he thinks the Fable of the Monkey which had seen the
World is levelled at him.  If you have leisure to write something
merry upon the occasion, let us have it immediately, and answer this
Letter another time. For, you must know, we are very great Jokers in
this Coffee-House.  There is a little dapper Lord, an Acquaintance
of Tim's, will laugh and teize him into his Chair, and home again. 

Ä


                       Tim and the Fables.
                                
MY meaning will be best unravell'd,
When I premise, that Tim has Travell'd.
In Lucass's by chance there lay
The Fables writ by Mr. Gay,
Tim set the Volume on a Table,                        
Read over here and there a Fable,
And found, as he the pages twirl'd,
The Monkey, who had seen the World.
(For Tonson had, to help the Sale,
Prefixt a Cut to ev'ry Tale.)                        
The Monkey was compleatly drest,
The Beau in all his Ayrs exprest.
Tim with surprize and pleasure staring,
Ran to the Glass, and then comparing
His own sweet Figure with the Print,                 
Distinguish'd ev'ry Feature in't;
The Twist, the Squeeze, the Rump, the Fidge an' all,
Just as they lookt in the Original.
By ÄÄÄÄ says Tim (and let a FÄÄÄÄt)
This Graver understood his Art.                      
'Tis a true Copy, I'll say that for't,
I well remember when I sat for't.
My very Face, at first I knew it,
Just in this dress the Painter drew it.
Tim, with his likeness deeply smitten,               
Wou'd read what underneath was written,
The merry Tale with moral Grave.
He now began to storm and rave;
The cursed Villain! now I see
This was a Libel meant at me;                        
These Scriblers grow so bold of late,
Against us Ministers of State!
Such Jacobites as he deserve,ÄÄÄÄ
Dammee, I say, they ought to starve.
Dear Tim, no more such angry Speeches,               
Unbutton and let down your Breeches,
Tare out the Tale, and wipe your AÄÄÄÄ
I know you love to act a Farce.