 NUMB. IX.

FROM frequently reflecting upon the Course and Method of Educating
Youth in this and a Neighbouring Kingdom, with the general Success
and consequence thereof; I am come to this Determination, That
Education is always the worse in Proportion to the Wealth and
Grandeur of the Parents. Nor do I doubt in the least, that if the
whole World were now under the Dominion of one Monarch (provided I
might be allowed to chuse where he should fix the Seat of his
Empire) the only Son and Heir of that Monarch, would be the worst
Educated Mortal, that ever was born since the Creation: And, I doubt
the same Proportion will hold through all Degrees and Titles, from
an Emperor downwards, to the common Gentry. I do not say that this
hath been always the case: for in better times it was directly
otherwise; and a Scholar may fill half his Greek and Roman Shelves
with Authors of the Noblest Birth, as well as highest Virtue. Nor,
do I tax all Nations at present with this defect, for I know there
are some to be excepted, and particularly Scotland, under all the
Disadvantages of it's Clymate and Soyle, if that happiness be not
rather owing even to those very dis-advantages. What is then to be
done, if this Reflection must fix on two Countries, which will be
most ready to take Offence, and which of all others it will be least
prudent or safe to offend?
		But there is one Circumstance yet more Dangerous and
Lamentable. For if, according to the Postulatum already laid down,
the higher Quality any Youth is of, he is in greater likelyhood to
be worse Educated, it behooves me to dread, and keep far from the
Verge of Scandalum Magnatum.
		Retracting therefore that hazardous Postulatum, I shall venture
no further at present than to say, that perhaps some Additional Care
in Educating the Sons of Nobility, and principal Gentry, might not
be ill employed. If this be not delivered with softness enough, I
must for the future be Silent.
		In the mean time, let me ask only two Questions, which relate
to a Neighbouring Kingdom, from whence the Chief among us are
descended, and whose manners we most affect to follow. I ask first,
how it comes about, that for above 60 Years past, the Chief Conduct
of Affairs in that Kingdom hath been generally placed in the Hands
of New-men, with very few Exceptions. The Noblest Blood of England
having been shed in the grand Rebellion, many great Families became
extinct, or supported only by Minors: when the King was Restored,
very few of those Lords remained, who began, or at least had
improved their Education, under the happy Reign of King James, or
King Charles I, of which Lords the two principal were the Marquiss
of Ormonde, and the Earl of Southampton. The Minors had, during the
Rebellion and Usurpation, either received too much Tincture of bad
Principles from those Fanatick Times, or coming to Age at the
Restoration, fell into the Vices of that dissolute Reign.
		I Date from this ’ra, the Corrupt Method of Education among us,
and the consequence thereof, in the Necessity the Crown lay under of
Introducing New-men into the chief Conduct of publick Affairs, or to
the Office of what we now call Prime Ministers, Men of Art,
Knowledge, Application, and Insinuation, meerly for want of a supply
among the Nobility. They were generally (though not always) of good
Birth, sometimes Younger Brothers, at other times, such who although
inheriting good Estates, yet happened to be well Educated, and
provided with Learning; such under that King, were Hyde, Bridgman,
Clifford, Coventry, Osborn, Godolphin, Ashley-Cooper; Few or none
under the short Reign of King James II. Under King William; Summers,
Montague, Churchil, Vernon, Harry Boyle, and many others: Under the
Queen; Harley, St. John, Harcourt, Trevers, who indeed were Persons
of the best private Families, but unadorn'd with Titles. So in the
last Reign, Mr. Robert Walpole, was understood for many Years, to be
Prime Minister, in which Post he still happily continues; His
Brother Horace is Ambassador Extraordinary to France. Mr. Addison,
and Mr. Craiggs, without the least Allyance to support them, have
been Secretaries of State.
		If the Facts have been thus for above 60 years past (whereof I
could with a little further Recollection produce many more
Instances) I would ask again, how it hath happened, that in a Nation
plentifully abounding with Nobility, so great share in the most
important parts of publick management, hath been for so long a
Period chiefly entrusted to Commonners; unless some Omissions, or
Defects of the highest Import, may be charged upon those to whom the
care of Educating our Noble Youth hath been committed. For, if there
be any difference between human Creatures in the point of natural
Parts, as we usually call them, it should seem, that the Advantage
lyes on the side of Children born from Noble and Wealthy Parents;
the same Traditional Sloth and Luxury which render their Body Weak
and Effeminate, perhaps refining and giving a freer motion to the
Spirits, beyond what can be expected from the gross robust Issue of
meaner Mortals. Add to this, the peculiar Advantages, which all
young Noblemen possess, by the Priviledges of their Birth; Such as a
free access to Courts, and a universal Deference pay'd to their
Persons.
		But as my Lord Bacon chargeth it for a fault on Princes, that
they are impatient to compass Ends without giving themselves the
trouble of consulting or executing the means. So perhaps it may be
the disposition of young Nobles, either from the Indulgence of
Parents, Tutors and Governors, or their own Inactivity, that they
expect the accomplishments of a good Education without the least
expence of Time or Study, to acquire them.
		What I said last, I am ready to retract; For the case is
infinitely worse; and the very Maxims set up to direct modern
Education, are enough to destroy all the Seeds of Knowledge, Honour,
Wisdom, and Virtue among us. The current Opinion prevails that the
study of Greek and Latin is loss of Time; that publick Schools by
mingling the Sons of Noblemen, with those of the Vulgar, engage the
former in bad Company; That whipping breaks the Spirits of Lads well
Born; That Universities make young Men Pedants. That, to Dance,
Fence, speak French, and know how to behave your self among great
Persons of both Sexes, comprehends the whole duty of a Gentleman.
		I cannot but think this wise System of Education, hath been
much cultivated among us by those Worthies of the Army, who during
the last War returning from Flanders at the close of each Campaign,
became the Dictators of Behaviour, Dress and Politeness to all those
Youngsters, who frequent Chocolate-Coffee-Gaming-Houses, Drawing-
Rooms, Opera's, Levees, and Assemblies; where a Colonel by his Pay,
Perquisites, and Plunder, was qualifyed to outshine many Peers of
the Realm; and by the influence of an exotick Habit and Demeanor,
added to other foreign Accomplishments, gave the Law to the whole
Town, and were copyed as the Standard-Patterns of whatever was
refined in Dress, Equipage, Conversation, or Diversions.
		I remember in those Times, an Admired Original of that
Vocation, sitting in a Coffee-house near two Gentlemen, whereof one
was of the Clergy, who were engaged in some discourse that savoured
of Learning; This Officer thought fit to interpose, and professing
to deliver the Sentiments of his Fraternity as well as his own (and
probably did so of too many among them) turning to the Clergyman,
spoke in the following manner. DÄÄn me, Doctor, say what you will,
the Army is the only School for Gentlemen. Do you think my Lord
Marlborough beat the French, with Greek and Latin. DÄÄn me, a
Scholar when he comes into good Company; what is he but an Ass? DÄÄn
me, I would be glad by GÄÄd to see any of your Schollars with his
Nouns, and his Verbs, and his Philosophy, and Trigonometry, what a
figure he would make at a Siege or Blockado or reconoitring ÄÄ DÄÄn
me &c. After which he proceeded with a Volley of Military Terms,
less significant, sounding worse, and harder to be understood than
any that were ever Coyned by the Commentators upon Aristotle. I
would not here be thought to charge the Soldiery with Ignorance and
contempt of Learning, without allowing Exceptions, of which I have
known many, and some even in this Kingdom, but however, the worse
example, especially in a great Majority will certainly prevail.
		I have heard that the late Earl of Oxford in the time of his
Ministry, never past by White's Chocolate-house (the common
Rendezvous of infamous Sharpers, and noble Cullies) without
bestowing a Curse upon that famous Accademy, as the Bane of half the
English Nobility. I have been likewise told another passage
concerning that great Minister; which because it gives a humorous
Idea of one principal Ingredient in modern Education, take as
followeth. Le-Sac the Famous French Dancing-master in great
Admiration asked a friend, whether it were true that Mr. Harley was
made an Earl, and Lord Treasurer: And finding it confirmed, said;
Well, I wonder what the Devil the Queen could see in him; for I
attended him two Years, and he was the greatest Dunce that ever I
taught.
		Another hindrance to good Education, and I think, the greatest
of any, is that pernicious custom in Rich and Noble Families, of
entertaining French Tutors in their Houses. These wretched
P‘dagogues are enjoyned by the Father, to take special care, that
the Boy shall be perfect in his French; By the Mother, that Master
must not walk till he is hot, nor be suffered to play with other
Boys, nor be wet in his Feet, nor daub his Cloaths, and to see that
the Dancing-master attends constantly, and does his Duty: she
further insists that the Child be not kept too long poring on his
Book, because he is subject to sore Eyes, and of a weakly
Constitution.
		By these methods the young Gentleman is in every Article as
fully accomplished at 8 Years old as at eight and twenty (Age adding
only to the growth of his Person and his Vice) so that if you should
look at him in his Boyhood through the magnifying end of a
Perspective, and in his Manhood through the other, it would be
impossible to spy any difference: The same Airs, the same Strutt,
the same Cock of his Hat, and posture of his Sword (as far as the
change of fashions will allow) the same understanding, the same
compass of knowledge, with the very same Absurdity, Impudence, and
Impertinence of Tongue.
		He is taught from the Nursery that he must inherit a great
Estate, and hath no need to mind his Book, which is a Lesson he
never forgets to the end of his life. His chief Solace is to steal
down and play at Span-farthing with the Page, or young Black-a-moor,
or little favorite Foot-boy, one of which is his principal
Confident, and Bosom-friend.
		There is one young Lord in this Town, who by an unexampled
piece of good Fortune, was miraculously snatched out of the Gulph of
Ignorance, confined to a publick School for a due Term of Years,
well Whipped when he deserved it; clad no better than his Comrades,
and always their Play-fellow on the same foot, had no Precedence in
the School, but what was given him by his Merit, and lost it
whenever he was Negligent. It is well known how many Mutinies were
bred at this unpresidented Treatment, what complaints among his
Relations, and other Great ones of both Sexes; that his Stockings
with silver Clocks were ravished from him, that he wore his own
Hair, that his dress was undistinguished; that he was not fit to
appear at a Ball or Assembly, nor suffered to go to either. And it
was with the utmost difficulty that he became qualifyed for his
present removal, where he may probably be farther Persecuted, and
possibly with Success, if the firmness of a very Worthy Governor,
and his own good Dispositions will not preserve him. I confess, I
cannot but wish he may go on in the way he began, because I have a
curiosity to know by so singular an Experiment, whether Truth,
Honour, Justice, Temperance, Courage and good Sense acquired by a
School and College Education, may not produce a very tolerable Lad,
although he should happen to fail in one or two of those
accomplishments, which in the general Vogue, are held so important
to the finishing of a Gentleman.
		It is true, I have known an Accademical Education to have been
exploded in publick Assemblies; and have heard more than one or two
Persons of high Rank, declare they could learn nothing more at
Oxford and Cambridge, than to drink Ale and smoke Tobacco; wherein I
firmly believ'd them, and could have added some hundred Examples
from my own observation in one of those Universities, but they all
were of young Heirs sent thither, only for form, either from Schools
where they were not suffered by their careful Parents, to stay above
three Months in the Year, or from under the management of French
Family-Tutors, who yet often attended them to their College, to
prevent all possibility of their Improvement. But, I never yet knew
any one Person of Quality, who followed his Studies at the
University, and carryed away his just Proportion of Learning, that
was not ready upon all occasions to celebrate and defend that course
of Education, and to prove a Patron of Learned Men.
		There is one circumstance in a learned Education, which ought
to have much weight, even with those who have no Learning at all.
The Books read at Schools and Colleges, are full of Incitements to
Virtue, and Discouragements from Vice, drawn from the wisest
Reasons, the strongest Motives, and the most influencing Examples.
Thus, young Minds are filled early with an inclination to Good, and
an abhorrence of Evil, both which encrease in them, according to the
advances they make in Literature: And, although they may be, and too
often are, drawn by the Temptations of Youth, and the Opportunities
of a large Fortune, into some Irregularities, when they come forward
into the great World, it is ever with Reluctance and Compunction of
Mind, because their Byas to Virtue still continues. They may stray
sometimes out of Infirmity or Complyance, but they will soon return
to the right Rode, and keep it always in view. I speak only of those
Excesses, which are too much the Attendants of Youth and warmer
Blood; for, as to the Points of Honour, Truth, Justice, and other
noble Gifts of the Mind, wherein the temperature of the Body hath no
concern, they are seldom or never known to be misled.
		I have engaged my self very unwarily in too copious a Subject
for so short a Paper. The present Scope I would aim at is to prove,
that some Proportion of human Knowledge appears requisite to those,
who by their Birth or Fortune, are called to the making of Laws, and
in a subordinate way to the execution of them; and that such
Knowledge is not to be obtained without a Miracle, under the
frequent, corrupt, and sottish Methods, of educating those who are
born to Wealth or Titles. For, I would have it remembred, that I do
by no means confine these Remarks to young Persons of Noble Birth;
the same Errors running through all Families, where there is Wealth
enough to afford, that their Sons (at least the Eldest) may be good
for nothing. Why should my Son be a Scholar, when it is not intended
that he should live by his Learning? By this Rule, if what is
commonly said be true, that Money answereth all Things, why should
my Son be honest, temperate, just, or charitable, since he hath no
intention to depend upon any of these Qualities for a Maintenance?
		When all is done, perhaps upon the whole, the matter is not so
bad as I would make it; and, God, who worketh good out of evil,
acting only by the ordinary Course and rule of Nature, permits this
continual Circulation of human things, for his own unsearchable
Ends. The Father grows rich by Avarice, Injustice, Oppression; he is
a Tyrant in the Neighbourhood, over Slaves and Beggars, whom he
calls his Tenants. Why should he desire to have qualities infused
into his Son, which himself never possessed, or knew, or found the
want of in the acquisition of his Wealth? The Son bred in Sloth and
Idleness, becomes a Spendthrift, a Cully, a Profligate, and goes out
of the World a Beggar, as his Father came in: Thus, the former is
punished for his own Sins, as well as for those of the latter. The
Dunghil having raised a huge Mushroom of short duration, is now
spread to enrich other Mens Lands. It is indeed of worse
consequence, where noble Families are gone to decay; because their
Titles and Priviledges out-live their Estates: And, Politicians tell
us, that nothing is more dangerous to the Publick, than a numerous
Nobility without Merit or Fortune. But even here, God hath likewise
prescribed some Remedy in the order of Nature; so many great
Families coming to an end by the Sloth, Luxury, and abandoned Lusts,
which enervated their Breed thorough every Succession, producing
gradually a more effeminate Race, wholly unfit for Propagation.