NUMB. I.
      For Saturday May 11th, 1728. To be continued Weekly.
                                

IT may be said, without offence to other Cities, of much greater
consequence in the World, that our Town of Dublin doth not want it's
due proportion of Folly, and Vice, both Native and Imported; And as
to those Imported, we have the advantage to receive them last, and
consequently after our happy manner to improve, and refine upon
them. 
		But, because there are many Effects of Folly and Vice among us,
whereof some are general, others confined to smaller Numbers, and
others again, perhaps to a few individuals; There is a Society
lately established, who at great expence, have Erected an Office of
Intelligence, from which they are to receive Weekly Information of
all Important Events and Singularities, which this famous Metropolis
can furnish. Strict injunctions are given to have the truest
Information: In order to which, certain qualified Persons are
employed to attend upon Duty in their several Posts; some at the
Play-house, others in Churches, some at Balls, Assemblees, Coffee-
houses, and meetings for Quadrille; some at the several Courts of
Justice, both Spiritual and Temporal, some at the College, some upon
my Lord Mayor and Aldermen in their publick Affairs; lastly, some to
converse with favourite Chamber-maids, and to frequent those Ale-
houses, and Brandy-Shops, where the Footmen of great Families meet
in a Morning; only the Barracks and Parliament-house are excepted;
because we have yet found no enfans perdus bold enough to venture
their Persons at either. Out of these and some other Store-houses,
we hope to gather Materials enough to Inform, or Divert, or Correct,
or Vex the Town.
		But as Facts, Passages, and Adventures of all kinds, are like
to have the greatest share in our Paper, whereof we cannot always
Answer for the Truth; due Care shall be taken to have them applyed
to feigned Names, whereby all just Offence will be removed; for if
none be guilty, none will have cause to Blush or be Angry; if
otherwise, then the guilty Person is safe for the future upon his
present Amendment, and safe for the present, from all but his own
Conscience.
		There is another Resolution taken among us, which I fear will
give a greater and more general discontent, and is of so singular a
Nature, that I have hardly confidence enough to mention it, although
it be absolutely Necessary by way of Apology, for so bold and
unpopular an Attempt. But so it is, that we have taken a desperate
Counsel to produce into the World every distinguished Action, either
of Justice, Prudence, Generosity, Charity, Friendship, or publick
Spirit, which comes well attested to us. And although we shall
neither here be so daring as to Assign Names, yet we shall hardly
forbear to give some hints, that perhaps to the great displeasure of
such deserving Persons may endanger a Discovery. For we think that
even Virtue it self, should submit to such a Mortification, as by
it's visibility and example, will render it more useful to the
World. But however, the Readers of these Papers, need not be in pain
of being over-charged, with so dull and ungrateful a Subject. And
yet who knows, but such an occasion may be offered to us, once in a
Year or two, after we shall have settled a Correspondence round the
Kingdom.
		But after all our boasts of Materials, sent us by our several
Emissaries, we may probably soon fall short, if the Town will not be
pleased to lend us further Assistance towards entertaining it self.
The World best knows it's own Faults and Virtues, and whatever is
sent shall be faithfully returned back, only a little Embellished
according to the Custom of AUTHORS. We do therefore Demand and
Expect continual Advertisements in great Numbers, to be sent to the
PRINTER of this Paper, who hath employed a Judicious Secretary to
Collect such as may be most useful for the Publick.
		And although we do not intend to expose our own Persons by
mentioning Names, yet we are so far from requiring the same Caution
in our Correspondents, that on the contrary, we expressly Charge and
Command them, in all the Facts they send us, to set down the Names,
Titles, and Places of Abode at length; together with a very
particular Description of the Persons, Dresses, and Dispositions of
the several Lords, Ladies, Squires, Madams, Lawyers, Gamesters,
Toupees, Sots, Wits, Rakes, and Informers, whom they shall have
occasion to mention; otherwise it will not be possible for us to
adjust our Style to the different Qualities, and Capacities of the
Persons concerned, and Treat them with the Respect or Familiarity,
that may be due to their Stations and Characters, which we are
Determined to observe with the utmost strictness, that none may have
cause to Complain.