
                            NUMB. XX.
                                
                          DEAN SMEDLEY
                        Gone to seek his
                            FORTUNE.
                                
          Per varios casus per tot discrimina rare Rum.
                                
                  A short HISTORY of the DEAN,
                     by way of illustration.

HIS first rise in the Church was a small living in the Diocese of
Cork, given him by the GOVERNMENT, to the Surprize of the whole
World.  This Living he swapped soon after for a Chaplain's Post to a
Regiment, which he Sold for five Hundred Pounds.  He turned his Hand
with this Money, and in a very litle time, got a DEANERY, this he
swapped likewise for another Living.  After this again he got
another DEANERY, by some unacountable methods, but being much in
Debt, he was forced to fly his Country, and disposed of it, in what
manner no Body can tell, but himself and another.  He has left one
living behind him, which he could not avoid doing, because it was
sequestred for his Debts.  When he went for England, in order to
turn the Penny, he received Subscripsions from Numbers of Gentlemen,
to carry on a Work, which would have taken ten Years to accomplish,
if the most Ingenious and Learned Person had undertaken it, and
which he himself could not have done in ten Thousand Years.  After
all this, he run off to Fort St. George, and left the following
Character of himself.

Ä

FROM the Political State for the Month of February 1729 pag. 209.

ABOUT the same time it was published (in the Dayly Post of February
13th) that a Mezzotinto is engraving from an Original Picture of
Dean Smedley, with this remarkable Inscription, Written by Himself.

REVERENDUS Decanus, Jonathan Smedley: Theologia instructus; in Poesi
exercitatus; Politioribus excultus Literis: Parce Pius, Impius
minime: Veritatis Indagator; Libertatis Assertor: Subsannatus
multis; Fastiditus Quibusdam; Exoptatus plurimis; Omnibus Amicus;
Author hujus Sententi‘,
                       PATRES SUNT VETUL’.
Domata Invidia; Superato Odio; per Laudem et Vituperium; per Famam
atq; Infamiam: Utramque Fortunam, Variosq; expertus Casus; Mente
Sana; Sano Corpore; Volens, L‘tusq; Lustris plus quam XI numeratis;
ad Rem Familiarem Restaurandam, augendamq; et ad Evangelium, Indos
inter Orientales, pr‘dicandum; Grev‘, Idibus Februarii, Navem
ascendens, Arcemq; Sancti petens Georgii, Vernale per ’quinoxium;
Anno ’r‘ Christian‘, Millesimo Septingentesimo Vicesimo Octavo
TRANSFRETAVIT.
               ÄÄFata vocantÄÄRevocentq; precamur.
                      
              Thus translated.
                      
THE very Reverend Dean Smedley,
Of Dullness, Pride, Conceit, a medley,
Was equally allow'd to shine,
As Poet, Scholar and Divine.
With Godliness cou'd well dispense,         
Wou'd be a Rake, but wanted Sense.
Wou'd strictly after Truth enquire
Because he dreaded to come nigh'r.
For Liberty no Champion bolder,
He hated Bailiffs at his shoulder.         
To half the world a standing jest,
A perfect Nuissance to the rest.
From many (and we may believe him)
Had the best wishes they cou'd give him.
To all mankind a constant friend,          
Provided they had Cash to lend.
One thing he did before he went hence,
He left us a Laconick Sentence,
By cutting of his Phrase, and trimming,
To prove that Bishops were old Women.      
Poor Envy durst not shew her Phiz,
She was so terrify'd at his.
He waded without any shame,
Thro' thick and thin, to get a name.
Try'd ev'ry sharping Trick for Bread,      
And after all he seldom Sped.
When fortune favour'd, he was nice,
He never once wou'd cog the Dice,
But if she turn'd against his play,
He knew to stop a quater trois.            
Now sound in mind, and sound in corpus,
(Says he) tho' swell'd like any porpus,
He heys from hence at forty four,
(But by his Leave he sinks a Score,)
To the East Indies, there to cheat,        
'Till he can purchase an Estate;
Where after he has fill'd his chest,
He'll mount his Tub, and preach his best,
And plainly prove by dint of Text,
This World is his, and theirs the next.    
	Lest that the reader shou'd not know,
The Bank where last he set his Toe,
'Twas Greenwich.  There he took a Ship,
And gave his Creditors the Slip.
But lest Chronology should vary,           
Upon the Ides of February,
In seventeen hundred eight and twenty,
To Fort St. George a Pedlar went he.
Ye Fates, when all he gets is Spent,
RETURN HIM BEGGAR AS HE WENT.              

Ä

ALL Gentlemen, who are any ways attacked by Dunces, are desired to
send a formal Complaint to the Intelligencer, with the Names of the
Delinquents, there shall be ample Satisfaction given, by Printing
the Dunces Names at length, with Animadversions, suitable to their
Crimes and Qualities.  By which means, we shall in time be enabled
to accomplish an Irish Dunciad, in imitation of that incomparable
Duncepick Poem, Written and Published, by the most Ingenious Mr.
Pope against the Grub-street Scriblers of Great-Brittain.  The
Intelligencer does likewise for the Ease of the Publick, give
Warning to all Dunces, of what Rank soever, forthwith to lay aside
their Crambo, or he does in a most solemn manner declare he will
Couple them together in their own Rhymes.  He does farther assure
them, that if, after this his Proclamation, any Dunce within this
Realm of Ireland, shall presume to touch Pen, Ink, or Paper, after
the twentieth Day of this Instant, before which time it is to be
presumed he may hear this Read, that then, ipso facto, he pronounces
him an Out-law, and of Consequence every Man has a right to his
Head.  And for every such Head, brought in, the Reward shall be the
current Price of a Sheep's Head, be the Rate ever so High.

                                           Dated at our Chambers.
                                               May, the 7th 1729.
                                                                 