 NUMB. VII.
                                
                ÄÄÄÄÄÄProbitas laudatur & alget.

CORUSODES an Oxford Student, and a Farmers Son, was never absent
from Prayers, or Lecture, nor once out of his College after Tom had
tolld. He spent every Day ten hours in his Closet, in Reading his
Courses, Dozing, clipping Papers, or darning his Stockings, which
last he performed to Admiration. He could be soberly Drunk at the
expence of others, with College Ale, and at those Seasons was always
most Devout. He wore the same Gown five Years, without dagling or
tearing. He never once looked into a Play-book or a Poem. He Read
Virgil and Ramus in the same Cadence, but with a very different
Taste. He never understood a Jest, or had the least Conception of
Wit.
		For one saying he stands in Renown to this Day. Being with some
other Students over a Pot of Ale; one of the Company said so many
pleasant things, that the rest were much diverted, only Corusodes
was silent and unmoved. When they parted, he called this merry
Companion aside, and said; Sir, I perceived by your often speaking,
and our Friends laughing, that you spoke many jests, and you could
not but observe my Silence. But Sir this is my humour, I never make
a jest myself, nor ever laugh at another Man's.
		Corusodes thus endowed, and got into Holy Orders, having by the
most extreme Parsimoney, saved thirty four Pounds out of a very
Beggarly Fellowship, went up to London, where his Sister was
Waiting-woman to a Lady, and so good a Sollicitor, that by her means
he was admitted to Read Prayers in the Family twice a Day, at
fourteen shillings a Month. He had now acquired a low Obsequious
awkward Bow, and a talent of gross flattery both in and out of
season; he would shake the Butler by the Hand; He taught the Page
his Catechism, and was sometimes admitted to Dine at the Stewards
Table. In short he got the good Word of the whole Family, and was
Recommended by my Lady for Chaplain to some other Noble House, by
which his Revenue (beside Vales) amounted to about 30 l. a Year. His
Sister procured him a Scarf from my Lord (who had a small design of
Gallantry upon her) And by his Lordships Sollicitation he got a
Lectureship in Town of 60 l. a Year; where he Preached constantly in
Person, in a grave manner, with an Audible Voice, a Style
Ecclesiastick, and the matter (such as it was) well suited to the
intellectuals of his Hearers. Some time after, a Country Living fell
in my Lord's Disposal, and his Lordship who had now some
encouragement given him of Success in his Amour, bestowed the Living
on Corusodes, who still kept his Lectureship and Residence in Town,
where he was a constant Attendant at all Meetings relating to
Charity, without ever contributing further than his frequent Pious
Exhortations. If any Women of better fashion in the Parish happened
to be absent from Church, they were sure of a Visit from him in a
Day or two, to Chide and to Dine with them.
		He had a select number of Poor constantly attending at the
Street Door of his Lodgings, for whom he was a common Sollicitor to
his former Patroness, dropping in his own Half Crown among the
Collections and taking it out when he disposed the money. At a
Person of Qualities House, he would never sit down till he was
thrice bid, and then upon the corner of the most distant chair. His
whole demeanor was formal and starched, which adhered so close, that
he could never shake it off in his highest Promotion.
		His Lord was now in high Employment at Court, and attended by
him with the most abject Assiduity, and his Sister being gone off
with Child to a private Lodging, my Lord continued his Graces to
Corusodes, got him to be a Chaplain in ordinary, and in due time a
Parish in Town, and a Dignity in the Church.
		He paid his Curates punctually, at the lowest Sallery, and
partly out of the communion money, but gave them good advice in
abundance. He Marryed a Citizens Widow, who taught him to put out
small sums at ten per cent, and brought him acquainted with Jobbers
in Change-Alley. By her dexterity he sold the Clarkship of his
Parish, when it became vacant.
		He kept a miserable house, but the Blame was layed wholly upon
Madam; For the good Doctor was always at his Books, or visiting the
Sick, or doing other Offices of Charity and piety in his Parish.
		He treated all his inferiors of the Clergy with a most
sanctifyed pride; was rigorously and universally, censorious upon
all his brethren of the Gown, on their first appearance in the
world, or while they continued meanly preferred; But gave large
allowance to the Layity of high rank, or great riches, using neither
Eyes nor Ears for their faults. He was never sensible of the least
corruption in Courts, Parliaments, or Ministries, but made the most
favourable constructions of all publick proceedings; and Power, in
whatever Hands, or whatever Party, was always secure of his most
charitable opinion.  He had many wholsome maxims ready to excuse all
miscarriages of State. Men are but Men. Erunt vitia donec homines;
and Quod Supra nos nihil ad nos. with several others of equal
weight.
		It would lengthen my paper beyond measure to trace out the
whole System of his conduct: His dreadfull apprehensions of Popery;
his great moderation towards Dissenters of all Denominations; with
hearty wishes that by yielding somewhat on both sides, there might
be a general Union among Protestants; his short inoffensive Sermons
in his turns at Court, and the matter exactly suited to the present
juncture of prevailing Opinions. The arts he used to obtain a Mitre,
by writing against Episcopacy, and the proofs he gave of his loyalty
by palliating or defending the murder of a martyred Prince.
		Endowed with all these accomplishments we leave him in the full
Carrier of Success, mounting fast towards the top of the Ladder
Ecclesiastical, which he hath a fair probability to reach, without
the merit of one single Virtue, moderately stocked with the least
valuable parts of Erudition, utterly devoyd of all Taste, Judgment
or Genius; and in his grandeur naturally chusing to hawl up others
after him, whose accomplishments most resemble his own, except his
beloved Sons, Nephews, or other kindred be not in competition, or
lastly except his inclinations be diverted by those who have power
to mortify or further advance him.
		Eugenio Set out from the same University, and about the same
time with Corusodes; He had the reputation of an arch Lad at School,
and was unfortunately possessed with a Talent for Poetry, on which
account he received many chiding Letters from his Father, and grave
advice from his Tutor. He did not neglect his College Learning, but
his chief Study was the Authors of Antiquity, with a perfect
knowledge in the Greek and Roman Tongues; He could never Procure
himself to be chosen Fellow; for it was objected against him that he
had written Verses, and particularly some wherein he glanced at a
certain Reverend Doctor, famous for Dullness: That he had been seen
bowing to Ladies, as he met them in the Streets; And it was proved
that once he had been found dancing in a private family with half a
dozen of both Sexes.
		He was the younger Son to a Gentleman of a good birth, but
small fortune, and his Father Dying he was driven to London, to seek
his fortune: he got into Orders, and became Reader in a Parish
Church at twenty Pounds a Year; was carryed by an Oxford friend to
Wills Coffee-house, frequented in those Days by the Men of Wit;
where in some time he had the bad luck to be distinguished. His
Scanty Sallery compelled him to run deep in debt for a new Gown and
Cassock, and now and then forced him to Write some Paper of Wit or
humour, or Preach a Sermon for Ten shillings, to supply his
Necessities. He was a thousand times recommended by his Poetical
Friends to great Persons, as a young man of excellent parts, who
deserved encouragement and received a thousand Promises; But his
modesty, and a generous spirit which disdained the Slavery of
continual application, and attendance, always disappointed him,
making room for Vigilant Dunces, who were sure to be never out of
sight.
		He had an excellent faculty in preaching, if he were not
sometimes a little too refined, and apt to trust too much to his own
way of thinking, and reasoning.
		When upon the vacancy of Preferment he was hardly drawn to
attend upon some promising Lord he received the usual Answer, that
he came too late, for it had been given to another the very day
before. And he had onely this comfort left, that every body said, it
was a thousand pities some thing could not be done for Poor Mr.
Eugenio.
		The Remainder of his Story will be dispatched in a few Words.
Wearied with weak hopes, and weaker pursuits he accepted a Curacy in
Darby-Shire, of thirty Pounds a Year, and when he was five and
forty, had the great felicity to be preferred by a friend of his
Father to a Vicaridge worth annually 60 pound, in the most desert
parts of Lincolnshire, where his spirit quite sunk with those
reflections, that solitude and disappointments bring, he married a
Farmers widow, and is still alive, utterly undistinguished and
forgotten, onely some of the Neighbours have accidentally heard that
he had been a notable man in his Youth.