CHAP. III.
HOW JOHN GOT A TERRIBLE FRIGHT IN HIS OWN HOUSE OF BULL-HALL.
It was not always without cause, that John Bull disliked the visits of Lewis Baboon; he knew what fine sport that rogue might have made for himself in such a house; and that besides cuckoldom, many other misfortunes might have befallen the landlord. But history, with all her gravity, will scarcely make posterity believe, how much John was afraid of his own sister Margaret's garret lodgers. Once upon a time, two or three of them being seduced by some outlandish person, who stiled himself young Mr Geoffrey, got down stairs, ran into Margaret's dining room and drawing-room, overset the china, drank the cream, and having found one of John's game-keepers teaching the maids to coddle apples in the back-kitchen, gave him a slap in the chops, and poured the scalding water on him. From thence they proceeded as they thought proper; and though Margaret threw her poker at them as they passed, with an air of great bitterness and vexation, yet John took it in his head that it was all her doing, and sent her word to keep them at home, otherwise he would set fire to her house: but just as he was talking in this strain, and abusing his poor sister as a treacherous vixin, who might have kept better order in her house if she pleased, he was silenced at once with a knock on the pate; and without staying to see what was the matter, ran up to the leads, called out to his gamekeepers, who were gone nobody knows where, then to Nicholas Frog, Rousterdivel, and all the damned names you can think of, to come to the assistance of John Bull, whose throat was just going to be cut in his own house.
Mean time, MacLurchar, for this was the ringleader in all this mischief, continued to do what he pleased. Whenever he met any of John's fellows, he asked, 'What trade are you?' And if they were weavers, he made them furnish what cloth he wanted; threatening to rip up their guts. In like manner, if they were brewers, tanners, cooks, scullions, or malsters, each in his way had something good for MacLurchar, and the fellow had learned not to be afraid, although there were three hundred of them together.
This fray, however, did not last long; MacLurchar was tired, and went away home to his garret, and John, who had been more afraid than hurt, came down stairs, and when he saw that the foe was actually gone, called out to set fire to Peg's house, to burn her, and all her vermin; for, says he, we shall never get any peace for them. Mean time, the game-keeper' took heart at last, went up to the garret, and gave MacLurchar a stunning blow in the guts, just as he was stripping to go to bed, and dragged him down to the court, where John was in a little prevailed on to come and see the object of his terror, with his hands tied behind his back. Then, indeed, he began to be ashamed of his own behaviour, and abused all his people for letting him be so much afraid; he scolded the very scullions for letting the bacon be carried off by so paultry a fellow as MacLurchar. In short, he and everybody else threw the blame upon his neighbour, but all agreed in cursing and sinking sister Peg, to the deepest pit of hell. 
It was hard to say what the poor woman had done to deserve all this treatment; but some people set to work with here merely because it was the fashion, and others found their account in it, some in one way, some in another. As for the game-keeper, it was not very difficult to see his motive; he had never beat any body before in all his life, and wanted now to magnify his feats as much as he could, and accordingly said, that few people knew the amount of what he had done; that if he had not fought with sister Margaret's people one and all, he was no true man; that he totally subdued them, and knew of nobody to compare himself to, but the ancient conquerors. That if any body said, that the whole of Margaret's people was not against him, he was a scoundrel, and a rascal, and not to be trusted.
After this, who and who were to be trusted became the great question in John's house. There was no pretending to any thing without being able to talk about trusting; and some people would scarcely let John Bull trust himself. As for poor Peg, he was the finest fellow that spoke the most ill of her. Even some of her own children who took care of nobody but themselves all the time that MacLurchar was stirring, came abroad now to confess with regret, that their mother was a sad vixin; that she had given MacLurchar a dram of cherry-brandy, before he set out upon that damned unnatural diabolical hell-fire scamper; that for their parts it was true, they had the misfortune to be born in her house, some people said of her own proper person, but few people know who their real parents are: this, however, they knew, that they had left her very young, and never liked her company. When one had made such a speech as this, another endeavoured still to improve upon it; and if one gave his mother two, three, or more abusive epithets, the next did not fail to give five or six. At last one great dolt of a fellow, called Bumbo, made a shift to get a round dozen of them on his finger ends, with which he never failed to entertain John Bull as often as he met him.
The sequel of all this spite to their mother, was a great deal of kindness to John Bull. 'Leave matters to us', said they, 'we shall take care that so worthy a man shall not be imposed upon; you should always have some of us about your own person, and give us some decent employment, that no body may suspect the design of our being here; we shall take care to place people in that unnatural sister's house, so that not a whisper shall be uttered among her gossips, but you shall hear of it'; and these speeches they commonly concluded, with a beware of counterfeits. John upon all this looked like a perfect oaff: he thought MacLurchar's knife was at his throat every moment; and these favourable dispositions they took care to improve. One time he was told that a cousin of MacLurchar's had come in secretly at Peg's garret window; at another time, that MacLurchar himself had bought a pair of new shoes; at another time, that his sister Margaret had laughed at him, when she heard that he went up to the leads; and all this, besides being asked regularly every morning, what would become of him, if he had not some trusty friends to stand between him and that unnatural sister. In short, John was put from his sleep and his appetite; he stared and stammered in his speech; you could not hear a word of common sense from him; and to have spoken a word of common sense, would have disgraced you with him for ever.
History says, however, that John did not continue very long in this humour; and, indeed, it must be owned, that it was for once a good thing to be of a changeable temper: it would have been the devil indeed, to have continued for ever in the hands of spies and informers, perpetually talking of the miseries of human life; and the truth is, that there was nothing in the world more repugnant to his ordinary temper; so that though he could not all at once return to a perfect cordiality with his sister, yet he listened to people who advised him to take gentle methods with her. He accordingly, let even MacLurchar himself off, with little more than an obligation to put on his breeches every morning before he came down stairs among the ladies; and sent a civil message to his sister, to ask her how she did, and to propose taking a lease of her garret, and said that he would pay her any rent she chose to put upon it. Many odd projects, indeed, were put in his head at this time; such as to turn that garret into a stable and coach-house; to make sister Peg lodge her coals in it, brew her ale, and wash her linen; in short, to make MacLurchar himself, besides putting on his breeches, carry up earth, and plant cabbages and turnips upon the leads. It is true, that nothing of all this has been done; but it is not John's fault, he was at some expense about it, and meant all for the best.
CHAP. XII.
HOW MRS BULL'S ATTENDANTS WERE PREPARED ON THIS SUBJECT.
Margaret could scarcely expect any other answer from her brother; he might, indeed, have talked to his wife, and it would have become him to have done so very loudly; but the settling matters of that kind, was left entirely to her and Sir Thomas. This circumstance Peg knew, and accordingly wrote to Mrs Bull, Sir Thomas, and all her own clerks in the office, to each in the style which was proper for her to make use of; and as all the originals are in our hands, not to interrupt the course of our narration, we intend to defer the publication of them, with that of many other original papers, to the conclusion of this great work.
Notwithstanding that Peg had taken all this trouble, many people were of opinion that the affair would never be heard of in the counting-room, so much were they used to see Peg's affairs overlooked; but they were mistaken. Gilbert told Mrs Bull the first or second time he saw her, what a suit he was to present from her sister, and two or three of Peg's boys were determined that it should not go without a hearing. Mean time, the nurse and Hubble-bubble were not idle. The scheme which they thought to have frustrated was taking place very fast. The boy George and his companions were laughing at them as usual, and the young men who had been sent out to watch Lewis Baboon's motions, past their time merrily in the fields, playing at cricket, pitch-bar, and foot-ball, from morning to night, eat their victuals with a good appetite, and slept as sound in a barn, as ever they had done in the best bed in John's house: all which, the nurse would not have believed, if you had sworn it to her on all the four evangelists. In short, there was no appearance of their tiring, and they would have held out through mere spite, if they had been tired, when they found that there was any intention to vex them.
All this was sore enough upon the nurse, without being obliged to see her predictions equally falsified, by having the same thing tried in sister Peg's house. This she could by no means think of with any patience, and she determined to do all she could with Mrs Bull to prevent it. For this purpose, Hubble-bubble and she took their opportunity to talk to many of Mrs Bull's attendants. They put them in mind of all the perquisites, presents and vails, which had been so kindly thrown in their way; observed of what consequence the present affair was to them, and that if they suffered their friends to be baffled, and discredited, they must not expect to be served so, in time coming. 'You may soon get other people in our places', said they, 'who will be willing to court you for the sake of your mistress; but can you go as familiarly to a new comer, to ask for a bit of victuals, or a glass of liquor between meals?' By this and such like talk, they contrived to secure the people who had Mrs Bull's ear. And though they were sure of herself at last, yet matters would go much more smoothly, if they could get any of sister Peg's own clerks to give up the affair, as if she was not very much bent upon it herself.
Historians agree, that they tampered with many people for this purpose; but it is well known that not a soul of them would listen to proposals of that kind, till they came to Bumbo, whom they would have tried sooner, if they had not thought themselves sure of him, and at the same time known what degree of credit he was likely to bring them. They had sometimes let him loose upon Mrs Bull before, to very little purpose; although for discourse he was always ready, and had stuff in his head, which might be turned into jocular sayings, serious sentences, pathetic declamations, angry ebullitions, or plantive ditties, with equal propriety. He made the same thing pass in all these shapes, but the hearers did not know either when to laugh or cry, unless he gave them a signal, by a slap in the chops, a remarkable roar, or a doleful whine, by means of which it was dangerous to sit near him; and whether you was near him or no, the changes of his voice produced an odd sort of mounting and dipping, like the heaving of waves, and had the same effect in raising a violent inclination to vomit. They say, that he had often turned Mrs Bull's stomach, and that she always took cordials when she expected a visit from him. This being the case, he was to be employed with caution; but he had still one quality, from which they expected some good, and that was his precise and accurate method of dividing mankind into Thomists and Geoffrites; in the last of which classes, he commonly put his mother Peg.
A Geoffrite originally meant any person who was for restoring Squire Geoffrey to the management of John Bull's business, and a Thomist the opposite. What this gentlemen meant by these appellations nobody could find out, for he sometimes bestowed them indifferently on Sir Thomas's best friends; and what is more surprizing still, on people who never thought of Sir Thomas nor Squire Geoffrey in all their lives; as well as some Others, who never thought of anything at all, but how to fill their own bellies and their pockets. He himself, it was said, was a Thomist of this kind; but whilst he did nothing himself, but swallow the warm pottage he had got from John Bull's nurse, he wanted to persuade you, that other people's heads were constantly taken up about the divine right of attornies to treat their clients as they pleased. A Geoffrite was his favourite topic to speak upon; but whether it was to show his sagacity in finding out what escaped other people, or merely because he had never seen any body paid for finding out Thomists, it is certain, that for one Thomist, he would point you out a dozen of Geoffrites; and you would be surprized, how the devil Sir Thomas got into the management of John Bull's or sister Peg's business at all, as Bumbo certainly was not in the way to help him to it.
With all these considerations pro and con, the nurse was extremely desirous to see him; and as fortune would have it, he was no less anxious to see her. He wanted at this very time a special reward for all his services, no less than to be appointed major-domo in Peg's own house: this was a sort of a man house-keeper, and was commonly a grave elderly person who kept the keys of Peg's pantry, and entertained as he thought proper any of the tenants, who had affairs about the house. The last major-domo was lately dead; and as John Bull's nurse took the charge of all pantries and nurseries far and near, and would let nobody meddle with them, but who was of her own chusing, it was not doubted at this time, that her favourite Bumbo would be the man. But in order to secure it the more, he furnished himself with a list of some dozen of Geoffrites, picked up nobody knows how, and containing some of those who were likely to oppose himself, in getting the major-domo-ship in Peg's family. With this provision he went down stairs, and so across the court to John Bull's house.
xmilestone
CHAP. XIII.
HOW BUMBO DISCOURSED WITH JOHN BULL'S NURSE, AND FOUND HER NOT SO GREAT A FOOL AS HE THOUGHT HER.
Bumbo, without staying to speak with any body, went straight to the nurse's closet, where he found her very melancholy, lamenting her connection with such a fool as Hubble-bubble, and not much conforted with the thought of having nobody now to trust to but Bumbo. However, as the saying is, a drowning man will catch at a straw; whenever he appeared, she got up and embraced him. Which he understanding to be as much as to say, My dear major-domo, I am glad to see you, was going to thank her, when she broke out into a perfect rage against sister Peg and her family.
'What', says she, 'is the meaning of this impertinent saucy letter, you have sent from your house to Mr Bull? have I not enough to do with his own humours and his freaks, without your refreshing his memory, and pretending to copy after him like the ass in Aesop? Set you up, indeed! we should bring our matters to a fine pass, if we minded all your letters and remonstrances.'
'I hope your ladyship', says Bumbo, 'does not imagine that I had any hand in writing that letter, or would put any thing in Peg's head, which I knew to be so disagreeable to your ladyship; indeed, I could not shew myself any where, without the hazard of being absolutely worried by the people who were for writing that insolent letter.'
'What shall we do then?' says the nurse; 'if that vixen is so much bent upon this whim, Mrs Bull cannot possibly refuse her husband's own sister, what the world will call so poor a favour; it would look like mere jealousy and spleen, and might breed heart-burnings between the two families.'
Here Mr Bumbo, perceiving the good woman's extreme distress, thought how he best might comfort her, and thereby turn the discourse to the affair of his own major-domo-ship. 'My dear madam', says he, 'don't be uneasy; this letter was written by a parcel of Geoffrites, of whom I have a list in my pocket; the few Thomists that are in that house, would sooner be hanged than do anything so disagreeable to your ladyship.'
'Yours are right Thomists', says the nurse; 'ours here are more troublesome about those matters, than any body; but assure me', says she, 'that this letter is a forgery, and I shall love you as long as I breathe.'
'A mere forgery upon my salvation', says Bumbo. 
'Well said', says she, 'what comfort you give me! Let us away to Mrs Bull, and have those forgers tried to the utmost.'
'Before your ladyship goes', says Bumbo, 'I have a little affair to mention: your ladyship knows, that the major-domo is dead, may not I presume to hope, that your ladyship will do me a good office with Sir Thomas on this occasion?'
'Assure yourself that you shall be major-domo', says the nurse; 'but you must not go, till Mrs Bull has heard your evidence about the forgery.'
'Upon my honour and reputation', says Bumbo, 'there is no Occasion; the forgery will appear quite plain, every word of it forged, as I declare to you; but that unnatural woman was persuaded to desire me to second her application, and your ladyship knows, that even a major-domo leads but a dog's life, if the mistress and every body be against him. There is Small-Trash, the Laird of Lick-pelf's brother, will give his oath about the forgery; and that is the same thing as if I did it myself, for every body knows that we always swear the same things.'
'I don't understand your scruples now', says the nurse; 'would any woman desire you to second a forged application? Besides nobody ever heard of Small-Trash; and we cannot be answerable for trusting his evidence. Stay, stay, my dear major-domo, and give us your own proper evidence in this important point of forgery.'
'I pray, says Bumbo, that your ladyship would consider my straits; I dare not say a word about Geoffrites; every body will roar, and say, they knew what was a coming; nor dare I speak my mind about Peg; I beg that your ladyship would not expose me like a bawd on the pillory, to be pelted, battered, and splashed with rotten eggs, chewed apples, and street dirt, for the faithful counsel which I give in your private ear. I will do twice as much for you in another way.'
'Well, well', says the nurse, 'I see the matter is hard, Gilbert and James will carry all before them. I shall neither meddle nor make; Sir Thomas will be imposed upon about the major-domo-ship. There are many people looking for the place, and let me tell you it is an office of great consequence. You are young, Mr Bumbo; and they say, you are hot when my back is turned, and you do not understand much of the larder or the pantry, and you huff the poor tenants when they come about the kitchen, and that Margaret herself has not that confidence in you, which the mistress of a family should have in a person, who has such a trust about her house. In short, I have had many disputes on your account, and now I am an old woman, and don't meddle much. There is little appearance of my being able to obtain this favour for you; but you may talk to Sir Thomas about it yourself. I am, indeed, very much out of order; old age has many infirmities; a very severe cough I have, and am troubled with wind; indeed, I have not eat an ounce of victuals for these three days.'
It is impossible to describe what passed in Bumbo's countennance during this harangue. It changed from suspence to embarrassment, from embarrassment to confusion, from confusion to absolute despair; and there it settled, when the nurse concluded her speech and was just a going. 'Well', says he, with a faultering voice, 'I have got many enemies on your account and Sir Thomas's; here they are, pulling the list out of his pocket, sworn Geoffrites, as I hope to be saved.'
'That will not do, Mr Bumbo', says the nurse; 'we do not care a rush for your Geoffrites or your Thomists either. They do well enough in their time, but when one is about serious business, I hate trifling. If John Bull and his sister take the defence of their houses upon themselves, we may all go packing. What influence can any body have in a family, where he has little or nothing to give away? I have been all my life contriving things for Sir Thomas and myself, to take to ourselves, or to give away, and now you would have us part with one of the best things we have. I have found, Mr Bumbo, that a person's influence in any family, depends on the number of good things he has to give; you must have caps, ribbons and petticoats for the maids, sugar-plumbs for the children, and luncheons for the clerks, and be able to help a footman now and then out of livery, otherwise they will not give an old song for you; and Sir Thomas has found plenty about John's house, otherwise Mrs Bull and he would not be so good friends as they are. People must have their vails and their perquisites. Many a time has Sir Thomas obliged his friend with a game-keeper's place or so; and consider with yourself, that if John continues to do any part of that business himself, what numbers, not only of game-keepers, foresters and whippers-in, but even weavers, taylors, smiths, accountants, bakers, tanners, and shoe-makers, will forget the way to Sir Thomas's closet, and never think more of Hubble-bubble, or your humble servant. And then the management of Rousterdivel's affairs when he was brought over, was an excellent thing; trust me, many a pretty fortune has been got by Rousterdivel. But it is all over, Mr Bumbo, all over; and now a person who comes to ask for a major-domo-ship, thinks he may do what he pleases.'
'Much honoured madam', says Bumbo, 'I hope you do not consider the scruples of a friend as an absolute refusal. I have always been ready to swear what you please, and if my oath be required to this forgery, I am ready to give it.'
'That was spoken like a major-domo', says the nurse; 'let us away to Hubble-bubble, and settle the tenour of your evidence.'

CHAP. XVI.
HOW BUMBO GAVE HIS EVIDENCE.
We are far from commending the practice of certain historians, who pretend to give the compleat speeches which were spoken many ages before, by leaders of armies, members of councils, and orators in popular assemblies; we maintain that nobody can do this, except the devil, or some person to whom the speaker himself gave a copy of his harangue in writing. This not being our case, we content ourselves with giving a few broken hints, such as we have been able to collect from the best authorities, in order to give our reader some notion of the substance of what was said to Mrs Bull upon this great occasion. With respect to the contents of this chapter, indeed, we are singularly happy, in having met with the memoirs of Suck-Fist, a very learned man of that age, who used to feed the game-keeper's pointer, and being present with Mrs Bull on this occasion, has transmitted to posterity the particulars of Bumbo's appearance.
By him we are informed, that Bumbo, after all, was not put to his oath; that the terrors of a formal oath approaching, he so explained what he had said about the forgery, that it was not thought expedient to put him to it in public; and the nurse thought it was better to hazard a speech from him at large, which if the lady's bowels could bear to an end, would at least show the world, that there was one of Peg's own people against granting her request.
Bumbo therefore appeared with this view, as no better could be made of it. Suck-Fist relates, that he began with declaring the instructions he had got from Margaret, to second her application. He said, that for his part it was his opinion, that nothing could be more reasonable than the proposal she made; that if John Bull had arms in his house, or sent his children to the fencing-school for a month or two, there was no reason why Margaret should be hindered from doing the same thing; and that there was nothing more desireable than to have every distinction between the two families abolished.
Were not Suck-Fist a writer of good authority, both in point of judgment and veracity, we should be apt to question the following particulars of his narration; they are so repugnant to what went before, and so totally void of sense or coherence, that not only we, but all future historians will hesitate before they transcribe this part of his memoirs into their works. But as fiction is often more probable than truth, we draw a presumption of veracity from the very want of likelihood in the case, and are sure that such things could never have come into any body's head, if they had not been true. To dissuade Mrs Bull from signing the order, which, it seems, was brought her ready written, relating to Peg's people, he tells her, that it was exactly like that she had already given in her own house. He did not pretend, at least in public, that the Geoffrites were many in Peg's house, yet he would not even let Sir Thomas pick and chuse, but said, it was giving arms indiscriminately, to raise turbulent spirits. He commended MacLurchar extremely, and said it was a pity to take him off his loom, except he was to be transported; that giving him arms would spoil his hand as a weaver, and hinder his fighting, in which he had behaved so gloriously, that he did not deserve to be discouraged, much less annihilated, till John had made up matters with Lewis Baboon. He pointed at many bad consequences, that would attend employing MacLurchar, for the defence of the house, such as spoiling a good weaver, and the like; but he insisted, that no distinction should be made between him and any body else, by pushing a line, or any other method that could separate the house into two parts; 'I implore, beseech, and intreat', says he, 'that you would not push any such line across our house; let us all be treated alike, and if there be any of us who are not in danger of being molested, or others who are not fit to carry arms, let us all be refused them together, that nobody's mind may be ruffled, nor any heart-burnings be left, but those which do or may subsist between John Bull himself and his worthy sister Margaret; they have been used to more dust than any can raise between them, and can bear it all.' He advised Mrs Bull to do nothing at all in Peg's house, lest she should forget something; 'when you have shown to us, that you can remember every circumstance at once, then we will apply for your directions, or devise a method of our own; and as Margaret has already born the disgrace of this difference so long, I see no reason why she may not bear it some time longer; her house can never be more open, or more defenceless than it is now, nor her children less qualified to resist thieves; and I see no reason to hurry the supply of defects, to which she is now so well accustomed.' He concluded by telling Mrs Bull, what a dangerous thing it would be to give any orders in Peg's house, when he was told that her ladyship was just going to give some fresh order in her own.
These particulars, posterity will no doubt admit upon the testimony of Suck-Fist; especially as he adds, that if any body shall say, that Bumbo reasoned upon other principles, he is ready to contradict them, by saying it is not true. He subjoins, that Jowler paid him great respect in speaking after him; and we ourselves know, that Small-Trash exclaimed, that he had gained immortal honour.
xmilestone