"            A SHORT"
"HISTORY"
"OF THE"
"OPPOSITION"
"DURING THE"
"Last Session of Parliament."
"            DUBLIN:"
"PRINTED FOR THE COMPANY OF BOOKSELLERS."
"M,DCC,LXXIX."
"         "
"         "
"            "
"kingdomMr.  T"
"                     _…"
"                  Speech, Nov. 26th, 1778. To sow discontents, among the"
"militia, they alleged, that the officers had been"
"'scandalously neglectedSpeech of  T"
"                     _…"
"                   Nov. 26, 1778.. To excite mutiny in"
"the army and navy, they asserted that Govern-ment"
"had employed no commander of an army,"
"no admiral of a fleet, whom they had not dis-graced,"
"or with whom they had not quarrelledSpeech of  F"
"                     _"
"                   Nov. 26, 1778. Speech of"
"C"
"                     _…"
"                  B"
"                     _…"
"                  ."
"With a contradiction in terms, which nei-ther"
"folly nor rage itself could justify, they aver-red"
"that Ministry had succeeded in no instance;"
"yet that fortune had been favourable in every in-stance,"
"during the whole campaignIbid.. They"
"owned, that unanimity was absolutely necessary"
"for the safety of their country; yet, with pe-culiar"
"honesty, avowed that they would clog
the wheels of government, when it ought to
be assisted by every manIbid.."
"            Though the clogging the wheels of Govern-ment"
"at home, and their encouraging the sedi-tious"
"abroad, had been the obvious cause of the"
"rise and progress of the American war, they"
"traced the cause of the war to the pretended ty-ranny"
"of Great-BritainIbid.. Though America had"
"continued an atrocious rebellion for many years,"
"against her parent and benefactress; yet they"
"affirmed, that a war against America is
against our own country. Though the"
"Americans have been declared rebels, by all the"
"'solemnity of law, by all the forms of the con-stitution,"
"they are still our fellow-subjects,
and every blow we strike is against our-selvesSpeech of                       _
                   Nov. 26, 1778. Speech of                      _…
                                       _…
                  . Though they have broke capitu-lationsGovernor J"
"                     _…"
"                  st"
"                     _…"
"                  ne Speech, Nov. 26, 1778.,"
"disregarded flags of truceAdmiral Gambier Letter to Congress., violat-ed"
"conventions, trampled on every principle of"
"war, that governs civilized nationsSpeech of Governor J"
"                     _…"
"                  st"
"                     _…"
"                  ne.; yet as
their war is a war of passionSpeech of Mr.                      _
                   Nov. 26, 1778., we ought"
"to withdraw our forces entirely from their
coastIbid.. Though offensive war is pointed
out as proper for this countryIbid., war ought"
"not to be offensive with respect to America."
"With unexampled absurdity, they alleged,"
"that rebels in arms had a better right to a
relaxation of hostilities, than foreign ene-mies,"
"whom the alliance of those rebels had"
"excited against their country. With a perver-sion"
"of terms, unknown, in any other times,"
"they asserted, that men, whose hands are daily"
"'stained with the blood of their countrymen,"
"ought to be treated not as enemies, but as"
"peaceable fellow-subjects and friendsSpeeches of all the Opposition.."
"            In the Upper Assembly the zeal of Patriotism,"
"as springing from higher ground, rose to a"
"greater height. Not content to amend the dress"
"to the Throne, it was insisted, that no"
"Address at all should be madeL"
"                     _…"
"                  B"
"                     _…"
"                  Speech, Nov. 26, 1778.. It was as-serted"
"that our armies were either mouldered"
"away, by death, desertion, and sickness, or re-duced"
"by loss in battleL"
"                     _…"
"                  C"
"                     _…"
"                  Speech, Nov. 26.. That our com-merce"
"was totally lost, our public credit draw-ing"
"to annihilation, our fleet on the verge of"
"absolute ruinL"
"                     _…"
"                  B"
"                     _…"
"                  Speech.. That nothing could save"
"the empire, but withdrawing our troops from"
"America, acknowledging her independence,"
"and imploring her forgivenessVide Opposition Speeches, passim."
"               . That it"
"would be even imprudent, if not impossible,"
"to persist in a war against FranceB"
"                     _…"
"                  of P"
"                     _…"
"                  rb"
"                     _…"
"                  gh Speech.. That"
"Spain would aid France; that Holland, as a"
"commercial state, would treat with America;"
"that the whole world would join against us;"
"that we were without men, without money,"
"without an ally; that nothing, in short, could"
"'save the state, but an immediate dismission of"
"all his Majesty present servants, and the plac-ing"
"the reins of Government, in the hands of OppositionSpeeches passim, Nov. 26, 1778."
"            "
"            Assertions, which carried along with them"
"their own refutation, were not likely to make"
"converts within, nor proselytes without doors."
"But what the party could not effect by facts"
"and arguments, they endeavoured to accom-plish,"
"by address and intrigue. Mismanage-ments,"
"and a consequent want of suceess, on"
"every side of the war, had convinced the na "
"that there was an error in planning at"
"home, or a defect in the execution abroad."
"Generals and Admirals had returned, from"
"their different commands, not only without"
"laurels, but some of them covered with disgrace"
"or misfortune. The coldness, with which they"
"had been received, by their country, had raised"
"their resentment, as it hurt their pride. As Go-vernment"
"brought forward no accusation against"
"them, the presumption was, that they them-selves"
"were partly to blame. As men of little"
"prudence and considerable names, are the fittest"
"tools for the hands of party, Opposition took"
"care to secure engines, which they hoped to"
"play off with advantage, on the enemy."
"            "
"               "
"G"
"                  _…"
"               B"
"                  _…"
"               ne, though a man spirit, of"
"conducted himself, as if political prudence form-ed"
"no part of his character. His enemies re-marked,"
"that he came from America, where he"
"had lost an army, with as much confidence, as"
"Terentius Varro returned to Rome, from the fa-tal"
"fields of Cannae. Men, in general, have"
"less blamed his conduct abroad, than his beha-viour"
"at home. His accepting a leave of absence"
"from a Congress, who had shamefully evaded"
"hs own convention, the remembrance of recent"
"misfortunes, and a suspicion of former errors,"
"justified the court, in adhering to an etiquette,"
"which excludes officers, who have been unfor-tunate,"
"from the Royal Presence, till they are"
"acquitted by a Court Martial."
"            The General forgot his own errors, if such"
"existed, and remembered only, what he thought,"
"the severity of Government. He also forgot,"
"that he had left his captive fellow-soldiers,"
"whom he ought to have protected from insult"
"and oppression, by his presence; and he even,"
"eluded orders given him to return to their aid,"
"in their melancholy and severe captivity. It was"
"observed, upon the whole, that regret and pity"
"were all he could hope to meet with; but,"
"it seems, he expected approbation. Resent-ment"
"arose, in his mind, as from injustice;"
"and with a precipitancy, which cannot easily be"
"defended, he either sought or accepted the pro-tection"
"of Opposition."
"            Sir W"
"                  _…"
"                H"
"                  __"
"               had, indeed, lost no army,"
"but as he had decisively improved no advantage,"
"the American war rather increased, than dimi-nished,"
"upon his hands. Possessed of the com-mon"
"routine of military knowledge, he seems to"
"have been capable of securing from defeat such"
"troops as be led against such an enemy: But"
"the conducting them to any brilliant victory,"
"and the making a decisive use of the supe-riority"
"he enjoyed, appear to have been ob-jects"
"foreign to his talents. Sensible, per-haps,"
"of this defect, in his own mind, he chose"
"to prevent any reverie of fortune by retiring"
"from the command of the army; but as mi-litary
secessions, in the midst of war, require"
"an explanation, his retreat was ascribed to his"
"having lost the confidence of men in power."
"The fact might be true, but it was not sufficient,"
"to satisfy the people. Though he was received"
"with kindness by the Sovereign, and attention"
"by the Ministry, he perceived that he was va-nishing"
"fast from the memory of the nation."
"In the space of a few months, he found him-self"
"of as little account, in the estimation"
"of the Public, as any of his own commissaries;"
"and, to recover his reputation, he closed ea-gerly,"
"with Opposition; as they promised him"
"their hearty assistance, in a Parliamentary In-quiry."
"            To these lucky aids from America, the party"
"added a still greater acquisition in Europe. An"
"Admiral possessed of professional reputation,"
"equal at least to his merit, though connected"
"with Opposition, was placed at the head of the"
"Western Squadron. The selecting men of op-posing"
"principles, for the command of fleets and"
"armies, has been long a favourite maxim of"
"Government. This conduct may have had its"
"foundation in liberal sentiments; but it has ope-rated"
"like weakness, and led to a train of mis-fortunes."
"Few officers are such sturdy mora-lists,"
"as to exclude political prejudices from"
"the line of their duty."
"            Our Admiral put to sea, with one of the"
"most powerful squadrons, that ever sailed, from"
"the ports of this kingdom. He met the ene-my;"
"and a running fight, rather than an en-gagement,"
"ensued. No trophies were lost; but"
"no laurels were gained. The professional terms,"
"in which the accounts of naval actions are in-volved,"
"render them obscure, if not unintel-ligible,"
"to the generality of mankind. One"
"fact, however, was universally admitted: A
superior British fleet had engaged an inferior
French squadron; and neither advantage nor
trophy was obtained."
"            A nation, accustomed to value themselves"
"upon naval victories, were not likely to be sa-tisfied"
"with a drawn battle, under such circum-stances."
"But though no symptoms of approba-tion"
"appeared, no signs of resentment were"
"'shown. A cold silence certainly prevailed; a"
"'species of censure, more mortifying to a feeling"
"mind, than even clamour. Had the Admiral"
"been permitted to remain, under this cloud, he"
"would have become a useless engine, in the"
"hands of his party. To derive benefit from his"
"former popularity, it was found necessary to"
"remove the stain, which want of success had left"
"upon his character. Some officers, in his suite,"
"were, accordingly, induced to propagate insi-nuations,"
"to the disadvantage of Vice-Admiral"
"Sir H"
"                  _…"
"                P"
"                  _…"
"                That gentleman, by be-ing"
"in place, might be supposed to act in"
"concert with men in power, for the ruin of his"
"Admiral; and to make the former the accuser"
"was to arm the prejudices of the people in fa-vour"
"of the latter."
"            "
"               "
"The Vice Admiral being a man of more spirit"
"than foresight, unfortunately fell into the trap"
"laid for him by the faction. Conscious of his"
"deserving praise, instead of censure, for his be-haviour"
"on the 27th of July, he became irri-tated"
"at the injustice done to his reputation."
"From being the accused, he became the accuser;"
"and this step turned the scale of opinion in fa-vour"
"of his opponent. In this circumstance"
"alone the gallant Vice-Admiral, as it after-wards"
"appeared, was to blame. Had he manded"
"and insisted upon his own trial, his"
"character would have recovered its deserved"
"lustre; and that of the Admiral might have lost"
"much of that splendour which was thrown upon"
"it, by his industrious friends."
"            A party, who had lost the confidence of the"
"nation, seized with eagerness the sudden change"
"which appeared in the popular tide. Whispers"
"artfully propagated, without doors, were im-proved"
"by degrees into a general clamour."
"Within doors, every opportunity was taken, and"
"every artifice used to feed the rising flame. The"
"two Admirals, if a vulgar expression may be"
"used, were pitted against each other. Much"
"'sport, or what is the same thing to Opposition,"
"much mischief, was expected from this contest."
"A man of popularity was accused, by a man"
"in office. The common changes of mini-sterial"
"interference were rung, without ceas "
"in the ears of the people. The helpless"
"condition of INNOCENCE, when persecuted by"
"POWER, was echoed, from every corner, by"
"the runners, writers, and abettors of Opposi "
"The two houses of Parliament resounded"
"with vehement declamations, or broken accents"
"of whining oratory; and that amiable but much"
"abused virtue, pity, was excited, every where,"
"in the breasts of the deluded, the credulous and"
"the weak."
"            In vain had Sir H"
"                  _…"
"                P"
"                  _…"
"               declared, in"
"the most solemn and public manner, that he"
"had not communicated his design to any man in"
"office. In vain did men in office affirm, upon"
"the faith of Gentlemen, that they knew nothing"
"of the accusation, till it was officially delivered"
"to the Admiralty. No credit was to be given to"
"any member of a Tory Administration. They"
"were leagued together in one plan of oppression,"
"in one dark design, in one pre-concerted conspi-racy,"
"to ruin the reputation, and even to take"
"the life, of a Whig Admiral."
"            In this general turmoil, this intemperate"
"joy of faction, Opposition not only for-got"
"their poor country, but even their poor"
"            ADVERTISEMENT."
"            THE present situation of Public Affairs"
"calls forcibly upon every good Subject,"
"to exert himself in the Public Service. Every"
"individual possesses a power, which can aid and"
"'support his country. He can draw his sword in"
"her defence, contribute to her resources, or"
"combat with argument, and expose to just in-dignation,"
"those, who have proved themselves"
"her internal, and consequently, her unnatural"
"enemies."
"            The Author of the following Essay has long"
"entertained an opinion, that the most formi-dable"
"foes of Great Britain were nursed in her"
"own bosom: These, under the masque of Patri-otism,"
"fomented rebellion in her Colonies; and"
"by exposing her pretended weakness, created a"
"combination of powerful States, not only against"
"her interest, but her very existence, as a great"
"and independent Kingdom."
"            In the emergency, which is the result of that"
"combination, two objects seem necessary to the"
"friends. Sir W"
"                  _…"
"                H"
"                  _…"
"               could not gain"
"their promised support, for a moment, with all"
"the verdure of his laurels. The advantages"
"hoped from his exculpation were not equal in"
"themselves, and they were more distant in pro-spect,"
"than the benefits to be drived from the"
"acquittal of Admiral K"
"                  _…"
"                In vain did"
"General B"
"                  _…"
"               ne endeavour to awake the pity"
"of the party, when he failed to command their"
"attention. In vain did he exclaim that he was
one of those brave men who made the con-vention
at Saratoga: That, however, he
claimed no single merit in that transaction;
that, in the face of famine, despair, and
death, he had compelled the enemy to grant
conditions, honourable, if they had been
complied withAlmon Debates, No. XI.  75.. The party were deaf"
"to the tale of tears; and all the attention"
"paid to the unfortunate general scarce amounted"
"to one dolorous anhelationVide Dr. Johnson on the Irish Howl,  13., from the"
"feeling bosom of Mr. E"
"                  _…"
"               B"
"                  _…"
"               ke."
"            The conduct of Opposition, during the trial,"
"and after the acquittal of A"
"                  _…"
"               K"
"                  _…"
"                is"
"too recent in the recollection of the public, to"
"require more than a very general recapitulation."
"Their abrogating the old forms of the Admi-ralty,"
"by removing a trial for a naval offence"
"to the land, to accommodate their own purposes,"
"their appearance at Portsmouth, upon the occa-sion,"
"their biassing witnesses, their carrying all"
"the indecencies of a play-house audience into a"
"Court of Justice, their soliciting the officers of"
"the navy, their sowing discontents among the"
"common seamen, their parading the streets, for"
"the purpose of inflaming the populace, were"
"'such mean, scandalous, and unjustifiable tricks"
"of faction, as can scarcely be paralleled by any"
"example in history."
"            The pitiful victory which they obtained over"
"an unfortunate, because a vehement, man, was"
"pursued with an intemperance inexcusable even"
"in boys, and with a rancour which the most pro-fligate"
"and hard-hearted men, if prudent, would"
"have concealed, to preserve, at least, the ap-pearance"
"of decency. That men of the first fa-milies,"
"in this country, should disguise them-selves"
"like porters to force illuminations by"
"breaking windows, is a circumstance which"
"throws an indelible stain upon the times, as"
"well as on the party. It even appeared, that,"
"with every inclination to commit mischief, the"
"riotous demagogues were obliged to have re-course"
"to the bottle, for that courage which na-ture"
"had denied. That in the hour of intoxi-cation
and adscititious boldness, they attack-ed"
"the feeble and old among the men, and"
"terrified into fits and miscarriages several wo-men,"
"by the rude barbarity of their behaviour."
"That, however, as a just retribution for their"
"wanton cruelties, many of them suffered under"
"the hands and cudgels of the injured; and that"
"'several were carried into Roundhouses, covered"
"with ignominious marks of the chastisement they"
"had received."
"            Few men of sense, who were not connected"
"with the views, or privy to the designs of the"
"party, could perceive any just grounds for this"
"'species of vulgar ovation. Though the accuser"
"had not brought his charges to the standard of"
"legal proof, the accused had not exculpated him-self"
"to the satisfaction of the public. Those who"
"were most willing to deny his want of conduct,"
"regretted his want of good fortune; and a ge-neral"
"cry went forth, that an opportunity was"
"lost, which might never return again."
"            The conduct of the Admiral himself, on the"
"occasion, was not calculated to establish any"
"high idea of his good sense or of his principles."
"If he thought that he merited a triumph for the"
"drawn battle of the 27th of July, 1778, what"
"are we to think of his understanding? If, on"
"the other hand, he made himself the tool of a"
"faction, what judgment must we form of that"
"dignified honour which his friends annex to"
"his character? A victory, which had lain con-cealed"
"for seven months, and was, at length,"
"discovered by accident, was not, intrinsically,"
"worth the expence of many candles; and the"
"applause of a mob is the coarsest commodity"
"either a gentleman or his friends can purchase."
"            But the Faction, as well as their naval friend,"
"acted as if they really gave credit to their own"
"assertions and assumptions. Whilst HE paraded"
"the streets amidst the foolish, if not hired, ac-clamations"
"of a rabble, THEY were busy in"
"weaving a wreath, for his brows, in both"
"Houses of Parliament. Thinking, at length,"
"they had sufficiently charged the engine with"
"popularity, they resolved to bring it to bear,"
"not only upon Administration, but upon their"
"Sovereign. They proposed to make motions,"
"against the former, on naval subjects; he un-dertook,"
"with peculiar modesty, to write re-scripts"
"to the latter. Even before this double"
"battery was opened, Opposition began to pre-enjoy"
"their expected success with that childish"
"intemperance which has uniformly marked their"
"conduct."
"            "
"               "
"A"
"                  _…"
"               K"
"                  _…"
"               having acquired, in the be-ginning"
"of March, as many laurels as he was"
"likely to obtain, his honourable relation, Mr."
"F"
"                  _"
"                introduced the first of a long string of mo-tions,"
"which, he owned, led to an address for"
"the removal of the first Lord of the Admiralty,"
"and ultimately of all his Majesty servantsMr. F"
"                     _"
"                  Speech, March 3d and 8th, 1779.."
"In support of the motion, he alleged, that the"
"noble Lord, who presided over the naval partment,"
"had, as early as the month of No-vember"
"1777, solemnly pledged himself, in his"
"official capacity, that there were thirty five ships"
"of the line ready for sea, and fit for actual ser-vice."
"That, notwithstanding this assertion, there"
"were not six ships of the line, in a state to meet"
"an enemy, in the month of March 1778."
"That early in the month of June, his honour-able"
"relationAdmiral Keppel. was sent to cruize, on the coast"
"of France, with twenty ships of the line only;"
"though it was known, or ought to have been"
"known, that there were twenty-seven ships of"
"force lying in Brest water. From these sup-posed"
"facts, he deduced this conclusion, that"
"the Ministry, who had led the nation into so pe-rilous"
"a situation, ought instantly to be removed,"
"as unequal to the trust committed to their"
"chargeCrime enorme aux yeux du Sieur Fox. Gazette de"
"France, du Vendredi 26 Mars 1779.."
"            In opposition to these assertions, it was proved,"
"from official documents, that, in November"
"1777, there were actually thirty-five ships of the"
"line ready for service. That in the month of"
"March 1778, some more ships were in a state of"
"great forwardness for sea. That the whole num-ber,"
"fit for meeting an enemy in June, amounted"
"to forty-four. That when Mr. K"
"                  _…"
"               was"
"ordered to sail, with twenty ships of the line, of"
"which a large proportion was three-deckers, there"
"were but seventeen ships in the harbour of Brest"
"ready for action. That should it even appear,"
"which was by no means the case, that there"
"actually was a greater number of ships in Brest,"
"it was well known to seamen, that an inferior"
"force may block up a superior one in a narrow"
"harbour. That, upon the whole, the Board of"
"Admiralty had placed a number of ships, ade-quate"
"to the service, under the command of"
"A"
"                  _…"
"               K"
"                  _…"
"                even to the satisfaction and"
"approbation of the Admiral himself. That,"
"therefore, as the premises, endeavoured to be"
"established by Opposition, were not founded in"
"fact, their conclusions must of course fall to the"
"groundLord M"
"                     _…"
"                  ve Speech, March 3d and 8th, 1779.."
"            Such were the assertions, which Opposition,"
"mixed with much abuse and altercation, re-peatedly"
"echoed, from side to side, in both"
"Houses. Though the public, as well as Par-liament,"
"are frequently invited to an entertain-ment"
"of politics, by some very eloquent Patriots,"
"the dish served up is always the same. To use"
"their own expression, they have travelled so
often over the ground, that they have trod"
"out every appearance of vegetation; and those"
"who are so idle as to accompany them in the"
"dreary journey, can neither expect amuse-ment,"
"nor reap advantage."
"            The operations of the party, without doors,"
"were more decisive than their arguments within."
"Confident of success, or assuming the appear-ance"
"of confidence, they had previously gained"
"the votes of several provident members, who"
"wisely look into futurity. Lazy Whigs and"
"expecting patriots were roundly told, that to"
"'share in the spoil it was necessary to take an"
"active part in obtaining the victory. Mandates"
"were issued for the immediate appearance of all"
"absentees, from every corner of the kingdom."
"The beds of the sick, the couches of the gouty"
"and lame were visited; leaders were sent to the"
"blind. In short, patriotism crowded the lobbies"
"of both Houses, with all the mortifying pictures"
"of age, misfortune and disease."
"            To aid, with a species of mutiny among sea-men,"
"the attacks of Opposition upon Admi-ralty,"
"the seeds of sedition had been sown with a"
"lavish hand at Portsmouth. Officers had been"
"attacked through their ruling passions; the vain"
"with flattery, the weak with fallacious reason-ings,"
"and the avaricious and ambitious with"
"promises. To add indecency to presumption"
"and folly, the nation was threatened, with what"
"is vulgarly called a Round Robin, from every"
"'seaport. An Admiral, who had made such a"
"'splendid figure on the 27th of July, 1778,"
"dared to say to his sovereign, that he would"
"withdraw his talents from the service, unless the"
"Admiralty, and every department of the State,"
"were placed in the hands of men whom he"
"could trust."
"            Opposition drove, with so much rapidity and"
"'so little judgment, that they overturned their"
"own designs. Their mean, and even criminal"
"conduct, offended the people; and the Sove-reign,"
"with becoming dignity, rejected their"
"insolent requisitions. The current turned a-gainst"
"them, and their spirit vanished when their"
"hopes declined. The nation discovered their"
"insidious designs, their lust for power, their"
"thirst for places. It was perceived that they"
"meant to sacrifice Great Britain, her rights, her"
"interests, and even honour, to the demagogues"
"of America, by rendering her independent of"
"the parent from whom she sprung. Even those"
"who had been seduced by their assurances, or"
"gained by their promises, finding their mistake,"
"began to retreat. The friends whom they had"
"brought from the country, by a species of"
"habeas corpus, packed up their cloak-bags and"
"left the town. The beds of the sick, and cou-ches"
"of the lame, were re-occupied; and even"
"the blind found their way home. Ad"
"                  _…"
"               K"
"                  _…"
"               l"
"executed his threats against his devoted country,"
"by quitting her service. The muddy stream,"
"which had overflowed the whole kingdom, and"
"covered it with slime, returned to its old bed;"
"and babbled, as formerly, through the rugged"
"channel of OppositionThe Gazette France, du Vendredi 26 Mars 1779,"
"with a kind of regret, says: Aupres touts ces débats, le"
"voix etant recueillés, motion Sieur Fox en eut que"
"170 contre 204.."
"            "
"               "
"The hopes of the Faction had been raised so"
"high, that disappointment depressed their"
"minds in proportion to their former elevation."
"Some, who either ignorantly or fondly imagi-ned"
"that the nation would take their part, be-gan"
"to talk of a secession. A few orators are"
"'said to have actually retired, to vent the tropes"
"of unfinished speeches to the echo of trees
and murmur of rills on some friend's"
"estate.A certain Baronet, who in a fit of despair relative"
"to the good Old Cause, has lately become a zealous Whig,"
"is much given to such solitary rehearsals of the Speeches"
"which he intends to fire off, upon the House.. But as listless groves and in-sensible
streams are not the most encou-raging"
"audiences, the solitary patriots were"
"induced to rejoin their friends, who, though"
"defeated, still remained in the field."
"            Whilst the expectations of Opposition were"
"at their height, by the aid received from A"
"                  _…"
"               l"
"K"
"                  _…"
"               acquittal, a new topic was started,"
"which, as it promised much mischief to their"
"country, opened a fresh prospect of advantage"
"to the party. The trade of Ireland, and conse-quently"
"its revenue, had been on the decline"
"for some years past. The causes of that misfor-tune"
"are more difficult to ascertain than the"
"fact itself. Whether this diminution of com-merce"
"Public Safety. These are, the knowledge of"
"our friends from our enemies; and that spirited"
"exertion, which alone can extricate us, from our"
"present situation. If the facts advanced, and"
"encouragements exhibited, in the following Es-say,"
"'shall contribute to throw light, on the one;"
"or to add vigour to the other, the Writer has"
"attained his purpose."
"         "
"      "
"      "
"         "
"            "
"proceeded from a decrease of the do-mestic"
"industry, or a failure of foreign markets,"
"it equally demanded a remedy, if it could be"
"applied. Some steps had been accordingly ta-ken,"
"toward that object, in the preceding"
"'session. But it appeared, at the time, that the"
"facility with which relief was granted, instead"
"of satisfying Opposition, was calculated to"
"create new demands. These demands, as they"
"interfered with the commerce of Great Britain,"
"were certain of being opposed: a circumstance,"
"which could not fail to create the desirable con-fusion"
"which suits the views of the party."
"            To those, who really wished to remove the"
"evil, it appeared that the Irish legislature ought"
"to be the best judges of the remedy. But nei-ther"
"that legislature, nor their constituents, had"
"'signified any dissatisfaction at the relief obtain "
"To convince both of the impropriety of"
"their peaceable conduct, Opposition, by making"
"demands in the name of Ireland, pointed out"
"what she might extort from Great Britain."
"This artifice, they hoped, would reduce the"
"Ministry to a disagreeable dilemma. Should"
"they grant the demanded relief to the Irish,"
"they could not fail to offend the whole com-mercial"
"interest in great Britain: should they"
"refuse it, there was a prospect, by proper ma-nagement,"
"of creating tumults, and, perhaps,"
"of kindling a rebellion in Ireland."
"            Though this commercial adventure has not"
"yet been productive of all the profit expected"
"by the Faction, as the ship is still at sea, the"
"cargo may turn out to some account. The in-ferior"
"Irish are, and have been in a distressed"
"'situation. The nature of the government, the"
"tenures of the country, a listless inactivity,"
"which always accompanies distress, a want of"
"industry, created by domestic discouragements"
"of various kinds, have combined to render"
"their condition more wretched than that of"
"almost any other in Europe. They have long"
"felt their own misery, without knowing well"
"from whence it came. Our worthy Patriots,"
"by pointing out Great Britain as the author"
"of Irish distress, may have some chance of rou-sing"
"Irish resentment. They have fomented"
"and encouraged resistance in America, and"
"why may they not excite rebellion in Ireland?"
"The truth is, they seem to have injured their"
"country beyond their degree of forgiveness;"
"and if they cannot satisfy their ambition by"
"her misfortunes, they are at least resolved to"
"gratify their resentment by her ruin."
"            The attacks, in both Houses were so simi-lar,"
"in manner, assertion, declamation, and in-vective,"
"that it was apparent every measure had"
"been weighed and pre-concerted in the cabinet"
"of sedition without doors. In this political war-fare,"
"the post of honour was given to the Pa-triots"
"of the Lower Assembly, where the enemy"
"was supposed to be most vulnerable. After the"
"battle was lost below, it was generally rehearsed"
"above; where some noble orators wielded, with"
"peculiar dexterity, those very weapons of scurri-lity"
"and invective, which had so little availed the"
"cause in the hands of their more humble friends."
"            In the slightest skirmishes, with the common"
"enemy, the same co-operation, the same concert"
"appeared. Though composed of such discordant"
"members, the whole party played in unison;"
"and every key, that was touched below, was"
"faithfully answered by a similar note from above."
"            The Irish business seemed to promise such"
"a plentiful harvest of confusion, that the whole"
"party employed their joint labour, in pre-paring"
"the soil and sowing the feed. Indi-viduals"
"were not, in the mean time, idle, in"
"their separate efforts, for the benefit of the"
"common cause. The D"
"                   _____ "
"                of R"
"                  _…"
"               "
"with his usual application, tenacity, and vehe-mence,"
"had introduced and supported, in the"
"Upper House, an Inquiry into the Magagement"
"of Greenwich Hospital. The nature and fate of"
"this Inquiry, are so recent in the memory of the"
"Public, that a particular detail is as unnecessa-ry"
"in itself, as it would be here out of place."
"            It may be sufficient to observe, that the in-tention"
"of the enquiry was to criminate the first"
"Lord of the Admiralty. That after a most te-dious"
"examination, which lasted near three"
"months, not one of the charges was proved."
"That the  of S"
"                  _…"
"               ch, instead of meriting"
"censure, deserved the highest praise. That he"
"had paid peculiar and uncommon attention to"
"the hospital. That he had improved its reve-nue,"
"increased the number of the pensioners,"
"prevented the admission of improper objects,"
"made new regulations, for the more speedy re-covery"
"of the sick, and the better accommodati-on"
"of those in health. That instead of convert-ing"
"his superintendency of the charity to any"
"advantage, he had abolished all sinecures of"
"inferior offices, which had formerly been in"
"the disposal of the first Lord. That, in direct"
"opposition to what had been alledged, there"
"is not one, out of 2169 pensioners at present in"
"the Hospital, who is not intitled to the chari-ty,"
"by length of service, or infirmities, con-tracted"
"in the discharge of duty."
"            "
"               "
"Whilst the  of R"
"                  _…"
"               derived some"
"hopes, to the faction, from the expected issue"
"of the Hospital Inquiry, a more flattering pros-pect"
"of criminating men in office was open "
"in the Lower Assembly. Sir W"
"                  _…"
"                H"
"                  _"
"               we,"
"though not publicly accused, was still anxious"
"to exculpate himself to the Public. Either"
"'swayed, by a good opinion of his own con-duct,"
"or trusting to the kind partiality of his"
"friends, he had flattered the Patriots and, per-haps,"
"himself, that he should be able to lay the"
"burden of American misfortunes, to the ac-count"
"of the minister for the American partment."
"The nation found itself disap-pointed,"
"but till matters were examined, it"
"was not known decidedly where censure ought"
"to fall. An unwillingness in Government, to"
"admit of a Parliamentary Inquiry, on a military"
"'subject, furnished their enemies with an oppor-tunity"
"of drawing conclusions, unfavourable"
"to Ministry. These conclusions, in the usual"
"manner, became topics of patriotic invective"
"and declamation; which, in a manner, extort-ed"
"an inquiry, that had been once refused, by"
"a vote."
"            But the result of the Inquiry, was very different"
"from what Opposition hoped. It appeared, that"
"rebellion first arose in America, from an ambi-tious"
"faction; and not from the general sense of"
"the body of the peopleEvidence of Major General Robertson, before the"
"House of Commons, June 8, 1779, MS.  9. 10.. That the reduction"
"of that faction and, consequently, the extinc-tion"
"of rebellion, had uniformly been the object"
"of Administration, and not the conquest or un-conditional"
"'subjection of the coloniesThe object of the war was to enable the loyal sub-jects"
"of America to get free from the tyranny of the rebels;"
"and to let the country follow its inclination, by returning"
"to the king government. Evidence, June 10,  18.—No"
"idea of subduing the Americans—but to assist the good"
"Americans to subdue the bad ones.   20.. That"
"to accomplish that desirable end, they had not"
"only sent a force sufficient for the purpose, but"
"a much greater one, than was either wished for"
"or expected, by the most sanguine friend of Go-vernment"
"in America"
"                    17. The demand of 20,000 men was
thought to be rather extravagant.   63.The
force we had was adequate to the subduing the re-bellion. Evidence, June 10,  22.. That the army had"
"been amply provided, on all occasions, with"
"every necessary, every implement, every re-source"
"of war. That the hands of the General"
"had been so far from being tied up, by instruc-tions,"
"or his operations counteracted, by or-ders,"
"from home, that the manner of carrying"
"on the war had been left entirely to his judg-ment"
"and discretion."
"            "
"               "
"It appeared, that the Americans, instead of"
"overpowering by numbers, had never, together,"
"at one place, above 16,000, and consequently"
"had never been so numerous in the field, as the"
"army under Sir W"
"                  _…"
"                H"
"                  _"
"               weEvidence, June 10,  14.. That our"
"troops were well disciplined, and uniformly"
"made the best and most military appearance"
"                    16.."
"That the enemy were an undisciplined rabble,"
"without order, without arms, without cloathing"
"Except the Maryland Regiment, who were well
cloathed and accoutred..   16.; though by procrastinating the war, they"
"attained discipline and acquired military know-ledge."
"That, upon all occasions, the British"
"troops executed their duty, with energy, brave-ry"
"and effect. That, upon no occasion, those of"
"America behaved, with the spirit, firmness,"
"and intrepidity of soldiers. That the former"
"were victorious, in every assault, attack, and"
"fair battle. That the latter obtained no advan-tage,"
"but by stratagem or surprise. The infe-rences"
"deducible, from these facts, were, that"
"the British army were either unskilfully or lan-guidly"
"led; or that the natural strength of the"
"country, and unanimity of its inhabitants, had"
"enabled the Americans to prevent the conse-quences"
"of losses, and disasters in the field."
"            "
"               "
"In support of the first position it appeared,"
"That the evacuation of Boston had been too"
"long delayed; and undertaken, at length,"
"in an improper season. That the retreat to Ha-lifax"
"furnished the rebels, with an opportunity"
"of strengthening their force at New-York."
"That the victory obtained at Long-island might"
"have proved decisive, had it been properly pur-sued"
"Some of the troops were going to storm the lines.
Gen.                      _
                  we called them back.—Putnam, who had the
command of 7000, had detached all but 300.—But this
was not known. Evidence, June 9.  73, 74.. That an opportunity of putting an"
"end to the war had been lost at the White-Plains,"
"by a delay in attacking the rebels, when"
"they offered battle. That the distance and in-judicious"
"dispositions of the stations chosen in"
"the Jerseys, the placing foreigners, who neither"
"knew the nature nor the language of the coun-try,"
"in a post liable to surprise and attack, the"
"giving the command to an Officer, whom an"
"habitual intemperance had rendered unfit for"
"the discharge of his duty, by presenting an un-expected"
"opportunity to a ruined and dispersed"
"enemyWho had dwindled to 3000 men.  Robertson's"
"Evidence, June 8,  16., encouraged them to re-assemble,"
"and enabled them to obtain an advantage"
"which turned the scale of the war. That the"
"operations, which followed this disaster, were"
"less calculated to retrieve the misfortune, than"
"to encourage the enemy. That the retreat from"
"QuibbletonOur army (in the Jerseys in 1777) was 17,015
men; that of the rebels, some said 8, some 9, and
some 10,000 men in that camp. Evidence, June 9."
"p. 63.—We had 52,815 men in North. America; of
those Sir  Howe had under his command 40, 874."
"Ibid. June 10,  39., the embarkation of the troops,"
"the tedious expedition to the Delaware, and"
"then to Chesapeak-Bay, the neglecting to im-prove"
"the victory obtained at the Brandywine,"
"the surprise at German Town, the injudicious"
"manner of assaulting Red-Bank and attacking"
"Mud-Island, the inactive winter at Philadel-phia,"
"if not proofs of incapacity, were instan-ces"
"of blameable inactivity, in the General."
"            With regard to the strength of the country,"
"it appeared, that it presented no advantages to"
"the natives, which it did not hold forth to the"
"invaders. That, on the contrary, it was rather"
"more favourable to the latter, than to the"
"former. That its great rivers, instead of co-vering"
"the retreat of the rebels, by being navi-gable,"
"laid them open to fresh misfortunes,"
"from an enemy, possessing the command of"
"the sea. That Hudson River, in particular, by"
"dividing the whole continent from North to"
"South, formed a natural and strong barrier,"
"between the revolted provinces. That the"
"'seizing this barrier was an object of the first"
"consequenceEvidence,  51., towards the extinction of the"
"rebellion. That this object might have been"
"easily obtained, as the river presents an excel-lent"
"and expeditious water-communication,"
"between New-York and AlbanyAn army may pass from New York to Albany
(170 miles) by means of Hudson River, in two days."
"Ibid.  47. 75.. That"
"this great advantage rendered the co-operation"
"of the main army, with the troops coming"
"from Canada, as obvious, as it was easy and ex-peditious;"
"and that, it was the want of such"
"co-operation, that ruined the Northern expe-ditionMany feared that general Burgoyne army would
be lost, if not supported by Sir  Howe. I wrote
myself, on being informed of the situation of the dif-ferent
armies, I wrote, &amp  that if General Burgoyne
extricated himself, future ages would have little occa-sion
to talk of Hannibal.   39.,"
"lost an army, turned the scale in"
"favour of rebellion, and loaded Great-Britain,"
"with the expence and danger of a foreign war."
"            In the course of the Evidence taken at home,"
"and more especially by the most authentic in-formation"
"from abroad, it has appeared, that the"
"            A SHORT"
"HISTORY"
"OF THE"
"OPPOSITION."
"            IN every age, and almost in every country,"
"the ambition, which is inherent in human na-ture,"
"has prompted individuals to aspire to dis-tinction"
"and pre-eminence, among their fellow-citizens."
"The means, used to obtain those ob-jects,"
"are various; as to render them success-ful"
"they must be accommodated to the spirit"
"of the government, under which they are ap-plied."
"In despotic monarchies, the favour of"
"the Prince, who is the fountain of all prefer-ment,"
"is generally procured by intrigue or dress."
"In republics, influence and authority"
"are acquired, by gaining the confidence, or by"
"'seducing the principles of the people; and, in"
"mixed governments, like that of Great Britain,"
"injudicious and inactive management of the"
"war has been the sole obstacle, to the restoration"
"of peace. That a very great majority of the peo-ple"
"of America are and have been, averse to the"
"measures, and disgusted at the tyranny of the"
"CongressEvidence, June 9.  12. June 16, passim."
"               . That they were prevented, from"
"exhibiting their loyalty to their Sovereign and"
"their aversion to usurpation, by the desultory"
"manner, in which the war was conducted, on"
"our part; as it deprived them of permanent"
"protection, and left them exposed to the inso-lence,"
"cruelty, and revenge of their enemies."
"            That the quitting of the Jerseys, and the go-ing"
"to sea, with the whole army in July 1777,"
"terrified other provinces from submitting, for"
"fear of being deserred. That the three Dela-ware"
"Counties had offered their submission to"
"Government, on condition of their being only"
"assisted, in protecting themselves, against the re-belsEvidence, June 16,  59.."
"That their application having either"
"been disregarded or neglected, they adhered"
"to the usurped government. That, as a gene-ral"
"idea had gone abroad, that protection was"
"uncertain, or rather that desertion was certainWe soon left the country. The rebels took up
the signers (of addresses), banished them, or sent them
to the mines.   25.,"
"the victory at the Brandywine, the taking of"
"Philadelphia, the destruction of the rebel ship-ping,"
"the reduction of Mud-Island and Red-Bank,"
"were attended with none of those vantages,"
"which accompany successes in war."
"That no person of great consequence, and few"
"of any consequence at all, submitted after"
"those events. That, when a resolution was for-med"
"to evacuate Philadelphia, such as had"
"'submitted were advised to make their peace"
"Mr. Schumacker mentioned to me what he had
told me, a few days before, that Sir William Howe vised
him to go over to Washington, and make his
peace.—Mr. Galloway Evidence, June 16,  70."
"—He (Sir William) gave me the same advice. "
"p. 71.—Sir Henry Clinton said, that the game was not
up, that the war was not over, but would still be car-ried
on vigorously, and desired that we would not enter-tain
thought of going over to the enemy. "
"p. 74., with the congress. That some unfortunate"
"persons, who followed that advice, fell a sacri-fice,"
"to the relentless violence and unforgiving"
"tyranny of the rebels. That, in short, the want"
"of protection on the one side, and the certain-ty"
"of punishment for defection, on the other,"
"eradicated every hope from the minds of the"
"loyal, and forced them to swear allegiance to"
"an usurpation, which they despised and abhor-red."
"            "
"               "
"Though these facts came forward with a"
"force, which commanded conviction, the fac-tion"
"adhered, with invincible obstinacy, to the"
"line of their former conduct. With their usual"
"insult, upon the common feelings and common"
"'sense of mankind, they established false pre-mises,"
"and deduced, from those premises, ar-guments"
"for the total dereliction, and conse-quently,"
"for the dependance of America."
"They affirmed, that rebellion can never be ex-tinguished;"
"though the want of vigour, in pur-suing"
"our successes, has been the demonstrable"
"cause of its continuing so long. They asserted,"
"that a general unanimity prevails against Great"
"Britain; though the adherence of the people"
"to the congress proceeded, from our not af-fording"
"them a permanent protection, under"
"the shelter of our arms. They alleged, that the"
"courage of the rebels, and the natural strength"
"of their country, are unsurmountable obsta-cles;"
"though the first seldom appear in the"
"field, but to fly, and the latter opens every"
"where its bosom to invasion, by the means of"
"extensive arms of the sea, and many great and"
"navigable rivers."
"            When we deny other public virtues to Op-position,"
"we must allow, that they possess the"
"negative merit of consistency in their political"
"conduct. They struck one key, at the begin-ning"
"of the American troubles, and they have"
"ever since continued the same note, or impro-ved"
"upon it, as events arose. When the tu-mults"
"began at Boston, when licentiousness and"
"riot exhibited their first wild scenes, in Fa-neuil-Hall,"
"they encouraged the piece, by ap-plauding"
"the actors. The prints of the depar-ting"
"'steps of Freedom, like those of Astraea,"
"were only to be found, they affirmed, round"
"the Tree of Liberty, on Boston Common. A"
"gloomy despotism had seized Great Britain at"
"home, and it became necessary, that her hands"
"'should be settered, to prevent the recovery of"
"her authority abroad. Every effort on the part"
"of the Mother-country was an exertion of ty-ranny;"
"every resistance, in the colonies, was"
"an instance of public virtue. The grim tyrant,"
"Arbitrary Power, had taken up arms against"
"that innocent little child, American Liberty;"
"and to defend the weak against the strong was"
"a service of much reputation and little danger."
"            Obvious as the deceptions, held forth by the"
"party, ought to have been, they were attended"
"with success, both without and within doors."
"The people thought, that assertions, so confi-dently"
"and so often repeated, had some found-ation"
"in truth; and, though Government knew"
"the contrary, they acted, as if they gave them"
"credit. The consequence was, that languid"
"measures were adopted, when vigour and exer-tion"
"were necessary; and, thus, by the for-bearance"
"of Administration, the encourage-ment"
"of Opposition, the inactivity or inability"
"of commanders, that monster, REBELLION,"
"which should have been stifled as soon as born,"
"was fostered and reared to maturity."
"            Unfortunately for this country, Opposition"
"were permitted, in a manner, to take the lead"
"in American measures. War, and especially"
"rebellion, being one of the greatest evils, that"
"can afflict a state, the most speedy and power-ful"
"remedies must be applied, to remove the"
"disease. The only certain road to peace lies"
"through exertion and victory. An anxiety for"
"negociation, being generally a mark of weak-ness,"
"too often encourages an enemy to a conti-nuation"
"of resistance. It has also a most unfa-vourable"
"effect on the spirit of the people, a-mong"
"whose leaders such anxiety appears. This"
"double consideration had rendered the propo-sing"
"terms a favourite topic of patriotic elo-quence."
"To depress the minds of their coun-trymen,"
"to elevate those of the rebels; to make"
"the first to doubt, the second to become con-fident"
"of success; to keep up, if the expression"
"may be used, the ball of contention between"
"the parties, were circumstances that probably"
"might lengthen the dispute to the verge"
"of some public misfortune; that misfortune,"
"if it favoured not the views of ambition,"
"might, at least, be turned to the purposes of"
"revenge."
"            The calamity expected, with so much anxi-ety,"
"by Opposition, at length arrived. An ar-my"
"was lost in America. A rebellion, which"
"'seemed to stagger under partial and ill-pursu-ed"
"defeats, became firmly established by vic-tory."
"The spirits of the country began to sink;"
"and the Faction added to the general depressi-on,"
"by their unmanly oratory. Instead of pro-posing"
"those vigorous exertions, which the ho-nour,"
"as well as interest of the nation required,"
"they recommended a tame submission to re-bels;"
"an acknowledgment of former errors,"
"and assurances of future amendment. The"
"world, in general, ascribed to artifice a con-duct"
"which could not be reconciled to the prin-ciples"
"of common sense. Was it probable that"
"insurgents, who had offered no terms during"
"their misfortunes, would receive any in the"
"moment of victory? Or could it be expected,"
"that a Congress, who had declared for inde-pendence,"
"when thirty thousand disciplined"
"'soldiers were ready to land on the coast, would"
"relinquish that independence, after they had"
"made a whole army prisoners of war?"
"            The most sanguine lovers of tranquility"
"could scarcely derive any hopes from this pa-cific"
"'system; but it was adopted. The Faction"
"thus obtained that degradation of their own"
"country, which seems to have been uniformly"
"a part of their plan. But as it had been justly"
"apprehended, that American resistance might,"
"at last, cease, through the failure of American"
"resources, it had become necessary to procure"
"powerful allies, for the support of the cause."
"The defeat and capture of the army, under"
"G"
"                  _…"
"               B"
"                  _…"
"               ne, had certainly its weight in"
"the French cabinet. But the deplorable pic-ture"
"given, in both Houses, of the state of this"
"kingdom, could only induce France to throw"
"her weight into the scale of America."
"            The weight of France having been found"
"insufficient in the operations of the last sum-mer,"
"the necessity of obtaining another ally, to"
"the cause of Liberty, became apparent during"
"the winter. Every encouragement and every"
"lure were held out to Spain. Under a pretence"
"of bewailing their unfortunate country, Oppo-sition"
"exposed her weakness. Their own decla-mations"
"'shewed that her councils were dis-tracted"
"by faction; and their assertions, rela-tive"
"to the state of her navy and army, repre-sented"
"her to foreigners as an easy prey. To"
"bring the certainty of her approaching ruin to"
"a point of demonstration, some theorists, ac-quainted"
"with figures, were employed to make"
"fictitious states of her finances. Even some of"
"the party had the folly, or rather presumption,"
"to assert, in public, that the very indepen-dence"
"of Great Britain was in the power of"
"the house of BourbonContemptible as such assertions may seem, at home,"
"they make an impression abroad; as appears, from the"
"Gazette France du Vendredi 18 Juin 1779: Il soutint
que les forces France étoient presque egales a celle Grand-Bretagne en Europe et en Amerique; que
I'Espagne tenoit balance. Il osa prononcer que Il' An-gleterre
ne domineroit plus, sur les mers, qu'autant
qu'il plairoit à Maison Bourbon. eloquent"
"Burke soutint que le Sieur Hartley avoit rien avancé, qui"
"ne fut vrai il appuya cette opinion, par un detail circon-stancie"
"de toutes les forces del'Espagne.."
"            The phlegmatic councils of Spain were, how-ever,"
"too slow for the fire and vehemence of"
"her British friends. Though their eloquence"
"had its proper influence at Madrid, that desira-ble"
"circumstance had been concealed in Cas-tilian
taciturnity. Deprived almost of every"
"hope, from the other side of the Bay of Biscay,"
"the eyes of our Patriots were again turned to"
"the regions beyond the Atlantic. As the treaty"
"attempted last summer had stopt the operati-ons"
"of war, it was expedient to throw negoti-ation"
"in the way of hostility in the present year."
"Though the party had reprobated their own"
"measure, the conciliatory bills, as degrading"
"and disgraceful, they proposed the renewal of"
"the commission, which those bills authorized."
"This mode of relief, or rather respite, to rebel-lion,"
"having been refused, the old proposal, of"
"withdrawing the troops from America, was"
"renewed. This last effort was also unsuccess-ful;"
"and that melancholy gloom, which usu-ally"
"covers the rear of unsuccessful, political"
"campaigns, began to fall on the party."
"            A sudden, though not unexpected light,"
"broke through this gloom, and revived their"
"drooping spirits. Spain, being seduced by"
"France, and, perhaps, encouraged by the re-presentations"
"given, in our public assemblies,"
"of our weaknessLe Sieur Thowsend, Fox et Burke furent, parmi les"
"opposans, ceux qui signalérent davantage contre cette mo "
"en observant que nation dans etat alarmant ou"
"celle se trouvoit epuisoit par des dèpenses énormes, tan-dis"
"que chaque jour lui decouvroit quelque nouvelle enne-mi;"
"que Espagne alloit immanquablement se declarer;"
"que Irlande, menacée une invasion, avoit pris cette cir-constance"
"pour se soulever contre le gouvernement An-glois;"
"que ECOSSE meme etoit plein mècontents. Ga-zette"
"de France du Vendredi 18 Juin 1779., determined to throw her"
"weight in the scale of our enemies. Of One"
"hundred injuries, which she had received, she"
"only specified two, and proved none. With"
"peculiar attention to her worthy friends out"
"of office, she pointed her whole resentment"
"against the British Ministry. These men, it"
"'seems, had grievously offended this froward"
"Dame; but how or where, she could not"
"tell. When she has time to recollect the cir-cumstances,"
"BUCCARELLI, or some other old"
"Spanish acquaintance, will, no doubt, com-municate"
"them to C"
"                  _…"
"               B"
"                  _…"
"               ré, and then we"
"'shall know the whole."
"            The uniform conduct of Opposition seemed"
"calculated, if not intended, to arm Spain in fa-vour"
"of France and America; yet they affect-ed"
"a degree of melancholy when that event was"
"announced. With a pernicious consistency,"
"they dwelt on the weakness of Great Britain,"
"and on the force of her enemies. Instead of"
"'standing forth with that manly boldness, which"
"other patriots have either felt or feigned, in"
"times of peril, they unbraced the nerves of their"
"country with womanish lamentations. To"
"magnify the danger, they pretended to recom-mend"
"unanimity; and to promife support to"
"the S"
"                  _…"
"                whilst they undermined his just"
"influence and authority. But the notes of af-fected"
"'sorrow were soon changed for the voice"
"the nearest road to power lies between those two"
"extremes."
"            The Revolution, which happened about"
"ninety years ago, though it made but few"
"changes in the forms of authority, established a"
"balance of influence, between the Crown and the"
"People. The first retained the essence, but lost"
"much of the terror of power. The representa-tives"
"of the latter having a great deal to bestow,"
"as a body, thought themselves, as individuals,"
"entitled to a share in a government, which they"
"'supported. A mutual dependence was created,"
"by the possession of the means of conferring mu-tual"
"favours. A Prince, who stood in need of"
"'supplies, was directed, by common prudence,"
"where to chuse his servants. But as candidates"
"were more numerous than offices, the disap-pointed"
"never failed to persecute the successful,"
"till, by watching faults, errors, or misfortunes,"
"they obtained their point, and they them-selves"
"became, in their turn, the objects of"
"attack."
"            As a degree of the public confidence was ne-cessary"
"to direct the Sovereign in his choice of"
"'servants, men who wished to be employed, took"
"care to support, in their public appearances,"
"the principles and perhaps the prejudices of"
"the people. An habitual jealousy of the power"
"of discord; and it became apparent, that the"
"party lamented their own condition more than"
"the state of their country."
"            In the preceding detail, many circumstan-ces"
"are omitted, equally descriptive of the"
"conduct, and expressive of the designs of Op-position,"
"with those that have been related."
"But, as the intention of this Essay is only"
"to give a general idea of the subject, it was"
"thought unnecessary to descend to every par-ticular."
"One obvious observation will natural-ly"
"'suggest itself to the mind of the Reader:"
"That an Opposition begun in ambition, has"
"degenerated, through disappointment, into a"
"'species of infinity; and that, in attempting"
"to ruin the Ministry, the party have given a"
"fatal stab to the honour and interests of their"
"country."
"            In every popular government, opposition is"
"not only natural, but, when conducted on libe-ral"
"principles, useful, and even necessary."
"There is a kind of charm in authority, which"
"may induce the most virtuous magistrates to"
"extend it too far, if subject to no controul."
"The original object of a national representative,"
"was to watch over the political rights of the"
"executive power. The trust is great; and,"
"'strictly speaking, ought to be solely appro-priated"
"to the public good. Those who use it"
"as an engine of private ambition and personal"
"inrerest, meet with forgiveness, on account of"
"the frequency of the practice. But the employ-ing"
"a weapon, given for the defence of our"
"country, against its existence, is a species of"
"political assassination which no example can"
"justify, no state ought to pass without punish-ment."
"            If the great lines of the conduct of Oppositi-on,"
"during the last session of parliament, have"
"been fairly traced, in the preceding disquisiti-on,"
"no terms can be too severe, no indignati-on"
"too violent, in exposing the principles and"
"plans of the party. If the account, which has"
"been given of their assertions and actions, has"
"been exaggerated, the Public will judge of"
"both with more candour. But, unfortunately"
"for Great Britain, the stamp of truth has been"
"affixed to the representation, contained in this"
"Essay, by the most uncontrovertible of all argu-ments,"
"the events of the times: events unparal-leled"
"in the history of any other age or country."
"            Let the consequences of an opposite conduct,"
"in the party, be considered, for a moment."
"Let it be supposed, that, instead of abetting re-bellion"
"and encouraging foreign war, they had"
"declared that, when the American Congress"
"avowed Independence, and especially when they"
"leagued with France, the grounds of the origi-nal"
"question were entirely changed. That, as"
"friends of their country, they had resolved to"
"'strengthen her hands, to restore her authority,"
"to protect her interests, and to recover her ho-nour."
"That the object of their pursuit had been"
"to render Ministers responsible for remissness in"
"carrying on the war; or for obstinacy in refusing"
"adequate and honourable conditions of peace."
"That they had been the first to inquire into the"
"failure of measures in the execution; not to"
"assert without examination, that the error lay"
"in the cabinet and not in the field. That they"
"had taken measures to ascertain, by what mis-management"
"or misconduct, in commanders, an"
"army had been lost, to a contemptible enemy,"
"and a superior fleet had returned from action,"
"without a victory? That, instead of receiving"
"into the bosom of their party, a general, who"
"had quitted his command in the midst of war,"
"they had inquired, why the advantages, he"
"either possessed or obtained, had not been more"
"decisively improved?"
"            To render still more finished the picture of"
"the reverse of their actual proceedings, let it be"
"'supposed, that instead of announcing, to all"
"Europe, the weakness of Great Britain, they"
"had, in their speeches and their actions, exhi-bited"
"a spirited and disinterested love for their"
"country, an unanimity to arm her exertions,"
"not to clog her measures, a manly boldness to"
"meet, to break, to disconcert the combinations"
"of her domestic and foreign enemies. What"
"would have been, in such a case, the present"
"'situation of public affairs? What the state of"
"public opinion, relative to themselves? The re-sistance"
"of America must have ceased. France"
"might have given up the contest; and the junc-tion"
"of Spain would have been prevented."
"            One should suppose it hardly possible, that an"
"Opposition, consisting of several men, whose rank"
"and fortune connect their private interest with"
"that of the public, should follow a line of con-duct,"
"that leads to the destruction of their coun-try,"
"and, consequently, to their own ruin. This"
"is an argument which they themselves repeat, and"
"think unanswerable. The truth is, that every"
"faction may avail itself of the same argument;"
"but general reasoning must fall to the ground,"
"when contradicted by facts. There is a pride"
"and obstinacy in party, which disdain to ac-knowledge"
"error; and, therefore, though Op-position"
"may, nay must, perceive the pernicious"
"tendency of their conduct, they choose to persist,"
"rather than own a fault."
"            "
"               "
"An opportunity offered itself lately, which"
"might have reflected credit on Opposition, with-out"
"the supposed disgrace of changing their"
"former opinions. The Spanish Rescript fur-nished"
"this opportunity; yet the nation cannot"
"'see, without indignation and astonishment, that"
"ACTS indispensably necessary for the safety of"
"the State have been combated, with all the rulence"
"and obstinacy of oratory, in every stage"
"of their progress. That the party clogged every"
"measure for arming the kingdom, by sea and"
"land, while they asserted, that the enemy were"
"ready to invade our coast, and that a few days"
"might bring the report of their guns to the ears"
"of both houses of parliament. That, when a"
"'spirit of unanimity and exertion became the duty"
"of all lovers of their country, the faction an-nounced,"
"with a species of savage triumph, that"
"the City of London would not vote a man"
"or a shilling, for the national defence in the pre-sent"
"emergency. That, in short, they presumed to"
"assert in public, that the tyranny of France and"
"Spain would be more welcome to them, than"
"the continuance of their rivals in power."
"            After such proofs of aversion to the public"
"good, it will be in vain to hope for any reform-ation"
"in Opposition. The distress in which they"
"have involved their country, can advance but"
"one step farther, to furnish them with an oppor-tunity"
"of retreating from the line of their miscon-duct."
"That step is an invasion of this Island,"
"the last effort of the conspiracy of our foreign"
"enemies. In that critical moment, a moment"
"which every good subject would meet with spirit"
"and confidence in his cause, there is every rea-son"
"to fear, that Opposition would be still an"
"Opposition. Such has been the inveteracy which"
"a consciousness of criminality, a jealousy of rivals,"
"a habit of opposing the interests and degrading"
"the dignity of their country; and a despair em-bittered"
"by an unpopular and fruitless contest of"
"many years, have mixed with every spring of"
"their actions, every power of their minds."
"            Upon the whole, we may fairly affirm,"
"that neither the talents they possess, nor the"
"conduct they have pursued, are likely to re-commend"
"Opposition as proper persons for ma-naging"
"public affairs at the present crisis. If"
"our situation is alarming, we must look for re-lief"
"to the resources of the kingdom, and the"
"'spirit of our countrymen, and not to those, who"
"have uniformly endeavoured to depreciate the"
"first, and to damp the second. The truth is,"
"that, very fortunately for this country, this"
"desponding party have hitherto failed in their"
"views of convincing us that our ruin is inevitable."
"We feel the contrary, in the internal vigour of"
"the state, and in that unanimity of sentiment"
"among the people, which forbids us to connect"
"danger with despair."
"            But why should either be mentioned, upon"
"the present occasion? This country, with much"
"'smaller resources, and much less unanimity, has"
"repeatedly weathered more dreadful storms than"
"those which only seem to threaten it at present."
"In the first Dutch war, France and Denmark"
"joined the enemy against EnglandIn 1665, 1666, &amp  Vide Life of Clarendon,"
"Burnet, Rapin, Ralph, &amp  &amp . She had"
"no friendly port on the continent, from the Pyre-nees"
"to the pole; no ally but the Bishop of"
"Munster. The Dutch came out, to a decisive"
"battle, with one hundred and thirteen ships of"
"war, eleven fire-ships, and seven yatchts; led by"
"able, experienced, and brave commanders."
"France, co-operating with her allies, entered"
"the Channel with forty ships of the line. The"
"usual revenue of England amounted only to the"
"annual sum of one million two hundred thou-sand"
"pounds; and the supplies granted, for the"
"year, exceeded not double that sum. Our"
"'standing army scarcely consisted of five thou-sand"
"men; and there was no militia in the king-dom."
"            "
"               "
"The nation was, in the mean time, visited"
"with two of the most dreadful calamities that"
"can afflict a people, pestilence and fire. Near"
"eighty thousand persons had been carried off by"
"the first, in London alone. The city had become"
"a kind of desert; and grass was observed to"
"grow in the middle of CheapsideBaker,  637.. The"
"plague followed those who fled to the country;"
"and terror and death filled every corner of the"
"kingdom. This scourge was followed by a"
"fire, which consumed fifteen out of the twenty-six"
"wards of the city, consisting of four hundred"
"'streets and lanes, thirteen thousand houses, and"
"eighty-nine parish-churchesVide Clarendon, Heath, Burnet.. But these mis-fortunes"
"neither damped the spirits of the"
"people, nor obstructed the measures of Govern-ment."
"Our fleets, though much inferior, fought,"
"and vanquished the enemy. The alliance against"
"us was broken, and an honourable and advan-tageous"
"peace was obtained."
"            In the year 1690, the French fleet entered"
"the English channel, appeared before Plymouth,"
"on the 20th of June, drove the combined fleets"
"of England and Holland, from the back, of the"
"isle of Wight, engaged and totally defeated"
"them, in a general battle, near Beachy-head."
"In this unfortunate action we lost eight ships of"
"the line, besides many more, that were rendered"
"unfit for service; and the shattered remains of"
"the fleet were forced to shelter themselves in the"
"ThamesLord Torrington Letter, July 1, 1690.. The French rode triumphant,"
"for some months, in the Channel. They in-sulted"
"our sea-ports; and threatened our coasts"
"with invasion. There were, at the time, no"
"more than five thousand regular troops in Eng-land;"
"the militia were not arrayed; King Wil-liam"
"was, in a manner, confined to Ireland, by"
"the superiority of the enemy at sea."
"            The nation was, at the same time, dis-tracted"
"and divided in opinion, on account"
"of a disputed succession. Public credit, du-ring"
"the whole war, was so low, that soon"
"after this period, Exchequer and Navy Bills"
"became almost of as little value, as the paste-board"
"dollars of the American Congress; and"
"even the notes of the Bank of England were"
"at forty per cent. discountKennet, Ralph, Burnet, &amp  &amp . Near six thou-sand"
"trading vessels were taken by the French in"
"the course of the warVide Journals of the Commons, 169"
"                     •"
"                  .. Notwithstanding"
"these misfortunes, the vigour of Government"
"and spirit of the people surmounted all difficul-ties"
"The enemy was disappointed, in all his"
"ambitious views, an honourable peace was ob-tained,"
"the revolution confirmed, the protest-ant"
"'succession secured, and public credit re-stored."
"            In the present times, our resources are much"
"greater, our spirit equal, and our danger less,"
"than at either of those periods. We have an"
"ample revenue, an untainted credit, a great and"
"a growing navy. Instead of five thousand men,"
"we have above sixty thousand disciplined troops,"
"for our internal defence; and we have a certain"
"prospect of half as many more, in the space of"
"a few months. A spirit of unanimity, vigour,"
"and exertion, begins to pervade the whole king-dom."
"Our nobility and gentry, with a spirit"
"becoming Britons, either serve in our constitu-tional"
"defence, the militia, or with their in-fluence"
"and purses exert themselves, in raising"
"new corps. The greatest commercial society,"
"in the kingdom, has set a noble example to"
"their fellow-subjects, by an unanimous and"
"powerful aid to the state, in the present emer-gency."
"Voluntary subscriptions, for raising sol-diers,"
"and for giving a bounty to sailors, have"
"been opened, in several places; and the same"
"'spirit will diffuse itself through both the British"
"isles. Such as are debarred, by infirmities and"
"of the Crown, kept open the ears of the public"
"to every alarm. Scarce any measure of Go-vernment"
"could be so free from error, as not"
"to be vulnerable on some popular ground."
"Every Opposition seized this obvious advan-tage,"
"and assumed or obtained the title of the
popular party. No distinction was made,"
"in this respect, between Whig and Tory. Each"
"party, when out of place, adopted the same"
"principles; and thus both were alternately"
"dignified with the once honourable name of"
"PATRIOTS."
"            The present reign began, with advantages,"
"calculated to put an end to foolish distinctions,"
"which ought to have expired, with the preju-dices,"
"on which they had been founded. A"
"young prince had succeeded to the throne, who"
"disdained to govern his people through the me-dium"
"of a faction. The door of preferment"
"was laid open to all his subjects; but though"
"this liberal conduct might have pleased the un-prejudiced,"
"it was incapable of extinguishing"
"party among the interested. These, though of"
"different principles and characters, by imposing"
"on the weak and credulous, formed new factions,"
"on the shadows of departed political tenets."
"However heterogeneous before, the heat of re-sentment,"
"and rage of disappointment, as it"
"were, gradually melted them into one mass;"
"years, from personal service, will undoubtedly"
"exhibit, on the present occasion, their love for"
"their country, and their zeal for its safety."
"            Instead of being depressed, with a sense of"
"danger, all ranks and degrees of men feel that"
"elevation, which threatened perils excite, in"
"generous minds. Instead of looking forward to"
"future disgraces or disasters, they reflect on the"
"glory of former times. The posterity of those,"
"who conquered at Poictiers, Cressy, and Agin-court,"
"and annexed France itself to the English"
"crown, cannot form to themselves any fears from"
"a French invasion. On the contrary, when they"
"have sufficiently prepared for security at home,"
"they will act offensively abroad; and carry back"
"to the bosom of the enemy that terror, which"
"he vainly hopes to create."
"            If we are at war in America, we have"
"not the burden of a continental war; that"
"'sink, in which our treasure has always dis-appeared,"
"without any hope of return. The"
"money laid out on our navy, or expended in"
"our Colonies, will return to the center of the"
"kingdom, through all the veins of commerce."
"Our trade has been protected, against the ene-my,"
"to a degree unknown in any former war."
"We have lost, in no quarter of the world, any"
"territory without an equivalent; in some we"
"have gained. In the West Indies, we are still"
"'superior to our Enemies. We have eradicated"
"them entirely from the East Indies, and we"
"have a flattering prospect of a speedy termina-tion"
"of resistance, in North America."
"            In the first stage of a war, the advantage of"
"attack is possessed, by that nation, who first"
"breaks the peace. The disadvantages of fence"
"must, for some time, remain with its op-ponent."
"A state possessing such extensive do-minions,"
"as Great Britain, cannot be supposed,"
"to be invulnerable, on every side. We may"
"'suffer some losses, at the beginning; for what"
"people was ever uniformly successful in war?"
"The Romans themselves were not always invinci-ble."
"They frequently lost provinces and ar-mies;"
"yet they rose superior to all nations. The"
"profits and losses of war can only be estimated,"
"on the day, which concludes a peace. Let us"
"be unanimous among ourselves, and that day"
"cannot be distant, disadvantageous, or disho-nourable;"
"on the contrary, it will be attended"
"with that glory, which the spirit and exertion of"
"a great state cannot fail to acquire."
"            THE END."
"         "
"      "
"   "
"and they revived in themselves the name, though"
"little of the principles of WHIGS."
"            The vehemence of the present Opposition"
"'seems to have carried them to extremities,"
"which supersede all former descriptions of party,"
"and which cannot fail to defeat their views. In"
"former times, the candidates for public favour"
"thought it prudent to adhere, in their exhibi-tions,"
"to public principles. But in our times,"
"an eagerness to thwart the measures of Govern-ment"
"has expelled all regard for the opinions of"
"the people. The dignity and honour of the"
"nation were formerly the favourite themes of Op-positions;"
"melancholy, meanness, and despair,"
"now fill the whole circle of patriotic oratory."
"With a want of prudence, as well as of decency,"
"they tie up the hands of their country in the"
"hour of danger. They not only justify rebel-lion,"
"against her authority, but indirectly pro-mote"
"a foreign war against her very existence:"
"By magnifying the power of her opponents,"
"they endeavour to depress her spirits; by ex-posing"
"her real or pretended weakness, they"
"wish to inspire her enemies with a confidence of"
"'success."
"            These strange positions, and many more of"
"the same kind, might be established, on incon-testible"
"authorities, by a plain narrative of the"
"conduct of opposition, since the commencement"
"of the present parliament. But, the pursu-ing"
"them through such a variety of matter,"
"and such a length of time, would be a task"
"of great labour, and little entertainment. We"
"'shall, therefore, confine ourselves to the most"
"'striking features of the last session. In the"
"'space of seven months, they have contrived to"
"croud together most of the absurdities of seven"
"years; and, though the studied brevity of this"
"disquisition must necessarily exclude many cir-cumstances,"
"enough, we trust, will appear to"
"'shew the principles, designs, and views of so"
"'strange a confederacy."
"            On the 26th of November, 1778, the fifth"
"'session of the present parliament was opened,"
"with a speech from the throne. A complaint"
"of the perfidy of France, in commencing hosti-lities,"
"and the obstinacy of America, in refusing"
"terms, together with a request of support, were"
"the chief heads of the speech. It expressed, at"
"the same time, a regret that the efforts of
his Majesty had not been attended with all
the success which the justice of the cause, and
the vigour of exertions, seemed to promise."
"Unanimity was, in the usual form, recommend "
"and surely no period in history more re-quired"
"the unanimous exertion of the whole"
"nation."
"            "
"               "
"Opposition have denominated themselves"
"an active Opposition; and if zeal in thwart "
"assiduity in obstructing, and success in feating"
"public measures, merit a designation,"
"which implies a kind of applause, they are"
"certainly entitled to that name. The una-nimity"
"and concert, which their Sovereign"
"requested, for the support of the interests"
"and honour of the nation, exist only among"
"them, for the ruin of the one, and the tarnish-ing"
"of the other. A short detail of the prin-ciples,"
"which they advanced in the first exhibi-tions"
"of the season, will establish the truth of"
"this observation. The orators in the Lower"
"House mixed reflections on the past, with pro-phecies"
"of future disasters. The first we shall"
"'submit to the judgment of the Reader; seve-ral"
"of the latter have been already refuted by"
"time."
"            Opposition opened the political campaign,"
"with assertions, which had been often refuted;"
"and with predictions of national disasters, which"
"their own conduct seemed, uniformly, calculated"
"to realize. As the public misfortunes may be"
"deduced, from the rebellion in America, they"
"asserted, contrary to fact, that hostilities had"
"been first commenced by government. They"
"recurred to their usual prophecies, relative to"
"foreign wars; and they even went so far as to arm"
"Holland, our ancient ally, against this devoted"
