V. AN EXCURSION IN THE HIGHLANDS :
DISCOURSE ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS 
The Diversion of Hunting and Shooting consider’d; as Recreation & The operation of
Instinct in Animals contrasted with that of Free Will in Man. 1 to 12.
In what consists what may be called supreme good: Epicurus’ and Zeno’s opinions. 12 to 17.
The Principle of Action in Man various. Sense of Beauty and Deformity as applied to
Architecture & Virtue and Vice. Variety: how far it contributes to Happiness, the real end of
our Life. Happiness and Perfection the same. Evidence of first Cause in the Wisdom and
goodness displayed in the order of Things. Scale of Gradation to Perfection and Happiness.
The Principle of Moral approbation: Distinction of Right and Wrong. Estimation of moral
Character. 17 to the end.
 of Oedipus 1 than he des of any family in Atholl b2 afterwards
repeated this acc as trait of the manners in the highlands, I know
your author. Walking, he pretends to be wag and laughs at your Lowlander for their Ignorance & want of Speech, and seeing where My Visitors
indeed were delighted with the Aspect of the Country its Rivers Hills &
Woods your Question pointed would not baulk your Credulity your Lowlanders he has often said to me will believe any thing. To prove are mankind
to interpret difference of any kind against foreigners and in their own
favour. I am not sure but the most ured are the most apt  Spy Barbarity in every thing different from themselves. And something like the
Chineze Map 3 of the world is to be found in every European head. My
Friends however were not insensible to the Natural Beauties of the Country.
Its Woods Waters Lofty Hills & Precipices and my heart overflowed with
pleasure in Company to which I was so much attached from & in whom I
had taken my first Draughts of Moral Science. 
Having already Rode or Walked through every Road or by Path among
the Woods & the Banks of the River, We agreed one Evening that next day
we should Ascend the mountains &  enjoy Pleasure which I had often
talked of to them of sauntering amidst. The Solemnity of Lone & Empty
Vales among the mountains with nothing to be seen but heath towering
hills & Majestic Rock & not Sound but that of the Whittering Plower or
Moor Cock when he spring the Heath.
But that we might appear to have some method in our Walks & not pass
for madmen in the Countr I undertook to Arm them all with some sort of
Guns & procure a Dog to give l us the Appearance of Sportsmen. The
Scheme being formed overnight m all of  were dressed for the Mountain
about four o’Clock in the morning at Signal which I was appointed to give
by firing off my piece under the  Window  the Place where they
Slept. And we accordingly Sett off with Gilly whitfoot 5 with bag of Provisions to Stay hunger which never fails to make itself n very intensely felt
through the day in Such excursion.
We had scarcely turned the Brow of the first Hill & lost sight of the
Strath 6 we had left and all its Vestige of human habitation when we fell in
with one of those Sportsmen who are called Stalkers & live by the most
fatiguing & tiresome of all pursuits that of the Deer whose Vigilance &
Wary & shyness can baffle the hunters skill for Weeks to get within Shot of
them. This person was my acquaintance & he undertook to Conduct  us
where we might me with Sport. My Low Country friends thought it
became them as persons  come from wild Country to complain of
those rugged Assents & Barbarous Regions & but for shame some of them o
would have thrown their Guns being little used to Such implements of
Sport. Our friend the Stalker indeed was very much puzled what to make of
us for tho he put two or three Coveys in different places. The Birds were
allowed to go unmolested. His own Gun was loaded with Ball & he did not
deign to fire at Bird, and my Friends continued the dissputes which they
got into while the game Sprung from their feet. I was myself  no shot &
tho I fired once or twice killed nothing. I led the way however to Spring &
Rivulet with which I was well acquainted & where I proposed we should
take some Rest and Refreshment. The doubting that our bag might no be
very plenty p Stalker took different way towards Shealing 7 from which he
said he would meet us round hill with some Supply of Milk & what else the
Shealing could Supply. We had accordingly scarce got sight of our Rivulet when our Friend appeared accompanyed with herdsman & two young
women carrying Pitchers of Milk Cream & Why 8 with Barley Cakes of
the most delicious , as every one of the Company owned at this time,
tho  at any other perhaps they would scarcely have tasted such fare. My
Friend Adam q9 while he devourd the Cakes & the Milk held up his hands &
exclaimed that whoever could not fend on such fare should be taken out and
Shot. And here is luxury said Cleghorn 10 stretching himself on the green
bank of this Rivulet which no Sopha even surpassed.
I was in haste this morning to know what sort of pleasure Sportsmen
could r have in killing poor birds. But I might have lay still in my bed for all
I have learned. s So you might t for u I don’t think you so much as looked at
the Dog or cocked your Gun once Wilkie 11 & you could have settled your
disputes just as well at the Breakfast Table as among these Hills. And he
would not have lost his Powder Horn  as I am told he has done.
What is more says Wilkie I should not have worn out good pair of
Shoes which cost me Boll 12 of Pease at Christmas.
Nay, says R. Adam if they have lasted from Christmas till now at Midsummer there is not much to be said against the pleasure of shooting.
Shooting I said is like many of our other pleasures consists in the excercise
it gives to our Skill & our faculties as well as our limbs. My wonder is says
Cleghorn that so lazy an Animal as man should take it in his head to have
his bones broken for diversion. A Country Squire v will risk his neck at any
time w rather than be quiet in his bed. Hunting in this Country is laborious
and hazardous: but what was when the Game was Boar or Lyon. These are
 publick enemies says Home 13 And every lover of Arms must be keen
to encounter them. Yes when he could not avoid them I said: but to put
himself x in their Way on purpose does not appear to be very reasonable. If
we did nothing but what reason prescribes we should pass but dull life in
my Opinion. There is reason for you says he turning to Cleghorn who
seemed to be falling asleep. I heard what you say, said Cleghorn But I had
rather be left alone with the pratling of this little Brook. y
Are you now to learn that mans life must pass in Action whether with or
without reason And his very best enjoyment are in the Nature of passing
Scenes not fixed Acquisitions or possessions. 14 He had Scarcely Spoke these
words when our Stalker in hasty & menacing kind of whisper called 
Close. Then pointing to Windward with his face almost touching the
Ground. We Spyed Stag coming at Speed over height beyond us. We
have the Wind of him said the Stalker and if I but get shot you will not
want Venison here this eight days. z
For your Life says Cleghorn dont shoot him I would not forgo the pleasure of seeing him pass for all the Venison in your Dukes 15 Forrest. The
Animal was soon near enough to spy his Danger and making Spring to
avoid us, raised kind of involuntary Shout from all the Company: but the
Stalker was Silent ai & without saying Word to any of us took his departure. Are you surprised says Cleghorn that Animals should be fond of their
own Movements, With what Majesty & Grace he went off  tho alarmed
for his Life on seeing bi Gang of Thieves and Murderers. It was very fine
says R. Adam: but I doubt whether he was Conscious of it or meant to show
Away. That may be doubted says Cleghorn But who can doubt ci that in
Nature there is meaning which Couples the Grace of Action with the
Instinctive dissposition to show it. I believe the great difference between
Man & the other animals is that they are made to perform their functions
Gracefully. Man is all to perceive why he should so perform them:
but left to choose for himself at the hazard of missing the Aim in which
Other Animals are for the most part correct. I believe that all Animals says
Wilkie do what is agreeable to them & Man among the rest. And if pleasure
is so placed as to  Misslead them. The Arrangement of Nature is defective not the Animal that conform himself di to the Law of his Nature.
Certainly so says Cleghorn with Respect to Animals who have no power
of discernment beyond the present impression: But in respect to Man who
not only like the other animals is occasionally sollicited by different Pleasures: but who at all times, ei whatever the present impression may be can
recollect & State the whole sum of considerations on which he is to Act. If
he neglect to do or make wrong choice in the face of better information
The defect is in him not in the scene whi nature has opened for his
Choice & exertions. 16 It is expected of him that he shall chuse that which
upon the whole is constituent of most pleasure & least pain taking in the
whole of time the past the Present & the Future. What Mighty Vista you
would open says Adam for so short sighted Creature. It is so no doubt said
Cleghorn And neither  the very sudden fi occasion on which he is Often
to make his Choice nor the extent of his views enable  to Act upon this
principle alone. But there is another Principle 17 neither requiring so much
deliberation nor such extensive views on which he may Act with Tolerable
Safety & is probably that to which Nature has trusted his Conduct. And I
need not say that this is the distinguishing principle of right & Wrong
Innocent & Guilt Honour & disshonour or by whatever name the Estimable
& Praiseworthy gi is disstinguished from the blameable & Vile.
I am affraid says Wilkie that we are not always correct in the Application
of this Principle any more than the Former. Absolute Correction says Cleghorn is no where our lot. But in the Application of this Principle I believe
we are safer than in that of any other. And less Evil is incurred by those who
do what they believe to be their duty than by those who study nothing but
pleasure or Interest however well pondered &  calculated. In our deliberations indeed upon every Principle we must decline present Enjoyment
for future Considerations but I believe we are more effectually Supported in
acting thus through Sentiments of Integrity & honour than any mere consideration of future Interest or Safety. I even doubt whether it be correct to
Say that the Man of Integrity upon any occasion forgos Pleasure to persevere in his duty for to him I believe this very perseverance is the Supreme
pleasure 18 on every Occasion. And if Nature have taught him and all Other
Animals to pursue his their pleasure She has not neglected to Mark the
proper Object of his Choice.
Other Pleasures have their Separate & Absolute value whatever it may.
This of doing right derives me possible hi Pleasure from the comparable
neglect of every other one.
Virtue it should seem by this account to be the greatest Pleasure And the
Systems of Epicurus 19 & Zeno 20 were the same. Just so he said all to the 
mere order of Words & the possible mistakes traveller may commit in setting out from one end of the Road he is to Travel or The Other.
Epicurus says that Pleasure is the Chief Good. 21
Zeno says that Virtue his Chief Good is Supremely pleasant. 22
Here the only difference seems to be that the Adjective & Substantive are
differently placed. Strange that so slight difference should have occasioned so much Controversy or that in the effect there should be any
difference.
What difference can it make in the Effect says R. Adam. It may make
some Answerd Cleghorn. The Epicurean says Pleasure is the chief Good &
leaves his Pupils to chuse their pleasure, many of them I’m affraid will take
the first that Comes Altho he owns that Virtue is the highest yet many who
set out in the pursuit of Pleasure may never Arrive at Virtue. 23
According to Zeno The Choice is at once directed to Virtue and all inferiour pleasure are sett aside in the Effort to  arrive at this. 24
If according to Epicurus himself there be choice of Pleasures the very
meaning of Formula in Stating the Chief Good is the Specification of that
which is the preferable pleasure. And if retitude & Integrity of mind be
that pleasure Common sense requires that it should be Specifyed be its
Name Virtue Moral Excellence or any Other.
I am affraid says Wilkie that if the World is to be governed by the Choice
of Names we have little to expect from Philosophy at least.
C I am not very Sanguine in my expectations. But of the Principles of Action in human Nature allowing that pleasure of one kind or other
is the gratification of all. It is of consequence at least in speculation to know.
That the Principle of Estimation in the human mind is at least one of the
strongest and its gratifications of the greatest value.
W What Mysterious and Indefineable Principle you open upon
us.  And Plato 25 himself I believe with his One in Many or his many in
one could hardly make Sense of it. What is it? Vanity Ambition ii or Pride.
The fashionable point of humour Dress or Beauty Politeness Education Science Fortune or birth or any thing else which mankind affect to set
themselves off.
C It is indeed none of these exclusively: but all of them springing from one Source of which the Waters in its very first ishue into different
Channels is instantly sweet or bitter, Clear or foul poisonous or Salutary.
R. Adam. What wonderful Spring. One must take care where he tastes
it or rather tasting at one channel can give no notion of what it is at
another.
W. C Just so person who has tasted only of Integrity & just
Elevation of mind will not know what the Proud or Vainglorious Enjoy or
Suffer.
R. A Yet all  this you say comes from One Spring. I wish you
would show it us.
W. C Ferguson there will show it. He has often told me it is the
point at which all that is forcible in the human Mind is Collected. The
Honest ji Mans Integrity The Gentlemans honour which neither will forgo
to preserve his Life The Soldiers Glory for which life is exposed thousand
times and often Sacrificed. 26 It is the Martyrs Crown which renders Suffering indifferent or matter of Joy and Triumph. Whoever can direct the
Channel in which it is to Run ki may command Mankind to any Purpose or
to any extent.
R. A This is still no better than leaving us to grope for the Point
over an amazing li extent of Surface. For in what point do the Plain honest
Man mi & Integrity Military Glory  or Religious Enthusiasm agree.
Fer. There are Forms or Characters for differing human Nature
from mere integrity & honour such as Emulation, Pride & Vanity and yet I
believe they are derived from one common source whose water in flowing in
any of its Streams are bitter Altho the source from which they are derived is
Sweet. ni
A What for source is that?
Fer To drop the Metaphor It is certain disposition to Esteem the
Excellent or Perfect in contradisstinction to Imperfection or defect. In what
relates to our own attainments I would call it Ambition. A term in common
use for the most limited to the desire of Power. But according to the definition which is given of it in our Dictionary 27 Viz. The desire of something
higher & better than the present We may venture to call the desire of Excellence Ambition As we call the Love of Animal Pleasure Sensuality.
Ambition then in this sense is that Polarity of the Human Soul which
gives it direction horizontal or rather Elevated to what is Esteemable As
sensuality like what befalls the dipping needle tends to ascension oi or
depression. pi
Johnson 28 defines it not the desire of Power: but the desire of something
higher & better than the present. This implys at least distinction of high
& low to which in our mind Correspond sentiments of Esteem & Contempt
& what may be termed Species of Polaty in human Nature ever pointing to the Esteemed or the Estimable And away from the Contemned or
Contemptible with as many different Appearances as their qi are things in
which the distinction of Excellence And defect can in imagination be
applyed.
The  ri F. If I have ever ventured to say anything to you on
this Subject it could be little more than repetition of what I had learned
from yourself 29 and Water is better from the Fountain than from any Vessel
in which it has  kept any time.
W. If you toss the subject in compliments from one to the Other we
had better be after the Deer that might have  shot for our Dinner
when we might have more Patience to listen to Speculations. Here are three
or four of us something to do with the Arts that contribute to Pleasure as
well as Profit. And if each will Specify what he Aims at. For Beauty in his
Way we may possibly find some Point in which to agree.
H. Whether you agree or not we may at least part good Friends. I
do not wish to end the dispute at once. But my faith is pinned on Bob
Adam. I shall desire no other account of Beauty than what he will give.
 A. In our Profession we have less to do with Beauty than People
imagine. We must humour our employers. They have each Crotchets and
think only how they may be lodged at the least Expence.
D. H. Now this to me is the very summit of Beauty Utility 30 in
which every one is entitled to judge for himself. Will any one lay out his
money on what he does not want or is of no use to him.
R. A. I am not so unreasonable as to think he should: But Still
Beauty is proper Object for the Rich: but if any one with money in his
Pocket should Prefer Lump of Mere Mason to the Pantheon 31 or Collonade of Grecian Building he might be well enough lodged within But the
outside of his Mansion would Argue little Taste or Spirit.
D. H What would you have our monied si People do in this Respect.
R. A The Remains of Antiquity Even Pieces of Cornices & Broken
 Columns will show them what they ought to do.
D. H Even in the Stile of Antient Building I believe it is acknowledged that the ornaments or the Beauty of Parts is derived from apparent
utility 32 and the ornaments are but apparent Supports or strength of the
Building and hence the great Superiority of the Grecian to the Gothic
Architecture.
A. F This I believe is true and in this point of View. An Edifice
is Beautiful in the same Sense in which any other work well Contrived in
the means for beneficent End is admired as Beauty.
D. H. A Beneficent End and Apt means are only so many more
words to Express utility. 33
A. F. Such Work no doubt is Useful but if Utility be the sole
Recommendation of what is Called Beautiful. It should follow that utility
whever found shall have the same Effect And Dunghill be more
Admired than the Pantheon of Agrippa 34 or the Dome of St Peters. 35
 D. H. I grant you that Utility without art or Design especially if
it offend our other Senses is not admitted for Beauty.
A. F It is not mere utility 36 then but utility Obtained by design
that Constitutes Beauty. And if Beneficent Design or Beneficent Ends &
wise means even when they are not of any Actual use to any one as in the
Pantheon of Agrippa are admired as Beautiful and if Actual Utility is sometimes Observed with disgust it follows that the order of Salutary Ends &
Wise Means is the Genuine Constituent of Beauty And while we bestow
encomiums on the work it is only the workmen we admire.
W. W. We have let the Deer Escape and I suspect we must let the
Game you are in pursuit of Escape also. It is too nimble I doubt for our
Speculations. In trying to catch it we lay hold of some block or heap of baggage that ly in the Way. What connection can Beauty the mistress ti of Fancy
and lively conceit have  with Utility the dullest of all considerations or
with great schemes of Contrivance however beneficent. This is mere plodding and puzle not the gay aspect of Beauty. Beauty has always appeared to
me Matter of Surface & Delight not of internal Solidity or Depth of
thought. A Pair of tools bespatterd with Dirt should be beautyful because of
the Use they were of in keeping traveller clean And Steam Engine
should be beautiful because of its purpose and exquisite Contrivance but no
Gentleman would like to have such Beauty seen from his Windows wherever it may be placed for use he endeavours to Lose it from the sight. So
much for Useful & well contrived things which have no Beauty. Show me
then Beauty which has these qualities of Utility or Design. What is the
Use or Design  of Tulip or Rose perhaps among the first Specimens
of Beauty which ought to have occurred to your Inquiry if you had not been
misled by the Sprightly bouncing of Stag who mistook you for hunters of
Venison of which notwithstanding his appearance he may be at this season
but an indifferent specimen. Beauty is mere outside and too often but covers defects.
W. C. In that W you are surely right. Beauty is often an
Apparent Recommendation & often detected not to be real. Yet it may be
apparent Utility or Apparent ingenuity. For no one contends that it must
always be the Reality of Either.
W. W. I repeat my question respecting the apparent ui as well as the
Real Utility or Contrivance. What is the Apparent use or Contrivance of a
Rose or Tulip. Do not we say that Tint or this Note of Music is beautiful.
No one ever denyed that  Hogarths 37 line is more beautiful than the
Zig Zag of Sawe. That Circle is more beautiful than any angular Figure
yet here is no appearance of Use or Design.
A. F. It is possible we may be disputing about Words. They are
seldom so well fixed to precise meaning as not to occasion an apparent difference of opinion even where there is none. We apply the term beauty
frequently to whatever delights or pleases us & it is certain that the sources
of Pleasure are to us so various that they ought not to be confounded under
the same . Mere sensation is pleasant without any regard to its external cause. We have other pleasures constituted in sentiment of Esteem or
admiration in regard to the merit or excellence of an object. I taste or smell
the flavour or fragrance of Fruit or Flower but I admire an amiable Character. Here too is delight or Pleasure but there is merit in the object as well
as satisfaction to me. I would confine the  appellation of vi Beauty to
cases of Esteem or Admiration and withhold it from all cases of mere pleasant Sensation.
There is yet another source of Ambiguity in the Terms we employ on
this. There are some things in their own Nature agreeable or Admirable:
Others are so only by association with something else. A Fine Morning or
Evening is pleasant in itself. The Rise of the Curtain at the Playhouse is
pleasant on account of the Entertainment expected to follow. Many
Instances now mentioned of very Simple or indifferent things to which the
Epithet of Beauty is applied owed to some Association casual or founded in
some Slight Analogy Certain pleasing affections of the mind Are associated
with notes of Music or tints of Colour and the very terms in which we
express our Sense of Beauty in such Instances point out its Source. A Note
or Tint is Gay or Sorrowful that is to say it is associated in our Fancy with
Joy or sorrow and because the Beautiful is pleasant we say that such Sensations are beautiful.
 I would however limit the Appellation of Beauty to such Cases as bear
the association not to mere pleasure but to somewhat in its Nature Estimable or admirable And I doubt that in all merely Corporeal Subjects to which
the Epithet of Beautiful is applied the title is founded in some such association. What is the Beauty of Certain Expressions of the Countenance but the
Characters of Innocence Good Sense and Candour which they bear to the
observer. Nay what is the Countenance And the Person himself but the
Work of Divine artist. For since I place Beauty among the Subjects not of
mere Sensation but of Esteem admiration & even Extasy I do not fear to
ascend too high penetrate too far wi in Search of its origin.
W. C. You are going now where I have long Wished to go with
Plato to the Idea of first Fair & first Perfect 38 derived from the Majesty of
God himself and by him impressed on the minds of Intelligent beings.
W. W. We have heard  much of Words & their Ambiguity on
this occasion. I wish some one would tell us the meaning of these.
W. C. I can tell you only the Sense in which I take them myself
And it is no more than this.
That the Almighty in superadding Intelligence to the Animal & Sensitive nature of Man gave him the Power of discriminating Excellence &
Defect and Under the Disstinction of becoming acquainted with that Perfection which is Eternal & without Limit that is without Defect for
whatever is short of Infinity is Defective so much that in finite or Created
Being The least Defect is the greatest Attainable Perfection.
D. H. Do you think that no Power but that of Intelligence alone is
required for this Purpose.
W. C. I know not any other.
W. W. What not know of the Moral Sense The Sense of Beauty; the
Sense of Ridicule and so forth. Understanding or Intelligence is employed
in discovering Truth or refuting Error. But in judging of Merit or Demerit
there is Sensation as well as Reasoning.
 W. C. It may be so: but if any one should tell me he understood that the Sun was placed nearly in the Center of the Planetary System
but that he was not qualified to Judge whether it was wisely so placed. I confess I should question his understanding or Intellectual Faculty: but this
after all is but dispute about Words.
The Moral Sense or the Sense of Right and Wrong is term like many
other metaphorical Expressions familiar in common it is nevertheless a
mere metaphor and as Metaphors frequently do tends to misslead our Conception. We are not indeed told of any Internal organs like those of the Eye
or the Ear. But as Sensation whether of Colour or Sound is very different
from its Cause We are apt to imagine that the Approbation of Virtue has the
same arbitrary connection with Virtue that Sound has with the Tremour of
a String or Bell. This with me is an objection to the use of such Metaphorical Language. It is the tremour of Chord that produces the sensation of
Sound. But it is the Thing itself that produces the Approbation of
Benevolence.
 W. W. Benevolence Im affraid is an affection as little xi known to
some people as the Tension and Vibration of Chords required to musical
note is known to others.
W. C. People are no doubt unequally disposed to it but there are
few if any who do not in some or on some occasions experience it.
W. W. The Question at present however is not concerning the
Reality of Moral Distinctions: but that of mere Beauty and Deformity or
Uglyness. 39 This Sentiment may be produced by something abroad in its
own Nature indifferent. It is found in Stocks and Stones no less than in living Creatures: But on this question if this were proper time and place I
should wish to proceed more regularly than we have yet done. The Question may be divided into two.
1st What is in the Nature or Form of Things that thus affects the
Observer of Beauty.
2d By what faculty in the Observer this Perception or Sentiment is
Obtained.
To the first Question some Answerers have said That Beauty consists in
Uniformity amidst Variety. 40  Others that it consists in mere form in
gently flowing Lines & Surfaces. 41
The first appears to place Beauty in mere Contradiction. Uniformity contradicts Variety & Variety contradicts Uniformity. 42 The Error however
may be in the terms not in the Substance. If in Stead of Uniformity we Substitute Analogy The terms will be consistent. Analogy is Consistent with
Variety And this of course with analogy and such indeed is the Scene of
Nature exhibiting variety almost indefinite through which however there is
still analogy that seems to Argue The Identity of Genius in the Great Inventor of all Living Natures whether Vegetable Animal or Intellectual having
their origin in seminal Germ have their progress to Maturity and Period
of Life in the Individual But in the Race are continued by successive &
renewed Generation. And the scene is undoubtedly Beautiful: but whether
is so from its Mere Variety and Analogy may be doubted. These circumstances may be conceived to take place in scenes of which the effect will be
quite the reverse.
Suppose for Instance of Torture but Analogous in the manner of their
Application by Machinery or by Fire. The Hell produced with all variety &
 Analogy would be Scene of Horror and Detestation not of Delight or
Admiration. It is therefore not the mere Analogy of Various Classes and
orders of things that Constitutes their Beauty, But the Beneficent Intention
that appears throughout and still appears in all the Variation of unexhaustible Invention.
The Gently flowing & bending line or Surface of the Ingenious Artist
Hogarth has something childish that would tempt us to believe he yi never
looked for Beauty beyond the Folliage which decorates the Frame of Picture. In Architure the Streight line and plane Surface are as Necessary
to Beauty as foliage is to the Festoon, or Serpentine Walk to the Pleasure.
Give Hogarths line of Beauty to the zi Column & his Waving Surface to his
pavement in the Portico. I imagine his Beauty will disgust or offend the
Taste it is meant to Gratify. These and every other Instance it is Propriety
the Child of ingenious and beneficent Desire we admire not any capricious
variety or unmeaning combination of Parts.
W. W. I am affraid if we allow you  to go on you will bring us
to combination and means: the Serious aii we beg you to damp or sadden or
damp Speculation on which Boys & Girls might be employed with
delight.
A. F. The Consequence does not deter me for I am bii without
the that there is no Excellence real or supposed and would limit the use cii to
Subjects of Esteem and admiration.
W. W. We shall not quarrel with you about Words provided you
help us to understand their meaning. But I doubt Excellence or Perfection
as you sometimes call it will puzle us as much as Beauty itself.
A. F. It is that for which in our Esteem is preferred to another.
W. W. I know what is in our Esteem But it does not follow that in
Nature there is any Such Thing.
A. F. Do you think there is no Gradation in the scale of
Nature. 43
W. W. As we conceive there is  but as things are I cannot conceive what it dii should be Things are in unequal Demand in our Market but
our Demand & our Esteem are all Creations of our own Heads. There is neither Esteem Demand or Market in the System of Nature. In Nature every
thing is in Demand 44 Otherwise it would not have been there And Soil in
greater demand than Diamond or Gold otherwise it would not have been
more plentiful. Our Demand is so much the Reverse of Nature that ours
increases as that of Nature diminishes. And so we erect Scale the Reverse
of that which Nature has adopted.
A. F. If the Demand of Nature is to be measurd by the quantity
she has produced so is ours & by that Rule The Soil on which we trade is
more in demand that is occupied by Thousands where Diamond is never
thought of. But nothing is more in demand than  Happiness and you
will own that in the Nature of Things it is preferable to Misery And if so
you will own that in Scale of Being Happiness is most real and important
distinction.
A. F. That distion most assuredly is real but like the Others it’s in the mind of the Observer.
Is the mind of the Observer no part in the System of Nature. I imagine
that great as the System of Nature is Mind is predominant and Being without mind altogether indifferent or not Susceptible of any Distinction
whatever.
W. W. That there may be Gradation of Happiness I do not deny:
but how will this Assist you in Establishing Gradation of Perfection or
Excellence.
A. F. The Gradation of Excellence is Established If Happiness
& Perfection be the same.
W. W. Did you never know an Excellent Person Suffering under
Misfortune or Disease.
A. F. Man is kind of Mixt or Amphibious Nature, we cannot
begin the Scale of Gradation 45 from him he partakes so much both of what
is above  him & below him that we must had both under our View
before we can denounce him truly.
W. W. Begin then where you please. I shall not interrupt you.
A. F. In describing Scale we may begin at Bottom & Ascend
or at Top & descend. Which order is best I shall not say but either is better
than beginning at the eii midle which in fact will be best understood at last
after both extreams are contrasted to one Another. To give Existence any
Value Power must be Supposed and even Power can scarcely be Conceived
to Exist with Exertion and both are indifferent untill it be known to what
End-All these bring. Supposed Gradation will Ensue from the Measure of
Power And Energy & from the Value of that End proved and Obtained.
Let the Top & Bottom of our Scale then be considered upon this Principle of Estimation. At the Bottom of our Scale we have mere Corporeall
Substance or Still Matter. Here however there is Power  The Power to
resist or withstand any changes. The Vis Inertiae. 46 If this were the Sole
Power in fii Being it must have remaind forever without Exertion. But there
is in Fact Power to change & the Resistance of matter Appears. A Power to
coagulate termed Gravitation or Cohesion. The Exertions of this Power
would soon terminate in Mass Universal & Still immensity the same as for
Existence or Death. There is however Saving Power by which Coagulation
is sufferd to proceed Certain length and Spheres of different Dimensions
are Formed. They do not Rest but Gravitating towards each other are so
urged by Lateral Power of Motion as to revolve in Orbits instead of Running into Mass. And among Number  Globes the Heavyest of all or
nearest the Center is found to have Salutary Influence on all around it.
Here then or in other analogous Instances  The Observer begins to
Observe Purpose transcending the best of his own. The Same Order of
things as far as we can discern or Conjecture prevails throughout the
immensity of Space & we but exhaust our feeble Powers in the attempt to
conceive it. Design Wisdom Goodness Magnificence all crowd upon the feeble Conception. And our thoughts are hurried at once from the Bottom of
the Scale we are in Search of to boundless tract of Existence beyond its
Summit. We are placed where Being seemingly begins and Ends And look
back from Effect to Cause And to Cause preceeding Cause. But feel in the
End that if there were not first there could not be Succession & to be
first is the same thing as to have been forever & because it was Necessary &
Could not have been Otherwise. Where all is order The First Cause or Principle of Existence must have been the Principle of order its Power directed
by  Goodness & Wisdom. 47 These then it seems are in Being, gii Consequently boundless in Measure or Extent: If Power be necessary it must be
omnipotence. If Wisdom & Goodness they must be perfect.
W. W. But what are we who thus presume to reason every
Depart of Nature however remote or exalted above our Reach.
A. F. We are not the lowest & probably much less nearest the
Summit in this Scale of Being we are considering but we too are constituted Power not the least Eminent and indeed that which alone gives value
to Existence The Power to be happy.
W. W. And to be miserable.
A. F. Happiness is the Object of all Intelligent Being and the
Power of Intelligence is bent to suffer is passive & imbecil the Reverse or
defect of Power not Modification of it. In our Way to Happiness Facts &
the Estimate of things are highly interesting & we are not in any Instance
precluded from the use of Reason in guarding against mistake or Errors
And our Faculties improve by  Exercise And the very Form of our
Existence is progressive. I am not affraid to Offer Conjecture that the
Frame of Nature is presented to our Observation As the Aliment of Intelligence As the Fields on this Globe are Covered with Verdure for the Aliment
of Pasturing animals. I am ready to contend that still matter in any form has
no Value but in its Relation to living Nature and on this Earth chiefly to the
Living and Intelligent Nature of Man. The Huntsman finds his game even
on these Barren & Towering mountains and if the Stag were ten times more
cautious & swift than his pursuers would find out ways to overtake & seize
. The game for Contemplation & Thought is spread overall from the
Earth on which we tread to the Gallaxy and the sparkling suns that do but
now reach us with their Ray. We may err in the order in which we employ
our Thoughts and our opinions be no better than matter for Correction: but
we are not out of our way so long as even  the mistakes we saw made
have hii still an approach to our End. To the Progress of Intelligence this is
peculiar that the experience of Mistake & its consequences lead to the discovery of Truth. We are not therefore to be deterred from the Use of Reason
for it is in using it that we render ourselves fit to enter on the higher Scenes
of Being to which our progression may lead. This indeed is Form of Being
implying in itself Scale of Gradation from the Germ in which it originates
to the Maturity or indefinite height of its possible attainments. 48 And in
this Comparison of Man with man and of manhood with Infancy you will
own there is palpable ground of distinction enough.
W. W. The progress of Indls in every species from small
beginnings to higher attain in his kind cannot be disputed. But still
how far one species in the System of Nature of an Order Superior to others
may be questioned or at least the grounds of any such superiority  may
be considered.
A. F. I have already hinted at what I consider as the first in the
Estimate of Physical Rank. It is Power which gives reality to Existence. It is
however hardly conceived to Exist untill it is exerted and even then remains
to be estimated from its object. Happiness to be obtained or bestowed is the
Object which fixes its Value and this value being once admired the Rank so
constituted will consist in the measure of Power. Omnipotence is that to
which there is no Resemblance or Approach in any Contingent Being. Even
Contingent Intelligence however is of prominent Rank in the Order of
Created Being. Here is Will directed to Happiness and in proportion as this
is approached There is Will to bestow it. The Will to be good to be wise
Intrepid orderly is happiness And is also the Will to Bestow it. You quoted
the sufferings of an iii Animal incident to man as Proof that happi
is not always proportioned to the Excellence of Mind. But the Happiness of
 Man is not the peculiar State of his Enjoyment at any Particular time
but the Summit to which his Progress is directed & which in the Result of
his Being he is finally destined. The Wants the Defects and the Sufferings
of an animal are in part Constituents of the School in which this mighty
Lesson of Goodness & Wisdom is to be obtained.
When the jii send on Earth Virtue his darling Child designed.
The present Felicity of Man consists in kii the possession of his Powers of
Progression and the fitness of the Scene 49 in which he is engaged by Excercise Experience and Information to conduct him in his Approaches to
Happiness The measure of lii which at future Periods cannot now be Ascertained. But when we consider what his Intelligence may be capable of it is
scarcely possible to suppose its being to determine with the organization of
his animal Frame.
 If Happiness be ground sufficiently solid on which to rest in Estimating the Value of Existence. The Power to obtain and communicate
Happiness as it may be modifyed in degree or Extent cannot be rejected as a
distinction on which to found mii Scale of Gradation in the orders to which
this Distinction may apply. On this Principle mere Still matter can of itself
admit of no Distinction of Value however varyed in its descript of
Great or Small of Fixed or Fluid Hard or Soft &c. &c. If the Immensity of
Space were filled with Diamond & Gold or with Corn & Money It would be
of no more value than Vacuity or none Entity itself. This Being then if it
may  called so Never could have been Created on its own Account. In
Relation to living & Intelligent Being it may be supply of some Want. It
may form the scene of their operations the means of their communications
the Material of their Arts and of their Beneficence. Such the Material Earth
in the Variety of its parts actually is to Man &c &c. And Magnificent as the
Material  World is with its Countless Suns and Planets of which the
nearest and the least tho of dimension easily expressed in Numbers of any
standard measure yet exceeds Imagination itself when Stated as the object
of one Single or comprehensive view. The Globe of Earth itself on which
Millions of Men are yearly Born does not in its Dimension does not exceed
a Millioneth Part of The Sun And to these mighty orbs we are led by Analogy to Suppose that every Star in the Heavens is Counter part and like this
our Planetary System also mere Scennery for the Reception and accommodation of Intelligent Being which without either Magnitude or Figure
Constitute that Power in Existence in Subservience to which all Magnitude
& Figure is created imagined for and all that we know of them after all is
the sensation Perception or imagination they suggest. 50
On the present occasion however we  not so much concerned to fill
up the Scale of Gradation in Nature as to mark what is undoubtedly to be
placed in direction to the Summit I mean Intelligence the Power of conscious Enjoyment & Felicity.  We inquire what is the Actual Subject of
Esteem or Admiration in the Nature of Things & by what faculty we are
enabled to distinguish it. If such Subject at all exist it must be the highest
quality of the highest form of Existence or in other Words Goodness & Wisdom. The Perfection And Happiness of Intelligent Being as to the Faculty
which enables us to discern I know not how Wisdom & Goodness should or
can be discerned but by the Intelligence of which these are the Properties &
Conscious possessions. Even he by whom they are obtained in the same
measure the Sense of Defect is shunned And its opposite however mistaken
is matter  continual desire. Beauty too less Respected Name than Wisdom and Goodness still points at Perfection & Excellence and cannot long
delight where these are found to be wanting. The commendation of Beauty
tho meant of Excellence is given on the first Appearance of it While that
excellence is reserved as matter of deliberate Judgement.
If the grounds of Esteem and admiration have been rightly assigned
Mere still matter cannot bear in itself any distinction of Excellence than as
it is Subservient to the Purpose of  mind nor be pronounced beautiful
otherwise than as it is associated with some mental affection or caries in
its appearance the Design & Execution of Ingenuity & Goodness so much
that it may with Confidence be said That mind alone is truly happy Excellent and Fair And if we are right in this Conclusion we are come very near
to Satisfactory Decision on the much agitated Question relating to the
Principle of moral Approbation And the serious distinction of Right &
Wrong. If the highest order of Being in the Gradations of Nature admits
also in itself of Comparative Excellence & Defect There can be no doubt
that there is in Nature fixed Subject of Esteem which when Wanting or
reversed must incur Disapprobation or contempt. The exhibition of this
difference in the detail of human life will account for the distinction of
Right & wrong so familiar in the Appretiation of human Actions.
This distinction and the sources of Moral Law have by Dr Clerk 51 and
the President Montesquieu 52 have been derived from the fixed relations
and Fitness of Things are of course as fixed and unalterable as  things
themselves and their Relations.
This if our Conclusion be true we cannot be disposed to question: but the
Enunciation is too general. We must Ask what Things & Relations.
Undoubtedly The Things & Relations to which moral Laws refer That is
human Mind And the Relations of Man to Man And to his Maker. By
Another 53 This Distinction is said to be founded in Truth that is in Truth
relating to God & Man for there are certainly Truths to which it has no reference As in Mathematics &c &c others 54 derive from the Utility of some
Actions & the pernicious Nature of others: but in Science Morality may be
Considered under two different aspects. That of the mind possessed of
moral Excellence and That of The external Action which mind so disposed is in the habit to perform. The mind may be in itself be commendable
& Happy That is to say Wise & Good or in that very Condion which
renders specially Estimable in an order of Being which is in itself in the
highest Order of Being. Such Minds indeed having conduct to adopt
respecting fellow & fellow Creatures will Naturally choose to perform such
Actions as are Usefull And as the action is preferred for being useful 
and it may be admitted that Virtue considered in respect to external actions
is distinguished by it utility but it is Esteemed & loved not merely in proportion to its Actual Utility but in proportion to the Estimable affection or
disposition which serves to Evince.
A Shower in Season may be more useful than any human Action but
commands no moral Esteem Benevolence provided nii by misfortune of any
external Effect As when person may perish
with his Child or his Friend in Attempting to save him tho without Utility is nevertheless highly Esteem and Loved.
Benevolence is in itself highly Estimable but to call it useful is mere
abuse of Words. Aristotle in the Outset of his Treatise on Ethics observes
that some things are sought as Ends and others as means to some Ends. 55
And it happens frequently that what in one Instance is sought for as an End
in another is sought as means to some Farther End and so indefinitely. The
End of one pursuit is the means of another: but this cannot be infinite.
There must be some where an End Valuable in itself other no means
could be of any Value. The Value of means is measured by their Utility: but
the  Value of the Ultimates by the Good it constitutes and ought not to
be referred under the name of Utility to any Other purpose whatever. Hence
The Question concerning the Chief Good is in Latin termed Question de
Finibus 56 or of that which  valuable and to be sought on its own
Account. This we cannot doubt is the proper distinction of Mind intrepid
Benevolent & Wise.
There is Moral Sense 57 as other tell oii us by pii which we perceive this
Truth but they ought to tell us that it is true whether we perceive it or no.
Others in treating of this Subject confound two questions together as different as Wisdom is from folly and Candour from Partiality.
From what Principle may we Safely & truly decide of Action and
Character.
On what Principle do men actually decide or entertain Sentiments of
Praise or Blame.
To us who think the distinction of merit and demerit in  Character is
as real as Happiness or Misery it is idle to tell us of the false or ill founded
Judgements of men with any Other View than that of warning us against
them. The Sole Question at Issue is how may we Securely decide whether in
General or in any Particular Case.
To the first Question we have now endeavoured to Answer That Wisdom
& Goodness the Excellence of Intelligent Being is the Test of Moral Rectitude & Felicity and that well Informed Intelligence is competent to judge of
Such Merits.
To the second Question we may admit qii that Men frequently consult
their own Interest in judging of merit in Others.
To Others we may admit that what they are pleased to call sympathy 58 or
coincidence of Sentiment or reverse is the ordinary or frequent ground of
Estimation of praise or Censure. But we Cannot admit that either is safe
ground of Estimation much less the only Ground which Nature had laid for
the disstinction of Right & Wrong.  And every attempt to Instruct us
on the Subject without distinguishing the Question is not only Nugatory
and Perplexing to the unwary but actually tending to explain away distinctions of the utmost importance to mankind turning Zeal for morality into a
mere selfish Interest 59 or into mere coincidence of sentiment 60 which may
take place among Knaves and Fools as well as honest Men.
In the judgements of Men respecting others there is much Variance and
sometimes difficulties arising from multiplicity of Particulars to be taken
into the Account. But in the breast of the Individual Respecting himself
there is seldom difficulty or Risk of That function of Wisdom or Intelligence which is termed Conscience undecided or erroneous in its
Judgements. It is Watch that Seldom Slumbers or sleeps or mistakes whatever the Party concerned may plead or pretend to
others.

