
IV. OF STATESMEN AND WARRIOURS 
Their proper Functions defined. Generals and Armies. The importance of Discipline aided
by vigour of Body and Mind, the essential requisites to make a good Soldier. 3 to 5.
Of the Duties of a General; choice of Position; to gain the confidence of his Soldiers, and
instill the principle of rigid Honour in his Officers; to set the example in his own person. 5 to
10.
Genuine Patriotism more observable in Free Governments; its importance as a stimulus to
acts of Heroism. 10 to 14.
The necessity of Promotion being open to every Soldier without distinction of Rank: this
principle more observable in the French Revolutionary Army; its Effect. 14 to 17.
The several requisites to ensure the Zeal of the Soldier enumerated. 17 to 24.
State of the French Army before the Revolution; abject state of the common Soldier, and the
entire change the Revolution effected: its consequences. 24 to 27.
Of Statesmen: the advantages of the union of the Talents of a Statesman and General, enumerated. The Ancients superior in the Science of Government, and the Knowledge of Men
and Manners: the two Functions of Statesman and General, generally united in Ancient
times: Their separation. 27 to 33.
Suggestions for the improvement of the Military Department. 33 to 36.
As the Soul or Intelligent Principle in Mans Nature presides amidst the
Sensations Perceptions opinions and affections as Elements constituent of
his Form & mode of Existence: So there are Individual men fit to preside in
the assemblage of Numbers however diversifyd in Condition disposition or
Power. These are termed Statesmen and Warriors.
The number amid whom they preside consist of Persons of whom each
can do and does for himself what is Essential to his own being & State.
 The Statesman presides among Citizens. The Warrior among Soldiers.
The Citizen subsists by Labour opinion consent or Law.
The Soldier is the Bearer of Force which he may Employ when just &
necessary.
Their functions are intimately Connected being to Act on the same
Materials and with the Same Instruments tho to different Ends. 2
The statesman is to act with men at Peace. The Warrior with Men at War.
The first is defective if he neglect the resources of War. The other if he is
not provided for the Reverse yet their peculiar Functions may be separately considered.
The first preserves to men & with the assistance the order of Pacific
Society.
The other  would prepare Men for the Use of Force such as may repell
or redress contingent Wrongs.
Both require the Knowledge of Human Nature its dispositions and
means of working upon it to protect & encourage what is Right to restrain
or discourage what is wrong. d
To omit for the present any further consideration of State affairs.
The Warrior being to conduct Men in the use of Arms through danger &
hardship to Victory over their Enemies must cultivate skill and habit in the
use of Arms and the forms of array or Tactics requird to enable numbers to
act successfully together.
For these Ends Maual Excercise and order whether of Movement 
or Rest are required.
By excercise and discipline Armies may be presented under the most formidable appearance of Energie & Force.
But such presentments being made without Any circumstance of Danger
or hardship do not contain any Assurance of fitness for Service against a
resisting Enemy.
To have such assurance it is not Sufficient that men know their place &
handle their Arms well. A certain Vigour of mind consisting of Intrepidity
competence And Ardour to meet or Steddiness to resist an Enemy are the
great & Essential Requisites.
It is not sufficient that these should be found in officers or commanders
they are required in every Rank.
 It is the Bussiness of a General to Review his Battalions. The Cloathing
the Fierce Cokked hat the Steddy Rank The Arms well handled Signalize
The Corps and do honour to the officers. Armies so composed merit the
Confidence of Generals and are fit to Awe an Enemy.
Let the ground be well chosen on which to receive an Enemy or movements well devised with which to frustrate any Advantage an Enemy
endeavours to avail himself. Let officers be men of Honour.
This & no more is requisite to qualify An Army & its Leader for the
Service to be performed on  every Topic of that Theme. The Reasoning
Soldier is prepard to give opinion and account for most Events in War.
He has considered how to give a Corps its proper Discipline and Aspect.
But how to Inspire an officer Jealousy of Honour 3 And how to Spread
Stedely Vigour and Ardent Courage through his Ranks is not a common
Problem in conversations on this subject. The Subject is discussed in every
point but this the most important of all. Tis vain to choose a Post if men
will not defend it or to plan an Attack if men will not perform it. What will
make the Rank & File retain its post  unmovd or Scar an Enemy with
impetuous Force?
Armies are not always Equal in these Respects and the Superiour has a
great Advantage may Act on the offensive and even Shun his Enemy on
equal Ground. The Inferior is put on the defensive & must not hazard
Action without some favourable Circumstance or Signal Advantage. 4 Such
were the Campaigns of Julius Caesar 5 in all his wars. And such the Campaigns of Napoleon on the modern Continent of Europe. For the confidence
of their troops those  Warriors no doubt were much indebted To their
first and Continued Successs. And it is no doubt on this Account as well
on every other Account An Object of Importance to the Warrior to set out
successfully. For this purpose he may expose himself & seek for opportunitys to show his Men their Enemies Back though otherwise of little moment
and when his Repution is fixed Danger may be left to others. His troops
will be pleased that he is Safe. In this respect however success which Implys
ability does but continue its Effects And it may appear nugatory to tell an
officer to beat  his Enemy that he may continue Still to Vanquish him
yet the point deserves our Notice when Armies flushed with Victory are to
be opposed.
Men enured to Success Advance to An Enemy with a Confidence which
is often Sufficient to Obtain the Victory.
Men are individually distinguished by unequal measures of Fortitude &
personal Vigour: 6 but of this either in respect to its origin or Effect. The
Discipline of Armys does not treat having to do chiefly with those measures
of Fortitude which may be made to pervade at once numerous Bodies of
Men and inspire the Rank and File of an Army to the Lowest Condition.
This is  sometimes the Effect of National Estimation well or ill
founded on truth. It is needless to observe that genuine Patriotism is a Powerful motive to Valour in its Cause And it Scarcely can fail to operate where
the community is an honour and Protection to its members as it is in free
Constitutions of Government where no rank is depressed so low as not to
feel its participation in the General Wellfare. 7
Hence the Valour of Freemen Armed in defence of their Country 8 is akin
to that of the Parent in defence of her Young The Effect of an Ardent affection approaching to Enthusiasm which stifles the Sense of Difficulty or
danger. This Principle which is so powerful  in Free States may be further cultivated by Proper Application to promote its Effect on the minds of
Military men. 9 The Spartans And Even the Romans were eminently Distinguished in the use of this Policy. The Whole Discipline of Sparta 10 was
directed to inspire The Reality not the appearance of Fortitude and military
Valour And it was the more Successful in the Reality that it checked the
Ostentation. The Romans to promote the general Tendency of their Policy
to this effect had a Multiplicity of Specific Honours to be bestowd on particular Acts of Valour & Military Merit Such as saving a fellow Citizen
overawing an Enemy in single combat Being the first to scale an Enemies
Wall &c &c  And these honorary Rewards being attainable by the
Legionary Soldier as well as the Officer pervaded the Ranks and formed a
Mass of owerpowering and irresistable strength. 11
National Estimation 12 is a known Principle of Valour. Hence the Superiority of a Greek to an Asiatic and of one Nation to another in many well
known Instances.
This Principle is often mere ill-formed Prejudice and absurd but should
not be eradicated nor in any degree rashly discouraged. It is well to concur
in it & even to express the Confidence it tends to inspire.
It is a merit in the Warriour whatever advantage he may have from the
Character Reputation of prejudice of his country to devise every means of
improving it or Supplying its defect in the form & construction of 
his Ranks in the course of Preferments and in the distribution of honours
occasional .
In States where the Civil Distinction of Ranks 13 is extream and Indelible
as in most Nations of Europe. The same extream distinction is Observed in
the Army. The officer is Noble & he only is intitled to preferment. The Low
Born is a mass of Vulgar important only by their Number & implicit obedience. There is nothing to inspire them with Zeal for the object on which
they are employd there are no hopes of advancement in distinguishing
themselves. Enurd to Privation & Hardship they witness the superior
Accommodation of their officers. In this Description there is a Signal
source of  Inferiority to others in which contrary Circumstances take
place where the Condition of a Soldier is nearer that of his Offi where
they not only partake in the same dangers but in the same privations and
hardships. Where the Low may hope to rise by his Merit & Where Nothing
is dreaded so much as disgrace. In the Roman Legion the Pay of a Centurion was but double that of a Legionary Soldier and in great straits or
difficulties they lived Pell mell together. 14
The French Revolution has enabled the Warrior to procure all these
advantages in the Form of his Army. And he studies to improve them by
Artificial Means.
He can promote the private Soldier if  he deserve it through every
Rank to the highest. He has devised a gradation of Honours under the Title
of a Legion 15 by which he has a Reward prepard for every indual in
his Rank & which serves as a Badge of his Title to farther Preferments. That
his Army conducted by himself should prevail in the contest with that of
other Nations in the Continent of Europe is not to be wondered at.
That the Event is different in his Contest with Britons whether by sea or
Land is owing more to the Spirit of a Free Nation 16 than to any Superiority
of Discipline or concerted Policy of those to whom the Department of War
is entrusted.
 It had been observd in a company 17 of which I had the honour to be
one That the Vigour of mind which breathed in the Ranks or the means of
improving seldom or never made a part in the Subject of discussion in the
Conversations of Military Men. That it is nevertheless one of the most
important considerations in the Form or Conduct of Armies. That by which
Greeks prevailed in their contest with Persians. 18 Caesar with his Antagonists and Napoleon 19 in his Wars in the Continent of Europe.
Whoever has the upper hand in this particular may dispense with Numbers & keep his Enemy on the defensive & unwilling to hazard Engagement
without some manifest advantage 20 & therefore ever  ready to give way
when the Ground is to be disputed on equal terms.
Men are carefully taught to handle their Arms and move in their Ranks:
why not also to receive an Enemy who attacks with Steddiness or rush upon
him with Ardour & Confidence of Valour.
The national Character the Love of a Leader & Confidence in his conduct with Zeal for a Cause are principal Constituents in this mighty
Advantage. But whatever it be defects may be supplied and the case
improved.
Promotion laid open to all who distinguish themselves in the Ranks Military honours for Singular Services, The Valour & example of officers who
Suffer or act nearly on a level  with the Ranks they command are expedients that may be resorted to by able Warriours in Every Instance however
wanting in Nation. 21
All Measures of this sort may be thought Superfluous in the Constitution
of British Armies already Superior to every Enemy in the Vigour &
National Spirit of their Ranks. 22 If so let it be rewarded and honoured and
everything be done to confirm & perpetuate so great a National Blessing &
Security.
It appears to me that Something may be done for the Rank and File
including the non Commissioned Officers. For the Battalion: and for the
General officers, tending to confirm the Spirit  of Inferiour, draw into
the superior order more of the National Genius And enlarge the field from
amidst which Government may choose to be employed in the Conduct of
Particular services.
The Road to Preferment from the Rank of Private to that of commissiond officer is very much obstructed in most nations of Europe by the
supposed indelible Distinction of birth 23 And tho’ less so in Brittain than
any where else except Revolutionary France is still considerably so by the
difference of manners & Education So that it is difficult to raise a Man from
the Rank & File into the Society of Commissioned Officer. This tho difficult is not to be  entirely set aside.
It is of Consequence that it should be known in the Rank that distinguish merit will raise the Soldier to any height in his Profession and for
this purpose the opportunity of Promotion should be seized as often as
proper Instances of occur. The inconvenience is a trifle & the good consequence to the Service incalculable.
But in whatever degree this practice may take place a certain gradation of
preferment may be introduced from the Rank of Private up to that of Quarter master and Adjutant to which the objection is Proposed Desire of
Promotion is the ruling Passion of mere Military Men. This if they have no
Other motive is sufficient to  Conduct them through all the Forms and
difficulties of their Profession And is an incitement to great Actions. And
this Prospect should not be shut against them in any Case whatever.
In regular Battalions it may be presented even in the lowest Rank without extending so far as to carry the Private at once into the Line of
Commissioned Officers. A Line of Preferment may be drawn from the mere
Centinel through a number of successive steps sufficient to present the Soldier with a prospect of bettering himself by Sobriety order & regular
Conduct if not by brilliant Action and thus engage him in his duty by a
Motive far superior  to the fear of Punishment or the Actual Infliction
of those degrading Punishments which tend to dispirit any class of men
that feel themselves exposed to them. 24
There may be a Step of Preferment to the mere Recruit from the Rear to
the Front Rank From the Battalion to the Flank Companies From the mere
Centinel to the Corporal thence to the Sergeant, To the Sergeant Major To
the Ajutant or Quartermaster &c. These steps may be marked by a small
increase of Pay & some visible badge of Dress. This may require in the Military Establishment a small Addition of Expense but the advantage of trust
would be cheaply purchased.
 The Neglect of Officers to cultivate the Spirit And respect the Character of Men under their command as well the show of their Ranks at a
Review is part of that Pride which Gentlemen Indulge in comparing themselves with the mass of the People. Officers are furnished in Europe from
the Noblesse or Gentlemen who derived Indelible Priviledge from their
Birth. 25
These were considered as the Soul & Spirit of Armies. The line of Battle
was Supposed a mere mass to be torpid or Active as they should incline.
In this State the Revolution found the Armies of France in particular &
when open war  made for the line to emerge from this state of 
Relation between officers & Men it soon Appeard that Noblesse was an
empty Name and the great Body of men with Arms in their hands & Conscious of their own importance Subverted the Monarchy and laid it with all
its priviledged orders in the Dust. 26 Men raised their Rank on a presumption or Experience of merit Living & Suffering with their men in all times
of Privation hardship or danger. And men from the Ranks looking up for
preferment due to their Action have trampled on all the former Military
Establishments of the Continent of Europe & make a General p27 knowing
how to conduct them, Ascend from a State of Europe to the unprecedented
Dominion of Nations formerly Supposed invincible and not to be shaken
by  any attack to be feared from abroad.
The Pride of a Genuine Warrior rests on the spirit and Vigour of those he
has the honour to command and on the Ardour with which they join with
him in every hardship Privation & Danger to which the Service may be
exposed. But if in this we would moderate the distinction between officers
& Men it should be by bettering that of the men not by lowering or impairing the Condition of Officers.
In all that has been Said however no more than one Department in the
Service of Armies has been touched That of the Instrument which is to be
employed in War. The hand of an artist who is to employ that Instrument
yet remains to be Considered.
In the Ancient times of Greece & Italy The Departments of  State &
War to the Manifest Advantage of those employed in them were generally
United. 28 The Statesmen cannot be ignorant of war without great inconvenience nor the Warrior of all Matters of State. 29 They are each equally
concerned to know mankind to know what men can do & how they may be
made to do it.
The Statesman in some degree is paramount & must judge the occasions
of War and Consequences of War. Short of this he is no more than a Clerk in
office & a Bable in Council. 30 The Warriour as at Rome may occasi
only change his Gown for the Sagum 31 but without knowing how to graft
his Services on those of the State is a mere prize fighter & Bully, 32 whose
only  form of proceeding is mere Violence or Force. 33
These Departments are nevertheless for the most part, distinguished in
Modern Europe. 34 And the Consequence that the accomplishments severally fitting for Departments are Supposed to consist in some trivial or even
Mechanical practices separately required in one or the other. Writing &
Speaking are the Qualities of Statesmen. r
The forms of Parade & Review those of the Warrior. An Officer who has
been drilled & drilling all his Life is a reputed Master of his Trade. A
Tongue in debate and hand for the Pen in office is a man of Bussiness in the
State. That knowledge and Respect for Mankind which ability & Wisdom &
which lead the Multitude of men in the Council or the Field are  seldom to be found or sought for in the account of either. Hence it is that
Nations are so much at the mercy of such whenever they are found united.
We sometimes boast the Superiority of modern to Ancient times in Science. 35 But all we are entitled to say is that we have applied to different
Branches of Study. The Greeks & Romans applied to that Branch which
concerned them most. Men manners the Forms of State and the Conduct of
men whether in Peace or in war. We have ransacked nature the Earth & the
Heavens for Geographical Physical and Astronomical Science. Man himself
is forgotten or considered only as a Party in Trade and a Dealer in Manufactures & Money. 36 I  doubt we shall never be able to unite the Sagacity of
a Spartan in the Field with the Skill of a Chymist in his laboratory. But if
this be too much people who are at leisure may learn to compare & distinguish such Characters.
Under every high name transmitted in the History of Italy we have at
once a Statesman and a Warriour. 37
The function  War may have been for youth that of the State for
Mature Age. But the genius & Accomplishments were not to be distinguished. At Rome in particular even this difference was not attended to.
The Civil Magistrate & Military Commander was chosen a the same time
and in the same Person. 38 In consequence of this union of Characters 
all the Genus 39 of the People was directed into these Channel and the
publick might look for both in every Person who aspired to distinction
and publick Honours.
Where these departments are separated the case is otherwise according as
either prevails the Genus 40 of the People is drawn into that Channel and
Mutilated Statesmen or Mutilated Warriours is all that the state can
produce.
The State as including all is no doubt to be preferred to the Army which
is but a part. 41 And if the Honours are as they ought to be at the disposal of
the former The State may be at a loss to find any person worthy of great military trust.
When the principal Honours of the State are as in Great Britain made the
Prize of civil or Political Merits  Genius is directed chiefly into this
Channel And men come into publick View with the Single Talent of
Speech-making as Sufficient to ensure their Fortunes.
In Families of Rank The quick are destined for Parliament The Slow will
do for the Army. By the Influence of this apprehension a choice is made
already prejudical to the Military Department & by limiting from high
Military command to those who have been bred to the Service and passed
through all the Steps of Preferment The choice of Military commanders
comes to be limited to Persons already far advanced in Life and who in the
Detail of Battalion forms have lost all Sense of what is necessary to meet an
Enemy of Genius and in the of Genius in the Fields where address & enterprise are required instead of show and the Forms of Parade.
 It were therefore a real Improvent of the Military Establishment
in such case if any thing could be done to direct the Genius of the Country
more into that department And to extend the List from which the sovereign
may Select those most worthy of high Military Trust.
The first may be done by holding out to the Ambitions at an Early Period
of Life the prospect of great & honourable distinction in this Line and prospect may result in some degree by the Course which may be taken to widen
the Circle from which Commanders may be Selected.
At present when the King is to nominate a Staff for any Military Province or Enterprise He is limited in his Choice to those who have the Rank of
General officers in direct Subordination to the Chief & in  Gradation to
one another. To loossen the fetters which The King by his Commission has
imposed on himself: may all such Commissions of Rank be withheld untill
it shall appear what assortment of Abilities may be requird for the Particular Services in View. And the King appoints a Court of Oyer & Terminer for
Tryals in a particular Case so he may nominate a Staff with determinate
Ranks for that particular Province or Service only And beyond such Particular occasion there should be no permanent Rank of Generals.
In the meantime as every Battalion Regiment or Corps is an occasion of
permanent Service there must be a Suitable gradation of Ranks from the
Subaltern up to the Colonel or Commandant.
 But when he is to Employ two or more Regiments together he makes
his generals for the occasion from any part of his Military List.
How is then is this Military List to be made up and of whom is it to consist? I answer That as none could be chosen to command at Rome That is to
be a Magistrate who had not Served ten years in the Legions, 42 So none
should be placed on the Military List in Britain till after he had served ten
years in a Regiment, in order to be acquainted with its Forms & Details. 43
But as this advantage may be gained in any Rank as Volunteer or Subaltern
a Person of high Views in the Service may Serve his Time in any such Rank
without competing with his fellow Soldiers  for Emolument or Battalion Rank.
What is to become then of those who have rose gradually to the Rank of
Colonels of Regiments. 44 I answer They may as at present retain the Emoluments of Colonels And being on the General List may be appointed as at
present to the Government of Fortified distant settlements or put upon
Staff for stationary or Occasional service as The King shall appoint 45 And
as the mere Rank of General at present brings no Emolument: the only
change proposed in the condition is that they shall not bear the Title of
General or Marechal untill it brings proportion & Profit along with it.
This is my project 46 and I flatter myself that it would bring many Persons of Genius and high Views on the Military List who are now excluded
from it.

VI. OF HAPPINESS AND MERIT 
Are they different objects, or the same object under different points of view? Enjoyment and
Suffering, their various and opposite effect on some Minds. The Power of Truth and Wisdom
in correcting errors of the Mind. 1 to 3.
True happiness consists not in Riches or worldly enjoyment, but in Mental Attainments
which is Wisdom. What the signs of Happiness and Merit in the Rich and Poor man. 3 to 6.
Of Benevolence or Charity. Fortitude. The Terms Happiness and Merit frequently misapplied. Who are the truly Happy. 6 to 12.
Are these different Objects or The same Object in different points of
View?
To many they are different objects. But when well understood they are
the same And ought not to be distinguished under different points of view.
In vulgar language it is not uncommon to say That a Person is not so
happy as he deserves to be or that he is more so than he deserves. Such language implys a distinction of the enjoyments which constitute Happiness
and the Qualities which constitute Merit And tends to sett human Nature
in a State of Warfare & Contention with itself. For who can be indifferent to
Happiness or who can be happy if he is oppressed with a Sense of deserving
to be otherwise?
Of this Warfare indeed in human Nature there are Strong Features or
Appearances. Enjoyment is what Men desire and Suffering is what  they
avoid. 2 The reverse however is not uncommon. 3 Enjoyments are in some
Instances of so mean degree as to imply meanness in the Person Addicted to
them and the converse is true of Sufferings. Ne quid Nimis 4 seems on many
occasions to sett the Judgement at War with Enjoyment or Appetite.
This Species of War however is but one  the difficulties which Nature
has laid in our Way to exercise that Faculty of Reason which we are born to
inherit which Waxes in being exerted and acquires Power in being obliged
to employ it.
Experience is Information and The Habit of Action an Accession of
Power. Folly under the disguise of Enjoyment cannot mislead nor Wisdom
under the appearance of Suffering deter. And the War of Competition
among the Objects of attachment or pursuit may end. But this which in
thinking is but a Single Step may be the work of Ages in the progress of
Sensitive mind. Here Experience must be repeated before it gains the
Ascendant of opinion. Even after one false conception is Exploded another
may  Succeed and thus mistakes may be repeated before truth alone is
left to occupy the mind. Habit keeps possession even after mistakes are
acknowledged. And time indefinite may be required  run the Course of
Successive Practice and the habits which may occupy the mind and yet it
should appear that Periods unlimited & unconfined Reality Truth & Wisdom must prevail And occupy an Empire of the Soul of whose Right there
can be no detection by which it can be overthrown or no preferable Habit or
Practice to Supplant the best of which the title to be preferred is experience
already obtained  what it is compared with every Other choice of
mind.
What may be the Issue or result of indefinite Progression even to created
mind is probably too much for us to Anticipate. Philosophers of old 5 supposed it to be an Assumption into the Essence of God from which it
emerged: But whatever may be  result of a Progress at once to Perfection & to Happiness 6 we cannot doubt that those Ends may not only meet:
but are in  reality the same. They are alike the Objects of a Wise Ambition which if the ends were separate tho consistent might be frustrated in
the attainment of one or the Other.
This in fact happens under the mistaken apprehension of Men in this
Period of Animal Life.
Men are thought to be happy in consequence of events or in possessing
the gifts of Fortune: but frequently to have merit in despising those Gifts.
Even those who would reason themselves into a different opinion are seldom fully Successful in the attempt. It is nevertheless a piteous State of the
Mind When we rail at the World when Merit as we express it is not
rewarded with Fortune. But none are more disposed to adopt this complaint
than those who affect the greatest Zeal for morality. They would be thought
Zealous for Merit but are possibly no more than Envious of Fortune. The
Subject is of all others the most important and just conception of it the most
valuable attainment of human Reason in its Preparation for higher
advances in the Scale of Intelligent  Being.
We may in some degree indulge our hopes of immortality in proportion
as we are qualified now to perceive the Superiority of mental Attainments
to all the conditions of mere Animal Life.
The Horse probably prefers nothing to the Riches of his Pasture & that
Swiftness of his foot. But Man while he enjoys the Accommodations of Animal Life Adores the Wisdom & Goodness with which they are Supplied. He
inhabits a Corner but his Thoughts extend to the Universe of Space & the
Eternity of Duration. These are among the Stamina by which he is qualified
and on which he may continue to build the hopes of a Future & indefinite
Progression.
In short: when all the sources of Folly are exhausted; unless Intelligence
itself be not suppressed; Wisdom must Succeed & take the firmer hold that
no Imposture remains untried.
Even here or in this period of Intellectual Progression it were Idle to
make choice of Prosperity in preference to adversity for neither is at our
Option And we must take our Part in either as it comes. In prosperity 
Temperance Frugality & the use of what Fortune Supplys without being
absorbed in attention to it or affecting to despise it is at once a Constituent
of Happiness & Merit. In Adversity Fortitude whether active or passive as
occasion requires is precisely in the same predicament as the real Constituent of Happiness & Merit.
What is Benevolence? Surely The most undeniable proof of a mind in
itself agreeably affected and Estimable or acceptable to others. Thus uniting the Supreme Characters of Happiness & Merit As its reverse or Malice
unites those of Wretchedness and detestation.
Benevolence unitd with Wisdom and Almighty Power are the attributes
of God: or in other Words the Supreme Felicity & Perfection of Intelligent
being.
The Wisdom of Man but enables him to distinguish between Good 
Evil without Mistake in the detail of Choice or in the means of carrying it
into Effect.
 This Character as in respect to Happiness it carries with it every pursuit
the Assurance of Safety Gratification & Success it is the Specific Excellence
of Intellectual Nature and as such highly Esteemed or Constituent of Merit.
Fortitude also or the Power under to encounter difficulties. Threats or
adverse Events so Appropriate to the Lot of Man is at once the Measure 
his Force or Power & best antidote to unavoidable Suffering. 7 And is Surely
as much required to support him in his own Esteem as in that of others.
Happiness Therefore & Merit are Perfection  mind & Character are
but different Names for the same Condition. Whence is it then that men so
often hate those who they think happy And pity or lament those who they
think meritorious? Surely because they mistake both those Characters.
Such we cannot doubt is the Result when we would  infer what is best
for mankind in the form or condition of their Being: Or in Other Words
when we would Specify what is to them Constituent of Happiness And
Merit. In these terms we would express the Ultimate Objects of living or
Intelligent Nature That for which Life itself is of any value either of Estimation or Enjoyment. And yet these terms are so loosely employed that
their meaning seems scarcely to admit of a Serious Consideration. A Person
is said to be happy as often as he finds anything to please himself and to
have merit as often as he does anything to please Others. And in this use of
words The Coxcomb is happy And the Impostor has Merit. When we awake
from these mistakes and call the Coxcomb a Fool & the Impostor a Knave
Still Happiness is one thing and Merit another. A Person  may have
merit in what he has done but be happy or unhappy in his Circumstances
And a person is Sometimes Said to be happy tho’ he is insensible of it.
If we would correct these follies it seems necessary to begin with an
attempt to fix the object in View under the Terms we employ. And by way of
Postulatum require that Happiness Should Stand for the most Perfect State
of Enjoyment And merit for the sum of most Estimable Qualities. And with
general precaution we would discend to Particulars: The Identity of Happiness & Merit as in the preceeding Argument may be fully Established.
After all & notwithstanding the Identity of matter alluded to in the
Terms Happiness & Merit: There is a distinctive Propriety in the  use
of these Terms corresponding to the different respects in which the Subject
is considered. Wisdom Benevolence Fortitude and Temperance considered
in Respect to Enjoyment is properly termed Happiness or the State of greatest Enjoyment & least suffering. In respect to the Excellence of Character or
the Esteem in which they are held by others  are properly distinguishd in the Appellation of Merit: But Happy at once and Meritorious is
he whose Selfish or care of his own Wellfare or Happiness has merit in the
View of those who are proper Judges of Merit & whose Vanity or desire of
Applause leads him only to Affect what is really Constituent of Happiness
to himself.
On these Conditions we shall blame the Selfish nor despise the Vain. The
one will  be attentive to himself: but the Quality of which is most tenacious to himself is benevolence to others And Virtue tho’ supposed to be
dissinterested by those who mistake their own Interest is nevertheless the
Interest of Man or his most valuable & secure Possession. Selfishness in
Vulgar Estimation because it is Supposed to exclude its best & most valuable Personal Concern And Benevolence is supposed to be of no Value to the
owner because it is a Concern for the Wellfare of others or the order of
Beings susceptible of Happiness.
The missapplication of Words is a mistake of things And mistake. The
Permanence of ill Habits of thinking & Acting the Slow acquisition of New
habits which in their Turn are perhaps to  be removed by slow Alteration or Change untill every Mistake or ill habit has been tryed is that which
makes the Progress of Mans Intellectual Germ to Wisdom So Slow & so little in Appearance Advanced in the Periods through which we see it carried:
but which in its Attainments will be the More Secure & to the mind which
has made the Attainments more his own.

VII. DISTINCTION OF VALUE AND ITS
SOURCE IN EXISTENCE
Distinction, Good and Evil, Happiness and Misery, Mind and Matter. Variety the Primary
feature throughout Nature. Man a variety; his Infancy, Youth and Manhood: his faculties. 1
to 9.
Happiness and Perfection, various ideas of. Ambition which prompts to Exertion, and its
opposite Indolence: their influence. 9 to 11.
The Grand Distinction of Man as an Intelligent Being. That the present scene is projected
for the advancement of his Intellectual Progress; considered in a review of his Progress
through Life. Origin of Laws; Commerce &c. Man as a Member of Society. Incitement to
active Exertion in the Love of his Country &c. In calling forth his Energies promotes his
Happiness; the whole order of things tend to the same end. Political Societies, States &c. 11
to 28.
Man’s Infancy: Faculty of Speech. Distribution of Good & Evil, Pleasure and Pain tend to
make him Happy; The Superiority of Mind over Matter. The Wisdom and Goodness of God
manifested in all the works of Creation, all tending to Man’s Happiness. 28 to end.
1st Distinction Good & Evil. Where neither is applicable Existence is
altogether Indifferent.
2d Distinction. Happiness and Misery. Happiness is the possession of
Good Misery the accumulation of Evil. The Sentient & Conscious alone are
Susceptable of Happiness or Misery. The Intelligent most of all.
3d Distinction Mind & matter. All Existence of Happiness or Misery
come under the appellation of Mind. All other existence is Matter.
Matter has no Value But in its Relation to Mind. If there be an Eternal
Principle of Existence in Creative Power It must be a Principle of Selection
choosing that which is made in contradistinction to what is Otherwise. But
there is no ground of Selection but Good & Evil Happiness or Misery or
tendency whether near or remote to one or the other.
It follows that mind alone  or what is related to mind can Present
object to induce the Exertions of Intelligent & Selective Creatures. And that
Existence is limited to mind & the matter any fitted to form an Allotment
for mind as a Scene or Material of Action & of Art & Accommodation and
all matter exists but for the Sake of Mind. 1
For this all Suns & Planets be their numbers & Magnitude what they
may are Valuable only in their Relation to Mind As the Work of Eternal
Mind And the Lot of those for whom they are Created.
This Planet Earth in all its Constituent Parts its Still its Organised &
Living orders its permanent and Active & Variable Forms Its Laws and
their Phenomena whether of Mechanics in Chymistry Vegetation Animal
Life or Intelligence is the Lot of Man Intelligent Conscious or active Whenever such Planets exist it is Natural to Suppose  Analogous Relation of
Mind & Matter; And in the Solar System man in some degree partakes with
Other minds And by a Stretch of Conjecture also with all minds of which
universe itself is the allotment.
Of the Good or Evil to be apprehended in the Creative mind His works
alone are indications. Contingencies may come from Other minds Creation
from Him alone. In this He is revealed and nother Mind but his. Language Spoken or Written may bear the meanings of Men Creation alone the
meaning of Almighty God.
Here his meaning is to be collected from the Lot & as all is made for man
his Lot alone can furnish Information of the Creators Will & meaning.
In the prosecution of an  Argument in which we are to question the
fitness of a Person to his place or of the place to him: it appears proper first
to Characterise The Person His Form dispositions And Powers. Next the
circumstances provided for his Accommodation and gratification or promotion towards the End or destination of his Existence.
In this or in the first Aspect of Nature throughout Indefinite Variety is a
Primary Feature. It meets the Observer in every Compartment In the
assemblage of Still materials that compose the Globe. In all the Forms
organised or participant in any Species of Life whether Vegetative or Sensitive acting by Will As in the Animal forms of being. Of the Latter Class
Man himself appears at first no more than a Variety distinguished from the
general train of animals by Circumstances & by no means to his Advantage.
Born to an Infancy more weak, &  dependent & of longer Continuance
than that of the young in many other Upon the Tardy Appearance of his
Instincts or Native propensities 2 he appears no way better directed than
Other Species on the contrary in this part of his Nature he appears less correct or guarded against dangerous abuse than any Other Animal persisting
frequently to mislead into hurtful Excesses of which the other Animals are
by Nature incapable. With these Appearances to his dissadvantage he opens
the Career of a Progressive Being Agreeably to the General Character of
Creation in all its organised or living Forms known to us. In every The
Analogy of Birth Infancy Puerility youth manhood & Age are exhibited
throughout and these are the Stages through which this Singular Animal is
known to Pass. And if he is observed to set out with some dissadvantages in
what is termed his Infancy: he proceeds in a manner  different from the
Other Animals And tho at first less correct yet soon appearing likely to
carry him through a Range of Attainment & Action far Superior to theirs.
With less precise direction to a Specific Object he is qualified to Observe to
conceive and chuse An Object for himself. He acts accordingly from Opinion rather than Instinct. And as opinion may vary Indefinitely and
thousands may be wrong for one that  hence Mistake Error Caprice
and Folly are more frequent in these first Periods of his History than Wisdom or a just Apprehension of things. In Mistake or Error having Occasion
to experience its falsehood he cannot persist for ever.
From the indefinite Variety incident to opinion or habits of thinking we
derive the varieties by which Men differ from one Another. And the same
Man differs from himself at different times.
The Apprehensions of certain distinctions under the Titles of Good &
Evil of Excellence or Perfection &  Defect of Right & Wrong as well as
Pleasure & Pain obtained or incurred in the Gratification or dissappoint of Propensities or in the quality of Mere Sensations as
Particulars happen to be ranged under these Titles they are coveted or
Shuned and the Actor is not only Spontaneous but likewise Conscious
knows what he does & for what Reason.
In this he is said to be intelligent & accountable for his Actions. 3 Of the
Past he is conscious of the Future he projects intends & Contrives. His Powers are Derived from the great Source of Existence & of Power but his
Exertions & Attainments are his own & in this alone probably consists any
Analogy to that Personality & Intelligence of which the order of Nature
gives a Perception in the Being of its Self Existing Author.
If the Consciousness of what he had done of what he had attained or lost
were wanting in the human Mind he must be degraded from the Rank of
Intelligent Being & have  no Germ from  to originate a Progression towards the Completion of those attainments of Which the Germ of
Intelligence is susceptible. As he now is We see only the outset of a Progress
of which the Issue is probably hid beyond the Limits of his Animal Life. As
an Animal he waxes in Stature & Muscular Power As intelligent he waxes in
Knowledge Sagacity Judgement Invention & Contrivance for his Purpose.
His Faculties like those of the Living & Active in most Instances do not
waste but Wax in their Exertions. As the human mind is essentially Active
Certain Modes of Activity constitute its most Perfect and Happiest State
The Contemplation of Nature The Discovery of its Physical Laws & the
Comprehension of its interesting Phaenomena Benevolence & its Exertions
in the System of Intelligent Beings. Wisdom, with its unerring Selection of
Good in every Instance Fortitude with its Exemption from Fear or Distrust
and Jealousy the Surmounting of Difficulties and passage through Dangers
are the Supreme  Enjoyments of this Active or Ambitious Being. 4 In this
Form we may conceive him to be advancing towards what is at once the
Felicity and Perfection of his Nature however lowness may apprehend the
yet actual attainments of the Species.
Under the Titles of Happiness & Perfection or Excellence The Nascent
mind yet ignorant of all begins with applying those names to some Contingent Circumstances such as catch the unexperienced Attention whether
Sensation Fortune or Estimation. They engage in the pursuit of Such
Objects practise the Arts or become dependent on the Aids by which they
hope to procure them. Ambition 5 or the desire of Elevation or Perfection is
certainly among the Strongest or the most powerful  the human Breast.
When we consider the Sacrifices of Ease Pleasure & Safety which are
made or the Labour Suffering & Dangers incurred in the pursuits of Glory
mistaken for Excellence & Elevation of Character we may be tempted to
Suppose that the Love of  Perfection from which its Misapplication
originate is in reality the most powerful of any Principle in its Sway over
the Actions and dispositions of the human Mind And is Sufficient to Suspend the Consideration of even of Happiness without which Intelligence
Itself has no favourable disstinction and Existence to Curse. But when we
consider also the Obstructions given to this Aspiring dissposition of mind
by Indolence or the Allurements of degrading of frivolous Pleasure more
frequent than not so Conspicuous as the Aberrations of Vain Glory & supposed Exaltation of Character the Counter Effects. Effects of mistaken
Pleasure may appear no less Powerful than those of its opposite And the
two contending Divinities under the Judgement of Hercules 6 will appear
Equally realized in human life as in the Celebrated Apologue of Prodicus. 7
The one seems Negligent of Happiness & the Other of  Estimation
or Dignity the first and highest Object of Consideration among the Pretensions of human Nature. Happiness and Exaltation of Character are thus too
often considered as Varieties in the Pursuits of Men and even at Variance
with one Another and this Error is perhaps the most important that occurs
to be Corrected towards the Advancement of this progressive Intelligence
with which man is endowed.
The great Disstinction of Intelligent Being and by it is a fit Subject of
Creative Power is That it is susceptible of a Gradual Advancement in a
Direction towards the Measure of Created Excellence & Felicity. To Suppose that these are in their Nature, either inconsistent or even distinct and
separable is an Absurdity & contradiction in the Very Nature of Intelligent
Being.
We conceive the Almighty to be Supremely Happy because He is
Supremely Perfect.  His Wisdom & Goodness Are at once the Security
the Possession And the Emanation of Excellence & Felicity in their Several
Gradations to all that Exist. What Quality in Human Nature could be
denominated Happy if it were withal contemptible or Odious or what could
be esteemed or Respected if withal the Possion of it were Misery. Perfection of Nature And Happiness are in fact different Denominations of the
same thing thought of only under different Aspects. The One of its Enjoyment, the Other of its Estimation & place in the Gradations of Being. And
to Arrive at this Point of discernment and the habits of Wisdom resulting
from it is the Summit of that Eminence to which Man is directed And
which he is enabled after all Aberrations by the Experience and Exercise of
his Intellectual Faculties of which the occasion at least begins to be furnished in his Present Scene & which is probable farther continued in the
Subsequent Scenes.
The Present Scene it has been Said is projected for the Advancement of
Man in his Intellectual Progress and  We proceed to verify that Observation by a reference to the Particulars from which it may  Collected.
As such in their order we may recur to some particulars that have been
mentioned as apparent defects in the Animal of Man compared to that of
other Species in the Animal Kingdom. Of this kind are the Low & the prolonged State of Infancy The Naked The unarmed and the comparatively
feeble State of the Species in its Contest with Other Animals too weak for
Battle and too Slow to Escape by flight And more scantily Supplied with the
very necessaries of Life than most of the Animal Tribes being obliged to
Labour & Toil for what his associates in this living Order find spontaneously produced on the Earths Surface.
In all these particulars however The fact is that man has more than full
compensation for all those dissadvantages under which he seems to be
placed. The Comparative defects of Infancy are more than Compensated by
the Superior faculty & tender  Care of the Intelligent Parent whose
instinctive Propensity to watch over her Ofspring is but the Germ of a
Social Affection destined to operate for Ages through all the Gradations of
Kindred into a principle of Union & Cooperation for common Support &
Safety. 8 What the Parent can do for her Child he need not  be qualified
to do for himself. And in this we read what is frequent in the System of
Nature The manifest Signs of Intention and of a Reason for what  done
or ommitted not Supply in one Form what is otherwise provided for in a
Superiour manner or degree. The Compensation however we are not to
Consider as the Sole End of Creative Economy. If this were all the method
pursued with Other Animals were perhaps the most direct & the best.
But the case is here altered And Nature has to provide not merely for
Subsistence And Accommodation of an animal: but for the exertion and
Exercise of Faculties destined to Spring from a sense of  necessity &
want. The Beast of the Field in fully Supplied without any device or
Invention of his own. Man to find an Equivalent for the Fur of the Quadruped His pasture in the Field his Lodgement in the Cave or Cover of the
Wood is obliged to become a Manufacturer a Builder & a Husbandman.
Tho qualified to Subsist alike in any Climat he no where finds in any Situation or from Any Soil Spontaneous Subsistence fit to Subsist the Species
in any Numbers without Culture Labour & Industry of their own. Tho
Qualified to feed on great Variety 9 whether Animal or Vegetable The Species of Plant which supply him with his best or almost necessary  are
to be carefully Cultivated or will Cease to grow and the Soil is ever to be prepard for them by eradica Weeds or the ever renewed Growth of
Noxious or unprofitable Herbage that force their way Spontaneously and
choak the Vegetation of those that Supply the  Necessities. The Limited or Scanty measure in which those Necessities are provided for The
Method of Labour and Skill by which they are Obtained Suggest the Necessity of Securing the Surplus of the present for future Use And Persons
conscious of having obtaind them by the Use of their own Faculties Suggest
& Support the Claims of Property and this Right is gradually extended to
every Subject that may be fairly occupied & Secured for future as well as
present occasion.
Hence the Foundation & mighty Superstructure of Law & Social Policy
To define the Solemn and interesting Distinction of Justice of Right &
Wrong & to direct their applications to cases of indefinite Variety And such
Intricacy as require the exercise of Judgements which is not to be acquired
without Study or professional Labour exempt from any other care or
pursuit.
Under the Titles of Necessaries Accommodations or Luxurys the Subjects of Property are  multiplied indefinitely and are unequally
distributed as to introduce the distinction of Rich & Poor so that one is [in
a] condition to buy the Labour of another & that other is necessitated to sell
his own Subordination ensues & from the Variety of Surplus or Want of different Persons Climate Arts & Possessions Commerce or the Exchange of
Commodities ensue. The means of Conveyance the Medium of Trafic or
Exchange form such a System of Policy Oeconomy and it would have been
impossible to forrsee that it should Arise from the mere defect of Food Raiment & Lodging under which Man compard to the other animals is made to
Labour. And like the Science of Law itself constitute a Subject of profound
Study as well as Intricate practice.
Has Nature in all this no other object than that of Supplying Man with
Food Clothing & Lodging. If so the Model of mere animal Life as exhibited
in the fowls  of the Air & Beasts of the Field is greatly preferable.
But this is not the Sole nor the Principal Object of Nature in this Case.
There is a Germ of Intelligence to be made to Spring up and Advance
through a Gradual progress to indefinite hights of Elevation and Power. A
progress of which we probably see but a part in the present Scene & Order
of things.
The Necessity of procuring Subsistence &c. leads to Mental Pursuits
with which it does not appear to have any affinity. The Laws of Nature must
be Studyd in order to discover how we may Influence Nature to our Purpose. The first lights of Knowledge show the way to More & What Curiosity
to penetrate every Cloud that spreads in the Way. Contemplation & Science
become Necessaries of Life to many And the first principle of Want which
Caused the Germ of Intelligence to Spring is comparatively overlooked &
 forgotten.
As in Hunting Health is acquird without being the immediate object
proposed So in this Train of affairs. The Earth is ransacked much knowledge acquired Arts introduced & Faculties improved merely to accumulate
wealth while the mind continues or becomes inattentive to itself or attainments are valued chiefly for their Utility in Trade. A good man is
understood merely to be Solvent or to have that by which the Law may
force him to fullfil his engagements even if he should be unwilling to do so.
The Moralist may therefore not be inclined not very highly to value the
Progress so made in the Mental or Intelligent Nature of Man.
Man thus committed to the circumstances of his Lot for direction in the
line he is to follow in the Progress of his Intelligent Being has been likened
to Clay in the Hands of a Potter 10 by whom materials tho the same received
different Forms and are at the discretion of the Artist destined to Honour
or disshonour. But the Emblem so far fails in its application to him. That
being  himself the Artist the Form he at any time bears is that which
he has himself voluntarily Assumed and no longer retains than Circumstances seem to require. Whatever may be the Effect of Physical Causes his
Passions and Affections are occupied chiefly by the Occasions which result
from his Relation to Other Men And the Society in which he is placed is in
reality the Principal part of that Lot the Propensity & fitness of which to
forward the Progress of his moral and intelligent Being we are now
considering.
Men form themselves into Society and the Society reacts upon its members to an Effect that contributes more than any other Circumstance to the
Form which its members Assume and the Rank they bear in the System of
Created Intelligence or the Approach to that which is at once the Perfection
and Happiness united in the final Result of this progressive Nature 
Progress of which our Condition enables us to perceive this Specimen tho
but in part & within the limits of a Short Period  but representative. We
may guess of what is going on throughout the System of the Universe where
the Multiplication of Intelligent Being its Progress & The fitness of Scenery
for its indefinite Advancement is the Object Worthy of that Power whose
Felicity & Perfection is in Itself and in all its Energies Eternal and Unalterable. Such Are Ideas to which we indulge our Apprehension Under the
Notion That Wisdom & Goodness are the Sole Ends of Creation in all the
Stages of Existence or reality: Is it so here or does The History of Man confirm it? Is human Society a School of Wisdom & Goodness, and is the
tenour of mixed & precarious life announce the prospect or completion of a
happy Nature? If indeed its tendency is such and final result however distant we have a right to consider this as its Character however short of the
End that part which falls under our Observation may be. The Series of
Events may be various & Long but Time has no bounds to terminate The
progress before its  arrival at the Point to which it is directed. Created
Intelligence begins in Ignorance but Knowledge proceeds by Observation
& may accumulate without End. Mistake is corrected by Experience & if
Still succeeded by Error may by Experience still receive its Correction and
no opinion on the Result be left But that of Truth at last to be entertaind. It
is thus that Intelligence if it continue to Exist must continue to advance or
to Perfect itself.
If we should be disposed to Under value the ordinary attainments of men
& think them below the just Pretensions of Intelligent Nature Such as
Sense of the Condition from which we have to emerge is the reverse of a
Symptom that man is destined not to surmount this Level: it even Evinces
a Stimulus to Efforts of a better Effect. The Courier is urged in his Speed no
less by the fear of being distanced than by the Ardour with which he pants
for the Goal.
In human Society, there is yet more powerful incitements to Active
Exertion 11 more Signal occasions  of calling every human Faculty into
in the Cooperations or opposition of Parties or even Individuals more to be
learned from mutual communications & the records of ages and the disscussion of Legal National & Political Concern than could have resulted from
the whole Physical System in which this Being involved.
In this Principal School of the Intelligent Facultys man is not only and
Advancement in the Powers of deliberation Judgment & Execution but has
also presented to his View and Choice distinctions that Apply to his own
Personal Character & Form tho’ not so Obvious to his reflection as they are
in the Visible & interesting Examples which are presented and felt by lively
Experience in human Life. There he may Compare the Attainments to
which he ought to Aspire in the Examples of Aurelius Titus 12 & Trajan 13
with others which ought to shun in the wretched Debasements of 
Heliogabalus 14 Commodus 15 & Nero. He is no longer limited to the Attainments of Faculty in mere exercise of occasional Pursuits. The Supreme and
Primary End of all pursuit is laid open to him in the Good of which his own
Nature is Susceptible or in guarding Against The Evil to which it is
exposed. In his own mind he has the Conscious Experience Esteem Affection & Confidence the great source of Serenity Peace & Enjoyment
Contrastd with the opposite Evils Jealousy Envy Malice & Fear and
Dependence of mind not on its Resolution and Condition but on chance or
Contingent Event.
This being the Character of Man and his Allottment of Place & Circumstance as an Actor in the Scenes that are opend before him we cannot doubt
The Object of his Maker respecting to be gradual Form of Progression in
the line of ‘his’ Intelligent Being towards the Perfection or Happiness to
which he is destined.
This Law of Progression is agreeable to the Course in every Instance of
living or organized Form within our Observation and in this of Created
Intelligence it appears  to be the Essential or Necessary Form of Existence. That it is the Special Destination of Man cannot be doubted from
many original & Charistick Provisions Qualifing to Avail himself
of it & improve his Advantages.
Interested as he is by the wants and Necessities of Animal Nature to controul or regulate & obtain Effects to his Purpose. The Powers with which
Nature has furnished And the Form in what Nature is Subjected to his Controul furnish a Striking  of Design deliberate provision for his
Accommodation. Not impowered to Create he can only Place Conjoin &
Mix Matters and Materials Together. Nature at the same time acting by
fixed Laws & exhibiting Effects different in different circumstances and
therefore under Contrivance of the Confessedly productive effects such as
his occasion requires. The Law of Gravitation by which every thing loose
must descend to the Ground with his direction the Plummit & Center of
Arches enables to fabricks of heavy Materials to indefinite heights The
more Solid and Firm the more they press to the Ground whether in the
Wall the Column or the Archs, Affections of Attractions & Repulsion 
in different Instances are his Powers of Command Mixtures change or
improve the Composition of Substances to his Purpose Motion & Heat are
occasionally employed in his Service And indefinitely vary their Effects to
his Pleasure. The Soil undergoes the most important change for him And
Plants & Animals of every kind are in his Power to be propagated or extirpated at his Pleasure. In the order of Nature every Plant has its Seed And
every Seed in Proper Soil Springs up into its Plant. 16 We naturally suppose
that this order must have had a beginning & the Creative Power must have
been adequate to produce either Plant or Seed and must we conceive be so
adequate for ever where Woods are wanted The Creative Power we cannot
Doubt may have Cloathed every mountain with full grown Trees. Why this
slow method of rearing from the Seed? To accommodate we may say
Intelligent Man This favourite Tennant of the Earth who observing The
Law of Propagation Established in Nature can by conforming himself to
it & with a Small  of Seed in his hand can have a Forrest where he
 chuses & in a little time transplant Forrests of America to Europe or
the Converse And by Analogous Process command every Species of Corn or
Fruit and every  of his Flock or his Herds. Who can doubt that
man was intended to be a Husbandman & Proprietor  the Earth.
While the Powers of man as entrusted with a Controul over the Physical
System for his own Supply and accommodation are provided for in the very
Laws and apparently fixed Condition of things His Dominion projected
over the Forms of his own Species and the operations which take place on
himself As the Material on which they work is also provided for in particulars Significant of Design & Goodness on the part of his Maker. His
Instinctive Formation into Groups & Societies 17 of Indefinite Extent at
once give rise to an Artist of Power and a Subject in continual need of his
care or attention. Such is the Political Scene exhibited throughout the Various Devisions & their Respective Forms throughout the Political World
constituted by the human Race. The Combinations  of Numbers that
take place in States and Political Compartments may Oblige us to look back
on the relations Subsisting in detail among Individuals forming their connections and The Influences & Ties by which they are enabled to Act in
such Bodies.
Mere Intelligence implys no more than that every such Form of Existence is Conscious of itself & its Continued Identity throughout the Period
of its existence. In Society Separate Persons so Constituted are supposed to
be mutually apprised of their Respective minds and Conditions and every
Individual has a part to act respecting what passes in the thoughts and
Intentions of another as an Evidence that Society is Intentional & projected
for the Human Species in a much higher form than that of the mere herding
animals.
Among the Animals Language is the gift of Nature to Man Alone. The
use of Language tho specific to man does not appear to result from any Signal advance of the Intellectual faculties. It is almost the earliest of his
Specific acquisitions.  The Horse the moment he drops on the Ground
betakes him to Walk and turns on his Dam to grope for the Dug: but man
after months and even years are passed has Language before he can change
his Place & has learned to Speak while  is yet but attempting to walk.
His looks & Gestures are by Nature Significant and mediately understood
And  this foundation the Species has founded a Multiplicity of Arbitrary Signs consisting chiefly of Articulate Sounds varied indefinitely in
every Separate Hord or Assemblage of Men: But agreeing the origins of
Speech by which they are pronounced the organ of hearing through which
they press to be interpreted It may appear Strange a Subject so Common
and familiar at all noticed: but it is neverless of all Natural Phenomena
the most remarkable & important and being without question Instinctive
the most powerful Evidence of a Design in Nature & preparative of all the
Effects that result from human society to forward the Progress of mans
Intellectual Existence.
Hence all the Effects of  communication Information Instruction
and the very Existence of Consent deliberation or Council and the very Fabric of Society itself in all its parts. When we thus find the Great resulting
from what is comparatively Small there can be no doubt of the Design And
that the Less has been meditating for the Sake of the Greater.
Without dwelling any longer then on what  Evident The Advantages
which the Progressive Nature of Man derives from the Scene in which his
Germ of Intelligence is made to Spring and to Wax in what we must 
End  inclined to call this first Stage of its progress. We may ask from
what Topick we are to tell the Character of that Power which has laid the
foundation of this order of things in which we partake.
Are we to consider every Instance of Misfortune or Pain strewed over the
Lot of Man as exceptions derogating from the general Evidence of benevolent so manifest in the order of Nature or in the Construction of Living and
organised Existence? This were surely very erroneous as in the  distribution of Pleasure and Pain throughout the Animal Kingdom if not the
Intellectual Pain is an Evidence or Effect of Beneficent Design no less than
Pleasure. As Pleasure for the most part invites to what is Salutary or
required for Preservation Pain deters from what is adverse or hurtful,
equally evincing in every Case That the Design is beneficent & Wise.
If this Law is not so Strictly observed in the case of man as in that of the
other animals It is undoubtedly because man is more left to his own Government And place is given to the Exercise of those Faculties And of that
Freedom which form the Distinction of Intelligent Being. In this Race it is
a Saying of great Authority that he who spareth the Rod Hateth the Child
and the Parent in chusing a School for his offspring does not pitch upon
that in which they will be most pampered with Sweet and exempted from
Labour but where they will be kept to their Exercises and advanced in those
attainments which Constitute merit & Felicity of their Characters. Adversity is known to be the Reformer of Pride Usurpation & Vanity and a Life of
Frequent Tryal in Difficulty 18  Danger & Hardship The best school for
Ability Fortitude and Wisdom. It is even probable if not certain that such is
a life of more Enjoyment or Satisfaction than what is commonly Supposed
a Life of more Ease or Leisure from Business or those Active Engagements
which are said to be Trouble. The French Ennuis 19 is known to be Worse
than And that to avoid any sort of occupation is preferred And the Sense of
Mankind on this Subject may be Collected from the Nature of Amusements
or Sports they devise to occupy their time with Pleasure. In these we ever
have a portion of Difficulty Danger And Contest to be Sustained or
Avoided.
In contending for an Exemption from pain or trouble as the condition in
which the Evidence of Divine goodness  Wisdom can be admitted The
Atheist 20 Mistakes the Nature of Man his Choice and the Real object of Creation in respect to him which can be no other than that of opening  for
him a Way by which he may Arrive at the Specific Excellence And Felicity
of his Nature The Way of Observation Experience & continued Progression. The form in which Creation Proceeds in every Instance known to us is
analogous to this And is Beneficial & Wisely provided in the mixed Scene
of Prosperity & Adversity through which Life is destined to pass. In a continued  of Ease or pleasure unremitted the faculties of mind must have
Languished or have been totally Suppressed.
Agreeably to the general Tenet That mere matter is of no value apart
from its Relation to mind as a Material of art & accommodation We may
venture to assume that Terrestrial Sphere is made for man as its sole Intelligent Possessor. For him it is presented so the Suns Influence with a Surface
of Land & Water Justly proportioned to one Another with an atmosphere to
bear the Evaporation of water to the Land Inequalities of Hill & Dale on
which to return the surplus of Water again to the Sea with Vegetation Animal Life & Physical Law presenting An Order Variety Analogy and Mutual
Subservience fitted to supply the animal Exigencies of Man & mutual subservience fitted to supply the Animal Exogenus of man and  awake his
mind to observation comprehension and the Perception of Wisdom of Ends
& Mean giving a Place to his own Exertions & furnishing mean for his
success with a Continual for the use & Advancement of his Faculties.
In this view of the Terrestrial System to which our observation of Nature
is in a great measure limited & reduced as we conceive it to have as the Parts
of which it is composed That is of Man in his destination to Emerge from a
mere Germ of Intelligence wrapt up in an Animal into the Order of Superiour Natures whose Happiness consists in Wisdom & Goodness in the one
Part and on the Other a Physical & moral Arrangement made for his Reception and affording the proper Exercise and Scope of his Powers for the
Progress & attainment of their End. And This Statement not as a Part But
the whole Creation relative to him we are to pronounce on the Character of
that Design which is Apparent & Obvious to our search. On this Ground
the Argument must rest. If the mixed Scene of Human Life is well adjusted
to a Nature requiring Action 21 for  his Advancement to that point at
which his perfection & happiness are placed then is the Scheme Beneficently And Wisely laid. If otherwise we must remain at least in doubt on the
Subject.
But here also Is God, And the Storms which in moments of Superficial
thinking may incline us to Doubt Proclaim Him more loudly than does any
provision that is made for Indulgence or Safety in the lower Forms of Life.

VIII. OF THE COMPARTIVE
FORMS OF BEING 
Of the Intellectual or World of Minds. The subserviency of all nature to Man. Variety and
analogy most observable in the aspect of things. Law of gravitation. Planetary System. Variety of Worlds in Infinite Space. 1 to 4.
The Intellectual and Animal part of Man considered. Probability of other Worlds for the
reception of Minds. Progress of Intelligence in the Human Mind. Characters. World of Spirits countless number of its Inhabitants. Our Knowledge here limited. To Act well our part is
to ensure our Happiness. 4 to the end.
The material World being such as we perceive it from afar as well near
Indefinitely Various & Great: what are we to think of the Intellectual or
World of minds?
Mere Corporeal Substance however Great is Still & Lifeless in itself destit of Value: but as it is Subservient to the Cause of living Natures or of
Mind That is: as it is cause of Sensation and The Object of Perception as it
may be organised & become the aliment of Life the Material of Art. The
Object of Contemplation of Ratiocination. The medium of Expression or
Communication from mind to mind And above all from God to his Observant Creatures. In any or in all of these Respects This Terrestrial  is
fitted to the Lot of Man A Scene in which he may enjoy The Supply of all
his Wants & the exercise of all his Powers so destined to expand themselves
& make him Lord of all this Stage on which he treads.
Even here however when the World of Intelligence begins to show itself
in man. The merely material Scene is apt to preoccupy our thoughts or 
fix them on the Spacious Dwelling instead of the Inhabitant for whose
accommodation Solely they are built.
If thus the Scale of Estimation be disturbed on Earth where the human
Soul is so perspicuous; no wonder we are Ravished with the magnitude and
order of a firmament now discovered by the Sagacity of Men to present
many such worlds as we inhabit while the Essence of a Superiour Form of
Being for whose use such magnitude of Scenery is made has yet if at all but
faintly or by conjecture dawned upon our Sight.
To a general observer the first Aspect of Nature is Indefinite Variety with
continued analogy through Forms unlike Mere Matter whether Fixed or
Fluid Hard or Soft Ductile or Friable has Gravitation throughout with
affinities that coagulate in kinds into Mass. Even the atmosphere whose
component Atoms repel one Another is collected by Gravity into the form
of a Globe.
On this Ground we may erect some Rule for Conjecture when existence
only is known but its form to be guessed. From the  Magnitude &c of
Planets They were guessed to be Worlds like this Earth and from their
Motions This Earth was guessed to be a Planet like them. Of this there is
now no doubt but when we would go farther and guess they are inhabited
we must admit the probability of great Variety as well as Analogy in the
Forms of Existence in Comparison with that we experience.
It is thus that, without rejecting the Characteristick diversity of Forms in
Nature we apprehend in every Planet by which our Sun is Surrounded a living World Analogous to that of which we ourselves make a Part on this
terrestrial Sphere. And in every fixed Star a Sun like our own environed
also with Planets revolving in Orbits such as we have learned with so much
accuracy in all their Anomaly Vibrations and mutual disturbances. Nor do
we find a limit to this Assumption of Worlds not to be limited merely by
our defect of Sight which does not extend beyond a mere Corner of Universal  existence that has no bounds but those of Number & Space if to such
there be any limits.
So great so numerous are the forms of material Existence to what effect
or for what purpose?
This Question forever occurs on our observation of Nature And where it
cannot be solved we are slow of belief in the Fact so manifest commonly is
the end in all forms or operations of Nature.
Mere Body is perceived by mind & is the cause of Sensation to Sensitive
Beings. It becomes by mere means a medium of communication or intercourse in a plurality of minds. It is matter of accommodation for Sensitive
Beings. It is an Object of Search and of Study it is a Material of Art & Subject of Property and in all these or other Respects constituent of a Scene for
the Occupation and Action of Mind. Although therefore in itself it is neither Good nor Evil Susceptible neither of  Happiness nor Misery yet in
Relation to mind it has a place in Existence and a Call for all the Varieties of
Consistence Magnitude & Figure which it is found to possess or exhibit.
Is the Universe of Body then formd for the sake of mind alone? 1
To us there appears no Other End or Purpose for which it is made. If so
great the Corporeal Department of Nature What are we to think of the Mental for whose Sake those departments are so formd and dispersed
throughout the immensity of Space.
Upon these grounds we Shrink not from the Thought that follows nor
dread to apprehend an Universe of minds proportioned to the mighty Scenery of unnumbered Worlds prepared for their reception And may be
tempted even to think that Worlds of matter are but Sensations and Perceptions in the Midst of which the Living Spirit dwells.
To us indeed the World of minds is notifyed in man his conscious Reason
or Intelligence & Will. His Works declare it in absence of that  Workman. The Cultivated the Choice Plantation The humble Cottage The
Village Tenements the Gaudy Mansion the Gorgeous Palace & the Solemn
Temple even in their Ruins evince where he has been and in their preservation pronounce him Still remaining in his Place. Yet far beyond what he
performs or can attempt Nature bears the marks of Workmanship which at
a Single Step leads up the uninstructed Mind of Man to God. The Essence
and the Source of Being unaware how many intermediate Forms of mind
may intervene beneath the Highest .
In the human Race we may observe the Germ of Intelligence Spring from
the Soil of mere Animal life. In the Multitude it is little more than the use
or the Practise of Art for Subsistence & accommodation. Even in the Distinguished it is little more than the Trick of a Mischievous Boy as in
Alexander or Caesar to set one part of the Species against another. Yet in
others in Cato  Epictetus 2 & Aurelius we are taught how happy the
Human Soul may become 3 or in Copernicus 4 & Newton 5 how far its Views
may reach. If in the many we are apprised of the tardy Progress of Mind In
others we are forbid to despair and encouraged to look forward to future
Scenes of Being for the continuance & Accomplishment of a Progress of
 the outset & the Capacity are now to be seen.
If the Source of Nascent Intelligence be perennial and the Swarms continue to multiply thoug no more than in this Instance of accumulating
Numbers The Universe of minds we may Conceive to keep Pace with the
extent of a Material Creation prepared for its Reception. How much more
must every thought be led to repose on the Magnificence of Being where
the Material Scene however Great is fully provided with Actors. That we
may  perceive the vanity to number in this Instance be it remembered
That the Human Species of any one Generation has been reckoned at one
thousand millions; if but one hundred Generations are supposed to have
passed one hundred Thousand millions of Souls have already flown from
Terrestrial Source And if every Planet in the Solar System has been equally
productive The Sum will amount to Seven hundred thousand Millions.
And if every fixed Star supposed to be two thousand is but the Sign Post of a
System Similar to ours let imagination try to accompany in thought the
Thousands Millions of Millions which figures may in Vain be used to
express And let the vanquished Conception acknowledge that the Material
World however great is Still Subordinate  and even upon such data as
the Material World itself can Supply must Shrink in Magnitude as well as in
Estimation before the World of living and Conscious Existence whose
Essence is Power and Destination Felicity.
In such Forms there is proper Object for Creative omnipotence And for
the Sake of this there may be reason why mere matter in any or all its Forms
should be Allowed to exist.
Our knowledge does not extend to the Origin of things. The Changes
exhibited around us are no more than Sensations or Mixtures. Yet even in
this Conjecture is not prohibited if we do not mistake it for knowledge nor
entertain it in contradiction to what we do know or what we are still more
likely to suffer allow ourselves to be misled by Metaphor or the transfer of
Words from one Subject  another.
Thus some Philosophers of Old 6 adventured to say that the human Soul
was a Spark emitted from the eternal Source of  Intelligence and after
some Periods of Progression returns into the Source again.
We cannot indeed be too proud of our Origin nor entertain too Noble an
object of Hope if it Stimulate just Efforts of Ambition of which the most
feeble Effects may be better than None.
When the Aspiring mind recalls the Millions of Millions and hundred
thousands of Millions of Millions with whom he may now have to contend
for distinction he may possibly shrink in Despair. But if he judge aright the
Object of a just Ambition 7 is not comparative but of an Absolute Value.
That in which the Value of Existence itself consists is the Capacity of Happiness and the Happy Mind is of the highest Value whatever be the number
that partakes in the same Distinction.
If you perform what in the present moment what you are called upon to
do with Benignity Diligence and Resolution you are happy. 8
To this it may be Subjoined that the Multitude of Competitors in the
same pursuit will not impede: but promote the Success.

IX . REPUTED PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION 
The objects of conception from which these Pleasures result are Beauty, Novelty and Grandeur. Of Beauty: Distinction of Excellence in Mind. 1 to 4.
Novelty and Grandeur & to the End.
These Pleasures are distinguished from Sensation as resulting from Conception or Apprehension of an Agreeable Object & therefore a
Characteristic Lot of mind or Intelligence.
The Objects of Conception from which These Pleasures result are Said to
be Novelty Beauty & Grandeur.
Beauty 1 is conceived for the most part in Visible Forms and in the loose
application of Terms is applied to any Form of which the sight or Remembrance is agreeable whether from mere Sensation as in a Single Tint of
Colour or Note in Music or from any association of Agreeable circumstance
which may be merely Accidental like the Association of Joy with the place
in which Glad Tidings were Received or the association of Rank with the
Dress in Fashion an Association frequently Shifting and as often varying
the Forms of Beauty in manners & Dress. This application of the Term is a
mere abuse if Beauty is to be considered as  fixed distinction in Nature.
The only fixed Distinction I  can find in mere Corporeal Form is a
Material of Art or a production of Art or in some way an accommodation to
mind in its capacity of Felicity or Excellence. Beyond the Range of Being so
Qualified or its appurtenances There is neither Good nor Evil Excellence or
Defect. Infinite Space Replete with Diamond and Gold or Nectar and
Ambrosia would be of no more Value than Sand Stone or Mud.
Mind of itself is Happy or Wretchd And a source of Happiness or Misery
to Collateral Beings or Minds as Far as far I repeat there is no other form of
Existence distinguishable as either Good or Evil.
What then is the distinction of Excellence in Mind? It is the discernment
And the Power of Commanding what is Good Omniscience And
Omnipotence.
The Possession & the Communication of Happiness or the Emanation of
such qualities in some Finite Degree.
This in the Eternal is Perfection Infinite in the Created Being is Excellence And Merit and felicity.
If there is not any Distinction  of Good or Evil in any other form of
Being but in that of Mind alone whence is it that we Ascribe Beauty to mere
corporeal Form Whence the Beauty of the Sun & Planets of the Land and
Sea of the Atmosphere, of the Plant that covers of the Ground of the Forest
And Woods of their living Stock of the Organised Forms in so many
Instances of Men and all the forms they produce for the Accommodation?
The Specimens referred to will I doubt not Suggest the Answer. These are
the Works in part of feeble Man: but more Conspicuously of Supreme
Beneficence  Power.
Beauty then in mere Corporeal Forms is the Evidence there given of Wisdom Goodness & Power.
If this be the genuine account of Beauty as exhibited in material Forms it
is justly entitled a Pleasure of imagination for the Effect is admiration or
Esteem Sentiments highly agreeable of ever meeting the conception or
Imagination of Goodness & Wisdom however presented to the feeling Mind
 And however disjoined from any other concomitant recommendation
whatever.
Here then we may ask has Novelty or Grandeur the same title to be reckoned among these Pleasures.
Novelty or Greatness whether in measure or degree it is said draw crowds
of Spectators & fix the Attention by what charm if not by the Pleasure with
which they are beheld or contemplated.
But does not pain fix the attention perhaps still more than Pleasure and
do not crowds assemble to behold sights of Horror as well as Pleasure Executions Dissasters Murders Tortures which with the Vulgar are principal
allurements of Tragic Muse and all they require in return for expense of
Money and Time at the Theater.
Hence indeed it is  concluded that Sights of Distress are pleasant And
that a Person who looking from the  on a Ship that is perishing at Sea
Enjoys himself in his own
Safety. The Assumption of Pleasures in such cases and thus explanation of
it is founded in the general Principle so well known to be false: That there
must be pleasure wherever there are crouds of Attentive & gaping
Spectators.
Things new & Strange bring People together from Curiosity to know
what they are and when the passion of Curiosity is gratifyed there is pleasure which comes when Novelty no longer exists. The Figure of a man with
the Head of a Toad would draw Crowds of Spectators but with an Effect we
may believe the Reverse of Pleasure which even the gratification of Curiosity would not Appease.
Things that surprise come with Augmented Effect which abates with
familiarity or  continued Acquaintance whether Pleasant or Painful.
Beauty unexpected is enhanced by Surprise: but repeated looses much of
its Effect.
Unexpected ugliness is the more shocking for being New and there cannot be a more convincing Proof that Novelty 2 as such is not productive of
Pleasure.
This Title therefore is surely to be dismissed from the Enumeration of
the Pleasures of Imagination notwithstanding the Authority of Addison 3
and Akenside 4 to the Contrary. These Gentlemen present no other Effect of
Novelty but that of Surprise which if pleasant in some instances is equally
painful in Others. And the Affectation of Novelty which their Doctrine has
encouraged among the Votaries of Distinction & Eminence has opened a
Road by which the meanest Capacity may hope to succeed with the world.
For what more easy than to produce what never entered before into  the
mind of any Rational Creature. Those who would benefit Mankind in the
Practice of any Art Whether of Information or Convenience should endeavour to improve the known Resources of human Nature of which for the
most part the most Notorious are sometimes the most neglected as well as
the most important: but these Are left to the dull & incapable because men
of Genius must have something new and must distinguish themselves by
demolishing the Fabrick of Human Wisdom rather than by Cultivating The
Strength of a Burden of which every one Knows the importance.
Newton made new dis in the Heavens for he traced the Power
of Gravitation. Thither Socrates & Zeno made discoveries of human Nature
to itself yet the Doctrines  Kepler 5 Copernicus and Newton are better
known than those of Socrates or Zeno. The multitude are still gaping for
something new without knowing that the Cultivation of Genuine Wisdom
is one  the newest  things that mankind ever found. g
Mr Bourke in his Treatise on the Beautiful and Sublime 6 for the latter h
requires greatness still in Measure or Degree and in the Painful and horrid
may be Sublime as well as the Pleasant or Agreeable And in illustration
cites the Sublime of an enormous Stench. 7 On this Principle however mere
Grandeur or great is improper reckoned among the Pleasures of Imagination. If a great Beauty is the cause of Great Pleasure & Great Deformity
must be the Reverse. Mere Greatness indeed like Novelty may excite curiosity & this may be gratifyed. The crouds that Assemble to behold it may be
disgusted or terrifyd as much or as well as pleased And we must never forget
that attention is fixed by Pain as well  Pleasure And we may account for
the Crouds that repair to Sights of Distress without supposing them
pleasant.
Compassion or pity tho constituent of Pain or Suffering as we express it
for a Felow Creature 8 is very different from the Suffering of Anger Fear
Resentment or hatred. It is even acknowledged to be in its Nature 
Agreeable or to reconcile the mind to its State of Suffering  and reject
any means of relief but that of the Party for whom we Suffer. This may
account in Part for the Charms of Tragedy. And joined with the Charms of
Fortitude Magnanimity And the Sympathies of Love and of which The
Tragick Muse above all others avail herself render her Exhibitions the
occasion of most real Enjoyment altho to account for the Crowded assemblage at her Theater Pain alone would be Sufficient and even the prospect of
pleasure unnecessary. Women & Children croud to every application of Torture altho they know that Pain alone is  be expected. Setting aside the
Beauties of Poetic Stile in his Tragedy of Oedipus, 9 What other Charm has
Sophocles 10 employd to bind an Audience to that Tyrant of the Athenean
stage.

X . COGNITUTEM WITH THE OF WISDOM 
Metaphysics. Discernment and choice the essence of Wisdom. Generalization. 1 to 4.
Pleasure. The happiness to be perfect is a state of the greatest Enjoyment. The choice of
Pleasure and rejection of Pain. Evil propensities to be restrained and properly regulated. To
perform the Duties of the present moment with Benignity and Diligence, is to be wise and
Happy. The danger of the substitution of Pleasure and Pain for Good and Evil without
proper discernment. Philosophy of Zeno and Epicurus. 4 to the End.
Metaphysics set out with Existence itself & so from Universal to Generals would come at las to Individuals or particulars of which the proper
discernment & Choice is the Essence of Wisdom.
In every Conjuncture the Subjects in view are particular & must be particularly known to be properly treated.
Wisdom therefore begins with particulars but mixing comprehension
with Practice perceives the concourse of many under general Names 
And learns to talk of many under a few General Names.
This is termed Generasation and is the distinction of Science when
compared with common sense.
The boast of Science is to investigate the Law that prevails in the Course
of things and to trace singulars to the Law from which they are derived.
This is Satisfactory it is a Form of Advance or promotion of which
Human Intelligence is Susceptible and is accordingly a deduction in
which its progress is carried ard on.
If Generalisation is thus successfull & Correct it is no  doubt perfective of that Nature to which it is appropriate.
But to render happy in its Course as well as in the termination or End
some incidental Errors Mistakes should be carefully avoided.
Of these I shall at present point out only one by which under the pretence of Generalisation we affect to confound matters together in the
separation or disstinction of which the happiness and consequently the
Wisdom of Mankind is much more concerned than it can be in any Supposed assemblage or Combination.
In every such case it is wise to distinguish  and maybe at least Dangerous to Assemble.
For example of this sort we may trace Man’s Happiness & Misery to the
most opposite things in Nature to one common denomination of a Condition of Sensitive or Conscious Being.
It is even sometimes material to Consider them in this point of View f
when there is any danger of Considering or mistaking some Collateral Circumstance as Constituent of the thing itself.
Another Instance is when Happiness is traced up to the General Term
Pleasure And this made the general denominatio  of all that is Good
to be Selected agreeably to the Taste and Actuall Experience of the Person to
be gratifyed for whatever other Rule can be admitted in the choice of Pleasure What is food to one we say is poison to Another and so Taste seems.
After having in this term of Pleasure levelld all matters of choice we
may endeavour to distinguish the act licit or Illicit dignifyd or mean but
we shal never perhaps be able to repair the breach made in the Wall of
Separation between them. After having admitted under the general Term of
Pleasure the  Intoxication of the Drunkard with the Consciousness of j
Integrity Beneficence & Magnanimity of the Wise. The Scratching of the k
Itch or Conceited folly of the Vain with tranquillity of Health or the Serenity of the Candid or Innocent.
One of the first Inferences to be drawn is that pleasures are to be Estimated by their Measure & no their Nature or Quality.
To those who enumerate Pleasures in order to ascertain the measure of
Good in the Form or condition of any Living or  Conscious Being it
must be admitted as a self evident Maxim that nothing is Good but in proportion as it is matter of Enjoyment now or hereafter.
That Happiness to be perfect must be a State of the greatest Enjoyment
and least Suffering 2 of which the Being is question is Susceptible.
And supposing Existence indefinite The Future is to be admitted to consideration as well as the present. That the Future may indeed overballance
the present.
Upon these grounds it seems to be admitted That in Estimating The
Good or Evil  in any particular Case or matter of deliberation The measure or degree of pleasure or Pain now or hereafter alone is to be Considered.
That all Supposed distinctions of any Other distinction of Right or Wrong
of Perfection or defect of high or low honourable or Vile & Mean are to be
rejected as vulgar impositions or Words without meaning. That the Praise
bestowed on Suffering Fortitude without any prospect of Retribution is the
Praise of Folly and fitted only to mislead the Vainglorious.
That in short is the Object of Wisdom in every case to Estimate the
present & the Future so as to do what upon the Whole may or  does
amount to the greatest sum of pleasure and least Pain. 3
If this be a difficult Task from inabily to Estimate perhaps untryed or
unforeseen Pleasure or Pain: it is nevertheless the Sole Directory of which
human Understanding is Susceptible And to say that it is either limited or
difficult is no more than to own That in the mind of Man the attainments of
Wisdom are limited and in their application difficult.
This indeed must be acknowledged on every Supposition and it is not so
wonderful in cases of Prudential Concern to see Men in doubt &  indecision & irresolution as on the contrary to see them prompt & determind
almost in any Case whatever having so much to look for in future prospects
as well as present Condition or matter of actual discernment.
Upon the least pretensions to Wisdom human Action could scarcely proceed, And nothing Short of temerity Ignorance & presumption could bring
human Council to a full & ultimate Decision.
What we see to the contrary must occasion some pause and a return to
the premises from which it is supposd that there is no immediate principle
of decision in  the human mind besides the measure or degree of Pleasure without regard to any Other distinction whatever.
It is no doubt true that in every Act of the human Will there is some propensity to be gratified And as Gratification is but another name for
Pleasure, this in every Instance is to be pronounced the Object of Will in
every instance. But are Propensities in every Instance independent of one
Another. May it not be the Object of one Propensity to decline that to
which another inclines. Love or hatred may incline to Action Indolence
may incline to repose And the Scale may  preponderate only by the
Surplus of its Weight.
In short may there not be propensities whose Object or tendency it is to
regulate and controul The tendency of some Others As Modesty or Shame
controuls the Intercourse of the Sexes and regulates or forbids it in time and
Place Excess in all the Animal Appetites is restrained by a propensity to
moderation and the preservation of Reason which excuses tend to dissorder or Suppress.
And when it was Said of a Sow wallowing in the Mire That Tastes must
not be questiond 4 This was not true of human Nature for such tastes are 
continually censured as degrading and Vile and without any consideration
of the Comparative Strength of Propensities one is condemned as degrading The Other as becoming our Nature So that the Voluptuary cannot plead
for lust to his Excesses by the Consideration of an equality of Consideration due to all the Actual propensities for it is the province of Some to
controul the Others And if both are to be indulged some one is to be limited
or contrould The desire of Spirituous Liquours by the Love of sobriety. /
 In this manner The Human Resolution is not without a Guide that is
ever Prompt and ready to decide on the first Presentment of many an
Important Question. And Justice or Injustice Honour or dishonour decide
without Hesitation without entering into Calculation of Consequence or
future effects.
Nor is this censured as Temerity & presumption by those who have studied most intensely what is constituent of most Enjoyment & least Suffering
in human Nature. If you perform with Benignity & Diligence what in the
present moment you are called upon to do, Says Antoninus: 5 you will be
Happy.
 The Foundation for These Reflections has been laid in a question of
mere Arrangement or Generalisation; but in a department of Nature where
the Detriment of misnomer & oversight in particular difference is greater
than any extension of Views or Comprehension can repair.
The substitution of Pleasure & Pain for Good & Evil seems to clear the
Way to a discernment of Particulars: but in the application endangers the
oversight of differences the most important in this application of Words.
Marcus Aurelius 6 & Epictetus 7 were no less men of Pleasure than
Sardanapalus 8 or Heliogabalus. And Men  are taught to indulge in
Pleasure without being told of What Sort. If Good is Nothing but Pleasure
let every one choose for himself he who is pleased cannot be in the Wrong.
This was the Mistake which made almost the sole difference between
The Philosophy of Socrates & Aristippus 9 of Zeno & Epicurus And men
undervalue the difference by supposing it to Consist in Words Alone: 10 but
Words are so Connected with their meaning that in using the one we cannot
stand clear of the other. The Pleasure of Epicurus led to retirement & Ease
without any Cares of Family or of State. 11
 The Virtue of Aurelius 12 led him to perform with benignity & Diligence what in the present moment he was called upon to do whether in the
Cares of Family or of Empire. And yet he too was pleasd in a higher measure or degree than the Votary of a different Philosophy whose outset was a
professed pursuit of Pleasure 13 but the names of Pleasure & of Virtue lead
the first steps into different Ways And opposite directions.


XIII. OF CAUSE AND EFFECT/ ENDS AND
MEANS/ORDER COMBINATION AND/ DESIGN 
Power, the first Element of importance in Being. Cause and Effect the exertion and result of
Power. Of Will. The Relation of Cause and Effect: there must be a first Cause Self-Existent.
1 to 6.
Cause and Effect leads to Result or End. The specific End of Intelligence is good. Cause
judged by the Effect. 6 to 8.
The Beneficence and Goodness of the First Cause manifest. Could not that Power which
gave Being to the means, accomplish the End without any means? 8 to 9.
The whole Creation made for Man to exercise his Faculties and forward his Progress to Perfectibility and Happiness. 9 to 13.
The Wisdom and Goodness of God manifest in the arrangements of Nature relative to Man.
13 to 17.
The contemplation of the works of Creation one great source of Happiness: the Atheist who
endeavours to undermine this Happiness compared to a Robber. 17 to 19.
Religion, its abuse. The Zealots fury &c. &c.. No Jury or Court of Inquisition adequate to
try causes for Impiety or Atheism. Arguments for and against Atheism. Evidence of a First
Cause. 19 to the End.
The first Element of Importance in Existence or Being is Power. Without
Power Existence is Altogether Indifferent if real.
Power is known only by its Exertion and this in many cases only by its
result. b
Power in Exertion is termed a Cause. The Result of its Exertion is termed
an Effect.
Causality or Power exerted consists in means Effect is the result of
means.
To know the Existence of such Relation as Cause and Effect is to perceive
the Exertion and tendency of Power together with Means accomplishing
the Result.
These Elements are matter of  of pure Intelligence and may be exemplified in Every Mathematical Problem as in the first of Euclid 1 while we
describe an Equilaral Triangle on a given Base We are conscious of the
Power of the means & of the intended Result or Effect. Here then our
knowledge and we proceed in action and in contemplation with this known
Relation of Cause & Effect in our Thoughts. Will is exerted and Muscular
motion Succeeds we are conscious of the Will of Intention to move and in
that intention the relation of the Cause to the Effect is anticipated before
the Result Ensues. Here we doubt not the Causality altho The means are
unknown. In command or communications of Will to other Persons The
Will Intention and Effect and to a certain  The Causality or means
are also known as when a person depending on Another for his Preservation
or Welfare conforms to his Will. When in the System of Nature things come
presented together & when this  Fact alone is Observed the Elements
required to constitute the Relation of Cause & Effect are wanting and no
Such Relation would be apprehended. When two or more persons appear or
pass one after another in the Street from this Circumstance it never occurs
to any one that they are Cause & Effect. Spring follows Winter and so on in
the Succession of Seasons but no one conceives them as Cause & Effect. Nor
can it be Supposed that mere Contiguity would Suggest to a Person previously unapprised of this Relation would have ever Suggested it. Yet it has
been alledged that the Contiguity of things in the course of Nature is the
only Source of this apprehension but as in the case of mere Physical Events
the means or Causality is unknown they contend the Apprehension is altogether imaginary & void of Reality.
It is Strange that Men of speculation should overlook their own Modes
 Existence to search for the Origins of their conceptions in Sources less
known or where the presentment of Relation is much less perfect or Compleat  Being Apprised of Power and its exertion in ourselves & of Ends
or Intentions and means with their Results & Effects. We are ready to
apprehend the same relations existing in Cases when any Appearance may
lead to such associations; but this we seldom do on account of mere Contiguity without some Other Circumstance such as we previously Apprehend
to be necessary in the Relation of Cause & Effect.
Having experienced the reality of this relation in our own intentional
active exertions and their results we are qualified in our Intelligence to pursue the fact to Consequences & improve upon Experience. The cause we say
must be adequate to the effect they must be inseparable and keep pace in
Just Proportion. Each must be known prior to their alledged connection &
upon these maxim not founded in Experience but inferred from the
Nature of Things Modern Science has advanced to its present attainments.
Nay we say more. That what is necessary must always have been & never
can be Otherwise And that whatever  has or has had a beginning must
have a previous Cause. This is not learned from Experience for many and
the greatest part of Events are not preceded by Causes known to us but we
admit that  must have had their Causes and that those causes must
have been preceded by others and so on Indefinitely. Yet if we attempt to
figure a past Eternity of such Succession Intelligence revolts And we say
that there must have been a first Self Existent otherwise that nothing could
have been. 2 It would be Absurd to say that this is learned from Experience
And it has the most powerful of all Evidence viz. that it cannot be doubted.
From the first Cause all is derived Even those causes whose Effects are
perceived by us And the System of Nature consists of a Series of Causes and
their  or in Other Words of Means and Ends.
As we are Conscious of Powers & Intentions The Effect intended is
termed the End. Mere Events tho considered as Effects do not necessarily
appear as Ends that is as  Effects intended except where The Cause is
known or conceived to be Mind or Intelligent Power.
In the acquisition of Knowledge The first Steps are Consciousness and
Perception. The following may be termed Inference including even Testimony. Where Cause & Effect are Known the Existence of either is inferred
from the Other. From the Effect most Commonly we infer the Cause as
from the Appearance of Smoked sooty Walls & Remnants of Chared Wood
we infer the Action of Combustion or Fire. This may have been intended &
destruction the End, But the mere Effect does not lead to any such Apprehension. Intending Power or Intelligence is a Power to obtain or to
communicate Happiness it will not admit of Suffering but in the defect of
Power to remove it. This is Evil The contrary is Good. The Specific End of
Intelligence then is Good adverse to Evil. Whatever Evidence may be that a
Mind is Misguided to intend Evil It is only when Good is apparent that the
interposition of Mind or  Intention can be inferred from the mere
Effect. Goodness of Effect however is in a considerable degree evidence of
Choice or Intention in the Cause. If to this be joined a combination of
means appearing to have no other connection than their joint cooperation
in producing a Good Effect The Evidence of mind or Intention is as compleat As Reality in the case presented could have furnished. The Case is an
actual presentment of Ends & Means the results of Intention Design Invention choice Contrivance and Power of Intelligence.
The System of Nature then consisting not merely of Cause & Effect but
of Ends & means bears in every Department The Indications of Intelligence
of Wisdom & Goodness in the first Cause.
The completion of this Topic must be left to the Physiologist and Natural
Historian in treating of organised Matter in Plants & Animals & the
Mechanical System of the Earth and the Heavens but there is no one so
blind as not to see the footsteps of Intelligence in the tracts nearest to
himself.
As Small Specimens of Art obtain the Praise of Ingenuity & skill
amongst  men; This Mighty Frame & Order of Nature must carry to the
Mind of every observation the Evidence not merely of Design & beneficent
Intention but of a Power so directed And in Measure Magnificent beyond
the possible reach of any such conception as ours. Such we would express is
the first Cause Necessarily & Essentially Existent of Course Eternal unlimited to place Infinite or Compleat in every Perfection which being
Necessary cannot have Degrees or Limits.
Even under this Power the Cause of all The Order of Nature seems to be
conducted in a Succession of Events of which Nature appears to contain
The Causes in itself. The Seasons keep pace with apparent movements of
the Sun. Forrests Spring up from the apparent Effects of Moisture & Heat
and so furth in Numberless Instances.
How are we to Conceive this Matter In the use of means or what we call
secondary Causes Necessary to the Almighty.
Could not that Power  which gave Being to the means accomplish the
End without any mean?
This question it is not possible to answer in the Negative And to obtain
some Consistency of Thought on the Subject we must follow where it leads.
The Eternal is Intelligent and the order of being to be multiplied by his
Power is of this Class. Still or lifeless matter is made for them not for itself.
It is but a provision for fancy Imagination And communication And Art.
They are made for themselves and coming into Existence with a Power to
be happy must owe the Event to themselves to what they learn to what they
attain & to what they become. What is chiefly wanting to them is a Scene on
which to perform their part & on which to acquire and exert their Strength.
On this Scene they have their Ends And to these means are requisite.
If the Almighty were to operate merely by Acts of Will without the intervention of Secondary means The Intelligent Creature would have no
resources but that of  Prayer to the Almighty for Interposition in
Obtaining the end or purpose in View. If he wanted a Tree he must pray to
have it full grown in his land e3 and if Prayer is the only Support to his faculties on this Earth.
The order of Nature made up of parts as it is indefinitely Various is still
in a high degree analogous in the Assortment Frame & Conduct of each
well fitted accommodated & placed in a Course Salutary To each & mutually
subservient or Consistent. In the Mineral & unorganised parts there is an
assortment of Materials for the Support Subsistence and occupation of the
Living & Active or Organised of the inferiour Class. In the living Sensitive
And Intelligent The Organisation however Various is Still Systematic &
Compleat Still fitted to the Element & Manner of Life. In the course things
Salutary to the Individual preservative & to the Species in the Succession of
Generations renovating and continual: yet in all this so exquisitely Contrived and so kindly conducted including the Condition and Fortunes of
Man with that of other animals there is occasional Interruption of order
defect Misfortune & distress. To him the soil is frequently Barren or
infested with Weeds The Season inclement & what he is tempted to 
use for Food poisonous or hurtful. His accommodations are to be found like
that of other Animals in the course of things but Nature Appears to do less
for him than for most of the other Animals And to have her work in some
degree defective for him to Supply.
But is not this the very Circumstance which fits the Scene in a peculiar
degree for him? In lieu of a provision without defect She has given him a
Power to devise and provide for himself. But is not this unnecessarily harsh
Why not save him the Suffering of so much labour and toil? Because occupation is to him a principal Source of Enjoyment. Because his Specific
happiness is in prospect in the termination of that Progress of Intelligence
and Wisdom in which he is engaged And his present felicity is to be measured by the fitness of the Course he runs to his arrival at that termination.
The Scene is fitted to him in a peculiar degree by calling forth the exercise
of faculties that profit by exertion and Habit by affording occasions of
research And experience that extend his information and correct his Errors
And the circumstances that promote this progress and contribute to these
are perhaps in nothing more Eminent  than in this That the Author of
Nature though himself omnipotent acts in Every Department by the Intervention of Secondary Causes. 4 Which his Intelligent Creatures destined for
Active Life may Observe And Availing themselves of these Secondary
Causes are enabled to a certain degree to Controul or direct the course of
Nature itself. By the use of Menstrua they can dissolve Salts & Minerals By
the use of Seeds they can propagate Plants change the productions of
Nature or cover the Barren Hills with Wood & remove the Wild Beast to
make Way for profitable Herds & Flocks.
The Secondary Cause is an Instrument in the hand of Man by which to
effect his Purpose in many Instances and the Materials strewed on the
Earth or hid in its bosom are Subjects of his Art And the usefulness of the
Cause And the Material is a continual Spur to research and Inquiry in his
way to accessions of Science & Intelligence. Is there not here enough to
Silence Atheistical Cavils that would represent the Wise & beneficent
Arrangement of a Scene so well fitted to promote the Progress in which it is
 the felicity of Man to advance or an Argument  the Goodness of
his Maker. Is it not rather a Striking Instance of that Goodness and Wisdom
which the Atheists would bring to refute.
As man is the principal object on this Terrestrial Scene Beautiful as it is
in every other Department The Test of Wisdom & Goodness in the Author
is to be collected from the Arrangements of Nature relating to him. In him
Life originates in mere Embryo as in the Case of other Animals. But at his
birth more dependent than the young of any other Species Long unable to
do any thing for himself how is  then provided. His Food is prepared
and ready to Spring from the Breast of his Parent And what is Still more
Important an affection is inspired into the Mind of that Parent which no
trouble no disgust no toil can bar in the most tender and unremitted care of
his Safety & Supply of every thing necessary to his Wellbeing.
He is weak an can do nothing but every is done for him by the
Society of Intelligent beings amongst whom he is born. The Germ of 
Intelligence in him springs up and expands by degree for a certain Period
more Aided by what is done for him than by any thing done by himself.
The time however must come in which he is to be an Actor and exhibit the
Carreer of Life  which  is born. How is he then treated: With every
Appearance of Neglect & Severity. The Scene so benign to every Other Animal is harsh to him. Wants of every kind assail him in his attempt to supply
them inconvenience difficulty & Danger are encountered at every Step. g5
Has Nature that was so kind to him in his Infancy now deserted him &
turned her Love into hatred? No! The Milk that was made to Spring up in
the breast of the Parent to nourish an animal Frame is now changed into
occasions of Thought of Invention of Ingenuity And of Action to Nourish
not an Animal Frame but the Faculties and Virtues of an Intelligent Mind
and to give its direction to a Progress which continues for ever after 
the occasions of an Animal may cease to Exist. In Manhood the mixed
scenes of Human Life The Difficulties to be surmounted The Sufferings to
be endured The Dangers to be braved And the advantages to be gained by
Labour & Ingenuity are Necessary to the Intelligent Being 6 as the Supplys
of Subsistence and accomodation are to the Animals.
What does he gain then in this Life. Individuals & whole Races of men
no doubt gain unequally. The Man indeed is every where Superiour to the
Infant And this may be all that is required in the present Scene to prepare
for the Future and if more be required that Future may be destined only for
those who deserve it. The Idea of Merit and Demerit is coeval with Intelligence. This Form of Being is formed for itself. It is a Power to be happy if it
learn and resolve to become so. Other Beings are made what they are. This
Being is furnished with Power to find what he is good for in himself.
 As happiness or Misery may result from the Good or ill use of this
Power so may even existence itself may Continue or cease as the Specific
constituents of Life are by such Agents cultivated or Suffer to decay. The
man who leads no more than the Life of an Animal may be expected to die
as mere Animals And future scenes of Existence be prepard only for those
who bear the faculties & Virtues of Intelligent Being in a State to pursue
their further Careers.
However this be Progression is the Lot of Man And beyond any other
terrestrial form of Being Characteristic of his Species Continued at times
from Age to Age through many generations. And that what is thus done
may be again repeated. There is a Vicissitude and fluctuation of Events corresponding to the Varieties which Nature exhibits in the Coexistent
description of organized & living Forms.
Here then we pause to Estimate our Lot and avail ourselves of our Condition. What is it thus to know That to be  gaining Wisdom Benevolence
and Love of Order is to be gaining Happiness That these are the Principles
on which the Universe is formed and Nature is made to run its Course Still
holding out to the Intelligent Those blessed Fruits of Excellence to which
he may Aspire. What if it should be Error. It were happy to be so deceived
And if Mind like the mere Organization of Separable parts should cease and
be no more Tis sweet to Meditate of Order now And to those who cease to
be no dissappointment can ensue.
But now to Speak in more humble terms yet not so ill Suited to a Son of
Earth. To know of God and of His Government what simple unaffected
Reason may collect from Fact and fair Appearances is to Man An Estate
more precious than Fortune can bestow. In the Inheritance of Man of
which Fortune cannot impair which brings him admiration confidence and
Safety And the Centinel in Garrison or on Board of ship Still calls 
aloud that all is Well. Among the greatest Crimes that poor deluded Man
Commits is the Attempt to rob a Neighbour of his fair Possession. Here the
Criminal has nought to gain, nor can any Motive but Wanton Levity or the
affectation of Superiority to other men. The attempt indeed to disprove the
Existence of Order or the Evidence of Wisdom & Goodness in Nature is
Criminal and a Cruel offence the less pardonable that it is committed without any probable Motive such as tempt the Indigent to steal or the Violent
to break the Peace. And upon the Principle of Defence or compulsory Law
the People are no doubt entitled to measures of Safety in the use of forcible
Restraints & the application of Penal Law: But in this Instance we find an
Occasion clearly to distinguish the Policy of Penal Jurisdiction from the
Interpretation of Injury & Wrong.
The Law is Strict and Peremptory That the Injurious may be restrained
by Force. But when & how to punish is a question not of Strict Laws but of
Expedience & prudential Concern and it will probably appear in the case of
Atheism or Attempt to violate  the Peace of Mind which rests on the
Confidence of Divine Wisdom & Goodness is an Instance on which The
Penal Law must be Silent and the offence Left to the Chastisement of the
general Indignation and Horror with which it is commonly received.
Religion Source of powerful Energies and best assurance of Mans high
Rank in Nature is like the Happiness to which it leads Subject  Mistake
and great abuse.
The Priesthoods Usurpation The degrading Fears of mean Superstition
The Antipathy of different Sects the Zealots Fury and the Court which
Baseness would pay to Heaven by vengeance on its Reputed Ennemies of
God who cannot have an Ennemy in Being are Evils to be dreaded from its
abuse And render human Judicature the least unfit for Tryal of Atheism or
impiety. In Questions on this Subject no discretion can be safely left to
Judge or jury and the definition of the overt Acts to which Conviction may
be Attacked is Singularly difficult. Experience Shows that Courts established for such Tryal degenerate into mere Inquisition adopting Forms that
prove  a Snare to Innocence and are only then Supposed Successful
when they multiply Victims to the fury of Zealots and the Usurping Arrogance and Interest of Priests. Such are the Evils which would attend the
Prosecution of Atheism itself as a Crime and object of Penal Law.
The most real Evils would be incurred to meet a Shadow which can
scarcely have a Being or Effect beyond the folly whence it flows. Let the
owner take its fruits. In society it canot prevail: for its Effect would be to
overthrow Society and Order. What order can Exist with Man if in the Universe itself there is no Order and Natures Laws are but desultory Facts
without Design or Wisdom to ensure their Permanence.
Corolary.
From the Reflections and Argument terminated as above it may appear
to the Satisfaction of fair Raison: That Objections brought to invalidate the
Evidence of Divine Wisdom & Goodness operating the Frame of Nature are
in Reality the most Convincing Proofs of that Truth.
The admirable mechanism of the Earth & Heavens with the Organisation of living Forms are acknowledged but the conclusion that mind alone
can be the Cause we are told is too hasty. It is possible  there may be in
Existence a principle of order different from Mind or Intelligence fully adequate to this Effect And the Ends being obtained not by Will but by the
Intervention of Physical means is a presumption of the reality of such. o
If the Order where most acknowledged and admired proceeded from
mind and a beneficent choice of the end. It would have failed precisely in
the Departments most interesting to Mind And in the distribution of
Enjoyments and Suffering the only matter in  Goodness or Wisdom
Can be Brought to the Test.
Here might follow a long & piteous account of the Sufferings to which
animals are exposed. The Neglect of Man in articles in which other animals
are carefully provided for. Naked Feeble & unarmd too weak for Battle with
many of his rivals on Earth too  for Flight. The Soil tho fertile to the
Cow & the Stag is barren to him overrun by poisonous or unprofitable
Weeds. He is to himself the worst Enemy by his Errors dissorders and folly
bringing upon himself all the Evils to which he is exposed in mind or body
&c. &c. Yet we are told the World is made for him & bears evidence of the
Wisdom & Goodness of his Maker.
 The lot of man it is confessed is deficient in things in which Other animals are more fully are fully provided by Nature. But his frame &
destination are also different. Tho’ an animal he is endowed with a Germ of
Intelligence destined to know himself & his Place in Nature Qualified to
Observe to remember to comprehend to Obtain Dominions to exercise it in
every Department of Mechanism Vegetation and Animal Life to distinguish
what is Excellent in Existence to Aim at it and in his Sphere to Obtain to be
himself that Good thing which he chuses to possess to be in short the Artificer of his own Condition & Character by the Information he Obtains be the
Exercise of his faculties by the Experience and Correction of his errors &
ultimate choice of What is Good. Thither his Intelligent Being tends and
the Fin is not better fitted to the Water or the Wing to the Air, than Mans
Principle of Intelligence to the Diversifyed & Mixed Nature of the Scene in
what he is placed. The exercise so necessary to the Advancement of his Faculties  continully furnished by the wants he is left to supply  for
himself the Inconveniences he is left to remove the difficulties he has to
overcome the Dangers to Brave And the Advantages tho within his reach
are nevertheless to be won by diligence & Strenuous Effort.
From these considerations it appears that the Appointment of a Scene for
Mans Active and progressive Nature mixed or presenting defects to be supplied Good to be Obtained and Ills to be avoided is no less an Evidence of
Goodness in the Design and Order of Nature than the Organisation exhibited in Living Natures And the Accomodations provided for each. And we
have in this mixed Scene of Nature an Evidence of Goodness & Intelligent
Power not an Objection to invalidate the Proof on which it is founded.
And in this The Final Cause or Object of Nature in this Terrestrial Scene
being the Progress and Advancement of Human Intelligence. The Work
would remain incompleat unless man to whom the occasions of Action are
thus provided were not likewise supplied with Power or means so to influence or direct the Course of Nature as the Exigencies of his Case may to him
seem to require.
 On the Question relating to  operation of Intellectual Power in
Nature it is alledged that Events are seen to result from Physical Causes that
do not admit the immediate interposition of mere Will or Design. If the
Earth is Covered with Plants or crouded with animals or Men They are
propagated from Seeds nourished by Warmth & Moisture Subsisted by food
and preserved by Successive Generation. If the Principle of Existence be
Intelligent & Conscious of Omnipotence why not Act in every Instance by
his Will without the intervention of means which to him cannot be
necessary? It is true Omnipotence excludes the necessity of Means in
Obtaining its End. But the accommodation of Created Intelligences for
whose sake all Creation is effected requires that Events in which they are to
interpose should proceed from Means or as they are termed Secondary
Causes which the Intelligent may Observe and Employ to its own purpose.
Hence the Incitement to the Study of Science and hence all the foundations
of Art. Minerals have their Solvents. Events are varyd Indefinitely by Mixture of Fluids. Prometheus 7 is said to have Stolen the Fire from 
Heaven And Ceres 8 to have furnished the husbandman with his Seed and
all the Fables of old are but forms in which to express the Design & Wisdom
of Eternal Power with the Means of that Dominion he is destined to excercise for his own accommodation and the Advancement of his Intelligent
Being. And here again the Evasion offered to Elude our Conclusion of
Design in Nature serves strongly to fix and confirm it.
Lawyers admit that a Case is strong when it is Supported even by the
Evidence which the antagonist adduces against. Such is the Case of Design
& Wisdom manifest in the order of Nature And they who Contend that this
order may have a Cause different from Mind must confess That the Cause
may be Mind or Intelligence And of these equal supposed Possibilities
The most probable is to be admitted without any doubt derived from a
Mere possibility of the matter being otherwise.
Why should he hesitate to Believe That the Eternal Being is Supreme in
that order of Being with the Reality of which alone we are acquainted.


XIV. OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION WITH ITS ACTUAL AND STILL IMPENDING CONSEQUENCES IN EUROPE 
State of France: manners of the French people. French Monarchs previous to the Revolution.
Haughtiness arrogance and Pride of the Noblesse. 1 to 3.
State of the French Army. Atheism the prevailing Philosophy. Pride and Profligacy of the
French Court. 3 to 6.
The Parliament: arbitrary proceedings of the Commons. National Assembly. Soldiers join the
Mob. King of Prussia’s proceedings; his defeat. Change of System in the French Army; Promotion laid open to the meanest Soldier. Termination of the Monarchy. 6 to 11.
Conduct of the Neighbouring Nations. Success of the French Arms, to what owing. Bonaparte on his return from Egypt solicits Peace, is refused. 11 to 14.
European League against France. War in the then turbulent state of France necessary to her.
Jealousies of the Allied Powers among themselves. 14 to 19.
Great Britain; her situation &c with respect to France and the European Powers. To the end.
There perhaps never was a monarchy more favourably Situated than
France in Respect to Limits Climate & Neighbourhood. Sufficient in itself
yet open to every Supply its Neighbours could give in Merchandise Science
or Literature.
Whatever be the Causes which distinguish one Race of Men from
another, The French exhibited their effects in a very high degree. The
Thoughtless were lively and Gay. The Thoughtful were inventive and even
profound with a prevalent propensity to Vanity or Ambition over all.
Whoever led the Fashion whether The Court or The City and in whatever it consisted whether Dress manner or opinion Fashion still carried
the Multitude along as Wind carries the Dust in Summer and the leaves in
Autumn.
 Birth was the great distinction sanctioned by Legal Priviledge as well as
Custom & Manners. Birth f1 required no Aids of Character or personal
Accomplishments to raise the possessor above the mass of the People however Accomplished.
The King tho accounted the Fountain of Honour and tho in the Practice
of conferring Letters of Nobless yet with little Effect. How Absurd says the
Presiden Haynault 2 to pretend by Letters to make the ofspring of Parents
unknown to come of Parents known as far back as any record or memory of
Ages remain: for such is the Definition of Nobless Titles Renown or Rank
of Service even the Crown itself might give Lustre but not Nobless. And
there were Families in France who affected Superiority to the Royal Family
itself in this Respect.
This Distinction gave its Cast to the manners of the  People & its
Genius to the Government itself. The King himself could not advance or
receive the Low-Born without giving Offence which was too much for him
to encounter. What Horror it was said to see such Persons brought forward.
Men of doubtful Birth were Sometimes Necessary for their Talents: but
tho in the highest Offices of State & vested with all the Patronage of the
Crown yet thought themselves honoured by Notice from the Slightest Coxcomb of a Noble man & honourd even by Acceptance of their Services And
sometimes had recourse to fabricated Briefs of Noblesse from Abroad where
their Names had never been heard of.
The French Nobless though not equally Jealous of Forreigns in the
Forreign Troops of their Service would not  allow any low born French
man to hold any Rank in the National Troops of France to hold any rank
above that of a Corporal or Sergeant And in this they placed their Security
That the French Army would be always of their Side. 3
There were Circumstances that reconciled the Government to this State
of Things. Nobless of Fortune took Regiment & held them at a great
Expence from a Species of Vanity. They kept a Table for the Officers who
accordingly Served upon very small Pay. The Privates were Scarcely above
Beggary And the National Troops of France were kept  a Smaller
Expence than those of any other Nation in Europe. A French Soldier was
thought to be disgraced by the touch of money or a money Reward for any
Service whatever.
This precaution of the Noblesse to exclude the Low Born from any Rank
or Command in the Army as a Security for themselves had as is not 
uncommon An Effect contrary to what was intended.
The distinction itself had a tendency to corrupt one order by making
them secure of their Eminence on the foot of Birth alone & to animate the
Other with Ambition to compensate their dissadvantage.
The Noblesse had sensibly declined and an admiration of Wit & Literature gave the People in general an open to consideration. The Philosophy in
fashion was Atheism 4 & Anarchy.  Nature there were not any Ends or
Means but things were so because they could not be otherwise. In Society
the Sovereignty was vested in the whole not in a Part: And This misterious
Sovereign who never c Act precluded the Right of every pretender to
Power.
The Court as usual intent upon Pleasure only was become Weak & Profligate beyond any other part of the Community. A great Revenue being let to
Farmers 5 who Oppressed the People & fed the Court with money enabled
them to Anticipate the Revenue  and expend the Income of Years in
Advance. Imbecillities & difficulties were felt in every Department. The
King was advised to throw himself upon the Generosity of His People to
call the Assembly of the States 6 or a representation of all the different
orders Nobles Clergy And People or Commons. The form of their meeting
was in great measure at the Discretion of the King. It was not fixed
whether three Estates were to meet in one Assembly or in three separate
Assembly but the Representatives of the Commons in number equalled the
other two And they of Course insisted on the formation of a Single Assembly. Being by far the Strongest both within Doors and without they
prevailed & proceeded to execute a Tyranny more bloody & terrible than
any that is known in the history of Mankind. The King was thought to be
Secure at the head of his Army but alass the Army consisted of Noblesse
Officers. The Rank &  File were low born who were now taught to consider their exclusion from preferment as Injurious & who were told by the
National Assembly that their pay would be augmented & their Wrongs
redressed.
They left or drove awa their Noblesse officers & every where joined
the Popular Party.
There was none more bussy in the mobs at Paris than those who bore the
Uniform of the Kings Guard.
It used to be a Standing reproach to the English in France that they cut
off the Head of their King. 7 This Example was become matter of Emulation
and carried into Effect.
All Europe Stood aghast at this enormous Scene & not knowing how
fruitless or dangerous it is to meddle with a People that is roused to any
great act of Revolution in the prospect of some glorious change in favour of
the People. In such Paroxisms they operate with irresistible Effect wherever
they move in a Body: but left to themselves they generally break into 
Divisions & waste their Strength against one Another. This was too profound a Secret for German Heads. The King of Prussia 8 protested against
the Dissorders that prevailed in France passed the Rhine & Advanced into
Champagne to repress them. His Invasion united the Jarring Spirits of Revolutionary France. His Stop & his subsequent Retreat excited Contempt &
taught those whom he attempted to frighten to despise such Ennemies as he
was. They saw how expedient it was for them to have Wars abroad. They
formed Armies they took officers from the Ranks & from the lowest Station
wherever genius or Ability could be found. Their neighbours taking men as
they happend to be in the Way were unfit to compete with this Sudden
Spring up of Genius without restraint from former Institutions and the
meanest Soldier in the Ranks felt the Revolution & relyd on preferment if
he could but distinguish himself.
Dumurier 9 led them to  Victory in two or three Instances And when
fortune turned against him on the Side of the Revolution he proposed to
dispose of his Army & join the Austrians in Restoring the King: but even
he did not understand what had happened or that the Army were Sensible
of what they had gained by having preferment laid open to all Ranks and
Spurned the Idea of a King And his Noblesse pretending to monopolize all
preferments and Honours. The people were now Sovereign & the Army i
belonged to the People. When Dumurier met a Column on the March and
Asked by whose Orders they Moved. He was Answered by the Question
What are you & was fain to leap a Ditch to get out of Their Way & was followed by a Volley of Shot which he escaped to meditate on the effects of a
Revolution which he hoped to Conduct. 10
 It now became manifest that the National Troops of France were Sensible of their Share in the projected Revolution And had lost that Zeal for
Royalty with which they were Supposed to be Animated more than any
other Troops in Europe.
Of their concern  the Revolution they had been early admonished by
a Resolution passed  the National Assembly that the Pay of the National
Troops should be Augmented And the Uniform of the Kings Guard was
seen to mix in the riotous mobs in the Streets of Paris, that Huzza’d for Liberty & the Subversion of Monarchy. It was given out that the Continuance
of these dissorders & the Sitting of the popular Assembly were owing to the
forbearance of the King who abhorred the Shedding of Blood and declined
the Offer that  made of dissolving the Assembly by Force.
It was however well known at Court that this was no longer matter of
choice. The Noblesse officers driven from Quarters by Some of  the
Regiments or deserted there by Others were repairing to Court in numbers
to declare their Willingness & inability to Serve His Majesty any longer. In
this the Revolution consisted or by this alone it was effected. If the Army
had adhered to the King the popular Assembly would have been dismissed
And a Military Government had been Established in the House of Bourbon
Innocent indeed Compared to that which has since taken place in the
House of Buonaparte.
Neighbouring Nations reproved the proceedings of France And the Rulers of France knew it was their interest to be at War with all the World.
They sent Armies in every direction made Conquests & extended their
frontier on every Side without regard to former possession or Right. Savoy
Lombardy the Banks of the Rhine & the Low Countries were occupyed as
Appendages of France. The Long Boasted Ballance of Power  was sett
at Nought. 11
The French Arms were becomeing irresistible: For when troops in the
Ordinary State of men quiescent & no way Affected  what was passing
could resist a Multitude roused by expectation of a rising Sun of Glory to
their Country & unlimited Elevation to preferments & honours excited in
the breast of every Individual & conducted by Leaders who had gained
their Stations by the sole proof or Appearance of Genius & Superior
Ability. k
Their first successes qualified & prepared them for more. Even defeats
did not damp or disspirit them. They returned to the Charge Again &
Again untill Fortune turned in their favours And then by one effectual
Effort they repaired or recovered what the Misfortunes of a Campaign or
even of preceding Years seemed to have lost. A General discomfited in
Egypt 12 returned to take the whole conduct of  France upon himself
and that State of Things Sollicited Peace with his Neighbours.
But the Powers to whom he applied had not yet taken into Consideration
the Effects of a National Spirit roused to uncommon exertion by revolutionary prospects of Elevation & Glory. They had not yet considerd that a
Moment of dejection if it take place in Such a Party is the fittest moment
possible for Negotiation with an Ennemy of this Description. They rejected
the Overtures of Negotiation with expressions of Contempt 13 for the Party
from whom they came And forced that Party already too well known for
Superiour Ability to make trial of that Force with which he was entrusted
& at a Single Blow to recover what whole unsuccessful Campaigns had Lost
& to resume at once l14 that formidable Aspect by which Europe had been so
 much allarmed.
This Allarm was serious & well founded. The Great Nations of Europe
Great Britain Austria & Russia con m15 together And entered into
League to oppose it. Each saw its own Safety at Stake and the Power of
France ready to effect their Ruin. With this they could not be too deeply
impressed. They were mistaken as to the means of counteracting it.
France is become dangerous. This was true: But the Inference that followed let us make War upon her was inconsiderate and false. Or The way
to make successful War on Such a Power an Irish Blunderer 16 Observed is
to be at peace with her.
The Times were not yet passed in which the French Nation if left to
themselves might not have broke to pieces gone to War among themselves
& saved their Neighbours the trouble of reducing their too formidable 
greatness: But the sound of Allarm from Abroad was in reality an admonition to Suspend this dissensions and Waste their dangerous powers on the
Frontier. o
The Assembling of Armies from Austria & Russia 17 at one time & that of
Russia and Prussia 18 at another time operated merely as so many Calls on
the Military Leader of France so Superiour to every one that was likely to
be opposed to him to come and possess himself of Germany & Poland quite
to the Frontiers of Russia. Of these another Battle might possibly have
given him possession & left no one to dispute his Empire from the
Attlantick to the American Straits to the North of Kamchatka. 19
It may be Asked then what are Nations to do in the neighbourhood of
such a Power? Certainly not to provoke a War because his Force preponderates & ensures  him Success. 20 If attacked the weak must defend
himself for the most unequal chances of War may be preferable to Concessions, that amount to Subjugation or lead to that extreme at the discretion
of the person to whom they are made.
Confederacy is no doubt the first resource of numbers against an overbearing Power which no one can Singly resist; and if they are so stupid or
untractable as to act more from former Jealousies than from any Sense of
common Interest; The case is desperate & they must Singly or Successively
perish.
At one time the Prussians with a Secret Joy Saw the Austrians reduced &
the Austrians in their turn enjoyed the down fall of Prussia And the Conqueror Whatever advantage he took of either Still left Silesia the Subject of
their jealousies still as he found it. 21
 And what could be expected from Parties who having Rights or Properties of their own to mantain accepted as a Gift from the Robber one the
unoffending Republick and Territory of Venice. 22 The Other a like gift of
Hanover 23 and then provoked a War with the Donor because he presumed
to intrigue for confederacy with some of the Powers in their
Neighbourhood.
Great Britain from her insular Situation & Naval defences may long sett
the Powers of the Continent at defiance. And untill it please God to Inspire
some mind with faculties fit to Contend for the Independence of Continental Nations it were vain to rely on any Confederacy to be formed of Such
Parties. They must be sensible that if the Ruler of France were as powerful
at Sea as he is by Land, No state or Province  could be safe from California to Japan And yet under Awe of this power they now cooperate with
him in the Reduction of this Island Although they must know that whatever indulgence they now enjoy is owing merely to the limit which this
Island yet setts to his Empire And that if it ever should be compleat their
Properties & Persons will be at his discretion.Altho they obey him in shutting their Ports against the English 24 he knows their dissaffection & heart
and every where Stations troops of his own to ensure the effect.
The Partizans of Buonaparte say he has given peace to the continent of
Europe. What Peace Subjugation! 25 and Arraign the British Councils for
refusing Peace. The meaning is obvious and it is Evident that any Peace
tending to reduce the defences of Britain either at Sea or by Land would be
ruinous not only  to her but to every Nation wh the Mandates of
this European Sovereign could reach. His Vessels might be met with on the
Ocean fetching his Contributions at once from Mexico & Japan.
What a Triumph for France may not some Vainglorious Frenchman say?
Such a Triumph as the Reduction and Spoil of distant Provinces were to
Italy; The means of pampering corrupting & Alluring its rulers to every
enormity of profligacy Cruelty & Vice most oppressive tremendous & ruinous to those who  nearest at hand & most immediately Subject to its
hatred or Caprice. They were not the Heads of Daerans q26 or Armenians 27
which Nero wished to have sett upon neck to be struck off at a Blow: but
those of the Romans inhabiting the Seven hills of Rome. And Tiberius
whose Jealousy did not extend to the Provinces never ceased with his
Informers and  Spies never ceased to Avenge the miseries of his own
Mind on the most respectable Citizens of Rome & when remote from them
on the very Instruments of his Vile & execrable Pleasures at Caprae. 28
Is there then on the Continent of Europe or most Especially in France a
Person so stupid as to wish for more Power in the Hands that already have
so much.

XV. OF THE SEPARATION OF DEPARTMENTS
PROFESSIONS AND TASKS RESULTING FROM
THE PROGRESS OF ARTS IN SOCIETY 
Progress of Arts. The Separation of Departments in the formation of one Article of Art or
Manufacture, considered. 1 to 4.
How far some Departments of Art or Manufacture affect the Morals of the people employed.
Of Slavery, Subordination. Rich and Poor, vices peculiar to each. Political Slavery. 4 to 7.
How far the being engaged in any particular Branch of Trade or Manufacture, confines the
Thoughts and the exercise of the Faculties. Of the requisite qualifications to form a Gentleman. 7 to 9.
Of Schollars, Men of Science, Statesmen, Warriors. Qualifications of each; connection and
separation of their several Departments. 9 to 17.
The Statesman and Warrior united in the Roman Common wealth. Knowledge of Men and
Manners necessary in these Departments. 17 to 19.
On Education. Public Seminaries, their inadequacy; the inattention to their Rules, Forms
&c. The separation of some Departments prejudicial to Society. The Statesman should be a
Warrior and the Warrior a Statesman. 19 to the End.
Every man in the outset of Arts must do all for himself find at once his
Subsistence his Shelter & his Rayment.
How much his State has been improved by the recourse of different Men
to different employments and the Mutual Exchange or Commerce of their
several productions need not be stated.
Every accommodation will be more Compleat & every Supply more plentyful as this Expedient advances its height: but like every thing else in
human Life it has its limits.
A Pin 2 we are told furnishes a separate Task to no less than twenty different Workmen & the implement is better & more cheaply furnished than it
could be by fewer Workmen. Yet there are limits to this separation of
Labour. The pointing  of a Pin may be compleated by one Person to
divide that Task and pass it from one to another for the completion of it
would be loss of time & risk of defect in the work by the attempt to join
effects not justly fitted to one another.
Similar limits might be pointed  in the performance of every
Mechanical Task. And even if we should admit that the improvement of
Workmanship might be advanced indefinitely by this means: yet there are
other considerations to make us pause in the pursuit of it. The comparative
importance of the improvement gained gradually diminishes And ceases at
last to be of sufficient value to compensate the trouble of farther Arrangement. Parts ceased to be equally well performd by separate hands as they
would by the same hand. In Masonry for instance suppose the Stone to be
placed by one Person and the Mortar placed by another The work probably
would be inferiour to that which one tradesman  could produce: besides
that they would probably interfere & interrupt one Another.
There is still a farther consideration of Consequence in this bussiness.
This Separation of Tasks is intended for the better Performance of each &
for the Benefit of Mankind in general. If it should ever mar the performance
or become prejudicial to human Nature; in either Case no doubt it ought to
be stopped.
If in Painting for Instance The different Shades Lights & Colours were
to  laid by different hands the work it is probable might Suffer And the
Artists Fancy impaired by his being restrained from the Scope of his Conception which subsists not in parts but in the Unity of a Whole.
The Work of man may be important: but the Artist himself is still more
so. It is true no doubt that altho Society is intended for the Good of its 
Members; yet the individual on Occasion must be sacrificed to the Whole.
Amidst the Departments of Bussiness and Profession there is great inequality of Effect in the Cultivation of Intellectual Faculty & Moral Habits
and Some are of so mean a tendency in these Respects as to be matter of
general Regret yet to be necessary for the general Accommodation And it
may be difficult to fix the extent to which this may be endured & where it
must be absolutely stopped. 3 It may with confidence be said that Slavery is
a point to which it should never Extend And yet there are voluntary Stations and occupations in human Society more debasing than Slavery
necessarily or even Generally is. All we can say is that the less that there is
of this Sort the better, And that Subordination however valuable is too
dearly bought by the debasement of any order or Class of the  People.
There is a Principle of Subordination in the difference of Natural Talents
in the distribution of Property Power & Dependence. 4
The Poor must labour in order to subsist. The Rich may hire the Labour
of Others 5 but still find occasion on which to labour for themselves.
There is nothing debasing in either Condition but the Vices to which
both are Obnoxious Envy & Rapacity on the part of The Poor Arrogance &
Licentiousness on the part of the Rich. 6
These Vices are found in the extremes & in all the intermediate orders of
a People. The worst possible condition in which man can be conceived is
that in which all Labour were precluded or in which all Power is vested in
one and all Dependence imposed upon another. The nearest approach to
this Condition is that of Master & Slave  however constituted whether as
a Civil relation of Proprietor & Property or Sovereign & Subject.
Of These The Political Servitude is debasing in the greatest de & to
the greatest Extent. The Courtiers of Tiberius or Nero even the Senators of
Neros time were debased to a degree far beyond that of the Slave to an
Ordinary Master.
Such abuses however it may be said are not necessary and unavoidable in
the Subdivision of Labour or the Subordination of Ranks. 7 Here indeed it
is necessary that the human faculties should be unequally cultivated in proportion as the task assigned to each tends to exercise And improve them. In
a Person whose task is a mere movement of the hand or the Foot as is The
Case in the distribution of Labour which is made in some branches of manufacture may be supposed to remain in some measure of Torpor while that
of a Master who directs the Whole or that of an Artist who has many things
to combine  many Incidents to guard against and a choice to be made
amidst a Variety of Expedients which different occasions require is still in
the very state which Nature has devised for her Intelligent order of Being
tending at once to exercise and Cultivate their faculties.
The Subdivision of Tasks tends in some Instances to mar the effects of
this Destination & to improve them in Others. The mind of a Tradesman 8
in many Instances is less practised in thought than that of a Savage While
in more liberal Stations of Life the mind Profits by exemption from Inferiour Cares & Anxieties & the effect of more extensive Views And the more
Arduous combinations of Thought.
Men are carryed along in the Progress of Establishments and of Arts as
Vessels afloat in the Water are carryed along by the Torrents to which it is
Subject. And it is uncertain how far information respecting the direction of
their  movements may enable them in any degree to change that direction or modify the result.
Men certainly Act from opinion as well as Instinct or Habit and Correct
opinion is desireable in itself whatever be the measure of its Influence in
the general Affairs of Men.
It has been Observed 9 that by the Separation of Tasks & Professions The
work is improved and Obtained at a Smaller Cost. The Artist also is sometimes improved in his designation of Intelligence & Manhood: But if
neither is always the Case; it is no doubt of Moment to distinguish the
Instances in which the Separation of Arts & Profession is unfavourable in
the Result whether in respect to the Character of the Artist or the Value of
his Work.
In the Mass of the People it is not required of a Tradesman that he be
knowing in any Branch 10 but his own nor does any collateral Skill enable
him the better to execute his peculiar Work  except where different
works proceed upon some Common Principle of Science.
For those who are termed Gentlemen or persons dissengaged from peculiar pursuits or applications there is no peculiarity of Skill required. Of
them it is requird that they be Happy That is to say Wise Benevolent Courageous and Temperate and the less they possess any habit to the exclusion of
Others equally valuable so much the Better.
In Actual Profession or Publick Station the Case is different. Scholars &
Men of Science And publick Functionaries of any denomination have their
Tasks Assigned them and must devote themselves in a peculiar manner to
some Particular Branch. It is so in mere Science as well as in the learned
Professions of Medicine or Law.
To Obtain what may be Obtaind in any Branch of Science it is necessary h
that it be made the Object of peculiar Study: but yet to know one Branch &
nothing more is to be a Tradesman not a  Scholar. The Sciences are
more  less connected and give mutual lights to one Another. To possess
them all is to know the Order of Nature And the Person whose knowledge is
limited to a particular Branch must know even that the less Perfectly that
he is ignorant of its place & connection in the general Order of Nature. To
be a Man of Science on the best model thus it does not exclude all separate
& peculiar Pursuits but requires a Liberal extensive view to the Nature &
importance of Collateral Studies. It is thus the Scholar may Avoid that narrow and illiberal Contempt which Professional Men sometimes entertain
for every Branch of Study but their own. The Mechanic or the Chymist
despises the Moralist & is equally treated in his Turn. The mere Lawyer &
the mere Doctor of Medicine are but ungracious members of Society. And
but lame practitioners even in what they profess from a defect  in those
habits which are required in the concourse of men.
In mere Manual operations The Man is sometimes sacrificed to his Trade
an separate parts are assigned to different Workmen who have to perform
a Simple movement of the hand or the foot to save necessity of Thought or
of time in changing Tools or of thought in passing from one Step to
Another. 11 It is Evident however That the Principle of Subdivision which is
so Successful in Manufacture cannot be applied with the Same advantage in
those operations where Man himself with all his Faculties is required in
every Step as well as in the result or Combination of the Whole.
In the Bussiness of State and of War there are no doubt parts that
Approach to mere Mechanism And in these the Statesman & the Warriour 12
like the Master in a Counting House may have his Tools or his  workmen to whom the principle of Subdivision Applys & in respect to which
The Profession of a Statesman and Warriour are materially different.
The Statesman must have his Clerks & Separate Boards of Commission
in Matters of Laws & Revenue The Warriour must have his Tacticians &
Leaders of Division from the Smallest of a Platoon to the greatest of a Column Line or Wing of an Army. He too must have his Clerks, his
Commissaries & his Providers of every requisite to an Army. But the greatest Error that can be committed in the affairs of Men is to Suppose that the
Genius or Art of a Statesman or Warriour terminates in the possession or
Combination of such Mechanical parts together.
The Statesman or Warriour must be so far Master of those mechanical
parts as to  know when they are well or ill performed by those to whom
they are entrusted: but his own part is that of a Man fit to lead among Men
on whom men will rely for Preservation or Success in all their Undertakings. Penetration & Strength of Mind Wisdom & Courage Goodness or
Benevolence that Encourage a Friend Rapidity & Force that Strike Terror
into an Ennemy are at once his Tools & his Arts. The Statesman must be
Skillful to know how every Measure will affect every order of the People.
How the most dependent may be made to feel Secure in his right how the
most powerful may be made to feel the restraints of Justice humanity &
Good Order. In these respects the Warriour too is a Statesman And must
practise all the Art & Wisdom of Peace in his own Line or  encampment that he may be the more terrible in the View of his Ennemy. Of this
Art Socrates 13 expressed himself like a Master no less than in Any Other
department of Moral or Civil Wisdom. Of Military Tactics he said 14 nothing
Can be done without order or form: but a Warriour must be more than a
Tactician He must be Cautious & Rash a Thief & a Thiefcatcher Cruel &
humane Penurious & Prodigal Cautious & Rash.
His Tools or Weapons Are Men & he must know them, how to excite &
how to restrain them what can be expected from them & what not & when
required how they can be roused to do all that men will or Can Do.
The Departments of State Political Civil & Military in well Regulated
Establishments are on account of the Mechanical details in which they differ generally Separated But in the Heads under whom those details are
conducted  proceed on the Same grounds of Knowledge & of Power.
The knowledge of Men & the Power it gives is the Essence of Ability in
either Department And that Strength of mind which gives an Ascendant
over Men is equally required in both.
The Mechanical details in which those departments differ tho necessary k
are comparatively of small importance: because they may be learned & practised by persons of Vulgar capacity And ought never to be mistaken for the
test or constituent of Ability in the Heads of either Department. Men of
either Department are apt to be jelous of the other One or the Other may
have the Ascendant under different Establishments. And whether the
Statesman is to choose the Warriour or The Warriour to choose the Statesman It is evident that the Elector ought to be acquainted in either Case with
the  merit on which his choice is to proceed. The Statesman ought to be
acquainted with the Professional peculiarities of a Soldier that he may not
Mistake them for the whole grounds of his choice or Sufficient to Justify if
he commit the publick Safety to  incompetent. A Statesman or Minister
who errd in this particular has been known to say. The military is not my
Department. I had recourse to the Profession for a Person long Practised &
Established in it he is responsible & not I for the Consequences. The mere
Military Despot on the contrary may make as ill a choice of those he
employs in the Civil or Political Depart: And it is Evident that in
any well Established Community The Qualities of Either department
should be so well combined that neither could plead a ruinous Ignorance. 15
A Person ignorant of War  and its Forms is as unfit to be  Statesman
as a Person unacquainted with Variable Winds & Storms is to be a mariner.
And to say that a Statesman know nothing of War or a Warriour knows
nothing of The State is to detract equally from the Merit or Ability.
In the Roman Commonwealth, in many respects the Model of Felicity to
Nations, The Departments of State & of War 16 were not only Strictly Allied
& known to each other but for the most  actually filled & Conducted
by the same Person. 17 All the Distinction they made between the first Magistrate & the Commander in Chief of their Armies was that he was
Magistrate within the Walls of Rome & the other outside of those Walls. He
acted from his Office in either & in both these Capacities. The mere forms
of either were such as the meanest Could learn and never intercepted the
View of his Country or his Own in the choice of Persons to whom they 
might entrust their Affairs. Whether in the Roman Magistrates Gown or
the Sagum 18 of the Legionary Soldier. m
This Union of Departments was early provided for in the very first Elements of the Roman Constitution. It was provided that every Citizen should
State himself as part of his Countrys Strength & to qualify him for any Civil
or Political advance by having actually Served a Certain Term in the Wars of
his Country. 19
Altho The Talent for Affairs of State in general and War in particular is
the same or founded in the Same knowledge of Men and Ascendant of the
mind yet the exercises & the habits of Body they require Are different. Warriours have been distinguished in Youth or early Life. Statesmen profit
more by experience And the deliberation of Maturity and Age.
As Military Tactics and manual Exercise are within the competence of
Children they ought not to be neglected amidst the Rudiments of Education  in early Life. So that what every one knows or possesses could not
be mistaken for the Criterion of great Ability or fitness for the highest &
most important functions of human Life As the Habits of a Clerk in
Office 20 or a drill Serjeant on the Parade are made to pass for the qualifications of Statesmen or leaders & commanders of Men in the Field.
Nothing is supposed more important than Education. And the world &
Abounds with Institutions or Establishments for that purpose yet Government is Seldom attentive to what is taught in those Institutions And even in
these Later ages of great Experience few things except reading writing &
Arithmetic that can be of use in after Life are taught either at School or College. The Gramar of Dead Languages The Mythology which served as
the foundation of Antient Poetry Even the prosody or fabric of Verse or
Metre are crammed down the Throats of high & Low of Futur 
Tradesmen Merchants Senators And Soldiers Rank & File Citizens And
Drovers and little with any one except the habit of being obliged in Childhood to regard what Others inculcate And which indeed however little it
may seem is indeed very great And actually the most important attainment
of Such Schools as we have provided for the Education of the Coming Age.
The occasions & the manners of Human Society are transient And Successive. The Institutions of one Age to accommodate Ages that follow at any
considerable interval are to be changed or modifyed And no Age can with
advantage Legislate unalterably for the Ages that follow. 21
On this Account a late writer of Eminence on the Wealth and Other Concerns of Nations places Education on the same foot with Trade and Other
concerns most Safely entrusted to the Par concerned & reprobates
fixed Institutions  or Intervention of Government. 22 From this general
Rule however he excepts every Case in which Defence or publick Safety is at
Stake 23 And of Course should except Education so far as the publick Safety
is concerned. A Committee of Parliament or Other publick authority might
no doubt with great Advantage be interposed to report from Age to Age
what Regulations might be requird in Publick Schools to prepare the rising
Generation for that part which necessity might impose on every Individual
for the safety of his Country. He who cannot defend himself is not a Man &
he who cannot take part in the defence of his Country is not a Citizen nor
worthy of the Protection which the Laws of  Country bestow. Other
cares may be delegated & become matter of Separate Profession  to a
part of the People: but to set Valour apart as the Characteristic of a few were
to change Virtue & happiness itself as a Matter of Profession & Study peculiar to a devision of the Community. 24 For furnish Shoes or erect
Palaces may be the Object of Separate Professions but to be man is the equal
concern of all And the want of Courage degrades him no less than the want
of Understanding or Truth.
Men are Wise to Avail themselves of every Advantage which the Subdivision of Arts and the Separation of Employments can give: but where this
expedient is noxious to the Genius & Character of man it is Wisdom to
check or restrain it. 25
Let the Statesman be Ashamed to own he is no Warriour And the Warriour to own he is no Statesman. Under these confessions the one is a mere
Clerk in Office The other a mere prize  fighter & a Bully. 26


XVI. OF THE FREEDOM OF WIT AND
HUMOUR AND THEIR VALUE AS A
TEST OF RECTITUDE AND TRUTH 
Of the Laws of Nature or Physical Laws relative to Man. Self Preservation, Congregation,
Estimation, with the qualities belonging to each. 1 to 2.
Of Esteem and Contempt well or ill directed, and as terminating in Virtue or Vice. Of Ridicule and Laughter: where Ridicule ought to be used and where Reprobation; both frequently
misplaced. 2 to 5.
The Power of ridicule as a figure of Speech in Rhetoric; its frequent misapplication; not
always a test of Truth or Justice; arising from some odd combination or incongruity. 5 to 7.
Freedom of Wit and Humour, as an Innocent relaxation to the Mind; different from Ridicule, which should be a weapon to shame  immorality. 7 to 9.
Of Calumny. Law of Libel. Trial by Jury &c. 9 to 10.
The Laws of Nature or Physical Laws relative to man, have been comprised under Three general Titles.
1. The Law of Self-preservation.
2. The Law of Society or Congregation.
3. The Law of Estimation.
The 1st comprehends many or most of the Animal Instincts & propensities with the love of Ease & Safety &c.
The Second comprehend together with some Animal Instincts The
preference of Company to Solitude Sympathy Benevolence Love Friendship Justice And Good Repute.
The third comprehends all the Phaenomena of Esteem or Contempt
whether well or ill founded & terminating  in Vice or Virtue. Such as
Vanity and Pride Integrity Magnanimity & Elevation of Mind. Well
directed it is the Principle of Magnanimity & Just Ambition. Ill directed it
is the principle of Arrogance Pride Vanity & erroneous Ambition.
In either way it is one of the Strongest or most powerful Principles in
human Nature.
In respect to Character or Dignity it is Approbation or Admiration or the
Contrary Reprobation or Contempt in all their Phases & Phaenomena.
Among the Phaenomena of reprobation may be reckoned Ridicule or
Laughter.
To dissapprove or to be displeased as to Approve is to be pleasd.
These different Affections admit of indefinite Gradations.
In exception to the general Rule Ridicule or Laughter though excited by
defect is not disspleasure: but is in a  peculiar Manner respecting Others
joyous & Acceptable And appears to derogate from the Beneficent Character of Nature founded in the tendency of Evil or defect to give Pain and of
Good or Excellence to give pleasure hereby exciting a Will to Avoid the one
and Aim at the Other.
This Law indeed even with Respect to the Ridiculous holds in the concern which every Man takes in his own Character. Laughter is pleasing but
no one likes to be laughed at. The Buffoon who makes him ridiculous
expects to be Esteemd for his Art in doing so.
The Follies and defects of mankind are so numerous & Frequent that if
each were matter of Hatred or serious Indignation; human life would be a
Scene of Melancholy Anguish and despair Such as the Parent feels for the
Defects of his Children or the Coxcomb feels for the dissappointments of
his Vanity.
It appears therefore  among the Final Causes Suggested of the Beneficent kind that while every one hates to be laughed at in his own Person
And is therefore directed to shun the Ridiculous yet many of the defects
and errors so frequent in human Life may be matter of Animadversion &
Censure without casting the Gloom of Melancholy or Severe displeasure
over so many of the Scenes of Society & Intercourse as might furnish occasion to serious discontent.
Meanwhile it is well known That Nature does not admit of Ridicule or
Laughter in every Case of Reprobation. And it were of Consequence to distinguish the province of Serious Indignation from that  Ridicule
Laughter or merriment.
This disstinction like many others is Obvious in the extreme but Slight
& difficult in some of the intermediat Occasions that in certain degree
admit either of Ridicule or serious Reprobation.
 Malice we may assume is ever matter of Serious Reprobation not of Ridicule. Timidity is Sometimes the one & sometimes the Other. So is dullness
of Fancy & insensibility of Heart Irascibility & Tameness, &c. &c.
Reprobation is the lot of Crime and Depravity.
Ridicule is the Lot of Imbecility & Defect.
Just Reprobation is the Test of one.
Just Ridicule is the Test of the other.
But Actual Reprobation or Actual Laughter may be erroneous and misslead & is not without inquiry to be received as a Test of Demerit or of
Defect.
The Rhetorician by his Figures of Speech can lay the Colours of Depravity on the Innocent. Or the Colours of Defect & Ridicule on the Respectable
& the Just. The Powers of Epithet and Metaphor to these effects are well
known. The Epithet of Divus Julius 2 made a  Saint or Sanctified a
Bloody Adventurer in search of Power.
The designation of Contented Cuckold was meant to throw contempt on
Marcus Aurelius 3 & in some minds may have its Effects.
An imaginary Personage with nothing of Socrates 4 but the Name
brought Ridicule or dissrespect on that Person who has in fact remained the
admiration of Ages.
Tho Ridicule always implies some supposed Defect. The imputation of it
is no more a Test of Truth or Reality than the Imputation of a Crime is a test
of Guilt.
Ridicule is most commonly the Effect of incongruity or some kind of odd
Combination. Some feature of meanness with Pride or Vanity, a Dish Clout
pinned to the Tail of a Person otherwise finely dressed. It is possible therefore to clap such Additions on Respectable Subjects & to raise  a Laugh.
The Lord Mayor of London on Horse is an Object of Respect but so
mounted & eating Custard on Horseback on his way to the Conventicle is
Ridiculous.
Lord Shaftesbury 5 contends for the Freedom of Wit & Humour And in
whatever Sense his words are understood it must be granted. For in all
human Establishment if Wise & Just Crimes alone are restraind Every
Innocent Act of the mind is free And it is in proportion to this degree of
Freedom that minds can enjoy themselves or make any Valuable attainment
Under Restraint. The Genius is Suppressed as Lamps in a Box are soon
extinguished: But Wit & Humour may incur the Guilt of a Crimes &
Crimes in every shape must be restrained. The Danger or Safety of this Policy depends intirely on the Character of the Tribunal before which such
Crimes are tryed. Neither  the ordinary Magistrate nor the Priest is
Safely intrusted with this Branch of Judicature.
The Culprit has a right to be tryed by his own fellow Citizens who are
equally interested in the Safety of his Innocence or the punishment of his
Guilt.
But in the Terms Wit & Humour The Noble Author 6 does not seem to
mean Ridicule but rather what is commonly termed Good Humour or
Exemption from Acrimony or personal Animosity too common in Controversy or Theological Disputes. He himself indeed seldom attempts Ridicule
properly so called or when he does so should be Sensible that the Ridicule
employs against Certain Controversy under Analogy of Foot Ball 7 as it is
just in some Sectarian Contests might be unjust if applied to matter of
Serious debate in National Councils or in Pleadings before a Tribunal of 
Justice.
Ridicule like any other Rhetorical Figure may be employed in any Cause.
The Art itself like any other Power compard to its opposite weakness or
defect is Good but to be loved must be employed for beneficial not mischievous purposes. And even so employed is not The Test either of Truth or of
Justice.
Notwithstanding the general Rule that Crimes of every Form are to be
restrained it is well understood in the Policy of Free Nations, that it is less
dangerous to overlook matters actually Criminal than to Unsheath the
Sword of the Magistrate in every Case to repress them. Every thing human
has its defects or Abuses And the Abuses of Power are more tremenduous
than those of the despicable & unauthorised delinquent. Summum Jus
therefore may be Summa Injuria 8 when to correct the smallest dissorders an
Open is made for much  greater.
There is therefore no Article in the Criminal Code more to be Guarded
than the Law of Libel.
It may perhaps be safely Admitted that altho Calumny is punished mere
Ridicule may be overlooked. There are Evils in Society which Ridicule
alone can Suppress such as Solemn impostures under grave pretences of
Religion or Wisdom or Science. And even where merit itself is unjustly
attacked with this Weapon it is difficult to Ascertain the dammage of being
laughed at before a Tribunal of Justice.
As it is difficult to form any general Rule in this matter or to be secure
of its safe Application if formed The Trial by Jury 9 is perhaps the best expedient that has been devised against the Evils whether of Criminality or
Penality that may be incurred in this Matter.

XVII. WAKING DREAMS 
Of the First Cause, and the Intelligent and Perceptible Power in Man and what it leads to. 1
to 7.
On the Works of the Creation. Man: his Infancy, Manhood. 7 to 12.
The ruling Passions of Men are Interest, Dignity and Pleasure. In what they consist; Happiness the object of all tho’ variously pursued. The whole order of things tend to Man’s
Happiness. 12 to the End.
Something now Exists, says Dr Samuel Clerk. 1 Therfore Something
must have existed Eternally That is necessarily. But whatever exists necessarily must be boundless in its way as Space & time are Boundless. For how
can supplyable limit or defect be necessary. Of this I can offer no proof: but
in my thought it is insusceptible of Doubt as my own Existence. 2
This Existence however & much more is contingent & Nascent, the Creation of Antecedent Power.
 In Creation there is a manifest display of Ends & Means. Or in other
words the Creating Power as meaning or is Intelligent.
From what Power Else could come this Germ of Intelligence in me but
from an Intelligent Source or Cause.
If the Necessity of Existence amounts to boundless Existence in Eternal
Perfection The Necessary Being must have been of the highest order
Supremely Excellent Supremely happy Omnipotent Wise & Good: for short
of this Existence would be subordinate Contingent & Perisable.
As it appears absurd to Suppose that dead materials could engender Living Intelligence it appears so  no less to suppose that mere Intelligence
could call up solid matter out of Nothing. 3
All this Perception of Material World is a mode of my intellectual Being
And the Universe itself consists of Eternal mind and the Germs of Nascent
Intelligence the ofspring of Will & Eternal Intelligent Power.
The Perceptions of which I am conscious from abroad have their cause
distinct from me. As those which I mean to give around me have their
Cause in me. As I mean what I do so what is done to me of the same kind is
meant also.  Part comes from Other Beings like myself. But the greater
part from Being infinitely Superiour And Mere Perceptions or perceptibles
are the means of communication between Created Minds & the Revelation
of eternal Intelligence & Creative mind.
They are in the Society of men not only the means of communication:
but The Occasion of Action the materials of Art the exercise & improvement of progressive intelligence tending to fit & Qualify it for Other &
more elevated Scenes of Being where other perceptions & means of communications will be made to succeed to these.
If the Existence  of Mind is Eternally necessary it must be boundless
in Number as well  Perfection. But infinite number of mind infinitely
Perfect must be at one. The same Consciousness the same Will the same
meaning if ther were any difference one or other must be imperfect,
which is absurd. If the Germs of Nascent Intelligence Advance indefinitely
& approach to infinitely they tend to what they possibly never can reach to
be at one with God.
And if this were Possible the Eternal mind 4 is continually Emitting its
Germs And these continually returning to be at one with himself 
although this be too high for Belief what can be too high, for the wish of
Intelligence or the Aspiring Progression of a Nature that must forever have
an Aim Superiour to its actual attainments.
Such dreams are but a Stretch of the human faculties beyond their limits:
but it were pleasant even awake to think that all existence is mind Eternal &
Perfect; or Nascent & progressive the only Subject of Excellence or defect of
Beauty or deformity of Happiness or Misery. All Other Subjects or Names
are its Modes or Relations important in being accommodated to its operations  the Materials of its Arts the expressions of its meanings & the
Substratum on which are impressed the Vestiges of its Wisdom Goodness &
Power. These are the distinctions of a Supposed Material World branched
into Millions of Suns and Planets in voluble or quiescent order as the exigencies of mind require. To created minds revealing the Majesty of God,
and furnishing the medium of Communication with one Another.
On this Globe called Earth Invention and its Aim Variety for ever seem 
to Reign but Order is the more Conspicuous that parts appear to Slight it
and hasten to accumulate a Chaos of discordant Parts: yet all is Harmony 5
and the fit Conjunction of an Active and a Passive Scene.
What Mind is here Besides the Eternal God and the Created Mind of
man we know not. The Work bespeaks its Author and in part even to Man
its End.
The board is spread for him and coverd with a fare that is fit to nourish
him. See but the infant born today  feeble but to breath in Air & utter
Cries for Aid. But how kindly is the Scene prepared for his reception. The
breast is made to teem with Milk. And under the Names of Parent Servants
are engagd to minister in all his wants & Comforts with a Zeal & Assiduity
which neither Wealth nor power could ever purchase or command.
Is he therefore nursed through Infancy to be abandoned at the Age of
Man? So he is apt to think before the light of Science dawn upon his Mind.
 The Parent on whose breast he hung is forced away. Why is not the
Woods and Fields to which he Seems Consigned prepared to yield him Rayment Food and Shelter: Why is he turned out naked to the Storm. Why are
the Fields & woods so barren & fit to yield him nought but penury & Toil?
Is this the Lot to which the pampered Infant was preserved. And thus the
Seeming favourite of Nature abandoned to himself. Why is the milk that fed
his infant Organs now withheld. Why is want difficulty and Danger provided by the same beneficient Power  which Ministered so Kindly to
his early wants. What has that Power bestowd upon him now in lieu of
former favours. 6
Those very wants difficulties & Dangers of which he now Complains. To
the Active is requird A Scene of Action. 7 To the Intelligent a Labyrinth or
maze where Science Triumphs and where Contemplation Soars.
For the feeble Infant all is done but for the adult all is left to be done by
himself and his very life prolonged by labours.
 The Ruling Passions of Men are Interest Dignity & Pleasure. Out of
these in various measures they propose to effect their Happiness.
Interest consists Chiefly in matters of Property or Concerns of Animal
Life.
Dignity consists in matters of Estimation. Such as Rank however constituted. Merit Personal Excellence And Beauty.
Pleasure consists in agreeable Sensations Occupations & Prospects &
requiring exemption from Pain.
The best effect of Interest is  Frugality. Industry and Ingenious Art.
Its Evils are Covetousness Avarice & Rapin.
The best effects of Dignity are Integrity and Magnamity. Its worst
effects are Pride Contemptuousness Vanity and Ambition or Lust of Power.
The best Effects of Pleasure are its Allurement to what is Salutary in Diet
Excercise and amicable Society.
Its worst Effects are Effeminacy Debauchery and Prodigality.
Among those who have reasoned on the Subject  of Happiness some
have recommended the good Effects of Pleasure. 8
Others the Good Effects of Elevation or Dignity. 9 That is Integrity &
Magnanimity.
Interest was admitted by all in its best effects to be commensurate to the
Value of animal Life And Frugality in Particular to be a Guardian of Virtue
as well as Security & independence.
The Worst of Pleasure as a general appellation of Good, is to endanger
Selection to lay open the mind to every present Allurement. And preclude
Deliberation  where it is of all other Departments of conduct the most
wanted.
Hence a Supposed life of Pleasure is for the most part Idle inconsiderate
frivolous & debauched.
Happiness Pleasure & Merit 10 are in the apprehension of most men Separate Names for different things.
But as they are objects of the most ardent Passions of Men Nature cannot
be ultimately so inconsistent with itself. As to engage men in equal passion
for inconsistent things. The presumption then is that when these objects 
are well understood they will meet like converging Rays of Light in a Focus
the same to all.
The Happiness & Perfection of Intelligent Being are one and the same
point.
Hence it is that in the order of things the Progress of Intelligence is provided for as the progress to Happiness.
Man in infancy has every thing provided for him in Manhood must provide for himself & Subsist by the Sweat of his brow. All his Faculties are
called furth in Exertion and thereby improved. The  mistakes are corrected by experience And in the End Intellectual Power & Felicity are
compl.
Why is not all Nature so formed at once?
Ask the Eternal Principle of Existence why he prefers Variety to
Sameness.
Why in all living Natures He prefers Progressive to Stationary Forms.
He is the Creator of all: but the Intelligent to Obtain their distinctive
Value must be in part at least the formers or Authors of what themselves
become. This in the feeble line  of Created Being is that Image of the
Maker which Man is said to bear.
He is like Clay in the hands of the Potter but that Potter is in part no
other than himself. 11
Look then from this point of View on the Scene of human things. The
Germ of Intelligence by which man is distinguishd The occasion by which
it brought into Excercise and into the Train of improvement.
Observe the Laws which give at once Stability to the Scene And furnish
him with a handle by which to lay hold of it and influence events  his
Purpose.
The Law of  Nature informs him what he must lay his Account
within the undisturbed Course of things or in known conjunctions And
what he may Obtain for his own purpose by modelling the Conjuncture in
which the Law is to Operate.
The Law  Gravitation that would bring every Weight to the Ground
is made in building by plummet is made to give Stability & firmness to
Walls & Towers of Indefinite height.
Will man complain that this or any Other Law of Nature is never Suspended even to prevent harm from its Effects. It is a Sufficient Answer 
to say that if the Law were ever suspended it never Could be trusted at all. 12
If Plants were not raised from their Seed Man would have no Power in
the Fields & to obtain a Plantation could only Pray to the Almighty to
favour him with one to his mind.
Observe then how man is fitted to his place & his place to him. 13
On this point hangs the Order of his Planet. And tho Planets be multiplyd to Infinity, they can reveal no more than this.


XVIII. OF THE DISSTINCTIONS ON WHICH
WE ACT IN HUMAN LIFE a 1
Of the Distinctions of Good and Evil, Happiness and Misery. 1 to 3.
Distinctions of Pleasure and Pain, Profit and Loss, Excellence and Defect; their ascendancy
in the Human Mind. 3 to 12.
Characters. The Miser, Votary of Pleasure Sensualist &c 12 to the End.
Of these the shun is called Evil. 2
Equivalent terms are common to every Language. They may be well or ill
Applied And the Object may be real or mistaken.
The Accumulation of real Good is Happiness of real Evil is misery.
This disstinction therefore is the first or  most important Object of
inquiry in human Life. Actions of men are regulated by what they would
shun as by what they would Obtain. And in applying the great disstinction
of Good & Evil they take different courses And act upon disstinctions seemingly different from one Another.
Of these the number & variety may be indefinite; but we may endeavour
to comprehend them under a few heads.
1. The  disstinction of Pleasure & Pain.
2. The disstinction of Profit & Loss.
3.d The disstinction of Ri an Wrong.
4. The disstinction of Excellence & defect.
Under one or Other of these disstinctions the whole may be
comprehended.
Even the first is sometimes supposed to comprehend the Whole.
In all our desires or Aversions 3 Gratification is pleasant  And this
pleasure is the Object in all And the contrary is the Pain we would Shun in
all.
But this would be to take away all difference of pursuit or Character and
to make Epitetus no less a Voluptuary than Heliogabalus or
Sardanapalus. 4
The disstinctions which  mad in every Language are matters of
Experience & like the Land mark pointed out from time immemorial are
of use in directing ours without recourse in every particular case to
the  Observations on which they were founded.
Pleasure in Common Language is no longer the Object of all.  s
opposed to Bussiness to Duty & to Honour And the person who acts chiefly
on the disstinction of pleasure And pains is of a very different Character
from the person who acts on the disstinction of Profit & Loss Right &
Wrong &c.
Immediate pleasure attracts him immediate Pain repels him.
This is the Charcter of Childhood even of Youth.
 If continued it would exclude all Patience or Fortitude And as many of
the greatest Blessings present themselves under an Aspect of Labour and
Pleasure would lead to many of the greatest Mistakes.
It has frequently led to Sensuality Effeminacy And Prodigality.
The disstinction of Profit & Loss is that on which the Trades Professional Acts. It forms the Motive of Interest or what is vulgarly called
Selfishness  and is the Parent of Avarice.
The disstinction of Right & Wrong is found generally in all the Characters dispositions And Actions of Men.
At the moment we are Conscious of an End or Purpose we are Conscience of its Innocence or Guilt.
When we recollect such a Purpose attempted or carryed into Effect we
are Seized with a Conscience of Merit or Demerit Remorse Shame &c.
Hence the operation  of Intelligence is termed Conscience & figuratively moral Sense or Sense of Right & W.
Men Sometimes Act because it is Right to do  or becase it would be
wrong to omit But in many Instances also it serves only to modify the
course of Action on the disstinctions of Pleasure and Pain of Profit & Loss.
On the first of these disstinctions it is Moderation & Temp On
the other it is Justice Integrity Liberality & Char.
The disstinction of Excellence & Defect applys to all those Considerations on which men are entitled to Esteem or to  contempt. There is not
a commonly Stated or more Powerful  in its effects. It gives Subordination to every Society And lurks or flames in the mind of every
Individual. No distinction can be more real than the Superiority of Intelligence and its Specific Accomplishments of Wisdom & Goodness to the
opposite defects of Folly & Wickedness yet a distinction so commonly
entertained as this of Estimation  and Rank is likely to be as commonly
mistaken or missapplied. No one can be altogether indifferent to personal
Qualities yet how Seldom do they bear man against Riches Birth even equipage & Dress.
This disstinction if the occasion of Mananimity And just Elevation
of Mind to some is the occasion of Vanity & Contemptuous Pride to Others
It is indeed the Source of great Action, but in Meaner Minds the Source of
 Emulation Envy & Detraction. None Supports the Mind through difficulty danger & Suffering but none Supports Error & Mistake more
Obstinately against better information or Correction.
Hence it is that Fashion prevails over reason & every consideration of
Use or Convenience.
Although we have thus Stated these distinctions Apart and Asignd them
their Votaries Separately, yet there is probably no person  so devoted to
any one as to be indifferent to any Other. The Miser tho’ chiefly intent on
profit and loss is not only Sensible to Pleasure & Pain but has also some
points of estimation on which he values himself. Men differ in most
Instances in respect to the degree in which they attend to one of these distinctions more than the Others. And this degree appears also in the degree
to which their Characters Are Affected by their Partiality.
 Characters are affected by it.
The distinctive Votary of Pleasure & Pain of Right &  of Profit &
loss of Excellence and defect 5 bear a suitable Aspect in their Manners &
incline to the habits whether Good or ill to which the Basis of Action on
which they stand inclines them. Hence it is that among the Vices Sensuality
Superstition Avarice & Pride have more hold of some. And among the Virtues Integrity Industry Economy &  Magnanimity have a preferable
hold of Others.
As man is thus presented with various distinctions & is destined to Suffer as well as to enjoy: His Happiness, tho’ perhaps leading to a Single point
at Last ________ Concourse with God: in his way to it can be no Other
than the State of most Enjoyment & least Suffering 6 of which he is Susceptible. This is at once his Excellence His prosperity or as we term it his
Virtue.
In respect to Animal Pleasure it is Temperance.  In Respect to his
mind it is Wisdom Goodness & Power of thought exempted from Spleen
Fear Malice or any torturing Passion.
In his Relations around him It is order or beneficent Ends pursued with
Apposite Means.
In respect to the Whole it is Confidence in the Order of Nature or in
Other Words in the Wisdom & Goodness of God.
In the pursuit of Happiness Man must sometimes forgo present Enjoyment or incur present Suffering.
The Account to be ballanced is  long & intricate comprehending all
Effects and future Consequences far exceeding the reach of his comprehension or View.
To remedy or in Some degree to supply this defect has the Creator given a
discernment of Right & Wrong. 7 With this Power in every case  need
not look beyond the Case in which we are to act & if we do right have no
occasion to fear the Consequences.
Here indeed we may mistake & Conscience itself may fail. But as the
Mariner to keep his intended Course has only to guard the Compass from
disturbances So the moralist has only to Study the disstinction of Right
 wrong to be assumed in the choice he ought to make on all occasions.
In this lys the distinction between Epicurus And Zeno. Do said the first
what upon the whole is most pleasant and least painful. A good if we were
competent to apply it. Do said the Other what God has enabled  to discern as Right. 8 He has made this Power umpire in every Case & Censorial
inspector in every Act of Will that it might interfere and Govern in all. 
