OF PERFECTION AND HAPPINESS 
Separately and conjointly considered. The Effect of Happiness.1 to 4.
What is supposed to be Happiness; in the enjoyment of Health, Equanimity, conscious safety,
and the occupations of a well regulated Mind. 4 to 6.
Happiness variously pursued; the chief end of our Being. The Happiness of Man consulted
in the formation of his Corporeal and Mental Faculties. His superiority to other Animals. 6
to 8.
The continual exercise of his Faculties necessary to his Happiness. The difference in what
consists the pleasures of a worthy and vicious mind. 8 to 14.
The employment of the mind in useful attainments and active Benevolence, necessary to
Respectability and Happiness in Life; to which end present ease must be sacrificed to future
attainments instanced in the labours of the Student and Schollar. 14 to 22.
Man, to be Happy, must be Wise, Intrepid, Benevolent, and Temperate; relying on the Wisdom and Goodness of his Maker, lives Happy in this World, and meets Death with Fortitude
and Hope. 22 to the End.
When different Terms have Place in Language it may be Supposed that
they stand for different or at least the same thing under different Aspects.
Happiness refers to Ease or enjoyment. Perfection to Excellence or matter of Estimation & merit.
So far they may coincide in the same thing under different Aspects, and
as they are  severally Supreme Objects of desire it is consonant to the
order of Nature to suppo them perfectly consistent if not one & the same
thing.
Happiness is appropriate to Sensitive if not mly to intelligent
B.
Perfection is a kind of Figure applyed even to inanimate or merely material Forms when they bear the marks of Intelligen design or are
Subservient to any valuable purpose of Intelligent .
Thus a Building is perfect when it exhibits an Admira Plan and 
Sufficient Workmanship, but in both it is the excellence of mind that
appears in the construction of the work.
Mind or Intelligenc is perfect or imperfect in itself: but mere Corporeal Forms as they cary indications of perfect or imperfect Intelligence.
Happiness in Created Being is the State of highest Enjoyment and least
Suffering 1 applied to Being in its whole exte. 2
Present Enjoyment that bring an over-ballance of Suffering here after
are not happiness & Sufferings that bring an over-ballance of Enjoyment
are not misery.
 These observations have no reference to that Happiness which is Eternal and umixed. But in the mixed State of Created progressive Being are
highly important.
To the Happy Man The past is matter of agreeable recollection not of
regret.
The present is not matter of Suffering but of Satisfaction & Joy.
The future is not matter of Fear but Confidence & Hope.
When past umerit Suffering as well as Innocence and Beneficence
are ma of agreeable recollection. Insomuch that is happy to have been
excellent  deserving or Perfect in the past.
In the present not Animal pleasu without measure or distinction:
but Health & its preservatives or functions are at once the preferable Enjoyments as well as perfection of animal Life.
Exemption from Malice or Fear in every Form or degree & the Contrary
Sentiment of Benevolence & Fortitude. The occupations of a Well
employed mind constitute the state of best
enjoyment, least Suffering and greate Perfection or Merit.
Conscious Safety is the great constituent of  Happiness respecting the
Future; But he who owes all to his own Resolution and determined mind 3
is therefore Safe.
These are at once the Perfections of Human Nature its highest and most
Secure enjoyments.
Thus the votaries of Pleasure 4 Virtue Elevation and Happiness 5 although
They Appear to divert and diverge for a time actually converge and meet in
a point at Least. 6
And the Creator in laying a Scheme of Progression 7 for man towards the
Perfection of his Intellectual  Being has at the Same time projected his
Happiness As the end of Creation.
The Animal System is beautyfully formd in respect to man in particular.
Besides the organization of his Body, his Instincts and Sensations bear the
marks of Divine Wisdom and obvious even to himself. They tend to his
preservation & wellbeing but not so unerring as the Instincts and Sensations of the Other Animals do in respect to them. Man having more
Intelligence  is left to his own Government. His Happiness or Misery is
in part deriv’d from this Source: but not in the degree in which he enjoys or
suffers as an animal: but in the degree in which he acquits himself properly
of his charge as an Intellectual and Moral Agent.
The Wise & courageous does  sink under animal sufferings nor forget himself in the midst of Animal enjoyments. 8 His happiness requires
that he should be superior to either and his Perfection is evidently placed
upon a higher Scale: The Contemplation The Affections The occupations
of a Powerful and  Intelligent Being. The animal instints and pleasures direct or allure him to the Animal Funons of Life & Safety.
Pursued beyond this purpose they tend to disgust or disease.
Pain has a Similar correspondence with respect to the ills to be removed
from animal Life.
Happiness or Misery depends on the good or ill us of a life that is preserved in the result of its Instincts or Senses; Mind is enlargd and gratifyed
in its discoveries & Contemplations. The Order of Nature as it is displayed
in the Ends and means  of Eternal Wisdom is Supremely gratifying as
matter of contemplation merely as well as a pledge of Benefice in that Power
on whom we depend for Existence. 9
Benevolent and Candid affections constitute the Specific perfection &
Felicity of designing and Intelligent Natures in all respects the reverse of
Malice, Envy or Jealousy.
The human mind being in its progress is yet incapable of uninterrupted
Enjoyment: but ingenuous & beneficent occupation is the most continued
Satisfaction  of which it is Susceptible.
From these considerations also we repeat our conclusion.
That the perfection and happi of mankind  same. e10
A mere Animal may have all the happiness of which he is susceptible in a
continued exemption from pain & in a succession of pleasing sensations:
But an Intelligent Being to be happy must be conscious of his State how
constituted & how secured. With him it is a principal consideration what he
himself is not merely what he feels. If he  knows himself to be mean or
unworthy the Sense of pleasure sickens & gives way to self abasement
Shame or Remorse.
A series of pleasures that would Suspend all the faculties of the mind
would change Man into a Brute & terminate in misery.
Such a State with a seeming indifference to Right or Wrong Honour or
dishonour appears to be projected in the term of Indiscriminate Pleasure
for the Chief good 11 or Ultima Object or pursuit. When however in
descending to particulars the term is limited to pleasure Safe & Worthy 
of the Mind The Votaries of Pleasure 12 seem to differ from  of Virtue
only in Words. 13 And if Words were of no Consequence, Such Sectaries
would not differ at all. But Words are often Ambiguous untill they are
explained, and few take the trouble to explain them & give way to their first
impressions.
In the Judgement of Hercules, 14 Virtu that is to say Worthy Attainment of Wisdom & Goodness Temperance Constancy & Fortitude Are
figured on the Summit of a  Hill 15 where real pleasure is also placed:
but there are such pleasures at the bottom that the Person who deliberates
below is in danger of remaining where he is instead of attempting the
Ascent to come at what he may with less trouble.
Της δ’αρετης ιδροσα 16 a man must Sweat to have the pleasure of Virtue.
But sloth assumes the Aspect of Relaxation & Ease.
Observe then the mixed Scene of human . The more frequent occasions which are given to Active exertion 17 than to passive Enjoyment the
Sufferings  and inconveniences which are to be avoided and confess
that even in those Instances and even more than in any Other the Goodness
of God towards Man is conspicuous.
In Many Cases indeed present Enjoyment or Ease is Sacrificed to future
Attainment And the Pupil of Nature like the School boy on his form
labours that he may lay the foundation of manly attainments & become
qualified for his part in human Life.
If Labour & pain are not to be endured for the  Sake of mental or
intellectual accomplishments why does the tender Parent instead of sending
his Child where he may be indulged where he may be pampered with
Sweets sends him into Confinement & Restraint where under the lash of a
Demagogue he is forced to forgo his Pleasures or look for them only after
having finished his task. 18
Few Parents are so Supine as to shrink from policy in the treatment of
their Children yet the Analogous Policy of Nature is admitted as an objection  to the Doctrine of Divine Goodness or Wisdom and The
happiness of the Creature we are sometimes told is not the End of Creation.
But it is manifest even to human Reason that there can be no end but the
diffusion of Good to the Energies of Eternal Power unchangeably Perfect &
Happy. 19
And the present mixed Scheme of human Life as it Suits our best conception of Wisdom & Goodness in the Author: So it bears the Aspect of a
Scheme but now  begun & likely to continue indefinitely.
The progress from Infancy to Age is sum of where Men in general are
destined to make in this Life if a Few exhibit much greater Attainments
than Manhood alone implys their Example but shows that the human
Capacity is far from being exhausted in the present Scene.
This Nature in its lowest Specimens may yet extricate itself And in the
highest may have made out a step towards somewhat higher. And the sudden break in  a progress so fairly begun & yet so far short of the point to
which it is directed tho’ in any scheme defect in the presumption that the
break is merely Apparent & but a transition from one period to another or
more in which the Scheme of progression will be continued to its consummation or end.
In thus sounding the depths of Futurity we no doubt may soon get
beyond the length of our Life  but in a Being  whom The maker has
Manifested himself in the order of his works 20 who can look so far beyond
his own position as to measure the very Globe on the Surface of which he is
but an attom number the Planets of which this Globe is but one delineate
their Courses round a fountain of Light & of heat so essential to the Living
worlds arround him himself so abundant and So great as far to exceed in
dimension the sum of all the Planets that  perform their movements in
orbits prescribed and as held by a line at distances which they vary but
within limits which they can neither contract to exceed: a Being to whose
imagination every fixed Star is a Sun And The Galaxy but the faint gleam of
numberless Suns planted in that direction through infinite Space & made
Sensible by a tinge of united light tho not individually perceived. In such a
Being The  future may be thrown open to conjecture as the present is to
his Investigation and measurement.
To the Herd which looks not beyond the Field on  they pasture
the duration of Being may not exceed that of the frame which their organs
Serve to compose but to a Being whose field of Contemplation is the universe itself The Tenure of Existence may extend like that of the Universe
itself. While he rests every hope or conjecture On The Assumed Justice
Wisdom & Goodness of Almighty God he cannot Err or mistake the 
present Course  it becomes old.
The very darkness of Futurity is to him an intimation that his bussiness
is now before him 21 and can receive no direction from a futurity of which
his information is yet so imperfect.
To be happy now he must be Wise Intrepid Benevolent & Temperate.
And till his Essence change from Intelligence to some other form these are
the Constituents of Happiness of Excellence Perfection and Beauty. The
Period of Being is not his own.  To be in the next impending moment is
as much at the Will of his Maker As the first Act of Respiration that took
possession of the life he was to lead on his dismission from the Parents
Womb.
If when this Respiration ceases he be worthy of Admission to an higher
Scene if his Nature be Susceptible of farther Existence he may hope &
rejoice in the prospect: but if it cannot be who can repine that the order of
nature is observed in his case as well as in that of every other Being.
 If a voluntary Sacrifice were required to the order of such a System
who that perceives that order could be reluctant in performing it.
Or what can be a more real occasion of Joy on any Event than to know
that it comes from the destination of Supreme Wisdom Goodness &
Almighty Power.
Under Such Government it is joyous to live & it is a Triumph to Die.

II. WHAT MAY BE AFFIRMED OR
APPREHENDED OF THE SUPREME
CREATIVE BEING 
That He acts from Design, and means to obtain an End. The irresistible evidence of a First
Cause and Creative Being in the Beauty, diversity, yet regularity, and analogy preserved in
things the most different. Happiness the End of our Being. Mere Enjoyment do not constitute Happiness. 1 to 3.
The contemplation of God’s works lifts the mind up to the Creator and disposes Man to Acts
of affection and good will towards his Fellow-Creatures, the true means of Happiness. Free
Agency. The various forms of Created things as affording pleasure, tend to make man
Happy. 3 to 7.
The Superiority of man over other Animals in being endowed with a reasonable Soul; which
enables him to look forward to another and better World, to be an Inhabitant perhaps of
another System. 7 to 9.
1st That he Acts from Design 1 & means to obtain an End.
This the Organic Form of Nascent Being to begin continue and preserve itself 2 is irresistible Evidence.
2d As this order of things bears the Stamp of Intelligence: 3 are there not
other Characters on the Face of Created things that lead to the apprehension of Corresponding attributes in the Creative Powers?
Does the Indefinite Variety 4 of Created Being 5 argue a diversity &
Multiplicity of Creative Powers? 6
Or is this apprehension Sufficiently Checked & the Identity of the Creative Power throughout the Whole sufficiently evinced by the Identity of
multiplied Forms and by the Analogy presented in things the most
different.
If so is Diversification to be apprehended as a primary Object or End of
Creative Design.
In our minds no end appears worthy of Creative design but Happiness
and this the most Perfect of which Created Nature is susceptible and this
would exclude Variety as a primary object. For Perfect Happiness though it
may be realized in multiplied Instances must be a repetition of the same
Identical Form and this Form  Consciousness  or Intellectual Power
in the high measure to which Creation is competent.
To perfect Happiness mere Enjoyment even Conscious Enjoyment does
not appear sufficient. Consciousness of Power also to be and to remain in
possession appears Necessary to Consummate Happiness.
The Supreme Being is of himself & by his own Power Supremely Perfect
& happy.
Created Perfection & happiness requires as much of this security as can
be infused into Created Being.
He must apprehend a Cause of that Existence of which he is conscious
and therefore depending for Continuance upon that Cause: but while he
exists he may be Conscious of having distinguished And preferred the Good
of which he is possessed & therefor may be conscious of it as his own and
as secure as the will to chuse the Good in preference to Evil. A Security
which if the Choice is exempt from Error never can be shaken.
Man cannot be the Conscious Author of his own Existence. But conscious of this Existence he may be the Conscious Author of what he
acquires by Experience Observation and the diligent use of his Faculties.
 He may be conscious of having entertained and of having discoverd
& corrected an Error of having found how delightful it is to know and comprehend the Works of God 7 to live with his fellow Creatures in habits or
affections of Good Will & Candour he may be conscious of a Will fixed in
the Choice of Happiness because he has discern’d it.
May nothing then open our Eyes and give sight of the final Cause 8 in
that Progressive Form of Being assigned to man and from continued by
continued by Analogy every other living form  this terrestrial Scene.
And is not Progression the most perfect Form of  Created Being
is susceptible. Tho to us who measure all by Time seemingly late & tardy in
Attainments yet to the Eternal Now simultaneous & at once Compleat. In
every passing  deriving Excellence & Beauty from its Destiny if
not from what it is.
So much is implyed in the Character of free Agency 9 in the Blame which
accompanys miscariage And in the merit which is acknowledged  in
worthy attainments and just performances and in the relaxation of mere
Instinct by which Animals are precisely Conducted. There is no climate to
which he is exclusively attached 10 No Species of Food whether Animal or
Vegetable Substance of which he is not free to Avail himself. He is a trader
in all commodities And an Artist in the Use of all Materials. Nature has presented the occasions And opportunitys of Action of Inquiry research &
discovery but left him to find his Way & take his Measures.
The Scene f11 is in every department wonderfully fitted to him. The
steddy form of Nature and its invariable Laws assuring the observer of what
he may expect & rely on in every Instance.
The means by which Events may be obtained The Indefinite Variety of
Still Material of Organised Nature Furnishing Subject of Contemplation
Comparison Analogy & Variety so well Suited as provision for the Nascent
search  Imagination and Arrangement constituting method & Comprehension in  this first Period extending Knowledge.
The Indefinite Variety of Created Being seems to exhibit Variety at first
Sight as a Primary Object of Creative Power. 12 But as Variety merely as such
does not constitute Happiness it cannot be supposed in itself an ultimate or
primary end of Creation. But as Being without Intelligence or Life is merely
subservient to the Living & Intelligent we may look for the final Cause of
Variety among the rest in this Subserviency to the use of mind.
Aristotle 13 had great merit in tracing the mode of human knowledge to
the Form & Distribution of things in which he is concerned as designing
and Active Power. In this Capacity his Bussiness with Individuals: But his
Knowledge of Order Classes Genera and Species prepares him to encounter
the Already known to him all to any peculiarity or accidents which it
behoves him to Observe.
And as I apprehend that material or mere passive Being have no other
Value than as they are Subservient to the Being and Progress of Mind I
think  this variety displayed to man is not itself an Ultimate End of Creative Power or Invention but a mere School of Intelligen and mental
Exercise to Man to whose beginning  Progress this Scene is Subservient: and in this point of View the Final Cause 14 of the Systematick Variety
of Things is discernible by us in the same manner as the Final Cause is discovered in the Construction of the Eye & Ear or the distribution of the
Joints & Muscles. 15
If the System of Terrestrial Nature be thus Accommodated to favour &
Urge the progressive Nature of Man What shall we say of that which is to
him the most important of Arrangements relating to him That he has not
every where to tread among his Inferior of in a still greater Department of
his affairs to cooperate or Contend with his Equals. This indeed is the Scene
in which if not his greatest honours are won his progressive Nature receives
the greatest impulse.
How Earth came to be  peopled The People cannot tell: For the first
man knew less than the last who has Parish Record for his Birth.
The Earth is now a System what it was before its Parts assembled who
can tell. Man begins an Infant on his Parents Breast 16 and here for him the
System terminates. He has no wish to widen it But the Family press
arround he is himself but one but much concerned for all. The Neighbours
too The Town the State itself become concerns of his. Tis well if he overlooks farther. The stranger may move his Wonder or his Pity. But thus
Humanity begins to bud beyond the seedling leaf. This living scene may
not be too much for him to grasp in its Prospective order. Perhaps he may
hereafter be entrustd with the Conduct of a Planet. When master of that
Jack a Solar System might not be too much. The Zodiac in the sequel with
all the Spheres of Night are but his Path to that Great scene the Universe
And this but leads him to  behold the Source of Being in respect of
which all he had seen is but slight Emanation or a taper lost to Vision in the
Blaze of Day.
It is common to man with the other Orders of Being in this Scene of his
Nascent Existence to make Part in a System to the End or object of which
his Powers & Energies contribute but it is peculiar to him in this Terrestrial
System to be conscious of his Part to Embrace it with a Willing mind &
even to carry his Views beyond it to a Source of Order & Beneficence to the
Extent of which he can apprehend no bounds or limits. So much is implyd
in that Distinction peculiar to man That while Other Animals perceive
their Lot in Being he alone attempts to trace from whence it comes. k
In this direction his efforts may be Feeble & of small success. But Ignorance perceived is the beginning of Knowledge 17 and the Collision of
Errors 18 may point to the Truth and the progress of Knowledge extending
far beyond the limits of a Present or any Actual scene may correspond to the
Infinity of its objects.
May we not thus  consider the first Germ of Region in the human
Soul as a pledge of its duration beyond the Limits assigned to mere Animal
Life?

III. OF HISTORY AND ITS
APPROPRIATE STILE 
Literature as applied to History. Poetry or works of Immagination. History Descriptive and
Narrative. Strict adherence to Truth in History; its importance. 1 to 3.
Display of Genius and Brilliancy of Language in Works of Immagination and Information:
its danger when Truth is lost sight of to some Readers. Abuse of Talents. 3 to 6.
History, its use, and value as an Example. The Danger of a Party Historian as being likely
to mislead. Simple matter of fact best in History. How to distinguish the faithful Historian. 6
to 12.
Character of Livy as an Historian; his Eloquence; not to be imitated as an Historian. A Historian should be a Moralist as well as a Narrator of Facts. Perfection not to be expected in
History any more than any other Human Art. 12 to 18.
Statesmen and Warriors actually engaged not to be relyed on as faithful Historians. Of those
most likely to be faithful Historians. 18 to 22.
Of the use of Metaphors as an Ornament of Speech, condemned in History. Truth the very
Essence of History. Advice to Historians. Some Authors known by characteristic traits in
their Compositions; not so Authors of true Genius and capacity. 22 to 27.
Literature serves to record Speech and address it to the World at Large.
Its Uses are Information or Exercise of Mind & Enjoyment. And from
these uses are derived the Disstinctions of Literary Compositions & their
value.
On the Principle of Information 1 are Formed History 2 Descriptive or
Narrative 3 Theory or Science and Method or Practice of Art.
On the Principle of mental Exercise & Enjoyment are formed all works
of Poetry or Invention whether in verse or Prose.
There are works which professedly operate on both these Principles,
Such as Moral Dissertation in Single Discourse or Dialogue & Rhetorical
Harangue for Perswasion or Pathos. But this mixed or compound  Form
of Speech will be best understood after the other two are separately
considered.
Of Informative Discourse History is the Primary Form. Descriptive History is the Statement of Coexistent Particulars as in the Description of
Minerals Plants & Animals.
Narrative History is the statement in detail of successive Events as in the
origin Progress & termination of Past Transactions.
Descriptive History extends The Field of Knowledge which personal
Observation opened.
Narrative History extends indefinitely the field of Experience and
Teaches to Anticipate or conjecture the Event of Transactions from their
origin and progress.
For this purpose the past should be recorded with the most Rigorous
regard to Reality. So that nothing of Moment be overlooked nothing false
be inserted or nothing Idle or impertinent tho true be retained.
We may thus conceive the object of Narrative History  to be the
detail 4 of what has actually past: so that the Reader may be as nearly as possible in the Condition of an Intelligent Eye & Ear witness of what has
passed & be made to know all that he could have perceived understood seen
or heard if he had been present & let into every passage as it opened in the
course of the transaction.
This however is to be understood of circumstances material to the origin
progress & Event of the Transaction. In this chiefly the parts or Capacity of
the Historian is tried. If he fail in it be his talent for composition other wise
what they may his work is impertinent and worse than useless because it
missleads the mind of his Reader.
In all Literary compositions there is admitted an Effort of the author to
exhibit  & distinguish himself.
Tis needless here to observe how this may be done in works of Imagination or mental Exercise and Enjoyment without affecting the Essential
Qualities of the Work.
In works of information the case is different. The Author is distinguished in some measure by concealing himself. The Essence of his Work is
the display of its Subject. This is to stand forward on every occasion and in
this to the discerning Reader the Person and merit of the Author is most
Apparent or Conspicuous.
This merit however is not the most obvious to the Reader in general &
therefore not the most Aimed at by Authors in general. They endeavour to
exhibit themselves in the brilliancy of their Language their Sentiments
Reflection Penetration and Judgement. So that a Reader who commits himself to the guidance  of his Author comes off with a deep impression of
his Abilities and his Party his opinions or Judgements but scarcely any
memory of the Subject farther than as it served to furnish matter to the
Author’s Genius and ability.
This is the most dangerous abuse of which pretended compositions are
susceptible because it may impose upon Readers 5 capable of real Information when presented to them: but intercepts it by presenting somewhat
plausible but Illusive in its stead.
This Effect is obtained in part by the brilliancy of figurative expression.
Metaphor & Rhetorical Turns and accomplished Periods in which the Subject is rather alluded to as matter of the authors Estimation than as matter
of Information to the Reader. The Information  indeed if any is thought
to be of mean & Vulgar Consideration Compared to the Blaze of Genius
Dissplayed by the Author. He foresees the Event from the very beginning.
He distinguishes the Wisdom of every Action that is to succeed. The folly of
every attempt or Enterprise that is to miscarry. The Actors are in his hands
he extols or decries at Pleasure. He states himself as Master of the show And
with the Trumpet in his hands consigns to Fame or Infamy Persons to
whom he is himself no way comparable in Ranks of Estimation or Power. 6
History we say is instructive but we do not Specify the respect in which it
is properly & peculiarly so.
It is a narrative of past transactions, and by informing us of what has
been in particular instances tends to reveal the actual course of things in
which  we are engaged and which we may lay our account with in the
future as in the past, and so to become prudent in guarding against one
event and in taking measures to obtain another.
Is this all? Does it not also instruck us in the Disstinction of Virtue &
Vice and lead us by examples to Embrace the one and avoid the other.
If it be allowed that example instrucks, such instruction is not peculiar to
History. 7 It may be obtained in Poetry, Novel and Fable of any sort in which
the Good is contrasted with the bad & lights chosen the most effectual to
conduct the Reader’s choice and if the approbation or reprobation of the
Author is of moment this may be obtaind no less & more properly in moral
Dissertion and Estimate of manners.
Altho this is not the specific Object of History yet as it is confessed to be
of great moment, it is not to be neglected even in History so far as it may be
 obtained without marring its Effect in what is peculiar to it & what is
not to be obtained in any other Branch of Literature.
Here no doubt some caution is required. It is known that the Zeal of
Party may warp the Narrative of History and so may Zeal of any kind: but
that Zeal which is peculiar to History. The Zeal of correct & genuine statement of Fact That truth and Reality in comparison to which nothing else is
of any Value in History.
To Instruck by Example is a plausible object: but to corrupt by Example
is no less to be dreaded than the other is to be hoped. If the example of
Cato 8 is powerful with some that of Caesar 9 is no less so with others. And as
the Examples of fashiona Vice are as frequent as those of Virtue Example we may doubt is of Ambiguous Tendency whether in relation of the past
or exhibition of present manners. On this Account even  History has
been reprobated by some Moralists 10 who think that Knowledge should be
sacrificed to Virtue and men kept in Ignorance rather than expose them to
the Seduction of Vice.
Here is not the place to discuss this Question: But the Object of History
it must be confessed is a fair statement of the passed And this it is probable
on the whole will be favourable to the choice of what is best in human Life
call it what you will Wisdom and Virtue or folly & vice. 11
A Man is not qualified to make a choice unless he knows both sides of a
Question And the object of nature does not seem to terminate in that sort of
Virtue which consists in the Ignorance of anything else.
When the Historian states a Fact it is not always necessary he should
either applaud or condemn, if he state it fully & fairly: it is but an ill 
compliment to his reader to suppose he must be told also what to think of
it. 12
In this however Historians seem to place their merit and display their
Eloquence which is indeed more conspicuous in Satire or Panegyric than in
mere Statement of Fact And language or Stile not so much in the use of simple and appropriate terms. As in metaphor that Amplify or extenuate the
matter according as the Author is himself Affected & would Affect his
Readers.
This however is certainly an Abuse in History. Metaphors amuse the
Imagination by presenting analogies novel & Surprising or any way pleasing in their Effect. But in matter of Information  are either of no
Effect or are apt to mislead. To be of any Effect the Reader ought to know
both the Subject from which the metaphor is Borrowed & that to which it is
transferred. When a ship  is said to plow the Waters the metaphor will
mislead a mere Ploughman. Or if a Plough is said to sail over its Field it will
no less mislead a mere Seaman. To a person who is acquainted with both the
Analogy so far as it takes place is amusing but contains no information And
is therefore very improper where information is the Object. 13
In this we may be supposed to exclude from History not only an officious
display of Sentiment, but even all the ornaments of Speech which consist
not merely in propriety of Expression and Perspicuity but in figure Metaphor & Picturesque Language. What do we leave him then by which to
please his Reader or merit the distinction of literary Excellence. Must
Livy 14 strip himself of his Eloquence to write like a mere Journalist or
Recorder of events.
 To Estimate the merits of History We must distinguish the genuine
State & Course of things from all the Colouring and decorations they may
receive from the Partial Favour or dislike of the Eloquent.
The first is of the greatest consequence as constituting Information of
what Men are have been and may be again. The Colours of Rhetoric laid
upon a Subject tend to inform us of an Authors talents compared to the
Other or actual Course of human Affairs surely of very little importance. An
Authors opinion may Mislead & is of little Authority compared to Nature &
reality itself the object of History.
If an Author is ambitious of Praise he must be contented with that which
pertains to the work in which he is engaged.
He must not expect the Praise of Eloquence in a work which Eloquence
would Marr & disfigure or rather if it be Eloquence to treat of every Subject
in the best manner he must  be powerful in that Eloquence which 
appropriate to History. Proper terms that neither amplify nor extenuate
stating every Circumstance of moment to the origin Progress or result of the
transaction he would relate suffering nothing idle to intrude or nothing of
moment to be omitted so that the Intelligent Reader may have no question
or explanation to Ask. If an Author could appreciate the Value of this
Praise, he would Prefer it to any other or at least while  professed History would he covet the Praise of Figurative amplification or diminution.
Livy is justly placed in the first Class of writers or Artist bent on the
decoration not the mere exact Delineation of their Subject but he ought to
have entitled his word the Panegyric not the History of the Romans.
The Romans from the first were accomplished Statesmen. Their opponents Barbarians they were always in the Right their Ennemies in the
wrong Submission to them  was Reason & Justice opposition mere folly
or Caprice. When an Ennemy decline fighting it was Cowardice when
the Romans protracted the War It was Ability and Good Conduct. Every
Roman spoke like an orator & has a speech composed for him in the most
Accomplished Form. 15
Even in this perhaps it may  thought there is Merit, That merit
which Consts in Partiality to our Country. This however is best shown in
Actions & scarcely can be admitted in professed narration of Truth for the
Information of mankind. It is not the ground on which Livy deserves to be
Commended.
His Eloquence is invaluable to those who think this the highest Talent
which man can Arrive. In him it is so abundant as to Cloy and Fatigue his
Readers and tho this may be called a redundance of Ornament it is certainly
an Error or defect in writing. That he was a man of Probity and a  free
Spirit appears in the genrre of his narrations. Tho a relative in the family of
Livia 16 there are expressions or fragments of his lost History remaining 17 in
which he breaths a Republican and Extols the Majesty of Cato in Particular
above all his contemporarys:
The loss of so great a Part of his voluminous & almost miraculous Performance is irreparable.
With all gloss many Particulars of the greatest importance now unknown
must have been learned from him. But whoever aims at the Praise of History must not Copy from him or think that the Eloquence of History Poetry
or Novel or Pleading Pathetic or Perswasion are the same. The Historians
may give Delight & excite Emotion of Every kind: 19 but it is the Effect of
his subject not of his manner unless Simplicity & propriety of terms be
accounted Rhetoric which indeed in all works of mere  Information it
certainly is and of the best kind and of the most powerful in Poetry as well j
as pleading and Attempts to persuade.
It is certainly requisite in History to Study the most proper interesting
Satisfactory forms of Narration. The Reader should no doubt be prepared
for every Successive step he is to make not by Anticipating Events but by
such previous lights as enable him to comprehend what passes. Though in
order to fix his attention it is the Charm of Narration to keep him in suspense to the last. There are Narratives in which the Authors Vanity and
ostentation of Foresight knowing before he begins to write what was the
Event leads him to talk of measures with an Affectation of penetration little
short of an Absolute prediction of what is to happen. And the Reader is left
to admire & enjoy the author’s depth & forsight in lieu of that Suspense
and Gratification which a Well Conducted Narrative affords! But as I
believe both Author & Reader are dissappointed.
An Ingenuous Author will be desirous to make the best  moral
Impressions on his Reader no less than Supply the requisite communication of Political And Military Transaction.
This however is to be done not so much by expression of the Authors
own Sentiment as by the Features or indications of Characters Intentions
and Effects as bring the Rights & wrongs the Merits Benefits or Sufferings
of Person into view & strike the reader with Sentiments of Esteem Admiration & Love or contempt & Hatred towards the guilty Actor or
Congratulation & joy towards the meritorious & Innocent or Commiseration & Sympathy with the Innocent. In this Tacitus 20 is a Powerful Master
of his Readers Heart. In his Stile in general he resembles more the Painters
who work by repeatd masterly stroke that touch the leading points of
Character than by full and finished expression of every Part. Voltair has
somewhere called him a Bel Esprit Malin 21 Because he has touched 
the points that sting his Reader with Hatred or Contempt of Certain
Emperors & the Tools of their Odious Government. But to have Spared
Tiberius 22 or Nero 23 could not be quoted as an Evidence of Love to
Mankind.
An Able Historian may no doubt Benefit his Reader by giving his opinion in terms direct & in his own Person but this is not the Specific of
Historical Instruction And the Author is under the strictest obligation not
to Substitute opinion of any particular for the proper Statement of such Particular nor to suffer his opinion to byass him in the Detail of his Narration.
These Faults turn Pretended History into mere Dissertation & partial
Argumentation which may have its own merit but not the merit of History.
Perfection in History is no more to be expected in human Life than Perfection in any department of human Art.
If it be the Perfection of History to place its Readers in the  Condition of Persons present to every Transaction so far as to every Circumstance
of moment respecting the origin progress & result of such transaction, it is
evident that no one is qualified to execute such a wrong without he himself
was present Observant Intelligent Impartiall & perspicuous in communicating what he knows. Statesmen & Warriours m24 actually Employed are
the most likely to be so accomplished but even they labour under certain
dissadvantages.
They are of a Side & may not be impartial. There  circumstances
which time alone brings into & of which they may not have been apprised
tho’ material to the origin & progress of Affairs.
As the Person who is to record a transaction should know & distinguish n
what  important in each. It follows that Statesmen are the fittest to
record matters of State and warriours to record operations of War. Yet even
they are apt to fail in the Informations required to the general Reader. Professional Men are apt to pass in Silence all matters of Course as too well
known to require being mentioned which nevertheless are required to the
 Information of General Readers.
Caesar no where mentions the depth of his line in Battle and but once
this Circumstance in the dissposition of his Ennemys saying that
Pompeys 25 line at Pharsalia 26 was ten Deep in the Files though his own to
equalize his Front must have been much less & must have varried on different occasions as the extent of Front to be presented required. This however
now is a desidertum in the Military department of Roman History.
For these Reasons perhaps not the Person present & Concerned nor the
Professional Man: but a Person observant of human affairs Intelligent &
impartial collecting from the memoirs of those who were present from the
Skillful & intelligent in their respective Professions what is peculiarly
important in each account of the informations required to the general
Reader & collecting his own informations at Periods when all important
Materials have come into public View & before any of them have been lost
are upon the whole best  qualified to compose informations of past to
future Ages.
In all works of Information whether History of Science The Language
required is simple naming the Subject and its attributes in proper terms
without any aim on the part of the Author to display his Talent for any
other Embellishment of Stile or Composition. What should we think of a
Waiter who being called on for a Glass of Water in stead of bringing it
should set himself to Gesticulate & cut capers to exhibit the Graces of his
Person or who should bring it with the Air of a Dancer handing the Lady in
a Minuet. The most accomplished Master of all the Graces so performing
the duty of a waiter tho he might be admird on any other occasion would be
laughed at on this. The accomplished master indeed is so far Master of his
Art as to be as tenacious of simplicity on some occasions as he might be of
Art & Concerted Grace on any other.
 Among the Ornaments of Stile Metaphor 27 is the most frequent.
In this Figure of Speech terms appropriate to one Subject are transferred
to another And this practice is so much in Favour with some Speakers or
Writers that they treat of every subject not in its appropriate terms but in
terms appropriate to some other Subject. Mind is treated of in Terms appropriate to Matter & Mechanism and in return matter & Mechanism receive
the Appellations of mental affection & Will. The mind receives & retains
impressions of weight & Forces Bodies have their affections of Gravitation
Cohaesion or aversion & repulsion. This in the progress of Language was
often an aid to expression and what was a convenience at first is still
retained as an ornament.
When the orator would Amplify a Subject he borrows the Language of
one that is  greater. When he would lessen or depreciate a Subject he
takes Reverse. Pericles 28 Thundered in the Assemblies at Athens. Thersites
Schreched in the Assembly of Grecian Chiefs. 29 Even when neither of
these Ends is in View we are delighted with the Analogy of subjects that
mutually throw light upon one Another and Metaphors that point out such
Analogies are pleasant. They become so frequent in use sometimes as not to
be distinguished from proper terms. They are as well understood in their
Application to the Subject to which they are borrow as on those from
which they are derivd. Impression on Mind is as well understood as impression on Wax altho the meanings are as different as mind & Body. They tend
to confound our Notions of things & make the Theorist think he can
explain the  Phaenomena of one Subject by the Substitution of another.
Types & Pictures are made to explain knowledge or the Apprehension of
Things. This is another abuse of Analogy & Metaphor to be avoided in
Speculation on Theory of any sort otherwise than as mere illustration or
play of Fancy.
Metaphors have their place in Rhetorical Compositions on account of
their Rhetorical Effects of Elevating or depressing its Subjects.
But in History would on this Account be reckoned a deceit altogether
contrary to the very Essence of History itself. History is truth & its Effect r
is neither Elevation nor depression.
Metaphor as expression or means of Information in History is of very
doubtful Effect. If both the subject from which the Metaphor is taken &
that to which it is applied are known to the Reader the Metaphor may illustrate and please: But if either is unknown it can only mislead by 
Suggesting Identity in place of unknown Analogy. When a Countryman
who never saw a Ship on her Way is told that she Ploughs the Waters. He is
apt to conceive a Team or draught a Furrow broke up Land raised on Edge
or turned over. What else is to plough. The information to a Seaman who
never saw a Plough would be equally imperfect or deceitful to any Person
who never saw either Plough or Ship it would be altogether meaningless or
Blank.
In every Point of View the metaphoric Stile is altogether improper in
History.
According to Swift’s definition of a Good Stile 30 Proper words in proper
Places History may excell in Stile no less than any other denomination of
Writing or Composition.
Its perfection is truth compleat & well Selected Detail. 31 The preceeding
a preparation for the understanding of What is to follow but the future not
to be anticipated without Necessity. The  matter to be so stated as to
have its proper Effect on the Readers mind without any express prescription from the Author of what he should think or feel. It is not necessary that
the Author should be forever out of sight or never address the Reader in his
own Person But the less Frequent occasions of this sort occur the more near
to the Perfection of History.
Authors are Sometimes to be known by their Stile through all the variety
of Subjects of which they treat and on all occasions. This however is rather
the symptom of a Rotine or habit acquired than of Genuine Power to acquit
themselves as the occasion requires.
Genuine Intelligence & Sensibility is equally prepared for every Subject
of which it has the proper Cognizance. As the name of every Subject is different so are the expressions in which it is to be unfolded. As the mind is
differently affected by various subjects and on Various Occasions so is the
very Tone of a speaker or the Stile of a Writer And it is no praise to a speaker
or  writer to say that he is the same on all Subjects and on all occasions.
That he talks of the small in the same Tone with the Great or that he is
always Elevated & solemn or always depressed & familiar.
It should probably be said of a powerful speaker or Writer that he ascends
or Descends with his Subject Simple or Figurative according as he
employed to inform or Agitate his Audience or his Readers. Always Simple
in History sometimes even in pleading a Cause: but when he would carry a
Point or make an impression proportionally Armed with all the weapons of
Rhetorick or declamation. Such a Person is not to be known his Stile otherwise than as the Powerful is known by the effect of his performances.

IV. OF STATESMEN AND WARRIOURS 
Their proper Functions defined. Generals and Armies. The importance of Discipline aided
by vigour of Body and Mind, the essential requisites to make a good Soldier. 3 to 5.
Of the Duties of a General; choice of Position; to gain the confidence of his Soldiers, and
instill the principle of rigid Honour in his Officers; to set the example in his own person. 5 to
10.
Genuine Patriotism more observable in Free Governments; its importance as a stimulus to
acts of Heroism. 10 to 14.
The necessity of Promotion being open to every Soldier without distinction of Rank: this
principle more observable in the French Revolutionary Army; its Effect. 14 to 17.
The several requisites to ensure the Zeal of the Soldier enumerated. 17 to 24.
State of the French Army before the Revolution; abject state of the common Soldier, and the
entire change the Revolution effected: its consequences. 24 to 27.
Of Statesmen: the advantages of the union of the Talents of a Statesman and General, enumerated. The Ancients superior in the Science of Government, and the Knowledge of Men
and Manners: the two Functions of Statesman and General, generally united in Ancient
times: Their separation. 27 to 33.
Suggestions for the improvement of the Military Department. 33 to 36.
As the Soul or Intelligent Principle in Mans Nature presides amidst the
Sensations Perceptions opinions and affections as Elements constituent of
his Form & mode of Existence: So there are Individual men fit to preside in
the assemblage of Numbers however diversifyd in Condition disposition or
Power. These are termed Statesmen and Warriors.
The number amid whom they preside consist of Persons of whom each
can do and does for himself what is Essential to his own being & State.
 The Statesman presides among Citizens. The Warrior among Soldiers.
The Citizen subsists by Labour opinion consent or Law.
The Soldier is the Bearer of Force which he may Employ when just &
necessary.
Their functions are intimately Connected being to Act on the same
Materials and with the Same Instruments tho to different Ends. 2
The statesman is to act with men at Peace. The Warrior with Men at War.
The first is defective if he neglect the resources of War. The other if he is
not provided for the Reverse yet their peculiar Functions may be separately considered.
The first preserves to men & with the assistance the order of Pacific
Society.
The other  would prepare Men for the Use of Force such as may repell
or redress contingent Wrongs.
Both require the Knowledge of Human Nature its dispositions and
means of working upon it to protect & encourage what is Right to restrain
or discourage what is wrong. d
To omit for the present any further consideration of State affairs.
The Warrior being to conduct Men in the use of Arms through danger &
hardship to Victory over their Enemies must cultivate skill and habit in the
use of Arms and the forms of array or Tactics requird to enable numbers to
act successfully together.
For these Ends Maual Excercise and order whether of Movement 
or Rest are required.
By excercise and discipline Armies may be presented under the most formidable appearance of Energie & Force.
But such presentments being made without Any circumstance of Danger
or hardship do not contain any Assurance of fitness for Service against a
resisting Enemy.
To have such assurance it is not Sufficient that men know their place &
handle their Arms well. A certain Vigour of mind consisting of Intrepidity
competence And Ardour to meet or Steddiness to resist an Enemy are the
great & Essential Requisites.
It is not sufficient that these should be found in officers or commanders
they are required in every Rank.
 It is the Bussiness of a General to Review his Battalions. The Cloathing
the Fierce Cokked hat the Steddy Rank The Arms well handled Signalize
The Corps and do honour to the officers. Armies so composed merit the
Confidence of Generals and are fit to Awe an Enemy.
Let the ground be well chosen on which to receive an Enemy or movements well devised with which to frustrate any Advantage an Enemy
endeavours to avail himself. Let officers be men of Honour.
This & no more is requisite to qualify An Army & its Leader for the
Service to be performed on  every Topic of that Theme. The Reasoning
Soldier is prepard to give opinion and account for most Events in War.
He has considered how to give a Corps its proper Discipline and Aspect.
But how to Inspire an officer Jealousy of Honour 3 And how to Spread
Stedely Vigour and Ardent Courage through his Ranks is not a common
Problem in conversations on this subject. The Subject is discussed in every
point but this the most important of all. Tis vain to choose a Post if men
will not defend it or to plan an Attack if men will not perform it. What will
make the Rank & File retain its post  unmovd or Scar an Enemy with
impetuous Force?
Armies are not always Equal in these Respects and the Superiour has a
great Advantage may Act on the offensive and even Shun his Enemy on
equal Ground. The Inferior is put on the defensive & must not hazard
Action without some favourable Circumstance or Signal Advantage. 4 Such
were the Campaigns of Julius Caesar 5 in all his wars. And such the Campaigns of Napoleon on the modern Continent of Europe. For the confidence
of their troops those  Warriors no doubt were much indebted To their
first and Continued Successs. And it is no doubt on this Account as well
on every other Account An Object of Importance to the Warrior to set out
successfully. For this purpose he may expose himself & seek for opportunitys to show his Men their Enemies Back though otherwise of little moment
and when his Repution is fixed Danger may be left to others. His troops
will be pleased that he is Safe. In this respect however success which Implys
ability does but continue its Effects And it may appear nugatory to tell an
officer to beat  his Enemy that he may continue Still to Vanquish him
yet the point deserves our Notice when Armies flushed with Victory are to
be opposed.
Men enured to Success Advance to An Enemy with a Confidence which
is often Sufficient to Obtain the Victory.
Men are individually distinguished by unequal measures of Fortitude &
personal Vigour: 6 but of this either in respect to its origin or Effect. The
Discipline of Armys does not treat having to do chiefly with those measures
of Fortitude which may be made to pervade at once numerous Bodies of
Men and inspire the Rank and File of an Army to the Lowest Condition.
This is  sometimes the Effect of National Estimation well or ill
founded on truth. It is needless to observe that genuine Patriotism is a Powerful motive to Valour in its Cause And it Scarcely can fail to operate where
the community is an honour and Protection to its members as it is in free
Constitutions of Government where no rank is depressed so low as not to
feel its participation in the General Wellfare. 7
Hence the Valour of Freemen Armed in defence of their Country 8 is akin
to that of the Parent in defence of her Young The Effect of an Ardent affection approaching to Enthusiasm which stifles the Sense of Difficulty or
danger. This Principle which is so powerful  in Free States may be further cultivated by Proper Application to promote its Effect on the minds of
Military men. 9 The Spartans And Even the Romans were eminently Distinguished in the use of this Policy. The Whole Discipline of Sparta 10 was
directed to inspire The Reality not the appearance of Fortitude and military
Valour And it was the more Successful in the Reality that it checked the
Ostentation. The Romans to promote the general Tendency of their Policy
to this effect had a Multiplicity of Specific Honours to be bestowd on particular Acts of Valour & Military Merit Such as saving a fellow Citizen
overawing an Enemy in single combat Being the first to scale an Enemies
Wall &c &c  And these honorary Rewards being attainable by the
Legionary Soldier as well as the Officer pervaded the Ranks and formed a
Mass of owerpowering and irresistable strength. 11
National Estimation 12 is a known Principle of Valour. Hence the Superiority of a Greek to an Asiatic and of one Nation to another in many well
known Instances.
This Principle is often mere ill-formed Prejudice and absurd but should
not be eradicated nor in any degree rashly discouraged. It is well to concur
in it & even to express the Confidence it tends to inspire.
It is a merit in the Warriour whatever advantage he may have from the
Character Reputation of prejudice of his country to devise every means of
improving it or Supplying its defect in the form & construction of 
his Ranks in the course of Preferments and in the distribution of honours
occasional .
In States where the Civil Distinction of Ranks 13 is extream and Indelible
as in most Nations of Europe. The same extream distinction is Observed in
the Army. The officer is Noble & he only is intitled to preferment. The Low
Born is a mass of Vulgar important only by their Number & implicit obedience. There is nothing to inspire them with Zeal for the object on which
they are employd there are no hopes of advancement in distinguishing
themselves. Enurd to Privation & Hardship they witness the superior
Accommodation of their officers. In this Description there is a Signal
source of  Inferiority to others in which contrary Circumstances take
place where the Condition of a Soldier is nearer that of his Offi where
they not only partake in the same dangers but in the same privations and
hardships. Where the Low may hope to rise by his Merit & Where Nothing
is dreaded so much as disgrace. In the Roman Legion the Pay of a Centurion was but double that of a Legionary Soldier and in great straits or
difficulties they lived Pell mell together. 14
The French Revolution has enabled the Warrior to procure all these
advantages in the Form of his Army. And he studies to improve them by
Artificial Means.
He can promote the private Soldier if  he deserve it through every
Rank to the highest. He has devised a gradation of Honours under the Title
of a Legion 15 by which he has a Reward prepard for every indual in
his Rank & which serves as a Badge of his Title to farther Preferments. That
his Army conducted by himself should prevail in the contest with that of
other Nations in the Continent of Europe is not to be wondered at.
That the Event is different in his Contest with Britons whether by sea or
Land is owing more to the Spirit of a Free Nation 16 than to any Superiority
of Discipline or concerted Policy of those to whom the Department of War
is entrusted.
 It had been observd in a company 17 of which I had the honour to be
one That the Vigour of mind which breathed in the Ranks or the means of
improving seldom or never made a part in the Subject of discussion in the
Conversations of Military Men. That it is nevertheless one of the most
important considerations in the Form or Conduct of Armies. That by which
Greeks prevailed in their contest with Persians. 18 Caesar with his Antagonists and Napoleon 19 in his Wars in the Continent of Europe.
Whoever has the upper hand in this particular may dispense with Numbers & keep his Enemy on the defensive & unwilling to hazard Engagement
without some manifest advantage 20 & therefore ever  ready to give way
when the Ground is to be disputed on equal terms.
Men are carefully taught to handle their Arms and move in their Ranks:
why not also to receive an Enemy who attacks with Steddiness or rush upon
him with Ardour & Confidence of Valour.
The national Character the Love of a Leader & Confidence in his conduct with Zeal for a Cause are principal Constituents in this mighty
Advantage. But whatever it be defects may be supplied and the case
improved.
Promotion laid open to all who distinguish themselves in the Ranks Military honours for Singular Services, The Valour & example of officers who
Suffer or act nearly on a level  with the Ranks they command are expedients that may be resorted to by able Warriours in Every Instance however
wanting in Nation. 21
All Measures of this sort may be thought Superfluous in the Constitution
of British Armies already Superior to every Enemy in the Vigour &
National Spirit of their Ranks. 22 If so let it be rewarded and honoured and
everything be done to confirm & perpetuate so great a National Blessing &
Security.
It appears to me that Something may be done for the Rank and File
including the non Commissioned Officers. For the Battalion: and for the
General officers, tending to confirm the Spirit  of Inferiour, draw into
the superior order more of the National Genius And enlarge the field from
amidst which Government may choose to be employed in the Conduct of
Particular services.
The Road to Preferment from the Rank of Private to that of commissiond officer is very much obstructed in most nations of Europe by the
supposed indelible Distinction of birth 23 And tho’ less so in Brittain than
any where else except Revolutionary France is still considerably so by the
difference of manners & Education So that it is difficult to raise a Man from
the Rank & File into the Society of Commissioned Officer. This tho difficult is not to be  entirely set aside.
It is of Consequence that it should be known in the Rank that distinguish merit will raise the Soldier to any height in his Profession and for
this purpose the opportunity of Promotion should be seized as often as
proper Instances of occur. The inconvenience is a trifle & the good consequence to the Service incalculable.
But in whatever degree this practice may take place a certain gradation of
preferment may be introduced from the Rank of Private up to that of Quarter master and Adjutant to which the objection is Proposed Desire of
Promotion is the ruling Passion of mere Military Men. This if they have no
Other motive is sufficient to  Conduct them through all the Forms and
difficulties of their Profession And is an incitement to great Actions. And
this Prospect should not be shut against them in any Case whatever.
In regular Battalions it may be presented even in the lowest Rank without extending so far as to carry the Private at once into the Line of
Commissioned Officers. A Line of Preferment may be drawn from the mere
Centinel through a number of successive steps sufficient to present the Soldier with a prospect of bettering himself by Sobriety order & regular
Conduct if not by brilliant Action and thus engage him in his duty by a
Motive far superior  to the fear of Punishment or the Actual Infliction
of those degrading Punishments which tend to dispirit any class of men
that feel themselves exposed to them. 24
There may be a Step of Preferment to the mere Recruit from the Rear to
the Front Rank From the Battalion to the Flank Companies From the mere
Centinel to the Corporal thence to the Sergeant, To the Sergeant Major To
the Ajutant or Quartermaster &c. These steps may be marked by a small
increase of Pay & some visible badge of Dress. This may require in the Military Establishment a small Addition of Expense but the advantage of trust
would be cheaply purchased.
 The Neglect of Officers to cultivate the Spirit And respect the Character of Men under their command as well the show of their Ranks at a
Review is part of that Pride which Gentlemen Indulge in comparing themselves with the mass of the People. Officers are furnished in Europe from
the Noblesse or Gentlemen who derived Indelible Priviledge from their
Birth. 25
These were considered as the Soul & Spirit of Armies. The line of Battle
was Supposed a mere mass to be torpid or Active as they should incline.
In this State the Revolution found the Armies of France in particular &
when open war  made for the line to emerge from this state of 
Relation between officers & Men it soon Appeard that Noblesse was an
empty Name and the great Body of men with Arms in their hands & Conscious of their own importance Subverted the Monarchy and laid it with all
its priviledged orders in the Dust. 26 Men raised their Rank on a presumption or Experience of merit Living & Suffering with their men in all times
of Privation hardship or danger. And men from the Ranks looking up for
preferment due to their Action have trampled on all the former Military
Establishments of the Continent of Europe & make a General p27 knowing
how to conduct them, Ascend from a State of Europe to the unprecedented
Dominion of Nations formerly Supposed invincible and not to be shaken
by  any attack to be feared from abroad.
The Pride of a Genuine Warrior rests on the spirit and Vigour of those he
has the honour to command and on the Ardour with which they join with
him in every hardship Privation & Danger to which the Service may be
exposed. But if in this we would moderate the distinction between officers
& Men it should be by bettering that of the men not by lowering or impairing the Condition of Officers.
In all that has been Said however no more than one Department in the
Service of Armies has been touched That of the Instrument which is to be
employed in War. The hand of an artist who is to employ that Instrument
yet remains to be Considered.
In the Ancient times of Greece & Italy The Departments of  State &
War to the Manifest Advantage of those employed in them were generally
United. 28 The Statesmen cannot be ignorant of war without great inconvenience nor the Warrior of all Matters of State. 29 They are each equally
concerned to know mankind to know what men can do & how they may be
made to do it.
The Statesman in some degree is paramount & must judge the occasions
of War and Consequences of War. Short of this he is no more than a Clerk in
office & a Bable in Council. 30 The Warriour as at Rome may occasi
only change his Gown for the Sagum 31 but without knowing how to graft
his Services on those of the State is a mere prize fighter & Bully, 32 whose
only  form of proceeding is mere Violence or Force. 33
These Departments are nevertheless for the most part, distinguished in
Modern Europe. 34 And the Consequence that the accomplishments severally fitting for Departments are Supposed to consist in some trivial or even
Mechanical practices separately required in one or the other. Writing &
Speaking are the Qualities of Statesmen. r
The forms of Parade & Review those of the Warrior. An Officer who has
been drilled & drilling all his Life is a reputed Master of his Trade. A
Tongue in debate and hand for the Pen in office is a man of Bussiness in the
State. That knowledge and Respect for Mankind which ability & Wisdom &
which lead the Multitude of men in the Council or the Field are  seldom to be found or sought for in the account of either. Hence it is that
Nations are so much at the mercy of such whenever they are found united.
We sometimes boast the Superiority of modern to Ancient times in Science. 35 But all we are entitled to say is that we have applied to different
Branches of Study. The Greeks & Romans applied to that Branch which
concerned them most. Men manners the Forms of State and the Conduct of
men whether in Peace or in war. We have ransacked nature the Earth & the
Heavens for Geographical Physical and Astronomical Science. Man himself
is forgotten or considered only as a Party in Trade and a Dealer in Manufactures & Money. 36 I  doubt we shall never be able to unite the Sagacity of
a Spartan in the Field with the Skill of a Chymist in his laboratory. But if
this be too much people who are at leisure may learn to compare & distinguish such Characters.
Under every high name transmitted in the History of Italy we have at
once a Statesman and a Warriour. 37
The function  War may have been for youth that of the State for
Mature Age. But the genius & Accomplishments were not to be distinguished. At Rome in particular even this difference was not attended to.
The Civil Magistrate & Military Commander was chosen a the same time
and in the same Person. 38 In consequence of this union of Characters 
all the Genus 39 of the People was directed into these Channel and the
publick might look for both in every Person who aspired to distinction
and publick Honours.
Where these departments are separated the case is otherwise according as
either prevails the Genus 40 of the People is drawn into that Channel and
Mutilated Statesmen or Mutilated Warriours is all that the state can
produce.
The State as including all is no doubt to be preferred to the Army which
is but a part. 41 And if the Honours are as they ought to be at the disposal of
the former The State may be at a loss to find any person worthy of great military trust.
When the principal Honours of the State are as in Great Britain made the
Prize of civil or Political Merits  Genius is directed chiefly into this
Channel And men come into publick View with the Single Talent of
Speech-making as Sufficient to ensure their Fortunes.
In Families of Rank The quick are destined for Parliament The Slow will
do for the Army. By the Influence of this apprehension a choice is made
already prejudical to the Military Department & by limiting from high
Military command to those who have been bred to the Service and passed
through all the Steps of Preferment The choice of Military commanders
comes to be limited to Persons already far advanced in Life and who in the
Detail of Battalion forms have lost all Sense of what is necessary to meet an
Enemy of Genius and in the of Genius in the Fields where address & enterprise are required instead of show and the Forms of Parade.
 It were therefore a real Improvent of the Military Establishment
in such case if any thing could be done to direct the Genius of the Country
more into that department And to extend the List from which the sovereign
may Select those most worthy of high Military Trust.
The first may be done by holding out to the Ambitions at an Early Period
of Life the prospect of great & honourable distinction in this Line and prospect may result in some degree by the Course which may be taken to widen
the Circle from which Commanders may be Selected.
At present when the King is to nominate a Staff for any Military Province or Enterprise He is limited in his Choice to those who have the Rank of
General officers in direct Subordination to the Chief & in  Gradation to
one another. To loossen the fetters which The King by his Commission has
imposed on himself: may all such Commissions of Rank be withheld untill
it shall appear what assortment of Abilities may be requird for the Particular Services in View. And the King appoints a Court of Oyer & Terminer for
Tryals in a particular Case so he may nominate a Staff with determinate
Ranks for that particular Province or Service only And beyond such Particular occasion there should be no permanent Rank of Generals.
In the meantime as every Battalion Regiment or Corps is an occasion of
permanent Service there must be a Suitable gradation of Ranks from the
Subaltern up to the Colonel or Commandant.
 But when he is to Employ two or more Regiments together he makes
his generals for the occasion from any part of his Military List.
How is then is this Military List to be made up and of whom is it to consist? I answer That as none could be chosen to command at Rome That is to
be a Magistrate who had not Served ten years in the Legions, 42 So none
should be placed on the Military List in Britain till after he had served ten
years in a Regiment, in order to be acquainted with its Forms & Details. 43
But as this advantage may be gained in any Rank as Volunteer or Subaltern
a Person of high Views in the Service may Serve his Time in any such Rank
without competing with his fellow Soldiers  for Emolument or Battalion Rank.
What is to become then of those who have rose gradually to the Rank of
Colonels of Regiments. 44 I answer They may as at present retain the Emoluments of Colonels And being on the General List may be appointed as at
present to the Government of Fortified distant settlements or put upon
Staff for stationary or Occasional service as The King shall appoint 45 And
as the mere Rank of General at present brings no Emolument: the only
change proposed in the condition is that they shall not bear the Title of
General or Marechal untill it brings proportion & Profit along with it.
This is my project 46 and I flatter myself that it would bring many Persons of Genius and high Views on the Military List who are now excluded
from it.

VI. OF HAPPINESS AND MERIT 
Are they different objects, or the same object under different points of view? Enjoyment and
Suffering, their various and opposite effect on some Minds. The Power of Truth and Wisdom
in correcting errors of the Mind. 1 to 3.
True happiness consists not in Riches or worldly enjoyment, but in Mental Attainments
which is Wisdom. What the signs of Happiness and Merit in the Rich and Poor man. 3 to 6.
Of Benevolence or Charity. Fortitude. The Terms Happiness and Merit frequently misapplied. Who are the truly Happy. 6 to 12.
Are these different Objects or The same Object in different points of
View?
To many they are different objects. But when well understood they are
the same And ought not to be distinguished under different points of view.
In vulgar language it is not uncommon to say That a Person is not so
happy as he deserves to be or that he is more so than he deserves. Such language implys a distinction of the enjoyments which constitute Happiness
and the Qualities which constitute Merit And tends to sett human Nature
in a State of Warfare & Contention with itself. For who can be indifferent to
Happiness or who can be happy if he is oppressed with a Sense of deserving
to be otherwise?
Of this Warfare indeed in human Nature there are Strong Features or
Appearances. Enjoyment is what Men desire and Suffering is what  they
avoid. 2 The reverse however is not uncommon. 3 Enjoyments are in some
Instances of so mean degree as to imply meanness in the Person Addicted to
them and the converse is true of Sufferings. Ne quid Nimis 4 seems on many
occasions to sett the Judgement at War with Enjoyment or Appetite.
This Species of War however is but one  the difficulties which Nature
has laid in our Way to exercise that Faculty of Reason which we are born to
inherit which Waxes in being exerted and acquires Power in being obliged
to employ it.
Experience is Information and The Habit of Action an Accession of
Power. Folly under the disguise of Enjoyment cannot mislead nor Wisdom
under the appearance of Suffering deter. And the War of Competition
among the Objects of attachment or pursuit may end. But this which in
thinking is but a Single Step may be the work of Ages in the progress of
Sensitive mind. Here Experience must be repeated before it gains the
Ascendant of opinion. Even after one false conception is Exploded another
may  Succeed and thus mistakes may be repeated before truth alone is
left to occupy the mind. Habit keeps possession even after mistakes are
acknowledged. And time indefinite may be required  run the Course of
Successive Practice and the habits which may occupy the mind and yet it
should appear that Periods unlimited & unconfined Reality Truth & Wisdom must prevail And occupy an Empire of the Soul of whose Right there
can be no detection by which it can be overthrown or no preferable Habit or
Practice to Supplant the best of which the title to be preferred is experience
already obtained  what it is compared with every Other choice of
mind.
What may be the Issue or result of indefinite Progression even to created
mind is probably too much for us to Anticipate. Philosophers of old 5 supposed it to be an Assumption into the Essence of God from which it
emerged: But whatever may be  result of a Progress at once to Perfection & to Happiness 6 we cannot doubt that those Ends may not only meet:
but are in  reality the same. They are alike the Objects of a Wise Ambition which if the ends were separate tho consistent might be frustrated in
the attainment of one or the Other.
This in fact happens under the mistaken apprehension of Men in this
Period of Animal Life.
Men are thought to be happy in consequence of events or in possessing
the gifts of Fortune: but frequently to have merit in despising those Gifts.
Even those who would reason themselves into a different opinion are seldom fully Successful in the attempt. It is nevertheless a piteous State of the
Mind When we rail at the World when Merit as we express it is not
rewarded with Fortune. But none are more disposed to adopt this complaint
than those who affect the greatest Zeal for morality. They would be thought
Zealous for Merit but are possibly no more than Envious of Fortune. The
Subject is of all others the most important and just conception of it the most
valuable attainment of human Reason in its Preparation for higher
advances in the Scale of Intelligent  Being.
We may in some degree indulge our hopes of immortality in proportion
as we are qualified now to perceive the Superiority of mental Attainments
to all the conditions of mere Animal Life.
The Horse probably prefers nothing to the Riches of his Pasture & that
Swiftness of his foot. But Man while he enjoys the Accommodations of Animal Life Adores the Wisdom & Goodness with which they are Supplied. He
inhabits a Corner but his Thoughts extend to the Universe of Space & the
Eternity of Duration. These are among the Stamina by which he is qualified
and on which he may continue to build the hopes of a Future & indefinite
Progression.
In short: when all the sources of Folly are exhausted; unless Intelligence
itself be not suppressed; Wisdom must Succeed & take the firmer hold that
no Imposture remains untried.
Even here or in this period of Intellectual Progression it were Idle to
make choice of Prosperity in preference to adversity for neither is at our
Option And we must take our Part in either as it comes. In prosperity 
Temperance Frugality & the use of what Fortune Supplys without being
absorbed in attention to it or affecting to despise it is at once a Constituent
of Happiness & Merit. In Adversity Fortitude whether active or passive as
occasion requires is precisely in the same predicament as the real Constituent of Happiness & Merit.
What is Benevolence? Surely The most undeniable proof of a mind in
itself agreeably affected and Estimable or acceptable to others. Thus uniting the Supreme Characters of Happiness & Merit As its reverse or Malice
unites those of Wretchedness and detestation.
Benevolence unitd with Wisdom and Almighty Power are the attributes
of God: or in other Words the Supreme Felicity & Perfection of Intelligent
being.
The Wisdom of Man but enables him to distinguish between Good 
Evil without Mistake in the detail of Choice or in the means of carrying it
into Effect.
 This Character as in respect to Happiness it carries with it every pursuit
the Assurance of Safety Gratification & Success it is the Specific Excellence
of Intellectual Nature and as such highly Esteemed or Constituent of Merit.
Fortitude also or the Power under to encounter difficulties. Threats or
adverse Events so Appropriate to the Lot of Man is at once the Measure 
his Force or Power & best antidote to unavoidable Suffering. 7 And is Surely
as much required to support him in his own Esteem as in that of others.
Happiness Therefore & Merit are Perfection  mind & Character are
but different Names for the same Condition. Whence is it then that men so
often hate those who they think happy And pity or lament those who they
think meritorious? Surely because they mistake both those Characters.
Such we cannot doubt is the Result when we would  infer what is best
for mankind in the form or condition of their Being: Or in Other Words
when we would Specify what is to them Constituent of Happiness And
Merit. In these terms we would express the Ultimate Objects of living or
Intelligent Nature That for which Life itself is of any value either of Estimation or Enjoyment. And yet these terms are so loosely employed that
their meaning seems scarcely to admit of a Serious Consideration. A Person
is said to be happy as often as he finds anything to please himself and to
have merit as often as he does anything to please Others. And in this use of
words The Coxcomb is happy And the Impostor has Merit. When we awake
from these mistakes and call the Coxcomb a Fool & the Impostor a Knave
Still Happiness is one thing and Merit another. A Person  may have
merit in what he has done but be happy or unhappy in his Circumstances
And a person is Sometimes Said to be happy tho’ he is insensible of it.
If we would correct these follies it seems necessary to begin with an
attempt to fix the object in View under the Terms we employ. And by way of
Postulatum require that Happiness Should Stand for the most Perfect State
of Enjoyment And merit for the sum of most Estimable Qualities. And with
general precaution we would discend to Particulars: The Identity of Happiness & Merit as in the preceeding Argument may be fully Established.
After all & notwithstanding the Identity of matter alluded to in the
Terms Happiness & Merit: There is a distinctive Propriety in the  use
of these Terms corresponding to the different respects in which the Subject
is considered. Wisdom Benevolence Fortitude and Temperance considered
in Respect to Enjoyment is properly termed Happiness or the State of greatest Enjoyment & least suffering. In respect to the Excellence of Character or
the Esteem in which they are held by others  are properly distinguishd in the Appellation of Merit: But Happy at once and Meritorious is
he whose Selfish or care of his own Wellfare or Happiness has merit in the
View of those who are proper Judges of Merit & whose Vanity or desire of
Applause leads him only to Affect what is really Constituent of Happiness
to himself.
On these Conditions we shall blame the Selfish nor despise the Vain. The
one will  be attentive to himself: but the Quality of which is most tenacious to himself is benevolence to others And Virtue tho’ supposed to be
dissinterested by those who mistake their own Interest is nevertheless the
Interest of Man or his most valuable & secure Possession. Selfishness in
Vulgar Estimation because it is Supposed to exclude its best & most valuable Personal Concern And Benevolence is supposed to be of no Value to the
owner because it is a Concern for the Wellfare of others or the order of
Beings susceptible of Happiness.
The missapplication of Words is a mistake of things And mistake. The
Permanence of ill Habits of thinking & Acting the Slow acquisition of New
habits which in their Turn are perhaps to  be removed by slow Alteration or Change untill every Mistake or ill habit has been tryed is that which
makes the Progress of Mans Intellectual Germ to Wisdom So Slow & so little in Appearance Advanced in the Periods through which we see it carried:
but which in its Attainments will be the More Secure & to the mind which
has made the Attainments more his own.

VII. DISTINCTION OF VALUE AND ITS
SOURCE IN EXISTENCE
Distinction, Good and Evil, Happiness and Misery, Mind and Matter. Variety the Primary
feature throughout Nature. Man a variety; his Infancy, Youth and Manhood: his faculties. 1
to 9.
Happiness and Perfection, various ideas of. Ambition which prompts to Exertion, and its
opposite Indolence: their influence. 9 to 11.
The Grand Distinction of Man as an Intelligent Being. That the present scene is projected
for the advancement of his Intellectual Progress; considered in a review of his Progress
through Life. Origin of Laws; Commerce &c. Man as a Member of Society. Incitement to
active Exertion in the Love of his Country &c. In calling forth his Energies promotes his
Happiness; the whole order of things tend to the same end. Political Societies, States &c. 11
to 28.
Man’s Infancy: Faculty of Speech. Distribution of Good & Evil, Pleasure and Pain tend to
make him Happy; The Superiority of Mind over Matter. The Wisdom and Goodness of God
manifested in all the works of Creation, all tending to Man’s Happiness. 28 to end.
1st Distinction Good & Evil. Where neither is applicable Existence is
altogether Indifferent.
2d Distinction. Happiness and Misery. Happiness is the possession of
Good Misery the accumulation of Evil. The Sentient & Conscious alone are
Susceptable of Happiness or Misery. The Intelligent most of all.
3d Distinction Mind & matter. All Existence of Happiness or Misery
come under the appellation of Mind. All other existence is Matter.
Matter has no Value But in its Relation to Mind. If there be an Eternal
Principle of Existence in Creative Power It must be a Principle of Selection
choosing that which is made in contradistinction to what is Otherwise. But
there is no ground of Selection but Good & Evil Happiness or Misery or
tendency whether near or remote to one or the other.
It follows that mind alone  or what is related to mind can Present
object to induce the Exertions of Intelligent & Selective Creatures. And that
Existence is limited to mind & the matter any fitted to form an Allotment
for mind as a Scene or Material of Action & of Art & Accommodation and
all matter exists but for the Sake of Mind. 1
For this all Suns & Planets be their numbers & Magnitude what they
may are Valuable only in their Relation to Mind As the Work of Eternal
Mind And the Lot of those for whom they are Created.
This Planet Earth in all its Constituent Parts its Still its Organised &
Living orders its permanent and Active & Variable Forms Its Laws and
their Phenomena whether of Mechanics in Chymistry Vegetation Animal
Life or Intelligence is the Lot of Man Intelligent Conscious or active Whenever such Planets exist it is Natural to Suppose  Analogous Relation of
Mind & Matter; And in the Solar System man in some degree partakes with
Other minds And by a Stretch of Conjecture also with all minds of which
universe itself is the allotment.
Of the Good or Evil to be apprehended in the Creative mind His works
alone are indications. Contingencies may come from Other minds Creation
from Him alone. In this He is revealed and nother Mind but his. Language Spoken or Written may bear the meanings of Men Creation alone the
meaning of Almighty God.
Here his meaning is to be collected from the Lot & as all is made for man
his Lot alone can furnish Information of the Creators Will & meaning.
In the prosecution of an  Argument in which we are to question the
fitness of a Person to his place or of the place to him: it appears proper first
to Characterise The Person His Form dispositions And Powers. Next the
circumstances provided for his Accommodation and gratification or promotion towards the End or destination of his Existence.
In this or in the first Aspect of Nature throughout Indefinite Variety is a
Primary Feature. It meets the Observer in every Compartment In the
assemblage of Still materials that compose the Globe. In all the Forms
organised or participant in any Species of Life whether Vegetative or Sensitive acting by Will As in the Animal forms of being. Of the Latter Class
Man himself appears at first no more than a Variety distinguished from the
general train of animals by Circumstances & by no means to his Advantage.
Born to an Infancy more weak, &  dependent & of longer Continuance
than that of the young in many other Upon the Tardy Appearance of his
Instincts or Native propensities 2 he appears no way better directed than
Other Species on the contrary in this part of his Nature he appears less correct or guarded against dangerous abuse than any Other Animal persisting
frequently to mislead into hurtful Excesses of which the other Animals are
by Nature incapable. With these Appearances to his dissadvantage he opens
the Career of a Progressive Being Agreeably to the General Character of
Creation in all its organised or living Forms known to us. In every The
Analogy of Birth Infancy Puerility youth manhood & Age are exhibited
throughout and these are the Stages through which this Singular Animal is
known to Pass. And if he is observed to set out with some dissadvantages in
what is termed his Infancy: he proceeds in a manner  different from the
Other Animals And tho at first less correct yet soon appearing likely to
carry him through a Range of Attainment & Action far Superior to theirs.
With less precise direction to a Specific Object he is qualified to Observe to
conceive and chuse An Object for himself. He acts accordingly from Opinion rather than Instinct. And as opinion may vary Indefinitely and
thousands may be wrong for one that  hence Mistake Error Caprice
and Folly are more frequent in these first Periods of his History than Wisdom or a just Apprehension of things. In Mistake or Error having Occasion
to experience its falsehood he cannot persist for ever.
From the indefinite Variety incident to opinion or habits of thinking we
derive the varieties by which Men differ from one Another. And the same
Man differs from himself at different times.
The Apprehensions of certain distinctions under the Titles of Good &
Evil of Excellence or Perfection &  Defect of Right & Wrong as well as
Pleasure & Pain obtained or incurred in the Gratification or dissappoint of Propensities or in the quality of Mere Sensations as
Particulars happen to be ranged under these Titles they are coveted or
Shuned and the Actor is not only Spontaneous but likewise Conscious
knows what he does & for what Reason.
In this he is said to be intelligent & accountable for his Actions. 3 Of the
Past he is conscious of the Future he projects intends & Contrives. His Powers are Derived from the great Source of Existence & of Power but his
Exertions & Attainments are his own & in this alone probably consists any
Analogy to that Personality & Intelligence of which the order of Nature
gives a Perception in the Being of its Self Existing Author.
If the Consciousness of what he had done of what he had attained or lost
were wanting in the human Mind he must be degraded from the Rank of
Intelligent Being & have  no Germ from  to originate a Progression towards the Completion of those attainments of Which the Germ of
Intelligence is susceptible. As he now is We see only the outset of a Progress
of which the Issue is probably hid beyond the Limits of his Animal Life. As
an Animal he waxes in Stature & Muscular Power As intelligent he waxes in
Knowledge Sagacity Judgement Invention & Contrivance for his Purpose.
His Faculties like those of the Living & Active in most Instances do not
waste but Wax in their Exertions. As the human mind is essentially Active
Certain Modes of Activity constitute its most Perfect and Happiest State
The Contemplation of Nature The Discovery of its Physical Laws & the
Comprehension of its interesting Phaenomena Benevolence & its Exertions
in the System of Intelligent Beings. Wisdom, with its unerring Selection of
Good in every Instance Fortitude with its Exemption from Fear or Distrust
and Jealousy the Surmounting of Difficulties and passage through Dangers
are the Supreme  Enjoyments of this Active or Ambitious Being. 4 In this
Form we may conceive him to be advancing towards what is at once the
Felicity and Perfection of his Nature however lowness may apprehend the
yet actual attainments of the Species.
Under the Titles of Happiness & Perfection or Excellence The Nascent
mind yet ignorant of all begins with applying those names to some Contingent Circumstances such as catch the unexperienced Attention whether
Sensation Fortune or Estimation. They engage in the pursuit of Such
Objects practise the Arts or become dependent on the Aids by which they
hope to procure them. Ambition 5 or the desire of Elevation or Perfection is
certainly among the Strongest or the most powerful  the human Breast.
When we consider the Sacrifices of Ease Pleasure & Safety which are
made or the Labour Suffering & Dangers incurred in the pursuits of Glory
mistaken for Excellence & Elevation of Character we may be tempted to
Suppose that the Love of  Perfection from which its Misapplication
originate is in reality the most powerful of any Principle in its Sway over
the Actions and dispositions of the human Mind And is Sufficient to Suspend the Consideration of even of Happiness without which Intelligence
Itself has no favourable disstinction and Existence to Curse. But when we
consider also the Obstructions given to this Aspiring dissposition of mind
by Indolence or the Allurements of degrading of frivolous Pleasure more
frequent than not so Conspicuous as the Aberrations of Vain Glory & supposed Exaltation of Character the Counter Effects. Effects of mistaken
Pleasure may appear no less Powerful than those of its opposite And the
two contending Divinities under the Judgement of Hercules 6 will appear
Equally realized in human life as in the Celebrated Apologue of Prodicus. 7
The one seems Negligent of Happiness & the Other of  Estimation
or Dignity the first and highest Object of Consideration among the Pretensions of human Nature. Happiness and Exaltation of Character are thus too
often considered as Varieties in the Pursuits of Men and even at Variance
with one Another and this Error is perhaps the most important that occurs
to be Corrected towards the Advancement of this progressive Intelligence
with which man is endowed.
The great Disstinction of Intelligent Being and by it is a fit Subject of
Creative Power is That it is susceptible of a Gradual Advancement in a
Direction towards the Measure of Created Excellence & Felicity. To Suppose that these are in their Nature, either inconsistent or even distinct and
separable is an Absurdity & contradiction in the Very Nature of Intelligent
Being.
We conceive the Almighty to be Supremely Happy because He is
Supremely Perfect.  His Wisdom & Goodness Are at once the Security
the Possession And the Emanation of Excellence & Felicity in their Several
Gradations to all that Exist. What Quality in Human Nature could be
denominated Happy if it were withal contemptible or Odious or what could
be esteemed or Respected if withal the Possion of it were Misery. Perfection of Nature And Happiness are in fact different Denominations of the
same thing thought of only under different Aspects. The One of its Enjoyment, the Other of its Estimation & place in the Gradations of Being. And
to Arrive at this Point of discernment and the habits of Wisdom resulting
from it is the Summit of that Eminence to which Man is directed And
which he is enabled after all Aberrations by the Experience and Exercise of
his Intellectual Faculties of which the occasion at least begins to be furnished in his Present Scene & which is probable farther continued in the
Subsequent Scenes.
The Present Scene it has been Said is projected for the Advancement of
Man in his Intellectual Progress and  We proceed to verify that Observation by a reference to the Particulars from which it may  Collected.
As such in their order we may recur to some particulars that have been
mentioned as apparent defects in the Animal of Man compared to that of
other Species in the Animal Kingdom. Of this kind are the Low & the prolonged State of Infancy The Naked The unarmed and the comparatively
feeble State of the Species in its Contest with Other Animals too weak for
Battle and too Slow to Escape by flight And more scantily Supplied with the
very necessaries of Life than most of the Animal Tribes being obliged to
Labour & Toil for what his associates in this living Order find spontaneously produced on the Earths Surface.
In all these particulars however The fact is that man has more than full
compensation for all those dissadvantages under which he seems to be
placed. The Comparative defects of Infancy are more than Compensated by
the Superior faculty & tender  Care of the Intelligent Parent whose
instinctive Propensity to watch over her Ofspring is but the Germ of a
Social Affection destined to operate for Ages through all the Gradations of
Kindred into a principle of Union & Cooperation for common Support &
Safety. 8 What the Parent can do for her Child he need not  be qualified
to do for himself. And in this we read what is frequent in the System of
Nature The manifest Signs of Intention and of a Reason for what  done
or ommitted not Supply in one Form what is otherwise provided for in a
Superiour manner or degree. The Compensation however we are not to
Consider as the Sole End of Creative Economy. If this were all the method
pursued with Other Animals were perhaps the most direct & the best.
But the case is here altered And Nature has to provide not merely for
Subsistence And Accommodation of an animal: but for the exertion and
Exercise of Faculties destined to Spring from a sense of  necessity &
want. The Beast of the Field in fully Supplied without any device or
Invention of his own. Man to find an Equivalent for the Fur of the Quadruped His pasture in the Field his Lodgement in the Cave or Cover of the
Wood is obliged to become a Manufacturer a Builder & a Husbandman.
Tho qualified to Subsist alike in any Climat he no where finds in any Situation or from Any Soil Spontaneous Subsistence fit to Subsist the Species
in any Numbers without Culture Labour & Industry of their own. Tho
Qualified to feed on great Variety 9 whether Animal or Vegetable The Species of Plant which supply him with his best or almost necessary  are
to be carefully Cultivated or will Cease to grow and the Soil is ever to be prepard for them by eradica Weeds or the ever renewed Growth of
Noxious or unprofitable Herbage that force their way Spontaneously and
choak the Vegetation of those that Supply the  Necessities. The Limited or Scanty measure in which those Necessities are provided for The
Method of Labour and Skill by which they are Obtained Suggest the Necessity of Securing the Surplus of the present for future Use And Persons
conscious of having obtaind them by the Use of their own Faculties Suggest
& Support the Claims of Property and this Right is gradually extended to
every Subject that may be fairly occupied & Secured for future as well as
present occasion.
Hence the Foundation & mighty Superstructure of Law & Social Policy
To define the Solemn and interesting Distinction of Justice of Right &
Wrong & to direct their applications to cases of indefinite Variety And such
Intricacy as require the exercise of Judgements which is not to be acquired
without Study or professional Labour exempt from any other care or
pursuit.
Under the Titles of Necessaries Accommodations or Luxurys the Subjects of Property are  multiplied indefinitely and are unequally
distributed as to introduce the distinction of Rich & Poor so that one is [in
a] condition to buy the Labour of another & that other is necessitated to sell
his own Subordination ensues & from the Variety of Surplus or Want of different Persons Climate Arts & Possessions Commerce or the Exchange of
Commodities ensue. The means of Conveyance the Medium of Trafic or
Exchange form such a System of Policy Oeconomy and it would have been
impossible to forrsee that it should Arise from the mere defect of Food Raiment & Lodging under which Man compard to the other animals is made to
Labour. And like the Science of Law itself constitute a Subject of profound
Study as well as Intricate practice.
Has Nature in all this no other object than that of Supplying Man with
Food Clothing & Lodging. If so the Model of mere animal Life as exhibited
in the fowls  of the Air & Beasts of the Field is greatly preferable.
But this is not the Sole nor the Principal Object of Nature in this Case.
There is a Germ of Intelligence to be made to Spring up and Advance
through a Gradual progress to indefinite hights of Elevation and Power. A
progress of which we probably see but a part in the present Scene & Order
of things.
The Necessity of procuring Subsistence &c. leads to Mental Pursuits
with which it does not appear to have any affinity. The Laws of Nature must
be Studyd in order to discover how we may Influence Nature to our Purpose. The first lights of Knowledge show the way to More & What Curiosity
to penetrate every Cloud that spreads in the Way. Contemplation & Science
become Necessaries of Life to many And the first principle of Want which
Caused the Germ of Intelligence to Spring is comparatively overlooked &
 forgotten.
As in Hunting Health is acquird without being the immediate object
proposed So in this Train of affairs. The Earth is ransacked much knowledge acquired Arts introduced & Faculties improved merely to accumulate
wealth while the mind continues or becomes inattentive to itself or attainments are valued chiefly for their Utility in Trade. A good man is
understood merely to be Solvent or to have that by which the Law may
force him to fullfil his engagements even if he should be unwilling to do so.
The Moralist may therefore not be inclined not very highly to value the
Progress so made in the Mental or Intelligent Nature of Man.
Man thus committed to the circumstances of his Lot for direction in the
line he is to follow in the Progress of his Intelligent Being has been likened
to Clay in the Hands of a Potter 10 by whom materials tho the same received
different Forms and are at the discretion of the Artist destined to Honour
or disshonour. But the Emblem so far fails in its application to him. That
being  himself the Artist the Form he at any time bears is that which
he has himself voluntarily Assumed and no longer retains than Circumstances seem to require. Whatever may be the Effect of Physical Causes his
Passions and Affections are occupied chiefly by the Occasions which result
from his Relation to Other Men And the Society in which he is placed is in
reality the Principal part of that Lot the Propensity & fitness of which to
forward the Progress of his moral and intelligent Being we are now
considering.
Men form themselves into Society and the Society reacts upon its members to an Effect that contributes more than any other Circumstance to the
Form which its members Assume and the Rank they bear in the System of
Created Intelligence or the Approach to that which is at once the Perfection
and Happiness united in the final Result of this progressive Nature 
Progress of which our Condition enables us to perceive this Specimen tho
but in part & within the limits of a Short Period  but representative. We
may guess of what is going on throughout the System of the Universe where
the Multiplication of Intelligent Being its Progress & The fitness of Scenery
for its indefinite Advancement is the Object Worthy of that Power whose
Felicity & Perfection is in Itself and in all its Energies Eternal and Unalterable. Such Are Ideas to which we indulge our Apprehension Under the
Notion That Wisdom & Goodness are the Sole Ends of Creation in all the
Stages of Existence or reality: Is it so here or does The History of Man confirm it? Is human Society a School of Wisdom & Goodness, and is the
tenour of mixed & precarious life announce the prospect or completion of a
happy Nature? If indeed its tendency is such and final result however distant we have a right to consider this as its Character however short of the
End that part which falls under our Observation may be. The Series of
Events may be various & Long but Time has no bounds to terminate The
progress before its  arrival at the Point to which it is directed. Created
Intelligence begins in Ignorance but Knowledge proceeds by Observation
& may accumulate without End. Mistake is corrected by Experience & if
Still succeeded by Error may by Experience still receive its Correction and
no opinion on the Result be left But that of Truth at last to be entertaind. It
is thus that Intelligence if it continue to Exist must continue to advance or
to Perfect itself.
If we should be disposed to Under value the ordinary attainments of men
& think them below the just Pretensions of Intelligent Nature Such as
Sense of the Condition from which we have to emerge is the reverse of a
Symptom that man is destined not to surmount this Level: it even Evinces
a Stimulus to Efforts of a better Effect. The Courier is urged in his Speed no
less by the fear of being distanced than by the Ardour with which he pants
for the Goal.
In human Society, there is yet more powerful incitements to Active
Exertion 11 more Signal occasions  of calling every human Faculty into
in the Cooperations or opposition of Parties or even Individuals more to be
learned from mutual communications & the records of ages and the disscussion of Legal National & Political Concern than could have resulted from
the whole Physical System in which this Being involved.
In this Principal School of the Intelligent Facultys man is not only and
Advancement in the Powers of deliberation Judgment & Execution but has
also presented to his View and Choice distinctions that Apply to his own
Personal Character & Form tho’ not so Obvious to his reflection as they are
in the Visible & interesting Examples which are presented and felt by lively
Experience in human Life. There he may Compare the Attainments to
which he ought to Aspire in the Examples of Aurelius Titus 12 & Trajan 13
with others which ought to shun in the wretched Debasements of 
Heliogabalus 14 Commodus 15 & Nero. He is no longer limited to the Attainments of Faculty in mere exercise of occasional Pursuits. The Supreme and
Primary End of all pursuit is laid open to him in the Good of which his own
Nature is Susceptible or in guarding Against The Evil to which it is
exposed. In his own mind he has the Conscious Experience Esteem Affection & Confidence the great source of Serenity Peace & Enjoyment
Contrastd with the opposite Evils Jealousy Envy Malice & Fear and
Dependence of mind not on its Resolution and Condition but on chance or
Contingent Event.
This being the Character of Man and his Allottment of Place & Circumstance as an Actor in the Scenes that are opend before him we cannot doubt
The Object of his Maker respecting to be gradual Form of Progression in
the line of ‘his’ Intelligent Being towards the Perfection or Happiness to
which he is destined.
This Law of Progression is agreeable to the Course in every Instance of
living or organized Form within our Observation and in this of Created
Intelligence it appears  to be the Essential or Necessary Form of Existence. That it is the Special Destination of Man cannot be doubted from
many original & Charistick Provisions Qualifing to Avail himself
of it & improve his Advantages.
Interested as he is by the wants and Necessities of Animal Nature to controul or regulate & obtain Effects to his Purpose. The Powers with which
Nature has furnished And the Form in what Nature is Subjected to his Controul furnish a Striking  of Design deliberate provision for his
Accommodation. Not impowered to Create he can only Place Conjoin &
Mix Matters and Materials Together. Nature at the same time acting by
fixed Laws & exhibiting Effects different in different circumstances and
therefore under Contrivance of the Confessedly productive effects such as
his occasion requires. The Law of Gravitation by which every thing loose
must descend to the Ground with his direction the Plummit & Center of
Arches enables to fabricks of heavy Materials to indefinite heights The
more Solid and Firm the more they press to the Ground whether in the
Wall the Column or the Archs, Affections of Attractions & Repulsion 
in different Instances are his Powers of Command Mixtures change or
improve the Composition of Substances to his Purpose Motion & Heat are
occasionally employed in his Service And indefinitely vary their Effects to
his Pleasure. The Soil undergoes the most important change for him And
Plants & Animals of every kind are in his Power to be propagated or extirpated at his Pleasure. In the order of Nature every Plant has its Seed And
every Seed in Proper Soil Springs up into its Plant. 16 We naturally suppose
that this order must have had a beginning & the Creative Power must have
been adequate to produce either Plant or Seed and must we conceive be so
adequate for ever where Woods are wanted The Creative Power we cannot
Doubt may have Cloathed every mountain with full grown Trees. Why this
slow method of rearing from the Seed? To accommodate we may say
Intelligent Man This favourite Tennant of the Earth who observing The
Law of Propagation Established in Nature can by conforming himself to
it & with a Small  of Seed in his hand can have a Forrest where he
 chuses & in a little time transplant Forrests of America to Europe or
the Converse And by Analogous Process command every Species of Corn or
Fruit and every  of his Flock or his Herds. Who can doubt that
man was intended to be a Husbandman & Proprietor  the Earth.
While the Powers of man as entrusted with a Controul over the Physical
System for his own Supply and accommodation are provided for in the very
Laws and apparently fixed Condition of things His Dominion projected
over the Forms of his own Species and the operations which take place on
himself As the Material on which they work is also provided for in particulars Significant of Design & Goodness on the part of his Maker. His
Instinctive Formation into Groups & Societies 17 of Indefinite Extent at
once give rise to an Artist of Power and a Subject in continual need of his
care or attention. Such is the Political Scene exhibited throughout the Various Devisions & their Respective Forms throughout the Political World
constituted by the human Race. The Combinations  of Numbers that
take place in States and Political Compartments may Oblige us to look back
on the relations Subsisting in detail among Individuals forming their connections and The Influences & Ties by which they are enabled to Act in
such Bodies.
Mere Intelligence implys no more than that every such Form of Existence is Conscious of itself & its Continued Identity throughout the Period
of its existence. In Society Separate Persons so Constituted are supposed to
be mutually apprised of their Respective minds and Conditions and every
Individual has a part to act respecting what passes in the thoughts and
Intentions of another as an Evidence that Society is Intentional & projected
for the Human Species in a much higher form than that of the mere herding
animals.
Among the Animals Language is the gift of Nature to Man Alone. The
use of Language tho specific to man does not appear to result from any Signal advance of the Intellectual faculties. It is almost the earliest of his
Specific acquisitions.  The Horse the moment he drops on the Ground
betakes him to Walk and turns on his Dam to grope for the Dug: but man
after months and even years are passed has Language before he can change
his Place & has learned to Speak while  is yet but attempting to walk.
His looks & Gestures are by Nature Significant and mediately understood
And  this foundation the Species has founded a Multiplicity of Arbitrary Signs consisting chiefly of Articulate Sounds varied indefinitely in
every Separate Hord or Assemblage of Men: But agreeing the origins of
Speech by which they are pronounced the organ of hearing through which
they press to be interpreted It may appear Strange a Subject so Common
and familiar at all noticed: but it is neverless of all Natural Phenomena
the most remarkable & important and being without question Instinctive
the most powerful Evidence of a Design in Nature & preparative of all the
Effects that result from human society to forward the Progress of mans
Intellectual Existence.
Hence all the Effects of  communication Information Instruction
and the very Existence of Consent deliberation or Council and the very Fabric of Society itself in all its parts. When we thus find the Great resulting
from what is comparatively Small there can be no doubt of the Design And
that the Less has been meditating for the Sake of the Greater.
Without dwelling any longer then on what  Evident The Advantages
which the Progressive Nature of Man derives from the Scene in which his
Germ of Intelligence is made to Spring and to Wax in what we must 
End  inclined to call this first Stage of its progress. We may ask from
what Topick we are to tell the Character of that Power which has laid the
foundation of this order of things in which we partake.
Are we to consider every Instance of Misfortune or Pain strewed over the
Lot of Man as exceptions derogating from the general Evidence of benevolent so manifest in the order of Nature or in the Construction of Living and
organised Existence? This were surely very erroneous as in the  distribution of Pleasure and Pain throughout the Animal Kingdom if not the
Intellectual Pain is an Evidence or Effect of Beneficent Design no less than
Pleasure. As Pleasure for the most part invites to what is Salutary or
required for Preservation Pain deters from what is adverse or hurtful,
equally evincing in every Case That the Design is beneficent & Wise.
If this Law is not so Strictly observed in the case of man as in that of the
other animals It is undoubtedly because man is more left to his own Government And place is given to the Exercise of those Faculties And of that
Freedom which form the Distinction of Intelligent Being. In this Race it is
a Saying of great Authority that he who spareth the Rod Hateth the Child
and the Parent in chusing a School for his offspring does not pitch upon
that in which they will be most pampered with Sweet and exempted from
Labour but where they will be kept to their Exercises and advanced in those
attainments which Constitute merit & Felicity of their Characters. Adversity is known to be the Reformer of Pride Usurpation & Vanity and a Life of
Frequent Tryal in Difficulty 18  Danger & Hardship The best school for
Ability Fortitude and Wisdom. It is even probable if not certain that such is
a life of more Enjoyment or Satisfaction than what is commonly Supposed
a Life of more Ease or Leisure from Business or those Active Engagements
which are said to be Trouble. The French Ennuis 19 is known to be Worse
than And that to avoid any sort of occupation is preferred And the Sense of
Mankind on this Subject may be Collected from the Nature of Amusements
or Sports they devise to occupy their time with Pleasure. In these we ever
have a portion of Difficulty Danger And Contest to be Sustained or
Avoided.
In contending for an Exemption from pain or trouble as the condition in
which the Evidence of Divine goodness  Wisdom can be admitted The
Atheist 20 Mistakes the Nature of Man his Choice and the Real object of Creation in respect to him which can be no other than that of opening  for
him a Way by which he may Arrive at the Specific Excellence And Felicity
of his Nature The Way of Observation Experience & continued Progression. The form in which Creation Proceeds in every Instance known to us is
analogous to this And is Beneficial & Wisely provided in the mixed Scene
of Prosperity & Adversity through which Life is destined to pass. In a continued  of Ease or pleasure unremitted the faculties of mind must have
Languished or have been totally Suppressed.
Agreeably to the general Tenet That mere matter is of no value apart
from its Relation to mind as a Material of art & accommodation We may
venture to assume that Terrestrial Sphere is made for man as its sole Intelligent Possessor. For him it is presented so the Suns Influence with a Surface
of Land & Water Justly proportioned to one Another with an atmosphere to
bear the Evaporation of water to the Land Inequalities of Hill & Dale on
which to return the surplus of Water again to the Sea with Vegetation Animal Life & Physical Law presenting An Order Variety Analogy and Mutual
Subservience fitted to supply the animal Exigencies of Man & mutual subservience fitted to supply the Animal Exogenus of man and  awake his
mind to observation comprehension and the Perception of Wisdom of Ends
& Mean giving a Place to his own Exertions & furnishing mean for his
success with a Continual for the use & Advancement of his Faculties.
In this view of the Terrestrial System to which our observation of Nature
is in a great measure limited & reduced as we conceive it to have as the Parts
of which it is composed That is of Man in his destination to Emerge from a
mere Germ of Intelligence wrapt up in an Animal into the Order of Superiour Natures whose Happiness consists in Wisdom & Goodness in the one
Part and on the Other a Physical & moral Arrangement made for his Reception and affording the proper Exercise and Scope of his Powers for the
Progress & attainment of their End. And This Statement not as a Part But
the whole Creation relative to him we are to pronounce on the Character of
that Design which is Apparent & Obvious to our search. On this Ground
the Argument must rest. If the mixed Scene of Human Life is well adjusted
to a Nature requiring Action 21 for  his Advancement to that point at
which his perfection & happiness are placed then is the Scheme Beneficently And Wisely laid. If otherwise we must remain at least in doubt on the
Subject.
But here also Is God, And the Storms which in moments of Superficial
thinking may incline us to Doubt Proclaim Him more loudly than does any
provision that is made for Indulgence or Safety in the lower Forms of Life.

VIII. OF THE COMPARTIVE
FORMS OF BEING 
Of the Intellectual or World of Minds. The subserviency of all nature to Man. Variety and
analogy most observable in the aspect of things. Law of gravitation. Planetary System. Variety of Worlds in Infinite Space. 1 to 4.
The Intellectual and Animal part of Man considered. Probability of other Worlds for the
reception of Minds. Progress of Intelligence in the Human Mind. Characters. World of Spirits countless number of its Inhabitants. Our Knowledge here limited. To Act well our part is
to ensure our Happiness. 4 to the end.
The material World being such as we perceive it from afar as well near
Indefinitely Various & Great: what are we to think of the Intellectual or
World of minds?
Mere Corporeal Substance however Great is Still & Lifeless in itself destit of Value: but as it is Subservient to the Cause of living Natures or of
Mind That is: as it is cause of Sensation and The Object of Perception as it
may be organised & become the aliment of Life the Material of Art. The
Object of Contemplation of Ratiocination. The medium of Expression or
Communication from mind to mind And above all from God to his Observant Creatures. In any or in all of these Respects This Terrestrial  is
fitted to the Lot of Man A Scene in which he may enjoy The Supply of all
his Wants & the exercise of all his Powers so destined to expand themselves
& make him Lord of all this Stage on which he treads.
Even here however when the World of Intelligence begins to show itself
in man. The merely material Scene is apt to preoccupy our thoughts or 
fix them on the Spacious Dwelling instead of the Inhabitant for whose
accommodation Solely they are built.
If thus the Scale of Estimation be disturbed on Earth where the human
Soul is so perspicuous; no wonder we are Ravished with the magnitude and
order of a firmament now discovered by the Sagacity of Men to present
many such worlds as we inhabit while the Essence of a Superiour Form of
Being for whose use such magnitude of Scenery is made has yet if at all but
faintly or by conjecture dawned upon our Sight.
To a general observer the first Aspect of Nature is Indefinite Variety with
continued analogy through Forms unlike Mere Matter whether Fixed or
Fluid Hard or Soft Ductile or Friable has Gravitation throughout with
affinities that coagulate in kinds into Mass. Even the atmosphere whose
component Atoms repel one Another is collected by Gravity into the form
of a Globe.
On this Ground we may erect some Rule for Conjecture when existence
only is known but its form to be guessed. From the  Magnitude &c of
Planets They were guessed to be Worlds like this Earth and from their
Motions This Earth was guessed to be a Planet like them. Of this there is
now no doubt but when we would go farther and guess they are inhabited
we must admit the probability of great Variety as well as Analogy in the
Forms of Existence in Comparison with that we experience.
It is thus that, without rejecting the Characteristick diversity of Forms in
Nature we apprehend in every Planet by which our Sun is Surrounded a living World Analogous to that of which we ourselves make a Part on this
terrestrial Sphere. And in every fixed Star a Sun like our own environed
also with Planets revolving in Orbits such as we have learned with so much
accuracy in all their Anomaly Vibrations and mutual disturbances. Nor do
we find a limit to this Assumption of Worlds not to be limited merely by
our defect of Sight which does not extend beyond a mere Corner of Universal  existence that has no bounds but those of Number & Space if to such
there be any limits.
So great so numerous are the forms of material Existence to what effect
or for what purpose?
This Question forever occurs on our observation of Nature And where it
cannot be solved we are slow of belief in the Fact so manifest commonly is
the end in all forms or operations of Nature.
Mere Body is perceived by mind & is the cause of Sensation to Sensitive
Beings. It becomes by mere means a medium of communication or intercourse in a plurality of minds. It is matter of accommodation for Sensitive
Beings. It is an Object of Search and of Study it is a Material of Art & Subject of Property and in all these or other Respects constituent of a Scene for
the Occupation and Action of Mind. Although therefore in itself it is neither Good nor Evil Susceptible neither of  Happiness nor Misery yet in
Relation to mind it has a place in Existence and a Call for all the Varieties of
Consistence Magnitude & Figure which it is found to possess or exhibit.
Is the Universe of Body then formd for the sake of mind alone? 1
To us there appears no Other End or Purpose for which it is made. If so
great the Corporeal Department of Nature What are we to think of the Mental for whose Sake those departments are so formd and dispersed
throughout the immensity of Space.
Upon these grounds we Shrink not from the Thought that follows nor
dread to apprehend an Universe of minds proportioned to the mighty Scenery of unnumbered Worlds prepared for their reception And may be
tempted even to think that Worlds of matter are but Sensations and Perceptions in the Midst of which the Living Spirit dwells.
To us indeed the World of minds is notifyed in man his conscious Reason
or Intelligence & Will. His Works declare it in absence of that  Workman. The Cultivated the Choice Plantation The humble Cottage The
Village Tenements the Gaudy Mansion the Gorgeous Palace & the Solemn
Temple even in their Ruins evince where he has been and in their preservation pronounce him Still remaining in his Place. Yet far beyond what he
performs or can attempt Nature bears the marks of Workmanship which at
a Single Step leads up the uninstructed Mind of Man to God. The Essence
and the Source of Being unaware how many intermediate Forms of mind
may intervene beneath the Highest .
In the human Race we may observe the Germ of Intelligence Spring from
the Soil of mere Animal life. In the Multitude it is little more than the use
or the Practise of Art for Subsistence & accommodation. Even in the Distinguished it is little more than the Trick of a Mischievous Boy as in
Alexander or Caesar to set one part of the Species against another. Yet in
others in Cato  Epictetus 2 & Aurelius we are taught how happy the
Human Soul may become 3 or in Copernicus 4 & Newton 5 how far its Views
may reach. If in the many we are apprised of the tardy Progress of Mind In
others we are forbid to despair and encouraged to look forward to future
Scenes of Being for the continuance & Accomplishment of a Progress of
 the outset & the Capacity are now to be seen.
If the Source of Nascent Intelligence be perennial and the Swarms continue to multiply thoug no more than in this Instance of accumulating
Numbers The Universe of minds we may Conceive to keep Pace with the
extent of a Material Creation prepared for its Reception. How much more
must every thought be led to repose on the Magnificence of Being where
the Material Scene however Great is fully provided with Actors. That we
may  perceive the vanity to number in this Instance be it remembered
That the Human Species of any one Generation has been reckoned at one
thousand millions; if but one hundred Generations are supposed to have
passed one hundred Thousand millions of Souls have already flown from
Terrestrial Source And if every Planet in the Solar System has been equally
productive The Sum will amount to Seven hundred thousand Millions.
And if every fixed Star supposed to be two thousand is but the Sign Post of a
System Similar to ours let imagination try to accompany in thought the
Thousands Millions of Millions which figures may in Vain be used to
express And let the vanquished Conception acknowledge that the Material
World however great is Still Subordinate  and even upon such data as
the Material World itself can Supply must Shrink in Magnitude as well as in
Estimation before the World of living and Conscious Existence whose
Essence is Power and Destination Felicity.
In such Forms there is proper Object for Creative omnipotence And for
the Sake of this there may be reason why mere matter in any or all its Forms
should be Allowed to exist.
Our knowledge does not extend to the Origin of things. The Changes
exhibited around us are no more than Sensations or Mixtures. Yet even in
this Conjecture is not prohibited if we do not mistake it for knowledge nor
entertain it in contradiction to what we do know or what we are still more
likely to suffer allow ourselves to be misled by Metaphor or the transfer of
Words from one Subject  another.
Thus some Philosophers of Old 6 adventured to say that the human Soul
was a Spark emitted from the eternal Source of  Intelligence and after
some Periods of Progression returns into the Source again.
We cannot indeed be too proud of our Origin nor entertain too Noble an
object of Hope if it Stimulate just Efforts of Ambition of which the most
feeble Effects may be better than None.
When the Aspiring mind recalls the Millions of Millions and hundred
thousands of Millions of Millions with whom he may now have to contend
for distinction he may possibly shrink in Despair. But if he judge aright the
Object of a just Ambition 7 is not comparative but of an Absolute Value.
That in which the Value of Existence itself consists is the Capacity of Happiness and the Happy Mind is of the highest Value whatever be the number
that partakes in the same Distinction.
If you perform what in the present moment what you are called upon to
do with Benignity Diligence and Resolution you are happy. 8
To this it may be Subjoined that the Multitude of Competitors in the
same pursuit will not impede: but promote the Success.

IX . REPUTED PLEASURES OF IMAGINATION 
The objects of conception from which these Pleasures result are Beauty, Novelty and Grandeur. Of Beauty: Distinction of Excellence in Mind. 1 to 4.
Novelty and Grandeur & to the End.
These Pleasures are distinguished from Sensation as resulting from Conception or Apprehension of an Agreeable Object & therefore a
Characteristic Lot of mind or Intelligence.
The Objects of Conception from which These Pleasures result are Said to
be Novelty Beauty & Grandeur.
Beauty 1 is conceived for the most part in Visible Forms and in the loose
application of Terms is applied to any Form of which the sight or Remembrance is agreeable whether from mere Sensation as in a Single Tint of
Colour or Note in Music or from any association of Agreeable circumstance
which may be merely Accidental like the Association of Joy with the place
in which Glad Tidings were Received or the association of Rank with the
Dress in Fashion an Association frequently Shifting and as often varying
the Forms of Beauty in manners & Dress. This application of the Term is a
mere abuse if Beauty is to be considered as  fixed distinction in Nature.
The only fixed Distinction I  can find in mere Corporeal Form is a
Material of Art or a production of Art or in some way an accommodation to
mind in its capacity of Felicity or Excellence. Beyond the Range of Being so
Qualified or its appurtenances There is neither Good nor Evil Excellence or
Defect. Infinite Space Replete with Diamond and Gold or Nectar and
Ambrosia would be of no more Value than Sand Stone or Mud.
Mind of itself is Happy or Wretchd And a source of Happiness or Misery
to Collateral Beings or Minds as Far as far I repeat there is no other form of
Existence distinguishable as either Good or Evil.
What then is the distinction of Excellence in Mind? It is the discernment
And the Power of Commanding what is Good Omniscience And
Omnipotence.
The Possession & the Communication of Happiness or the Emanation of
such qualities in some Finite Degree.
This in the Eternal is Perfection Infinite in the Created Being is Excellence And Merit and felicity.
If there is not any Distinction  of Good or Evil in any other form of
Being but in that of Mind alone whence is it that we Ascribe Beauty to mere
corporeal Form Whence the Beauty of the Sun & Planets of the Land and
Sea of the Atmosphere, of the Plant that covers of the Ground of the Forest
And Woods of their living Stock of the Organised Forms in so many
Instances of Men and all the forms they produce for the Accommodation?
The Specimens referred to will I doubt not Suggest the Answer. These are
the Works in part of feeble Man: but more Conspicuously of Supreme
Beneficence  Power.
Beauty then in mere Corporeal Forms is the Evidence there given of Wisdom Goodness & Power.
If this be the genuine account of Beauty as exhibited in material Forms it
is justly entitled a Pleasure of imagination for the Effect is admiration or
Esteem Sentiments highly agreeable of ever meeting the conception or
Imagination of Goodness & Wisdom however presented to the feeling Mind
 And however disjoined from any other concomitant recommendation
whatever.
Here then we may ask has Novelty or Grandeur the same title to be reckoned among these Pleasures.
Novelty or Greatness whether in measure or degree it is said draw crowds
of Spectators & fix the Attention by what charm if not by the Pleasure with
which they are beheld or contemplated.
But does not pain fix the attention perhaps still more than Pleasure and
do not crowds assemble to behold sights of Horror as well as Pleasure Executions Dissasters Murders Tortures which with the Vulgar are principal
allurements of Tragic Muse and all they require in return for expense of
Money and Time at the Theater.
Hence indeed it is  concluded that Sights of Distress are pleasant And
that a Person who looking from the  on a Ship that is perishing at Sea
Enjoys himself in his own
Safety. The Assumption of Pleasures in such cases and thus explanation of
it is founded in the general Principle so well known to be false: That there
must be pleasure wherever there are crouds of Attentive & gaping
Spectators.
Things new & Strange bring People together from Curiosity to know
what they are and when the passion of Curiosity is gratifyed there is pleasure which comes when Novelty no longer exists. The Figure of a man with
the Head of a Toad would draw Crowds of Spectators but with an Effect we
may believe the Reverse of Pleasure which even the gratification of Curiosity would not Appease.
Things that surprise come with Augmented Effect which abates with
familiarity or  continued Acquaintance whether Pleasant or Painful.
Beauty unexpected is enhanced by Surprise: but repeated looses much of
its Effect.
Unexpected ugliness is the more shocking for being New and there cannot be a more convincing Proof that Novelty 2 as such is not productive of
Pleasure.
This Title therefore is surely to be dismissed from the Enumeration of
the Pleasures of Imagination notwithstanding the Authority of Addison 3
and Akenside 4 to the Contrary. These Gentlemen present no other Effect of
Novelty but that of Surprise which if pleasant in some instances is equally
painful in Others. And the Affectation of Novelty which their Doctrine has
encouraged among the Votaries of Distinction & Eminence has opened a
Road by which the meanest Capacity may hope to succeed with the world.
For what more easy than to produce what never entered before into  the
mind of any Rational Creature. Those who would benefit Mankind in the
Practice of any Art Whether of Information or Convenience should endeavour to improve the known Resources of human Nature of which for the
most part the most Notorious are sometimes the most neglected as well as
the most important: but these Are left to the dull & incapable because men
of Genius must have something new and must distinguish themselves by
demolishing the Fabrick of Human Wisdom rather than by Cultivating The
Strength of a Burden of which every one Knows the importance.
Newton made new dis in the Heavens for he traced the Power
of Gravitation. Thither Socrates & Zeno made discoveries of human Nature
to itself yet the Doctrines  Kepler 5 Copernicus and Newton are better
known than those of Socrates or Zeno. The multitude are still gaping for
something new without knowing that the Cultivation of Genuine Wisdom
is one  the newest  things that mankind ever found. g
Mr Bourke in his Treatise on the Beautiful and Sublime 6 for the latter h
requires greatness still in Measure or Degree and in the Painful and horrid
may be Sublime as well as the Pleasant or Agreeable And in illustration
cites the Sublime of an enormous Stench. 7 On this Principle however mere
Grandeur or great is improper reckoned among the Pleasures of Imagination. If a great Beauty is the cause of Great Pleasure & Great Deformity
must be the Reverse. Mere Greatness indeed like Novelty may excite curiosity & this may be gratifyed. The crouds that Assemble to behold it may be
disgusted or terrifyd as much or as well as pleased And we must never forget
that attention is fixed by Pain as well  Pleasure And we may account for
the Crouds that repair to Sights of Distress without supposing them
pleasant.
Compassion or pity tho constituent of Pain or Suffering as we express it
for a Felow Creature 8 is very different from the Suffering of Anger Fear
Resentment or hatred. It is even acknowledged to be in its Nature 
Agreeable or to reconcile the mind to its State of Suffering  and reject
any means of relief but that of the Party for whom we Suffer. This may
account in Part for the Charms of Tragedy. And joined with the Charms of
Fortitude Magnanimity And the Sympathies of Love and of which The
Tragick Muse above all others avail herself render her Exhibitions the
occasion of most real Enjoyment altho to account for the Crowded assemblage at her Theater Pain alone would be Sufficient and even the prospect of
pleasure unnecessary. Women & Children croud to every application of Torture altho they know that Pain alone is  be expected. Setting aside the
Beauties of Poetic Stile in his Tragedy of Oedipus, 9 What other Charm has
Sophocles 10 employd to bind an Audience to that Tyrant of the Athenean
stage.

X . COGNITUTEM WITH THE OF WISDOM 
Metaphysics. Discernment and choice the essence of Wisdom. Generalization. 1 to 4.
Pleasure. The happiness to be perfect is a state of the greatest Enjoyment. The choice of
Pleasure and rejection of Pain. Evil propensities to be restrained and properly regulated. To
perform the Duties of the present moment with Benignity and Diligence, is to be wise and
Happy. The danger of the substitution of Pleasure and Pain for Good and Evil without
proper discernment. Philosophy of Zeno and Epicurus. 4 to the End.
Metaphysics set out with Existence itself & so from Universal to Generals would come at las to Individuals or particulars of which the proper
discernment & Choice is the Essence of Wisdom.
In every Conjuncture the Subjects in view are particular & must be particularly known to be properly treated.
Wisdom therefore begins with particulars but mixing comprehension
with Practice perceives the concourse of many under general Names 
And learns to talk of many under a few General Names.
This is termed Generasation and is the distinction of Science when
compared with common sense.
The boast of Science is to investigate the Law that prevails in the Course
of things and to trace singulars to the Law from which they are derived.
This is Satisfactory it is a Form of Advance or promotion of which
Human Intelligence is Susceptible and is accordingly a deduction in
which its progress is carried ard on.
If Generalisation is thus successfull & Correct it is no  doubt perfective of that Nature to which it is appropriate.
But to render happy in its Course as well as in the termination or End
some incidental Errors Mistakes should be carefully avoided.
Of these I shall at present point out only one by which under the pretence of Generalisation we affect to confound matters together in the
separation or disstinction of which the happiness and consequently the
Wisdom of Mankind is much more concerned than it can be in any Supposed assemblage or Combination.
In every such case it is wise to distinguish  and maybe at least Dangerous to Assemble.
For example of this sort we may trace Man’s Happiness & Misery to the
most opposite things in Nature to one common denomination of a Condition of Sensitive or Conscious Being.
It is even sometimes material to Consider them in this point of View f
when there is any danger of Considering or mistaking some Collateral Circumstance as Constituent of the thing itself.
Another Instance is when Happiness is traced up to the General Term
Pleasure And this made the general denominatio  of all that is Good
to be Selected agreeably to the Taste and Actuall Experience of the Person to
be gratifyed for whatever other Rule can be admitted in the choice of Pleasure What is food to one we say is poison to Another and so Taste seems.
After having in this term of Pleasure levelld all matters of choice we
may endeavour to distinguish the act licit or Illicit dignifyd or mean but
we shal never perhaps be able to repair the breach made in the Wall of
Separation between them. After having admitted under the general Term of
Pleasure the  Intoxication of the Drunkard with the Consciousness of j
Integrity Beneficence & Magnanimity of the Wise. The Scratching of the k
Itch or Conceited folly of the Vain with tranquillity of Health or the Serenity of the Candid or Innocent.
One of the first Inferences to be drawn is that pleasures are to be Estimated by their Measure & no their Nature or Quality.
To those who enumerate Pleasures in order to ascertain the measure of
Good in the Form or condition of any Living or  Conscious Being it
must be admitted as a self evident Maxim that nothing is Good but in proportion as it is matter of Enjoyment now or hereafter.
That Happiness to be perfect must be a State of the greatest Enjoyment
and least Suffering 2 of which the Being is question is Susceptible.
And supposing Existence indefinite The Future is to be admitted to consideration as well as the present. That the Future may indeed overballance
the present.
Upon these grounds it seems to be admitted That in Estimating The
Good or Evil  in any particular Case or matter of deliberation The measure or degree of pleasure or Pain now or hereafter alone is to be Considered.
That all Supposed distinctions of any Other distinction of Right or Wrong
of Perfection or defect of high or low honourable or Vile & Mean are to be
rejected as vulgar impositions or Words without meaning. That the Praise
bestowed on Suffering Fortitude without any prospect of Retribution is the
Praise of Folly and fitted only to mislead the Vainglorious.
That in short is the Object of Wisdom in every case to Estimate the
present & the Future so as to do what upon the Whole may or  does
amount to the greatest sum of pleasure and least Pain. 3
If this be a difficult Task from inabily to Estimate perhaps untryed or
unforeseen Pleasure or Pain: it is nevertheless the Sole Directory of which
human Understanding is Susceptible And to say that it is either limited or
difficult is no more than to own That in the mind of Man the attainments of
Wisdom are limited and in their application difficult.
This indeed must be acknowledged on every Supposition and it is not so
wonderful in cases of Prudential Concern to see Men in doubt &  indecision & irresolution as on the contrary to see them prompt & determind
almost in any Case whatever having so much to look for in future prospects
as well as present Condition or matter of actual discernment.
Upon the least pretensions to Wisdom human Action could scarcely proceed, And nothing Short of temerity Ignorance & presumption could bring
human Council to a full & ultimate Decision.
What we see to the contrary must occasion some pause and a return to
the premises from which it is supposd that there is no immediate principle
of decision in  the human mind besides the measure or degree of Pleasure without regard to any Other distinction whatever.
It is no doubt true that in every Act of the human Will there is some propensity to be gratified And as Gratification is but another name for
Pleasure, this in every Instance is to be pronounced the Object of Will in
every instance. But are Propensities in every Instance independent of one
Another. May it not be the Object of one Propensity to decline that to
which another inclines. Love or hatred may incline to Action Indolence
may incline to repose And the Scale may  preponderate only by the
Surplus of its Weight.
In short may there not be propensities whose Object or tendency it is to
regulate and controul The tendency of some Others As Modesty or Shame
controuls the Intercourse of the Sexes and regulates or forbids it in time and
Place Excess in all the Animal Appetites is restrained by a propensity to
moderation and the preservation of Reason which excuses tend to dissorder or Suppress.
And when it was Said of a Sow wallowing in the Mire That Tastes must
not be questiond 4 This was not true of human Nature for such tastes are 
continually censured as degrading and Vile and without any consideration
of the Comparative Strength of Propensities one is condemned as degrading The Other as becoming our Nature So that the Voluptuary cannot plead
for lust to his Excesses by the Consideration of an equality of Consideration due to all the Actual propensities for it is the province of Some to
controul the Others And if both are to be indulged some one is to be limited
or contrould The desire of Spirituous Liquours by the Love of sobriety. /
 In this manner The Human Resolution is not without a Guide that is
ever Prompt and ready to decide on the first Presentment of many an
Important Question. And Justice or Injustice Honour or dishonour decide
without Hesitation without entering into Calculation of Consequence or
future effects.
Nor is this censured as Temerity & presumption by those who have studied most intensely what is constituent of most Enjoyment & least Suffering
in human Nature. If you perform with Benignity & Diligence what in the
present moment you are called upon to do, Says Antoninus: 5 you will be
Happy.
 The Foundation for These Reflections has been laid in a question of
mere Arrangement or Generalisation; but in a department of Nature where
the Detriment of misnomer & oversight in particular difference is greater
than any extension of Views or Comprehension can repair.
The substitution of Pleasure & Pain for Good & Evil seems to clear the
Way to a discernment of Particulars: but in the application endangers the
oversight of differences the most important in this application of Words.
Marcus Aurelius 6 & Epictetus 7 were no less men of Pleasure than
Sardanapalus 8 or Heliogabalus. And Men  are taught to indulge in
Pleasure without being told of What Sort. If Good is Nothing but Pleasure
let every one choose for himself he who is pleased cannot be in the Wrong.
This was the Mistake which made almost the sole difference between
The Philosophy of Socrates & Aristippus 9 of Zeno & Epicurus And men
undervalue the difference by supposing it to Consist in Words Alone: 10 but
Words are so Connected with their meaning that in using the one we cannot
stand clear of the other. The Pleasure of Epicurus led to retirement & Ease
without any Cares of Family or of State. 11
 The Virtue of Aurelius 12 led him to perform with benignity & Diligence what in the present moment he was called upon to do whether in the
Cares of Family or of Empire. And yet he too was pleasd in a higher measure or degree than the Votary of a different Philosophy whose outset was a
professed pursuit of Pleasure 13 but the names of Pleasure & of Virtue lead
the first steps into different Ways And opposite directions.

XI. OF THE CATEGORIES OR CONSTITUENTS OF DISCOURSE AND FABRIC OF THOUGHT
Of the constituents of Discourse. Subject, Quality, Quantity, Number, Relations, Action or
Passion, Time and Place. The Primary order of Being is Power. Man an Intelligent Power
combined with Animal Life. The Power Intelligent consists of 2 points; the Cognitive and
Selective Powers; divided into 2 Branches of Science, Logic and Ethics: described: 1 to 4.
Of Language. Misapplication of some Terms in Language, such as Pleasure, Good, Ambition, Honour, Religion &c. 4 to 8.
Figurative and mysterious Language sometimes of more effect than the simple and concise.8
to 11.
In reciting those of Aristotle 1 I think we mistake in translating ουσια 2
into Substance.
Every thing Substantial in our conception has dimension and occupies
place.
Ουσια is a Being or thing & in the list of Categories is properly
Translatd. 3
A Subject and the other Categories maybe its Quality its Quantity its
Number its Relations its Action or Passion, its Time & Place. b
These to me seem to compleat the whole nothing enters into any statement or discourse that may not be comprehended in one or Other of These
Nine and hence the Parts of Speech are the noun Subjective or Adjective
The Verb and the Date, &c.
What was the Quality &c of one Discourse may be the Subject of another.
And Quality or Power may exist without Dimension & may be itself the
Thing ousia or Subject Qualifyd or impowered.  The Primary order of
Being is Power absolute & unlimited Like Space & Time immeasureable
unlimited unplaced undated And can have no beginning and no End. Tis
Cause not Effect. Tis one. If we should conceive a Number they must be at
one & can have no difference. c
The Secondary Form of Being is Power derivd Specific & limited. Its
Possible & real Varieties are Indefinite. Tis both effect & Cause.
If it be progressive as beginning Intelligence is. It may advance Indefinitely & tend to be at one with the Primary form of Being, but never Reach
it.
The Third or last order of Being is Effect not Power or Cause.
This order of Being is the Material and Scenery of Power.
Man is a Power Intelligent combined with Animal Life &c.
The Power Intelligent may be considered in two Separate points of View.
1 That of a Power Cognitive.
2 That of a Power Selective.
 So viewed it may  divided into two capital Branches of Science.
Logic and Ethic.
Logic is the History & Conduct of the Power Cognitive.
Ethic is the History & Conduct of the Power Selective.
The first recounts the sources of Knowledge The Evidence of Truth of
Generalisation and Arrangement of Physical Law comprehension & Order,
And Concludes with the Canons of Investigation and Argument or
Syllogism.
It is of much Consequence in the pursuits of Science to Anticipate our
End in just definitions. If I were beginning my Studies I would take 
above definitions of Logic & think I could not go wrong or mistake my
Way.
Dr Reid 4 should help me in one part. Lord Bacon 5 And the Naturalists
in a Second and Aristotle 6 in the last.
This Branch of Science however important as it is but the Avenue to a
Mansion in  which The Intelligent Being is to fix his Habitation and his
Throne: To Command his Perfections & his Enjoyment. To correct his
Defects and avoid his Sufferings.
Such is the End of the Power Selective whose the History and Conduct is
to man in a Special degree the Knowledge of himself & his Way to Improvement felicity & Safety.
Armed with this Definition I think that no source of Enjoyment or Suffering should Escape my Notice. Perfection & defects should be justly
Estimated. Enjoyments that mislead should be detected & Sufferings that
promote to conduct to Superior Enjoyment should be Acknowledged &
chearfully endured. And that Institution & manners in human Life could
be justly Estimated and turned to Advantage. I should then not only know
but be master of myself & Arbiter of all my Fortunes. I am now four & five
alass how much time I have lost. 7
 Of Language.
This even in the Dialect Tone Accent & Gesture of Rude Nation has
attaind to a Power beyond what is gained in any other department of human
Life. Yet being the Creature of Practice & the Slave of Custom, it fails the
Philosopher when he would open the Sources of Elevation & felicity to
Mankind beyond the limits of ordinary thought. If he employ words
uncommon or new, he is not understood. If he employ words that are common, they are so spoilt & contaminated in Vulgar use that the effect  to
common readers is far short of his Object.
The Term Pleasure with which a Philosopher of some note would
express the Enjoyment of a Peaceful & liberal mind, was understood by the
Vulgar to mean eating & drinking or other animal gratifications.
The Term Virtue which another would employ to express the attainments of Magnanimity in Goodness Wisdom & Fortitude is mistaken by
the ordinary Reader for Some habits of Moderation or decency in common
Life & external practice.
Good either in its Abstract or Applicate Sense which he would employ to
designate the supreme object of Choice in  every Instace is multiplied
in every Carriers Waggon & in every dealers Store house. It is to be had in
every Market. And money is the great procurer of all Goods to those who
want them & the great Reward of Industry to those who Supply them to
Mankind.
If the Philosopher in search of a term in which to express the great Principle of Progression and incitement of a Mind that Aspires to Excellence
and perfection in every Work or Attainment of the Mind And if he should
employ the term Ambition in this Sense he will be understood to speak of
Vanity or the desire of Fame of Promotion or Power.
 If he employ the term Honour to mark the dignifyed Sentiment of
Integrity and Justice he will be understood to mean a certain Punctilious
requisition of the forms in which Gentlemen are Supposed to treat one
another.
If he speak of Religion or the Elevation of the human Soul to the Conception of God & the order of his Works he will be understood to Speak of
Arbitrary Institutions of arbitrary Rites the observation of Days and distinguishing Forms of Speech which in the distinction of Sects are term
Doctrines & indispensable Articles of Faith.
The Philosopher may possibly do better for his Reader in employing
misterious &  figurative expressions that sett the Ingenuous a thinking
what he means and by that means employ him to find out a just meaning
for himself than he would by aiming at Simple direct and Appropriate
terms which fine persons understand in any other than Vulgar & mean
acceptation.
If any one pass the first Words of Montesquieu, 8 Esprit des Loix 
Rapport qui derive de la Nature des Choses with any thought it 
probable he will not learn much from that Author.
These are figurative And mysterious terms in the  interpretation of
which every Reader may please himself and profit more in the attempt than
he could by any communications in more appropriate terms.
If any one attempt to Illustrate any general Notice by example or particular Reference This author would turn away with disgust. Comment peut-on
dire tout sans un Mortel Ennui. 9
To this Ennui however We must Submit in addressing the Publick,
whilst the mere incitements of thought in The Few are left as the prov
of Genius to Superior minds.
To which the world is most indebted is a question which I shall not
attempt  to decide.
In most branches of science there is little to be gained by attempting perspicuity even to the ignorant. And the profit of every reader is proportioned
to the thought he employs rather than the information he receives, and if a
reader is to emerge from the study of Aurelius or Epictetus a partner in
the felicity which they describe, he must owe it to himself however he may
be disposed to ascribe it to them.

XII. OF THE DISTINCTIONS WHICH MANKIND
EXPERIENCE OR APPREHEND IN THE
NATURE OF THINGS TO DIRECT THEM
IN WHAT THEY PURSUE OR AVOID 
The most comprehensive of these are Good and Evil. Of what may be called Good. Pleasure
and Pain; distinction of Pleasure. True Pleasure is Virtue; various ideas of Pleasure; Man
of Liberal Mind; miser; Friend; Enemy; Benevolent; Malicious. 1 to 12.
Distinction of Good and Evil; of Right and Wrong; Happiness or Misery. What results from
these Distinctions. 12 to the End.
These Distinctions may be comprised in general Titles of which the first
& most comprehensive are Good & Evil And in Specifying the Constituents
of Each of these general Titles we may reckon under that of Good Pleasure
Excellence or Dignity Rectitude or Virtue. With their opposites Pain defect
or meanness Vice or Guilt. 1
In general the  distinction of Good & Evil is apprehended in whatever
we desire or shun And it differs in common use from the distinction of
Happiness & Misery in respect to the Aspect under which the Subject is
considered.
Good refers to the Thing as it is supposd to be in itself.
Happiness refers to the Enjoyment of it. A Quality is Good But the Person who enjoys it is happy.
In the careless use of Terms a man is said to be happy in being Gratifyd
tho in a matter perhaps in the result destructive or Hurtful.
In Science we would Ascertain What is on the Whole most beneficial &
safe or productive of  most Enjoyment & least Suffering. 2 A man is said
to Enjoy when he is conscious of any agreeable to him & to suffer on
the Contrary when he incurs or is Conscious of any thing Dissagreeable to
him.
In descending from these first & most general titles of Good & Evil Happiness & Misery to their Particular applications. The first is Pleasure &
Pain.
Here the use of Language is loose careless & ambiguous. At one time
Pleasure is but another Name for Enjoyment of what is agreeable without
any regard to its Species or result.  And in this sense it cannot be denyed
that the object of every Pursuit is Pleasure & Pleasure itself the Measure of
Happiness.
But in Language no less common Pleasure is contradistinguished to Bussiness and the Man of Pleasure is Distinguishd from the Man of Bussiness
and the Man of Virtue. While it is confessed that Bussiness is often Pleasant
and Virtuous Habits always so.
To account for this seeming contradiction we may observe that Enjoyments are very justly distinguishd into transient  and permanent
Hurtful & Safe Dignifyed & Mean As well as intense And Slight.
The Person who is carryd off by every immediate call of Pleasure without
sufficient Regard to these distinctions is said to be a man of Pleasure for
mere pleasure as such is supposed to be his only Guide.
Another attends to these distinctions & Selects the Best tho on the first
appearance rather a Pain or a Privation than a Pleasure Such as the affairs
which constitute  Bussiness. And the Habits of Beneficence Frugality &
Temperance which Constitute Virtue. 3
In the promiscuous & indistinguishing use of the Term Pleasure Epictetus was no less a Man of Pleasure than Aristippus and Marcus Aurelius than
Heliogabalus. 4
If however the Votaries of Pleasure are so different in their Characters It
is certainly a great Error to Slur over the distinction of Enjoyments by
always affecting the use of one Common Name for all leaving the  party
concerned at the hazard of putting up with the first that presents itself tho
the least Eligible or worst. This Error the Epicureans Committed and many
of them fell a Prey to mere Animal or Brutal Enjoyments.
Men of Bussiness reject Pleasure for Profit And the Virtuous reject it in
the discharge of Their Duty or in the Pursuits of Friendship Publick Spirit
And Proprieties of Manner.
This it may be said is no more than preferring one Pleasure to another &
rejecting the nearest Pleasure for one supposed greater in Prospect.
 Thus returning to the Play of Words And directly in the face of the distinction commonly made between Men of Bussiness and Men of Pleasure
And the Fact that is so familiar. That Some to Bussiness some to pleasure
sake &c.
It is sometimes however stated with an Air of Superiour penetration And
Discovery that every pursuit has Pleasure for its Object And the wise man
must try all before he can decide And as there are Pleasures of  Malice as
well as of Benevolence. The Instinctive Preference of moral Esteem is no
more than a Taste for which or against which there is no ground of Preference but a fair Comparison of the Pleasure it Brings with that it rejects. And
the maxim that Tastes are not to be disputed. 5
It is impossible to derive any Advantage from this Practice of Confounding under one General  denomination of Pleasure things so different as
the Object of The high minded with the mean The Object of the Liberal
with that of the Miser The Object of a Friend with that of an Enemy or of
the Benevolent in general with that of the Malicious.
The Magnanimous no doubt would be Satisfied as well as the Mean or
pusillanimous. But the Satisfaction of the one leads to great Energy and
advancement of Intellectual Power The other to its Degradation  or
Suppression.
Heliogabalus b6 no doubt woud be Satisfied or pleasd no less than Marcus
Aurelius: 7 But Heliogabalus would be satisfied to domineer among Cooks
Buffoons and Prostitutes to have his Stomach replete his Head intoxicated
And his Members laid in Sloth & Stupor.
Marcus severe to himself but lenient and mild to others would not be
satisfied without an effort to resemble the most high in Goodness & Justice 8
And employ in his Station all the energies of Intelligence & Wisdom.
Does it contribute in any degree to the ends of Science to Slur over this
difference of Character by the application to both of one Common appellation of Pursuits of Pleasure? d
And the course of human Nature from the progress of Intelligent Being
to its Stop or retrogradation unless we admit that independent of Weight in
the Scale of Pleasure the Distinction of Right & Wrong of Perfection &
Defect are allowed to cast the Pleasure.
We are told and it is probably true that an infallible Rule of human Conduct would be to Do what upon the Whole would Ensure the highest
measure  Enjoyment & least Suffering.  But Nature does not enable
us to carry our View so far into the results of Consequences of any present
action to Supply this defect. We are competent to discern on the face of
Every transaction what is Right or Wrong And in this we have the Security
of Nature itself that Good upon the Whole will result from what we do from
this paramount & overruling Consideration.
Good & Evil are peculiarly incident to Sentient and Intellectual Power.
In any other Order of Being if any such there  be there is no such
Distinction & with it the distinction of Happiness & Misery Perfection &
defect is peculiar to them also.
The merely Sentient may be preferred to the Rank of Intelligence & the
merely Intelligent to the Wise & Good. We do not know of any Excellence
in Kind Superiour to this vested with adequate Power & Effect. This Therefore is at once the Perfection and the happiness. The Supreme Object of
Creative Will and Proceeding in the case of man tho apparently with 
much Deviation from the direct Road of what is Right to correction and
attainment which is founded on the experience of Partial Evil as well as
Good.
Such is the School of Wisdom and of Goodness also in Man is destined to
be as befits Intelligent Power in himself the Source of Advancement Excellence & Felicity.
The Power is given by the Author of his Being but the Attainment is
learned or Acquired not given.
The Object of moral Study & Science is to  treat of the distinction on
which we are of the Effects of each And of the best and Secure on which
 can proceed.
The Distinction of Profit and Loss refers chiefly to the increase or diminution of Stock or Possession. If any one were to Act solely on this
Disstinction he would of Course be Sordid illiberal & unconscionable in his
Disposition & in every Act of his Life. But as the means of Self Preservation
come under this Title it must be admitted for part in  the deliberations
of every Wise or Prudent man.
The means of Subsistence being Necessary to Life they are of the same
Value as Life itself that is to say may be the occasion either of happiness or
Misery. In the Proper Use they are occasions or materials of Prudence Justice and Beneficence of Art Diligence Frugality & good Conduct in many
respects Constituent of Wisdom Goodness & Independence The very
Essence of human Perfection & Felicity. But in the  abuse they may be
the occasion & materials of eve opposite Evil Folly Injustice Intemperance Dissease Prodigality Beggary and Slavish Dependence. The Prayer of
the Wise therefore is not for Profit but for the proper use of what he has.
The distinction of Right & Wrong relates to the dispositions intentions
And actions of Men.
With the Conscientious it is never forgotten & directs if not Their 
Ends in every pursuit at least the means by which to Obtain . The
Result is integrity Probity & Candour. The consciousness of Innocence
Purity exemption from Blame Remorse Shame Fear and every degrading &
torturing Passion.
Prosperity And Adversity are akin to profit & Loss depending for their
Value on the proper use which is another name for Virtue.
Prosperity abused is Pride Vanity and Insolence the Worst of Vices In its
proper use may be the Occasion of many Virtues.
The Mean Spirited Sink under  Adversity and are degraded. The
Strenuous contend with it & surmount it. To Men in general it is a School
of Fellow feeling of Charity of Considerate Caution in Judging of Others.
Perfection & Defect. They who act chiefly on this Disstinctions tend to
Magnitude in every Pursuit In vices or where they mistake the Application
of Excellence they everywhere tend to Excess Pride or Contempt of Others
Extravagance in Shew Emulation Ambition of Rank and Fame &c.
When  Excellence is well Understood the Highminded Excel in
Modesty Benevolence Candour As well as Magnanimity.
Upon the Whole there is nothing unalterably Good But Wisdom and
Benevolence. Even Power itself may be abused and is no where absolutely
Safe: but where the Goodness & wisdom are also Eternal And Infinite.


XIII. OF CAUSE AND EFFECT/ ENDS AND
MEANS/ORDER COMBINATION AND/ DESIGN 
Power, the first Element of importance in Being. Cause and Effect the exertion and result of
Power. Of Will. The Relation of Cause and Effect: there must be a first Cause Self-Existent.
1 to 6.
Cause and Effect leads to Result or End. The specific End of Intelligence is good. Cause
judged by the Effect. 6 to 8.
The Beneficence and Goodness of the First Cause manifest. Could not that Power which
gave Being to the means, accomplish the End without any means? 8 to 9.
The whole Creation made for Man to exercise his Faculties and forward his Progress to Perfectibility and Happiness. 9 to 13.
The Wisdom and Goodness of God manifest in the arrangements of Nature relative to Man.
13 to 17.
The contemplation of the works of Creation one great source of Happiness: the Atheist who
endeavours to undermine this Happiness compared to a Robber. 17 to 19.
Religion, its abuse. The Zealots fury &c. &c.. No Jury or Court of Inquisition adequate to
try causes for Impiety or Atheism. Arguments for and against Atheism. Evidence of a First
Cause. 19 to the End.
The first Element of Importance in Existence or Being is Power. Without
Power Existence is Altogether Indifferent if real.
Power is known only by its Exertion and this in many cases only by its
result. b
Power in Exertion is termed a Cause. The Result of its Exertion is termed
an Effect.
Causality or Power exerted consists in means Effect is the result of
means.
To know the Existence of such Relation as Cause and Effect is to perceive
the Exertion and tendency of Power together with Means accomplishing
the Result.
These Elements are matter of  of pure Intelligence and may be exemplified in Every Mathematical Problem as in the first of Euclid 1 while we
describe an Equilaral Triangle on a given Base We are conscious of the
Power of the means & of the intended Result or Effect. Here then our
knowledge and we proceed in action and in contemplation with this known
Relation of Cause & Effect in our Thoughts. Will is exerted and Muscular
motion Succeeds we are conscious of the Will of Intention to move and in
that intention the relation of the Cause to the Effect is anticipated before
the Result Ensues. Here we doubt not the Causality altho The means are
unknown. In command or communications of Will to other Persons The
Will Intention and Effect and to a certain  The Causality or means
are also known as when a person depending on Another for his Preservation
or Welfare conforms to his Will. When in the System of Nature things come
presented together & when this  Fact alone is Observed the Elements
required to constitute the Relation of Cause & Effect are wanting and no
Such Relation would be apprehended. When two or more persons appear or
pass one after another in the Street from this Circumstance it never occurs
to any one that they are Cause & Effect. Spring follows Winter and so on in
the Succession of Seasons but no one conceives them as Cause & Effect. Nor
can it be Supposed that mere Contiguity would Suggest to a Person previously unapprised of this Relation would have ever Suggested it. Yet it has
been alledged that the Contiguity of things in the course of Nature is the
only Source of this apprehension but as in the case of mere Physical Events
the means or Causality is unknown they contend the Apprehension is altogether imaginary & void of Reality.
It is Strange that Men of speculation should overlook their own Modes
 Existence to search for the Origins of their conceptions in Sources less
known or where the presentment of Relation is much less perfect or Compleat  Being Apprised of Power and its exertion in ourselves & of Ends
or Intentions and means with their Results & Effects. We are ready to
apprehend the same relations existing in Cases when any Appearance may
lead to such associations; but this we seldom do on account of mere Contiguity without some Other Circumstance such as we previously Apprehend
to be necessary in the Relation of Cause & Effect.
Having experienced the reality of this relation in our own intentional
active exertions and their results we are qualified in our Intelligence to pursue the fact to Consequences & improve upon Experience. The cause we say
must be adequate to the effect they must be inseparable and keep pace in
Just Proportion. Each must be known prior to their alledged connection &
upon these maxim not founded in Experience but inferred from the
Nature of Things Modern Science has advanced to its present attainments.
Nay we say more. That what is necessary must always have been & never
can be Otherwise And that whatever  has or has had a beginning must
have a previous Cause. This is not learned from Experience for many and
the greatest part of Events are not preceded by Causes known to us but we
admit that  must have had their Causes and that those causes must
have been preceded by others and so on Indefinitely. Yet if we attempt to
figure a past Eternity of such Succession Intelligence revolts And we say
that there must have been a first Self Existent otherwise that nothing could
have been. 2 It would be Absurd to say that this is learned from Experience
And it has the most powerful of all Evidence viz. that it cannot be doubted.
From the first Cause all is derived Even those causes whose Effects are
perceived by us And the System of Nature consists of a Series of Causes and
their  or in Other Words of Means and Ends.
As we are Conscious of Powers & Intentions The Effect intended is
termed the End. Mere Events tho considered as Effects do not necessarily
appear as Ends that is as  Effects intended except where The Cause is
known or conceived to be Mind or Intelligent Power.
In the acquisition of Knowledge The first Steps are Consciousness and
Perception. The following may be termed Inference including even Testimony. Where Cause & Effect are Known the Existence of either is inferred
from the Other. From the Effect most Commonly we infer the Cause as
from the Appearance of Smoked sooty Walls & Remnants of Chared Wood
we infer the Action of Combustion or Fire. This may have been intended &
destruction the End, But the mere Effect does not lead to any such Apprehension. Intending Power or Intelligence is a Power to obtain or to
communicate Happiness it will not admit of Suffering but in the defect of
Power to remove it. This is Evil The contrary is Good. The Specific End of
Intelligence then is Good adverse to Evil. Whatever Evidence may be that a
Mind is Misguided to intend Evil It is only when Good is apparent that the
interposition of Mind or  Intention can be inferred from the mere
Effect. Goodness of Effect however is in a considerable degree evidence of
Choice or Intention in the Cause. If to this be joined a combination of
means appearing to have no other connection than their joint cooperation
in producing a Good Effect The Evidence of mind or Intention is as compleat As Reality in the case presented could have furnished. The Case is an
actual presentment of Ends & Means the results of Intention Design Invention choice Contrivance and Power of Intelligence.
The System of Nature then consisting not merely of Cause & Effect but
of Ends & means bears in every Department The Indications of Intelligence
of Wisdom & Goodness in the first Cause.
The completion of this Topic must be left to the Physiologist and Natural
Historian in treating of organised Matter in Plants & Animals & the
Mechanical System of the Earth and the Heavens but there is no one so
blind as not to see the footsteps of Intelligence in the tracts nearest to
himself.
As Small Specimens of Art obtain the Praise of Ingenuity & skill
amongst  men; This Mighty Frame & Order of Nature must carry to the
Mind of every observation the Evidence not merely of Design & beneficent
Intention but of a Power so directed And in Measure Magnificent beyond
the possible reach of any such conception as ours. Such we would express is
the first Cause Necessarily & Essentially Existent of Course Eternal unlimited to place Infinite or Compleat in every Perfection which being
Necessary cannot have Degrees or Limits.
Even under this Power the Cause of all The Order of Nature seems to be
conducted in a Succession of Events of which Nature appears to contain
The Causes in itself. The Seasons keep pace with apparent movements of
the Sun. Forrests Spring up from the apparent Effects of Moisture & Heat
and so furth in Numberless Instances.
How are we to Conceive this Matter In the use of means or what we call
secondary Causes Necessary to the Almighty.
Could not that Power  which gave Being to the means accomplish the
End without any mean?
This question it is not possible to answer in the Negative And to obtain
some Consistency of Thought on the Subject we must follow where it leads.
The Eternal is Intelligent and the order of being to be multiplied by his
Power is of this Class. Still or lifeless matter is made for them not for itself.
It is but a provision for fancy Imagination And communication And Art.
They are made for themselves and coming into Existence with a Power to
be happy must owe the Event to themselves to what they learn to what they
attain & to what they become. What is chiefly wanting to them is a Scene on
which to perform their part & on which to acquire and exert their Strength.
On this Scene they have their Ends And to these means are requisite.
If the Almighty were to operate merely by Acts of Will without the intervention of Secondary means The Intelligent Creature would have no
resources but that of  Prayer to the Almighty for Interposition in
Obtaining the end or purpose in View. If he wanted a Tree he must pray to
have it full grown in his land e3 and if Prayer is the only Support to his faculties on this Earth.
The order of Nature made up of parts as it is indefinitely Various is still
in a high degree analogous in the Assortment Frame & Conduct of each
well fitted accommodated & placed in a Course Salutary To each & mutually
subservient or Consistent. In the Mineral & unorganised parts there is an
assortment of Materials for the Support Subsistence and occupation of the
Living & Active or Organised of the inferiour Class. In the living Sensitive
And Intelligent The Organisation however Various is Still Systematic &
Compleat Still fitted to the Element & Manner of Life. In the course things
Salutary to the Individual preservative & to the Species in the Succession of
Generations renovating and continual: yet in all this so exquisitely Contrived and so kindly conducted including the Condition and Fortunes of
Man with that of other animals there is occasional Interruption of order
defect Misfortune & distress. To him the soil is frequently Barren or
infested with Weeds The Season inclement & what he is tempted to 
use for Food poisonous or hurtful. His accommodations are to be found like
that of other Animals in the course of things but Nature Appears to do less
for him than for most of the other Animals And to have her work in some
degree defective for him to Supply.
But is not this the very Circumstance which fits the Scene in a peculiar
degree for him? In lieu of a provision without defect She has given him a
Power to devise and provide for himself. But is not this unnecessarily harsh
Why not save him the Suffering of so much labour and toil? Because occupation is to him a principal Source of Enjoyment. Because his Specific
happiness is in prospect in the termination of that Progress of Intelligence
and Wisdom in which he is engaged And his present felicity is to be measured by the fitness of the Course he runs to his arrival at that termination.
The Scene is fitted to him in a peculiar degree by calling forth the exercise
of faculties that profit by exertion and Habit by affording occasions of
research And experience that extend his information and correct his Errors
And the circumstances that promote this progress and contribute to these
are perhaps in nothing more Eminent  than in this That the Author of
Nature though himself omnipotent acts in Every Department by the Intervention of Secondary Causes. 4 Which his Intelligent Creatures destined for
Active Life may Observe And Availing themselves of these Secondary
Causes are enabled to a certain degree to Controul or direct the course of
Nature itself. By the use of Menstrua they can dissolve Salts & Minerals By
the use of Seeds they can propagate Plants change the productions of
Nature or cover the Barren Hills with Wood & remove the Wild Beast to
make Way for profitable Herds & Flocks.
The Secondary Cause is an Instrument in the hand of Man by which to
effect his Purpose in many Instances and the Materials strewed on the
Earth or hid in its bosom are Subjects of his Art And the usefulness of the
Cause And the Material is a continual Spur to research and Inquiry in his
way to accessions of Science & Intelligence. Is there not here enough to
Silence Atheistical Cavils that would represent the Wise & beneficent
Arrangement of a Scene so well fitted to promote the Progress in which it is
 the felicity of Man to advance or an Argument  the Goodness of
his Maker. Is it not rather a Striking Instance of that Goodness and Wisdom
which the Atheists would bring to refute.
As man is the principal object on this Terrestrial Scene Beautiful as it is
in every other Department The Test of Wisdom & Goodness in the Author
is to be collected from the Arrangements of Nature relating to him. In him
Life originates in mere Embryo as in the Case of other Animals. But at his
birth more dependent than the young of any other Species Long unable to
do any thing for himself how is  then provided. His Food is prepared
and ready to Spring from the Breast of his Parent And what is Still more
Important an affection is inspired into the Mind of that Parent which no
trouble no disgust no toil can bar in the most tender and unremitted care of
his Safety & Supply of every thing necessary to his Wellbeing.
He is weak an can do nothing but every is done for him by the
Society of Intelligent beings amongst whom he is born. The Germ of 
Intelligence in him springs up and expands by degree for a certain Period
more Aided by what is done for him than by any thing done by himself.
The time however must come in which he is to be an Actor and exhibit the
Carreer of Life  which  is born. How is he then treated: With every
Appearance of Neglect & Severity. The Scene so benign to every Other Animal is harsh to him. Wants of every kind assail him in his attempt to supply
them inconvenience difficulty & Danger are encountered at every Step. g5
Has Nature that was so kind to him in his Infancy now deserted him &
turned her Love into hatred? No! The Milk that was made to Spring up in
the breast of the Parent to nourish an animal Frame is now changed into
occasions of Thought of Invention of Ingenuity And of Action to Nourish
not an Animal Frame but the Faculties and Virtues of an Intelligent Mind
and to give its direction to a Progress which continues for ever after 
the occasions of an Animal may cease to Exist. In Manhood the mixed
scenes of Human Life The Difficulties to be surmounted The Sufferings to
be endured The Dangers to be braved And the advantages to be gained by
Labour & Ingenuity are Necessary to the Intelligent Being 6 as the Supplys
of Subsistence and accomodation are to the Animals.
What does he gain then in this Life. Individuals & whole Races of men
no doubt gain unequally. The Man indeed is every where Superiour to the
Infant And this may be all that is required in the present Scene to prepare
for the Future and if more be required that Future may be destined only for
those who deserve it. The Idea of Merit and Demerit is coeval with Intelligence. This Form of Being is formed for itself. It is a Power to be happy if it
learn and resolve to become so. Other Beings are made what they are. This
Being is furnished with Power to find what he is good for in himself.
 As happiness or Misery may result from the Good or ill use of this
Power so may even existence itself may Continue or cease as the Specific
constituents of Life are by such Agents cultivated or Suffer to decay. The
man who leads no more than the Life of an Animal may be expected to die
as mere Animals And future scenes of Existence be prepard only for those
who bear the faculties & Virtues of Intelligent Being in a State to pursue
their further Careers.
However this be Progression is the Lot of Man And beyond any other
terrestrial form of Being Characteristic of his Species Continued at times
from Age to Age through many generations. And that what is thus done
may be again repeated. There is a Vicissitude and fluctuation of Events corresponding to the Varieties which Nature exhibits in the Coexistent
description of organized & living Forms.
Here then we pause to Estimate our Lot and avail ourselves of our Condition. What is it thus to know That to be  gaining Wisdom Benevolence
and Love of Order is to be gaining Happiness That these are the Principles
on which the Universe is formed and Nature is made to run its Course Still
holding out to the Intelligent Those blessed Fruits of Excellence to which
he may Aspire. What if it should be Error. It were happy to be so deceived
And if Mind like the mere Organization of Separable parts should cease and
be no more Tis sweet to Meditate of Order now And to those who cease to
be no dissappointment can ensue.
But now to Speak in more humble terms yet not so ill Suited to a Son of
Earth. To know of God and of His Government what simple unaffected
Reason may collect from Fact and fair Appearances is to Man An Estate
more precious than Fortune can bestow. In the Inheritance of Man of
which Fortune cannot impair which brings him admiration confidence and
Safety And the Centinel in Garrison or on Board of ship Still calls 
aloud that all is Well. Among the greatest Crimes that poor deluded Man
Commits is the Attempt to rob a Neighbour of his fair Possession. Here the
Criminal has nought to gain, nor can any Motive but Wanton Levity or the
affectation of Superiority to other men. The attempt indeed to disprove the
Existence of Order or the Evidence of Wisdom & Goodness in Nature is
Criminal and a Cruel offence the less pardonable that it is committed without any probable Motive such as tempt the Indigent to steal or the Violent
to break the Peace. And upon the Principle of Defence or compulsory Law
the People are no doubt entitled to measures of Safety in the use of forcible
Restraints & the application of Penal Law: But in this Instance we find an
Occasion clearly to distinguish the Policy of Penal Jurisdiction from the
Interpretation of Injury & Wrong.
The Law is Strict and Peremptory That the Injurious may be restrained
by Force. But when & how to punish is a question not of Strict Laws but of
Expedience & prudential Concern and it will probably appear in the case of
Atheism or Attempt to violate  the Peace of Mind which rests on the
Confidence of Divine Wisdom & Goodness is an Instance on which The
Penal Law must be Silent and the offence Left to the Chastisement of the
general Indignation and Horror with which it is commonly received.
Religion Source of powerful Energies and best assurance of Mans high
Rank in Nature is like the Happiness to which it leads Subject  Mistake
and great abuse.
The Priesthoods Usurpation The degrading Fears of mean Superstition
The Antipathy of different Sects the Zealots Fury and the Court which
Baseness would pay to Heaven by vengeance on its Reputed Ennemies of
God who cannot have an Ennemy in Being are Evils to be dreaded from its
abuse And render human Judicature the least unfit for Tryal of Atheism or
impiety. In Questions on this Subject no discretion can be safely left to
Judge or jury and the definition of the overt Acts to which Conviction may
be Attacked is Singularly difficult. Experience Shows that Courts established for such Tryal degenerate into mere Inquisition adopting Forms that
prove  a Snare to Innocence and are only then Supposed Successful
when they multiply Victims to the fury of Zealots and the Usurping Arrogance and Interest of Priests. Such are the Evils which would attend the
Prosecution of Atheism itself as a Crime and object of Penal Law.
The most real Evils would be incurred to meet a Shadow which can
scarcely have a Being or Effect beyond the folly whence it flows. Let the
owner take its fruits. In society it canot prevail: for its Effect would be to
overthrow Society and Order. What order can Exist with Man if in the Universe itself there is no Order and Natures Laws are but desultory Facts
without Design or Wisdom to ensure their Permanence.
Corolary.
From the Reflections and Argument terminated as above it may appear
to the Satisfaction of fair Raison: That Objections brought to invalidate the
Evidence of Divine Wisdom & Goodness operating the Frame of Nature are
in Reality the most Convincing Proofs of that Truth.
The admirable mechanism of the Earth & Heavens with the Organisation of living Forms are acknowledged but the conclusion that mind alone
can be the Cause we are told is too hasty. It is possible  there may be in
Existence a principle of order different from Mind or Intelligence fully adequate to this Effect And the Ends being obtained not by Will but by the
Intervention of Physical means is a presumption of the reality of such. o
If the Order where most acknowledged and admired proceeded from
mind and a beneficent choice of the end. It would have failed precisely in
the Departments most interesting to Mind And in the distribution of
Enjoyments and Suffering the only matter in  Goodness or Wisdom
Can be Brought to the Test.
Here might follow a long & piteous account of the Sufferings to which
animals are exposed. The Neglect of Man in articles in which other animals
are carefully provided for. Naked Feeble & unarmd too weak for Battle with
many of his rivals on Earth too  for Flight. The Soil tho fertile to the
Cow & the Stag is barren to him overrun by poisonous or unprofitable
Weeds. He is to himself the worst Enemy by his Errors dissorders and folly
bringing upon himself all the Evils to which he is exposed in mind or body
&c. &c. Yet we are told the World is made for him & bears evidence of the
Wisdom & Goodness of his Maker.
 The lot of man it is confessed is deficient in things in which Other animals are more fully are fully provided by Nature. But his frame &
destination are also different. Tho’ an animal he is endowed with a Germ of
Intelligence destined to know himself & his Place in Nature Qualified to
Observe to remember to comprehend to Obtain Dominions to exercise it in
every Department of Mechanism Vegetation and Animal Life to distinguish
what is Excellent in Existence to Aim at it and in his Sphere to Obtain to be
himself that Good thing which he chuses to possess to be in short the Artificer of his own Condition & Character by the Information he Obtains be the
Exercise of his faculties by the Experience and Correction of his errors &
ultimate choice of What is Good. Thither his Intelligent Being tends and
the Fin is not better fitted to the Water or the Wing to the Air, than Mans
Principle of Intelligence to the Diversifyed & Mixed Nature of the Scene in
what he is placed. The exercise so necessary to the Advancement of his Faculties  continully furnished by the wants he is left to supply  for
himself the Inconveniences he is left to remove the difficulties he has to
overcome the Dangers to Brave And the Advantages tho within his reach
are nevertheless to be won by diligence & Strenuous Effort.
From these considerations it appears that the Appointment of a Scene for
Mans Active and progressive Nature mixed or presenting defects to be supplied Good to be Obtained and Ills to be avoided is no less an Evidence of
Goodness in the Design and Order of Nature than the Organisation exhibited in Living Natures And the Accomodations provided for each. And we
have in this mixed Scene of Nature an Evidence of Goodness & Intelligent
Power not an Objection to invalidate the Proof on which it is founded.
And in this The Final Cause or Object of Nature in this Terrestrial Scene
being the Progress and Advancement of Human Intelligence. The Work
would remain incompleat unless man to whom the occasions of Action are
thus provided were not likewise supplied with Power or means so to influence or direct the Course of Nature as the Exigencies of his Case may to him
seem to require.
 On the Question relating to  operation of Intellectual Power in
Nature it is alledged that Events are seen to result from Physical Causes that
do not admit the immediate interposition of mere Will or Design. If the
Earth is Covered with Plants or crouded with animals or Men They are
propagated from Seeds nourished by Warmth & Moisture Subsisted by food
and preserved by Successive Generation. If the Principle of Existence be
Intelligent & Conscious of Omnipotence why not Act in every Instance by
his Will without the intervention of means which to him cannot be
necessary? It is true Omnipotence excludes the necessity of Means in
Obtaining its End. But the accommodation of Created Intelligences for
whose sake all Creation is effected requires that Events in which they are to
interpose should proceed from Means or as they are termed Secondary
Causes which the Intelligent may Observe and Employ to its own purpose.
Hence the Incitement to the Study of Science and hence all the foundations
of Art. Minerals have their Solvents. Events are varyd Indefinitely by Mixture of Fluids. Prometheus 7 is said to have Stolen the Fire from 
Heaven And Ceres 8 to have furnished the husbandman with his Seed and
all the Fables of old are but forms in which to express the Design & Wisdom
of Eternal Power with the Means of that Dominion he is destined to excercise for his own accommodation and the Advancement of his Intelligent
Being. And here again the Evasion offered to Elude our Conclusion of
Design in Nature serves strongly to fix and confirm it.
Lawyers admit that a Case is strong when it is Supported even by the
Evidence which the antagonist adduces against. Such is the Case of Design
& Wisdom manifest in the order of Nature And they who Contend that this
order may have a Cause different from Mind must confess That the Cause
may be Mind or Intelligence And of these equal supposed Possibilities
The most probable is to be admitted without any doubt derived from a
Mere possibility of the matter being otherwise.
Why should he hesitate to Believe That the Eternal Being is Supreme in
that order of Being with the Reality of which alone we are acquainted.


XIV. OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION WITH ITS ACTUAL AND STILL IMPENDING CONSEQUENCES IN EUROPE 
State of France: manners of the French people. French Monarchs previous to the Revolution.
Haughtiness arrogance and Pride of the Noblesse. 1 to 3.
State of the French Army. Atheism the prevailing Philosophy. Pride and Profligacy of the
French Court. 3 to 6.
The Parliament: arbitrary proceedings of the Commons. National Assembly. Soldiers join the
Mob. King of Prussia’s proceedings; his defeat. Change of System in the French Army; Promotion laid open to the meanest Soldier. Termination of the Monarchy. 6 to 11.
Conduct of the Neighbouring Nations. Success of the French Arms, to what owing. Bonaparte on his return from Egypt solicits Peace, is refused. 11 to 14.
European League against France. War in the then turbulent state of France necessary to her.
Jealousies of the Allied Powers among themselves. 14 to 19.
Great Britain; her situation &c with respect to France and the European Powers. To the end.
There perhaps never was a monarchy more favourably Situated than
France in Respect to Limits Climate & Neighbourhood. Sufficient in itself
yet open to every Supply its Neighbours could give in Merchandise Science
or Literature.
Whatever be the Causes which distinguish one Race of Men from
another, The French exhibited their effects in a very high degree. The
Thoughtless were lively and Gay. The Thoughtful were inventive and even
profound with a prevalent propensity to Vanity or Ambition over all.
Whoever led the Fashion whether The Court or The City and in whatever it consisted whether Dress manner or opinion Fashion still carried
the Multitude along as Wind carries the Dust in Summer and the leaves in
Autumn.
 Birth was the great distinction sanctioned by Legal Priviledge as well as
Custom & Manners. Birth f1 required no Aids of Character or personal
Accomplishments to raise the possessor above the mass of the People however Accomplished.
The King tho accounted the Fountain of Honour and tho in the Practice
of conferring Letters of Nobless yet with little Effect. How Absurd says the
Presiden Haynault 2 to pretend by Letters to make the ofspring of Parents
unknown to come of Parents known as far back as any record or memory of
Ages remain: for such is the Definition of Nobless Titles Renown or Rank
of Service even the Crown itself might give Lustre but not Nobless. And
there were Families in France who affected Superiority to the Royal Family
itself in this Respect.
This Distinction gave its Cast to the manners of the  People & its
Genius to the Government itself. The King himself could not advance or
receive the Low-Born without giving Offence which was too much for him
to encounter. What Horror it was said to see such Persons brought forward.
Men of doubtful Birth were Sometimes Necessary for their Talents: but
tho in the highest Offices of State & vested with all the Patronage of the
Crown yet thought themselves honoured by Notice from the Slightest Coxcomb of a Noble man & honourd even by Acceptance of their Services And
sometimes had recourse to fabricated Briefs of Noblesse from Abroad where
their Names had never been heard of.
The French Nobless though not equally Jealous of Forreigns in the
Forreign Troops of their Service would not  allow any low born French
man to hold any Rank in the National Troops of France to hold any rank
above that of a Corporal or Sergeant And in this they placed their Security
That the French Army would be always of their Side. 3
There were Circumstances that reconciled the Government to this State
of Things. Nobless of Fortune took Regiment & held them at a great
Expence from a Species of Vanity. They kept a Table for the Officers who
accordingly Served upon very small Pay. The Privates were Scarcely above
Beggary And the National Troops of France were kept  a Smaller
Expence than those of any other Nation in Europe. A French Soldier was
thought to be disgraced by the touch of money or a money Reward for any
Service whatever.
This precaution of the Noblesse to exclude the Low Born from any Rank
or Command in the Army as a Security for themselves had as is not 
uncommon An Effect contrary to what was intended.
The distinction itself had a tendency to corrupt one order by making
them secure of their Eminence on the foot of Birth alone & to animate the
Other with Ambition to compensate their dissadvantage.
The Noblesse had sensibly declined and an admiration of Wit & Literature gave the People in general an open to consideration. The Philosophy in
fashion was Atheism 4 & Anarchy.  Nature there were not any Ends or
Means but things were so because they could not be otherwise. In Society
the Sovereignty was vested in the whole not in a Part: And This misterious
Sovereign who never c Act precluded the Right of every pretender to
Power.
The Court as usual intent upon Pleasure only was become Weak & Profligate beyond any other part of the Community. A great Revenue being let to
Farmers 5 who Oppressed the People & fed the Court with money enabled
them to Anticipate the Revenue  and expend the Income of Years in
Advance. Imbecillities & difficulties were felt in every Department. The
King was advised to throw himself upon the Generosity of His People to
call the Assembly of the States 6 or a representation of all the different
orders Nobles Clergy And People or Commons. The form of their meeting
was in great measure at the Discretion of the King. It was not fixed
whether three Estates were to meet in one Assembly or in three separate
Assembly but the Representatives of the Commons in number equalled the
other two And they of Course insisted on the formation of a Single Assembly. Being by far the Strongest both within Doors and without they
prevailed & proceeded to execute a Tyranny more bloody & terrible than
any that is known in the history of Mankind. The King was thought to be
Secure at the head of his Army but alass the Army consisted of Noblesse
Officers. The Rank &  File were low born who were now taught to consider their exclusion from preferment as Injurious & who were told by the
National Assembly that their pay would be augmented & their Wrongs
redressed.
They left or drove awa their Noblesse officers & every where joined
the Popular Party.
There was none more bussy in the mobs at Paris than those who bore the
Uniform of the Kings Guard.
It used to be a Standing reproach to the English in France that they cut
off the Head of their King. 7 This Example was become matter of Emulation
and carried into Effect.
All Europe Stood aghast at this enormous Scene & not knowing how
fruitless or dangerous it is to meddle with a People that is roused to any
great act of Revolution in the prospect of some glorious change in favour of
the People. In such Paroxisms they operate with irresistible Effect wherever
they move in a Body: but left to themselves they generally break into 
Divisions & waste their Strength against one Another. This was too profound a Secret for German Heads. The King of Prussia 8 protested against
the Dissorders that prevailed in France passed the Rhine & Advanced into
Champagne to repress them. His Invasion united the Jarring Spirits of Revolutionary France. His Stop & his subsequent Retreat excited Contempt &
taught those whom he attempted to frighten to despise such Ennemies as he
was. They saw how expedient it was for them to have Wars abroad. They
formed Armies they took officers from the Ranks & from the lowest Station
wherever genius or Ability could be found. Their neighbours taking men as
they happend to be in the Way were unfit to compete with this Sudden
Spring up of Genius without restraint from former Institutions and the
meanest Soldier in the Ranks felt the Revolution & relyd on preferment if
he could but distinguish himself.
Dumurier 9 led them to  Victory in two or three Instances And when
fortune turned against him on the Side of the Revolution he proposed to
dispose of his Army & join the Austrians in Restoring the King: but even
he did not understand what had happened or that the Army were Sensible
of what they had gained by having preferment laid open to all Ranks and
Spurned the Idea of a King And his Noblesse pretending to monopolize all
preferments and Honours. The people were now Sovereign & the Army i
belonged to the People. When Dumurier met a Column on the March and
Asked by whose Orders they Moved. He was Answered by the Question
What are you & was fain to leap a Ditch to get out of Their Way & was followed by a Volley of Shot which he escaped to meditate on the effects of a
Revolution which he hoped to Conduct. 10
 It now became manifest that the National Troops of France were Sensible of their Share in the projected Revolution And had lost that Zeal for
Royalty with which they were Supposed to be Animated more than any
other Troops in Europe.
Of their concern  the Revolution they had been early admonished by
a Resolution passed  the National Assembly that the Pay of the National
Troops should be Augmented And the Uniform of the Kings Guard was
seen to mix in the riotous mobs in the Streets of Paris, that Huzza’d for Liberty & the Subversion of Monarchy. It was given out that the Continuance
of these dissorders & the Sitting of the popular Assembly were owing to the
forbearance of the King who abhorred the Shedding of Blood and declined
the Offer that  made of dissolving the Assembly by Force.
It was however well known at Court that this was no longer matter of
choice. The Noblesse officers driven from Quarters by Some of  the
Regiments or deserted there by Others were repairing to Court in numbers
to declare their Willingness & inability to Serve His Majesty any longer. In
this the Revolution consisted or by this alone it was effected. If the Army
had adhered to the King the popular Assembly would have been dismissed
And a Military Government had been Established in the House of Bourbon
Innocent indeed Compared to that which has since taken place in the
House of Buonaparte.
Neighbouring Nations reproved the proceedings of France And the Rulers of France knew it was their interest to be at War with all the World.
They sent Armies in every direction made Conquests & extended their
frontier on every Side without regard to former possession or Right. Savoy
Lombardy the Banks of the Rhine & the Low Countries were occupyed as
Appendages of France. The Long Boasted Ballance of Power  was sett
at Nought. 11
The French Arms were becomeing irresistible: For when troops in the
Ordinary State of men quiescent & no way Affected  what was passing
could resist a Multitude roused by expectation of a rising Sun of Glory to
their Country & unlimited Elevation to preferments & honours excited in
the breast of every Individual & conducted by Leaders who had gained
their Stations by the sole proof or Appearance of Genius & Superior
Ability. k
Their first successes qualified & prepared them for more. Even defeats
did not damp or disspirit them. They returned to the Charge Again &
Again untill Fortune turned in their favours And then by one effectual
Effort they repaired or recovered what the Misfortunes of a Campaign or
even of preceding Years seemed to have lost. A General discomfited in
Egypt 12 returned to take the whole conduct of  France upon himself
and that State of Things Sollicited Peace with his Neighbours.
But the Powers to whom he applied had not yet taken into Consideration
the Effects of a National Spirit roused to uncommon exertion by revolutionary prospects of Elevation & Glory. They had not yet considerd that a
Moment of dejection if it take place in Such a Party is the fittest moment
possible for Negotiation with an Ennemy of this Description. They rejected
the Overtures of Negotiation with expressions of Contempt 13 for the Party
from whom they came And forced that Party already too well known for
Superiour Ability to make trial of that Force with which he was entrusted
& at a Single Blow to recover what whole unsuccessful Campaigns had Lost
& to resume at once l14 that formidable Aspect by which Europe had been so
 much allarmed.
This Allarm was serious & well founded. The Great Nations of Europe
Great Britain Austria & Russia con m15 together And entered into
League to oppose it. Each saw its own Safety at Stake and the Power of
France ready to effect their Ruin. With this they could not be too deeply
impressed. They were mistaken as to the means of counteracting it.
France is become dangerous. This was true: But the Inference that followed let us make War upon her was inconsiderate and false. Or The way
to make successful War on Such a Power an Irish Blunderer 16 Observed is
to be at peace with her.
The Times were not yet passed in which the French Nation if left to
themselves might not have broke to pieces gone to War among themselves
& saved their Neighbours the trouble of reducing their too formidable 
greatness: But the sound of Allarm from Abroad was in reality an admonition to Suspend this dissensions and Waste their dangerous powers on the
Frontier. o
The Assembling of Armies from Austria & Russia 17 at one time & that of
Russia and Prussia 18 at another time operated merely as so many Calls on
the Military Leader of France so Superiour to every one that was likely to
be opposed to him to come and possess himself of Germany & Poland quite
to the Frontiers of Russia. Of these another Battle might possibly have
given him possession & left no one to dispute his Empire from the
Attlantick to the American Straits to the North of Kamchatka. 19
It may be Asked then what are Nations to do in the neighbourhood of
such a Power? Certainly not to provoke a War because his Force preponderates & ensures  him Success. 20 If attacked the weak must defend
himself for the most unequal chances of War may be preferable to Concessions, that amount to Subjugation or lead to that extreme at the discretion
of the person to whom they are made.
Confederacy is no doubt the first resource of numbers against an overbearing Power which no one can Singly resist; and if they are so stupid or
untractable as to act more from former Jealousies than from any Sense of
common Interest; The case is desperate & they must Singly or Successively
perish.
At one time the Prussians with a Secret Joy Saw the Austrians reduced &
the Austrians in their turn enjoyed the down fall of Prussia And the Conqueror Whatever advantage he took of either Still left Silesia the Subject of
their jealousies still as he found it. 21
 And what could be expected from Parties who having Rights or Properties of their own to mantain accepted as a Gift from the Robber one the
unoffending Republick and Territory of Venice. 22 The Other a like gift of
Hanover 23 and then provoked a War with the Donor because he presumed
to intrigue for confederacy with some of the Powers in their
Neighbourhood.
Great Britain from her insular Situation & Naval defences may long sett
the Powers of the Continent at defiance. And untill it please God to Inspire
some mind with faculties fit to Contend for the Independence of Continental Nations it were vain to rely on any Confederacy to be formed of Such
Parties. They must be sensible that if the Ruler of France were as powerful
at Sea as he is by Land, No state or Province  could be safe from California to Japan And yet under Awe of this power they now cooperate with
him in the Reduction of this Island Although they must know that whatever indulgence they now enjoy is owing merely to the limit which this
Island yet setts to his Empire And that if it ever should be compleat their
Properties & Persons will be at his discretion.Altho they obey him in shutting their Ports against the English 24 he knows their dissaffection & heart
and every where Stations troops of his own to ensure the effect.
The Partizans of Buonaparte say he has given peace to the continent of
Europe. What Peace Subjugation! 25 and Arraign the British Councils for
refusing Peace. The meaning is obvious and it is Evident that any Peace
tending to reduce the defences of Britain either at Sea or by Land would be
ruinous not only  to her but to every Nation wh the Mandates of
this European Sovereign could reach. His Vessels might be met with on the
Ocean fetching his Contributions at once from Mexico & Japan.
What a Triumph for France may not some Vainglorious Frenchman say?
Such a Triumph as the Reduction and Spoil of distant Provinces were to
Italy; The means of pampering corrupting & Alluring its rulers to every
enormity of profligacy Cruelty & Vice most oppressive tremendous & ruinous to those who  nearest at hand & most immediately Subject to its
hatred or Caprice. They were not the Heads of Daerans q26 or Armenians 27
which Nero wished to have sett upon neck to be struck off at a Blow: but
those of the Romans inhabiting the Seven hills of Rome. And Tiberius
whose Jealousy did not extend to the Provinces never ceased with his
Informers and  Spies never ceased to Avenge the miseries of his own
Mind on the most respectable Citizens of Rome & when remote from them
on the very Instruments of his Vile & execrable Pleasures at Caprae. 28
Is there then on the Continent of Europe or most Especially in France a
Person so stupid as to wish for more Power in the Hands that already have
so much.

XV. OF THE SEPARATION OF DEPARTMENTS
PROFESSIONS AND TASKS RESULTING FROM
THE PROGRESS OF ARTS IN SOCIETY 
Progress of Arts. The Separation of Departments in the formation of one Article of Art or
Manufacture, considered. 1 to 4.
How far some Departments of Art or Manufacture affect the Morals of the people employed.
Of Slavery, Subordination. Rich and Poor, vices peculiar to each. Political Slavery. 4 to 7.
How far the being engaged in any particular Branch of Trade or Manufacture, confines the
Thoughts and the exercise of the Faculties. Of the requisite qualifications to form a Gentleman. 7 to 9.
Of Schollars, Men of Science, Statesmen, Warriors. Qualifications of each; connection and
separation of their several Departments. 9 to 17.
The Statesman and Warrior united in the Roman Common wealth. Knowledge of Men and
Manners necessary in these Departments. 17 to 19.
On Education. Public Seminaries, their inadequacy; the inattention to their Rules, Forms
&c. The separation of some Departments prejudicial to Society. The Statesman should be a
Warrior and the Warrior a Statesman. 19 to the End.
Every man in the outset of Arts must do all for himself find at once his
Subsistence his Shelter & his Rayment.
How much his State has been improved by the recourse of different Men
to different employments and the Mutual Exchange or Commerce of their
several productions need not be stated.
Every accommodation will be more Compleat & every Supply more plentyful as this Expedient advances its height: but like every thing else in
human Life it has its limits.
A Pin 2 we are told furnishes a separate Task to no less than twenty different Workmen & the implement is better & more cheaply furnished than it
could be by fewer Workmen. Yet there are limits to this separation of
Labour. The pointing  of a Pin may be compleated by one Person to
divide that Task and pass it from one to another for the completion of it
would be loss of time & risk of defect in the work by the attempt to join
effects not justly fitted to one another.
Similar limits might be pointed  in the performance of every
Mechanical Task. And even if we should admit that the improvement of
Workmanship might be advanced indefinitely by this means: yet there are
other considerations to make us pause in the pursuit of it. The comparative
importance of the improvement gained gradually diminishes And ceases at
last to be of sufficient value to compensate the trouble of farther Arrangement. Parts ceased to be equally well performd by separate hands as they
would by the same hand. In Masonry for instance suppose the Stone to be
placed by one Person and the Mortar placed by another The work probably
would be inferiour to that which one tradesman  could produce: besides
that they would probably interfere & interrupt one Another.
There is still a farther consideration of Consequence in this bussiness.
This Separation of Tasks is intended for the better Performance of each &
for the Benefit of Mankind in general. If it should ever mar the performance
or become prejudicial to human Nature; in either Case no doubt it ought to
be stopped.
If in Painting for Instance The different Shades Lights & Colours were
to  laid by different hands the work it is probable might Suffer And the
Artists Fancy impaired by his being restrained from the Scope of his Conception which subsists not in parts but in the Unity of a Whole.
The Work of man may be important: but the Artist himself is still more
so. It is true no doubt that altho Society is intended for the Good of its 
Members; yet the individual on Occasion must be sacrificed to the Whole.
Amidst the Departments of Bussiness and Profession there is great inequality of Effect in the Cultivation of Intellectual Faculty & Moral Habits
and Some are of so mean a tendency in these Respects as to be matter of
general Regret yet to be necessary for the general Accommodation And it
may be difficult to fix the extent to which this may be endured & where it
must be absolutely stopped. 3 It may with confidence be said that Slavery is
a point to which it should never Extend And yet there are voluntary Stations and occupations in human Society more debasing than Slavery
necessarily or even Generally is. All we can say is that the less that there is
of this Sort the better, And that Subordination however valuable is too
dearly bought by the debasement of any order or Class of the  People.
There is a Principle of Subordination in the difference of Natural Talents
in the distribution of Property Power & Dependence. 4
The Poor must labour in order to subsist. The Rich may hire the Labour
of Others 5 but still find occasion on which to labour for themselves.
There is nothing debasing in either Condition but the Vices to which
both are Obnoxious Envy & Rapacity on the part of The Poor Arrogance &
Licentiousness on the part of the Rich. 6
These Vices are found in the extremes & in all the intermediate orders of
a People. The worst possible condition in which man can be conceived is
that in which all Labour were precluded or in which all Power is vested in
one and all Dependence imposed upon another. The nearest approach to
this Condition is that of Master & Slave  however constituted whether as
a Civil relation of Proprietor & Property or Sovereign & Subject.
Of These The Political Servitude is debasing in the greatest de & to
the greatest Extent. The Courtiers of Tiberius or Nero even the Senators of
Neros time were debased to a degree far beyond that of the Slave to an
Ordinary Master.
Such abuses however it may be said are not necessary and unavoidable in
the Subdivision of Labour or the Subordination of Ranks. 7 Here indeed it
is necessary that the human faculties should be unequally cultivated in proportion as the task assigned to each tends to exercise And improve them. In
a Person whose task is a mere movement of the hand or the Foot as is The
Case in the distribution of Labour which is made in some branches of manufacture may be supposed to remain in some measure of Torpor while that
of a Master who directs the Whole or that of an Artist who has many things
to combine  many Incidents to guard against and a choice to be made
amidst a Variety of Expedients which different occasions require is still in
the very state which Nature has devised for her Intelligent order of Being
tending at once to exercise and Cultivate their faculties.
The Subdivision of Tasks tends in some Instances to mar the effects of
this Destination & to improve them in Others. The mind of a Tradesman 8
in many Instances is less practised in thought than that of a Savage While
in more liberal Stations of Life the mind Profits by exemption from Inferiour Cares & Anxieties & the effect of more extensive Views And the more
Arduous combinations of Thought.
Men are carryed along in the Progress of Establishments and of Arts as
Vessels afloat in the Water are carryed along by the Torrents to which it is
Subject. And it is uncertain how far information respecting the direction of
their  movements may enable them in any degree to change that direction or modify the result.
Men certainly Act from opinion as well as Instinct or Habit and Correct
opinion is desireable in itself whatever be the measure of its Influence in
the general Affairs of Men.
It has been Observed 9 that by the Separation of Tasks & Professions The
work is improved and Obtained at a Smaller Cost. The Artist also is sometimes improved in his designation of Intelligence & Manhood: But if
neither is always the Case; it is no doubt of Moment to distinguish the
Instances in which the Separation of Arts & Profession is unfavourable in
the Result whether in respect to the Character of the Artist or the Value of
his Work.
In the Mass of the People it is not required of a Tradesman that he be
knowing in any Branch 10 but his own nor does any collateral Skill enable
him the better to execute his peculiar Work  except where different
works proceed upon some Common Principle of Science.
For those who are termed Gentlemen or persons dissengaged from peculiar pursuits or applications there is no peculiarity of Skill required. Of
them it is requird that they be Happy That is to say Wise Benevolent Courageous and Temperate and the less they possess any habit to the exclusion of
Others equally valuable so much the Better.
In Actual Profession or Publick Station the Case is different. Scholars &
Men of Science And publick Functionaries of any denomination have their
Tasks Assigned them and must devote themselves in a peculiar manner to
some Particular Branch. It is so in mere Science as well as in the learned
Professions of Medicine or Law.
To Obtain what may be Obtaind in any Branch of Science it is necessary h
that it be made the Object of peculiar Study: but yet to know one Branch &
nothing more is to be a Tradesman not a  Scholar. The Sciences are
more  less connected and give mutual lights to one Another. To possess
them all is to know the Order of Nature And the Person whose knowledge is
limited to a particular Branch must know even that the less Perfectly that
he is ignorant of its place & connection in the general Order of Nature. To
be a Man of Science on the best model thus it does not exclude all separate
& peculiar Pursuits but requires a Liberal extensive view to the Nature &
importance of Collateral Studies. It is thus the Scholar may Avoid that narrow and illiberal Contempt which Professional Men sometimes entertain
for every Branch of Study but their own. The Mechanic or the Chymist
despises the Moralist & is equally treated in his Turn. The mere Lawyer &
the mere Doctor of Medicine are but ungracious members of Society. And
but lame practitioners even in what they profess from a defect  in those
habits which are required in the concourse of men.
In mere Manual operations The Man is sometimes sacrificed to his Trade
an separate parts are assigned to different Workmen who have to perform
a Simple movement of the hand or the foot to save necessity of Thought or
of time in changing Tools or of thought in passing from one Step to
Another. 11 It is Evident however That the Principle of Subdivision which is
so Successful in Manufacture cannot be applied with the Same advantage in
those operations where Man himself with all his Faculties is required in
every Step as well as in the result or Combination of the Whole.
In the Bussiness of State and of War there are no doubt parts that
Approach to mere Mechanism And in these the Statesman & the Warriour 12
like the Master in a Counting House may have his Tools or his  workmen to whom the principle of Subdivision Applys & in respect to which
The Profession of a Statesman and Warriour are materially different.
The Statesman must have his Clerks & Separate Boards of Commission
in Matters of Laws & Revenue The Warriour must have his Tacticians &
Leaders of Division from the Smallest of a Platoon to the greatest of a Column Line or Wing of an Army. He too must have his Clerks, his
Commissaries & his Providers of every requisite to an Army. But the greatest Error that can be committed in the affairs of Men is to Suppose that the
Genius or Art of a Statesman or Warriour terminates in the possession or
Combination of such Mechanical parts together.
The Statesman or Warriour must be so far Master of those mechanical
parts as to  know when they are well or ill performed by those to whom
they are entrusted: but his own part is that of a Man fit to lead among Men
on whom men will rely for Preservation or Success in all their Undertakings. Penetration & Strength of Mind Wisdom & Courage Goodness or
Benevolence that Encourage a Friend Rapidity & Force that Strike Terror
into an Ennemy are at once his Tools & his Arts. The Statesman must be
Skillful to know how every Measure will affect every order of the People.
How the most dependent may be made to feel Secure in his right how the
most powerful may be made to feel the restraints of Justice humanity &
Good Order. In these respects the Warriour too is a Statesman And must
practise all the Art & Wisdom of Peace in his own Line or  encampment that he may be the more terrible in the View of his Ennemy. Of this
Art Socrates 13 expressed himself like a Master no less than in Any Other
department of Moral or Civil Wisdom. Of Military Tactics he said 14 nothing
Can be done without order or form: but a Warriour must be more than a
Tactician He must be Cautious & Rash a Thief & a Thiefcatcher Cruel &
humane Penurious & Prodigal Cautious & Rash.
His Tools or Weapons Are Men & he must know them, how to excite &
how to restrain them what can be expected from them & what not & when
required how they can be roused to do all that men will or Can Do.
The Departments of State Political Civil & Military in well Regulated
Establishments are on account of the Mechanical details in which they differ generally Separated But in the Heads under whom those details are
conducted  proceed on the Same grounds of Knowledge & of Power.
The knowledge of Men & the Power it gives is the Essence of Ability in
either Department And that Strength of mind which gives an Ascendant
over Men is equally required in both.
The Mechanical details in which those departments differ tho necessary k
are comparatively of small importance: because they may be learned & practised by persons of Vulgar capacity And ought never to be mistaken for the
test or constituent of Ability in the Heads of either Department. Men of
either Department are apt to be jelous of the other One or the Other may
have the Ascendant under different Establishments. And whether the
Statesman is to choose the Warriour or The Warriour to choose the Statesman It is evident that the Elector ought to be acquainted in either Case with
the  merit on which his choice is to proceed. The Statesman ought to be
acquainted with the Professional peculiarities of a Soldier that he may not
Mistake them for the whole grounds of his choice or Sufficient to Justify if
he commit the publick Safety to  incompetent. A Statesman or Minister
who errd in this particular has been known to say. The military is not my
Department. I had recourse to the Profession for a Person long Practised &
Established in it he is responsible & not I for the Consequences. The mere
Military Despot on the contrary may make as ill a choice of those he
employs in the Civil or Political Depart: And it is Evident that in
any well Established Community The Qualities of Either department
should be so well combined that neither could plead a ruinous Ignorance. 15
A Person ignorant of War  and its Forms is as unfit to be  Statesman
as a Person unacquainted with Variable Winds & Storms is to be a mariner.
And to say that a Statesman know nothing of War or a Warriour knows
nothing of The State is to detract equally from the Merit or Ability.
In the Roman Commonwealth, in many respects the Model of Felicity to
Nations, The Departments of State & of War 16 were not only Strictly Allied
& known to each other but for the most  actually filled & Conducted
by the same Person. 17 All the Distinction they made between the first Magistrate & the Commander in Chief of their Armies was that he was
Magistrate within the Walls of Rome & the other outside of those Walls. He
acted from his Office in either & in both these Capacities. The mere forms
of either were such as the meanest Could learn and never intercepted the
View of his Country or his Own in the choice of Persons to whom they 
might entrust their Affairs. Whether in the Roman Magistrates Gown or
the Sagum 18 of the Legionary Soldier. m
This Union of Departments was early provided for in the very first Elements of the Roman Constitution. It was provided that every Citizen should
State himself as part of his Countrys Strength & to qualify him for any Civil
or Political advance by having actually Served a Certain Term in the Wars of
his Country. 19
Altho The Talent for Affairs of State in general and War in particular is
the same or founded in the Same knowledge of Men and Ascendant of the
mind yet the exercises & the habits of Body they require Are different. Warriours have been distinguished in Youth or early Life. Statesmen profit
more by experience And the deliberation of Maturity and Age.
As Military Tactics and manual Exercise are within the competence of
Children they ought not to be neglected amidst the Rudiments of Education  in early Life. So that what every one knows or possesses could not
be mistaken for the Criterion of great Ability or fitness for the highest &
most important functions of human Life As the Habits of a Clerk in
Office 20 or a drill Serjeant on the Parade are made to pass for the qualifications of Statesmen or leaders & commanders of Men in the Field.
Nothing is supposed more important than Education. And the world &
Abounds with Institutions or Establishments for that purpose yet Government is Seldom attentive to what is taught in those Institutions And even in
these Later ages of great Experience few things except reading writing &
Arithmetic that can be of use in after Life are taught either at School or College. The Gramar of Dead Languages The Mythology which served as
the foundation of Antient Poetry Even the prosody or fabric of Verse or
Metre are crammed down the Throats of high & Low of Futur 
Tradesmen Merchants Senators And Soldiers Rank & File Citizens And
Drovers and little with any one except the habit of being obliged in Childhood to regard what Others inculcate And which indeed however little it
may seem is indeed very great And actually the most important attainment
of Such Schools as we have provided for the Education of the Coming Age.
The occasions & the manners of Human Society are transient And Successive. The Institutions of one Age to accommodate Ages that follow at any
considerable interval are to be changed or modifyed And no Age can with
advantage Legislate unalterably for the Ages that follow. 21
On this Account a late writer of Eminence on the Wealth and Other Concerns of Nations places Education on the same foot with Trade and Other
concerns most Safely entrusted to the Par concerned & reprobates
fixed Institutions  or Intervention of Government. 22 From this general
Rule however he excepts every Case in which Defence or publick Safety is at
Stake 23 And of Course should except Education so far as the publick Safety
is concerned. A Committee of Parliament or Other publick authority might
no doubt with great Advantage be interposed to report from Age to Age
what Regulations might be requird in Publick Schools to prepare the rising
Generation for that part which necessity might impose on every Individual
for the safety of his Country. He who cannot defend himself is not a Man &
he who cannot take part in the defence of his Country is not a Citizen nor
worthy of the Protection which the Laws of  Country bestow. Other
cares may be delegated & become matter of Separate Profession  to a
part of the People: but to set Valour apart as the Characteristic of a few were
to change Virtue & happiness itself as a Matter of Profession & Study peculiar to a devision of the Community. 24 For furnish Shoes or erect
Palaces may be the Object of Separate Professions but to be man is the equal
concern of all And the want of Courage degrades him no less than the want
of Understanding or Truth.
Men are Wise to Avail themselves of every Advantage which the Subdivision of Arts and the Separation of Employments can give: but where this
expedient is noxious to the Genius & Character of man it is Wisdom to
check or restrain it. 25
Let the Statesman be Ashamed to own he is no Warriour And the Warriour to own he is no Statesman. Under these confessions the one is a mere
Clerk in Office The other a mere prize  fighter & a Bully. 26


XVI. OF THE FREEDOM OF WIT AND
HUMOUR AND THEIR VALUE AS A
TEST OF RECTITUDE AND TRUTH 
Of the Laws of Nature or Physical Laws relative to Man. Self Preservation, Congregation,
Estimation, with the qualities belonging to each. 1 to 2.
Of Esteem and Contempt well or ill directed, and as terminating in Virtue or Vice. Of Ridicule and Laughter: where Ridicule ought to be used and where Reprobation; both frequently
misplaced. 2 to 5.
The Power of ridicule as a figure of Speech in Rhetoric; its frequent misapplication; not
always a test of Truth or Justice; arising from some odd combination or incongruity. 5 to 7.
Freedom of Wit and Humour, as an Innocent relaxation to the Mind; different from Ridicule, which should be a weapon to shame  immorality. 7 to 9.
Of Calumny. Law of Libel. Trial by Jury &c. 9 to 10.
The Laws of Nature or Physical Laws relative to man, have been comprised under Three general Titles.
1. The Law of Self-preservation.
2. The Law of Society or Congregation.
3. The Law of Estimation.
The 1st comprehends many or most of the Animal Instincts & propensities with the love of Ease & Safety &c.
The Second comprehend together with some Animal Instincts The
preference of Company to Solitude Sympathy Benevolence Love Friendship Justice And Good Repute.
The third comprehends all the Phaenomena of Esteem or Contempt
whether well or ill founded & terminating  in Vice or Virtue. Such as
Vanity and Pride Integrity Magnanimity & Elevation of Mind. Well
directed it is the Principle of Magnanimity & Just Ambition. Ill directed it
is the principle of Arrogance Pride Vanity & erroneous Ambition.
In either way it is one of the Strongest or most powerful Principles in
human Nature.
In respect to Character or Dignity it is Approbation or Admiration or the
Contrary Reprobation or Contempt in all their Phases & Phaenomena.
Among the Phaenomena of reprobation may be reckoned Ridicule or
Laughter.
To dissapprove or to be displeased as to Approve is to be pleasd.
These different Affections admit of indefinite Gradations.
In exception to the general Rule Ridicule or Laughter though excited by
defect is not disspleasure: but is in a  peculiar Manner respecting Others
joyous & Acceptable And appears to derogate from the Beneficent Character of Nature founded in the tendency of Evil or defect to give Pain and of
Good or Excellence to give pleasure hereby exciting a Will to Avoid the one
and Aim at the Other.
This Law indeed even with Respect to the Ridiculous holds in the concern which every Man takes in his own Character. Laughter is pleasing but
no one likes to be laughed at. The Buffoon who makes him ridiculous
expects to be Esteemd for his Art in doing so.
The Follies and defects of mankind are so numerous & Frequent that if
each were matter of Hatred or serious Indignation; human life would be a
Scene of Melancholy Anguish and despair Such as the Parent feels for the
Defects of his Children or the Coxcomb feels for the dissappointments of
his Vanity.
It appears therefore  among the Final Causes Suggested of the Beneficent kind that while every one hates to be laughed at in his own Person
And is therefore directed to shun the Ridiculous yet many of the defects
and errors so frequent in human Life may be matter of Animadversion &
Censure without casting the Gloom of Melancholy or Severe displeasure
over so many of the Scenes of Society & Intercourse as might furnish occasion to serious discontent.
Meanwhile it is well known That Nature does not admit of Ridicule or
Laughter in every Case of Reprobation. And it were of Consequence to distinguish the province of Serious Indignation from that  Ridicule
Laughter or merriment.
This disstinction like many others is Obvious in the extreme but Slight
& difficult in some of the intermediat Occasions that in certain degree
admit either of Ridicule or serious Reprobation.
 Malice we may assume is ever matter of Serious Reprobation not of Ridicule. Timidity is Sometimes the one & sometimes the Other. So is dullness
of Fancy & insensibility of Heart Irascibility & Tameness, &c. &c.
Reprobation is the lot of Crime and Depravity.
Ridicule is the Lot of Imbecility & Defect.
Just Reprobation is the Test of one.
Just Ridicule is the Test of the other.
But Actual Reprobation or Actual Laughter may be erroneous and misslead & is not without inquiry to be received as a Test of Demerit or of
Defect.
The Rhetorician by his Figures of Speech can lay the Colours of Depravity on the Innocent. Or the Colours of Defect & Ridicule on the Respectable
& the Just. The Powers of Epithet and Metaphor to these effects are well
known. The Epithet of Divus Julius 2 made a  Saint or Sanctified a
Bloody Adventurer in search of Power.
The designation of Contented Cuckold was meant to throw contempt on
Marcus Aurelius 3 & in some minds may have its Effects.
An imaginary Personage with nothing of Socrates 4 but the Name
brought Ridicule or dissrespect on that Person who has in fact remained the
admiration of Ages.
Tho Ridicule always implies some supposed Defect. The imputation of it
is no more a Test of Truth or Reality than the Imputation of a Crime is a test
of Guilt.
Ridicule is most commonly the Effect of incongruity or some kind of odd
Combination. Some feature of meanness with Pride or Vanity, a Dish Clout
pinned to the Tail of a Person otherwise finely dressed. It is possible therefore to clap such Additions on Respectable Subjects & to raise  a Laugh.
The Lord Mayor of London on Horse is an Object of Respect but so
mounted & eating Custard on Horseback on his way to the Conventicle is
Ridiculous.
Lord Shaftesbury 5 contends for the Freedom of Wit & Humour And in
whatever Sense his words are understood it must be granted. For in all
human Establishment if Wise & Just Crimes alone are restraind Every
Innocent Act of the mind is free And it is in proportion to this degree of
Freedom that minds can enjoy themselves or make any Valuable attainment
Under Restraint. The Genius is Suppressed as Lamps in a Box are soon
extinguished: But Wit & Humour may incur the Guilt of a Crimes &
Crimes in every shape must be restrained. The Danger or Safety of this Policy depends intirely on the Character of the Tribunal before which such
Crimes are tryed. Neither  the ordinary Magistrate nor the Priest is
Safely intrusted with this Branch of Judicature.
The Culprit has a right to be tryed by his own fellow Citizens who are
equally interested in the Safety of his Innocence or the punishment of his
Guilt.
But in the Terms Wit & Humour The Noble Author 6 does not seem to
mean Ridicule but rather what is commonly termed Good Humour or
Exemption from Acrimony or personal Animosity too common in Controversy or Theological Disputes. He himself indeed seldom attempts Ridicule
properly so called or when he does so should be Sensible that the Ridicule
employs against Certain Controversy under Analogy of Foot Ball 7 as it is
just in some Sectarian Contests might be unjust if applied to matter of
Serious debate in National Councils or in Pleadings before a Tribunal of 
Justice.
Ridicule like any other Rhetorical Figure may be employed in any Cause.
The Art itself like any other Power compard to its opposite weakness or
defect is Good but to be loved must be employed for beneficial not mischievous purposes. And even so employed is not The Test either of Truth or of
Justice.
Notwithstanding the general Rule that Crimes of every Form are to be
restrained it is well understood in the Policy of Free Nations, that it is less
dangerous to overlook matters actually Criminal than to Unsheath the
Sword of the Magistrate in every Case to repress them. Every thing human
has its defects or Abuses And the Abuses of Power are more tremenduous
than those of the despicable & unauthorised delinquent. Summum Jus
therefore may be Summa Injuria 8 when to correct the smallest dissorders an
Open is made for much  greater.
There is therefore no Article in the Criminal Code more to be Guarded
than the Law of Libel.
It may perhaps be safely Admitted that altho Calumny is punished mere
Ridicule may be overlooked. There are Evils in Society which Ridicule
alone can Suppress such as Solemn impostures under grave pretences of
Religion or Wisdom or Science. And even where merit itself is unjustly
attacked with this Weapon it is difficult to Ascertain the dammage of being
laughed at before a Tribunal of Justice.
As it is difficult to form any general Rule in this matter or to be secure
of its safe Application if formed The Trial by Jury 9 is perhaps the best expedient that has been devised against the Evils whether of Criminality or
Penality that may be incurred in this Matter.

XVII. WAKING DREAMS 
Of the First Cause, and the Intelligent and Perceptible Power in Man and what it leads to. 1
to 7.
On the Works of the Creation. Man: his Infancy, Manhood. 7 to 12.
The ruling Passions of Men are Interest, Dignity and Pleasure. In what they consist; Happiness the object of all tho’ variously pursued. The whole order of things tend to Man’s
Happiness. 12 to the End.
Something now Exists, says Dr Samuel Clerk. 1 Therfore Something
must have existed Eternally That is necessarily. But whatever exists necessarily must be boundless in its way as Space & time are Boundless. For how
can supplyable limit or defect be necessary. Of this I can offer no proof: but
in my thought it is insusceptible of Doubt as my own Existence. 2
This Existence however & much more is contingent & Nascent, the Creation of Antecedent Power.
 In Creation there is a manifest display of Ends & Means. Or in other
words the Creating Power as meaning or is Intelligent.
From what Power Else could come this Germ of Intelligence in me but
from an Intelligent Source or Cause.
If the Necessity of Existence amounts to boundless Existence in Eternal
Perfection The Necessary Being must have been of the highest order
Supremely Excellent Supremely happy Omnipotent Wise & Good: for short
of this Existence would be subordinate Contingent & Perisable.
As it appears absurd to Suppose that dead materials could engender Living Intelligence it appears so  no less to suppose that mere Intelligence
could call up solid matter out of Nothing. 3
All this Perception of Material World is a mode of my intellectual Being
And the Universe itself consists of Eternal mind and the Germs of Nascent
Intelligence the ofspring of Will & Eternal Intelligent Power.
The Perceptions of which I am conscious from abroad have their cause
distinct from me. As those which I mean to give around me have their
Cause in me. As I mean what I do so what is done to me of the same kind is
meant also.  Part comes from Other Beings like myself. But the greater
part from Being infinitely Superiour And Mere Perceptions or perceptibles
are the means of communication between Created Minds & the Revelation
of eternal Intelligence & Creative mind.
They are in the Society of men not only the means of communication:
but The Occasion of Action the materials of Art the exercise & improvement of progressive intelligence tending to fit & Qualify it for Other &
more elevated Scenes of Being where other perceptions & means of communications will be made to succeed to these.
If the Existence  of Mind is Eternally necessary it must be boundless
in Number as well  Perfection. But infinite number of mind infinitely
Perfect must be at one. The same Consciousness the same Will the same
meaning if ther were any difference one or other must be imperfect,
which is absurd. If the Germs of Nascent Intelligence Advance indefinitely
& approach to infinitely they tend to what they possibly never can reach to
be at one with God.
And if this were Possible the Eternal mind 4 is continually Emitting its
Germs And these continually returning to be at one with himself 
although this be too high for Belief what can be too high, for the wish of
Intelligence or the Aspiring Progression of a Nature that must forever have
an Aim Superiour to its actual attainments.
Such dreams are but a Stretch of the human faculties beyond their limits:
but it were pleasant even awake to think that all existence is mind Eternal &
Perfect; or Nascent & progressive the only Subject of Excellence or defect of
Beauty or deformity of Happiness or Misery. All Other Subjects or Names
are its Modes or Relations important in being accommodated to its operations  the Materials of its Arts the expressions of its meanings & the
Substratum on which are impressed the Vestiges of its Wisdom Goodness &
Power. These are the distinctions of a Supposed Material World branched
into Millions of Suns and Planets in voluble or quiescent order as the exigencies of mind require. To created minds revealing the Majesty of God,
and furnishing the medium of Communication with one Another.
On this Globe called Earth Invention and its Aim Variety for ever seem 
to Reign but Order is the more Conspicuous that parts appear to Slight it
and hasten to accumulate a Chaos of discordant Parts: yet all is Harmony 5
and the fit Conjunction of an Active and a Passive Scene.
What Mind is here Besides the Eternal God and the Created Mind of
man we know not. The Work bespeaks its Author and in part even to Man
its End.
The board is spread for him and coverd with a fare that is fit to nourish
him. See but the infant born today  feeble but to breath in Air & utter
Cries for Aid. But how kindly is the Scene prepared for his reception. The
breast is made to teem with Milk. And under the Names of Parent Servants
are engagd to minister in all his wants & Comforts with a Zeal & Assiduity
which neither Wealth nor power could ever purchase or command.
Is he therefore nursed through Infancy to be abandoned at the Age of
Man? So he is apt to think before the light of Science dawn upon his Mind.
 The Parent on whose breast he hung is forced away. Why is not the
Woods and Fields to which he Seems Consigned prepared to yield him Rayment Food and Shelter: Why is he turned out naked to the Storm. Why are
the Fields & woods so barren & fit to yield him nought but penury & Toil?
Is this the Lot to which the pampered Infant was preserved. And thus the
Seeming favourite of Nature abandoned to himself. Why is the milk that fed
his infant Organs now withheld. Why is want difficulty and Danger provided by the same beneficient Power  which Ministered so Kindly to
his early wants. What has that Power bestowd upon him now in lieu of
former favours. 6
Those very wants difficulties & Dangers of which he now Complains. To
the Active is requird A Scene of Action. 7 To the Intelligent a Labyrinth or
maze where Science Triumphs and where Contemplation Soars.
For the feeble Infant all is done but for the adult all is left to be done by
himself and his very life prolonged by labours.
 The Ruling Passions of Men are Interest Dignity & Pleasure. Out of
these in various measures they propose to effect their Happiness.
Interest consists Chiefly in matters of Property or Concerns of Animal
Life.
Dignity consists in matters of Estimation. Such as Rank however constituted. Merit Personal Excellence And Beauty.
Pleasure consists in agreeable Sensations Occupations & Prospects &
requiring exemption from Pain.
The best effect of Interest is  Frugality. Industry and Ingenious Art.
Its Evils are Covetousness Avarice & Rapin.
The best effects of Dignity are Integrity and Magnamity. Its worst
effects are Pride Contemptuousness Vanity and Ambition or Lust of Power.
The best Effects of Pleasure are its Allurement to what is Salutary in Diet
Excercise and amicable Society.
Its worst Effects are Effeminacy Debauchery and Prodigality.
Among those who have reasoned on the Subject  of Happiness some
have recommended the good Effects of Pleasure. 8
Others the Good Effects of Elevation or Dignity. 9 That is Integrity &
Magnanimity.
Interest was admitted by all in its best effects to be commensurate to the
Value of animal Life And Frugality in Particular to be a Guardian of Virtue
as well as Security & independence.
The Worst of Pleasure as a general appellation of Good, is to endanger
Selection to lay open the mind to every present Allurement. And preclude
Deliberation  where it is of all other Departments of conduct the most
wanted.
Hence a Supposed life of Pleasure is for the most part Idle inconsiderate
frivolous & debauched.
Happiness Pleasure & Merit 10 are in the apprehension of most men Separate Names for different things.
But as they are objects of the most ardent Passions of Men Nature cannot
be ultimately so inconsistent with itself. As to engage men in equal passion
for inconsistent things. The presumption then is that when these objects 
are well understood they will meet like converging Rays of Light in a Focus
the same to all.
The Happiness & Perfection of Intelligent Being are one and the same
point.
Hence it is that in the order of things the Progress of Intelligence is provided for as the progress to Happiness.
Man in infancy has every thing provided for him in Manhood must provide for himself & Subsist by the Sweat of his brow. All his Faculties are
called furth in Exertion and thereby improved. The  mistakes are corrected by experience And in the End Intellectual Power & Felicity are
compl.
Why is not all Nature so formed at once?
Ask the Eternal Principle of Existence why he prefers Variety to
Sameness.
Why in all living Natures He prefers Progressive to Stationary Forms.
He is the Creator of all: but the Intelligent to Obtain their distinctive
Value must be in part at least the formers or Authors of what themselves
become. This in the feeble line  of Created Being is that Image of the
Maker which Man is said to bear.
He is like Clay in the hands of the Potter but that Potter is in part no
other than himself. 11
Look then from this point of View on the Scene of human things. The
Germ of Intelligence by which man is distinguishd The occasion by which
it brought into Excercise and into the Train of improvement.
Observe the Laws which give at once Stability to the Scene And furnish
him with a handle by which to lay hold of it and influence events  his
Purpose.
The Law of  Nature informs him what he must lay his Account
within the undisturbed Course of things or in known conjunctions And
what he may Obtain for his own purpose by modelling the Conjuncture in
which the Law is to Operate.
The Law  Gravitation that would bring every Weight to the Ground
is made in building by plummet is made to give Stability & firmness to
Walls & Towers of Indefinite height.
Will man complain that this or any Other Law of Nature is never Suspended even to prevent harm from its Effects. It is a Sufficient Answer 
to say that if the Law were ever suspended it never Could be trusted at all. 12
If Plants were not raised from their Seed Man would have no Power in
the Fields & to obtain a Plantation could only Pray to the Almighty to
favour him with one to his mind.
Observe then how man is fitted to his place & his place to him. 13
On this point hangs the Order of his Planet. And tho Planets be multiplyd to Infinity, they can reveal no more than this.


XVIII. OF THE DISSTINCTIONS ON WHICH
WE ACT IN HUMAN LIFE a 1
Of the Distinctions of Good and Evil, Happiness and Misery. 1 to 3.
Distinctions of Pleasure and Pain, Profit and Loss, Excellence and Defect; their ascendancy
in the Human Mind. 3 to 12.
Characters. The Miser, Votary of Pleasure Sensualist &c 12 to the End.
Of these the shun is called Evil. 2
Equivalent terms are common to every Language. They may be well or ill
Applied And the Object may be real or mistaken.
The Accumulation of real Good is Happiness of real Evil is misery.
This disstinction therefore is the first or  most important Object of
inquiry in human Life. Actions of men are regulated by what they would
shun as by what they would Obtain. And in applying the great disstinction
of Good & Evil they take different courses And act upon disstinctions seemingly different from one Another.
Of these the number & variety may be indefinite; but we may endeavour
to comprehend them under a few heads.
1. The  disstinction of Pleasure & Pain.
2. The disstinction of Profit & Loss.
3.d The disstinction of Ri an Wrong.
4. The disstinction of Excellence & defect.
Under one or Other of these disstinctions the whole may be
comprehended.
Even the first is sometimes supposed to comprehend the Whole.
In all our desires or Aversions 3 Gratification is pleasant  And this
pleasure is the Object in all And the contrary is the Pain we would Shun in
all.
But this would be to take away all difference of pursuit or Character and
to make Epitetus no less a Voluptuary than Heliogabalus or
Sardanapalus. 4
The disstinctions which  mad in every Language are matters of
Experience & like the Land mark pointed out from time immemorial are
of use in directing ours without recourse in every particular case to
the  Observations on which they were founded.
Pleasure in Common Language is no longer the Object of all.  s
opposed to Bussiness to Duty & to Honour And the person who acts chiefly
on the disstinction of pleasure And pains is of a very different Character
from the person who acts on the disstinction of Profit & Loss Right &
Wrong &c.
Immediate pleasure attracts him immediate Pain repels him.
This is the Charcter of Childhood even of Youth.
 If continued it would exclude all Patience or Fortitude And as many of
the greatest Blessings present themselves under an Aspect of Labour and
Pleasure would lead to many of the greatest Mistakes.
It has frequently led to Sensuality Effeminacy And Prodigality.
The disstinction of Profit & Loss is that on which the Trades Professional Acts. It forms the Motive of Interest or what is vulgarly called
Selfishness  and is the Parent of Avarice.
The disstinction of Right & Wrong is found generally in all the Characters dispositions And Actions of Men.
At the moment we are Conscious of an End or Purpose we are Conscience of its Innocence or Guilt.
When we recollect such a Purpose attempted or carryed into Effect we
are Seized with a Conscience of Merit or Demerit Remorse Shame &c.
Hence the operation  of Intelligence is termed Conscience & figuratively moral Sense or Sense of Right & W.
Men Sometimes Act because it is Right to do  or becase it would be
wrong to omit But in many Instances also it serves only to modify the
course of Action on the disstinctions of Pleasure and Pain of Profit & Loss.
On the first of these disstinctions it is Moderation & Temp On
the other it is Justice Integrity Liberality & Char.
The disstinction of Excellence & Defect applys to all those Considerations on which men are entitled to Esteem or to  contempt. There is not
a commonly Stated or more Powerful  in its effects. It gives Subordination to every Society And lurks or flames in the mind of every
Individual. No distinction can be more real than the Superiority of Intelligence and its Specific Accomplishments of Wisdom & Goodness to the
opposite defects of Folly & Wickedness yet a distinction so commonly
entertained as this of Estimation  and Rank is likely to be as commonly
mistaken or missapplied. No one can be altogether indifferent to personal
Qualities yet how Seldom do they bear man against Riches Birth even equipage & Dress.
This disstinction if the occasion of Mananimity And just Elevation
of Mind to some is the occasion of Vanity & Contemptuous Pride to Others
It is indeed the Source of great Action, but in Meaner Minds the Source of
 Emulation Envy & Detraction. None Supports the Mind through difficulty danger & Suffering but none Supports Error & Mistake more
Obstinately against better information or Correction.
Hence it is that Fashion prevails over reason & every consideration of
Use or Convenience.
Although we have thus Stated these distinctions Apart and Asignd them
their Votaries Separately, yet there is probably no person  so devoted to
any one as to be indifferent to any Other. The Miser tho’ chiefly intent on
profit and loss is not only Sensible to Pleasure & Pain but has also some
points of estimation on which he values himself. Men differ in most
Instances in respect to the degree in which they attend to one of these distinctions more than the Others. And this degree appears also in the degree
to which their Characters Are Affected by their Partiality.
 Characters are affected by it.
The distinctive Votary of Pleasure & Pain of Right &  of Profit &
loss of Excellence and defect 5 bear a suitable Aspect in their Manners &
incline to the habits whether Good or ill to which the Basis of Action on
which they stand inclines them. Hence it is that among the Vices Sensuality
Superstition Avarice & Pride have more hold of some. And among the Virtues Integrity Industry Economy &  Magnanimity have a preferable
hold of Others.
As man is thus presented with various distinctions & is destined to Suffer as well as to enjoy: His Happiness, tho’ perhaps leading to a Single point
at Last ________ Concourse with God: in his way to it can be no Other
than the State of most Enjoyment & least Suffering 6 of which he is Susceptible. This is at once his Excellence His prosperity or as we term it his
Virtue.
In respect to Animal Pleasure it is Temperance.  In Respect to his
mind it is Wisdom Goodness & Power of thought exempted from Spleen
Fear Malice or any torturing Passion.
In his Relations around him It is order or beneficent Ends pursued with
Apposite Means.
In respect to the Whole it is Confidence in the Order of Nature or in
Other Words in the Wisdom & Goodness of God.
In the pursuit of Happiness Man must sometimes forgo present Enjoyment or incur present Suffering.
The Account to be ballanced is  long & intricate comprehending all
Effects and future Consequences far exceeding the reach of his comprehension or View.
To remedy or in Some degree to supply this defect has the Creator given a
discernment of Right & Wrong. 7 With this Power in every case  need
not look beyond the Case in which we are to act & if we do right have no
occasion to fear the Consequences.
Here indeed we may mistake & Conscience itself may fail. But as the
Mariner to keep his intended Course has only to guard the Compass from
disturbances So the moralist has only to Study the disstinction of Right
 wrong to be assumed in the choice he ought to make on all occasions.
In this lys the distinction between Epicurus And Zeno. Do said the first
what upon the whole is most pleasant and least painful. A good if we were
competent to apply it. Do said the Other what God has enabled  to discern as Right. 8 He has made this Power umpire in every Case & Censorial
inspector in every Act of Will that it might interfere and Govern in all. 

XIX . OF THE CATEGORIES 
Of the word the Categories. The Power and Goodness of God. All things made for the
Progress of Man to Perfectibility. Man, the cause of his own Happiness or Misery. 1 to 5.
Categories of Aristotle. All Being is Power. Power of Resistance, Force &c. 5 to 8.
Of Vegetation, Organisation, Animation. The Intelligent Power Communication &c. 8 to
11.
Of the First Cause or Eternal Power. Man’s Existence. Perceptions. Senses. Communication
or Intercourse. Society. Works of Creation the Language of God to Man. The necessity of
being Good to be Happy. Man’s happiness depends on himself. 11 to 18.
Of the Mind of Intelligent Power in Man. Contemplation of God’s Works leads to the Mind
up to God and Happiness. 18 to the End.
Aristotle in his ambitiously comprehensive arrangements of Being has
referred the Whole to ten Heads called Categories 1 or Meanings and Matter of Statement of which The first or ουσια 2 is unfortunately translated
into our Language by the term Substance & is made to mean what is not
only real but substantial and in this Sense  mathematical Point 3 tho a
meaning with Place Relations &c is not a Substance.
The Meaning of Categories with this Correction may be stated in our
Language under  Terms Subject or Thing Quality  Quantity,
Number Relation Power Action Passion Time & Place. 4
It is pleasing thus to conceive all Being as Meaning or Matter of Statement to Mind And in Fact as all things flow from Design or Mental
Purpose So they are essentially Relative to mind for any distinction of Good
or Evil Excellence or defect applicable to them. A Planetary System we say
is Magnificently Beautifull. The Pearl The Ruby & the Diamond are the
Ornament of Scepters & of Crowns. But Suns & Planets are the Ornaments
of Scepters & of Crowns, but Suns & Planets composed of Diamond or Pearl
were but Dross without the mind that formed & beholds them.
The Material Universe itself is but the Emanation of  Omniscience &
Almighty Power. And its fairest Corner but  Department for the Nursery
& exercise of Nascent or Created Minds. Without Intelligence there would
be neither Good nor Evil Excellence or Defect. Count if you Can the Myriads of human being that every moment  sends into Life. 5 For
them the Sun is made to Shine & for them this diversifyed Scene is opened
that each may Act & lose or Acquire for himself & as he loses or Acquires
Intelligence the essence of Being proceed for Ever or Sink into the Pit of
Nonentity from which he Sprang.
The Soul of Man we say is  immortal. It is not essentially So. It arose
from Mortality & from Death previously Eternal had Life & thought
bestowed. These in Essence are but a Power to Ascend among Being. If it
does not Ascend it will Sink among Beings & even forfeit its Power.
Why has the Almighty proposed this Alternative.
That there might be like him a Power however a Power tho in a remote
degree Self forming to Wisdom & Goodness. Upon this Plan Socrates is
gone up to Eternity & his Murderers Sunk again into Dust.
 Give Scope to Thought.
It must have a Subject.
The Subject may have its Qualities Its Quantity Its Number Its Relations
Its Actions Its Passions Its Time & Place and so Forth. 6 Such are the Categories of Aristotle. The first or ουσια Being or Subject We Translate into
Substance 7 without  considering how much that Term in our Vulgar use
of it is apt to Mislead. Substance in our imagination has dimension and
place and however airy or Vapid occupies Space.
Ουσια 8 is a mere Being or Subject tho no more than a Mathematical
Point 9 a Thought or Affection. It is therefore mere Entity or Abstraction of
Being.
From this most General or Universal Term of Entity or Subject The first
Step towards Specification Is Power: and we may venture to say That  all
Being is Power.
Corporeal Being is the Power of Resistance to Change.
The Change it resists is that of Place or disposition of Parts. That is from
Rest to Motion from Union to Separation of Parts Change of Velocity
Change of Direction & so forth.
In the Exercise of this Power of Resistance The following Laws are
Observed.
Body remains in its State of Rest or uniform Motion till some Force is
impressed.
The Change is proportioned  to the Force impressed.
In the Application of Force Action and Reaction are equal & Contrary as
much as the Force gains upon the Resistance it expends of itself.
Vegetation is a Power of Organisation And Assumption of Nourishment
to growth & dimension. Animation is a Spontaneous Power joined to Sensation Perception & Choice or instinctive direction. All the Powers of
Animation may accompany Intelligence.
Intelligence is a Power to know  to Compare to Deliberate to Judge
and to determine resolve or Will.
It knows by Consciousness Sensation Perception or Experience And Testimony. The Powers of Intelligence constitute Personal Existence &
Resposibility.
Persons are Many & may hold Communication or be known to one
Another.
The Powers of Communication are Sensations & Perceptions.
These are Mental Appurtenances  and may have no other form of
Existence: But as to every mind they come originally from Abroad They are
Evidence of  external Existing Cause. And as they may be emitted in
rturn are to different Persons means of Communication or Evidence of
Coexisting Persons & their meanings.
In Knowledge nothing can be more certain than that which cannot be
Doubted. 10
Existence therefore is Certain And in the Form of some must have
been Necessary  and Eternal. For we cannot doubt that have a beginning then must be a Cause & the Primary Cause have ever many must have
been of itself for ever without a previous Cause. 11
Power Eternal is God by Necessity unlimited And competent to every
possible Effect.
From this Power all Existence Emanates or Exists in it.
The Meanings of Men Communicate to one Another  in Sensations
and Perceptions bear intimation of Ends & Means of Intellectual Power
And to Persons reciprocally a communication of Persons one with Another.
The Perception of Limbs & Organs of which Every Person has Cognisance in himself. And the Repetition Of Actions or expressions to which he
himself is competent is the signal.
 Feeling sight Hearing Taste and Smell and the Perceptions to which
they give occasion are matters in which the mind may be intirely Passive.
To the Person feeling &c. The Perception is in some Instances is that or
the Perception of what he calls a Part or Members of himself As when with
on hand he feels some other Part of his Body &c. or it is a feeling 
hearing or Sight coming from above and giving perception of Separate or
Collateral Being.
Perceiving of Others what he perceives of himself & what he can give
them like occasion to Perceive is Society Intercourse or Conversation.
The Communication So made may bear the Characters of Accident or
design of Wisdom or Folly.
The Character of design counts of Ends & Means.
Of wisdom Important & beneficent Ends well concerted or effective
means.
Ends such as Man conceives  and means such as he is known to
Employ are the Evidence of Man to Man.
Ends more Vast And means above the reach of Man to employ are Evidence of Power Intelligent or Mental Superior to Man Perhaps of Power
Eternal & Omnipo.
The Sensations which Men give & Take constitute the Society or Intercourse of Men.
The Sensation of Ends & Means above the Sphere of Man is the Communication or Revelation of God to his Intelligent Creatures.
 Suns & Planets Sea & Land Atmosphere Clouds Winds Rain Springs
Running Stream Fertile Soil Woods Lawns Hills & Valley Flocks &
Herds Artists Materials of Art uniform Laws of natural Production Occasions of Action to the Active & of Progression to the Progressive. The
Power of Learning to be happy to the living or Sensitive Are the Language
or Revelation of God to man.
His Being & Means are equally per in the part as in the Whole in
that small &c.
 The first and greatest order of Being is that which Exists of itself. The
Lowest order of Being is that which is made altogether what it is. Such we
conceive to be matter or Body.
An Intermediate Order of Being. Having Power but committed to itself
for the exercise of this Power And being of itself happy or Miserable Such is
Created Intelligence.
As Power is the Essence of Being the Power  of Enjoyment & Perfection is peculiar to the living or Sentient Conscious & Intelligent Forms of
Being.
Where Being is Necessary it is also Perfect In Will Omnipotent Therefore Happy unbounded in Wisdom & Goodness Eternal & Immense
unlimited to Time or Place. It must be infinite in Number as well as Greatness or Perfection.
But the Infinitely Perfect however Numerous cannot be different without imperfection must Coincide in every Instance Whether of 
Conscious or Will and be therefore at one in all things the same and
Unity of Being.
The Germs that Result from This Eternal Power Being endowe with
conscious separate Existence Are not Powers to be perfect & Happy But
the Power of Progression or Advancement in direction pointed to Perfection & Happiness.
The Line in which they proceed has no End. If it had an End it would
place them  where it is impossible for them to Arrive that is At One
with God.
Originating in Defect & with a Power of progression only there is no
Measure of temporary aberration which they may not exhibit for the Experience of Evil as well as of Good tends to correct Error & constitute that
Felicity which Consists in Choice. 12
The Pupil of Wisdom may learn to be Wise And happy but must become
so of himself  made so at the Power or Will of Another. In this if in
any Sense it is said That Man is formd after the Image of God.
In this Image alone is the Criterion of Worth or Excellence to be found.
The Power to be happy or of Progress is that Alone which gives Value to
being.
The Power of matter may be such as to form a Scene for the Action of
Men i13  give occasion to thought and like furnish Materials to the
Artist  and accommodations to the Restive and Contemplative excercise Inquiry to the Curious The means of Beneficence to the Charitable and
of Communication & intercourse from Mind to Mind And from the Eternal
to the Nascent & progressive Being he has formed.
But apart from the Subserviency of Such Scenery to mind Immensity
replete with Diamonds And with Gold ever bespangled with innumerable
Suns & Planetary Systems would be of no more value than  mere empty
Space. 14 What were the Diamond on which it Sparkles or the Sun himself
without that little organ on  the Power of Vision is bestowed.
Admire as we may the Material System ’tis made for Mind alone And the
Fairness and Magnificence of its form is but the Evidence it bears of that
Eternal Goodness Wisdom & Power of which it is the Work. The Gift of
Eternal Mind to  form an Equipage for those who are Travelling from
Below toward the higher Scenes of Being.
It is true that the mere Sensation or Perception of what we call the Material World would have the Same Effect with that we call its reality. And
indeed its reality in respect to us is no more than our perception of it the
mere Appurtenance of Mind.
And as mind is the Eternal Mode of  Existence it is pleasant to think
That there is yet no other nor ever be any Other.
Men who Speculate profoundly on the Essence of Matter incline to this
opinion. And  the Slightest inqui into the Cause of our Sensation
are inclined to entertain the same opinion respecting the Connection of
Perception with its external Objects.
This Doctrine I embrace with fond Conviction.
 Who would not Gladly tell the Sun & all these Globes on which he
Shines; Ye are my pleasure grounds & but the Steps on which my Mind
Ascends to God. Even when above your Height I shall not cease to rise.
Blest be the Power that gives Eyes to see & thoughts to comprehend your
Order So Significant of Might Benevolence & Wisdom.
This Doctrine is in the Department of mere Thought not of Art or of
Action and no way affects the Conduct of life.
Common Sense 15 is  the same whether a Person professes to act on
the Distinction of his Perceptions or on the Disstinction of Things
Perceived.
His perception is still the only Ground on which he can act and his
Action will be the Same in avoiding the Perception of Suffering as in avoiding its Cause.
How Idle then is it to labour on Speculations that have no Consequence
or Effect.
Tis true that in Practice The Theory of Corporeal Forms 16 has no Effect
But in  thought we may repeat its Effects are immense.
The first or Eternal Principle of Existence is Inteligence as appears from
the Design & order of his Work but the Work itself is merely Spiritual Consisting of Mind & its Procession of Sensations perception and imagination
or Thought.
To Die is the discontinuance of one System of Perceptions to enter upon
Another: 17 & mental Existence is still the same And its Power of Enjoyment the only distinction that gives value to Being. Without this
Magnitude and Figure exist  in Vain & present no Reality to lead the
will or the choice of Intelligence.
In thought there is no limit to Space Whether it be full or only give place
to separate orbs of Matter is in itself Perfectly indifferent And of moment
only as the one is Recipient of Order & is a Department of Wisdom Goodness & Power. The Other is nought but impenetrable non Existence and
Death.
A Pause to Theory. Who can account for Existence? Who would ever
believe its Reality if he could  disbelieve his own. 18 But here it is; The
difficulty is removed and other Beings to any extent may exist as well as
mind.
The only Form of Being which I cannot doubt is mind & its appurtenances or Provisions of Sensations Perception and Thought.
This then is the Form of Being distinguished in the Superiour assurance
of its Reality and I am Warranted in thinking it has prevailed from Eternity
& will prevail forever.
It were perverse  to know this & yet to controvert the existence of
Mind beyond the Organs of a human Body. 19

XX . OF THE DISSTINCTIONS ON WHICH IT
IS THE LOT OF MAN TO DELIBERATE 
Of the Constituents of Good and Evil; Happiness and Misery; Enjoyment and Suffering;
Excellence and Defect; Beauty and Deformity; Right and Wrong; Virtue and Vice; Prosperity and Adversity; Pleasure and Pain; Profit and Loss. On the choices of one or more of
these particulars the Characters of Men depend. 1 to 4.
Of the Interested; the Voluptuous; the Highminded &c. Good and Evil incident to each; to
secure the Good and avoid the Evil, is Wisdom. 4 to 8.
Conscience, the supreme Arbiter and Bias of Nature may mistake. Happiness is the chief
Good. 8 to 9.
What is Happiness? Epicurus and Zeno’s seeming contradiction. To be virtuous is to be
Happy. 9 to 11.
Self Preservation, its influence on Man’s conduct. Selfishness. Prudence &c. 11 to the End.
It is Characteristick of Living sentient and Intelligent Being to be susceptible of Good & Evil.
To be possessed of Good is Happyness. To incur Evil is Misery.
It is further Characteristic of Intelligent Being to be the artificer of his
own Condition 2 & to be vested with a choice in detail among particulars
that may be referred to the general disstinctions of Good & Evil Happiness
or Misery.
On these distinctions in general  there cannot be any deliberation.
But it is frequently doubtful to which of these heads a particular should be
referred.
And under these most General distinctions others are comprised stating
the Constituents of Good & Evil under different Aspects denominations
under which men would descend to particulars: but have their expressions
Still in comprehensive Terms. Such as Enjoyment & Suffering Excellence &
Defect Beauty & Deformity Right & Wrong Virtue & Vice Prosperity &
Adversity.
On distinctions so general as even these are there is no room for deliberation untill  they came to be applied to different Instances, or Men make
their option or acquire their habits of being chiefly occupied by one or
other of these disstinctions in preference to the others.
Some men in the choice of particulars are chiefly occupied by the distinctions of Pleasure & Pain Others by the distinction of Excellence & Defect
Right & Wrong Profit and Loss. 3 And on this diversity The Characters of
men in a great measure depend.
The Votaries of Pleasure. Of Gain of Excellence Rectitude & Virtue
exhibit  different Characters tho all of them would be happy and aim at
what they conceive to be good.
When we have reduced the disstinction on which Men Act in detail to
the general Heads of Profit & Loss Pleasure & Pain Excellence & Defect
And class men accordingly into The Interested The Voluptuous, & the
High minded Such is the present State of man that under each of these
heads there is both Good & Evil.
The Interested may be Frugal & Industrious or rapacious & 
avaritious.
The Voluptuous may be Inoffensive & humain or Effeminate &
Debauched.
The high minded may be Benevolent & Just or Contemptuous and Arrogant. So that when under any of these general Titles we have chosen our
Class The great Task of human Wisdom Still remains to secure the Good &
avoid the Evil incident to each.
This is Wisdom and Happiness or the Supreme Good consists in a proper
Choice of particulars 4 under each.
Frugality without avarice Innocence and  Complacency without
Effeminacy or Debauchery. Benevolence and Justice themselves a bar to
Contemptuous or Arrogance.
Philosophers in their different applications of the term Chief Good. 5 For
Pleasure Interest or Virtue & Excellence without Observing that each of
these tho separately expressed & supposed different when happily pursued
Actually terminate in one & the same point.
It is the Interest Pleasure & Excellence of a man to be Happy.
These are all supreme Objects of desire And Nature is not so inconsistent
as  to expose the Intelligent Being in aiming at one to forgo the Other.
The Pleasure he ought to aim at is the most Agreeable & the most secure.
The state  highest Enjoyment & least Suffering.
Here is matter of Calculation for the most part easy & obvious in the
result. Tho’ carried to the utmost or extending to the past present and
Future is beyond the reach of  human Faculties. To cut Short in many
Instances Nature has Affixed a mark and given a Byas to the preferable
Pleasure.
The Right in contradistinction to the Wrong And Conscience the
Supreme Arbiter & Byas of Nature in this distinction.
In following this Byas we sometimes appear to reject Pleasure and Rank
but in Fact secure The highest Profit Pleasure & Elevation of Nature.
 The Question then among the Sects of Epicurus Zeno or Aristotle is not
what is the Chief Good. For this by the Confession of all is Happiness: but
by what name is it most safely designed in entering on the detail of Practice.
Conscience may mistake as well as Appetite or Interest: but not so frequently & its Gratifications are the preferable pleasures & gains of human
life.
It appears then most Safe to Speak with the Stoics and go where Conscience and the Love of Virtue leads.  Virtue is supremely pleasant to
those who profess it.
To Epicurus then we may say if this be the pleasure you mean as you tell
us when you come to particulars it is why not Specify it at once & not leave
us to contend with a Vague or general Term which every one will apply in
his own way The Childish the Effeminate The Debauched all of them in a
Way which you yourself will reject.
Virtue is candid Benevolent highminded Courageous & Temperate. You
cannot  detract from it without impairing Enjoyment or the admission
of suffer.
The uncandid repine at another Good.
Benevolence is pleasant. Indifference at best is blank and Malice is
Suffering.
The low mind is drooping and mean.
The Coward trembles And the intemperate Suffers from disgust or
dissease.
The interested and the Selfish are Supposed equivale terms and
applied with dissapprobation  and disslike.
Why? Is it faulty to mind our own Concerns & be careful of ourselves?
No. The Author of  says not!
The first law of Nature to every living Creature is Preserve thyself. Whoever says Otherwise either Counteracts Nature or mistakes himself.
If I should limit the appellation of Self to this Animal life and the Appellation of Interest to its preservatives and Accomodations. Still even in this
Sense the first Law of  Nature or Self preservation is not only blameless
but the most continual & unremitted in its operation and Effects.
The Parent will expose himself & the Citizen on Occasion to preserve his
Country: but these are great and occasional Efforts. The ordinary State of
Nature is a Vigilance for personal Wellfare & Safety And on this the Author
 Nature chiefly rests the preservation of his living Works.
But if the  Appellation of Self be not limited to mere Animal Life
&c. but extend as it ought to every constituent of a rational or Intelligent
Being to the mind its attainments Affections & Habits or what is best under
these designations Wisdom Goodness & Fortitude. In this Acceptation of
Self. The Virtuous alone are Selfish And Sefishness that Aspiring Ambition to resemble the Supreme God. Which in the Caesars of Julian 6 is made
the Characteristic of Marcus Aurelius 7 And is actually the object  of
that Work which we all the Meditations of Antoninus: 8 but in the original is entitled The Consideration of His Own Affairs. 9
To the Vulgar Selfishness is the love of personal Security & Money So little careful we are to fix the terms on which we rest the whole Estimate of
human life. And whilst we require Virtue as indispensible  allow it to
respect the good of Others More than our own And thus suffer a misnomer
of Self to undermine the edifice  of Morality which we profess so great
An Anxiety to raise.
The Praise of Virtue we are told is founded on its publick utility. 10
Strange that a person distinguished for Candour Humanity Benevolence
and Sobriety should forget how valuable these qualities were to himself.
The Fact is that in choosing his Friends & in acting for himself he made no
mistake but in speculating on Virtue he thought of External Actions only
altho when pushed in Argument he was forced to Admit that Moral Estimation was agreeable to the mind and to external actions only as expressive of
mind. h

XXI. OF THE INTELLECTUAL SYSTEM 
Of the mind or Intellectual part of man; subserviency of matter to mind. The Dangers and
Difficulties man has to encounter through Life, is but an Exercise for the expansion of the
Germ of Intelligence with which he is possess’d. Matter of no value but in its relation to
Mind. 1 to 8.
Is the Existence of Matter necessary to give us the Knowledge of God and of one another?
The connection of Mind and Matter; our Perceptions; Sensations &c. Of the Material
World. Bodies; Expansion; Contraction; Attraction &c. The Wisdom and goodness of God
visible in the Intellectual and Material World, and tends to Man’s progress to Perfectibility
and Happiness. 8 to the End.
It is said that the Indian Philosophers of Old considered the multiplication of mind or Intelligence as the sole Object of Creation and mantained
that the material Fabrick was altogether Subservient to this That it served
merely to Manifest the Eternal mind to his Intelligent Creatures, and form
to them the links of communication with one Another.
 It may no doubt be safely Assumed that is at least one Purpose for
which the material System is formed: But it is in other Respects also well
fitted as a Nursery to the Intelligent Being of Man. In him the Germ of
Intelligence is to be evolved & enlarged by its proper exercise Observation
and Experience.
Altho in Infancy he is amply provided for with little or no Effort 1 of his
own yet to his opening Faculties continual occasions of exertion 2 are presented to him. With the Stimuli of Animal  Life he has its wants to be
Supplyed advanages to be aimed as Difficulties to be removed Dangers to
be encountered And Sufferings to be guarded against or Aswaged.
To his Active Nature 3 the Active Scene is accommodated. And to his progressive Nature The Observation he is concerned to make the Lessons of
Experience & the faculties acquird by Practice are fully & Specifically
accommodated.
In this manner is the Creation of that Intelligence with which we are
acquainted conducted and  carried on from Age to Age. The End is the
multiplication & Advancement of Minds. The means are in part at least the
occasions supplyed throughout the Intricacies difficulties allurements or
allarms of a Material System.
But what is this Material System in the great Globe of this Earth merely
Subservient to the living creatures scarcely perceptible on its Surface. Is the
mighty Sun a Million of times its bulk placed merely for the use of a few
such Nurseries of impalpable living Creatures? Yes! We may say, For 
mind altho it has no Bulk is that alone which is entitled to the distinction of
Greatness of Excelence or Beauty. And the Material World if Commensurate to Space & immensity itself would have no value or Obtain any
distinction but in its relation to mind alone. 4 The Diamond has no
brillancy but through the Visual Organ that conveys it to Mind & if Infinite Space were replete with such matter all would be darkness indifference
& Death. 5 Matter has no Value but in its relation to mind, As a material of
art & means  of Beneficence. It has no Beauty but as it bears the Marks
of Ingenuous  employd by Man or The Majesty of Eternal
Wisdom & Goodness imprinted by that Almighty Power who alone is great.
Even to Man the material World is of no moment but as he perceives it.
Let the perception cease & the Universe of Matter is as Nothing: 6 Be it
the Will of God that his Perceptions return tho without any returning Matter; his condition is fully restored; And the Scene of life & intelligence is to
him precisely the same as  upon the supposition of reality in the Object
as well as in the perception of it.
Our sensations & Perceptions have their causes apart from us. We know
not what they are but the Sensations & Perceptions are conditions of Mind
And our own.
Earth Water & Air &c &c Are Names which we give to our Perceptions:
but Sensation Perception thought and Mental Affection are all that we have
give them what names we please.
Of this their can be no doubt & it is possibly all that we are qualifyed to
say respecting the Actual State of Existence: the  World around us. Men
of Speculation 7 may fancy what they please but a World of mental Sensation
And Perception or a world of Separate Being perceived will be to us in
respect to Conduct Society Religion and Science precisely the same.
Is the actual existence of Matter Necessary to give us the Knowledge of
God & of one Another? For we draw the same Conclusion from our Perceptions that we would from matter perceived, and the fact is that we have no
other premises on either Supposition from which to draw our conclusions.
Is it  respectful to Suppose that The Almighty has given us falacious
Perceptions? 8 We do not suppose it nor are our perceptions fallacious. They
are indeed Mental not corporeal existences: but the most certain grounds
on which we may rely in all our designs Selections and pursuits. My perception of Precipice or Fire does not deceive me for if I avoid them I am safe if
I do not the Consequence may be Fatal: but the Admonition was true &
beneficently Given.
I have sometimes found fault with  those who would explode the
Existence of Matter because the question was altogether Nugatory & could
have no consequence in the Conduct of Life. But there is equal  to
find fault with those who contend for the Reality of matter 9 this being
equally void of any Consequence in the Conduct of Life.
In this no doubt the question is Nugatory & the Solution indifferent. But
the mind independent of its perceptions from Abroad has a World of its
own in which to range. Having the Knowledge of God & our fellow 
Creatures it is acceptable & congenial to suppose a Universe of Mind with
Eternal Wisdom goodness & omnipotence at its head than so great a mass of
lifeless materials as this perceptible world seems to imply.
It is justly thought absurd to Suppose that a Material Cause  produce Intelligence: but is it less so to suppose that thought or Intelligence
could produce solid matter. It is difficult to conceive how mind & body as
in the Case of Man can be united & mutually affected one with the Other. If
our Sensations & perceptions be conceived merely as a  Mode of our
Mental Existence and no more Every difficulty of this Sort will dissappear.
To be born is to be brought into a Scene of Specific Perceptions the
means of Communication and the occasions of Action. 10 To Die is to
exchange the first System of perceptions for a Subsequent one 11 And the
Mind immortal receives with its advanced qualities new means of Communication And occasions of Superiour Exertion and Continual Progress.
These Considerations may incline us to adopt the Idea of a System purely
Intellectual System  the Work And Province of Eternal Mind. And it is
matter of Curiosity to Observe by what Steps men of Speculation have been
led in different Instances to question the existence of matter in any other
form than that of mental perception.
Some of those who have examined the Sources of information & the
causes of belief have found the evidence of a material World deficient and
accordingly withheld the Assent. 12 Having Assumed that all our knowledge  of things must rest upon certain Ideas Types or Representations
of them in our Minds and considering that Representations are no evidence of Facts they deny the existence of matter as being Supported on no
other evidence than the Idea of it in our Minds.
Whatever we may think of this Conclusion the Process of supposed Reason on which it is founded is certainly incorrect. In their Haste to come at
their Hypohesis of Ideas in the mind they overlook the most important part
of the Fact in our Cognisance of the material World.
We do not first harbour Ideas or Representations  of a Material
World and then proceed to take proofs of its Reality. 13 We begin with perceiving it And form the best notion of it we can from continued
Observation.
Perception is prior to Proof and the most convincing foundation upon
which any proof of Fact can rely. We have seen the Earth & the Firmament
& Cannot doubt their Existence as for the Types or Ideas you mention we do
not perceive them & have no reason to believe their Existence & have no
difficulty in thinking of the Sun & the Moon while they continue to 
pass over our head in the Sky. Our Observations in many cases may be hasty
& superficial but when properly made are the best information we have to
conduct us through hazards of the greatest amount.
Things may not be as we perceive them but your attemp to disprove
them proceeds upon an assumption which we neither perceive nor otherwise know to exist.
Those who attend to the Facts perceived in the Phaenomenon of Body
proceed more directly to a Solution of the Question relating to the existence
of matter  extended and Solid. Body consists of parts. It is Subject to
expansion & Contraction the parts then must approach or recede while they
recede they cannot be in Contact. If they ever be in contact they cannot contract. But nobody is exempt from Expansion by heat or contraction by Cold.
Therefore no body is made up of parts in Absolute Contact. 14
On this ground it is Concluded that Contact no where exists in Body that
the parts or attoms of which it is Composed owe their cohesion or fixture to
attraction in a certain state of Contiguity not of Contact.
 The fixture indeed a precise State if Continued, must require some
power to counterballance the attraction & retain every part in its place Otherwise absolute contact would ensue And the Volubility of Living Nature
would Cease.
This Catastrophe is Averted by an eminent theorist (Boscovich) 15 who
instead of parts or Attoms composing Body has recourse to Mathematical
Points which having no dimension, never can touch. Attractions & Repulsions from & towards these points at different distances  ballance one
Another so exactly as to Constitute limits of Bodies and by the different distances at which they Act form all the variety of Corporeal Substance with
which we are acquainted.
If this theory were lyable to no Objection but that which lys against every
mere Hypothesis it certainly should be rejected.
The Phaenomenon of Body is certainly in our apprehension Coeval or
prior to any Law of Nature from which it can be explaind. Unless we recour
to that first Law of All The Will of  Almighty God by which all minds
exist and Obtain their conditions constituted in their own Nature or in
other Natures with which they communicate. That the Condition of Man is
effected in both ways cannot be doubted. He stands related to his Maker &
to fellow Creatures of Intelligence like his own. The Link or Channel of
Communication with either is the perception he receives & gives from the



a-z, with spaces  , -end of line, lower-case i

