
REMARKS ON A PAMPHLET LATELY PUBLISHED BY DR. PRICE, INTITLED, OBSERVATIONS on the NATURE of CIVIL LIBERTY, the PRINCIPLES of GOVERNMENT, and the JUSTICE and POLICY of the WAR with AMERICA, &C.

IN A LETTER from a GENTLEMAN in the Country to a MEMBER of PARLIAMENT.


S I R, SEND you some Remarks upon Dr. Price's Pamphlet, concerning which you do me the honour to desire my opinion. A gentleman who gives his name to the Public is intitled to have the fairest conftruftion put upon his words, and I shall be extremely sorry if, in differirg from Dr. Price, any exprefion escape from me that is too abrupt for the refpe& that is due to him. As I am a mere commentator, I am likely to bas dull as the reit of my fraternity, but flall, nevertheless, abide by the order, and confine myself to the matter, that is fuggefled by my Author.

You will please to observe, that the Doc-or refs his argument on a definition of Civil Liberty, which is therefore a principal subjet of theie Remarks. He confiders Liberty under four general divisions, Phbfical Liberty, Moral Liberty, Religious Liberty, and Civil Liberty .
The firR is the principle of spontaneity. The fecond is the power of following our own jenfe of right and wrong. The third, the power of exercifing the religic;n we like best. And the fourth, or Civil Liberty, is the power of a civil society or jfate to govern ifteif ly its own cifcretion.

The Docor, in the following inference from all thele definitions collated together, puts Liberty in contradifcinction to Restraint, and makes Restraint, in every cafe, the essence of Slavery. ;iln all these cafes, he fays, there is a fcrce -which sands opposed to the agent's own will, and wL ick, as far as it operates, produces servitude.
And he concludes the whole deduction with observing, that as far as in any inflance the operation of a:y ca'.r comes in to ;refrain the power of selfgo'-vernmrt, so far flaveiy is introduced. Nor do I think, he adds, that a p-ecifer idea than this of Libe;-,y and Slaveiy can be formed.

I am under the necessity, however, of owning, that this idea is omewhat perplexing to me.
It does not appear, that upon this idea of Liberty any civil community can be formed without introducing slavery. For even where the collective body are sovereigns, they are seldom unanimous, and the minority must ever fubmir to a power that ltands opposed to their own will.

In this, however, the loss of Liberty may be fiJpc';l unavoidable; for it is common to fay, that men, by entering into society, give up a part of their Natural Liberty.

But there is yet another difficulty. If Liberty be opposed to Refiraint; I am afraid it is inconfiient with the great end of civil government itself, which is to give people security from the effe& of crimes and disorders, and to preserve the peace of mankind.

The Liberty of any single man, in this fenfc of a freedom from relsraint, would be the servitude of all. In Turkey, perhaps in Brandenburgh, there are persons who pretend to this Liberty; but I believe that no one can devise a more plentiful source of slavery than this. The Liberty of every separate diffriE or corporation in a slate would be national independence; and as far as the humour for it should spread, would threaten every community with the loss of every incorporated member that has a pretence for separation, or a fancy to fct up for ifclf.

I confess I am somewhat surprised that Dr. Price, who quotts ontifquieu with o much regard on cthcr occasions, fliould have overlooked wh.t he has said on th's. Among the other milfaken notions of Liberty, this celebrated writer ohfirves, T1'at some ,ha: ciofounded the LPcwrr- cf the people with the Liberty f the people* . -T:ha ini deocracies the pecple seem to do ,what they pl je; tlt tht Liberty does not colnfi in doing hbat we pleafi. It conrifts in being free to do what we ought to incline, and in not being cbligcd to do what we ought not to incline . We oo-hbt to remember, he continues, that Independence is one thing, and Liberty another. That if any cilizen wee free to do what he pleased, this vwold be an extincion of Li!erty, for every one e!2 woidd have the fame freidc;m j.

If the Doctor perfit in his definition of Civil Liberty, it will be difficult to support the high encomium which he bestows upon it. For it would be a real curse to numbers of mankind to to be left to do what they please. Certain, infiances we have had of this Liberty in the cafe of despotic princes, who were taught to think that they had a right to do what they pleased;
but they were, in consequence of this Liberty, the completeft wretches that have appeared in the hi'ory of mankind.

Whether we fay or no with Montesquieu, that the power of the people is not the liberty of the people, it may be said with confidence, that the power of the people is not the happiness of the people. Corrupt and vicious men, afiembled in great bodies, cannot have a greater curie beflowed upon them, rih:n the power of governing thcmfelves.

It is possible that the Doctor may have meant to qualify his definition and the encomium of Civil Liberty, by supposing, that it was preceded by Moral Liberty; and if he did, :his would be rather an aukward way of informing us, that Liberty conlifts in the freedom t doo what is ju and innocent. In the mean cine, and till Moral Liberty is fully eftabliihed in ihe world, we flall do well to prepare foine efiraint for the inclinations of men, and be contented with a Liberty which secures to us the possession of our rights, while it restrains from invading the rights of others.

Here, however, I am obliged to look forward fomn pages , and mufi confess, that the Doclor hiiniflf has qualified his description of Liberty in iome such manner as this: A free fJane, he fays, at the fame time that it is free itfcE, makes all its members free, y excluding liceniioiuf;efs, and guarding their pejons and property and good name againfl infilt. That is to fay, when we bring together the two parts of the Docor's description, that a free state produces servitude, to produce Liberty. Or, as he concludes the paragraph himelf, that Gcvernmiet reJifrains Liberty, when used to dejiroy Liberty.

This collision of words, I confess, renders the precision of the Dodcor's former idea somewhat suspicious; but we must be contented with the good meaning, and only regret, that the qualification of the general definition had not come sooner, and that it is not more uniformly kept in view through the piece. If a writer should insist, that the inhabitants of St. Giles's have a right to seize the houses in Grosvenor Square, and afterwards, upon a difficulty Itated, should qualify his doctrine by fayuig, that he affirmed the right only on a supposition that they had bought the subje&s in queflion, and had paid for them, his doctrine might be true on the whole; but his manner of stating it, by leaving out so important a condition till it was required to solve an objection, especially if he dropt it, afterwards through the whole of his argument might appear somewhat exceptionable. It is probable that ome of the parties concerned would be in such haste to avail themselves of the right, that they would not stay to think of the condition. And I apprehend with some regret, that the Docor may have readers who will reason on his definition of Liberty, and think themselves entitled to do what they please, without attending to the qualification that is asterwards brought to explain it.

My impatience to have a satisfactory account of this important subject, by collating together the descriptions and limitations of my Author, has carried me a few pages too faf ; I think myself now, however, authorised to conclude with the content of the Doctor, that Civil Liberty is not precisely a power to do what we please, but the security of our rights; and that a person may be free, although contrary to his own will he is obliged to pay his debts, and even to contribute to the revenue ol' the iate.
And if the Doctor insists that Liberty f ii implies a freedom from restraint, he will please to observe, that nothing can give a more complete freedom from unjult rcftraint, than the perfeit fccurity that we cannot be wronged. This is the frecdom which Mcntefquieu holds forth to our esteem; and I presume, it is that Liberty on which Dr. Price beflows his encomium, notwithflandiig his apparent partiality to the freedom of doing what we please. I now return to the place at which I met my Author .

The Doctor, in every fep of his argument, is somewhat hurried by his own definition. In every free slate, he fays, every man is his own legiiator: all taxes are free gifts for public services. It may be fair to ak in what part of the world such a state does, or ever did exist ?
Or what fort of laws thieves and pickpockets are likely to make against theft ? Or how much of his property the miser is likely to bring to the coffers of the Public ?

In most free Rates the populace have as much need to be guarded against the effe& of their own folly and errors, as againR the usurpation of any other person whatever. And the eflence of political Liberty is such an etablishment as gives power to the wife, and safety to all. The exercise of power in popular assemblies has a mixture of effecs, good and bad.
It teaches a people, as it did the Athenians, to become wits, critics, and orators. It gives to every man one chance against being oppressed, in allowing him to appear for himself. But it places him when accused before rash, precipitate, prejudiced, and inequitable judges; he is no more his own legislator, than he is the master of the people, And he is in fa& subjet to a power, which is of all others the most unstable, capricious, and arbitrary: bound by no law, and fubjeat to no appeal. For this reason, Mr. Montesquieu has very wifely said, that Democracy and Aristocracy are not by their nature free governments *.

They are inferior in this refpef to certain species of monarchy, where law is more fixed and the abuses of power are better restrained.

The Door farther observes , or concludes, from his definition, that Civil Liberty in the mofi perfect degree can be enjoyed only in small flates, 'where every member is capable of giving his susfrage in person, and of being chosen into public offices.

It is true that democracy is tolerable only in small states; and the Do&or certainly means to speak of democracy, when he makes this inference on the fubje& of Liberty. But even in the smallest fates, the preservation of public consistency and justice, the security of private rights, must ever recommend some mixture of ariftocratical power, that may prove a check on the caprice of the people; and such a mixture took place in all the happiest institutions of antiquity.

The Doaor owns *, that although Liberty be most perfea in small states, it is not altogether banilhed from great ones: For, where alt the members of a fate are not capable of giving their suffrages on pzblic measures individually and personally, they may do this by the appointment of fubfitutes or representatives.

In this conceflion, the Dotor begins to elude the force of his own definition; and when we confider how little in some cafes the conitituent may know of what his representative does, it appears, that by this device, men may be their own legislators, without so much as knowing that laws are enacted or proposed. And even.

America, at the distance of three thousand miles of sea, may enjoy its freedom by fending fubflitutes or representatives to the Parliament of Great Britain.

This indeed is one of the happiest institutions of mankind, and might be of use in small as well as in great states, by giving every order of the people that thare in the legislature of their country, which is necessary to guard their own rights, without enabling them to usurp on the rights of others. But I must still contend, that the Liberty of every class and order is not proportioned to the power they enjoy, but to the security they have for the preservation of their rights.

In stating this fortunate principle however, theDoctor very reasonably recommends a fair and adequate representation, and makesfuch a defcription of pretended inadequate representation, as I
am afraid can hardly fail of being applied to the government of Great Britain *. The reprefentatives of seven millions are chosen by less than three hundred thousand, and the whole is attended with circumstances that make the Dotor exclaim, it is an abuse of language to fay, that fucb a slate poseses Liberty. And that rather than bE governed in such a manner, it would perhaps be better to be governed by the will of On: JMan without any representation.

The fat in our history, I believe, is, that there never entered into the head of any person able to bring it about, except Cliver Cromwell, the idea of having the people of Great Britain represented. Perfins of a certain description were in the way of attending the king in his wars and in his Parliaments. It appears that they confidered this diftinetion rather as a burden than as a privilege. The kings were in use to grant exemptions to the officers of their court, and to others. The counties and boroughs that ent fubfitutes were obliged to give-them wages; and sometimes, by the connivance of heriffs, eluded the duty altogether. In process of time, however, a place in the King's Court of Parliament became of more confequence. Deputies became willing to serve without wages; boroughs revived their charters.
Freeholders embraced their distinction as a privilege, and their representatives improved it into a formidable power, which became of the greateft importance to themselves and to their country. So little however are mankind corn.
monly aware when they are laying in politics the foundation of the best fuperftruaures. The spirit of the constitution, the design of the conftitution, are the mere conftrucions of fpeculative men; at least, they only mean the cffeet of the constitution, which, notwithstanding the disdain of our Author, has been in many refpeas superior to the effect of any other conflitution in the known world; and notwithitanding the high ideas of Liberty with which it is contracted does atually bestow upon its fubjecs higher degrees of Liberty than any other people are known to enjoy.

It is known, that under all the defects of the British Legislation, the subjet enjoys more fecurity than was ever before enjoyed by any people; and this not accidentally, but by a very natural tendency of the constitution, by lodging legislation in the hands of persons interested in the justice of the laws which they make, and by giving to all the different orders of the state a power to rejeEt or amend every law that is likely to be grievous on themselves. It is less material who elects, than it is who may be elected.

For so long as no one can be elected without the qualifications of a British commoner, the interests of the Commons in the lower house is fecu e.

The experience of Europe, Asia, and Africa, should convince Dr. Price, that it is not better to be governed by one man than by such a representation: but this hasty expression of the Dotor, hows the danger of going so fast in search of ideal perfection, which is apt to make us despise what is attainable and obtained, for the fake of something impracicable, and sometimes absurd.

It is of great moment to extend the participation of power and government, as far as the circumstances and charater of a people will permit; but extremely dangerous to confound this advantage with Civil or Political Liberty; for it may often happen, that to extend the participation of power, is to destroy Liberty. When al the powers of the Roman senate were tranfferred to the popular assemblics, the Liberty of Rome came to an end.

In general, to be free, is to be guided by one's ewn will; but licentiousness is its opposite *.

Dr. Price seems to forget his own definition of Liberty, and admits the reitraint of crimes as necessary to it: nay, admits that Liberty is not les infringed when the licentious multitude do what they please, than it is when a single person does so; although he seems to think, and perhaps justly, that the former infringement is the most repairable and the least prnicious of the two, .

Dr. Price has very juffly observed, that the imputation of omnipotence to any government' except that of the firongeft, the most numerous, or the greatest force; is absurd and that even force cannot always secure obedience. It must be satisfied with the alternative of obedience, of tortures, or of death. Government, whatever be its origin, must employ various engines, of which force is but one authority, refpe&t, public confidence, persuasion, are the principal engines to be employed with the body of a wellmeaning and innocent people: force is the engine to be employed against criminals and slaves.

And the government of mere force, in every instance, either finds people slaves, or makes them so.

It is absurd to fay, as some writers have said in the course of this paper-war, that there mufft be in every state one supreme uncontrolable power; for this never yet existed in any state whatever. The despotic Prince, in search of such a power, finds, that he changes the corntrol of assemblies, councils, civil departments, or of men of education and virtue only, to come under the control of Serjeants and Corporals.
In our government, King, Lords, and Commons are not one power, but three collateral powers; any one of which may flop the motions of all the reft. This observation, however, takes 'nothing from the authority of their joint as wherever they concur, nor had any one till now, from the extreme ettlements of Britilh subje&s in the old world, to their utmost migrations in the new, doubted the validity of any such a. Dr.
Price seems to regret that the efforts formerly made by our fathers in behalf of Liberty are no longer repeated he hould likewise regret, that our liberties are no longer attacked in the fame manner as in the times of our fathers. The contest between the prerogative of the King and the privilege of Parliament is discontinued: the King has influence enough in Parliament to obtain the neceflary supports of his government, though, I hope, never to obtain the smallest resignation of the people's right. In the contest of our times, the parties are the pretenders to office and the holders of office. A noble contest, though an ignoble cause. I must call it a noble contest, as it is undoubtedly one principle of life in our constitution. It leads one party to watch the motions of adminiftration; and the other to be on their guard because they are watched. As the matter now flands, indeed, it is more the interest of oppofition to stop the ordinary movement of government, than to prevent its abuses. If they can stop the ordinary course of government, the minister must withdraw to make way for themselves: but in preventing abuses, they only oblige him to change ill measures for good, and by this means to take a firmer hold of his power.
I know that many ill consequences might be imputed to the state of our parties; but I am not for removing any one safe-guard to freedom, until we have found a better.

Dr. Price infers from his argument, that no one community can have any power over the property or legijlatiot of another, that is not incorporated with it by a jus and adequate representation.

In this paflage, by the word Power, he certainly means the right to have such a power; for it is an undoubted fad, that many ltates have had the power. Even the admired and happy republics of Swifterland and Holland have their fubje& towns and provinces; and this nascent republic of New England too, if it D acquire the independence which, under the denomination of Liberty is projected for it, may come to have its subject towns and provinces, and, among the foremost, some of those who are now so ready to become partners of its revolt against the state.

I do not contend for the right to any such power in any actual cafe, but I contend not only for the reality of the power, but for the right likewise in some supposable cafes. No writer on the law of nature, that I know of, has denied that states or bodies politic may perform every a that any private party can perform; and if this be admitted, it follows, that they may, either by contract or forfeiture, become tributary or subjet to another state or body politic, as much as a single man may become the servant or debtor of another single man by fipulation or forfeiture.

This maxim of the law of nature, I confess, does not bind the Americans to contribute to the supply of the British Empire, unless it can be shewn that they have received all the benefit of fubjeEts; and therefore have stipulated to perform all the duties of fubjets, by the fame tacit convention that binds every inhabitant of Great Britain.

I agree with the Dotor, that the fubjecton of one state to another is inexpedient, and often calamitous for both; but this will not preclude one member of the fame slate, who has always made common cause with another, from having a very just claim to expeE a joint contribution to the common support.

After what has passed between Great Britain and her Colonies, whoever pretends that Great Britain hould drop every claim of a return, and the Colonies refuse to make any return, under every possible security to their property, must have very high notions of the generosity incumbent on the one party, and as low notions of what is incumbent on the other. Nay, but they have traded with us, and this is enough: and have not we traded with them ? Have they given us their goods for nothing ? Or have they been careful to receive value? Or have they taken less value than other nations would have taken ? These questions should be anfwered before we are told that their trade has repaid us for all the blood and treasure we have expended in the common cause, and before it can be admitted that in the heights of prosperity, at which they may arrive, they are not bound under any form, or with any precautions, for the remainder of their property, to contribute any part of it whatever to the common supplies of the Empire.

The Do&or owns that one state may become bound to indemnify another for an injury done them, or be bound to give security against future injury; but who can set limits to the poffible rights thus established in the claim of one state against another. It is impossible to tell how long a state may be tributary, or how much it may pay before it has acquitted a debt of indemnification; or what precaution may be neceflary to obtain, for the future, a sufficient security against injuries. The Romans, when they recovered Campania from its revolted inhabitants, and from Hanibal, thought proper, for their own future security, to abolish the Municipal Senate, and assemblies of that province: Such meetings they confidered as a standing conspiracy against themselves. In this I shall not pretend to justify their condut, but suppositions may be made that would be fufficient to justify it, and such as I shall neither be willing to make nor apply to the American Colonies: But let no one contend, that in the plenitude of madness, they may not forfeit more to the state, than any one would be willing to exaa from them. I will not fay what an imperious flare, like that of the Romans, so often quoted in a imilar cafe, would have exaced and done; but if we are to hope that one party will not inflit the penalty, we may hope likewife that the other will not incur it.

Writers on the Law of Nature sustain the validity of a fair contra&t in all cafes where the performance is possible or lawful. That it is both possible and lawful for one corporation or body politic to submit themselves to the laws, and contribute to the supplies of another, no one will doubt; that all corporations and bodies politic belonging to the fame state are aually under such a contract, no body ever questioned.

No one can bind himself to receive the religious opinions of another, because his opinions are not in his power, but he may bind himself, if he pleases, to pay a ihilling in the pound of his estate.

But can one generation bind another ? No doubt, in every lawful contract, as much as any person can bind his heirs, or as much as the late King of France could bind the successors to his crown to leave Canada in the possession of the English. The Docor's reasoning on this subjeet takes away the obligation of treaties, or at best makes them temporary agreements, to last for the lives of those who made them.

It is confessed, that favours voluntarily conferred, cannot be stated as a ground of debt; but they who reft so much on the affection and attachment of the Colonies to the Mother Country, ought to allow Something for the favours done by the Mother Country to her Colonies.

The Doctor attempts a diftintion between the reparation of parts in the fame kingdom, and the reparation of parts in the fame empire, which I confess I cannot comprehend; but if he lays so great a stress on the difference of names, he may be told, that Great Britain and its dependencies is not an Empire, but a kingdom.
I see no warrantable part for mankind to a& under either denomination, but to acquiesce in the government which Providence has given to their kingdom or their empire, until they are sure that they do not change it for the worse; and in this, reformers upon general principle, however sanguine, are far from being secure.

It is the fashion, however, I observe, with some writers, to give high expecations of the great perfection to which human nature is tending, especially in America; for I think Old England, by their account, is degenerating. 
But a republic extending 1200 miles in one direction, and without any known bounds in the other, is ill an experiment to be made in the history of mankind. Our ancestors made the experiment in vain, within narrower limits; they too had high expectations of what mankind were about to exhibit; they thought the millennium and the kingdom of Christ were at hand, but they found, in their tead, the iron reign of an usurper, supported by military force. It is charity, perhaps, to pray that if the Colonies must break with us for ever, they may be more faithfully served by those they employ, than they themselves have served their country. The officer, perhaps, has not yet appeared, who, on that emergency, is to dismiss the Congress as Cromwell did the Parliament. But what title have they to hope for an exemption from the too common fate of mankind; the fate that has ever attended Democracies attempted on too large a scale; that of plunging at once into military government ? The armies they form against their country will need no other title to become their malters. It is even fair to conclude, from the history of the world, that there is no time of more danger than those times of sanguine, of florid, and enthusiastic expeclation, in which mankind are bent on great and hazari dous change.

Americans, however, may ill be thought out of this question; they seek no innovation; they are the parties that contend for the ancient eftablilhment. Their plea, however, I hope is better founded than this *. The Parliament of Great Britain has made laws for the Colonies from their first eftablilhments. The charters of the Colonies fubjeaed them to taxes, and they have been taxed by as of the British Parliament: Matters therefore were in their ordinary train, when the Americans ftopt hort, and would proceed no farther. I will not, however, insist, that the change of circumstances may not have required a change of policy; and that, as the Americans are growing rich, and have something that tempts rapacity, they ought to have better security for their property, than the continuance of former pracice will perhaps betlow.
But, in this view of the contest, what is to be done if the Colonies have a right to contend for new securities ? Let them apply to the state with proper professions of duty, and representations of the dangers they apprehended; but no one See the Rights of Great Britain aflerted againt the Claims of America, can pretend that the state ought to yield up the ordinary way of constituting a revenue, till a new and better way is fubfiituted in its place.

The Dotor refers to the example of the Romans, and bids us confider how much they sussered for having been the tyrants of other nations, and I shall never recommend to any slate to follow their example.

Dr. Price * has deduced, from our leading principle, viz. that every rejiraint on the will of man is an introduSion of slavery, a number of consequences that seem to hi- incapable of being disputed. There is, indeed, nothing that requires to be disputed, but his principle itself, for with that, the consequences mull fall. Its application, as he observes, to the present quesion with America, is obvious; and the principle indeed seems to be made for the application, and is fitted to justify the desire of national independence, under the name of Civil Liberty.
The change of words has a mighty effe&, even in the frame of an argument. There is not an Englilh gentleman, I believe, that would not Ihrink from the thought of reducing millions of his fellow-fubjests to a fate of lervitude, and as few that will not be sized with indignation in being told that the Colonies aim at independence, and will contribute no longer to the joint support of their common country.

We shall be told, however, that the Colonies do not aim at independence.-Yes, if they aim at the Liberty designed for them by Dr. Price.
If they aim only at security to their rights and properties, let the question be fairly flated, and put in the train of pacific discussion.

The Doctoris pleased to fay, that the question of right, with all liberal inquirers, ought to be;
not what jurifdicion over them, precedents, ifatutes, and charters give, but what reason and equity, and the rights of humanity give: This, he fays, in truth, is a question which no kingdom has ever bad occasion to agitate. It is certainly the firfl time it ever was proposed that men having any political eablifhments, statutes, precedents, or charters, should at once demolifih, cancel, or set aside all the maxims, records, or conventions on which every party must rely for the preservation of his property, and from which alone he can learn the relation in which he stands to the tfate, or to his fellow-fubjets. Why has no kingdom ever had occasion to agitate such a question ? Have no parties arose in politics before ? Have no dillrits or corporations of the fame community claimed privileges and exemptions that have been disputed with them ?
It is well known that such queffions have been agitated, and that parties uniformly referred to precedents, tatutes, and charters for a determination. To bring queffions of this fort to any supposed tribunal of reason, of equity, and humanity, is to set human affairs afloat upon the ea of opinion and private interef, and to deprive men of those charts, landmarks, and rules of failing, by which they were in use to be guided, and to diret their cause.

It is certainly true, that no nation ever planted Colonies with o liberal or so noble a hand as England has done. But she has done so on the plan of those very charters, flatutes, and precedents which are now to be set aside. And her having done so much for her Colonies, is surely an unfavourable topic from which to inser the right of her Colonies to do nothing for her. It is indeed to be lamented, that, in the place of argument, this controversy is haften.
ing to employ the sword. Blessed were he that could bring it to a different issue. But 1 hope, that neither the Americans, nor the advocates that plead for them, will think, that every concefflon flould come from Great Britain. They have hitherto said to the King of Great Britain, on his own territory, as the Romans said to Pyrrhus and to Hannibal, " You muff evacuate " this land before we will treat;" and if this were granted them, it is likely they would be ready to declare what further concessions they expeE from the Crown and Legilfature of their country.

The Docor * proposes to determine the justice of the war by the obje& of it; and this he collects from a latute moved and carried in Parliament, under the auspices of a noble Lord, and of honourable gentlemen, who are the declared friends of America, and in whose intentions the Americans repose such confidence, that they have never once, as I have been told, complained of this declaratory law. From this tfate of the cafe; that is, from the silence of America on this law, and from the friendly intentions towards America of those who obtained it; I am inclined to think, that this law cannot be the ground f the quarrel. I rather lufpe&, that we are going to war about taxaatiun and property, than about speculative declarations of right; and that one party is very indifferent about laws that are to bring them nothing, and others about laws that are to take nothing from them. And on this supposition I Should think, the fair way of determining the justice of the claim, would be by flating two questions. The firit, Whether the charters, ftatutes, and precedents; that is to fay, whether the present confiitu:ion of Great Britain refpeting her Colonies; has committed a power of Taxation over America, to the legislature of Great Britain. If this question hall be decided in the affirmative, as I am persuaded it mut be so decided, it will follow, that the Legiflature of Great Britain has yet incurred no blame in urging a claim in which they were justified by the constitution of the state.

I however mofl willingly admit a second question. Has the situation of affairs undergone any change that require a change of policy and of measures, that deserve the attention of the Legifature, and on which the Colonies ought to be heard with candour and patience, bo as to avoid, if poflible, inconveniencies to which, in a new situation, old precedents, and even statutes and charters might carry us ?

The principal changes in our circumstances are, that our Colonies, under the influence of charters and statutes, have increased in resources and in people: that Great Britain is heavily burdened, and that now, from being at an or
dinary 

dinary expence in nursing and protecting her Colonies, ihe would gladly draw ome share of the public supplies from thence. This fituation, I confess, is new, and may require some suitable policy. If the Parliament of Great Britain, as formerly, be to grant the money of the Americans ; the latter may think their property not secure. At the fame time, if any party independent of the Parliament of Great Britain be to grant money to the Crown; this constitution loses one of its principal securities, the dependence of the Crown for supplies on the Commons of Great Britain.

Here is a difficulty, on which it is not furprifing that parties ihould differ, and inadvertently get into a very hearty quarrel, in which both may susser extremely before any one is able to find a solution.

In Rating the question, I have passed over many things which other persons may think of great consequence, in order to come at what I apprehend every one will think so.

I do not write in order to persuade my correfpondent, that the Legislature of Great Britain should retain their unlimited power of granting the money of America. But I write under a I deep convition, that the Americans ought to contribute to the supplies of the empire. And that they ought now, before an indemnity is granted for the pafl, to specify the taxes on which they will effablith a revenue for the state, and which, without augmenting the burden on them, may increase with their resources their population and the immunities given to their trade; but subjea to no other alteration, without the content of Parliament and their own.
Or if they choose rather to pay some fixed proportion of what the Commons of Great Britain from time to time levy on themselves, let them have it in the mode which they themselves, or better judgments than mine, can determine.

They have been told, that the Parliament of Great Britain will not tax them, if they are pleased to tax themselves. No fpeci.c tax, no specific fum has been mentioned to them; and yet this proposition, coming from the Commons of Great Britain, has, by themselves and by their advocates on this fide the water, been termed an insult. The plain Englifl, I am afraid, is, that the Americans do not think any supply from thence due to the state of Great Britain. Or, that their advocates do not think they ought to grant any such supply till they themselves are in power. The Americans may flatter themselves, that if the party that now opposes Government, were in power, they would obtain every favour and every concession. But they may be assured, that no Minister in the councils of the King will surrender the undoubted right of this country, to require from America ome hare in the supplies which are necessary to support the the Imperial Crown and the Empire of Great Britain. If precautions be wanting to secure the rights of that people in the mode of attaining this necessary end, the parties may still have an opportunity of entering into a candid and fair discussion of this subjec. Commissioners are soon to be appointed by the King, who are to accompany his fleets and armies across the Atlantic, doubtless with the humane and merciful intention to spare, by pacific means, if that is yet possible, the effusion of blood.

In this light the Colonies ought certainly to confider this lenient measure. And if they do, I think they ought to be ready on their part, to meet the advances of the King with dutiful representations of the Securities they deem necessary in the future administration of government refpeaing them.If no such ftep is taken, we may fairly conclude, that they are intoxicated with the idea of feparation and independence, and that they are resolved solved not tb grant supplies in any mode or ir any proportion whatever. And if this be their resolution, I am afraid the sword muff strike as well as be raised; and till they exculpate themselves from the design of withdrawing their allegiance, and every reasonable mode of ulpply from the Crown of Great-Britain, the wounds they receive will appear to comefrom the hand of Justice, and will remain unpitied by many persons, who are far from wishing to invade their liberties.

It is likely that the councils of the King will incur more censure for the relucance with which they have armed the kingdom against this revolt, than they will for any supposed precipitation in urging matters to extremities. But it is a noble error to have been flow in believing.
that Britifi fubjeds, unmoleited in their religion or in their liberties, still in pofleffion of that government by which they had arrived at so much prosperity, untouched in their property by any unprecedented invasion ; and if assailed, only assailed by penal statutes, to make compenfation for an outrage done to the property and the trade of their fellow-fubjets: It was, I fay, a noble error to be flow in believing that British subjects, under this description; would have drawn upon themselves and this nation all the horrots of a civil war. If we were taught to think them pufilanimous, they were certainly taught to think our councils irresolute, diftrated, and unflable; but both, I hope, will return from their errors, and exchange the sword for a more rational mode of arbitration.

Dr. Price, being to confider the jufice of the war, recites all the pleas that may be offered by the state in support of coercive measures.
Those pleas he supposes to be, he necfity of war to preferie the unity of the empire: our fuperi;rity: our pretensions as the parent fiate: the return duefor our benefits: our sovereignty in the territory of imerica. The Do&or will own, that union is at least a desirable object, and will pardon our endeavours to preserve it, by the tame means that states, the most moderate, have employed for this purpose; the policy of a common interest, a common sense of duty, and the authority of a common government. If any one contend, that we ought to rely on either of the former principles to the exclusion of the latter, and that we ought to resign either the authority or the force which government on occasion must exert, I should fufpec that he does not wih to have us united, nor even to leave us possesed of the common resources for the preservation of peace and good order, that all nations have employed within their dependencies.

I mean not to argue from the second topic.

Nations do not found obligations of allegiance and duty on difference of wealth, numbers of people, or the uppcfed precedency of scholars and learned men. i hopc the remaining title, however, will not be ol flithtiy trcated. The name of Parent State is not an empty found.
It carries the authority by which civil rights are eftabliflled and modified. If America derive nothing from this authority, why did its settlers take any charters from the crown of GreatBritain ? Or if they were emancipated by these charters, why is not their emancipation expreiled in ome such terms as the following?
Wh'Vereas certain persons mean to depart this our kingdom and form fiates apart, we hereby emancipate fich perfions, discharge their allegiance to us, and difiontinue our prote.icon. If, on the contrary, they took possession of their settlements by grants of the Crown, if they have been uniformly confidered as British fubjecs, amenable to the law and under the protection of the state, what title have they now to withdraw their allegiance because their settlements were made in America, any more than if they had been on Hounllow-Heath or on Finchley-Common?
The charters, the precedents, the flatutes on which this right of the state is founded, can no more be disputed than the charters, precedents, and statutes on which the constitution of the state, respecting any other part of its power, is established. The utmost any party can plead is, that circumstances are changed, and require a new system of policy, or at leaf some additional precautions, to give to the British fubjets of America the fame security, or a security as nearly as possible the fame, with that which is enjoyed by their fellow-fubjects at home.

Exaction of gratitude is but an ungracious plea; the fa& is, that the state protected and encouraged that part of her fubjets on the fame mixed motives of political interest and affection, that he protects and encourages every other member of the community, and there is no other member that has not an equal title to reje& the claim of gratitude. It may again be repeated, that confidering what has passed between Great Britain and her Colonies, the Americans will be found to a an odious part in this contest; they are not satisfied with the enjoyment of their municipal governments, and such a mode of contributing to the supplies of the empire, as may be consistent with the safety of their persons and their properties.

The sovereignty of a territory, and the property of its land, every where admits of a diftinaion. The state is undoubtedly sovereign of all the territory on which any of her fubjeas, under her protecion, and by her charters and grants, have made any settlements; and the territory of North America was, and is subject to all the claims of sovereignty under the limitation of statutes and charters. I write from memory, but appeal to the original deeds, whether ome of them did not give an exemption from Taxation during a limited time, with . c-cent implication, that at the expiration of that term they should be fubje& to taxation like other British fubjt&s. And whether others did not limit taxation to specific duties, mentioned with a like implication, that the right of taxation was entire while the exercise of that right was reftrited.

But Dr. Price is willing to plead *, that the Colonies did fettle under the faith of charters, and we muff admit, that they have a right to all the immunities and exemptions granted them by statute, or by charter under the authority of statute; but let not their advocates plead the authority of charters in one page and rejet them in the next. It is certain, that the Colonies were planted on the authority of law, and never aspired to establish their privilege on a higher base. It is likewise probable, that all of them, at their first settlement, would have enbraced, as an ample security of their property, an exemption from every burden besides that of parliamentry taxation. How far this security may now be deemed sufficient, I am willing to leave as a subject of better and more able difculion.

The remainder of Dr. Price's observations on the jufrice of the war tend to prove, that the pait or present site of the constitution refpeaing the Colonies, is not precisely what it ought to be in the present state of the empire, nor such as it ought to be in the event of farther changes, of which he has tated the poflible contingency; and in this 1 do not pretend to decide, but hope that persons better qualified will bring it to proper trial, not of force, but of political expediency and national wisdom.

Dr. Price, in the 2d Section of the 2d Part of his Pamphlet, in which he inquires, whether the war with America is j.ftified by the principles of the constitution, affects to confider the Americans as a separate people; and inquires, whether the war be made to elabliJh our constitution among them. If this question has any meaning at all, I apprehend it should stand, Whether, by the present conflitution of the state, the Legislature of Great Britain is in poffeilion of a right to impose taxes and to enact laws binding in America ? If they be in possession of such a right, have they been known to abuse it ? They have been in poffeflion of the right, and scarcely at all exerted it. But the Americans are now alarmed, and think that this right may be abufed; let them come forward, therefore, and urge the precautions necessary to be taken against this abuse. If they will accept of no security below that of independency, and total feparation of commonwealth; this, I apprehend, they muff acquire at the point of the sword. But other and better remedies for the evil may yet be expe&ed from the councils of a state that has been as remarkable for moderation, as for resolution in the conduct of great affairs.

Advocates in this cause perpetually quote the spirit and principles of the British confitution against the letter and the fact. Do they mean its primeval slate, the intention of its 'founder, or something else, that they fancy concerning it?
Its primeval state is very little known; and if it were, could not be admitted as the rule of proceeding in opposition to subsequent eflablifhments and compacts. In that sage which is called 

called the feudal constitution, the King had hid domain or royal estate, and had no other claim on his fubjeas but their personal services in his wars. When he wanted some extraordinary supply, he summoned his vassals together, and made his proposition to them for that purpose; they deliberated and refused, or granted ometimes in commutation for military services, and fomtimes as a voluntary gift.
The Constitution was gradually raised upon these foundations. The Parliament became what it is, and the state in poffefiion of a maxim, that the King can raise no supplies without consent of Parliament. This is the origin, and this is the far in our constitution; and right or wrong, till within these few years, or few months, within the Britilh territory Of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, Parliament was supposed omnipotent and irresistible: what change may now be made to accommodate forms to new fituations, I hope may fill be determined by a better decision than that of the sword. But, till that is determined, I hope, that every good subjea will pay a proper refpe& to the fat, and the letter of the confitution, whatever fancy he may have about the spirit of it. We may wish for improvements in the laws of the Rfate, but till these are made, we must abide by the law as it stands.

In the next Sedion*, Dr. Price brings in question the policy of the war with America.
There is, in fad, no apology can be made for any war, betides the necessity of it to maintain bome right, and some right that is worth concontending for at this expence. Whether Great Britain has any such right now at flake, and by what steps this right came to be brought in hazard, are two separate questions.

I muf maintain, that until our union is legally dissolved, the American Colonies are a part of the British empire. That ads of sovereignty, from which Great Britain might, or did derive, material advantage, were exerted by the legiflature of Great Britain. That the ad of navigation, the ads limiting trade, the appointment of governors and other civil officers, the eflabliflment of a revenue, however inconsiderable, were all of them ads of sovereignty, in which the state and people of Great Britain are deeply interested. That the interest of Great Britain, constituted by there ads of sovereignty, is now in imminent hazard; and in all human probability, to be secured by that force alone with which the slate shall appear to be armed in support of its own rights. So much has been said for the Americans in this country, and they have met with so little control in their own, that their pretensions arelikely to rife. If they prevail by force in reducing the power of legislation, will they not take the fame opportunity to reduce the navigation at, and other every right of sovereignty? What is to hinder their proceeding to asfume that independency, which is so roundly prescribed to them under the denomination of Liberty? Are they not getting fast into a fituation, in which the overeignty of the Crown is likely to become as odious, at least to their leaders, as the power of the Legifature itself ?
One man is brought from behind the counter, to be member of a sovereign Congress; another to be one of five that wield the executive power of a great empire: others are promoted proportionally, though to inferior ftations; and may entertain hopes of rising to the highest: one man is raised from a dealer in hories to 'e a general, another from a barber to be a culonel; all of them, I make no doubt, well qualified for the stations they fill: but whether they be or no, likely to be fond of their dignities, and unwilling to part with them; ready to employ all their authority, all their credit, all the force they can command to prevent the return of peace, which muff bring the downfal of their power, and fend them again to their trades and their obscurity; what but a proper force, and a proper aspec of determination, on the part of Great Britain, can bring flch persons as these to reason, or deliver out of their hands the bulk of the fober and the induftrious people of America ? who, feeing their properties and their peace at flake, will be glad to return to the bosom of the ate, and be happy to receive such fatisfa&ion on the future security of their property and civil rights, as I hope no generous or candid mind can ever entertain any idea of refuting them.

Men are indeed, as Dr. Price observes, too apt to be governed by the lust of power, by revenge, and by other detestable paiffons. But are these passions unknown in America? Have the leaders in this revolt no ambition, no revenge to gratify, or would it be prudent in any administration to trust to the moderation and candor of parties, who have oared already so high above the condition of fubjeas, and who have such an interest in perpetuating a breach to which they owe so much personal consequence ?

It may be confessed, that as matters now fland, the Americans are not likely to acknowledge the moif evident rights of Great Britain, farther than thole rights are supported by force. But it will be asked, How came we into this situation ? Is not the war, though neceTfary now, the sequel of many unnecefary steps, that being discontinued in time, would have prevented it entirely ? It may be so, and so have been the greater number of wars that have afflicted mankind. Disputes arise, provocations become reciprocal, and evils accumulate. The beginnings are admitted, because no body perceives the end; and every fool is a wife man after the event has shown him what was coming.

I am willing to own, that Dr. Price is inclined to censure measures, rather than to strike at men. That for this purpose he recals to our memory, the policy of many years, fraught with initruction to those who are now to act on the scene of public affairs. He predics, though 1 hope rashly, the loss of America; and to make us fenfible how much we are to lose, he paints in the most favourable colours, the happy state at which that country at the beginning of these hostilities had arrived, and the growing importance of its trade to Great Britain. I hope, however, it will be remembered, that the Colonies arrived at this happy Rate under the influence of British policy, and under the undisputed right of the British Legislature to bind them in all cafes whatsoever: and as we have so long prospered together, under this this policy; that the Do&or's prediction may still prove false; that a moderate hare of public spirit and good intention, on that fide of the water as well as on this, may still save to all parties their reciprocal advantages, without incurring the inconvenience that either apprehends.
But for this purpose, as we are perpetually alarmed with the hundreds of thousands that the Americans can arm, I am afraid that Britain must not come to the conference unarmed, or in a ft to be insulted.

I write in every page on the supposition that negociation may take place; and who, but infernal spirits, would ever go to war with any other intention than to obtain an equitable peace. The party on whose fide the aversion to treaty lies, will be answerable for the confequence.

As for the trade of America, I am ready to allow it as high as the advocates of America are pleased to make it. Be it granted that we fold them our goods at our own price; but unless this price was a higher than we received from other markets, unless it was better paid, I do not fee why this trade is preferable to any other vent fcr our commodities. Even if the price were higher, which I am told it was not, the flow returns of this market rendered it less profitable than many others we have had and till may have.

But have the Americans a right to withdraw their trade from our merchants and manufacturers, as well as their supplies from the state ?
If they have not, why should it be supposed that they mean to carry the lines of separation beyond the bounds which they themselves, and their advocates, assea to prescribe. Trade is the child of interest, and will follow where its parent leads. But the right of sovereignty must be maintained by authority, and ometimes by force. The subjects of Great Britain do not claim a right of sovereignty, neither in Europe nor in America; but they expect from each other, and from the Americans, the reasonable co-operation of fellow-fubje&s; and the state itself must maintain its sovereignty in both. If any part of the monarchy withdraw its allegiance, the remainder mutl repel such an insult with their blood.

We are, in this argument, threatened with the attacks of enemies from abroad, while we are engaged in a war with our Colonies. But the advocates of America, it is hoped, do not with that the ifate of Great-Britain should bow the head to foreign nations, as well as to her own subjects. If our quarrel be momentous and just, we must support it or perilh, be the enemy who he will. But we have had our wars, and none of our enemies have yet had cause to rejoice in the effet of their arms against us. I am, however, inclined to believe, that this alarm, as it is injurious to the honour of nations with whom we are at peace on the faith of treaties, so it is injurious to their sagacity, and discernment of their own political interest. What are they likely to gain by erecting the colonies of North-America into a power independent of Britain ? Will their own Colonies become more dutiful after this example of a supposed successful revolt ? Or will they have lets to fear in behalf of their Weft-India settlements, from this rising confederacy, than they have from Britain ? The new enemy will be nearer to those settlements, and have many more advantages in seizing them, than the old.

Few persons are qualified to enter the lilts with Dr. Pricc, on the subjed of accounts and calculations; but this alone will not enable us, in particular cafes, to decide the great questions of national right. Paper-currency and public debt are the consequences of a fortunate conftitution, and of an unlimited credit both public and private. They have given us the advantage in many a contest to forces superior to our own; and the evil, though great, by our Author's account, is susceptible of a cure. It is probably in order to urge this cure, that the desperate ifate of the patient is so much explored. Such admonitions go home to Ministers of State, who can verify or disprove the sacs, and will not be shaken by false allegations. The people, however, are in more danger, and in the most flouriflhing time of the Public, may susser as much from a false alarm of bankruptcy, as they could from a real one. A false and wanton alarm of fire, in a crowded theatre, has cost many lives; but they who alarm us so loudly on the subject of public credit, may have the consolation to know, that their own accounts are not fully credited, otherwise we should have the people of England crowding into every avenue that leads to the Bank, and treading each other to death, with an eager haste to get forward while any cash was to be had for their paper.

Most people, however, believe, that it is not necessary for a great kingdom to have all its riches in cash; and even the example of the Americans, whose advantages Dr. Price is not on the present occasion inclined to decry, will serve to prove, that a people, with no better resource than a paper circulation, may rush into the midst of alarming convulsions. The Americans have reaoln to believe, that their country will be a feat of war, and yet carry on their operations with paper. Will not the landing of a few troops on their coafis, infuJrreions threatening a revolution of governmenct, or events that produce a general panic, operate in America as they would do in Europe ? And put an end there, as it would any where else, to the subsistence of armies, and to every species of traffic that depends on the faith of paper, or the credit of a government that supposes a revolution in order to give it any being.

But if in the present contest with America our revenue is likely to decline, and if the whole of it be scarcely adequate to the difficulties in which we are involved; this does not appear a proper argument to convince us, that we ought not to expect any aid from America; nor is it a very liberal apology for the Americans refusing to bear any part of the burden, of which a considerable part was incurred in their own cause. In their cause singly, if they persist and prevail in gaining that Liberty of independence which is now pointed out to them; but in our common cause if they continue united with us, and bear ajuft proportion of our burdens.

In tfating the honour of the nation as affeed by the war with Amnerica, Dr. Price supposes, that the claims of the state are wrong, and that the refiltance of the Colonies is jufi. On this iuppofition, the argument is unanswerably for him; and the concetfions of justice, however late, would, at least to our fellow-fubje&s, be honourable. But this, I humbly conceive, is begging the question. Hitherto the State has proceeded in the traa of precedents, and followed the rules of law and of charters. If a change be expected, the grounds of it should be laid in amicable representation, not in open war and hostility. Nations are like private men, they may commit errors, but must not susser themselves to be kicked even into reason. When the parties are once armed, a great nation must attend to is reputation, as well when it sheaths as when it employs the sword. If the Americans refuse upon any terms, whether in conjunction with, or in subordination to the Parliament of Great-Britain, to furnish any part of the public supplies, it is by no means necessary, in order to justify the ue of the sword against them, that they invade this fland. If a person re:use the payment of his just debts, he may be compelled to do right in his own habitation, no less than if he had aually entered with violence the house of his creditor.

We are said to assume as much power over the Americans as either the Genoese or the French could afiume over the Corsicans. The State of Great-Britain had assumed nothing but the power of prote&ing her Colonies, when her conttitutional powers in America began to be denied, and her authority spurned. What has happened since is surely matter of regret, at least, if not of just censure, to the warmest friends of America. A daring breach of peace and violence to property was committed, and went unpunished. Direct war has been levied in return for penal statutes. And inflead of reparation to their fellow-citizens for the damage done by the citizens of Boston, we are told, that they are an independent republic, and no longer accountable to the laws.

We are bid to think of the allies of the Romans in Italy, how they claimed to be enrolled as citizens of Romeo how they fought, and how the state perifned in the struggle. The claim of those allies was, by every reasonable person, thought to be fraught with disorder and public ruin. It was strenuously opposed by the mot H candid and virtuous citizens of Rome. The multitude of the people, in the place of assembly, but too often made a scene of confuion. IE was not thought necessary to bring an acceffon of the whole populace of Italy to swell the tumult. The event of the war was fatal to Rome; not because the claim of the allies was refused, as Dr. Price seems to insinuate, but because it was granted; and the sequel proved a striking example of what the Doctor does not seem to apprehend, that the power of the people is not the good of the people. Their liberty funk as their power increased, and perished at last by the very hands that were employed in support of the popular cause.

W.e are bid to confider* how far we are likely to succeed in the present war. The reader will please to observe, that success in war is a term of uncertain meaning. It may stand for the extermination of an enemy on the one hand, or for the most equitable terms of peace that can be obtained on te other. If the Doctor means the first, I hope that we Ilall not fucceed. If he means the second, I hope we hall succeed; and if the Americans be actuated by any thing hort of frenzy, they will not resign their property and their peace, burn their own towns, and fly to the desert, as the Doctor insinuates, to avoid embracing us once more as their brethren, and concurring with us upon some equitable and safe ground, in supporting the common cause of the slate. This I hall call vicory; and a victory to all the ingenuous and well-informed natives of America, as well as to those of the fame deicription in Britain.

Some individuals among them, who mcet in Congress, or frand at the head of armies, as the Lords of America, may think the reunion of the Empire a defeat; but to every one else, I hope, it will appear a new era of prosperity, and glory to the slate.

Dr. Price supposes , contrary to the leon of independence, which, under the denomination of Liberty he has read to the Americans, that they may still be willing to remain in the bofomn of the state, and on the fame bottom with their feliow-;fubjeas in Britain: But in what sense, and to what effec, remain on the fame bottom with us ? Will they acknowledge the law of the slate, and contribute some reasonable proportion toward its support ? Will they be contented with a reasonable security, admitted in the form of granting this supply, that it fliall not be augmented without their own content ?
If ever any such proposal had come from America, I am persuaded it might have served as the foundation of friendship, and terminated in some happy arrangement. But if, by maintaining their union with us, they only mean to continue the practice of calling upon our fleets and armies to defend them when attacked, without contributing any thing to support the power that protets them, I do not fee what interest the Rate has in this union. Nay, but they are willing to leave us the command of their trade. I confers I do not fee the wisdom of this policy on the part of America; we are arrived at an age of experience, in which all parties might fee the expedience of exchanging reftritions on trade for compensations in revenue. If the slate were disposed to oppress, he might do so as effectually by reftri&fions on trade, as by impofitions of taxes. And I believe, that if the Parliament of Great Britain, in its disputes with the Crown, had hofen rather to leave the trade of the people at its mercy, than to grant its supplies, the Public would have long since suffered severely by the choice.

I am sorry that Dr. Price hould endeavour to flatter the Americans on a supposed aversion of the people of Great Britain to this war, or impute to this circumstance the supposed flow progrefs made in recruiting the army. The nursery of the army in this country consists in the supernumeraries of our manufaturers, and labouring hands. Had the American leaders, by flhutting their ports on our traders, distressed us as they proposed, recruits for the army would have been bur too easily found; but as matters now stand, our armaments muf increase with their usual pace. If, to avoid loading the public, by means of new levies, with an enormous half-pay lift at the end of the war, it is to be opened with a supply of foreign troops, I hope ik wi cl ole with them too; and that in what(::.: manner the first army that goes to America i, composed, it will satisfy the people of that country that peace with Great Britain is better than war.

I am farther sorry, that Dr. Price ihould flatter the Americans on the subjed of their own strength, and of our weakness. If the Docor were pleated to recollec a few more of the pasfages of history, with which he is so well acquainted, he would observe, that no general, being to invade a country, thought himself obliged to have an army in numbers equal to the natives; and that most of the unhappy conquests recorded in the history of mankind were made with small armies, who, having the fuperiority of discipline, made a progress the more rapid that their numbers were few: in hort, that small armies have done more than I hope the arms of Great Britain will have to do in America; they have reduced, and kept in subje&ion, extensive countries, replenished with numbers of people, not of the weak and effeminate alone, but of the molt warlike and fiercest nations that are known in history.

The Romans, a little before the second Punic war *, mustered in Italy seven hundred thousand foot, and seventy thousand horse; yet this country was invaded by Hannibal with twenty thousand foot, and fix thousand horse : The greateft part of it was reduced, and remained in the hands of this enemy for sixteen years. With how small an army did Cafar reduce four hundred independent Certons, and fierce nations in Gaul ? With how few did he afterwards invade Italy itself, and with how few did he reduce the whole Roman Empire ? Were the Saxons that landed in Britain superior to the Britons; the Danes to the Saxons, or the Normans to the Englih ? On this point, therefore, .cald be sorry to flatter the Americans. The cii r:'ions * Polyb. lib. ii. c. 24. ;. ,,d that arise in a country that is invaded, turn the superiority of numbers into disorder and weakness. The Americans have not yet met the Britiih soldiers on the plain, and when they do, their numbers, I imagine, will not avail them much.

I have as high a sense of what men ought, and will do, in defence of their liberties, as any man: But I flatter myself, in the present cafe, that, unless the Americans mistake independence and separation of commonwealth for Liberty, that they will not think themselves called upon to try the force of this principle.

I hould willingly, with Dr. Price, in the close of his pamphlet, or while he is hastening to the conclusion *, rejoice in the profpea of a power growing in America that shall astonish the world. If it were not proposed to raise this power by dismembering the slate of Great Britain, and by stripping her of a branch lhe has nourished with so much care, and which by having partaken with her in every national advantage, is now in condition to bear an equitable part in her burdens; and which certainly, on every principle ofjuftice, human and divine, is not now entitled to fay, we need you no longer, and will take no father part in your affairs.

I confess that I think, when the cause of our country is at flake, impartiality is but a doubt.
ful virtue. It may be noble to wiih that our country should do no wrong, and it may be lawful to flay her hand when raflly lifted up against ti-e weak and the helpless; but when swords are drawn, to beat down that of a friend while the enemy is striking, I am afraid, is perfidy.

The Americans, it is true, are not come here to invade us; but they with-hold the rights of Great Britain, and oblige us to invade them, which is a no less justifiable ground of hotility. When citizens of Great Britain anticipate with joy the independent or separate greatness of America, it is natural to suppose, that they think the dismemberment of this empire will bring us back only to what we were about a century ago; diminish our luxury, give a check to many vices, and by landing us down a few fleps on the scale, only renew our endeavours to remount again. This, however, is not of a piece with the history of mankind; nations in their progress, though weak and inferior to 3 their 

their neighbours, spurn their condition, and continue to advance from the bottom to the top of the scale. But nations that have been high can seldom bear a fall; they fink in fthe cale with a retrograde motion as rapid as they advanced. Is Great Britain then to be sacrificed to America; the whole to a part, and a state which has attained high measures of national felicity, for one that is yet only in expecation, and which, by attempting such extravagant plans of Continental Republic, is probably laying the feeds of anarchy, of civil wars, and at last of a military government, so much that, in this great contest, Dr, Price might have ventured to fay, that the friends as well as the enemies of America may not know what they are doing?

I am happy to find in the conclusion of this Pamphlet , that Dr. Price, notwithstanding the language of independence which he has taught the Americans, is pleated to repeat with ome exprefiions of approbation, a motion for peace, fuggeted by a noble Lord, in which the union, dependency, and participation of America in the burdens of the Empire are included as part of the plan. The proposal does honour to the noble Lord; and if it had atually come from Ameriea, I mhould have thought it an equitable ground upon which to open a council of deliberation with the most friendly intentions. I should have prayed that, while the deliberations were open, parties would agree to a cessation of arms, and a suspension of penal ftatutes. But I fee not the use of fabricating plans, of which the firIt ftep always is a concession on the part of the Rfate, without any overture of submission on the part of its fubjeas. These subjects have treated plans of the minority with the fame contempt that they have treated acts of Parliament or resolutions of the majority, and seem to be determined to bring this contest to an iflue more agreeable to the enemies of Great Britain than to its citizens and friends.

P. S. I know not how the tenets of any party may be affeaed by what I write, but my paper is now in your hands if you publish it, I shall become the Author of a Pamphlet; and in that cafe beg of you to remember, that we pamphlet-writers of every condition mistake ourselves for statesmen, and so decide and advise without reserve. But that, not being singular, you w ill treat me no worse than you have done others of the fame description. Our esteem with many is fallen; but our consequence with a warm-hearted and reasoning people, who like to be consulted in their own affairs, merits the interposition of the best informed and best intentioned persons in the kingdom. My small pretensions being only to a hare of the last gratification, I hope to meet with ome indulgence on the first. And am, Your's, &c.
THE END.
