
how far the perception of this beauty may be regarded as one of the original principles of approbation 356
               
            
            
               PART V. Of the influence of custom and fashion upon the sentiments of moral approbation and disapproba-tion.
               
                  SECT. I. Of the influence of custom and fashion upon our notion of beauty and deformity 371
                  SECT. II. Of the influence of custom and fashion upon moral sentiments 386
               
            
            
               PART VI. Of Systems of Moral Philosophy.
               
                  SECT. I. Of the questions which ought to be examined in a theory of moral sentiments 413
                  SECT. II. Of the different accounts which have been given of the nature of virtue 416

                        

constraint. In a little time, therefore, he generally leaves all his old friends behind him, some of the meanest of them ex-cepted, who may, perhaps, condescend to become his dependents: nor does he al-ways acquire any new ones; the pride of his new connections is as much affront-ed at finding him their equal, as that of his old ones had been by his becoming their superior: and it requires the most obstinate and persevering modesty to at-tone for this mortification to either. He generally grows weary too soon, and is provoked by the sullen and suspicious pride of the one, and by the saucy contempt of the other, to treat the first with neglect, and the second with pet
                        •
                     lance, till at last he grows habitually insolent, and forfeits the esteem of all. If the chief part of human happiness arises from the consciousness of being beloved, as I believe it does, those sudden changes of fortune seldom contribute much to happi-ness. He is happiest who advances more gradually to greatness, whom the public destines to every step of his preferment long before he arrives at it, in whom, upon that account, when it comes, it

can excite no extravagant joy, and with regard to whom it cannot reasonably create either any jealousy in those he overtakes, or any envy in those he leaves behind.
                  Mankind, however, more readily sym-pathise with those smaller joys which flow from less important causes. It is decent to be humble amidst great pros-perity; but we can scarce express too much satisfaction in all the little occurrences of common life, in the company with which we spent the evening last night, in the entertainment that was set before us, in what was said and what was done, in all the little incidents of the present con-versation, and in all those frivolous nothings which fill up the void of human life. Nothing is more graceful than habitual chearfulness, which is always founded up-on a peculiar relish for all the little plea-sures which common occurrences afford. We readily sympathise with it: it inspires us with the same joy, and makes every trifle turn up to us in the same agreeable aspect in which it presents itself to the person endowed with this happy dispo-sition. Hence it is that youth, the sea-son

of gaiety, so easily engages our affec-tions. That propensity to joy which seems even to animate the bloom, and to sparkle from the eyes of youth and beauty, tho' in a person of the same sex, exalts, even the aged, to a more joyous mood than ordinary. They forget, for a time, their infirmities, and abandon themselves to those agreeable ideas and emotions to which they have long been strangers, but which, when the presence of so much happiness recalls them to their breast, take their place there, like old acquaint-ance, from whom they are sorry to have ever been parted, and whom they em-brace more heartily upon account of this long separation.
                  It is quite otherwise with grief. Small vexations excite no sympathy, but deep affliction calls forth the greatest. The man who is made uneasy by every little disagreeable incident, who is hurt if either the cook or the butler have failed in the least article of their duty, who feels every defect in the highest ceremonial of polite-ness, whether it be shewn to himself or to any other person, who takes it amiss that his intimate friend did not bid him

good-morrow when they met in the fore-noon, and that his brother hummed a tune all the time he himself was telling a story; who is put out of humour by the badness of the weather when in the country, by the badness of the roads when upon a journey, and by the want of company, and dullness of all public diversions when in town; such a person, I say, though he should have some reason, will seldom meet with much sympathy. Joy is a pleasant emotion, and we gladly abandon ourselves to it upon the slightest occasion. We readily, therefore, sympa-thise with it in others, whenever we are not prejudiced by envy. But grief is pain-ful, and the mind, even when it is our own misfortune, naturally resists and re-coils from it. We would endeavour ei-ther not to conceive it at all, or to shake it off as soon as we have conceived it. Our aversion to grief will not, indeed, always hinder us from conceiving it in our own case upon very trifling occasions, but it constantly prevents us from sympathising with it in others when excited by the like frivolous causes: for our sympathetic pas-sions are always less irresistible than our

original ones. There is, besides, a malice in mankind, which not only prevents all sympathy with little uneasinesses, but renders them in some measure diverting. Hence the delight which we all take in raillery, and in the small vexation which we observe in our companion, when he is pushed, and urged, and teased upon all sides. Men of the most ordinary good breeding dissemble the pain which any little in-cident may give them, and those who are more thoroughly formed to society, turn, of their own accord, all such inci-dents into raillery, as they know their com-panions will do for them. The habit which a man, who lives in the world, has acquired of considering how every thing that concerns himself will appear to others, makes those frivolous calamities turn up in the same ridiculous light to him, in which he knows they will cer-tainly be considered by them.
                  Our sympathy, on the contrary, with deep distress, is very strong and very sin-cere. It is unnecessary to give an in-stance. We weep even at the feigned representation of a tragedy. If you labour, therefore, under any signal calamity, if


by some extraordinary misfortune you are fallen into poverty, into diseases, into disgrace and disappointment; even though your own fault may have been, in part, the occasion, yet you may generally de-pend upon the sincerest sympathy of all your friends, and, as far as interest and honour will permit, upon their kindest assistance too. But if your misfortune is not of this dreadful kind, if you have only been a little baulked in your am-bition, if you have only been jilted by your mistress, or only hen-pecked by your wife, lay your account with the raillery of all your acquaintance.
               
            
            
               

               SECTION IV. Of the effects of prosperity and adver-sity upon the judgment of mankind with regard to the propriety of action; and why it is more easy to obtain their approbation in the one state than in the other.
               
                  CHAP. I. That though our sympathy with sorrow is generally a more lively sensation than our sympathy with joy, it commonly falls much more short of the violence of what is felt by the person prin-cipally concerned.
                  OUR sympathy with sorrow, though not more real, has been more taken notice of than our sympathy with joy. The word sympathy, in its most proper and primitive signification, denotes our fellow-feeling with the sufferings, not that with the enjoyments, of others. A late ingenious and subtile philosopher thought it necessary to prove, by arguments, that


we had a real sympathy with joy, and that congratulation was a principle of human nature. No body, I believe, ever thought it necessary to prove that com-passion was such.
                  First of all, our sympathy with sor-row is, in some sense, more universal than that with joy. Though sorrow is exces-sive, we may still have some fellow-feel-ing with it. What we feel does not, in-deed, in this case, amount to that com-pleat sympathy, to that perfect harmony and correspondence of sentiments which con-stitutes approbation. We do not weep, and exclaim, and lament, with the suf-ferer. We are sensible, on the contrary, of his weakness and of the extravagance of his passion, and yet often feel a very sensible concern upon his account. But if we do not intirely enter into, and go along with, the joy of another, we have no sort of regard or fellow-feeling for it. The man who skips and dances about with that intemperate and senseless joy which we cannot accompany him in, is the object of our contempt and indig-nation.
                  
                     
Pain besides, whether of mind or body, is a more pungent sensation than plea-sure, and our sympathy with pain, though it falls greatly short of what is naturally felt by the sufferer, is generally a more lively and distinct perception than our sympathy with pleasure, though this last often approaches more nearly, as I shall show immediately, to the natural viva-city of the original passion.
                  Over and above all this, we often struggle to keep down our sympathy with the sor-row of others. Whenever we are not under the observation of the sufferer, we endeavour, for our own sake, to suppress it as much as we can, and we are not always successful. The opposition which we make to it, and the reluctance with which we yield to it, necessarily oblige us to take more particular notice of it. But we never have occasion to make this opposition to our sympathy with joy. If there is any envy in the case, we never feel the least propensity towards it; and if there is none, we give way to it without any reluctance. On the contrary, as we are always ashamed of our own envy, we often pretend, and sometimes really

wish to sympathise with the joy of others, when by that disagreeable sentiment we are disqualified from doing so. We are glad, we say, upon account of our neigh-bour's good fortune, when in our hearts, perhaps, we are really sorry. We often feel a sympathy with sorrow when we would wish to be rid of it; and we often miss that with joy when we would be glad to have it. The obvious observa-tion, therefore, which it naturally falls in our way to make, is that our pro-pensity to sympathise with sorrow must be very strong, and our inclination to sympathise with joy very weak.
                  Notwithstanding this prejudice, how-ever, I will venture to affirm, that, when there is no envy in the case, our propen-sity to sympathise with joy is much stronger than our propensity to sympathise with sorrow; and that our fellow-feeling for the agreeable emotion approaches much more nearly to the vivacity of what is naturally felt by the persons principally concerned, than that which we conceive for the painful one.
                  We have some indulgence for that ex-cessive grief which we cannot entirely go

                        CHAP. I. Of those systems which make virtue consist in propriety p. 418
                        CHAP. II. Of those systems which make virtue consist in prudence 441
                        CHAP. III. Of those systems which make virtue consist in benevolence 455
                        CHAP. IV. Of licentious systems 470
                     
                  
                  SECT. III. Of the different systems which have been formed concerning the principle of appro-bation. 490

                        CHAP. I. Of those systems which deduce the principle of approbation from self-love 492
                        CHAP. II. Of those systems which make reason the prin-ciple of approbation. 498
                        CHAP. III. Of those systems which make sentiment the principle of approbation 506
                     
                  
                  SECT. IV. Of the manner in which different authors have treated of the practical rules of mo-rality 521
               
            
         
      
      
         
            

along with. We know what a prodigious effort is requisite before the sufferer can bring down his emotions to compleat har-mony and concord with those of the spectator. Though he fails, therefore, we easily pardon him. But we have no such indulgence for the intemperance of joy; be-cause we are not conscious that any such vast effort is requisite to bring it down to what we can intirely enter into. The man who, under the greatest calamities, can command his sorrow, seems worthy of the highest admiration; but he who, in the fulness of prosperity, can in the same manner master his joy, seems hardly to de-serve any praise. We are sensible that there is a much wider interval in the one case than in the other, between what is naturally felt by the person principally con-cerned, and what the spectator can in-tirely go along with.
                  What can be added to the happiness of the man who is in health, who is out of debt, and has a clear conscience? To one in this situation, all accessions of fortune may properly be said to be super-fluous: and if he is much elevated upon account of them, it must be the effect of

the most frivolous levity. This situation, however, may very well be called the na-tural and ordinary state of mankind. Notwithstanding the present misery and depravity of the world, so justly lament-ed, this really is the state of the greater part of men. The greater part of men, therefore, cannot find any great difficulty in elevating themselves to all the joy which any accession to this situation can well ex-cite in their companion.
                  But though little can be added to this state, much may be taken from it. Tho' between this condition and the highest pitch of human prosperity, the interval is but a trifle; between it and the lowest depth of misery the distance is immense and pro-digious. Adversity, upon this account, ne-cessarily depresses the mind of the sufferer much more below its natural state, than prosperity can elevate him above it. The spectator, therefore, must find it much more difficult to sympathise entirely, and keep perfect time, with his sorrow, than thoroughly to enter into his joy, and must depart much further from his own na-tural and ordinary temper of mind in the one case than in the other. It is upon this account, that, though our sympathy

with sorrow is often a more pungent sen-sation than our sympathy with joy, it al-ways falls much more short of the violence of what is naturally felt by the person principally concerned.
                  It is agreeable to sympathise with joy; and wherever envy does not oppose it, our heart abandons itself with satisfaction to the highest transports of that delightful sentiment. But it is painful to go along with grief, and we always enter into it with reluctance. When we attend to the representation of a tragedy, we struggle against that sympathetic sorrow which the entertainment inspires as long as we can, and we give way to it at last only when we can no longer avoid it: we even then endea-vour to cover our concern from the com-pany. If we shed any tears, we carefully conceal them, and are afraid lest the specta-tors, not entering into this excessive ten-derness, should regard it as effeminacy and weakness. The wretch whose misfortunes call upon our compassion feels with what reluctance we are likely to enter into his sorrow, and therefore proposes his grief to us with fear and hesitation: he even smothers the half of it, and is ashamed,


upon account of this hard-heartedness of mankind, to give vent to the fulness of his affliction. It is otherwise with the man who riots in joy and success. Wherever envy does not interest us against him, he expects our compleatest sympathy. He does not fear, therefore, to enounce him-self with shouts of exultation, in full con-fidence that we are heartily disposed to go along with him.
                  Why should we be more ashamed to weep than to laugh before company? We may often have as real occasion to do the one as to do the other: but we always feel that the spectators are more likely to go along with us in the agreeable, than in the pain-ful emotion. It is always miserable to complain, even when we are oppressed by the most dreadful calamities. But the tri-umph of victory is not always ungraceful. Prudence, indeed, would often advise us to bear our prosperity with more moderation; because prudence would teach us to avoid that envy which this very triumph is, more than any thing, apt to excite.
                  How hearty are the acclamations of the mob, who never bear any envy to their superiors, at a triumph or a public entry?

And how sedate and moderate is commonly their grief at an execution? Our sorrow at a funeral generally amounts to no more than an affected gravity; but our mirth at a christening, or a marriage, is always from the heart, and without any affectation. Up-on these, and all such joyous occasions, our satisfaction, though not so durable, is often as lively as that of the persons principally concerned. Whenever we cordially con-gratulate our friends, which, however, to the disgrace of human nature, we do but seldom, their joy literally becomes our joy: we are, for the moment, as happy as they are: our heart swells and overflows with real pleasure: joy and complacency sparkle from our eyes, and animate every feature of our countenance, and every gesture of our body.
                  But, on the contrary, when we condole with our friends in their afflictions, how little do we feel, in comparison of what they feel? We sit down by them, we look at them, and while they relate to us the circumstances of their misfortune, we listen to them with gravity and attention. But while their narration is every moment in-terrupted by those natural bursts of passion


which often seem almost to choak them in the midst of it; how far are the languid emotions of our hearts from keeping time to the transports of theirs? We may be sensible, at the same time, that their passion is natural, and no greater than what we ourselves might feel upon the like occasion. We may even inwardly reproach ourselves with our own want of sensibility, and per-haps, upon that account, work ourselves up into an artificial sympathy, which, how-ever, when it is raised, is always the slight-est and most transitory imaginable; and generally, as soon as we have left the room, vanishes, and is gone forever. Nature, it seems, when she loaded us with our own sorrows, thought that they were enough, and therefore did not command us to take any further share in those of others, than what was necessary to prompt us to relieve them.
                  It is upon account of this dull sensibility to the afflictions of others, that magna-nimity amidst great distress appears always so divinely graceful. His behaviour is genteel and agreeable who can maintain his chearfulness amidst a number of frivo-lous disasters. But he appears to be more

than mortal who can support in the same manner the most dreadful calamities. We feel what an immense effort is requisite to silence those violent emotions which natu-rally agitate and distract those in his situa-tion. We are amazed to find that he can command himself so intirely. His firmness, at the same time, perfectly coincides with our insensibility. He makes no demand upon us for that more exquisite degree of sensibility which we find, and which we are mortified to find, that we do not pos-sess. There is the most perfect correspon-dence between his sentiments and ours, and upon that account the most perfect pro-priety in his behaviour. It is a propriety too, which, from our experience of the usual weakness of human nature, we could not reasonably have expected he should be able to maintain. We wonder with sur-prise and astonishment at that strength of mind which is capable of so noble and ge-nerous an effort. The sentiment of com-pleat sympathy and approbation, mixed and animated with wonder and surprise, con-stitutes what is properly called admiration, as has already been more than once taken notice of. Cato, surrounded on all sides

by his enemies, unable to resist them, dis-daining to submit to them, and reduced, by the proud maxims of that age, to the neces-sity of destroying himself; yet never shrink-ing from his misfortunes, never supplicating with the lamentable voice of wretchedness, those miserable sympathetic tears which we are always so unwilling to give; but on the contrary, arming himself with manly forti-tude, and the moment before he executes his fatal resolution, giving, with his usual tran-quillity, all necessary orders for the safety of his friends; appears to Seneca, that great preacher of insensibility, a spectacle which even the gods themselves might behold with pleasure and admiration.
                  Whenever we meet, in common life, with any examples of such heroic magna-nimity, we are always extremely affected. We are more apt to weep and shed tears for such as, in this manner, seem to feel no-thing for themselves, than for those who give way to all the weakness of sorrow: and in this particular case, the sympathe-tic grief of the spectator appears to go be-yond the original passion in the person principally concerned. The friends of So-crates all wept when he drank the last

potion, while he himself expressed the gaiest and most chearful tranquillity. Upon all such occasions the spectator makes no ef-fort, and has no occasion to make any, in order to conquer his sympathetic sorrow. He is under no fear that it will transport him to any thing that is extravagant and improper; he is rather pleased with the sen-sibility of his own heart, and gives way to it with complacence and self-approbation. He gladly indulges, therefore, the most melancholy views which can naturally oc-cur to him, concerning the calamity of his friend, for whom, perhaps, he never felt so exquisitely before, the tender and tear-ful passion of love. But it is quite other-wise with the person principally concerned. He is obliged, as much as possible, to turn away his eyes from whatever is either na-turally terrible or disagreeable in his situa-tion. Too serious an attention to those circumstances, he fears, might make so vi-olent an impression upon him, that he could no longer keep within the bounds of mode-ration, or render himself the object of the compleat sympathy and approbation of the spectators. He fixes his thoughts, there-fore, upon those only which are agreeable,


the applause and admiration which he is about to deserve by the heroic magnani-mity of his behaviour. To feel that he is capable of so noble and generous an effort, to feel that in this dreadful situation he can still act as he would desire to act, ani-mates and transports him with joy, and enables him to support that triumphant gaiety which seems to exult in the vic-tory that he thus gains over his misfor-tunes.
                  On the contrary, he always appears, in some measure, mean and despicable, who is sunk in sorrow and dejection upon ac-count of any calamity of his own. We cannot bring ourselves to feel for him what he feels for himself, and what, per-haps, we should feel for ourselves if in his situation: we, therefore, despise him; un-justly, perhaps, if any sentiment could be regarded as unjust, to which we are by na-ture irresistibly determined. The weakness of sorrow never appears in any respect agree-able, except when it arises from what we feel for others more than from what we feel for ourselves. A son, upon the death of an indulgent and respectable father, may give way to it without much blame. His sor-row

            PART I. Of the PROPRIETY of ACTION.
            
               SECTION I. Of SYMPATHY.
               HOW selfish soever man may be sup-posed, there are evidently some prin-ciples in his nature, which interest him in the fortune of others, and render their happiness necessary to him, though he derives nothing from it except the plea-sure of seeing it. Of this kind is pity or compassion, the emotion which we feel for the misery of others, when we either see it, or are made to conceive it in a very lively manner. That we often de-rive sorrow from the sorrow of others is too obvious to require any instances to prove it; for this sentiment, like all the other original passions of human nature,

is chiefly founded upon a sort of sympa-thy with his departed parent; and we readily enter into this humane emotion. But if he should indulge the same weakness upon ac-count of any misfortune which affected him-self only, he would no longer meet with any such indulgence. If he should be reduced to beggary and ruin, if he should be expos-ed to the most dreadful dangers, if he should even be led out to a public execution, and there shed one single tear upon the scaffold, he would disgrace himself forever in the opi-nion of all the gallant and generous part of mankind. Their compassion for him, however, would be very strong, and very sincere; but as it would still fall short of this excessive weakness, they would have no pardon for the man who could thus ex-pose himself in the eyes of the world. His behaviour would affect them with shame rather than with sorrow; and the dishonour which he had thus brought upon himself would appear to them the most lamentable circumstance in his misfortune. How did it disgrace the memory of the intrepid Duke of Byron, who had so often braved death in the field, that he wept upon the scaf-fold, when he beheld the state to which he

was fallen, and remembered the favour and the glory from which his own rash-ness had so unfortunately thrown him.
               
               
                  CHAP. II. Of the origin of ambition, and of the distinction of ranks.
                  IT is because mankind are disposed to sympathise more entirely with our joy than with our sorrow, that we make parade of our riches, and conceal our poverty. Nothing is so mortifying as to be obliged to expose our distress to the view of the pub-lic, and to feel, that though our situation is open to the eyes of all mankind, no mor-tal conceives for us the half of what we suffer. Nay, it is chiefly from this regard to the sentiments of mankind, that we pur-sue riches and avoid poverty. For to what purpose is all the toil and bustle of this world? what is the end of avarice and am-bition, of the pursuit of wealth, of power, and preheminence? Is it to supply the ne-cessities of nature? The wages of the meanest labourer can supply them. We see that they afford him food and cloath-ing,

the comfort of a house, and of a fa-mily. If we examine his oeconomy with rigor, we shall find that he spends a great part of them upon conveniencies, which may be regarded as superfluities, and that, upon extraordinary occasions, he can give something even to vanity and distinction. What then is the cause of our aversion to his situation, and why should those who have been educated in the highest ranks of life, regard it as worse than death, to be reduced to live, even without labour, upon the same simple fare with him, to dwell under the same lowly roof, and to be cloath-ed in the same humble attire? Do they ima-gine that their stomach is better, or their sleep sounder in a palace than in a cottage? The contrary has been so often observed, and, indeed, is so very obvious, though it had never been observed, that there is no-body ignorant of it. From whence, then, arises that emulation which runs through all the different ranks of men, and what are the advantages which we propose by that great purpose of human life which we call bettering our condition? To be observ-ed, to be attended to, to be taken notice of with sympathy, complacency and ap-probation,

are all the advantages which we can propose to derive from it. It is the vanity, not the ease, or the pleasure, which interests us. But vanity is always founded upon the belief of our being the object of attention and approbation. The rich man glories in his riches, because he feels that they naturally draw upon him the attention of the world, and that mankind are dis-posed to go along with him in all those agreeable emotions with which the advan-tages of his situation so readily inspire him. At the thought of this, his heart seems to swell and dilate itself within him, and he is fonder of his wealth, upon this account, than for all the other advantages it procures him. The poor man, on the contrary, is ashamed of his poverty. He feels that it either places him out of the sight of man-kind, or, that if they take any notice of him, they have, however, scarce any fel-low-feeling with the misery and distress which he suffers. He is mortified upon both accounts; for though to be overlook-ed, and to be disapproved of, are things entirely different, yet as obscurity covers us from the daylight of honour and ap-probation, to feel that we are taken no


notice of, necessarily damps the most agree-able hope, and disappoints the most ardent desire, of human nature. The poor man goes out and comes in unheeded, and when in the midst of a croud is in the same obscuri-ty as if shut up in his own hovel. Those hum-ble cares and painful attentions which occu-py those in his situation, afford no amuse-ment to the dissipated and the gay. They turn away their eyes from him, or if the extremity of his distress forces them to look at him, it is only to spurn so disagreeable an object from among them. The fortu-nate and the proud wonder at the insolence of human wretchedness, that it should dare to present itself before them, and with the loathsome aspect of its misery, presume to disturb the serenity of their happiness. The man of rank and distinction, on the contrary, is observed by all the world. Every body is eager to look at him, and to conceive, at least by sympathy, that joy and exultation with which his circum-stances naturally inspire him. His actions are the objects of the public care. Scarce a word, scarce a gesture, can fall from him that is altogether neglected. In a great assembly he is the person upon whom all

direct their eyes; it is upon him that their passions seem all to wait with expectation, in order to receive that movement and di-rection which he shall impress upon them; and, if his behaviour is not altogether absurd, he has, every moment, an opportu-nity of interesting mankind, and of render-ing himself the object of the observation and fellow-feeling of every body about him. It is this, which, notwithstanding the re-straint it imposes, notwithstanding the loss of liberty with which it is attended, renders greatness the object of envy, and compen-sates, in the opinion of mankind, all that toil, all that anxiety, all those mortifica-tions which must be undergone in the pur-suit of it; and what is of yet more conse-quence, all that leisure, all that ease, all that careless security, which are forfeited forever by the acquisition.
                  When we consider the condition of the great, in those delusive colours in which the imagination is apt to paint it, it seems to be almost the abstract idea of a perfect and happy state. It is the very state which, in all our waking dreams and idle reveries, we had sketched out to ourselves as the final object of all our desires. We

feel, therefore, a peculiar sympathy with the satisfaction of these who are in it. We favour all their inclinations, and forward all their wishes. What pity, we think, that any thing should spoil and corrupt 
                        •
                     o agreeable a situation! We could even wish them immortal; and it seems hard to 
                        •
                     s, that death should at last put an end 
                        •
                     o such perfect enjoyment. It is cruel, we 
                        •
                     hink, in nature, to compel them from 
                        •
                     heir exalted stations, to that humble, but hospitable home, which she has provided for all her children. Great King, live for ever! is the compliment, which, after the manner of eastern adulation, we should 
                        •
                     eadily make them, if experience did not 
                        •
                     each us its absurdity. Every calamity 
                        •
                     hat befals them, every injury that is done 
                        •
                     hem, excites in the breast of the spectator 
                        •
                     en times more compassion and resentment 
                        •
                     han he would have felt, had the same 
                        •
                     hings happened to other men. It is the misfortunes of Kings only which afford 
                        •
                     he proper subjects for tragedy. They re-
                     
                        •
                     emble, in this respect, the misfortunes of 
                        •
                     overs. Those two situations are the chief which interest us upon the theatre; be-cause, in spite of all that reason and expe-rience

can tell us to the contrary, the pre-judices of the imagination attach to these two states a happiness superior to any other. To disturb, or to put an end to such per-fect enjoyment, seems to be the most atro-cious of all injuries. The traitor who conspires against the life of his monarch, is thought a greater monster than any other murderer. All the innocent blood that was shed in the civil wars, provoked less indignation than the death of Charles I. A stranger to human nature, who saw the indifference of men about the misery of their inferiors, and the regret and in-dignation which they feel for the misfor-tunes and sufferings of those above them, would be apt to imagine, that pain must be more agonizing, and the convulsions of death more terrible to persons of high rank, than to those of meaner stations.
                  Upon this disposition of mankind, to go along with all the passions of the rich and the powerful, is founded the distinction of ranks, and the order of society. Our obsequiousness to our superiors more fre-quently arises from our admiration for the advantages of their situation, than from

any private expectations of benefits from their good-will. Their benefits can extend but to a few; but their fortunes interest almost every body. We are eager to assist them in compleating a system of happiness that approaches so near to perfection; and we desire to serve them for their own sake, without any other recompence but the va-nity or the honour of obliging them. Nei-ther is our deference to their inclinations founded chiefly, or altogether, upon a re-gard to the utility of such submission, and to the order of society, which is best sup-ported by it. Even when the order of society seems to require that we should op-pose them, we can hardly bring ourselves to do it. That kings are the servants of the people, to be obeyed, resisted, deposed, or punished, as the public conveniency may require, is the doctrine of reason and philosophy; but it is not the doctrine of nature. Nature would teach us to sub-mit to them, for their own sake, to tremble and bow down before their exalted station, to regard their smile as a reward sufficient to compensate any services, and to dread their displeasure, though no other evil was to follow from it, as the severest of all


mortifications. To treat them in any re-spect as men, to reason and dispute with them upon ordinary occasions, requires such resolution, that there are few men whose magnanimity can support them in it, unless they are likewise assisted by fa-miliarity and acquaintance. The strongest motives, the most furious passions, fear, hatred and resentment, are scarce sufficient to balance this natural disposition to re-spect them: and their conduct must, ei-ther justly or unjustly, have excited the highest degree of all those passions, before the bulk of the people can be brought to oppose them with violence, or to desire to see them either punished or deposed. Even when the people have been brought this length, they are apt to relent every mo-ment, and easily relapse into their habi-tual state of deference to those whom they have been accustomed to look upon as their natural superiors. They cannot stand the mortification of their monarch. Com-passion soon takes the place of resentment, they forget all past provocations, their old principles of loyalty revive, and they ru
                        •
                      to re-establish the ruined authority of thei
                        •
                      old masters, with the same violence wit
                        •
                     
                     

is by no means confined to the virtuous and humane, though they perhaps may feel it with the most exquisite sensi-bility. The greatest ruffian, the most hardened violator of the laws of society, is not altogether without it.
               As we have no immediate experience of what other men feel, we can form no idea of the manner in which they are affected, but by conceiving what we our-selves should feel in the like situation. Though our brother is upon the rack, as long as we are at our ease, our senses will never inform us of what he suffers. They never did and never can carry us beyond our own persons, and it is by the imagination only that we can form any conception of what are his sensations. Neither can that faculty help us to this any other way, than by representing to us what would be our own if we were in his case. It is the impressions of our own senses only, not those of his, which our imaginations copy. By the imagination we place ourselves in his situation, we conceive ourselves enduring all the same torments, we enter as it were into his body and become in some measure him, and


which they had opposed it. The death of Charles I. brought about the Restoration of the royal family. Compassion for James II. when he was seized by the populace in mak-ing his escape on ship-board, had almost prevented the revolution, and made it go on more heavily than before.
                  Do the great seem insensible of the easy price at which they may acquire the pub-lic admiration; or do they seem to imagine that to them, as to other men, it must be the purchase either of sweat or of blood? By what important accomplishments is the young nobleman instructed to support the dignity of his rank, and to render him-self worthy of that superiority over his fel-low citizens, to which the virtue of his ancestors had raised them? Is it by know-ledge, by industry, by patience, by self-denial, or by virtue of any kind? As all his words, as all his motions are attended 
                        •
                     o, he learns an habitual regard to every circumstance of ordinary behaviour, and studies to perform all those small duties with the most exact propriety. As he is conscious how much he is observed, and how much mankind are disposed to favour all his inclinations, he acts, upon the most

indifferent occasions, with that freedom and elevation which the thought of this natu-rally inspires. His air, his manner, his de-portment, all mark that elegant and grace-ful sense of his own superiority, which those who are born to inferior stations can hard-ly ever arrive at: these are the arts by which he proposes to make mankind more easily submit to his authority, and to go-vern their inclinations according to his own pleasure: and in this he is seldom disap-pointed. These arts, supported by rank and preheminence, are, upon ordinary oc-casions, sufficient to govern the world. Lewis XIV. during the greater part of his reign, was regarded, not only in France, but over all Europe, as the most perfect model of a great prince. But what were the talents and virtues by which he ac-quired this great reputation? Was it by the scrupulous and inflexible justice of all his undertakings, by the immense dangers and difficulties with which they were at-tended, or by the unwearied and unre-lenting application with which he pursued them? Was it by his extensive knowledge, by his exquisite judgment, or by his he-roic valour? It was by none of these qua-lities.

But he was, first of all, the most powerful prince in Europe, and consequent-ly held the highest rank among kings; and then, says his historian,
he surpassed all his courtiers in the gracefulness of his shape, and the majestic beauty of his features. The sound of his voice, noble and affecting, gained those hearts which his presence intimidated. He had a step and a deportment which could suit only him and his rank, and which would have been ridiculous in any other person. The embarassment which he occasioned to those who spoke to him, flattered that secret satisfaction with which he felt his own superiority. The old officer, who was confounded and faultered in asking him a favour, and not being able to conclude his discourse, said to him: Sir, your ma-jesty, I hope, will believe that I do not tremble thus before your enemies: had no difficulty to obtain what he demand-ed.
These frivolous accomplishments, supported by his rank, and, no doubt too, by a degree of other talents and virtues, which seems, however, not to have been much a-bove mediocrity, established this prince in the esteem of his own age, and have drawn,

even from posterity, a good deal of re-spect for his memory. Compared with these, in his own times, and in his own presence, no other virtue, it seems, ap-peared to have any merit. Knowledge, industry, valour and beneficence, trembled, were abashed, and lost all dignity before them.
                  But it is not by accomplishments of this kind, that the man of inferior rank must hope to distinguish himself. Politeness is so much the virtue of the great, that it will do little honour to any body but themselves. The coxcomb, who imitates their manner, and affects to be eminent by the superior propriety of his ordinary behaviour, is re-warded with a double share of contempt for his folly and presumption. Why should the man, whom nobody thinks it worth while to look at, be very anxious about the manner in which he holds up his head, or disposes of his arms while he walks through a room? He is occupied surely with a very superfluous attention, and with an attention too that marks a sense of his own importance, which no other mortal can go along with. The most per-fect modesty and plainness, joined to as

much negligence as is consistent with the respect due to the company, ought to be the chief characteristics of the behaviour of a private man. If ever he hopes to dis-tinguish himself, it must be by more im-portant virtues. He must acquire depen-dants to balance the dependants of the great, and he has no other fund to pay them from, but the labour of his body, and the activity of his mind. He must cultivate these therefore: he must acquire superior knowledge in his profession, and superior industry in the exercise of it. He must be patient in labour, resolute in dan-ger, and firm in distress. These talents he must bring into publick view, by the difficulty, importance, and, at the same time, good judgment of his undertakings, and by the severe and unrelenting applica-tion with which he pursues them. Pro-bity and prudence, generosity and frank-ness, must characterise his behaviour upon all ordinary occasions; and he must, at the same time, be forward to engage in all those situations, in which it requires the greatest talents and virtues to act with propriety, but in which the greatest ap-plause is to be acquired by those who can

acquit themselves with honour. With what impatience does the man of spirit and ambition, who is depressed by his situ-ation, look round for some great opportu-nity to distinguish himself? No circum-stances, which can afford this, appear to him undesireable. He even looks forward with satisfaction to the prospect of foreign war, or civil dissension; and, with secret transport and delight, sees through all the confusion and bloodshed which attend them, the probability of those wished for occa-sions presenting themselves, in which he may draw upon himself the attention and admiration of mankind. The man of rank and distinction, on the contrary, whose whole glory consists in the propriety of his ordinary behaviour, who is contented with the humble renown which this can afford him, and has no talents to acquire any other, is unwilling to embarass himself with what can be attended either with dif-ficulty or distress. To figure at a ball is his great triumph, and to succeed in an intrigue of gallantry, his highest exploit. He has an aversion to all publick confu-sions, not from the love of mankind, for the great never look upon their inferiors

as their fellow-creatures; nor yet from want of courage, for in that he is seldom defective; but from a consciousness that he possesses none of the virtues which are re-quired in such situations, and that the pub-lick attention will certainly be drawn away from him by others. He may be willing to expose himself to some little danger, and to make a campaign when it happens to be the fashion. But he shudders with horror at the thought of any situation which demands the continual and long exertion of patience, industry, forti-tude, and application of thought. These virtues are hardly ever to be met with in men who are born to those high stations. In all governments accordingly, even in monarchies, the highest offices are gene-rally possessed, and the whole detail of the administration conducted by men who were educated in the middle and inferior ranks of life, who have been carried forward by their own industry and abilities, tho' 
                        •
                     oaded with the jealousy, and opposed by the resentment of all those who were born their superiors, and to whom the great, after having regarded them first with con-tempt, and afterwards with envy, are at


last contented to truckle with the same ab-ject meanness with which they desire that the rest of mankind should behave to themselves.
                  It is the loss of this easy empire over the affections of mankind which renders the fall from greatness so insupportable. When the family of the King of Macedon was led in triumph by Paulus Aemilius, their misfortunes, it is said, made them divide with their conqueror the attention of the Roman people. The sight of the royal children, whose tender age rendered them insensible of their situation, struck the spec-tators, amidst the public rejoicings and prosperity, with the tenderest sorrow and compassion. The King appeared next in the procession; and seemed like one con-founded and astonished, and bereft of all sentiment, by the greatness of his cala-mities. His friends and ministers follow-ed after him. As they moved along, they often cast their eyes upon their fallen sove-reign, and always burst into tears at the sight; their whole behaviour demonstrat-ing that they thought not of their own misfortunes, but were occupied intirely by the superior greatness of his. The gene-rous

Romans, on the contrary, beheld him with disdain and indignation, and regard-ed as unworthy of all compassion the man who could be so mean-spirited as to bear to live under such calamities. Yet what did those calamities amount to? Accord-ing to the greater part of historians, he was to spend the remainder of his days, under the protection of a powerful and humane people, in a state which in itself should seem worthy of envy, a state of plenty, ease, leisure, and security, from which it was impossible for him even by his own folly to fall. But he was no longer to be surrounded by that admiring mob of fools, flatterers, and dependants, who had formerly been accustomed to at-tend upon all his motions. He was no longer to be gazed upon by multitudes, nor to have it in his power to render him-self the object of their respect, their grati-tude, their love, their admiration, The passions of nations were no longer to mould themselves upon his inclinations. This was that insupportable calamity which bereaved the King of all sentiment; which made his friends forget their own misfortunes; and which the Roman mag-nanimity

could scarce conceive how any man could be so mean-spirited as to bear to survive.
                  
                     Love, says my Lord Rochefaucault, is commonly succeeded by ambition; but ambition is hardly ever succeeded by love.
That passion, when once it has got intire possession of the breast, will ad-mit neither a rival nor a successor. To those who have been accustomed to the possession, or even to the hope of public admiration, all other pleasures sicken and decay. Of all the discarded statesmen who for their own ease have studied to get the better of ambition, and to despise those honours which they could no longer arrive at, how few have been able to succeed▪ The greater part have spent their time in the most listless and insipid indolence, cha-grined at the thoughts of their own insig-nificancy, incapable of being interested in the occupations of private life, without en-joyment except when they talked of their former greatness, and without satisfaction except when they were employed in some vain project to recover it. Are you in earnest resolved never to barter your liber-ty for the lordly servitude of a Court, but

thence form some idea of his sensations, and even feel something which, though weaker in degree, is not altogether unlike them. His agonies, when they are thus brought home to ourselves, when we have thus adopted and made them our own, begin at last to affect us, and we then tremble and shudder at the thought of what he feels. For as to be in pain or distress of any kind excites the most exces-sive sorrow, so to conceive or to imagine that we are in it, excites some degree of the same emotion, in proportion to the vivacity or dulness of the conception.
               That this is the source of our fellow-feeling for the misery of others, that it is by changing places in fancy with the sufferer, that we come either to conceive or to be affected by what he feels, may be demonstrated by many obvious obser-vations, if it should not be thought suf-ficiently evident of itself. When we see a stroke aimed and just ready to fall upon the leg or arm of another person, we natu-rally shrink and draw back our own leg or our own arm; and when it does fall, we feel it in some measure, and are hurt by it as well as the sufferer. The mob, when they


to live free, fearless, and independant? There seems to be one way to continue in that virtuous resolution; and perhaps but one. Never enter the place from whence so few have been able to return; never come within the circle of ambition; nor ever bring yourself into comparison with those masters of the earth who have alrea-dy engrossed the attention of half mankind before you.
                  Of such mighty importance does it ap-pear to be, in the imaginations of men, to stand in that situation which sets them most in the view of general sympathy and atten-tion. And thus, place, that great object which divides the wives of aldermen, is the end of half the labours of human life; and is the cause of all the tumult and bustle, all the rapine and injustice, which avarice and ambition have introduced into this world. People of sense, it is said, in-deed despise place; that is, they despise sitting at the head of the table, and are in-different who it is that is pointed out to the company by that frivolous circum-stance, which the smallest advantage is ca-pable of overbalancing. But rank, distinc-tion, preeminence, no man despises, unless

he is either raised very much above, or sunk very much below, the ordinary stan-dard of human nature; unless he is either so confirmed in wisdom and real philo-sophy, as to be satisfied that, while the propriety of his conduct renders him the just object of approbation, it is of little consequence tho' he be neither attended to, nor approved of; or so habituated to the idea of his own meanness, so sunk in sloth-ful and sottish indifference, as intirely to have forgot the desire, and almost the very wish, for superiority.
               
               
                  CHAP. III. Of the stoical philosophy.
                  WHEN we examine in this manner into the ground of the different degrees of estimation which mankind are apt to bestow upon the different condi-tions of life, we shall find, that the exces-sive preference, which they generally give to some of them above others, is in a great measure without any foundation. If to be able to act with propriety, and to render ourselves the proper objects of the appro-bation

of mankind, be, as we have been endeavouring to show, what chiefly re-commends to us one condition above ano-ther, this may be equally attained in them all. The noblest propriety of conduct may be supported in adversity, as well as in prosperity; and tho' it is somewhat more difficult in the first, it is upon that very account more admirable. Perils and misfortunes are not only the proper school of heroism, they are the only proper the-atre which can exhibit its virtue to advan-tage, and draw upon it the full applause of the world. The man, whose whole life has been one even and uninterrupted course of prosperity, who never braved any dan-ger, who never encountered any difficulty, who never surmounted any distress, can excite but an inferior degree of admira-tion. When poets and romance-writers endeavour to invent a train of adventures, which shall give the greatest lustre to those characters for whom they mean to interest 
                        •
                     s, they are all of a different kind. They 
                        •
                     re rapid and sudden changes of fortune, 
                        •
                     ituations the most apt to drive those who 
                        •
                     re in them to frenzy and distraction, or 
                        •
                     o abject despair; but in which their he-roes


act with so much propriety, or at least with so much spirit and undaunted reso-lution, as still to command our esteem. Is not the unfortunate magnanimity of Cato, Brutus, and Leonidas, as much the object of admiration, as that of the successful Caesar or Alexander? To a generous mind, therefore, ought it not to be as much the object of envy? If a more dazzling splen-dor seems to attend the fortunes of suc-cessful conquerors, it is because they join together the advantages of both situations, the lustre of prosperity to the high admi-ration which is excited by dangers en-countered, and difficulties surmounted, with intrepidity and valour.
                  It was upon this account that, accord-ing to the stoical philosophy, to a wise man all the different conditions of life were equal. Nature, they said, had re-commended some objects to our choice, and others to our disapprobation. Our primary appetites directed us to the pur-suit of health, strength, ease, and perfec-tion, in all the qualities of mind and body▪ and of whatever could promote or secure these, riches, power, authority: and the same original principle taught us to avoid

the contrary. But in chusing or rejecting, in preferring or postponing, those first objects of original appetite and aversion, nature had likewise taught us, that there was a certain order, propriety, and grace, to be observed, of infinitely greater conse-quence to happiness and perfection, than the attainment of those objects themselves. The objects of our primary appetites or aversions were to be pursued or avoided, chiefly because a regard to this grace and propriety required such conduct. In di-recting all our actions according to these, consisted the happiness and glory of hu-man nature. In departing from those rules which they prescribed to us, its great-est wretchedness and most compleat de-pravity. The outward appearance of this order and propriety was indeed more ea-sily maintained in some circumstances than in others. To a fool, however, to one whose passions were subjected to no proper controul, to act with real grace and pro-priety, was equally impossible in every situ-ation. Tho' the giddy multitude might admire him, tho' his vanity might some-times be elated by their ignorant praises into something that resembled self-appro-bation,

yet still when he turned his view to what passed within his own breast, he was secretly conscious to himself of the absurd-ity and meanness of all his motives, and inwardly blushed and trembled at the thoughts of the contempt which he knew he deserved, and which mankind would certainly bestow upon him if they saw his conduct in the light in which in his own heart he was obliged to regard it. To a wise man, on the contrary, to one whose passions were all brought under perfect subjection to the ruling principles of his nature, to reason and the love of propri-ety, to act so as to deserve approbation was equally easy upon all occasions. Was he in prosperity, he returned thanks to Ju-piter for having joined him with circum-stances which were easily mastered, and in which there was little temptation to do wrong. Was he in adversity, he equally returned thanks to the director of this spectacle of human life, for having oppo-sed to him a vigorous athlete, over whom, tho' the contest was likely to be more vio-lent, the victory was more glorious, and equally certain. Can there be any shame in that distress which is brought upon us

without any fault of our own, and in which we behave with perfect propriety? There can, therefore, be no evil, but, on the contrary, the greatest good and ad-vantage. A brave man exults in those dangers, in which, from no rashness of his own, his fortune has involved him. They afford an opportunity of exercising that heroic intrepidity, whose exertion gives the exalted delight which flows from the consciousness of superior propriety and deserved admiration. One who is master of all his exercises has no aversion to mea-sure his strength and activity with the strongest. And in the same manner, one who is master of all his passions, does not dread any circumstance in which the su-perintendent of the universe may think proper to place him. The bounty of that divine being has provided him with vir-
                     
                        •
                     ues which render him superior to every 
                        •
                     ituation. If it is pleasure, he has temper-ance to refrain from it; if it is pain, he has constancy to bear it; if it is danger or death, he has magnanimity and fortitude 
                        •
                     o despise it. He never complains of the destiny of providence, nor thinks the uni-verse in confusion when he is out of order.

He does not look upon himself, according to what self-love would suggest, as a whole, separated and detached from every other part of nature, to be taken care of by it-self, and for itself. He regards himself in the light in which he imagines the great Genius of human nature, and of the world regards him. He enters, if I may say so, into the sentiments of that Divine Being, and considers himself as an atom, a particle, of an immense and infinite system, which must, and ought to be disposed of, according to the conveniency of the whole. Assured of the wisdom which directs all the events of human life, whatever lot be-falls him, he accepts it with joy, satisfied that, if he had known all the connexions and dependencies of the different parts of the universe, it is the very lot which he himself would have wished for. If it is life, he is contented to live: and if it is death, as nature must have no further oc-casion for his presence here, he willingly goes where he is appointed. I accept, said a stoical philosopher, with equal joy and satisfaction, whatever fortune can befal me. Riches or poverty, pleasure or pain, health or sickness, all is alike: nor would I

desire that the Gods should in any respect change my destination. If I was to ask of them any thing, beyond what their bounty has already bestowed, it would be that they would inform me beforehand what it was their pleasure should be done with me, that I might of my own accord place myself in this situation, and demonstrate the chear-fulness with which I embraced their allot-ment. If I am going to sail, says Epicte-tus, I chuse the best ship, and the best pi-lot, and I wait for the fairest weather that my circumstances and duty will allow. Prudence and propriety, the principles which the Gods have given me for the di-rection of my conduct, require this of me; but they require no more: and if, not-withstanding, a storm arises, which neither the strength of the vessel, nor the skill of the pilot are likely to withstand, I give myself no trouble about the consequence. All that I had to do, is done already, The directors of my conduct never command me to be miserable, to be anxious, despond-ing, or afraid. Whether we are to be drowned, or to come to a harbour, is the business of Jupiter, not mine. I leave it intirely to his determination, nor ever

break my rest with considering which way he is likely to decide it, but receive what-ever comes with equal indifference and se-curity.
                  Such was the philosophy of the stoics. A philosophy which affords the noblest lessons of magnanimity, is the best school of heroes and patriots, and to the greater part of whose precepts there can be no other objection, except that honourable one, that they teach us to aim at a per-fection altogether beyond the reach of hu-man nature. I shall not at present stop to examine it. I shall only observe, in con-firmation of what has formerly been said, that the most dreadful calamities are not always those which it is most difficult to support. It is often more mortifying to appear in publick, under small disasters, than under great misfortunes. The first excite no sympathy; but the second, tho' they may excite none that approaches to the anguish of the sufferer, call forth, however, a very lively compassion. The sentiments of the spectators are, in this last case, therefore, less wide of those of the sufferer, and their imperfect fel-low-feeling

are gazing at a dancer on the slack rope, naturally writhe and twist and balance their own bodies, as they see him do, and as they feel that they themselves must do in his situation. Persons of delicate fibres and a weak constitution of body, complain that in looking on the sores and ulcers that are exposed by beggars in the streets, they are apt to feel an itching or uneasy sensation in the correspondent part of their own bodies. The horror which they con-ceive at the misery of those wretches af-fects that particular part in themselves more than any other; because that hor-ror arises from conceiving what they them-selves would suffer, if they really were the wretches whom they are looking upon, and if that particular part in themselves was actually affected in the same miser-able manner. The very force of this conception is sufficient, in their feeble frames, to produce that itching or uneasy sensation complained of. Men of the most robust make, observe that in looking up-on sore eyes they often feel a very sensible soreness in their own, which proceeds from the same reason; that organ being in the strongest man more delicate than


lends him some assistance in supporting his misery. Before a gay assembly, a gentleman would be more mortified to appear covered with filth and rags than with blood and wounds. This last situation would interest their pity; the other would provoke their laughter. The judge who orders a criminal to be set in the pillory, dishonours him more than if he had condemned him to the scaffold. The great prince, who, some years ago, caned a general officer at the head of his army, disgraced him irrecoverably. The punishment would have been much less had he shot him through the body. By the laws of honour, to strike with a cane dishonours, to strike with a sword does not, for an obvious reason. Those slighter punishments, when inflicted on a gentle-man, to whom dishonour is the greatest of all evils, come to be regarded among a hu-mane and generous people, as the most dreadful of any. With regard to persons of that rank, therefore, they are univer-
                     
                        •
                     ally laid aside, and the law, while it takes 
                        •
                     heir life upon many occasions, respects 
                        •
                     heir honour upon almost all. To scourge

a person of quality, or to set him in the pillory, upon account of any crime what-ever, is a brutality of which no European government, except that of Russia, is ca-pable.
                  A brave man is not rendered contemp-tible by being brought to the scaffold; he is, by being set in the pillory. His beha-viour in the one situation may gain him universal esteem and admiration. No be-haviour in the other can render him agree-able. The sympathy of the spectators sup-ports him in the one case, and saves him from that shame, that consciousness that his misery is felt by himself only, which is of all sentiments the most unsupportable. There is no sympathy in the other; or, if There is any, it is not with his pain, which is a trifle, but with his consciousness of the want of sympathy with which this pain is attended. It is with his shame, not with his sorrow. Those who pity him, blush and hang down their heads for him. He droops in the same manner, and feels himself irrecoverably degraded by the pu-nishment, though not by the crime. The man, on the contrary, who dies with re-solution,

as he is naturally regarded with erect aspect of esteem and approbation, so he wears himself the same undaunted countenance; and, if the crime does not deprive him of the respect of others, the punishment never will. He has no suspi-cion that his situation is the object of con-tempt or derision to any body, and he can, with propriety, assume the air, not only of perfect serenity, but of triumph and exultation.
                  
                     Great dangers, says the cardinal de Retz, have their charms, because there is some glory to be got, even when we miscarry. But moderate dangers have nothing but what is horrible, because the loss of reputation always attends the want of success.
His maxim has the same foundation with what we have been observing just now, with regard to punish-ments.
                  Human virtue is superior to pain, to poverty, to danger, and to death; nor does it even require its remotest efforts to despise them. But to have its misery ex-posed to insult and derision, to be led in triumph, to be set up for the hand of scorn

to point at, is a situation in which its con-stancy is much more apt to fail. Com-pared with the contempt of mankind, all other evils are easily supported.
               
            
         
         
            

            PART II. Of MERIT and DEMERIT; or, of the Objects of REWARD and PU-NISHMENT.
            
               SECTION I. Of the sense of merit and demerit.
               
                  INTRODUCTION.
                  THERE is another set of qualities ascribed to the actions and con-duct of mankind, distinct from their propriety or impropriety, their de-cency or ungracefulness, and which are the objects of a distinct species of approba-tion and disapprobation. These are me-rit and demerit, the qualities of deserving reward, and of deserving punishment.
                  It has already been observed, that the 
                        •
                     entiment or affection of the heart, from which any action proceeds, and upon which 
                        •
                     ts whole virtue or vice depends, may be

considered under two different aspects, or in two different relations: First, in re-lation to the cause or object which ex-cites it; and, secondly, in relation to the end which it proposes, or to the effect which it tends to produce: that upon the suitableness or unsuitableness, upon the proportion or disproportion, which the affection seems to bear to the cause or ob-ject which excites it, depends the proprie-ty or impropriety, the decency or ungrace-fulness of the consequent action; and that upon the beneficial or hurtful effects which the affection proposes or tends to produce, depends the merit or demerit, the good or ill desert of the action to which it gives occasion. Wherein consists our sense o
                        •
                      the propriety or impropriety of actions, has been explained in the former part of thi
                        •
                      discourse. We come now to consider, where-in consists that of their good or ill de-sert.
               
               
                  

                  CHAP. I. That whatever appears to be the proper object of gratitude, appears to deserve reward; and that, in the same manner, whatever appears to be the proper ob-ject of resentment, appears to deserve punishment.
                  TO us, therefore, that action must appear to deserve reward, which ap-pears to be the proper and approved ob-
                     
                        •
                     ect of that sentiment, which most imme-diately and directly prompts us to reward, or to do good to another. And in the same manner, that action must appear to 
                        •
                     eserve punishment, which appears to be 
                        •
                     he proper and approved object of that 
                        •
                     entiment which most immediately and 
                        •
                     irectly prompts us to punish, or to inflict 
                        •
                     vil upon another.
                  The sentiment which most immediate-
                     
                        •
                     y and directly prompts us to reward, is gratitude; that which most immediately 
                        •
                     nd directly prompts us to punish, is re-
                     
                        •
                     entment.
                  
                     
To us, therefore, that action must ap-pear to deserve reward, which appears to be the proper and approved object of gra-titude; as, on the other hand, that action must appear to deserve punishment, which appears to be the proper and approved ob-ject of resentment.
                  To reward, is to recompense, to remu-nerate, to return good for good received. To punish, too, is to recompense, to re-munerate, though in a different manner; it is to return evil for evil that has been done.
                  There are some other passions, besides gratitude and resentment, which interest us in the happiness or misery of others; but there are none which so directly ex-cite us to be the instruments of either. The love and esteem which grow upon acquaintance and habitual approbation, necessarily lead us to be pleased with the good fortune of the man who is the ob-ject of such agreeable emotions, and con-sequently, to be willing to lend a hand to promote it. Our love, however, is fully satisfied, though his good fortune should be brought about without our assistance. All that this passion desires is to see him

                     
                        •
                     appy, without regarding who was the 
                        •
                     uthor of his prosperity. But gratitude is 
                        •
                     ot to be satisfied in this manner. If the person to whom we owe many obliga-
                     
                        •
                     ions, is made happy without our assist-
                     
                        •
                     nce, though it pleases our love, it does 
                        •
                     ot content our gratitude. Till we have 
                        •
                     ecompensed him, till we ourselves have 
                        •
                     een instrumental in promoting his hap-
                     
                        •
                     iness, we feel ourselves still loaded with 
                        •
                     hat debt which his past services have laid 
                        •
                     pon us.
                  The hatred and dislike, in the same manner, which grow upon habitual dis-
                     
                        •
                     pprobation, would often lead us to take 
                        •
                      malicious pleasure in the misfortune 
                        •
                     f the man whose conduct and character 
                        •
                     xcite so painful a passion. But though 
                        •
                     islike and hatred harden us against all 
                        •
                     ympathy, and sometimes dispose us even 
                        •
                     o rejoice at the distress of another, yet, 
                        •
                     f there is no resentment in the case, if 
                        •
                     either we nor our friends have received 
                        •
                     ny great personal provocation, these 
                        •
                     assions would not naturally lead us to wish to be instrumental in bringing it 
                        •
                     bout. Though we could fear no punish-ment in consequence of our having had

some hand in it, we would rather that it should happen by other means. To one under the dominion of violent hatred i
                        •
                      would be agreeable, perhaps, to hear, th
                        ••
                      the person whom he abhorred and detested was killed by some accident. But if he had the least spark of justice, which, tho' thi
                        •
                      passion is not very favourable to virtue, he might still have, it would hurt him exces-sively to have been himself, even witho
                        ••
                      design, the occasion of this misfortune. Much more would the very thought of vo-luntarily contributing to it shock him be-yond all measure. He would reject wi
                        ••
                      horror even the imagination of so execra-ble a design; and if he could imagine him-self capable of such an enormity, he would begin to regard himself in the same odio
                        ••
                      light in which he had considered the per-son who was the object of his dislike. Bu
                        •
                      it is quite otherwise with resentment: i
                        •
                      the person who had done us some great in-jury, who had murdered our father or ou
                        •
                      brother, for example, should soon after-wards die of a fever, or even be brought 
                        
                      the scaffold upon account of some othe
                        •
                      crime, tho' it might sooth our hatred, 
                        
                      would not fully gratify our resentment.

any other part of the body is in the weakest.
               Neither is it those circumstances only, which create pain or sorrow, that call forth our fellow-feeling. Whatever is the passion which arises from any object in the person principally concerned, an analagous emotion springs up, at the thought of his situation, in the breast of every attentive spectator. Our joy for the deliverance of those heroes of tragedy or romance who interest us, is as sin-cere as our grief for their distress, and our fellow-feeling with their misery is not more real than that with their happiness. We enter into their gratitude towards those faithful friends who did not desert them in their difficulties; and we heartily go along with their resentment against those perfidious traitors who injured, abandon-ed, or deceived them. In every passion of which the mind of man is susceptible, the emotions of the by-stander always correspond to what, by bringing the case home to himself, he imagines, should be the sentiments of the sufferer.
               Pity and compassion are words appro-priated to signify our fellow-feeling with

Resentment would prompt us to desire, not only that he should be punished, but that he should be punished by our means, and upon account of that particular injury which he had done to us. Resentment can-not be fully gratified, unless the offender is not only made to grieve in his turn, but to grieve for that particular wrong which we have suffered from him. He must be made to repent and be sorry for this very action, that others, thro' fear of the like punish-ment, may be terrified from being guilty of the like offence. The natural gratifi-cation of this passion tends, of its own ac-cord, to produce all the political ends of punishment; the correction of the crimi-nal, and the example to the public.
                  Gratitude and resentment, therefore, are 
                        •
                     he sentiments which most immediately and directly prompt to reward and to pu-nish. To us, therefore, he must appear to deserve reward, who appears to be the pro-per and approved object of gratitude; and he to deserve punishment, who appears to be that of resentment.
               
               
                  

                  CHAP. II. Of the proper objects of gratitude and resentment.
                  TO be the proper and approved object either of gratitude or resentment, can mean nothing but to be the object of that gratitude, and of that resentment, which naturally seems proper, and is ap-proved of.
                  But these, as well as all the other pas-sions of human nature, seem proper and are approved of, when the heart of every impartial spectator intirely sympathises with them, when every indifferent by-stander in-tirely enters into, and goes along with them.
                  He, therefore, appears to deserve reward, who, to some person or persons, is the na-tural object of a gratitude which every hu-man heart is disposed to beat time to, and thereby applaud: and he, on the other hand, appears to deserve punishment, who in the same manner is to some person or persons the natural object of a resentment which the breast of every reasonable man

is ready to adopt and sympathise with. To us, surely, that action must appear to deserve reward, which every body who knows of it would wish to reward, and therefore delights to see rewarded: and that action must as surely appear to deserve pu-nishment, which every body who hears of it is angry with, and upon that account re-joices to see punished.
                  1. As we sympathize with the joy of our companions when in prosperity, so we join with them in the complacency and sa-tisfaction with which they naturally regard whatever is the cause of their good for-tune. We enter into the love and affec-tion which they conceive for it, and begin to love it too. We should be sorry for their sakes if it was destroyed, or even if it was placed at too great a distance from them, and out of the reach of their care and protection, tho' they should lose no-thing by its absence except the pleasure of seeing it. If it is man who has thus been the fortunate instrument of the happiness of his brethren, this is still more peculiarly the case. When we see one man assisted, pro-tected, relieved by another, our sympathy with the joy of the person who receives the

benefit serves only to animate our fellow-feeling with his gratitude towards him who bestows it. When we look upon the per-son who is the cause of his pleasure with the eyes with which we imagine he must look upon him, his benefactor seems to stand before us in the most engaging and amiable light. We readily therefore sym-pathize with the grateful affection which he conceives for a person to whom he has been so much obliged; and consequently applaud the returns which he is disposed to make for the good offices conferred up-on him. As we intirely enter into the af-fection from which these returns proceed, they necessarily seem every way proper and suitable to their object.
                  2. In the same manner, as we sympa-thize with the sorrow of our fellow-creature whenever we see his distress, so we like-wise enter into his abhorrence and aver-sion for whatever has given occasion to it. Our heart, as it adopts and beats time to his grief, so is it likewise animated with that spirit by which he endeavours to drive away or destroy the cause of it. The indolent and passive fellow-feeling, by which we accompany him in his sufferings,

readily gives way to that more vigorous and active sentiment by which we go along with him in the effort he makes, either to repel them, or to gratify his aversion to what has given occasion to them. This is still more peculiarly the case, when it is man who has caused them. When we see one man oppressed or injured by another, the sympathy which we feel with the dis-tress of the sufferer seems to serve only to animate our fellow-feeling with his resent-ment against the offender. We are rejoic-ed to see him attack his adversary in his turn, and are eager and ready to assist him whenever he exerts himself for defence, or even for vengeance within a certain degree. If the injured should perish in the quarrel, we not only sympathize with the real re-sentment of his friends and relations, but with the imaginary resentment which in fancy we lend to the dead, who is no long-er capable of feeling that or any other hu-man sentiment. But as we put ourselves in his situation, as we enter, as it were, into his body, and in our imaginations, in some measure, animate anew the de-formed and mangled carcase of the slain, when we bring home in this manner his

case to our own bosoms, we feel upon this, as upon many other occasions, an emotion which the person principally concerned is incapable of feeling, and which yet we feel by an illusive sympathy with him. The sympathetic tears which we shed for that immense and irretrievable loss, which in our fancy he appears to have sustained, seem to be but a small part of the duty which we owe him. The injury which he has suffered demands, we think, a prin-cipal part of our attention. We feel that resentment which we imagine he ought to feel, and which he would feel, if in his cold and lifeless body there remained any consci-ousness of what passes upon earth. His blood, we think, calls aloud for vengeance. The ve-ry ashes of the dead seem to be disturbed at the thought that his injuries are to pass unre-venged. The horrors which are supposed to haunt the bed of the murderer, the ghosts which, superstition imagines, rise from their graves to demand vengeance up-on those who brought them to an untimely end, all take their origin from this natu-ral sympathy with the imaginary resent-ment of the slain. And with regard, at least, to this most dreadful of all crimes,

nature, antecedent to all reflexions upon the utility of punishment, has in this man-ner stamped upon the human heart, in the strongest and most indelible characters, an immediate and instinctive approbation of the sacred and necessary law of retaliation.
               
               
                  CHAP. III. That where there is no approbation of the conduct of the person who confers the benefit, there is little sympathy with the gratitude of him who receives it: and that, on the contrary, where there is no disapprobation of the motives of the per-son who does the mischief, there is no sort of sympathy with the resentment of him who suffers it.
                  IT is to be observed, however, that, how beneficial soever on the one hand, or how hurtful soever on the other, the actions or intentions of the person who acts may have been to the person who is, if I may say so, acted upon, yet if in the one case there appears to have been no propriety in the motives of the agent, if we cannot en-ter into the affections which influenced

his conduct, we have little sympathy with the gratitude of the person who receives the benefit: or if, in the other case, there appears to have been no impropriety in the motives of the agent, if, on the contrary, the affections which influenced his con-duct are such as we must necessarily enter into, we can have no sort of sympathy with the resentment of the person who suffers. Little gratitude seems due in the one case, and all sort of resentment seems unjust in the other. The one action seems to merit little reward, the other to deserve no pu-nishment.
                  1. First, I say, That wherever we cannot sympathize with the affections of the agent, wherever there seems to be no propriety in the motives which influenced his conduct, we are less disposed to enter into the gra-titude of the person who received the bene-fit of his actions. A very small return seems due to that foolish and profuse ge-nerosity which confers the greatest benefits from the most trivial motives, and gives an estate to a man merely because his name and sirname happen to be the same with those of the giver. Such services do not seem to demand any proportionable recom-pense.

Our contempt for the folly of the agent hinders us from thoroughly entering into the gratitude of the person to whom the good office has been done. His bene-factor seems unworthy of it. As when we place ourselves in the situation of the person obliged, we feel that we could conceive no great reverence for such a benefactor, we ea-sily absolve him from a great deal of that submissive veneration and esteem which we should think due to a more respectable cha-racter; and provided he always treats his weak friend with kindness and humanity, we are willing to excuse him from many attentions and regards which we should de-mand to a worthier patron. Those Princes, who have heaped, with the greatest profu-sion, wealth, power, and honours, upon their favourites, have seldom excited that degree of attachment to their persons which has often been experienced by those who were more frugal of their favours. The well-natured, but injudicious prodigality, of James the First of Great Britain seems to have attached no body to his person; and that Prince, notwithstanding his social and harmless disposition, appears to have lived and died without a friend. The whole gentry

and nobility of England exposed their lives and fortunes in the cause of his more fru-gal and distinguishing son, notwithstand-ing the coldness and distant severity of his ordinary deportment.
                  2. Secondly, I say, That wherever the conduct of the agent appears to have been intirely directed by motives and affections which we thoroughly enter into and ap-prove of▪ we can have no sort of sympathy with the resentment of the sufferer, how great soevet the mischief which may have been done to him. When two people quarrel, if we take part with, and intirely adopt the resentment of one of them, it is impossible that we should enter into that of the other. Our sympathy with the person whose motives we go along with, and whom therefore we look upon as in the right, can-not but harden us against all fellow-feeling with the other, whom we necessarily re-gard as in the wrong. Whatever this last, therefore, may have suffered, while it is no more than what we ourselves should have wished him to suffer, while it is no more than what our own sympathetic indigna-tion would have prompted us to inflict upon him, it cannot either displease or pro-voke

the sorrow of others. Sympathy, though its meaning was, perhaps, originally the same, may now, however, without much impropriety, be made use of to denote our fellow-feeling with any passion what-ever.
               Upon some occasions sympathy may seem to arise meerly from the view of a certain emotion in another person. The passions, upon some occasions, may seem to be transfused from one man to an-other, instantaneously, and antecedent to any knowledge of what excited them in the person principally concerned. Grief and joy, for example, strongly expressed in the look and gestures of any one, at once affect the spectator with some degree of a like painful or agreeable emotion. A smiling face is, to every body that sees it, a chearful object; as a sorrowful coun-tenance, on the other hand, is a melan-choly one.
               This, however, does not hold univer-sally with regard to every passion. There are some of which the expressions excite no sort of sympathy, but before we are acquainted with what gave occasion to them, serve rather to disgust and provoke

us. When an inhuman murderer is brought to the scaffold, tho' we have some compassion for his misery, we can have no sort of fellow-feeling with his resentment, if he should be so absurd as to express any against either his prosecutor or his judge. The natural tendency of their just indig-nation against so vile a criminal is indeed the most fatal and ruinous to him. But it is impossible that we should be displeased with the tendency of a sentiment, which, when we bring the case home to ourselves, we feel that we cannot avoid adopting.
               
               
                  CHAP. IV. Recapitulation of the foregoing chapters.
                  1. WE do not, therefore, thoroughly and heartily sympathize with the gratitude of one man towards another, merely because this other has been the cause of his good fortune, unless he has been the cause of it from motives which we intirely go along with. Our heart must adopt the principles of the agent, and go along with all the affections which influ-enced his conduct, before it can intirely

sympathize with, and beat time to, the gra-titude of the person who has been benefited by his actions. If in the conduct of the benefactor there appears to have been no propriety, how beneficial soever its effects, it does not seem to demand, or necessarily to require, any proportionable recom-pence.
                  But when to the beneficent tendency of the action is joined the propriety of the affection from which it proceeds, when we intirely sympathize and go along with the motives of the agent, the love which we conceive for him upon his own account enhances and enlivens our fellow-feeling with the gratitude of those who owe their prosperity to his good conduct. His ac-tions seem then to demand, and, if I may say so, to call aloud for a proportionable recompense. We then intirely enter into that gratitude which prompts to bestow it. The benefactor seems then to be the proper object of reward, when we thus intirely sympathize with, and approve of, that sen-timent which prompts to reward him. When we approve of, and go along with, the affection from which the action pro-ceeds, we must necessarily approve of the

action, and regard the person towards whom it is directed as its proper and suit-able object.
                  2. In the same manner, we cannot at all sympathize with the resentment of one man against another, merely because this other has been the cause of his misfortune, un-less he has been the cause of it from mo-tives which we cannot enter into. Before we can adopt the resentment of the sufferer, we must disapprove of the motives of the agent, and feel that our heart renounces all sympathy with the affections which influ-enced his conduct. If there appears to have been no impropriety in these, how fa-tal soever the tendency of the action which proceeds from them to those against whom it is directed, it does not seem to deserve any punishment, or to be the proper object of any resentment.
                  But when to the hurtfulness of the action is joined the impropriety of the affection from whence it proceeds, when our heart rejects with abhorrence all fellow-feeling with the motives of the agent, we then heartily and intirely sympathize with the resentment of the sufferer. Such actions seem then to deserve, and, if I may say so,

to call aloud for, a proportionable punish-ment; and we intirely enter into, and there-by approve of, that resentment which prompts to inflict it. The offender neces-sarily seems then to be the proper object of punishment, when we thus intirely sympa-thize with, and thereby approve of, that sentiment which prompts to punish. In this case too, when we approve, and go along with, the affection from which the action proceeds, we must necessarily ap-prove of the action, and regard the person against whom it is directed, as its proper and suitable object.
               
               
                  CHAP. V. The analysis of the sense of merit and de-merit.
                  1. AS our sense, therefore, of the pro-priety of conduct arises from what I shall call a direct sympathy with the affec-tions and motives of the person who acts, so our sense of its merit arises from what I shal
                        •
                      call an indirect sympathy with the grati-tude of the person who is, if I may say so, acted upon.
                  
                     
As we cannot indeed enter thoroughly into the gratitude of the person who re-ceives the benefit, unless we beforehand approve of the motives of the benefactor, so, upon this account, the sense of merit seems to be a compounded sentiment, and to be made up of two distinct emotions; a direct sympathy with the sentiments of the agent, and an indirect sympathy with the gratitude of those who receive the bene-fit of his actions.
                  We may, upon many different occa-sions, plainly distinguish those two differ-ent emotions combining and uniting toge-ther in our sense of the good desert of a particular character or action. When we 
                        •
                     ead in history concerning actions of pro-per and beneficent greatness of mind, how 
                        •
                     agerly do we enter into such designs? How much are we animated by that high-spi-
                     
                        •
                     ited generosity which directs them? How 
                        •
                     een are we for their success? How grieved at 
                        •
                     heir disappointment? In imagination we become the very person whose actions are 
                        •
                     epresented to us: we transport ourselves 
                        •
                     n fancy to the scenes of those distant and forgotten adventures, and imagine our-selves acting the part of a Scipio or a Ca-millus,


a Timoleon or an Aristides. So far our sentiments are founded upon the direct sympathy with the person who acts. Nor is the indirect sympathy with those who receive the benefit of such actions less sensibly felt. Whenever we place ourselves in the situation of these last, with what warm and affectionate fellow-feeling do we enter into their gratitude towards those who served them so essentially? We em-brace, as it were, their benefactor along with them. Our heart readily sympathi-zes with the highest transports of their grateful affection. No honours, no re-wards, we think, can be too great for them to bestow upon him. When they make this proper return for his services, we heartily applaud and go along with them; but are shocked beyond all measure, if by their conduct they appear to have little sense of the obligations conferred upon them. Our whole sense, in short, of the merit and good desert of such actions, of the propriety and fitness of recompensing them, and making the person who per-formed them rejoice in his turn, arises from the sympathetic emotions of grati-tude and love, with which, when we bring

home to our own breasts the situation of those principally concerned, we feel our-selves naturally transported towards the man who could act with such proper and noble beneficence.
                  2. In the same manner as our sense of the impropriety of conduct arises from a want of sympathy, or from a direct anti-pathy to the affections and motives of the agent, so our sense of its demerit arises from what I shall here too call an indirect sym-pathy with the resentment of the sufferer.
                  As we cannot indeed enter into the resentment of the sufferer, unless our heart before-hand disapproves the motives of the agent, and renounces all fellow-feeling with them; so upon this account the 
                        •
                     ense of demerit, as well as that of merit, 
                        •
                     eems to be a compounded sentiment, and 
                        •
                     o be made up of two distinct emotions; 
                        •
                      direct antipathy to the sentiments of the 
                        •
                     gent, and an indirect sympathy with the 
                        •
                     esentment of the sufferer.
                  We may here too, upon many different 
                        •
                     ccasions, plainly distinguish those two 
                        •
                     ifferent emotions combining and uniting 
                        •
                     ogether in our sense of the ill desert of a 
                        •
                     articular character or action. When we

read in history concerning the perfidy and cruelty of a Borgia or a Nero, our heart rises up against the detestable sentiment
                        •
                      which influenced their conduct, and re-nounces with horror and abomination all fellow-feeling with such execrable motives. So far our sentiments are founded upon the direct antipathy to the affections of the agent: and the indirect sympathy with the resentment of the sufferers is still more sensibly felt. When we bring home to ourselves the situation of the persons whom those scourges of mankind insulted, mur-dered, or betrayed, what indignation do we not feel against such insolent and inhu-man oppressors of the earth? Our sym-pathy with the unavoidable distress of the innocent sufferers is not more real nor more lively, than our fellow-feeling with their just and natural resentment. The former sentiment only heightens the latter, and the idea of their distress serves only to inflame and blow up our animosity against those who occasioned it. When we think of the anguish of the sufferers, we take part with them more earnestly against their oppressors; we enter with more eagerness into all their schemes of vengeance, and

feel ourselves every moment wreaking, in imagination, upon such violators of the laws of society, that punishment which our sympathetic indignation tells us is due to their crimes. Our sense of the horror and dreadful atrocity of such conduct, the delight which we take in hearing that it was properly punished, the indignation which we feel when it escapes this due re-taliation, our whole sense and feeling, in short, of its ill desert, of the propriety and fitness of inflicting evil upon the person who is guilty of i
                        •
                     , and of making him grieve in his turn, arises from the sympa-thetic indignation which naturally boils up in the breast of the spectator, whenever he thoroughly brings home to himself the case of the sufferer 
                        To ascribe in this manner our natural sense of the ill desert of human actions to a sympathy with the re-sentment of the sufferer, may seem, to the greater part of people, to be a degradation of that sentiment. Re-sentment is commonly regarded as so odious a passion, that they will be apt to think it impossible that so laudable a principle, as the sense of the ill desert of vice, should in any respect be founded upon it. They will be more willing, perhaps, to admit that our sense of the merit of good actions is founded upon a sympathy with the gratitude of the persons who receive the benefit of them; because gratitude, as well as all the other bene-volent passions, is regarded as an amiable principle,


which can take nothing from the worth of whatever is founded upon it. Gratitude and resentment, however, are in every respect, it is evident, counterparts of one another; and if our sense of merit arises from a sympa-thy with the one, our sense of demerit can scarce miss to proceed from a fellow-feeling with the other.
                        Let it be considered too that resentment, tho', in the degrees in which we too often see it, the most odious, perhaps, of all the passions, is not disapproved of when properly humbled and intirely brought down to the le-vel of the sympathetic indignation of the spectator. When we, who are the bystanders, feel that our own animosity intirely corresponds with that of the sufferer, when the resentment of this last does not in any respect go beyond our own, when no word, no gesture, escapes him that denotes an emotion more violent than what we can keep time to, and when he never aims at inflict-ing any punishment beyond what we should rejoice to see inflicted, or what we ourselves would upon his ac-count even desire to be the instruments of inflicting, it is impossible, that we should not intirely approve of his sentiments. Our own emotion in this case must, in our eyes, undoubtedly justify his. And as experience teach-es us how much the greater part of mankind are inca-pable of his moderation, and how great an effort must be made in order to bring down the rude and undisci-plined impulse of resentment to this suitable temper, we cannot avoid conceiving a considerable degree of esteem and admiration for one who appears capable of exerting so much self-command over one of the most ungovern-able passions of his nature. When indeed the animosity of the sufferer exceeds, as it almost always does, what we can go along with, as we cannot enter into it, we necessarily disapprove of it. We even disapprove of it more than we should of an equal excess of almost any other passion derived from the imagination. And this too violent resentment, instead of carrying us along with it, becomes itself the object of our resentment and indignation. We enter into the opposite resent-ment of the person who is the object of this unjust emo-tion,

us against them. The furious behaviour of an angry man is more likely to exaspe-rate us against himself than against his ene-mies. As we are unacquainted with his provocation, we cannot bring his case home to ourselves, nor conceive any thing like the passions which it excites. But we plainly see what is the situation of those with whom he is angry, and to what vio-lence they may be exposed from so en-raged an adversary. We readily, there-fore, sympathize with their fear or resent-ment, and are immediately disposed to take party against the man from whom they appear to be in so much danger.
               If the very appearances of grief and joy inspire us with some degree of the like emotions, it is because they suggest to us the general idea of some good or bad fortune that has befallen the person in whom we observe them: and in these passions this is sufficient to have some little influence upon us. The effects of grief and joy terminate in the person who feels those emotions, of which the expressions do not, like those of resent-ment, suggest to us the idea of any other person for whom we are concerned, and


and who is in danger of suffering from it. Re-venge, therefore, the excess of resentment, appears to be the most detestable of all the passions, and is the object of the horror and indignation of every body. And as in the way in which this passion commonly discovers it-self among mankind, it is excessive a hundred times for once that it is moderate, we are very apt to consider it as a
                              •
                           together odious and detestable, because in its most ordinary appearances it is so. Nature, however, even in the present depraved state of mankind, does not seem to have dealt so unkindly with us, as to have endowed us with any principle which is wholly and in every re-spect evil, or which, in no degree and in no direction, can be the proper object of praise and approbation. Upon some occasions we are sensible that this passion, which is generally too strong, may likewise be too weak. We sometimes complain that a particular person shows too little spirit, and has too little sense of the in-juries that have been done to him; and we are as ready to despise him for the defect, as to hate him for the ex-cess of this passion.
                        The inspired writers would not surely have talked so frequently or so strongly of the wrath and anger of God, if they had regarded every degree of those passions as vicious and evil, even in so weak and imperfect a creature as man.
                        Let it be considered too, that the present inquiry is not concerning a matter of right, if I may say so, but concerning a matter of fact. We are not at present ex-amining upon what principles a perfect being would ap-prove of the punishment of bad actions; but upon what principles so weak and imperfect a creature as man actually and in fact approves of it. The principles which I have just now mentioned, it is evident, have a very great effect upon his sentiments; and it seems wisely ordered that it should be so. The very existence of society requires that unmerited and unprovoked ma-lice should be restrained by proper punishments; and consequently, that to inflict those punishments should be regarded as a proper and laudable action. Though


man, therefore, be naturally endowed with a desire of the welfare and preservation of society, yet the author of nature has not intrusted it to his reason to find out that a certain application of punishments is the proper means of attaining this end; but has endowed him with an immediate and instinctive approbation of that very application which is most proper to attain it. The oeconomy of nature is in this respect exactly of a piece with what it is upon many other occasions. With re-gard to all those ends which, upon account of their pe-culiar importance, may be regarded, if such an expres-sion is allowable, as the favourite ends of nature, she has constantly in this manner not only endowed man-kind with an appetite for the end which she proposes, but likewise with an appetite for the means by which alone this end can be brought about, for their own sakes, and independent of their tendency to produce it. Thus self-preservation, and the propagation of the spe-cies, are the great ends which nature seems to have pro-posed in the formation of all animals. Mankind are endowed with a desire of those ends, and an aversion to the contrary; with a love of life, and a dread of disso-lution; with a desire of the continuance and perpetuity of the species, and with an aversion to the thoughts of its intire extinction. But tho' we are in this manner endowed with a very strong desire of those ends, it has not been intrusted to the slow and uncertain determina-tions of our reason, to find out the proper means of bringing them about. Nature has directed us to the greater part of these by original and immediate instincts. Hunger, thirst, the passion which unites the two sexes, the love of pleasure, and the dread of pain, prompt us to apply those means for their own sakes, and without any consideration of their tendency to those beneficent ends which the great director of nature intended to produce by them.
                        Before I conclude this note, I must take notice of a difference between the approbation of propriety and that of merit or beneficence. Before we approve of the sentiments of any person as proper and suitable to their

objects, we must not only be affected in the same man-ner as he is, but we must perceive this harmony and correspondence of sentiments between him and our-selves. Thus, tho' upon hearing of a misfortune that had befallen my friend, I should conceive precisely that degree of concern which he gives way to; yet till I am informed of the manner in which he behaves, till I per-ceive the harmony between his emotions and mine, I cannot be said to approve of the sentiments which in-fluence his behaviour. The approbation of propriety therefore requires, not only that we should intirely sym-pathize with the person who acts, but that we should perceive this perfect concord between his sentiments and our own. On the contrary, when I hear of a benefit that has been bestowed upon another person, let him who has received it be affected in what manner he pleases, if, by bringing his case home to myself, I feel gratitude arise in my own breast, I necessarily approve of the conduct of his benefactor, and regard it as me-ritorious, and the proper object of reward. Whether the person who has received the benefit conceives grati-tude or not, cannot, it is evident, in any degree alter our sentiments with regard to the merit of him who has bestowed it. No actual correspondence of sentiments, therefore, is here required. It is sufficient that, if he was grateful, they would correspond; and our sense of merit is often founded upon one of those illusive sympa-thies, by which, when we bring home to ourselves the case of another, we are often affected in a manner in which the person principally concerned is incapable of being affected. There is a similar difference between our d
                              •
                           sapprobation of demerit, and that of impro-priety.
                     .
               
            
            
               

               SECTION II. Of justice and beneficence.
               
                  CHAP. I. Comparison of those two virtues.
                  ACTIONS of a beneficent tendency which proceed from proper motives seem alone to require reward; because such alone are the approved objects of gratitude, or excite the sympathetic grati-tude of the spectator.
                  Actions of a hurtful tendency, which proceed from improper motives, seem alone to deserve punishment; because such alone are the approved objects of re-sentment, or excite the sympathetic resent-ment of the spectator.
                  Beneficence is always free, it cannot be extorted by force, the meer want of it ex-poses to no punishment: because the meer want of beneficence tends to do no real positive evil. It may disappoint of the good which might reasonably have been expected, and upon that account it may

justly excite dislike and disapprobation: it cannot, however, provoke any resentment which mankind will go along with. The man who does not recompence his bene-factor, when he has it in his power, and when his benefactor needs his assistance, is, no doubt, guilty of the blackest in-gratitude. The heart of every impartial spectator rejects all fellow-feeling with the selfishness of his motives, and he is the pro-per object of the highest disapprobation. But still he does no posiive hurt to anybody; he only does not do that good which in pro-priety he ought to have done. He is the ob-ject of hatred, a passion which is naturally excited by impropriety of sentiment and behaviour; not of resentment, a passion which is never properly called forth but by actions which tend to do real and posi-tive hurt to some particular persons. His want of gratitude, therefore, cannot be punished. To oblige him by force to per-form what ingratitude he ought to per-form, and what every impartial spectator would approve of him for performing, would, if possible, be still more improper than his neglecting to perform it. His benefactor would dishonour himself if he

attempted by violence to constrain him to gratitude, and it would be impertinent for any third person, who was not the superior of either, to intermeddle. But of all the duties of beneficence, those which gratitude recommends to us approach near-est to what is called a perfect and compleat obligation. What friendship, what gene-rosity, what charity, would prompt us to do with universal approbation, is still more free, and can still less be extorted by force than the duties of gratitude. We talk of the debt of gratitude, not of charity, or generosity, nor even of friendship, when friendship is meer esteem, and has not been enhanced and complicated with gratitude for good offices.
                  Resentment seems to have been given us by nature for defence, and for defence only. It is the safeguard of justice and the security of innocence. It prompts us to beat off the mischief which is attempted to be done to us, and to retaliate that which is already done; that the offender may be made to repent of his injustice; and that others, through fear of the like punishment, may be terrified from being guilty of the like offence. It must be reserved therefore

for these purposes, nor can the spectator ever go along with it when it is exerted for any other. But the meer want of the be-neficent virtues, though it may disappoint us of the good which might reasonably be expected, neither does, nor attempts to do, any mischief from whch we can have oc-casion to defend ourselves.
                  There is, however, another virtue, of which the observance is not left to the freedom of our own wills, which may be extorted by force, and of which the viola-tion exposes to resentment, and consequent-ly to punishment. This virtue is justice: the violation of justice is injury: it does real and positive hurt to some particular persons, from motives which are naturally disapproved of. It is, therefore, the pro-per object of resentment, and of punish-ment, which is the natural consequence of resentment. As mankind go along with, and approve of, the violence employed to avenge the hurt which is done by injustice, so they much more go along with, and ap-prove of, that which is employed to pre-vent and beat off the injury, and to re-strain the offender from hurting his neigh-bours. The person himself who meditates

an injustice is sensible of this, and feels that force may, with the utmost propriety, be made use of both by the person whom he is about to injure, and by others, either to obstruct the execution of his crime, or to punish him when he has executed it. And upon this is founded that remarkable dis-tinction between justice and all the other social virtues, which has of late been par-ticularly insisted upon by an author of very great and original genius, that we feel ourselves to be under a stricter obliga-tion to act according to justice, than agreeably to friendship, charity, or gene-rosity; that the practice of these last men-tioned virtues seems to be left in some measure to our own choice, but that, some-how or other, we feel ourselves to be in a peculiar manner tyed, bound, and obliged to the observation of justice. We feel, that is to say, that force may, with the utmost propriety, and with the approbation of all mankind, be made use of to constrain us to observe the rules of the one, but not to follow the precepts of the other.
                  We must always, however, carefully distinguish what is only blameable, or the proper object of disapprobation, from what

force may be employed either to punish or to prevent. That seems blameable which falls short of that ordinary degree of proper be-neficence which experience teaches us to expect of every body; and on the contrary, that seems praise-worthy which goes beyond it. The ordinary degree itself seems neither blameable nor praise-worthy. A father, a son, a brother, who behaves to the corres-pondent relation neither better nor worse than the greater part of men commonly do, seems properly to deserve neither praise nor blame. He who surprises us by ex-traordinary and unexpected, though still proper, and suitable kindness, or on the contrary, by extraordinary and unexpected, as well as unsuitable unkindness, seems praise-worthy in the one case, and blame-able in the other.
                  Even the most ordinary degree of kind-ness or beneficence, however, cannot, among equals, be extorted by force. Among equals each individual is naturally, and an-tecedent to the institution of civil govern-ment, regarded as having a right both to defend himself from injuries, and to exact a certain degree of punishment for those which have been done to him. Every ge-nerous

spectator not only approves of his conduct when he does this, but enters so far into his sentiments as often to be will-ing to assist him. When one man attacks, or robs, or attempts to murder another, all the neighbours take the alarm, and think that they do right when they run, either to revenge the person who has been injured, or to defend him who is in danger of being so. But when a father fails in the ordinary degree of parental affection towards a son; when a son seems to want that filial reve-rence which might be expected to his father; when brothers are without the usual de-gree of brotherly affection; when a man shuts his▪ breast against compassion, and refuses to relieve the misery of his fellow-creatures, when he can with the greatest ease; in all these cases, though every body blames the conduct, nobody imagines that those who might have reason, perhaps, to expect more kindness, have any right to extort it by force. The sufferer can only complain, and the spectator can intermeddle no other way than by advice and persua-sion. Upon all such occasions for equals to use force against one another, would

whose interests are opposite to his. The general idea of good or bad fortune, therefore, creates some concern for the person who has met with it, but the general idea of provocation excites no sympathy with the anger of the man who has received it. Nature, it seems, teaches us to be more averse to enter in-to this passion, and, till informed of its cause, to be disposed rather to take part against it.
               Even our sympathy with the grief or joy of another, before we are informed of the cause of either, is always extreme-ly imperfect. General lamentations, which express nothing but the anguish of the sufferer, create rather a curiosity to en-quire into his situation, along with some disposition to sympathize with him, than any actual sympathy that is very sensible. The first question that we ask is, What has befallen you? 'Till this be answered, tho' we are uneasy both from the vague idea of his misfortune, and still more from torturing ourselves with conjectures about what it may be, yet our fellow-feeling is not very considerable.
               
                  

be thought the highest degree of insolence and presumption.
                  A superior may, indeed, sometimes, with universal approbation, oblige those under his jurisdiction to behave, in this respect, with a certain degree of propriety to one another. The laws of all civilized nations oblige parents to maintain their children, and children to maintain their parents, and impose upon men many other duties of beneficence. The civil magistrate is en-trusted with the power not only of preserv-ing the public peace by restraining injustice, but of promoting the prosperity of the com-monwealth, by establishing good disci-pline, and by discouraging every sort of vice and impropriety; he may prescribe rules, therefore, which not only prohibit mutual injuries among fellow-citizens, but com-mand mutual good offices to a certain de-gree. When the sovereign commands what is meerly indifferent, and what antecedent to his orders might have been omitted with-out any blame, it becomes not only blame-able but punishable to disobey him. When he commands, therefore, what, antecedent to any such order, could not have been o-mitted without the greatest blame, it surely

becomes much more punishable to be want-ing in obedience. Of all the duties of a law-giver, however, this, perhaps, is what it requires the greatest delicacy and reserve to execute with propriety and judgment. To neglect it altogether exposes the common-wealth to many gross disorders and shock-ing enormities, and to push it too far is destructive of all liberty, security, and justice.
                  Though the meer want of beneficence seems to merit no punishment from equals, the greater exertions of that virtue appear to deserve the highest reward. By being productive of the greatest good, they are the natural and approved objects of the liveliest gratitude. Though the breach of justice, on the contrary, exposes to punishment, the observation of the rules of that virtue seems scarce to deserve any reward. There is, no doubt, a propriety in the practice of justice, and it merits, upon that account, all the approbation which is due to propriety. But as it does no real positive good, it is entitled to very little gratitude. Meer justice is, upon most occasions, but a negative virtue, and only hinders us from hurting our neigh-bour.

The man who barely abstains from violating either the person, or the estate, or the reputation of his neighbours, has surely very little positive merit. He ful-fils, however, all the rules of what is pe-culiarly called justice, and does every thing which his equals can with propriety force him to do, or which they can punish him for not doing. We may often fulfil all the rules of justice by sitting still and doing nothing.
                  As every man doth, so shall it be done to him, and retaliation seems to be the great law which is dictated to us by nature. Beneficence and generosity we think due to the generous and benificent. Those whose hearts never open to the feel-ings of humanity, should, we think, be shut out, in the same manner, from the affec-tions of all their fellow-creatures, and be allowed to live in the midst of society, as in a great desart where there is no-body to care for them, or to enquire after them. The violator of the laws of justice ought to be made to feel himself that evil which he has done to another; and since no re-gard to the sufferings of his brethren is capable of restraining him, he ought to

be over-awed by the fear of his own. The man who is barely innocent, who only ob-serves the laws of justice with regard to others, and meerly abstains from hurting his neighbours, can merit only that his neighbours in their turn should respect his innocence, and that the same laws should be religiously observed with regard to him.
               
               
                  CHAP. II. Of the sense of justice, of remorse, and of the consciousness of merit.
                  THERE can be no proper motive for hurting our neighbour, there can be no incitement to do evil to another, which mankind will go along with, except just in-dignation for evil which that other has done to us. To disturb his happiness meerly because it stands in the way of our own, to take from him what is of real use to him meerly because it may be of equal or of more use to us, or to indulge, in this manner, at the expence of other people, the natural preference which every man has for his own happiness above that of

other people, is what no impartial specta-tor can go along with. Every man, is no doubt, by nature first, and principally re-commended to his own care; and as he is fitter to take care of himself than of any other person, it is fit and right that it should be so. Every man, therefore, is much more deeply interested in whatever immediately concerns himself, than in what concerns any other man: and to hear, perhaps, of the death of another person, with whom we have no particular connection, will give us less concern, will spoil our stomach, or break our rest much less than a very insignificant disaster which has befallen ourselves. But tho' the ruin of our neighbour may affect us much less than a very small misfortune of our own, we must not ruin him to prevent that small misfortune, nor even to prevent our own ruin. We must, here, as in all other cases, view ourselves not so much according to that light in which we may naturally appear to ourselves, as according to that in which we naturally appear to others. Tho' every man may, according to the proverb, be the whole world to himself, to the rest of mankind he is a most insignificant part of

it. Tho' his own happiness may be of more importance to him than that of all the world besides, to every other person it is of no more consequence than that of any other man. Tho' it may be true, therefore, that every individual, in his own breast, na-turally prefers himself to all mankind, yet he dares not look mankind in the face, and avow that he acts according to this princi-ple. He feels that in this preference they can never go along with him, and that how natural soever it may be to him, it must always appear excessive and extrava-gant to them. When he views himself in the light in which he is conscious that others will view him, he sees that to them he is but one of the multitude in no respect bet-ter than any other in it. If he would act so as that the impartial spectator may en-ter into the principles of his conduct, which is what of all things he has the greatest desire to do, he must, upon this, as upon all other occasions, humble the arrogance of his self-love, and bring it down to some-thing which other men can go along with. They will indulge it so far as to allow him to be more anxious about, and to pursue with more earnest assiduity, his own happi-ness

than that of any other person. Thus far, whenever they place themselves in his situation, they will readily go along with him. In the race for wealth, and honours, and preferments, he may run as hard as he can, and strain every nerve and every muscle, in order to outstrip all his compe-titors. But if he should justle, or throw down any of them, the indulgence of the spectators is entirely at an end. It is a vio-lation of fair play, which they cannot ad-mit of. This man is to them, in every re-spect, as good as he: they do not enter into that self-love by which he prefers him-self so much to this other, and cannot go along with the motive from which he hurt him. They readily, therefore, sympathize with the natural resentment of the injur-ed, and the offender becomes the object of their hatred and indignation. He is sen-sible that he becomes so, and feels that those sentiments are ready to burst out from all sides against him.
                  As the greater and more irreparable the evil that is done, the resentment of the sufferers runs naturally the higher, so does likewise the sympathetic indignation of the spectator, as well as the sense of guilt in the

agent. Death is the greatest evil which one man can inflict upon another, and excites the highest degree of resentment in those who are immediately connected with the slain. Murder, therefore, is the most atrocious of all crimes which affect indivi-duals only, in the sight both of mankind, and of the person who has committed it. To be deprived of that which we are pos-sessed of, is a greater evil than to be disap-pointed of what we have only the expecta-tion. Breach of property, therefore, theft and robbery, which take from us what we are possessed of, are greater crimes than breach of contract, which only disappoints us of what we expected. The most sacred laws of justice, therefore, those whose vio-lation seems to call loudest for vengeance and punishment, are the laws which guard the life and person of our neighbour; the next are those which guard his property and possessions; and last of all come those which guard what are called his personal rights, or what is due to him from the pro-mi
                        •
                     es of others.
                  The violator of the more sacred laws of justice can never reflect on the sentiments which mankind must entertain with re-gard

to him, without feeling all the ago-nies of shame and horror, and consterna-tion. When his passion is gratified, and he begins coolly to reflect on his past con-duct, he can enter into none of the mo-tives which influenced it. They appear now as detestable to him as they did always to other people. By sympathizing with the hatred and abhorrence which other men must entertain for him, he becomes in some measure the object of his own ha-tred and abhorrence. The situation of the person, who suffered by his injustice, now calls upon his pity. He is grieved at the thought of it; regrets the unhappy effects of his own conduct, and feels at the same time that they have rendered him the pro-per object of the resentment and indigna-tion of mankind, and of what is the na-tural consequence of resentment, venge-ance and punishment. The thought of this perpetually haunts him, and fills him with terror and amazement. He dares no longer look society in the face, but ima-gines himself as it were rejected, and thrown out from the affections of all mankind. He cannot hope for the consolation of sym-pathy in this his greatest, and most dread-ful

distress. The remembrance of his crimes has shut out all fellow-feeling with him from the hearts of his fellow-creatures. The sentiments which they entertain with regard to him, are the very thing which he is most afraid of. Every thing seems hos-tile, and he would be glad to fly to some inhospitable desert, where he might never more behold the face of a human creature, nor read in the countenance of mankind the condemnation of his crimes. But soli-tude is still more dreadful than society. His own thoughts can present him with nothing but what is black, unfortunate, and disastrous, the melancholy forebod-ings of incomprehensible misery and ruin. The horror of solitude drives him back in-to society, and he comes again into the presence of mankind, astonished to appear before them, loaded with shame and dis-tracted with fear, in order to supplicate some little protection from the countenance of those very judges, who he knows have already all unanimously condemned him. Such is the nature of that sentiment, which is properly called remorse; of all the sen-timents which can enter the human breast the most dreadful. It is made up of shame

            THE THEORY OF MORAL SENTIMENTS.
         
         
            
Sympathy, therefore, does not arise so much from the view of the passion, as from that of the situation which excites it. We sometimes feel for another, a passion of which he himself seems to be altogether incapable; because when we put ourselves in his case, that passion arises in our breast from the imagination, though it does not in his from the re-ality. We blush for the impudence and rudeness of another, though he himself appears to have no sense of the impro-priety of his own behaviour; because we cannot help feeling with what confusion we ourselves should be covered, had we behaved in so absurd a manner.
               Of all the calamities to which the con-dition of mortality exposes mankind, the loss of reason appears, to those who have the least spark of humanity, by far the most dreadful, and they behold that last stage of human wretchedness with deeper commiseration than any other. But the poor wretch, who is in it, laughs and sings perhaps, and is altogether insensible of his own misery. The anguish which humanity feels, therefore, at the sight of such an object, cannot be the reflection

from the sense of the impropriety of past conduct; of grief for the effects of it; of pity for those who suffer by it; and of the dread and terror of punishment from the consciousness of the justly provoked resent-ment of all rational creatures.
                  The opposite behaviour naturally inspires the opposite sentiment. The man who, not from frivolous fancy, but from proper motives, has performed a generous action, when he looks forward to those whom he has served, feels himself to be the natural object of their love and gratitude, and by sympathy with them, of the esteem and approbation of all mankind. And when he looks backward to the motive from which he acted, and surveys it in the light in which the indifferent spectator will sur-vey it, he still continues to enter into it, and applauds himself by sympathy with the approbation of this supposed impartial judge. In both these points of view his own conduct appears to him every way agreeable. His mind, at the thought of it, is filled with chearfulness, serenity, and composure. He is in friendship and har-mony with all mankind, and looks upon his fellow-creatures with confidence and

benevolent satisfaction, secure that he has rendered himself worthy of their most fa-vourable regards. In the combination of all these sentiments consists the conscious-ness of merit, or of deserved reward.
               
               
                  CHAP. III. Of the utility of this constitution of na-ture.
                  IT is thus that man, who can subsist on-ly in society, was fitted by nature to that situation for which he was made. All the members of human society stand in need of each others assistance, and are like-wise exposed to mutual injuries. Where the necessary assistance is reciprocally af-forded from love, from gratitude, from friendship and esteem, the society flourishes and is happy. All the different members of it are bound together by the agreeable bands of love and affection, and are, as it were, drawn to one common centre of mu-tual good offices.
                  But tho' the necessary assistance should not be afforded from such generous and dis-interested

motives, tho' among the different members of the society there should be no mutual love and affection, the society, tho' less happy and agreeable, will not necessa-rily be dissolved. Society may subsist among different men, as among different mer-chants, from a sense of its utility, with-out any mutual love or affection; and tho' no one man in it should owe any obliga-tion, or be bound in gratitude to any other, it may still be upheld by a mercenary ex-change of good offices according to an agreed valuation.
                  Society, however, cannot subsist among those who are at all times ready to hurt and injure one another. The moment that in-jury begins, the moment that mutual re-sentment and animosity take place, all the bands of it are broke asunder, and the dif-ferent members of which it consisted are, as it were, dissipated and scattered abroad by the violence and opposition of their dis-cordant affections. If there is any society among robbers and murderers, they must at least, according to the trite observation, abstain from robbing and murdering one another. Beneficence, therefore, is less essential to the existence of society than

justice. Society may subsist, tho' not in the most comfortable state, without benefi-cence; but the prevalence of injustice must utterly destroy it.
                  Tho' nature, therefore, exhorts mankind to acts of beneficence, by the pleasing con-sciousness of deserved reward, she has not thought it necessary to guard and enforce the practice of it by the terrors of merited punishment in case it should be neglected. It is the ornament which embellishes, not the foundation which supports the build-ing, and which it was, therefore, sufficient to recommend, but by no means necessary to impose. Justice, on the contrary, is the main pillar that upholds the whole edi-fice. If it is removed, the great, the im-mense fabric of human society, that fabric which to raise and to support seems in this world, if I may say so, to have been the peculiar and darling care of nature, must in a moment crumble into atoms. To en-force the observation of justice, therefore, nature has implanted in the human breast that consciousness of ill-desert, those ter-rors of merited punishment which attend upon its violation, as the great safe-guards of the association of mankind, to protect

the weak, to curb the violent, and to chas-tize the guilty. Men, tho' naturally sym-pathetic, feel so little for another, with whom they have no particular connection, in comparison of what they feel for them-selves; the misery of one, who is merely their fellow-creature, is of so little impor-tance to them in comparison even of a small conveniency of their own; they have it so much in their power to hurt him, and may have so many temptations to do so, that if this principle did not stand up within them in his defence, and overawe them into a respect for his innocence, they would, like wild beasts, be at all times ready to fly up-on him; and a man would enter an assem-bly of men as he enters a den of lions.
                  In every part of the universe we observe means adjusted with the nicest artifice to the ends which they are intended to pro-duce; and in the mechanism of a plant, or animal body, admire how every thing is contrived for advancing the two great pur-poses of nature, the support of the indivi-dual, and the propogation of the species. But in these, and in all such objects, we still distinguish the efficient from the final cause of their several motions and organi-zations.

The digestion of the food, the circulation of the blood, and the secretion of the several juices which are drawn from it, are operations all of them necessary for the great purposes of animal life. Yet we never endeavour to account for them from those purposes as from their efficient causes, nor imagine that the blood circulates, or that the food digests of its own accord, and with a view or intention to the pur-poses of circulation or digestion. The wheels of the watch are all admirably ad-justed to the end for which it was made, the pointing of the hour. All their vari-ous motions conspire in the nicest manner to produce this effect. If they were endow-ed with a desire and intention to produce it, they could not do it better. Yet we ne-ver ascribe any such desire or intention to them, but to the watch-maker, and we know that they are put into motion by a spring, which intends the effect it produces as little as they do. But tho', in account-ing for the operations of bodies, we never fail to distinguish in this manner the effi-cient from the final cause, in accounting for those of the mind we are very apt to confound these two different things with

one another. When by natural principles we are led to advance those ends, which a refined and enlightened reason would re-commend to us, we are very apt to impute to that reason, as to their efficient cause, the sentiments and actions by which we advance those ends, and to imagine that to be the wisdom of man, which in reality is the wisdom of God. Upon a superficial view this cause seems sufficient to produce the effects which are ascribed to it; and the system of human nature seems to be more simple and agreeable when all its different operations are in this manner deduced from a single principle.
                  As society cannot subsist unless the laws of justice are tolerably observed, as no so-cial intercourse can take place among men who do not generally abstain from injuring one another; the consideration of this ne-cessity, it has been thought, was the ground upon which we approved of the enforce-ment of the laws of justice by the punish-ment of those who violated them. Man, it has been said, has a natural love for so-ciety, and desires that the union of mankind should be preserved for its own sake, and tho' he himself was to derive no benefit from

it. The orderly and flourishing state of society is agreeable to him, and he takes delight in contemplating it. It's disorder and confusion, on the contrary, is the ob-ject of his aversion, and he is chagrined at whatever tends to produce it. He is sensible too that his own interest is con-nected with the prosperity of society, and that the happiness, perhaps the preserva-tion of his existence, depends upon its pre-servation. Upon every account, therefore, he has an abhorrence at whatever can tend to destroy society, and is willing to make use of every means, which can hinder so hated, and so dreadful an event. Injustice necessarily tends to destroy it. Every ap-pearance of injustice, therefore, alarms him, and he runs, if I may say so, to stop the progress of what, if allowed to go on, would quickly put an end to every thing that is dear to him. If he cannot restrain it by gentle and fair means, he must beat it down by force and violence, and at any rate must put a stop to its further progress. Hence it is, they say, that he often ap-proves of the enforcement of the laws of justice even by the capital punishment of those who viola
                        •
                     e them. The disturber of

the public peace is hereby removed out of the world, and others are terrified by his fate from imitating his example.
                  Such is the account commonly given of our approbation of the punishment of in-justice. And so far this account is un-doubtedly true that we frequently have oc-casion to confirm our natural sense of the propriety and fitness of punishment by re-flecting how necessary it is for preserving the order of society. When the guilty is about to suffer that just retaliation, which the natural indignation of mankind tells them is due to his crimes; when the inso-lence of his injustice is broken and hum-bled by the terror of his approaching pu-nishment; when he ceases to be an object of fear, with the generous and humane he begins to be an object of pity. The thought of what he is about to suffer extinguishes their resentment for the sufferings of others to which he has given occasion. They are disposed to pardon and forgive him, and to save him from that punishment which in all their cool hours they had considered as the retribution due to such crimes. Here, therefore, they have occasion to call to their assistance the consideration of the

general interest of society. They counter-balance the impulse of this weak and par-tial humanity, by the dictates of a hu-manity that is more generous and com-prehensive. They reflect that mercy to the guilty is cruelty to the innocent, and oppose to the emotions of compassion which they feel for a particular person, a more enlarged compassion, which they feel for mankind.
                  Sometimes too we have occasion to de-fend the propriety of observing the general rules of justice by the consideration of their necessity to the support of society. We frequently hear the young and the licenti-ous ridiculing the most sacred rules of mo-rality, and professing, sometimes from the corruption, but more frequently from the vanity of their hearts, the most abomi-nable maxims of conduct. Our indigna-tion rouses, and we are eager to refute and expose such detestable principles. But tho' it is their intrinsic hatefulness and detest-ableness, which originally inflames us against them, we are unwilling to assign this as the sole reason why we condemn them, or to pretend that it is merely be-cause we ourselves hate and detest them.

of any sentiment of the sufferer. The compassion of the spectator must arise altogether from the consideration of what he himself would feel if he was reduced to the same unhappy situation, and, what perhaps is impossible, was at the same time able to regard it with his present reason and judgment.
               What are the pangs of a mother when she hears the moanings of her infant that during the agony of disease cannot express what it feels? In her idea of what it suf-fers, she joins, to its real helplessness, her own consciousness of that helplessness, and her own terrors for the unknown conse-quences of its disorder; and out of all these forms, for her own sorrow, the most complete image of misery and distress. The infant, however, feels only the un-easiness of the present instant, which can never be great. With regard to the fu-ture it is perfectly secure, and in its thought-lessness and want of foresight possesses an antidote against fear and anxiety, the great tormentors of the human breast, from which reason and philosophy will in vain attempt to defend it when it grows up to a man.
               
                  

The reason, we think, would not appear to be conclusive. Yet why should it not; if we hate and detest them because they are the natural and proper objects of ha-tred and detestation? But when we are asked why we should not act in such or such a manner, the very question seems to sup-pose that, to those who ask it, this manner of acting does not appear to be for its own sake the natural and proper object of those sentiments. We must show them, there-fore, that it ought to be so for the sake of something else. Upon this account we ge-nerally cast about for other arguments, and the consideration which first occurs to us is the disorder and confusion of society which would result from the universal prevalence of such practices. We seldom fail, there-fore, to insist upon this topic.
                  But tho' it commonly requires no great discernment to see the destructive tendency of all licentious practices to the welfare of society, it is seldom this consideration which first animates us against them. All men, even the most stupid and unthink-ing, abhor fraud, perfidy, and injustice, and delight to see them punished. But few men have reflected upon the necessity

of justice to the existence of society, how obvious soever that necessity may appear to be.
                  That it is not a regard to the preserva-tion of society, which originally interests us in the punishment of crimes committed against individuals, may be demonstrated by many obvious considerations. The con-cern which we take in the fortune and hap-piness of individuals does not, in common cases, arise from that which we take in the fortune and happiness of society. We are no more concerned for the destruction or loss of a single man, because this man is a member or part of society, and because we should be concerned for the destruction of society, than we are concerned for the loss of a single guinea, because this guinea is a part of a thousand guineas, and be-cause we should be concerned for the loss of the whole sum. In neither case does our regard for the individuals arise from our regard for the multitude; but in both cases our regard for the multitude is com-pounded and made up of the particular regards which we feel for the different in-dividuals of which it is composed. As when a small sum is unjustly taken from

us we do not so much prosecute the injury from a regard to the preservation of our whole fortune, as from a regard to that particular sum which we have lost; so when a single man is injured or destroyed we demand the punishment of the wrong that has been done to him, not so much from a concern for the general interest of society, as from a concern for that very in-dividual who has been injured. It is to be observed, however, that this concern does not necessarily include in it any de-gree of those exquisite sentiments which are commonly called love, esteem and af-fection, and by which we distinguish our particular friends and acquaintance. The concern which is requisite for this is no more than the general fellow-feeling which we have with every man merely because he is our fellow-creature. We enter into the resentment even of an odious person, when he is injured by those to whom he has given no provocation. Our disapprobation of his ordinary character and conduct does not in this case altogether prevent our fel-low-feeling with his natural indignation; tho' with those who are not either extreme-ly candid, or who have not been accus-tomed

to correct and regulate their natu-ral sentiments by general rules, it is very apt to damp it.
                  Upon some occasions, indeed, we both punish and approve of punishment, mere-ly from a view to the general interest of society, which, we imagine, cannot other-wise be secured. Of this kind are all the punishments inflicted for breaches of what is called either civil police, or military dis-cipline. Such crimes do not immediately or directly hurt any particular person; but their remote consequences, it is supposed, do produce, or might produce, either a considerable inconveniency, or a great dis-order in the society. A centinel, for ex-ample, who falls asleep upon his watch, suffers death by the laws of war, because such carelessness might endanger the whole army. This severity may, upon many oc-casions, appear necessary, and, for that reason, just and proper. When the pre-servation of an individual is inconsistent with the safety of a multitude, nothing can be more just than that the many should be preferred to the one. Yet this punishment, how necessary soever, always appears to be excessively severe. The natural atrocity of

the crime seems to be so little, and the punishment so great, that it is with diffi-culty that our heart can reconcile itself to it. Though such carelessness appears very blameable, yet the thought of this crime does not naturally excite any such resent-ment, as would prompt us to take such dreadful revenge. A man of humanity must recollect himself, must make an ef-fort, and exert his whole firmness and re-solution, before he can bring himself either to inflict it, or to go along with it when it is inflicted by others. It is not, how-ever, in this manner, that he looks upon the just punishment of an ungrateful mur-derer or parricide. His heart, in this case, applauds with ardour, and even with trans-port, the just retaliation which seems due to such detestable crimes, and which, if, by any accident, they should happen to escape, he would be highly enraged and disappointed. The very different senti-ments with which the spectator views those different punishments, is a proof that his approbation of the one is far from being founded upon the same principles with that of the other. He looks upon the centinel as an unfortunate victim, who, indeed,

must, and ought to be, devoted to the safety of numbers, but whom still, in his heart, he would be glad to save; and he is only sorry, that the interest of the many should oppose it. But if the murderer should escape from punishment, it would excite his highest indignation, and he would call upon God to avenge, in an-other world, that crime which the injus-tice of mankind had neglected to chastise upon earth.
                  For it well deserves to be taken notice of, that we are so far from imagining that injustice ought to be punished in this life, merely on account of the order of society, which cannot otherwise be maintained, that nature teaches us to hope, and reli-gion authorises us to expect, that it will be punished, even in a life to come. Our sense of its ill desert pursues it, if I may say so, even beyond the grave, though the example of its punishment there cannot serve to deter the rest of mankind, who see it not, who know it not, from being guil-ty of the like practices here. The justice of God, however, we think, still requires, that he should hereafter avenge the inju-ries

of the widow and the fatherless, who are here so often insulted with impunity.
                  That the Deity loves virtue and hates vice, as a voluptuous man loves riches and hates poverty, not for their own sakes, but for the effects which they tend to pro-duce; that he loves the one, only because it promotes the happiness of society, which his benevolence prompts him to desire; and that he hates the other, only because it oc-casions the misery of mankind, which the same divine quality renders the object of his aversion; is not the doctrine of nature, but of an artificial, though ingenious, re-finement of philosophy. All our natural sentiments prompt us to believe, that as perfect virtue is supposed necessarily to ap-pear to the Deity, as it does to us, for its own sake, and without any further view, the natural and proper object of love and reward, so must vice, of hatred and pu-nishment. That the gods neither resent nor hurt, was the general maxim of all the different sects of the ancient philoso-phy: and if, by resenting, be understood, that violent and disorderly perturbation, which often distracts and confounds the human breast; or if, by hurting, be un-derstood,

the doing mischief wantonly, and without regard to propriety or justice, such weakness is undoubtedly unworthy of the divine perfection. But if it be meant, that vice does not appear to the Deity to be, for its own sake, the object of abhor-rence and aversion, and what, for its own sake, it is fit and right should be punished, the truth of this maxim can, by no means, be so easily admitted. If we consult our natural sentiments, we are apt to fear, lest before the holiness of God, vice should appear to be more worthy of punishment than the weakness and imperfection of hu-man virtue can ever seem to be of reward. Man, when about to appear before a be-ing of infinite perfection, can feel but little confidence in his own merit, or in the im-perfect propriety of his own conduct. In the presence of his fellow-creatures, he may often justly elevate himself, and may of-ten have reason to think highly of his own character and conduct, compared to the still greater imperfection of theirs. But the case is quite different when about to appear before his infinite Creator. To such a being, he can scarce imagine, that his littleness and weakness should ever seem

to be the proper object, either of esteem or of reward. But he can easily conceive▪ how the numberless violations of duty, of which he has been guilty, should render him the proper object of aversion and pu-nishment; neither can he see any reason why the divine indignation should not be let loose without any restraint, upon so vile an insect, as he is sensible that he himself must appear to be. If he would still hope for happiness, he is conscious that he can-not demand it from the justice, but that he must entreat it from the mercy of God. Repentance, sorrow, humiliation, contri-tion at the thought of his past conduct, are, upon this account, the sentiments which become him, and seem to be the only means which he has left for appeasing that wrath which, he knows, he has just-ly provoked. He even distrusts the effi-cacy of all these, and naturally fears, lest the wisdom of God should not, like the weakness of man, be prevailed upon to spare the crime, by the most importunate lamentations of the criminal. Some other intercession, some other sacrifice, some other atonement, he imagines, must be made for him, beyond what he himself is ca-pable

of making, before the purity of the divine justice can be reconciled to his ma-nifold offences. The doctrines of revela-tion coincide, in every respect, with those original anticipations of nature; and, as they teach us how little we can depend upon the imperfection of our own virtue, so they show us, at the same time, that the most powerful intercession has been made, and that the most dreadful atone-ment has been paid for our manifold trans-gressions and iniquities.
               
            
            
               
We sympathize even with the dead, and overlooking what is of real impor-tance in their situation, that awful futu-rity which awaits them, we are chiefly af-fected by those circumstances which strike our senses, but can have no influence upon their happiness. It is miserable, we think, to be deprived of the light of the sun; to be shut out from life and conversation; to be laid in the cold grave a prey to corruption and the reptiles of the earth; to be no more thought of in this world, but to be obliterated in a little time from the affections and almost from the me-mory of their dearest friends and relations. Surely, we imagine, we can never feel too much for those who have suffered so dread-ful a calamity. The tribute of our fellow-feeling seems doubly due to them now when they are in danger of being forgot by every body: and, by the vain honours which we pay to their memory, we endea-vour, for our own misery, artificially to keep alive our melancholy remembrance of their misfortune. That our sympathy can afford them no consolation seems to be an addition to their calamity; and to think that all we can do is unavailing,

               SECT. III. Of the influence of fortune upon the sen-timents of mankind, with regard to the merit or demerit of actions.
               
                  INTRODUCTION.
                  WHATEVER praise or blame can be due to any action, must be-long either, first, to the intention or af-fection of the heart, from which it pro-ceeds; or, secondly, to the external action or movement of the body, which this affec-tion gives occasion to; or last, to all the good or bad consequences, which actually, and in fact, proceed from it. These three different things constitute the whole na-ture and circumstances of the action, and must be the foundation of whatever qua-lity can belong to it.
                  That the two last of these three cir-cumstances cannot be the foundation of any praise or blame, is abundantly evident; nor has the contrary ever been asserted by

any body. The external action or move-ment of the body is often the same in the most innocent, and in the most blameable actions. He who shoots a bird, and he who shoots a man, both of them perform the same external movement: each of them draws the tricker of a gun. The conse-quences which actually, and in fact, hap-pen to proceed from any action, are, if possible, still more indifferent either to praise or blame, than even the external movement of the body. As they depend, not upon the agent, but upon fortune, they cannot be the proper foundation for any sentiment, of which his character and conduct are the objects.
                  The only consequences for which he can be answerable, or by which he can deserve either approbation or disapprobation of any kind, are those which were some way or other intended, or those which, at least, show some agreeable or disagreeable qua-lity in the intention of the heart, from which he acted. To the intention or af-fection of the heart, therefore, to the pro-priety or impropriety, to the beneficence or hurtfulness of the design, all praise or blame, all approbation or disapprobation,

of any kind, which can justly be bestowed upon any action must ultimately belong.
                  When this maxim is thus proposed, in abstract and general terms, there is no body who does not agree to it. It's self-evident justice is acknowledged by all the world, and there is not a dissenting voice among all mankind. Every body allows, that, how different soever the accidental, the unintended and unforeseen consequen-ces of different actions, yet, if the in-tentions or affections from which they arose were, on the one hand, equally proper and equally beneficent, or, on the other, equally improper and equally male-volent, the merit or demerit of the actions is still the same, and the agent is equally the suitable object either of gratitude or of resentment.
                  But how well soever we may seem to be persuaded of the truth of this equitable maxim, when we consider it after this manner, in abstract, yet when we come to particular cases, the actual consequen-ces which happen to proceed from any action, have a very great effect upon our 
                        •
                     entiments concerning its merit or demerit, 
                        •
                     nd almost always either enhance or di-minish

our sense of both. Scarce, in any one instance, perhaps, will our sentiments be found, after examination, to be en-tirely regulated by this rule, which we all acknowledge ought entirely to regulate them.
                  This irregularity of sentiment, which every body feels, which scarce any body is suf-ficiently aware of, and which no body is willing to acknowledge, I proceed now to explain; and I shall consider, first, the cause which gives occasion to it, or the me-chanism by which nature produces it; se-condly, the extent of its influence; and, last of all, the end which it answers, or the purpose which the author of nature seems to have intended by it.
               
               
                  CHAP. I. Of the causes of this influence of fortune.
                  THE causes of pain and pleasure, whatever they are, or however they operate, seem to be the ob-jects, which, in all animals, immediately excite those two passions of gratitude and

resentment. They are excited by inani-mated, as well as by animated objects. We are angry, for a moment, even at the stone that hurts us. A child beats it, a dog barks at it, a choleric man is apt to curse it. The least reflection, indeed, cor-rects this sentiment, and we soon become sensible, that what has no feeling is a very improper object of revenge. When the mischief, however, is very great, the ob-ject which caused it becomes disagreeable to us ever after, and we take pleasure to burn or destroy it. We should treat, in this manner, the instrument which had accidentally been the cause of the death of a friend, and we should often think ourselves guilty of a sort of inhumanity, if we neglected to vent this absurd sort of vengeance upon it.
                  We conceive, in the same manner, a sort of gratitude for those inanimated ob-jects, which have been the causes of great, or frequent pleasure to us. The sailor, who, as soon as he got ashore, should mend his fire with the plank upon which he had just escaped from a shipwreck, would seem to be guilty of an unnatural action. We should expect that he would

rather preserve it with care and affection, as a monument that was, in some mea-sure, dear to him. A man grows fond of a snuff-box, of a pen-knife, of a staff which he has long made use of, and con-ceives something like a real love and af-fection for them. If he breaks or loses them, he is vexed out of all proportion to the value of the damage. The house which we have long lived in, the tree, whose verdure and shade we have long enjoyed, are both looked upon with a sort of re-spect that seems due to such benefactors. The decay of the one, or the ruin of the other, affects us with a kind of melancho-ly, though we should sustain no loss by it. The Dryads and the Lares of the ancients, a sort of genii of trees and houses, were probably first suggested by this sort of af-fection, which the authors of those super-stitions felt for such objects, and which seemed unreasonable, if there was nothing animated about them.
                  But, before any thing can be the proper object of gratitude or resentment, it must not only be the cause of pleasure or pain, it must likewise be capable of feeling them. Without this other quality, those passions

cannot vent themselves with any sort of sa-tisfaction upon it. As they are excited by the causes of pleasure and pain, so their gra-tification consists in retaliating those sensati-ons upon what gave occasion to them; which it is to no purpose to attempt upon what has no sensibility. Animals, therefore, are less improper objects of gratitude and re-sentment than inanimated objects. The dog that bites, the ox that gores, are both of them punished. If they have been the causes of the death of any person, neither the public, nor the relations of the slain, can be satisfied, unless they are put to death in their turn: nor is this merely for the security of the living, but, in some measure, to revenge the injury of the dead. Those animals, on the contrary, that have been remark-ably serviceable to their masters, become the objects of a very lively gratitude. We are shocked at the brutality of that officer mentioned in the Turkish Spy, who stab-bed he horse that had carried him a-cross an arm of the sea, lest that animal should afterwards distinguish some other person by a similar adventure.
                  But, though animals are not only the causes of pleasure and pain, but are also ca-pable of feeling those sensations, they are

still far from being compleat and perfect objects, either of gratitude or resentment; and those passions still feel, that there is something wanting to their entire gratifi-cation. What gratitude chiefly desires, is not only to make the benefactor feel plea-sure in his turn, but to make him conscious that he meets with this reward on account of his past conduct, to make him pleased with that conduct, and to satisfy him, that the person upon whom he bestowed his good offices was not unworthy of them. What most of all charms us in our bene-factor, is the concord between his senti-ments and our own, with regard to what interests us so nearly as the worth of our own character, and the esteem that is due to us. We are delighted to find a person who values us as we value ourselves, and distinguishes us from the rest of mankind, with an attention not unlike that with which we distinguish ourselves. To main-tain in him these agreeable and flattering sentiments, is one of the chief ends pro-posed by the returns we are disposed to make to him. A generous mind often dis-dains the interested thought of extorting new favours from its benefactor, by what

may be called the importunities of its gra-titude. But to preserve and to increase his esteem, is an interest which the greatest mind does not think unworthy of its at-tention. And this is the foundation of what I formerly observed, that when we cannot enter into the motives of our bene-factor, when his conduct and character appear unworthy of our approbation, let his services have been ever so great, our gratitude is always sensibly diminished. We are less flattered by the distinction; and to preserve the esteem of so weak, or so worthless a patron, seems to be an ob-ject which does not deserve to be pursued for its own sake.
                  The object, on the contrary, which re-sentment is chiefly intent upon, is not so much to make our enemy feel pain in his turn, as to make him conscious that he feels it upon account of his past conduct, to make him repent of that conduct, and to make him sensible, that the person whom he injured did not deserve to be treated in that manner. What chiefly enrages us against the man who injures or insults us, is the little account which he seems to make of us, the unreasonable preference which

he gives to himself above us, and that ab-surd self-love, by which he seems to ima-gine, that other people may be sacrificed at any time, to his conveniency or his humour. The glaring impropriety of this conduct, the gross insolence and in-justice which it seems to involve in it, often shock and exasperate us more than all the mischief which we have suffered. To bring him back to a more just sense of what is due to other people, to make him sen-sible of what he owes us, and of the wrong that he has done to us, is frequently the principal end proposed in our revenge, which is always imperfect when it cannot accomplish this. When our enemy ap-pears to have done us no injury, when we are sensible that he acted quite properly, that, in his situation, we should have done the same thing, and that we deserved from him all the mischief we met with; in that case, if we have the least spark either of candour or justice, we can entertain no sort of resentment.
                  Before any thing, therefore, can be the compleat and proper object, either of gra-titude or resentment, it must possess three different qualifications. First, it must be the cause of pleasure in the one case,

and that, what alleviates all other distress, the regret, the love and the lamentation of their friends, can yield no comfort to them, serves only to exasperate our sense of their misery. The happiness of the dead, however, most assuredly, is affected by none of these circumstances; nor is it the thought of these things which can ever disturb the security of their repose. The idea of that dreary and endless melancholy, which the fancy naturally ascribes to their condition, arises altogether from our join-ing to the change which has been pro-duced upon them, our own consciousness of that change, from our putting ourselves in their situation, and from our lodging, if I may be allowed to say so, our own living souls in their inanimated bodies, and thence conceiving what would be our emotions in this case. It is this very illu-sion of the imagination which renders the foresight of our own dissolution so terrible to us, and the idea of those circumstances, which undoubtedly can give us no pain when we are dead, makes us miserable while we are alive. And from thence arises one of the most important prin-ciples in human nature, the dread of death,

and of pain in the other. Secondly, it must be capable of feeling those sensations. And, thirdly, it must not only have produced those sensations, but it must have produced them from design, and from a design that is approved or in the one case, and dis-approved of in the other. It is by the first qualification, that any object is ca-pable of exciting those passions: it is by the second, that it is in any respect capable of gratifying them: the third qualification is both necessary for their compleat satisfac-tion, and as it gives a pleasure or pain that is both exquisite and peculiar, it is likewise an additional exciting cause of those passions.
                  As what gives pleasure or pain, there-fore, either in one way or another, is the sole exciting cause of gratitude and resent-ment; though the intentions of any per-son should be ever so proper and beneficent, on the one hand, or ever so improper and malevolent on the other; yet, if he has failed in producing either the good or the evil which he intended, as one of the ex-citing causes is wanting in both cases, less gratitude seems due to him in the one, and less resentment in the other. And, on the contrary, though in the intentions of any

person, there was either no laudable de-gree of benevolence, on the one hand, or no blameable degree of malice on the o-ther, yet, if his actions should produce either great good or great evil, as one of the exciting causes takes place upon both these occasions, some gratitude is apt to arise towards him in the one, and some resentment in the other. A shadow of merit seems to fall upon him in the first, a shadow of demerit in the second. And, as the consequences of actions are alto-gether under the empire of fortune, hence arises her influence upon the sentiments of mankind, with regard to merit and demerit.
               
               
                  CHAP. II. Of the extent of this influence of fortune.
                  THE effect of this influence of for-tune is, first, to diminish our sense of the merit or demerit of those actions which arose from the most laudable or blameable intentions, when they fail of producing their proposed effects: and, se-condly, to increase our sense of the merit

or demerit of actions, beyond what is due to the motives or affections from which they proceed, when they accidentally give occasion either to extraordinary pleasure or pain.
                  I. First, I say, though the intentions of any person should be ever so proper and beneficent, on the one hand, or ever so improper and malevolent, on the other, yet, if they fail in producing their effects, his merit seems imperfect in the one case, and his demerit incompleat in the other. Nor is this irregularity of sentiment felt only by those who are immediately affec-ted by the consequence of any action. It is felt, in some measure, even by the im-partial spectator. The man who solicits an office for another, without obtaining it, is regarded as his friend, and seems to deserve his love and affection. But the man who not only solicits, but procures it, is more peculiarly considered as his pa-tron and benefactor, and as intitled to his respect and gratitude. The person obliged, we are apt to think, may, with some jus-tice, imagine himself on a level with the first; but we cannot enter in his senti-ments, if he does not feel himself inferior

to the second. It is common indeed to say, that we are equally obliged to the man who has endeavoured to serve us, as to him who actually did so. It is the speech which we constantly make upon every un-successful attempt of this kind; but which, like all other fine speeches, must be under-stood with a grain of allowance. The senti-ments which a man of generosity entertains for the friend who fails, may often indeed be nearly the same with those which he conceives for him who succeeds: and the more generous he is, the more nearly will those sentiments approach to an exact level. With the truly generous, to be beloved, to be esteemed by those whom they them-selves think worthy of esteem, gives more pleasure, and thereby excites more gratitude, than all the advantages which they can ever expect from those sentiments. When they lose those advantages therefore, they seem to lose but a trifle, which is scarce worth regarding. They still however lose something. Their pleasure therefore, and consequently their gratitude, is not perfect-ly compleat: and accordingly if, between the friend who fails and the friend who succeeds, all other circumstances are equal,

there will, even in the noblest and the best mind, be some little difference of affec-tion in favour of him who succeeds. Nay, so unjust are mankind in this respect, that though the intended benefit should be pro-cured, yet if it is not procured by the means of a particular benefactor, they are apt to think that less gratitude is due to the man, who with the best intentions in the world could do no more than help it a little forward. As their gratitude is in this case divided among the different per-sons who contributed to their pleasure, a smaller share of it seems due to any one. Such a person, we hear men commonly say, intended no doubt to serve us; and we really believe exerted himself to the utmost of his abilities for that purpose. We are not, however, obliged to him for this be-nefit; since had it not been for the con-currence of others, all that he could have done would never have brought it about. This consideration, they imagine, should, even in the eyes of the impartial specta-tor, diminish the debt which they owe to him. The person himself who has unsuc-cessfully endeavoured to confer a benefit, has by no means the same dependency up-on

the gratitude of the man whom he meant to oblige, nor the same sense of his own merit towards him which he would have had in the case of success.
                  Even the merit of talents and abilities which some accident has hindered from producing their effects, seems in some mea-sure imperfect, even to those who are ful-ly convinced of their capacity to produce them. The general who has been hinder-ed by the envy of ministers from gaining some great advantage over the enemies of his country, regrets the loss of the oppor-tunity for ever after. Nor is it only upon account of the public that he regrets it. He laments that he was hindered from per-forming an action which would have ad-ded a new lustre to his character in his own eyes, as well as in those of every o-ther person. It satisfies neither himself nor others to reflect that the plan or design was all that depended on him, that no greater capacity was required to execute it than what was necessary to concert it: that he was allowed to be every way ca-pable of executing it, and that had he been permitted to go on, success was infal-lible. He still did not execute it; and

though he might deserve all the approba-tion which is due to a magnanimous and great design, he still wanted the actual me-rit of having performed a great action. To take the management of any affair of public concern from the man who has al-most brought it to a conclusion, is regard-ed as the most invidious injustice. As he had done so much, he should, we think, have been allowed to acquire the compleat merit of putting an end to it. It was ob-jected to Pompey, that he came in upon the victories of Lucullus, and gathered those laurels which were due to the fortune and valour of another. The glory of Lu-cullus, it seems, was less compleat even in the opinion of his own friends, when he was not permitted to finish that conquest which his conduct and courage had put in the power of almost any man to finish. It mortifies an architect when his plans are either not executed at all, or when they are so far altered as to spoil the effect of the building. The plan, however, is all that depends upon the architect. The whole of his genius is, to good judges, as compleatly discovered in that as in the ac-tual execution. But a plan does not, even

to the most intelligent, give the same plea-sure as a noble and magnificent building. They may discover as much both of taste and genius in the one as in the other. But their effects are still vastly different, and the amusement derived from the first, ne-ver approaches to the wonder and admi-ration which are sometimes excited by the second. We may believe of many men, that their talents are superior to those of Caesar and Alexander; and that in the same situations they would perform still greater actions. In the mean time, however, we do not behold them with that astonish-ment and admiration with which those two heroes have been regarded in all ages and na-tions. The calm judgments of the mind may approve of them more, but they want the splendor of great actions to dazzle and trans-port it. The superiority of virtues and talents have not, even upon those who acknowledge that superiority, the same effect with the superiority of atchievements.
                  As the merit of an unsuccessful attempt to do good seems thus, in the eyes of un-grateful mankind, to be diminished by the miscarriage, so does likewise the demerit of an unsuccessful attempt to do evil. The

design to commit a crime, how clearly so-ever it may be proved, is scarce ever pu-nished with the same severity as the actual commission of it. The case of treason is perhaps the only exception. That crime immediately affecting the being of the government itself, the government is naturally more jealous of it than of any other. In the punishment of treason, the sovereign resents the injuries which are immediately done to himself: in the pu-nishment of other crimes, he resents those which are done to other men. It is his own resentment which he indulges in the one case: it is that of his subjects which by sympathy he enters into in the other. In the first case, therefore, as he judges in his own cause, he is very apt to be more violent and sanguinary in his punishments than the impartial spectator can approve of. His resentment too rises here upon smaller occasions, and does not always, as in other cases, wait for the perpetration of the crime, or even for the attempt to com-mit it. A treasonable concert, tho' nothing has been done, or even attempted in con-sequence of it, nay, a treasonable conver-
                     
                        •
                     ation, is in many countries punished in

the same manner as the actual commission of treason. With regard to all other crimes, the mere design, upon which no attempt has followed, is seldom punished at all, and is never punished severely. A criminal design, and a criminal action, it may be said indeed, do not necessarily sup-pose the same degree of depravity, and ought not therefore to be subjected to the same punishment. We are capable, it may be said, of resolving, and even of taking measures to execute, many things which, when it comes to the point, we feel ourselves altogether incapable of execu-ting. But this reason can have no place when the design has been carried the length of the last attempt. The man, however, who fires a pistol at his enemy, but misses him, is punished with death by the laws of scarce any country. By the old law of Scotland, tho' he should wound him, yet, unless death ensues within a cer-tain time, the assassine is not liable to the last punishment. The resentment of man-kind, however, runs so high against thi
                        •
                      crime, their terror for the man who show himself capable of committing it is s
                        •
                      great, that the mere attempt to commit i
                        •
                     
                     

the great poison to the happiness, but the great restraint upon the injustice of mankind, which, while it afflicts and mor-tifies the individual, guards and protects the society.
            
            
               

ought in all countries to be capital. The attempt to commit smaller crimes is almost always punished very lightly, and some-times is not punished at all. The thief, whose hand has been caught in his neigh-bour's pocket before he had taken any thing out of it, is punished with ignominy only. If he had got time to take away an handkerchief, he would have been put to death. The house-breaker, who has been found setting a ladder to his neighbour's window, but had not got into it, is not exposed to the capital punishment. The at-tempt to ravish is not punished as a rape. The attempt to seduce a married woman is not punished at all, tho' seduction is pu-nished severely. Our resentment against the person who only attempted to do a mis-chief is seldom so strong as to bear us out in inflicting the same punishment upon him which we should have thought due if he had actually done it. In the one case, the joy of our deliverance alleviates our sense of the atrocity of his conduct; in the other, the grief for our misfortune in-creases it. His real demerit, however, is undoubtedly the same in both cases, since his intentions were equally criminal; and

there is in this respect, therefore, an irre-gularity in the sentiments of all men, and a consequent relaxation of discipline in the laws of, I believe, all nations, of the most civilized, as well as of the most barbarous. The humanity of a civilized people dis-poses them either to dispense with, or to mi-tigate punishments wherever their natural indignation is not goaded on by the conse-quences of the crime. Barbarians, on the other hand, when no actual consequence has happened from any action, are not apt to be very delicate or inquisitive about the motives.
                  The person himself who either from passion, or from the influence of bad com-pany, has resolved, and perhaps taken measures to perpetrate some crime, but who has fortunately been prevented by an acci-dent which put it out of his power, is sure, if he has any remains of conscience, to re-gard this event all his life after as a great and signal deliverance. He can never think of it without returning thanks to Heaven for having been thus graciously pleased to save him from the guilt into which he was just ready to plunge himself, and to hinder him from rendering all the rest of his life a

s
                        •
                     ene of horror, remorse, and repentance. But tho' his hands are innocent, he is con-scious that his heart is equally guilty as if he had actually executed what he was so fully resolved upon. It gives great ease to his conscience, however, to consider that the crime was not executed, tho' he knows that the failure arose from no virtue in him. He still considers himself as less de-serving of punishment and resentment; and this good fortune either diminishes, or takes away altogether, all sense of guilt. To remember how much he was resolved upon it, has no other effect than to make him regard his escape as the greater and more miraculous: for he still fancies that he has escaped, and he looks back upon the danger to which his peace of mind was exposed, with that terror, with which one who is in safety may sometimes remem-ber the hazard he was in of falling over a precipice, and shudder with horror at the thought.
                  2. The second effect of this influence of fortune, is to increase our sense of the me-rit or demerit of actions beyond what is due to the motives or affection from which 
                        •
                     hey proceed, when they happen to give

occasion to extraordinary pleasure or pain. The agreeable or disagreeable effects of the action often throw a shadow of merit or demerit upon the agent, tho' in his inten-tion there was nothing that deserved either praise or blame, or at least that deserved them in the degree in which we are apt to bestow them. Thus, even the messenger of bad news is disagreeable to us, and, on the contrary, we feel a sort of gratitude for the man who brings us good tidings. For a moment we look upon them both as the authors, the one of our good, the other of our bad fortune, and regard them in some measure as if they had really brought about the events which they only give an account of. The first author of our joy is natural-ly the object of a transitory gratitude: we embrace him with warmth and affection, and should be glad, during the instant of our prosperity, to reward him as for some signal service. By the custom of all courts, the officer, who brings the news of a vic-tory, is intitled to considerable preferments, and the general always chuses one of his principal favourites to go upon so agree-able an errand. The first author of our sorrow is, on the contrary, just as natural-ly

the object of a transitory resentment. We can scarce avoid looking upon him with chagrine and uneasiness; and the rude and brutal are apt to vent upon him that spleen which his intelligence gives oc-casion to. Tigranes, King of Armenia, struck off the head of the man who brought him the first account of the approach of a formidable enemy. To punish in this manner the author of bad tidings, seems barbarous and inhuman: yet, to reward the messenger of good news, is not disagree-able to us; we think it suitable to the bounty of kings. But why do we make this difference, since, if there is no fault in the one, neither is there any merit in the other? It is because any sort of reason seems sufficient to authorize the ex-ertion of the social and benevolent affec-tions; but it requires the most solid and substantial to make us enter into that of the unsocial and malevolent.
                  But tho' in general we are averse to enter into the unsocial and malevolent affections, tho' we lay it down for a rule that we ought never to approve of their gratifica-tion unless so far as the malicious and un-just intention of the person, against whom

they are directed, renders him their proper object; yet, upon some occasions, we relax of this severity. When the negligence of one man has occasioned some unintended damage to another, we generally enter so far into the resentment of the sufferer, as to approve of his inflicting a punishment upon the offender much beyond what the offence would have appeared to deserve, had no such unlucky consequence followed from it.
                  There is a degree of negligence, which would appear to deserve some chastise-ment tho' it should occasion no damage to any body. Thus, if a person should throw a large stone over a wall into a public street without giving warning to those who might be passing by, and without regard-ing where it was likely to fall, he would undoubtedly deserve some chastisement. A very accurate police would punish so ab-surd an action, even tho' it had done no mischief. The person who has been guilty of it, shows an insolent contempt of the happiness and safety of others. There is real injustice in his conduct. He wanton-ly exposes his neighbour to what no man in his senses would chuse to expose himself,

and evidently wants that sense of what is due to his fellow creatures which is the ba-sis of justice and of society. Gross negli-gence therefore is, in the law, said to be al-most equal to malicious design Lata culpa prope dolum est.. When any unlucky consequences happen from such carelessness, the person who has been guilty of it is often punished as if he had really intended those consequences; and his conduct, which was only thoughtless and insolent, and what deserved some chastisement, is considered as atrocious, and as liable to the severest punishment. Thus if, by the imprudent action above mentioned, he should accidentally kill a man, he is, by the laws of many coun-tries, particularly by the old law of Scot-land, liable to the last punishment. And tho' this is no doubt excessively severe, it is not altogether inconsistent with our natu-ral sentiments. Our just indignation a-gainst the folly and inhumanity of his conduct is exasperated by our sympathy with the unfortunate sufferer. Nothing however would appear more shocking to our natural sense of equity, than to bring a man to the scaffold merely for having

thrown a stone carelessly into the street without hurting any body. The folly and inhumanity of his conduct, however, would in this case be the same; but still our sen-timents would be very different. The con-sideration of this difference may satisfy us how much the indignation, even of the spectator, is apt to be animated by the actual consequences of the action. In cases of this kind there will, if I am not mis-taken, be found a great degree of severity in the laws of almost all nations; as I have already observed that in those of an op-posite kind there was a very general re-laxation of discipline.
                  There is another degree of negligence which does not involve in it any sort of in-justice. The person who is guilty of it treats his neighbour as he treats himself, means no harm to any body, and is far from entertaining any insolent contempt for the safety and happiness of others. He is not, however, so careful and circumspect in his conduct as he ought to be, and de-serves upon this account some degree of blame and censure, but no sort of punish-ment. Yet if by a negligence Culpa levis. of this kind

he should occasion some damage to an-other person, he is by the laws of, I be-lieve, all countries, obliged to compensate it. And though this is no doubt a real punishment, and what no mortal would have thought of inflicting upon him, had it not been for the unlucky accident which his conduct gave occasion to; yet this de-cision of the law is approved of by the na-tural sentiments of all mankind. Nothing, we think, can be more just than that one man should not suffer by the carelessness of another; and that the damage occasioned by blameable negligence should be made up by the person who was guilty of it.
                  There is another species of negligence Culpa levissima., which consists merely in a want of the most anxious timidity and circumspection, with regard to all the possible consequences of our actions. The want of this painful at-tention, when no bad consequences follow from it, is so far from being regarded as blameable, that the contrary quality is ra-ther considered as such. That timid circum-spection which is afraid of every thing, is never regarded as a virtue, but as a qua-lity which more than any other incapacitates

for action and business. Yet when, from a want of this excessive care, a person hap-pens to occasion some damage to another, he is often by the law obliged to compen-sate it. Thus, by the Aquilian law, the man, who not being able to manage a horse that had accidentally taken fright, should happen to ride down his neighbour's slave, is obliged to compensate the damage. When an accident of this kind happens, we are apt to think that he ought not to have rode such a horse, and to regard his attempting it as an unpardonable levity; though without this accident we should not only have made no such reflection, but should have regarded his refusing it as the effect of timid weakness, and of an an-xiety about merely possible effects, which it is to no purpose to be aware of. The person himself, who by an accident even of this kind has involuntarily hurt another, seems to have some sense of his own ill de-sert, with regard to him. He naturally runs up to the sufferer to express his con-cern for what has happened, and to make every acknowledgment in his power. If he has any sensibility, he necessarily desires to compensate the damage, and to do every

               SECT. II. Of the sentiment by which we ap-prove or disapprove of the pas-sions and affections of other men, as suitable or unsuitable to their objects.
               
                  CHAP. I. Of the pleasure of mutual SYMPATHY.
                  BUT whatever may be the cause of sympathy, or however it may be excited, nothing pleases us more than to observe in other men a fellow-feeling with all the emotions of our own breast; nor are we ever so much shocked as by the appearance of the contrary. Those who are fond of deducing all our sen-timents from certain refinements of self-love, think themselves at no loss to ac-count, according to their own principles, both for this pleasure and this pain. Man, say they, conscious of his own weakness

thing he can to appease that animal resent-ment, which he is sensible will be apt to arise in the breast of the sufferer. To make no apology, to offer no atonement, is re-garded as the highest brutality. Yet why should he make an apology more than any other person? Why should he, since he was equally innocent with any other by-stander, be thus singled out from among all mankind, to make up for the bad for-tune of another? This task would surely never be imposed upon him, did not even the impartial spectator feel some indul-gence for what may be regarded as the un-just resentment of that other.
               
               
                  CHAP. III. Of the final cause of this irregularity of sentiments.
                  SUCH is the effect of the good or bad consequences of actions upon the sen-timents both of the person who performs them, and of others; and thus, fortune, which governs the world, has some influ-ence where we should be least willing to allow her any, and directs in some mea-sure

the sentiments of mankind, with re-gard to the character and conduct both of themselves and others. That the world judges by the event, and not by the design, has been in all ages the complaint, and is the great discouragement of virtue. Every body agrees to the general maxim, that as the event does not depend on the agent, it ought to have no influence upon our sentiments, with regard to the merit or propriety of his conduct. But when we come to particulars, we find that our sen-timents are scarce in any one instance ex-actly conformable to what this equitable maxim would direct. The happy or un-prosperous event of any action, is not on-ly apt to give us a good or bad opinion of the prudence with which it was conduct-ed, but almost always too animates our gratitude or resentment, our sense of the merit or demerit of the design.
                  Nature, however, when she implanted the seeds of this irregularity in the human breast, seems, as upon all other occasions, to have intended the happiness and perfec-tion of the species. If the hurtfulness of the design, if the malevolence of the affec-tion, were alone the causes which excit-ed

our resentment, we should feel all the furies of that passion against any person in whose breast we suspected or believed such designs or affections were haboured, though they had never broke out into any action. Sentiments, thoughts, intentions, would become the objects of punishment; and if the indignation of mankind run as high against them as against actions; if the baseness of the thought which had given birth to no action, seemed in the eyes of the world as much to call aloud for vengeance as the baseness of the action, every court of judicature would become a real inquisition. There would be no safety for the most innocent and circum-spect conduct. Bad wishes, bad views, bad designs, might still be suspected; and while these excited the same indignation with bad conduct, while bad intentions were as much resented as bad actions, they would equally expose the person to punish-ment and resentment. Actions therefore which either produce actual evil, or at-tempt to produce it, and thereby put us in the immediate fear of it, are by the au-thor of nature rendered the only proper and approved objects of human punish-ment


and resentment. Sentiments, designs, affections, though it is from these that ac-cording to cool reason human actions derive their whole merit or demerit, are placed by the great Judge of hearts beyond the li-mits of every human jurisdiction, and are reserved for the cognizance of his own un-erring tribunal. That necessary rule of justice, therefore, that men in this life are liable to punishment for their actions on-ly, not for their designs and intentions, is founded upon this salutary and useful ir-regularity in human sentiments concern-ing merit or demerit, which at first sight appears so absurd and unaccountable. But every part of nature, when attentively surveyed, equally demonstrates the provi-dential care of its author, and we may ad-mire the wisdom and goodness of God even in the weakness and folly of men.
                  Nor is that irregularity of sentiments altogether without its utility, by which the merit of an unsuccessful attempt to serve, and much more that of meer good inclinations and kind wishes, appears to be imperfect. Man was made for action, and to promote by the exertion of his faculties such changes in the external circumstances

both of himself and others, as may seem most favourable to the happiness of all. He must not be satisfied with indolent be-nevolence, nor fancy himself the friend of mankind, because in his heart he wishes well to the prosperity of the world. That he may call forth the whole vigour of his soul, and strain every nerve, in order to produce those ends which it is the purpose of his being to advance, nature has taught him, that neither himself nor mankind can be fully satisfied with his conduct, nor be-stow upon it the full measure of applause, unless he has actually produced them. He is made to know, that the praise of good intentions, without the merit of good of-fices, will be but of little avail to excite either the loudest acclamations of the world, or even the highest degree of self-
                        •
                     pplause. The man who has performed 
                        •
                     o single action of importance, but whose whole conversation and deportment express 
                        •
                     he justest, the noblest, and most generous 
                        •
                     entiments, can be intitled to demand no 
                        •
                     ery high reward, even tho' his inutility 
                        •
                     hould be owing to nothing but the want 
                        •
                     f an opportunity to serve. We can still 
                        •
                     efuse it him without blame. We can

still ask him, What have you done? What actual service can you produce, to intitle you to so great a recompence? We esteem you, and love you; but we owe you no-thing. To reward indeed that latent vir-tue which has been useless only for want of an opportunity to serve, to bestow upon it those honours and preferments which, tho' in some measure it may be said to deserve them, it could not with propriety have in-sisted upon, is the effect of the most divine benevolence. To punish, on the contrary, for the affections of the heart only, where no crime has been committed, is the most insolent and barbarous tyranny. The be-nevolent affections seem to deserve most praise, when they do not wait till it be-comes almost a crime for them not to exert themselves. The malevolent, on the con-trary, can scarce be too tardy, too slow or deliberate.
                  It is even of use that the evil which is done without design should be regarded as a misfortune to the doer as well as to the sufferer. Man is thereby taught to reve-rence the happiness of his brethren, to tremble lest he should, even unknowingly, do any thing that can hurt them, and to

dread that animal resentment which he feels is ready to burst out against him, if he should without design be the unhappy ins-trument of their calamity.
                  Notwithstanding, however, all these seeming irregularities of sentiment, if man should unfortunately either give occasion to those evils which he did not intend, or fail in producing that good which he intended, nature has not left his innocence altogether without consolation, nor his virtue alto-gether without reward. He then calls to his assistance that just and equitable ma-xim, that those events which did not de-pend upon our conduct ought not to di-minish the esteem that is due to us. He summons up his whole magnanimity and firmness of soul, and strives to regard him-self, not in the light in which he at present appears, but in that in which he ought to appear, in which he would have appeared had his generous designs been crowned with success, and in which he would still appear notwithstanding their miscarriage, 
                        •
                     f the sentiments of mankind were either altogether candid and equitable, or even perfectly consistent with themselves. The more candid and humane part of mankind

intirely go along with the effort which he thus makes to support himself in his own opinion. They exert their whole genero-sity and greatness of mind, to correct in themselves this irregularity of human na-ture, and endeavour to regard his unfor-tunate magnanimity in the same light in which, had it been successful, they would, without any such generous exertion, have naturally been disposed to consider it.
               
            
         
         
            

            PART III. Of the foundation of our judgments concerning our own sentiments and conduct, and of the sense of duty.
            
               SECT. I. Of the consciousness of merited praise or blame.
               IN the two foregoing parts of this dis-course, I have chiefly considered the origin and foundation of our judgments concerning the sentiments and conduct of others. I come now to consider the ori-gin of those concerning our own.
               The desire of the approbation and esteem of those we live with, which is of so much importance to our happiness, cannot be fully and intirely contented but by render-ing ourselves the just and proper objects of those sentiments, and by adjusting our own character and conduct according to those measures and rules by which esteem and approbation are naturally bestowed. It is

not sufficient, that from ignorance or mis-take, esteem and approbation should some way or other be bestowed upon us. If we are conscious that we do not deserve to be so favourably thought of, and that, if the truth was known, we should be regarded with very opposite sentiments, our satisfac-tion is far from being complete. The man who applauds us either for actions which we did not perform, or for motives which had no sort of influence upon our conduct, applauds not us, but another person. We can derive no sort of satisfaction from his praises. To us they should be more mor-tifying than any censure, and should per-petually call to our minds, the most hum-bling of all reflexions, the reflexion upon what we ought to be, but what we are not. A woman who paints to conceal her ugli-ness, could derive, one should imagine, but little vanity from the compliments that are paid to her beauty. These, we should ex-pect, ought rather to put her in mind of the sentiments which her real complexion would excite, and mortify her the more by the contrast. To be pleased with such ground-less applause is a proof of the most super-ficial levity and weakness. It is what is

and of the need which he has for the as-sistance of others, rejoices whenever he observes that they adopt his own passions, because he is then assured of that assist-ance; and grieves whenever he observes the contrary, because he is then assured of their opposition: But both the pleasure and the pain are always felt so instantaneously, and often upon such frivolous occasions, that it seems evident that neither of them can be derived from any such self-interest-ed consideration. A man is mortified when, after having endeavoured to divert the company, he looks round and sees that no-body laughs at his jests but himself. On the contrary, the mirth of the company is highly agreeable to him, and he re-gards this correspondence of their senti-ments with his own as the greatest ap-plause.
                  Neither does his pleasure seem to arise altogether from the additional vivacity which his mirth may receive from sym-pathy with theirs, nor his pain from the disappointment he meets with when he misses this pleasure; though both the one and the other, no doubt, do in some

properly called vanity, and is the founda-tion of the most ridiculous and contempti-ble vices, the vices of affectation and com-mon lying; follies which, if experience did not teach us how common they are, one should imagine the least spark of com-mon sense would save us from. The fool-ish lyar, who endeavours to excite the ad-miration of the company by the relation of adventures which never had any exis-tence, the important coxcomb who gives himself airs of rank and distinction which he well knows he has no just pretensions to, are both of them, no doubt, pleased with the applause which they fancy they meet with. But their vanity arises from so gross an illusion of the imagination, that it is diffi-cult to conceive how any rational creature should be imposed upon by it. When they place themselves in the situation of those whom they fancy they have deceived, they are struck with the highest admiration for their own persons. They look upon themselves, not in that light in which, they know, they ought to appear to their companions, but in that in which they believe their compa-nions actually look upon them. Their su-perficial weakness and trivial folly hinder

them from ever turning their eyes inwards, or from seeing themselves in that despi-cable point of view in which their own consciences should tell them that they would appear to every body, if the real truth should ever come to be known.
               As ignorant and groundless praise can give no solid joy, no satisfaction that will bear any serious examination, so, on the contrary, it often gives real comfort to re-flect, that tho' no praise should actually be bestowed upon us, our conduct, however, has been such as to deserve it, and has been in every respect suitable to those mea-sures and rules by which praise and appro-bation are naturally and commonly bestow-ed. We are pleased not only with praise, but with having done what is praise-worthy. We are pleased to think that we have rendered ourselves the natural objects of approbation, though no approbation should ever actually be bestowed upon us: and we are mortified to reflect that we have justly incurred the blame of those we live with, though that sentiment should never actually be exerted against us. The man who is conscious to himself that he has exactly observed those measures of

conduct which experience informs him are generally agreeable, reflects with satisfac-tion on the propriety of his own behaviour; when he views it in the light in which the impartial spectator would view it, he thoroughly enters into all the motives which influenced it; he looks back upon every part of it with pleasure and approbation, and tho' mankind should never be acquaint-ed with what he has done, he regards him-self not so much according to the light in which they actually regard him, as accord-ing to that, in which they would regard him if they were better informed. He an-ticipates the applause and admiration which in this case would be bestowed upon him, and he applauds and admires himself by sympathy with sentiments which do not indeed actually take place, but which the ignorance of the public alone hinders from taking place, which he knows are the na-tural and ordinary effects of such conduct, which his imagination strongly connects with it, and which he has acquired a habit of conceiving as something that naturally and in propriety ought to flow from it. Men have often volun-tarily thrown away life to acquire after

death a renown which they could no longer enjoy. Their imagination, in the mean time, anticipated that fame which was thereafter to be bestowed upon them. Those applauses which they were never to hear rung in their ears. The thoughts of that admiration, whose effects they were never to feel, played about their hearts, banished from their breasts the strongest of all natu-ral fears, and transported them to perform actions which seem almost beyond the reach of human nature. But in point of reality there is surely no great difference between that approbation which is not to be be-stowed till we can no longer enjoy it, and that which indeed is never to be bestowed, but which would be bestowed if the world was ever made to understand properly the real circumstances of our behaviour. If the one often produces such violent effects, we cannot wonder that the other should always be highly regarded.
               On the contrary, the man who has broke thro' all those measures of conduct, which can alone render him agreeable to man-kind, tho' he should have the most perfect assurance that what he had done was for-ever to be concealed from every human eye,

it is all to no purpose. When he looks back upon it, and views it in the light in which the impartial spectator would view it, he finds that he can enter into none of the motives which influenced it. He is abashed and confounded at the thoughts of it, and ne-cessarily feels a very high degree of that shame which he would be exposed to, if his actions should ever come to be generally known. His imagination, in this case too, anticipates the contempt and derision from which nothing saves him but the ignorance of those he lives with. He still feels that he is the natural object of these sentiments, and still trembles at the thought of what he would suffer if they were ever actually exerted against him. But if what he had been guilty of was not meerly one of those improprieties which are the objects of sim-ple disapprobation, but one of those enor-mous crimes which excite detestation and resentment, he could never think of it, as long as he had any sensibility left, without feeling all the agony of horror and remorse; and tho' he could be assured that no man was ever to know it, and could even bring himself to believe that there was no God to

revenge it, he would still feel enough of both these sentiments to embitter the whole of his life: He would still regard himself as the natural object of the hatred and indig-nation of all his fellow-creatures; and if his heart was not grown callous by the ha-bit of crimes, he could not think without terror and astonishment even of the man-ner, in which mankind would look upon him, of what would be the expression of their countenance and of their eyes, if the dreadful truth should ever come to be known. These natural pangs of an afrighted conscience are the daemons, the avenging fu-ries which in this life haunt the guilty, which allow them neither quiet nor repose, which often drive them to despair and distraction, from which no assurance of secrecy can protect them, from which no principles of irreligion can entirely deliver them, and from which nothing can free them but the vilest and most abject of all states, a com-pleat insensibility to honour and infamy, to vice and virtue. Men of the most detest-able characters, who, in the execution of the most dreadful crimes, had taken their measures so coolly as to avoid even the sus-picion of guilt, have sometimes been driven

by the horror of their situation, to discover of their own accord, what no human saga-city could ever have investigated. By ac-knowledging their guilt, by submitting themselves to the resentment of their of-fended citizens, and by thus satiating that vengeance of which they were sensible that they were become the proper objects, they hoped by their death to reconcile themselves, at least in their own imagination, to the natural sentiments of mankind, to be able to consider themselves as less worthy of hatred and resentment, to attone in some measure for their crimes, and, if possible, to die in peace and with the forgiveness of all their fellow-creatures. Compared to what they felt before the discovery, even the thought of this, it seems, was happi-ness.
            
            
               SECT. II. In what manner our own judgments re-fer to what ought to be the judgments of others: And of the origin of general rules.
               A Great part, perhaps the greatest part of human happiness and misery arises from the view of our past conduct, and from the degree of approbation or dis-approbation

which we feel from the conside-ration of it. But in whatever manner it may affect us, our sentiments of this kind have always some secret reference either to what are, or to what upon a certain condition would be, or to what we imagine ought to be the sentiments of others. We examine it as we imagine an impartial spectator would examine it. If upon placing ourselves in his situation we thoroughly enter into all the passions and motives which influenced it, we approve of it by sympathy with the ap-probation of this supposed equitable judge. If otherwise, we enter into his disapproba-tion and condemn it.
               Was it possible that a human creature could grow up to manhood in some solitary place without any communication with his own species, he could no more think of his own character, of the propriety or demerit of his own sentiments and conduct, of the beauty or deformity of his own mind, than of the beauty or deformity of his own face. All these are objects which he cannot easily see, which naturally he does not look at, and upon which he is provided with no mirror to enable him to turn his eyes. Bring him into society, and he is imme-diately

provided with the mirror which he wanted before. It is placed in the coun-tenance and behaviour of those he lives with, which always mark when they enter into, and when they disapprove of his senti-ments; and it is here that he first views the propriety and impropriety of his own pas-sions, the beauty and deformity of his own mind. To a man who from his birth was a stranger to society, the objects of his passions, the external bodies which either pleased or hurt him, would occupy his whole attention. The passions themselves, the desires or aversions, the joys or sorrows which those objects excited, tho' of all things the most immediately present to him, could scarce ever be the objects of his thoughts. The idea of them could never in-terest him so much as to call upon his atten-tive consideration. The consideration of his 
                     •
                  oy could in him excite no new joy, nor that of his sorrow any new sorrow, tho' the con-sideration of the causes of those passions might often excite both. Bring him into society, and all his own passions will im-mediately become the causes of new pas-sions. He will observe that mankind ap-
                  
                     •
                  rove of some of them and are disgusted

by others. He will be elevated in the one case, and cast down in the other; his de-sires and aversions, his joys and sorrows will now often become the causes of new desires and new aversions, new joys and new sorrows: they will now therefore in-terest him deeply, and often call upon his most attentive consideration.
               To be amiable and to be meritorious, that is, to deserve love and to deserve re-ward, are the great characters of virtue, and the contrary of vice. But both these cha-racters have an immediate reference to the sentiments of others. Virtue is not said to be amiable or to be meritorious, because it is the object of its own love or of its own gratitude, but because it excites those sentiments in other men. The conscious-ness that it is the object of such favourable regards is the source of that inward tran-quillity and self-satisfaction with which it is naturally attended, as the suspicion of the contrary gives occasion to the torments of vice. What so great happiness, as to be beloved, and to know that we deserve to be beloved? What so great misery, as to be hated, and to know that we deserve to be hated?
               
                  

measure. When we have read a book or poem so often that we can no longer find any amusement in reading it by ourselves, we can still take pleasure in reading it to a companion. To him it has all the graces of novelty; we enter into the surprize and admiration which it naturally excites in him, but which it is no longer capable of exciting in us; we consider all the ideas which it presents rather in the light in which they appear to him than in that in which they appear to ourselves, and we are amused by sympathy with his amuse-ment which thus enlivens our own. On the contrary, we should be vexed if he did not seem to be entertained with it, and we could no longer take any pleasure in reading it to him. It is the same case here. The mirth of the company, no doubt, enlivens our own mirth, and their silence, no doubt, disappoints us. But tho' this may contribute both to the pleasure which we derive from the one, and to the pain which we feel from the other, it is by no means the sole cause of either; and this correspondence of the sentiments of others with our own appears to be a cause of
To judge or ourselves as we judge of others, to approve and condemn in our-selves what we approve and condemn in others, is the greatest exertion of candour and impartiality. In order to do this, we must look at ourselves with the same eyes with which we look at others: we must imagine ourselves not the actors, but the spectators of our own character and con-duct, and consider how these would affect us when viewed from this new station, in which their excellencies and imperfections can alone be discovered. We must enter, in short, either into what are, or into what ought to be, or into what, if the whole circumstances of our conduct were known, we imagine would be the sentiments of others, before we can either applaud or condemn it.
               A moral being is an accountable being. An accountable being, as the word ex-presses, is a being that must give an ac-count of its actions to some other, and that consequently must regulate them ac-cording to the good-liking of this other. Man is accountable to God and his fellow creatures. But tho' he is, no doubt, prin-cipally accountable to God, in the order of

time, he must necessarily conceive himself as accountable to his fellow creatures, be-fore he can form any idea of the Deity, or of the rules by which that Divine Be-ing will judge of his conduct. A child surely conceives itself as accountable to its parents, and is elevated or cast down by the thought of their merited approbation or disapprobation, long before it forms any idea of its accountableness to the Dei-ty, or of the rules by which that Divine Being will judge of its conduct.
               Our first ideas of personal beauty and deformity, are drawn from the shape and appearance of others, not from our own. We soon become sensible however, that others exercise the same criticism upon us. We are pleased when they approve of our figure, and are disobliged when they seem to be disgusted. We become anxious to know how far our appearance deserves ei-ther their blame or approbation. We exa-mine our own persons limb by limb, and by placing ourselves before a looking-glass▪ or by some such expedient, endeavour, a
                     •
                   much as possible, to view ourselves at th
                     •
                   distance and with the eyes of other people▪ If after this examination we are satisfie
                     •
                  
                  

with our own appearance, we can more easily support the most disadvantageous judgments of others: if, on the contrary, we are sensible that we are the natural ob-jects of distaste, every appearance of their disapprobation mortifies us beyond all mea-sure. A man who is tolerably handsome, will allow you to laugh at any little irregu-larity in his person; but all such jokes are commonly insupportable to one who is real-ly deformed. It is evident, however, that we are anxious about our own beauty and deformity, only upon account of its effect upon others. If we had no connection with society, we should be altogether in-different about either.
               In the same manner our first moral cri-ticisms are exercised upon the characters and conduct of other people; and we are all very forward to observe how each of these affects us. But we soon learn, that others are equally frank with regard to our own. We become anxious to know how far we deserve their censure or applause, and whether to them we must necessarily appear those agreeable or disagreeable creatures which they represent us. We begin upon this account to examine our

own passions and conduct, and to consider how these must appear to them, by consi-dering how they would appear to us if in their situation. We suppose ourselves the spectators of our own behaviour, and en-deavour to imagine what effect it would, in this light, produce upon us. This is the only looking-glass by which we can, in some measure, with the eyes of others, scrutinize the propriety of our own con-duct. If in this view it pleases us, we are tolerably satisfied. We can be more in-different about the applause, and, in some measure, despise the censure of others; secure that however misunderstood or mis-represented, we are the natural and proper objects of approbation. On the contrary, if we are displeased with it, we are often upon that very account more anxious to gain their approbation, and, provided we have not already, as they say, shaken hands with infamy, we are altogether distracted at the thoughts of their censure, which then strikes us with double severity.
               Unfortunately this moral looking-glass is not always a very good one. Common looking-glasses, it is said, are extremely

deceitful, and by the glare which they throw over the face, conceal from the par-tial eyes of the person many deformities which are obvious to every body besides. But there is not in the world such a smooth-er of wrinkles as is every man's imagina-tion, with regard to the blemishes of his own character.
               There are two different occasions when we examine our own conduct, and endea-vour to view it in the light in which the impartial spectator would view it; first, when we are about to act, and secondly, after we have acted. Our views are very partial in both cases, but they are most so, when it is of most importance that they should be otherwise.
               When we are about to act, the eagerness of passion will seldom allow us to consider what we are doing with the candour of an indifferent person. The violent emotions which at that time agitate us, discolour our views of things, even when we are en-deavouring to place ourselves in the situa-tion of another, and to regard the objects that interest us, in the light which they will naturally appear to him. The fury of our own passions constantly calls us back

to our own place, where every thing ap-pears magnified and misrepresented by self-love. Of the manner in which those ob-jects would appear to another, of the view which he would take of them we can ob-tain, if I may say so, but instantaneous glimpses, which vanish in a moment, and which even while they last are not altoge-ther just. We cannot even for that mo-ment divest ourselves entirely of the heat and keenness with which our peculiar si-tuation inspires us, nor consider what we are about to do with the compleat impar-tiality of an equitable judge. The pas-sions, upon this account, as father Male-branch says, all justify themselves, and seem reasonable, and proportioned to their objects, as long as we continue to feel them.
               When the action is over, indeed, and the passions which prompted it have sub-sided, we can enter more coolly into the sentiments of the indifferent spectator. What before interested us, is now become almost as indifferent to us as it always was to him, and we can now examine our own conduct with his candour and impartiality. But our judgments now are of little im-portance,

compared to what they were be-fore; and when they are most severely im-partial, can commonly produce nothing but vain regret, and unavailing repent-ance, without securing us from the like er-rors for the future. It is seldom, however, that they are quite candid even in this case. The opinion which we entertain of our own character, depends entirely on our judgment concerning our past conduct. It is so disagreeable to think ill of our-selves, that we often purposely turn away our view from those circumstances which might render that judgment unfavourable. He is a bold surgeon, they say, whose hand does not tremble when he performs an operation upon his own person; and he is often equally bold who does not hesitate to pull off the mysterious veil of self-delu-sion, which covers from his view the de-formities of his own conduct. Rather than see our own behaviour under so disa-greeable an aspect, we too often, foolishly and weakly, endeavour to exasperate anew those unjust passions which had formerly misled us; we endeavour by artifice to awaken our old hatreds, and irritate afresh our almost forgotten resentments: we even

exert ourselves for this miserable purpose and thus persevere in injustice, merely be-cause we once were unjust, and because we are ashamed and afraid to see that we were so.
               So partial are the views of mankind with regard to the propriety of their own con-duct, both at the time of action and after it; and so difficult is it for them to view it in the light in which any indifferent spec-tator would consider it. But if it was by a peculiar faculty, such as the moral sense is supposed to be, that they judged of their own conduct, if they were endued with a par-ticular power of perception, which distin-guished the beauty or deformity of passi-ons and affections; as their own passions would be more immediately exposed to the view of this faculty, it would judge with more accuracy concerning them, than con-cerning those of other men, of which it had only a more distant prospect.
               This self-deceit, this fatal weakness of mankind, is the source of half the disor-ders of human life. If we saw ourselves in the light in which others see us, or in which they would see us if they knew all,

a reformation would generally be unavoid-able. We could not otherwise endure the sight.
               Nature, however, has not left this weak-ness, which is of so much importance, al-together without a remedy; nor has she abandoned us entirely to the delusions of self-love. Our continual observations up-on the conduct of others, insensibly lead us to form to ourselves certain general rules concerning what is fit and proper either to be done or to be avoided. Some of their ac-tions shock all our natural sentiments. We hear every body about us express the like detestation against them. This still further confirms, and even exasperates our natural sense of their deformity. It satis-fies us that we view them in the proper light, when we see other people view them in the same light. We resolve never to be guilty of the like, nor ever, upon any account, to render ourselves in this manner the objects of universal disapprobation. We thus naturally lay down to ourselves a general rule, that all such actions are to be avoided, as tending to render us odious, contemptible, or punishable, the objects of all those sentiments for which we have

the greatest dread and aversion. Other actions, on the contrary, call forth our approbation, and we hear every body a-round us express the same favourable opi-nion concerning them. Every body is ea-ger to honour and reward them. They excite all those sentiments for which we have by nature the strongest desire; the love, the gratitude, the admiration of man-kind. We become ambitious of perform-ing the like; and thus naturally lay down to ourselves a rule of another kind, that every opportunity of acting in this manner is carefully to be sought after.
               It is thus that the general rules of mo-rality are formed. They are ultimately founded upon experience of what, in par-ticular instances, our moral faculties, our natural sense of merit and propriety, ap-prove, or disapprove of. We do not ori-ginally approve or condemn particular ac-tions; because, upon examination, they appear to be agreeable or inconsistent with a certain general rule. The general rule, on the contrary, is formed by finding from experience, that all actions of a certain kind, or circumstanced in a certain man-ner, are approved or disapproved of. To

pleasure, and the want of it a cause of pain, which cannot be accounted for in this manner. The sympathy, which my friends express with my joy, might, indeed, give me pleasure by enlivening that joy; but that which they express with my grief could give me none, if it served only to enlieven that grief. Sympathy, however, enlivens joy and alleviates grief. It enlivens joy by presenting another source of satis-faction; and it alleviates grief by insinu-ating into the heart almost the only agree-able sensation which it is at that time ca-pable of receiving.
                  It is to be observed accordingly, that we are still more anxious to communicate to our friends our disagreeable than our agree-able passions, that we derive still more satis-faction from their sympathy with the for-mer than from that with the latter, and that we are still more shocked by the want of it.
                  How are the unfortunate relieved when they have found out a person to whom they can communicate the cause of their sor-row? Upon his sympathy they seem to disburthen themselves of a part of their distress: he is not improperly said to share

the man who first saw an inhuman mur-der, committed from avarice, envy, or un-just resentment, and upon one too that loved and trusted the murderer, who be-held the last agonies of the dying person, who heard him, with his expiring breath, complain more of the perfidy and ingra-titude of his false friend, than of the vio-lence which had been done to him, there could be no occasion, in order to conceive how horrible such an action was, that he should reflect, that one of the most sacred rules of conduct was what prohibited the taking away the life of an innocent per-son, that this was a plain violation of that rule, and consequently a very blameable action. His detestation of this crime, it is evident, would arise instantaneously and antecedent to his having formed to himself any such general rule. The general rule, on the contrary, which he might afterwards form, would be founded upon the detesta-tion which he felt necessarily arise in his own breast, at the thought of this, and every other particular action of the same kind.
               When we read in history or romance, the account of actions either of generosity

or of baseness, the admiration which we con-ceive for the one, and the contempt which we feel for the other, neither of them arise from reflecting that there are certain gene-ral rules which declare all actions of the one kind admirable, and all actions of the other contemptible. Those general rules, on the contrary, are all formed from the experience we have had of the effects which actions of all different kinds naturally pro-duce upon us.
               An amiable action, a respectable action, an horrid action, are all of them actions which naturally excite the love, the respect, or the horror of the spectator, for the per-son who performs them. The general rules which determine what actions are, and what are not, the objects of each of those sentiments, can be formed no other way than by observing what actions actu-ally and in fact excite them.
               When these general rules, indeed, have been formed, when they are universally acknowleged and established, by the con-curring sentiments of mankind, we fre-quently appeal to them as to the standards of judgment, in debating concerning the de-gree

of praise or blame that is due to cer-tain actions of a complicated and dubious nature. They are upon these occasions commonly cited as the ultimate foundations of what is just and unjust in human con-duct; and this circumstance seems to have misled several very eminent authors, to draw up their systems in such a manner, as if they had supposed that the original judgments of mankind with regard to right and wrong, were formed like the decisions of a court of judicatory, by considering first the general rule, and then, secondly, whether the particular action under consi-deration fell properly within its compre-hension.
               Those general rules of conduct, when they have been fixed in our mind by habi-tual reflection, are of great use in correct-ing the misrepresentations of self-love con-cerning what is fit and proper to be done in our particular situation. The man of furious resentment, if he was to listen to the dictates of that passion, would perhaps re-gard the death of his enemy, as but a small compensation for the wrong, he imagines, he has received; which, however, may be no more than a very slight provocation.

But his observations upon the conduct of others, have taught him how horrible all such sanguinary revenges appear. Unless his education has been very singular, he has laid it down to himself as an inviolable rule, to abstain from them upon all occa-sions. This rule preserves its authority with him, and renders him incapable of being guilty of such a violence. Yet the fury of his own temper may be such, that had this been the first time in which he considered such an action, he would un-doubtedly have determined it to be quite just and proper, and what every impartial spectator would approve of. But that re-verence for the rule which past experience has impressed upon him, checks the impe-tuosity of his passion, and helps him to correct the too partial views which self-love might otherwise suggest, of what was proper to be done in his situation. If he should allow himself to be so far trans-ported by passion as to violate this rule yet even in this case, he cannot throw of altogether the awe and respect with which he has been accustomed to regard it. 
                     
                   the very time of acting, at the moment i
                     •
                   which passion mounts the highest, he hesi-tates

and trembles at the thought of what he is about to do: he is secretly conscious to himself, that he is breaking thro' those measures of conduct which, in all his cool hours, he had resolved never to infringe, which he had never seen infringed by others without the highest disapprobation, and of which the infringement, his own mind for-bodes, must soon render him the object of the same disagreeable sentiments. Before he can take the last fatal resolution, he is tormented with all the agonies of doubt and uncertainty; he is terrified at the thought of violating so sacred a rule, and at the same time is urged and goaded on by the fury of his desires to violate it. He changes his purpose every moment; some-times he resolves to adhere to his principle, and not indulge a passion which may cor-rupt the remaining part of his life with the horrors of shame and repentance; and a momentary calm takes possession of his breast, from the prospect of that security and tranquillity which he will enjoy when he thus determines not to expose himself to the hazard of a contrary conduct. But immediately the passion rouses anew, and with fresh fury drives him on to commit

what he had the instant before resolved to abstain from. Wearied and distracted with those continual irresolutions, he at length, from a sort of despair, makes the last fatal and irrecoverable step; but with that terror and amazement with which one flying from an enemy, throws himself over a precipice, where he is sure of meet-ing with more certain destruction than from any thing that pursues him from behind. Such are his sentiments even at the time of acting; tho' he is then, no doubt, less sen-sible of the impropriety of his own con-duct than afterwards, when his passion being gratified and palled, he begins to view what he has done in the light in which others are apt to view it; and actually feels, what he had only foreseen very imper-fectly before, the stings of remorse and repentance begin to agitate and torment him.
            
            
               

               SECT. III. Of the influence and authority of the ge-neral rules of morality, and that they are justly regarded as the laws of the Deity.
               THE regard to those general rules of conduct, is what is properly called a sense of duty, a principle of the greatest consequence in human life, and the only principle by which the bulk of mankind 
                     •
                  re capable of directing their actions. Many men behave very decently, and thro' 
                     •
                  he whole of their lives avoid any consi-
                  
                     •
                  erable degree of blame, who yet, per-
                  
                     •
                  aps, never felt the sentiment upon the 
                     •
                  ropriety of which we found our appro-
                  
                     •
                  ation of their conduct, but acted merely 
                     •
                  rom a regard to what they saw were the 
                     •
                  stablished rules of behaviour. The man 
                     •
                  ho has received great benefits from ano-
                  
                     •
                  her person, may, by the natural coldness 
                     •
                  f his temper, feel but a very small degree 
                     •
                  f the sentiment of gratitude. If he has

been virtuously educated, however, he will often have been made to observe how odi-ous those actions appear which denote a want of this sentiment, and how amiable the contrary. Tho' his heart therefore is not warmed with any grateful affection, he will strive to act as if it was, and will endeavour to pay all those regards and at-tentions to his patron which the liveliest gratitude could suggest. He will visit him regularly; he will behave to him respect-fully; he will never talk of him but with expressions of the highest esteem, and of the many obligations which he owes to him. And what is more, he will chearfully em-brace every opportunity of making a pro-per return for past services. He may do all this too without any hypocrisy or blame-able dissimulation, without any selfish in-tention of obtaining new favours, and without any design of imposing either up-on his benefactor or the public. The mo-tive of his actions may be no other tha
                     •
                   a reverence for the established rule of duty a serious and earnest desire of acting, i
                     •
                   every respect, according to the law of gra
                     •
                  titude. A wife, in the same manner, ma
                     •
                   sometimes not feel that tender regard 
                     
                  
                  

her husband which is suitable to the rela-tion that subsists between them. If she has been virtuously educated, however, she will endeavour to act as if she felt it, to be careful, officious, faithful▪ and sincere, and to be deficient in none of those attentions which the sentiment of conjugal affection could have prompted her to perform. Such a friend, and such a wife, are neither of them, undoubtedly, the very best of their kinds; and tho' both of them may have the most serious and earnest desire to fulfil every part of their duty, yet they will fail 
                     •
                  n many nice and delicate regards, they will miss many opportunities of obliging, which they could never have overlooked if 
                     •
                  hey had possessed the sentiment that is pro-
                  
                     ••
                  er to their situation. Tho' not the very first of their kinds, however, they are per-haps the second; and if the regard to the general rules of conduct has been very 
                     •
                  trongly impressed upon them, neither of 
                     •
                  hem will fail in any very essential part of 
                     •
                  heir duty. None but those of the hap-
                  
                     •
                  iest mold are capable of suiting with 
                     •
                  xact justness, their sentiments and beha-
                  
                     •
                  iour to the smallest difference of situation, 
                     •
                  nd of acting upon all occasions with the

most delicate and accurate propriety. The coarse clay of which the bulk of mankind are formed, cannot be wrought up to such perfection. There is scarce any man, how-ever, who by discipline, education, and example, may not be so impressed with a regard to general rules, as to act upon al-most every occasion with tolerable decency, and thro' the whole of his life avoid any considerable degree of blame.
               Without this sacred regard to general rules, there is no man whose conduct can be much depended upon. It is this which constitutes the most essential difference be-tween a man of principle and honour and a worthless fellow. The one adheres, up-on all occasions, steadily and resolutely to his maxims, and preserves thro' the whole of his life one even tenor of conduct. The other, acts variously and accidentally, as humour, inclination, or interest chance to be uppermost. Nay, such are the ine-qualities of humour to which all men ar
                     •
                   subject, that without this principle, th
                     •
                   man who, in all his cool hours, had th
                     •
                   most delicate sensibility to the propriety o
                     •
                   conduct, might often be led to act ab
                     •
                  surdly

it with them. He not only feels a sorrow of the same kind with that which they feel, but as if he had derived a part of it to himself, what he feels seems to alleviate the weight of what they feel. Yet by re-lating their misfortunes they in some mea-sure renew their grief. They awaken in their memory the remembrance of those circumstances which occasioned their afflic-tion. Their tears accordingly flow faster than before, and they are apt to abandon themselves to all the weakness of sorrow. They take pleasure, however, in all this, and, it is evident, are sensibly relieved by it; because the sweetness of his sympathy more than compensates the bitterness of that sorrow, which, in order to excite this sympathy, they had thus enlivened and renewed. The cruelest insult, on the con-trary, which can be offered to the unfor-tunate, is to appear to make light of their calamities. To seem not to be affected with the joy of our companions is but want of politeness; but not to wear a serious countenance when they tell us their afflictions, is real and gross inhumanity.
                  Love is an agreeable; resentment, a dis-agreeable, passion: and accordingly we are

upon the most frivolous occasions, and when it was scarce possible to assign any serious motive for his behaving in this manner. Your friend makes you a visit when you happen to be in a humour which makes it disagreeable to receive him: in your present mood his civility is very apt to appear an impertinent intrusion; and if you was to give way to the views of things which at this time occur, tho' civil in your temper, you would behave to him with coldness and contempt. What ren-ders you incapable of such a rudeness, is nothing but a regard to the general rules of civility and hospitality, which prohibit it. That habitual reverence which your former experience has taught you for these, enables you to act, upon all such occasions, with nearly equal propriety, and hinders those inequalities of temper, to which all men are subject, from influencing your conduct in any very sensible degree. But if without regard to these general rules, even the duties of politeness, which are so easily observed, and which one can scarce have any serious motive to violate, would yet be so frequently violated, what would become of the duties of justice, of truth,

of chastity, of fidelity, which it is often so difficult to observe, and which there may be so many strong motives to violate? But upon the tolerable observance of these duties, depends the very existence of hu-man society, which would crumble into nothing if mankind were not generally im-pressed with a reverence for those impor-tant rules of conduct.
               This reverence is still further enhanced by an opinion which is first impressed by nature, and afterwards confirmed by rea-soning and philosophy, that those impor-tant rules of morality, are the commands and laws of the Deity, who will finally re-ward the obedient, and punish the trans-gressors of their duty.
               This opinion or apprehension, I say, seems first to be impressed by nature. Men are naturally led to ascribe to those myste-rious beings, whatever they are, which happen in any country, to be the object of religious fear, all their own sentiments and passions. They have no other, they can conceive no other to ascribe to them. Those unknown intelligences which they imagine but see not, must necessarily be formed with some sort of resemblance to

those intelligences of which they have ex-perience. During the ignorance and dark-ness of pagan superstition, mankind seem to have formed the ideas of their divinities with so little delicacy, that they ascribed to them, indiscriminately, all the passi-ons of human nature, those not excepted which do the least honour to our species, such as lust, hunger, avarice, envy, re-venge. They could not fail, therefore, to ascribe to those beings, for the excellence of whose nature they still conceived the highest admiration, those sentiments and qualities which are the great ornaments of humanity, and which seem to raise it to a resemblance to divine perfection, the love of virtue and beneficence, and the abhor-rence of vice and injustice. The man who was injured, called upon Jupiter to be wit-ness of the wrong that was done to him, and could not doubt, but that divine be-ing would behold it with the same indig-nation which would animate the meanest of mankind, who looked on when injus-tice was committed. The man who did the injury, felt himself to be the proper object of the detestation and resentment of mankind; and his natural fears led

him to impute the same sentiments to those awful beings, whose presence he could not avoid, and whose power he could not re-sist. These natural hopes and fears, and suspicions, were propagated by sympathy, and confirmed by education; and the Gods were universally represented and believed to be the rewarders of humanity and mer-cy, and the avengers of perfidy and in-justice. And thus religion, even in its rudest form, gave a sanction to the rules of morality, long before the age of artifi-cial reasoning and philosophy. That the terrors of religion should thus enforce the natural sense of duty, was of too much importance to the happiness of mankind, for nature to leave it dependent upon the slowness and uncertainty of philosophical researches.
               These researches, however, when they came to take place, confirmed those ori-ginal anticipations of nature. Upon what-ever we suppose that our moral faculties are founded, whether upon a certain mo-dification of reason, upon an original in-stinct, called a moral sense, or upon some other principle of our nature, it cannot

be doubted, that they were given us for the direction of our conduct in this life. They carry along with them the most evident badges of this authority, which denote that they were set up within us to be the supreme arbiters of all our actions, to su-perintend all our senses, passions, and ap-petites, and to judge how far each of them was either to be indulged or restrained. Our moral faculties are by no means, as some have pretended, upon a level in this respect with the other faculties and appe-tites of our nature, endowed with no more right to restrain these last, than these last are to restrain them. No other faculty or principle of action judges of any other. Love does not judge of resentment, nor resentment of love. Those two passions may be opposite to one another, but can-not, with any propriety, be said to approve or disapprove of one another. But it is the peculiar office of those faculties now under our consideration to judge, to be-stow censure or applause upon all the other principles of our nature. They may be considered as a sort of senses of which those principles are the objects. Every sense is supreme over its own objects.

There is no appeal from the eye with re-gard to the beauty of colours, nor from the ear with regard to the harmony of sounds, nor from the taste with regard to the agreeableness of flavours. Each of those senses judges in the last resort of its own objects. Whatever gratifies the taste is sweet, whatever pleases the eye is beau-tiful, whatever sooths the ear is harmoni-ous. The very essence of each of those qualities consists in its being fitted to please the sense to which it is addressed. It be-longs to our moral faculties, in the same manner to determine when the ear ought to be soothed, when the eye ought to be indulged, when the taste ought to be gra-tified, when and how far every other prin-ciple of our nature ought either to be in-dulged or restrained. What is agreeable to our moral faculties, is fit and right, and proper to be done; the contrary, wrong, unfit and improper. The sentiments which they approve of, are graceful and becom-ing: the contrary, ungraceful and unbe-coming. The very words right, wrong, fit, improper, graceful, unbecoming, mean only what pleases or displeases those fa-culties.
               
                  
Since these, therefore, were plainly in-tended to be the governing principles of human nature, the rules which they pre-scribe, are to be regarded as the commands and laws of the Deity, promulgated by those vicegerents which he has thus set up within us. All general rules are common-ly denominated laws: thus the general rules which bodies observe in the commu-nication of motion, are called the laws of motion. But those general rules which our moral faculties observe in approving or condemning whatever sentiment or ac-tion is subjected to their examination, may much more justly be denominated such. They have a much greater resemblance to what are properly called laws, those gene-ral rules which the sovereign lays down to direct the conduct of his subjects. Like 
                     •
                  hem they are rules to direct the free ac-
                  
                     •
                  ions of men; they are prescribed most 
                     •
                  urely by a lawful superior, and are at-
                  
                     •
                  ended too with the sanction of rewards 
                     •
                  nd punishments. Those vicegerents of God within us, never fail to punish the 
                     •
                  iolation of them, by the torments of in-ward shame, and self-condemnation; and 
                     •
                  n the contrary always reward obedience

with tranquility of mind, with content-ment, and self-satisfaction.
               There are innumerable other considera-tions which serve to confirm the same con-clusion. The happiness of mankind, as well as of all other rational creatures, seems to have been the original purpose intended by the Author of Nature, when he brought them into existence. No other end seems worthy of that supreme wisdom and di-vine benignity which we necessarily ascribe to him; and this opinion, which we are led to by the abstract consideration of his infinite perfections, is still more confirmed by the examination of the works of na-ture, which seem all intended to promote happiness, and to guard against misery. But by acting according to the dictates of our moral faculties, we necessarily pursue the most effectual means for promoting the happiness of mankind, and may therefore be said, in some sense, to co-operate with the Deity, and to advance as far as in our power the plan of Providence. By acting otherways, on the contrary, we seem to obstruct, in some measure, the scheme which the Author of Nature has establish-ed for the happiness and perfection of the

world, and to declare ourselves, if I may say so, in some measure the enemies of God. Hence we are naturally encouraged to hope for his extraordinary favour and reward in the one case, and to dread his vengeance and punishment in the other.
               There are besides many other reasons, and many other natural principles, which all tend to confirm and inculcate the same salutary doctrine. If we consider the ge-neral rules by which external prosperity and adversity are commonly distributed in this life, we shall find, that notwithstand-ing the disorder in which all things appear to be in this world, yet even here every virtue naturally meets with its proper re-ward, with the recompense which is most fit to encourage and promote it; and this too so surely, that it requires a very extra-ordinary concurrence of circumstances en-tirely to disappoint it. What is the reward most proper for encouraging industry, pru-dence, and circumspection? Success in every sort of business. And is it possible that in the whole of life these virtues should fail of attaining it? Wealth and external honours are their proper recompence, and

the recompence which they can seldom fail of acquiring. What reward is most pro-per for promoting the practice of truth, justice, and humanity? The confidence, the esteem, and love of those we live with. Humanity does not desire to be great, but to be beloved. It is not in being rich that truth and justice would rejoice, but in be-ing trusted and believed, recompences which those virtues must almost always acquire. By some very extraordinary and unlucky circumstance, a good man may come to be suspected of a crime of which he was altogether incapable, and upon that account be most unjustly exposed for the remaining part of his life to the horror and aversion of mankind. By an accident of this kind he may be said to lose his all, notwithstanding his integrity and justice; in the same manner as a cautious man, notwithstanding his utmost circumspection, may be ruined by an earthquake or an in-undation. Accidents of the first kind, however, are perhaps still more rare, and still more contrary to the common course of things than those of the second; and it still remains true, that the practice of truth, justice, and humanity, is a certain

            THE THEORY OF MORAL SENTIMENTS.
            BY ADAM SMITH, PROFESSOR of MORAL PHILOSOPHY in the University of GLASGOW.
            LONDON: Printed for A. MILLAR, in the STRAND, And A. KINCAID and J. BELL, in EDINBURGH MDCCLIX.
         
         
            

not half so anxious that our friends should adopt our friendships, as that they should enter into our resentments. We can forgive them though they seem to be but little affect-ed with the favours which we may have re-ceived, but lose all patience if they seem in-different about the injuries which may have been done to us: nor are we half so angry with them for not entering into our gra-titude, as for not sympathising with our resentment. They can easily avoid being friends to our friends, but can hardly avoid being enemies to those with whom we are at variance. We seldom resent their being at enmity with the first, though upon that account we may sometimes affect to make an aukward quarrel with them; but we quarrel with them in good earnest if in friendship with the last. The agreeable passions of love and joy can satisfy and sup-port the heart without any auxiliary plea-sure. The bitter and painful emotions of grief and resentment more strongly re-quire the healing consolation of sympa-thy.
                  As the person who is principally interest-ed in any event is pleased with our sympathy, and hurt by the want of it, so we, too, seem

and almost infallible method of acquiring what those virtues chiefly aim at, the con-fidence and love of those we live with. A person may be very easily misrepresented with regard to a particular action; but it is scarce possible that he should be so with regard to the general tenor of his conduct. An innocent man may be believed to have done wrong: this, however, will rarely happen. On the contrary, the established opinion of the innocence of his manners, will often lead us to absolve him where he has really been in the fault, notwithstand-ing very strong presumptions. A knave, in the same manner may escape censure, or even meet with applause, for a particular knave-ry, in which his conduct is not under-stood. But no man was ever habitually such, without being almost universally known to be so, and without being even frequently suspected of guilt, when he was in reality perfectly innocent. And so far as vice and virtue can be either punished or rewarded by the sentiments and opinions of mankind, they both, according to the common course of things, meet even here with something more than exact and im-partial justice.
               
                  
But tho' the general rules by which pros-perity and adversity are commonly distri-buted, when considered in this cool and philosophical light, appear to be perfectly suited to the situation of mankind in this life, yet they are by no means suited to some of our natural sentiments. Our na-tural love and admiration for some virtues is such, that we should wish to bestow on them all sorts of honours and rewards, even those which we must acknowledge to be the proper recompences of other quali-ties with which those virtues are not al-ways accompanied. Our detestation, on the contrary, for some vices is such, that we should desire to heap upon them every sort of disgrace and disaster, those not ex-cepted which are the natural consequences of very different qualities. Magnanimity, generosity, and justice command so high a degree of admiration, that we desire to see them crowned with wealth, and power, and honours of every kind, the natural consequences of prudence, industry, and application; qualities with which those virtues are not inseparably connected. Fraud, falsehood, brutality, and violence,

on the other hand, excite in every human breast such scorn and abhorrence, that our indignation rouzes to see them possess those advantages which they may in some sense be said to have merited, by the diligence and industry with which they are some-times attended. The industrious knave cultivates the soil; the indolent good man leaves it uncultivated. Who ought to reap the harvest? who starve, and who live in plenty? The natural course of things de-cides it in favour of the knave: the natu-ral sentiments of mankind in favour of the man of virtue. Man judges, that the good qualities of the one are greatly over-re-compensed by those advantages which they tend to procure him, and that the omissions of the other are by far too severely punish-ed by the distress which they naturally bring upon him; and human laws, the consequences of human sentiments, for-feit the life and the estate of the industri-ous and cautious traitour, and reward, by extraordinary recompenses, the fidelity and public spirit of the improvident and care-less good citizen. Thus man is by nature directed to correct, in some measure, that distribution of things which she herself

would otherwise have made. The rules which for this purpose she prompts him to follow, are different from those which she herself observes. She bestows upon every virtue, and upon every vice, that precise reward or punishment which is best fitted to encourage the one, or to restrain the other. She is directed by this sole consi-deration, and pays little regard to the dif-ferent degrees of merit and demerit, which they may seem to possess in the sentiments and passions of man. Man, on the con-trary, pays regard to this only, and would endeavour to render the state of every vir-tue precisely proportioned to that degree of love and esteem, and of every vice to that degree of contempt and abhorrence which he himself conceives for it. The rules which she follows are fit for her, those which he follows for him: but both are calculated to promote the same great end, the order of the world, and the perfection and happiness of human nature.
               But tho' man is thus employed to alter that distribution of things which natural events would make, if left to themselves; tho', like the Gods of the poets, he is per-petually interposing, by extraordinary


means, in favour of virtue, and in oppo-sition to vice, and like them, endeavours to turn away the arrow that is aimed at the head of the righteous, but accelerates the sword of destruction that is lifted up against the wicked; yet he is by no means able to render the fortune of either quite suitable to his own sentiments and wishes. The natural course of things cannot be entirely controuled by the impotent endea-vours of man: the current is too rapid and too strong for him to stop it; and tho' the rules which direct it appear to have been established for the wisest and best purposes, they sometimes produce ef-fects which shock all his natural senti-ments. That a great combination of men, should prevail over a small one; that those who engage in an enterprize with fore-thought and all necessary preparation, should prevail over such as oppose them without any; and that every end should be acquired by those means only which na-ture has established for acquiring it, seems to be a rule not only necessary and una-voidable in itself, but even useful and pro-per for rouzing the industry and attention of mankind. Yet, when in consequence

of this rule, violence and artifice prevail over sincerity and justice, What indig-nation does it not excite in the breast of every human spectator? What sorrow and compassion for the sufferings of the innocent, and what furious resentment against the success of the oppressor? We are equally grieved and enraged, at the wrong that is done, but often find it al-together out of our power to redress it▪ When we thus despair of finding any force upon earth which can check the triumph of injustice, we naturally appeal to hea-ven, and hope, that the great author of our nature will himself execute hereafter, what all the principles which he has given us, for the direction of our conduct, prompt us to attempt even here; that he will compleat the plan which he himself has thus taught us to begin; and will, in a life to come, render to every one accord-ing to the works which he has performed in this world. And thus we are led to the belief of a future state, not only by the weaknesses, by the hopes and fears of hu-man nature, but by the noblest and best principles which belong to it, by the love

of virtue, and by the abhorrence of vice and injustice.
               "Does it suit the greatness of God," says the eloquent and philosophical bishop of Clermont, with that passionate and ex-aggerating force of imagination, which seems sometimes to exceed the bounds of decorum;
does it suit the greatness of God, to leave the world which he has created in so universal a disorder? To see the wicked prevail almost always over the just; the innocent dethroned by the usurper; the father become the victim of the ambition of an unnatural son; the husband expiring under the stroak of a barbarous and faithless wife? From the height of his greatness ought God to behold those melancholy events as a fantastical amusement, without taking any share in them? Because he is great, should he be weak, or unjust, or barbarous? Because men are little, ought they to be allowed either to be dissolute without punishment, or vir-tuous without reward? O God! if this is the character of your Supreme Being; if it is you whom we adore un-der such dreadful ideas; can I 
                        
                     
                     

longer acknowledge you for my father, for my protector, for the comforter of my sorrow, the support of my weak-ness, the rewarder of my fidelity? You would then be no more but an indolent and fantastical tyrant, who sacrifices mankind to his insolent vanity, and who has brought them out of nothing, only to make them serve for the sport of his leisure, and of his caprice.
               
               When the general rules which deter-mine the merit and demerit of actions, come thus to be regarded, as the laws of an All-powerful Being, who watches over our conduct, and who, in a life to come, will reward the observance, and punish the breach of them; they necessarily ac-quire a new sacredness from this consi-deration. That our regard to the will of the Deity, ought to be the supreme rule of our conduct, can be doubted of by no body who believes his existence. The very thought of disobedience appears to involve in it the most shocking impro-priety. How vain, how absurd would it be for man, either to oppose or to neglect the commands that were laid upon him

by Infinite Wisdom, and Infinite Power! How unnatural, how impiously ungrate-ful not to reverence the precepts that were prescribed to him by the infinite goodness of his Creator, even tho' no punishment was to follow their violation. The sense of propriety too is here well supported by the strongest motives of self-interest. The idea that, however, we may escape the observation of man, or be placed above the reach of human punishment, yet we are always acting under the eye, and ex-posed to the punishment of God, the great avenger of injustice, is a motive capable of restraining the most headstrong passions, with those at least who, by constant re-flection, have rendered it familiar to them.
               It is in this manner that religion en-forces the natural sense of duty: and hence it is, that mankind are generally disposed to place great confidence in the probity of those who seem deeply impress-ed with religious sentiments. Such persons, they imagine, act under an additional tye, besides those which regulate the conduct of other men. The regard to the propriety of action as well as to reputation, the

regard to the applause of his own breast, as well as to that of others, are motives which they suppose have the same influ-ence over the religious man, as over the man of the world. But the former lies under another restraint, and never acts deliberately but as in the presence of that Great Superior who is finally to recom-pense him according to his deeds. A greater trust is reposed, upon this account, in the regularity and exactness of his con-duct. And wherever the natural princi-ples of religion are not corrupted by the factious and party zeal of some worthless cabal; wherever the first duty which it re-quires, is to fulfil all the obligations of morality; wherever men are not taught to regard frivolous observances, as more immediate duties of religion, than acts of justice and beneficence; and to imagine, that by sacrifices and ceremonies, and vain supplications, they can bargain with the Deity for fraud, and perfidy, and violence, the world undoubtedly judges right in this respect, and justly places a double confi-dence in the rectitude of the religious man's behaviour.
            
            
               

to be pleased when we are able to sympa-thize with him, and to be hurt when we are unable to do so. We run not only to congratulate the successful, but to con-dole with the afflicted; and the pleasure which we find in conversing with a man whom we can entirely sympathise with in all his passions, seems to do more than compensate the painfulness of that sorrow with which the view of his situa-tion affects us. On the contrary, it is al-ways disagreeable to feel that we cannot sympathize with him, and instead of be-ing pleased with this exemption from sym-pathetic pain, it hurts us to find that we cannot share his uneasiness. If we hear a person loudly lamenting his misfortunes, which, however, upon bringing the case home to ourselves, we feel, can produce no such violent effect upon us, we are shocked at his grief; and, because we can-not enter into it, call it pusillanimity and weakness. It gives us the spleen, on the other hand, to see another too happy or too much elevated, as we call it, with any little piece of good fortune. We are disobliged even with his joy, and, because we cannot go along with it, call it levity

               CHAP. IV. In what cases the sense of duty ought to be the sole principle of our conduct; and in what cases it ought to concur with other motives.
               RELIGION affords such strong mo-tives to the practice of virtue, and guards us by such powerful restraints from the temptations of vice, that many have been led to suppose, that religious princi-ples were the sole laudable motives of ac-tion. We ought neither, they said, to reward from gratitude, nor punish from resentment; we ought neither to protect the helplessness of our children, nor af-ford support to the infirmities of our pa-rents, from natural affection. All affec-tions for particular objects, ought to be extinguished in our breast, and one great affection take the place of all others, the love of the Deity, the desire of ren-dering ourselves agreeable to him, and of directing our conduct in every respect ac-cording to his will. We ought not to be grateful from gratitude, we ought not to

be charitable from humanity, we ought not to be public spirited from the love of our country, nor generous and just from the love of mankind. The sole principle and motive of our conduct in the perform-ance of all those different duties, ought to be a sense that God has commanded us to perform them. I shall not at present take time to examine this opinion particularly; I shall only observe, that we should not have expected to have found it entertained by any sect, who professed themselves of a religion in which, as it is the first precept to love the Lord our God with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength, so it is the second to love our neighbour as we love ourselves; and we love ourselves surely for our own sakes, and not merely because we are commanded to do so. That the sense of duty should be the sole prin-ciple of our conduct, is no where the pre-cept of Christianity; but that it should be the ruling and the governing one, as phi-losophy, and as, indeed, common sense di-rects. It may be a question, however, in what cases our actions ought to arise chief-ly or entirely from a sense of duty, or from

a regard to general rules; and in what cases some other sentiment or affection ought to concur, and have a principal in-fluence.
               The decision of this question, which cannot, perhaps, be given with any very great accuracy, will depend upon two dif-ferent circumstances; first, upon the na-tural agreeableness or deformity of the sen-timent or affection which would prompt us to any action independent of all regard to general rules; and secondly, upon the precision and exactness, or the looseness and inaccuracy of the general rules them-selves.
               I. First, I say, it will depend upon the natural agreeableness or deformity of the affection itself, how far our actions should arise from it, or entirely proceed from a regard to the general rule.
               All those graceful and admired actions, 
                     •
                  o which the benevolent affections would prompt us, ought to proceed as much from the passions themselves, as from any regard to the general rules of conduct. A benefactor thinks himself but ill requit-ed, if the person upon whom he has be-
                  
                     •
                  towed his good offices, repays them merely

from a cold sense of duty, and without any affection to his person. A husband is dissatisfied with the most obedient wife, when he imagines her conduct is animated by no other principle besides her regard to what the relation she stands in requires. Tho' a son should fail in none of the offi-ces of filial duty, yet if he wants that af-fectionate reverence which it so well be-comes him to feel, the parent may justly complain of his indifference. Nor could a son be quite satisfied with a parent who, tho' he performed all the duties of his si-tuation, had nothing of that fatherly fond-ness which might have been expected from him. With regard to all such benevolent and social affections, it is agreeable to see the sense of duty employed rather to re-strain than to enliven them, rather to hin-der us from doing too much, than to prompt us to do what we ought. It gives us pleasure to see a father obliged to check his own fondness, a friend obliged to set bounds to his natural generosity, a person who has received a benefit, obliged to re-strain the too sanguine gratitude of his own temper.
               
                  
The contrary maxim takes place with regard to the malevolent and unsocial pas-sions. We ought to reward from the gra-titude and generosity of our own hearts, without any reluctance, and without be-ing obliged to reflect how great the pro-priety of rewarding: but we ought al-ways to punish with reluctance, and more from a sense of the propriety of punish-ing, than from any savage disposition to revenge. Nothing is more graceful than the behaviour of the man who appears to 
                     •
                  resent the greatest injuries, more from a sense that they deserve, and are the proper objects of resentment, than from feeling himself the furies of that disagreeable pas-sion; who, like a judge, considers only 
                     •
                  he general rule, which determines what vengeance is due for each particular of-fence; who, in executing that rule, feels 
                     •
                  ess for what himself has suffered, than for what the offender is about to suffer; who, 
                     •
                  ho' in wrath remembers mercy, and is disposed to interpret the rule in the most gentle and favourable manner, and to al-
                  
                     •
                  ow of all the alleviations which the most 
                     •
                  andid humanity could, consistently with good sense, admit of.
               
                  
As the selfish passions, according to what has formerly been observed, hold in other respects a sort of middle place, between the social and unsocial affections, so do they likewise in this. The pursuit of the objects of private interest, in all common, little, and ordinary cases, ought to flow rather from a regard to the general rules which prescribe such conduct, than from any passion for the objects themselves; but upon more important and extraordi-nary occasions, we should be aukward, insipid, and ungraceful, if the objects themselves did not appear to animate us with a considerable degree of passion. To be anxious, or to be laying a plot either to gain or to save a single shilling, would degrade the most vulgar tradesman in the opinion of all his neighbours. Let his circumstances be ever so mean, no atten-tion to any such small matters, for the sake of the things themselves, must appear in his conduct. His situation may require the most severe oeconomy, and the mo
                     ••
                   exact assiduity: but each particular exer-tion of that oeconomy and assiduity must proceed not so much from a regard for that particular saving or gain, as for the gene-ral

rule which to him prescribes, with the utmost rigour, such a tenor of conduct. His parsimony to day must not arise from 
                     •
                   desire of the particular three pence which 
                     •
                  e will save by it, nor his attendance in 
                     •
                  is shop from a passion for the particular 
                     
                   pence which he will acquire by it: 
                     •
                  oth the one and the other ought to pro-
                  
                     •
                  eed solely from a regard to the general 
                     •
                  ule, which prescribes, with the most un-
                  
                     •
                  elenting severity, this plan of conduct to 
                     •
                  ll persons in his way of life. In this con-
                  
                     ••
                  sts the difference between the character of 
                     
                   miser and that of a person of exact oeco-
                  
                     •
                  omy and assiduity. The one is anxious 
                     ••
                  out small matters for their own sake: 
                     
                   other attends to them only in conse-
                  
                     ••
                  ence of the scheme of life which he has 
                     
                   down to himself.
               It is quite otherwise with regard to the 
                     •
                  ore extraordinary and important objects 
                     •
                  f self-interest. A person appears mean-
                     ••
                  irited, who does not pursue these with 
                     
                   degree of earnestness for their own 
                     
                  . We should despise a prince who was 
                     •
                  ot anxious about conquering or defend-
                  
                     ••
                  g a province. We should have little re-
                  
                     ••
                  ect for a private gentleman who did not

exert himself to gain an estate, or even a considerable office, when he could acquire them without either meanness or injustice. A member of parliament who shews no keenness about his own election, is aban-doned by his friends, as altogether unwor-thy of their attachment. Even a trades-man is thought a poor-spirited fellow a-mong his neighbours, who does not bestir himself to get what they call an extraor-dinary job, or some uncommon advantage. This spirit and keenness constitutes the dif-ference betwixt the man of enterprize and the man of dull regularity. Those great objects of self-interest, of which the loss or acquisition quite changes the rank of the person, are the objects of the passion properly called ambition; a passion, which when it keeps within the bounds of pru-dence and justice, is always admired in the world, and has even sometimes a certain irregular greatness, which dazzles the ima-gination, when it passes the limits of both these virtues, and is not only unjust but extravagant. Hence the general admira-tion for Heroes and Conquerors, and even for Statesmen, whose projects have been

                  
                     •
                  ery daring and extensive, tho' altogether 
                     •
                  evoid of justice. Such as those of the Cardinals of Richlieu and of Retz. The 
                     •
                  bjects of avarice and ambition differ only in their greatness. A miser is as 
                     •
                  urious about a halfpenny, as a man of ambition about the conquest of a king-
                  
                     •
                  om.
               II. Secondly, I say, it will depend part-
                  
                     •
                  y upon the precision and exactness, or 
                     •
                  he looseness and inaccuracy of the gene-
                  
                     •
                  al rules themselves, how far our conduct ought to proceed entirely from a regard to them.
               The general rules of almost all the virtues, the general rules which determine what are the offices of prudence, of cha-rity, of generosity, of gratitude, of friend-ship, are in many respects loose and in-accurate, admit of many exceptions, and require so many modifications, that it is scarce possible to regulate our conduct en-
                  
                     •
                  irely by a regard to them. The common proverbial maxims of prudence, being founded in universal experience, are per-haps the best general rules which can be given about it. To affect, however, a

very strict and literal adherence to them would evidently be the most absurd and ridiculous pedantry. Of all the virtues I have just now mentioned, gratitude is that, perhaps, of which the rules are the most precise, and admit of the few-est exceptions. That as soon as we can we should make a return of equal, and if possible of superior value to the ser-vices we have received, would seem to be a pretty plain rule, and one which admitted of scarce any exceptions. Upon the most superficial examination, how-ever, this rule will appear to be in the highest degree loose and inaccurate, and to admit of ten thousand exceptions. If your benefactor attended you in your sick-ness, ought you to attend him in his? or can you fulfil the obligation of gra-titude, by making a return of a differ-ent kind? If you ought to attend him, how long ought you to attend him? The same time which he attended you, or longer, and how much longer? If your friend lent you money in your distress, ought you to lend him money in his? How much ought you to lend him? When

and folly. We are even put out of hu-mour if our companion laughs louder or longer at a joke than we think it deserves; that is, than we feel that we ourselves could laugh at it.
               
               
                  

ought you to lend it him? Now, or to-morrow, or next month? And for how long a time? It is evident, that no ge-neral rule can be laid down, by which a precise answer can, in all cases, be given to any of these questions. The differ-ence between his character and your's, be-tween his circumstances and your's, may be such, that you may be perfectly grateful, and justly refuse to lend him a halfpenny: and, on the contrary, you may be wil-ling to lend, or even to give him ten times the sum which he lent you, and yet justly be accused of the blackest in-gratitude, and of not having fulfilled the hundredth part of the obligation you lie under. As the duties of gratitude, how-ever, are perhaps the most sacred of all those which the beneficent virtues pre-scribe to us, so the general rules which determine them are, as I said before, the most accurate. Those which ascertain the actions required by friendship, hu-manity, hospitality, generosity, are still more vague and indeterminate.
               There is, however, one virtue of which the general rules determine with the great-est

exactness every external action which it requires. This virtue is justice. The rules of justice are accurate in the highest degree, and admit of no exceptions or modifications, but such as may be ascer-tained as accurately as the rules them-selves, and which generally, indeed, flow from the very same principles with them. If I owe a man ten pounds, justice requires that I should precisely pay him ten pounds, either at the time agreed upon, or when he demands it. What I ought to per-form, how much I ought to perform, when and where I ought to perform it, the whole nature and circumstances of the action prescribed, are all of them pre-cisely fixt and determined. Tho' it may be aukward and pedantic, therefore, 
                     
                   affect too strict an adherence to the com-mon rules of prudence or generosity, there is no pedantry in sticking fast by the rule
                     •
                   of justice. On the contrary, the most sacred regard is due to them; and 
                     
                   actions which this virtue requires are ne-ver so properly performed, as when the chief motive for performing them is a re-verential and religious regard to thos
                     •
                  
                  

general rules which require them. In the practice of the other virtues, our conduct should rather be directed by a certain idea of propriety, by a certain taste for a par-ticular tenor of conduct, than by any re-gard to a precise maxim or rule; and we should consider the end and foundation of the rule, more than the rule itself. But it is otherwise with regard to justice: the man who in that refines the least, and adheres with the most obstinate stedfast-ness, to the general rules themselves, is the most commendable, and the most to be depended upon. Tho' the end of the rules of justice be, to hinder us from hurt-ing our neighbour, it may frequently be a crime to violate them, tho' we could pretend, with some pretext of reason, that this particular violation could do no hurt. A man often becomes a villain the moment he begins, even in his own heart, to chi-cane in this manner. The moment he thinks of departing from the most staunch and positive adherence to what those in-violable precepts prescribe to him, he is no longer to be trusted, and no man can say what degree of guilt he may not arrive

at. The thief imagines he does no evil▪ when he steals from the rich, what he supposes they may easily want, and what possibly they may never even know has been stolen from them. The adulterer imagines he does no evil, when he cor-rupts the wife of his friend, provided he covers his intrigue from the suspicion of the husband, and does not disturb the peace of the family. When once we begin to give way to such refinements, there is no enormity so gross of which we may not be capable.
               The rules of justice may be compared to the rules of grammar; the rules of the other virtues, to the rules which criticks lay down for the attainment of what is sublime and elegant in composition. The one, are precise, accurate, and indispen-sible. The other, are loose, vague, and indeterminate, and present us rather with a general idea of the perfection we ought to aim at, than afford us any certain and infallible directions for acquiring it. A man may learn to write grammatically by rule, with the most absolute infallibility; and so, perhaps, he may be taught to act justly.

But there are no rules whose observance will infallibly lead us to the attainment of elegance or sublimity in writing, tho' there are some which may help us, in some mea-sure, to correct and ascertain the vague ideas which we might otherwise have en-tertained of those perfections: and there are no rules by the knowledge of which we can infallibly be taught to act upon all occasions with prudence, with just magnanimity, or proper beneficence. Tho' there are some which may enable us to correct and ascertain, in several respects, the imperfect ideas which we might other-wise have entertained of those virtues.
               It may sometimes happen, that with the most serious and earnest desire of acting so as to deserve approbation, we may mistake the proper rules of conduct, and thus be misled by that very principle which ought to direct us. It is in vain to expect, that in this case mankind should entirely approve of our behaviour. They cannot enter into that absurd idea of duty which influenced us, nor go along with any of the actions which follow from it. There is still, however, something respect-able

in the character and behaviour of one who is thus betrayed into vice, by a wrong sense of duty, or by what is called an erroneous conscience. How fatally so-ever he may be misled by it, he is still, with the generous and humane, more the object of commiseration than of hatred or resentment. They lament the weak-ness of human nature, which exposes us to such unhappy delusions, even while we are most sincerely labouring after perfec-tion, and endeavouring to act according to the best principle which can possibly direct us. False notions of religion are almost the only causes which can occasion any very gross perversion of our natural sentiments in this way; and that prin-ciple which gives the greatest authority to the rules of duty, is alone capable of distorting our ideas of them in any con-siderable degree. In all other cases com-mon sense is sufficient to direct us, if not to the most exquisite propriety of co
                     •
                  
                  -duct, yet to something which is not very far from it; and provided we are in ear-nest desirous to do well, our behaviour will always, upon the whole, be praise-worthy. That to obey the will of the

Deity, is the first rule of duty, all men are agreed. But concerning the particu-lar commandments which that will may impose upon us, they differ widely from one another. In this, therefore, the great-est mutual forbearance and toleration is due; and tho' the defence of society re-quires that crimes should be punished, from whatever motives they proceed, yet a good man will always punish them with reluctance, when they evidently proceed from false notions of religious duty. He will never feel against those who commit them that indignation which he feels against other criminals, but will rather re-gret, and sometimes even admire their un-fortunate firmness and magnanimity, at the very time that he punishes their crime. In the tragedy of Mahomet, one of the finest of Mr. Voltaire's, it is well repre-sented, what ought to be our sentiments for crimes which proceed from such mo-
                  
                     ••
                  ves. In that tragedy, two young peo-ple of different sexes, of the most inno-cent and virtuous dispositions, and with-out any other weakness except what en-dears them the more to us, a mutual fondness for one another, are instigated

by the strongest motives of a false religion, to commit a horrid murder, that shocks all the principles of human nature: a venerable old man, who had expressed the most tender affection for them both, for whom, notwithstanding he was the avow-ed enemy of their religion, they had both conceived the highest reverence and esteem, and who was in reality their father, tho' they did not know him to be such, is pointed out to them as a sacrifice which God had expressly required at their hands, and they are commanded to kill him. While they are about executing this crime, they are tortured with all the agonies which can arise from the struggle between the idea of the indispensibleness of religi-ous duty on the one side, and compassion, gratitude, reverence for the age, and love for the humanity and virtue of the per-son whom they are going to destroy, on the other. The representation of this ex-hibits one of the most interesting, and perhaps the most instructive spectacle that was ever introduced upon any theatre. The sense of duty, however, at last pre-vails over all the amiable weaknesses of human nature. They execute the crime

imposed upon them; but immediately dis-cover their error▪ and the fraud which had deceived them, and are distracted with horror, remorse, and resentment. Such as are our sentiments for the unhappy Seid and Palmira, such ought we to feel for every person who is in this manner misled by religion, when we are sure that it is really religion which misleads him, and not the pretence of it, which is made a cover to some of the worst of human passions.
               As a person may act wrong by following a wrong sense of duty, so nature may some-times prevail, and lead him to act right in opposition to it. We cannot in this case be displeased to see that motive prevail, which we think ought to prevail, tho' the person himself is so weak as to think otherwise. As his conduct, however, is the effect of weak-ness, not principle, we are far from bestow-ing upon it any thing that approaches to compleat approbation. A bigotted Roman Catholic, who, during the massacre of St. Bartholomew, had been so overcome by compassion, as to save some unhappy pro-testants, whom he thought it his duty to destroy, would not seem to be entitled to

that high applause which we should have bestowed upon him, had he exerted the same generosity with compleat self-appro-bation. We might be pleased with the humanity of his temper, but we should still regard him with a sort of pity which is altogether inconsistent with the admira-tion that is due to perfect virtue. It is the same case with all the other passions. We do not dislike to see them exert them-selves properly, even when a false notion of duty would direct the person to restrain them. A very devout Quaker, who upon being struck upon one cheek, instead of turning up the other, should so far forget his literal interpretation of our Saviour's precept, as to bestow some good discipline upon the brute that insulted him, would not be disagreeable to us. We should laugh, and be diverted with his spirit, and rather like him the better for it. But we should by no means regard him with that respect and esteem which would seem due to one who, upon a like occasion, had acted properly, from a just sense of what was proper to be done. No action can pro-perly be called virtuous, which is not ac-companied with the sentiment of self-ap-probation.
            
         
         
            

                  CHAP. II. Of the manner in which we judge of the propriety or impropriety of the affections of other men, by their concord or disso-nance with our own.
                  WHEN the original passions of the person principally concerned are in perfect concord with the sympathetic emo-tions of the spectator, they necessarily ap-pear to this last just and proper, and suit-able to their objects; and, on the contrary, when, upon bringing the case home to him-self, he finds that they do not coincide with what he feels, they necessarily appear to him unjust and improper, and unsuitable to the causes which excite them. To ap-prove of the passions of another, therefore, as suitable to their objects, is the same thing, as to observe that we intirely sympathize with them; and not to approve of them as such, is the same thing as to observe that we do not entirely sympathize with them. The man who resents the inju-ries that have been done to me, and ob-serves that I resent them precisely as he does, necessarily approves of my resentment.


            PART IV. Of the EFFECT of UTILITY upon the sentiment of approbation.
            
               SECT. I. Of the beauty which the appearance of UTI-LITY bestows upon all the productions of art, and of the extensive influence of this species of beauty.
               THAT utility is one of the principal sources of beauty has been observed by every body, who has considered with any attention what constitutes the nature of beau-ty. The conveniency of a house gives plea-sure to the spectator as well as its regularity, and he is as much hurt when he observes the contrary defect, as when he sees the cor-respondent windows of different forms, or the door not placed exactly in the middle of the building. That the fitness of any system or machine to produce the end for which it was intended, bestows a certain propriety and

beauty upon the whole, and renders the very thought and contemplation of it agreeable, is so very obvious that nobody has over-looked it.
               The cause too, why utility pleases, has of late been assigned by an ingenious and agree-able philosopher, who joins the greatest depth of thought to the greatest elegance of ex-pression, and possesses the singular and happy talent of treating the abstrusest subjects not only with the most perfect perspicuity, but with the most lively eloquence. The utility of any object, according to him, pleases the master by perpetually suggesting to him the pleasure or conveniency which it is fitted to promote. Every time he looks at it, he is put in mind of this pleasure; and the object in this manner becomes a source of perpetual satisfaction and enjoyment. The spectator enters by sympathy into the sentiments of the master, and necessarily views the object un-der the same agreeable aspect. When we visit the palaces of the great, we cannot help conceiving the satisfaction we should enjoy if we ourselves were the masters, and were pos-sessed of so much artful and ingeniously con-trived accommodation. A similar account is given why the appearance of inconveniency

should render any object disagreeable both to the owner and to the spectator.
               But that this fitness, this happy contri-vance of any production of art should often be more valued, than the very end for which it was intended; and that the exact adjust-ment of the means for attaining any conve-niency or pleasure, should frequently be more regarded, than that very conveniency or pleasure, in the attainment of which their whole merit would seem to consist, has not, so far as I know, been yet taken notice of by any body. That this however is very frequently the case, may be observed in a thousand instances, both in the most frivo-lous and in the most important concerns of human life.
               When a person comes into his chamber, and finds the chairs all standing in the middle of the room, he is angry with his servant, and rather than see them continue in that disorder, perhaps takes the trouble himself to set them all in their places with their backs to the wall. The whole propriety of this new situation arises from its superior conveniency in leaving the floor free and disengaged. To attain this conveniency he voluntarily puts himself to more trouble than all he could

have suffered from the want of it; since no-thing was more easy, than to have set himself down upon one of them, which is probably what he does when his labour is over. What he wanted therefore, it seems, was not so much this conveniency, as that arangement of things which promotes it. Yet it is this conveniency which ultimately recommends that arrangement, and bestows upon it the whole of its propriety and beauty.
               A watch, in the same manner, that falls behind above two minutes in a day, is de-spised by one curious in watches. He sells it perhaps for a couple of guineas, and pur-chases another at fifty, which will not lose above a minute in a fortnight. The sole use of watches however, is to tell us what o'clock it is, and to hinder us from breaking any en-gagement, or suffering any other inconveni-ency by our ignorance in that particular point. But the person so nice with regard to this machine, will not always be found ei-ther more scrupulously punctual than other men or more anxiously concerned upon any other account, to know precisely what time of day it is. What interests him is not so much the attainment of this piece of know-ledge

as the perfection of the machine that serves to attain it.
               How many people ruin themselves by lay-ing out money on trinkets of frivolous utility? What pleases these lovers of toys is not so much the utility, as the aptness of the ma-chines that are fitted to promote it. All their pockets are stuffed with little conveniencies. They contrive new pockets, unknown in the cloaths of other people, in order to carry a greater number. They walk about loaded with a multitude of baubles, in weight and sometimes in value not inferior to an ordinary Jews-box, some of which may sometimes be of some little use, but all of which might at all times be very well spared, and of which the whole utility is certainly not worth the fatigue of bearing the burden.
               Nor is it only with regard to such frivo-lous objects that our conduct is influenced by this principle; it is often the secret motive of the most serious and important pursuits of both private and public life.
               The poor man's son, whom heaven in its anger has visited with ambition, when he be-gins to look around him admires the con-dition of the rich. He finds the cottage of his father too small for his accommodation,

and fancies he should be lodged more at his ease in a palace. He is displeased with be-ing obliged to walk a-foot, or to endure the fatigue of riding on horseback. He sees his superiors carried about in machines, and imagines that in one of these he could travel with less inconveniency. He feels himself naturally indolent, and willing to serve him-self with his own hands as little as possible; and judges, that a numerous retinue of ser-vants would save him from a great deal of trouble. He thinks if he had attained all these, he could sit still contentedly, and be quiet, enjoying himself in the thought of the happiness and tranquillity of his situation. He is enchanted with the distant idea of this felicity. It appears in his fancy like the life of some superior rank of beings▪ and, in order to arrive at it, he devotes himself for ever to the pursuit of wealth and greatness. To obtain the conveniencies which these afford he submits in the first year, nay in the first month of his application, to more fa-tigue of body and more uneasiness of mind than he could have suffered through the whole of his life from the want of them. He studies to distinguish himself in some la-borious profession. With the most unrelent-ing

industry he labours night and day to ac-quire talents superior to all his competitors. He endeavours next to bring those talents into public view, and with equal assiduity so-licits every opportunity of employment. For this purpose he makes his court to all man-kind; he serves those whom he hates, and is obsequious to those whom he despises. Through the whole of his life he pursues the idea of a certain artificial and elegant repose which he may never arrive at, for which he sacrifices a real tranquillity that is at all times in his power, and which, if in the extremity of old age he should at last attain to it, he will find to be in no respect preferable to that humble security and contentment which he had abandoned for it. It is then, in the last dregs of life, his body wasted with toil and diseases, his mind gauled and ruffled by the memory of a thousand injuries and disap-pointments which he imagines he has met with from the injustice of his enemies, or from the perfidy and ingratitude of his friends, that he begins at last to find that wealth and greatness are mere trinkets of frivolous utility, no more adapted for pro-curing ease of body or tranquillity of mind than the tweezer-cases of the lover of toys;

and like them too more troublesome to the person who carries them about with him than all the advantages they can afford him are commodious. There is no other real differ-ence between them, except that the conve-niencies of the one are somewhat more ob-servable than those of the other. The pa-laces, the gardens, the equipage, the re-tinue of the great are objects of which the obvious conveniency strikes every body. They do not require that their masters should point out to us wherein consists their utility. Of our own accord we readily enter into it, and by sympathy enjoy and thereby applaud the satisfaction which they are fitted to afford him. But the curiosity of a tooth-pick, of an ear-picker, of a machine for cutting the nails, or of any other trinket of the same kind, is not so obvious. Their conveniency may perhaps be equally great, but it is not so striking, and we do not so readily enter into the satisfaction of the man who possesses them. They are therefore less reasonable subjects of vanity than the magnificence of wealth and greatness; and in this consists the sole advantage of these last. They more effectually gratify that love of distinction so natural to man. To one who was to live

alone in a desolate island it might be a matter of doubt perhaps whether a palace or a collec-tion of such small conveniencies as are com-monly contained in a tweezer-case, would con-tribute most to his happiness and enjoyment. If he is to live in society, indeed, there can be no comparison, because in this, as in all other cases, we constantly pay more re-gard to the sentiments of the spectator, than to those of the person principally concern'd, and consider rather how his situation will appear to other people, than how it will appear to himself. If we examine, however, why the spectator distinguishes with such admira-tion the condition of the rich and the great, we shall find that it is not so much upon ac-count of the superior ease or pleasure which they are supposed to enjoy, as of the num-berless artificial and elegant contrivances for promoting this ease or pleasure. He does not even imagine that they are really happier than other people: but he imagines that they possess more means of happiness. And it is the ingenious and artful adjustment of those means to the end for which they were intend-ed, that is the principal source of his admi-ration.
               
                  
But in the languor of disease, and the wea-riness of old age, the pleasures of the vain and empty distinctions of greatness disappear. To one in this situation they are no longer capable of recommending those toilsome pur-suits in which they had formerly engaged him. In his heart he curses ambition, and vainly regrets the ease and the indolence of youth, pleasures which are fled forever, and which he has foolishly sacrificed for what, when he has got it, can afford him no real satisfaction.
               In this miserable aspect does greatness ap-pear to every man when reduced either by spleen or disease to observe with attention his own situation, and to consider what it is that is really wanting to his happiness. Power and riches appear then to be, what they are, enormous and operose machines, contrived to produce a few triffling conveniencies to the body, consisting of springs the most nice and delicate, which must be kept in order with the most anxious attention, and which in spite of all our care are ready every mo-ment to burst into pieces, and to crush in their ruins their unfortunate possessor. They are immense fabrics, which it requires the labour of a life to raise, which threaten every

The man whose sympathy keeps time to my grief, cannot but admit the reasonable-ness of my sorrow. He who admires the same poem, or the same picture, and ad-mires them exactly as I do, must surely al-low the justness of my admiration. He who laughs at the same joke, and laughs along with me, cannot well deny the propriety of my laughter. On the con-trary, the person who, upon these diffe-rent occasions, either feels no such emo-tion as that which I feel, or feels none that bears any proportion to mine, cannot avoid disapproving my sentiments on account of their dissonance with his own. If my animosity goes beyond what the indig-nation of my friend can correspond to; if my grief exceeds what his most tender compassion can go along with; if my ad-miration is either too high or too low to tally with his own; if I laugh loud and heartily at what he only smiles, or, on the contrary, only smile when he laughs loud and heartily; in all these cases, as soon as he comes from considering the ob-ject, to observe how I am affected by it, according as there is more or less dispropor-tion between his sentiments and mine, I

moment to overwhelm the person who dwells in them, and which while they stand, though they may save him from some small-er inconveniencies, can protect him from none of the severer inclemencies of the sea-son. They keep off the summer shower, not the winter storm, but leave him always as much, and sometimes more exposed than before, to anxiety, to fear, and to sorrow; to diseases, to danger, and to death.
               But tho' this splenetic philosophy, which in time of sickness or low spirits is familiar to every man, thus entirely depreciates those great objects of human desire, when in bet-ter health and in better humour, we never fail to regard them under a more agreeable aspect. Our imagination, which in pain and sorrow seems to be confined and cooped up within our own persons, in times of ease and prosperity expands itself to every thing around us. We are then charmed with the beauty of that accomodation which reigns in the palaces and oeconomy of the great; and admire how every 
                     •
                  hing is adapted to promote their ease, to prevent their wants, to gratify their wishes, and to amuse and entertain their most frivo-
                  
                     •
                  ous desires. If we consider the real satis-faction which all these things are capable of

affording, by itself and seperated from the beauty of that arangement which is fitted to promote it, it will always appear in the high-est degree contemptible and trifling. But we rarely view it in this abstract and philosophi-cal light. We naturally confound it in our imagination with the order, the regular and harmonious movement of the system, the machine or oeconomy by means of which it is produced. The pleasures of wealth and greatness, when considered in this complex view, strike the imagination as something grand and beautiful and noble, of which the attainment is well worth all the to
                     ••
                   and anxiety which we are so apt to bestow upon it.
               And it is well that nature imposes upon us in this manner. It is this deception which rouses and keeps in continual motion the in-dustry of mankind. It is this which first prompted them to cultivate the ground, to build houses, to found cities and common-wealths, and to invent and improve all the sciences and arts, which ennoble and embel-lish human life; which have entirely chang-ed the whole face of the globe, have turned the rude forests of nature into agreeable and fertile plains, and made the trackless and bar-ren

ocean a new fund of subsistence, and the great high road of communication to the dif-ferent nations of the earth. The earth by these labours of mankind has been obliged to redouble her natural fertility, and to maintain a greater multitude of inhabitants. It is to no purpose, that the proud and unfeeling land-lord views his extensive fields, and without a thought for the wants of his brethren, in ima-gination consumes himself the whole harvest that grows upon them. The homely and vulgar proverb, that the eye is larger than the belly, never was more fully verified than with regard to him. The capacity of his sto-mach bears no proportion to the immensity of his desires, and will receive no more than that of the meanest peasant. The rest he is obliged to distribute among those, who pre-pare, in the nicest manner, that little which he himself makes use of, among those who fit up the palace in which this little is to be con-sumed, among those who provide and keep in order all the different baubles and trinkets, which are employed in the oeconomy of great-ness; all of whom thus derive from his luxu-ry and caprice, that share of the necessaries of life, which they would in vain have ex-pected from his humanity or his justice. The

produce of the soil maintains at all times nearly that number of inhabitants, which it is ca-pable of maintaining. The rich only select from the heap what is most precious and agreeable. They consume little more tha
                     •
                   the poor, and in spite of their natural selfish-ness and rapacity, tho' they mean only their own conveniency, tho' the sole end which they propose from the labours of all the thou-sands whom they employ, be the gratification of their own vain and insatiable desires, they divide with the poor the produce of all their improvements. They are led by an invisible hand to make nearly the same distribution of the necessaries of life, which would have been made, had the earth been divided into equal portions among all its inhabitants, and thus without intending it, without knowing it, advance the interest of the society, and afford means to the multi-plication of the species. When providence divided the earth among a few lordly masters, it neither forgot nor abandoned those who seemed to have been left out in the partition▪ These last too enjoy their share of all that i
                     •
                   produces. In what constitutes the real hap-piness of human life, they are in no respect inferior to those who would seem so much

                  
                     •
                  bove them. In ease of body and peace of 
                     •
                  ind, all the different ranks of life are nearly 
                     •
                  pon a level, and the beggar, who suns him-
                  
                     •
                  elf by the side of the highway, possesses that 
                     •
                  ecurity which kings are fighting for.
               The same principle, the same love of sys-
                  
                     •
                  em, the same regard to the beauty of order, 
                     •
                  f art and contrivance, frequently serves to 
                     •
                  ecommend those institutions, which tend to 
                     •
                  romote the public welfare. When a patriot 
                     •
                  xerts himself for the improvement of any 
                     •
                  art of the public police, his conduct does not 
                     •
                  lways arise from pure sympathy with the 
                     •
                  appiness of those, who are to reap the bene-
                  
                     ••
                  t of it. It is not commonly from a fellow-
                     •
                  eeling with carriers and waggoners that a 
                     •
                  ublic spirited man encourages the mending 
                     •
                  f high roads. When the legislature estab-
                  
                     ••
                  shes praemiums and other encouragements 
                     •
                  o advance the linnen or woollen manufactu-
                  
                     •
                  es, its conduct seldom proceeds from pure 
                     ••
                  mpathy with the wearer of cheap or fine 
                     •
                  loth, and much less from that with the ma-
                  
                     •
                  ufacturer, or merchant. The perfection of 
                     •
                  olice, the extension of trade and manufac-
                  
                     •
                  ures, are noble and magnificent objects. The contemplation of them pleases us, and we are interested in whatever can tend to ad-vance

them. They make part of the great system of government, and the wheels of the political machine seem to move with more harmony and ease by means of them. We take pleasure in beholding the perfection of so beautiful and grand a system, and we are uneasy till we remove any obstruction that can in the least disturb or incumber the regu-larity of its motions. All constitutions of government, however, are valued only in proportion, as they tend to promote the hap-piness of those who live under them. This is their sole use and end. From a certain spi-rit of system, however, from a certain love of art and contrivance, we sometimes seem to value the means more than the end, and to be eager to promote the happiness of our fel-low-creatures, rather from a view to perfect and improve a certain beautiful and orderly system, than from any immediate sense o
                     •
                   feeling of what they either suffer or enjoy▪ There have been men of the greatest public spirit, who have shown themselves in othe
                     •
                   respects not very sensible to the feelings o
                     •
                   humanity. And on the contrary, there have been men of the greatest humanity, 
                     
                   seem to bave been entirely devoid of publi
                     •
                   spirit. Every man may find in the circle 
                     
                  
                  

his acquaintance instances both of the one kind and the other. Who had ever less hu-manity, or more public spirit than the cele-brated legislator of Muscovy? The social and well natured James the first of Great-Britain seems on the contrary to have had scarce any passion, either for the glory, or the interest of his country. Would you awaken the indu-stry of the man, who seems almost dead to ambition, it will often be to no purpose to describe to him the happiness of the rich and the great; to tell him that they are gene-rally sheltered from the sun and the rain, that they are seldom hungry, that they are seldom cold, and that they are rarely ex-posed to weariness, or to want of any kind. The most eloquent exhortation of this kind will have little effect upon him. If you would hope to succeed, you must describe to him the conveniency and arrangement of the different apartments in their palaces; you must explain to him the propriety of their equipages, and point out to him the number, the order, and the different of-fices of all their attendants. If any thing is capable of making impression upon him this will. Yet all these things tend only to keep off the sun and the rain, to save them from hunger and cold, from want and wea-riness.

In the same manner, if you would implant public virtue in the breast of him, who seems heedless of the interest of his coun-try, it will often be to no purpose to tell him, what superior advantages the subjects of a well-governed state enjoy; that they are bet-ter lodged, that they are better cloathed, that they are better fed. These conside-rations will commonly make no great impres-sion. You will be more likely to persuade, if you describe the great system of public po-lice which procures these advantages, if you explain the connections and dependencies of its several parts, their mutual subordination to one another, and their general subservi-ency to the happiness of the society; if you show how this system might be introduced into his own country, what it is that hinders it from taking place there at present, how those obstructions might be removed, and all the several wheels of the machine of govern-ment be made to move with more harmony and smoothness, without grating upon one another, or mutually retarding one another's motions. It is scarce possible that a man should listen to a discourse of this kind, and not feel himself animated to some degree of public spirit. He will, at least for the mo-ment, feel some desire to remove those ob-structions,

and to put into motion so beautiful and so orderly a machine. Nothing tends so much to promote public spirit as the study of politics, of the several systems of civil go-vernment, their advantages and disadvan-tages, of the constitution of our own coun-try, its situation, and interest with regard to foreign nations, its commerce, its defence, the disadvantages it labours under, the dan-gers to which it may be exposed, how to re-move the one, and how to guard against the other. Upon this account political disquisi-tions, if just, and reasonable, and practicable, are of all the works of speculation the most useful. Even the weakest and the worst of them are not altogether without their utility. They serve at least to animate the public pas-sions of men, and rouze them to seek out the means of promoting the happiness of the so-ciety.
            
            
               

               SECT. II. Of the beauty which the appearance of uti-lity bestows upon the characters and acti-ons of men; and how far the perception of this beauty may be regarded as one of the original principles of approbation.
               THE characters of men, as well as the contrivances of art, or the institutions of civil government, may be fitted either to pro-mote or to disturb the happiness both of the individual and of the society. The prudent, the equitable, the active, resolute and sober character promises prosperity and satisfaction▪ both to the person himself and to every one connected with him. The rash, the insolent, the slothful, effeminate and voluptuous, on the contrary forbodes ruin to the individual, and misfortune to all who have any thing to do with him. The first turn of mind has at least all the beauty which can belong to the most perfect machine that was ever in-vented for promoting the most agreeable pur-pose: and the second all the deformity of the

must incur a greater or less degree of his disapprobation: and upon all occasions his own sentiments are the standards and mea-sures by which he judges of mine.
                  To approve of another man's opinions is to adopt those opinions, and to adopt them is to approve of them. If the same arguments which convince you convince me likewise, I necessarily approve of your conviction; and if they do not, I necessa-rily disapprove of it: neither can I possibly conceive that I should do the one without the other. To approve or disapprove, there-fore, of the opinions of others is acknow-ledged, by every body, to mean no more than to observe their agreement or disagree-ment with our own. But this is equally the case with regard to our approbation or disapprobation of the sentiments or passions of others.
                  There are, indeed, some cases in which we seem to approve without any sympathy or correspondence of sentiments, and in which, consequently, the sentiment of ap-probation would seem to be different from the perception of this coincidence. A lit-tle attention, however, will convince us that even in these cases our approbation


most aukward and clumsy contrivance. What institution of government could tend so much to promote the happiness of mankind as the general prevalence of wisdom and virtue? All government is but an imperfect remedy for the deficiency of these. Whatever beauty, therefore, can belong to civil government up-on account of its utility, must in a far supe-rior degree belong to these. On the contrary, what civil policy can be so ruinous and de-structive as the vices of men. The fatal effects of bad government arise from no-thing, but that it does not sufficiently guard against the mischiefs which human wicked-ness gives occasion to.
               This beauty and deformity which charac-ters appear to derive from their usefulness or inconveniency, are apt to strike, in a pecu-liar manner, those who consider in an abstract and philosophical light, the actions and con-duct of mankind. When a philosopher goes to examine why humanity is approved of, or cruelty condemned, he does▪ not always form to himself in a very clear and distinct manner, the conception of any one particular action either of cruelty or of humanity, but is com-monly contented with the vague and inde-terminate idea which the general names of

those qualities suggest to him. But it is in particular instances only that the propriety or impropriety, the merit and demerit of actions is very obvious and discernible. It is only when particular examples are given that we perceive distinctly either the concord or disa-greement between our own affections and those of the agent, or feel a social gratitude arise to-wards him in the one case, or a sympathetic re-sentment in the other. When we consider vir-tue and vice in an abstract and general manner, the qualities by which they excite these se-veral sentiments seem in a great measure to disappear, and the sentiments themselves be-come less obvious and discernible. On the contrary the happy effects of the one and the fatal consequences of the other seem then to rise up to the view, and as it were to stand out and distinguish themselves from all the other qualities of either.
               The same ingenious and agreeable author who first explained why utility pleases, has been so struck with this view of things, as to resolve our whole approbation of virtue into a perception of this species of beauty which results from the appearance of utility. No qualities of the mind, he observes, are approved of as virtuous, but such as are use-ful

or agreeable either to the person himself or to others; and no qualities are disapproved of as vitious but such as have a contrary tendency. And, nature, indeed, seems to have so hap-pily adjusted our sentiments of approbation and disapprobation, to the conveniency both of the individual and of the society, that af-ter the strictest examination it will be found, I believe, that this is universally the case. But still I affirm, that it is not the view of this utility or hurtfulness which is either the first or principal source of our approbation and disapprobation. These sentiments are no doubt enhanced and enlivened by the perception of the beauty or deformity which results from this utility or hurtfulness. But still, I say, they are originally and essentially different from this perception.
               For first of all it seems impossible that the approbation of virtue should be a senti-ment of the same kind with that by which we approve of a convenient and well contrived building; or that we should have no other reason for praising a man than that for which we commend a chest of drawers.
               And secondly it will be found, upon exa-mination, that the usefulness of any disposi-tion of mind is seldom the first ground of

our approbation; and that the sentiment of approbation always involves in it a sense of propriety quite distinct from the perception of utility. We may observe this with regard to all the qualities which are approved of as virtuous, both those which, according to this system, are originally valued as useful to ourselves, as well as those which are esteem-ed on account of their usefulness to others.
               The qualities most useful to ourselves are first of all superior reason and understand-ing, by which we are capable of discerning the remote consequences of all our actions, and of forseeing the advantage or detriment which is likely to result from them: and se-condly, self-command, by which we are en-abled to abstain from present pleasure or to endure present pain, in order to obtain a greater pleasure or to avoid a greater pain in some future time. In the union of those two qualities consists the virtue of prudence, of all the virtues that which is most useful to the individual.
               With regard to the first of those qualities, it has been observed upon a former occasion that superior reason and understanding are originally approved of as just and right and accurate, and not meerly as useful or ad-vantageous.

It is in the abstruser sciences, particularly in the higher parts of mathema-tics, that the greatest and most admired ex-ertions of human reason have been displayed. But the utility of those sciences, either to the individual or to the public, is not very obvi-ous, and to prove it requires a discussion which is not always very easily comprehend-ed. It was not, therefore, their utility which first recommended them to the public admi-ration. This quality was but little insisted upon, till it became necessary to make some reply to the reproaches of those, who, hav-ing themselves no taste for such sublime dis-coveries, endeavoured to depreciate them as useless.
               That self-command, in the same manner, by which we restrain our present appetites in order to gratify them more fully upon ano-ther occasion is approved of as much under the aspect of propriety as under that of utility. When we act in this manner the sentiments which influence our conduct seem exactly to coincide with those of the spectator. The spectator does not feel the sollicitations of our present appetites. To him the pleasure which we are to enjoy a week hence, or a year hence, is just as interesting as that which we are to

enjoy this moment. When for the sake of the present, therefore, we sacrifice the future, our conduct appears to him absurd and ex-travagant in the highest degree, and he can-not enter into the principles which influence it. On the contrary, when we abstain from present pleasure, in order to secure greater pleasure to come, when we act as if the re-mote object interested us as much as that which immediately presses upon the senses, as our affections exactly correspond with his own, he cannot fail to approve of our beha-viour: and as he knows from experience, how few are capable of this self-command he looks upon our conduct with a considera-ble degree of wonder and admiration. Hence arises that eminent esteem with which all men naturally regard a steady perseverance in the practice of frugality, industry and ap-plication, though directed to no other purpose than the acquisition of fortune. The resolute firmness of the person who acts in this manner, and in order to obtain a great though remote advantage, not only gives up all present pleasures, but endures the greatest labour both of mind and body, necessarily com-mands our approbation. That view of his interest and happiness which appears to re-gulate

his conduct, exactly tallies with the idea which we naturally form of it. There is the most perfect correspondence between his sentiments and our own, and at the same time, from our experience of the common weakness of human nature, it is a correspondence which we could not rea-sonably have expected. We not only ap-prove, therefore, but in some measure ad-mire his conduct, and think it worthy of a considerable degree of applause. It is the consciousness of this merited approbation and esteem which is alone capable of sup-porting the agent in this tenor of conduct. The pleasure which we are to enjoy ten years hence interests us so little in comparison with that which we may enjoy to day, the passion which the first excites, is naturally so weak in comparison with that violent emotion which the second is apt to give occasion to, that the one could never be any balance to the other, unless it was supported by the sense of propriety, by the consciousness that we merited the esteem and approbation of every body, by acting in the one way, and that we became the proper objects of their contempt and derision by behaving in the other.
               
                  
Humanity, justice, generosity and public spirit, are the qualities most useful to others. Wherein consists the propriety of humanity and justice has been explained upon a former occasion, where it was shewn how much our esteem and approbation of those qualities de-pended upon the concord between the af-fections of the agent and those of the spec-tators.
               The propriety of generosity and public spirit is founded upon the same principle with that of justice. Generosity is diffe-rent from humanity. Those two qualities, which at first sight seem so nearly allied, do not always belong to the same person. Hu-manity is the virtue of a woman, generosity of a man. The fair sex, who have com-monly much more tenderness than ours, have seldom so much generosity. That women rarely make considerable donations is an ob-servation of the civil law Raro mulieres donare solent.. Humanity consists merely in the exquisite fellow-feeling which the spectator entertains with the sentiments of the persons principally concerned so as to grieve for their sufferings, to resent their injuries, and rejoice at their good fortune.

The most humane actions require no self-denial, no self-command, no great exertion of the sense of propriety. They consist on-ly in doing what this exquisite sympathy would of its own accord prompt us to do. But it is otherways with generosity. We ne-ver are generous except when in some respect we prefer some other person to ourselves, and sacrifice some great and important interest of our own to an equal interest of a friend or of a superior. The man who gives up his pretensions to an office that was the great object of his ambition, because, he imagines that the services of another are better entitled to it; the man who exposes his life to defend that of his friend, which he judges to be of more importance, neither of them act from huma-nity, or because they feel more exquisitely what concerns that other person than what concerns themselves. They both consider those opposite interests not in the light in which they naturally appear to themselves, but in that in which they appear to others. To every bystander the success or preserva-tion of this other person may justly be more interesting than their own, but it cannot be so to themselves. When to the interest of this other person, therefore, they sacrifice their

own; they accommodate themselves to the sentiments of the spectator, and by an effort of magnanimity act according to those views of things which they feel, must naturally oc-cur to any third person. The soldier who throws away his life in order to defend that of his officer, would perhaps be but little af-fected by the death of that officer, if it should happen without any fault of his own, and a very small disaster which had befallen himself might excite a much more lively sor-row. But when he endeavours to act so as to deserve applause, and to make the impar-tial spectator enter into the principles of his conduct, he feels that to every body but him-self his own life is a trifle compared with that of his officer, and that when he sacrifices the one to the other, he acts quite properly and agreeably to what would be the natural ap-prehensions of every impartial bystander.
               It is the same case with the greater exertions of public spirit. When a young officer exposes his life to acquire some inconsiderable addi-tion to the dominions of his sovereign, it is not, because the acquisition of the new territory is to himself an object more desireable than the preservation of his own life. To him his own life is of infinitely more value than the

is ultimately founded upon a sympathy or correspondence of this kind. I shall give an instance in things of a very frivolous na-ture, because in them the judgments of mankind are less apt to be perverted by wrong systems. We may often approve of a jest, and think the laughter of the com-pany quite just and proper, though we our-selves do not laugh, because, perhaps, we are in a grave humour, or happen to have our attention engaged with other objects. We have learned, however, from experience, what sort of pleasantry is upon most occasions capable of making us laugh, and we observe that this is one of that kind. We approve, therefore, of the laughter of the company, and feel that it is natural and suitable to its object; because, though in our present mood we cannot easily enter into it, we are sensible that upon most occasions we should very heartily join in it.
                  The same thing often happens with re-gard to all the other passions. A stranger passes by us in the street with all the marks of the deepest affliction; and we are imme-diately told that he has just received the news of the death of his father. It is impossible that, in this case, we should not

conquest of a whole kingdom for the state which he serves. But when he compares those two objects with one another, he does not view them in the light, in which they naturally appear to himself, but in that, in which they appear to the nation he fights for. To them the success of the war is of the highest importance; the life of a private person of scarce any consequence. When he puts himself in their situation, he imme-diately feels that he cannot be too prodigal of his blood, if by shedding it he can pro-mote so valuable a purpose. In thus thwart-
                  
                     •
                  ng from a sense of duty and propriety, the strongest of all natural propensities, consists 
                     •
                  he heroism of his conduct. There is many 
                     •
                  n honest Englishman, who in his private station would be more seriously disturbed by the 
                     •
                  oss of a guinea than by the national loss of Minorca, who yet, had it been in his power to defend that fortress, would have sacrificed his 
                     •
                  ife a thousand times, rather than, through his fault, have let it fall into the hands of the enemy. When the first Brutus led forth his own sons to a capital punishment, because 
                     •
                  hey had conspired against the rising liberty of Rome, he sacrificed what, if he had con-
                  
                     •
                  ulted his own breast only, would appear to

be the stronger to the weaker affection. Bru-tus ought naturally to have felt much 
                     
                   for the death of his own sons, than for 
                     
                   that probably Rome could have suffered fro
                     •
                   the want of so great an example. But h
                     •
                   viewed them, not with the eyes of a father, but with those of a Roman citizen. He en-tered so thoroughly into the sentiments of 
                     
                   last character that he paid no regard to 
                     
                   tye, by which he himself was connected with them, and to a Roman citizen, the 
                     
                   even of Brutus seemed contemptible, 
                     
                   put into the balance with the smallest inter-est of Rome. In these and in all other ca-ses of this kind, our admiration is not 
                     
                   much founded upon the utility, as upon th
                     •
                   unexpected, and on that account the grea
                     •
                  
                  ▪ the noble and exalted propriety of such ac-tions. This utility when we come to 
                     
                   it, bestows upon them undoubtedly a 
                     
                   beauty, and upon that account still furthe
                     •
                   recommends them to our approbation. 
                     
                   beauty, however, is chiefly perceived by men of reflection and speculation, and is b
                     •
                   no means the quality which first recom-mends such actions to the natural sentime
                     ••
                   of the bulk of mankind.
               
                  
It is to be observed, that so far as the sen-
                  
                     •
                  iment of approbation arises from the percep-
                  
                     •
                  ion of this beauty of utility, it has no refe-
                  
                     •
                  ence of any kind to the sentiments of others. 
                     •
                  f it was possible, therefore, that a person 
                     •
                  hould grow up to manhood without any 
                     •
                  ommunication with society, his own actions 
                     •
                  ight, notwithstanding, be agreeable or dis-
                  
                     •
                  greeable to him upon account of their ten-
                  
                     •
                  ency to his happiness or disadvantage. He 
                     •
                  ight perceive a beauty of this kind in pru-
                  
                     •
                  ence, temperance and good conduct, and a 
                     •
                  eformity in the opposite behaviour: He 
                     •
                  ight view his own temper and character 
                     •
                  ith that sort of satisfaction with which we 
                     •
                  onsider a well contrived machine, in the 
                     
                   case; or with that sort of distaste and 
                     ••
                  ssatisfaction with which we regard a very 
                     ••
                  kward and clumsy contrivance, in the other. 
                     
                   these perceptions, however, are meerly 
                     
                   matter of taste, and have all the feebleness 
                     
                   delicacy of that species of perceptions, 
                     ••
                  on the justness of which what is properly 
                     
                   taste is founded, they probably would 
                     
                   be much attended to by one in this 
                     
                   and miserable condition. Even though 
                     ••
                  ey should occur to him, they would by no 
                     •
                  eans have the same effect upon him, ante-cedent

to his connection with society, which they would have in consequence of that con-nection. He would not be cast down with inward shame at the thought of this defor-mity; nor would he be elevated with secret triumph of mind from the consciousness of the contrary beauty. He would not ex
                     •
                  lt from the notion of deserving reward in the one case, nor tremble from the suspicion of meriting punishment in the other. All such sentiments suppose the idea of some other being, who is the natural judge of the per-son that feels them; and it is only by sym-pathy with the decisions of this arbiter of his conduct that he can conceive either the tri-umph of self-applause, or the shame of self-condemnation.
            
         
         
            

            PART V. Of the INFLUENCE of CUSTOM and FASHION upon the sentiments of moral approbation and disappro-bation.
            
               SECT. I. Of the Influence of custom and fashion upon our notions of beauty and deformity.
               THERE are other principles, besides those already enumerated, which have a considerable influence upon the moral sentiments of mankind, and are the chief causes of the many irregular and discordant opinions which prevail in different ages and nations concerning what is blameable or praise worthy. These principles are custom and fashion, principles which extend their domi-nion over our judgments concerning beauty of every kind.
               When two objects have frequently been seen together, the imagination acquires a ha-bit of passing easily from the one to the other. If the first appears we lay our account that the second is to follow. Of their own ac-cord


they put us in mind of one another, and the attention glides easily along them. Tho' independent of custom, there should be no real beauty in their union, yet when custom has thus connected them together, we feel an impropriety in their separation. The one we think is aukward when it appears without its usual companion. We miss something which we expected to find, and the habitual arangement of our ideas is disturbed by the disappointment. A suit of cloaths, for ex-ample, seems to want something if they are without the most insignificant ornament which usually accompanies them, and we find a meanness or aukwardness in the ab-sence even of a haunch button. When there is any natural propriety in the union, custom increases our sense of it, and makes a diffe-rent arangement appear still more disagree-able than it would otherwise seem to be. Those who have been accustomed to see things in a good taste are more disgusted by whatever is clumsy or aukward. Where the conjunction is improper, custom either diminishes or takes away altogether our sense of the impropriety. Those who have been accustomed to slo-venly disorder lose all sense of neatness or elegance. The modes of furniture or dress

which seem ridiculous to strangers give no offence to the people who are used to them.
               Fashion is different from custom, or rather is a particular species of it. That is not the fashion which every body wears, but which those wear who are of a high rank, or cha-racter. The graceful, the easy and com-manding manners of the great, joined to the usual richness and magnificence of their dress, give a grace to the very form which they happen to bestow upon it. As long as they continue to use this form, it is connected in our imaginations with the idea of something that is genteel and magnificent, and tho' in itself it should be indifferent, it seems on ac-count of this relation, to have something about it that is genteel and magnificent too. As soon as they drop it, it loses all the grace, which it had appeared to possess before, and being now used only by the inferior ranks of people, seems to have something of their meanness and aukwardness.
               Dress and furniture are allowed by all the world to be entirely under the dominion of custom and fashion. The influence of those principles, however, is by no means con-fined to so narrow a sphere, but extends it-self to whatever is in any respect the object

of taste to music, to poetry, to architec-ture. The modes of dress and furniture are continually changing, and that fashion ap-pearing ridiculous to-day which was admir-ed five years ago, we are experimentally con-vinced that it owed its vogue chiefly or en-tirely to custom and fashion. Cloaths and furniture are not made of very durable ma-terials. A well fancied coat is done in a twelve month, and cannot continue longer to propagate, as the fashion, that form ac-cording to which it was made. The modes of furniture change less rapidly than those of dress; because furniture is commonly more durable, In five, or six years, however, it generally undergoes an entire revolution, and every man in his own time sees the fashion in this respect change many different ways. The productions of the other arts are much more lasting, and, when happily imagined, may continue to propagate the fashion of their make for a much longer time. A well contrived building may en-dure many centuries: a beautiful air may be delivered down by a sort of tradition, thro' many successive generations: A well written poem may last as long as the world, and all of them continue for ages together, to

give the vogue to that particular stile, to that particular taste or manner, according to which each of them was composed. Few men have an opportunity of seeing in their own times the fashion in any of these arts change very considerably. Few men have so much experience and acquaintance with the different modes which have obtained in remote ages and nations, as to be thoroughly reconciled to them, or to judge with impar-tiality between them, and what takes place in their own age and country. Few men therefore are willing to allow that custom or fashion have much influence upon their judg-ments concerning what is beautiful, or other-wise, in the productions of any of those arts; but imagine, that all the rules, which they think ought to be observed in each of them, are founded upon reason and nature, not upon habit or prejudice. A very little at-tention, however, may convince them of the contrary, and satisfy them that the influ-ence of custom and fashion over dress and furniture is not more absolute than over ar-chitecture, poetry, and music.
               Can any reason, for example, be assigned why the Doric capital should be appropriated to a pillar, whose height is equal to eight dia-meters;

the Jonic volute to one of nine▪ and the Corinthian foliage to one of ten? The propriety of each of those appropriations can be founded upon nothing but habit and cus-tom. The eye having been used to see a particular proportion connected with a parti-cular ornament, would be offended if they were not joined together. Each of the five orders has its peculiar ornaments, which can-not be changed for any other, without giving offence to all those who know any thing of the rules of architecture. According to some architects, indeed, such is the exquisite judg-ment with which the antients have assigned to each order its proper ornaments, that no others can be found which are equally suit-able. It seems, however, a little difficult to be conceived that these forms, tho' no doubt extremely agreeable, should be the only forms which can suit those proportions, o
                     •
                   that there should not be five hundred others which, antecedent to established custom, would have fitted them equally well. When custom, however, has established particular rules of building, provided they are not ab-solutely unreasonable, it is absurd to think of altering them for others which are only equally good, or even for others which, in

approve of his grief. Yet it may often happen, without any defect of humanity on our part, that, so far from entering into the violence of his sorrow, we should scarce conceive the first movements of con-cern upon his account. Both he and his father, perhaps, are intirely unknown to us, or we happen to be employed about other things, and do not take time to pic-ture out in our imagination the different circumstances of distress which must occur to him. We have learned, however, from experience, that such a misfortune naturally excites such a degree of sorrow, and we know that if we took time to consider his situation fully and in all its parts, we should, without doubt, most sincerely sym-pathize with him. It is upon the consci-ousness of this conditional sympathy, that our approbation of his sorrow is founded, even in those cases in which that sympa-thy does not actually take place; and the general rules derived from our preceding experience of what, upon most occasions, our sentiments would correspond with, cor-rect the impropriety of our present emo-tions.
                  
                     

point of elegance and beauty, have natu-rally some little advantage over them. A man would be ridiculous who should appear in public with a suit of cloaths quite different from those which are commonly worn, tho' the new dress should in itself be ever so graceful or convenient. And there seems to be an absurdity of the same kind in orna-menting a house after a quite different man-ner from that which custom and fashion have prescribed; tho' the new ornaments should 
                     •
                  n themselves be somewhat superior to the common ones.
               According to the antient rhetoricians a cer-
                  
                     •
                  ain measure of verse was by nature appro-
                  
                     •
                  riated to each particular species of writing, 
                     •
                  s being naturally expressive of that charac-
                  
                     •
                  er, sentiment or passion, which ought to 
                     •
                  redominate in it. One verse, they said, was 
                     
                   for grave and another for gay works, which could not, they thought, be inter-
                  
                     •
                  hanged without the greatest impropriety. The experience of modern times, however, 
                     •
                  eems to contradict this principle, tho' in it-
                  
                     •
                  elf it would appear to be extremely pro-
                  
                     •
                  able. What is the burlesque verse in eng-
                  
                     ••
                  sh is the heroic verse in French. The tra-gedies

of Racine and the Henriad of Vol-taire, are in the same verse with
Thus said to my lady the knight full of care.
The burlesque verse in French, on the con-trary is pretty much the same with the heroic verse of ten syllables in English. Cus-tom has made the one nation associate the ideas of gravity, sublimity and seriousness, to that measure which the other has connected with whatever is gay, flippant and ludicrous. Nothing would appear more absurd in Eng-lish than a tragedy written in the Alexandri
                     ••
                   verses of the French; or in French, than a work of the same kind in verses of ten syl-lables.
               An eminent artist will bring about a con-siderable change in the established modes of each of those arts, and introduce a new fashion of writing, music, or architecture. As the dress of an agreeable man of high rank recommends itself, and how peculiar and fantastical soever, comes soon to be ad-mired and imitated; so the excellencies of an eminent master recommend his peculia-rities, and his manner becomes the fashion-able stile in the art which he practises. The taste of the Italians in music and architecture has, within these fifty years, undergone a con-siderable

change, from imitating the peculia-rities of some eminent masters in each of those arts. Seneca is accused by Quintilian of having corrupted the taste of the Romans, and of having introduced a frivolous pretti-ness in the room of majestic reason and mas-culine eloquence. Sallust and Tacitus have by others been charged with the same accu-sation, tho' in a different manner. They gave reputation it is pretended to a stile, which tho' in the highest degree concise, ele-gant, expressive, and even poetical, wanted, however, ease, simplicity, and nature, and was evidently the production of the most la-boured and studied affectation. How many great qualities must that writer possess who can thus render his very faults agreeable? After the praise of refining the taste of a na-tion, the highest eulogy, perhaps, which can be bestowed upon any author is to say, that he corrupted it. In our own language, Mr. Pope and Dr. Swift have each of them introduced a manner different from what was practised before, into all works that are written in Rhyme, the one in long verses, the other in short. The quaintness of Butler has given place to the plainness of Swift. The rambling freedom of Dryden,

and the correct but often tedious and prosaic languor of Addison are no longer the objects of imitation, but all long verses are now writ-ten after the manner of the nervous precision of Mr. Pope.
               Neither is it only over the productions of the arts, that custom and fashion exert their dominion. They influence our judgments, in the same manner, with regard to the beauty of natural objects. What various and op-posite forms are deemed beautiful in different species of things? The proportions which are admired in one animal, are altogether different from those which are esteemed in another. Every class of things has its own peculiar conformation, which is approved of, and has a beauty of its own, distinct from that of every other species. It is upon this account that a learned Jesuit, father Buffier, has determined that the beauty of every object consists in that form and colour, which is most usual among things of that particular sort to which it belongs. Thus, in the human form, the beauty of each fea-ture lies in a certain middle equally removed from a variety of other forms that are ugly. A beautiful nose, for example, is one that is neither very long, nor very short, neither

very streight, nor very crooked, but a sort of middle among all these extremes, and less different from any one of them, than all of them are from one another. It is the form which nature seems to have aimed at in them all, which, however, she deviates from in a great variety of ways▪ and very seldom hits ex-actly; but to which all those deviations still bear a very strong resemblance. When a number of drawings are made after one pat-tern, tho' they may all miss it in some re-spects, yet they will all resemble it more than they resemble one another; the general cha-racter of the pattern will run through them all; the most singular and odd will be those that are most wide of it; and tho' very few will copy it exactly, yet the most accurate delineations will bear a greater resemblance to the most careless, than the careless ones will bear to one another. In the same man-ner in each species of creatures, what is most beautiful bears the strongest characters of the general fabric of the species, and has the strongest resemblance to the greater part of 
                     •
                  he individuals with which it is classed. Mon-sters, on the contrary, or what is perfectly deformed, are always most singular and odd, 
                     •
                  nd have the least resemblance to the genera-lity

of that species to which they belong. And thus the beauty of each species, though in one sense the rarest of all things, because few individuals hit this middle form exactly, yet in another, is the most common, because all the deviations from it resemble it more than they resemble one another. The most customary form, therefore, is in each species of things, according to him, the most beau-tiful. And hence it is that a certain practice and experience in contemplating each species of objects is requisite, before we can judge of its beauty, or know wherein the middle and most usual form consists. The nicest judg-ment concerning the beauty of the human species, will not help us to judge of that of flowers, or horses, or any other species of things. It is for the same reason that in dif-ferent climates and where different customs and ways of living take place, as the genera-lity of any species receives a different confor-mation from those circumstances, so different ideas of its beauty prevail. The beauty of a moorish is not exactly the same with that of an English horse. What different ideas are formed in different nations concerning the beauty of the human shape and countenance? A fair complexion is a shocking deformity

upon the coast of Guinea. Thick lips and a flat nose are a beauty. In some nations long ears that hang down upon the shoulders are the objects of universal admiration. In Chi-na if a lady's foot is so large as to be fit to walk upon, she is regarded as a monster of uggliness. Some of the savage nations in North-America tie four boards round the heads of their children, and thus squeeze them, while the bones are tender and gristly, into a form that is almost perfectly square. Euro-peans are astonished at the absurd barbarity of this practice, to which some missionaries have imputed the singular stupidity of those nations among whom it prevails. But when they condemn those savages they do not re-flect that the ladies in Europe had, till with-in these very few years, been endeavouring for near a century past, to squeeze the beau-tiful roundness of their natural shape into a square form of the same kind. And that notwithstanding the many distortions and di-seases which this practice was known to oc-casion, custom had rendered it agreeable among some of the most civilized nations which, perhaps, the world ever beheld.
               Such is the system of this learned and in-genious father, concerning the nature of

beauty; of which the whole charm, accord-ing to him, would thus seem to arise from its falling in with the habits which custom had impressed upon the imagination, with re-gard to things of each particular kind. I cannot, however, be induced to believe that our sense even of external beauty is founded altogether on custom. The utility of any form, its fitness for the useful purposes for which it was intended, evidently recom-mends it, and renders it agreeable to us inde-pendent of custom. Certain colours are more agreeable than others, and give more delight to the eye even the first time it ever beholds them. A smooth surface is more agreeable than a rough one. Variety is more pleasing than a tedious undiversified uniformity. Connected variety, in which each new ap-pearance seems to be introduced by what went before it, and in which all the ad-joining parts seem to have some natural relation to one another, is more agreeable than a disjointed and disorderly assemblage of un-connected objects. But tho' I cannot ad-mit that custom is the sole principle of beauty, yet I can so far allow the truth of this ingenious system as to grant, that there is scarce any one external form so

beautiful as to please if quite contrary to cus-tom and unlike whatever we have been used to in that particular species of things: Or so deformed as not to be agreeable, if custom uniformly supports it, and habituates us to see it in every single individual of the kind.
            
         
         
            

            PART VI.
            
               SECTION II. Of the influence of custom and fashion upo
                     •
                   moral sentiments.
               SINCE our sentiments concerning beau
                     •
                  ty of every kind, are so much influen
                     •
                  ced by custom and fashion, it cannot be ex
                     •
                  pected, that those, concerning the beauty 
                     
                   conduct, should be entirely exempted fro
                     •
                   the dominion of those principles. Their i
                     ••
                  fluence here, however, seems to be muc
                     •
                   less than it is every where else. There 
                     
                   perhaps, no form of external objects, 
                     
                   absurd and fantastical soever, to which custo
                     •
                   will not reconcile us, or which fashion 
                     
                   not render even agreeable. But the ch
                     ••
                  racters and conduct of a Nero, or a 
                     
                   us, are what no custom will ever 
                     
                   us to, what no fashion will ever render agre
                     ••
                  able;
The sentiment or affection of the heart from which any action proceeds, and upon which its whole virtue or vice must ulti-mately depend, may be considered under two different aspects, or in two different relations; first, in relation to the cause that excites it, or the motive that gives oc-casion to it; and secondly, in relation to the end that it proposes, or the effect that it tends to produce.
                  In the suitableness or unsuitableness, in the proportion or disproportion which the affection seems to bear to the cause or ob-ject which excites it, consists the propriety or impropriety, the decency or ungrace-fulness of the consequent action.
                  In the beneficial or hurtful nature of the effects which the affection aims at, or tends to produce, consists the merit or demerit of the action, the qualities by which it is en-titled to reward, or is deserving of punish-ment.
                  Philosophers have, of late years, consider-ed chiefly the tendency of affections, and have given little attention to the relation which they stand in to the cause which ex-cites them. In common life, however, when we judge of any person's conduct, and of

but the one will always be the object of dread and hatred; the other of scorn and derision. The principles of the imagination▪ upon which our sense of beauty depends, are of a very nice and delicate nature, and may easily be altered by habit and education: But the sentiments of moral approbation and disapprobation, are founded on the strongest and most vigorous passions of human nature; and tho' they may be somewhat warpt, can-not be entirely perverted.
               But though the influence of custom and fashion, upon moral sentiments, is not alto-gether so great, it is however perfectly simi-
                  
                     •
                  ar to what it is every where else. When custom and fashion coincide with the natural principles of right and wrong, they heighten 
                     •
                  he delicacy of our sentiments, and increase our abhorrence for every thing that approach-es to evil. Those who have been educated 
                     •
                  n what is really good company, not in what 
                     •
                  s commonly called such, who have been 
                     •
                  ccustomed to see nothing in the persons whom they esteemed and lived with, but 
                     •
                  ustice, modesty, humanity, and good order; 
                     •
                  re more shocked with whatever seems to be 
                     •
                  nconsistent with the rules which those vir-
                  
                     •
                  ues prescribe. Those on the contrary, who

have had the misfortune to be brought up amidst violence, licentiousness, falshood and injustice; lose, though not all sense of the impropriety of such conduct, yet all sense of its dreadful enormity, and of the vengeance and punishment that is due to it. They have been familiarized with it from their infancy, custom has rendered it habitual to them, and they are very apt to regard it as what is call-ed the way of the world, something which either may or must be practiced to hinder us from being the dupes of our own integrity.
               Fashion too, will sometimes give reputa-tion to a certain degree of disorder, and on the contrary, discountenance qualities which deserve esteem. In the reign of Charles II. a degree of licentiousness was deemed the characteristic of a liberal education. It was connected, according to the notions of those times, with generosity, sincerity, magnani-mity, loyalty, and proved that the person who acted in this manner, was a gentleman, and not a puritan; severity of manners, and regularity of conduct, on the other hand, were altogether unfashionable, and were con-nected, in the imagination of that age, with cant, cunning, hypocrisy, and low manners. To superficial minds, the vices of the great

seem at all times agreeable. They connect them, not only with the splendour of for-tune, but with many superior virtues, which they ascribe to their superiors; with the spi-rit of freedom and independency, with frankness, generosity, humanity and polite-ness. The virtues of the inferior ranks of people, on the contrary, their parsimonious frugality, their painful industry, and rigid adherence to rules, seem to them mean and disagreeable. They connect them, both with the meanness of the station to which those qualities commonly belong, and with many great vices, which, they suppose, usually ac-company them; such as an abject, coward-ly, ill-natured, lying, pilfering disposition.
               The objects with which men in the differ-ent professions and states of life are con-versant, being very different, and habituating them to very different passions, naturally form in them very different characters and manners. We expect in each rank and pro-fession, a degree of those manners, which, experience has taught us, belong to it. But as in each species of things, we are par-ticularly pleased with the middle confor-mation, which in every part and feature agrees most exactly with the general stan-dard

that nature seems to have established for things of that kind; so in each rank, or, if I may say so, in each species of men, we are particularly pleased, if they have nei-ther too much, nor too little of the charac-ter which usually accompanies their parti-cular condition and situation. A man, we say, should look like his trade and profes-sion; yet the pedantry of every profession is disagreeable. The different periods of life have, for the same reason, different man-ners assigned to them. We expect in old age, that gravity and sedateness which its in-firmities, its long experience, and its wo
                     ••
                   out sensibility seem to render both natural and respectable; and we lay our account to find in youth that sensibility, that gaiety and sprightly vivacity which experience teaches us to expect from the lively impressions that all interesting objects are apt to make upon the tender and unpracticed senses of that early period of life. Each of those two ages, however, may easily have too much of the peculiarities which belong to it. The flirting levity of youth, and the immovable insensibility of old age, are equally disagreea-ble. The young, according to the common saying, are most agreeable when in their be-haviour

there is something of the manners of the old, and the old, when they retain something of the gaiety of the young. Ei-ther of them, however, may easily have too much of the manners of the other. The ex-treme coldness, and dull formality, which are pardoned in old age, make youth ridi-culous. The levity, the carelessness, and the vanity, which are indulged in youth, render old age contemptible.
               The peculiar character and manners which we are led by custom to appropriate to each rank and profession, have sometimes perhaps a propriety independent of custom; and are what we should approve of for their own sakes, if we took into consideration all the different circumstances which naturally affect those in each different state of life. The propriety of a person's behaviour, de-pends not upon its suitableness to any one circumstance of his situation, but to all the circumstances, which, when we bring his case home to ourselves we feel, should na-
                  
                     •
                  urally call upon his attention. If he appears 
                     •
                  o be so much occupied by any one of them, 
                     •
                  s entirely to neglect the rest, we disapprove of his conduct, as something which we can-not

entirely go along with, because not per-fectly adjusted to all the circumstances of his situation: yet, perhaps, the emotion he ex-presses for the object which principally in-terests him, does not exceed what we should entirely sympathize with, and approve of, in one whose attention was not required by any other thing. A parent in private life might, upon the loss of an only son, express without blame, a degree of grief and tenderness, which would be unpardonable in a general at the head of an army, when glory, and the public safety, demanded so great a part of his attention. As different objects ought, upon common occasions, to occupy the attention of men of different professions, so different passions ought naturally to become habitual to them; and when we bring home to ourselves their situation in this particular respect, we must be sensible, that every occurrence should naturally affect them more or less, ac-cording as the emotion which it excites, co-incides or disagrees with the fixt habit and temper of their minds. We cannot expect the same sensibility to the gay pleasures and amusements of life in a clergyman which we lay our account with in an officer. The man, whose peculiar occupation it is to keep

the world in mind of that awful futurity which awaits them, who is to anounce what may be the fatal consequences of every devia-tion from the rules of duty, and who is him-self to set the example of the most exact con-formity, is the messenger of tidings, which cannot, in propriety, be delivered either with levity or indifference. His mind is continu-ally occupied with what is too grand and solemn, to leave any room for the impres-sions of those frivolous objects, which fill up the attention of the dissipated and the gay. We readily feel therefore, that, inde-pendent of custom, there is a propriety in the manners which custom has allotted to this profession; and that nothing can be more suitable to the character of a clergyman, than that grave, that austere and abstracted seve-rity, which we are habituated to expect in his behaviour. These reflections are so very obvious, that there is scarce any man so in-considerate, as not, at some time, to have made them, and to have accounted to him-self in this manner for his approbation of the usual character of this order.
               The foundation of the customary charac-ter of some other professions is not so obvious, and our approbation of it is founded entirely

in habit, without being either confirmed, or enlivened by any reflections of this kind. We are led by custom, for example, to an-nex the character of gaiety, levity, and sprightly freedom, as well as of some degree of dissipation, to the military profession: yet, if we were to consider what mood or tone of temper would be most suitable to this situa-tion, we should be apt to determine, per-haps, that the most serious and thoughtful turn of mind, would best become these whose lives are continually exposed to un-common danger; and who should therefore be more constantly occupied with the thoughts of death and its consequences than other men. It is this very circumstance, however, which is not improbably the occa-sion why the contrary turn of mind prevail
                     •
                   so much among men of this profession. It requires so great an effort to conquer the fear of death, when we survey it with steadiness and attention, that those who are constantly exposed to it, find it easier to turn away their thoughts from it altogether, to wrap them-selves up in careless security and indifference, and to plunge themselves, for this purpose, into every sort of amusement and dissipation▪ A camp is not the element of a thoughtful

or a melancholy man: persons of that cast, 
                     •
                  ndeed, are often abundantly determined, 
                     •
                  nd are capable, by a great effort, of going 
                     •
                  n with inflexible resolution to the most un-
                  
                     •
                  voidable death. But to be exposed to con-
                  
                     •
                  inual, though less imminent danger, to be obliged to exert, for a long time, a degree 
                     •
                  f this effort, exhausts and depresses the mind, and renders it incapable of all happi-
                  
                     •
                  ess and enjoyment. The gay and careless, who have occasion to make no effort at all, who fairly resolve never to look before them, 
                     •
                  ut to lose in continual pleasures and amuse-ments, all anxiety about their situation, more 
                     •
                  asily support such circumstances. Whenever, 
                     •
                  y any peculiar circumstances, an officer has no 
                     •
                  eason to lay his account with being exposed 
                     •
                  o any uncommon danger, he is very apt to 
                     •
                  ose the gaiety and dissipated thoughtlesness 
                     •
                  f his character. The captain of a city guard a
                     •
                   commonly as sober, careful, and penurious 
                     •
                  n animal as the rest of his fellow citizens. A long peace is, for the same reason, very 
                     •
                  pt to diminish the difference between the 
                     •
                  ivil and the military character. The ordi-
                  
                     •
                  ary situation, however, of men of this pro-
                  
                     •
                  ession, renders gaiety, and a degree of dissi-
                  
                     •
                  ation, so much their usual character; and

custom has, in our imagination, so strongly connected this character with this state of life, that we are very apt to despise any man, whose peculiar humour or situation, renders him incapable of acquiring it. We laugh at the grave and careful faces of a city guard, which so little resemble those of their pro-fession. They themselves seem often to be ashamed of the regularity of their own man-ners, and, not to be out of the fashion of their trade, are fond of affecting that levity, which is by no means natural to them. What-ever is the deportment which we have been accustomed to see in a respectable order of men, it comes to be so associated in our ima-gination with that order, that whenever we see the one, we lay our account that we are to meet with the other, and when disappoint-ed, miss something which we expected to find. We are embarassed, and put to a stand, and know not how to address ourselves to a character, which plainly affects to be of a different species from those with which we should have been disposed to class it.
               The different situations of different ages and countries, are apt in the same manner, to give different characters to the generality of those who live in them, and their senti-ments

the sentiments which directed it, we con-stantly consider them under both these as-pects. When we blame in another man the excesses of love, of grief, of resent-ment, we not only consider the ruinous effects which they tend to produce, but the little occasion which was given for them. The merit of his favourite, we say, is not so great, his misfortune is not so dreadful, his provocation is not so extraordinary, as to justify so violent a passion. We should have indulged, we say; perhaps, have approved of the vio-lence of his emotion, had the cause been in any respect proportioned to it.
                  When we judge in this manner of any affection, as proportioned or dispro-portioned to the cause which excites it, it is scarce possible that we should make use of any other rule or canon but the cor-respondent affection in ourselves. If, upon bringing the case home to our own breast, we find that the sentiments which it gives occasion to coincide and tally with our own, we necessarily approve of them as propor-tioned and suitable to their objects: if otherwise, we necessarily disapprove of them, as extravagant and out of proportion.
                  
                     

concerning the particular degree of each quality, that is either blameable, or praise-worthy, vary according to that degree, which is usual in their own country, and in their own times. That degree of politeness, which would be highly esteemed, perhaps would be thought effeminate adulation, in Russia, would be regarded as rudeness and barbarism at the court of France. That de-gree of order and frugality, which, in a Polish nobleman would be considered as excessive parsimony, would be regarded as extravagance in a citizen of Amsterdam. Every age and country look upon that degree of each qua-lity, which is commonly to be met with in those who are esteemed among themselves, as the golden mean of that particular talent or virtue. And as this varies according as their different circumstances render different qualities more or less habitual to them, their sentiments concerning the exact propriety of character and behaviour vary accordingly.
               Among civilized nations, the virtues which are founded upon humanity, are more cultivated than those which are founded upon self-denial and the com-mand of the passions. Among rude and barbarous nations, it is quite otherwise, the virtues of self-denial are more cultivated than

those of humanity. The general security and happiness which prevail in ages of civi-lity and politeness afford little exercise to the contempt of danger, to patience in enduring labour, hunger, and pain. Poverty may ea-sily be avoided, and the contempt of it, therefore, almost ceases to be a virtue. The abstinence from pleasure, becomes less ne-cessary, and the mind is more at liberty to un-bend itself, and to indulge its natural incli-nations in all those particular respects.
               Among savages and barbarians it is quite otherwise. Every savage undergoes a sort of Spartan discipline, and by the necessity of his situation is inured to every sort of hard-ship. He is in continual danger: He is often exposed to the greatest extremities of hun-ger, and frequently dies of pure want. His circumstances not only habituate him to eve-ry sort of distress, but teach him to give way to none of the passions which that distress is apt to excite. He can expect from his coun-trymen no sympathy or indulgence for such weakness. Before we can feel much for o-thers, we must in some measure be at ease ourselves. If our own misery pinches us very severely, we have no leisure to attend to that of our neighbour: And all savages are too much occupied with their own wants

and necessities, to give much attention to those of another person. A savage, there-fore, whatever be the nature of his distress, expects no sympathy from those about him, and disdains, upon that account, to expose himself, by allowing the least weakness to escape him. His passions, how furious and violent soever, are never permitted to disturb the serenity of his countenance or the com-posure of his conduct and behaviour. The savages in North America, we are told, as-sume upon all occasions the greatest indiffer-ence, and would think themselves degraded if they should ever appear in any respect to be overcome, either by love or grief, or re-sentment. Their magnanimity and self-com-mand, in this respect, are almost beyond the conception of Europeans. In a country in which all men are upon a level, with regard to rank and fortune, it might be expected that the mutual inclinations of the two par-ties should be the only thing considered in marriages, and should be indulged without any sort of controul. This, however, is the country in which all marriages without ex-ception are made up by the parents, and in which a young man would think himself disgraced for ever, if he shewed the least

preference of one woman above another, or did not express the most compleat indiffer-ence, both about the time when, and the person to whom he was to be married. The weakness of love, which is so much indulg-ed in ages of humanity and politeness, is re-garded among savages as the most unpardon-able effeminacy. Even after the marriage the two parties seem to be ashamed of a connection which is founded upon so sordid a necessity. They do not live together. They see one another by stealth only. They both continue to dwell in the house of their re-spective fathers, and the open cohabitation of the two sexes, which is permitted with-out blame in all other countries, is here con-sidered as the most indecent and unmanly sensuality. Nor is it only over this agreeable passion that they exert this absolute self-com-mand. They often bear in the fight of all their countrymen with injuries, reproach, and the grossest insults with the appearance of the greatest insensibility, and without expressing the smallest resentment. When a savage is made prisoner of war, and receives, as is usual, the sentence of death from his con-querors, he hears it without expressing any

emotion, and afterwards submits to the most dreadful torments, without ever bemoaning himself, or discovering any other passion but contempt of his enemies. While he is hung by the shoulders over a slow fire, he derides his tormentors, and tells them with how much more ingenuity, he himself had tor-mented such of their countrymen as had fallen into his hands. After he has been scorched and burnt, and lacerated in all the most tender and sensible parts of his body for several hours together, he is often allow-ed, in order to prolong his misery, a short respite, and is taken down from the stake: he employs this interval in talking upon all indifferent subjects, inquires after the news of the country, and seems indifferent about nothing but his own situation. The spec-tators express the same insensibility; the sight of so horrible an object seems to make no 
                     •
                  mpression upon them; they scarce look at the prisoner, except when they lend a hand to torment him. At other times they smoke tobacco, and amuse themselves with any common object, as if no such matter was go-
                  
                     •
                  ng on. Every savage is said to prepare him-self from his earliest youth for the dreadful end. He composes, for this purpose, what

they call the song of death, a song which he is to sing when he has fallen into the hands of his enemies, and is expiring under the tor-tures which they inflict upon him. It con-sists of insults upon his tormentors, and ex-presses the highest contempt of death and pain. He sings this song upon all extraordinary oc-casions, when he goes out to war, when he meets his enemies in the field, or whenever he has a mind to show that he has familiarised his imagination, to the most dreadful misfor-tunes, and that no human event can daunt his resolution, or alter his purpose. The same contempt of death and torture prevails among all other savage nations. There is not a negro from the coast of Africa who does not, in this respect, possess a degree of mag-nanimity which the soul of his sordid master is scarce capable of conceiving. Fortune never exerted more cruelly her empire over mankind, than when she subjected those na-tions of heroes to the refuse of the jails of Europe, to wretches who possess the virtues neither of the countries which they come from, nor of those which they go to, and whose levity, brutality and baseness, so justly expose them to the contempt of the van-quished.
               
                  
This heroic and unconquerable firmness which the custom and education of his coun-try demand of every savage, is not required of those who are brought up to live in civi-lized societies. If these last complain when they are in pain, if they grieve when they are in distress, if they allow themselves either to be overcome by love, or to be discomposed by anger, they are easily pardoned. Such weaknesses are not apprehended to affect the essential parts of their character. As long as they do not allow themselves to be trans-ported to do any thing contrary to justice or humanity, they lose but little reputation, tho' the serenity of their countenance or the com-posure of their discourse and behaviour should be somewhat ruffled and disturbed. A hu-mane and polished people, who have more sensibility to the passions of others, can more readily enter into an animated and passionate behaviour, and can more easily pardon some 
                     •
                  ittle excess. The person principally con-cerned is sensible of this; and being as-
                  
                     •
                  ured of the equity of his judges, indulges himself in stronger expressions of pas-
                  
                     •
                  ion, and is less afraid of exposing himself to 
                     •
                  heir contempt by the violence of his emo-
                  
                     •
                  ions. We can venture to express more emo-tion

in the presence of a friend than in that of a stranger, because we expect more indul-gence from the one than from the other. And in the same manner the rules of decorum among civilized nations, admit of a more ani-mated behaviour than is approved of among barbarians. The first converse together with the openness of friends; the second with the reserve of strangers. The emotion and viva-city with which the French and Italians, the two most polished nations upon the conti-nent, express themselves on occasions that are at all interesting, surprize at first those stran-gers who happen to be travelling among them, and who having been educated among a people of duller sensibility, cannot enter into this pas-sionate behaviour, of which they have never seen any examples in their own country. A young French nobleman will weep in the presence of the whole court upon being re-fused a regiment. An Italian, says the abbot Dû Bos, expresses more emotion upon being condemned in a fine of twenty shillings than an Englishman upon receiving the sentence of death. Cicero, in the times of the highest Roman politeness, could, without degrading himself, weep with all the bitterness of sor-row in the sight of the whole senate and the

whole people; as it is evident he must have done in the end of almost every oration. The orators of the earlier and ruder ages of Rome could not probably, consistent with the man-ners of the times, have expressed themselves with so much emotion. It would have been re-garded, I suppose, as a violation of nature and propriety in the Scipio's, in the Lelius's, and in the elder Cato, to have exposed so much ten-derness to the view of the public. Those antient warriors could express themselves, with order, gravity and good judgment, but are said to have been strangers to that sublime and passionate eloquence which was first in-troduced into Rome, not many years before the birth of Cicero, by the two Gracchi, by Crassus and by Sulpitius. This animated elo-quence, which has been long practised, with or without success, both in France and Italy, is but just beginning to be introduced into England. So wide is the difference between the degrees of self-command which are re-quired in civilized and in barbarous nations. And by such different standards do they 
                     •
                  udge of the propriety of behaviour.
               This difference gives occasion to many others that are not less essential. A polished people being accustomed to give way in some mea-sure

to the movements of nature, become frank; open and sincere. Barbarians, on the contrary, being obliged to smother and con-ceal the appearance of every passion, neces-sarily acquire the habits of falshood and dis-simulation. It is observed by all those who have been conversant with savage nations whether in Asia, Africa, or America, that they are all equally impenetrable, and that when they have a mind to conceal the truth, no examination is capable of drawing it from them. They cannot be trepanned by the most artful questions. The torture itself is incapable of making them confess any thing which they have no mind to tell. The pas-sions of a savage too, tho' they never express themselves by any outward emotion, but lye concealed in the breast of the sufferer, are, notwithstanding, all mounted to the highest pitch of fury. Tho' he seldom shows any symptoms of anger, yet his vengeance, when he comes to give way to it, is always sangui-nary and dreadful. The least affront drives him to despair. His countenance and dis-course indeed are still sober and composed, and express nothing but the most perfect tran-quility of mind: But his actions are often the most furious and violent. Among the

            CONTENTS.
            
               PART I. OF the Propriety of Action.
               
                  SECT. I. Of Sympathy Page 1
                  SECT. II. Of the sentiments by which we approve or disapprove of the passions and affections of other men, as suitable or unsuitable to their objects.

                        CHAP. I. Of the pleasure of mutual sympathy 14
                        CHAP. II. Of the manner in which we judge of the pro-priety or impropriety of the affection of other men 22
                        CHAP. III. The same subject continued 30
                        
                           
Every faculty in one man is the measure by which he judges of the like faculty in another. I judge of your sight by my sight, of your ear by my ear, of your rea-son by my reason, of your resentment by my resentment, of your love by my love. I neither have, nor can have, any other way of judging about them.
               
               
                  

North-Americans it is not uncommon for persons of the tenderest age and more fearful sex to drown themselves upon receiving only a slight reprimand from their mothers, and this too without expressing any passion or saving any thing, except you shall no longer have a daughter. In civilized nations the passions of men are not commonly so furious or so desperate. They are often clamorous and noisy, but are seldom very hurtful; and seem frequently to aim at no other satisfac-tion but that of convincing the spectator, that they are in the right to be so much moved, and of procuring his sympathy and appro-bation.
               All these effects of custom and fashion, however, upon the moral sentiments of mankind, are inconsiderable in comparison of those which they give occasion to in some other cases; and it is not concerning the general stile of character and behaviour, that those principles produce the greatest perversion of judgment, but concerning the propriety or impropriety of particular usages.
               The different manners which custom teaches us to approve of in the different pro-fessions and states of life, do not concern things of the greatest importance. We ex-pect

truth and justice from an old man as well as from a young, from a clergyman as well as from an officer; and it is in matters of smaller moment only that we look for the distinguishing marks of their respective cha-racters. With regard to these too, there is often some unobserved circumstance which, if it was attended to, would show us that, independent of custom, there was a propriety in the character which custom had taught us to allot to each profession. We cannot complain, therefore, in this case, that the perversion of natural sentiment is very great. Tho' the manners of different nations re-quire different degrees of the same quality, in the character which they think worthy of esteem, yet the worst that can be said to happen even here, is that the duties of one virtue are sometimes extended so as to en-croach a little upon the precincts of some other. The rustic hospitality that is in fashion among the Poles encroaches, per-haps, a little upon oeconomy and good or-der; and the frugality that is esteemed in Holland, upon generosity and good-fellowship. The hardiness demanded of savages diminishes their humanity; and perhaps the delicate sensibility required in civilized nations some-times

destroys, the masculine firmness of the character. In general the stile of manners which takes place in any nation, may commonly upon the whole be said to be that which is most suitable to its situation. Hardiness is the character most suitable to the circumstances of a savage; sensibility to those of one who lives in a very civilized society. Even here, therefore, we cannot complain that the mo-ral sentiments of men are very grossly per-verted.
               It is not therefore in the general stile of conduct or behaviour that custom authorizes the widest departure from what is the natural propriety of action. With regard to parti-cular usages its influence is often much more destructive of good morals, and it is capable of establishing as lawful and blameless parti-cular actions which shock the plainest princi-ples of right and wrong.
               Can there be greater barbarity, for exam-ple, than to hurt an infant? it's helplessness, 
                     •
                  t's innocence, it's amiableness, call forth the compassion, even of an enemy, and not to 
                     •
                  pare that tender age is regarded as the most furious effort of an enraged and cruel con-queror. What then should we imagine, must

be the heart of a parent who could injure that weakness which even a furious enemy is afraid to violate? yet the exposition, that is, the murder of new born infants, was a prac-tice allowed of in almost all the states of Greece even among the polite and civilized Atheni-ans, and whenever the circumstances of the parent rendered it inconvenient to bring up the child, to abandon it to hunger, or to wild beasts, was regarded without blame or censure. This practice had probably begun in times of the most savage barbarity. The imagination
                     •
                   of men had been first made familiar with it in that earliest period of society, and the uniform continuance of the custom had hin-dered them afterwards from perceiving it's enormity. We find, at this day, that 
                     
                   practice prevails among all savage nations; and in that rudest and lowest state of society 
                     
                   is undoubtedly more pardonable than in any other. The extreme indigence of a savage is often such that he himself is frequently ex-posed to the greatest extremity of hunger, he often dies of pure want, and it is frequently impossible for him to support both himse
                     ••
                   and his child. We cannot wonder, therefore that in this case he should abandon it. 
                     
                   who in flying from an enemy whom it 
                     
                  
                  

                  
                     •
                  mpossible to resist, should throw down his 
                     •
                  nfant because it retarded his flight, would 
                     •
                  urely be excusable; since by attempting to 
                     •
                  ave it he could only hope for the consolation 
                     •
                  f dying along with it. That in this state of 
                     •
                  ociety, therefore, a parent should be allowed 
                     •
                  o judge whether he can bring up his child, 
                     •
                  ught not to surprize us so greatly. In the 
                     •
                  atter ages of Greece, however, the same 
                     •
                  hing was permitted from views of remote in-
                  
                     •
                  erest or conveniency which could by no 
                     •
                  eans excuse it. Uninterrupted custom had 
                     •
                  y this time so thoroughly authorized the 
                     •
                  ractice, that not only the loose maxims of 
                     •
                  he world tollerated this barbarous preroga-
                  
                     ••
                  ve, but even the doctrine of philosophers, which ought to have been more just and ac-
                  
                     •
                  urate, was led away by the established cus-
                  
                     •
                  om, and upon this as upon many other occa-
                  
                     ••
                  ons, instead of censuring, supported the 
                     •
                  orrible abuse by far fetched considerations of 
                     •
                  ublick utility. Aristotle talks of it as of 
                     •
                  hat the magistrate ought upon many occa-
                  
                     ••
                  ons to encourage. The humane Plato is of 
                     •
                  he same opinion, and, with all that love of 
                     •
                  ankind which seems to animate all his writ-
                  
                     ••
                  gs, no where marks this practice with dis-
                  
                     ••
                  probation. When custom can give sancti-on

to so dreadful a violation of humanity, we may well imagine that there is scarce any par-ticular practice so gross which it cannot au-thorize. Such a thing, we hear men every day saying, is commonly done, and they seem to think this a sufficient apology for what in itself is the most unjust and unreasonable con-duct.
               There is an obvious reason why custom should never pervert our sentiments with re-gard to the general stile and character of con-duct and behaviour, in the same degree as with regard to the propriety or unlawfullness of particular usages. There never can be any such custom. No society could subsist a mo-ment in which the usual strain of mens con-duct and behaviour was of a piece with the horrible practice I just now mentioned.
            
         
         
            

            PART VII. Of Systems of MORAL PHILOSOPHY.
            
               SECT. I. Of the questions which ought to be exami-ned in a theory of moral sentiments.
               IF we examine the most celebrated and re-markable of the different theories which have been given concerning the nature and origin of our moral sentiments, we shall find that almost all of them coincide with some part or other of that which I have been en-deavouring to give an account of; and that 
                     •
                  f every thing which has already been said be fully considered, we shall be at no loss to ex-plain what was the view or aspect of nature which led each particular author to form his particular system. From some one or other of those principles which I have been endea-vouring to unfold, every system of morality that ever had any reputation in the world has, perhaps, ultimately been derived. As they are all of them, in this respect founded

upon natural principles, they are all of them in some measure in the right. But as many of them are derived from a partial and imper-fect view of nature, there are many of them too in some respects in the wrong.
               In treating of the principles of morals there are two questions to be considered. First, wherein does virtue consist; or what is the tone of temper, and tenor of conduct, which constitutes the excellent and praise-worthy character, the character which is the natural object of esteem, honour and approbation? and secondly, by what power or faculty i
                     •
                   the mind is it, that this character whatever it be, is recommended to us? or in other words, how and by what means does it come to pass, that the mind prefers one tenor of conduct to another, denominates the one right and the other wrong; considers the one as the object of approbation, honour and re-ward, and the other of blame, censure and punishment?
               We examine the first question when we consider whether virtue consists in benevo-lence, as Dr. Hutcheson imagines; or in act-ing suitably to the different relations we stand in, as Dr. Clark supposes; or in the wise and

                  
                     •
                  rudent pursuit of our own real and solid happiness, as has been the opinion of others?
               We examine the second question, when we consider, whether the virtuous character, whatever it consists in, be recommended to 
                     •
                  s by self-love, which makes us perceive that his character, both in ourselves and others, 
                     •
                  ends most to promote our own private inter-
                  
                     •
                  st; or by reason, which points out to us the 
                     •
                  ifference between one character and another, 
                     •
                  n the same manner as it does that between 
                     •
                  ruth and falshood; or by a peculiar power 
                     •
                  f perception, called a moral sense, which his virtuous character gratifies and pleases, 
                     •
                  s the contrary disgusts and displeases it; or 
                     •
                  ast of all, by some other principle in human 
                     •
                  ature, such as a modification of sympathy, 
                     •
                  r the like.
               I shall begin with considering the systems which have been formed concerning the 
                     ••
                  rst of these questions, and shall proceed af-
                  
                     •
                  erwards to examine those concerning the 
                     •
                  econd.
            
            
               

               SECT. II. Of the different accounts which have been given of the nature of virtue.
               
                  INTRODUCTION.
                  THE different accounts which have been given of the nature of virtue, or of the temper of mind which constitutes the excellent and praise-worthy character, may be reduced to three different classes. Ac-cording to some, the virtuous temper of mind does not consist in any one species of affections, but in the proper government and direction of all our affections, which may be either virtuous or vitious according to the ob-jects which they pursue, and the degree of violence with which they pursue them. Ac-cording to these authors, therefore, virtue consists in propriety.
                  According to others, virtue consists in the judicious pursuit of our own private interest and happiness, or in the proper government and direction of those selfish affections which aim solely at this end. In the opinion of these

                  CHAP. III. The same subject continued.
                  WE may judge of the propriety or impropriety of the sentiments of another person by their correspondence or disagreement with our own, upon two different occasions; either, first, when the objects which excite them are considered without any peculiar relation, either to our-selves or to the person whose sentiments we judge of; or, secondly, when they are con-sidered as peculiarly affecting one or other of us.
                  1. With regard to those objects which are considered without any peculiar relation either to ourselves or to the person whose sentiments we judge of; wherever his sen-timents intirely correspond with our own, we ascribe to him the qualities of taste and good judgment. The beauty of a plain, the greatness of a mountain, the ornaments of a building, the expression of a picture, the composition of a discourse, the conduct of a third person, the proportions of different quantities and numbers, the various ap-pearances

authors, therefore virtue consists in pru-dence.
                  Another set of authors make virtue consist in those affections only which aim at the happiness of others, not in those which aim at our own. According to them, therefore, disinterested benevolence is the only motive which can stamp upon any action the cha-racter of virtue.
                  The character of virtue, it is evident, must either be ascribed indifferently to all our af-fections when under proper government and direction, or it must be confined to some one class or division of them. The great divi-
                     
                        •
                     ion of our affections is into the selfish and 
                        •
                     he benevolent. If the character of virtue 
                        •
                     herefore cannot be ascribed indifferently to 
                        •
                     ll our affections when under proper govern-
                     
                        •
                     ent and direction, it must be confined either 
                        •
                     o those which aim directly at our own pri-
                     
                        •
                     ate happiness, or to those which aim di-
                     
                        •
                     ectly at that of others. If virtue, therefore, 
                        •
                     oes not consist in propriety, it must consist 
                        •
                     ither in prudence or in benevolence. Be-
                     
                        ••
                     des these three, it is scarce possible to ima-
                     
                        •
                     ine that any other account can be given of 
                        •
                     he nature of virtue. I shall endeavour to 
                        
                      hereafter how all the other accounts,

which are seemingly different from any of these, coincide at bottom with some one or other of them.
               
               
                  CHAP. I. Of those systems which make virtue 
                        
                      in propriety.
                  ACCORDING to Plato, to Ari-stotle and to Zeno, virtue consists in the propriety of conduct, or in the suitable-ness of the affection from which we act 
                        
                      the object which excites it.
                  I. In the system of Plato See Plato de rep. lib 4. the soul is con-sidered as something like a little state or re-publick, composed of three different facul-ties or orders.
                  The first is the judging faculty, the faculty which determines not only what are the pro-per means for attaining any end, but 
                        
                      what ends are fit to be pursued, and 
                        
                      degree of relative value we ought to 
                        
                      upon each. This faculty Plato called, as 
                        
                      is very properly called, reason, and cons
                        ••
                     dered it as what had a right to be the govern
                        •
                     ing

principle of the whole. Under this ap-pellation, it is evident, he comprehended not only that faculty by which we judge of truth and falshood, but that by which we judge of the propriety or impropriety of de-sires and affections.
                  The different passions and appetites, the natural subjects of this ruling principle, but which are so apt to rebel against their master, 
                        
                      reduced to two different classes or orders. The first consisted of those passions, which are 
                        •
                     ounded in pride and resentment, or in what 
                        •
                     he schoolmen called the irascible part of the 
                        •
                     oul; ambition, animosity, the love of ho-
                     
                        •
                     our and the dread of shame, the desire of 
                        •
                     ictory, superiority and revenge; all those 
                        •
                     assions, in short, which are supposed either 
                        •
                     o arise from, or to denote what by a meta-
                     
                        •
                     hor in our language we commonly call spi-
                     
                        ••
                     t or natural fire. The second consisted of 
                        •
                     hose passions which are founded in the love 
                        •
                     f pleasure, or in what the schoolmen called 
                        •
                     he concupiscible part of the soul. It com-
                     
                        ••
                     ehended all the appetites of the body, the 
                        
                      of ease and security, and of all sensual 
                        •
                     ratifications.
                  
                     
It rarely happens that we break in upon that plan of conduct which the governing principle prescribes, and which in all our cool hours we had laid down to ourselves as what was most proper for us to pursue, but when prompted by one or other of those two different sets of passions; either by ungo-vernable ambition and resentment, or by the importunate sollicitations of present ease and pleasure. But tho' these two orders of pas-sions are so apt to mislead us, they are still considered as necessary parts of human na-ture: The first having been given to defend us against injuries, to assert our rank and dignity in the world, to make us aim at what is noble and honourable, and to make 
                        •
                     s distinguish those who act in the same man-ner; the second to provide for the suppo
                        ••
                      and necessities of the body.
                  In the strength, acuteness and perfection 
                        
                      the governing principle was placed the essen-tial virtue of prudence, which, according 
                        
                      Plato consisted in a just and clear discern-ment, founded upon general and 
                        
                      ideas, of the ends which were proper to 
                        
                      pursued, and of the means which were pr
                        ••
                     per for attaining them.
                  
                     
When the first set of passions, those of the irascible part of the soul, had that degree of strength and firmness, which enabled them, un-der the direction of reason, to despise all dan-gers in the pursuit of what was honourable and noble; it constituted the virtue of for-titude and magnanimity. This order of pas-sions, according to this system, was of a more generous and noble nature than the other. They were considered upon many occasions as the auxiliaries of reason to check, and re-strain the inferior and brutal appetites. We are often angry at ourselves, it was observed, we often become the objects of our own re-sentment and indignation, when the love of pleasure prompts us to do what we disap-prove of; and the irascible part of our na-
                     
                        •
                     ure is in this manner called in to assist the 
                        •
                     ational against the concupiscible.
                  When all those three different parts of our 
                        •
                     ature were in perfect concord with one an-
                     
                        •
                     ther, when neither the irascible nor concupi-
                     
                        •
                     cible passions ever aimed at any gratification which reason did not approve of, and when 
                        •
                     eason never commanded any thing, but what 
                        •
                     hese of their own accord were willing to 
                        •
                     erform: this happy composure, this perfect 
                        •
                     nd compleat harmony of soul constituted

that virtue which in their language is express-ed by a word which we commonly translate temperance, but which might more properly be translated good temper, or sobriety and moderation of mind.
                  Justice, the last and greatest of the four cardinal virtues, took place, according to this system, when each of those three faculties of the mind, con
                        •
                     ined itself to it's proper office, without attempting to encroach upon that of any other; when reason directed and pas-sion obeyed, and when each passion perform-ed its proper duty, and exerted itself towards its proper object easily and without reluc-tance, and with that degree of force and en-ergy, which was suitable to the value of what it pursued. In this consisted that compleat virtue, that perfect propriety of conduct, which Plato, after some of the antient Pytha-goreans, denominated Justice.
                  The word, it is to be observed, which ex-presses justice in the Greek language has se-veral different meanings; and as the corres-pondent word in all other languages, so far as I know, has the same, there must be some natural affinity among those various significa-tions. In one sense we are said to do justice to our neighbour when we abstain from doing

him any positive harm, and do not directly hurt him, either in his person, or in his estate, or in his reputation. This is that justice which I have treated of above, the ob-servance of which may be extorted by force, and the violation of which exposes to punish-ment. In another sense we are said not to do justice to our neighbour unless we con-ceive for him all that love, respect and esteem, which his character, his situation, and his connection with ourselves, render suitable and proper for us to feel, and unless we act accordingly. It is in this sense that we are said to do injustice to a man of merit who is connected with us, tho' we abstain from hurt-ing him in every respect, if we do not exert ourselves to serve him and to place him in that situation in which the impartial specta-tor would be pleased to see him. The first sense of the word coincides with what Ari-stotle and the Schoolmen call commutative 
                        •
                     ustice; and with what Grotius calls the jus-titia expletrix, which consists in abstaining from what is anothers, and in doing volun-tarily whatever we can with propriety be forced to do. The second sense of the word coincides with what some have called distri-butive


justice The distributive justice of Aristotle is somewhat differe
                           ••
                         It consists in the proper distribution of rewards from the pub-lick stock of a community. see Aristotle Ethic. Nic. l. 5. c. 2., and with the justitia attributri
                           •
                        
                      of Grotius, which consists in proper benefi-cence, in the becoming use of what is our own, and in the applying it to those pur-poses either of charity or generosity, to which it is most suitable in our situation that it should be applied. In this sense justice com-prehends all the social virtues. There is yet another sense in which the word justice is sometimes taken, still more extensive than either of the former, tho' very much akin to the last; and which runs too, so far as I know, through all languages. It is in this last sense that we are said to be unjust, when we do not seem to value any particular object with that degree of esteem, or to pursue it with that degree of ardour which to the im-partial spectator it may appear to deserve or to be naturally fitted for exciting. Thus we are said to do injustice to a poem or a picture, when we do not admire them enough, and we are said to do them more than justice when we admire them too much. In the same manner we are said to do injustice to ourselves when we appear not to give sufficient atten-tion

to any particular object of self-interest. In this last sense, what is called justice means the same thing with exact and perfect proprie-ty of conduct and behaviour, and compre-hends in it, not only the offices of both com-mutative and distributive justice, but of every other virtue, of prudence, of fortitude, of temperance. It is in this last sense that Plato evidently understands what he calls justice, and which, therefore according to him, com-prehends in it the perfection of every sort of virtue.
                  Such is the account given by Plato of the nature of virtue, or of that temper of mind which is the proper object of praise and ap-probation. It consists, according to him, in that state of mind in which every faculty con-fines itsself within its proper sphere without encroaching upon that of any other, and per-forms its proper office with that precise de-gree of strength and vigour which belongs to it. His account, it is evident, coincides in every respect with what we have said above concerning the propriety of conduct.
                  II. Virtue, See Aristotle Ethic. Nic. l. 2. c. 5. et seq. et l. 3. c. 5. et seq. according to Aristotle, con-sists

in the habitual mediocrity of the affec-tions according to right reason. Every par-ticular virtue, according to him, lies in a kind of middle between two opposite vices, of which the one offends from being too much, the other from being too little affected by a particular species of objects. Thus the virtue of fortitude or courage lies in a middle be-tween the opposite vices of cowardice and of presumptuous rashness, of which the one of-fends from being too much, and the other from being too little affected by the objects of fear. Thus too the virtue of frugality lies in a middle between avarice and profusion, of which the one consists in an excess, the other in a defect of the proper attention to the objects of self-interest. Magnanimity, in the same manner, lies in a middle between the ex-cess of arrogance and the defect of pusillani-mity, of which the one consists in too extrava-gant, the other in too weak a sentiment of our own worth and dignity. It is unnecessary to ob-serve that this account of virtue corresponds too pretty exactly with what has been said above concerning the propriety and impro-priety of conduct.
                  
                     

which the great machine of the universe is perpetually exhibiting, with the secret wheels and springs which produce them; in a word, all the general subjects of science and taste, are what we and our com-panion regard, as having no peculiar relation to either of us. We both look at them from the same point of view, and we have no oc-casion for sympathy, or for that imaginary change of situations from which it arises, in order to produce, with regard to these the most perfect harmony of sentiments and affections. If, notwithstanding, we are of-ten differently affected, it arises either from the different degrees of attention, which our different habits of life allow us to give easily to the several parts of those com-plex objects, or from the different degrees of natural acuteness in the faculty of the mind to which they are addressed.
                  When the sentiments of our companion coincide with our own in things of this kind, which are obvious and easy, and in which, perhaps, we never found a single person who differed from us, though we, no doubt, must approve of them, yet he seems to deserve no praise of admiration on account of them. But when they
According to Aristotle See Aristotle Ethic. Nic. lib. ii. ch. 1.2.3 and 4., indeed, virtue did not so much consist in those moderate and right affections, as in the habit of this mode-ration. In order to understand this, it is to be observed, that virtue may be considered either as the quality of an action, or as the quality of a person. Considered as the quality of an action, it consists, even accord-ing to Aristotle, in the reasonable moderation of the affection from which the action pro-ceeds, whether this disposition be habitual to the person or not. Considered as the quality of a person, it consists in the habit of this reasonable moderation, in it's having become the customary and usual disposition of the mind. Thus the action which proceeds from an occasional fit of generosity is undoubtedly a generous action, but the man who performs it, is not necessarily a generous person, be-cause it may be the single action of the kind which he ever performed. The motive and disposition of heart, from which this action was performed, may have been quite just and proper: but as this happy mood seems to have been the effect rather of accidental hu-mour than of any thing steady or permanent

in the character, it can reflect no great ho-nour upon the performer. When we deno-minate a character generous, or charitable, or virtuous in any respect, we mean to signify that the disposition expressed by each of those appellations is the usual and customary dispo-sition of the person. But single actions of any kind, how proper and suitable soever, are of little consequence to show that this is the case. If a single action was sufficient to stamp the character of any virtue upon the person who performed it, the most worthless of mankind might lay claim to all the virtues; since there is no man who has not, upon some occasions, acted with prudence, justice, tem-perance and fortitude. But tho' single actions, how laudable soever, reflect very little praise upon the person who performs them, a single vitious action performed by one whose conduct is usually very regular, greatly dimi-nishes and sometimes destroys altogether our opinion of his virtue. A single action of this kind sufficiently shows that his habits are not perfect, and that he is less to be depended upon than from the usual train of his be-haviour we might have been apt to imagine.
                  
                     
Aristotle too See Aristotle Mag. Mor. lib. i. ch. 1., when he made virtue to con-sist in practical habits, had it probably in his view to oppose the doctrine of Plato, who seems to have been of opinion that just sen-timents and reasonable judgments concerning what was fit to be done or to be avoided, were alone sufficient to constitute the most per-fect virtue. Virtue, according to Plato, might be considered as a species of science, and no man, he thought, could see clearly and de-monstratively what was right and what was wrong, and not act accordingly. Passion might make us act contrary to doubtful and uncertain opinions, not to plain and evident judgments. Aristotle, on the contrary, was of opinion, that no conviction of the under-standing was capable of getting the better of inveterate habits, and that good morals arose not from knowledge but from action.
                  III. According to Zeno See Cicero de finibus, lib. iii. also Diogenes Laertius in Zenone, lib. vii. segment. 84., the founder of the Stoical doctrine, every animal was by nature recommended to its own care, and was indowed with the principle of self-love

that it might endeavour to preserve, not only its existence, but all the different parts of its nature in the best and most perfect state of which they were capable.
                  The self-love of man embraced, if I may say so, his body and all its different mem-bers, his mind and all its different faculties and powers, and desired the preservation and maintainance of them all in their best and most perfect condition. Whatever tended to support this state of existence was, therefore by nature pointed out to him as fit to be chosen; and whatever tended to destroy it, as fit to be rejected. Thus health, strength, agility and ease of body, as well as all the ex-ternal conveniencies which could promote these, wealth, power, honours, the respect and esteem of those we live with, were na-turally pointed out to us as things eligible, and of which the possession was preferable to the contrary. On the other hand, sickness, infirmity, unweildiness, pain of body, as well as all the external inconveniencies which tended to occasion or bring on any of them, poverty, the want of authority, the contempt or hatred of those we live with; were in the same manner, pointed out to us as things to be shunned and avoided. In each of those two

different classes of objects there were some which appeared to be more the objects either of choice or rejection than others in the same class. Thus in the first class health appeared evidently preferable to strength, and strength to agility; reputation to power and power to riches. And thus too, in the second class, sickness was more to be avoided than unweil-deness of body, ignominy than poverty, and poverty than the want of authority. Virtue and the propriety of conduct consisted in choosing and rejecting all different objects and circumstances according as they were by nature rendered more or less the objects of choice or rejection; in selecting always from among the several objects of choice which were presented to us, that which was most to be chosen, when we could not obtain them all: and in selecting too out of the several objects of rejection which might 
                        •
                     e offered to us, that which was least to be avoided when it was not in our power to avoid them all. By choosing and rejecting with this just and accurate discernment, by thus bestowing upon every object the precise de-gree of attention that was due to it, accord-ing to the place which it held in this natural scale of things, we maintained, according to the

Stoics, that perfect rectitude of conduct which constituted the essence of virtue. This was what they called to live consistently, to live ac-cording to nature, and to obey those laws and directions which nature or the author of na-ture had prescribed for our conduct.
                  So far the Stoical idea of propriety and virtue is not very different from that of Aristotle and the antient peripatetics. What chiefly distin-guished those two systems from one another was the different degrees of self-command which they required. The peripatetics allowed of some degree of perturbation as suitable to the weakness of human nature, and as useful to so imperfect a creature as man. If his own mis-fortune excited no passionate grief, if his own injuries called forth no violent resentment, rea-son, or a regard to the general rules which deter-mined what was right and fit to done, would commonly, they thought, be too weak to prompt him to avoid the one or to beat off the other. The Stoics, on the contrary, de-manded the most perfect apathy, and re-garded every emotion that could in the smal-lest degree disturb the tranquility of the mind, as the effect of levity and folly. The Peri-patetics seem to have thought that no passion exceeded the bounds of propriety as long as

the spectator, by the utmost effort of huma-
                     
                        •
                     ity, could sympathize with it. The stoics, 
                        •
                     n the contrary, appear to have regarded every 
                        •
                     assion as improper, which made any demand 
                        •
                     pon the sympathy of the spectator, or re-
                     
                        •
                     uired him to alter in any respect the natural 
                        •
                     nd ordinary state of his mind, in order to 
                        •
                     eep time with the vehemence of its emo-
                     
                        ••
                     ons. A man of virtue, they seem to have 
                        •
                     ought, ought not to depend upon the ge-
                     
                        •
                     erosity of those he lives with for pardon or 
                        •
                     pprobation.
                  According to the stoics every event ought, 
                        
                      a wise man, to appear indifferent, and what 
                        
                      its own sake could be the object neither 
                        
                      desire, nor aversion, neither of joy, nor 
                        ••
                     rrow. If he preferred some events to 
                        
                     , if some situations were the objects of 
                        
                      choice, and others of his rejection Some of these expressions sound a little aukward in the 
                           ••
                        glish language: they are literal translations of the technical 
                           
                         of the stoics., it 
                        
                      not, because he regarded the one as in 
                        ••
                     emselves, in any respect better than the other, 
                        
                      thought that his own happiness would be 
                        •
                     ore compleat in what is called the fortu-
                     
                        ••
                     te, than in what is commonly regarded as 
                        
                      distressful situation; but because the 
                        
                      of action, the rule which the gods had

given him for the direction of his condu
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ required him to choose and reject in this 
                        
                     . Among the primary objects of natural inclination, or among those things which nature had originally recommended to us 
                        
                      eligible, was the prosperity of our family▪ of our relations, of our friends, of our coun
                        •
                     try, of mankind, and of the universe in ge
                        •
                     neral. Nature too had taught us that as 
                        
                      prosperity of two was preferable to that 
                        
                      one, that of many or of all must be 
                        
                      more so. That we ourselves were but 
                        
                     
                     ▪ and that consequently wherever our 
                        
                      was inconsistent with that either 
                        
                      the whole, or of any considerable 
                        
                      of the whole, it ought, even in our 
                        
                      choice, to yield to what was so vastly prefer-able. As all the events in this world 
                        
                      conducted by the providence of a 
                        
                      powerful and good God, we might be 
                        
                      that whatever happened, tended to 
                        
                      prosperity and perfection of the whole. 
                        
                      we ourselves, therefore, were in poverty, 
                        
                      sickness, or in any other calamity, we 
                        
                      first of all to use our utmost endeavours, 
                        
                      far as justice and our duty to others would 
                        
                     , to rescue ourselves from this disagr
                        •••
                     able circumstance. But if after all we 
                        
                     
                     

do, we found this impossible, we ought to rest satisfied that the order and perfection of the universe required that we should in the mean time continue in this situation. And as the prosperity of the whole should, even to us, appear preferable to so insignificant a part as ourselves, our situation, whatever it was, ought from that moment to become the object of our choice, and even of our de-sire, if we would maintain that compleat pro-priety and rectitude of sentiment and conduct in which the perfection of our nature con-sists. If, indeed, any opportunity of extri-cating ourselves should offer, it became our duty to embrace it. The order of the uni-verse, it was evident, no longer required our continuance in this situation, and the great director of the world plainly called upon us 
                        •
                     o leave it, by so clearly pointing out the road which we were to follow. It was the same 
                        •
                     ase with the adversity of our relations, our 
                        •
                     riends, our country. If without violating 
                        •
                     ny more sacred obligation, it was in our 
                        •
                     ower to prevent or to put an end to their 
                        •
                     alamity, it undoubtedly was our duty to do 
                        
                     . The propriety of action, the rule which 
                        •
                     upiter had given us for the direction of our 
                        •
                     onduct, evidently required this of us. But

if it was altogether out of our power to do either, we ought then to consider this event as the most fortunate which could possibly have happened: Because we might be assured that it tended most to the prosperity and or-der of the whole; which was what we our-selves, if we were wise and equitable, ought most of all to desire.
In what sense, says Epictetus, are some things said to be ac-cording to our nature, and others contrary to it? It is in that sense in which we co
                           •
                        
                        -sider ourselves as separated and detached from all other things. For thus it may be said to be according to the nature of the foot to be always clean. But if you con-sider it as a foot, and not as something de-tached from the rest of the body, it must behoove it sometimes to trample in the di
                           •
                        t, and sometimes to tread upon thorns, and sometimes too to be cut off for the sake of the whole body; and if it refuses this, it is no longer a foot. Thus too ought 
                           
                         to conceive with regard to ourselves. What are you? A man. If you consider yourse
                           ••
                         as something separated and detached, it i
                           •
                         agreeable to your nature to live to old age▪ to be rich, to be in health. But if you consider yourself as a man and as a part 
                           
                         a whole, upon account of that whole i
                           •
                        
                        

not only coincide with our own, but lead and direct our own; when in forming them he appears to have attended to many things which we had overlooked, and to have ad-justed them to all the various circumstan-ces of their objects; we not only approve of them, but wonder and are surprised at their uncommon and unexpected acute-ness and comprehensiveness, and he ap-pears to deserve a very high degree of ad-miration and applause. For approbation heightned by wonder and surprise, consti-tutes the sentiment which is properly call-ed admiration, and of which applause is the natural expression. The decision of the man who judges that exquisite beauty is preferable to the grossest deformity, or that twice two are equal to four, must certainly be approved of by all the world, but will not, surely, be much admired. It is the acute and delicate discernment of the man of taste, who distinguishes the minute, and scarce perceptible, differences of beauty and deformity; it is the compre-hensive accuracy of the experienced mathe-matician, who unravels, with ease, the most intricate and perplexed proportions; it is the great leader in science and taste, the

will behoove you sometimes to be in sick-ness, sometimes to be exposed to the incon-veniency of a sea voyage, sometimes to be in want; and at last, perhaps, to die be-fore your time. Why then do you com-plain? Don't you know that by doing so, as the foot ceases to be a foot, so you cease to be a man Arrian. lib. ii. c. 5..
                  
                  This submission to the order of the uni-verse, this entire indifference with regard to whatever concerns ourselves, when put into the balance with the interest of the whole, could derive its propriety, it is evident, from no other principle besides that upon which I have endeavoured to show that the propriety of justice was founded. As long as we view our own interests with our own eyes, it is scarce possible that we should willingly ac-quiesce in their being thus sacrificed to the 
                        •
                     nterests of the whole. It is only when we view those opposite interests with the eyes of others that what concerns ourselves can appear 
                        •
                     o be so contemptible in the comparison, as to 
                        •
                     e resigned without any reluctance. To 
                        •
                     very body but the person principally con-
                     
                        •
                     erned nothing can appear more agreeable to

reason and propriety than that the part should give place to the whole. But what is agree-able to the reason of all other men, ought not to appear contrary to his. He himself therefore ought to approve of this sacrifice and acknowledge its conformity to reason. But all the affections of a wise man, accord-ing to the stoics, are perfectly agreeable to reason and propriety, and of their own ac-cord coincide with whatever these ruling principles prescribe. A wise man, therefore, could never feel any reluctance to comply with this disposition of things.
                  IV. Besides these antient, there are some modern systems, according to which virtue consists in propriety; or in the suitableness of the affection from which we act to the cause or object which excites it. The system of Dr. Clark, which places virtue in acting ac-cording to the relations of things, in regula-ting our conduct according to the fitness or incongruity which there may be in the appli-cation of certain actions to certain things, or to certain relations: That of Mr. Woollaston, which places it in acting according to the truth of things, according to their proper nature and essence, or in treating them as what they really are, and not as what they are not: that

of my lord Shaftesbury, which places it in main-taining a proper balance of the affections, and in allowing, no passion to go beyond its pro-per sphere: are all of them more or less inac-curate descriptions of the same fundamental idea.
                  The description of virtue which is either given, or at least meant and intended to be given in each of those systems, for some of the modern authors are not very fortunate in their manner of expressing themselves, is no doubt quite just, so far as it goes. There is no virtue without propriety, and wherever there is pro-priety, some degree of approbation is due. But still this description is imperfect. For tho' propriety is an essential ingredient in every virtuous action, it is not always the sole in-gredient. Beneficent actions have in them another quality by which they appear not only to deserve approbation but recompence. None of those systems account either easily or suf-ficiently for that superior degree of esteem which seems due to such actions, or for that diversity of sentiment which they naturally excite. Neither is the description of vice more compleat. For, in the same manner, tho' impropriety is a necessary ingredient in every vitious action, it is not always the sole

ingredient, and there is often the highest de-gree of absurdity and impropriety in very harmless and insignificant actions. Deliberate actions, of a pernicious tendency to those we live with, have, besides their impropriety, a peculiar quality of their own by which they appear to deserve, not only disapprobation, but punishment; and to be the objects, not of dislike merely, but of resentment and re-venge: and none of those systems easily and sufficiently accounts for that superior degree of detestation which we feel for such actions.
               
               
                  

                  CHAP. II. Of those systems which make virtue consist in prudence.
                  THE most antient of those systems which make virtue consist in prudence, and of which any considerable remains have come down to us is that of Epicurus, who is said however, to have borrowed all the leading principles of his philosophy from some of 
                        •
                     hose who had gone before him, particularly from Aristippus; tho' it is very probable, notwithstanding this allegation of his enemies, 
                        •
                     hat at least his manner of applying those principles was altogether his own.
                  According to Epicurus See Cicero de finibus, lib. i. Diogenes Laert. l. x. bodily pleasure and 
                        •
                     ain were the sole ultimate objects of natu-
                     
                        •
                     al desire and aversion. That they were al-ways the natural objects of those passions, he 
                        •
                     hought, required no proof. Pleasure, might 
                        •
                     ndeed, appear sometimes to be avoided; 
                        •
                     ot, however, because it was pleasure, but 
                        •
                     ecause, by the enjoyment of it, we should 
                        •
                     ither forfeit some greater pleasure, or expose

ourselves to some pain that was more to be avoided than this pleasure was to be desired. Pain, in the same manner, might appear sometimes to be eligible; not, however, be-cause it was pain, but because by enduring it we might either avoid a still greater pain, or acquire some pleasure of much more impor-tance. That bodily pain and pleasure, there-fore, were always the natural objects of de-sire and aversion, was, he thought, abun-dantly evident. Nor was it less so, he ima-gined, that they were the sole ultimate ob-jects of those passions. Whatever else was either desired or avoided was so, according to him, upon account of its tendency to pro-duce one or other of those sensations. The tendency to procure pleasure rendered power and riches desireable, as the contrary ten-dency to produce pain made poverty and in-significancy the objects of aversion. Honour and reputation were valued, because the es-teem and love of those we live with were of the greatest consequence both to procure plea-sure and to defend us from pain. Ignominy and bad fame, on the contrary, were to be avoided, because the hatred, contempt and resentment of those we live with destroyed

all security, and necessarily exposed us to the greatest bodily evils.
                  All the pleasures and pains of the mind were, according to Epicurus, ultimately de-rived from those of the body. The mind was happy when it thought of the past plea-sures of the body, and hoped for others to come: and it was miserable when it thought of the pains which the body had formerly endured, and dreaded the same or greater thereafter.
                  But the pleasures and pains of the mind, tho' ultimately derived from those of the body, were vastly greater than their origi-nals. The body felt only the sensation of the present instant, whereas the mind felt also the past and the future, the one by re-membrance, the other by anticipation, and consequently both suffered and enjoyed much more. When we are under the greatest bodily pain, he observed, we shall always find, if we attend to it, that it is not the suf-fering of the present instant which chiefly 
                        •
                     orments us, but either the agonizing re-membrance of the past, or the yet more hor-
                     
                        •
                     ible dread of the future. The pain of each 
                        •
                     nstant, considered by itself, and cut off from 
                        •
                     ll that goes before and all that comes after


it is a trifle, not worth the regarding. Yet this is all which the body can ever be said to suffer. For the same manner, when we en-joy the greatest pleasure, we shall always find that the bodily sensation, the sensation of the present instant makes but a small part of our happiness, that our enjoyment chiefly arises either from the chearful recollection of the past or the still more joyous anticipation of the future, and that the mind always contri-butes by much the largest share of the enter-tainment.
                  Since our happiness and misery, therefore, depended chiefly upon the mind, if this part of our nature was well disposed, if our thoughts and opinions were as they should be, it was of little importance in what man-ner our body was affected. Tho' under great bodily pain, we might still enjoy a consider-able share of happiness, if our reason and judg-ment maintained their superiority. We might entertain ourselves with the remembrance of past, and with the hopes of future pleasure; we might soften the rigour of our pains, by recollecting what it was which, even in this situation, we were under any necessity of suf-fering. That this was meerly the bodily sen-sation, the pain of the present instant, which

by itself could never be very great. That whatever agony we suffered from the dread of its continuance was the effect of an opi-nion of the mind, which might be corrected by juster sentiments; by considering that if our pains were violent they would probably be of short duration; and that if they were of long continuance, they would probably be moderate, and admit of many intervals of ease; and that, at any rate, death was always at hand and within call to deliver us, which as, according to him, it put an end to all sen-sation, either of pain or pleasure, could not be regarded as an evil. When we are, said he, death is not; and when death is, we are not; death therefore can be nothing to us.
                  If the actual sensation of positive pain was in itself so little to be feared, that of pleasure was still less to be desired. Naturally the sensation of pleasure was much less pungent than that of pain. If, therefore, this last could take so very little from the happiness of a well-disposed mind, the other could add scarce any thing to it. When the body was free from pain and the mind from fear and anxiety, the superadded sensation of bodily pleasure could be of very little importance; and though it might diversify, could not pro-perly

be said to increase the happiness of this situation.
                  In ease of body, therefore, and in security or tranquility of mind, consisted, according to Epicurus, the most perfect state of human nature, the most compleat happiness which man was capable of enjoying. To obtain this great end of natural desire was the sole object of all the virtues, which, according to him, were not desireable upon their own account, but upon account of their tendency to bring about this situation.
                  Prudence, for example, tho', according to this philosophy, the source and principle of all the virtues, was not desireable upon its own account. That careful and laborious and circumspect state of mind, ever watch-ful and ever attentive to the most distant con-sequences of every action, could not be a thing pleasant or agreeable for its own sake, but upon account of its tendency to the greatest goods and to keep off the greatest evils.
                  To abstain from pleasure too, to curb and restrain our natural passions for enjoyment, which was the office of temperance, could never be desireable for its own sake. The whole value of this virtue arose from its uti-lity from its enabling us to postpone the pre-sent

man who directs and conducts our own sen-timents, the extent and superior justness of whose talents astonish us with wonder and surprise, who excites our admiration and seems to deserve our applause: and upon this foundation is grounded the greater part of the praise which is bestow-ed upon what are called the intellectual virtues.
                  The utility of those qualities, it may be thought, is what first recommends them to us; and, no doubt, the consideration of this, when we come to attend to it, gives them a new value. Originally, however, we approve of another man's judgment, not as something useful, but as right, as accurate, as agreeable to truth and reality: and it is evident we attribute those qualities to it for no other reason but because we find that it agrees with our own. Taste, in the same manner, is originally approved of, not as useful, but as just, as delicate, and as precisely suited to its object. The idea of the utility of all qualities of this kind, is plainly an after-thought, and not what first recommends them to our approba-tion.
                  
                     

enjoyment for the sake of a greater to come, or to avoid a greater pain that might ensue from it. Temperance, in short, was nothing but prudence with regard to pleasure.
                  To support labour, to endure pain, to be exposed to danger or to death, the situations which fortitude would often lead us into, were surely still less the objects of natural de-sire. They are chosen only to avoid greater evils. We submit to labour, in order to avoid the greater shame and pain of poverty, and we expose ourselves to danger and to death in defence of our liberty and property, the means and instruments of pleasure and happiness; or in defence of our country, in the safety of which our own is necessarily comprehended. For-titude enables us to do all this chearfully, as the best which, in our present situation, can possibly be done, and is in reality no more than prudence, good judgment and presence of mind in properly appreciating pain, labour and danger, always chusing the less in order to avoid the greater.
                  It is the same case with justice. To ab-stain from what is anothers is not desireable upon its own account, and it cannot surely be better for you, that I should possess what

is my own, than that you should possess it. You ought, however, to abstain from what-ever belongs to me, because by doing other-wise you will provoke the resentment and in-dignation of mankind. The security and tranquility of your mind will be entirely de-stroyed. You will be filled with fear and consternation at the thought of that punish-ment which you will imagine that men are at all times ready to inflict upon you, and from which no power, no art, no conceal-ment, will ever in your own fancy be suffi-cient to protect you. That other species of justice which consists in doing proper good offices to different persons, according to the various relations of neighbours, kinsmen, friends, benefactors, superiors or equals, which they may stand in to us, is recommended by the same reasons. To act properly in all these different relations procures us the esteem and love of those we live with; as to do other-wise excites their contempt and hatred. By the one we naturally secure, by the other we necessarily endanger, our own ease and tran-quility, the great and ultimate objects of all our desires. The whole virtue of justice, therefore, the most important of all the vir-tues,

is no more than discreet and prudent conduct with regard to our neighbours.
                  Such is the doctrine of Epicurus concern-ing the nature of virtue. It may seem ex-traordinary that this philosopher, who is de-scribed as a person of the most amiable man-ners, should never have observed, that, what-ever may be the tendency of those virtues, or of the contrary vices with regard to our bodily ease and security, the sentiments which they naturally excite in others are the objects of a much more passionate desire or aversion than all their other consequences; That to be amiable, to be respectable, to be the proper object of esteem, is by every well-disposed mind more valued than all the ease and secu-rity which love, respect and esteem can pro-cure us; That, on the contrary, to be odious, to be contemptible, to be the proper object of indignation, is more dreaded than all that we can suffer in our body from hatred, con-tempt or indignation; and that consequently our desire of the one character, and our aver-sion to the other, cannot arise from any regard 
                        •
                     o the effects which either of them is likely 
                        •
                     o produce upon the body.
                  
                     
This system is, no doubt, altogether incon-sistent with that which I have been endea-vouring to establish. It is not difficult, how-ever, to discover from what phasis, if I may say so, from what particular view or aspect of nature this account of things derives its probability. By the wise contrivance of the author of nature, virtue is upon all ordinary occasions, even with regard to this life, real wisdom, and the surest and readiest means of obtaining both safety and advantage. Our success or disappointment in our undertakings must very much depend upon the good or bad opinion which is commonly entertained of us, and upon the general disposition of those we live with, either to assist or to oppose us. But the best, the surest, the easiest and the readiest way of obtaining the advantageous and avoiding the unfavourable judgments of others, is undoubtedly to render ourselves the proper objects of the former and not of the latter.
Do you desire, said Socrates, the reputation of a good musician? The only sure way of obtaining it, is to become a good musician. Would you desire in the same manner to be thought capable of serving your country either as a general o
                           •
                         as a statesman? The best way in this ca
                           ••
                        
                        

too is really to acquire the art and expe-rience of war and government, and to be-come really fit to be a general or a states-man. And in the same manner if you would be reckoned sober, temperate, just and equitable, the best way of acquiring this reputation is to become sober, tempe-rate, just and equitable. If you can really render yourself amiable, respectable, and the proper object of esteem, there is no fear of your not soon acquiring the love, the respect and esteem of those you live with.
Since the practice of virtue, there-fore, is in general so advantageous, and that of vice so contrary to our interest, the con-sideration of those opposite tendencies un-doubtedly stamps an additional beauty and propriety upon the one, and a new deformity and impropriety upon the other. Tempe-rance, magnanimity, justice and beneficence, come thus to be approved of, not only under their proper characters, but under the addi-tional character of the highest wisdom and most real prudence. And in the same man-ner the contrary vices of intemperance, pu-silanimity, injustice, and either malevolence or sordid selfishness come to be disapproved of, not only under their proper characters,

but under the additional character of the most short-sighted folly and weakness. Epi-curus appears in every virtue to have at-tended to this species of propriety only. It is that which is most apt to occur to those who are endeavouring to persuade others to regu-larity of conduct. When men by their prac-tice and perhaps too by their maxims, mani-festly show that the natural beauty of virtue is not likely to have much effect upon them, how is it possible to move them but by re-presenting the folly of their conduct, and how much they themselves are in the end likely to suffer by it?
                  By running up all the different virtues too to this one species of propriety, Epicurus in-dulged a propensity, which is natural to all men, but which philosophers in particular are apt to cultivate with a peculiar fondness, as the great means of displaying their inge-nuity, the propensity to account for all ap-pearances from as few principles as possible▪ And he, no doubt, indulged this propensity still further, when he referred all the primary objects of natural desire and aversion to the pleasures and pains of the body. The great patron of the atomical philosophy, who 
                        
                      so much pleasure in deducing all the pow
                        ••
                     
                     

and qualities of bodies from the most obvious and familiar, the figure, motion and arrange-ment of the small parts of matter, felt no doubt a similar satisfaction, when he ac-counted, in the same manner, for all the sen-timents and passions of the mind from those which are most obvious and familiar.
                  The system of Epicurus agreed with those of Plato, Aristotle, and Zeno, in making vir-tue consist in acting in the most suitable man-ner to obtain the Prima naturae. primary objects of natural desire. It differed from all of them in two other respects; first, in the account which it gave of those primary objects of natural de-sire; and secondly, in the account which it gave of the excellence of virtue or of the rea-son why that quality ought to be esteemed.
                  The primary objects of natural desire con-sisted, according to Epicurus in bodily plea-sure and pain, and in nothing else: whereas, according to the other three philosophers, there were many other objects, such us know-ledge, such as the happiness of our relations, of our friends, of our country, which were ultimately desireable for their own sake.
                  
                     
Virtue too, according to Epicurus, did not deserve to be pursued for its own sake, nor was itself one of the primary objects of natu-ral appetite, but was eligible only upon ac-count of its tendency to prevent pain and to procure ease and pleasure. In the opinion of the other three, on the contrary, it was desireable, not meerly as the means of pro-curing the other primary objects of natural desire, but as something which was in itself more valuable than them all. Man, they thought, being born for action, his happi-ness must consist, not meerly in the agreeable-ness of his passive sensations, but also in the propriety of his active exertions.
               
               
                  

                  CHAP. III. Of those systems which make virtue con-sist in benevolence.
                  THE system which makes virtue con-sist in benevolence, tho' I think not so antient as all of those which I have already given an account of, is, however, of very great antiquity. It seems to have been the doctrine of the greater part of those philo-sophers who, about and after the age of Au-gustus, called themselves Eclectics, who pre-tended to follow chiefly the opinions of Plato and Pythagoras, and who upon that account are commonly known by the name of the latter Platonists.
                  In the divine nature, according to these authors, benevolence or love was the sole principle of action, and directed the exertion of all the other attributes. The wisdom of the deity was employed in finding out the means for bringing about those ends which his goodness suggested, as his infinite power was exerted to execute them. Benevolence,

however, was still the supreme and governing attribute, to which the others were subser-vient, and from which the whole excellency, or the whole morality, if I may be allowed such an expression, of the divine operations, was ultimately derived. The whole perfec-tion and virtue of the human mind consisted in some resemblance or participation of the di-vine perfections, and, consequently, in being filled with the same principle of benevolence and love which influenced all the actions of the deity. The actions of men which flowed from this motive were alone truly praise-worthy, or could claim any merit in the sight of the deity. It was by actions of cha-rity and love only that we could imitate, as became us, the conduct of God, that we could express our humble and devout admi-ration of his infinite perfections, that by fostering in our own minds the same divine principle, we could bring our own affections to a greater resemblance with his holy attri-butes, and thereby become more proper ob-jects of his love and esteem; till at last we arrived at that immediate converse and com-munication with the deity to which it was
2. With regard to those objects, which affect in a particular manner either our-selves or the person whose sentiments we judge of, it is at once more difficult to preserve this harmony and correspondence, and at the same time, vastly more impor-tant. My companion does not naturally look upon the misfortune that has befallen me, or the injury that has been done me, from the same point of view in which I consider them. They affect me much more nearly. We do not view them from the same station, as we do a picture, or a poem, or a system of philosophy, and are, there-fore, apt to be very differently affected by them. But I can much more easily over-look the want of this correspondence of sentiments with regard to such indifferent objects as concern neither me nor my com-panion, than with regard to what interests me so much as the misfortune that has be-fallen me, or the injury that has been done me. Though you despise that pic-ture, or that poem, or even that system of philosophy, which I admire, there is little danger of our quarrelling upon that ac-count. Neither of us can reasonably be

the great object of this philosophy to raise us.
                  This system, as it was much esteemed by many antient fathers of the christian church, so after the reformation it was adopted by se-veral divines of the most eminent piety and learning and of the most amiable manners; particularly, by Dr. Ralph Cudworth, by Dr. Henry More, and by Mr. John Smith of Cambridge. But of all the patrons of this system, antient or modern, the late Dr. Hut-cheson, was undoubtedly beyond all compa-rison, the most acute, the most distinct, the most philosophical, and what is of the greatest consequence of all, the soberest and most ju-dicious.
                  That virtue consists in benevolence is a notion supported by many appearances in hu-man nature. It has been observed already that proper benevolence is the most graceful and agreeable of all the affections, That it is recommended to us by a double sympathy, that as its tendency is necessarily beneficient, it is the proper object of gratitude and re-ward, and that upon all these accounts it ap-pears to our natural sentiments to possess a merit superior to any other. It has been ob-served

too that even the weaknesses of bene-volence are not very disagreeable to us, whereas those of every other passion are al-ways extremely disgusting. Who does not abhor, excessive malice, excessive selfishness, or excessive resentment? But the most ex-cessive indulgence even of partial friendship is not so offensive. It is the benevolent pas-sions only which can exert themselves with-out any regard or attention to propriety, and yet retain something about them which is en-gaging. There is something pleasing even in mere instinctive good-will which goes on to do good offices without once reflecting whether by this conduct it is the proper ob-ject either of blame or approbation. It is not so with the other passions. The moment they are deserted, the moment they are unaccom-panied by the sense of propriety, they cease to be agreeable.
                  As benevolence bestows upon those ac-tions which proceed from it a beauty superior to all others, so the want of it, and much more the contrary inclination communicates a peculiar deformity to whatever evidences such a disposition. Pernicious actions are of-ten punishable for no other reason than be-cause

they show a want of sufficient attention to the happiness of our neighbour.
                  Besides all this Dr. Hutcheson See enquiry concerning virtue sect. 1. and 2. observed, that whenever in any action, supposed to proceed from benevolent affections, some other motive had been discovered, our sense of the merit of this action was just so far di-minished as this motive was believed to have influenced it. If an action supposed to pro-ceed from gratitude, should be discovered to have arisen from an expectation of some new favour, or if what was apprehended to pro-ceed from public spirit, should be found out to have taken its origin from the hope of a pecuniary reward, such a discovery would entirely destroy all notion of merit or praise-worthiness in either of these actions. Since, therefore, the mixture of any selfish motive, like that of a baser alloy, diminished or took away altogether the merit which would otherwise have belonged to any action, it was evident, he imagined, that virtue must consist in pure and disinterested benevo-lence alone.
                  When those actions, on the contrary, which are commonly supposed to proceed

from a selfish motive, are discovered to have arisen from a benevolent one, it greatly en-hances our sense of their merit. If we be-lieved of any person that he endeavoured to advance his fortune from no other view but that of doing friendly offices, and of making proper returns to his benefactors, we should only love and esteem him the more. And this observation seemed still more to confirm the conclusion, that it was benevolence only which could stamp upon any action the cha-racter of virtue.
                  Last of all, what, he imagined, was an evi-dent proof of the justness of this account of virtue, in all the disputes of casuists con-cerning the rectitude of conduct, the public good, he observed, was the standard to which they constantly referred, thereby universally acknowledging that whatever tended to pro-mote the happiness of mankind was right and laudable and virtuous, and the contrary wrong, blameable and vitious. In the late debates about passive obedience and the right of resistence, the sole point in controversy among men of sense was, whether universal submission would probably be attended with greater evils than temporary insurrections

when privileges were invaded. Whether what upon the whole, tended most to the happiness of mankind, was not also morally good, was never once, he said, made a question.
                  Since benevolence, therefore, was the only motive which could bestow upon any action the character of virtue, the greater the bene-volence which was evidenced by any action, the greater the praise which must belong to it.
                  Those actions which aimed at the happi-ness of a great community, as they demon-strated a more enlarged benevolence than those which aimed only at that of a smaller system, so were they, likewise, proportionally the more virtuous. The most virtuous of all affections, therefore, was that which em-braced as its object the happiness of all intel-ligent beings. The least virtuous, on the con-trary, of those to which the character of vir-tue could in any respect belong, was that which aimed no further than at the happi-ness of an individual, such as a son, a brother, a friend.
                  In directing all our actions to promote the greatest possible good, in submitting all infe-rior

affections to the desire of the general happiness of mankind, in regarding ourselves but as one of the many, whose prosperity was to be pursued no further than it was con-sistent with or conducive to that of the whole, consisted the perfection of virtue.
                  Self-love was a principle which could never be virtuous in any degree or in any direction. It was vitious whenever it obstructed the ge-neral good. When it had no other effect than to make the individual take care of his own happiness, it was meerly innocent, and tho' it deserved no praise, neither ought it to incur any blame. Those benevolent actions which were performed, notwithstanding some strong motive from self-interest, were the more virtuous upon that account. They de-monstrated the strength and vigour of the benevolent principle.
                  Dr. Hutcheson Inquiry concerning virtue, sect. 2. art. 4, also illustra-tions on the moral sense, sect. 5. last paragraph. was so far from allowing self-love to be in any case a motive of vir-tuous actions, that even a regard to the plea-sure of self-approbation, to the comfortable applause of our own consciences, according

to him diminished the merit of a benevolent action. This was a selfish motive, he thought, which, so far as it contributed to any action, demonstrated the weakness of that pure and disinterested benevolence which could alone stamp upon the conduct of men the character of virtue. In the common judgments of man-kind, however, this regard to the approba-tion of our own minds is so far from being considered as what can in any respect dimi-nish the virtue of any action, that it is rather looked upon as the sole motive which de-serves the appellation of virtuous.
                  Such is the account given of the nature of virtue in this amiable system, a system which has a peculiar tendency to nourish and sup-port in the human heart the noblest, and the most agreeable of all affections, and not only to check the injustice of self-love, but in some measure to discourage that principle altogether, by representing it as what could never reflect any honour upon those who were influenced by it.
                  As some of the other systems which I have already given an account of, do not suffi-ciently explain from whence arises the pecu-liar excellency of the supreme virtue of be-neficence,

so this system seems to have the contrary defect, of not sufficiently explain-ing from whence arises our approbation of the inferior virtues of prudence, vigilance, circumspection, temperance, constancy, firm-ness. The view and aim of our affections, the beneficent and hurtful effects which they tend to produce, are the only qualities that are at all attended to in this system. Their propriety and impropriety, their suitableness and unsuitableness to the cause which ex-cites them, are disregarded altogether.
                  Regard to our own private happiness and interest too, appear upon many occasions very laudable principles of action. The habits of oeconomy, industry, discretion, attention and application of thought, are generally supposed to be cultivated from self-interested motives, and at the same time are appre-hended to be very praise-worthy qualities, which deserve the esteem and approbation of every body. The mixture of a selfish motive, it is true, seems often to sully the beauty of those actions which ought to arise from a be-nevolent affection. The cause of this, how-ever, is not that self-love can never be the

motive of a virtuous action, but that the be-nevolent principle appears in this particular case to want its due degree of strength, and to be altogether unsuitable to its object. The character, therefore, seems evidently imper-fect, and upon the whole to deserve blame rather than praise. The mixture of a bene-volent motive in an action to which self-love alone ought to be sufficient to prompt us, is not so apt indeed to diminish our sense of its propriety, or of the virtue of the person who performs it. We are not ready to suspect any person of being defective in selfishness. This is by no means the weak side of human nature, or the failing of which we are apt to be suspicious. If we could really believe, however, of any man that, was it not from a regard to his family and friends, he would not take that proper care of his health, his life, or his fortune, to which self-preservation ought alone to be sufficient to prompt him, it would undoubtedly be a failing, tho' one of those amiable failings, which render a per-son rather the object of pity than of contempt or hatred. It would still, however, some-what diminish the dignity and respectableness of his character. Carelessness and want of oeconomy are universally disapproved of▪
                     

not, however, as proceeding from a want of benevolence, but from a want of the proper attention to the objects of self-interest.
                  Tho' the standard by which casuists fre-quently determine what is right or wrong in human conduct, be its tendency to the wel-fare or disorder of society; it does not follow that a regard to the welfare of society should be the sole virtuous motive of action, but only that, in any competition, it ought to cast the balance against all other motives.
                  Benevolence may, perhaps, be the sole principle of action in the deity, and there are several, not improbable, arguments which tend to persuade us that it is so. It is not easy to conceive what other motive an independent and all-perfect being, who stands in need of nothing external and whose happiness is com-pleat in himself, can act from. But what-ever may be the case with the deity, so im-perfect a creature as man, the support of whose existence requires so many things exter-nal to him, must often act from many other motives. The condition of human nature were peculiarly hard, if those affections, which, by the very nature of our being, ought frequently to influence our conduct, could upon no occasion appear virtuous, or

much interested about them. They ought all of them to be matters of great indifference to us both; so that, though our opinions may be opposite, our affections may still be very nearly the same. But it is quite other-wise with regard to those objects by which either you or I are particularly affected. Though your judgments in matters of spe-culation, though your sentiments in matters of taste, are quite opposite to mine, I can easily overlook this opposition; and if I have any degree of temper, I may still find some entertainment in your conversation, even upon those very subjects. But if you have either no fellow-feeling for the mis-fortunes I have met with, or none that bears any proportion to the grief which distracts me; or if you have either no in-dignation at the injuries I have suffered, or none that bears any proportion to the resentment which transports me, we can no longer converse upon these subjects. We become intolerable to one another. I can neither support your company, nor you mine. You are confounded at my violence and passion, and I am enraged at your cold insensibility and want of feeling.
                  
                     

deserve esteem and commendation from any body.
                  Those three systems, that which places virtue in propriety, that which places it in prudence, and that which makes it consist in benevolence, are the principal accounts which have been given of the nature of virtue. To one or other of them, all the other descrip-tions of virtue, how different soever they may appear, are easily reducible.
                  That system which places virtue in obe-dience to the will of the deity, may be counted either among those which make it consist in prudence, or among those which make it consist in propriety. When it is asked, why we ought to obey the will of the deity, this question, which would be im-pious and absurd in the highest degree, if asked from any doubt that we ought to obey him, can admit but of two different an-swers. It must either be said that we ought to obey the will of the deity because he is a being of infinite power, who will re-ward us eternally if we do so and punish us eternally if we do otherwise: Or it must be said, that independent of any regard to our own happiness, or to rewards and pu-nishments

of any kind, there is a con-gruity and fitness that a creature should obey its creator, that a limited and imperfect be-ing should submit to one of infinite and in-comprehensible perfections. Besides one or other of these two it is impossible to con-ceive that any other answer can be given to this question. If the first answer be the proper one, virtue consists in prudence or in the proper pursuit of our own final in-terest and happiness; since it is upon this ac-count that we are obliged to obey the will of the deity. If the second answer be the pro-per one, virtue must consist in propriety, since the ground of our obligation to obe-dience is the suitableness or congruity of the sentiments of humility and submission to the superiority of the object which excites them.
                  That system which places virtue in uti-lity coincides too with that which makes it consist in propriety. According to this system all those qualities of the mind which are agreeable or advantageous, either to the person himself or to others are approved of as virtuous, and the contrary disapproved of as vitious. But the agreeableness or utility

of any affection depends upon the degree which it is allowed to subsist in. Every af-fection is useful when it is confined to a cer-tain degree of violence; and every affection is disadvantageous when it exceeds the bounds of this moderation. According to this system therefore, virtue consists, not in any one af-fection, but in the proper degree of all the affections. The only difference between it and that which I have been endeavouring to establish, is, that it makes utility, and not sympathy, or the correspondent affection of the spectator, the measure of this proper degree.
               
               
                  

                  CHAP. IV. Of licentious systems.
                  ALL those systems, which I have hitherto given an account of, suppose that there is a real and essential distinction between vice and virtue, whatever these qua-lities may consist in. There is a real and essential difference between the propriety and impropriety of any affection, between bene-volence and any other principle of action, between real prudence and short sighted folly or precipitate rashness. In the main too all of them contribute to encourage the praise-worthy, and to discourage the blameable disposition.
                  It may be true, perhaps, of some of them, that they tend in some measure to break the ballance of the affections, and to give the mind a particular biass to some principles of action beyond the proportion that is due to them. The antient systems, which place virtue in propriety, seem chiefly to recom-mend the great, the awful and the respect-able

virtues, the virtues of self-government and self-command; fortitude, magnanimity, independency upon fortune, the contempt of all outward accidents, of pain, poverty, exile and death. It is in these great exertions that the noblest propriety of conduct is displayed. The soft, the amiable, the gentle virtues, all the virtues of indulgent humanity are in comparison but little insisted upon, and seem on the contrary, by the Stoics in particular, to have been often regarded as meer weaknesses which it behoved a wise man not to harbour in his breast.
                  The benevolent system, on the other hand, while it fosters and encourages all those mil-der virtues in the highest degree, seems en-tirely to neglect the more awful and respect-able qualities of the mind. It even denies them the appellation of virtues. It calls them moral abilities and treats them as qualities which do not deserve the same sort of esteem and approbation which is due to what is pro-perly denominated virtue. All those prin-ciples of action which aim only at our own interest, it treats, if that be possible, still worse. So far from having any merit of their own, they diminish, it pretends, the merit of benevolence, when they co-operate

with it: and prudence, it is as-serted, when employed only in promoting private interest, can never even be imagined a virtue.
                  That system, again, which makes virtue consist in prudence only, while it gives the highest encouragement to the habits of cau-tion, vigilance, sobriety and judicious mode-ration, seems to degrade equally both the amiable and respectable virtues, and to strip the former of all their beauty and the latter of all their grandeur.
                  But notwithstanding these defects, the ge-neral tendency of each of those three systems is to encourage the best and most laudable habits of the human mind: and it were well for society if either mankind in general, or even those few who pretend to live according to any philosophical rule, were to regulate their conduct by the precepts of any one of them. We may learn from each of them something that is both valuable and peculiar. If it was possible, by precept and exhorta-tion, to inspire the mind with fortitude and magnanimity, the antient systems of pro-priety would seem sufficient to do this. Or if it was possible, by the same means to soften

it into humanity, and to awaken the affec-tions of kindness and general love towards those we live with, some of the pictures with which the benevolent system presents us, might seem capable of producing this effect. We may learn from the system of Epicurus, tho' undoubtedly the worst of all the three, how much the practice of both the amiable and respectable virtues is conducive to our own interest, to our own ease and safety and quiet even in this life. As Epicurus placed happiness in the attainment of ease and secu-rity, he exerted himself in a particular man-ner to show that virtue was, not meerly the best and the surest, but the only means of acquiring those invaluable possessions. The good effects of virtue, upon our inward tran-quility and peace of mind, are what other philosophers have chiefly celebrated. Epi-curus, without neglecting this topic, has chiefly insisted upon the influence of that amiable quality on our outward prosperity and safety. It was upon this account that his writings were so much studied in the an-tient world by men of all different philoso-phical parties. It is from him that Cicero, the great enemy of the Epicurean system, borrows his most agreeable proofs that virtue

alone is sufficient to secure happiness. Sene-ca, tho' a stoic, the sect most opposite to that of Epicurus, yet quotes this philosopher more frequently than any other.
                  There are, however, some other systems which seem to take away altogether the di-stinction between vice and virtue, and of which the tendency, is upon that account, wholly pernicious: I mean the systems of the duke of Rochefaucault and Dr. Mande-ville. Tho' the notions of both these au-thors are in almost every respect erroneous, there are, however, some appearances in hu-man nature which, when viewed in a cer-tain manner, seem at first sight to favour them. These, first slightly sketched out with the elegance and delicate precision of the duke of Rochefaucault, and afterwards more fully represented with the lively and humourous, tho' coarse and rustic eloquence of Dr. Mandeville, have thrown upon their doctrines an air of truth and probability which is very apt to impose upon the unskilful.
                  Dr. Mandeville, the most methodical of those two authors, considers whatever is done from a sense of propriety, from a regard to what is commendable and praise-worthy, as

being done from a love of praise and com-mendation, or as he calls it from vanity. Man, he observes, is naturally much more interested in his own happiness than in that of others, and it is impossible that in his heart he can ever really prefer their prospe-rity to his own. Whenever he appears to do so, we may be assured that he imposes upon us, and that he is then acting from the same selfish motives as at all other times. Among his other selfish passions, vanity is one of the strongest, and he is always easily flattered and greatly delighted with the applauses of those about him. When he appears to sacrifice his own interest to that of his companions, he knows that this conduct will be highly agreeable to their self-love, and that they will not fail to express their satisfaction by bestowing upon him the most extravagant praises. The pleasure which he expects from this, overbalances, in his opinion, the interest which he abandons in order to procure it. His conduct, therefore, upon this occasion is in reality just as selfish, and arises from just as mean a motive as upon any other. He is flattered, however, and he flatters himself with the belief that it is entirely disin-terested; since, unless this was supposed, it

would not seem to merit any commendation either in his own eyes or in those of others. All public spirit, therefore, all preference of public to private interest, is, according to him, a meer cheat and imposition upon mankind; and that human virtue which is so much boasted of, and which is the occasion of so much emulation among men, is the meer offspring of flattery begot upon pride.
                  Whether the most generous and public spi-rited actions may not in some sense be re-garded as proceeding from self-love I shall not at present examine. The decision of this question is not, I apprehend, of any im-portance towards establishing the reality of virtue, since self-love may frequently be a virtuous motive of action. I shall only en-deavour to show that the desire of doing what is honourable and noble, of rendering ourselves the proper objects of esteem and approbation cannot with any propriety be called vanity. Even the love of well-grounded fame and reputation, the desire of acquiring esteem by what is really estimable, does not deserve that name. The first is the love of virtue, the noblest and best passion of hu-man nature. The second is the love of true glory, a passion inferior no doubt to the for-mer,
In all such cases, that there may be some correspondence of sentiments between the spectator and the person principally concern-ed, the spectator must, first of all, endea-vour, as much as he can, to put himself in the situation of the other, and to bring home to himself every little circumstance of distress which can possibly occur to the sufferer. He must adopt the whole case of his companion with all its minutest in-cidents; and strive to render, as perfect as possible, that imaginary change of situa-tion upon which his sympathy is founded.
                  After all this, however, the emotions of the spectator will still be very apt to fall short of the violence of what is felt by the sufferer. Mankind, though natu-rally sympathetic, never conceive, for what has befallen another, that degree of passion which naturally animates the person prin-cipally concerned. That imaginary change of situation, upon which their sympathy is founded, is but momentary. The thought of their own safety, the thought that they themselves are not really the suf-ferers, continually intrudes itself upon them; and though it does not hinder them


but which in dignity appears to come immediately after it. He is guilty of vanity who desires praise for qualities which are either not praise-worthy in any degree, or not in that degree in which he expects to be praised for them; who sets his character upon the frivolous ornaments of dress and equi-page, or the equally frivolous accomplish-ments of ordinary behaviour. He is guilty of vanity who desires praise for what indeed very well deserves it, but what he perfectly knows does not belong to him. The empty coxcomb who gives himself airs of impor-tance which he has no title to, the silly liar who assumes the merit of adventures which never happened, the foolish plagiary who gives himself out for the author of what he has no pretensions to, are properly accused of this passion. He too is said to be guilty of vanity who is not contented with the silent sentiments of esteem and approbation, who seems to be fonder of their noisy expressions and acclamations than of the sentiments them-selves, who is never satisfied but when his own praises are ringing in his ears, and who sollicits with the most anxious importunity all external marks of respect, is fond of titles, of compliments, of being visited, of being

attended, of being taken notice of in public places with the appearance of deference and attention. This frivolous passion is altogether different from either of the two former, and is the passion of the lowest, and the least of mankind as they are of the noblest and the greatest.
                  But tho' these three passions, the desire of rendering ourselves the proper objects of ho-nour and esteem; or of becoming what is ho-nourable and estimable; the desire of ac-quiring honour and esteem by really deserv-ing those sentiments; and the frivolous de-sire of praise at any rate, are widely dif-ferent; tho' the two former are always ap-proved of while the latter never fails to be despised; there is, however, a certain remote affinity among them which, exaggerated by the humorous and diverting eloquence of this lively author, has enabled him to impose upon his readers. There is an affinity be-tween vanity and the love of true glory, as both these passions aim at acquiring esteem and approbation. But they are different in this, that the one is a just, reasonable and equitable passion, while the other is unjust, absurd and ridiculous. The man who de-sires esteem for what is really estimable, de-sires

nothing but what he is justly entitled to, and what cannot be refused him without some sort of injury. He, on the contrary, who desires it upon any other terms, demands what he has no just claim to. The first is easily satisfied, is not apt to be jealous or suspicious that we do not esteem him enough, and is seldom sollicitous about receiving many external marks of our regard. The other, on the contrary, is never to be satis-fied, is full of jealousy and suspicion that we do not esteem him so much as he desires, because he has some secret consciousness that he desires more than he deserves. The least neglect of ceremony, he considers, as a mor-tal affront and as an expression of the most determined contempt. He is restless and im-patient and perpetually afraid that we have 
                        •
                     ost all respect for him, and is upon this ac-count always anxious to obtain new expres-sions of esteem, and cannot be kept in tem-per but by continual attendance and adu-
                     
                        •
                     ation.
                  There is an affinity too between the desire of becoming what is honourable and estim-
                     
                        •
                     ble, and the desire of honour and esteem, 
                        •
                     etween the love of virtue and the love of 
                        •
                     rue glory. They resemble one another not

only in this respect, that both aim at really being what is honourable and noble, but even in that respect in which the love of true glory resembles what is properly called vani-ty, some reference to the sentiments of others. The man of the greatest magnanimity, who desires virtue for its own sake, and is most in-different about what actually are the opinions of mankind with regard to him, is still, how-ever, delighted with the thoughts of what they should be, with the consciousness that tho' he may neither be honoured nor ap-plauded, he is still the proper object of ho-nour and applause, and that if mankind were cool and candid and consistent with them-selves, and properly informed of the motives and circumstances of his conduct, they would not fail to honour and applaud him. Tho' he despises the opinions which are actu-ally entertained of him, yet he has the highest value for those which ought to be entertained of him. That he might think himself worthy of those honourable sentiments, and, whatever was the idea which other men might conceive of his character, that when he should put himself in their situation, and consider, not what was, but what ought to be their opinion, he should always have the

highest idea of it himself, was the great and 
                        •
                     xalted motive of his conduct. As even in 
                        •
                     he love of virtue, therefore, there is still some 
                        •
                     eference; tho' not to what is, yet to what in 
                        •
                     eason and propriety ought to be, the opinion of others, there is even in this respect some 
                        •
                     ffinity between it, and the love of true glory. There is, however, at the same time, a very great difference between them. The man who acts solely from a regard to what is right 
                        •
                     nd fit to be done, from a regard to what is 
                        •
                     he proper object of esteem and approbation, 
                        •
                     ho' these sentiments should never be bestowed 
                        •
                     pon him, acts from the most sublime and godlike motive which human nature is even 
                        •
                     apable of conceiving. The man, on the other 
                        •
                     and, who while he desires to merit appro-
                     
                        •
                     ation, is at the same time anxious to obtain 
                        •
                     t, tho' he too is laudable in the main, yet 
                        •
                     is motives have a greater mixture of human 
                        •
                     nfirmity. He is in danger of being morti-
                     
                        •
                     ied by the ignorance and injustice of man-
                     
                        •
                     ind, and his happiness is exposed to the envy 
                        •
                     f his rivals, and the folly of the publick. The happiness of the other, on the contrary, is 
                        •
                     ltogether secure and independent of fortune, 
                        •
                     nd of the caprice of those he lives with.

The contempt and hatred which may be thrown upon him by the ignorance of man-kind, he considers as not belonging to him, and is not at all mortified by it. Mankind despise and hate him from a false notion of his character and conduct. If they knew him better they would esteem and love him. It is not him whom, properly speaking, they hate and despise, but another person whom they mistake him to be. Our friend, whom we should meet at a masquerade in the garb of our enemy, would be more diverted than mortified, if under that disguise we should vent our indignation against him. Such are the sentiments of a man of real magnanimity; when exposed to unjust censure. It seldom happens, however, that human nature arrives at this degree of firmness. Tho' none b
                        •
                     t the weakest and most worthless of mankind are much delighted with false glory, yet, by a strange inconsistency, false ignominy is often capable of mortifying those who appear the most resolute and determined.
                  Dr. Mandeville is not satisfied with repre-senting the frivolous motive of vanity, as the source of all those actions which are com-monly accounted virtuous. He endeavours to point out the imperfection of human vir-tue

in many other respects. In every case, he pretends, it falls short of that compleat self-denial which it pretends to, and, instead of a conquest, is commonly no more than a con-cealed indulgence of our passions. Wherever our reserve with regard to pleasure▪ falls short of the most ascetic abstinence, he treats it as gross luxury and sensuality. Every thing, ac-cording to him, is luxury which exceeds what is absolutely necessary for the support of hu-man nature, so that there is vice even in the use of a clean shirt, or of a convenient habi-tation. The indulgence of the inclination to sex, in the most lawful union, he considers as the same sensuality with the most hurtful gratifi-cation of that passion, and derides that tem-perance and that chastity which can be prac-tised at so cheap a rate. The ingenious so-phistry of his reasoning, is here, as upon many other occasions, covered by the ambi-guity of language. There are some of our passions which have no other names except those which mark the disagreeable and offen-sive degree. The spectator is more apt to take notice of them in this degree than in any other. When they shock his own sentiments, when they give him some sort of antipathy and uneasiness, he is necessarily obliged to at-tend

to them, and is from thence naturally led to give them a name. When they fall in with the natural state of his own mind, he is very apt to overlook them altogether, and either gives them no name at all, or, if he gives them any, it is one which marks rather the subjection and restraint of the passion, than the degree which it still is allowed to subsist in, after it is so subjected and restrained. Thus the common names of the Luxury and lust. love of pleasure, and of the b love of sex denote a vitious and offensive degree of those passions. The words temperance and chastity on the other hand, seem to mark rather the restraint and subjec-tion which they are kept under than the de-gree which they are still allowed to subsist in▪ When he can show, therefore, that they still subsist in some degree, he imagines, he has entirely demolished the reality of the virtue
                        •
                      of temperance and chastity, and shown them to be meer impositions upon the inattenti
                        ••
                      and simplicity of mankind. Those virtues, however, do not require an entire insensibi-lity to the objects of the passions which they mean to govern. They only aim at restrain-ing the violence of those passions so far as not

to hurt the individual, and neither disturb nor offend the society.
                  It is the great fallacy of Dr. Mandeville's book Fable of the Bees.to represent every passion as wholly vi-tious which is so in any degree and in any di-rection. It is thus that he treats every thing as vanity which has any reference either to what are or to what ought to be the senti-ments of others: and it is by means of this sophistry that he establishes his favourite con-clusion, that private vices are public benefits. If the love of magnificence, a taste for the elegant arts and improvements of human life, for whatever is agreeable in dress, furniture, or equipage, for architecture, statuary, paint-
                     
                        •
                     ng and music, is to be regarded as luxury, sensuality and ostentation, even in those whose situation allows, without any inconveniency, the indulgence of those passions, it is certain that luxury, sensuality and ostentation are public benefits: since, without the qualities upon which he thinks proper to bestow such opprobrious names, the arts of refinement could never find encouragement, and must 
                        •
                     anguish for want of employment. Some popular ascetic doctrines which had been cur-rent

before his time, and which placed virtue in the entire extirpation and annihilation of all our passions, were the real foundation of this licentious system. It was easy for Dr. Mandeville to prove, first, that this en-tire conquest never actually took place among men; and, secondly, that, if it was to take place, universally, it would be pernicious to society, by putting an end to all industry and commerce, and in a manner to the whole bu-siness of human life. By the first of these propositions he seemed to prove that there was no real virtue, and that what pretended to be such was a meer cheat and imposition upon mankind; and by the second, that pri-vate vices were public benefits, since with-out them no society could prosper or flourish.
                  Such is the system of Dr. Mandeville, which once made so much noise in the world, and which, tho' perhaps it never gave occa-sion to more vice than what would have been without it, at least taught that vice which arose from other causes to appear with more effrontery, and to avow the corruption of its motives with a profligate audaciousness which had never been heared of before.
                  
                     

from conceiving a passion somewhat analo-gous to what is felt by the sufferer, hinders them from conceiving any thing that ap-proaches to the same degree of violence. The person concerned is sensible of this, and, at the same time, passionately desires a more compleat sympathy. He longs for that re-lief which nothing can afford him but the entire concord of the affections of the spec-tators with his own. To see the emo-tions of their hearts, in every respect, beat time to his own, in the violent and disa-greeable passions, constitutes his sole con-solation. But he can only hope to obtain this by lowering his passion to that pitch, in which the spectators are capable of go-ing along with him. He must flatten, if I may be allowed to say so, the sharpness of its natural tone, in order to reduce it to harmony and concord with the emo-tions of those who are about him. What they feel, will, indeed, always be, in some respects, different from what he feels, and compassion can never be exactly the same with original sorrow; because the secret consciousness that the change of situations, from which the sympathetic sentiment arises, is but imaginary, not only lowers
But how destructive soever this system may appear, it could never have imposed upon so great a number of persons, nor have occasioned so general an alarm among those who are the friends of better principles, had it not in some respects bordered upon the truth. A system of natural philosophy may appear very plausible and be for a long time very generally received in the world, and yet have no foundation in nature, nor any sort of resemblance to the truth. The vortices of Des Cartes were regarded by a very inge-nious nation, for near a century together, as a most satisfactory account of the revolutions of the heavenly bodies. Yet it has been de-monstrated to the conviction of all mankind that these pretended causes of those wonder-ful effects, not only do not actually exist, but are utterly impossible, and if they did exist, could produce no such effects as are ascribed to them. But it is otherwise with systems of moral philosophy, and an author who pre-tends to account for the origin of our moral sentiments, cannot deceive us so grossly, nor depart so very far from all resemblance to the truth. When a traveller gives us an account of some distant country, he may impose upon our credulity the most groundless and absurd

as the most certain matters of fact. But when a person pretends to inform us of what passes in our own neighbourhood, and of the affairs of the very parish which we live in, tho' here too, if we are so careless as not to examine things with our own eyes, he may deceive us in many respects, yet the greatest falshoods which he imposes upon us must bear some resemblance to the truth, and must even have a considerable mixture of truth in them. An author who treats of na-tural philosophy, and pretends to assign the causes of the great phaenomena of the uni-verse, pretends to give an account of the af-fairs of a very distant country, concerning which he may tell us what he pleases, and as long as his narration keeps within the bounds of seeming possibility, he need not despair of gaining our belief. But when he proposes to explain the origin of our desires and affections, of our sentiments of appro-bation and disapprobation, he pretends to give an account, not only of the affairs of the very parish that we live in, but of our own do-mestic concerns. Tho' here too, like indo-lent masters who put their trust in a steward who deceives them, we are very liable to be imposed upon, yet we are incapable of pas-sing

any account which does not preserve some little regard to the truth. Some of the articles, at least, must be just, and even those which are most overcharged must have had some foundation, otherwise the fraud would 
                        •
                     e detected even by that careless inspection which we are disposed to give. The author who should assign, as the cause of any natu-
                     
                        •
                     al sentiment, some principle which neither 
                        •
                     ad any connection with it, nor resembled 
                        •
                     ny other principle which had some such 
                        •
                     onnection, would appear absurd and ridicu-
                     
                        •
                     ous to the most injudicious and unexperi-
                     
                        •
                     nced reader.
               
            
            
               

               SECTION III. Of the different systems which have been formed concerning the principle of appro-bation.
               
                  INTRODUCTION.
                  AFTER the inquiry concerning the na-ture of virtue, the next question of importance in Moral Philosophy, is concern-ing the principle of approbation, concerning the power or faculty of the mind which ren-ders certain characters agreeable or disagree-able to us, makes us prefer one tenor of con-duct to another, denominate the one right and the other wrong, and consider the one as the object of approbation, honour and re-ward; the other as that of blame, censure and punishment.
                  Three different accounts have been give
                        •
                      of this principle of approbation. Accord-ing to some, we approve and disapprove 
                        
                      of our own actions and of those of others from self-love only, or from some view 
                        
                      their tendency to our own happiness or d
                        ••
                     
                     -advantage: according to others▪ reason, 
                        
                     
                     

same faculty by which we distinguish be-tween truth and falshood, enables us to di-stinguish between what is fit and unfit both in actions and affections: according to others this distinction is altogether the effect of im-mediate sentiment and feeling, and arises from the satisfaction or disgust with which the view of certain actions or affections in-spires us. Self-love, reason and sentiment, therefore, are the three different sources which have been assigned for the principle of approbation.
                  Before I proceed to give an account of those different systems, I must observe, that the determination of this second question, though of the greatest importance in specu-lation, is of none in practice. The question concerning the nature of virtue necessarily has some influence upon our notions of right and wrong in many particular cases. That concerning the principle of approbation can possibly have no such effect. To examine from what contrivance or mechanism within, those different notions or sentiments arise, is a meer matter of philosophical curiosity.
               
               
                  

                  CHAP. I. Of those systems which deduce the principle of approbation from self-love.
                  THOSE who account for the principle of approbation from self-love, do not all account for it in the same manner, and there is a good deal of confusion and inac-curacy in all their different systems. Accord-ing to Mr. Hobbs, and many of his follow-ers Puffendorf. Mandeville., man is driven to taken refuge in so-ciety, not by any natural love which he bears to his own kind, but because without the assistance of others he is incapable of subsist-ing with ease or safety. Society, upon this account, becomes necessary to him, and whatever tends to its support and welfare, he considers as having a remote tendency to his own interest, and, on the contrary, whatever is likely to disturb or destroy it, he regards as in some measure hurtful or pernicious to himself. Virtue is the great support and vice the great disturber of human society. The former therefore, is agreeable, and the

latter offensive to every man; as from the one he foresees the prosperity, and from the other the ruin and disorder of what is so ne-cessary for the comfort and security of his existence.
                  That the tendency of virtue to promote, and of vice to disturb the order of society, when we consider it coolly and philosophi-cally, reflects a very great beauty upon the one, and a very great deformity upon the other, cannot, as I have observed upon a former occasion, be called in question. Hu-man society, when we contemplate it in a certain abstract and philosophical light, ap-pears like a great, an immense machine whose regular and harmonious movements produce a thousand agreeable effects. As in any other beautiful and noble machine that was the production of human art, whatever tended to render its movements more smooth and easy, would derive a beauty from this effect, and, on the contrary, whatever ten-ded to obstruct them would displease upon that account: so virtue, which is, as it were, 
                        •
                     he fine polish to the wheels of society, ne-cessarily pleases; while vice, like the vile 
                        ••
                     ust, which makes them jarr and grate upon one another, is as necessarily offensive. This

account, therefore, of the origin of appro-bation and disapprobation, so far as it derives them from a regard to the order of society, runs into that principle which gives beauty to utility, and which I have explained upon a former occasion; and it is from thence that this system derives all that appearance of pro-bability which it possesses. When those authors describe the innumerable advantages of a cultivated and social, above a savage and solitary life; when they expatiate upon the necessity of virtue and good order for the maintainance of the one, and demonstrate how infallibly the prevalence of vice and dis-obedience to the laws tend to bring back the other, the reader is charmed with the no-velty and grandeur of those views which they open to him; he sees plainly a new beauty in virtue, and a new deformity in vice, which he had never taken notice of before, and is commonly so delighted with the discovery, that he seldom takes time to reflect, that this political view, having never occurred to him in his life before, cannot possibly be the ground of that approbation and disapprobation with which he has always been accustomed to consider those different qualities.
                  
                     
When those authors, on the other hand, deduce from self-love the interest which we take in the welfare of society, and the esteem which upon that account we bestow upon virtue, they do not mean, that when we in this age applaud the virtue of Cato, and de-test the villainy of Catiline, our sentiments are influenced by the notion of any benefit we receive from the one or of any detriment we suffer from the other. It was not because the prosperity or subversion of society, in those remote ages and nations, was apprehended to have any influence upon our happiness or misery in the present times; that according to those philosophers, we esteemed the vir-tuous, and blamed the disorderly character. They never imagined that our sentiments were influenced by any benefit or damage which we supposed actually to redound to us from either; but by that which might have redounded to us, had we lived in those distant ages and countries; or by that which might still redound to us, if in our own times we should meet with characters of the same kind. The idea, in short, which those authors were groping about, but which they were never able to unfold distinctly, was that indirect sympathy which we feel with

the gratitude or resentment of those who re-ceived the benefit or suffered the damage re-sulting from such opposite characters: and it was this which they were indistinctly point-ing at, when they said, that it was not the thought of what we had gained or suffered which prompted our applause or indignation, but the conception or imagination of what we might gain or suffer if we were to act in society with such associates.
                  Sympathy, however, cannot, in any sense, be regarded as a selfish principle. When I sympathize with your sorrow or your indig-nation, it may be pretended, indeed, that my emotion is founded in self-love, because it arises from bringing your case home to my-self, from putting myself in your situation, and thence conceiving what I should feel in the like circumstances. But tho' sympathy is very properly said to arise from an imagi-nary change of situations with the person principally concerned, yet this imaginary change is not supposed to happen to me in my own person and character, but in that of the person with whom I sympathize. When I condole with you for the loss of your only son, in order to enter into your grief I do not consider what I, a person of such a cha-racter

it in degree, but, in some measure, varies it in kind, and gives it a quite different modification. These two sentiments, how-ever, may, it is evident, have such a cor-respondence with one another, as is suffi-cient for the harmony of society. Though they will never be unisons, they may be concords, and this is all that is wanted or required.
                  In order to produce this concord, as nature teaches the spectators to assume the circumstances of the person principally con-cerned, so she teaches this last in some measure to assume those of the spectators. As they are continually placing themselves in his situation, and thence conceiving emotions similar to what he feels; so he is as constantly placing himself in theirs, and thence conceiving some degree of that cool-ness about his own fortune, with which he is sensible that they will view it. As they are constantly considering what they them-selves would feel, if they actually were the sufferers, so he is as constantly led to ima-gine in what manner he would be affected if he was only one of the spectators of his own situation. As their sympathy makes them look at it, in some measure, with his


and profession, should suffer, if I had a son, and if that son was unfortunately to die, but I consider what I should suffer if I was really you, and I not only change cir-cumstances with you, but I change persons and characters. My grief, therefore, is en-tirely upon your account, and not in the least upon my own. It is not, therefore, in the least selfish. How can that be regarded as a selfish passion which does not arise even from the imagination of any thing that has befallen or that relates to myself in my own proper person and character, but which is entirely occupied about what relates to you. A man may sympathize with a woman in child-bed; though it is impossible that he should con-ceive himself as suffering her pains in his own proper person, and character. That whole account of human nature, however, which deduces all sentiments and affections from self-love, which has made so much noise in the world, but which, so far as I know, has never yet been fully and distinctly explained, 
                        •
                     eems to me to have arisen from some con-
                     
                        •
                     used misapprehension of the system of sym-
                     
                        •
                     athy.
               
               
                  

                  CHAP. II. Of those systems which make reason the prin-ciple of approbation.
                  IT is well known to have been the doc-trine of Mr. Hobbs, that a state of nature, is a state of war; and that antecedent to the institution of civil government there could be no safe or peaceable society among men. To preserve society, therefore, according to him, was to support civil government, and to dis-troy civil government was the same thing as to put an end to society. But the existence of civil government depends upon the obe-dience that is paid to the supreme magistrate. The moment he loses his authority, all go-vernment is at an end. As self-preservation, therefore, teaches men to applaud whatever tends to promote the welfare of society, and to blame whatever is likely to hurt it; so the same principle, if they would think and speak consistently, ought to teach them to applaud upon all occasions obedience to the civil ma-gistrate, and to blame all disobedience and re-bellion.

The very ideas of laudable and blameable, ought to be the same with those of obedience and disobedience. The laws of the civil magistrate, therefore, ought to be regarded as the sole ultimate standards of what was just and unjust, of what was right and wrong.
                  It was the avowed intention of Mr. Hobbs, by propagating these notions, to subject the consciences of men immediately to the civil, 
                        •
                     nd not to the ecclesiastical powers, whose 
                        •
                     urbulence and ambition, he had been taught, by the example of his own times, to regard 
                        •
                     s the principal source of the disorders of 
                        •
                     ociety. His doctrine, upon this account, was peculiarly offensive to Theologians, who 
                        •
                     ccordingly did not fail to vent their indigna-
                     
                        •
                     ion against him with great asperity and 
                        •
                     itterness. It was likewise offensive to all 
                        •
                     ound moralists, as it supposed that there was 
                        •
                     o natural distinction between right and wrong, that these were mutable and change-
                     
                        •
                     ble and depended upon the meer arbitrary will of the civil magistrate. This account 
                        •
                     f things, therefore, was attacked from all 
                        •
                     uarters and by all sorts of weapons, by sober 
                        •
                     eason as well as by furious declamation.
                  
                     
In order to confute so odious a doctrine it was necessary to prove, that antecedent to all law or positive institution, the mind was na-turally indowed with a faculty by which it distinguished in certain actions and affections the qualities of right, laudable and virtuous, and in others those of wrong, blameable and vitious.
                  Law, it was justly observed by Dr. Cud-worth Immutable morality. l. 1., could not be the original source of those distinctions; since upon the supposi-tion of such a law, it must either be right to obey it, and wrong to disobey it, or indiffe-rent whether we obeyed it, or disobeyed it. That law which it was indifferent whether we obeyed or disobeyed, could not, it was evident, be the source of those distinctions; neither could that which it was right to obey and wrong to disobey, since even this 
                        
                      supposed the antecedent notions or ideas of right and wrong, and that obedience to the law was conformable to the idea of right, and disobedience to that of wrong.
                  Since the mind, therefore, had a notion 
                        
                      those distinctions antecedent to all law, 
                        
                      seemed necessarily to follow, that it deriv
                        ••
                     
                     

this notion from reason, which pointed out the difference between right and wrong, in the same manner in which it did that between truth and falsehood: and this conclusion, which tho' true in some respects, is rather hasty in others, was more easily received at a time when the abstract science of human nature was but in its infancy, and before the distinct offices and powers of the different fa-culties of the human mind had been carefully examined and distinguished from one another. When this controversy with Mr. Hobbs was carried on with the greatest warmth and keenness, no other faculty had been thought of from which any such ideas could possibly 
                        •
                     e supposed to arise. It became at this time, therefore, the popular doctrine, that the essence of virtue and vice did not consist in the conformity or disagreement of human actions with the law of a superior, but in 
                        •
                     heir conformity or disagreement with reason, which was thus considered as the original 
                        •
                     ource and principle of approbation and dis-
                     
                        •
                     pprobation.
                  That virtue consists in conformity to rea-son is true in some respects, and this faculty may very justly be considered, as in some 
                        •
                     ense, the source and principle of approbation

and disapprobation, and of all solid judgments concerning right and wrong. It is by reason that we discover those general rules of justice by which we ought to regulate our actions: and it is by the same faculty that we form those more vague and indeterminate ideas of what is prudent, of what is decent, of what is generous or noble, which we carry con-stantly about with us, and according to which we endeavour, as well as we can, to model the tenor of our conduct. The general maxims of morality are formed, like all other general maxims, from experience and induc-tion. We observe in a great variety of par-ticular cases what pleases or displeases our moral faculties, what these approve or disap-prove of, and, by induction from this expe-rience, we establish those general rules. But induction is always regarded as one of the operations of reason. From reason, therefore, we are very properly said to derive all those general maxims and ideas. It is by these, however, that we regulate the greater part of our moral judgments, which would be extremely uncertain and precarious if they depended altogether upon what is liable to so many variations as immediate sentiment and feeling, which the different states of health

and humour are capable of altering so essen-tially. As our most solid judgments, there-fore, with regard to right and wrong are re-gulated by maxims and ideas derived from an induction of reason, virtue may very properly be said to consist in a conformity to reason, and so far this faculty may be considered as the source and principle of approbation and disapprobation.
                  But tho' reason is undoubtedly the source of the general rules of morality, and of all the moral judgments which we form by means of them; it is altogether absurd and unintelli-gible to suppose that the first perceptions of right and wrong can be derived from reason, even in those particular cases upon the expe-rience of which the general rules are formed. These first perceptions, as well as all other experiments upon which any general rules are founded, cannot be the object of reason, but of immediate sense and feeling. It is by find-ing in a vast variety of instances that one tenor of conduct constantly pleases in a cer-tain manner, and that another as constantly displeases the mind, that we form the general rules of morality. But reason cannot render any particular object either agreeable or dis-agreeable to the mind for its own sake.

Reason may show that this object is the means of obtaining some other which is naturally either pleasing or displeasing, and in this man-ner may render it either agreeable or disagree-able for the sake of something else. But no-thing can be agreeable or disagreeable for its own sake which is not rendered such by im-mediate sense and feeling. If virtue, there-fore, in every particular instance, necessarily pleases for its own sake, and if vice as cer-tainly displeases the mind, it cannot be reason, but immediate sense and feeling, which in this manner, reconciles us to the one, and alienates us from the other.
                  Pleasure and pain are the great objects of desire and aversion: but these are distinguish-ed not by reason but by immediate sense and feeling. If virtue, therefore, is desireable for its own sake, and if vice is, in the same man-ner the object of aversion, it cannot be rea-son which originally distinguishes those diffe-rent qualities, but immediate sense and feel-ing.
                  As reason, however, in a certain sense, may justly be considered as the principle of approbation and disapprobation, these senti-ments were thro' inattention, long regarded as originally flowing from the operations of

this faculty. Dr. Hutcheson had the merit of being the first who distinguished with any degree of precision in what respect all moral distinctions may be said to arise from reason, and in what respect they are founded upon immediate sense and feeling. In his illustra-tions upon the moral sense he has explained this so fully, and, in my opinion, so unan-swerably that, if any controversy is still kept up about this subject, I can impute it to no-thing, but either to inattention to what that gentleman has written, or to a superstitious attachment for certain forms of expression, a weakness not very uncommon among the 
                        •
                     earned, especially in subjects so deeply inter-esting as the present, in which a man of virtue is often loath to abandon, even the propriety of a single phrase which he has been accus-tomed to.
               
               
                  

                  CHAP. III. Of those systems which make sentiment the principle of approbation.
                  THOSE systems which make sentiment the principle of approbation may be divided into two different classes.
                  I. According to some the principle of ap-probation is founded upon a sentiment of a peculiar nature, upon a particular power of perception exerted by the mind at the view of certain actions or affections; some of which affecting this faculty in an agreeable and others in a disagreeable manner, the first are stampt with the characters of right, laudable, and virtuous; the last with those of wrong, blameable and vitious. This sentiment be-ing of a peculiar nature distinct from every other, and the effect of a particular power of perception, they give it a particular name, and call it a moral sense.
                  II. According to others, in order to ac-count for the principle of approbation, there is no occasion for supposing any new power of perception which had never been heard of
CHAP. IV. Of the amiable and respectable virtues page 41
                     
                  
                  SECT. III. Of the degrees of the different passions which are consistent with propriety 49

                        CHAP. I. Of the passions which take their origin from the body 51
                        CHAP. II. Of those passions which take their origin from a particular turn or habit of the imagina-tion 60
                        CHAP. III. Of the unsocial passions 67
                        CHAP. IV. Of the social passions 80
                     
                  
                  SECT. IV. Of the effects of prosperity and adversity upon the judgment of mankind with regard to the propriety of action; and why it is more easy to obtain their approbation in the one state than in the other 93

                        

eyes, so his sympathy makes him look at it, in some measure, with theirs, especially when in their presence and acting under their observation: and as the reflected pas-sion, which he thus conceives, is much weaker than the original one, it necessa-rily abates the violence of what he felt be-fore he came into their presence, before he began to recollect in what manner they would be affected by it, and to view his situation in this candid and impartial light.
                  The mind, therefore, is rarely so disturb-ed, but that the company of a friend will restore it to some degree of tranquillity and sedateness. The breast is, in some measure, calmed and composed the moment we come into his presence. We are immediately put in mind of the light in which he will view our situation, and we begin to view it ourselves in the same light; for the effect of sympathy is instantaneous. We expect less sympathy from a common acquaintance than from a friend: we cannot open to the former all those little circumstances which we can unfold to the latter: we assume, therefore, more tranquillity before him, and endeavour to fix our thoughts upon those

before: nature, they imagine, acts here, as in all other cases, with the strictest oeconomy, and produces a multitude of effects from one and the same cause; and sympathy, a power which has always been taken notice of, and with which the mind is manifestly endowed, is, they think, sufficient to account for all the effects ascribed to this peculiar faculty.
                  I. Dr. Hutcheson Enquiry concerning virtue. had been at great pains to prove that the principle of approbation was not founded on self-love. He had de-monstrated too that it could not arise from any operation of reason. Nothing remained, 
                        •
                     he thought, but to suppose it a faculty of a peculiar kind, with which nature had endow-ed the human mind, in order to produce this one particular and important effect. When self-love and reason were both excluded, it did not occur to him that there was any other known faculty of the mind which could in any respect answer this purpose.
                  This new power of perception he called a moral sense, and supposed it to be somewhat analogous to the external senses. As the bodies around us by affecting these in a cer-
                     
                        •
                     ain manner appear to possess the different qualities of sound, taste, odour, colour; so

the various affections of the human mind by touching this particular faculty in a certain manner, appear to possess the different qua-lities of amiable and odious, of virtuous and vitious, of right and wrong.
                  The various senses or powers of percep-tion Treatise of the passions., from which the human mind derives all its simple ideas, were, according to this system, of two different kinds, of which the one were called the direct or antecedent, the other the reflex or consequent senses. The direct senses were those faculties from which the mind derived the perception of such species of things as did not presuppose the antecedent perception of any other. Thus sounds and colours were objects of the direct senses. To hear a sound or to see a colour does not presuppose the antecedent perception of any other quality or object. The reflex or consequent senses, on the other hand, were those faculties from which the mind de-rived the perception of such species of things as presupposed the antecedent perception of some other. Thus harmony and beauty were objects of the reflex senses. In order to per-ceive the harmony of a sound, or the beauty of a colour, we must first perceive the sound

or the colour. The moral sense was con-sidered as a faculty of this kind. That fa-culty, which Mr. Locke calls reflection, and from which he derived the simple ideas of the different passions and emotions of the human mind, was, according to Dr. Hutche-son, a direct internal sense. That faculty again by which we perceived the beauty or deformity, the virtue or vice of those dif-ferent passions and emotions was a reflex in-ternal sense.
                  Dr. Hutcheson endeavoured still further to support this doctrine, by shewing that it was agreeable to the analogy of nature, and that the mind was endowed with a variety of other reflex senses exactly similar to the moral sense, such as a sense of beauty and deform-ity in external objects; a public sense by which we sympathize with the happiness or misery of our fellow-creatures; a sense of shame and honour, and a sense of ridicule.
                  But notwithstanding all the pains which this ingenious philosopher has taken to prove that the principle of approbation is founded in a peculiar power of perception, somewhat analogous to the external sen-ses, there are some consequences, which he acknowledges to follow from this doctrine,

that will, perhaps, be regarded by many as a sufficient confutation of it. The qualities, he allows Illustrations upon the moral sense. Sect. 1. page 237, 
                           
                         seq. Third Edition., which belong to the objects of any sense cannot without the greatest absur-dity be ascribed to the sense itself. Who-ever thought of calling the sense of seeing black or white, the sense of hearing loud or low, or the sense of tasting sweet or bitter? and, according to him, it is equally absurd to call our moral faculties virtuous or vicious, morally good or evil. These qualities belong to the objects of those faculties, not to the faculties themselves. If any man, therefore, was so absurdly constituted as to approve of cruelty and injustice as the highest virtues, and to disapprove of equity and humanity as the most pitiful vices, such a constitution of mind might indeed be regarded as inconveni-ent both to the individual and to the society, and likewise as strange, surprising and un-natural in itself; but it could not, without the greatest absurdity, be denominated vi-cious or morally evil.
                  Yet surely if we saw any man shouting with admiration and applause at a barbarous and unmerited execution, which some insolent ty-rant

had ordered, we should not think we were guilty of any great absurdity in denominating 
                        •
                     his behaviour vicious and morally evil in the highest degree, tho' it expressed nothing but depraved moral faculties, or an absurd appro-bation of this horrid action, as of what was 
                        •
                     oble, magnanimous and great. Our heart, 
                        
                      imagine, at the sight of such a spectator, would forget for a while its sympathy with 
                        •
                     he sufferer, and feel nothing but horror and 
                        •
                     etestation, at the thought of so execrable a wretch. We should abominate him even more than the tyrant who might be goaded 
                        •
                     n by the strong passions of jealousy, fear and 
                        •
                     esentment, and upon that account be more 
                        •
                     xcusable. But the sentiments of the spec-
                     
                        •
                     ator would appear altogether without cause 
                        •
                     r motive, and therefore most perfectly and 
                        •
                     ompleatly detestable. There is no perver-
                     
                        ••
                     on of sentiment or affection which our heart would be more averse to enter into, or which 
                        
                      would reject with greater hatred and indig-
                     
                        •
                     ation than one of this kind, and so far from 
                        •
                     egarding such a constitution of mind as being 
                        •
                     eerly something strange or inconvenient, and 
                        •
                     ot in any respect vitious or morally evil, we

should rather consider it as the very last and most dreadful stage of moral depravity.
                  Correct moral sentiments, on the contrary, naturally appear in some degree laudable and morally good. The man whose censure and applause are upon all occasions suited with the greatest accuracy to the value or unworthiness of the object, seems to deserve a degree even of moral approbation. We admire the de-licate precision of his moral sentiments: they lead our own judgments, and upon account of their uncommon and surprizing justness, they even excite our wonder and applause. We cannot indeed be always sure that the conduct of such a person would be in any respect correspondent to the precision and accuracy of his judgments concerning the conduct of others. Virtue requires habit and resolution of mind, as well as delicacy of sentiment, and unfortunately the former qualities are some-times wanting, where the latter is in the great-est perfection. This disposition of mind, however, tho' it may sometimes be attended with imperfections is incompatible with any thing that is grosly criminal, and is the hap-piest foundation upon which the superstruc-ture of perfect virtue can be built. There are many men who mean very well and seri-ously

propose to do what they think their duty, who notwithstanding are disagreeable on ac-count of the coarseness of their moral senti-ments.
                  It may be said perhaps that tho' the prin-ciple of approbation is not founded upon any power of perception that is in any respect an-alogous to the external senses, it may still be founded upon a peculiar sentiment which an-swers this one particular purpose and no other. Approbation and disapprobation, it may be pretended, are certain feelings or emotions which arise in the mind upon the view of different characters and actions; and as re-sentment might be called a sense of injuries, or gratitude a sense of benefits, so these may very properly receive the name of a sense of right and wrong, or of a moral sense.
                  But this account of things, tho' it may not 
                        •
                     e liable to the same objections with the fore-going, is exposed to others which are equally 
                        •
                     nanswerable.
                  First of all, whatever variations any par-
                     
                        ••
                     cular emotion may undergo, it still preserves 
                        
                      general features which distinguish it to be 
                        
                      emotion of such a kind, and these general 
                        
                      are always more striking and remark-
                     
                        •
                     ble than any variation which it may undergo

in particular cases. Thus anger is an emo-tion of a particular kind: and accordingly its general features are always more distinguish-able than all the variations it undergoes in particular cases. Anger against a man, i
                        •
                     , no doubt, somewhat different from anger against a woman, and that again from anger against a child. In each of those three cases, the general passion of anger receives a diffe-rent modification from the particular charac-ter of its object, as may easily be observed by the attentive. But still the general fea-tures of the passion predominate in all these cases. To distinguish these, requires no nice observation: a very delicate attention, on the contrary, is necessary to discover their variati-ons: every body takes notice of the former▪ scarce any body observes the latter. If ap-probation and disapprobation, therefore, were, like gratitude, and resentment, emotions of a particular kind, distinct from every other, we should expect that in all the variations which either of them might undergo, it would 
                        
                      retain the general features which mark it 
                        
                      be an emotion of such a particular 
                        
                      clear, plain and easily distinguishable. 
                        
                      in fact it happens quite otherwise. If 
                        
                      attend to what we really feel when upon 
                        •••
                     ferent

occasions we either approve or disap-prove, we shall find that our emotion in one case is often totally different from that in an-other, and that no common features can pos-sibly be discovered between them. Thus the approbation with which we view a tender, delicate and humane sentiment, is quite dif-ferent from that with which we are struck by one that appears great, daring and mag-nanimous. Our approbation of both may upon different occasions be perfect and intire; 
                        •
                     ut we are softened by the one, and we are 
                        •
                     levated by the other, and there is no sort of 
                        •
                     esemblance between the emotions which 
                        •
                     hey excite in us. But, according to that 
                        •
                     ystem which I have been endeavouring to 
                        •
                     stablish, this must necessarily be the case. 
                        •
                     s the emotions of the person whom we ap-
                     
                        •
                     rove of are quite opposite to one another 
                        •
                     nd as our approbation arises from sympathy 
                        •
                     ith those opposite emotions, what we feel 
                        •
                     pon the one occasion, can have no sort of 
                        ••
                     semblance to what we feel upon the other. 
                        •
                     ut this could not happen if approbation 
                        •
                     onsisted in a peculiar emotion which had no-
                     
                        ••
                     ing in common with the sentiments we ap-
                     
                        ••
                     oved of, but which arose at the view of those 
                        ••
                     ntiments, like any other passion at the view

of its proper object. The same thing holds true with regard to disapprobation. Our hor-ror for cruelty has no sort of resemblance to our contempt for mean-spiritedness. It is quite a different species of discord which we feel at the view of those two different vices, between our own minds and those of the person whose sentiments and behaviour we consider.
                  Secondly, I have already observed, that not only the different passions or affections of the human mind that are approved or disap-proved of, appear morally good or evil, but that proper and improper approbation appear to our natural sentiments to be stampt with the same characters. I would ask, therefore, how it is, that, according to this system, we approve or disapprove of proper or improper approbation. To this question, I imagine there is but one reasonable answer, which can possibly be given. It must be said th
                        ••
                      when the approbation with which our neigh-bour regards the conduct of a third 
                        
                      coincides with our own, we approve of his approbation and consider it as in some me
                        •
                     
                     -sure morally good, and that on the contra
                        ••
                      when it does not coincide with our own 
                        •••
                     
                     -timents, we disapprove of it, and consider

general outlines of our situation which he is willing to consider. We expect still less sympathy from an assembly of strangers, and we assume, therefore, still more tran-quillity before them, and always endeavour to bring down our passion to that pitch, which the particular company we are in may be expected to go along with. Nor is this merely an assumed appearance: for if we are at all masters of ourselves, the pre-sence of a mere acquaintance will really compose us, still more than that of a friend; and that of an assembly of strangers still more than that of a mere acquaintance.
                  Society and conversation, therefore, are the most powerful remedies for restoring the mind to its tranquillity, if, at any time, it has unfortunately lost it; as well as the best preservatives of that equal and happy temper, which is so necessary to self-satis-faction and enjoyment. Men of retirement and speculation, who are apt to sit brooding at home over either grief or resentment, though they may often have more humani-ty, more generosity, and a nicer sense of honour, yet seldom possess that equality of temper which is so common among men of the world.
               
               
                  

as in some measure morally evil. It must be allowed, therefore, that, at least in this one case, the coincidence or opposition of senti-ments between the observer and the person observed, constitutes moral approbation or disapprobation. And if it does so in this one case, I would ask, why not in every other? or to what purpose imagine a new power of perception in order to account for those senti-ments?
                  Against every account of the principle of approbation which makes it depend upon a peculiar sentiment distinct from every other, I would object; that it is strange that this sen-timent, which providence undoubtedly in-tended to be the governing principle of hu-man nature, should hitherto have been so little taken notice of, as not to have got a name in any language. The word moral sense is of very late formation, and cannot 
                        •
                     et be considered as making part of the En-glish tongue. The word approbation has but within these few years been appropriated to 
                        •
                     enote peculiarly any thing of this kind. In 
                        •
                     ropriety of language we approve of what-
                     
                        •
                     ver is entirely to our satisfaction, of the form 
                        •
                     f a building, of the contrivance of a ma-
                     
                        •
                     hine, of the flavour of a dish of meat. The

word conscience does not immediately denote any moral faculty by which we approve or disapprove. Conscience supposes, indeed, the existence of some such faculty, and properly signifies our consciousness of having acted agreeably or contrary to its directions. When love, hatred, joy, sorrow, gratitude, resent-ment, with so many other passions which are all supposed to be the subjects of this prin-ciple, have made themselves considerable enough to get titles to know them by, is it not surprizing that the sovereign of them all should hitherto have been so little heeded, that, a few philosophers excepted, no body has yet thought it worth while to bestow a name upon it.
                  When we approve of any character or ac-tion, the sentiments which we feel, are, ac-cording to the foregoing system, derived from four sources, which are in some respects dif-ferent from one another. First, we sympa-thize with the motives of the agent; second-ly, we enter into the gratitude of those 
                        
                      receive the benefit of his actions; thirdly, we observe that his conduct has been agree-able to the general rules by which those 
                        
                      sympathies generally act; and, last of 
                        
                      when we consider such actions as making▪
                     

part of a system of behaviour which tends to promote the happiness either of the individual or of the society, they appear to derive a beauty from this utility, not unlike that which we ascribe to any well contrived machine. After deducting, in any one particular case, all that must be acknowledged to proceed from some one or other of these four principles, I should be glad to know what remains, and I shall freely allow this overplus to be ascribed to a moral sense, or to any other peculiar fa-culty, provided any body will ascertain pre-cisely what this overplus is. It might be ex-pected, perhaps, that if there was any such peculiar principle, such as this moral sense is supposed to be, we should feel it, in some par-ticular cases, separated and detached from every other, as we often feel joy, sorrow, hope and fear, pure and unmixed with any other emotion. This however, I imagine, cannot even be pretended. I have never heard any instance alledged in which this principle could be said to exert itself alone and 
                        •
                     nmixed with sympathy or antipathy, with gratitude or resentment, with the perception 
                        •
                     f the agreement or disagreement of any ac-
                     
                        •
                     ion to an established rule, or last of all with

that general taste for beauty and order which is excited by inanimated as well as by animat-ed objects.
                  II. There is another system which attempts to account for the origin of our moral senti-ments from sympathy, distinct from that which I have been endeavouring to establish. It is that which places virtue in utility, and accounts for the pleasure with which the spec-tator surveys the utility of any quality from sympathy with the happiness of those who are affected by it. This sympathy is different both from that by which we enter into the motives of the agent, and from that by which we go along with the gratitude of the per-sons who are benefited by his actions. It is the same principle with that by which we approve of a well contrived machine. But no machine can be the object of either of those two last mentioned sympathies. I have already, in the fourth part of this discourse, given some account of this system.
               
            
            
               

               SECTION IV. Of the manner in which different authors have treated of the practical rules of morality.
               IT was observed in the third part of this discourse, that the rules of justice are 
                     •
                  he only rules of morality which are precise 
                     •
                  nd accurate; that those of all the other vir-
                  
                     •
                  ues are loose, vague, and indeterminate; 
                     •
                  hat the first may be compared to the rules 
                     •
                  f grammar; the others to those which 
                     •
                  ritics lay down for the attainment of what 
                     
                   sublime and elegant in composition, and which present us rather with a general idea 
                     •
                  f the perfection we ought to aim at than 
                     •
                  fford us any certain and infallible directions 
                     
                   acquiring it.
               As the different rules of morality admit 
                     •
                  uch different degrees of accuracy, those 
                     •
                  uthors who have endeavoured to collect and 
                     •
                  igest them into systems have done it in two 
                     •
                  ifferent manners, and one set has followed 
                     ••
                  rough the whole that loose method to which 
                     ••
                  ey were naturally directed by the considera-tion

of one species of virtues; while another has as universally endeavoured to introduce into their precepts that sort of accuracy of which only some of them are susceptible. The first have wrote like critics, the second like gram-marians.
               I. The first, among whom we may count all the antient moralists, have contented them-selves with describing in a general manner the different vices and virtues, and with point-ing out the deformity and misery of the one disposition as well as the propriety and hap-piness of the other, but have not affected to lay down many precise rules that are to hold good unexceptionably in all particular cases. They have only endeavoured to ascertain, as far as language is capable of ascertaining, first, wherein consists the sentiment of the heart, upon which each particular virtue is found-ed, what sort of internal feeling or emotion it is which constitutes the essence of friend-ship, of humanity, of generosity, of justice, of magnanimity, and of all the other virtues as well as of the vices which are opposed to them: and, secondly, What is the general way of acting, the ordinary tone and tenor of conduct to which each of those sentiments would direct us, or how it is that a friendly,

a generous, a brave, a just, and a humane man, would, upon ordinary occasions, chuse to act.
               To characterize the sentiment of the heart, upon which each particular virtue is found-ed, tho' it requires both a delicate and an ac-curate pencil, is a task, however, which may be executed with some degree of exactness. It is impossible, indeed, to express all the variations which each sentiment either does or ought to undergo, according to every possible variation of circumstances. They are endless, and language wants names to mark them by. The sentiment of friend-ship, for example, which we feel for an old man is different from that which we feel for a young: that which we entertain for an austere man different from that which we feel for one of softer and gentler manners: and that again from what we feel for one of gay vivacity and spirit. The friendship which we conceive for a man is different from that with which a woman affects us, even where there is no mixture of any grosser passion. Who could enumerate and ascertain these and all the other infinite varieties which this sentiment is capable of undergoing? But still the general sentiment of friendship and fa-miliar

attachment that is common to them all, may be ascertained with a sufficient de-gree of accuracy. The picture that is drawn of it, tho' it will always be in many respects incompleat, may, however, have such a re-semblance as to make us know the original when we meet with it, and even distinguish it from other sentiments to which it has a considerable resemblance, such as good-will, respect, esteem, admiration.
               To describe, in a general manner, what is the ordinary way of acting to which each virtue would prompt us, is still more easy. It is indeed scarce possible to describe the in-ternal sentiment or emotion upon which it is founded without doing something of this kind. It is impossible by language to express, if I may say so, the invisible features of all the dif-ferent modifications of passion as they show themselves within. There is no other way of marking and distinguishing them from one another, but by describing the effects which they produce without, the alterations which they occasion in the countenance, in the air and external behaviour, the resolutions they suggest, the actions they prompt to. It is thus that Cicero, in the first book of his offices, endeavours to direct us to the practice of the four cardinal virtues, and that Ari-stotle

in the practical parts of his ethics, points out to us the different habits by which he would have us regulate our behaviour, such as liberality, magnificence, magnanimity, and even jocularity and good humour, qualities, which that indulgent philosopher has thought worthy of a place in the catalogue of the virtues, tho' the lightness of that approbation which we naturally bestow upon them, should not seem to entitle them to so venerable a name.
               Such works present us with agreeable and lively pictures of manners. By the vivacity of their descriptions they inflame our natural love of virtue, and increase our abhorrence of vice: by the justness as well as delicacy of their observations they may often help both to correct and to ascertain our natural sentiments with regard to the propriety of conduct, and suggesting many nice and de-licate attentions, form us to a more exact justness of behaviour, than what, without such instruction, we should have been apt to think of. In treating of the rules of mo-rality, in this manner, consists the science which is properly called ethics, a science, which tho' like criticism, it does not admit of the most accurate precision, is, however, both highly useful and agreeable. It is of

all others the most susceptible of the embel-lishments of eloquence, and by means of them of bestowing, if that be possible, a new importance upon the smallest rules of duty. Its precepts when thus dressed and adorned are capable of producing upon the flexibility of youth the noblest and most last-ing impressions, and as they fall in with the natural magnanimity of that generous age, they are able to inspire, for a time at least, the most heroic resolutions, and thus tend both to establish and confirm the best and most useful habits of which the mind of man is susceptible. Whatever precept and exhortation can do to animate us to the prac-tice of virtue, is done by this science de-livered in this manner.
               II. The second set of moralists, among whom we may count all the casuists of the middle and latter ages of the christian church as well as all those who in this and in the preceeding century have treated of what is called natural jurisprudence, do not content themselves with characterizing in this gene-ral manner that tenor of conduct which they would recommend to us, but endeavour to lay down exact and precise rules for the di-rection of every circumstance of our beha-viour. As justice is the only virtue with re-gard

                  CHAP. IV. Of the amiable and respectable virtues.
                  UPON these two different efforts, upon that of the spectator to enter into the sentiments of the person principally concerned, and upon that of the person principally concerned, to bring down his emotions to what the spectator can go along with, are founded two different sets of virtues. The soft, the gentle and the ami-able virtues, the virtues of candid conde-scension and indulgent humanity, are founded upon the one: the great, the awful and respectable, the virtues of self-denial, of self-government, of that com-mand of the passions which subjects all the movements of our nature to what our own dignity and honour, and the propriety of our own conduct require, take their origin from the other.
                  How amiable does he appear to be, whose sympathetic heart seems to re-echo all the sentiments of those with whom he converses, who grieves for their calamities, who re-sents their injuries, and who rejoices at

to which such exact rules can properly be given; it is this virtue, that has chiefly fallen under the consideration of those two different sets of writers. They treat of it, however, in a very different manner.
               Those who write upon the principles of Jurisprudence consider only what the person to whom the obligation is due ought to think himself entitled to exact by force, what every impartial spectator would approve of him for exacting, or what a judge or arbiter to whom he had submitted his case, and who had un-dertaken to do him justice, ought to oblige the other person to suffer or to perform. The casuists on the other hand do not so much examine what it is that might properly be exacted by force, as what it is that the per-son who owes the obligation ought to think himself bound to perform from the most sa-cred and scrupulous regard to the general rules of justice, and from the most conscien-tious dread, either of wronging his neighbour, or of violating the integrity of his own cha-racter. It is the end of jurisprudence to pre-scribe rules for the decisions of judges and arbiters. It is the end of casuistry to prescribe rules for the conduct of a good man. By observing all the rules of jurisprudence, sup-posing

them ever so perfect, we should deserve nothing but to be free from external punish-ment. By observing those of casuistry, sup-posing them such as they ought to be, we should be entitled to considerable praise by the exact and scrupulous delicacy of our be-haviour.
               It may frequently happen that a good man ought to think himself bound, from a sacred and conscientious regard to the general rules of justice, to perform many things which it would be the highest injustice to extort from him, or for any judge or arbiter to impose up-on him by force. To give a trite example; a highway-man, by the fear of death, ob-liges a traveller to promise him a certain sum of money. Whether such a promise, extort-ed in this manner by unjust force, ought to be regarded as obligatory, is a question that has been very much debated.
               If we consider it meerly as a question of jurisprudence, the decision can admit of no doubt. It would be absurd to suppose that the highway-man can be entitled to use force to constrain the other to perform. To ex-tort the promise was a crime that deserved the highest punishment, and to extort the per-formance would only be adding a new crime

to the former. He can complain of no inju-ry who has only been deceived by the person by whom he might justly have been killed. To suppose that a judge ought to enforce the obligation of such promises, or that the ma-gistrate ought to allow them to sustain action at law, would be the most ridiculous of all ab-surdities. If we consider this question, there-fore, as a question of jurisprudence we can be at no loss about the decision.
               But if we consider it as a question of casu-istry, it will not be so easily determined. Whether a good man from a conscientious regard to that most sacred rule of justice, which commands the observance of all seri-ous promises, would not think himself bound to perform, is at least much more doubtful. That no regard is due to the disappointment of the wretch who brings him into this situa-tion, that no injury is done to the robber, and consequently that nothing can be extorted by force, will admit of no sort of dispute. But whether some regard is not, in this case, due to his own dignity and honour, to the inviolable sacredness of that part of his cha-racter which makes him reverence the law of truth and abhor every thing that ap-proaches to treachery and falsehood, may,

perhaps, more reasonably be made a question. The casuists accordingly are greatly divided about it. One party, with whom we may count Cicero among the antients, among the moderns, Puffendorf, Barbeyrac his commen-tator, and above all the late Dr. Hutcheson, one who in most cases was by no means a loose casuist, determine, without any hesita-tion, that no sort of regard is due to any such promise, and that to think otherwise is meer weakness and superstition. Another party, among whom we may reckon St. Augustine, la Placette. some of the antient fathers of the church, as well as some very eminent modern casuists, have been of another opinion, and have judged all such promises obligatory.
               If we consider the matter according to the common sentiments of mankind, we shall find that some regard would be thought due even to a promise of this kind; but that it is impossible to determine how much, by any general rule that will apply to all cases with-out exception. The man who was quite frank and easy in making promises of this kind, and who violated them with as little ceremony, we should not chuse for our friend and com-panion.

A gentleman who should promise a highway-man five pounds and not perform would incur some blame. If the sum pro-mised, however, was very great, it might be more doubtful, what was proper to be done. If it was such, for example, that the payment of it would entirely ruin the family of the promiser, if it was so great as to be sufficient for promoting the most useful pur-poses, it would appear in some measure cri-minal, at least extremely improper, to throw it, for the sake of a punctilio, into such worth-less hands. The man who should beggar himself, or who should throw away a hun-dred thousand pounds, tho' he could af-ford that vast sum, for the sake of observ-ing such a parole with a thief, would appear to the common sense of mankind absurd and extravagant in the highest degree. Such pro-fusion would seem inconsistent with his duty, with what he owed both to himself and others, and what, therefore, regard to a pro-mise extorted in this manner, could by no means authorize. To fix, however, by any precise rule, what degree of regard ought to be paid to it, or what might be the greatest sum which could be due from it, is evident-ly impossible. This would vary according to

the characters of the persons, according to their circumstances, according to the solem-nity of the promise, and even according to the incidents of the rencounter: and if the promiser had been treated with a great deal of that sort of gallantry, which is sometimes to be met with in persons of the most aban-doned characters, more would seem due than upon other occasions. It may be said in ge-neral, that exact propriety requires the obser-vance of all such promises, wherever it is not inconsistent with some other duties that are more sacred; such as regard to the public interest, to those whom gratitude, whom natural affection, or whom the laws of proper beneficence should prompt us to provide for. But, as was formerly taken notice of, we have no precise rules to determine what ex-ternal actions are due from a regard to such motives, nor, consequently, when it is that those virtues are inconsistent with the obser-vance of such promises.
               It is to be observed, however, that when-ever such promises are violated, tho' for the most necessary reasons, it is always with some degree of dishonour to the person who made them. After they are made, we may be con-vinced of the impropriety of observing them.

But still there is some fault in having made them. It is at least a departure from the highest and noblest maxims of magnanimity and ho-nour. A brave man ought to die, rather than make a promise which he can neither keep without folly nor violate without Ignominy. For some degree of ignominy always attends a situation of this kind. Treachery and false-hood, are vices so dangerous, so dreadful, and at the same time, such as may so easily, and, upon many occasions, so safely be indulg-ed, that we are more jealous of them than of almost any other. Our imagination there-fore attaches the idea of shame to all violati-ons of faith, in every circumstance and in every situation. They resemble, in this respect, the violations of chastity in the fair sex, a virtue of which, for the like reasons, we are excessively jealous; and our sentiments are not more delicate with regard to the one, than with regard to the other. Breach of chasti-ty dishonours irretriveably. No circumstances, no sollicitation can excuse it; no sorrow, no repentance atone for it. We are so nice in this respect that even a rape dishonours, and the innocence of the mind cannot, in our imagination, wash out the pollution of the body. It is the same case with the violation

of faith, when it has been solemnly pledged, even to the most worthless of mankind. Fi-delity is so necessary a virtue, that we appre-hend it in general to be due even to those to whom nothing else is due, and whom we think it lawful to kill and destroy. It is to no purpose that the person who has been guilty of the breach of it, urges that he pro-mised in order to save his life, and that he broke his promise because it was inconsistent with some other respectable duty to keep it. These circumstances may alleviate, but can-not entirely wipe out his dishonour. He ap-pears to have been guilty of an action with which, in the imaginations of men, some de-gree of shame is inseparably connected. He has broke a promise which he had solemnly averred he would maintain; and his charac-ter, if not irretrievably stained and polluted, has at least a ridicule affixed to it, which it will be very difficult entirely to efface; and no man, I imagine, who had gone thro' an ad-venture of this kind, would be fond of telling the story.
               This instance may serve to show wherein consists the difference between casuistry, and jurisprudence, even when both of them con-sider

the obligations of the general rules of justice.
               But tho' this difference be real and essenti-al, tho' those two sciences propose quite dif-ferent ends, the sameness of the subject has made such a similarity between them, that the greater part of authors whose professed design was to treat of jurisprudence, have determined the different questions they ex-amine, sometimes according to the principles of that science, and sometimes according to those of casuistry, without distinguishing and perhaps without being themselves aware when they did the one, and when the other.
               The doctrine of the casuists, however, is by no means confined to the consideration of what a conscientious regard to the general rules of justice, would demand of us. It embraces many other parts of christian and moral duty. What seems principally to have given occasion to the cultivation of this species of science was the custom of auricular con-fession, introduced by the Roman Catholic su-perstition, in times of barbarism and igno-rance. By that institution, the most secret actions, and even the thoughts of every per-son, which could be suspected of receeding in the smallest degree from the rules of christi-an

purity were to be revealed to the confes-sor. The confessor informed his penitents whether, and in what respect they had vio-lated their duty, and what pennance it be-hooved them to undergo, before he could ab-solve them in the name of the offended deity.
               The consciousness, or even the suspicion of having done wrong, is a load upon every mind, and is accompanied with anxiety and terror in all those who are not hardened by long habits of iniquity. Men, in this, as in all other distresses, are naturally eager to dis-burden themselves of the oppression which they feel upon their thoughts, by unbosom-ing the agony of their mind to some person whose secrecy and discretion they can confide in. The shame, which they suffer from this acknowledgment, is fully compensated by that alleviation of their uneasiness which the sympathy of their confident seldom fails to occasion. It relieves them to find that they are not altogether unworthy of regard, and that however their past conduct may be cen-sured, their present disposition is at least ap-proved of, and is perhaps sufficient to com-pensate the other, at least to maintain them in some degree of esteem with their friend. A numerous and artful clergy had, in those

their good fortune! When we bring home to ourselves the situation of his companions, we enter into their gratitude, and feel what consolation they must derive from the ten-der sympathy of so affectionate a friend. And for a contrary reason, how disagree-able does he appear to be, whose hard and obdurate heart feels for himself only, but is altogether insensible to the happiness or misery of others! We enter, in this case too, into the pain which his presence must give to every mortal with whom he con-verses, to those especially with whom we are most apt to sympathize, the unfortu-nate and the injured.
                  On the other hand, what noble pro-priety and grace do we feel in the con-duct of those who, in their own case, exert that recollection and self-command which constitute the dignity of every passion, and which bring it down to what others can enter into. We are disgusted with that clamorous grief, which, without any de-licacy, calls upon our compassion with sighs and tears and importunate lamenta-tions. But we reverence that reserved, that silent and majestic sorrow, which dis-covers itself only in the swelling of the eyes,


times of superstition, insinuated themselves into the confidence of almost every private family, They possessed all the little learning which the times could afford, and their man-ners, tho' in many respects rude and disor-derly, were polished and regular compared with those of the age they lived in. They were regarded, therefore, not only as the great directors of all religious, but of all mo-ral duties. Their familiarity gave reputation to whoever was so happy as to possess it, and every mark of their disapprobation stamped the deepest ignominy upon all who had the misfortune to fall under it. Being consi-dered as the great judges of right and wrong, they were naturally consulted about all scru-ples that occurred, and it was reputable for any person to have it known that he made those holy men the confidents of all such secrets, and took no important or delicate step in his conduct without their advice and approbation. It was not difficult for the clergy, therefore, to get it established as a ge-neral rule, that they should be entrusted with what it had already become fashionable to entrust them, and with what they generally would have been entrusted, tho' no such rule

had been established. To qualify themselves for confessors became thus a necessary part of the study of churchmen and divines, and they were thence led to collect what are called cases of conscience, nice and delicate situations in which it is hard to determine whereabouts the propriety of conduct may lie. Such works, they imagined, might be of use both to the directors of consciences and to those who were to be directed; and hence the origin of books of casuistry.
               The moral duties which fell under the consideration of the casuists were chiefly those which can, in some measure at least, be circumscribed within general rules, and of which the violation is naturally attended with some degree of remorse and some dread of suffering punishment. The design of that institution which gave occasion to their works, was to appease those terrors of con-science which attend upon the infringement of such duties. But it is not every virtue of which the defect is accompanied with any very severe compunctions of this kind, and no man applies to his confessor for absolu-tion, because he did not perform the most generous, the most friendly or the most

magnanimous action which, in his circum-stances, it was possible to perform. In fai-lures of this kind, the rule that is violated is commonly not very determinate, and is ge-nerally of such a nature too that tho' the observance of it might entitle to honour and reward, the violation seems to expose to no positive blame, censure or punishment. The exercise of such virtues the casuists seem to have regarded as a sort of works of superero-gation, which could not be very strictly ex-acted, and which it was, therefore, unneces-sary for them to treat of.
               The breaches of moral duty, therefore, which came before the tribunal of the con-fessor, and upon that account fell under the cognizance of the casuists, were chiefly of three different kinds.
               First and principally breaches of the rules of justice. The rules here are all express and positive, and the violation of them is na-turally attended with the consciousness of de-serving, and the dread of suffering, punish-ment both from God and man.
               Secondly, breaches of the rules of chastity. These in all grosser instances are real breaches of the rules of justice, and no person can be

guilty of them without doing the most un-pardonable injury to some other. In smaller instances, when they amount only to a vio-lation of those exact decorums which ought to be observed in the conversation of the two sexes, they cannot indeed justly be con-sidered as violations of the rules of justice. They are generally, however, violations of a pretty plain rule, and, at least in one of the sexes, tend to bring ignominy upon the per-son who has been guilty of them, and con-sequently to be attended in the scrupulous with some degree of shame and contrition of mind.
               Thirdly, breaches of the rules of veracity. The violation of truth, it is to be observed, is not always a breach of justice, tho' it is so upon many occasions, and consequently can not always expose to any external punish-ment. The vice of common lying, tho' a most miserable meanness, may frequently do hurt to no person, and in this case no claim of vengeance or satisfaction can be due either to the persons imposed upon or to others. But though the violation of truth is not al-ways a breach of justice, it is always a breach of a very plain rule, and what naturally tends

to cover with shame the person who has been guilty of it. The great pleasure of conver-sation, and indeed of society, arises from a certain correspondence of sentiments and opi-nions, from a certain harmony of minds, which like so many musical instruments co-incide and keep time with one another. But this most delightful harmony cannot be ob-tained unless there is a free communication of sentiments and opinions. We all desire, upon this account, to feel how each other is affected, to penetrate into each others bosoms and to observe the sentiments and affections which really subsist there. The man who indulges us in this natural passion, who in-vites us into his heart, who, as it were, sets open the gates of his breast to us, seems to exercise a species of hospitality more delight-ful than any other. No man, who is in or-dinary good temper, can fail of pleasing if he has the courage to utter his real sentiments as he feels them, and because he feels them. It is this unreserved sincerity which renders even the prattle of a child agreeable. How weak and imperfect soever the views of the open-hearted, we take pleasure to enter into them, and endeavour, as much as we can,

to bring down our own understanding, to the level of their capacities, and to regard every subject in the particular light in which they appear to have considered it. This passion to discover the real sentiments of others is naturally so strong, that it often degenerates into a troublesome and impertinent curiosity to pry into those secrets of our neighbours which they have very justifiable reasons for concealing, and, upon many occasions, it re-quires prudence and a strong sense of pro-priety to govern this, as well as all the other passions of human nature, and to reduce it to that pitch which any impartial spectator can approve of. To disappoint this curiosity, however, when it is kept within proper bounds, and aims at nothing which there can be any just reason for concealing, is equally disagreeable in its turn. The man who eludes our most innocent questions, who gives no satisfaction to our most inoffensive inquiries, who plainly wraps himself up in impenetrable obscurity, seems, as it were, to build a wall about his breast. We run for-ward to get within it, with all the eagerness of harmless curiosity, and feel ourselves all at once pushed back with the rudest and most

offensive violence. If to conceal is so dis-agreeable, to attempt to deceive us is still more disgusting, even tho' we could possibly suffer nothing by the success of the fraud. If we see that our companion wants to im-pose upon us, if the sentiments and opinions which he utters appear evidently not to be his own, let them be ever so fine, we can derive no sort of entertainment from them; and if something of human nature did not now and then transpire through all the covers which falshood and affectation are capable of wraping around it, a puppet of wood would be altogether as pleasant a companion as a person who never spoke as he was affected. No man ever deceives, with regard to the most insignificant matters, who is not con-scious of doing something like an injury to those he converses with; and who does not inwardly blush and shrink back with shame and confusion even at the secret thought of a detection. Breach of veracity, therefore, be-ing always attended with some degree of re-morse and self-condemnation, naturally fell under the cognizance of the casuists.
               The chief subjects of the works of the casuists, therefore, were the conscientious

regard that is due to the rules of justice; how far we ought to respect the life and property of our neighbour; the duty of re-stitution; the laws of chastity and modesty, and wherein consisted what, in their lan-guage are called the sins of concupiscence: the rules of veracity and the obligation of oaths, promises and contracts of all kinds.
               It may be said in general of the works of the casuists that they attempted, to no purpose, to direct by precise Rules what it belongs to feeling and sentiment only to judge of. How is it possible to ascertain by rules the exact point at which, in every case, a delicate sense of justice begins to run into a frivolous and weak scrupulosity of consci-ence? When it is that secrecy and reserve begin to grow into dissimulation? How far an agreeable irony may be carried, and at what precise point it begins to degenerate into a detestable lie? What is the highest pitch of freedom and ease of behaviour which can be regarded as graceful and be-coming, and when it is that it first begins to run into a negligent and thoughtless licen-tiousness? With regard to all such matters, what would hold good in any one case

would scarce do so exactly in any other, and what constitutes the propriety and happiness of behaviour varies in every case with the smallest variety of situation. Books of ca-suistry, therefore, are generally as useless as they are commonly tiresome. They could be of little use to one who should consult them upon occasion, even supposing their de-cisions to be just; because, notwithstanding the multitude of cases collected in them, yet upon account of the still greater variety of possible circumstances, it is a chance, if among all those cases there be found one ex-actly parallel to that under consideration. One, who is really anxious to do his duty, must be very weak, if he can imagine that he has much occasion for them; and with regard to one who is negligent of it, the stile of those writings is not such as is likely to awaken him to more attention. None of them tend to animate us to what is generous and noble. None of them tend to soften us to what is gentle and humane. Many of them, on the contrary, tend rather to teach us to chicane with our own consciences, and by their vain subtilties serve to authorise in-numerable evasive refinements with regard

to the most essential articles of our duty. That frivolous accuracy which they at-tempted to introduce into subjects which do not admit of it, almost necessarily betrayed them into those dangerous errors, and at the same time rendered their works dry and dis-agree
                     •
                  ble, abounding in abstruse and meta-physical distinctions, but incapable of ex-citing in the heart any of those emotions which it is the principal use of books of morality to excite.
               The two useful parts of moral philosophy, therefore, are Ethics and Jurisprudence: casuistry ought to be rejected altogether, and the ancient moralists appear to have judged much better, who, in treating of the same subjects, did not affect any such nice exact-ness, but contented themselves with describ-ing in a general manner, what is the senti-ment upon which justice, modesty and vera-sity are founded, and what is the ordinary way of acting to which those virtues would commonly prompt us.
               Something, indeed, not unlike the doctrine of the casuists, seems to have been attempted by several philosophers. There is something of this kind in the third book of Cicero's of-fices,

in the quivering of the lips and cheeks, and in the distant, but affecting, coldness of the whole behaviour. It imposes the like silence upon us. We regard it with re-spectful attention, and watch with anxious concern over our whole behaviour, lest by any impropriety we should disturb that concerted tranquillity, which it requires so great an effort to support.
                  The insolence and brutality of anger, in the same manner, when we indulge its fury without check or restraint, is, of all objects, the most detestable. But we ad-mire that noble and generous resentment which governs its pursuit of the greatest injuries, not by the rage which they are apt to excite in the breast of the sufferer, but by the indignation which they natu-rally call forth in that of the impartial spec-tator; which allows no word, no gesture, to escape it beyond what this more equita-ble sentiment would dictate; which never, even in thought, attempts any greater ven-geance, nor desires to inflict any greater punishment, than what every indifferent person would rejoice to see executed.
                  And hence it is, that to feel much for others and little for ourselves, that to re-strain

where he endeavours like a casuist to give rules for our conduct in many nice cases, in which it is difficult to determine where-abouts the point of propriety may lie. It appears too, from many passages in the same book, that several other philosophers had at-tempted something of the same kind before him. Neither he nor they, however, ap-pear to have aimed at giving a compleat system of this sort, but only meant to show how situations may occur, in which it is doubtful, whether the highest propriety of conduct consists in observing or in receeding from what, in ordinary cases, are the rules of duty.
               Every system of positive law may be regarded as a more or less imperfect attempt towards a system of natural jurisprudence, or towards an enumeration of the particular rules of justice. As the violation of justice is what men will never submit to from one another, the publick magistrate is under a necessity of employing the power of the commonwealth to enforce the practice of this virtue. With-out this precaution, civil society would be-come a scene of bloodshed and disorder, every man revenging himself at his own hand whenever he fancied he was injured.

To prevent the confusion which would at-tend upon every man's doing justice to him-self, the magistrate, in all governments that have acquired any considerable authority, undertakes to do justice to all, and promises to hear and to redress every complaint of in-jury. In all well-governed states too not only judges are appointed for determining the controversies of individuals, but rules are prescribed for regulating the decisions of those judges; and these rules are, in gene-ral, intended to coincide with those of natu-ral justice. It does not, indeed, always hap-pen that they do so in every instance. Some-times what is called the constitution of the state, that is, the interest of the government; sometimes the interest of particular orders of men who tyrannize the government, warp the positive laws of the country from what na-tural justice would prescribe. In some countries, the rudeness and barbarism of the people hinder the natural sentiments of justice from arriving at that accuracy and precision which, in more civi-lised nations, they naturally attain to. Their laws are like their manners gross and rude and undistinguishing. In other countries the unfortunate constitution of their courts of judicature hinders any regular system of juris-prudence

from ever establishing itself among them, tho' the improved manners of the people may be such as would admit of the most accurate. In no country do the deci-sions of positive law coincide exactly in every case with the rules which the natural sense of justice would dictate. Systems of positive law, therefore, tho' they deserve the greatest authority as the records of the sentiments of mankind in different ages and nations, yet can never be regarded as accurate systems of the rules of natural justice.
               It might have been expected that the rea-sonings of lawyers upon the different imper-fections and improvements of the laws of dif-ferent countries, should have given occasion to an enquiry into what were the natural rules of justice, independent of all positive in-stitution. It might have been expected that these reasonings should have led them to aim at establishing a system of what might pro-perly be called natural jurisprudence, or a theory of the general principles which ought to run through and be the foundation of the laws of all nations. But tho' the reasonings of lawyers did produce something of this

kind, and though no man has treated systema-tically of the laws of any particular country, without intermixing in his work many ob-servations of this sort; it was very late in the world before any such general system was thought of, or before the philosophy of law was treated of by itself, and without re-gard to the particular institutions of any one nation. In none of the ancient moralists, do we find any attempt towards a particular enu-meration of the rules of justice. Cicero in his offices, and Aristotle in his ethics, treat of justice in the same general manner in which they treat of all the other virtues. In the laws of Cicero and Plato, where we might naturally have expected some attempts to-wards an enumeration of those rules of natu-ral equity, which ought to be enforced by the positive laws of every country, there is, however, nothing of this kind. Their laws are laws of police not of justice. Grotius seems to have been the first who attempted to give the world any thing like a system of those principles which ought to run thro', and be the foundation of the laws of all na-tions; and his treatise of the laws of war and peace, with all its imperfections, is per-haps

at this day the most compleat work that has yet been given upon this subject. I shall in another discourse endeavour to give an ac-count of the general principles of law and government, and of the different revolu-tions they have undergone in the different ages and periods of society, not only in what concerns justice but in what concerns po-lice, revenue and arms, and whatever else is the object of law. I shall not, therefore, at present enter into any further detail con-cerning the history of jurisprudence.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            

            ERRATA.
            
               
                  
                     Page
                     Line
                      
                  
                  
                     4
                     5
                     as they themselves must do in his situation, read, if in his situation.
                  
                  
                     17
                     5
                     the person concerned, read, the person principally concerned.
                  
                  
                     52
                     23
                     to talk to a woman as we should to a man, read, as we would, &amp;c.
                  
                  
                     69
                     23
                     these passions, read, those passions.
                  
                  
                     70
                     13
                     the enemy, read, his enemy.
                  
                  
                     87
                     ult. i. read, it.
                  
                  
                     109
                     10
                     the highest ranks, read, the higher ranks.
                  
                  
                     139
                     24
                     its remotest efforts, read, its utmost efforts.
                  
                  
                     166
                     3
                     counterparts of one another, read, to one another.
                  
                  
                     Do
                     
                     25
                     his moderation, read, this moderation.
                  
                  
                     171
                     23
                     ingratitude, read, in gratitude.
                  
                  
                     178
                     19
                     observation, read, observance.
                  
                  
                     213
                     23
                     he horse, read the horse.
                  
                  
                     217
                     6
                     appoved or, read, approved of.
                  
                  
                     219
                     15
                     consequence, read, consequences.
                  
                  
                     Do
                     
                     penult. in, read, into.
                  
                  
                     261
                     antepenult. in the light which, read, in the light in which.
                  
                  
                     Do
                     
                     penult. to him. The fury, read, to him, the fury.
                  
                  
                     263
                     10
                     judgement, read, judgements.
                  
                  
                     268
                     1
                     of or, read, or of.
                  
                  
                     278
                     22
                     object. read, objects.
                  
                  
                     297
                     1
                     CHAP. IV. read, SECT. IV.
                  
                  
                     386
                     1
                     Part VI. read, Part V.
                  
                  
                     412
                     1
                     Part VII. read, Part VI.
                  
                  
                     432
                     16
                     misfortune, read, misfortunes.
                  
                  
                     446
                     21
                     tendency to the greatest goods, read, tendency to procure the greatest goods.
                  
                  
                     454
                     3
                     primary objects, read, ultimate objects.
                  
                  
                     457
                     22
                     That, read, that▪
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
   


our selfish, and to indulge our be-nevolent affections, constitutes the perfec-tion of human nature; and can alone pro-duce among mankind that harmony of sen-timents and passions in which consists their whole grace and propriety. As to love our neighbour as we love ourselves is the great law of christianity, so it is the great precept of nature to love ourselves only as we love our neighbour, or what comes to the same thing, as our neighbour is capable of loving us.
                  As taste and good judgment, when they are considered as qualities which deserve praise and admiration, are supposed to im-ply a delicacy of sentiment and an acute-ness of understanding not commonly to be met with; so the virtues of sensibility and self-command are not apprehended to con-sist in the ordinary, but in the uncommon degrees of those qualities. The amiable virtue of humanity requires, surely, a sensi-bility, much beyond what is possessed by the rude vulgar of mankind. The great and exalted virtue of magnanimity undoubtedly demands much more than that degree of self-command, which the weakest of mor-tals is capable of exerting. As in the com-mon

degree of the intellectual qualities, there is no abilities; so in the common de-gree of the moral, there is no virtue. Vir-tue is excellence, something uncommonly great and beautiful, which rises far above what is vulgar and ordinary. The ami-able virtues consist in that degree of sensi-bility which surprises by its exquisite and unexpected delicacy and tenderness. The awful and respectable, in that degree of self-command which astonishes by its amaz-ing superiority over the most ungovernable passions of human nature.
                  There is, in this respect, a considerable difference between virtue and mere pro-priety; between those qualities and actions which deserve to be admired and celebra-ted, and those which simply deserve to be approved of. Upon many occasions, to act with the most perfect propriety, requires no more than that common and ordinary degree of sensibility or self-command which the most worthless of mankind are possest of, and sometimes even that degree is not necessary. Thus, to give a very low in-stance, to eat when we are hungry, is cer-tainly, upon ordinary occasions, perfectly right and proper, and cannot miss being

approved of as such by every body. No-thing, however, could be more absurd than to say it was virtuous.
                  On the contrary, there may frequently be a considerable degree of virtue in those actions, which fall short of the most per-fect propriety; because they may still ap-proach nearer to perfection than could well be expected upon occasions in which it was so extremely difficult to attain it: and this is very often the case upon those occasions which require the greatest ex-ertions of self-command. There are some situations which bear so hard upon human nature, that the greatest degree of self-government, which can belong to so im-perfect a creature as man, is not able to stifle, altogether, the voice of human weak-ness, or reduce the violence of the passions to that pitch of moderation, in which the impartial spectator can entirely enter into them. Though in those cases, there-fore, the behaviour of the sufferer fall short of the most perfect propriety, it may still deserve some applause, and even, in a cer-tain sense, may be denominated virtuous. It may still manifest an effort of genero-sity and magnanimity of which the greater

part of men are incapable; and though it fails of absolute perfection, it may be a much nearer approximation towards per-fection, than what, upon such trying oc-casions, is commonly either to be found or to be expected.
                  In all cases of this kind, when we are determining the degree of blame or ap-plause that seems due to any action, we very frequently make use of two different standards. The first is the idea of com-plete propriety and perfection, which, in those difficult situations, no human con-duct ever did, or ever can come up to; and in comparison with which the actions of all men must forever appear blameable and imperfect. The second is the idea of that degree of proximity or distance from this complete perfection, which the actions of the greater part of men commonly arrive at. Whatever goes beyond this degree, how far soever it may be removed from absolute perfection, seems to deserve ap-plause; and whatever falls short of it, to deserve blame.
                  It is in the same manner that we judge of the productions of all the arts which ad-dress themselves to the imagination. When

a critic examines the work of any of the great masters in poetry or painting, he may sometimes examine it by an idea of perfection, in his own mind, which nei-ther that nor any other human work will ever come up to; and as long as he com-pares it with this standard, he can see no-thing in it but faults and imperfections. But when he comes to consider the rank which it ought to hold among other works of the same kind, he necessarily compares it with a very different standard, the com-mon degree of excellence which is usually attained in this particular art; and, when he judges of it by this new measure, it may often appear to deserve the highest ap-plause, upon account of its approaching much nearer to perfection than the greater part of those works which can be brought into competition with it.
               
            
            
               

                        CHAP. I. That tho' our sympathy with sorrow is gene-rally a more lively sensation than our sym-pathy with joy, it commonly falls much more short of the violence of what is felt by the person principally concerned p. 93
                        CHAP. II. Of the origin of ambition, and of the distinc-tion of ranks 108
                        CHAP. III. Of the stoical philosophy 128
                     
                  
               
            
            
               PART II. Of merit and demerit; or of the objects of reward and punishment.
               
                  SECT. I. Of the sense of merit and demerit 141

                        CHAP. I. That whatever appears to be the proper object of gratitude, appears to deserve reward; and that, in the same manner, whatever

               SECTION III. Of the degrees of the different passions which are consistent with propriety.
               
                  INTRODUCTION.
                  THE propriety of every passion ex-cited by objects peculiarly related to ourselves, the pitch which the spectator can go along with, must lye, it is evident, in a certain mediocrity. If the passion is too high, or if it is too low, he cannot enter into it. Grief and resentment for private misfortunes and injuries may easi-ly, for example, be too high, and in the greater part of mankind they are so. They may likewise, though this more rarely happens, be too low. We denominate the excess, weakness, and fury: and we call the defect stupidity, insensibility, and want of spirit. We can enter into neither of them, but are astonished and confound-ed to see them.
                  This mediocrity, however, in which the point of propriety consists, is different

in different passions. It is high in some, and low in others. There are some pas-sions which it is indecent to express very strongly, even upon those occasions, in which it is acknowledged we cannot avoid feeling them in the highest degree. And there are others of which the strongest expressions are upon many occasions ex-tremely graceful, even though the passions themselves do not, perhaps, arise so neces-sarily. The first are those passions with which, for certain reasons, there is little or no sympathy: the second are those with which, for other reasons, there is the greatest. And if we consider all the different passions of human nature, we shall find that they are regarded as de-cent, or indecent, just in proportion as mankind are more or less disposed to sympathise with them.
               
               
                  

                  CHAP. I. Of the passions which take their origin from the body.
                  1. IT is indecent to express any strong degree of those passions which arise from a certain situation or disposition of the body; because the company, not being in the same disposition, cannot be expected to sympathise with them. Violent hunger, for example, though upon many occasions not only natural, but unavoidable, is al-ways indecent, and to eat voraciously is universally regarded as a piece of ill man-ners. There is, however, some degree of sympathy, even with hunger. It is agree-able to see our companions eat with a good appetite, and all expressions of loath-ing are offensive. The disposition of body which is habitual to a man in health, makes his stomach easily keep time, if I may be allowed so coarse an expres-sion, with the one, and not with the other. We can sympathise with the distress which excessive hunger occasions, when we read the description of it in the journal of a

siege, or of a sea voyage. We imagine ourselves in the situation of the sufferers, and thence readily conceive the grief, the fear and consternation, which must necessarily distract them. We feel, our-selves, some degree of those passions, and therefore sympathise with them: but as we do not grow hungry by reading the description, we cannot properly, even in this case, be said to sympathise with their hunger.
                  It is the same case with the passion by which nature unites the two sexes. Though naturally the most furious of all the passions, all strong expressions of it are upon every occasion indecent, even between persons in whom its most com-pleat indulgence, is acknowledged by all laws, both human and divine, to be per-fectly innocent. There seems, however, to be some degree of sympathy even with this passion. To talk to a woman as we should to a man is improper: it is expected that their company should in-spire us with more gaiety, more plea-santry, and more attention; and an in-tire insensibility to the fair sex, renders a

man contemptible in some measure even to the men.
                  Such is our aversion for all the appe-tites which take their origin from the body: all strong expressions of them are loathsome and disagreeable. According to some antient philosophers, these are the passions which we share in common with the brutes, and which having no connec-tion with the characteristical qualities of human nature, are upon that account be-neath its dignity. But there are many other passions which we share in common with 
                        
                      brutes, such as resentment, natural 
                        
                     , and even gratitude, which do not, upon that account, appear to be so brutal▪ The true cause of the peculiar 
                        
                      we conceive for the 
                        
                      body, when we see them 
                        
                      men, is that we cannot enter into them. To the person himself who 
                        
                      them, as soon as they are gratified, the object that excited them ceases to be agreeable: even its presence often be-comes offensive to him; he looks round to no purpose for the charm which trans-ported him the moment before, and he can now as little enter into his own

passion as another person. When we have dined, we order the covers to be re-moved; and we should treat in the same manner the objects of the most ardent and passionate desires, if they were the objects of no other passions but those which take their origin from the body.
                  In the command of those appetites of the body consists that virtue which is pro-perly called temperance. To restrain them within those bounds, which regard to health and fortune prescribes, is the part of prudence. But to confine them with-in those limits, which grace, which pro-priety, which delicacy, and modesty, re-quire, is the office of temperance.
                  2. It is for the same reason that to cry out with bodily pain, how intolerable so-ever, appears always unmanly and un-becoming. There is, however, a good deal of sympathy even with bodily pain. If, as has already been observed, I see a stroke aimed, and just ready to fall upon the leg, or arm, of another person, I naturally shrink and draw back my own leg, or my own arm; and when it does fall, I feel it in some measure, and am hurt by it as well as the sufferer. My

hurt, however, is, no doubt, excessively slight, and, upon that account, if he makes any violent out-cry, as I cannot go along with him, I never fail to despise him. And this is the case of all the passions which take their origin from the body; they excite either no sympathy at all, or such a degree of it, as is altoge-ther disproportioned to the violence of what is felt by the sufferer.
                  It is quite otherwise with those pas-sions which take their origin from the imagination. The frame of my body can be but little affected by the altera-tions which are brought about upon that of my companion: but my imagination is more ductile, and more readily as-sumes, if I may say so, the shape and configuration of the imaginations of those wi
                        •
                     h whom I am familiar. A disappoint-ment in love, or ambition, will, upon this account, call forth more sympathy than the greatest bodily evil. Those pas-sions arise altogether from the imagina-tion. The person who has lost his whole fortune, if he is in health, feels nothing in his body. What he suffers is from the imagination only, which represents to him

the loss of his dignity, neglect from his friends, contempt from his enemies, de-pendance, want, and misery, coming fast upon him; and we sympathise with him more strongly upon this account, because our imaginations can more readily mould themselves upon his imagination, than our bodies can mould themselves upon his body.
                  The loss of a leg may generally be regarded as a more real calamity than the loss of a mistress. It would be a ridicu-lous tragedy, however, of which the ca-tastrophe was to turn upon a loss of that kind. A misfortune of the other kind, how frivolous soever it may appear to be, has given occasion to many a fine one.
                  Nothing is so soon forgot as pain. The moment it is gone the whole agony of it is over, and the thought of it can no longer give us any sort of disturbance. We ourselves cannot then enter into the anxiety and anguish which we had before conceived. An unguarded word from a friend will occasion a more durable unea-siness. The agony which this creates is by no means over with the word. What at first disturbs us is not the object of


the senses, but the idea of the imagina-tion. As it is an idea, therefore, which occasions our uneasiness, till time and other accidents have in some measure ef-faced it from our memory, the imagina-tion continues to fret and rankle within, from the thought of it.
                  Pain never calls forth any very lively sym-pathy unless it is accompanied with danger. We sympathise with the fear, though not with the agony of the sufferer. Fear, how-ever, is a passion derived altogether from the imagination, which represents, with an uncertainty and fluctuation that in-creases our anxiety, not what we really feel, but what we may hereafter possibly suffer. The gout, or the tooth-ach, tho' exquisitely painful, excite very little sympa-thy; more dangerous diseases, tho' accom-panied with very little pain, excite the highest.
                  Some people faint and grow sick at the sight of a chirurgical operation, and that bodily pain which is occasioned by tearing the flesh, seems, in them, to excite the most excessive sympathy. We conceive in a much more lively and distinct man-ner, the pain which proceeds from an ex-ternal

cause, than we do that which arises from an internal disorder. I can scarce form an idea of the agonies of my neigh-bour when he is tortured with the gout, or the stone; but I have the clearest con-ception of what he must suffer from an incision, a wound, or a fracture. The chief cause, however, why such objects produce such violent effects upon us, is their novelty. One who has been witness to a dozen dissections, and as many am-putations, sees, ever after, all operations of this kind with great indifference, and often with perfect insensibility. Though we have read or seen represented more than five hundred tragedies, we shall seldom feel so entire an abatement of our sensibility to the objects which they represent to us.
                  In some of the Greek tragedies there is an attempt to excite compassion, by the representation of the agonies of bodily pain. Philoctetes cries out and faints from the extremity of his sufferings. Hippoly-tus and Hercules are both introduced as expiring under the severest tortures, which, it seems, even the fortitude of Hercules was incapable of supporting. In all these cases, however, it is not the pain which

appears to be the proper object of resent-ment, appears to deserve punishment 143
                        CHAP. II. Of the proper objects of gratitude and resent-ment 148
                        CHAP. III. That where there is no approbation of the conduct of the person who confers the be-nefit, there is little sympathy with the gra-titude of him who receives it: and that, on the contrary, where there is no disapproba-tion of the motives of the person who does the mischief, there is no sort of sympathy with the resentment of him who suffers it p. 153
                        CHAP. IV. Recapitulation of the foregoing chapter 157
                        CHAP. V. The analysis of the sense of merit 160
                     
                  
                  SECT. II. Of justice and beneficence.

                        CHAP. I. Comparison of those two virtues 170
                        
                           

interests us, but some other circumstance. It is not the sore foot, but the solitude, of Philoctetes which affects us, and dif-fuses over that charming tragedy, that ro-mantic wildness, which is so agreeable to the imagination. The agonies of Hercules and Hippolytus are interesting only be-cause we forsee that death is to be the conse-quence. If those heroes were to recover, we should think the representation of their sufferings perfectly ridiculous. What a tra-gedy would that be of which the distress con-sisted in a cholic. Yet no pain is more exquisite. These attempts to excite com-passion by the representation of bodily pain, may be regarded as among the greatest breaches of decorum of which the Greek theatre has set the example.
                  The little sympathy which we feel with bodily pain is the foundation of the pro-priety of constancy and patience in endur-ing it. The man, who under the seve-rest tortures allows no weakness to escape him, vents no groan, gives way to no passion which we do not entirely enter in-to, commands our highest admiration. His firmness enables him to keep time with our indifference and insensibility.

We admire and intirely go along with the magnanimous effort which he makes for this purpose. We approve of his be-haviour, and from our experience of the common weakness of human nature, we are surprised, and wonder how he should be able to act so as to deserve approbation. Approbation, mixed and animated by won-der and surprize, constitutes the sentiment which is properly called admiration, of which, applause is the natural expression, as has already been observed.
               
               
                  CHAP. II. Of those passions which take their origin from a particular turn or habit of the imagination.
                  EVEN of the passions derived from the imagination, those which take their origin from a peculiar turn or habit it has acquired, though they may be ac-knowledged to be perfectly natural, are, however, but little sympathised with. The imaginations of mankind, not having acquired that particular turn, cannot enter into them; and such passions, though they

may be allowed to be almost unavoidable in some part of life, are always in some measure ridiculous. This is the case with that strong attachment which natu-rally grows up between two persons of different sexes, who have long fixed their thoughts upon one another. Our imagi-nation not having run in the same channel with that of the lover, we cannot enter into the eagerness of his emotions. If our friend has been injured, we readily sympathise with his resentment, and grow angry with the very person with whom he his angry. If he has received a be-nefit, we readily enter into his gratitude, and have a very high sense of the merit of his benefactor. But if he is in love, though we may think his passion just as reasonable as any of the kind, yet we never think ourselves bound to conceive a passion of the same kind, and for the same person for whom he has conceived it. The passion appears to every body, but the man who feels it, entirely dis-proportioned to the value of the object; and love, though it is pardoned in a certain age because we know it is natural, is always laughed at, because we cannot

enter into it. All serious and strong ex-pressions of it appear ridiculous to a third person; and if the lover is not good com-pany to his mistress, he is to no body else. He himself is sensible of this; and as long as he continues in his sober senses, endea-vours to treat his own passion with raillery and ridicule. It is the only stile in which we care to hear of it; because it is the only stile in which we ourselves are disposed to talk of it. We grow weary of the grave, pedantic, and long-sentenced love of Cow-ley and Propertius, who never have done with exaggerating the violence of their at-tachments; but the gaiety of Ovid, and the gallantry of Horace, are always agree-able.
                  But tho' we feel no proper sympathy with an attachment of this kind, tho' we never approach even in imagination to-wards conceiving a passion for that parti-cular person, yet as we either have con-ceived, or may be disposed to conceive, passions of the same kind, we readily en-ter into those high hopes of happiness which are proposed from its gratification, as well as into that exquisite distress which is feared from its disappointment. It in-terests

us not as a passion, but as a situa-tion that gives occasion to other passions which interest us; to hope, to fear, and to distress of every kind: In the same manner as in a description of a sea voy-age, it is not the hunger which interests us, but the distress which that hunger oc-casions. Tho' we do not properly enter into the attachment of the lover, we rea-dily go along with those expectations of romantic happiness which he derives from it. We feel how natural it is for the mind, in a certain situation, relaxed with indolence, and fatigued with the violence of desire, to long for serenity and quiet, to hope to find them in the gratification of that passion which distracts it, and to frame to itself the idea of that life of pas-toral tranquillity and retirement which the elegant, the tender, and the passionate Ti-bullus takes so much pleasure in describ-ing; a life like what the poets describe in the Fortunate Islands, a life of friend-ship, liberty, and repose; free from la-bour, and from care, and from all the turbulent passions which attend them. Even scenes of this kind interest us most, when they are painted rather as what is

hoped, than as what is enjoyed. The grossness of that passion, which mixes with, and is, perhaps, the foundation of love, disappears when its gratification is far off and at a distance; but renders the whole offensive, when described as what is im-mediately possessed. The happy passion, upon this account, interests us much less than the fearful and the melancholy. We tremble for whatever can disappoint such natural and agreeable hopes: and thus enter into all the anxiety, and concern, and distress of the lover.
                  Hence it is, that, in some modern tra-gedies and romances, this passion appears so wonderfully interesting. It is not so much the love of Castalio and Monimia which attaches us in the Orphan, as the distress which that love occasions. The author who should introduce two lovers, in a scene of perfect security, expressing their mutual fondness for one another, would excite laughter, and not sympathy. If a scene of this kind is ever admitted into a tragedy, it is always, in some mea-sure, improper, and is endured, not from any sympathy with the passion that is ex-pressed in it, but from concern for the dan-gers


and difficulties with which the audi-ence foresee that its gratification is likely to be attended.
                  The reserve which the laws of society impose upon the fair sex, with regard to this weakness, renders it more peculiarly distressful in them, and, upon that very account, more deeply interesting. We are charmed with the love of Phaedra, as it is expressed in the French tragedy of that name, notwithstanding all the extra-vagance and guilt which attend it. That very extravagance and guilt may be said, in some measure, to recommend it to us. Her fear, her shame, her remorse, her horror, her despair, become thereby more natural and interesting. All the seconda-ry passions, if I may be allowed to call them so, which arise from the situation of love, become necessarily more furious and violent: and it is with these secondary passions only that we can properly be said to sympathize.
                  Of all the passions, however, which are so extravagantly disproportioned to the va-lue of their objects, love is the only one that appears, even to the weakest minds, to have any thing in it that is either

graceful or agreeable. In itself, first of all, tho' it may be ridiculous, it is not na-turally odious; and tho' its consequences are often fatal and dreadful, its intentions are seldom mischievous. And then, tho' there is little propriety in the passion itself, there is a good deal in some of those which always accompany it. There is in love a strong mixture of humanity, gene-rosity, kindness, friendship, esteem; pas-sions with which, of all others, for rea-sons which shall be explained immediately, we have the greatest propensity to sympa-thize, even notwithstanding we are sensible that they are, in some measure, excessive. The sympathy which we feel with them, renders the passion which they accompany less disagreeable, and supports it in our imagination, notwithstanding all the vices which commonly go along with it; tho' in the one sex it necessarily leads to the last ruin and infamy; and tho' in the other, where it is apprehended to be least fatal, it is al-most always attended with an incapacity for labour, a neglect of duty, a contempt of fame, and even of common reputa-tion. Notwithstanding all this, the de-gree of sensibility and generosity with


which it is supposed to be accompanied, renders it to many the object of vanity; and they are fond of appearing capable of feeling what would do them no honour if they had really felt it.
                  It is for a reason of the same kind, that a certain reserve is necessary when we talk of our own friends, our own studies, our own professions. All these are objects which we cannot expect should interest our com-panions in the same degree in which they interest us. And it is for want of this reserve, that the one half of mankind make bad company to the other. A phi-losopher is company to a philosopher only; the member of a club, to his own little knot of companions.
               
               
                  CHAP. III. Of the unsocial passions.
                  THERE is another set of passions, which tho' derived from the imagi-nation, yet before we can enter into them, or regard them as graceful or becoming, must always be brought down to a pitch much lower than that to which undisci-plined

nature would raise them. These are hatred and resentment, with all their different modifications. With regard to all such passions, our sympathy is divided between the person who feels them and the person who is the object of them. The interests of these two are directly oppo-site. What our sympathy with the per-son who feels them would prompt us to wish for, our fellow-feeling with the other would lead us to fear. As they are both men, we are concerned for both, and our fear for what the one may suffer, damps our resentment for what the other has suf-fered. Our sympathy, therefore, with the man who has received the provocation, necessarily falls short of the passion which naturally animates him, not only upon account of those general causes which ren-der all sympathetic passions inferior to the original ones, but upon account of that particular cause which is peculiar to itself, our opposite sympathy with another person. Before resentment, therefore, can become graceful and agreeable, it must be more humbled and brought down below that pitch to which it would naturally rise, than almost any other passion.
                  
                     
CHAP. II. Of the sense of justice, of remorse, and of the consciousness of merit 180
                        CHAP. III. Of the utility of this constitution of nature 188
                     
                  
                  SECT. III. Of the influence of fortune upon the senti-ment of mankind, with regard to the me-rit or demerit of actions 207

                        CHAP. I. Of the causes of this influence of fortune 210
                        CHAP. II. Of the extent of this influence of fortune 218
                        CHAP. III. Of the final cause of this irregularity of senti-ments p. 237
                     
                  
               
            
            
               PART III. Of the foundation of our judgments concerning our own sentiments and conduct, and of the sense of duty.
               
                  SECT. I. Of the consciousness of merited praise or blame 248
                  
                     
Mankind, at the same time, have a very strong sense of the injuries that are done to another. The villain, in a tragedy or romance, is as much the object of our in-dignation, as the hero is that of our sym-pathy and affection. We detest Iago as much as we esteem Othello; and delight as much in the punishment of the one, as we are grieved for the distress of the other. But tho' mankind have so strong a fellow-feeling with the injuries that are done to their brethren, they do not always resent them the more that the sufferer appears to resent them. Upon most occasions, the greater his patience, his mildness, his hu-manity, provided it does not appear that he wants spirit, or that fear was the mo-tive of his forbearance, the higher the re-sentment against the person who injured him. The amiableness of the character exasperates their sense of the atrocity of the injury.
                  These passions, however, are regarded as necessary parts of the character of hu-man nature. A person becomes contemp-tible who tamely sits still, and submits to insults, without attempting either to repel or to revenge them. We cannot enter in-to

his indifference and insensibility: we call his behaviour mean-spiritedness, and are as really provoked by it, as by the insolence of his adversary. Even the mob are enra-ged to see any man submit patiently to af-fronts and ill usage. They desire to see this insolence resented, and resented by the person who suffers from it. They cry to him with fury, to defend, or to revenge himself. If his indignation rouses at last, they heartily applaud, and sympathise with it. It enlivens their own indignation a-gainst the enemy, whom they rejoice to see him attack in his turn, and are as real-ly gratified by his revenge, provided it is not immoderate, as if the injury had been done to themselves.
                  But though the utility of those passions to the individual, by rendering it dan-gerous to insult or injure him, be ac-knowledged; and though their utility to the publick, as the guardians of justice, and of the equality of its administration, be not less considerable, as shall be shewn hereafter; yet there is still something dis-agreeable in the passions themselves, which makes the appearance of them in other men the natural object of our aversion.

The expression of anger towards any body present, if it exceeds a bare intimation that we are sensible of his ill usage, is regarded not only as an insult to that par-ticular person, but as a rudeness to the whole company. Respect for them ought to have restrained us from giving way to so boisterous and offensive an emotion. It is the remote effects of these passions which are agreeable; the immediate ef-fects are mischief to the person against whom they are directed. But it is the immediate, and not the remote effects of objects which render them agreeable or disagreeable to the imagination. A pri-son is certainly more useful to the publick than a palace; and the person who founds the one is generally directed by a much juster spirit of patriotism, than he who builds the other. But the immediate ef-fects of a prison, the confinement of the wretches shut up in it, are disagreeable; and the imagination either does not take time to trace out the remote ones, or sees them at too great a distance to be much affected by them. A prison, therefore, will always be a disagreeable object; and the fitter it is for the purpose for which

it was intended, it will be the more so. A palace, on the contrary, will always be agreeable: yet its remote effects may of-ten be inconvenient to the publick. It may serve to promote luxury, and set the example of the dissolution of manners. Its immediate effects, however, the con-veniency, the pleasure and the gaiety of the people who live in it, being all agree-able, and suggesting to the imagination a thousand agreeable ideas, that faculty gene-rally rests upon them, and seldom goes fur-ther in tracing its more distant conse-quences. Trophies of the instruments of musick or of agriculture, imitated in painting or in stucco, make a common and an agreeable ornament of our halls and dining-rooms. A trophy of the same kind, composed of the instruments of surgery, of dissecting, and amputation-knives; of saws for cutting the bones, of trepanning instruments, &amp;c. would be ab-surd and shocking. Instruments of sur-gery, however, are always more finely polished, and generally more nicely adapt-ed to the purposes for which they are intended, than instruments of agricul-ture. The remote effects of them too,

the health of the patient, is agreeable; yet as the immediate effect of them is pain and suffering, the sight of them always dis-pleases us. Instruments of war are agree-able, tho' their immediate effect may seem to be in the same manner pain and suf-fering. But then it is the pain and suf-fering of our enemies, with whom we have no sympathy; and, with regard to us, they are immediately connected with the agreeable ideas of courage, victory, and honour. They are themselves, there-fore, supposed to make one of the noblest parts of dress, and the imitation of them one of the finest ornaments of architec-ture. It is the same case with the quali-ties of the mind. The antient stoics were of opinion, that as the world was governed by the all-ruling providence of a wise, powerful, and good God, every single event ought to be regarded, as mak-ing a necessary part of the plan of the universe, and as tending to promote the general order and happiness of the whole: that the vices and follies of mankind, therefore, made as necessary a part of this plan as their wisdom or their virtue; and by that eternal art which educes good

from ill, were made to tend equally to the prosperity and perfection of the great system of nature. No speculation of this kind, however, how deeply so-ever it might be rooted in the mind, could diminish our natural abhorrence for vice, whose immediate effects are so destructive, and whose remote ones are too distant to be traced by the imagination.
                  It is the same case with those passions we have been just now considering. Their immediate effects are so disagreeable, that even when they are most justly provoked; there is still something about them which dis-gusts us. These, therefore, are the only passions of which the expressions, as I for-merly observed, do not dispose and prepare us to sympathize with them, before we are informed of the cause which excites them. The plaintive voice of misery, when heard at a distance, will not allow us to be indifferent about the person from whom it comes. As soon as it strikes our ear, it interests us in his fortune, and, if continu-ed, forces us almost involuntarily to fly to his assistance. The sight of a smiling countenance, in the same manner, elevates even the pensive into that gay and airy

mood, which disposes him to sympathize with, and share the joy which it expres-ses; and he feels his heart, which with thought and care was before that shrunk and depressed, instantly expanded and elated. But it is quite otherwise with the expressions of hatred and resentment. The hoarse, boisterous, and discordant voice of anger, when heard at a distance, inspires us either with fear or aversion. We do not fly towards it, as to one who cries out with pain and agony. Women, and men of weak nerves, tremble and are overcome with fear, tho' sensible that themselves are not the objects of the anger. They con-ceive fear, however, by putting themselves in the situation of the person who is so. Even those of stouter hearts are disturb-ed; not indeed enough to make them a-fraid, but enough to make them angry; for anger is the passion which they would feel in the situation of the other person. It is the same case with hatred. Mere expressions of spite inspire it against no body, but the man who uses them. Both these passions are by nature the ob-jects of our aversion. Their disagreeable and boisterous appearance never excites,


never prepares, and often disturbs our sympathy. Grief does not more powerful-ly engage and attract us to the person in whom we observe it, than these, while we are ignorant of their cause, disgust and de-tach us from him. It was, it seems, the intention of nature, that those rougher and more unamiable emotions, which drive men from one another, should be less ea-sily and more rarely communicated.
                  When music imitates the modulations of grief or joy, it either actually inspires us with those passions, or at least puts us in the mood which disposes us to conceive them. But when it imitates the notes of anger, it inspires us with fear. Joy, grief, love, admiration, devotion, are all of them passions which are naturally musical. Their natural tones are all soft, clear, and melo-dious; and they naturally express them-selves in periods which are distinguished by regular pauses, and which upon that ac-count are easily adapted to the regular re-turns of the correspondent airs of a tune. The voice of anger, on the contrary, and of all the passions which are akin to it, is harsh and discordant. Its periods too are all irregular, sometimes very long, and

sometimes very short, and distinguished by no regular pauses. It is with difficulty, therefore, that music can imitate any of those passions; and the music which does imitate them is not the most agreeable. A whole entertainment may consist, without any impropriety, of the imitation of the social and agreeable passions. It would be a strange entertainment which consisted altogether of the imitations of hatred and resentment.
                  If those passions are disagreeable to the spectator, they are not less so to the person who feels them. Hatred and anger are the greatest poison to the happiness of a good mind. There is, in the very feeling of those passions, something harsh, jarring, and convulsive, something that tears and distracts the breast, and is al-together destructive of that composure and tranquillity of mind which is so necessary to happiness, and which is best promoted by the contrary passions of gratitude and love. It is not the value of what they lose by the perfidy and ingratitude of those they live with, which the generous and humane are most apt to regret. What-ever they may have lost, they can gene-rally


never prepares, and often disturbs our sympathy. Grief does not more powerful-ly engage and attract us to the person in whom we observe it, than these, while we are ignorant of their cause, disgust and de-tach us from him. It was, it seems, the intention of nature, that those rougher and more unamiable emotions, which drive men from one another, should be less ea-sily and more rarely communicated.
                  When music imitates the modulations of grief or joy, it either actually inspires us with those passions, or at least puts us in the mood which disposes us to conceive them. But when it imitates the notes of anger, it inspires us with fear. Joy, grief, love, admiration, devotion, are all of them passions which are naturally musical. Their natural tones are all soft, clear, and melo-dious; and they naturally express them-selves in periods which are distinguished by regular pauses, and which upon that ac-count are easily adapted to the regular re-turns of the correspondent airs of a tune. The voice of anger, on the contrary, and of all the passions which are akin to it, is harsh and discordant. Its periods too are all irregular, sometimes very long, and
SECT. II. In what manner our own judgments refer to what ought to be the judgments of others: and of the origin of general rules 253
                  SECT. III. Of the influence and authority of the general rule of morality, and that they are justly re-garded as the laws of the Deity 273
                  CHAP. IV. In what cases the sense of duty ought to be the sole principle of our conduct; and in what cases it ought to concur with other motives 297
               
            
            
               PART IV. Of the effect of utility upon the sen-timent of approbation.
               
                  SECT. I. Of the beauty which the appearance of utility bestows upon all 
                        •
                     he productions of art, and of the extensive influence of this species of beauty p. 337
                  SECT. II. Of the beauty which the appearance of utility upon the character and actions of men; and

sometimes very short, and distinguished by no regular pauses. It is with difficulty, therefore, that music can imitate any of those passions; and the music which does imitate them is not the most agreeable. A whole entertainment may consist, without any impropriety, of the imitation of the social and agreeable passions. It would be a strange entertainment which consisted altogether of the imitations of hatred and resentment.
                  If those passions are disagreeable to the spectator, they are not less so to the person who feels them. Hatred and anger are the greatest poison to the happiness of a good mind. There is, in the very feeling of those passions, something harsh, jarring, and convulsive, something that tears and distracts the breast, and is al-together destructive of that composure and tranquillity of mind which is so necessary to happiness, and which is best promoted by the contrary passions of gratitude and love. It is not the value of what they lose by the perfidy and ingratitude of those they live with, which the generous and humane are most apt to regret. What-ever they may have lost, they can gene-rally


be very happy without it. What most disturbs them is the idea of per-fidy and ingratitude exercised towards themselves; and the discordant and dis-agreeable passions which this excites, con-stitutes, in their own opinion, the chief part of the injury that they suffer.
                  How many things are requisite to ren-der the gratification of resentment com-pleatly agreeable, and to make the spec-tator thoroughly sympathise with our re-venge? The provocation must first of all be such that we should become con-temptible, and be exposed to perpetual in-sults, if we did not, in some measure, re-sent it. Smaller offences are always bet-ter neglected; nor is there any thing more despicable than that froward and captious humour which takes fire upon every slight occasion of quarrel. We should resent more from a sense of the propriety of resentment, from a sense that mankind expect and require it of us, than because we feel in ourselves the furies of that disagreeable passion. There is no passion, of which the human mind is ca-pable, concerning whose justness we ought to be so doubtful, concerning whose indul-gence


we ought so carefully to consult our natural sense of propriety, or so diligently to consider what will be the sentiments of the cool, and impartial spectator. Mag-nanimity, or a regard to maintain our own rank and dignity in society, is the only motive which can ennoble the expres-sions of this disagreeable passion. This motive must characterize our whole stile and deportment. These must be plain, open, and direct; determined without posi-tiveness, and elevated without insolence; not only free from petulance and low scurrility, but generous, candid, and full of all proper regards, even for the person who has offended us. It must ap-pear, in short, from our whole manner, without our labouring affectedly to express it, that passion has not extinguished our humanity; and that if we yield to the dictates of revenge, it is with reluctance, from necessity, and in consequence of great and repeated provocations. When resent-ment is guarded and qualified in this manner, it may be admitted to be even generous and noble.
               
               
                  

                  CHAP. IV. Of the social passions.
                  AS it is a divided sympathy which renders this whole set of passions, upon most occasions, so ungraceful and disagreeable; so there is another set op-posite to these, which a redoubled sym-pathy renders almost always peculiarly agreeable and becoming. Generosity, hu-manity, kindness, compassion, mutual friendship and esteem, all the social and benevolent affections, when expressed in the countenance or behaviour, even to-wards those who are peculiarly connected with ourselves, please the indifferent spec-tator upon almost every occasion. His sympathy with the person who feels those passions, exactly coincides with his concern for the person who is the object of them. The interest, which, as a man, he is obliged to take in the happiness of this last, enlivens his fellow-feeling with the sentiments of the other, whose emotions are employed about the same object. We have always, therefore, the strongest dis-position

to sympathise with the benevolent affections. They appear in every respect agreeable to us. We enter into the sa-tisfaction both of the person who feels them, and of the person who is the ob-ject of them. For as to be the object of hatred and indignation gives more pain than all the evil which a brave man can fear from his enemies; so there is a satisfaction in the consciousness of be-ing beloved, which, to a person of deli-cacy and sensibility, is of more import-ance to happiness than all the advantage which he can expect to derive from it. What character is so detestable as that of one who takes pleasure to sow dis-sention among friends, and to turn their most tender love into mortal hatred? Yet wherein does the atrocity of this so much 
                        •
                     bhorred injury consist? Is it in de-priving them of the frivolous good offi-
                     
                        •
                     es, which, had their friendship continued, 
                        •
                     hey might have expected from one ano-ther? It is in depriving them of that friend-
                     
                        •
                     hip itself, in robbing them of each others 
                        •
                     ffections, from which both derived so much 
                        •
                     atisfaction; it is in disturbing the har-mony of their hearts, and putting an end

to that happy commerce which had before subsisted between them. These affections, that harmony, this commerce, are felt, not only by the tender and the delicate, but by the rudest vulgar of mankind, to be of more importance to happiness than all the little services which could be expected to flow from them.
                  The sentiment of love is, in itself, agree-able to the person who feels it, it sooths and composes the breast, seems to favour the vital motions, and to promote the healthful state of the human constitution; and it is rendered still more delightful by the consciousness of the gratitude and satisfaction which it must excite in him who is the object of it. Their mutual regard renders them happy in one ano-ther, and sympathy, with this mutual re-gard, makes them agreeable to every other person. With what pleasure do we look upon a family, through the whole of which reign mutual love and esteem in which the parents and children ar
                        •
                      companions for one another, without an
                        •
                      other difference than what is made by re-spectful affection on the one side, an
                        •
                      kind indulgence on the other; whe
                        •
                     
                     

freedom and fondness, mutual raillery, and mutual kindness, show that no op-position of interests divides the brothers, nor any rivalship of favour sets the sisters at variance, and where every thing pre-sents us with the idea of peace, chear-fulness, harmony, and contentment. On the contrary, how uneasy are we made when we go into a house in which jar-ring contention sets one half of those who dwell in it against the other; where amidst affected smoothness and complai-sance, suspicious looks and sudden starts of passion betray the mutual jealousies which burn within them, and which are every moment ready to burst out through all the restraints which the presence of the company imposes.
                  Those amiable passions, even when they are acknowledged to be excessive, are ne-ver regarded with aversion. There is something agreeable even in the weakness of friendship and humanity. The too tender mother, the too indulgent father, the too generous and affectionate friend, may sometimes, perhaps, on account of the softness of their natures, be looked upon with a species of pity, in which,

however, there is a mixture of love, but can never be regarded with hatred and aversion, nor even with contempt, unless by the most brutal and worthless of man-kind. It is always with concern, with sympathy and kindness, that we blame them for the extravagance of their attach-ment. There is a helplessness in the cha-racter of extreme humanity which more than any thing interests our pity. There is nothing in itself which renders it ei-ther ungraceful or disagreeable. We only regret that it is unfit for the world, be-cause the world is unworthy of it, and be-cause it must expose the person who is en-dowed with it as a prey to the perfidy and in-gratitude of insinuating falshood, and to a thousand pains and uneasinesses, which, of all men, he the least deserves to feel, and which generally too he is, of all men, the least capable of supporting. It is quite otherwise with hatred and resent-ment. Too violent a propensity to those detestable passions, renders a person the object of universal dread and abhorrence, who, like a wild beast, ought, we think, to be hunted out of all civil society.
               
               
                  

                  CHAP. V. Of the selfish passions.
                  BESIDES those two opposite sets of passions, the social and unsocial, there is another which holds a sort of middle place between them; is never ei-ther so graceful as is sometimes the one set, nor is ever so odious as is sometimes the other. Grief and joy, when conceiv-ed upon account of our own private good or bad fortune, constitute this third set of passions. Even when excessive, they are never so disagreeable as excessive resent-ment, because no opposite sympathy can ever interest us against them: and when most suitable to their objects they are never so agreeable as impartial humanity and 
                        •
                     ust benevolence; because no double sym-pa
                        •••
                      can ever interest us for them. There 
                        •
                     s, however, this difference between grief and joy, that we are generally most dis-posed to sympathise with small joys and great sorrows. The man, who by some 
                        •
                     udden revolution of fortune is lifted up 
                        •
                     ll at once into a condition of life, greatly

above what he had formerly lived in, may be assured that the congratulations of his best friends are not all of them perfectly sincere. An upstart, though of the greatest merit, is generally disagreeable, and a sentiment of envy commonly pre-vents us from heartily sympathising with his joy. If he has any judgment he is sensible of this, and instead of appear-ing to be elated with his good fortune, he endeavours, as much as he can, to smother his joy, and keep down that elevation of mind with which his new circumstances naturally inspire him. He affects the same plainness of dress, and the same modesty of behaviour, which became him in his former station. He redoubles his attention to his old friends, and endea-vours more than ever to be humble, as-siduous, and complaisant. And this is the behaviour which in his situation we most approve of; because we expect, it seems, that he should have more sympa-thy with our envy and aversion to his happiness, than we have with his hap-piness. It is seldom that with all this he succeeds. We suspect the sincerity of his humility, and he grows weary of this


AN INQUIRY INTO THE Nature and Causes OF THE WEALTH OF NATIONS.
            VOL. II.
         
         
            
               

to preserve or to augment the quantity of those metals required more the attention of government, than to preserve or to augment the quantity of any other useful commodities, which the freedom of trade, without any such attention, never fails to supply in the proper quantity. They were sophistical too, perhaps, in assert-ing that the high price of exchange necessarily increased, what they called, the unfavourable balance of trade, or occasioned the ex-portation of a greater quantity of gold and silver. That high price, indeed, was extremely disadvantageous to the merchants who had any money to pay in foreign countries. They paid so much dearer for the bills which their bankers granted them upon those countries. But though the risk arising from the prohibition might occasion some extraordinary expence to the bankers, it would not necessarily carry any more money out of the country. This expence would generally be all laid out in the country, in smug-gling the money out of it, and could seldom occasion the export-ation of a single six-pence beyond the precise sum drawn for. The high price of exchange too would naturally dispose the mer-chants to endeavour to make their exports nearly balance their im-ports, in order that they might have this high exchange to pay upon as small a sum as possible. The high price of exchange, therefore, would tend, not to increase, but to diminish, what they called, the unfavourable balance of trade, and consequently the exportation of gold and silver.
               SUCH as they were, however, those arguments convinced the people to whom they were addressed. They were addressed by merchants to parliaments, and to the councils of princes, to nobles and to country gentlemen; by those who were supposed to understand trade, to those who were conscious to themselves that they knew nothing about the matter. That foreign trade enriched the country, experience demonstrated to the nobles and country

proportion of gold and silver to the annual produce of the land and labour of Spain and Portugal, and to that of other countries. It is said accordingly to be very considerable, and that you fre-quently find there a profusion of plate in houses, where there is nothing else which would, in other countries, be thought suitable or correspondent to this sort of magnificence. The cheapness of gold and silver, or, what is the same thing, the dearness of all commodities, which is the necessary effect of this redundancy of the precious metals, discourages both the agriculture and manufac-tures of Spain and Portugal, and enables foreign nations to supply them with many sorts of rude, and with almost all sorts of manu-factured produce, for a smaller quantity of gold and silver than what they themselves can either raise or make them for at home. The tax and prohibition operate in two different ways. They not only lower very much the value of the precious metals in Spain and Portugal, but by detaining there a certain quantity of those metals which would otherwise flow over other countries, they keep up their value in those other countries somewhat above what it otherwise would be, and thereby give those countries a double advan-tage in their commerce with Spain and Portugal. Open the flood-gates and there will presently be less water above, and more below, the dam-head, and it will soon come to a level in both places. Remove the tax and the prohibition, and as the quantity of gold and silver will diminish considerably in Spain and Portugal, so it will increase somewhat in other countries, and the value of those metals, their proportion to the annual produce of land and labour, will soon come to a level, or very near to a level, in all. The loss which Spain and Portugal could sustain by this exportation of their gold and silver would be altogether nominal and imaginary. The nominal value of their goods, and of the annual produce of their land and labour would fall, and would be expressed or represented by a smaller quantity of silver than before: but their real value would

be the same as before, and would be sufficient to maintain, com-mand, and employ, the same quantity of labour. As the nomi-nal value of their goods would fall, the real value of what re-mained of their gold and silver would rise, and a smaller quantity of those metals would answer all the same purposes of commerce and circulation which had employed a greater quantity before. The gold and silver which would go abroad would not go abroad for nothing, but would bring back an equal value of goods of some kind or another. Those goods too would not be all matters of mere luxury and expence, to be consumed by idle people who pro-duce nothing in return for their consumption. As the real wealth and revenue of idle people would not be augmented by this extraor-dinary exportation of gold and silver, so neither would their con-sumption be much augmented by it. Those goods would, proba-bly, the greater part of them, and certainly some part of them, consist in materials, tools, and provisions, for the employment and maintenance of industrious people, who would reproduce, with a profit, the full value of their consumption. A part of the dead stock of the society would thus be turned into active stock, and would put into motion a greater quantity of industry than had been employed before. The annual produce of their land and labour would immediately be augmented a little, and in a few years would, probably, be augmented a great deal; their industry being thus relieved from one of the most oppressive burdens which it at pre-sent labours under.
               THE bounty upon the exportation of corn necessarily ope-rates exactly in the same way as this absurd policy of Spain and Portugal. Whatever be the actual state of tillage, it renders our corn somewhat dearer in the home market than it otherwise would be in that state, and somewhat cheaper in the foreign; and as the average money price of corn regulates more or less that of

all other commodities, it lowers the value of silver considerably in the one, and tends to raise it a little in the other. It enables foreigners, the Dutch in particular, not only to eat our corn cheaper than they otherwise could do, but sometimes to eat it cheaper than even our own people can do upon the same occa-sions; as we are assured by an excellent authority, that of Sir Mathew Decker. It hinders our own workmen from furnishing their goods for so small a quantity of silver as they otherwise might do; and enables the Dutch to furnish their's for a smaller. It tends to render our manufactures somewhat dearer in every market, and their's somewhat cheaper than they otherwise would be, and consequently to give their industry a double advantage over our own.
               THE bounty, as it raises in the home market, not the real, but only the nominal price of our corn, as it augments, not the quantity of labour which a certain quantity of corn can maintain and employ, but only the quantity of silver which it will exchange for, it discourages our manufactures without rendering the smallest real service either to our farmers or country gentlemen. It puts, indeed, a little more money into the pockets of both, and it will perhaps be somewhat difficult to persuade the greater part of them that this is not rendering them a very real service. But if this money sinks in its value, in the quantity of labour, provisions, and commodities of all different kinds which it is capable of pur-chasing, as much as it rises in its quantity, the service will be merely nominal and imaginary.
               THERE is, perhaps, but one set of men in the whole com-monwealth to whom the bounty either was or could be really serviceable. These were the corn merchants, the exporters and importers of corn. In years of plenty the bounty necessarily

occasioned a greater exportation than would otherwise have taken place; and by hindering the plenty of one year from relieving the scarcity of another, it occasioned in years of scarcity a greater importation than would otherwise have been necessary. It in-creased the business of the corn merchant in both, and in years of scarcity it not only enabled him to import a greater quantity, but to sell it for a better price, and consequently with a greater profit than he could otherwise have made, if the plenty of one year had not been more or less hindered from relieving the scar-city of another. It is in this sett of men, accordingly, that I have observed the greatest zeal for the continuance or renewal of the bounty.
               OUR country gentlemen, when they imposed the high duties upon the importation of foreign corn, which in times of moderate plenty amount to a prohibition, and when they established the bounty, seem to have imitated the conduct of our manufacturers. By the one institution, they secured to themselves the monopoly of the home market, and by the other they endeavoured to prevent that market from ever being overstocked with their commodity. By both they endeavoured to raise its real value, in the same man-ner as our manufacturers had, by the like institutions, raised the real value of many different sorts of manufactured goods. They did not perhaps attend to the great and essential difference which nature has established between corn and almost every other sort of goods. When either by the monopoly of the home market, or by a bounty upon exportation, you enable our woollen or linen manufacturers to sell their goods for somewhat a better price than they otherwise could get for them, you raise, not only the nomi-nal, but the real price of those goods. You render them equiva-lent to a greater quantity of labour and subsistence, you increase, not only the nominal, but the real profit, the real wealth and

revenue of those manufacturers, and you enable them either to live better themselves, or to employ a greater quantity of labour in those particular manufactures. You really encourage those manufactures, and direct towards them a greater quantity of the industry of the country, than what would probably go to them of its own accord. But when by the like institutions you raise the nominal or money price of corn, you do not raise its real value. You do not increase the real wealth, the real revenue either of our farmers or country gentlemen. You do not encou-rage the growth of corn, because you do not enable them to maintain and employ more labourers in raising it. The nature of things has stamped upon corn a real value which no human institution can alter. No bounty upon exportation, no monopoly of the home market can raise it. The freest competition cannot lower it. Through the world in general that value is equal to the quantity of labour which it can maintain, and in every par-ticular place it is equal to the quantity of labour which it can maintain in the way, whether liberal, moderate, or scanty, in which labour is commonly maintained in that place. Woollen or linen cloth are not the regulating commodities by which the real value of all other commodities must be finally measured and determined. Corn is. The real value of every other commodity is finally measured and determined by the proportion which its average money price bears to the average money price of corn. The real value of corn does not vary with those variations in its average money price, which sometimes occur from one century to another. It is the real value of silver which varies with them.
               BOUNTIES upon the exportation of any home-made commodity are liable, first, to that general objection which may be made to all the different expedients of the mercantile system; the objection of forcing some part of the industry of the country into a channel

less advantageous than that in which it would run of its own accord: and, secondly, to the particular objection of forcing it, not only into a channel that is less advantageous, but into one that is actually disadvantageous; the trade which cannot be carried on but by means of a bounty being necessarily a losting trade. The bounty upon the exportation of corn is liable to this further objection, that it can in no respect promote the raising of that par-ticular commodity of which it was meant to encourage the produc-tion. When our country gentlemen, therefore, demanded the esta-blishment of the bounty, though they acted in imitation of our merchants and manufacturers, they did not act with that com-pleat comprehension of their own interest which commonly directs the conduct of those two other orders of people. They loaded the publick revenue with a very considerable expence; but they did not in any respect increase the real value of their own commodity, and by lowering somewhat the real value of silver they discouraged in some degree the general industry of the country, and instead of advancing, retarded more or less the improvement of their own lands, which necessarily depends upon the general industry of the country.
               To encourage the production of any commodity, a bounty upon production, one should imagine, would have a more direct operation than one upon exportation. It has, however, been more rarely granted. The prejudices established by the commer-cial system have taught us to believe that national wealth arises more immediately from exportation than from production. It has been more favoured accordingly, as the more immediate means of bringing money into the country. Bounties upon production, it has been said too, have been found by experience more liable to frauds than those upon exportation. How far this is true, I know not. That bounties upon exportation have been abused to many

fraudulent purposes, is very well known. But it is not the interest of merchants and manufacturers, the great inventors of all these expedients, that the home market should be overstocked with their goods, an event which a bounty upon production might some-times occasion. A bounty upon exportation, by enabling them to send abroad the surplus part, and to keep up the price of what remains in the home market, effectually prevents this. Of all the expedients of the mercantile system, accordingly, it is the one of which they are the fondest. I have known the different under-takers of some particular works agree privately among themselves to give a bounty out of their own pockets upon the exportation of a certain proportion of the goods which they dealt in. This expedient succeeded so well that it more than doubled the price of their goods in the home market, notwithstanding a very consider-able increase in the produce. The operation of the bounty upon corn must have been wonderfully different, if it has lowered the money price of that commodity.
               SOMETHING like a bounty upon production, however, has been granted upon some particular occasions. The encourage-ments given to the white-herring and whale-fisheries may, perhaps, be considered as somewhat of this nature. They tend directly to render the goods cheaper in the home market than they otherwise would be in the actual production. In other respects their effects are the same as those of bounties upon exportation. By means of them a part of the capital of the country is em-ployed in bringing goods to market, of which the price does not repay the cost, together with the ordinary profits of stock. But though the bounties to those fisheries do not contribute to the opulence of the nation, they may perhaps be defended as con-ducing to its defence, by augmenting the number of its sailors and shipping. This may frequently be done by means of such

bounties, at a much smaller expence than by keeping up a great standing navy, if I may use such an expression, in time of peace, in the same manner as a standing army.
               SOME other bounties may be vindicated perhaps upon the same principle. It is of importance that the kingdom should depend as little as possible upon its neighbours for the manufactures necessary for its defence; and if these cannot otherwise be main-tained at home, it is reasonable that all other branches of industry should be taxed in order to support them. The bounties upon the importation of naval stores from America, upon British made fail-cloth, and upon British made gunpowder, may perhaps all three be vindicated upon this principle. The first is a bounty upon the production of America, for the use of Great Britain. The two others are bounties upon exportation.
               WHAT is called a bounty is sometimes no more than a drawback, and consequently is not liable to the same objections as what is properly a bounty. The bounty, for example, upon refined sugar exported may be considered as a drawback of the duties upon the brown and muscovado sugars, from which it is made. The bounty upon wrought silk exported, a drawback of the duties upon raw and thrown silk imported. The bounty upon gun-powder exported, a drawback of the duties upon brimstone and saltpetre imported. In the language of the customs those allow-ances only are called drawbacks, which are given upon goods exported in the same form in which they are imported. When that form has been altered by manufacture of any kind, they are called bounties.
               PREMIUMS given by the publick to artists and manufacturers who excell in their particular occupations, are not liable to the same objections as bounties. By encouraging extraordinary dex-terity

and ingenuity, they serve to keep up the emulation of the workmen actually employed in those respective occupations, and are not considerable enough to turn towards any one of them a greater share of the capital of the country than what would go to it of its own accord. Their tendency is not to overturn the natural balance of employments, but to render the work which is done in each as perfect and compleat as possible. The expence of premiums, besides, is very trifling; that of bounties very great. The bounty upon corn alone has sometimes cost the publick in one year, more than three hundred thousand pounds.
               BOUNTIES are sometimes called premiums, as drawbacks are sometimes called bounties. But we must in all cases attend to the nature of the thing, without paying any regard to the word.
               I CANNOT conclude this chapter concerning bounties, with-out observing that the praises which have been bestowed upon the law which establishes the bounty upon the exportation of corn, and upon that system of regulations which is connected with it, are altogether unmerited. A particular examination of the nature of the corn trade, and of the principal British laws which relate to it, will sufficiently demonstrate the truth of this assertion. The great importance of this subject must justify the length of the digression.
               THE trade of the corn merchant is composed of four different branches, which, though they may sometimes be all carried on by the same person, are in their own nature four separate and distinct trades. These are, first, the trade of the inland dealer; secondly, that of the merchant importer for home consumption; thirdly, that of the merchant exporter of home produce for foreign con-sumption; and, fourthly, that of the merchant carrier, or of the importer of corn in order to export it again.
               
                  

I. THE interest of the inland dealer, and that of the great body of the people, how opposite soever they may at first sight appear, are, even in years of the greatest scarcity, exactly the same. It is his interest to raise the price of his corn as high as the real scarcity of the season requires, and it can never be his interest to raise it higher. By raising the price he discourages the consumption, and puts every body more or less, but particularly the inferior ranks of people, upon thrift and good management. If, by raising it too high, he discourages the consumption so much that the supply of the season is likely to go beyond the consumption of the season, and to last for some time after the next crop begins to come in, he runs the hazard, not only of losing a considerable part of his corn by natural causes, but of being obliged to sell what remains of it for much less than what he might have had for it several months before. If by not raising the price high enough he discourages the consumption so little, that the supply of the season is likely to fall short of the consumption of the season, he not only loses a part of the profit which he might otherwise have made, but he exposes the people to suffer before the end of the season, instead of the hard-ships of a dearth, the dreadful horrors of a famine. It is the interest of the people that their daily, weekly, and monthly con-sumption, should be proportioned as exactly as possible to the sup-ply of the season. The interest of the inland corn dealer is the same. By supplying them, as nearly as he can judge, in this pro-portion, he is likely to sell all his corn for the highest price, and with the greatest profit; and his knowledge of the state of the crop, and of his daily, weekly, and monthly sales, enable him to judge, with more or less accuracy, how far they really are supplied in this manner. Without intending the interest of the people, he is necessarily led, by a regard to his own interest, to treat them, even in years of scarcity, pretty much in the same manner as the pru-dent master of a vessel is sometimes obliged to treat his crew. When

gentlemen, as well as to the merchants; but how, or in what manner, none of them well knew. The merchants knew perfectly in what manner it enriched themselves. It was their business to know it. But to know in what manner it enriched the country, was no part of their business. This subject never came into their consideration, but when they had occasion to apply to their country for some change in the laws relating to foreign trade. It then became necessary to say something about the beneficial effects of foreign trade, and the manner in which those effects were obstructed by the laws as they then stood. To the judges who were to decide the business, it appeared a most satisfactory account of the matter, when they were told that foreign trade brought money into the country, but that the laws in question hindered it from bringing so much as it otherwise would do. Those arguments therefore produced the wished-for effect. The prohibition of exporting gold and silver was in France and England confined to the coin of those respective countries. The exportation of foreign coin and of bullion was made free. In Holland, and in some other places, this liberty was extended even to the coin of the country. The attention of government was turned away from guarding against the exportation of gold and silver, to watch over the balance of trade, as the only cause which could occasion any augmentation or diminution of those metals. From one fruitless care it was turned away to an-other care much more intricate, much more embarrassing, and just equally fruitless. The title of Mun's book, England's Treasure in Foreign Trade, became a fundamental maxim in the political oeconomy, not of England only, but of all other commercial countries. The inland or home trade, the most important of all, the trade in which an equal capital affords the greatest revenue and creates the greatest employment to the people of the country, was considered as subsidiary only to foreign trade. It neither brought money into the country, it was said, nor carried any out of it.

he foresees that provisions are likely to run short, he puts them upon short allowance. Though from excess of caution he should sometimes do this without any real necessity, yet all the inconveni-encies which his crew can thereby suffer are inconsiderable in com-parison of the danger, misery, and ruin, to which they might sometimes be exposed by a less provident conduct. Though from excess of avarice, in the same manner, the inland corn merchant should sometimes raise the price of his corn somewhat higher than the scarcity of the season requires, yet all the inconveniencies which the people can suffer from this conduct, which effectually secures them from a famine in the end of the season, are inconsiderable in comparison of what they might have been exposed to by a more liberal way of dealing in the beginning of it. The corn merchant himself is likely to suffer the most by this excess of avarice; not only from the indignation which it generally excites against him, but, though he should escape the effects of this indignation, from the quantity of corn which it necessarily leaves upon his hands in the end of the season, and which, if the next season happens to prove favourable, he must always fell for a much lower price than he might otherwise have had.
               WERE it possible, indeed, for one great company of merchants to possess themselves of the whole crop of an extensive country, it might, perhaps, be their interest to deal with it as the Dutch are said to do with the spiceries of the Molluccas, to destroy or throw away a considerable part of it, in order to keep up the price of the rest. But it is scarce possible, even by the violence of law, to esta-blish such an extensive monopoly with regard to corn; and, where-ever the law leaves the trade free, it is of all commodities the least liable to be engrossed or monopolised by the force of a few large capitals, which buy up the greater part of it. Not only its value far exceeds what the capitals of a few private men are capable of

purchasing, but, supposing they were capable of purchasing it, the manner in which it is produced renders this purchase altogether impracticable. As in every civilized country it is the commodity of which the annual consumption is the greatest, so a greater quan-tity of industry is annually employed in producing corn than in producing any other commodity. When it first comes from the ground too, it is necessarily divided among a greater number of owners than any other commodity; and these owners can never be collected into one place like a number of independent manufactu-rers, but are necessarily scattered through all the different corners of the country. These first owners either immediately supply the consumers in their own neighbourhood, or they supply other inland dealers who supply those consumers. The inland dealers in corn, therefore, including both the farmer and the baker, are necessa-rily more numerous than the dealers in any other commodity, and their dispersed situation renders it altogether impossible for them to enter into any general combination. If in a year of scarcity, there-fore, any of them should find that he had a good deal more corn upon hand than, at the current price, he could hope to dispose of before the end of the season, he would never think of keeping up this price to his own loss, and to the sole benefit of his rivals and competitors, but would immediately lower it in order to get rid of his corn before the new crop began to come in. The same mo-tives, the same interests, which would thus regulate the conduct of any one dealer, would regulate that of every other, and oblige them all in general to fell their corn at the price which, according to the best of their judgement, was most suitable to the scarcity or plenty of the season.
               WHOEVER examines, with attention, the history of the dearths and famines which have afflicted any part of Europe, during either the course of the present or that of the two preceeding centuries,

of several of which we have pretty exact accounts, will find, I believe, that a dearth never has arisen from any combination among the inland dealers in corn, nor from any other cause but a real scar-city, occasioned sometimes perhaps, and in some particular places, by the waste of war, but in by far the greatest number of cases, by the fault of the seasons; and that a famine has never arisen from any other cause but the violence of government attempting, by improper means, to remedy the inconveniencies of a dearth.
               IN an extensive corn country, between all the different parts of which there is a free commerce and communication, the scarcity occasioned by the most unfavourable seasons can never be so great as to produce a famine; and the scantiest crop, if managed with frugality and oeconomy, will maintain, through the year, the same number of people that are commonly fed in a more affluent man-ner by one of moderate plenty. The seasons most unfavourable to the crop are those of excessive drought or excessive rain. But, as corn grows equally upon high and low lands, upon grounds that are disposed to be too wet, and upon those that are disposed to be too dry, either the drought or the rain which is hurtful to one part of the country is favourable to another; and though both in the wet and in the dry season the crop is a good deal less than in one more properly tempered, yet in both what is lost in one part of the country is in some measure compensated by what is gained in the other. In rice countries, where the crop not only requires a very moist soil, but where in a certain period of its growing it must be laid under water, the effects of a drought are much more dis-mal. Even in such countries, however, the drought is, perhaps, scarce ever so universal as necessarily to occasion a famine, if the government would allow a free trade. The drought in Bengal, a few years ago, might probably have occasioned a very great dearth. Some improper regulations, some injudicious restraints imposed by

the servants of the East India Company upon the rice trade, con-tributed, perhaps, to turn that dearth into a famine.
               WHEN the government, in order to remedy the inconveniencies of a dearth, orders all the dealers to sell their corn at what it sup-poses a reasonable price, it either hinders them from bringing it to market, which may sometimes produce a famine, even in the begin-ning of the season; or if they bring it thither, it enables the peo-ple, and thereby encourages them to consume it so fast, as must necessarily produce a famine before the end of the season. The unlimited, unrestrained freedom of the corn trade, as it is the only effectual preventative of the miseries of a famine, so it is the best palliative of the inconveniencies of a dearth; for the incon-veniencies of a real scarcity cannot be remedied; they can only be palliated. No trade deserves more the full protection of the law, and no trade requires it so much; because no trade is so much ex-posed to popular odium.
               IN years of scarcity the inferior ranks of people impute their distress to the avarice of the corn merchant, who becomes the ob-ject of their hatred and indignation. Instead of making profit upon such occasions, therefore, he is often in danger of being utterly ruined, and of having his magazines plundered and de-stroyed by their violence. It is in years of scarcity, however, when prices are high, that the corn merchant expects to make his principal profit. He is generally in contract with some farmers to furnish him for a certain number of years with a certain quan-tity of corn at a certain price. This contract price is settled ac-cording to what is supposed to be the moderate and reasonable, that is, the ordinary or average price, which, before the late years of scarcity, was commonly about eight and twenty shillings for the quarter of wheat, and for that of other grain in proportion.

In years of scarcity, therefore, the corn merchant buys a great part of his corn for the ordinary price, and sells it for a much higher. That this extraordinary profit, however, is no more than sufficient to put his trade upon a fair level with other trades, and to compen-sate the many losses which he sustains upon other occasions, both from the perishable nature of the commodity itself, and from the frequent and unforeseen fluctuations of its price, seems evident enough, from this single circumstance, that great fortunes are as seldom made in this as in any other trade. The popular odium, however, which attends it in years of scarcity, the only years in which it can be very profitable, renders people of character and fortune averse to enter into it. It is abandoned to an inferior sett of dealers; and millers, bakers, mealmen and meal factors, toge-ther with a number of wretched hucksters, are almost the only middle people that, in the home market, come between the grower and the consumer.
               THE ancient policy of Europe, instead of discountenancing this popular odium against a trade so beneficial to the publick, seems, on the contrary, to have authorised and encouraged it.
               BY the 5th and 6th of Edward VI. cap. 14. it was enacted, That whoever should buy any corn or grain with intent to sell it again, should be reputed an unlawful engrosser, and should, for the first fault, suffer two months imprisonment, and forfeit the value of the corn; for the second, suffer six months imprison-ment, and forfeit double the value; and for the third, be set in the pillory, suffer imprisonment during the king's pleasure, and forfeit all his goods and chattels. The antient policy of most other parts of Europe was no better than that of England.
               
                  

OUR ancestors seem to have imagined that the people would buy their corn cheaper of the farmer than of the corn merchant, who, they were afraid, would require, over and above the price which he paid to the farmer, an exorbitant profit to himself. They endeavoured, therefore, to annihilate his trade altogether. They even endeavoured to hinder as much as possible any middle man of any kind from coming in between the grower and the consumer; and this was the meaning of the many restraints which they imposed upon the trade of those whom they called kidders or carries of corn, a trade which nobody was allowed to exercise without a licence ascertaining his qualifications as a man of probity and fair dealing. The authority of three justices of the peace was, by the statute of Edward VI. necessary, in order to grant this licence. But even this restraint was afterwards thought insufficient, and by a statute of Elizabeth, the privilege of granting it was confined to the quarter-sessions.
               THE antient policy of Europe endeavoured in this manner to regulate agriculture, the great trade of the country, by maxims quite different from those which it established with regard to ma-nufactures, the great trade of the towns. By leaving the farmer no other customers but either the consumer or his immediate factors, the kidders and carriers of corn, it endeavoured to force him to exercise the trade, not only of a farmer, but of a corn merchant or corn retailer. On the contrary, it in many cases prohibited the manufacturer from exercising the trade of a shop-keeper, or from selling his own goods by retail. It meant by the one law to promote the general interest of the country, or to ren-der corn cheap, without, perhaps, its being well understood how this was to be done. By the other it meant to promote that of a particular order of men, the shopkeepers, who would be so

much undersold by the manufacturer, it was supposed, that their trade would be ruined if he was allowed to retail at all.
               THE manufacturer, however, though he had been allowed to keep a shop, and to sell his own goods by retail, could not have undersold the common shopkeeper. Whatever part of his capital he might have placed in his shop, he must have withdrawn it from his manufacture. In order to carry on his business on a level with that of other people, as he must have had the profit of a manufacturer on the one part, so he must have had that of a shopkeeper upon the other. Let us suppose, for example, that in the particular town where he lived, ten per cent. was the ordi-nary profit both of manufacturing and shopkeeping stock; he must in this case have charged upon every piece of his own goods which he sold in his shop, a profit of twenty per cent. When he carried them from his workhouse to his shop, he must have valued them at the price for which he could have sold them to a dealer or shopkeeper, who would have bought them by wholesale. If he valued them lower, he lost a part of the profit of his manu-facturing capital. When again he sold them from his shop, unless he got the same price at which a shopkeeper would have sold them, he lost a part of the profit of his shopkeeping capital. Though he might appear, therefore, to make a double profit upon the same piece of goods, yet as these goods made successively a part of two distinct capitals, he made but a single profit upon the whole capital employed about them; and if he made less than this profit, he was a loser, or did not employ his whole capital with the same advantage as the greater part of his neighbours.
               WHAT the manufacturer was prohibited to do, the farmer was in some measure enjoined to do; to divide his capital between two different employments; to keep one part of it in his grana-ries

and stack yard, for supplying the occasional demands of the market; and to employ the other in the cultivation of his land. But as he could not afford to employ the latter for less than the ordinary profits of farming stock, so he could as little afford to employ the former for less than the ordinary profits of mercantile stock. Whether the stock which really carried on the business of the corn merchant belonged to the person who was called a farmer, or to the person who was called a corn merchant, an equal profit was in both cases requisite, in order to indemnify its owner for employing it in this manner; in order to put his business upon a level with other trades, and in order to hinder him from having an interest to change it as soon as possible for some other. The farmer, therefore, who was thus forced to exercise the trade of a corn merchant, could not afford to sell his corn cheaper than any other corn merchant would have been obliged to do in the case of a free competition.
               THE dealer who can employ his whole stock in one single branch of business, has an advantage of the same kind with the workman who can employ his whole labour in one single opera-tion. As the latter acquires a dexterity which enables him, with the same two hands, to perform a much greater quantity of work; so the former acquires so easy and ready a method of transacting his business, of buying and disposing of his goods, that with the same capital he can transact a much greater quan-tity of business. As the one can commonly afford his work a good deal cheaper, so the other can commonly afford his goods some-what cheaper than if his stock and attention were both employed about a greater variety of objects. The greater part of manu-facturers could not afford to retail their own goods so cheap as a vigilant and active shopkeeper, whose sole business it was to buy them by wholesale, and to retail them again. The greater part of farmers could still less afford to retail their own corn, or to supply

the inhabitants of a town, at perhaps four or five miles distance from the greater part of them, so cheap as a vigilant and active corn merchant, whose sole business it was to purchase corn by wholesale, to collect it into a great magazine, and to retail it again.
               THE law which prohibited the manufacturer from exercising the trade of a shopkeeper, endeavoured to force this division in the employment of stock to go on faster than it might otherwise have done. The law which obliged the farmer to exercife the trade of a corn merchant, endeavoured to hinder it from going on so fast. Both laws were evident violations of natural liberty, and there-fore unjust; and they were both too as impolitick as they were unjust. It is the interest of every society, that things of this kind should never either be forced or obstructed. The man who em-ploys either his labour or his stock in a greater variety of ways than his situation renders necessary, can never hurt his neigh-bour by underselling him. He may hurt himself, and he gene-rally does so. Jack of all trades will never be rich, says the proverb. But the law ought always to trust people with the care of their own interest, as in their local situations they must gene-rally be able to judge better of it than the legislator can do. The law, however, which obliged the farmer to exercise the trade of a corn merchant, was by far the most pernicious of the two.
               IT obstructed, not only that division in the employment of stock which is so advantageous to every society, but it obstructed likewise the improvement and cultivation of the land. By oblig-ing the farmer to carry on two trades instead of one, it forced him to divide his capital into two parts, of which one only could be employed in cultivation. But if he had been at liberty to sell his whole crop to a corn merchant as fast as he could thresh it out,

his whole capital might have returned immediately to the land, and have been employed in buying more cattle, and hiring more servants, in order to improve and cultivate it better. But by being obliged to sell his corn by retail, he was obliged to keep a great part of his capital in his granaries and stack yard through the year, and could not, therefore, cultivate so well as with the same capital he might otherwise have done. This law, therefore, necessarily obstructed the improvement of the land, and, instead of tending to render corn cheaper, must have tended to render it scarcer, and therefore dearer, than it would otherwise have been.
               AFTER the business of the farmer, that of the corn merchant is in reality the trade which, if properly protected and encou-raged, would contribute the most to the raising of corn. It would support the trade of the farmer in the same manner as the trade of the wholesale dealer supports that of the manu-facturer.
               THE wholesale dealer, by affording a ready market to the ma-nufacturer, by taking his goods off his hand as fast as he can make them, and by sometimes even advancing their price to him before he has made them, enables him to keep his whole capital, and sometimes even more than his whole capital, constantly em-ployed in manufacturing, and consequently to manufacture a much greater quantity of goods than if he was obliged to dis-pose of them himself to the immediate consumers, or even to the retailers. As the capital of the wholesale merchant too is ge-nerally sufficient to replace that of many manufacturers, this in-tercourse between him and them interests the owner of a large capital to support the owners of a great number of small ones, and to assist them in those losses and misfortunes which might otherwise prove ruinous to them.
               
                  

The country therefore could never become either richer or poorer by means of it, except so far as its prosperity or decay might indirectly influence the state of foreign trade.
               A COUNTRY that has no mines of its own must undoubtedly draw its gold and silver from foreign countries, in the same manner as one that has no vineyards of its own must draw its wines. It does not seem necessary, however, that the attention of government should be more turned towards the one than towards the other object. A country that has wherewithal to buy wine, will always get the wine which it has occasion for; and a country that has wherewithal to buy gold and silver, will never be in want of those metals. They are to be bought for a certain price like all other commodities, and as they are the price of all other commodities, so all other com-modities are the price of those metals. We trust with perfect secu-rity that the freedom of trade, without any attention of govern-ment, will always supply us with the wine which we have occasion for: and we may trust with equal security that it will always sup-ply us with all the gold and silver which we can afford to purchase or to employ, either in circulating our commodities or in other uses.
               THE quantity of every commodity which human industry can either purchase or produce, naturally regulates itself in every country according to the effectual demand, or according to the demand of those who are willing to pay the whole rent, labour, and profits which must be paid in order to prepare and bring it to market. But no commodities regulate themselves more easily or more exactly accord-ing to this effectual demand than gold and silver; because on account of the small bulk and great value of those metals, no commodities can be more easily transported from one place to another, from the places where they are cheap, to those where they are dear, from the

AN intercourse of the same kind universally established between the farmers and the corn merchants, would be attended with effects equally beneficial to the farmers. They would be enabled to keep their whole capitals, and even more than their whole capitals, constantly employed in cultivation. In case of any of those accidents, to which no trade is more liable than theirs, they would find in their ordinary customer, the wealthy corn merchant, a person who had both an interest to support them, and the ability to do it, and they would not, as at present, be entirely dependent upon the forbearance of their landlord, or the mercy of his steward. Were it possible, as perhaps it is not, to establish this intercourse universally, and all at once, were it pos-sible to turn all at once the whole farming stock of the kingdom to its proper business, the cultivation of land, withdrawing it from every other employment into which any part of it may be at present diverted, and were it possible, in order to support and assist upon occasion the operations of this great stock, to provide all at once another stock almost equally great, it is not perhaps very easy to imagine how great, how extensive, and how sudden would be the improvement which this change of circumstances would alone produce upon the whole face of the country.
               THE statute of Edward VI. therefore, by prohibiting as much as possible any middle man from coming in between the grower and the consumer, endeavoured to annihilate a trade of which the free exercise is not only the best palliative of the inconveniencies of a dearth, but the best preventative of that calamity: after the trade of the farmer, no trade contributing so much to the grow-ing of corn as that of the corn merchant.
               THE rigour of this law was afterwards softened by several subsequent statutes, which successively permitted the engrossing of corn when the price of wheat should not exceed twenty, twenty-four, thirty-two, and forty shillings the quarter. At last, by the

15th of Charles II. c. 7. the engrossing or buying of corn in order to sell it again, as long as the price of wheat did not exceed forty-eight shillings the quarter, and that of other grain in pro-portion, was declared lawful to all persons not being forestallers, that is, not selling again in the same market within three months. All the freedom which the trade of the inland corn dealer has ever yet enjoyed, was bestowed upon it by this statute. The statute of the twelfth of the present king, which repeals almost all the other antient laws against engrossers and forestallers, does not repeal the restrictions of this particular statute, which there-fore still continue in force.
               THIS statute, however, authorizes in some measure two very absurd popular prejudices.
               FIRST, it supposes that when the price of wheat has risen so high as forty-eight shillings the quarter, and that of other grain in proportion, corn is likely to be so engrossed as to hurt the people. But from what has been already said, it seems evident enough that corn can at no price be so engrossed by the inland dealers as to hurt the people; and forty-eight shillings the quarter besides, though it may be considered as a very high price, yet in years of scarcity it is a price which frequently takes place immediately after harvest, when scarce any part of the new crop can be sold off, and when it is impossible even for ignorance to suppose that any part of it can be so engrossed as to hurt the people.
               SECONDLY, it supposes that there is a certain price at which corn is likely to be forestalled, that is, bought up in order to be sold again soon after in the same market, so as to hurt the people. But if a mer-chant ever buys up corn, either going to a particular market or in a particular market, in order to sell it again soon after in the same mar-ket,

it must be because he judges that the market cannot be so libe-rally supplied through the whole season as upon that particular occa-sion, and that the price, therefore, must soon rise. If he judges wrong in this, and if the price does not rise, he not only loses the whole profit of the stock which he employs in this manner, but a part of the stock itself, by the expence and loss which necessarily attends the storing and keeping of corn. He hurts himself, therefore, much more essentially than he can hurt even the particular people whom he may hinder from supplying themselves upon that particu-lar market day, because they may afterwards supply themselves just as cheap upon any other market day. If he judges right, instead of hurting the great body of the people, he renders them a most im-portant service. By making them feel the inconveniencies of a dearth somewhat earlier than they otherwise might do, he prevents their feeling them afterwards so severely as they certainly would do, if the cheapness of price encouraged them to consume faster than suited the real scarcity of the season. When the soarcity is real, the best thing that can be done for the people is to divide the inconveniencies of it as equally as possible through all the diffe-rent months, and weeks, and days of the year. The interest of the corn merchant makes him study to do this as exactly as he can; and as no other person can have either the same interest, or the same knowledge, or the same abilities to do it so exactly as he, this most important operation of commerce ought to be trusted entirely to him; or, in other words, the corn trade, so far at least as concerns the supply of the home market, ought to be left per-fectly free.
               THE popular fear of engrossing and forestalling may be com-pared to the popular terrors and suspicions of witchcraft. The unfortunate wretches accused of this latter crime were not more innocent of the misfortunes imputed to them, than those who

have been accused of the former. The law which put an end to all prosecutions against witchcraft, which put it out of any man's power to gratify his own malice by accusing his neighbour of that imaginary crime, seems effectually to have put an end to those fears and suspicions, by taking away the great cause which encouraged and supported them. The law which should restore entire freedom to the inland trade of corn, would probably prove as effectual to put an end to the popular fears of engrossing and forestalling.
               THE 15th of Charles II. c. 7. however, with all its imperfec-tions, has perhaps contributed more both to the plentiful supply of the home market, and to the increase of tillage, than any other law in the statute book. It is from this law that the inland corn trade has derived all the liberty and protection which it has ever yet enjoyed; and both the supply of the home market, and the inte-rest of tillage, are much more effectually promoted by the inland, than either by the importation or exportation trade.
               THE proportion of the average quantity of all sorts of grain imported into Great Britain to that of all sorts of grain consumed, it has been computed by the author of the tracts upon the corn trade, does not exceed that of one to five hundred and seventy. For supplying the home market, therefore, the importance of the inland trade must be to that of the importation trade as five hun-dred and seventy to one.
               THE average quantity of all sorts of grain exported from Great Britain does not, according to the same author, exceed the one and thirtieth part of the annual produce. For the encouragement of tillage, therefore, by providing a market for the home produce, the importance of the inland trade must be to that of the exportation trade as thirty to one.
               
                  

I HAVE no great faith in political arithmetick, and I mean not to warrant the exactness of either of these computations. I men-tion them only in order to show of how much less consequence, in the opinion of the most judicious and experienced persons, the fo-reign trade of corn is than the home trade. The great cheapness of corn in the years immediately preceeding the establishment of the bounty, may perhaps, with reason, be ascribed in some measure to the operation of this statute of Charles II. which had been en-acted about five and twenty years before, and which had there-fore full time to produce its effect.
               A VERY few words will sufficiently explain all that I have to say concerning the other three branches of the corn trade.
               II. THE trade of the merchant importer of foreign corn for home consumption, evidently contributes to the immediate supply of the home market, and must so far be immediately beneficial to the great body of the people. It tends, indeed, to lower somewhat the average money price of corn, but not to diminish its real value, or the quantity of labour which it is capable of maintaining. If importation was at all times free, our farmers and country gentle-men would, probably, one year with another, get less money for their corn than they do at present, when importation is at most times in effect prohibited; but the money which they got would be of more value, would buy more goods of all other kinds, and would employ more labour. Their real wealth, their real revenue, therefore, would be the same as at present, though it might be expressed by a smaller quantity of silver; and they would neither be disabled nor discouraged from cultivating corn as much as they do at present. On the contrary, as the rise in the real value of sil-ver, in consequence of lowering the money price of corn, lowers somewhat the money price of all other commodities, it gives the

industry of the country where it takes place some advantage in all foreign markets, and thereby tends to encourage and increase that industry. But the extent of the home market for corn must be in proportion to the general industry of the country where it grows, or to the number of those who produce something else, and there-fore have something else, or what comes to the same thing, the price of something else, to give in exchange for corn. But in every country the home market, as it is the nearest and most conve-nient, so is it likewise the greatest and most important market for corn. That rise in the real value of silver, therefore, which is the effect of lowering the average money price of corn, tends to en-large the greatest and most important market for corn, and thereby to encourage, instead of discouraging, its growth.
               BY the 22d of Charles II. c. 13. the importation of wheat, whenever the price in the home market did not exceed fifty-three shillings and four pence the quarter, was subjected to a duty of sixteen shillings the quarter; and to a duty of eight shillings whenever the price did not exceed four pounds. The former of these two prices has, for more than a century past, taken place only in times of very great scarcity; and the latter has, so far as I know, not taken place at all. Yet, till wheat had risen above this latter price, it was by this statute subjected to a very high duty; and, till it had risen above the former, to a duty which amounted to a prohibition. The importation of other sorts of grain was restrained by duties proportionably high.
               THE distress which, in years of scarcity, the strict execution of this statute might have brought upon the people, would probably have been very great. But, upon such occasions, its execution was generally suspended by temporary statutes, which permitted, for a limited time, the importation of foreign corn. The necessity of

these temporary statutes sufficiently demonstrates the impropriety of this general one.
               THESE restraints upon importation, though prior to the esta-blishment of the bounty, were dictated by the same spirit, by the same principles, which afterwards enacted that regulation. How hurtful soever in themselves, these or some other restraints upon importation became necessary in consequence of that regulation. If, when wheat was either below forty-eight shillings the quarter, or not much above it, foreign corn could have been imported either duty free, or upon paying only a small duty, it might have been exported again, with the benefit of the bounty, to the great loss of the publick revenue, and to the intire perversion of the institution, of which the object was to extend the market for the home growth, not that for the growth of foreign countries.
               III. THE trade of the merchant exporter of corn for foreign consumption, certainly does not contribute directly to the plen-tiful supply of the home market. It does so, however, indirectly. From whatever source this supply may be usually drawn, whether from home growth or from foreign importation, unless more corn is either usually grown, or usually imported into the country, than what is usually consumed in it, the supply of the home market can never be very plentiful. But, unless the surplus can, in all ordinary cases, be exported, the growers will be careful never to grow more, and the importers never to import more, than what the bare consumption of the home market requires. That market will very seldom be overstocked; but it will generally be under-stocked, the people, whose business it is to supply it, being gene-rally afraid lest their goods should be left upon their hands. The prohibition of exportation limits the improvement and culti-vation of the country to what the supply of its own inhabitants

requires. The freedom of exportation enables it to extend its cul-tivation for the supply of foreign nations.
               BY the 12th of Charles II. c. 4. the exportation of corn was permitted whenever the price of wheat did not exceed forty shil-lings the quarter, and that of other grain in proportion. By the 15th of the same prince this liberty was extended till the price of wheat exceeded forty-eight shillings the quarter; and by the 22d, to all higher prices. A poundage, indeed, was to be paid to the king upon such exportation. But all grain was rated so low in the book of rates, that this poundage amounted only upon wheat to a shilling, upon oats to four-pence, and upon all other grain to sixpence the quarter. By the 1st of William and Mary, the act which established the bounty, this small duty was virtually taken off whenever the price of wheat did not exceed forty-eight shil-lings the quarter; and by the 11th and 12th of William III. c. 20. it was expressly taken off at all higher prices.
               THE trade of the merchant exporter was in this manner, not only encouraged by a bounty, but rendered much more free than that of the inland dealer. By the last of these statutes, corn could be engrossed at any price for exportation; but it could not be en-grossed for inland sale, except when the price did not exceed forty-eight shillings the quarter. The interest of the inland dealer, how-ever, it has already been shown, can never be opposite to that of the great body of the people. That of the merchant exporter may, and in fact sometimes is. If, while his own country labours under a dearth, a neighbouring country should be afflicted with a famine, it might be his interest to carry corn to the latter country in such quantities as might very much aggravate the calamities of the dearth. The plentiful supply of the home market was not the direct object of those statutes; but, under the pretence of encou-raging

agriculture, to raise the money price of corn as high as pos-sible, and thereby to occasion, as much as possible, a constant dearth in the home market. By the discouragement of importa-tion, the supply of that market, even in times of great scarcity, was confined to the home growth; and by the encouragement of exportation, when the price was so high as forty-eight shillings the quarter, that market was not, even in times of considerable scar-city, allowed to enjoy the whole of that growth. The temporary laws, prohibiting for a limited time the exportation of corn, and taking off for a limited time the duties upon its importation, expe-dients to which Great Britain has been obliged so frequently to have recourse, sufficiently demonstrate the impropriety of her general system. Had that system been good, she would not so frequently have been reduced to the necessity of departing from it.
               WERE all nations to follow the liberal system of free exporta-tion and free importation, the different states into which a great continent was divided would so far resemble the different provinces of a great empire. As among the different provinces of a great empire the freedom of the inland trade appears, both from reason and experience, not only the best palliative of a dearth, but the most effectual preventative of a famine; so would the freedom of the exportation and importation trade be among the different states into which a great continent was divided. The larger the conti-nent, the easier the communication through all the different parts of it, both by land and by water, the less would any one particu-lar part of it ever be exposed to either of these calamities, the scarcity of any one country being more likely to be relieved by the plenty of some other. But very few countries have entirely adopted this liberal system. The freedom of the corn trade is almost every where more or less restrained, and, in many countries, is confined by such absurd regulations, as frequently aggravate the unavoidable misfortune of a dearth into the dreadful calamity of a famine.

The demand of such countries for corn may frequently become so great and so urgent, that a small state in their neighbourhood, which happened at the same time to be labouring under some de-gree of dearth, could not venture to supply them without exposing itself to the like dreadful calamity. The very bad policy of one country may thus render it in some measure dangerous and impru-dent to establish what would otherwise be the best policy in ano-ther. The unlimited freedom of exportation, however, would be much less dangerous in great states, in which the growth being much greater, the supply could seldom be much affected by any quantity of corn that was likely to be exported. In a Swiss can-ton, or in some of the little states of Italy, it may, perhaps, some-times be necessary to restrain the exportation of corn. In such great countries as France or England it scarce ever can. To hin-der, besides, the farmer from sending his goods at all times to the best market, is evidently to sacrifice the ordinary laws of justice to an idea of public utility, to a sort of reasons of state; an act of legi-slative authority which ought to be exercised only, which can be pardoned only in cases of the most urgent necessity. The price at which the exportation of corn is prohibited, if it is ever to be prohibited, ought always to be a very high price.
               THE laws concerning corn may every where be compared to the laws concerning religion. The people feel themselves so much inte-rested in what relates either to their subsistence in this life, or to their happiness in a life to come, that government must yield to their prejudices, and, in order to preserve the public tranquillity, esta-blish that system which they approve of. It is upon this account, perhaps, that we so seldom find a reasonable system established with regard to either of those two capital objects.
               IV. THE trade of the merchant carrier, or of the importer of foreign corn, in order to export it again, contributes to the

places where they exceed, to those where they fall short of this ef-fectual demand. If there was in England, for example, an effectual demand for an additional quantity of gold, a packet-boat could bring from Lisbon, or from wherever else it was to be had, fifty tuns of gold, which could be coined into more than five mil-lions of guineas. But if there was an effectual demand for grain to the same value, to import it would require, at five guineas a tun, a million of tuns of shipping, or a thousand ships of a thousand tuns each. The navy of England would not be suf-ficient.
               WHEN the quantity of gold and silver imported into any country exceeds the effectual demand, no vigilance of government can prevent their exportation. All the sanguinary laws of Spain and Portugal are not able to keep their gold and silver at home. The continual importations from Peru and Brazil exceed the effectual demand of those countries, and sink the price of those metals there below that in the neighbouring countries. If, on the contrary, in any particular country their quantity fell short of the effectual demand, so as to raise their price above that in the neighbouring countries, the government would have no occasion to take any pains to import them. If it was even to take pains to prevent their importation, it would not be able to effectuate it. Those metals, when the Spartans had got wherewithal to purchase them, broke through all the barriers which the laws of Lycurgus opposed to their entrance into Lacedemon. All the sanguinary laws of the customs, are not able to prevent the importation of the teas of the Dutch and Gottenburg East India companies; because somewhat cheaper than those of the British company. A pound of tea, however, is about a hundred times the bulk of one of the highest prices, sixteen shillings, that is commonly paid for it in silver, and more than two thousand times the bulk of the

plentiful supply of the home market. It is not indeed the direct purpose of his trade to sell his corn there. But he will generally be willing to do so, and even for a good deal less money than he might expect in a foreign market; because he saves in this manner the expence of loading and unloading, of freight and insurance. The inhabitants of the country which, by means of the carrying trade, becomes the magazine and storehouse for the supply of other countries, can very seldom be in want them-selves. Though the carrying trade might thus contribute to reduce the average money price of corn in the home market, it would not thereby lower its real value. It would only raise some-what the real value of silver.
               THE carrying trade was in effect prohibited in Great Britain upon all ordinary occasions, by the high duties upon the im-portation of foreign corn; and upon extraordinary occasions, when a scarcity made it necessary to suspend those duties by tem-porary statutes, exportation was always prohibited. By this system of laws, therefore, the carrying trade was in effect prohibited upon all occasions.
               THAT system of laws, therefore, which is connected with the establishment of the bounty, seems to deserve no part of the praise which has been bestowed upon it. The improvement and prosperity of Great Britain, which has been so often ascribed to those laws, may very easily be accounted for by other causes. That security which the laws in Great Britain give to every man that he shall enjoy the fruits of his own labour, is alone sufficient to make any country flourish, notwithstanding these and twenty other absurd regulations of commerce; and this security was perfected by the revolution, much about the same time that the bounty was established. The natural effort of every individual

to better his own condition, when suffered to exert itself with freedom and security, is so powerful a principle that it is alone, and without any assistance, not only capable of carrying on the society to wealth and prosperity, but of surmounting a hundred impertinent obstructions with which the folly of human laws too often incumbers its operations; though the effect of these ob-structions is always more or less either to encroach upon its free-dom, or to diminish its security. In Great Britain industry is perfectly secure; and though it is far from being perfectly free, it is as free or freer than in any other part of Europe.
               THOUGH the period of the greatest prosperity and improve-ment of Great Britain, has been posterior to that system of laws which is connected with the bounty, we must not upon that account impute it to those laws. It has been posterior likewise to the national debt. But the national debt has most assuredly not been the cause of it.
               THOUGH the system of laws which is connected with the bounty, has exactly the same tendency with the police of Spain and Portugal; to lower somewhat the value of the precious metals in the country where it takes place; yet Great Britain is certainly one of the richest countries in Europe, while Spain and Portugal are perhaps among the most beggarly. This difference of situation, however, may easily be accounted for from two dif-ferent causes. First, the tax in Spain, the prohibition in Portu-gal of exporting gold and silver, and the vigilant police which watches over the execution of those laws, must, in two very poor countries, which between them import annually upwards of six millions sterling, operate, not only more directly, but much more forcibly in reducing the value of those metals there, than the corn laws can do in Great Britain. And, secondly, this bad policy is not in those countries counter-balanced by the general

liberty and security of the people. Industry is there neither free nor secure, and the civil and ecclesiastical governments of both Spain and Portugal, are such as would alone be sufficient to per-petuate their present state of poverty, even though their regula-tions of commerce were as wise as the greater part of them are absurd and foolish.
               THE 13th of the present king, c. 43. seems to have established a new system with regard to the corn laws, in many respects better than the ancient one, but in one respect perhaps not quite so good.
               BY this statute the high duties upon importation for home consumption are taken off as soon as the price of wheat is so high as forty-eight shillings the quarter, and instead of them a small duty is imposed of only sixpence upon the quarter of wheat, and upon that of other grain in proportion. The home market is in this manner not so totally excluded from foreign supplies as it was before.
               BY the same statute the old bounty of five shillings upon the quarter of wheat ceases when the price rises so high as forty-four shillings, and upon that of other grain in proportion. The bounties too upon the coarser sorts of grain are reduced some-what lower than they were before, even at the prices at which they take place. If bounties are as improper as I have en-deavoured to prove them to be, the sooner they cease and the lower they are, so much the better.
               THE same statute permits at all prices the importation of corn in order to be exported again, duty free; provided it is in the meantime lodged in the king's warehouse. This liberty indeed extends to no more than twenty-five of the different ports of

Great Britain. They are, however, the principal ones, and there may not perhaps be warehouses proper for this purpose in the greater part of the others. Some provision is thus made for the establishment of the carrying trade.
               So far this law seems evidently an improvement upon the antient system.
               BUT by the same law exportation is prohibited as soon as the price of wheat rises to forty-four shillings the quarter, and that of other grain in proportion. The price seems to be a good deal too low, and there seems to be an impropriety besides in stopping ex-portation altogether, at the very same price at which that bounty which was given in order to force it, is withdrawn. The bounty ought certainly either to have been withdrawn at a much lower price, or exportation ought to have been allowed at a much higher. So far, therefore, this law seems to be inferior to the ancient system.
            
            
               CHAP. VI. Of treaties of commerce.
               
               WHEN a nation binds itself by treaty either to permit the entry of certain goods from one foreign country which it prohibits from all others, or to exempt the goods of one coun-try from duties to which it subjects those of all others, the country, or at least the merchants and manufacturers of the country, whose commerce is so favoured, must necessarily derive

great advantage from the treaty. Those merchants and manufac-turers enjoy a sort of monopoly in the country which is so indul-gent to them. That country becomes a market both more ex-tensive and more advantageous for their goods: more extensive, because the goods of other nations being either excluded or sub-jected to heavier duties, it takes off a greater quantity of theirs: more advantageous, because the merchants of the favoured coun-try, enjoying a sort of monopoly there, will often sell their goods for a better price than if exposed to the free competition of all other nations.
               SUCH treaties, however, though they may be advantageous to the merchants and manufacturers of the favoured, are necessarily disadvantageous to those of the favouring country. A monopoly is thus granted against them to a foreign nation; and they must frequently buy the foreign goods they have occasion for dearer than if the free competition of other nations was admitted. That part of its own produce with which such a nation purchases foreign goods, must consequently be sold cheaper, because when two things are ex-changed for one another, the cheapness of the one is a necessary consequence, or rather is the same thing with the dearness of the other. The exchangeable value of its annual produce, therefore, is likely to be diminished by every such treaty. This diminution, however, can scarce amount to any positive loss, but only to a lessening of the gain which it might otherwise make. Though it sells its goods cheaper than it otherwise might do, it will not probably sell them for less than they cost; nor, as in the case of bounties, for a price which will not replace the capital employed in bringing them to market, together with the ordinary profits of stock. The trade could not go on long if it did. Even the favouring coun-try, therefore, may still gain by the trade, though less than if there was a free competition.
               
                  

SOME treaties of commerce, however, have been supposed ad-vantageous upon principles very different from these; and a com-mercial country has sometimes granted a monopoly of this kind against itself to certain goods of a foreign nation, because it expected that in the whole commerce between them, it would annually sell more than it would buy, and that a balance in gold and silver would be annually returned to it. It is upon this principle that the treaty of commerce between England and Por-tugal, concluded in 1703 by Mr. Methuen, has been so much commended. The following is a literal translation of that treaty, which consists of three articles only.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           ART. I.
                           HIS sacred royal majesty of Portugal promises, both in his own name, and that of his successors, to admit, for ever hereafter, into Portugal, the woollen cloths, and the rest of the woollen manufactures of the British, as was accustomed, till they were prohibited by the law; nevertheless upon this condition:
                        
                        
                           ART. II.
                           THAT is to say, that her sacred royal majesty of Great Britain shall, in her own name, and that of her successors, be obliged for ever hereafter, to admit the wines of the growth of Portu-gal into Britain; so that at no time, whether there shall be peace or war between the kingdoms of Britain and France, any thing more shall be demanded for these wines by the name of custom or duty, or by whatsoever other title, directly or indirectly, whe-ther they shall be imported into Great Britain in pipes or hogs-heads, or other casks, than what shall be demanded for the like quantity or measure of French wine, deducting or abating a third-part of the custom or duty. But if at any time this deduction or abatement of customs, which is to be made as aforesaid, shall in

any manner be attempted and prejudiced, it shall be just and lawful for his sacred royal majesty of Portugal, again to pro-hibit the woollen cloths, and the rest of the British woollen manufactures.
                        
                        
                           ART. III.
                           THE most excellent lords the plenipotentiaries promise and take upon themselves, that their above-named masters shall ratify this treaty, and within the space of two months, the ratifications shall be exchanged.
                        
                     
                  
               
               BY this treaty the crown of Portugal becomes bound to admit the English woollens upon the same footing as before the prohi-bition, that is, not to raise the duties which had been paid before that time. But it does not become bound to admit them upon any better terms than those of any other nation, of France or Holland, for example. The crown of Great Britain, on the contrary, becomes bound to admit the wines of Portugal, upon paying only two-thirds of the duty, which is paid for those of France, the wines most likely to come into competition with them. So far this treaty, therefore, is evidently advantageous to Portu-gal, and disadvantageous to Great Britain.
               IT has been celebrated, however, as a master-piece of the commercial policy of England. Portugal receives annually from the Brazils a greater quantity of gold than can be employed in its domestick commerce, whether in the shape of coin or of plate. The surplus is too valuable to be allowed to lie idle and locked up in coffers, and as it can find no advantageous market at home, it must, notwithstanding any prohibition, be sent abroad and exchanged for something for which there is a more advan-tageous market at home. A large share of it comes annually to England, in return either for English goods, or for those of other

European nations that receive their returns through England. Mr. Baretti was informed that the weekly packet-boat from Lisbon brings, one week with another, more than fifty thousand pounds in gold to England. The sum had probably been exag-gerated. It would amount to more than two millions six hun-dred thousand pounds a year, which is more than the Brazils are supposed to afford.
               OUR merchants were some years ago out of humour with the crown of Portugal. Some privileges which had been granted them, not by treaty, but by the free grace of that crown, at the solicitation, indeed, it is probable, and in return for much greater favours, defence and protection, from the crown of Great Britain, had been either infringed or revoked. The people, therefore, usually most interested in celebrating the Portugal trade, were then rather disposed to represent it as less advantageous than it had commonly been imagined. The far greater part, almost the whole, they pretended, of this annual importation of gold, was not on account of Great Britain, but of other European nations; the fruits and wines of Portugal annually imported into Great Britain nearly compensating the value of the British goods sent thither.
               LET us suppose, however, that the whole was on account of Great Britain, and that it amounted to a still greater sum than Mr. Baretti seems to imagine: this trade would not, upon that account, be more advantageous than any other in which for the same value sent out, we received an equal value of consum-able goods in return.
               IT is but a very small part of this importation which, it can be supposed, is employed as an annual addition either to the plate or to the coin of the kingdom. The rest must all be sent abroad and

exchanged for consumable goods of some kind or other. But if those consumable goods were purchased directly with the produce of English industry, it would be more for the advantage of England than first to purchase with that produce the gold of Portugal, and afterwards to purchase with that gold those consumable goods. A direct foreign trade of consumption is always more advantageous than a round-about one; and to bring the same value of foreign goods to the home market, requires a much smaller capital in the one than in the other. If a smaller share of its industry, there-fore, had been employed in producing goods fit for the Portugal market, and a greater in producing those fit for the other markets where those consumable goods for which there is a demand in Great Britain are to be had, it would have been more for the advantage of England. To procure both the gold, which it wants for its own use, and the consumable goods, would, in this way, employ a much smaller capital than at present. There would be a spare capital, therefore, to be employed for other purposes, in exciting an additional quantity of industry, and in raising a greater annual produce.
               THOUGH Britain were entirely excluded from the Portugal trade, it could find very little difficulty in procuring all the annual sup-plies of gold which it wants, either for the purposes of plate, or of coin, or of foreign trade. Gold, like every other commodity, is always somewhere or another to be got for its value by those who have that value to give for it. The annual surplus of gold in Por-tugal, besides, would still be sent abroad, and, though not carried away by Great Britain, would be carried away by some other nation, which would be glad to sell it again for its price, in the same man-ner as Great Britain does at present. In buying gold of Portu-gal, indeed, we buy it at the first hand; whereas, in buying it of any other nation, except Spain, we should buy it at the second,

and might pay somewhat dearer. This difference, however, would surely be too insignificant to deserve the publick attention.
               ALMOST all our gold, it is said, comes from Portugal. With other nations the balance of trade is either against us, or not much in our favour. But we should remember, that the more gold we import from one country, the less we must necessarily import from all others. The effectual demand for gold, like that for every other commodity, is in every country limited to a certain quan-tity. If nine-tenths of this quantity are imported from one coun-try, there remains a tenth only to be imported from all others. The more gold besides that is annually imported from some parti-cular countries, over and above what is requisite for plate and for coin, the more must necessarily be exported to some others; and the more, that most insignificant object of modern policy, the ba-lance of trade, appears to be in our favour with some particular countries, the more it must necessarily appear to be against us with many others.
               IT was upon this silly notion, however, that England could not subsist without the Portugal trade, that, towards the end of the late war, France and Spain, without pretending either offence or provocation, required the king of Portugal to exclude all Bri-tish ships from his ports, and for the security of this exclusion, to receive into them French or Spanish garrisons. Had the king of Portugal submitted to those ignominious terms which his brother-in-law the king of Spain proposed to him, Britain would have been freed from a much greater inconveniency than the loss of the Portugal trade, the burden of supporting a very weak ally, so unprovided of every thing for his own defence, that the whole power of England, had it been directed to that single purpose, could scarce perhaps have defended him for another

same price in gold, and consequently just so many times more dif-ficult to smuggle.
               IT is partly owing to the easy transportation of gold and silver from the places where they abound to those where they are wanted, that the price of those metals does not fluctuate continually like that of the greater part of other commodities, which are hindered by their bulk from shifting their situation, when the market happens to be either over or understocked with them. The price of those metals, indeed, is not altogether exempted from variation, but the changes to which it is liable are generally slow, gradual, and uni-form. In Europe, for example, it is supposed, without much foundation perhaps, that, during the course of the present and preceeding century, they have been constantly but gradually sink-ing in their value, on account of the continual importations from the Spanish West Indies. But to make any sudden change in the price of gold and silver, so as to raise or lower at once, sensibly and remarkably, the money price of all other commodities, re-quires such a revolution in commerce as that occasioned by the discovery of America.
               IF notwithstanding all this, gold and silver should at any time fall short in a country which has wherewithal to purchase them, there are more expedients for supplying their place, than that of almost any other commodity. If the materials of manufacture are wanted, industry must stop. If provisions are wanted, the people must starve. But if money is wanted, barter will supply its place, though with a good deal of inconveniency. Buying and selling upon credit, and the different dealers compensating their credits with one another, once a month or once a year, will supply it with less inconveniency. A well regulated paper money will supply it, not only without any inconveniency, but with very

campaign. The loss of the Portugal trade would, no doubt, have occasioned a considerable embarrassment to the merchants at that time engaged in it, who might not, perhaps, have found out, for a year or two, any other equally advantageous method of employing their capitals; and in this would probably have consisted all the inconveniency which England could have suffered from this notable piece of commercial policy.
               THE great annual importation of gold and silver is neither for the purpose of plate nor of coin, but of foreign trade. A round-about foreign trade of consumption can be carried on more advan-tageously by means of these metals than of almost any other goods. As they are the universal instruments of commerce, they are more readily received in return for all commodities than any other goods; and on account of their small bulk and great value, it costs less to transport them backward and forwards from one place to another than almost any other sort of merchandize, and they lose less of their value by being so transported. Of all the commodities, therefore, which are bought in one foreign country, for no other purpose but to be sold or exchanged again for some other goods in another, there are none so convenient as gold and silver. In facilitating all the different round-about foreign trades of consumption which are carried on in Great Britain, consists the principal advantage of the Portugal trade; and though it is not a capital advantage, it is, no doubt, a considerable one.
               THAT any annual addition which, it can reasonably be sup-posed, is made either to the plate or to the coin of the kingdom, could require but a very small annual importation of gold and silver, seems evident enough; and, though we had no direct trade with Portugal, this small quantity could always, somewhere or another, be very easily got.
               THOUGH the goldsmiths trade be very considerable in Great Bri-tain, the far greater part of the new plate which they annually

sell, is made from other old plate melted down; so that the addi-tion annually made to the whole plate of the kingdom cannot be very great, and could require but a very small annual importation.
               IT is the same case with the coin. Nobody imagines, I believe, that even the greater part of the annual coinage, amounting, for ten years together before the late reformation of the gold coin, to up-wards of eight hundred thousand pounds a year in gold, was an annual addition to the money before current in the kingdom. In a country where the expence of the coinage is defrayed by the govern-ment, the value of the coin, even when it contains its full standard weight of gold and silver, can never be much greater than that of an equal quantity of those metals uncoined; because it requires only the trouble of going to the mint, and the delay perhaps of a few weeks, to procure for any quantity of uncoined gold and silver an equal quantity of those metals in coin. But, in every country, the greater part of the current coin is almost always more or less worn, or otherwise degenerated from its standard. In Great Britain it was, before the late reformation, a good deal so, the gold being more than two per cent. and the silver more than eight per cent. below its stand-ard weight. But if forty-four guineas and a half, containing their full standard weight, a pound weight of gold, could purchase very little more than a pound weight of uncoined gold, forty-four guineas and a half wanting a part of their weight could not pur-chase a pound weight, and something was to be added in order to make up the deficiency. The current price of gold bullion at market, therefore, instead of being the same with the mint price, or 461. 14s. 6d. was then about 471. 14s. and sometimes about forty-eight pounds. When the greater part of the coin, however, was in this degenerate condition, forty-four guineas and a half, fresh from the mint, would purchase no more goods in the market than any other ordinary guineas, because when they come into the cof-fers of the merchant, being confounded with other money, they

could not afterwards be distinguished without more trouble than the difference was worth. Like other guineas they were worth no more than 461. 14s. 6d. If thrown into the melting pot, how-ever, they produced, without any sensible loss, a pound weight of standard gold, which could be sold at any time for between 471. 14s. and 481. either in gold or silver, as fit for all the purposes of coin as that which had been melted down. There was an evident pro-fit, therefore, in melting down new coined money, and it was done so instantaneously, that no precaution of government could prevent it. The operations of the mint were, upon this account, somewhat like the web of Penelope; the work that was done in the day was undone in the night. The mint was employed, not so much in making daily additions to the coin, as in replacing the very best part of it which was daily melted down.
               WERE the private people, who carry their gold and silver to the mint, to pay themselves for the coinage, it would add to the value of those metals in the same manner as the fashion does to that of plate. Coined gold and silver would be more valuable than uncoined. The seignorage, if it was not exorbitant, would add to the bullion the whole value of the duty; because, the government having every where the exclusive privilege of coining, no coin can come to market cheaper than they think proper to afford it. If the duty was exorbitant indeed, that is, if it was very much above the real value of the labour and expence requisite for coinage, false coiners, both at home and abroad, might be encouraged, by the great difference between the value of bullion and that of coin, to pour in so great a quantity of counterfeit money as might reduce the value of the government money. In France, however, though the seignorage is eight per cent. no sensible inconveniency of this kind is found to arise from it. The dangers to which a false coiner is every where exposed, if he lives in the country of which he coun-terfeits

the coin, and to which his agents or correspondents are exposed if he lives in a foreign country, are by far too great to be incurred for the sake of a profit of six or seven per cent.
               THE seignorage in France raises the value of the coin higher than in proportion to the quantity of pure gold which it contains. Thus by the edict of January, 1726, See Dictionaire des Monnoies, tom. i. article Seigneurage, p. 489. par M. Abot de Bazinghen, Conseiller-Comissaire en la Cour des Monnoies à Paris. the mint price of fine gold of twenty-four carats was fixed at seven hundred and forty livres, nine sous and one denier one-eleventh, the mark of eight Paris ounces. The gold coin of France, making an allowance for the remedy of the mint, contains twenty-one carats and three-fourths of fine gold, and two carats one-fourth of alloy. The mark of standard gold, therefore, is worth no more than about six hundred and seventy-one livres ten deniers. But in France this mark of standard gold is coined into thirty Louis d' ors of twenty-four livres each, or into seven hundred and twenty livres. The coinage, therefore, increases the value of a mark of standard gold bullion, by the difference between six hundred and seventy-one livres ten deniers and seven hundred and twenty livres; or by forty-eight livres, nineteen sous, and two deniers.
               A SEIGNORAGE will, in many cases, take away altogether, and will, in all cases, diminish the profit of melting down the new coin. This profit always arises from the difference between the quan-tity of bullion which the common currency ought to contain, and that which it actually does contain. If this difference is less than the seignorage, there will be loss instead of profit. If it is equal to the seignorage, there will neither be profit nor loss. If it is greater than the seignorage, there will indeed be some profit, but

less than if there was no seignorage. If, before the late reforma-tion of the gold coin, for example, there had been a seignorage of five per cent. upon the coinage, there would have been a loss of three per cent. upon the melting down of the gold coin. If the seignorage had been two per cent. there would have been neither profit nor loss. If the seignorage had been one per cent. there would have been a profit, but of one per cent. only instead of two per cent. Wherever money is received by tale, therefore, and not by weight, a seignorage is the most effectual preventative of the melting down of the coin, and, for the same reason, of its expor-tation. It is the best and heaviest pieces that are commonly either melted down or exported; because it is upon such that the largest profits are made.
               THE law for the encouragement of the coinage, by rendering it duty-free, was first enacted, during the reign of Charles II. for a limited time; and afterwards continued, by different prolongations, till 1769, when it was rendered perpetual. The bank of England, in order to replenish their coffers with money, are fre-quently obliged to carry bullion to the mint; and it was more for their interest, they probably imagined, that the coinage should be at the expence of the government, than at their own. It was, probably, out of complaisance to this great company that the go-vernment agreed to render this law perpetual. Should the custom of weighing gold, however, come to be difused, as it is very likely to be on account of its inconveniency; should the gold coin of England come to be received by tale, as it was before the late re-coinage, this great company may, perhaps, find that they have upon this, as upon some other occasions, mistaken their own inte-rest not a little.
               BEFORE the late re-coinage, when the gold currency of Eng-land was two per cent. below its standard weight, as there was

no seignorage, it was two per cent. below the value of that quantity of standard gold bullion which it ought to have con-tained. When this great company, therefore, bought gold bul-lion in order to have it coined, they were obliged to pay for it two per cent. more than it was worth after the coinage. But if there had been a seignorage of two per cent. upon the coinage, the common gold currency, though two per cent. below its stand-ard weight, would notwithstanding have been equal in value to the quantity of standard gold which it ought to have contained; the value of the fashion compensating in this case the diminution of the weight. They would indeed have had the seignorage to pay, which being two per cent. their loss upon the whole trans-action would have been two per cent. exactly the same, but no greater than it actually was.
               IF the seignorage had been five per cent. and the gold cur-rency only two per cent. below its standard weight, the bank would in this case have gained three per cent. upon the price of the bullion; but as they would have had a seignorage of five per cent. to pay upon the coinage, their loss upon the whole transac-tion would, in the same manner, have been exactly two per cent.
               In the seignorage had been only one per cent. and the gold currency two per cent. below its standard weight, the bank would in this case have lost only one per cent. upon the price of the bullion; but as they would likewise have had a seignorage of one per cent. to pay, their loss upon the whole transaction would have been exactly two per cent. in the same manner as in all other cases.
               IF there was a reasonable seignorage, while at the same time the coin contained its full standard weight, as it has done very

nearly since the late re-coinage, whatever the bank might lose by the seignorage, they would gain upon the price of the bullion; and whatever they might gain upon the price of the bullion, they would lose by the seignorage. They would neither lose nor gain, therefore, upon the whole transaction, and they would in this, as in all the foregoing cases, be exactly in the same situation as if there was no seignorage.
               WHEN the tax upon a commodity is so moderate as not to encourage smuggling, the merchant, who deals in it, though he advances, does not properly pay the tax, as he gets it back in the price of the commodity. The tax is finally paid by the last purchaser or consumer. But money is a commodity with regard to which every man is a merchant. Nobody buys it but in order to sell it again; and with regard to it there is in ordinary cases no last purchaser or consumer. When the tax upon coin-age, therefore, is so moderate as not to encourage false coin-ing, though every body advances the tax, nobody finally pays it; because every body gets it back in the advanced value of the coin.
               A MODERATE seignorage, therefore, would not in any case augment the expence of the bank, or of any other private per-sons who carry their bullion to the mint in order to be coined, and the want of a moderate seignorage does not in any case dimi-nish it. Whether there is or is not a seignorage, if the currency contains its full standard weight, the coinage costs nothing to any body, and if it is short of that weight, the coinage must always cost the difference between the quantity of bullion which ought to be contained in it, and that which actually is con-tained in it.
               THE government, therefore, when it defrays the expence of coinage, not only incurrs some small expence, but loses some

small revenue which it might get by a proper duty; and neither the bank nor any other private persons are in the smallest degree benefited by this useless piece of public generosity.
               THE directors of the bank, however, would probably be unwilling to agree to the imposition of a seignorage upon the authority of a speculation which promises them no gain, but only pretends to in-sure them from any loss. In the present state of the gold coin, and as long as it continues to be received by weight, they cer-tainly would gain nothing by such a change. But if the custom of weighing the gold coin should ever go into difuse, as it is very likely to do, and if the gold coin should ever fall into the same state of degradation in which it was before the late re-coinage, the gain, or more properly the savings of the bank, in consequence of the imposition of a seignorage, would probably be very consi-derable. The bank of England is the only company which sends any considerable quantity of bullion to the mint, and the bur-den of the annual coinage falls entirely or almost entirely upon it. If this annual coinage had nothing to do but to repair the unavoidable losses and necessary tear and wear of the coin, it could seldom exceed fifty thousand or at most a hundred thousand pounds. But when the coin is degraded below its standard weight, the annual coinage must, besides this, fill up the large vacuities which exportation and the melting pot are continually making in the current coin. It was upon this account that dur-ing the ten or twelve years immediately preceeding the late refor-mation of the gold coin, the annual coinage amounted at an average to more than eight hundred and fifty thousand pounds. But if there had been a seignorage of four or five per cent. upon the gold coin, it would probably, even in the state in which things then were, have put an effectual stop to the business both of exportation and of the melting pot. The bank, instead of losing

every year about two and a half per cent. upon the bullion which was to be coined into more than eight hundred and fifty thousand pounds, or incurring an annual loss of more than twenty one thousand two hundred and fifty pounds, would not probably have incurred the tenth part of that loss.
               THE revenue allotted by parliament for defraying the expence of the coinage is but fourteen thousand pounds a year, and the real expence which it costs the government, or the fees of the officers of the mint, do not upon ordinary occasions, I am assured, exceed the half of that sum. The saving of so very small a sum, or even the gaining of another which could not well be much larger, are objects too inconsiderable, it may be thought, to deserve the serious attention of government. But the saving of eighteen or twenty thousand pounds a year in case of an event which is not improbable, which has frequently hap-pened before, and which is very likely to happen again, is surely an object which well deserves the serious attention even of so great a company as the bank of England.
               SOME of the foregoing reasonings and observations might per-haps have been more properly placed in those chapters of the first book which treat of the origin and use of money, and of the difference between the real and the nominal price of com-modities. But as the law for the encouragement of coinage de-rives its origin from those vulgar prejudices which have been in-troduced by the mercantile system; I judged it more proper to reserve them for this chapter. Nothing could be more agreeable to the spirit of that system than a sort of bounty upon the pro-duction of money, the very thing which, it supposes, constitutes the wealth of every nation. It is one of its many admirable ex-pedients for enriching the country.
            
            
               

               CHAP. VII. Of Colonies.
               
               
                  PART FIRST. Of the motives for establishing new colonies.
                  
                  THE interest which occasioned the first settlement of the different European colonies in America and the West Indies, was not altogether so plain and distinct as that which directed the establishment of those of antient Greece and Rome.
                  ALL the different states of antient Greece possessed, each of them, but a very small territory, and when the people in any one of them multiplied beyond what that territory could easily main-tain, a part of them were sent in quest of a new habitation in some remote and distant part of the world; the warlike neigh-bours who surrounded them on all sides, rendering it difficult for any of them to enlarge very much its territory at home. The colonies of the Dorians resorted chiefly to Italy and Sicily, which in the times preceeding the foundation of Rome, were inhabited by barbarous and uncivilized nations: those of the Ionians and Eolians, the two other great tribes of the Greeks, to Asia minor and the islands of the Egean sea, of which the inhabitants seem at that time to have been pretty much in the same state as those of Sicily and Italy. The mother city, though she considered the colony as a child, at all times entitled to great favour and assist-ance, and owing in return much gratitude and respect, yet con-sidered it as an emancipated child over whom she pretended to claim no direct authority or jurisdiction. The colony settled its own form of government, enacted its own laws, elected its own magi-strates, and made peace or war with its neighbours as an inde-pendant state which had no occasion to wait for the approbation

great advantages. Upon every account, therefore, the attention of government never was so unnecessarily employed, as when di-rected to watch over the preservation or increase of the quantity of money in any country.
               No complaint, however, is more common than that of a scarcity of money. Money, like wine, must always be scarce with those who have neither wherewithal to buy it, nor credit to borrow it. Those who have either, will seldom be in want either of the money, or of the wine which they have occasion for. This complaint; however, of the scarcity of money, is not always confined to im-provident spendthrifts. It is sometimes general through a whole mercantile town, and the country in its neighbourhood. Over-trading is the common cause of it. Sober men, whose projects have been disproportioned to their capitals, are as likely to have neither wherewithal to buy money, nor credit to borrow it, as pro-digals whose expence has been disproportioned to their revenue. Before their projects can be brought to bear, their stock is gone, and their credit with it. They run about everywhere to borrow money, and every body tells them that they have none to lend. Even such general complaints of the scarcity of money do not always prove that the usual number of gold and silver pieces are not circulating in the country, but that many people want those pieces who have nothing to give for them. When the profits of trade happen to be greater than ordinary, overtrading becomes a general error both among great and small dealers. They do not always send more money abroad than usual, but they buy upon credit both at home and abroad, an unusual quantity of goods, which they send to some distant market, in hopes that the returns will come in before the demand for payment. The demand comes before the returns, and they have nothing at hand, with which they can either pur-chase money, or give solid security for borrowing. It is not any

or consent of the mother city. Nothing can be more plain and distinct than the interest which directed every such establishment.
                  ROME, like most of the other antient republicks, was originally founded upon an Agrarian law, which divided the publick territory in a certain proportion among the different citizens who composed the state. The course of human affairs, by marriage, by succes-sion, and by alienation, necessarily deranged this original divi-sion, and frequently threw the lands, which had been allotted for the maintenance of many different families, into the possession of a single person. To remedy this disorder, for such it was sup-posed to be, a law was made, restricting the quantity of land which any citizen could possess to five hundred jugera, about three hundred and fifty English acres. This law, however, though we read of its having been executed upon one or two occasions, was either neglected or evaded, and the inequality of fortunes went on continually increasing. The greater part of the citizens had no land, and without it the manners and customs of those times ren-dered it difficult for a freeman to maintain his independancy. In the present times, though a poor man has no land of his own, if he has a little stock, he may either farm the lands of another, or he may carry on some little retail trade; and if he has no stock, he may find employment either as a country labourer, or as an artifi-cer. But, among the antient Romans, the lands of the rich were all cultivated by slaves, who wrought under an overseer, who was likewise a slave; so that a poor freeman had little chance of being employed either as a farmer or as a labourer. All trades and manufactures too, even the retail trade, were carried on by the slaves of the rich for the benefit of their masters, whose wealth, authority and protection, made it difficult for a poor free-man to maintain the competition against them. The citizens, therefore, who had no land, had scarce any other means of subsist-ence

but the bounties of the candidates at the annual elections. The tribunes, when they had a mind to animate the people against the rich and the great, put them in mind of the antient division of lands, and represented that law which restricted this sort of pri-vate property as the fundamental law of the republick. The peo-ple became clamorous to get land, and the rich and the great, we may believe, were perfectly determined not to give them any part of theirs. To satisfy them in some measure, therefore, they fre-quently proposed to send out a new colony. But conquering Rome was, even upon such occasions, under no necessity of turning out her citizens to seek their fortune, if one may say so, through the wide world, without knowing where they were to settle. She assigned them lands generally in the conquered provinces of Italy, where, being within the dominions of the republick, they could never form any independent state; but were at best but a sort of corporation, which, though it had the power of enacting bye-laws for its own government, was at all times subject to the correction, jurisdiction, and legislative authority of the mother city. The sending out a colony of this kind, not only gave some satisfaction to the people, but often established a sort of garrison too in a newly conquered province, of which the obedience might other-wise have been doubtful. A Roman colony, therefore, whether we consider the nature of the establishment itself, or the motives for making it, was altogether different from a Greek one. The words accordingly, which in the original languages denote those different establishments, have very different meanings. The latin word (Colonia) signifies simply a plantation. The Greek word (
                        
                     ) on the contrary, signifies a separation of dwelling, a departure from home, a going out of the house. But, though the Roman colo-nies were in many respects different from the Greek ones, the inte-rest which prompted to establish them was equally plain and di-stinct. Both institutions derived their origin either from irresista-ble necessity, or from clear and evident utility.
                  
                     

THE establishment of the European colonies in America and the West Indies arose from no necessity; and though the utility which has resulted from them has been very great, it is not altogether so clear and evident. It was not understood at their first establish-ment, and was not the motive either of that establishment or of the discoveries which gave occasion to it, and the nature, extent, and limits of that utility are not, perhaps, well understood at this day.
                  THE Venetians, during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, carried on a very advantageous commerce in spiceries, and other East India goods, which they distributed among the other nations of Europe. They purchased them in Egypt, at that time under the dominion of the Mammeluks, the enemies of the Turks, of whom the Venetians were the enemies; and this union of interest, assisted by the money of Venice, formed such a connection as gave the Venetians almost a monopoly of the trade.
                  THE great profits of the Venetians tempted the avidity of the Portugueze. They had been endeavouring, during the course of the fifteenth century, to find out by sea a way to the countries from which the Moors brought them ivory and gold dust across the De-sart. They discovered the Madeiras, the Canaries, the Azores, the Cape de Verd islands, the coast of Guinea, that of Congo, Angola, and Loango, and, finally, the Cape of Good Hope. They had long wished to share in the profitable traffic of the Venetians, and this last discovery opened to them a probable prospect of doing so. In 1497, Vasco de Gama sailed from the port of Lisbon with a fleet of four ships, and, after a navigation of eleven months, arrived upon the coast of Indostan, and thus compleated a course of dis-coveries which had been pursued with great steadiness, and with very little interruption, for near a century together.
                  
                     

SOME years before this, while the expectations of Europe were in suspence about the projects of the Portugueze, of which the success appeared yet to be doubtful, a Genoese pilot formed the yet more daring project of failing to the East Indies by the west. The situation of those countries was at that time very imperfectly known in Europe. The few European travellers who had been there had magnified the distance; perhaps through simplicity and ignorance, what was really very great appearing almost infinite to those who could not measure it; or, perhaps, in order to increase somewhat more the marvellous of their own adventures in visiting regions so immensely remote from Europe. The longer the way was by the East, Columbus very justly concluded, the shorter it would be by the West. He proposed, therefore, to take that way, as both the shortest and the surest, and he had the good fortune to convince Isabella of Castile of the probability of his project. He failed from the port of Palos in August 1492, near five years be-fore the expedition of Vasco de Gama set out from Portugal, and, after a voyage of between two and three months, discovered first some of the small Bahama or Lucayan islands, and afterwards the great island of St. Domingo.
                  BUT the countries which Columbus discovered, either in this or in any of his subsequent voyages, had no resemblance to those which he had gone in quest of. Instead of the wealth, cultiva-tion, and populousness of China and Indostan, he found, in St. Domingo, and in all the other parts of the new world which he ever visited, nothing but a country quite covered with wood, uncul-tivated, and inhabited only by some tribes of naked and miserable savages. He was not very willing, however, to believe that they were not the same with some of the countries described by Marco Polo, the first European who had visited, or at least had left be-hind him, any description of China or the East Indies; and a very

sight resemblance, such as that which he found between the name of Cibao, a mountain in St. Domingo, and that of Cipango, men-tioned by Marco Polo, was frequently sufficient to make him return to this favourite prepossession, though contrary to the clearest evidence. In his letters to Ferdinand and Isabella he called the countries which he had discovered the Indies. He entertained no doubt but that they were the extremity of those which had been described by Marco Polo, and that they were not very distant from the Ganges, or from the countries which had been conquered by Alexander. Even when at last convinced that they were different, he still flat-tered himself that those rich countries were at no great distance, and, in a subsequent voyage, accordingly, went in quest of them along the coast of Terra Firma, and towards the isthmus of Darien.
                  IN consequence of this mistake of Columbus, the name of the Indies has stuck to those unfortunate countries ever since; and when it was at last clearly discovered that the new were altogether different from the old Indies, the former were called the West in contradistinction to the latter, which were called the East Indies.
                  IT was of importance to Columbus, however, that the coun-tries which he had discovered, whatever they were, should be repre-sented to the court of Spain as of very great consequence; and, in what constitutes the real riches of every country, the animal and vegetable productions of the soil, there was at that time nothing which could well justify such a representation of them.
                  THE Cori, something between a rat and a rabbit, and supposed by Mr. Buffon to be the same with the Aperea of Brazil, was the largest viviparous quadruped in St. Domingo. This species seems never to have been very numerous, and the dogs and cats of the Spaniards are said to have long ago almost entirely extirpated it, as

well as some other tribes of a still smaller size. These, however, together with a pretty large lizard, called the Ivana or Iguana, constituted the principal part of the animal food which the land afforded.
                  THE vegetable food of the inhabitants, though from their want of industry not very abundant, was not altogether so scanty. It consisted in Indian corn, yams, potatoes, bananes, &amp;c. plants which were then altogether unknown in Europe, and which have never since been very much esteemed in it, or supposed to yield a sustenance equal to what is drawn from the common sorts of grain and pulse, which have been cultivated in this part of the world time out of mind.
                  THE cotton plant indeed afforded the material of a very im-portant manufacture, and was at that time to Europeans un-doubtedly the most valuable of all the vegetable productions of those islands. But though in the end of the fifteenth century the muslins and other cotton goods of the East Indies were much esteemed in every part of Europe, the cotton manufacture itself was not cultivated in any part of it. Even this production there-fore, could not at that time appear in the eyes of Europeans to be of very great consequence.
                  FINDING nothing either in the animals or vegetables of the newly discovered countries, which could justify a very advantageous representation of them, Columbus turned his view towards their minerals; and in the richness of the productions of this third kingdom, he flattered himself, he had found a full compensation for the insignificancy of those of the other two. The little bits of gold with which the inhabitants ornamented their dress, and which, he was informed, they frequently found in the rivu-lets and torrents that fell from the mountains, were sufficient to

satisfy him that those mountains abounded with the richest gold mines. St. Domingo, therefore, was represented as a country abounding with gold, and, upon that account, (according to the prejudices not only of the present times, but of those times) an inexhaustible source of real wealth to the crown and kingdom of Spain. When Columbus, upon his return from his first voyage, was introduced with a sort of triumphal honours to the sovereigns of Castile and Arragon, the principal productions of the coun-tries which he had discovered were carried in solemn procession before him. The only valuable part of them consisted in some little fillets, bracelets, and other ornaments of gold, and in some bales of cotton. The rest were mere objects of vulgar wonder and curiosity; some reeds of an extraordinary size, some birds of a very beautiful plumage, and some stuffed skins of the huge alligator and manati; all of which were preceeded by six or seven of the wretched natives, whose singular colour and appearance added greatly to the novelty of the shew.
                  IN consequence of the representations of Columbus, the council of Castile determined to take possession of countries of which the inhabitants were plainly incapable of defending themselves. The pious purpose of converting them to christianity sanctified the injustice of the project. But the hope of finding treasures of gold there, was the sole motive which prompted to undertake it; and to give this motive the greater weight, it was proposed by Columbus that the half of all the gold and silver that should be found there should belong to the crown. This pro-posal was approved of by the council.
                  As long as the whole or the far greater part of the gold, which the first adventurers importe into Europe, was got by so very easy a method as the plundering of the defenceless natives, it was not perhaps very difficult to pay even this heavy tax. But

when the natives were once fairly stript of all that they had, which, in St. Domingo, and in all the other countries discovered by Columbus, was done compleatly in six or eight years, and when in order to find more it had become necessary to dig for it in the mines, there was no longer any possibility of paying this tax. The rigorous exaction of it, accordingly, first occa-sioned, it is said, the total abandoning of the mines of St. Do-mingo, which have never been wrought since. It was soon re-duced therefore to a third; then to a fifth; afterwards to a tenth, and at last to a twentieth part of the gross produce of the gold mines. The tax upon silver, indeed, still continues to be a fifth of the gross produce. But the first adventurers do not appear to have been much interested about silver. Nothing less precious than gold seemed worthy of their attention.
                  ALL the other enterprizes of the Spaniards in the new world, subsequent to those of Columbus, seem to have been prompted by the same motive. It was the sacred thirst of gold that carried Oieda, Nicuessa, and Vasco Nugnes de Balboa, to the isthmus of Darien, that carried Cortez to Mexico, and Almagro and Piz-zarro to Chili and Peru. When those adventurers arrived upon any unknown coast, their first enquiry was always if there was any gold to be found there; and according to the information which they received concerning this particular, they determined either to quit the country, or to settle in it.
                  OF all those expensive and uncertain projects, however, which bring bankruptcy upon the greater part of the people who engage in them, there is none perhaps more perfectly ruin-ous than the search after new silver and gold mines. It is perhaps the most disadvantageous lottery in the world, or the one in which the gain of those who draw the prizes bears the least proportion to the loss of those who draw the blanks: for though the prizes

are few and the blanks many, the common price of a ticket is the whole fortune of a very rich man. Projects of mining, in-stead of replacing the capital employed in them, together with the ordinary profits of stock, commonly absorb both capital and profit. They are the projects, therefore, to which of all others a prudent law-giver, who desired to increase the capital of his nation, would least chuse to give any extraordinary encourage-ment, or to turn towards them a greater share of that capital than what would go to them of its own accord. Such in reality is the absurd confidence which almost all men have in their own good fortune, that wherever there is the least probability of suc-cess, too great a share of it is apt to go to them of its own accord.
                  BUT though the judgement of sober reason and experience con-cerning such projects has always been extreamly unfavourable, that of human avidity has commonly been quite otherwise. The same passion which has suggested to so many people the absurd idea of the philosopher's stone, has suggested to others the equally absurd one of immense rich mines of gold and silver. They did not consider that the value of those metals has, in all ages and nations, arisen chiefly from their scarcity, and that their scarcity has arisen from the very small quantities of them which nature has any where deposited in one place, from the hard and intract-able substances with which she has almost every where surrounded those small quantities, and consequently from the labour and ex-pence which are every where necessary in order to penetrate to and get at them. They flattered themselves that veins of those metals might in many places be found as large and as abundant as those which are commonly found of lead, or copper, or tin, or iron. The dream of Sir Walter Raleigh concerning the golden city and country of Eldorado, may satisfy us that even wise men

are not always exempt from such strange delusions. More than a hundred years after the death of that great man, the jesuit Gumila was still convinced of the reality of that wonderful country, and expressed with great warmth, and I dare to say, with great sin-cerity, how happy he should be to carry the light of the gospel to a people who could so well reward the pious labours of their missionary.
                  IN the countries first discovered by the Spaniards, no gold or silver mines are at present known which are supposed to be worth the working. The quantities of those metals which the first ad-venturers are said to have found there, had probably been very much magnified, as well as the fertility of the mines which were wrought immediately after the first discovery. What those adven-turers were reported to have found, however, was sufficient to enflame the avidity of all their countrymen. Every Spaniard who failed to America expected to find an Eldorado. Fortune too did upon this what she has done upon very few other occasions. She realized in some measure the extravagant hopes of her votaries, and in the discovery and conquest of Mexico and Peru (of which the one happened about thirty, the other about forty years after the first expedition of Columbus) she presented them with some-thing not very unlike that profusion of the precious metals which they sought for.
                  A PROJECT of commerce to the East Indies, therefore, gave occasion to the first discovery of the West. A project of con-quest gave occasion to all the establishments of the Spaniards in those newly discovered countries. The motive which excited them to this conquest was a project of gold and silver mines; and a course of accidents, which no human wisdom could foresee, ren-dered this project much more successful than the undertakers had any reasonable grounds for expecting.
                  
                     

scarcity of gold and silver, but the difficulty which such people find in borrowing, and which their creditors find in getting payment, that occasions the general complaint of the scarcity of money.
               IT would be too ridiculous to go about seriously to prove, that wealth does not consist in money, or in gold and silver; but in what money purchases, and is valuable only for purchasing. Money, no doubt, makes always a part of the national capital; but it has already been shown that it generally makes but a small part, and always the most unprofitable part of it.
               IT is not because wealth consists more essentially in money than in goods, that the merchant finds it generally more easy to buy goods with money, than to buy money with goods; but because money is the known and established instrument of commerce, for which every thing is readily given in exchange, but which is not always with equal readiness to be got in exchange for every thing. The greater part of goods besides are more perishable than money, and he may frequently sustain a much greater loss by keeping them. When his goods are upon hand too, he is more liable to such demands for money as he may not be able to answer, than when he has got their price in his coffers. Over and above all this, his profit arises more directly from selling than from buying, and he is upon all these accounts generally much more anxious to exchange his goods for money, than his money for goods. But though a particular merchant, with abundance of goods in his warehouse, may sometimes be ruined by not being able to sell them in time, a nation or country is not liable to the same accident. The whole capital of a merchant frequently consists in perishable goods destined for purchasing money. But it is but a very small part of the annual produce of the land and labour of a country which can ever be destined for purchasing gold and silver

THE first adventurers of all the other nations of Europe, who attempted to make settlements in America, were animated by the like chimerical views; but they were not equally successful. It was more than a hundred years after the first settlement of the Brazils, before any silver, gold, or diamond mines were discovered there. In the English, French, Dutch and Danish colonies, none have ever yet been discovered; at least none that are at present supposed to be worth the working. The first English settlers in North America, however, offered a fifth of all the gold and silver which should be found there, to the king as a motive for granting them their patents. In the patents to Sir Walter Raleigh, to the Lon-don and Plymouth companies, to the council of Plymouth, &amp;c. this fifth was accordingly reserved to the crown. To the expecta-tion of finding gold and silver mines, those first settlers too joined that of discovering a north west passage to the East Indies. They have hitherto been disappointed in both.
               
               
                  PART SECOND. Causes of the prosperity of new colonies.
                  
                  THE colony of a civilized nation which takes possession, either of a waste country, or of one so thinly inhabited, that the natives easily give place to the new settlers, advances more rapidly to wealth and greatness than any other human society.
                  THE colonists carry out with them a knowledge of agriculture and of other useful arts, superior to what can grow up of its own accord in the course of many centuries among savage and harbarous nations. They carry out with them too the habit of subordination, some notion of the regular government which takes place in their own country, of the system of laws which support it, and of a re-gular administration of justice; and they naturally establish some-thing of the same kind in the new settlement. But among savage

and barbarous nations, the natural progress of law and govern-ment is still slower than the natural progress of arts, after law and government have been so far established, as is necessary for their pro-tection. Every colonist gets more land than he can possibly cul-tivate. He has no rent, and scarce any taxes to pay. No landlord shares with him in its produce, and the share of the sovereign is commonly but a trifle. He has every motive to render as great as possible a produce, which is thus to be almost entirely his own. But his land is commonly so extensive, that with all his own in-dustry, and with all the industry of other people whom he can get to employ, he can seldom make it produce the tenth part of what it is capable of producing. He is eager, therefore, to collect la-bourers from all quarters, and to reward them with the most liberal wages. But those liberal wages, joined to the plenty and cheap-ness of land, soon make those labourers leave him in order to be-come landlords themselves, and to reward, with equal liberality, other labourers, who soon leave them for the same reason that they left their first master. The liberal reward of labour encourages marriage. The children during the tender years of infancy are well fed and properly taken care of, and when they are grown up, the value of their labour greatly over-pays their maintenance. When arrived at maturity, the high price of labour, and the low price of land, enable them to establish themselves in the same man-ner as their fathers did before them.
                  IN other countries, rent and profit eat up wages, and the two superior orders of people oppress the inferior one. But in new co-lonies, the interest of the two superior orders obliges them to treat the inferior one with more generosity and humanity; at least, where that inferior one is not in a state of slavery. Waste lands, of the greatest natural fertility, are to be had for a trifle. The increase of revenue which the proprietor, who is always the undertaker, ex-pects

from their improvement, constitutes his profit; which in these circumstances is commonly very great. But this great profit cannot be made without employing the labour of other people in clearing and cultivating the land; and the disproportion between the great extent of the land and the small number of the people, which com-monly takes place in new colonies, makes it difficult for him to get this labour. He does not, therefore, dispute about wages, but is willing to employ labour at any price. The high wages of labour encourage population. The cheapness and plenty of good land encourage improvement, and enable the proprietor to pay those high wages.. In those wages consists almost the whole price of the land; and though they are high, considered as the wages of labour, they are low, considered as the price of what is so very valuable. What encourages the progress of population and improvement, encou-rages that of real wealth and greatness.
                  THE progress of many of the antient Greek colonies towards wealth and greatness, seems accordingly to have been very rapid. In the course of a century or two, several of them appear to have rivalled and even to have surpassed their mother cities. Syracuse and Aggrigentum in Sicily, Tarentum and Locri in Italy, Ephe-sus and Miletus in lesser Asia, appear by all accounts to have been, at least, equal to any of the cities of antient Greece. Though po-sterior in their establishment, yet all the arts of refinement, philo-sophy, poetry, and eloquence, seem to have been cultivated as early, and to have been improved as highly in them, as in any part of the mother country. The schools of the two oldest Greek philoso-phers, those of Thales and Pythagoras, were established, it is re-markable, not in antient Greece, but the one in an Asiatick, the other in an Italian colony. All those colonies had established them-selves in countries inhabited by savage and barbarous nations, who easily gave place to the new settlers. They had plenty of good land, and as they were altogether independent of the mother city, they

were at liberty to manage their own affairs in the way that they judged was most suitable to their own interest.
                  THE history of the Roman colonies is by no means so bril-liant. Some of them indeed, such as Florence, have in the course of many ages, and after the fall of the mother city, grown up to be considerable states. But the progress of no one of them seems ever to have been very rapid. They were all established in conquered provinces, which in most cases had been fully inhabited before. The quantity of land assigned to each colonist was seldom very considerable, and as the colony was not independent, they were not always at liberty to manage their own affairs in the way that they judged was most suitable to their own interest.
                  IN the plenty of good land, the European colonies established in America and the West-Indies resemble, and even greatly surpass those of ancient Greece. In their dependency upon the mother state, they resemble those of antient Rome; but their great distance from Europe has in all of them alleviated more or less the effects of this dependency. Their situation has placed them less in the view and less in the power of their mother country. In pursuing their in-terest their own way, their conduct has, upon many occasions, been over-looked, either because not known or not understood in Europe; and upon some occasions it has been fairly suffered and submitted to, because their distance rendered it difficult to restrain it. Even the violent and arbitrary government of Spain has, upon many occasions, been obliged to recall or soften the orders which had been given for the government of its colonies, for fear of a general insurrection. The progress of all the European colonies in wealth, population and improvement, has accordingly been very great.
                  
                     

THE crown of Spain, by its share of the gold and silver, derived some revenue from its colonies, from the moment of their first esta-blishment. It was a revenue too, of a nature to excite in human avidity the most extravagant expectations of still greater riches. The Spanish colonies, therefore, from the moment of their first esta-blishment, attracted very much the attention of their mother coun-try; while those of the other European nations were for a long time in a great measure neglected. The former did not, perhaps, thrive the better in consequence of this attention; nor the latter the worse in consequence of this neglect. In proportion to the extent of the country which they in some measure possess, the Spanish co-lonies are considered as less populous and thriving than those of almost any other European nation. The progress even of the Spa-nish colonies, however, in population and improvement, has cer-tainly been very rapid and very great. The city of Lima, founded since the conquest, is represented by Ulloa, as containing fifty thousand inhabitants near thirty years ago. Quito, which had been but a miserable hamlet of Indians, is represented by the same author as in his time equally populous. Gemelli Carreri, a pre-tended traveller, it is said, indeed, but who seems every where to have written upon extreme good information, represents the city of Mexico as containing a hundred thousand inhabitants; a num-ber which, in spite of all the exaggerations of the Spanish writers, is, probably, more than five times greater than what it contained in the time of Montezuma. These numbers exceed greatly those of Boston, New York and Philadelphia, the three greatest cities of the English colonies. Before the conquest of the Spaniards there were no cattle fit for draught, either in Mexico or Peru. The lama was their only beast of burden, and its strength seems to have been a good deal inferior to that of a common ass. The plough was un-known among them. They were ignorant of the use of iron. They had no coined money, nor any established instrument of commerce of any kind. Their commerce was carried on by barter. A sort

of wooden spade was their principal instrument of agriculture. Sharp stones served them for knives and hatchets to cut with; fish bones and the hard sinews of certain animals served them for nee-dles to sew with; and these seem to have been their principal instru-ments of trade. In this state of things, it seems impossible, that either of those empires could have been so much improved or so well cultivated as at present, when they are plentifully furnished with all sorts of European cattle, and when the use of iron, of the plough, and of many of the arts of Europe, has been introduced among them. But the populousness of every country must be in propor-tion to the degree of its improvement and cultivation. In spite of the cruel destruction of the natives which followed the conquest, these two great empires are, probably, more populous now than they ever were before, and the people are surely very different; for we must acknowledge, I apprehend, that the Spanish creoles are in many respects superior to the antient Indians.
                  AFTER the settlements of the Spaniards, that of the Portugueze in Brazil is the oldest of any European nation in America. But as for a long time after the first discovery, neither gold nor silver mines were found in it, and as it afforded, upon that account, little or no revenue to the crown, it was for a long time in a great measure neglected; and during this state of neglect, it grew up to be a great and powerful colony. While Portugal was under the dominion of Spain, Brazil was attacked by the Dutch, who got possession of seven of the fourteen provinces into which it is divided. They expected soon to conquer the other seven, when Portugal recovered its independency by the elevation of the family of Braganza to the throne. The Dutch then, as enemies to the Spaniards, became friends to the Portugueze, who were likewise the enemies of the Spaniards. They agreed, therefore, to leave that part of Brazil, which they had not conquered, to the king of Portugal, who agreed to leave that part which they had conquered to them, as a matter

not worth disputing about with such good allies. But the Dutch government soon began to oppress the Portugueze colonists, who, instead of amusing themselves with complaints, took arms against their new masters, and by their own valour and resolution, with the connivance indeed, but without any avowed assistance from the mother country, drove them out of Brazil. The Dutch, therefore finding it impossible to keep any part of the country to themselves, were contented that it should be entirely restored to the crown of Portugal. In this colony there are said to be more than six hun-dred thousand people, either Portugueze or descended from Portu-gueze, creoles, mulattoes, and a mixed race between Portugueze and Brazilians. No one colony in America is supposed to contain so great a number of people of European extraction.
                  TOWARDS the end of the fifteenth, and during the greater part of the sixteenth century, Spain and Portugal were the two great naval powers upon the ocean; for though the commerce of Venice ex-tended to every part of Europe, its fleets had scarce ever sailed be-yond the Mediterranean. The Spaniards, in virtue of the first discovery, claimed all America as their own; and though they could not hinder so great a naval power as that of Portugal from set-tling in Brazil, such was, at that time, the terror of their name, that the greater part of the other nations of Europe were afraid to establish themselves in any other part of that great continent. The French, who attempted to settle in Florida, were all murdered by the Spaniards. But the declension of the naval power of this latter nation, in consequence of the defeat of miscarriage of, what they called their Invincible Armada, which happened towards the end of the sixteenth century, put it out of their power to obstruct any lon-ger the settlements of the other European nations. In the course of the seventeenth century, therefore, the English, French, Dutch, Danes and Swedes, all the great nations who had any ports upon the ocean, attempted to make some settlements in the new world.
                  
                     

THE Swedes established themselves in New Jersey; and the number of Swedish families still to be found there, sufficiently demonstrates, that this colony was very likely to prosper, had it been protected by the mother country. But being neglected by Sweden, it was soon swallowed up by the Dutch colony of New York, which again in 1674, fell under the dominion of the English.
                  THE small islands of St. Thomas and Santa Cruz are the only countries in the new world that have ever been possessed by the Danes. These little settlements too were under the government of an exclusive company, which had the sole right, both of purchasing the surplus produce of the colonists, and of supplying them with such goods of other countries as they wanted, and which, therefore, both in its purchases and sales, had not only the power of oppressing them, but the greatest temptation to do so. The government of an exclusive company of merchants is, perhaps, the worst of all govern-ments for any country whatever. It was not, however, able to stop altogether the progress of these colonies, though it rendered it more slow and languid. The late king of Denmark dissolved this company, and since that time the prosperity of these colonies has been very great.
                  THE Dutch settlements in the West, as well as those in the East Indies, were originally put under the government of an exclusive company. The progress of some of them, therefore, though it has been considerable, in comparison with that of almost any coun-try that has been long peopled and established, has been languid and slow in comparison with that of the greater part of new colonies. The colony of Surinam, though very considerable, is still inferior to the greater part of the sugar colonies of the other European nations. The colony of Nova Belgia, now divided into the two provinces of New York and New Jersey, would pro-bably have soon become considerable too, even though it had re-mained

under the government of the Dutch. The plenty and cheapness of good land are such powerful causes of prosperity, that the very worst government is scarce capable of checking altogether the efficacy of their operation. The great distance too from the mother country would enable the colonists to evade more or less by smuggling the monopoly which the company enjoyed against them. At present the company allows all Dutch ships to trade to Surinam upon paying two and a half per cent. upon the value of their cargo for a licence; and only reserves to itself exclusively the direct trade from Africa to America, which consists almost entirely in the slave trade. This relaxation in the exclusive privileges of the company, is probably the principal cause of that degree of prosperity which that colony at present enjoys. Curaçoa and Eustatia, the two principal islands belonging to the Dutch, are free ports open to the ships of all nations; and this freedom, in the midst of better colonies whose ports are open to those of one nation only, has been the great cause of the prosperity of those two barren islands.
                  THE French colony of Canada was, during the greater part of the last century, and some part of the present, under the govern-ment of an exclusive company. Under so unfavourable an admi-nistration its progress was necessarily very slow in comparison with that of other new colonies; but it became much more rapid when this company was dissolved after the fall of what is called the Mississipi scheme. When the English got possession of this country, they found in it near double the number of inhabitants which father Char-levoix had assigned to it between twenty and thirty years before. That jesuit had travelled over the whole country, and had no in-clination to represent it as less considerable than it really was.
                  THE French colony of St. Domingo was established by pirates and free-booters, who, for a long time, neither required the pro-tection,

nor acknowledged the authority of France; and when the race of banditti became so far citizens as to acknowledge this au-thority, it was for a long time necessary to exercise it with very great gentleness. During this period the population and improve-ment of this colony encreased very fast. Even the oppression of the exclusive company to which it was for some time subjected, with all the other colonies of France, though it no doubt retarded, had not been able to stop its progress altogether. The course of its prosperity returned as soon as it was relieved from that oppression. It is now the most important of the sugar colonies of the West Indies, and its produce is said to be greater than that of all the English sugar colonies put together. The other sugar colonies of France are in general all very thriving.
                  BUT there are no colonies of which the progress has been more rapid than that of the English in North America.
                  PLENTY of good land, and liberty to manage their own affairs their own way, seem to be the two great causes of the prosperity of all new colonies.
                  IN the plenty of good land the English colonies of North Ame-rica, though, no doubt, very abundantly provided, are, however, in-ferior to those of the Spaniards and Portugueze, and not superior to some of those possessed by the French before the late war. But the political institutions of the English colonies have been more favour-able to the improvement and cultivation of this land, than those of any of the other three nations.
                  FIRST, the engrossing of uncultivated land, though it has by no means been prevented altogether, has been more restrained in the English colonies than in any other. The colony law which im-poses

from their neighbours. The far greater part is circulated and consumed among themselves; and even of the surplus which is sent abroad, the greater part is generally destined for the purchase of other foreign goods. Though gold and silver, therefore, could not be had in exchange for the goods destined to purchase them, the nation would not be ruined. It might, indeed, suffer some loss and inconveniency, and be forced upon some of those expe-dients which are necessary for supplying the place of money. The annual produce of its land and labour, however, would be the same, or very nearly the same, as usual, because the same, or very nearly the same consumable capital would be employed in maintaining it. And though goods do not always draw money so readily as money draws goods, in the long-run they draw it more necessarily than even it draws them. Goods can serve many other purposes besides purchasing money, but money can serve no other purpose besides purchasing goods. Money, therefore, necessarily runs after goods, but goods do not always or necessarily run after money. The man who buys, does not always mean to sell again, but frequently to use or to consume; whereas he who sells, always means to buy again. The one may frequently have done the whole, but the other can never have done more than the one-half of his business. It is not for its own sake that men desire money, but for the sake of what they can purchase with it.
               CONSUMABLE commodities, it is said, are soon destroyed; where-as gold and silver are of a more durable nature, and, were it not for this continual exportation, might be accumulated for ages to-gether, to the incredible augmentation of the real wealth of the country. Nothing, therefore, it is pretended, can be more dis-advantageous to any country, than the trade which consists in the exchange of such lasting for such perishable commodities. We do not, however, reckon that trade disadvantageous which consists

upon every proprietor the obligation of improving and culti-vating, within a limited time, a certain proportion of his lands, and which, in case of failure, declares those neglected lands grantable to any other person; though it has not, perhaps, been very strictly executed, has, however, had some effect.
                  SECONDLY, in Pensylvania there is no right of primogeniture, and lands, like moveables, are divided equally among all the chil-dren of the family. In three of the provinces of New England the oldest has only a double share, as in the Mosaical law. Though in those provinces, therefore, too great a quantity of land should sometimes be engrossed by a particular individual, it is likely, in the course of a generation or two, to be sufficiently divided again. In the other English colonies, indeed, the right of primogeniture takes place, as in the law of England. But in all the English co-lonies the tenure of their lands, which are all held by free socage, facilitates alienation, and the grantee of any extensive tract of land generally finds it for his interest to alienate, as fast as he can, the greater part of it, reserving only a small quit-rent. In the Spanish and Portugueze colonies, what is called the right of Mayo-razzo Jus Mayoratus. takes place in the succession of all those great estates to which any title of honour is annexed. Such estates go all to one person, and are in effect entailed and unalienable. The French colonies, indeed, are subject to the custom of Paris, which, in the inheritance of land, is much more favourable to the younger chil-dren than the law of England. But, in the French colonies, if any part of an estate, held by the noble tenure of chivalry and homage, is alienated, it is, for a limited time, subject to the right of redemption, either by the heir of the superior or by the heir of the family; and all the largest estates of the country are held by such noble tenures, which necessarily embarrass alienation. But, in a new colony, a great uncultivated estate is likely to be much

more speedily divided by alienation than by succession. The engross-ing, however, of uncultivated land, it has already been observed, is the greatest obstruction to its improvement and cultivation; and the labour that is employed in the improvement and cultivation of land, affords the greatest and most valuable produce to the society. Its produce, in this case, pays not only its own wages, and the profit of the stock which employs it, but the rent of the land too upon which it is employed. The labour of the English colonists, therefore, being more employed in the improvement and cultiva-tion of land, is likely to afford a greater and more valuable pro-duce than that of any of the other three nations, which, by the engrossing of land, is more or less diverted towards other employ-ments.
                  THIRDLY, the labour of the English colonists is not only likely to afford a greater and more valuable produce, but, in consequence of the moderation of their taxes, a greater proportion of this produce belongs to themselves, which they may store up and employ in put-ting into motion a still greater quantity of labour. The English colonists have never yet contributed any thing towards the defence of the mother country, or towards the support of its civil govern-ment. They themselves, on the contrary, have hitherto been de-fended almost entirely at the expence of the mother country. But the expence of fleets and armies is out of all proportion greater than the necessary expence of civil government. The expence of their own civil government has always been very moderate. It has gene-rally been confined to what was necessary for paying competent salaries to the governor, to the judges, and to some other officers of police, and for maintaining a few of the most useful publick works. The expence of the civil establishment of Massachusets Bay, before the commencement of the present disturbances, used to be but about 18,000l. a year. That of New Hampshire and

Rhode Island 3,500l. each. That of Connecticut 4,000l. That of New York and Pensilvania 4,500l. each. That of New Jersey 1,200l. That of Virginia and South Carolina 8,000l. each. The civil establishment of Nova Scotia and Georgia are partly supported by an annual grant of parliament. But Nova Scotia pays, be-sides, about 7,000l. a year towards the publick expences of the colony; and Georgia about 2,500l. a year. All the different civil establishments in North America, in short, exclusive of those of Maryland and North Carolina, of which no exact account has been got, did not, before the commencement of the present distur-bances, cost the inhabitants above 64,700l. a year; an ever me-morable example at how small an expence three millions of people may not only be governed, but well governed. The most impor-tant part of the expence of government, indeed, that of defence and protection, has constantly fallen upon the mother country. The ceremonial too of the civil government in the colonies, upon the reception of a new governor, upon the opening of a new assembly, &amp;c. though sufficiently decent, is not accompanied with any expensive pomp or parade. Their ecclesiastical government is conducted upon a plan equally frugal. Tithes are unknown among them; and their clergy, who are far from being numerous, are maintained either by moderate stipends, or by the voluntary contri-butions of the people. The power of Spain and Portugal, on the contrary, derives some support from the taxes levied upon their colo-nies. France, indeed, has never drawn any considerable revenue from its colonies, the taxes which it levies upon them being gene-rally spent among them. But the colony government of all these three nations is conducted upon a much more expensive plan, and is accompanied with a much more expensive ceremonial. The sums spent upon the reception of a new viceroy of Peru, for example, have frequently been enormous. Such ceremonials are not only real taxes paid by the rich colonists upon those particular occasions,

but they serve to introduce among them the habit of vanity and expence upon all other occasions. They are not only very grievous occasional taxes, but they contribute to establish perpetual taxes of the same kind still more grievous; the ruinous taxes of private luxury and extravagance. In the colonies of all those three nations too the ecclesiastical government is extremely oppressive. Tithes take place in all of them, and are levied with the utmost rigour in those of Spain and Portugal. All of them besides are oppressed with a numerous race of mendicant friars, whose beggary being not only licensed, but consecrated by religion, is a most grievous tax upon the poor people, who are most carefully taught that it is a duty to give, and a very great sin to refuse them their charity. Over and above all this the clergy are, in all of them, the greatest engrossers of land.
                  FOURTHLY, in the disposal of their surplus produce, or of what is over and above their own consumption, the English colonies have been more favoured, and have been allowed a more extensive mar-ket than those of any other European nation. Every European nation has endeavoured more or less to monopolize to itself the commerce of its colonies, and, upon that account, has prohibited the ships of foreign nations from trading to them, and has pro-hibited them from importing European goods from any foreign nation. But the manner in which this monopoly has been exercised in different nations has been very different.
                  SOME nations have given up the whole commerce of their colo-nies to an exclusive company, of whom the colonists were obliged to buy all such European goods as they wanted, and to whom they were obliged to sell the whole of their own surplus produce. It was the interest of the company, therefore, not only to sell the for-mer as dear, and to buy the latter as cheap as possible, but to buy

no more of the latter, even at this low price, than what they could dispose of for a very high price in Europe. It was their interest, not only to degrade in all cases the value of the surplus produce of the colony, but in many cases to discourage and keep down the natural increase of its quantity. Of all the expedients that can well be contrived to stunt the natural growth of a new colony, that of an exclusive company is undoubtedly the most effectual. This, however, has been the policy of Holland, though their company in the course of the present century, has given up in many respects the exertion of their exclusive privilege. This too was the policy of Denmark till the reign of the late king. It has occasionally been the policy of France, and of late, since 1755, after it had been abandoned by all other nations, on ac-count of its absurdity, it has become the policy of Portugal with regard at least to two of the principal provinces of Brazil, Fer-numbuco and Marannon.
                  OTHER nations, without establishing an exclusive company, have confined the whole commerce of their colonies to a parti-cular port of the mother country, from whence no ship was allowed to sail, but either in a fleet and at a particular seasorr, or, if single, in consequence of a particular licence, which in most cases was very well paid for. This policy opened, indeed; the trade of the colonies to all the natives of the mother country, provided they traded from the proper port, at the proper season and in the proper vessels. But as all the different merchants, who joined their stocks in order to fit out those licensed vessels, would find it for their interest to act in concert, the trade which was carried on in this manner would necessarily be conducted very nearly upon the same principles as that of an exclusive company. The profit of those merchants would be almost equally exorbi-tant and oppressive. The colonies would be ill supplied, and

would be obliged both to buy very dear, and to sell very cheap. This, however, has always been the policy of Spain, and the price of all European goods, accordingly, is said to be enormous in the Spanish West Indies. At Quito, we are told by Ulloa, a pound of iron sells for about four and sixpence, and a pound of steel for about six and nine-pence sterling. But it is chiefly in order to purchase European goods, that the colonies part with their own produce. The more, therefore, they pay for the one, the less they really get for the other, and the dearness of the one is the same thing with the cheapness of the other. The policy of Por-tugal is in this respect the same as that of Spain, with regard to all its colonies, except Fernambuco and Marannon, and with regard to these it has lately adopted a still worse.
                  OTHER nations leave the trade of their colonies free to all their subjects who may carry it on from all the different ports of the mother country, and who have occasion for no other licence than the common dispatches of the customhouse. In this case the number and dispersed situation of the different traders ren-ders it impossible for them to enter into any general combination, and their competition is sufficient to hinder them from making very exorbitant profits. Under so liberal a policy the colonies are enabled both to sell their own produce and to buy the goods of Europe at a reasonable price. But since the dissolution of the Plymouth company, when our colonies were but in their in-fancy, this has always been the policy of England. It has ge-nerally too been that of France, and it has been uniformly so since the dissolution of what, in England, is commonly called their Missi-sippi company. The profits of the trade therefore which France and England carry on with their colonies, though no doubt somewhat higher than if the competition was free to all other nations, are, however, by no means exorbitant; and the price of European goods accordingly is not extravagantly high in the greater part of the colonies of either of those nations.
                  
                     

IN the exportation of their own surplus produce too it is only with regard to certain commodities that the colonies of Great Bri-tain are confined to the market of the mother country. These commodities having been enumerated in the Act of navigation and in some other subsequent acts, have upon that account been called enumerated commodities. The rest are called non-enumerated; and may be exported directly to other countries, provided it is in British or Plantation ships of which the owners and three-fourths of the mariners are British subjects.
                  AMONG the non-enumerated commodities are some of the most important productions of America and the West Indies; grain of all sorts, lumber, salt provisions, fish, sugar, and rum.
                  GRAIN is naturally the first and principal object of the cul-ture of all new colonies. By allowing them a very extensive market for it, the law encourages them to extend this culture much beyond the consumption of a thinly inhabited country, and thus to provide beforehand an ample subsistence for a con-tinually increasing population.
                  IN a country quite covered with wood, where timber con-sequently is of little or no value, the expence of clearing the ground is the principal obstacle to improvement. By allowing the colonies a very extensive market for their lumber, the law endeavours to facilitate improvement by raising the price of a commodity which would otherwise be of little value, and thereby enabling them to make some profit of what would otherwise be meer expence.
                  IN a country neither half peopled nor half cultivated, cattle naturally multiply beyond the consumption of the inhabitants, and are often upon that account of little or no value. But it is

necessary, it has already been shewn, that the price of cattle should bear a certain proportion to that of corn before the greater part of the lands of any country can be improved. By allowing to American cattle, in all shapes, dead and alive, a very extensive market, the law endeavours to raise the value of a commodity of which the high price is so very essential to improvement. The good effects of this liberty, however, must be somewhat diminish-ed by the 4th of George III. c. 15. which puts hides and skins among the enumerated commodities, and thereby tends to reduce the value of American cattle.
                  TO increase the shipping and naval power of Great Britain, by the extension of the fisheries of our colonies, is an object which the legislature seems to have had almost constantly in view. Those fisheries, upon this account, have had all the encouragement which freedom can give them, and they have flourished accordingly. The New-England fishery in particular was, before the late distur-bances, one of the most important, perhaps, in the world. The whale-fishery which, notwithstanding an extravagant bounty, is in Great Britain carried on to so little purpose, that in the opinion of many people (which I do not, however, pretend to warrant) the whole produce does not much exceed the value of the bounties which are annually paid for it, is in New England carried on without any bounty to a very great extent. Fish is one of the principal articles with which the North Americans trade to Spain, Portugal and the Mediterranean.
                  SUGAR was originally an enumerated commodity which could be exported only to Great Britain. But in 1731, upon a representa-tion of the sugar planters, its exportation was permitted to all parts of the world. The restrictions, however, with which this liberty was granted, joined to the high price of sugar in Great Britain, have rendered it, in a great measure, ineffectual. Great Britain

and her colonies, still continue to be almost the sole market for all the sugar produced in the British plantations. Their consumption increases so fast that, though in consequence of the increasing im-provement of Jamaica as well as of the ceded islands, the importation of sugar has increased very greatly within these twenty years, the exportation to foreign countries is said to be not much greater than before.
                  RUM is a very important article in the trade which the Americans carry on to the coast of Africa, from which they bring back negroe slaves in return.
                  IF the whole surplus produce of America in grain of all sorts, in salt provisions and in fish, had been put into the enumeration, and thereby forced into the market of Great Britain, it would have interfered too much with the produce of the industry of our own people. It was probably not so much from any regard to the interest of America, as from a jealousy of this interference, that those important commodities have not only been kept out of the enumeration, but that the importation into Great Britain of all grain, except rice, and of salt provisions has, in the ordinary state of the law, been prohibited.
                  THE non-enumerated commodities could originally be exported to all parts of the world. Lumber and rice, having been once put into the enumeration, when they were afterwards taken out of it, were confined, as to the European market, to the countries that lie south of Cape Finisterre. By the 6th of George III. c. 52. all non-enumerated commodities were subjected to the like re-striction. The parts of Europe which lie south of Cape Finisterre, are not manufacturing countries, and we were less jealous of the colony ships carrying home from them any manufactures which could interfere with our own.
                  
                     

THE enumerated commodities are of two sorts: first, such as are either the peculiar produce of America, or as cannot be pro-duced, or at least are not produced in the mother country. Of this kind are melasses, coffee, cacao-nuts, tobacco, pimento, ginger, whale-fins, raw silk, cotton-wool, beaver, and other peltry of America, indigo, fustick, and other dying woods: se-condly, such as are not the peculiar produce of America, but which are and may be produced in the mother country, though not in such quantities as to supply the greater part of her demand, which is principally supplied from foreign countries. Of this kind are all naval stores, masts, yards, and bowsprits, tar, pitch, and turpentine, pig and bar iron, copper ore, hides and skins, pot and pearl ashes. The largest importation of commodities of the first kind could not discourage the growth or interfere with the sale of any part of the produce of the mother country. By consining them to the home market, our merchants, it was expected, would not only be enabled to buy them cheaper in the plantations, and consequently to sell them with a better profit at home, but to establish between the plantations and foreign countries an advan-tageous carrying trade, of which Great Britain was necessarily to be the center or emporium, as the European country into which those commodities were first to be imported. The importation of commodities of the second kind might be so managed too, it was supposed, as to interfere, not with the sale of those of the same kind which were produced at home, but with that of those which were imported from foreign countries; because by means of proper duties, they might be rendered always somewhat dearer than the former, and yet a good deal cheaper than the latter. By confining such commodities to the home market, therefore, it was proposed to discourage the produce, not of Great Britain, but of some foreign countries with which the balance of trade was believed to be unfavourable to Great Britain.
                  
                     

in the exchange of the hardware of England for the wines of France; and yet hardware is a very durable commodity, and was it not for this continual exportation, might too be accumulated for ages together, to the incredible augmentation of the pots and pans of the country. But it readily occurs that the number of such utensils is in every country necessarily limited by the use which there is for them; that it would be absurd to have more pots and pans than were necessary for cooking the victuals usually consumed there; and that if the quantity of victuals were to in-crease, the number of pots and pans would readily increase along with it, a part of the increased quantity of victuals being employed in purchasing them, or in maintaining an additional number of workmen whose business it was to make them. It should as readily occur that the quantity of gold and silver is in every country limited by the use which there is for those metals; that their use consists in circulating commodities as coin, and in affording a species of houshold furniture as plate; that the quantity of coin in every country is regulated by the value of the commodities which are to be circulated by it: increase that value, and immediately a part of it will be sent abroad to purchase, wherever it is to be had, the additional quantity of coin requisite for circulating them: that the quantity of plate is regulated by the number and wealth of those private families who chuse to indulge themselves in that sort of magnificence: increase the number and wealth of such families, and a part of this increased wealth will most probably be employed in purchasing, wherever it is to be found, an addi-tional quantity of plate: that to attempt to increase the wealth of any country, either by introducing or by detaining in it an unnecessary quantity of gold and silver, is as absurd as it would be to attempt to increase the good cheer of private families, by obliging them to keep an unnecessary number of kitchen utensils. As the expence of purchasing those unnecessary utensils would diminish

THE prohibition of exporting from the colonies, to any other country but Great Britain, masts, yards, and bowsprits, tar, pitch, and turpentine, naturally tended to lower the price of timber in the colonies, and consequently to increase the expence of clearing their lands, the principal obstacle to their improve-ment. But about the beginning of the present century, in 1703, the pitch and tar company of Sweden endeavoured to raise the price of their commodities to Great Britain, by prohibiting their exportation, except in their own ships, at their own price, and in such quantities as they thought proper. In order to counteract this notable piece of mercantile policy, and to render herself as much as possible independent, not only of Sweden, but of all the other northern powers, Great Britain gave a bounty upon the importation of naval stores from America, and the effect of this bounty was to raise the price of timber in America, much more than the consinement to the home market could lower it; and as both regulations were enacted at the same time, their joint effect was rather to encourage than to discourage the clearing of land in America.
                  THOUGH pig and bar iron too have been put among the enu-merated commodities, yet as, when imported from America, they are exempted from considerable duties to which they are subject when imported from any other country, the one part of the regu-lation contributes more to encourage the erection of furnaces in America, than the other to discourage it. There is no manufacture which occasions so great a consumption of wood as a furnace, or which can contribute so much to the clearing of a country overgrown with it.
                  THE tendency of some of these regulations to raise the value of timber in America, and, thereby, to facilitate the clearing of the land, was neither, perhaps, intended nor understood by

the legislature. Though their beneficial effects, however, have been in this respect accidental, they have not upon that account been less real.
                  THE most perfect freedom of trade is permitted between the British colonies of America and the West Indies, both in the enume-rated and in the non-enumerated commodities. Those colonies are now become so populous and thriving, that each of them finds in some of the others a great and extensive market for every part of its produce. All of them taken together, they make a great internal market for the produce of one another.
                  THE liberality of England, however, towards the trade of her colonies has been confined chiefly to what concerns the market for their produce, either in its rude state, or in what may be called the very first stage of manufacture. The more advanced or more refined manufactures even of the colony produce, the merchants and manufacturers of Great Britain chuse to reserve to themselves, and have prevailed upon the legislature to prevent their establish-ment in the colonies, sometimes by high duties, and sometimes by absolute prohibitions.
                  WHILE, for example, Muskovado sugars from the British plan-tations, pay upon importation only 6s. 4d. the hundred weight; white sugars pay 1l. 1s. 1d.; and refined, either double or single, in loaves 4l. 2s. 5d. 8/20. When those high duties were imposed, Great Britain was the sole, and she still continues to be the principal market to which the sugars of the British colonies could be exported. They amounted, therefore, to a prohibition, at first of claying or refin-ing sugar for any foreign market, and at present of claying or refining it for the market, which takes off, perhaps, more than nine-tenths of the whole produce. The manufacture of claying or refining sugar accord-ingly,

though it has flourished in all the sugar colonies of France, has been little cultivated in any of those of England, except for the market of the colonies themselves. While Grenada was in the hands of the French, there was a refinery of sugar by claying, at least, upon almost every plantation. Since it fell into those of the English, almost all works of this kind have been given up, and there are at present, October 1773, I am assured, not above two or three remaining in the island. At present, however, by an indulgence of the custom-house, clayed or refined sugar, if reduced from loaves into powder, is commonly imported as Muskovado.
                  WHILE Great Britain encourages in America the manufactures of pig and bar iron, by exempting them from duties to which the like commodities are subject when imported from any other country, she imposes an absolute prohibition upon the erection of steel furnaces and slit-mills in any of her American plantations. She will not suffer her colonists to work in those more refined manufactures even for their own consumption; but insists upon their purchasing of her merchants and manufacturers all goods of this kind which they have occasion for.
                  SHE prohibits the exportation from one province to another by water, and even the carriage by land upon horse-back or in a cart, of hats, of wools and woollen goods, of the produce of America; a regulation which effectually prevents the establishment of any manufacture of such commodities for distant sale, and confines the industry of her colonists in this way to such coarse and houshold manufactures, as a private family commonly makes for its own use, or for that of some of its neighbours in the same province.
                  TO prohibit a great people, however, from making all that they can of every part of their own produce, or from employing their stock

and industry in the way that they judge most advantageous to them-selves, is a manifest violation of the most sacred rights of mankind. Unjust, however, as such prohibitions may be, they have not hitherto been very hurtful to the colonies. Land is still so cheap, and, consequently, labour so dear among them, that they can import from the mother country, almost all the more refined or more advanced manufactures cheaper than they could make them for themselves. Though they had not, therefore, been prohibited from establishing such manufactures, yet in their present state of improve-ment, a regard to their own interest would, probably, have pre-vented them from doing so. In their present state of improvement, those prohibitions, perhaps, without cramping their industry, or restraining it from any employment to which it would have gone of its own accord, are only impertinent badges of slavery imposed upon them, without any sufficient reason, by the groundless jealousy of the merchants and manufacturers of the mother country. In a more advanced state they might be really oppressive and insup-portable.
                  GREAT Britain too, as she confines to her own market some of the most important productions of the colonies, so in compensation she gives to some of them an advantage in that market; sometimes by imposing higher duties upon the like productions when imported from other countries, and sometimes by giving bounties upon their importation from the colonies. In the first way she gives an advan-tage in the home market to the sugar, tobacco and iron of her own colonies, and in the second, to their raw silk, to their hemp and flax, to their indigo, to their naval stores, and to their building timber. This second way of encouraging the colony produce by bounties upon importation, is, so far as I have been able to learn, peculiar to Great Britain. The first is not. Portugal does not content herself with imposing higher duties upon the importation of

tobacco from any other country, but prohibits it under the severest penalties.
                  WITH regard to the importation of goods from Europe, England has likewise dealt more liberally with her colonies than any other nation.
                  GREAT Britain allows a part, almost always the half, generally a larger portion, and sometimes the whole of the duty which is paid upon the importation of foreign goods, to be drawn back upon their exportation to any foreign country. No inde-pendent foreign country, it was easy to foresee, would receive them if they came to it loaded with the heavy duties to which almost all foreign goods are subjected on their importation into Great Britain. Unless, therefore, some part of those duties was drawn back upon exportation, there was an end of the carrying trade; a trade so much favoured by the mercantile system.
                  OUR colonies, however, are by no means independent foreign countries; and Great Britain having assumed to herself the exclusive right of supplying them with all goods from Europe, might have forced them (in the same manner as other countries have done their colonies) to receive such goods, loaded with all the same duties which they paid in the mother country. But, on the contrary, till 1763, the same drawbacks were paid upon the exportation of the greater part of foreign goods to our colonies as to any independent foreign country. In 1763, indeed, by the 4th of George IIId, c. 15. this indulgence was a good deal abated, and it was enacted, That no part of the duty called the old subsidy should be drawn back for any goods of the growth, production, or manufacture of Europe or the East Indies, which should be exported from this kingdom to any British colony or plantation in America; wines, white callicoes and muslins excepted. Before this law, many different sorts of foreign goods might have been bought

cheaper in the plantations than in the mother country; and some may still.
                  OF the greater part of the regulations concerning the colony trade, the merchants who carry it on, it must be observed, have been the principal advisers. We must not wonder, therefore, if in the greater part of them, their interest has been more considered than either that of the colonies or that of the mother country. In their exclusive privilege of supplying the colonies with all the goods which they wanted from Europe, and of purchasing all such parts of their surplus produce as could not interfere with any of the trades which they themselves carried on at home, the interest of the colonies was sacrificed to the interest of those merchants. In allowing the same drawbacks upon the re-exportation of the greater part of European and East India goods to the colonies, as upon their re-exportation to any independent country, the interest of the mother country was sacrificed to it, even according to the mercantile ideas of that interest. It was for the interest of the merchants to pay as little as possible, for the foreign goods which they sent to the colonies, and, consequently, to get back as much as possible of the duties which they advanced upon their importation into Great Britain. They might thereby be enabled to sell in the colonies, either the same quantity of goods with a greater profit, or a greater quantity with the same profit, and, consequently, to gain something either in the one way or the other. It was, likewise, for the interest of the colonies to get all such goods as cheap and in as great abundance as possible. But this might not always be for the interest of the mother country. She might frequently suffer both in her revenue, by giving back a great part of the duties which had been paid upon the importation of such goods; and in her manu-factures, by being undersold in the colony market, in consequence of the easy terms upon which foreign manufactures could be carried thither by means of those drawbacks. The progress of the linen

manufacture of Great Britain, it is commonly said, has been a good deal retarded by the drawbacks upon the re-exportation of German linen to the American colonies.
                  BUT though the policy of Great Britain with regard to the trade of her colonies has been dictated by the same mercantile spirit as that of other nations, it has, however, upon the whole, been less illiberal and oppressive than that of any of them.
                  IN every thing, except their foreign trade, the liberty of the English colonists to manage their own affairs their own way is compleat. It is in every respect equal to that of their fellow citizens at home, and is secured in the same manner, by an assembly of the represen-tatives of the people, who claim the sole right of imposing taxes for the support of the colony government. The authority of this assembly over-awes the executive power, and neither the meanest nor the most obnoxious colonist, as long as he obeys the law, has any thing to fear from the resentment either of the governour or of any other civil or military officer in the province. The colony assemblies, though, like the house of commons in England, they are not always a very equal representation of the people, yet as the executive power either has not the means to corrupt them, or, on account of the support which it receives from the mother country, is not under the necessity of doing so, they are perhaps in general more influenced by the inclinations of their consti-tuents. The councils, which, in the colony legislatures, corre-spond to the House of Lords in Great Britain, are not composed of an hereditary nobility. In some of the colonies, as in three of the governments of New England, those councils are not appointed by the king, but chosen by the representatives of the people. In none of the English colonies is there any hereditary nobility. In all of them, indeed, as in all other free countries, the descendant of an old colony family is more respected than an upstart

of equal merit and fortune: but he is only more respected, and he has no privileges by which he can be troublesome to his neigh-bours. Before the commencement of the present disturbances, the colony assemblies had not only the legislative, but a part of the executive power. In Connecticut and Rhode island, they elected the governor. In the other colonies they appointed the revenue officers who collected the taxes imposed by those respective assemblies, to whom those officers were immediately responsible. There is more equality, therefore, among the English colonists than among the inha-bitants of the mother country. Their manners are more republican, and their governments, those of three of the provinces of New England in particular, have hitherto been more republican too.
                  THE absolute governments of Spain, Portugal, and France, on the contrary, take place in their colonies; and the discretionary powers which such governments commonly delegate to all their inferior officers are, on account of the great distance, naturally exercised there with more than ordinary violence. Under all absolute governments there is more liberty in the capital than in any other part of the country. The sovereign himself can never have either interest or inclination to pervert the order of justice, or to oppress the great body of the people. In the capital his pre-sence over-awes more or less all his inferior officers, who in the remoter provinces, from whence the complaints of the people are less likely to reach him, can exercise their tyranny with much more safety. But the European colonies in America are more remote than the most distant provinces of the greatest empires which had ever been known before. The government of the English colo-nies is perhaps the only one which, since the world began, could give perfect security to the inhabitants of so very distant a pro-vince. The administration of the French colonies, however, has always been conducted with more gentleness and moderation than that of the Spanish and Portugueze. This superiority of conduct

is suitable both to the character of the French nation, and to what forms the character of every nation, the nature of their govern-ment, which though arbitrary and violent in comparison with that of Great Britain, is legal and free in comparison with those of Spain and Portugal.
                  IT is in the progress of the North American colonies, however, that the superiority of the English policy chiefly appears. The progress of the sugar colonies of France has been at least equal, perhaps superior, to that of the greater part of those of England; and yet the sugar colonies of England enjoy a free government nearly of the same kind with that which takes place in her colonies of North America. But the sugar colonies of France are not dis-couraged, like those of England, from refining their own sugar; and, what is of still greater importance, the genius of their govern-ment naturally introduces a better management of their negro slaves.
                  IN all European colonies the culture of the sugar cane is carried on by negro slaves. The constitution of those who have been born in the temperate climate of Europe could not, it is sup-posed, support the labour of digging the ground under the burn-ing sun of the West Indies; and the culture of the sugar cane, as it is managed at present, is all hand labour, though, in the opi-nion of many, the drill plough might be introduced into it with great advantage. But, as the profit and success of the cultiva-tion which is carried on by means of cattle, depend very much upon the good management of those cattle; so the profit and suc-cess of that which is carried on by slaves, must depend equally upon the good management of those slaves; and in the good manage-ment of their slaves the French planters, I think it is generally allowed, are superior to the English. The law, so far as it gives

some weak protection to the slave against the violence of his master, is likely to be better executed in a colony where the government is in a great measure arbitrary, than in one where it is altogether free. In every country where the unfortunate law of slavery is established, the magistrate, when he protects the slave, intermeddles in some measure in the management of the private property of the master; and, in a free country, where the master is perhaps either a mem-ber of the colony assembly, or an elector of such a member, he dare not do this but with the greatest caution and circumspection. The respect which he is obliged to pay to the master, renders it more difficult for him to protect the slave. But in a country where the government is in a great measure arbitrary, where it is usual for the magistrate to intermeddle even in the management of the pri-vate property of individuals, and to send them, perhaps, a lettre de cachet if they do not manage it according to his liking, it is much easier for him to give some protection to the slave; and common humanity naturally disposes him to do so. The protection of the magistrate renders the slave less contemptible in the eyes of his master, who is thereby induced to consider him with more regard, and to treat him with more gentleness. Gentle usage renders the slave not only more faithful, but more intelligent, and therefore, upon a double account, more useful. He approaches more to the condition of a free servant, and may possess some degree of inte-grity and attachment to his master's interest, virtues which fre-quently belong to free servants, but which never can belong to a slave, who is treated as slaves commonly are in countries where the master is perfectly free and secure.
                  THAT the condition of a slave is better under an arbitrary than under a free government, is, I believe, supported by the history of all ages and nations. In the Roman history, the first time we read of the magistrate interposing to protect the slave from the violence

instead of increasing either the quantity or goodness of the family provisions; so the expence of purchasing an unnecessary quantity of gold and silver must, in every country, as necessarily diminish the wealth which feeds, cloaths and lodges, which maintains and employs the people. Gold and silver, whether in the shape of coin or of plate, are utensils, it must be remembered, as much as the furniture of the kitchen. Increase the use for them, increase the consumable commodities which are to be circulated, managed and prepared by means of them, and you will infallibly increase the quantity; but if you attempt, by extraordinary means, to in-crease the quantity, you will as infallibly diminish the use and even the quantity too, which in those metals can never be greater than what the use requires. Were they ever to be accumulated beyond this quantity, their transportation is so easy, and the loss which attends their lying idle and unemployed so great, that no law could prevent their being immediately sent out of the country.
               IT is not always necessary to accumulate gold and silver, in order to enable a country to carry on foreign wars, and to main-tain fleets and armies in distant countries. Fleets and armies are maintained, not with gold and silver, but with consumable goods. The nation which, from the annual produce of its domestic industry, from the annual revenue arising out of its lands, labour and con-sumable stock, has wherewithal to purchase those consumable goods in distant countries, can maintain foreign wars there.
               A NATION may purchase the pay and provisions of an army in a distant country three different ways; by sending abroad either, first, some part of its accumulated gold and silver; or, secondly, some part of the annual produce of its manufactures; or last of all, some part of its annual rude produce.
               
                  

of his master, is under the emperors. When Vedius Pollio, in the presence of Augustus, ordered one of his slaves, who had com-mitted a slight fault, to be cut into pieces and thrown into his fish pond in order to feed his fishes, the emperor commanded him, with indignation, to emancipate immediately, not only that slave, but all the others that belonged to him. Under the republick no magistrate could have had authority enough to protect the slave, much less to punish the master.
                  THE stock, it is to be observed, which has improved the sugar colonies of France, particularly the great colony of St. Domingo, has been raised almost entirely from the gradual improvement and cultivation of those colonies. It has been almost altogether the produce of the soil and industry of the colonists, or, what comes to the same thing, the price of that produce gradually accumulated by good management, and employed in raising a still greater pro-duce. But the stock which has improved and cultivated the sugar colonies of England has, a great part of it, been sent out from England, and has by no means been altogether the produce of the soil and industry of the colonists. The prosperity of the English sugar colonies has been, in a great measure, owing to the great riches of England, of which a part has overflowed, if one may say so, upon those colonies. But the prosperity of the sugar colonies of France has been entirely owing to the good conduct of the colonists, which must therefore have had some superiority over that of the English; and this superiority has been remarked in nothing so much as in the good management of their slaves.
                  SUCH have been the general outlines of the policy of the different European nations with regard to their colonies.
                  THE policy of Europe, therefore, has very little to boast of, either in the original establishment, or in the subsequent prospe-rity of the colonies of America.
                  
                     

FOLLY and injustice seem to have been the principles which presided over and directed the first project of establishing those colonies; the folly of hunting after gold and silver mines, and the injustice of coveting the possession of a country whose harmless natives, far from having ever injured the people of Europe, had received the first adventurers with every mark of kindness and hospitality.
                  THE adventurers, indeed, who formed some of the later esta-blishments, joined, to the chimerical project of finding gold and silver mines, other motives more reasonable and more laudable; but even these motives do very little honour to the policy of Europe.
                  THE English puritans, persecuted at home, fled for freedom to America, and established there the four governments of New Eng-land. The English catholicks, treated with equal injustice, esta-blished that of Maryland; the Quakers, that of Pensylvania. The Portugueze Jews, persecuted by the inquisition, stript of their for-tunes, and banished to Brazil, introduced, by their example, some sort of order and industry among the transported felons and strum-pets, by whom that colony was originally peopled, and taught them the culture of the sugar cane. Upon all these different occa-sions it was, not the wisdom and policy, but the disorder and inju-stice of the European governments, which peopled and cultivated America.
                  IN effectuating some of the most important of these establish-ments, the different governments of Europe had as little merit as in projecting them. The conquest of Mexico was the project, not of the council of Spain, but of a governor of Cuba; and it was effectuated by the spirit of the bold adventurer to whom it was

entrusted, in spite of every thing which that governor, who soon repented of having trusted such a person, could do to thwart it. The conquerors of Chili and Peru, and of almost all the other Spanish settlements upon the continent of America, carried out with them no other publick encouragement, but a general per-mission to make settlements and conquests in the name of the king of Spain. Those adventures were all at the private risk and ex-pence of the adventurers. The government of Spain contributed scarce any thing to any of them. That of England contributed as little towards effectuating the establishment of some of its most important colonies in North America.
                  WHEN those establishments were effectuated, and had become so considerable as to attract the attention of the mother country, the first regulations which she made with regard to them had always in view to secure to herself the monopoly of their commerce; to confine their market, and to enlarge her own at their expence, and, consequently, rather to damp and discourage, than to quicken and forward the course of their prosperity. In the different ways in which this monopoly has been exercised, consists one of the most essential differences in the policy of the different European nations with regard to their colonies. The best of them all, that of Eng-land, is only somewhat less illiberal and oppressive than that of any of the rest.
                  IN what way, therefore, has the policy of Europe contributed either to the first establishment, or to the present grandeur of the colo-nies of America? In one way, and in one way only, it has contri-buted a good deal. Magna virûm Mater! It bred and formed the men who were capable of atchieving such great actions, and of laying the foundation of so great an empire; and there is no other quarter of the world of which the policy is capable of forming,

or has ever actually and in fact formed such men. The colo-nies owe to the policy of Europe the education and great views of their active and enterprizing founders; and some of the greatest and most important of them, owe to it scarce any thing else.
               
               
                  PART THIRD. Of the Advantages which Europe has derived from the Discovery of America, and from that of a Passage to the East Indies by the Cape of Good Hope.
                  
                  SUCH are the advantages which the colonies of America have derived from the policy of Europe.
                  WHAT are those which Europe has derived from the discovery and colonization of America?
                  THOSE advantages may be divided, first, into the general advan-tages which Europe, considered as one great country, has derived from those great events; and, secondly, into the particular advan-tages which each colonizing country has derived from the colonies which particularly belong to it, in consequence of the authority or dominion which it exercises over them.
                  THE general advantages which Europe, considered as one great country, has derived from the discovery and colonization of Ame-rica, consist, first, in the increase of its enjoyments; and, second-ly, in the augmentation of its industry.
                  THE surplus produce of America, imported into Europe, fur-nishes the inhabitants of this great continent with a variety of commodities which they could not otherwise have possessed, some for conveniency and use, some for pleasure, and some for orna-ment, and thereby contributes to increase their enjoyments.
                  
                     

THE discovery and colonization of America, it will readily be allowed, have contributed to augment the industry, first, of all the countries which trade to it directly; such as Spain, Portugal, France, and England; and, secondly, of all those which, without trading to it directly, send, through the medium of other coun-tries, goods to it of their own produce; such as Austrian Flan-ders, and some provinces of Germany, which, through the medium of the countries before mentioned, send to it a considerable quan-tity of linen and other goods. All such countries have evidently gained a more extensive market for their surplus produce, and must consequently have been encouraged to increase its quantity.
                  BUT, that those great events should likewise have contributed to encourage the industry of countries, such as Hungary and Poland, which may never, perhaps, have sent a single commodity of their own produce to America, is not, perhaps, altogether so evident. That those events have done so, however, cannot be doubted. Some part of the produce of America is consumed in Hungary and Po-land, and there is some demand there for the sugar, chocolate, and tobacco, of that new quarter of the world. But those commodi-ties must be purchased with something which is either the produce of the industry of Hungary and Poland, or with something which had been purchased with some part of that produce. Those com-modities of America are new values, new equivalents, introduced into Hungary and Poland, to be exchanged there for the surplus produce of those countries. By being carried thither they create a new and more extensive market for that surplus produce. They raise its value, and thereby contribute to encourage its increase. Though no part of it may ever be carried to America, it may be carried to other countries which purchase it with a part of their share of the surplus produce of America; and it may find a market by means of the circulation of that trade which was originally put into motion by the surplus produce of America.
                  
                     

THOSE great events may even have contributed to increase the enjoyments, and to augment the industry of countries which, not only never sent any commodities to America, but never received any from it. Even such countries may have received a greater abun-dance of other commodities from countries of which the surplus produce had been augmented by means of the American trade. This greater abundance, as it must necessarily have increased their enjoyments, so it must likewise have augmented their industry. A greater number of new equivalents of some kind or other must have been presented to them to be exchanged for the surplus produce of that industry. A more extensive market must have been created for that surplus produce, so as to raise its value, and thereby encourage its increase. The mass of commodities annu-ally thrown into the great circle of European commerce, and by its various revolutions annually distributed among all the different nations comprehended within it, must have been augmented by the whole surplus produce of America. A greater share of this greater mass, therefore, is likely to have fallen to each of those nations, to have increased their enjoyments, and augmented their industry.
                  THE exclusive trade of the mother countries tends to diminish, or, at least, to keep down below what they would otherwise rise to, both the enjoyments and industry of all those nations in general, and of the American colonies in particular. It is a dead weight upon the action of one of the great springs which puts into mo-tion a great part of the business of mankind. By rendering the colony produce dearer in all other countries it lessens its consump-tion, and thereby cramps the industry of the colonies, and both the enjoyments and the industry of all other countries, which both enjoy less when they pay more for what they enjoy, and produce less when they get less for what they produce. By rendering the produce of all other countries dearer in the colonies, it cramps,

in the same manner, the industry of all other countries, and both the enjoyments and the industry of the colonies. It is a clog which, for the supposed benefit of some particular countries, em-barrasses the pleasures, and encumbers the industry of all other countries; but of the colonies more than of any other. It only excludes, as much as possible, all other countries from one parti-cular market; but it confines, as much as possible, the colonies to one particular market: and the difference is very great between being excluded from one particular market, when all others are open, and being confined to one particular market, when all others are shut up. The surplus produce of the colonies, however, is the original source of all that increase of enjoyments and industry which Europe derives from the discovery and colonization of Ame-rica; and the exclusive trade of the mother countries tends to render this source much less abundant than it otherwise would be.
                  THE particular advantages which each colonizing country derives from the colonies which particularly belong to it, are of two diffe-rent kinds; first, those common advantages which every empire derives from the provinces subject to its dominion; and, secondly, those peculiar advantages which are supposed to result from pro-vinces of so very peculiar a nature as the European colonies of America.
                  THE common advantages which every empire derives from the provinces, subject to its dominion, consist, first, in the military force which they furnish for its defence; and, secondly, in the revenue which they furnish for the support of its civil govern-ment. The Roman colonies furnished occasionally both the one and the other. The Greek colonies, sometimes, furnished a mili-tary force; but seldom any revenue. They seldom acknowledged themselves subject to the dominion of the mother city. They were generally her allies in war, but very seldom her subjects in peace.
                  
                     

THE European colonies of America have never yet furnished any military force for the defence of the mother country. Their military force has never yet been sufficient for their own defence; and in the different wars in which the mother countries have been engaged, the defence of their colonies has generally occasioned a very considerable distraction of the military force of those countries. In this respect, therefore, all the European colonies have, without exception, been a cause rather of weakness than of strength to their respec-tive mother countries.
                  THE colonies of Spain and Portugal only have contributed any revenue towards the defence of the mother country, or the sup-port of her civil government. The taxes which have been levied upon those of other European nations, upon those of England in particular, have seldom been equal to the expence laid out upon them in time of peace, and never sufficient to defray that which they occasioned in time of war. Such colonies, therefore, have been a source of expence and not of revenue to their respective mother countries.
                  THE advantages of such colonies to their respective mother countries, consist altogether in those peculiar advantages which are supposed to result from provinces of so very peculiar a nature as the European colonies of America; and the exclusive trade, it is acknowledged, is the sole source of all those peculiar advantages.
                  IN consequence of this exclusive trade, all that part of the surplus produce of the English colonies, for example, which consists in what are called enumerated commodities, can be sent to no other country but England. Other countries must after-wards buy it of her. It must be cheaper therefore in England than it can be in any other country, and must contribute more to

increase the enjoyments of England, than those of any other country. It must likewise contribute more to encourage her in-dustry. For all those parts of her own surplus produce which England exchanges for those enumerated commodities, she must get a better price than any other country can get for the like parts of theirs when they exchange them for the same commodities. The manufactures of England, for example, will purchase a greater quantity of the sugar and tobacco of her own colonies, than the like manufactures of other countries can purchase of that sugar and tobacco. So far, therefore, as the manufactures of England and those of other countries are both to be exchanged for the sugar and tobacco of the English colonies, this superiority of price gives an encouragement to the former, beyond what the latter can in these circumstances enjoy. The exclusive trade of the colonies, there-fore, as it diminishes, or, at least, keeps down below what they would otherwise rise to, both the enjoyments and the industry of the countries which do not possess it; so it gives an evident advantage to the countries which do possess it over those other countries.
                  THIS advantage, however, will, perhaps, be found to be rather what may be called a relative than an absolute advantage; and to give a superiority to the country which enjoys it, rather by depres-sing the industry and produce of other countries, than by raising those of that particular country above what they would naturally rise to in the case of a free trade.
                  THE tobacco of Maryland and Virginia, for example, by means of the monopoly which England enjoys of it, certainly comes cheaper to England than it can do to France, to whom England commonly sells a considerable part of it. But had France, and all other European countries been, at all times, allowed a free trade

to Maryland and Virginia, the tobacco of those colonies might, by this time, have come cheaper than it actually does, not only to all those other countries, but likewise to England. The produce of tobacco, in consequence of a market so much more extensive than any which it has hitherto enjoyed, might, and probably would, by this time, have been so much increased as to reduce the profits of a tobacco plantation to their natural level with those of a corn planta-tion, which, it is supposed, they are still somewhat above. The price of tobacco might, and probably would, by this time, have fallen somewhat lower than it is at present. An equal quantity of the commodities either of England, or of those other countries, might have purchased in Maryland and Virginia a greater quantity of tobacco than it can do at present, and, consequently, have been sold there for so much a better price. So far as that weed, there-fore, can, by its cheapness and abundance, increase the enjoyments or augment the industry either of England or of any other country, it would, probably, in the case of a free trade, have produced both these effects in somewhat a greater degree than it can do at present. England, indeed, would not in this case have had any advantage over other countries. She might have bought the tobacco of her colonies somewhat cheaper, and, consequently, have sold some of her own commodities somewhat dearer than she actually does. But she could neither have bought the one cheaper nor sold the other dearer than any other country might have done. She might, perhaps, have gained an absolute, but she would certainly have lost a relative advantage.
                  IN order, however, to obtain this relative advantage in the colony trade, in order to execute the invidious and malignant project of excluding as much as possible other nations from any share in it, England, there are very probable reasons for believing, has not only sacrificed a part of the absolute advantage which she,

AN INQUIRY INTO THE Nature and Causes OF THE WEALTH OF NATIONS.
            By ADAM SMITH, LL. D. and F. R. S. Formerly Professor of Moral Philosophy in the University of GLASGOW.
            VOL. II.
            LONDON: PRINTED FOR W. STRAHAN; AND T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND.
            MDCCLXXVI.
         
         
            
               

THE gold and silver which can properly be considered as accumu-lated or stored up in any country, may be distinguished into three parts; first, the circulating money; secondly, the plate of private families; and last of all, the money which may have been collected by many years parsimony, and laid up in the treasury of the prince.
               IT can seldom happen that much can be spared from the circulating money of the country; because in that there can seldom be much redundancy. The value of goods annually bought and sold in any country requires a certain quantity of money to circulate and distribute them to their proper consumers, and can give employment to no more. The channel of circulation necessa-rily draws to itself a sum sufficient to fill it, and never admits any more. Something, however, is generally withdrawn from this channel in the case of foreign war. By the great number of people who are maintained abroad, fewer are maintained at home. Fewer goods are circulated there, and less money becomes necessary to circulate them. An extraordinary quantity of paper money, of some sort or other too, such as exchequer notes, navy bills, and bank bills in England, is generally issued upon such occasions, and by supplying the place of circulating gold and silver, gives an opportunity of sending a greater quantity of it abroad. All this, however, could afford but a poor resource for maintaining a foreign war, of great expence and several years duration.
               THE melting down the plate of private families, has upon every occasion been found a still more insignificant one. The French, in the beginning of the last war, did not derive so much advantage from this expedient as to compensate the loss of the fashion.
               THE accumulated treasures of the prince have, in former times, afforded a much greater and more lasting resource. In the present times, if you except the king of Prussia, to accumulate treasure seems to be no part of the policy of European princes.
               
                  

as well as every other nation, might have derived from that trade, but has subjected herself both to an absolute and to a relative disad-vantage in almost every other branch of trade.
                  WHEN, by the act of navigation, England assumed to herself the monopoly of the colony trade, the foreign capitals which had before been employed in it were necessarily withdrawn from it. The English capital, which had before carried on but a part of it, was now to carry on the whole. The capital which had before supplied the colonies with but a part of the goods which they wanted from Europe, was now all that was employed to supply them with the whole. But it could not supply them with the whole, and the goods with which it did supply them were necessarily sold very dear. The capital which had before bought but a part of the surplus produce of the colonies, was now all that was employed to buy the whole. But it could not buy the whole at any thing near the old price, and, therefore, whatever it did buy it necessarily bought very cheap. But in an employment of capital in which the merchant sold very dear and bought very cheap, the profit must have been very great, and much above the ordinary level of profit in other branches of trade. This superiority of profit in the colony trade, could not fail to draw from other branches of trade a part of the capital which had before been employed in them. But this revulsion of capital, as it must have gradually increased the competition of capitals in the colony trade, so it must have gradually diminished that competition in all those other branches of trade; as it must have gradually lowered the profits of the one, so it must have gradually raised those of the other, till the profits of all came to a new level, different from and somewhat higher than that at which they had been before.
                  THIS double effect, of drawing capital from all other trades, and of raising the rate of profit somewhat higher than it otherwise would

have been in all trades, was not only produced by this monopoly upon its first establishment, but has continued to be produced by it ever since.
                  FIRST, this monopoly has been continually drawing capital from all other trades to be employed in that of the colonies.
                  THOUGH the wealth of Great Britain has increased very much since the establishment of the act of navigation, it certainly has not increased in the same proportion as that of the colonies. But the foreign trade of every country naturally increases in proportion to its wealth, its surplus produce in proportion to its whole produce; and Great Britain having engrossed to herself almost the whole of what may be called the foreign trade of the colonies, and her capital not having increased in the same proportion as the extent of that trade, she could not carry it on without continually withdrawing from other branches of trade some part of the capital which had before been employed in them, as well as with-holding from them a great deal more which would otherwise have gone to them. Since the establishment of the act of navigation, accordingly, the colony trade has been continually increasing, while many other branches of foreign trade, particularly of that to other parts of Europe, have been continually decaying. Our manufactures for foreign sale, instead of being suited, as before the act of navigation, to the neighbouring market of Europe, or to the more distant one of the countries which lie round the Mediterranean sea, have, the greater part of them, been accommodated to the still more distant one of the colonies, to the market in which they have the monopoly, rather than to that in which they have many competitors. The causes of decay in other branches of foreign trade, which, by Sir Matthew Decker and other writers, have been sought for in the excess and improper mode of taxation, in the high price of labour, in the

increase of luxury, &amp;c. may all be found in the over-growth of the colony trade. The mercantile capital of Great Britain, though very great, yet not being infinite; and though greatly increased since the act of navigation, yet not being increased in the same proportion as the colony trade, that trade could not possibly be carried on without withdrawing some part of that capital from other branches of trade, nor consequently without some decay of those other branches.
                  ENGLAND, it must be observed, was a great trading country, her mercantile capital was very great and likely to become still greater and greater every day, not only before the act of naviga-tion had established the monopoly of the colony trade, but before that trade was very considerable. In the Dutch war, during the government of Cromwel, her navy was superior to that of Hol-land; and in that which broke out in the beginning of the reign of Charles II. it was at least equal, perhaps superior, to the united navies of France and Holland. Its superiority, perhaps, would scarce appear greater in the present times; at least if the Dutch navy was to bear the same proportion to the Dutch com-merce now which it did then. But this great naval power could not, in either of those wars, be owing to the act of navigation. During the first of them the plan of that act had been but just formed; and though before the breaking out of the second it had been fully enacted by legal authority; yet no part of it could have had time to produce any considerable effect, and least of all that part which established the exclusive trade to the colonies. Both the colonies and their trade were inconsiderable then in com-parison of what they are now. The island of Jamaica was an unwholesome desart, little inhabited and less cultivated. New York and New Jersey were in the possession of the Dutch: the half of St. Christopher's in that of the French. The island of

Antigua, the two Carolinas, Pensylvania, Georgia, and Nova Scotia, were not planted. Virginia, Maryland, and New Eng-land were planted; and though they were very thriving colonies, yet there was not, perhaps, at that time either in Europe or America a single person who foresaw or even suspected the rapid progress which they have since made in wealth, population and improvement. The island of Barbadoes, in short, was the only British colony of any consequence of which the condition at that time bore any resemblance to what it is at present. The trade of the colonies, of which England, even for some time after the act of navigation, enjoyed but a part (for the act of navigation was not very strictly executed till several years after it was enacted) could not at that time be the cause of the great trade of England, nor of the great naval power which was supported by that trade. The trade which at that time supported that great naval power was the trade of Europe, and of the countries which lie round the Mediterranean sea. But the share which Great Britain at pre-sent enjoys of that trade could not support any such great naval power. Had the growing trade of the colonies been left free to all nations, whatever share of it might have fallen to Great Bri-tain, and a very considerable share would probably have fallen to her, must have been all an addition to this great trade of which she was before in possession. In consequence of the monopoly, the increase of the colony trade has not so much occasioned an addition to the trade which Great Britain had before, as a total change in its direction.
                  SECONDLY, this monopoly has necessarily contributed to keep up the rate of profit in all the different branches of British trade higher than it naturally would have been, had all nations been allowed a free trade to the British colonies.
                  
                     

THE monopoly of the colony trade, as it necessarily drew to-wards that trade a greater proportion of the capital of Great Britain than what would have gone to it of its own accord; so by the expulsion of all foreign capitals it necessarily reduced the whole quantity of capital employed in that trade below what it naturally would have been in the case of a free trade. But, by lessening the competition of capitals in that branch of trade, it necessarily raised the rate of the profit in that branch. By lessen-ing too the competition of British capitals in all other branches of trade, it necessarily raised the rate of British profit in all those other branches. Whatever may have been, at any particular period, since the establishment of the act of navigation, the state or extent of the mercantile capital of Great Britain, the monopoly of the colony trade must, during the continuance of that state, have raised the ordinary rate of British profit higher than it other-wise would have been both in that and in all the other branches of British trade. If, since the establishment of the act of naviga-tion, the ordinary rate of British profit has fallen considerably, as it certainly has, it must have fallen still lower, had not the mo-nopoly established by that act contributed to keep it up.
                  BUT whatever raises in any country the ordinary rate of profit higher than it otherwise would be, necessarily subjects that country both to an absolute and to a relative disadvantage in every branch of trade of which she has not the monopoly.
                  IT subjects her to an absolute disadvantage: because in such branches of trade her merchants cannot get this greater profit, without selling dearer than they otherwise would do both the goods of foreign countries which they import into their own, and the goods of their own country, which they export to fo-reign countries. Their own country must both buy dearer and sell dearer; must both buy less and sell less; must both enjoy less and produce less than she otherwise would do.
                  
                     

IT subjects her to a relative disadvantage; because in such branches of trade it sets other countries which are not subject to the same absolute disadvantage either more above her or less below her than they otherwise would be. It enables them both to enjoy more and to produce more in proportion to what she enjoys and produces. It renders their superiority greater or their inferiority less than it otherwise would be. By raising the price of her produce above what it otherwise would be, it enables the merchants of other countries to undersell her in foreign markets, and thereby to justle her out of almost all those branches of trade, of which she has not the monopoly.
                  OUR merchants frequently complain of the high wages of British labour as the cause of their manufactures being undersold in foreign markets; but they are silent about the high profits of stock. They complain of the extravagant gain of other people; but they say nothing of their own. The high profits of British stock, however, may contribute towards raising the price of British manufactures in many cases as much, and in some perhaps more than the high wages of British labour.
                  IT is in this manner that the capital of Great Britain, one may justly say, has partly been drawn and partly been driven from the greater part of the different branches of trade of which she has not the monopoly; from the trade of Europe in particular, and from that of the countries which lie round the Mediterranean sea.
                  IT has partly been drawn from those branches of trade; by the attraction of superior profit in the colony trade in consequence of the continual increase of that trade, and of the continual in-sufficiency of the capital which had carried it on one year to carry it on the next.
                  
                     

IT has partly been driven from them; by the advantage which the high rate of profit, established in Great Britain, gives to other countries, in all the different branches of trade of which Great Britain has not the monopoly.
                  As the monopoly of the colony trade has drawn from those other branches a part of the British capital which would other-wise have been employed in them, so it has forced into them many foreign capitals which would never have gone to them, had they not been expelled from the colony trade. In those other branches of trade it has diminished the competition of British capitals, and thereby raised the rate of British profit higher than it otherwise would have been. On the contrary, it has increased the competition of foreign capitals, and thereby sunk the rate of foreign profit lower than it otherwise would have been. Both in the one way and in the other it must evidently have subjected Great Britain to a relative disadvantage in all those other branches of trade.
                  THE colony trade, however, it may perhaps be said, is more advantageous to Great Britain than any other; and the mono-poly, by forcing into that trade a greater proportion of the capital of Great Britain than what would otherwise have gone to it, has turned that capital into an employment more advantage-ous to the country than any other which it could have found.
                  THE most advantageous employment of any capital to the country to which it belongs, is that which maintains there the greatest quantity of productive labour, and increases the most the annual produce of the land and labour of that coun-try. But the quantity of productive labour which any capital employed in the foreign trade of consumption can main-tain is exactly in proportion, it has been shewn in the second book, to the frequency of its returns. A capital of a thousand

pounds, for example, employed in a foreign trade of consump-tion, of which the returns are made regularly once in the year, can keep in constant employment in the country to which it belongs a quantity of productive labour equal to what a thou-sand pounds can maintain there for a year. If the returns are made twice or thrice in the year it can keep in constant employ-ment a quantity of productive labour equal to what two or three thousand pounds can maintain there for a year. A foreign trade of consumption carried on with a neighbouring country is upon this account in general more advantageous than one carried on with a distant country; and for the same reason a direct foreign trade of consumption, as it has likewise been shewn in the second book, is in general more advantageous than a round-about one.
                  BUT the monopoly of the colony trade, so far as it has operated upon the employment of the capital of Great Britain, has in all cases forced some part of it from a foreign trade of consumption carried on with a neighbouring country; to one carried on with a more distant country, and in many cases from a direct foreign trade of consumption to a round-about one.
                  FIRST, the monopoly of the colony trade has in all cases forced some part of the capital of Great Britain from a foreign trade of consumption carried on with a neighbouring to one car-ried on with a more distant country.
                  IT has, in all cases, forced some part of that capital from the trade with Europe, and with the countries which lie round the Mediterranean sea, to that with the more distant regions of Ame-rica and the West Indies, from which the returns are necessarily less frequent, not only on account of the greater distance, but on

account of the peculiar circumstances of those countries. New colonies, it has already been observed, are always understocked. Their capital is always much less than what they could employ with great profit and advantage in the improvement and cultiva-tion of their land. They have a constant demand, therefore, for more capital than they have of their own; and, in order to sup-ply the deficiency of their own, they endeavour to borrow as much as they can of the mother country, to whom they are, therefore, always in debt. The most common way in which the colonists contract this debt, is not by borrowing upon bond of the rich people of the mother country, though they sometimes do this too, but by running as much in arrear to their correspondents, who supply them with goods from Europe, as those correspondents will allow them. Their annual returns frequently do not amount to more than a third, and sometimes not to so great a proportion of what they owe. The whole capital, therefore, which their correspondents advance to them is seldom returned to Britain in less than three, and sometimes not in less than four or five years. But a British capital of a thousand pounds, for example, which is returned to Great Britain only once in five years, can keep in constant employ-ment only one-fifth part of the British industry which it could maintain if the whole was returned once in the year; and, instead of the quantity of industry which a thousand pounds could main-tain for a year, can keep in constant employment the quantity only which two hundred pounds can maintain for a year. The planter, no doubt, by the high price which he pays for the goods from Eu-rope, by the interest upon the bills which he grants at distant dates; and by the commission upon the renewal of those which he grants at near dates, makes up, and probably more than makes up, all the loss which his correspondent can sustain by this delay. But, though he may make up the loss of his correspondent, he cannot make up that of Great Britain. In a trade of which the returns

are very distant, the profit of the merchant may be as great or greater than in one in which they are very frequent and near; but the advantage of the country in which he resides, the quantity of productive labour constantly maintained there, the annual produce of the land and labour must always be much less. That the returns of the trade to America, and still more those of that to the West Indies, are, in general, not only more distant, but more irregular, and more uncertain too, than those of the trade to any part of Europe, or even of the countries which lie round the Mediterranean sea, will readily be allowed, I imagine, by every body who has any experience of those different branches of trade.
                  SECONDLY, the monopoly of the colony trade has, in many cases, forced some part of the capital of Great Britain from a direct foreign trade of consumption, into a round-about one.
                  AMONG the enumerated commodities which can be sent to no other market but Great Britain, there are several of which the quantity exceeds very much the consumption of Great Britain, and of which a part, therefore, must be exported to other countries. But this cannot be done without forcing some part of the capital of Great Britain into a round-about foreign trade of consumption. Maryland and Virginia, for example, send annually to Great Bri-tain upwards of ninety-six thousand hogsheads of tobacco, and the consumption of Great Britain is said not to exceed fourteen thousand. Upwards of eighty-two thousand hogsheads, therefore, must be exported to other countries, to France, to Holland, and to the countries which lie round the Baltick and Mediterranean seas. But, that part of the capital of Great Britain which brings those eighty-two thousand hogsheads to Great Britain, which re-exports them from thence to those other countries, and which brings back from those other countries to Great Britain either goods or money

THE funds which maintained the foreign wars of the present century, the most expensive perhaps which history records, seem to have had little dependency upon the exportation either of the circulating money, or of the plate of private families, or of the treasure of the prince. The last French war cost Great Britain upwards of ninety millions, including not only the seventy-five millions of new debt that was contracted, but the additional two shillings in the pound land tax, and what was annually borrowed of the sinking fund. More than two-thirds of this expence was laid out in distant countries; in Germany, Portugal, America, in the ports of the Mediterranean, in the East and West Indies. The kings of England had no accumulated treasure. We never heard of any extraordinary quantity of plate being melted down. The circulating gold and silver of the country had not been sup-posed to exceed eighteen millions. Since the late recoinage of the gold, however, it is believed to have been a good deal under-rated. Let us suppose, therefore, according to the exaggerated computation of Mr. Horsely, that, gold and silver together, it amounted to thirty millions. Had the war been carried on, by means of our money, the whole of it must, even according to this computation, have been sent out and returned again at least twice, in a period of between six and seven years. Should this be supposed, it would afford the most decisive argument to demonstrate how unnecessary it is for government to watch over the preservation of money, since upon this supposition the whole money of the country must have gone from it and returned to it again, two different times in so short a period, without any body's knowing any thing of the matter. The channel of circulation, however, never appeared more empty than usual during any part of this period. Few peo-ple wanted money who had wherewithal to pay for it. The profits of foreign trade, indeed, were greater than usual during the whole war; but especially towards the end of it. This occasioned, what it always occasions, a general overtrading in all the ports of Great Britain; and this again occasioned the usual complaint of the

in return, is employed in a round-about foreign trade of consump-tion; and is necessarily forced into this employment in order to dispose of this great surplus. If we would compute in how many years the whole of this capital is likely to come back to Great Bri-tain, we must add to the distance of the American returns that of the returns from those other countries. If, in the direct foreign trade of consumption which we carry on with America, the whole capital employed frequently does not come back in less than three or four years; the whole capital employed in this round-about one is not likely to come back in less than four or five. If the one can keep in constant employment but a third or a fourth part of the domestick industry which could be maintained by a capital returned once in the year, the other can keep in constant employment but a fourth or a fifth part of that industry. But, had not the colonies been confined to the market of Great Britain for the sale of their tobacco, very little more of it would probably have come to us than what was necessary for the home consumption. The goods which Great Britain purchases at present for her own consumption with the great surplus of tobacco which she exports to other coun-tries, she would, in this case, probably have purchased with the immediate produce of her own industry, or with some part of her own manufactures. That produce, those manufactures, instead of being almost entirely suited to one great market, as at present, would probably have been fitted to a great number of smaller mar-kets. Instead of one great round-about foreign trade of consump-tion, Great Britain would probably have carried on a great num-ber of small direct foreign trades of the same kind. On account of the frequency of the returns, a part, and, probably, but a small part; perhaps not above a third or a fourth, of the capital which at present carries on this great round-about trade, might have been sufficient to carry on all those small direct ones, might have kept in constant employment an equal quantity of British industry, and

have equally supported the annual produce of the land and labour of Great Britain. All the purposes of this trade being, in this manner, answered by a much smaller capital, there would have been a large spare capital to apply to other purposes; to improve the lands, to increase the manufactures, and to extend the com-merce of Great Britain; to come into competition at least with the other British capitals employed in all those different ways, to reduce the rate of profit in them all, and thereby to give to Great Britain, in all of them, a superiority over other countries still greater than what she at present possesses.
                  THE monopoly of the colony trade too has forced some part of the capital of Great Britain from all foreign trade of con-sumption to a carrying trade; and, consequently, from supporting more or less the industry of Great Britain, to be employed alto-gether in supporting partly that of the colonies, and partly that of some other countries.
                  THE goods, for example, which are annually purchased with the great surplus of eighty-two thousand hogsheads of tobacco annu-ally re-exported from Great Britain, are not all consumed in Great Britain. Part of them, linen from Germany and Holland, for example, is returned to the colonies for their particular consump-tion. But, that part of the capital of Great Britain which buys the tobacco with which this linen is afterwards bought, is neces-sarily withdrawn from supporting the industry of Great Britain, to be employed altogether in supporting partly that of the colo-nies, and partly that of the particular countries who pay for this tobacco with the produce of their own industry.
                  THE monopoly of the colony trade besides, by forcing towards it a much greater proportion of the capital of Great Britain than

what would naturally have gone to it, seems to have broken alto-gether that natural balance which would otherwise have taken place among all the different branches of British industry. The indu-stry of Great Britain, instead of being accommodated to a great number of small markets, has been principally suited to one great market. Her commerce, instead of running in a great number of small channels, has been taught to run principally in one great channel. But the whole system of her industry and commerce has thereby been rendered less secure; the whole state of her body politick less healthful than it otherwise would have been. In her present condition, Great Britain resembles one of those unwhol-some bodies in which some of the vital parts are overgrown; and which, upon that account, are liable to many dangerous dis-orders scarce incident to those in which all the parts are more pro-perly proportioned. A small stop in that great blood vessel, which has been artificially swelled beyond its natural dimensions, and through which an unnatural proportion of the industry and com-merce of the country has been forced to circulate, is very likely to bring on the most dangerous disorders upon the whole body poli-tick. The expectation of a rupture with the colonies, accordingly, has struck the people of Great Britain with more terror than they ever felt for a Spanish armada or a French invasion. It was this terror, whether well or ill grounded, which rendered the repeal of the stamp act a popular measure, among the merchants at least. In the total exclusion from the colony market, was it to last only for a few years, the greater part of our merchants used to fancy that they foresaw an entire stop to their trade; the greater part of our master manufacturers, the entire ruin of their business; and the greater part of our workmen an end of their employment. A rupture with any of our neighbours upon the continent, though likely too to occasion some stop or interruption in the employments of some of all these different orders of people, is foreseen, however, without

any such general emotion. The blood, of which the circulation is stopt in some of the smaller vessels, easily disgorges itself into the greater, without occasioning any dangerous disorder; but, when it is stopt in any of the greater vessels, convulsions, apoplexy, or death, are the immediate and unavoidable consequences. If but one of those overgrown manufactures, which, by means either of bounties, or of the monopoly of the home and colony markets, have been artificially raised up to an unnatural height, finds some small stop or interruption in its employment, it frequently occa-sions a mutiny and disorder alarming to government, and embar-rassing even to the deliberations of the legislature. How great, therefore, would be the disorder and confusion, it was thought, which must necessarily be occasioned by a sudden and entire stop in the employment of so great a proportion of our principal manu-facturers?
                  SOME moderate and gradual relaxation of the laws which give to Great Britain the exclusive trade to the colonies, till it is rendered in a great measure free, seems to be the only expedient which can deliver her from this danger, which can enable her or even force her to withdraw some part of her capital from this overgrown employ-ment, and to turn it, though with less profit, towards other employments; and which, by gradually diminishing one branch of her industry and gradually increasing all the rest, can by degrees restore all the different branches of it to that natural, healthful and proper proportion which perfect liberty necessarily establishes, and which perfect liberty can alone preserve. To open the colony trade all at once to all nations, might not only occasion some transitory inconveniency, but a great permanent loss to the greater part of those whose industry or capital is at present engaged in it. The sudden loss of the employment even of the ships which import the eighty-two thousand hogsheads of tobacco, which are over and

above the consumption of Great Britain, might alone be felt very sensibly. Such are the unfortunate effects of all the regulations of the mercantile system! They not only introduce very dangerous disorders into the state of the body politic, but disorders which it is often difficult to remedy, without occasioning for a time, at least, still greater disorders. In what manner, therefore, the colony trade ought gradually to be opened; what are the restraints which ought first, and what are those which ought last to be taken away; or in what manner the natural system of perfect liberty and justice ought gradually to be restored, we must leave to the wisdom of future statesmen and legislators to determine.
                  FIVE different events, unforeseen and unthought of, have very fortunately concurred to hinder Great Britain from feeling, so sensibly as it was generally expected she would, the total exclusion which has now taken place for more than a year (from the first of December, 1774) from a very important branch of the colony trade, that of the twelve associated provinces of North America. First, those colonies in preparing themselves for their non-impor-tation agreement, drained Great Britain compleatly of all the com-modities which were fit for their market: secondly, the extraordi-nary demand of the Spanish Flota has, this year, drained Germany and the north of many commodities, linen in particular, which used to come into competition, even in the British market, with the manufactures of Great Britain: thirdly, the peace between Rus-sia and Turkey has occasioned an extraordinary demand from the Turkey market, which, during the distress of the country, and while a Russian fleet was cruizing in the Archipelago, had been very poorly supplied: fourthly, the demand of the north of Eu-rope for the manufactures of Great Britain, has been increasing from year to year for some time past: and, fifthly, the late parti-tion and consequential pacification of Poland, by opening the mar-ket

of that great country, have this year added an extraordinary demand from thence to the increasing demand of the north. These events are all, except the fourth, in their nature transitory and accidental, and the exclusion from so important a branch of the colony trade, if unfortunately it should continue much longer, may still occasion some degree of distress. This distress, however, as it will come on gradually, will be felt much less severely than if it had come on all at once; and, in the mean time, the industry and capital of the country may find a new employment and direction, so as to prevent it from ever rising to any considerable height.
                  THE monopoly of the colony trade, therefore, so far as it has turned towards that trade a greater proportion of the capital of Great Britain than what would otherwise have gone to it, has in all cases turned it, from a foreign trade of consumption with a neigh-buring, into one with a more distant country; in many cases, from a direct foreign trade of consumption, into a round-about one; and in some cases, from all foreign trade of consumption, into a carrying trade. It has in all cases, therefore, turned it, from a direction in which it would have maintained a greater quantity of productive labour, into one, in which it can maintain a much smaller quantity. By suiting, besides, to one particular market only so great a part of the industry and commerce of Great Britain, it has rendered the whole state of that industry and commerce more precarious and less secure, than if their produce had been accom-modated to a greater variety of markets.
                  WE must carefully distinguish between the effects of the colony trade and those of the monopoly of that trade. The former are always and necessarily beneficial; the latter always and necessarily hurtful. But the former are so beneficial, that the colony trade, though subject to a monopoly, and notwithstanding the hurtful effects of that

monopoly, is still upon the whole beneficial, and greatly beneficials though a good deal less so than it otherwise would be.
                  THE effect of the colony trade in its natural and free state, is to open a great, though distant market for such parts of the produce of British industry as may exceed the demand of the markets nearer home, of those of Europe and of the countries which lie round the Mediterranean sea. In its natural and free state the colony trade, without drawing from those markets any part of the produce which had ever been sent to them, encourages Great Britain to increase the surplus continually, by continually presenting new equivalents to be exchanged for it. In its natural and free state, the colony trade tends to increase the quantity of productive labour in Great Britain, but without altering in any respect the direction of that which had been employed there before. In the natural and free state of the colony trade, the competition of all other nations would hinder the rate of profit from rising above the common level either in the new market, or in the new employment. The new market, without drawing any thing from the old one, would create, if one may say so, a new produce for its own supply; and that new produce would constitute a new capital for carrying on the new employment which in the same manner would draw nothing from the old one.
                  THE monopoly of the colony trade, on the contrary, by excluding the competition of other nations, and thereby raising the rate of profit both in the new market and in the new employment, draws produce from the old market and capital from the old employment. To augment our share of the colony trade beyond what it other-wise would be, is the avowed purpose of the monopoly. If our share of that trade were to be no greater with, than it would have been without the monopoly, there could have been no reason for establishing the monopoly. But whatever forces into a branch of

trade of which the returns are slower and more distant than those of the greater part of other trades, a greater proportion of the capital of any country, than what of its own accord would go to that branch, necessarily renders the whole quantity of productive labour annually maintained there, the whole annual produce of the land and labour of that country less than they otherwise would be. It keeps down the revenue of the inhabitants of that country, below what it would naturally rise to, and thereby diminishes their power of accumulation. It not only hinders, at all times, their capital from maintaining so great a quantity of productive labour as it would otherwise maintain, but it hinders it from increasing so fast as it would otherwise increase, and consequently from maintaining a still greater quantity of productive labour.
                  THE natural good effects of the colony trade, however, more than counter-balance to Great Britain the bad effects of the mono-poly, so that, monopoly and all together, that trade, even as it is carried on at present, is not only advantageous, but greatly advan-tageous. The new market and new employment which are opened by the colony trade, are of much greater extent than that portion of the old market and of the old employment which is lost by the monopoly. The new produce and the new capital which has been created, if one may say so, by the colony trade, maintain in Great Britain a greater quantity of productive labour, than what can have been thrown out of employment by the revulsion of capital from other trades of which the returns are more frequent. If the colony trade, however, even as it is carried on at present is advan-tageous to Great Britain, it is not by means of the monopoly, but in spite of the monopoly.
                  IT is rather for the manufactured than for the rude produce of Europe, that the colony trade opens a new market. Agricul-ture

is the proper business of all new colonies; a business which, the cheapness of land renders more advantageous than any other. They abound, therefore, in the rude produce of land, and instead of importing it from other countries, they have generally a large surplus to export. In new colonies, agriculture, either draws hands from all other employments, or keeps them from going to any other employment. There are few hands to spare for the necessary, and none for the ornamental manufactures. The greater part of the manufactures of both kinds, they find it cheaper to purchase of other countries than to make for themselves. It is chiefly by encouraging the manufactures of Europe, that the colony trade indirectly encourages its agriculture. The manufac-turers of Europe to whom that trade gives employment constitute a new market for the produce of the land; and the most advanta-geous of all markets, the home market, for the corn and cattle, for the bread and butcher's-meat of Europe, is thus greatly extended by means of the trade to America.
                  BUT that the monopoly of the trade of populous and thriving colonies is not alone sufficient to establish, or even to maintain manufactures in any country, the examples of Spain and Portugal sufficiently demonstrate. Spain and Portugal were manufacturing countries before they had any considerable colonies. Since they had the richest and most fertile in the world they have both ceased to be so.
                  IN Spain and Portugal, the bad effects of the monopoly, aggra-vated by other causes, have entirely conquered the natural good effects of the colony trade. These causes seem to be, other mono-polies of different kinds; the degradation of the value of gold and silver below what it is in most other countries; the exclusion from foreign markets by improper taxes upon exportation, and the

narrowing of the home market, by still more improper taxes upon the transportation of goods from one part of the country to another; but above all, that irregular and partial administration of justice, which often protects the rich and powerful debtor from the pursuit of his injured creditor, and which makes the industrious part of the nation afraid to prepare goods for the consumption of those haughty and great men, to whom they dare not refuse to sell upon credit, and from whom they are altogether uncertain of re-payment.
                  IN England, on the contrary, the natural good effects of the colony trade, assisted by other causes, have in a great measure conquered the bad effects of the monopoly. These causes seem to be, the general liberty of trade, which, notwithstanding some restraints is at least equal, perhaps superior, to what it is in any other country; the liberty of exporting, duty free, almost all sorts of goods which are the produce of domestick industry, to almost any foreign country, and what, perhaps, is of still greater import-ance, the unbounded liberty of transporting them from any one part of our own country to any other, without being obliged to give any account to any publick office, without being liable to question or examination of any kind; but above all, that equal and impartial administration of justice which renders the rights of the meanest British subject respectable to the greatest, and which, by securing to every man the fruits of his own industry, gives the greatest and most effectual encouragement to every sort of industry.
                  IF the manufactures of Great Britain, however, have been ad-vanced, as they certainly have, by the colony trade, it has not been by means of the monopoly of that trade, but in spite of the monopoly. The effect of the monopoly has been, not to augment the quantity, but to alter the quality and shape of a part of the manufactures of Great Britain, and to accommodate to a

scarcity of money, which always follows overtrading. Many people wanted it, who had neither wherewithal to buy it, nor credit to borrow it; and because the debtors found it difficult to borrow, the creditors found it difficult to get payment. Gold and silver, however, were generally to be had for their value, by those who had that value to give for them.
               THE enormous expence of the late war, therefore, must have been chiefly defrayed, not by the exportation of gold and silver, but by that of British commodities of some kind or other. When the government, or those who acted under them, contracted with a merchant for a remittance to some foreign country, he would naturally endeavour to pay his foreign correspondent, upon whom he had granted a bill, by sending abroad rather commodities than gold and silver. If the commodities of Great Britain were not in demand in that country, he would endeavour to send them to some other country, in which he could purchase a bill upon that country. The transportation of commodities, when properly fuited to the market, is always attended with a considerable profit; whereas that of gold and silver is scarce ever attended with any. When those metals are sent abroad in order to purchase foreign commodities, the merchant's profit arises, not from the purchase, but from the sale of the returns. But when they are sent abroad merely to pay a debt, he gets no returns, and consequently no profit. He naturally, therefore, exerts his invention to find out a way of paying his foreign debts, rather by the exportation of commodities than by that of gold and silver. The great quantity of British goods ex-ported during the course of the late war, without bringing back any returns, is accordingly remarked by the author of The Present State of the Nation.
               BESIDES the three sorts of gold and silver above mentioned, there is in all great commercial countries a good deal of bullion alter-nately

market, from which the returns are slow and distant, what would otherwise have been accommodated to one from which the returns are frequent and near. Its effect has consequently been to turn a part of the capital of Great Britain from an employment in which it would have maintained a greater quantity of manu-facturing industry, to one in which it maintains a much smaller, and thereby to diminish, instead of increasing, the whole quantity of manufacturing industry maintained in Great Britain.
                  THE monopoly of the colony trade, therefore, like all the other mean and malignant expedients of the mercantile system, depresses the industry of all other countries, but chiefly that of the colonies, without in the least increasing, but on the con-trary diminishing that of the country in whose favour it is esta-blished.
                  THE monopoly hinders the capital of that country, whatever may at any particular time be the extent of that capital, from maintaining so great a quantity of productive labour as it would otherwise maintain, and from affording so great a revenue to the industrious inhabitants as it would otherwise afford. But as capital can be increased only by savings from revenue, the monopoly, by hindering it from affording so great a revenue as it would otherwise afford, necessarily hinders it from increasing so fast as it would otherwise increase, and consequently from maintaining a still greater quantity of productive labour, and affording a still greater revenue to the industrious inhabitants of that coun-try. One great original source of revenue, therefore, the wages of labour, the monopoly must necessarily have rendered at all timesless abundant than it otherwise would have been.
                  
                     

BY raising the rate of mercantile profit, the monopoly discou-rages the improvement of land. The profit of improvement de-pends upon the difference between what the land actually produces and what, by the application of a certain capital, it can be made to produce. If this difference affords a greater profit than what can be drawn from an equal capital in any mercantile employ-ment, the improvement of land will draw capital from all mer-cantile employments. If the profit is less, mercantile employments will draw capital from the improvement of land. Whatever there-fore raises the rate of mercantile profit, either lessens the supe-riority or increases the inferiority of the profit of improvement; and in the one case hinders capital from going to improvement, and in the other draws capital from it. But by discouraging im-provement, the monopoly necessarily retards the natural increase of another great original source of revenue, the rent of land. By raising the rate of profit too the monopoly necessarily keeps up the market rate of interest higher than it otherwise would be. But the price of land in proportion to the rent which it affords, the number of years purchase which is commonly paid for it, necessarily falls as the rate of interest rises, and rises as the rate of interest falls. The monopoly therefore hurts the interest of the landlord two different ways, by retarding the natural increase, first, of his rent, and secondly, of the price which he would get for his land in proportion to the rent which it affords.
                  THE monopoly, indeed, raises the rate of mercantile profit, and thereby augments somewhat the gain of our merchants. But as it obstructs the natural increase of capital, it tends rather to diminish than to increase the sum total of the revenue which the inhabitants of the country derive from the profits of stock; a small profit upon a great capital generally affording a greater revenue than a great profit upon a small one. The monopoly

raises the rate of profit, but it hinders the sum of profit from rising so high as it otherwise would do.
                  ALL the original sources of revenue, the wages of labour, the rent of land, and the profits of stock, the monopoly renders much less abundant than they otherwise would be. To promote the little interest of one little order of men in one country, it hurts the interest of all other orders of men in that country, and of all men in all other countries.
                  IT is solely by raising the ordinary rate of profit that the mo-nopoly either has proved or could prove advantageous to any one particular order of men. But besides all the bad effects to the country in general which have already been mentioned as neces-sarily resulting from a high rate of profit; there is one more fatal, perhaps, than all these put together, but which, if we may judge from experience, is inseparably connected with it. The high rate of profit seems every where to destroy that parsimony which in other circumstances is natural to the character of the merchant. When profits are high, that sober virtue seems to be superfluous, and expensive luxury to suit better the affluence of his situation. But the owners of the great mercantile capitals are necessarily the leaders and conductors of the whole industry of every nation, and their example has a much greater influence upon the manners of the whole industrious part of it than that of any other order of men. If his employer is attentive and parsimonious, the workman is very likely to be so too; but if the master is dissolute and disorderly, the servant who shapes his work according to the pattern which his master prescribes to him, will shape his life too according to the example which he sets him. Accumulation is thus prevented in the hands of all those who are naturally the most disposed to accumulate; and the funds

destined for the maintenance of productive labour receive no aug-mentation from the revenue of those who ought naturally to augment them the most. The capital of the country, instead of increasing, gradually dwindles away, and the quantity of produc-tive labour maintained in it grows every day less and less. Have the exorbitant profits of the merchants of Cadiz and Lisbon aug-mented the capital of Spain and Portugal? Have they alleviated the poverty, have they promoted the industry of those two beg-garly countries? Such has been the tone of mercantile expence in those two trading cities, that those exorbitant profits, far from augmenting the general capital of the country, seem scarce to have been sufficient to keep up the capitals upon which they were made. Foreign capitals are every day intruding themselves, if I may say so, more and more into the trade of Cadiz and Lisbon. It is to expel those foreign capitals from a trade which their own capital grows every day more and more insufficient for carrying on, that the Spaniards and Portugueze endeavour every day to straiten more and more the galling bands of their absurd monopoly. Compare the mercantile manners of Cadiz and Lisbon with those of Amsterdam, and you will be sensible how differently the con-duct and character of merchants are affected by the high and by the low profits of stock. The merchants of London indeed have not yet generally become such magnificent lords as those of Cadiz and Lisbon; but neither are they in general such attentive and parsimonious burghers as those of Amsterdam. They are sup-posed, however, many of them, to be a good deal richer than the greater part of the former, and not quite so rich as many of the latter. But the rate of their profit is commonly much lower than that of the former, and a good deal higher than that of the latter. Light come light go, says the proverb; and the ordinary tone of expence seems every where to be regulated, not so much according to the real ability of spending, as to the supposed facility of getting money to spend.
                  
                     

IT is thus that the single advantage which the monopoly pro-cures to a single order of men is in many different ways hurtful to the general interest of the country.
                  TO found a great empire for the sole purpose of raising up a people of customers, may at first sight appear a project fit only for a nation of shopkeepers. It is, however, a project altogether unfit for a nation of shopkeepers; but extremely fit for a nation that is governed by shopkeepers. Such sovereigns, and such so-vereigns only, are capable of fancying that they will find some advantage in employing the blood and treasure of their subjects, to found and to maintain such an empire. Say to a shopkeeper, Buy me a good estate, and I shall always buy my cloaths at your shop, even though I should pay somewhat dearer than what I can have them for at other shops; and you will not find him very forward to embrace your proposal. But should any other person buy you such an estate, the shopkeeper would be much obliged to your bene-factor if he would enjoin you to buy all your cloaths at his shop. England purchased for some of her subjects, who found them-selves uneasy at home, a great estate in a distant country. The price indeed was very small, and instead of thirty years purchase, the ordinary price of land in the present times, it amounted to little more than the expence of the different equipments which made the furst discovery, reconnoitered the coast, and took a fictitious possession of the country. The land was good and of great ex-tent, and the cultivators having plenty of good ground to work upon, and being for some time at liberty to sell their produce where they pleased, became in the course of little more than thirty or forty years (between 1620 and 1660) so numer-ous and thriving a people, that the shopkeepers and other traders of England wished to secure to themselves the monopoly of their custom. Without pretending, therefore, that they had paid any part, either of the original purchase money, or of the

subsequent expence of improvement, they petitioned the parlia-ment that the cultivators of America might for the future be confined to their shop; first, for buying all the goods which tey wanted from Europe; and, secondly, for selling all such parts of their own produce as those traders might find it convenient to buy. For they did not find it convenient to buy every part of it. Some parts of it imported into England might have inter-fered with some of the trades which they themselves carried on at home. Those particular parts of it, therefore, they were willing that the colonists should sell where they could; the farther off the better; and upon that account proposed that their market should be confined to the countries south of Cape Finisterre. A clause in the famous act of navigation established this truly shopkeeper proposal into a law.
                  THE maintenance of this monopoly has hitherto been the prin-cipal, or more properly perhaps the sole end and purpose of the dominion which Great Britain assumes over her colonies. In the exclusive trade, it is supposed, consists the great advantage of pro-vinces, which have never yet afforded either revenue or military force for the support of the civil government, or the defence of the mother country. The monopoly is the principal badge of their dependency, and it is the sole fruit which has hitherto been gathered from that dependency. Whatever expence Great Britain has hitherto laid out in maintaining this dependency, has really been laid out in order to support this monopoly. The expence of the ordinary peace establishment of the colonies amounted, before the commencement of the present disturbances, to the pay of twenty regiments of foot; to the expence of the artillery, stores, and extra-ordinary provisions with which it is necessary to supply them; and to the expence of a very considerable naval force which is con-stantly kept up in order to guard, from the smuggling vessels of

other nations, the immense coast of North America, and that of our West Indian islands. The whole expence of this peace establishment was a charge upon the revenue of Great Britain, and was, at the same time, the smallest part of what the dominion of the colonies has cost the mother country. If we would know the amount of the whole, we must add to the annual expence of this peace establishment the interest of the sums which, in consequence of her considering her colonies as provinces subject to her domi-nion, Great Britain has upon different occasions laid out upon their defence. We must add to it, in particular, the whole expence of the late war, and a great part of that which preceeded it. The late war was altogether a colony quarrel, and the whole expence of it, in whatever part of the world it may have been laid out, whether in Germany or in the East Indies, ought justly to be stated to the account of the colonies. It amounted to more than ninety millions sterling, including not only the new debt which was contracted, but the two shillings in the pound additional land tax, and the sums which were every year borrowed from the sinking fund. The Spanish war which began in 1739, was principally a colony quarrel. Its principal object was to prevent the search of the colony ships which carried on a contraband trade with the Spanish main. This whole expence is, in reality, a bounty which has been given in order to support a monopoly. The pretended purpose of it was to encourage the manufactures, and to encrease the commerce of Great Britain. But its real effect has been to raise the rate of mercantile profit, and to enable our merchants to turn into a branch of trade, of which the returns are more slow and distant than those of the greater part of other trades, a greater proportion of their capital than they otherwise would have done; two events which, if a bounty could have prevented, it might perhaps have been very well worth while to give such a bounty.
                  
                     

UNDER the present system of management, therefore, Great Bri-tain derives nothing but loss from the dominion which she assumes over her colonies.
                  To propose that Great Britain should voluntarily give up all authority over her colonies, and leave them to elect their own magi-strates, to enact their own laws, and to make peace and war as they might think proper, would be to propose such a measure as never was, and never will be adopted, by any nation in the world. No nation ever voluntarily gave up the dominion of any province, how troublesome soever it might be to govern it, and how small soever the revenue which it afforded might be in proportion to the expence which it occasioned. Such sacrifices, though they might frequently be agreeable to the interest, are always mortifying to the pride of every nation, and what is perhaps of still greater consequence, they are always contrary to the private interest of the governing part of it, who would thereby be deprived of the dis-posal of many places of trust and profit, of many opportunities of acquiring wealth and distinction, which the possession of the most turbulent, and, to the great body of the people, the most unpro-fitable province seldom fails to afford. The most visionary enthu-siast would scarce be capable of proposing such a measure, with any serious hopes at least of its ever being adopted. If it was adopt-ed, however, Great Britain would not only be immediately freed from the whole annual expence of the peace establishment of the colonies, but might settle with them such a treaty of commerce as would effectually secure to her a free trade, more advantageous to the great body of the people, though less so to the merchants, than the monopoly which she at present enjoys. By thus parting good friends, the natural affection of the colonies to the mother country, which, perhaps, our late dissensions have well nigh extinguished, would quickly revive. It might dispose them not only to respect,

for whole centuries together, that treaty of commerce which they had concluded with us at parting, but to favour us in war as well as in trade, and, instead of turbulent and factious subjects, to become our most faithful, affectionate, and generous allies; and the same sort of parental affection on the one side, and filial respect on the other, might revive between Great Britain and her colonies, which used to subsist between those of ancient Greece and the mother city from which they descended.
                  IN order to render any province advantageous to the empire to which it belongs, it ought to afford, in time of peace, a revenue to the publick sufficient not only for defraying the whole expence of its own peace establishment, but for contributing its proportion to the support of the general government of the empire. Every pro-vince necessarily contributes, more or less, to increase the expence of that general government. If any particular province, there-fore, does not contribute its share towards defraying this expence, an unequal burden must be thrown upon some other part of the empire. The extraordinary revenue too which every province affords to the publick in time of war, ought, from parity of reason, to bear the same proportion to the extraordinary revenue of the whole empire which its ordinary revenue does in time of peace. That neither the ordinary nor extraordinary revenue which Great Britain derives from her colonies, bears this proportion to the whole revenue of the British empire, will readily be allowed. The monopoly, it has been supposed, indeed, by increasing the private revenue of the people of Great Britain, and thereby enabling them to pay greater taxes, compensates the deficiency of the publick revenue of the colonies. But this monopoly, I have endeavoured to show, though a very grievous tax upon the colonies, and though it may increase the revenue of a particular order of men in Great Britain, dimi-nishes instead of increasing that of the great body of the people; and consequently diminishes instead of increasing the ability of the great

body of the people to pay taxes. The men too whose revenue the monopoly increases, constitute a particular order which it is both absolutely impossible to tax beyond the proportion of other orders, and extremely impolitick even to attempt to tax beyond that propor-tion, as I shall endeavour to show in the following book. No particular resource, therefore, can be drawn from this particular order.
                  THE colonies may be taxed either by their own assemblies or by the parliament of Great Britain.
                  THAT the colony assemblies can ever be so managed as to levy upon their constituents a publick revenue sufficient not only to maintain at all times their own civil and military establishment, but to pay their proper proportion of the expence of the general govern-ment of the British empire, seems not very probable. It was a long time before even the parliament of England, though placed immediately under the eye of the sovereign, could be brought under such a system of management, or could be rendered sufficiently liberal in their grants for supporting the civil and military establishments even of their own country. It was only by distributing among the parti-cular members of parliament, a great part either of the offices, or of the disposal of the offices arising from this civil and military establishment, that such a system of management could be esta-blished even with regard to the parliament of England. But the distance of the colony assemblies from the eye of the sovereign, their number, their dispersed situation, and their various constitutions, would render it very difficult to manage them in the same manner, even though the sovereign had the same means of doing it; and those means are wanting. It would be absolutely impossible to distribute among all the leading members of all the colony assemblies such a share, either of the offices or of the disposal of the offices arising

imported and exported for the purposes of foreign trade. This bullion, as it circulates among different commercial countries in the same manner as the national coin circulates in every particular country, may be considered as the money of the great mercantile republick. The national coin receives its movement and di-rection from the commodities circulated within the precincts of each particular country: the money of the mercantile republick, from those circulated between different countries. Both are em-ployed in facilitating exchanges, the one between different indivi-duals of the same, the other between those of different nations. Part of this money of the great mercantile republick may have been, and probably was, employed in carrying on the late war. In time of a general war, it is natural to suppose that a movement and direction should be impressed upon it, different from what it usually follows in profound peace; that it should circulate more about the seat of the war, and be more employed in purchasing there, and in the neighbouring countries, the pay and provisions of the different armies. But whatever part of this money of the mercantile republick, Great Britain may have annually em-ployed in this manner, it must have been annually purchased, either with British commodities, or with something else that had been pur-chased with them; which still brings us back to commodities, to the annual produce of the land and labour of the country, as the ultimate resources which enabled us to carry on the war. It is natural indeed to suppose, that so great an annual expence must have been de-frayed from a great annual produce. The expence of 1761, for example, amounted to more than nineteen millions. No accumulation could have supported so great an annual profusion. There is no annual produce even of gold and silver which could have supported it. The whole gold and silver annually im-ported into both Spain and Portugal, according to the best accounts, does not commonly much exceed six millions sterling,

from the general government of the British empire, as to dispose them to give up their popularity at home and to tax their constituents for the support of that general government, of which almost the whole emoluments were to be divided among people who were strangers to them. The unavoidable ignorance of administration, besides, concerning the relative importance of the different mem-bers of those different assemblies, the offences which must frequently be given, the blunders which must constantly be committed in attempting to manage them in this manner, seem to render such a system of management altogether impracticable with regard to them.
                  THE colony assemblies, besides, cannot be supposed the proper judges of what is necessary for the defence and support of the whole empire. The care of that defence and support is not intrusted to them. It is not their business, and they have no regular means of information concerning it. The assembly of a province, like the vestry of a parish, may judge very properly concerning the affairs of its own particular district; but can have no proper means of judging concerning those of the whole empire. It cannot even judge properly concerning the proportion which its own province bears to the whole empire; or concerning the relative degree of its wealth and importance, compared with the other provinces; because those other provinces are not under the inspection and super-intendancy of the assembly of a particular province. What is necessary for the defence and support of the whole empire, and in what proportion each part ought to contribute, can be judged of only by that assem-bly which inspects and super-intends the affairs of the whole empire.
                  IT has been proposed, accordingly, that the colonies should be taxed by requisition, the parliament of Great Britain determining the sum which each colony ought to pay, and the provincial assembly assessing

and levying it in the way that suited best the circumstances of the province. What concerned the whole empire would in this way be determined by the assembly which inspects and super-intends the affairs of the whole empire; and the provincial affairs of each colony might still be regulated by its own assembly. Though the colonies should in this case have no representatives in the British parliament, yet, if we may judge by experience, there is no probability that the parliamen-tary requisition would be unreasonable. The parliament of England has not upon any occasion shown the smallest disposition to over-burden those parts of the empire which are not represented in parliament. The islands of Guernsey and Jersey, without any means of resisting the authority of parliament, are more lightly taxed than any part of Great Britain. Parliament in attempting to exercise its supposed right, whether well or ill grounded, of taxing the colonies, has never hitherto demanded of them any thing which even approached to a just proportion to what was paid by their fellow subjects at home. If the contribution of the colonies, besides, was to rise or fall in proportion to the rise or fall of the land tax; parliament could not tax them without taxing at the same time its own constituents, and the colonies might in this case be consi-dered as virtually represented in parliament.
                  EXAMPLES are not wanting of empires in which all the different provinces are not taxed, if I may be allowed the expression, in one mass; but in which the sovereign regulates the sum which each province ought to pay, and in some provinces assesses and levies it as he thinks proper; while in others, he leaves it to be assessed and levied as the respective states of each province shall determine. In some provinces of France, the king not only imposes what taxes he thinks proper, but assesses and levies them in the way he thinks proper. From others he demands a certain sum, but leaves it to the states of each province to assess and levy that sum as they think

proper. According to the scheme of taxing by requisition, the parliament of Great Britain would stand nearly in the same situation towards the colony assemblies, as the king of France does towards the states of those provinces which still enjoy the privilege of having states of their own, the provinces of France which are supposed to be the best governed.
                  BUT though, according to this scheme, the colonies could have no just reason to fear that their share of the publick burdens should ever exceed the proper proportion to that of their fellow citizens at home; Great Britain might have just reason to fear that it never would amount to that proper proportion. The parliament of Great Britain has not for some time past had the same established authority in the colonies, which the French king has in those provinces of France, which still enjoy the privilege of having states of their own. The colony assemblies, if they were not very favour-ably disposed (and unless more skilfully managed than they ever have been hitherto, they are not very likely to be so) might still find many pretences for evading or rejecting the most reasonable requisitions of parliament. A French war breaks out, we shall suppose; ten millions must immediately be raised in order to defend the seat of the empire. This sum must be borrowed upon the credit of some parliamentary fund mortgaged for paying the interest. Part of this fund parliament proposes to raise by a tax to be levied in Great Britain, and part of it by a requisition to all the different colony assem-blies of America and the West Indies. Would people readily advance their money upon the credit of a fund, which partly depended upon the good humour of all those assemblies, far distant from the seat of the war, and sometimes, perhaps, thinking themselves not much con-cerned in the event of it? Upon such a fund no more money would probably be advanced than what the tax to be levied in Great Britain might be supposed to answer for. The whole burden of the debt

contracted on account of the war would in this manner fall, as it always has done hitherto, upon Great Britain, upon a part of the empire and not upon the whole empire. Great Britain is, perhaps, since the world began, the only state which, as it has extended its empire, has only increased its expence without once augmenting its resources. Other states have generally disburdened themselves upon their subject and subordinate provinces of the most considerable part of the expence of defending the empire. Great Britain has hitherto suffered her subject and subordinate provinces to disburden themselves upon her of almost this whole expence. In order to put Great Britain upon a footing of equality with her own colonies, which the law has hitherto supposed to be subject and subordinate, it seems necessary, upon the scheme of taxing them by parliamentary requisition, that parliament should have some means of rendering its requisitions immediately effec-tual in case the colony assemblies should attempt to evade or reject them; and what those means are, it is not very easy to conceive, and it has not yet been explained.
                  SHOULD the parliament of Great Britain, at the same time, be ever fully established in the right of taxing the colonies, even independent of the consent of their own assemblies, the impor-tance of those assemblies would from that moment be at an end, and with it that of all the leading men of British America. Men desire to have some share in the management of public affairs chiefly on account of the importance which it gives them. Upon the power which the greater part of the leading men, the natural aristocracy of every country, have of preserving or defending their respective importance, depends the stability and duration of every system of free government. In the attacks which those leading men are continually making upon the importance of one another, and in the defence of their own, consists the whole play

of domestic faction and ambition. The leading men of America, like those of all other countries, desire to preserve their own im-portance. They feel, or imagine that if their assemblies, which they are fond of calling parliaments, and of considering as equal in authority to the parliament of Great Britain, should be so far degraded as to become the humble ministers and executive officers of that parliament, the greater part of their own importance would be at an end. They have rejected, therefore, the proposal of being taxed by parliamentary requisition, and like other ambitious and high spirited men, have rather chosen to draw the sword in defence of their own importance.
                  TOWARDS the declension of the Roman republic, the allies of Rome, who had born the principal burden of defending the state and extending the empire, demanded to be admitted to all the privileges of Roman citizens. Upon being refused, the social war broke out. During the course of that war Rome granted those privileges to the greater part of them, one by one, and in pro-portion as they detached themselves from the general confederacy. The parliament of Great Britain insists upon taxing the colonies; and they refuse to be taxed by a parliament in which they are not represented. If to each colony, which should detach itself from the general confederacy, Great Britain should allow such a number of representatives as suited the proportion of what it contributed to the public revenue of the empire, in consequence of its being subjected to the same taxes, and in compensation admitted to the same freedom of trade with its fellow subjects at home; the num-ber of its representatives to be augmented as the proportion of its contribution might afterwards augment; a new method of acquir-ing importance, a new and more dazzling object of ambition would be presented to the leading men of each colony. Instead of piddling for the little prizes which are to be found in what

may be called the paltry raffle of colony faction; they might then hope, from the presumption which men naturally have in their own ability and good fortune, to draw some of the great prizes which sometimes come from the wheel of the great state lottery of British politics. Unless this or some other method is fallen upon, and there seems to be none more obvious than this, of preserving the importance and of gratifying the ambition of the leading men of America, it is not very probable that they will ever voluntarily submit to us; and we ought to consider that the blood which must be shed in forcing them to do so, is every drop of it, the blood either of those who are, or of those whom we wish to have for our fellow citizens. They are very weak who flatter themselves that, in the state to which things have come, our colonies will be easily conquered by force alone. The persons who now govern the resolutions of what they call their continental congress, feel in themselves at this moment a degree of importance which, perhaps, the greatest subjects in Europe scarce feel. From shopkeepers, tradesmen, and attornies, they are become states-men and legislators, and are employed in contriving a new form of government for an extensive empire, which, they flatter themselves, will become, and which, indeed, seems very likely to become one of the greatest and most formidable that ever was in the world. Five hundred different people, per-haps, who in different ways act immediately under the continental congress; and five hundred thousand, perhaps, who act under those five hundred, all feel in the same manner a proportionable rise in their own importance. Almost every individual of the govern-ing party in America fills, at present, in his own fancy, a station superior, not only to what he had ever filled before, but to what he had ever expected to fill; and unless some new object of am-bition is presented either to him or to his leaders, if he has the ordinary spirit of a man, he will die in defence of that station.
                  
                     

IT is a remark of the president Henaut that we now read with pleasure the account of many little transactions of the Ligue, which when they happened were not perhaps considered as very im-portant pieces of news. But every man then, says he, fancied himself of some importance; and the innumerable memoirs which have come down to us from those times, were, the greater part of them, written by people who took pleasure in recording and magnifying events in which, they flattered themselves, they had been considerable actors. How obstinately the city of Paris upon that occasion defended itself, what a dreadful famine it supported rather than submit to the best and afterwards the most beloved of all the French kings, is well known. The greater part of the citizens, or those who governed the greater part of them, fought in defence of their own importance, which they foresaw was to be at an end whenever the antient government should be re-establish-ed. Our colonies, unless they can be induced to consent to a union, are very likely to defend themselves against the best of all mother countries, as obstinately as the city of Paris did against one of the best of kings.
                  THE idea of representation was unknown in antient times. When the people of one state were admitted to the right of citizenship in another, they had no other means of exercising that right but by coming in a body to vote and deliberate with the people of that other state. The admission of the greater part of the inhabitants of Italy to the privileges of Roman citizens, completely ruined the Roman republic. It was no longer possible to distinguish between who was and who was not a Roman citizen. No tribe could know its own members. A rabble of any kind could be introduced into the assemblies of the people, could drive out the real citizens, and decide upon the affairs of the republic as if they themselves had been such. But though America was to

send fifty or sixty new representatives to parliament, the door-keeper of the house of commons could not find any great diffi-culty in distinguishing between who was and who was not a member. Though the Roman constitution, therefore, was neces-sarily ruined by the union of Rome with the allied states of Italy, there is not the least probability that the British constitution would be hurt by the union of Great Britain with her colonies. That constitution, on the contrary, would be compleated by it, and seems to be imperfect without it. The assembly which deliberates and decides concerning the affairs of every part of the empire, in order to be properly informed, ought certainly to have represen-tatives from every part of it. That this union, however, could be easily effectuated, or that difficulties and great difficulties might not occur in the execution, I do not pretend. I have yet heard of none, however, which appear insurmountable. The principal perhaps arise, not from the nature of things, but from the prejudices and opinions of the people both on this and the other side of the Atlantic.
                  WE, on this side the water, are afraid lest the multitude of American representatives should over-turn the balance of the consti-tution, and increase too much either the influence of the crown on the one hand, or the force of the democracy on the other. But if the number of American representatives was to be in pro-portion to the produce of American taxation, the number of people to be managed would increase exactly in proportion to the means of managing them; and the means of managing, to the number of people to be managed. The monarchical and de-mocratical parts of the constitution would, after the union, stand exactly in the same degree of relative force with regard to one another as they had done before.
                  
                     

THE people on the other side of the water are afraid lest their distance from the seat of government might expose them to many oppressions. But their representatives in parliament, of which the number ought from the first to be considerable, would easily be able to protect them from all oppression. The distance could not much weaken the dependency of the representative upon the con-stituent, and the former would still feel that he owed his seat in parliament and all the consequence which he derived from it to the good will of the latter. It would be the interest of the for-mer, therefore, to cultivate that good-will by complaining with all the authority of a member of the legislature, of every outrage which any civil or military officer might be guilty of in those remote parts of the empire. The distance of America from the seat of government, besides, the nations of that country might flatter themselves, with some appearance of reason too, would not be of very long continuance. Such has hitherto been the rapid progress of that country in wealth, population and improve-ment, that in the course of little more than a century, per-haps, the produce of American might exceed that of British taxation. The seat of the empire would then naturally remove itself to that part of the empire which contributed most to the general defence and support of the whole.
                  THE discovery of America, and that of a passage to the East Indies by the Cape of Good Hope, are the two greatest and most important events recorded in the history of mankind. Their con-sequences have already been very great: but, in the short period of between two and three centuries which has elapsed since these discoveries were made, it is impossible that the whole extent of their consequences can have been seen. What benefits, or what misfortunes to mankind may hereafter result from those great events no human wisdom can foresee. By uniting, in some measure, the most distant parts of the world, by enabling them to relieve one another's

wants, to increase one another's enjoyments, and to encourage one another's industry, their general tendency would seem to be bene-ficial. To the natives, however, both of the East and West Indies, all the commercial benefits which can have resulted from those events have been sunk and lost in the dreadful misfortunes which they have occasioned. These misfortunes, however, seem to have arisen rather from accident than from any thing in the nature of those events themselves. At the particular time when these dis-coveries were made, the superiority of force happened to be so great on the side of the Europeans, that they were enabled to com-mit with impunity every sort of injustice in those remote countries. Hereafter, perhaps, the natives of those countries may grow stronger, or those of Europe may grow weaker, and the inhabitants of all the different quarters of the world may arrive at that equality of courage and force which, by inspiring mutual fear, can alone overawe the injustice of independent nations into some sort of respect for the rights of one another. But nothing seems more likely to establish this equality of force than that mutual commu-nication of knowledge and of all sorts of improvements which an extensive commerce from all countries to all countries naturally, or rather necessarily, carries along with it.
                  IN the mean time one of the principal effects of those discove-ries has been to raise the mercantile system to a degree of splen-dor and glory which it could never otherwise have attained to. It is the object of that system to enrich a great nation rather by trade and manufactures than by the improvement and cultivation of land, rather by the industry of the towns than by that of the country. But, in consequence of those discoveries, the commer-cial towns of Europe, instead of being the manufacturers and car-riers for but a very small part of the world, (that part of Europe which is washed by the Atlantic ocean, and the countries which

which, in some years, would scarce have paid four months expence of the late war.
               THE commodities most proper for being transported to distant countries, in order to purchase there, either the pay and provisions of an army, or some part of the money of the mercantile republick to be employed in purchasing them, seem to be the finer and more improved manufactures; such as contain a great value in a small bulk, and can, therefore, be exported to a great distance at little expence. A country whose industry produces a great annual surplus of such manufactures, which are usually exported to foreign countries, may carry on for many years a very expensive foreign war, without either exporting any considerable quantity of gold and silver, or even having any such quantity to export. A con-siderable part of the annual surplus of its manufactures must, indeed, in this case be exported, without bringing back any returns. Some part of it, however, may still continue to bring back a return. The manufacturers, during the war, will have a double demand upon them, and be called upon, first, to work up goods to be sent abroad, for paying the bills drawn upon foreign countries for the pay and provisions of the army; and, secondly, to work up such as are necessary for purchasing the common returns that had usually been consumed in the country. In the midst of the most destructive foreign war, therefore, the greater part of manufactures may frequently flourish greatly; and, on the contrary, they may decline on the return of the peace. They may flourish amidst the ruin of their country, and begin to decay upon the return of its prosperity. The different state of many different branches of the British manufactures during the late war, and for some time after the peace, may serve as an illustration of what has been just now said.
               
                  

lie round the Baltick and Mediterranean seas), have now become the manufacturers for the numerous and thriving cultivators of America, and the carriers, and in some respects the manufacturers too, for almost all the different nations of Asia, Africa, and Ame-rica. Two new worlds have been opened to their industry, each of them much greater and more extensive than the old one, and the market of one of them growing still greater and greater every day.
                  THE countries which possess the colonies of America, and which trade directly to the East Indies, enjoy, indeed, the whole shew and splendor of this great commerce. Other countries, however, not-withstanding all the invidious restraints by which it is meant to exclude them, frequently enjoy a greater share of the real benefit of it. The colonies of Spain and Portugal, for example, give more real encouragement to the industry of other countries than to that of Spain and Portugal. In the single article of linen alone the consumption of those colonies amounts, it is said, but I do not pretend to warrant the quantity, to more than three millions ster-ling a year. But this great consumption is almost entirely sup-plied by France, Flanders, Holland, and Germany. Spain and Portugal furnish but a small part of it. The capital which supplies the colonies with this great quantity of linen is annually distri-buted among, and furnishes a revenue to the inhabitants of those other countries. The profits of it only are spent in Spain and Portugal, where they help to support the sumptuous profusion of the merchants of Cadiz and Lisbon.
                  EVEN the regulations by which each nation endeavours to secure to itself the exclusive trade of its own colonies, are frequently more hurtful to the countries in favour of which they are esta-blished than to those against which they are established. The

unjust oppression of the industry of other countries falls back, if I may say so, upon the heads of the oppressors, and crushes their industry more than it does that of those other countries. By those regulations, for example, the merchant of Hamburgh must send the linen which he destines for the American market to London, and he must bring back from thence the tobacco which he destines for the German market; because he can neither send the one directly to America, nor bring back the other directly from thence. By this restraint he is probably obliged to sell the one somewhat cheaper, and to buy the other somewhat dearer than he otherwise might have done; and his profits are probably somewhat abridged by means of it. In this trade, however, between Hamburgh and London, he certainly receives the returns of his capital much more quickly than he could possibly have done in the direct trade to America, even though we should suppose, what is by no means the case, that the payments of America were as punctual as those of London. In the trade, therefore, to which those regulations confine the merchant of Hamburgh, his capital can keep in con-stant employment a much greater quantity of German industry than it possibly could have done in the trade from which he is excluded. Though the one employment, therefore, may to him perhaps be less profitable than the other, it cannot be less advan-tageous to his country. It is quite otherwise with the employment into which the monopoly naturally attracts, if I may say so, the capital of the London merchant. That employment may, per-haps, be more profitable to him than the greater part of other employments, but, on account of the slowness of the returns, it cannot be more advantageous to his country.
                  AFTER all the unjust attempts, therefore, of every country in Europe to engross to itself the whole advantage of the trade of its own colonies, no country has yet been able to engross to itself any

thing but the expence of supporting in time of peace and of defending in time of war the oppressive authority which it assumes over them. The inconveniencies resulting from the possession of its colonies, every country has engrossed to itself completely. The advantages resulting from their trade it has been obliged to share with many other countries.
                  AT first sight, no doubt, the monopoly of the great commerce of America, naturally seems to be an acquisition of the highest value. To the undiscerning eye of giddy ambition, it naturally presents itself, amidst the confused scramble of politicks and war, as a very dazzling object to fight for. The dazzling splendor of the object, however, the immense greatness of the commerce, is the very quality which renders the monopoly of it hurtful, or which makes one employment, in its own nature necessarily less advan-tageous to the country than the greater part of other employments, absorb a much greater proportion of the capital of the country than what would otherwise have gone to it:
                  THE mercantile stock of every country, it has been shewn in the second book, naturally seeks, if one may say so, the employment most advantageous to that country. It it is employed in the carrying trade, the country to which it belongs becomes the emporium of the goods of all the countries whose trade that stock carries on. But the owner of that stock necessarily wishes to dispose of as great a part of those goods as he can at home. He thereby saves himself the trouble, risk and expence, of exportation, and he will upon that account be glad to sell them at home, not only for a much smaller price, but with somewhat a smaller profit than he might expect to make by sending them abroad. He naturally, therefore, endeavours as much as he can to turn his carrying trade into a foreign trade of consumption. If his stock again is employed in a foreign trade of consumption, he will, for the same reason, be glad

to dispose of at home as great a part as he can of the home goods, which he collects in order to export to some foreign market, and he will thus endeavour as much as he can, to turn his foreign trade of consumption into a home trade. The mercantile stock of every country naturally courts in this manner the near, and shuns the distant employment; naturally courts the employment in which the returns are frequent, and shuns that in which they are distant and slow; naturally courts the employment in which it can maintain the greatest quantity of productive labour in the country to which it belongs, or in which its owner resides, and shuns that in which it can maintain there the smallest quantity. It naturally courts the employment which in ordinary cases is most advantageous, and shuns that which in ordinary cases is least advan-tageous to that country.
                  BUT if in any of those distant employments, which in ordinary cases are less advantageous to the country, the profit should happen to rise somewhat higher than what is sufficient to balance the natural preference which is given to nearer employments, this superiority of profit will draw stock from those nearer employments, till the profits of all return to their proper level. This superiority of profit, however, is a proof that in the actual circumstances of the society, those distant employments are somewhat understocked in proportion to other employments, and that the stock of the society is not distri-buted in the properest manner among all the different employments carried on in it. It is a proof that something is either bought cheaper or sold dearer than it ought to be, and that some particular class of citizens is more or less oppressed either by paying more or by getting less than what is suitable to that equality, which ought to take place, and which naturally does take place among all the different classes of them. Though the same capital never will maintain the same quantity of productive labour in a distant as in a near employment, yet a distant employment may be as necessary for the welfare of the

society as a near one; the goods which the distant employment deals in being necessary, perhaps, for carrying on many of the nearer employments. But if the profits of those who deal in such goods are above their proper level, those goods will be sold dearer than they ought to be, or somewhat above their natural price, and all those engaged in the nearer employments will be more or less oppressed by this high price. Their interest, therefore, in this case requires that some stock should be withdrawn from those nearer employments, and turned towards that distant employment, in order to reduce its profits to their proper level, and the price of the goods which it deals in to their natural price. In this extraordi-nary case, the publick interest requires that some stock should be withdrawn from those employments which in ordinary cases are more advantageous, and turned towards one which in ordinary cases is less advantageous to the publick: and in this extraordinary case, the natural interests and inclinations of men coincide as exactly with the publick interest as in all other ordinary cases, and lead them to withdraw stock from the near, and to turn it towards the distant employment.
                  IT is thus that the private interests and passions of individuals naturally dispose them to turn their stock towards the employments which in ordinary cases are most advantageous to the society. Bu if from this natural preference they should turn too much of it towards those employments, the fall of profit in them and the rise of it in all others immediately dispose them to alter this faulty distri-bution. Without any intervention of law, therefore, the private interests and passions of men naturally lead them to divide and distribute the stock of every society, among all the different employ-ments carried on in it, as nearly as possible in the proportion which is most agreeable to the interest of the whole society.
                  
                     

ALL the different regulations of the mercantile system, necessarily derange more or less this natural and most advantageous distribution of stock. But those which concern the trade to America and the East Indies derange it perhaps more than any other; because the trade to those two great continents absorbs a greater quantity of stock than any two other branches of trade. The regulations, however, by which this derangement is effected in those two different branches of trade are not altogether the same. Monopoly is the great engine of both; but it is a different sort of monopoly. Monopoly of one kind or another, indeed, seems to be the sole engine of the mercantile system.
                  IN the trade to America every nation endeavours to engross as much as possible the whole market of its own colonies, by fairly excluding all other nations from any direct trade to them. During the greater part of the sixteenth century, the Portugueze endeavoured to manage the trade to the East Indies in the same manner, by claiming the sole right of sailing in the Indian seas, on account of the merit of having first found out the road to them. The Dutch still continue to exclude all other European nations from any direct trade to their spice islands. Monopolies of this kind are evidently established against all other European nations, who are thereby not only excluded from a trade to which it might be convenient for them to turn some part of their stock, but are obliged to buy the goods which that trade deals in somewhat dearer than if they could import them themselves directly from the countries which produce them.
                  BUT since the fall of the power of Portugal, no European nation has claimed the exclusive right of sailing in the Indian seas, of which the principal ports are now open to the ships of all European nations. Except in Portugal, however, and within these few years in France,

the trade to the East Indies has in every European country been subjected to an exclusive company. Monopolies of this kind are properly established against the very nation which erects them. The greater part of that nation are thereby, not only excluded from a trade to which it might be convenient for them to turn some part of their stock, but are obliged to buy the goods which that trade deals in, somewhat dearer than if it was open and free to all their countrymen. Since the establishment of the English East India company, for example, the other inhabitants of England, over and above being excluded from the trade, must have paid in the price of the East India goods which they have consumed, not only for all the extraordinary profits which the company may have made upon those goods in consequence of their monopoly, but for all the extraordinary waste which the fraud and abuse, inseparable from the management of the affairs of so great a company, must necessarily have occasioned. The absurdity of this second kind of monopoly, therefore, is much more manifest than that of the first.
                  BOTH these kinds of monopolies derange more or less the natural distribution of the stock of the society: but they do not always derange it in the same way.
                  MONOPOLIES of the first kind always attract to the particular trade in which they are established, a greater proportion of the stock of the society than what would go to that trade of its own accord.
                  MONOPOLIES of the second kind may sometimes attract stock towards the particular trade in which they are established and sometimes repel it from that trade according to different circum-stances. In poor countries they naturally attract towards that trade more stock than would otherwise go to it. In rich countries

they naturally repel from it a good deal of stock which would otherwise go to it.
                  SUCH poor countries as Sweden and Denmark, for example, would probably have never sent a single ship to the East Indies, had not the trade been subjected to an exclusive company. The esta-blishment of such a company necessarily encourages adventurers. Their monopoly secures them against all competitors in the home market, and they have the same chance for foreign markets with the traders of other nations. Their monopoly shows them the certainty of a great profit upon a considerable quantity of goods, and the chance of a considerable profit upon a great quantity. Without such extraordinary encouragement, the poor traders of such poor countries would probably never have thought of hazarding their small capitals in so very distant and uncertain an adventure as the trade to the East Indies must naturally have appeared to them.
                  SUCH a rich country as Holland, on the contrary, would pro-bably, in the case of a free trade, send many more ships to the East Indies than it actually does. The limited stock of the Dutch East India company probably repels from that trade many great mercantile capitals which would otherwise go to it. The mer-cantile capital of Holland is so great that it is, as it were, con-tinually overflowing, sometimes into the public funds of foreign countries, sometimes into loans to private traders and adventurers of foreign countries, sometimes into the most round about fo-reign trades of consumption, and sometimes into the carrying trade. All near employments being completely filled up, all the capital which can be placed in them with any tollerable profit being already placed in them, the capital of Holland necessarily flows towards the most distant employments. The trade to the East Indies, if it was altogether free, would probably absorb the

greater part of this redundant capital. The East Indies offer a market both for the manufactures of Europe and for the gold and silver as well as for several other productions of America, greater and more extensive than both Europe and America put together.
                  EVERY derangement of the natural distribution of stock is neces-sarily hurtful to the society in which it takes place; whether it be by repelling from a particular trade the stock which would other-wise go to it, or by attracting towards a particular trade that which would not otherwise come to it. If without any exclusive company, the trade of Holland to the East Indies would be greater than it actually is, that country must suffer a considerable loss by part of its capital being excluded from the employment most conve-nient for that part. And in the same manner, if without an exclu-sive company, the trade of Sweden and Denmark to the East Indies would be less than it actually is, or, what perhaps is more probable, would not exist at all, those two countries must likewise suffer a considerable loss by part of their capital being drawn into an employ-ment which must be more or less unsuitable to their present circum-stances. Better for them, perhaps, in their present circumstances to buy East India goods of other nations, even though they should pay somewhat dearer, than to turn so great a part of their small capital to so very distant a trade, in which the returns are so very slow, in which that capital can maintain so small a quantity of productive labour at home, where productive labour is so much wanted, where so little is done, and where so much is to do.
                  THOUGH without an exclusive company, therefore, a particular country should not be able to carry on any direct trade to the East Indies, it will not from thence follow that such a company ought to be established there, but only that such a country ought not in

these circumstances to trade directly to the East Indies. That such companies are not in general necessary for carrying on the East India trade, is sufficiently demonstrated by the experience of the Portu-gueze, who enjoyed almost the whole of it for more than a century together without any exclusive company.
                  No private merchant, it has been said, could well have capital sufficient to maintain factors and agents in the different ports of the East Indies, in order to provide goods for the ships which he might occasionally send thither; and yet, unless he was able do this, the difficulty of finding a cargo might frequently make his ships lose the season for returning, and the expence of so long a delay would not only eat up the whole profit of the adventure, but frequently occasion a very considerable loss. This argument, however, if it proved any thing at all, would prove that no one great branch of trade could be carried on without an exclusive company, which is contrary to the experience of all nations. There is no great branch of trade in which the capital of any one private merchant is sufficient for carrying on all the subordinate branches which must be carried on in order to carry on the principal branch. But when a nation is ripe for any great branch of trade, some merchants naturally turn their capitals towards the principal, and some towards the subor-dinate branches of it; and though all the different branches of it are in this manner carried on, yet it very seldom happens that they are all carried on by the capital of one private merchant. If a nation, therefore, is ripe for the East India trade, a certain portion of its capital will naturally divide itself among all the different branches of that trade. Some of its merchants will find it for their interest to reside in the East Indies, and to employ their capitals there in providing goods for the ships which are to be sent out by other merchants who reside in Europe. The settlements

No foreign war of great expence or duration could conveniently be carried on by the exportation of the rude produce of the soil. The expence of sending such a quantity of it to a foreign country as might purchase the pay and provisions of an army, would be too great. Few countries too produce much more rude produce than what is sufficient for the subsistence of their own inhabitants. To send abroad any great quantity of it therefore, would be to send abroad a part of the necessary subsistence of the people. It is otherwise with the exportation of manufactures. The maintenance of the people employed in them is kept at home, and only the sur-plus part of their work is exported. Mr. Hume frequently takes notice of the inability of the antient kings of England to carry on, without interruption, any foreign war of long duration. The English, in those days, had nothing wherewithal to purchase the pay and provisions of their armies in foreign countries, but either the rude produce of the soil, of which no considerable part could be spared from the home consumption, or a few manufactures of the coarsest kind, of which, as well as of the rude produce, the trans-portation was too expensive. This inability did not arise from the want of money, but of the finer and more improved manufactures. Buying and selling was transacted by means of money in England then, as well as now. The quantity of circulating money must have borne the same proportion to the number and value of pur-chases and sales usually transacted at that time, which it does to those transacted at present; or rather it must have borne a greater proportion, because there was then no paper, which now occupies a great part of the employment of gold and silver. Among nations to whom commerce and manufactures are little known, the sovereign, upon extraordinary occasions, can seldom draw any considerable aid from his subjects, for reasons which shall be explained hereafter. It is in such countries, therefore, that he generally endeavours to accumulate a treasure, as the only resource against such emergencies. Independant of this necessity, he is in

which different European nations have obtained in the East Indies, if they were taken from the exclusive companies to which they at present belong and put under the immediate protection of the sove-reign, would render this residence both safe and easy, at least to the merchants of the particular nations to whom those settlements belong. If at any particular time that part of the capital of any country which of its own accord tended and inclined, if I may say so, towards the East India trade, was not sufficient for carrying on all those different branches of it, it would be a proof that at that particular time, that country was not ripe for that trade, and that it would do better to buy for some time, even at a higher price, from other European nations, the East India goods it had occasion for, than to import them itself directly from the East Indies. What it might lose by the high price of those goods seldom be equal to the loss which it would sustain by the distraction of a large portion of its capital from other employments more necessary, or more useful, or more suitable to its circumstances and situation than a direct trade to the East Indies.
                  THOUGH the Europeans possess many considerable settlements both upon the coast of Africa and in the East Indies, they have not yet established in either of those countries such numerous and thriving colonies as those in the islands and continent of America Africa, however, as well as several of the countries comprehended under the general name of the East Indies, are inhabited by barba-rous nations. But those nations were by no means so weak and defenceless as the miserable and helpless Americans; and in propor-tion to the natural fertility of the countries which they inhabited, they were besides much more populous. The most barbarous nations either of Africa or of the East Indies were shepherds; even the Hotentots were so. But the natives of every part of America, except Mexico and Peru, were only hunters; and the difference is

very great between the number of shepherds and that of hunters whom the same extent of equally fertile territory can maintain. In Africa and the East Indies, therefore, it was more difficult to displace the natives, and to extend the European plantations over the greater part of the lands of the original inhabitants. The genius of exclusive com-panies, besides, is unfavourable, it has already been observed, to the growth of new colonies, and has probably been the principal cause of the little progress which they have made in the East Indies. The Portugueze carried on the trade both to Africa and the East Indies without any exclusive companies, and their settlements at Congo, Angola, and Benguela on the coast of Africa, and at Goa in the East Indies, though much depressed by superstition and every sort of bad government, yet bear some faint resemblance to the colonies of America, and are partly inhabited by Portugueze who have been established there for several generations. The Dutch settlements at the Cape of Good Hope and at Batavia, are at present the most considerable colonies which the Europeans have established either in Africa or in the East Indies, and both those settlements are pecu-liarly fortunate in their situation. The Cape of Good Hope was inhabited by a race of people almost as barbarous and quite as inca-pable of defending themselves as the natives of America. It is besides the half way-house, if one may say so, between Europe and the East Indies, at which almost every European ship makes some stay both in going and returning. The supplying of those ships with every sort of fresh provisions, with fruit and sometimes with wine, affords alone a very extensive market for the surplus produce of the colonists. What the Cape of Good Hope is between Europe and every part of the East Indies, Batavia is between the principal countries of the East Indies. It lies upon the most frequented road from Indostan to China and Japan, and is nearly about mid-way upon that road. Almost all the ships too that sail between

Europe and China touch at Batavia; and it is, over and above all this, the center and principal mart of what is called the country trade of the East Indies; not only of that part of it which is car-ried on by Europeans, but of that which is carried on by the native Indians, and vessels navigated by the inhabitants of China and Japan; of Tonquin, Malacca, Cochin-China and the island of Celebes, are frequently to be seen in its port. Such advantageous situations have enabled those two colonies to surmount all the obstacles which the oppressive genius of an exclusive company may have occasionally opposed to their growth. They have enabled Batavia to surmount the additional disadvantage of perhaps the most unwholesome climate in the world.
                  THE English and Dutch companies, though they have established no considerable colonies, except the two above mentioned, have both made considerable conquests in the East Indies. But in the man-ner in which they both govern their new subjects, the natural genius of an exclusive company has shown itself most distinctly. In the spice islands the Dutch burn all the spiceries which a fertile season produces beyond what they expect to dispose of in Europe with such a profit as they think sufficient. In the islands where they have no settlements, they give a premium to those who collect the young blossoms and green leaves of the clove and nutmeg trees which naturally grow there, but which this barbarous policy has now, it is said, almost completely extirpated. Even in the islands where they have settlements they have very much reduced, it is said, the number of those trees. If the produce even of their own islands was much greater than what suited their market, the natives, they suspect, might find means to convey some part of it to other nations; and the best way, they imagine, to secure their own monopoly, is to take care that no more shall grow than what they themselves carry to market. By different arts of oppression they have reduced the population of several of the Moluccas nearly to the number which

is sufficient to supply with fresh provisions and other necessaries of life their own insignificant garrisons, and such of their ships as occasionally come there for a cargo of spices. Under the govern-ment even of the Portugueze, however, those islands are said to have been tolerably well inhabited. The English company have not yet had time to establish in Bengal so perfectly destructive a system. The plan of their government, however, has had exactly the same tendency. It has not been uncommon, I am well assured, for the chief, that is, the first clerk of a factory, to order a peasant to plough up a rich field of poppies, and sow it with rice or some other grain. The pretence was, to prevent a scarcity of provisions; but the real reason, to give the chief an opportunity of selling at a better price a large quantity of opium, which he happened then to have upon hand. Upon other occasions the order has been reversed; and a rich field of rice or other grain has been ploughed up in order to make room for a plantation of poppies; when the chief foresaw that extraordinary profit was likely to be made by opium. The servants of the company have upon several occasions attempted to establish in their own favour the monopoly of some of the most important branches, not only of the foreign, but of the inland trade of the country. Had they been allowed to go on, it is impos-sible that they should not at some time or another have attempted to restrain the production of the particular articles of which they had thus usurped the monopoly, not only to the quantity which they themselves could purchase, but to that which they could expect to sell with such a profit as they might think sufficient. In the course of a century or two, the policy of the English company would in this manner have probably proved as completely destructive as that of the Dutch.
                  NOTHING, however, can be more directly contrary to the real interest of those companies, considered as the sovereigns of the countries which they have conquered, than this destructive plan.

In almost all countries the revenue of the sovereign is drawn from that of the people. The greater the revenue of the people, there-fore, the greater the annual produce of their land and labour, the more they can afford to the sovereign. It is his interest, therefore, to increase as much as possible that annual produce. But if this is the interest of every sovereign, it is peculiarly so of one whose revenue, like that of the sovereign of Bengal, arises chiefly from a land-rent. That rent must necessarily be in proportion to the quantity and value of the produce, and both the one and the other must depend upon the extent of the market. The quantity will always be suited with more or less exactness to the consumption of those who can afford to pay for it, and the price which they will pay will always be in proportion to the eagerness of their competition. It is the interest of such a sovereign, therefore, to open the most extensive market for the produce of his country, to allow the most perfect freedom of commerce, in order to increase as much as possible the number and the competition of buyers; and upon this account to abolish, not only all monopolies, but all restraints upon the transportation of the home produce from one part of the country to another, upon its exportation to foreign countries, or upon the importation of goods of any kind for which it can be exchanged. He is in this manner most likely to increase both the quantity and value of that produce, and consequently of his own share of it, or of his own revenue.
                  BUT a company of merchants are, it seems, incapable of consider-ing themselves as sovereigns, even after they have become such. Trade, or buying in order to sell again, they still consider as the principal business, and by a strange absurdity, regard the character of the sovereign as but an appendix to that of the merchant, as something which ought to be made subservient to it, or by means of which they may be enabled to buy cheaper in India and thereby to

sell with a better profit in Europe. They endeavour for this purpose to keep out as much as possible all competitors from the market of the countries which are subject to their government, and consequently to reduce, at least, some part of the surplus produce of those countries to what is barely sufficient for supplying their own demand, or to what they can expect to sell in Europe with such a profit as they may think reasonable. Their mercantile habits draw them in this manner, almost necessarily, though perhaps insensibly, to prefer upon all ordinary occasions the little and transitory profit of the monopolist to the great and permanent revenue of the sovereign, and would gradually lead them to treat the countries subject to their government nearly as the Dutch treat the Moluccas.
                  BUT if the genius of such a government, even as to what concerns its direction in Europe, is in this manner essentially and perhaps incurably faulty, that of its administration in India is still more so. That administration is necessarily composed of a council of mer-chants, a profession no doubt extremely respectable, but which in no country in the world carries along with it that sort of authority which naturally over-awes the people, and without force commands their willing obedience. Such a council can command obedience only by the military force with which they are accompanied, and their government is therefore necessarily military and despotical. Their proper business, however, is that of merchants. It is to sell, upon their masters account, the European goods consigned to them, and to buy in return Indian goods for the European market. It is to sell the one as dear and to buy the other as cheap as possible, and consequently to exclude as much as possible all rivals from the particular market where they keep their shop. The genius of the administration; therefore, so far as concerns the trade of the company, is the same as that of the direction. It tends to make government subservient to the interest of monopoly, and

consequently to stunt the natural growth of some parts at least of the surplus produce of the country to what is barely sufficient for answering the demand of the company.
                  ALL the members of the administration, besides, trade more or less upon their own account, and it is in vain to prohibit them from doing so. Nothing can be more completely foolish than to expect that the clerks of a great counting-house at ten thousand miles distance, and consequently almost quite out of sight, should, upon a simple order from their masters, give up at once doing any sort of business upon their own account, abandon forever all hopes of making a fortune of which they have the means in their hands, and content themselves with the moderate salaries which those masters allow them, and which, moderate as they are, can seldom be aug-mented, being commonly as large as the real profits of the company trade can afford. In such circumstances, to prohibit the servants of the company from trading upon their own account, can have scarce any other effect than to enable the superior servants, under pretence of executing their masters order, to oppress such of the inferior ones as have had the misfortune to fall under their displea-sure. The servants naturally endeavour to establish the same mono-poly in favour of their own private trade as of the publick trade of the company. If they are suffered to act as they could wish, they will establish this monopoly openly and directly, by fairly prohibiting all other people from trading in the articles in which they chuse to deal; and this perhaps is the best and least oppressive way of esta-blishing it. But if by an order from Europe they are prohibited from doing this, they will, notwithstanding, endeavour to establish a monopoly of the same kind, secretly and indirectly, in a way that is much more destructive to the country. They will employ the whole authority of government, and pervert the administration of justice, in order to harrass and ruin those who interfere with them

in any branch of commerce which by means of agents, either con-cealed or at least not publickly avowed, they may chuse to carry on. But the private trade of the servants will naturally extend to a much greater variety of articles than the publick trade of the company. The publick trade of the company extends no further than the trade with Europe, and comprehends a part only of the foreign trade of the country. But the private trade of the servants may extend to all the different branches both of its inland and foreign trade. The monopoly of the company can tend only to stunt the natural growth of that part of the surplus produce which in the case of a free trade would be exported to Europe. That of the servants tends to stunt the natural growth of every part of the produce in which they chuse to deal, of what is destined for home consumption, as well as of what is destined for exportation; and consequently to degrade the cultivation of the whole country, and to reduce the number of its inhabitants. It tends to reduce the quan-tity of every sort of produce, even that of the necessaries of life, whenever the servants of the company chuse to deal in them, to what those servants can both afford to buy and expect to sell with such a profit as pleases them.
                  FROM the nature of their situation too the servants must be more disposed to support with rigorous severity their own interest against that of the country which they govern, than their masters can be to support theirs. The country belongs to their masters, who cannot avoid having some regard for the interest of what belongs to them. But it does not belong to the servants. The real interest of their masters, if they were capable of understanding it, is the same with that of the country, and it is from ignorance only and the meanness of mercantile prejudice that they ever oppress it. But the real interest of the servants is by no means the same with that of the country, and the most perfect information would not necessarily

put an end to their oppressions. The regulations accordingly which have been sent out from Europe, though they have been frequently weak, have commonly been well-meaning. More intelligence and perhaps less good-meaning has sometimes appeared in those established by the servants in India. It is a very singular government in which every member of the administration wishes to get out of the country, and consequently to have done with the government, as soon as he can, and to whose interest, the day after he has left it and carried his whole fortune with him, it is perfectly indifferent if the whole country was swallowed up by an earthquake.
                  I MEAN not, however, by any thing which I have here said, to throw any odious imputation upon the general character of the servants of the East India company, and much less upon that of any particular persons. It is the system of government, the situation in which they were placed, that I mean to censure; not the character of those who have acted in it. They acted as their situation naturally directed, and they who have clamoured the loudest against them would probably not have acted better themselves. In war and negociation, the councils of Madrass and Calcutta have upon several occasions conducted themselves with a resolution and decisive wisdom which would have done honour to the senate of Rome in the best days of that republick. The members of those councils, however, had been bred to professions very different from war and politicks. But their situation alone, without education, experience, or even example, seems to have formed in them all at once the great quali-ties which it required, and to have inspired them both with abilities and virtues which they themselves could not well know that they possessed. If upon some occasions, therefore, it has animated them to actions of magnanimity which could not well have been expected from them; we should not wonder if upon others it has prompted them to exploits of somewhat a different nature.
                  
                     

SUCH exclusive companies, therefore, are nuisances in every respect; always more or less inconvenient to the countries in which they are established, and destructive to those which have the misfor-tune to fall under their government.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII. Of the agricultural Systems, or of those Systems of political Oeconomy which represent the Produce of Land as either the sole or the principal Source of the Revenue and Wealth of every Country.
               
               THE agricultural systems of political oeconomy will not require so long an explanation as that which I have thought it necessary to bestow upon the mercantile or commercial system.
               THAT system which represents the produce of land as the sole source of the revenue and wealth of every country, has, so far as I know, never been adopted by any nation, and it at present exists only in the speculations of a few men of great learning and inge-nuity in France. It would not, surely, be worth while to examine at great length the errors of a system which never has done, and probably never will do any harm in any part of the world. I shall endeavour to explain, however, as distinctly as I can, the great outlines of this very ingenious system.
               MR. Colbert, the famous minister of Lewis XIVth, was a man of probity, of great industry and knowledge of detail; of great experience and acuteness in the examination of publick accounts, and of abilities, in short, every way fitted for introducing method

such a situation naturally disposed to the parsimony requisite for accumulation. In that simple state, the expence even of a sove-reign is not directed by the vanity which delights in the gaudy finery of a court, but is employed in bounty to his tenants, and hos-pitality to his retainers. But bounty and hospitality very seldom lead to extravagance; though vanity almost always does. Every Tartar chief, accordingly, has a treasure. The treasures of Ma-zepa, chief of the Cossacks in the Ukraine, the famous ally of Charles the XIIth, are said to have been very great. The French kings of the Merovingian race had all treasures. When they divided their kingdom among their different children, they divided their treasure too. The Saxon princes, and the first kings after the conquest, seem likewise to have accumulated treasures. The first exploit of every new reign was commonly to seize the treasure of the preceeding king, as the most essential measure for securing the succession. The sovereigns of improved and com-mercial countries are not under the same necessity of accumulating treasures, because they can generally draw from their subjects ex-traordinary aids upon extraordinary occasions. They are likewise less disposed to do so. They naturally, perhaps necessarily, follow the mode of the times, and their expence comes to be regulated by the same extravagant vanity which directs that of all the other great proprietors in their dominions. The insignificant pageantry of their court becomes every day more brilliant, and the expence of it not only prevents accumulation, but frequently encroaches upon the funds destined for more necessary expences. What Dercyllidas said of the court of Persia, may be applied to that of several European princes, that he saw there much splendor but little strength, and many servants but few soldiers.
               THE importation of gold and silver is not the principal, much less the sole benefit which a nation derives from its foreign trade.

and good order into the collection and expenditure of the publick revenue. That minister had unfortunately embraced all the preju-dices of the mercantile system. That system, in its nature and essence a system of restraint and regulation, could scarce fail to be agreeable to a laborious and plodding man of business, who had been accustomed to regulate the different departments of publick offices, and to establish the necessary checks and controuls for confining each to its proper sphere. The industry and commerce of a great country he endeavoured to regulate upon the same model as the departments of a publick office; and instead of allowing every man to pursue his own interest his own way, upon the liberal plan of equality, liberty and justice, he bestowed upon certain branches of industry extraordinary privileges, while he laid others under as extraordinary restraints. He was not only disposed, like other European ministers, to encourage more the industry of the towns than that of the country, but in order to support the industry of the towns, he was willing even to depress and keep down that of the country. In order to render provisions cheap to the inhabitants of the towns, and thereby to encourage manufactures and foreign commerce, he prohibited altogether the exportation of corn, and thus excluded the inhabitants of the country from every foreign market for by far the most important part of the produce of their industry. This prohibition, joined to the restraints imposed by the antient provincial laws of France upon the transportation of corn from one province to another, and to the arbitrary and degrading taxes which are levied upon the cultivators in almost all the provinces, discouraged and kept down the agriculture of that country very much below the state to which it would naturally have risen in so very fertile a soil and so very happy a climate. This state of discouragement and depression was felt more or less in every different part of the country, and many different enquiries were set on foot concerning the causes of it. One of those causes

appeared to be the preference given, by the institutions of Mr. Colbert, to the industry of the towns above that of the country.
               IF the rod be bent too much one way, says the proverb, in order to make it straight you must bend it as much the other. The French philosophers, who have proposed the system which represents agriculture as the sole source of the revenue and wealth of every country, seem to have adopted this proverbial maxim; and as in the plan of Mr. Colbert the industry of the towns was certainly over-valued in comparison with that of the country; so in their system it seems to be as certainly under-valued.
               THE different orders of people who have ever been supposed to contribute in any respect towards the annual produce of the land and labour of the country, they divide into three classes. The first is the class of the proprietors of land. The second is the class of the cultivators, of farmers and country labourers, whom they honour with the peculiar appellation of the productive class. The third is the class of artificers, manufacturers and merchants, whom they endeavour to degrade by the humiliating appellation of the barren or unproductive class.
               THE class of proprietors contributes to the annual produce by the expence which they may occasionally lay out upon the improve-ment of the land, upon the buildings, drains, enclosures and other ameliorations, which they may either make or maintain upon it, and by means of which the cultivators are enabled, with the same capital, to raise a greater produce, and consequently to pay a greater rent. This advanced rent may be considered as the interest or profit due to the proprietor upon the expence or capital which he thus employs in the improvement of his land. Such expences are in this system called ground expences (depenses foncieres).
               
                  

THE cultivators or farmers contribute to the annual produce by what are in this system called the original and annual expences (depenses primitives et depenses annuelles) which they lay out upon the cultivation of the land. The original expences consist in the instruments of husbandry, in the stock of cattle, in the seed, and in the maintenance of the farmer's family, servants and cattle, during at least a great part of the first year of his occu-pancy, or till he can receive some return from the land. The annual expences consist in the seed, in the tear and wear of the instruments of husbandry, and in the annual maintenance of the farmer's servants and cattle, and of his family too, so far as any part of them can be considered as servants employed in cultiva-tion. That part of the produce of the land which remains to him after paying the rent, ought to be sufficient, first, to replace to him within a reasonable time, at least during the term of his occupancy, the whole of his original expences, together with the ordinary profits of stock; and, secondly, to replace to him an-nually the whole of his annual expences, together likewise with the ordinary profits of stock. Those two sorts of expences are two capitals which the farmer employs in cultivation; and unless they are regularly restored to him, together with a reasonable profit, he cannot carry on his employment upon a level with other employments; but, from a regard to his own interest, must desert it as soon as possible, and seek some other employ-ment. That part of the produce of the land which is thus ne-cessary for enabling the farmer to continue his business, ought to be considered as a fund sacred to cultivation, which if the land-lord violates, he necessarily degrades the produce of his own land, and in a few years not only disables the farmer from paying this racked rent, but from paying the reasonable rent which he might otherwise have got for his land. The rent which properly belongs to the landlord, is no more than the neat produce which remains

after paying in the compleatest manner all the necessary expences which must be previously laid out in order to raise the gross, or the whole produce. It is because the labour of the cultivators, over and above paying compleatly all those necessary expences, affords a neat produce of this kind, that this class of people are in this system peculiarly distinguished by the honourable appellation of the productive class. Their original and annual expences are for the same reason called, in this system, productive expences, because, over and above replacing their own value, they occasion the annual reproduction of this neat produce.
               THE ground expences, as they are called, or what the land-lord lays out upon the improvement of his land, are in this system too honoured with the appellation of productive expences. Till the whole of those expences, together with the ordinary profits of stock, have been compleatly repaid to him by the ad-vanced rent which he gets from his land, that advanced rent ought to be regarded as sacred and inviolable, both by the church and by the king; ought to be subject neither to tithe nor to taxa-tion. If it is otherwise, by discouraging the improvement of land, the church discourages the future increase of her own tithes, and the king the future increase of his own taxes. As in a well ordered state of things, therefore, those ground expences, over and above reproducing in the compleatest manner their own value, occasion likewise after a certain time a reproduction of a neat produce, they are in this system considered as productive expences.
               THE ground expences of the landlord, however, together with the original and the annual expences of the farmer, are the only three sorts of expences which in this system are considered as pro-ductive. All other expences and all other orders of people, even those who in the common apprehensions of men are regarded as

the most productive, are in this account of things represented as altogether barren and unproductive.
               ARTIFICERS and manufacturers, in particular, whose industry, in the common apprehensions of men, increases so much the value of the rude produce of land, are in this system represented as a class of people altogether barren and unproductive. Their labour, it is said, replaces only the stock which employs them, together with its ordinary profits. That stock consists in the ma-terials, tools, and wages, advanced to them by their employer; and is the fund destined for their employment and maintenance. Its profits are the fund destined for the maintenance of their em-ployer. Their employer, as he advances to them the stock of materials, tools and wages necessary for their employment, so he advances to himself what is necessary for his own maintenance, and this maintenance he generally proportions to the profit which he expects to make by the price of their work. Unless its price repays to him the maintenance which he advances to himself, as well as the materials, tools and wages which he advances to his workmen, it evidently does not repay him the whole expence which he lays out upon it. The profits of manufacturing stock, therefore, are not, like the rent of land, a neat produce which remains after compleatly repaying the whole expence which must be laid out in order to obtain them. The stock of the farmer yields him a profit as well as that of the master manufacturer; and it yields a rent likewise to another person, which that of the master manufacturer does not. The expence, therefore, laid out in employing and maintaining artificers and manufacturers, does no more than continue, if one may say so, the existence of its own value, and does not produce any new value. It is therefore altogether a barren and unproductive expence. The expence, on the contrary, laid out in employing farmers and country

labourers, over and above continuing the existence of its own value, produces a new value, the rent of the landlord. It is there-fore a productive expence.
               MERCANTILE stock is equally barren and unproductive with manufacturing stock. It only continues the existence of its own value, without producing any new value. Its profits are only the repayment of the maintenance which its employer advances to himself during the time that he employs it, or till he receives the returns of it. They are only the repayment of a part of the expence which must be laid out in employing it.
               THE labour of artificers and manufacturers never adds any thing to the value of the whole annual amount of the rude produce of the land. It adds indeed greatly to the value of some particular parts of it. But the consumption which in the mean time it occasions of other parts, is precisely equal to the value which it adds to those parts; so that the value of the whole amount is not, at any one moment of time, in the least augmented by it. The person who works the lace of a pair of fine ruffles, for example, will sometimes raise the value of perhaps a pennyworth of flax to thirty pounds sterling. But though at first sight he appears thereby to multiply the value of a part of the rude produce about seven thousand and two hundred times, he in reality adds nothing to the value of the whole annual amount of the rude produce. The working of that lace costs him perhaps two years labour. The thirty pounds which he gets for it when it is finished, is no more than the repay-ment of the subsistence which he advances to himself during the two years that he is employed about it. The value which, by every day's, month's, or year's labour, he adds to the flax, does no more than replace the value of his own consumption during that day, month, or year. At no moment of time, therefore, does he add

any thing to the value of the whole annual amount of the rude produce of the land: the portion of that produce which he is continually consuming, being always equal to the value which he is continually producing. The extream poverty of the greater part of the persons employed in this expensive, though trifling manufacture, may satisfy us that the price of their work does not in ordinary cases exceed the value of their subsistence. It is otherwise with the work of farmers and country labourers. The rent of the landlord is a value, which, in ordinary cases, it is con-tinually producing, over and above replacing, in the most compleat manner, the whole consumption, the whole expence laid out upon the employment and maintenance both of the workmen and of their employer.
               ARTIFICERS, manufacturers and merchants, can augment the revenue and wealth of their society, by parsimony only; or, as it is ex-pressed in this system, by privation, that is, by depriving themselves of a part of the funds destined for their own subsistence. They annually reproduce nothing but those funds. Unless, therefore, they annually save some part of them, unless they annually deprive themselves of the enjoyment of some part of them, the revenue and wealth of their society can never be in the smallest degree augmented by means of their industry. Farmers and country labourers, on the contrary, may enjoy compleatly the whole funds destined for their own subsistence, and yet augment at the same time the revenue and wealth of their society. Over and above the funds destined for their own subsistence, their industry annually affords a neat produce, of which the augmentation necessarily augments the revenue and wealth of their society. Nations, therefore, which, like France or England, consist in a great measure of proprietors and cultivators, can be enriched by industry and enjoyment. Nations, on the contrary, which, like Holland and Hamburgh, are composed chiefly of merchants, artificers and manufacturers, can grow rich

only through parsimony and privation. As the interest of nations so differently circumstanced is very different, so is likewise the com-mon character of the people. In those of the former kind libera-lity, frankness, and good fellowship, naturally make a part of that common character. In the latter, narrowness, meanness, and a selfish disposition, averse to all social pleasure and enjoyment.
               THE unproductive class, that of merchants, artificers, and manu-facturers, is maintained and employed altogether at the expence of the two other classes, of that of proprietors, and of that of culti-vators. They furnish it both with the materials of its work and with the fund of its subsistence, with the corn and cattle which it consumes while it is employed about that work. The proprietors and cultivators finally pay both the wages of all the workmen of the unproductive class, and the profits of all their employers. Those workmen and their employers are properly the servants of the proprietors and cultivators. They are only servants who work without doors, as menial servants work within. Both the one and the other, however, are equally maintained at the expence of the same masters. The labour of both is equally unproductive. It adds nothing to the value of the sum total of the rude produce of the land. Instead of increasing the value of that sum total, it is a charge and expence which must be paid out of it.
               THE unproductive class, however, is not only useful, but greatly useful to the other two classes. By means of the industry of mer-chants, artificers, and manufacturers, the proprietors and cultiva-tors can purchase both the foreign goods and the manufactured produce of their own country which they have occasion for, with the produce of a much smaller quantity of their own labour than what they would be obliged to employ if they were to attempt, in an aukward and unskilful manner, either to import the one or to

make the other for their own use. By means of the unproductive class, the cultivators are delivered from many cares which would otherwise distract their attention from the cultivation of land. The superiority of produce which, in consequence of this undivided attention, they are enabled to raise, is fully sufficient to pay the whole expence which the maintenance and employment of the unproductive class costs either the proprietors, or themselves. The industry of merchants, artificers, and manufacturers, though in its own nature altogether unproductive, yet contributes in this manner indirectly to increase the produce of the land. It increases the productive powers of productive labour, by leaving it at liberty to confine itself to its proper employment, the cultiva-tion of land; and the plough goes frequently the easier and the better by means of the labour of the man whose business is most remote from the plough.
               IT can never be the interest of the proprietors and cultivators to restrain or to discourage in any respect the industry of mer-chants, artificers and manufacturers. The greater the liberty which this unproductive class enjoys, the greater will be the com-petition in all the different trades which compose it, and the cheaper will the other two classes be supplied both with foreign goods, and with the manufactured produce of their own country.
               IT can never be the interest of the unproductive class to oppress the other two classes. It is the surplus produce of the land, or what remains after deducting the maintenance, first, of the cultiva-tors, and afterwards of the proprietors, that maintains and employs the unproductive class. The greater this surplus the greater must likewise be its maintenance and employment. The establishment of perfect justice, of perfect liberty, and of perfect equality, is the

very simple secret which most effectually secures the highest degred of prosperity to all the three classes.
               THE merchants, artificers, and manufacturers of those mercantile states which, like Holland and Hamburgh, consist chiefly of this unproductive class, are in the same manner maintained and em-ployed altogether at the expence of the proprietors and cultivators of land. The only difference is, that those proprietors and culti-vators are, the greater part of them, placed at a most inconvenient distance from the merchants, artificers, and manufacturers whom they supply with the materials of their work and the fund of their subsistence, are the inhabitants of other countries, and the subjects of other governments.
               SUCH mercantile states, however, are not only useful, but greatly useful to the inhabitants of those other countries. They fill up, in some measure, a very important void, and supply the place of the merchants, artificers and manufacturers, whom the inhabitants of those countries ought to find at home, but whom, from some defect in their policy, they do not find at home.
               IT can never be the interest of those landed nations, if I may call them so, to discourage or distress the industry of such mercantile states, by imposing high duties upon their trade, or upon the commodities which they furnish. Such duties, by rendering those commodities dearer, could serve only to sink the real value of the surplus produce of their own land, with which, or, what comes to the same thing, with the price of which those commodities are purchased. Such duties could serve only to discourage the increase of that surplus produce, and consequently the improvement and cultivation of their own land. The most effectual expedient, on the contrary, for raising the value of that surplus produce, for

Between whatever places foreign trade is carried on, they all of them derive two distinct benefits from it. It carries out that sur-plus part of the produce of their land and labour for which there is no demand among them, and brings back in return for it some-thing else for which there is a demand. It gives a value to their superfluities, by exchanging them for something else, which may satisfy a part of their wants, and increase their enjoyments. By means of it, the narrowness of the home market does not hinder the division of labour in any particular branch of art or manu-facture from being carried to the highest perfection. By opening a more extensive market for whatever part of the produce of their labour may exceed the home consumption, it encourages them to improve its productive powers, and to augment its annual produce to the utmost, and thereby increase the real revenue and wealth of the society. These great and important services foreign trade is continually occupied in performing, to all the different countries between which it is carried on. They all derive great benefit from it, though that in which the merchant resides generally derives the greatest, as he is generally more employed in supplying the wants, and carrying out the superfluities of his own, than of any other par-ticular country. To import the gold and silver which may be wanted, into the countries which have no mines, is, no doubt, a part of the business of foreign commerce. It is, however, a most insig-nificant part of it. A country which carried on foreign trade merely upon this account, could scarce have occasion to freight a ship in a century.
               IT is not by the importation of gold and silver, that the dis-covery of America has enriched Europe. By the abundance of the American mines, those metals have become cheaper. A service of plate can now be purchased for about a third part of the corn, or a third part of the labour, which it would have cost in the

encouraging its increase, and consequently the improvement and cultivation of their own land, would be to allow the most perfect freedom to the trade of all such mercantile nations.
               THIS perfect freedom of trade would even be the most effectual expedient for supplying them, in due time, with all the artificers, manufacturers and merchants, whom they wanted at home, and for filling up in the properest and most advantageous manner that very important void which they felt there.
               THE continual increase of the surplus produce of their land, would, in due time, create a greater capital than what could be employed with the ordinary rate of profit in the improvement and cultivation of land; and the surplus part of it would naturally turn itself to the employment of artificers and manufacturers at home. But those artificers and manufacturers, finding at home, both the materials of their work and the fund of their subsistence, might immediately, even with much less art and skill, be able to work as cheap as the like artificers and manufacturers of such mercantile states, who had both to bring from a great distance. Even though, from want of art and skill, they might not for some time be able to work as cheap, yet, finding a market at home, they might be able to sell their work there as cheap as that of the artificers and manufacturers of such mercantile states, which could not be brought to that market but from so great a distance; and as their art and skill improved, they would soon be able to sell it cheaper. The artificers and manufacturers of such mercantile states, therefore, would immediately be rivalled in the market of those landed nations, and soon after undersold and justled out of it altogether. The cheapness of the manufacturers of those landed nations, in conse-quence of the gradual improvements of art and skill, would, in due time, extend their sale beyond the home market, and carry

them to many foreign markets, from which they would in the same manner gradually justle out many of the manufactures of such mercantile nations.
               THIS continual increase both of the rude and manufactured produce of those landed nations would in due time create a greater capital than could, with the ordinary rate of profit, be employed either in agriculture or in manufacturers. The surplus of this capital would naturally turn itself to foreign trade, and be employed in exporting to foreign countries such parts of the rude and manufactured produce of its own country as exceeded the demand of the home market. In the exportation of the produce of their own country, the merchants of a landed nation would have an advantage of the same kind over those of mercantile nations, which its artificers and manufacturers had over the artificers and manufacturers of such nations; the advantage of finding at home that cargo, and those stores and provi-sions, which the others were obliged to seek for at a distance. With inferior art and skill in navigation, therefore, they would be able to sell that cargo as cheap in foreign markets as the merchants of such mercantile nations; and with equal art and skill they would be able to sell it cheaper. They would soon, therefore, rival those mercantile nations in this branch of their foreign trade, and in due time would justle them out of it altogether.
               ACCORDING to this liberal and generous system, therefore, the most advantageous method in which a landed nation can raise up arti-ficers, manufacturers and merchants of its own, is to grant the most perfect freedom of trade to the artificers, manufacturers and mer-chants of all other nations. It thereby raises the value of the surplus produce of its own land, of which the continual increase gradually establishes a fund which in due time necessarily raises up all the

artificers, manufacturers and merchants whom it has occasion for.
               WHEN a landed nation, on the contrary, oppresses either by high duties or by prohibitions the trade of foreign nations, it neces-sarily hurts its own interest in two different ways. First, by raising the price of all foreign goods and of all sorts of manufactures, it necessarily sinks the real value of the surplus produce of its own land, with which, or, what comes to the same thing, with the price of which it purchases those foreign goods and manufactures. Secondly, by giving a sort of monopoly of the home market to its own merchants, artificers and manufacturers, it raises the rate of mercantile and manufacturing profit in proportion to that of agricultural profit, and consequently either draws from agriculture a part of the capital which had before been employed in it, or hinders from going to it a part of what would otherwise have gone to it. This policy, therefore, discourages agriculture in two different ways; first, by sinking the real value of its produce, and thereby lowering the rate of its profit; and, secondly, by raising the rate of profit in all other employments. Agriculture is rendered less advantageous, and trade and manufactures more advantageous than they other-wise would be; and every man is tempted by his own interest to turn, as much as he can, both his capital and his industry from the former to the latter employments.
               THOUGH, by this oppressive policy, a landed nation should be able to raise up artificers, manufacturers and merchants, of its own, somewhat sooner than it could do by the freedom of trade; a matter, however, which is not a little doubtful; yet it would raise them up, if one may say so, prematurely, and before it was perfectly ripe for them. By raising up too hastily one species of industry, it would depress another more valuable species of industry. By raising

up too hastily a species of industry which only replaces the stock which employs it, together with the ordinary profit, it would depress a species of industry which, over and above replacing that stock with its profit, affords likewise a neat produce, a free rent to the landlord. It would depress productive labour, by encou-raging too hastily that labour which is altogether barren and unproductive.
               IN what manner, according to this system, the sum total of the annual produce of the land is distributed among the three classes abovementioned, and in what manner the labour of the unpro-ductive class, does no more than replace the value of its own consumption, without increasing in any respect the value of that sum total, is represented by Mr. Quesnai, the very ingenious and profound author of this system, in some arithmetical formularies. The first of these formularies, which by way of eminence he peculiarly distinguishes by the name of the Oeconomical Table, represents the manner in which he supposes this distribution takes place, in a state of the most perfect liberty, and therefore of the highest prosperity; in a state where the annual produce is such as to afford the greatest possible neat produce, and where each class enjoys its proper share of the whole annual produce. Some subsequent formularies represent the manner in which, he supposes, this distri-bution is made in different states of restraint and regulation; in which, either the class of proprietors, or the barren and unproductive class, is more favoured than the class of cultivators, and in which either the one or the other encroaches more or less upon the share which ought properly to belong to this productive class. Every such encroachment, every violation of that natural distribution, which the most perfect liberty would establish, must, according to this system, necessarily degrade more or less from one year to another the value and sum total of the annual produce, and must necessarily occasion

a gradual declension in the real wealth and revenue of the society; a declension of which the progress must be quicker or slower, according to the degree of this encroachment, according as that natural distribution, which the most perfect liberty would establish, is more or less violated. Those subsequent formularies represent the different degrees of declension, which, according to this system, correspond to the different degrees in which this natural distribution of things is violated.
               SOME speculative physicians seem to have imagined that the health of the human body could be preserved only by a certain precise regimen of diet and exercise, of which every the smallest violation necessarily occasioned some degree of disease or disorder proportioned to the degree of the violation. Experience, however, would seem to show that the human body frequently preserves, at least to all appearance, the most perfect state of health under a vast variety of different regimens; even under some which are generally believed to be very far from being perfectly wholesome. But the healthful state of the human body, it would seem, contains in itself some unknown principle of preservation, capable either of preventing or of correcting, in many respects, the bad effects even of a very faulty regimen. Mr. Quesnai, who was himself a physi-cian, and a very speculative physician, seems to have entertained a notion of the same kind concerning the political body, and to have imagined that it would thrive and prosper only under a certain precise regimen, the exact regimen of perfect liberty and perfect justice. He seems not to have considered that in the political body, the natural effort which every man is continually making to better his own condition, is a principle of preservation capable of prevent-ing and correcting in many respects the bad effects of a political oeconomy in some degree both partial and oppressive. Such a political oeconomy, though it no doubt retards more or less,

is not always capable of stopping altogether the natural progress of a nation towards wealth and prosperity, and still less of making it go backwards. If a nation could not prosper without the enjoyment of perfect liberty and perfect justice, there is not in the world a nation which could ever have prospered. In the political body, however, the wisdom of nature has fortunately made ample provision for remedying many of the bad effects of the folly and injustice of man; in the same manner as it has done in the natural body for remedying those of his sloth and intem-perance.
               THE capital error of this system, however, seems to lie in its representing the class of artificers, manufacturers and merchants, as altogether barren and unproductive. The following observations may serve to show the impropriety of this representation.
               FIRST, this class, it is acknowledged, reproduces annually the value of its own annual consumption, and continues, at least, the existence of the stock or capital which maintains and employs it. But upon this account alone the denomination of barren or unpro-ductive should seem to be very improperly applied to it. We should not call a marriage barren or unproductive, though it produced only a son and a daughter, to replace the father and mother, and though it did not increase the number of the human species, but only continued it as it was before. Farmers and country labourers, indeed, over and above the stock which maintains and employs them, reproduce annually a neat produce, a free rent to the landlord. As a marriage which affords three children is certainly more productive than one which affords only two; so the labour of farmers and country labourers is certainly more productive than that of merchants, artificers and manufacturers. The supe-rior

produce of the one class, however, does not render the other barren or unproductive.
               SECONDLY, it seems, upon this account, altogether improper to consider artificers, manufacturers and merchants, in the same light as menial servants. The labour of menial servants does not conti-nue the existence of the fund which maintains and employs them. Their maintenance and employment is altogether at the expence of their masters, and the work which they perform is not of a nature to repay that expence. That work consists in services which perish generally in the very instant of their performance, and does not fix or realize itself in any vendible commodity which can replace the value of their wages and maintenance. The labour, on the contrary, of artificers, manufacturers and merchants, naturally does fix and realize itself in some such vendible commodity. It is upon this account that, in the chapter in which I treat of productive and unproductive labour, I have classed artificers, manufacturers and merchants, among the productive labourers, and menial servants among the barren or unproductive.
               THIRDLY, it seems, upon every supposition, improper to say, that the labour of artificers, manufacturers and merchants, does not increase the real revenue of the society. Though we should suppose, for example, as it seems to be supposed in this system, that the value of the daily, monthly, and yearly consumption of this class was exactly equal to that of its daily, monthly, and yearly production, yet it would not from thence follow that its labour added nothing to the real revenue, to the real value of the annual produce of the land and labour of the society. An artificer, for example, who in the first six months after harvest, executes ten pounds worth of work, though he should in the same time consume ten pounds worth of corn and other necessaries, yet really adds the value of ten pounds to the

annual produce of the land and labour of the society. While he has been consuming a half yearly revenue of ten pounds worth of corn and other necessaries, he has produced an equal value of work capable of purchasing, either to himself or to some other person, an equal half yearly revenue. The value, therefore, of what has been consumed and produced during these six months is equal, not to ten, but to twenty pounds. It is possible, indeed, that no more than ten pounds worth of this value, may ever have existed at any one moment of time. But if the ten pounds worth of corn and other necessaries, which were consumed by the artificer, had been consumed by a soldier or by a menial servant, the value of that part of the annual produce which existed at the end of the six months, would have been ten pounds less than it actually is in consequence of the labour of the artificer. Though the value of what the artificer produces, therefore, should not at any one moment of time be supposed greater than the value he consumes, yet at every moment of time the actually existing value of goods in the market is, in conse-quence of what he produces, greater than it otherwise would be.
               WHEN the patrons of this system assert that the consumption of artificers, manufacturers and merchants, is equal to the value of what they produce, they probably mean no more than that their revenue, or the fund destined for their consumption, is equal to it. But if they had expressed themselves more accurately, and only asserted that the revenue of this class was equal to the value of what they produced, it might readily have occurred to the reader that what would naturally be saved out of this revenue, must necessarily increase more or less the real wealth of the society. In order, therefore, to make out something like an argument, it was necessary that they should express themselves as they have done; and this argument, even supposing things actually were as it seems to presume them to be, turns out to be a very inconclusive one.
               
                  

FOURTHLY, farmers and country labourers can no more aug-ment, without parsimony, the real revenue, the annual produce of the land and labour of their society, than artificers, manufac-turers and merchants. The annual produce of the land and labour of any society can be augmented only in two ways; either, first, by some improvement in the productive powers of the useful labour actually maintained within it; or, secondly, by some increase in the quantity of that labour.
               THE improvement in the productive powers of useful labour depend, first, upon the improvement in the ability of the work-man; and, secondly, upon that of the machinery with which he works. But the labour of artificers and manufacturers, as it is capable of being more subdivided, and the labour of each workman reduced to a greater simplicity of operation than that of farmers and country labourers, so it is likewise capable of both these sorts of improvement in a much higher degree. See Book I. Chap. I. N n 2 In this respect, there-fore, the class of cultivators can have no sort of advantage over that of artificers and manufacturers.
               THE increase in the quantity of useful labour actually employed within any society, must depend altogether upon the increase of the capital which employs it; and the increase of that capital again must be exactly equal to the amount of the savings from the revenue either of the particular persons who manage and direct the employ-ment of that capital, or of some other persons who lend it to them. If merchants, artificers and manufacturers are, as this system seems to suppose, naturally more inclined to parsimony and saving than proprietors and cultivators, they are, so far, more likely to aug-ment

the quantity of useful labour employed within their society, and consequently to increase its real revenue, the annual produce of its land and labour.
               FIFTHLY and lastly, though the revenue of the inhabitants of every country was supposed to consist altogether, as this system seems to suppose, in the quantity of subsistence which their industry could procure to them; yet, even upon this supposition, the revenue of a trading and manufacturing country must, other things being equal, always be much greater than that of one without trade or manufactures. By means of trade and manufactures, a greater quantity of subsistence can be annually imported into a particular country than what its own lands, in the actual state of their culti-vation, could afford. The inhabitants of a town, though they fre-quently possess no lands of their own, yet draw to themselves by their industry such a quantity of the rude produce of the lands of other people as supplies them, not only with the materials of their work, but with the fund of their subsistence. What a town always is with regard to the country in its neighbourhood, one inde-pendent state or country may frequently be with regard to other independent states or countries. It is thus that Holland draws a great part of its subsistence from other countries; live cattle from Holstein and Jutland, and corn from almost all the different coun-tries of Europe. A small quantity of manufactured produce pur-chases a great quantity of rude produce. A trading and manufactur-ing country, therefore, naturally purchases with a small part of its manufactured produce a great part of the rude produce of other coun-tries; while, on the contrary, a country without trade and manu-factures is generally obliged to purchase, at the expence of a great part of its rude produce, a very small part of the manufactured produce of other countries. The one exports what can subsist and accom-modate but a very few, and imports the subsistence and accommo-dation of a great number. The other exports the accommodation

fifteenth century. With the same annual expence of labour and commodities, Europe can annually purchase about three times the quantity of plate which it could have purchased at that time. But when a commodity comes to be sold for a third part of what had been its usual price, not only those who purchased it before can purchase three times their former quantity, but it is brought down to the level of a much greater number of purcha-sers; perhaps to more than ten, perhaps to more than twenty times the former number. So that there may be in Europe at present, not only more than three times, but more than twenty or thirty times the quantity of plate which would have been in it, even in its present state of improvement, had the discovery of the American mines never been made. So far Europe has, no doubt, gained a real conveniency, though surely a very trifling one. The cheapness of gold and silver renders those metals rather less fit for the purposes of money than they were before. In order to make the same purchases, we must load ourselves with a greater quantity of them, and carry about a shilling in our pocket where a groat would have done before. It is difficult to say which is most trifling, this inconveniency, or the opposite conveniency. Neither the one nor the other could have made any very essential change in the state of Europe. The discovery of America, how-ever, certainly made a most essential one. By opening a new and inexhaustible market to all the commodities of Europe, it gave occasion to new divisions of labour and improvements of art, which, in the narrow circle of the antient commerce, could never have taken place for want of a market to take off the greater part of their produce. The productive powers of labour were im-proved, and its produce increased in all the different countries of Europe, and together with it the real revenue and wealth of the inhabitants. The commodities of Europe were almost all new to America, and many of those of America were new to Europe.

and subsistence of a great number, and imports that of a very few only. The inhabitants of the one must always enjoy a much greater quantity of subsistence than what their own lands, in the actual state of their cultivation, could afford. The inhabitants of the other must always enjoy a much smaller quantity.
               THIS system, however, with all its imperfections is, perhaps the nearest approximation to the truth that has yet been published upon the subject of political oeconomy, and is upon that account well worth the consideration of every man who wishes to examine with attention the principles of that very important science. Though in representing the labour which is employed upon land as the only productive labour, the notions which it inculcates are perhaps too narrow and confined; yet in representing the wealth of nations as consisting, not in the unconsumable riches of money, but in the consumable goods annually reproduced by the labour of the society; and in representing perfect liberty as the only effectual expedient for rendering this annual reproduction the greatest possible, its doctrine seems to be in every respect as just as it is generous and liberal. Its followers are very numerous; and as men are fond of paradoxes, and of appearing to understand what surpasses the comprehension of ordinary people, the paradox which it maintains, concerning the unproductive nature of manufacturing labour, has not perhaps contributed a little to increase the number of its admirers. They have for some years past made a pretty considerable sect, distinguished in the French republick of letters by the name of, The Oeconomists. Their works have certainly been of some service to their country; not only by bringing into general discussion, many subjects which had never been well examined before, but by influencing in some measure the publick administration in favour of agriculture. It has been in consequence of their representations, accordingly, that the agriculture of France has been delivered from several of the

oppressions which it before laboured under. The term during which such a lease can be granted, as will be valid against every future purchaser or proprietor of the land, has been prolonged from nine to twenty-seven years. The antient provincial restraints upon the transportation of corn from one province of the kingdom to another, have been entirely taken away, and the liberty of exporting it to all foreign countries, has been established as the common law of the kingdom in all ordinary cases. This sect, in their works, which are very numerous, and which treat not only of what is properly called Political Oeconomy, or of the nature and causes of the wealth of nations, but of every other branch of the system of civil government, all follow implicitly, and without any sensible variation, the doctrine of Mr. Quesnai. There is upon this account little variety in the greater part of their works. The most distinct and best connected account of this doctrine is to be found in a little book written by Mr. Mercier de la Riviere, some-time Intendant of Martinico, intitled, The natural and essential Order of Political Societies. The admiration of this whole sect for their master, who was himself a man of the greatest modesty and simplicity, is not inferior to that of any of the antient philosophers for the founders of their respective systems. There have been, since the world began, says a very diligent and respectable author, the Marquis de Mirabeau, three great inventions which have princi-pally given stability to political societies, independent of many other inventions which have enriched and adorned them. The first is the invention of writing, which alone gives human nature the power of transmitting without alteration, its laws, its contracts, its annals, and its discoveries. The second, is the invention of money, which binds together all the relations between civilized societies. The third, is the Oeconomical Table, the result of the other two, which completes them both by perfecting their object; the great discovery of our age, but of which our posterity will reap the benefit.
               
                  

AS the political oeconomy of the nations of modern Europe, has been more favourable to manufactures and foreign trade, the industry of the towns, than to agriculture, the industry of the country; so that of other nations has followed a different plan, and has been more favourable to agriculture than to manufactures and foreign trade.
               THE policy of China favours agriculture more than all other employments. In China, the condition of a labourer is said to be as much superior to that of an artificer; as in most parts of Europe, that of an artificer is to that of a labourer. In China, the great ambition of every man is to get possession of some little bit of land, either in property or in lease; and leases are there said to be granted upon very moderate terms, and to be suffi-ciently secured to the lessees. The Chinese have little respect for foreign trade. Your beggarly commerce! was the language in which the Mandarins of Pekin used to talk to Mr. Langlet, the Russian envoy, concerning it. Except with Japan, the Chinese carry on themselves and in their own bottoms little or no foreign trade; and it is only into one or two ports of their kingdom that they even admit the ships of foreign nations. Foreign trade, therefore, is, in China, every way confined within a much nar-rower circle than that to which it would naturally extend itself, if more freedom was allowed to it, either in their own ships, or in those of foreign nations.
               MANUFACTURES, as in a small bulk they frequently contain a great value, and can upon that account be transported at less expence from one country to another than most sorts of rude produce, are in almost all countries the principal support of foreign trade. In countries besides less extensive and less favourably circum-stanced for interior commerce than China, they generally require the support of foreign trade. Without an extensive foreign market,

they could not well flourish either in countries so moderately exten-sive as to afford but a narrow home market; or in countries where the communication between one province and another was so difficult as to render it impossible for the goods of any particular place to enjoy the whole of that home market which the country could afford. The perfection of manufacturing industry, it must be remembered, depends altogether upon the division of labour; and the degree to which the division of labour can be introduced into any manufacture, is necessarily regulated, it has already been shown, by the extent of the market. But the great extent of the empire of China, the vast multitude of its inhabitants, the variety of climate, and consequently of productions in its different provinces, and the easy communication by means of water carriage between the greater part of them, render the home market of that country of so great extent, as to be alone suffi-cient to support very great manufactures, and to admit of very considerable subdivisions of labour. The home market of China is perhaps in extent not much inferior to the market of all the different countries of Europe put together. A more extensive foreign trade, however, which to this great home market added the foreign market of all the rest of the world; especially if any considerable part of this trade was carried on in Chinese ships; could scarce fail to increase very much the manufactures of China, and to improve very much the productive powers of its manufac-turing industry. By a more extensive navigation, the Chinese would naturally learn the art of using and constructing themselves all the different machines made use of in other countries, as well as all the other improvements of art and industry which are practised in all the different parts of the world. Upon their present plan they have little opportunity of improving themselves by the example of any other nation; except that of the Japanese.
               
                  

THE policy of antient Egypt too and that of the Gentoo govern-ment of Indostan seem to have favoured agriculture more than all other employments.
               BOTH in antient Egypt and in Indostan, the whole body of the people was divided into different casts or tribes, each of which was confined, from father to son, to a particular employment or class of employments. The son of a priest was necessarily a priest; the son of a soldier, a soldier; the son of a labourer, a labourer; the son of a weaver, a weaver; the son of a taylor, a taylor; &amp;c. In both countries, the cast of the priests held the highest rank, and that of the soldiers the next; and in both countries, the cast of the farmers and labourers was superior to the casts of merchants and manufacturers.
               THE government of both countries was particularly attentive to the interest of agriculture. The works constructed by the antient sovereigns of Egypt for the proper distribution of the waters of the Nile were famous in antiquity; and the ruined remains of some of them are still the admiration of travellers. Those of the same kind which were constructed by the antient sovereigns of Indostan, for the proper distribution of the waters of the Ganges as well as of many other rivers, though they have been less celebrated, seem to have been equally great. Both countries accordingly, though subject occasionally to dearths, have been famous for their great fertility. Though both were extreamly populous, yet in years of moderate plenty they were both able to export great quantities of grain to their neighbours.
               THE antient Egyptians had a superstitious aversion to the sea; and as the Gentoo religion does not permit its followers to light a fire, nor consequently to dress any victuals upon the water, it in

effect prohibits them from all distant sea voyages. Both the Egyptians and Indians must have depended almost altogether upon the navi-gation of other nations for the exportation of their surplus produce; and this dependency, as it must have confined the market, so it must have discouraged the increase of this surplus produce. It must have discouraged too the increase of the manufactured produce more than that of the rude produce. Manufactures require a much more extensive market than the most important parts of the rude produce of the land. A single shoemaker will make more than three hundred pairs of shoes in the year; and his own family will not perhaps wear out six pairs. Unless therefore he has the custom of at least fifty such families as his own, he cannot dispose of the whole produce of his own labour. The most numerous class of artificers will seldom, in a large country, make more than one in fifty or one in a hundred of the whole number of families contained in it. But in such large countries as France and England, the number of people employed in agriculture has by some authors been computed at a half, by others at a third, and by no author that I know of, at less than a fifth of the whole inhabitants of the country. But as the produce of the agriculture of both France and England is, the far greater part of it, consumed at home, each person employed in it must, according to these computations, require little more than the custom of one, two, or at most four such families as his own, in order to dispose of the whole produce of his own labour. Agricul-ture, therefore, can support itself under the discouragement of a confined market, much better than manufactures. In both antient Egypt and Indostan, indeed, the confinement of the foreign market was in some measure compensated by the conveniency of many inland navigations, which opened in the most advantageous manner the whole extent of the home market to every part of the produce of every different district of those countries. The great extent of Indostan too rendered the home market of that

country very great, and sufficient to support a great variety of manu-factures. But the small extent of antient Egypt, which was never equal to England, must at all times have rendered the home market of that country too narrow for supporting any great variety of ma-nufactures. Bengal, accordingly, the province of Indostan which commonly exports the greatest quantity of rice, has always been more remarkable for the exportation of a great variety of manufac-tures, than for that of its grain. Antient Egypt, on the contrary, though it exported some manufactures, fine linen in particular, as well as some other goods, was always most distinguished for its great exportation of grain. It was long the granary of the Roman empire.
               THE sovereigns of China, of ancient Egypt, and of the different kingdoms into which Indostan has at different times been divided, have always derived the whole, or by far the most considerable part, of their revenue from some sort of land-tax or land-rent. This land-tax or land-rent, like the tithe in Europe, consisted in a certain pro-portion, a fifth, it is said, of the produce of the land, which was either delivered in kind or paid in money, according to a certain valua-tion, and which therefore varied from year to year according to all the variations of the produce. It was natural, therefore, that the sovereigns of those countries should be particularly attentive to the interests of agriculture, upon the prosperity or declension of which immediately depended the yearly increase or diminution of their own revenue.
               THE policy of the antient republicks of Greece, and that of Rome, though it honoured agriculture more than manufactures or foreign trade, yet seems rather to have discouraged the latter employ-ments, than to have given any direct or intentional encouragement to the former. In several of the antient states of Greece, foreign trade was prohibited altogether; and in several others the employ-ments

of artificers and manufacturers were considered as hurtful to the strength and agility of the human body, as rendering it inca-pable of those habits which their military and gymnastic exercises endeavoured to form in it, and as thereby disqualifying it more or less from undergoing the fatigues and encountering the dangers of war. Such occupations were considered as fit only for slaves, and the free citizens of the state were prohibited from exercising them. Even in those states where no such prohibition took place, as in Rome and Athens, the great body of the people were in effect excluded from all the trades which are now commonly exercised by the lower sort of the inhabitants of towns. Such trades were at Athens and Rome all occupied by the slaves of the rich, who exercised them for the benefit of their masters, whose wealth, power and protection, made it almost impossible for a poor freeman to find a market for his work when it came into competition with that of the slaves of the rich. Slaves, however, are very seldom inventive; and all the most important improvements, either in machinery, or in that arrange-ment and distribution of work which facilitate and abridge labour, have been the discoveries of freemen. Should a slave propose any im-provement of this kind, his master would be very apt to consider the proposal as the suggestion of laziness, and of a desire to save his own labour at the master's expence. The poor slave, instead of reward, would probably meet with much abuse, perhaps with some punish-ment. In the manufactures carried on by slaves, therefore, more labour must generally have been employed to execute the same quantity of work than in those carried on by freemen. The work of the former must, upon that account, generally have been dearer than that of the latter. The Hungarian mines, it is remarked by Mr. Montes-quieu, though not more rich, have always been wrought with less expence, and therefore with more profit, than the Turkish mines in their neighbourhood. The Turkish mines are wrought by slaves; and the arms of those slaves are the only machines which the Turks have ever thought of employing. The Hungarian

mines are wrought by freemen, who employ a good deal of machinery, by which they facilitate and abridge their own labour. From the very little that is known about the price of manufactures in the times of the Greeks and Romans, it would appear that those of the finer sort were excessively dear. Silk sold for its weight in gold. It was not, indeed, in those times a European manufacture; and as it was all brought from the East Indies, the distance of the carriage may in some measure account for the greatness of the price. The price, however, which a lady, it is said, would sometimes pay for a piece of very fine linen seems to have been equally extravagant; and as linen was always either a European, or, at farthest, an Egyptian manufacture, this high price can be accounted for only by the great expence of the labour which must have been employed about it, and the expence of this labour again could arise from nothing but the aukwardness of the machinery which it made use of. The price of fine woollens too, though not quite so extravagant, seems however to have been much above that of the present times. Some cloths, we are told by Pliny, dyed in a particular manner, cost a hundred denarii, or three pounds six shillings and eight pence, the pound weight. Others dyed in another manner cost a thousand denarii the pound weight, or thirty-three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The Roman pound, it must be remembered, contained only twelve of our averdupois ounces. This high price, indeed, seems to have been principally owing to the dye. But had not the cloths themselves been much dearer than any which are made in the present times, so very expensive a dye would not probably have been bestowed upon them. The dispro-portion would have been too great between the value of the acces-sory and that of the principal. The price mentioned by the same author of some Triclinaria, a sort of woollen pillows or cushions made use of to lean upon as they reclined upon their couches at table, passes all credibility; some of them being said to have cost more than thirty thousand, others more than three hundred thou-sand

pounds. This high price too is not said to have arisen from the dye. In the dress of the people of fashion of both sexes, there seems to have been much less variety, it is observed by Doctor Arbuthnot, in antient than in modern times; and the very little variety which we find in that of the antient statues confirms his observation. He infers from this, that their dress must upon the whole have been cheaper than ours: but the conclusion does not seem to follow. When the expence of fashionable dress is very great, the variety must be very small. But when, by the improvements in the productive powers of manufacturing art and industry, the expence of any one dress comes to be very moderate, the variety will naturally be very great. The rich, not being able to distin-guish themselves by the expence of any one dress, will naturally endeavour to do so by the multitude and variety of their dresses.
               THE greatest and most important branch of the commerce of every nation, it has already been observed, is that which is carried on between the inhabitants of the town and those of the country. The inhabitants of the town draw from the country the rude produce which constitutes both the materials of their work and the fund of their subsistence; and they pay for this rude produce by sending back to the country a certain portion of it manufactured and prepared for immediate use. The trade which is carried on between those two different sets of people consists ultimately in a certain quantity of rude produce exchanged for a certain quan-tity of manufactured produce. The dearer the latter, there-fore, the cheaper the former; and whatever tends in any coun-try to raise the price of manufactured produce, tends to lower that of the rude produce of the land, and thereby to discourage agriculture. The smaller the quantity of manufactured produce which any given quantity of rude produce, or, what comes to the same thing, which the price of any given quantity of rude produce is capable of purchasing, the smaller the real value of that given

A new sett of exchanges, therefore, began to take place which had never been thought of before, and which should naturally have proved as advantageous to the new, as it certainly did to the old continent. The savage injustice of the Europeans rendered an event, which ought to have been beneficial to all, ruinous and destructive to several of those unfortunate countries.
               THE discovery of a passage to the East Indies, by the Cape of Good Hope, which happened much about the same time, opened, perhaps, a still more extensive range to foreign commerce than even that of America, notwithstanding the greater distance. There were but two nations in America, in any respect superior to savages, and these were destroyed almost as soon as discovered. The rest were mere savages. But the empires of China, Indostan, Japan, as well as several others in the East Indies, without having richer mines of gold or silver, were in every other respect much richer, better cultivated, and more advanced in all arts and manufactures than either Mexico or Peru, even though we should credit, what plainly deserves no credit, the exaggerated accounts of the Spanish writers, concerning the antient state of those empires. But rich and civilized nations can always exchange to a much greater value with one another, than with savages and barbarians. Europe, however, has hitherto derived much less advantage from its com-merce with the East Indies, than from that with America. The Portuguese monopolised the East India trade to themselves for about a century, and it was only indirectly and through them, that the other nations of Europe could either send out or receive any goods from that country. When the Dutch, in the beginning of the last century, began to encroach upon them, they vested their whole East India commerce in an exclusive company. The English, French, Swedes, and Danes, have all followed their example, so that no great nation in Europe has ever yet had the benefit of a

quantity of rude produce; the smaller the encouragement which either the landlord has to increase its quantity by improving, or the farmer by cultivating the land. Whatever, besides, tends to dimi-nish in any country the number of artificers and manufacturers, tends to diminish the home market, the most important of all markets, for the rude produce of the land, and thereby still further to discourage agriculture.
               THOSE systems, therefore, which preferring agriculture to all other employments, in order to promote it impose restraints upon manufactures and foreign trade, act contrary to the very end which they propose, and indirectly discourage that very species of industry which they mean to promote. They are so far, perhaps, more inconsistent than even the mercantile system. That system, by encouraging manufactures and foreign trade more than agriculture, turns a certain portion of the capital of the society from supporting a more advantageous, to support a less advantageous species of industry. But still it really and in the end encourages that species of industry which it means to promote. Those agricultural systems, on the contrary, really and in the end discourage their own favourite species of industry.
               IT is thus that every system which endeavours, either, by extraor-dinary encouragements, to draw towards a particular species of industry a greater share of the capital of the society than what would naturally go to it; or, by extraordinary restraints, to force from a particular species of industry some share of the capital which would otherwise be employed in it; is in reality subversive of the great purpose which it means to promote. It retards, instead of accelerating, the progress of the society towards real wealth and greatness; and diminishes, instead of increasing, the real value of the annual produce of its land and labour.
               
                  

ALL systems either of preference or of restraint, therefore, being thus completely taken away, the obvious and simple system of natural liberty establishes itself of its own accord. Every man, as long as he does not violate the laws of justice, is left perfectly free to pursue his own interest his own way, and to bring both his industry and capital into competition with those of any other man or order of men. The sovereign is completely discharged from a duty, in the attempting to perform which he must always be exposed to innumerable delusions, and for the proper performance of which no human wisdom or knowledge could ever be sufficient; the duty of super-intending the industry of private people, and of directing it towards the employments most suitable to the interest of the society. According to the system of natural liberty, the sove-reign has only three duties to attend to; three duties of great import-ance, indeed, but plain and intelligible to common understandings: first, the duty of protecting the society from the violence and invasion of other independent societies; secondly, the duty of protecting, as far as possible, every member of the society from the injustice or oppression of every other member of it, or the duty of establishing an exact administration of justice; and, thirdly, the duty of erect-ing and maintaining certain publick works and certain publick institutions, which it can never be for the interest of any indivi-dual, or small number of individuals, to erect and maintain; because the profit could never repay the expence to any individual or small number of individuals, though it may frequently do much more than repay it to a great society.
               THE proper performance of those several duties of the sovereign necessarily supposes a certain expence; and this expence again necessarily requires a certain revenue to support it. In the following book, therefore, I shall endeavour to explain; first, what are the necessary expences of the sovereign or common-wealth; and which

of those expences ought to be defrayed by the general contribution of the whole society; and which of them, by that of some par-ticular part only, or of some particular members of the society: secondly, what are the different methods in which the whole society may be made to contribute towards defraying the expences incumbent on the whole society, and what are the principal advan-tages and inconveniences of each of those methods: and, thirdly, what are the reasons and causes which have induced almost all modern governments to mortgage some part of this reve-nue, or to contract debts, and what have been the effects of those debts upon the real wealth, the annual produce of the land and labour of the society. The following book, therefore, will naturally be divided into three chapters.
            
         
         
            

            BOOK V. Of the Revenue of the Sovereign or Commonwealth.
            
               CHAP. I. Of the Expences of the Sovereign or Commonwealth.
               
               
                  PART FIRST. Of the Expence of Defence.
                  
                  THE first duty of the sovereign, that of protecting the society from the violence and invasion of other independent societies, can be performed only by means of a military force. But the expence both of preparing this military force in time of peace, and of employing it in time of war, is very different in the different states of society, in the different periods of improvement.
                  AMONG nations of hunters, the lowest and rudest state of society, such as we find it among the native tribes of North America, every man is a warrior as well as a hunter. When he goes to war, either to defend his society, or to revenge the injuries which have been done to it by other societies, he maintains himself by his own labour in the same manner as when he lives at home. His society, for in this state of things there is properly neither sovereign nor com-monwealth, is at no sort of expence, either to prepare him for the field, or to maintain him while he is in it.
                  
                     

AMONG nations of shepherds, a more advanced state of society, such as we find it among the Tartars and Arabs, every man is, in the same manner, a warrior. Such nations have commonly no fixed habitation, but live either in tents or in a sort of covered waggons which are easily transported from place to place. The whole tribe or nation changes its situation according to the different seasons of the year, as well as according to other accidents. When its herds and flocks have consumed the forage of one part of the country, it removes to another, and from that to a third. In the dry season, it comes down to the banks of the rivers; in the wet season it retires to the upper country. When such a nation goes to war, the warriors will not trust their herds and flocks to the feeble defence of their old men, their women and children; and their old men, their women and children, will not be left behind without defence and without subsistence. The whole nation, besides, being accustomed to a wandering life, even in time of peace, easily takes the field in time of war. Whether it marches as an army, or moves about as a company of herdsmen, the way of life is nearly the same, though the object proposed by it is very different. They all go to war together, therefore, and every one does as well as he can. Among the Tartars, even the women have been frequently known to engage in battle. If they conquer, whatever belongs to the hostile tribe is the recompence of the victory. But if they are vanquished, all is lost, and not only their herds and flocks, but their women and children become the booty of the conqueror. Even the greater part of those who survive the action are obliged to submit to him for the sake of immediate subsistence. The rest are commonly dissi-pated and dispersed in the desart.
                  THE ordinary life, the ordinary exercises of a Tartar or Arab, prepare him sufficiently for war. Running, wrestling, cudgel-play-ing, throwing the javeling, drawing the bow, &amp;c. are the common

pastimes of those who live in the open air, and are all of them the images of war. When a Tartar or Arab actually goes to war, he is maintained by his own herds and flocks which he carries with him, in the same manner as in peace. His chief or sovereign, for those nations have all chiefs or sovereigns, is at no fort of expence in preparing him for the field; and when he is in it, the chance of plunder is the only pay which he either expects or requires.
                  AN army of hunters can seldom exceed two or three hundred men. The precarious subsistence which the chace affords could seldom allow a greater number to keep together for any considerable time. An army of shepherds, on the contrary, may sometimes amount to two or three hundred thousand. As long as nothing stops their progress, as long as they can go on from one district, of which they have consumed the forage, to another which is yet entire; there seems to be scarce any limit to the number who can march on together. A nation of hunters can never be formi-dable to the civilized nations in their neighbourhood. A nation of shepherds may. Nothing can be more contemptible than an Indian war in North America. Nothing, on the contrary, can be more dreadful than a Tartar invasion has frequently been in Asia. The judgement of Thucidides, that both Europe and Asia could not resist the Scythians united, has been verified by the experience of all ages. The inhabitants of the extensive, but defenceless plains of Scythia or Tartary, have been frequently united under the dominion of the chief of some conquering horde or clan; and the havock and devastation of Asia have always signalized their union. The inha-bitants of the inhospitable desarts of Arabia, the other great nation of shepherds, have never been united but once; under Mahomet and his immediate successors. Their union, which was more the effect of religious enthusiasm than of conquest, was signalized in the same manner. If the hunting nations of America

should ever become shepherds, their neighbourhood would be much more dangerous to the European colonies than it is at present.
                  IN a yet more advanced state of society, among those nations of husbandmen who have little foreign commerce and no other manu-factures but those coarse and houshold ones which almost every private family prepares for its own use, every man, in the same manner, either is a warrior or easily becomes such. They who live by agriculture generally pass the whole day in the open air, exposed to all the inclemencies of the seasons. The hardiness of their ordinary life prepares them for the fatigues of war, to some of which their necessary occupations bear a good deal of analogy. The necessary occupation of a ditcher prepares him to work in the trenches, and to fortify a camp as well as to enclose a field. The ordinary pastimes of such husbandmen are the same as those of shepherds, and are in the same manner the images of war. But as husbandmen have less leisure than shepherds, they are not so frequently employed in those pastimes. They are soldiers, but soldiers not quite so much masters of their exercise. Such as they are, however, it seldom costs the sovereign or commonwealth any expence to prepare them for the field.
                  AGRICULTURE, even in its rudest and lowest state, supposes a settlement; some sort of fixed habitation which cannot be abandoned without great loss. When a nation of mere husbandmen, therefore, goes to war, the whole people cannot take the field together. The old men, the women and children, at least must remain at home to take care of the habitation. All the men of the military age, however, may take the field, and in small nations of this kind have frequently done so. In every nation the men of the military age are supposed to amount to about a fourth or fifth part of the whole body of the people. If the campaign too should begin after seed

time and end before harvest, both the husbandman and his prin-cipal labourers can be spared from the farm without much loss. He trusts that the work which must be done in the meantime can be well enough executed by the old men, the women and the children. He is not unwilling, therefore, to serve without pay during so short a campaign, and it frequently costs the sovereign or commonwealth as little to maintain him in the field as to prepare him for it. The citizens of all the different states of antient Greece seem to have served in this manner till after the second Persian war; and the people of Peloponesus till after the Peloponesian war. The Peloponesians, Thucidides observes, generally left the field in the summer and returned home to reap the harvest. The Roman people under their kings and during the first ages of the republick served in the same manner. It was not till the siege of Veii, that they who staid at home began to contribute something towards maintaining those who went to war. In the European monarchies which were founded upon the ruins of the Roman empire, both before and for some time after the establishment of what is properly called the feudal law, the great lords with all their immediate dependents used to serve the crown at their own expence. In the field, in the same manner as at home, they maintained themselves by their own revenue, and not by any stipend or pay which they received from the king upon that particular occasion.
                  IN a more advanced state of society, two different causes contri-bute to render it altogether impossible that they who take the field should maintain themselves at their own expence. Those two causes are, the progress of manufactures, and the improvement in the art of war.
                  THOUGH a husbandman should be employed in an expedition, provided it begins after seed time and ends before harvest, the inter-ruption

of his business will not always occasion any considerable diminution of his revenue. Without the intervention of his labour, nature does herself the greater part of the work which remains to be done. But the moment that an artificer, a smith, a car-penter, or a weaver, for example, quits his workhouse, the sole source of his revenue is completely dried up. Nature does nothing for him, he does all for himself. When he takes the field, there-fore, in defence of the publick, as he has no revenue to maintain himself, he must necessarily be maintained by the publick. But in a country of which a great part of the inhabitants are artificers and manufacturers, a great part of the people who go to war must be drawn from those classes, and must therefore be maintained by the publick as long as they are employed in its service.
                  WHEN the art of war too has gradually grown up to be a very intri-cate and complicated science, when the event of war ceases to be de-termined, as in the first ages of society, by a single irregular skirmish or battle, but when the contest is generally spun out through several different campaigns, each of which lasts during the greater part of the year; it becomes universally necessary that the publick should main-tain those who serve the publick in war, at least while they are employed in that service. Whatever in time of peace might be the ordinary occupation of those who go to war, so very tedious and expensive a service would otherwise be by far too heavy a burden upon them. After the second Persian war, accordingly, the armies of Athens seem to have been generally composed of mercenary troops; consisting indeed partly of citizens, but partly too of foreigners; and all of them equally hired and paid at the expence of the state. From the time of the seige of Veii the armies of Rome received pay for their service during the time which they remained in the field. Under the feudal governments the military service both of the great lords and of their immediate dependents

was, after a certain period, universally exchanged for a payment in money, which was employed to maintain those who served in their stead.
                  THE number of those who can go to war, in proportion to the whole number of the people, is necessarily much smaller in a civi-lized than in a rude state of society. In a civilized society, as the soldiers are maintained altogether by the labour of those who are not soldiers, the number of the former never can exceed what the latter can maintain, over and above maintaining in a manner suitable to their respective stations both themselves and the other officers of government, and law, whom they are obliged to maintain. In the little Agrarian states of antient Greece, a fourth or a fifth part of the whole body of the people considered themselves as soldiers, and would sometimes, it is said, take the field. Among the civilized nations of modern Europe, it is commonly computed, that not more than one hundredth part of the inhabitants of any country can be employed as soldiers, without ruin to the country at whose expence they are employed.
                  THE expence of preparing the army for the field seems not to have become considerable in any nation, till long after that of main-taining it in the field had devolved entirely upon the sovereign or commonwealth. In all the different republicks of antient Greece, to learn his military exercises was a necessary part of education imposed by the state upon every free citizen. In every city there seems to have been a publick field, in which, under the protec-tion of the publick magistrate, the young people were taught their different exercises by different masters. In this very simple institution consisted the whole expence which any Grecian state seems ever to have been at in preparing its citizens for war. In antient Rome the exercises of the Campus Martius answered the

The Reader is desired to correct with his Pen the two following ERRATA, which in this Second Volume affect the Sense.
            Page 467, Line 6, counting from the Bottom; instead of immoveable, read moveable.
            
            Page 488, Lines 3 and 4, counting from the Top; instead of three shillings a bushel, read three shillings and four-pence a bushel.
            
         
      
      
         
            

free commerce to the East Indies. No other reason need be assigned why it has never been so advantageous as the trade to America, which, between almost every nation of Europe and its own colonies, is free to all its subjects. The exclusive privileges of those East India companies, their great riches, the great favour and protection which these have prooured them from their respective governments, have excited much envy against them. This envy has frequently re-presented their trade as altogether pernicious, on account of the great quantities of silver, which it every year exports from the countries from which it is carried on. The parties concerned have replied, that their trade, by this continual exportation of silver, might, indeed, tend to impoverish Europe in general, but not the particular country from which it was carried on; because, by the exportation of a part of the returns to other European countries, it annually brought home a much greater quantity of that metal than it carried out. Both the objection and the reply are founded in the popular notion which I have been just now examining. It is, therefore, unnecessary to say any thing further about either. By the annual exportation of silver to the East Indies, plate is probably somewhat dearer in Europe than it other-wise might have been; and coined silver probably purchases a larger quantity both of labour and commodities. The former of these two effects is a very small loss, the latter a very small advantage; both too insignificant to deserve any part of the publick attention. The trade to the East Indies, by opening a market to the com-modities of Europe, or, what comes nearly to the same thing, to the gold and silver which is purchased with those commodities, must necessarily tend to increase the annual production of European commodities, and consequently the real wealth and revenue of Europe. That it has hitherto increased them so little, is pro-bably owing to the restraints which it every where labours under.
               
                  

same purpose with those of the Gymnasium in antient Greece. Under the feudal governments, the many publick ordinances that the citizens of every district should practise archery as well as several other military exercises, were intended for promoting the same purpose, but do not seem to have promoted it so well. Either from want of interest in the officers entrusted with the execution of those ordinances, or from some other cause, they appear to have been universally neglected; and in the progress of all those governments, military exercises seem to have gone gradually into disuse among the great body of the people.
                  IN the republicks of antient Greece and Rome, during the whole period of their existence, and under the feudal governments for a considerable time after their first establishment, the trade of a soldier was not a separate distinct trade which constituted the sole or principal occupation of a particular class of citizens. Every subject of the state, whatever might be the ordinary trade or occupation by which he gained his livelihood, considered himself upon all ordi-nary occasions as fit likewise to exercise the trade of a soldier, and upon many extraordinary occasions as bound to exercise it.
                  THE art of war, however, as it is certainly the noblest of all arts, so in the progress of improvement it necessarily becomes one of the most complicated among them. The state of the mechanical, as well as of some other arts with which it is necessarily connected, determines the degree of perfection to which it is capable of being carried at any particular time. But in order to carry it to this degree of perfection, it is necessary that it should become the sole or principal occupation of a particular class of citizens, and the divi-sion of labour is as necessary for the improvement of this as of every other art. Into other arts the division of labour is naturally introduced by the prudence of individuals, who find that they

promote their private interest better by confining themselves to a particular trade, than by exercising a great number. But it is the wisdom of the state only which can render the trade of a soldier a particular trade separate and distinct from all others. A private citizen who, in time of profound peace and without any particular encouragement from the publick, should spend the greater part of his time in military exercises, might, no doubt, both improve him-self very much in them, and amuse himself very well; but he cer-tainly would not promote his own interest. It is the wisdom of the state only which can render it for his interest to give up the greater part of his time to this peculiar occupation: and states have not always had this wisdom, even when their circumstances had become such that the preservation of their existence required that they should have it.
                  A SHEPHERD has a great deal of leisure; a husbandman, in the rude state of husbandry, has some; an artificer or manufacturer has none at all. The first may, without any loss, employ a great deal of his time in martial exercises; the second may employ some part of it; but the last cannot employ a single hour in them with-out some loss, and his attention to his own interest naturally leads him to neglect them altogether. Those improvements in husbandry too, which the progress of arts and manufactures necessarily intro-duces, leave the husbandman as little leisure as the artificer. Mili-tary exercises come to be as much neglected by the inhabitants of the country as by those of the town, and the great body of the people becomes altogether unwarlike. That wealth, at the same time, which always follows the improvements of agriculture and manu-factures, and which in reality is no more than the accumulated produce of those improvements, provokes the invasion of all their neighbours. An industrious, and upon that account, a wealthy nation, is of all nations the most likely to be attacked; and unless the state

takes some new measures for the publick defence, the natural habits of the people render them altogether incapable of defending themselves.
                  IN these circumstances there seem to be but two methods by which the state can make any tolerable provision for the publick defence.
                  IT may either, first, by means of a very rigorous police, and in spite of the whole bent of the interest, genius and inclinations of the people, enforce the practice of military exercises, and oblige either all the citizens of the military age, or a certain number of them, to join in some measure the trade of a soldier to whatever other trade or profession they may happen to carry on.
                  OR, secondly, by maintaining and employing a certain number of citizens in the constant practice of military exercises, it may render the trade of a soldier a particular trade, separate and distinct from all others.
                  IF the state has recourse to the first of those two expedients, its military force is said to consist in a militia; if to the second, it is said to consist in a standing army. The practice of military exercises is the sole or principal occupation of the soldiers of a standing army, and the maintenance or pay which the state affords them is the prin-cipal and ordinary fund of their subsistence. The practice of military exercises is only the occasional occupation of the soldiers of a militia, and they derive the principal and ordinary fund of their subsistence from some other occupation. In a militia, the charac-ter of the labourer, artificer or tradesman, predominates over that of the soldier: in a standing army, that of the soldier predominates over every other character; and in this distinction seems to consist

the essential difference between those two different species of mili-tary force.
                  MILITIAS have been of several different kinds. In some coun-tries the citizens destined for defending the state, seem to have been exercised only, without being, if I may say so, regimented; that is, without being divided into separate and distinct bodies of troops, each of which performed its exercises under its own proper and per-manent officers. In the republicks of antient Greece and Rome each citizen, as long as he remained at home, seems to have practised his exercises either separately and independently, or with such of his equals as he liked best; and not to have been attached to any particular body of troops till he was actually called upon to take the field. In other countries, the militia has not only been exercised, but regimented. In England, in Switzerland, and, I believe, in every other country of modern Europe, where any imperfect military force of this kind has been established, every mili-tia-man is, even in time of peace, attached to a particular body of troops, which performs its exercises under its own proper and perma-nent officers.
                  BEFORE the invention of fire-arms, that army was superior in which the soldiers had, each individually, the greatest skill and dexte-rity in the use of their arms. Strength and agility of body were of the highest consequence, and commonly determined the fate of battles. But this skill and dexterity in the use of their arms, could be acquired only in the same manner as fencing is acquired at present, by prac-tising, not in great bodies, but each man separately, in a particular school under a particular master, or with his own particular equals and companions. Since the invention of fire-arms, strength and agility of body, or even extraordinary dexterity and skill in the use of arms, though they are far from being of no consequence, are, however, of less consequence. The nature of the weapon, though

it by no means puts the awkward upon a level with the skilful, puts him more nearly so than he ever was before. All the dexterity and skill, it is supposed, which are necessary for using it, can be well enough acquired by practising in great bodies.
                  REGULARITY, order, and prompt obedience to command, are qualities which, in modern armies, are of more importance towards determining the fate of battles than the dexterity and skill of the soldiers in the use of their arms. But the noise of fire-arms, the smoke, and the invisible death to which every man feels himself every moment exposed, as soon as he comes within cannon-shot, and frequently a long time before the battle can be well said to be engaged, must render it very difficult to maintain any considerable degree of this regularity, order, and prompt obedience, even in the beginning of a modern battle. In an antient battle there was no noise but what arose from the human voice; there was no smoke, there was no invisible cause of wounds or death. Every man, till some mortal weapon actually did approach him, saw clearly that no such weapon was near him. In these circumstances, and among troops who had some confidence in their own skill and dexterity in the use of their arms, it must have been a good deal less difficult to preserve some degree of regularity and order, not only in the beginning, but through the whole progress of an antient battle, and till one of the two armies was fairly defeated. But the habits of regularity, order, and prompt obedience to command, can be acquired only by troops which are exercised in great bodies.
                  A MILITIA, however, in whatever manner it may be either disciplined or exercised, must always be much inferior to a well disciplined and well exercised standing army.
                  THE soldiers, who are exercised only once a week or once a month, can never be so expert in the use of their arms, as those

who are exercised every day or every other day; and though this circumstance may not be of so much consequence in modern, as it was in antient times; yet the acknowledged superiority of the Prus-sian troops, owing, it is said, very much to their superior expert-ness in their exercise, may satisfy us that it is, even at this day, of very considerable consequence.
                  THE soldiers, who are bound to obey their officer only once a week or once a month, and who are at all other times at liberty to manage their own affairs their own way, without being in any respect accountable to him, can never be under the same awe in his presence; can never have the same disposition to ready obedience, with those whose whole life and conduct are every day directed by him, and who every day even rise and go to bed, or at least retire to their quarters, according to his orders. In what is called discipline, or in the habit of ready obedience, a militia must always be still more inferior to a standing army, than it may sometimes be in what is called the manual exercise, or in the management and use of its arms. But in modern war the habit of ready and instant obedience is of much greater consequence than a considerable superiority in the management of arms.
                  THOSE militias which, like the Tartar or Arab militia, go to war under the same chieftains whom they are accustomed to obey in peace, are by far the best. In respect for their officers, in the habit of ready obedience, they approach nearest to standing armies. The highland militia, when it served under its own chieftains, had some advantage of the same kind. As the highlanders, however, were not wandering, but stationary shepherds, as they had all a fixed habitation, and were not, in peaceable times, accustomed to follow their chieftain from place to place; so in time of war they were less willing to follow him to any considerable distance, or to continue for any long time in the field. When they had acquired any booty

they were eager to return home, and his authority was seldom suf-ficient to detain them. In point of obedience they were always much inferior to what is reported of the Tartars and Arabs. As the highlanders too, from their stationary life, spend less of their time in the open air, they were always less accustomed to military exercises, and were less expert in the use of their arms than the Tartars and Arabs are said to be.
                  A MILITIA of any kind, it must be observed, however, which has served for several successive campaigns in the field, becomes in every respect a standing army. The soldiers are every day exercised in the use of their arms, and, being constantly under the command of their officers, are habituated to the same prompt obedience which takes place in standing armies. What they were before they took the field, is of little importance. They necessarily become in every respect a standing army, after they have passed a few cam-paigns in it. Should the war in America drag out through another campaign, the American militia may become in every respect a match for that standing army, of which, in the last war, the valour appeared at least not inferior to that of the hardiest veterans of France and Spain.
                  THIS distinction being well understood, the history of all ages, it will be found, bears testimony to the irresistible superiority which a well regulated standing army has over every sort of militia.
                  ONE of the first standing armies of which we have any distinct account, in any well authenticated history, is that of Philip of Macedon. His frequent wars with the Thracians, Illyrians, Thes-salians, and some of the Greek cities in the neighbourhood of Ma-cedon, gradually formed his troops, which in the beginning were probably militia, to the exact discipline of a standing army. When he was at peace, which he was very seldom, and never for any

long time together, he was careful not to disband that army. vanquished and subdued, after a long and violent struggle indeed, the galant and well exercised militias of the principal republicks of antient Greece; and afterwards, with very little struggle, the effeminate and ill exercised militia of the great Persian empire. The fall of the Greek republicks and of the Persian empire, was the effect of the irresistable superiority which a standing army has over every sort of militia. It is the first great revolution in the affairs of mankind of which history has preserved any distinct or circum-stantial account.
                  THE fall of Carthage, and the consequent elevation of Rome, is the second. All the varieties in the fortune of those two famous republicks may very well be accounted for from the same cause.
                  FROM the end of the first to the beginning of the second Cartha-ginian war, the armies of Carthage were continually in the field, and employed under three great generals, who succeeded one ano-ther in the command; Amilcar, his son in law Asdrubal, and his son Annibal; first in chastising their own rebellious slaves, after-wards in subduing the revolted nations of Africa, and, lastly, in conquering the great kingdom of Spain. The army which Anni-bal led from Spain into Italy must necessarily, in those different wars, have been gradually formed to the exact discipline of a stand-ing army. The Romans in the mean time, though they had not been altogether at peace, yet they had not, during this period, been engaged in any war of very great consequence; and their military discipline, it is generally said, was a good deal relaxed. The Roman armies which Annibal encountered at Trebia, Thrasymenus, and Cannae, were militia opposed to a standing army. This circum-stance, it is probable, contributed more than any other to deter-mine the fate of those battles.
                  
                     

THE standing army which Annibal left behind him in Spain, had the like superiority over the militia which the Romans sent to oppose it, and in a few years, under the command of his brother, the younger Asdrubal, expelled them almost entirely from that country.
                  ANNIBAL was ill supplied from home. The Roman militia, being continually in the field, became in the progress of the war a well disciplined and well exercised standing army; and the supe-riority of Annibal grew every day less and less. Asdrubal judged it necessary to lead the whole, or almost the whole of the standing army which he commanded in Spain, to the assistance of his bro-ther in Italy. In his march he is said to have been misled by his guides; and in a country which he did not know, was surprized and attacked by another standing army, in every respect equal or superior to his own, and was entirely defeated.
                  WHEN Asdrubal had left Spain, the great Scipio found nothing to oppose him but a militia inferior to his own. He conquered and subdued that militia, and, in the course of the war, his own militia necessarily became a well disciplined and well exercised stand-ing army. That standing army was afterwards carried to Africa, where it found nothing but a militia to oppose it. In order to defend Carthage it became necessary to recall the standing army of Annibal. The disheartened and frequently defeated African militia joined it, and, at the battle of Zama, composed the greater part of the troops of Annibal. The event of that day determined the fate of the two rival republicks.
                  FROM the end of the second Carthaginian war till the fall of the Roman republick, the armies of Rome were in every respect standing armies. The standing army of Macedon made some

resistance to their arms. In the height of their grandeur it cost them two great wars, and three great battles, to subdue that little kingdom; of which the conquest would probably have been still more difficult, had it not been for the cowardice of its last king. The militias of all the civilized nations of the ancient world, of Greece, of Syria, and of Egypt, made but a feeble resistance to the standing armies of Rome. The militias of some barbarous nations defended themselves much better. The Scythian or Tar-tar militia, which Mithridates drew from the countries north of the Euxine and Caspian seas, were the most formidable enemies which the Romans had to encounter after the second Carthaginian war. The Parthian and German militias too were always respect-able, and, upon several occasions, gained very considerable advan-tages over the Roman armies. In general, however, and when the Roman armies were well commanded, they appear to have been very much superior; and if the Romans did not pursue the final conquest either of Parthia or Germany, it was probably because they judged that it was not worth while to add those two barbarous countries to an empire which was already too large. The antient Parthians appear to have been a nation of Scythian or Tartar, extraction, and to have always retained a good deal of the manners of their ancestors. The ancient Germans were, like the Scythians or Tartars, a nation of wandering shepherds, who went to war under the same chiefs whom they were accustomed to follow in peace. Their militia was exactly of the same kind with that of the Scythians or Tartars, from whom too they were probably descended.
                  MANY different causes contributed to relax the discipline of the Roman armies. Its extreme severity was, perhaps, one of those causes. In the days of their grandeur, when no enemy appeared capable of opposing them, their heavy armour was laid aside as

I THOUGHT it necessary, though at the hazard of being tedious, to examine at full length this popular notion that wealth consists in money, or in gold and silver. Money in common language, as I have already observed, frequently signifies wealth; and this ambiguity of expression has rendered this popular notion so fa-miliar to us, that even they, who are convinced of its absurdity, are very apt to forget their own principles, and in the course of their reasonings to take it for granted as a certain and undeniable truth. Some of the best English writers upon commerce set out with observing, that the wealth of a country consists, not in its gold and silver only, but in its lands, houses, and consumable goods of all different kinds. In the course of their reasonings, however, the lands, houses, and consumable goods seem to slip out of their memory, and the strain of their argument frequently supposes that all wealth consists in gold and silver, and that to multiply those metals is the great object of national industry and commerce.
               THE two principles being established, however, that wealth consisted in gold and silver, and that those metals could be brought into a country which had no mines only by the balance of trade, or by exporting to a greater value than it imported; it necessarily became the great object of political oeconomy to diminish as much as possible the importation of foreign goods for home-consump-tion, and to increase as much as possible the exportation of the pro-duce of domestick industry. Its two great engines for enriching the country, therefore, were restraints upon importation, and en-couragements to exportation.
               THE restraints upon importation were of two kinds.
               FIRST, restraints upon the importation of such foreign goods for home-consumption as could be produced at home, from what-ever country they were imported.
               
                  

unnecessarily burdensome, their laborious exercises were neglected as unnecessarily toilsome. Under the Roman emperors besides, the standing armies of Rome, those particularly which guarded the German and Pannonian frontiers, became dangerous to their masters, against whom they used frequently to set up their own generals. In order to render them less formidable, according to some authors, Dioelesian, according to others, Constantine, first; withdrew them from the frontier, where they had always before been encamped in great bodies, generally of two or three legions each, and dispersed them in small bodies through the different provincial towns, from whence they were scarce ever removed, but when it became necessary to repel an invasion. Small bo-dies of soldiers quartered in trading and manufacturing towns, and seldom removed from those quarters, became themselves, tradesmen, artificers, and manufacturers. The civil came to pre-dominate over the military character; and the standing armies of Rome gradually degenerated into a corrupt, neglected, and undis-ciplined militia, incapable of resisting the attack of the German and Scythian militias, which soon afterwards invaded the western empire. It was only by hiring the militia of some of those nations, to oppose to that of others, that the emperors were for some time able to defend themselves. The fall of the western empire is the third great revolution in the affairs of mankind, of which antient history has preserved any distinct or circumstantial account. It was brought about by the irresistable superiority which the militia of a barbarous has over that of a civilized nation; which the militia of a nation of shepherds has over that of a nation of hus-bandmen, artificers, and manufacturers. The victories which have been gained by militias have generally been, not over standing armies, but over other militias in exercise and discipline inferior to themselves. Such were the victories which the Greek militia gained over that of the Persian empire; and such too were those which

in later times the Swiss militia gained over that of the Austrians and Burgundians.
                  THE military force of the German and Scythian nations who established themselves upon the ruins of the western empire, con-tinued for some time to be of the same kind in their new settle-ments as it had been in their original country. It was a militia of shepherds and husbandmen, which, in time of war, took the field under the command of the same chieftains whom it was accustomed to obey in peace. It was, therefore, tolerably well exercised, and tolerably well disciplined. As arts and industry advanced, however, the authority of the chieftains gradually decayed, and the great body of the people had less time to spare for military exercises. Both the discipline and the exercise of the feudal militia, therefore, went gradually to ruin, and standing armies were gradually intro-duced to supply the place of it. When the expedient of a stand-ing army, besides, had once been adopted by one civilized nation, it became necessary that all its neighbours should follow the example. They soon found that their safety depended upon their doing so, and that their own militia was altogether incapable of resisting the attack of such an army.
                  THE soldiers of a standing army, though they may never have seen an enemy, yet have frequently appeared to possess all the cou-rage of veteran troops, and the very moment that they took the field to have been fit to face the hardiest and most experienced veterans. In 1756, when the Russian army marched into Poland, the valour of the Russian soldiers did not appear inferior to that of the Prus-sians, at that time supposed to be the hardiest and most experienced veterans in Europe. The Russian empire, however, had enjoyed a profound peace for near twenty years before, and could at that time have very few soldiers who had ever seen an enemy. When

the Spanish war broke out in 1739, England had enjoyed a pro-found peace for about eight and twenty years. The valour of her soldiers, however, far from being corrupted by that long peace, was never more distinguished than in the attempt upon Carthagena, the first unfortunate exploit of that unfortunate war. In a long peace the generals, perhaps, may sometimes forget their skill; but, where a well regulated standing army has been kept up, the sol-diers seem never to forget their valour.
                  WHEN a civilized nation depends for its defence upon a militia, it is at all times exposed to be conquered by any barbarous nation which happens to be in its neighbourhood. The frequent con-quests of all the civilized countries in Asia by the Tartars, suffi-ciently demonstrate the natural superiority which the militia of a barbarous has over that of a civilized nation. A well regulated standing army is superior to every militia. Such an army, as it can best be maintained by an opulent and civilized nation, so it can alone defend such a nation against the invasion of a poor and barbarous neighbour. It is only by means of a standing army, therefore, that the civilization of any country can be perpetuated, or even preserved for any considerable time.
                  As it is only by means of a well regulated standing army that a civilized country can be defended, so it is only by means of it that a barbarous country can be suddenly and tolerably civilized. A standing army establishes, with an irresistible force, the law of the sovereign through the remotest provinces of the empire, and main-tains some degree of regular government in countries which could not otherwise admit of any. Whoever examines, with attention, the improvements which Peter the Great introduced into the Rus-sian empire, will find that they almost all resolve themselves into the establishment of a well regulated standing army. It is the instru-ment

which executes and maintains all his other regulations. That degree of order and internal peace which that empire has ever since enjoyed, is altogether owing to the influence of that army.
                  MEN of republican principles have been jealous of a standing army as dangerous to liberty. It certainly is so wherever the interest of the general and that of the principal officers are not necessarily connected with the support of the constitution of the state. The standing army of Cesar destroyed the Roman repub-lick. The standing army of Cromwell turned the long parlia-ment out of doors. But where the sovereign is himself the general, and the principal nobility and gentry of the country the chief officers of the army; where the military force is placed under the command of those who have the greatest interest in the sup-port of the civil authority, because they have themselves the greatest share of that authority, a standing army can never be dangerous to liberty. On the contrary, it may in some cases be favourable to liberty. The security which it gives to the sovereign renders unnecessary that troublesome jealousy which in some modern republicks seems to watch over the minutest actions, and to be at all times ready to disturb the peace of every citizen. Where the security of the magistrate, though supported by the principal people of the country, is endangered by every popular discontent; where a small tumult is capable of bringing about in a few hours a great revolution, the whole authority of government must be employed to suppress and punish every murmur and complaint against it. To a sovereign, on the contrary, who feels himself supported, not only by the natural aristocracy of the country, but by a well regulated standing army, the rudest, the most groundless, and the most licentious remonstrances can give little disturbance. He can safely pardon or neglect them, and his consciousness of his own superiority naturally disposes him to do

so. That degree of liberty which approaches to licentiousness can be tolerated only in countries where the sovereign is secured by a well regulated standing army. It is in such countries only that the publick safety does not require that the sovereign should be trusted with any discretionary power for suppressing even the impertinent wantonness of this licentious liberty.
                  THE first duty of the sovereign, therefore, that of defending the society from the violence and injustice of other independent societies, grows gradually more and more expensive as the society advances in civilization. The military force of the society, which originally cost the sovereign no expence either in time of peace or in time of war, must, in the progress of improvement, first be maintained by him in time of war, and afterwards even in time of peace.
                  THE great change introduced into the art of war by the inven-tion of fire arms, has enhanced still further both the expence of exercising and disciplining any particular number of soldiers in time of peace, and that of employing them in time of war. Both their arms and their ammunition are become more expensive. A musquet is a more expensive machine than a javelin or a bow and arrows; a cannon or a mortar, than a balista or a catapulta. The powder which is spent in a modern review is lost irrecover-ably, and occasions a very considerable expence. The javelins and arrows which were thrown or shot in an antient one, could easily be picked up again, and were besides of very little value. The cannon and the mortar are, not only much dearer, but much heavier machines than the balista or catapulta, and require a greater expence not only to prepare them for the field, but to carry them to it. As the superiority of the modern artillery too over that of the antients is very great; it has become much more

difficult, and consequently much more expensive, to fortify a rown so as to resist even for a few weeks the attack of that supe-tior artillery. In modern times many different causes contribute to render the defence of the society more expensive. The unavoid-able effects of the natural progress of improvement have, in this respect, been a good deal enhanced by a great revolution in the art of war, to which a mere accident, the invention of gunpowder, seems to have given occasion.
                  IN modern war the great expence of fire-arms gives an evident advantage to the nation which can best afford that expence; and consequently to an opulent and civilized over a poor and barbarous nation. In antient times the opulent and civilized found it diffi-cult to defend themselves against the poor and barbarous nations. In modern times the poor and barbarous find it difficult to defend themselves against the opulent and civilized. The invention of fire-arms, an invention which at first sight appears to be so perni-cious, is certainly favourable both to the permanency and to the extension of civilization.
               
               
                  PART II. Of the Expence of Justice
                  
                  THE second duty of the sovereign, that of protecting, as far as possible, every member of the society from the injustice or oppression of every other member of it, or the duty of establish-ing an exact administration of justice, requires too very different degrees of expence in the different periods of society.
                  AMONG nations of hunters, as there is scarce any property, or at least none that exceeds the value of two or three days labour; so there is seldom any established magistrate or any regular admi-nistration of justice. Men who have no property can injure one

another only in their persons or reputations. But when one man kills, wounds, beats, or defames another, though he to whom the injury is done suffers, he who does it receives no benefit. It is otherwise with the injuries to property. The benefit of the person who does the injury is often equal to the loss of him who suffers it. Envy, malice, or resentment, are the only passions which can prompt one man to injure another in his person or reputation. But the greater part of men are not very frequently under the influence of those passions; and the very worst men are so only occasionally. As their gratification too, how agreeable soever it may be to certain characters, is not attended with any real or permanent advantage, it is in the greater part of men commonly restrained by prudential considerations. Men may live together in society with some tolerable degree of security, though there is no civil magistrate to protect them from the injustice of those passions. But avarice and ambition in the rich, in the poor the hatred of labour and the love of present ease and enjoyment, are the passions which prompt to invade property, passions much more steady in their operation, and much more universal in their influence. Wherever there is great property, there is great ine-quality. For one very rich man, there must be at least five hundred poor, and the affluence of the few supposes the indigence of the many. The affluence of the rich excites the indignation of the poor, who are often both driven by want, and prompted by envy to invade his possessions. It is only under the shelter of the civil magistrate that the owner of that valuable property, which is acquired by the labour of many years, or perhaps of many successive generations, can sleep a single night in security. He is at all times surrounded by unknown enemies, whom, though he never provoked, he can never appease, and from whose injustice he can be protected only by the powerful arm of the civil magistrate continually held up to chastise it. The acqui-sition

of valuable or extensive property, therefore, necessarily requires the establishment of civil government. Where there is no property, or at least none that exceeds the value of two or three days labour, civil government is not so necessary.
                  CIVIL government supposes a certain subordination. But as the necessity of civil government gradually grows up with the acquisi-tion of valuable property, so the principal causes which naturally introduce subordination gradually grow up with the growth of that valuable property.
                  THE causes or circumstances which naturally introduce subordi-nation, or which naturally, and antecedent to any civil institution, give some men some superiority over the greater part of their brethren, seem to be four in number.
                  THE first of those causes or circumstances is the superiority of personal qualifications, of strength, beauty, and agility of body; of wisdom, and virtue, of prudence, justice, fortitude, and mo-deration of mind. The qualifications of the body, unless sup-ported by those of the mind, can give little authority in any period of society. He is a very strong man who by mere strength of body can force two weak ones to obey him. The qualifica-tions of the mind can alone give very great authority. They are, however, invisible qualities; always disputable, and generally disputed. No society, whether barbarous or civilized, has ever found it convenient to settle the rules of precedency, of rank and subordination, according to those invisible qualities; but according to something that is more plain and palpable.
                  THE second of those causes or circumstances is the superiority of age. An old man, provided his age is not so far advanced as to give suspicion of dotage, is every where more respected than a

young man of equal rank, fortune, and abilities. Among nations of hunters, such as the native tribes of North America, age is the sole foundation of rank and precedency. Among them, father is the appellation of a superior; brother, of an equal; and son, of an inferior. In the most opulent and civilized nations, age regulates rank among those who are in every other respect equal, and among whom therefore there is nothing else to regulate it. Among brothers and among sisters, the eldest always take place; and in the succession of the paternal estate every thing which cannot be divided, but must go entire to one person, such as a title of honour, is in most cases given to the eldest. Age is a plain and palpable quality which admits of no dispute.
                  THE third of those causes or circumstances is the superiority of fortune. The authority of riches, however, though great in every age of society, is perhaps greatest in the rudest age of society which admits of any considerable inequality of fortune. A Tartar chief, the increase of whose herds and flocks is sufficient to main-tain a thousand men, cannot well employ that increase in any other way than in maintaining a thousand men. The rude state of his society does not afford him any manufactured produce, any trinkets or baubles of any kind, for which he can exchange that part of his rude produce which is over and above his own con-sumption. The thousand men whom he thus maintains, de-pending entirely upon him for their subsistence, must both obey his orders in war, and submit to his jurisdiction in peace. He is necessarily both their general and their judge, and his chieftainship is the necessary effect of the superiority of his fortune. In an opulent and civilized society, a man may possess a much greater fortune, and yet not be able to command a dozen of people. Though the produce of his estate may be sufficient to maintain, and may perhaps actually maintain, more than a thousand people,

yet as those people pay for every thing which they get from him, as he gives scarce any thing to any body but in exchange for an equivalent, there is scarce any body who considers himself as en-tirely dependent upon him, and his authority extends only over a few menial servants. The authority of fortune, however, is very great even in an opulent and civilized society. That it is much greater than that either of age or of personal qualities, has been the constant complaint of every period of society which admitted of any considerable inequality of fortune. The first period of society, that of hunters, admits of no such inequality. Universal poverty establishes there universal equality, and the superiority either of age or of personal qualities are the feeble, but the sole foundations of authority and subordination. There is there-fore little or no authority or subordination in this period of society. The second period of society, that of shepherds, admits of very great inequalities of fortune, and there is no period in which the superiority of fortune gives so great authority to those who possess it. There is no period accordingly in which authority and subordination are more perfectly established. The authority of an Arabian scherif is very great; that of a Tartar khan alto-gether despotical.
                  THE fourth of those causes or circumstances is the superiority of birth. Superiority of birth supposes an antient superiority of fortune in the family of the person who claims it. All families are equally antient; and the ancestors of the prince, though they may be better known, cannot well be more numerous than those of the beggar. Antiquity of family means every where the anti-quity either of wealth, or of that greatness which is commonly either founded upon wealth or accompanied with it. Upstart greatness is every where less respected than antient greatness. The hatred of usurpers, the love for the family of an antient monarch,

SECONDLY, restraints upon the importation of goods of almost all kinds from those particular countries with which the balance of trade was supposed to be disadvantageous.
               THOSE different restraints consisted sometimes in high duties, and sometimes in absolute prohibitions.
               EXPORTATION was encouraged sometimes by drawbacks, some-times by bounties, sometimes by advantageous treaties of com-merce with foreign states, and sometimes by the establishment of colonies in distant countries.
               DRAWBACKS were given upon two different occasions. When the home-manufactures were subject to any duty or excise, either the whole or a part of it was frequently drawn back upon their exportation; and when foreign goods liable to a duty were im-ported, in order to be exported again, either the whole or a part of this duty was sometimes given back upon such expor-tation.
               BOUNTIES were given for the encouragement either of some beginning manufactures, or of such sorts of industry of other kinds as were supposed to deserve particular favour.
               BY advantageous treaties of commerce, particular privileges were procured in some foreign state for the goods and merchants of the country, beyond what were granted to those of other countries.
               BY the establishment of colonies in distant countries, not only particular privileges, but a monopoly was frequently procured

are in a great measure founded upon the contempt which men naturally have for the former, and upon their veneration for the latter. As a military officer submits without reluctance to the authority of a superior by whom he has always been commanded, but cannot bear that his inferior should be set over his head; so men easily submit to a family to whom they and their ancestors have always submitted, but are fired with indignation when another family, in whom they had never acknowledged any such superiority, assumes a dominion over them.
                  THE distinction of birth, being subsequent to the inequality of fortune, can have no place in nations of hunters, among whom all men, being equal in fortune, must likewise be very nearly equal in birth. The son of a wise and brave man may, indeed, even among them, be somewhat more respected than a man of equal merit who has the misfortune to be the son of a fool or a coward. The difference, however, will not be very great; and there never was, I believe, a great family in the world whose illustration was intirely derived from the inheritance of wisdom and virtue.
                  THE distinction of birth not only may, but always does take place among nations of shepherds. Such nations are always strangers to every sort of luxury, and great wealth can scarce ever be dissipated among them by improvident profusion. There are no nations accordingly who abound more in families revered and honoured on account of their descent from a long race of great and illustrious ancestors; because there are no nations among whom wealth is likely to continue longer in the same families.
                  BIRTH and fortune are evidently the two circumstances which principally set one man above another. They are the two great sources

of personal distinction, and are therefore the principal causes which naturally establish authority and subordination among men. Among nations of shepherds both those causes operate with their full force. The great shepherd or herdsman, respected on account of his great wealth, and of the great number of those who depend upon him for subsistence, and revered on account of the nobleness of his birth, and of the immemorial antiquity of his illustrious family, has a natural authority over all the inferior shepherds or herdsmen of his horde or clan. He can command the united force of a greater number of people than any of them. His military power is greater than that of any of them. In time of war they are all of them naturally disposed to muster themselves under his banner, rather than under that of any other person, and his birth and fortune thus naturally procure to him some sort of executive power. By com-manding too the united force of a greater number of people than any of them, he is best able to compel any one of them who may have injured another to compensate the wrong. He is the person, therefore, to whom all those who are too weak to defend themselves naturally look up for protection. It is to him that they naturally complain of the injuries which they imagine have been done to them, and his interposition in such cases is more easily submitted to, even by the person complained of, than that of any other person would be. His birth and fortune thus naturally procure him some sort of judicial authority.
                  IT is in the age of shepherds, in the second period of society, that the inequality of fortune first begins to take place, and intro-duces among men a degree of authority and subordination which could not possibly exist before. It thereby introduces some degree of that civil government which is indispensably necessary for its own preservation: and it seems to do this naturally, and even independent of the consideration of that necessity. The consideration of that

necessity comes no doubt afterwards to contribute very much to maintain and secure that authority and subordination. The rich, in particular, are necessarily interested to support that order of things which can alone secure them in the possession of their own advantages. Men of inferior wealth combine to defend those of superior wealth in the possession of their property, in order that men of superior wealth may combine to defend them in the possession of theirs. All the inferior shepherds and herdsmen feel that the security of their own herds and flocks depends upon the security of those of the great shepherd or herdsman; that the maintenance of their lesser autho-rity depends upon that of his greater authority, and that upon their subordination to him depends his power of keeping their inferiors in subordination to them. They constitute a sort of little nobility, who feel themselves interested to defend the property and to support the authority of their own little sovereign, in order that he may be able to defend their property and to support their authority. Civil government, so far as it is instituted for the security of property, is in reality instituted for the defence of the rich against the poor, or of those who have some property against those who have none at all.
                  THE judicial authority of such a sovereign, however, far from being a cause of expence, was for a long time a source of revenue to him. The persons who applied to him for justice were always willing to pay for it, and a present never failed to accompany a petition. After the authority of the sovereign too was thoroughly established, the person found guilty, over and above the satisfaction which he was obliged to make to the party, was likewise forced to pay an amercement to the sovereign. He had given trouble, he had disturbed, he had broke the peace of his lord the king, and for those offences an amercement was thought due. In the Tartar govern-ments

of Asia, in the governments of Europe which were founded by the German and Scythian nations who overturned the Roman empire, the administration of justice was a considerable source of revenue both to the sovereign and to all the lesser chiefs or lords who exercised under him any particular jurisdiction, either over some particular tribe or clan, or over some particular territory or district. Originally both the sovereign and the inferior chiefs used to exercise this jurisdiction in their own persons. After-wards they universally found it convenient to delegate it to some substitute, bailiff, or judge. This substitute, however, was still obliged to account to his principal or constituent for the profits of the jurisdiction. Whoever reads the instructions They are to be found in Tyrrell's History of England. which were given to the judges of the circuit in the time of Henry II. will see clearly that those judges were a sort of itinerant factors, sent round the country for the purpose of levying certain branches of the king's revenue. In those days the administration of justice not only afforded a certain revenue to the sovereign, but to procure this reve-nue seems to have been one of the principal advantages which he proposed to obtain by the administration of justice.
                  THIS scheme of making the administration of justice subservient to the purposes of revenue, could scarce fail to be productive of several very gross abuses. The person who applied for justice with a large present in his hand was likely to get something more than justice; while he who applied for it with a small one was likely to get some-thing less. Justice too might frequently be delayed, in order that this present might be repeated. The amercement, besides, of the person complained of, might frequently suggest a very strong reason for finding him in the wrong, even when he had not really been so. That such abuses were far from being uncommon, the antient history of every country in Europe bears witness.
                  
                     

WHEN the sovereign or chief exercised his judicial authority in his own person, how much soever he might abuse it, it must have been scarce possible to get any redress; because there could seldom be any body powerful enough to call him to account. When he exercised it by a bailiff, indeed, redress might sometimes be had. If it was for his own benefit only that the bailiff had been guilty of any act of injustice, the sovereign himself might not always be unwilling to punish him, or to oblige him to repair the wrong. But if it was for the benefit of his sovereign, if it was in order to make court to the person who appointed him and who might prefer him, that he had committed any act of oppression, redress would upon most occasions be as impossible as if the sovereign had committed it himself. In all bar-barous governments, accordingly, in all those antient governments of Europe in particular, which were founded upon the ruins of the Roman empire, the administration of justice appears for a long time to have been extremely corrupt; far from being quite equal and impartial even under the best monarchs, and altogether profligate under the worst.
                  AMONG nations of shepherds, where the sovereign or chief is only the greatest shepherd or herdsman of the horde or clan, he is maintained in the same manner as any of his vassals or subjects, by the increase of his own herds or flocks. Among those nations of husbandmen who are but just come out of the shepherd state, and who are not much advanced beyond that state; such as the Greek tribes appear to have been about the time of the Trojan war, and our German and Scythian ancestors when they first settled upon the ruins of the western empire; the sovereign or chief is in the same manner only the greatest landlord of the country, and is maintained, in the same manner as any other landlord, by a revenue derived from his own private estate, or from what in modern Europe was called the demesne of the crown. His subjects upon ordinary occasions contribute nothing to

his support, except when they stand in need of the interposition of his authority in order to protect them from the oppression of some of their fellow subjects. The presents which they make him upon such occasions constitute the whole ordinary revenue, the whole of the emoluments which, except perhaps upon some very extra-ordinary emergencies, he derives from his dominion over them. When Agamemnon, in Homer, offers to Achilles for his friend-ship the sovereignty of seven Greek cities, the sole advantage which he mentions as likely to be derived from it was, that the peo-ple would honour him with presents. As long as such presents, as long as the emoluments of justice, or what may be called the fees of court, constituted in this manner the whole ordinary revenue which the sovereign derived from his sovereignty, it could not well be expected, it could not even decently be proposed that he should give them up altogether. It might, and it frequently was proposed, that he should regulate and ascertain them. But after they had been so regulated and ascertained, how to hinder a person who was all-powerful from extending them beyond those regulations, was still very difficult, not to say impossible. During the continuance of this state of things, therefore, the corruption of justice, naturally resulting from the arbitrary and uncertain nature of those presents, scarce admitted of any effectual remedy.
                  BUT when from different causes, chiefly from the continually increasing expence of defending the nation against the invasion of other nations, the private estate of the sovereign had become alto-gether insufficient for defraying the expence of the sovereignty; and when it had become necessary that the people should, for their own security, contribute towards this expence by taxes of different kinds, it seems to have been very commonly stipulated that no present for the administration of justice should, under any pre-tence, be accepted either by the sovereign, or by his bailiffs and sub-stitutes,

the judges. Those presents, it seems to have been sup-posed, could more easily be abolished altogether, than effectually regulated and ascertained. Fixed salaries were appointed to the judges, which were supposed to compensate to them the loss of whatever might have been their share of the antient emoluments of justice; as the taxes more than compensated to the sovereign the loss of his. Justice was then said to be administered gratis.
                  JUSTICE, however, never was in reality administered gratis in any country. Lawyers and attornies, at least, must always be paid by the parties; and, if they were not, they would perform their duty still worse than they actually perform it. The fees annually paid to lawyers and attornies amount, in every court, to a much greater sum than the salaries of the judges. The circumstance of those salaries being paid by the crown, can no where much dimi-nish the necessary expence of a law-suit. But it was not so much to diminish the expence, as to prevent the corruption of justice, that the judges were prohibited from receiving any present or fee from the parties.
                  THE office of judge is in itself so very honourable, that men are willing to accept of it, though accompanied with very small emolu-ments. The inferior office of justice of peace, though attended with a good deal of trouble, and in most cases with no emoluments at all, is an object of ambition to the greater part of our country gentlemen. The salaries of all the different judges, high and low, together with the whole expence of the administration and execu-tion of justice, even where it is not managed with very good oeconomy, makes, in any civilized country, but a very inconsider-able part of the whole expence of government.
                  THE whole expence of justice too might easily be defrayed by the fees of court; and, without exposing the administration of justice

to any real hazard of corruption, the public revenue might thus be entirely discharged from a certain, though, perhaps, but a small incumbrance. It is difficult to regulate the fees of court effectu-ally, where a person so powerful as the sovereign is to share in them, and to derive any considerable part of his revenue from them. It is very easy, where the judge is the principal person who can reap any benefit from them. The law can very easily oblige the judge to respect the regulation, though it might not always be able to make the sovereign respect it. Where the fees of court are precisely regulated and ascertained, where they are paid all at once, at a certain period of every process, into the hands of a cashier or receiver, to be by him distributed in certain known pro-portions among the different judges after the process is decided, and not till it is decided, there seems to be no more danger of cor-ruption than where such fees are prohibited altogether. Those fees, without occasioning any considerable increase in the expence of a law-suit, might be rendered fully sufficient for defraying the whole expence of justice. By not being paid to the judges till the process was determined, they might be some incitement to the dili-gence of the court in examining and deciding it. In courts which consisted of a considerable number of judges, by proportioning the share of each judge to the number of hours and days which he had employed in examining the process, either in the court or in a committee by order of the court, those fees might give some encouragement to the diligence of each particular judge. Public services are never better performed than when their reward comes only in consequence of their being performed, and is proportioned to the diligence employed in performing them. In the different par-liaments of France, the fees of court (called Epices and vacations) constitute the far greater part of the emoluments of the judges. After all deductions are made, the neat salary paid by the crown to a coun-sellor or judge in the parliament of Toulouse, in rank and dignity the

second parliament of the kingdom, amounts only to a hundred and fifty livres, about six pounds eleven shillings sterling a year. About seven years ago that sum was in the same place the ordinary yearly wages of a common footman. The distribution of those Epices too is according to the diligence of the judges. A diligent judge gains a comfortable, though moderate revenue by his office: An idle one gets little more than his salary. Those parliaments are perhaps, in many respects, not very convenient courts of justice; but they have never been accused; they seem never even to have been suspected of corruption.
                  THE fees of court seem originally to have been the principal sup-port of the different courts of justice in England. Each court endeavoured to draw to itself as much business as it could, and was, upon that account, willing to take cognizance of many suits which were not originally intended to fall under its jurisdiction. The court of king's bench, instituted for the trial of criminal causes only, took cognizance of civil suits; the plaintiff pretending that the defendant, in not doing him justice, had been guilty of some trespass or misdemeanor. The court of exchequer, instituted for the levying of the king's revenue, and for enforcing the payment of such debts only as were due to the king, took cognizance of all other contract debts; the plaintiff alledging that he could not pay the king, be-cause the defendant would not pay him. In consequence of such fictions it came, in many cases, to depend altogether upon the par-ties before what court they would chuse to have their cause tried; and each court endeavoured, by superior dispatch and impartiality, to draw to itself as many causes as it could. The present admi-rable constitution of the courts of justice in England was, perhaps, originally in a great measure formed by this emulation which antiently took place between their respective judges; each judge endeavouring to give, in his own court, the speediest and most

effectual remedy, which the law would admit, for every sort of injustice. Originally the courts of law gave damages only for breach of contract. The court of chancery, as a court of con-science, first took upon it to enforce the specific performance of agreements. When the breach of contract consisted in the non-payment of money, the damage sustained could be compensated in no other way than by ordering payment, which was equivalent to a specific performance of the agreement. In such cases, there-fore, the remedy of the courts of law was sufficient. It was not so in others. When the tenant sued his lord for having unjustly outed him of his lease, the damages which he recovered were by no means equivalent to the possession of the land. Such causes, therefore, for some time, went all to the court of chancery, to the no small loss of the courts of law. It was to draw back such causes to themselves that the courts of law are said to have invented the artificial and fictitious writ of ejectment, the most effectual remedy for an unjust outer or dispossession of land.
                  A STAMP-DUTY upon the law proceedings of each particular court, to be levied by that court, and applied towards the mainte-nance of the judges and other officers belonging to it, might, in the same manner, afford a revenue sufficient for defraying the expence of the administration of justice, without bringing any bur-den upon the general revenue of the society. The judges indeed might, in this case, be under the temptation of multiplying unne-cessarily the proceedings upon every cause, in order to increase, as much as possible, the produce of such a stamp-duty. It has been the custom in modern Europe to regulate, upon most occasions, the payment of the attornies and clerks of court according to the number of pages which they had occasion to write; the court, however, requiring that each page should contain so many lines, and each line so many words. In order to increase their payment,

for the goods and merchants of the country which established them.
               THE two sorts of restraints upon importation above mentioned, together with these four encouragements to exportation, constitute the six principal means by which the commercial system proposes to increase the quantity of gold and silver in any country by turning the balance of trade in its favour. I shall consider each of them in a particular chapter, and without taking much further notice of their supposed tendency to bring money into the country, I shall examine chiefly what are likely to be the effects of each of them upon the annual produce of its industry. According as they tend either to increase or diminish the value of this annual produce, they must evidently tend either to increase or diminish the real wealth and revenue of the country.
            
            
               

the attornies and clerks have contrived to multiply words beyond all necessity, to the corruption of the law language of, I believe, every court of justice in Europe. A like temptation might per-haps occasion a like corruption in the form of law proceedings.
                  BUT whether the administration of justice be so contrived as to defray its own expence, or whether the judges be maintained by fixed salaries paid to them from some other fund, it does not seem necessary that the person or persons entrusted with the executive power should be charged with the management of that fund, or with the payment of those salaries. That fund might arise from the rent of landed estates, the management of each estate being entrusted to the particular court which was to be maintained by it. That fund might arise even from the interest of a sum of money, the lending out of which might, in the same manner, be entrusted to the court which was to be maintained by it. A part, though indeed but a small part, of the salary of the judges of the court of session in Scotland, arises from the interest of a sum of money. The necessary instability of such a fund seems, however, to render it an improper one for the maintenance of an institution which ought to last forever.
                  THE separation of the judicial from the executive power seems originally to have arisen from the increasing business of the society, in consequence of its increasing improvement. The administration of justice became so laborious and so complicated a duty as to require the undivided attention of the persons to whom it was entrusted. The person entrusted with the executive power not having leisure to attend to the decision of private causes himself, a deputy was appointed to decide them in his stead. In the progress of the Roman greatness, the consul was too much occupied with the poli-tical affairs of the state to attend to the administration of justice.

A praetor, therefore, was appointed to administer it in his stead. In the progress of the European monarchies which were founded upon the ruins of the Roman empire, the sovereigns and the great lords came universally to consider the administration of justice as an office both too laborious and too ignoble for them to execute in their own persons. They universally, therefore, discharged themselves of it by appointing a deputy, bailiff, or judge.
                  WHEN the judicial is united to the executive power, it is scarce possible that justice should not frequently be sacrificed to, what is vulgarly called, politics. The persons entrusted with the great interests of the state may, even without any corrupt views, sometimes imagine it necessary to sacrifice to those interests the rights of a pri-vate man. But upon the impartial administration of justice depends the liberty of every individual, the sense which he has of his own security. In order to make every individual feel himself perfectly secure in the possession of every right which belongs to him, it is not only necessary that the judicial should be separated from the executive power, but that it should be rendered as much as possible independent of that power. The judge should not be liable to be removed from his office according to the caprice of that power. The regular payment of his salary should not depend upon the good-will, or even upon the good oeconomy of that power.
               
               
                  PART III. Of the Expence of publick Works and publick Institutions.
                  
                  THE third and last duty of the sovereign or commonwealth is that of erecting and maintaining those publick institutions and those publick works, which, though they may be in the highest degree advantageous to a great society, are, however, of such a

nature, that the profit could never repay the expence to any indivi-dual or small number of individuals, and which it therefore cannot be expected that any individual or small number of individuals should erect or maintain. The performance of this duty requires too very different degrees of expence in the different periods of society.
                  AFTER the publick institutions and publick works necessary for the defence of the society, and for the administration of justice, both of which have already been mentioned, the other works and insti-tutions of this kind are chiefly those for facilitating the commerce of the society, and those for promoting the instruction of the people. The institutions for instruction are of two kinds; those for the education of the youth, and those for the instruction of people of all ages. The consideration of the manner in which the expence of those different sorts of publick work and institutions may be most properly defrayed, will divide this third part of the present chapter into three different articles.
                  
                     ARTICLE I.
                     Of the publick Works and Institutions for facilitating the Commerce of the Society.
                     THAT the erection and maintenance of the publick works which facilitate the commerce of any country, such as good roads, bridges, navigable canals, harbours, &amp;c. must require very different degrees of expence in the different periods of society, is evident without any proof. The expence of making and maintaining the publick roads of any country must evidently increase with the annual produce of the land and labour of that country, or with the quantity and weight of the goods which it becomes necessary to fetch and carry upon those roads. The strength of a bridge must be suited to the number and weight of the carriages which are likely to pass over it. The depth and the supply of water for a navigable canal must be proportioned to the number and tunnage of the lighters which are likely to carry

goods upon it; the extent of a harbour to the number of the ship-ping which are likely to take shelter in it.
                     IT does not seem necessary that the expence of those publick works should be defrayed from that publick revenue, as it is com-monly called, of which the collection and application is in most countries assigned to the executive power. The greater part of such publick works may easily be so managed as to afford a parti-cular revenue sufficient for defraying their own expence, without bringing any burden upon the general revenue of the society.
                     A HIGHWAY, a bridge, a navigable canal, for example, may in most cases be both made and maintained by a small toll upon the carriages which make use of them: a harbour, by a moderate port duty upon the tunnage of the shipping which load or unload in it. The coinage, another institution for facilitating commerce, in many countries, not only defrays its own expence, but affords a small revenue or seignorage to the sovereign. The post office, an-other institution for the same purpose, over and above defraying its own expence, affords in almost all countries a very considerable revenue to the sovereign.
                     WHEN the carriages which pass over a highway or a bridge, and the lighters which sail upon a navigable canal, pay toll in proportion to their weight or their tunnage, they pay for the maintenance of those publick works exactly in proportion to the tear and wear which they occasion of them. It seems scarce possible to invent a more equitable way of maintaining such works. This tax or toll too, though it is advanced by the carrier, is finally paid by the consumer, to whom it must always be charged in the price of the goods. As the expence of carriage, however, is very much reduced by means of such publick works, the goods, notwithstanding the toll, come cheaper

to the consumer than they could otherwise have done; their price not being so much raised by the toll, as it is lowered by the cheapness of the carriage. The person who finally pays this tax, therefore, gains, by the application, more than he loses by the payment of it. His payment is exactly in proportion to his gain. It is in reality no more than a part of that gain which he is obliged to give up in order to get the rest. It seems impossible to imagine a more equitable method of raising a tax.
                     WHEN the toll upon carriages of luxury, upon coaches, post-chaises, &amp;c. is made somewhat higher in proportion to their weight, than upon carriages of necessary use, such as carts, waggons, &amp;c. the indolence and vanity of the rich is made to contribute in a very easy manner to the relief of the poor, by rendering cheaper the trans-portation of heavy goods to all the different parts of the country.
                     WHEN high roads, bridges, canals, &amp;c. are in this manner made and supported by the commerce which is carried on by means of them, they can be made only where that commerce requires them, and consequently where it is proper to make them. Their expence too, their grandeur and magnificence must be suited to what that commerce can afford to pay. They must be made con-sequently as it is proper to make them. A magnificent high road cannot be made through a desart country where there is little or no commerce, or merely because it happens to lead to the country villa of the intendant of the province, or to that of some great lord to whom the intendant finds it convenient to make his court. A great bridge cannot be thrown over a river at a place where nobody passes, or merely to embellish the view from the windows of a neighbouring palace: things which sometimes happen in countries where works of this kind are carried on by any other revenue than that which they themselves are capable of affording.
                     
                        

IN several different parts of Europe the toll or lock-duty upon a canal is the property of private persons, whose private interest obliges them to keep up the canal. If it is not kept in tolerable order, the navigation necessarily ceases altogether, and along with it the whole profit which they can make by the tolls. If those tolls were put under the management of commissioners, who had them-selves no interest in them, they might be less attentive to the main-tenance of the works which produced them. The canal of Languedoc cost the king of France and the province upwards of thirteen millions of livres, which (at twenty-eight livres the mark of silver, the value of French money in the end of the last century) amounted to upwards of nine hundred thousand pounds sterling. When that great work was finished, the most likely method, it was found, of keeping it in constant repair was to make a present of the tolls to Riquet the engineer, who planned and conducted the work. Those tolls constitute at present a very large estate to the different branches of the family of that gentleman, who have therefore a great interest to keep the work in constant repair. But had those tolls been put under the management of commissioners who had no such interest, they might perhaps have been dissipated in ornamental and unneces-sary expences, while the most essential parts of the work were allowed to go to ruin.
                     THE tolls for the maintenance of a high road, cannot with any safety be made the property of private persons. A high road, though entirely neglected, does not become altogether impassable, though a canal does. The proprietors of the tolls upon a high road, therefore, might neglect altogether the repair of the road, and yet continue to levy very nearly the same tolls. It is proper, therefore, that the tolls for the maintenance of such a work should be put under the management of commissioners or trustees.
                     
                        

IN Great Britain, the abuses which the trustees have committed in the management of those tolls, have in many cases been very justly complained of. At many turnpikes, it has been said, the money levied is more than double of what is necessary for execut-ing in the compleatest manner the work which is often executed in a very slovenly manner, and sometimes not executed at all. The system of repairing the high roads by tolls of this kind, it must be observed, is not of very long standing. We should not wonder, therefore, if it has not yet been brought to that degree of perfection of which it seems to be capable. If mean and improper persons are frequently appointed trustees; and if proper courts of inspection and account have not yet been established for controuling their conduct, and for reducing the tolls to what is barely sufficient for executing the work to be done by them; the recency of the institution both accounts and apo-logizes for those defects, of which, by the wisdom of parliament, the greater part may in due time be gradually remedied.
                     THE money levied at the different turnpikes in Great Britain is supposed to exceed so much what is necessary for repairing the roads, that the savings, which with proper oeconomy might be made from it, have been considered, even by some ministers, as a very great resource which might at some time or another be applied to the exigencies of the state. Government, it has been said, by taking the management of the turnpikes into its own hands, and by employing the soldiers, who would work for a very small addition to their pay, could keep the roads in good order at a much less expence than it can be done by trustees who have no other workmen to employ, but such as derive their whole subsistence from their wages. A great revenue, half a million perhaps, it has been pretended, might in this manner be gained without laying any new burden upon the people; and the turn-pike

roads might be made to contribute to the general expence of the state, in the same manner as the post-office does at present.
                     THAT a considerable revenue might be gained in this manner, I have no doubt, though probably not near so much, as the pro-jectors of this plan have supposed. The plan itself, however, seems liable to several very important objections.
                     FIRST, if the tolls which are levied at the turnpikes should ever be considered as one of the resources for supplying the exi-gencies of the state, they would certainly be augmented as those exigencies were supposed to require. According to the policy of Great Britain, therefore, they would probably be augmented very fast. The facility with which a great revenue could be drawn from them, would probably encourage administration to recur very frequently to this resource. Though it may perhaps be more than doubtful whether half a million could by any oeconomy be saved out of the present tolls, it can scarce be doubted but that a million might be saved out of them if they were doubled, and perhaps two millions if they were tripled. This great revenue too might be levied without the appointment of a single new officer to collect and receive it. But the turnpike tolls being con-tinually augmented in this manner, instead of facilitating the inland commerce of the country, as at present, would soon be-come a very great encumbrance upon it. The expence of trans-porting all heavy goods from one part of the country to another would soon be so much increased, the market for all such goods consequently would soon be so much narrowed, that their pro-duction would be in a great measure discouraged, and the most important branches of the domestic industry of the country anni-hilated altogether.
                     
                        

SECONDLY, a tax upon carriages in proportion to their weight, though a very equal tax when applied to the sole purpose of re-pairing the roads, is a very unequal one, when applied to any other purpose, or to supply the common exigencies of the state. When it is applied to the sole purpose above mentioned, each carriage is supposed to pay exactly for the tear and wear which that carriage occasions of the roads. But when it is applied to any other purpose, each carriage is supposed to pay for more than that tear and wear, and contributes to the supply of some other exigency of the state. But as the turnpike toll raises the price of goods in proportion to their weight, and not to their value, it is chiefly paid by the consumers of coarse and bulky, not by those of precious and light commodities. Whatever exigency of the state therefore this tax might be intended to supply, that exigency would be chiefly supplied at the expence of the poor, not of the rich; at the expence of those who are least able to supply it, not of those who are most able.
                     THIRDLY, if government should at any time neglect the repa-ration of the high roads, it would be still more difficult than it is at present to compel the proper application of any part of the turnpike tolls. A large revenue might thus be levied upon the people, without any part of it being applied to the only purpose to which a revenue levied in this manner ought ever to be ap-plied. If the meanness and poverty of the trustees of turnpike roads render it sometimes difficult at present to oblige them to repair their wrong; their wealth and greatness would render it ten times more so in the case which is here supposed.
                     IN France the funds destined for the reparation of the high roads are under the immediate direction of the executive power. Those funds consist partly in the six days labour which the country people are in most parts of Europe obliged to give to the repa-ration

of the highways; and partly in such a portion of the ge-neral revenue of the state as the king chuses to spare from his other expences.
                     BY the antient law of France, as well as by that of most other parts of Europe, the six days labour was under the direction of a local or provincial magistracy, which had no immediate depen-dency upon the king's council. But by the present practice both the six days labour, and whatever other fund the king may chuse to assign for the reparation of the high roads in any particular province or generality, are entirely under the management of the intendant; an officer who is appointed and removed by the king's council, who receives his orders from it, and is in constant corres-pondence with it. In the progress of despotism the authority of the executive power gradually absorbs that of every other power in the state, and assumes to itself the management of every branch of reve-nue which is destined for any public purpose. In France, however, the great post roads, the roads which make the communication be-tween the principal towns of the kingdom, are in general kept in good order; and in some provinces are even a good deal superior to the greater part of the turnpike roads of England. But what we call the cross roads, that is, the far greater part of the roads in the country, are entirely neglected, and are in many places absolutely impassable for any heavy carriage. In some places it is even dan-gerous to travel on horseback, and mules are the only conveyance which can safely be trusted. The proud minister of an ostenta-tious court may frequently take pleasure in executing a work of splendor and magnificence, such as a great highway which is fre-quently seen by the principal nobility, whose applauses, not only flatter his vanity, but even contribute to support his interest at court. But to execute a great number of little works, in which nothing that can be done can make any great appearance, or excite the smallest degree of admiration in any traveller, and

               CHAP. II. Of Restraints upon the Importation of such Goods from Foreign Countries as can be produced at Home.
               
               BY restraining either by high duties or by absolute prohibitions the importation of such goods from foreign countries as can be produced at home, the monopoly of the home-market is more of less secured to the domestick industry employed in producing them. Thus the prohibition of importing either live cattle or salt provisions from foreign countries secures to the graziers of Great Britain the monopoly of the home-market for butchers-meat. The high duties upon the importation of corn, which in times of moderate plenty amount to a prohibition, give a like ad-vantage to the growers of that commodity. The prohibition of the importation of foreign woollens is equally favourable to the woollen manufacturers. The silk manufacture, though altogether employed upon foreign materials, has lately obtained the same advantage. The linen manufacture has not yet obtained it, but is making great strides towards it. Many other sorts of manu-facturers have, in the same manner, obtained in Great Britain, either altogether, or very nearly a monopoly against their coun-trymen.
               THAT this monopoly of the home-market frequently gives great encouragement to that particular species of industry which enjoys it, and frequently turns towards that employment a greater share of both the labour and stock of the society than would otherwise have gone to it, cannot be doubted. But whether it tends either

which, in short, have nothing to recommend them but their ex-treme utility, is a business which appears in every respect too mean and paultry to merit the attention of so great a magistrate. Under such an administration, therefore, such works are almost always entirely neglected.
                     IN China, and in several other governments of Asia, the execu-tive power charges itself both with the reparation of the high roads, and with the maintenance of the navigable canals. In the instructions which are given to the governor of each province, those objects, it is said, are constantly recommended to him, and the judgement which the court forms of his conduct is very much regulated by the attention which he appears to have paid to this part of his instructions. This branch of public police accordingly is said to be very much attended to in all those countries, but particularly in China, where the high roads, and still more the navigable canals, it is pretended, exceed very much every thing of the same kind which is known in Europe. The accounts of those works, however, which have been transmitted to Europe, have generally been drawn up by weak and wondering travellers, frequently by stupid and lying missionaries. If they had been examined by more intelligent eyes, and if the accounts of them had been reported by more faithful witnesses, they would not perhaps appear to be so wonderful. The account which Bernier gives of some works of this kind in Indostan, falls very much short of what had been reported of them by other travellers more disposed to the marvellous than he was. It may too perhaps be in those countries as it is in France, where the great roads, the great communications which are likely to be the subjects of con-versation at the court and in the capital, are attended to, and all the rest neglected. In China, besides, in Indostan, and in several other governments of Asia, the revenue of the sovereign arises almost altogether from a land-tax or land-rent, which rises or falls

with the rise or fall of the annual produce of the land. The great interest of the sovereign, therefore, his revenue, is in such coun-tries necessarily and immediately connected with the cultivation of the land, with the greatness of its produce, and with the value of its produce. But in order to render that produce both as great and as valuable as possible, it is necessary to procure to it as extensive a market as possible, and consequently to establish the freest, the easiest, and the least expensive communication between all the different parts of the country, which can be done only by means of the best roads and the best navigable canals. But the revenue of the sovereign does not in any part of Europe arise chiefly from a land-tax or land-rent. In all the great kingdoms of Europe, perhaps the greater part of it may ultimately depend upon the produce of the land: But that dependency is neither so immediate, nor so evident. In Europe, therefore, the sovereign does not feel himself so directly called upon to promote the increase, both in quantity and value, of the produce of the land, or, by maintain-ing good roads and canals, to provide the most extensive market for that produce. Though it should be true, therefore, what I apprehend is not a little doubtful, that in some parts of Asia this department of the public police is very properly managed by the executive power, there is not the least probability that, during the present state of things, it could be tolerably managed by that power in any part of Europe.
                     EVEN those public works which are of such a nature that they cannot afford any revenue for maintaining themselves, but of which the conveniency is nearly confined to some particular place or district, are always better maintained by a local or provincial revenue under the management of a local or provincial admini-stration, than by the general revenue of the state, of which the executive power must always have the management. Were the

streets of London to be lighted and paved at the expence of the treasury, is there any probability that they would be so well lighted and paved as they are at present, or even at so small an expence? The expence besides, instead of being raised by a local tax upon the inhabitants of each particular street, parish, or district in Lon-don, would, in this case, be defrayed out of the general revenue of the state, and would consequently be raised by a tax upon all the inhabitants of the kingdom, of whom the greater part derive no sort of benefit from the lighting and paving of the streets of London.
                     THE abuses which sometimes creep into the local and provincial administration of a local and provincial revenue, how enormous soever they may appear, are in reality, however, almost always very trifling in comparison of those which commonly take place in the administration and expenditure of the revenue of a great empire. They are, besides, much more easily corrected. Under the local or provincial administration of the justices of the peace in Great Bri-tain, the six days labour which the country people are obliged to give to the reparation of the highways, is not always perhaps very judiciously applied, but it is scarce ever exacted with any circum-stance of cruelty or oppression. In France, under the administra-tion of the intendants, the application is not always more judi-cious, and the exaction is frequently the most cruel and oppressive. Such Corvées, as they are called, make one of the principal instru-ments of tyranny by which the intendant chastises any parish or communauté which has had the misfortune to fall under his dis-pleasure.
                  
                  
                     ARTICLE II. Of the Expence of the Institutions for the Education of the Youth.
                     
                     THE institutions for the education of the youth may in the same manner furnish a revenue sufficient for defraying their own

expence. The fee or honorary which the scholar pays to the master naturally constitutes a revenue of this kind.
                     EVEN where the reward of the master does not arise altogether from this natural revenue, it still is not necessary that it should be derived from that general revenue of the society of which the col-lection and application is in most countries assigned to the execu-tive power. Through the greater part of Europe accordingly the endowment of schools and colleges makes either no charge upon that general revenue, or but a very small one. It every where arises chiefly from some local or provincial revenue, from the rent of some landed estate, or from the interest of some sum of money allotted and put under the management of trustees for this particular pur-pose, sometimes by the sovereign himself, and sometimes by some private donor.
                     HAVE those public endowments contributed in general to pro-mote the end of their institution? Have they contributed to encou-rage the diligence, and to improve the abilities of the teachers? Have they directed the course of education towards objects more useful, both to the individual and to the public, than those to which it would naturally have gone of its own accord? It should not seem very difficult to give at least a probable answer to each of those questions.
                     IN every profession the exertion of the greater part of those who exercise it is always in proportion to the necessity they are under of making that exertion. This necessity is greatest with those to whom the emoluments of their profession are the only source from which they expect their fortune, or even their ordinary revenue and sub-sistence. In order to acquire this fortune, or even to get this sub-sistence, they must, in the course of the year, execute a certain

quantity of work of a known value; and, where the competition is free, the rivalship of competitors, who are all endeavouring to justle one another out of employment, obliges every man to endea-vour to execute his work with a certain degree of exactness. The greatness of the objects which are to be acquired by success in some particular professions may, no doubt, sometimes animate the exer-tion of a few men of extraordinary spirit and ambition. Great objects, however, are evidently not necessary in order to occasion the greatest exertions. Rivalship and emulation render excellency, even in mean professions, an object of ambition, and frequently occasion the very greatest exertions. Great objects, on the con-trary, alone and unsupported by the necessity of application, have seldom been sufficient to occasion any considerable exertion. In England, success in the profession of the law leads to some very great objects of ambition; and yet how few men, born to easy fortunes, have ever in this country been eminent in that pro-fession!
                     THE endowments of schools and colleges have necessarily dimi-nished more or less the necessity of application in the teachers. Their subsistence, so far as it arises from their salaries, is evidently derived from a fund altogether independent of their success and reputation in their particular professions.
                     IN some universities the salary makes but a part, and frequently but a small part of the emoluments of the teacher, of which the greater part arises from the honoraries or fees of his pupils. The necessity of application, though always more or less diminished, is not in this case entirely taken away. Reputation in his profession is still of some importance to him, and he still has some dependency upon the affection, gratitude, and favourable report of those who have attended upon his instructions, and these favourable senti-ments

he is likely to gain in no way so well as by deserving them, that is, by the abilities and diligence with which he discharges every part of this duty.
                     IN other universities the teacher is prohibited from receiving any honorary or fee from his pupils, and his salary constitutes the whole of the revenue which he derives from his office. His inte-rest is, in this case, set as directly in opposition to his duty as it is possible to set it. It is the interest of every man to live as much at his ease as he can; and if his emoluments are to be precisely the same whether he does, or does not perform some very laborious duty, it is certainly his interest, at least as interest is vulgarly un-derstood, either to neglect it altogether, or, if he is subject to some authority which will not suffer him to do this, to perform it in as careless and slovenly a manner as that authority will permit. If he is naturally active and a lover of labour, it is his interest to employ that activity in any way, from which he can derive some advantage, rather than in the performance of his duty, from which he can derive none.
                     IF the authority to which he is subject resides in the body corpo-rate, the college, or university, of which he himself is a member, and in which the greater part of the other members are, like himself, persons who either are or ought to be teachers, they are likely to make a common cause, to be all very indulgent to one another, and every man to consent that his neighbour may neglect his duty, provided he himself is allowed to neglect his own. In the univer-sity of Oxford, the greater part of the public professors have, for these many years, given up altogether even the pretence of teaching.
                     IF the authority to which he is subject resides, not so much in the body corporate of which he is a member, as in some other extra-neous

persons, in the bishop of the diocese, for example; in the governor of the province; or, perhaps, in some minister of state, it is not indeed in this case very likely that he will be suffered to neglect his duty altogether. All that such superiors, however, can force him to do is to attend upon his pupils a certain number of hours, that is, to give a certain number of lectures in the week or in the year. What those lectures shall be, must still depend upon the diligence of the teacher; and that diligence is likely to be pro-portioned to the motives which he has for exerting it. An extra-neous jurisdiction of this kind, besides, is liable to be exercised both ignorantly and capriciously. In its nature it is arbitrary and discre-tionary, and the persons who exercise it, neither attending upon the lectures of the teacher themselves, nor perhaps understanding the sciences which it is his business to teach, are seldom capable of exercising it with judgement. From the insolence of office too they are frequently indifferent how they exercise it, and are very apt to censure or deprive him of his office wantonly, and without any just cause. The person subject to such jurisdiction is necessarily degraded by it, and, instead of being one of the most respectable, is rendered one of the meanest and most contemptible persons in the society. It is by powerful protection only that he can effectually guard him-self against the bad usage to which he is at all times exposed; and this protection he is most likely to gain, not by ability or diligence in his profession, but by obsequiousness to the will of his superiors, and by being ready, at all times, to sacrifice to that will the rights, the interest, and the honour of the body corporate of which he is a member. Whoever has attended for any considerable time to the administration of a French university, must have had occasion to remark the effects which naturally result from an arbitrary and extraneous jurisdiction of this kind.
                     WHATEVER forces a certain number of students to any college or university, independent of the merit or reputation of the teachers,

tends more or less to diminish the necessity of that merit or reputation.
                     THE privileges of graduates in arts, in law, in physic, and divinity, when they can be obtained only by residing a certain num-ber of years in certain universities, necessarily force a certain number of students to such universities independent of the merit or reputa-tion of the teachers. The privileges of graduates are a sort of statutes of apprenticeship, which have contributed to the improve-ment of education, just as other statutes of apprenticeship have to that of arts and manufactures.
                     THE charitable foundations of scholarships, exhibitions, burasa-ries, &amp;c. necessarily attach a certain number of students to certain colleges, independent altogether of the merit of those particular colleges. Were the students upon such charitable foundations left free to chuse what college they liked best, such liberty might perhaps contribute to excite some emulation among different colleges. A regulation, on the contrary, which prohibited even the independent members of every particular college from leaving it, and going to any other, without leave first asked and obtained of that which they meant to abandon, would tend very much to extinguish that emulation.
                     IF in each college the tutor or teacher who was to instruct each student in all arts and sciences, should not be voluntarily chosen by the student, but appointed by the head of the college; and if in case of neglect, inability, or bad usage, the student should not be allowed to change him for another without leave first asked and obtained; such a regulation would not only tend very much to extinguish all emulation among the different tutors of the

same college, but to diminish very much in all of them the necessity of diligence and of attention to their respective pupils. Such teachers, though very well paid by their students, might be as much disposed to neglect them as those who are not paid by them at all, or who have no other recompence but their salary.
                     IF the teacher happens to be a man of sense, it must be an unpleasant thing to him to be conscious, while he is lecturing his students, that he is either speaking or reading nonsense, or what is very little better than nonsense. It must too be unpleasant to him to observe that the greater part of his students desert his lectures; or perhaps attend upon them with plain enough marks of neglect, contempt and derision. If he is obliged, therefore, to give a certain number of lectures, these motives alone, without any other interest, might dispose him to take some pains to give tolerably good ones. Several different expedients, however, may be fallen upon which will effectually blunt the edge of all those incitements to diligence. The teacher, instead of explaining to his pupils himself, the science in which he proposes to instruct them, may read some book upon it; and if this book is written in a foreign and dead language, by interpreting it to them into their own; or, what would give him still less trouble, by making them interpret it to him, and by now and then making an occasional remark upon it, he may flatter himself that he is giving a lecture. The slightest degree of knowledge and application will enable him to do this with-out exposing himself to contempt or derision, or saying any thing that is really foolish, absurd, or ridiculous. The discipline of the college at the same time may enable him to force all his pupils to the most regular attendance upon this sham-lecture, and to maintain the most decent and respectful behaviour during the whole time of the performance.
                     
                        

THE discipline of colleges and universities is in general contrived not for the benefit of the students, but for the interest, or more properly speaking, for the ease of the masters. Its object is in all cases to maintain the authority of the master, and whether he neglects or performs his duty, to oblige the students in all cases to behave to him as if he performed it with the greatest diligence and ability. It seems to presume perfect wisdom and virtue in the one order and the greatest weakness and folly in the other. Where the masters, however, really perform their duty, there are no examples, I believe, that the greater part of the students ever neglect theirs. No discipline is ever requisite to force attendance upon lectures which are really worth the attending, as is well known where-ever any such lectures are given. Force and restraint may no doubt be in some degree requisite in order to oblige children or very young boys to attend to those parts of education which it is thought necessary for them to acquire during that early period of life; but after twelve or thirteen years of age, provided the master does his duty, force or restraint can scarce ever be necessary to carry on any part of education. Such is the generosity of the greater part of young men, that, so far from being disposed to neglect or despise the instructions of their master, provided he shows some serious intention of being of use to them, they are generally inclined to pardon a great deal of incorrectness in the performance of his duty, and sometimes even to conceal from the publick a good deal of gross negligence.
                     THOSE parts of education, it is to be observed, for the teaching of which there are no publick institutions, are generally the best taught. When a young man goes to a fencing or a dancing school, he does not indeed always learn to fence or to dance very well; but he seldom fails of learning to fence or to dance. The good effects of the riding school are not commonly so evident. The expence of a

to increase the general industry of the society, or to give it the most advantageous direction, is not, perhaps, altogether so cer-tain.
               THE general industry of the society never can exceed what the capital of the society can employ. As the number of workmen that can be kept in employment by any particular person must bear a certain proportion to his capital, so the number of those that can be continually employed by all the members of a great society must bear a certain proportion to the whole capital of that society, and never can exceed that proportion. No regulation of commerce can increase the quantity of industry in any society beyond what its capital can maintain. It can only divert a part of it into a di-rection into which it might not otherwise have gone; and it is by no means certain that this artificial direction is likely to be more advantageous to the society than that into which it would have gone of its own accord.
               EVERY individual is continually exerting himself to find out the most advantageous employment for whatever capital he can com-mand. It is his own advantage, indeed, and not that of the so-ciety, which he has in view. But the study of his own advantage naturally, or rather necessarily leads him to prefer that employment which is most advantageous to the society.
               FIRST, every individual endeavours to employ his capital as near home as he can, and consequently as much as he can in the support of domestick industry; provided always that he can thereby obtain the ordinary, or not a great deal less than the ordinary pro-fits of stock.
               THUS upon equal or nearly equal profits, every wholesale mer-chant naturally prefers the home-trade to the foreign trade of

riding school is so great, that in most places it is a publick institution. The three most essential parts of literary education, to read, write, and account, it still continues to be more common to acquire in private than in publick schools; and it very seldom happens that any body fails of acquiring them to the degree in which it is neces-sary to acquire them.
                     IN England the publick schools are much less corrupted than the universities. In the schools the youth are taught, or at least may be taught, Greek and Latin, that is, every thing which the masters pretend to teach, or which, it is expected, they should teach. In the universities the youth neither are taught, nor always can find any proper means of being taught, the sciences which it is the business of those incorporated bodies to teach. The reward of the schoolmaster in most cases depends principally, in some case almost entirely, upon the fees or honoraries of his scholars. Schools have no exclusive privileges. In order to obtain the honours of gradua-tion, it is not necessary that a person should bring a certificate of his having studied a certain number of years at a publick school. If upon examination he appears to understand what is taught there, no questions are asked about the place where he learnt it.
                     THE parts of education which are commonly taught in universi-ties, it may perhaps be said, are not very well taught. But had it not been for those institutions they would not have been com-monly taught at all, and both the individual and the public would have suffered a good deal from the want of those important parts of education.
                     THE present universities of Europe were originally, the greater part of them, ecclesiastical corporations; instituted for the educa-tion of churchmen. They were founded by the authority of the

pope, and were so entirely under his immediate protection, that their members, whether masters or students, had all of them what was then called the benefit of clergy, that is, were ex-empted from the civil jurisdiction of the countries in which their respective universities were situated, and were amenable only to the ecclesiastical tribunals. What was taught in the greater part of those universities was, suitable to the end of their institution, either theology, or something that was merely preparatory to theology.
                     WHEN christianity was first established by law, a corrupted latin had become the common language of all the western parts of Europe. The service of the church accordingly, and the transla-tion of the Bible, which was read in churches, were both in that corrupted latin, that is, in the common language of the country. After the irruption of the barbarous nations who overturned the Roman empire, latin gradually ceased to be the language of any part of Europe. But the reverence of the people naturally pre-serves the established forms and ceremonies of religion, long after the circumstances which first introduced and rendered them rea-sonable are no more. Though latin, therefore, was no longer understood any where by the great body of the people, the whole service of the church still continued to be performed in that lan-guage. Two different languages were thus established in Europe, in the same manner as in antient Egypt; a language of the priests, and a language of the people; a sacred and a profane; a learned and an unlearned language. But it was necessary that the priests should understand something of that sacred and learned language in which they were to officiate; and the study of the latin lan-guage therefore made from the beginning an essential part of university education.
                     IT was not so with that either of the Greek or of the Hebrew language. The infallible decrees of the church had pronounced

the latin translation of the Bible, commonly called the Latin Vul-gate, to have been equally dictated by divine inspiration, and therefore of equal authority with the Greek and Hebrew originals. The knowledge of those two languages, therefore, not being in-dispensibly requisite to a churchman, the study of them did not for a long time make a necessary part of the common course of university education. There are some Spanish universities, I am assured, in which the study of the Greek language has never yet made any part of that course. The first reformers found the Greek text of the new testament and even the Hebrew text of the old more favourable to their opinions than the vulgate translation, which, as might naturally be supposed, had been gradually accom-modated to support the doctrines of the catholic church. They set themselves therefore to expose the many errors of that transla-tion, which the Roman catholic clergy were thus put under the necessity of defending or explaining. But this could not well be done without some knowledge of the original languages, of which the study was therefore gradually introduced into the greater part of universities; both of those which embraced and of those which rejected the doctrines of the reformation. The Greek language was connected with every part of that classical learning, which, though at first principally cultivated by catholics and Italians, happened to come into fashion much about the same time that the doctrines of the reformation were set on foot. In the greater part of universities therefore that language was taught previous to the study of philosophy, and as soon as the student had made some progress in the latin. The Hebrew language having no connection with classical learning, and, except the holy scriptures, being the language of not a single book in any esteem, the study of it did not commonly commence till after that of philo-sophy, and when the student had entered upon the study of theology.
                     
                        

ORIGINALLY the first rudiments both of the Greek and Latin languages were taught in universities, and they still continue to be so in some universities. In others it is expected that the student should have previously acquired at least the rudiments of one or both of those languages, of which the study continues to make every where a very considerable part of university education.
                     THE antient Greek philosophy was divided into three great branches; physics, or natural philosophy; ethics, or moral philo-sophy; and logic. This general division seems perfectly agreeable to the nature of things.
                     THE great phenomena of nature, the revolution of the hea-venly bodies, eclipses, comets, thunder, lightning, and other extraordinary meteors, the generation, the life, growth, and dis-solution of plants and animals, are objects which, as they naturally excite the wonder, so they necessarily call forth the curiosity of mankind to enquire into their causes. Superstition first attempted to satisfy this curiosity by referring all those wonderful appearances to the immediate agency of the gods. Philosophy afterwards en-deavoured to account for them, from more familiar causes, or from such as mankind were better acquainted with, than the agency of the gods. As those great phenomena are the first objects of human curiosity, so the science which pretends to explain them must naturally have been the first branch of philo-sophy that was cultivated. The first philosophers accordingly of whom history has preserved any account, appear to have been natural philosophers.
                     IN every age and country of the world men must have attended to the characters, designs, and actions of one another, and many reputable rules and maxims for the conduct of human life, must have been laid down and approved of by common consent. As

soon as writing came into fashion, wise men, or those who fancied themselves such, would naturally endeavour to increase the num-ber of those established and respected maxims, and to express their own sense of what was either proper or improper conduct, some-times in the more artificial form of apologues, like what are called the fables of Aesop; and sometimes in the more simple one of apophthegms, or wise sayings, like the Proverbs of Solomon, the verses of Theognis and Phocyllides, and some part of the works of Hesiod. They might continue in this manner for a long time merely to multiply the number of those maxims of prudence and morality, without even attempting to arrange them in any very distinct or methodical order, much less to connect them together by one or more general principles, from which they were all deducible like effects from their natural causes. The beauty of a systematical arrangement of different observations connected by a few common principles, was first seen in the rude essays of those antient times towards a system of natural philosophy. Something of the same kind was afterwards attempted in morals. The maxims of common life were arranged in some methodical order, and connected together by a few common prin-ciples, in the same manner as they had attempted to arrange and connect the phenomena of nature. The science which pretends to investigate and explain those connecting principles, is what is properly called moral philosophy.
                     DIFFERENT authors gave different systems both of natural and moral philosophy. But the arguments by which they supported those different systems, far from being always demonstrations, were frequently at best but very slender probabilities, and sometimes mere sophisms, which had no other foundation but the inaccuracy and ambiguity of common language. Speculative systems have in all ages of the world been adopted for reasons too frivolous to have determined the judgement of any man of common sense, in

a matter of the smallest pecuniary interest. Gross sophistry has scarce ever had any influence upon the opinions of mankind, except in matters of philosophy and speculation; and in these it has frequently had the greatest. The patrons of each system of natural and moral philosophy naturally endeavoured to expose the weakness of the arguments adduced to support the systems which were opposite to their own. In examining those arguments, they were necessarily led to consider the difference between a probable and a demonstrative argument, between a fallacious and a con-clusive one; and Logic, or the science of the general principles of good and bad reasoning, necessarily arose out of the observations which a scrutiny of this kind gave occasion to. Though in its origin posterior both to physics and to ethics, it was commonly taught, not indeed in all, but in the greater part of the antient schools of philosophy, previously to either of those sciences. The student, it seems to have been thought, ought to understand well the difference between good and bad reasoning, before he was led to reason upon subjects of so great importance.
                     THIS antient division of philosophy into three parts was in the greater part of the universities of Europe, changed for another into five.
                     IN the antient philosophy, whatever was taught concerning the nature either of the human mind or of the Deity, made a part of the system of physics. Those beings, in whatever their essence might be supposed to consist, were parts of the great system of the universe, and parts too productive of the most important effects. Whatever human reason could either conclude or conjecture concerning them made, as it were, two chapters, though no doubt two very important ones, of the science which pretended to give an account of the origin and revolutions of the great system

of the universe. But in the universities of Europe, where philo-sophy was taught only as subservient to theology, it was natural to dwell longer upon those two chapters than upon any other of the science. Those two chapters were gradually more and more extend-ed, and were divided into many inferior chapters, till at last the doctrine of spirits, of which so little can be known, came to take up as much room in the system of philosophy as the doctrine of bodies, of which so much can be known. The doctrines concern-ing those two subjects were considered as making two distinct sci-ences. What was called Metaphysics or Pneumatics was set in opposition to Physics, and was cultivated not only as the more sub-lime, but, for the purposes of a particular profession, as the more useful science of the two. The proper subject of experiment and observation, a subject in which a careful attention is capable of making so many useful discoveries, was almost entirely neglected. The subject in which, after a few very simple and almost obvious truths, the most careful attention can discover nothing but obscu-rity and uncertainty, and can consequently produce nothing but subtleties and sophisms, was greatly cultivated.
                     WHEN those two sciences had thus been set in opposition to one another, the comparison between them naturally gave birth to a third, to what was called Ontology, or the science which treated of the qualities and attributes which were common to both the subjects of the other two sciences. But if subtleties and sophisms composed the greater part of the Metaphysics or Pneumatics of the schools, they composed the whole of this cobweb science of Onto-logy, which was likewise sometimes called Metaphysics.
                     WHEREIN consisted the happiness and perfection of a man, considered not only as an individual, but as the member of a family, of a state, and of the great society of mankind, was the

object which the antient moral philosophy proposed to investigate. In that philosophy the duties of human life were treated of as sub-servient to the happiness and perfection of human life. But when moral, as well as natural philosophy, came to be taught only as subservient to theology, the duties of human life were treated of as chiefly subservient to the happiness of a life to come. In the antient philosophy the perfection of virtue was represented as neces-sarily productive, to the person who possessed it, of the most per-fect happiness in this life. In the modern philosophy it was fre-quently represented as generally, or rather as almost always incon-sistent with any degree of happiness in this life; and heaven was to be earned only by penance and mortification, by the austerities and abasement of a monk; not by the liberal, generous, and spirited conduct of a man. Casuistry and an ascetic morality made up in most cases the greater part of the moral philosophy of the schools. By far the most important of all the different branches of philoso-phy, became in this manner by far the most corrupted.
                     SUCH, therefore, was the common course of philosophical edu-cation in the greater part of the universities of Europe. Logic was taught first: Ontology came in the second place: Pneumato-logy, comprehending the doctrine concerning the nature of the human soul and of the Deity, in the third: In the fourth followed a debased system of Moral philosophy, which was considered as immediately connected with the doctrines of Pneumatology, with the immortality of the human soul, and with the rewards and punishments which, from the justice of the Deity, were to be expected in a life to come: A short and superficial system of Phy-sics usually concluded the course.
                     THE alterations which the universities of Europe thus intro-duced into the antient course of philosophy, were all meant for the

education of ecclesiastics, and to render it a more proper introduc-tion to the study of theology. But the additional quantity of sub-tlety and sophistry; the casuistry and the ascetic morality which those alterations introduced into it, certainly did not render it more proper for the education of gentlemen or men of the world, or more likely either to improve the understanding, or to mend the heart.
                     THIS course of philosophy is what still continues to be taught in the greater part of the universities of Europe; with more or less diligence, according as the constitution of each particular uni-versity happens to render diligence more or less necessary to the teachers. In some of the richest and best endowed universi-ties the tutors content themselves with teaching a few unconnected shreds and parcels of this corrupted course; and even these they commonly teach very negligently and superficially.
                     THE improvements which, in modern times, have been made in several different branches of philosophy, have not, the greater part of them, been made in universities; though some no doubt have. The greater part of universities have not even been very forward to adopt those improvements after they were made; and several of those learned societies have chosen to remain for a long time the sanctuaries in which exploded systems and obsolete prejudices found shelter and protection, after they had been hunted out of every other corner of the world. In general, the richest and best endowed uni-versities have been the slowest in adopting those improvements, and the most averse to permit any considerable change in the established plan of education. Those improvements were more easily intro-duced into some of the poorer universities, in which the teachers, depending upon their reputation for the greater part of their sub-sistence, were obliged to pay more attention to the current opinions of the world.
                     
                        

BUT though the publick schools and universities of Europe were originally intended only for the education of a particular profession, that of churchmen; and though they were not always very dili-gent in instructing their pupils even in the sciences which were sup-posed necessary for that profession, yet they gradually drew to them-selves the education of almost all other people, particularly of almost all gentlemen and men of fortune. No better method, it seems, could be fallen upon of spending, with any advantage, the long interval between infancy and that period of life at which men begin to apply in good earnest to the real business of the world, the business which is to employ them during the remainder of their days. The greater part of what is taught in schools and univer-sities, however, does not seem to be the most proper preparation for that business.
                     IN England, it becomes every day more and more the custom to send young people to travel in foreign countries immediately upon their leaving school, and without sending them to any university. Our young people, it is said, generally return home much improved by their travels. A young man who goes abroad at seventeen or eighteen, and returns home at one and twenty, returns three or four years older than he was when he went abroad; and at that age it is very difficult not to improve a good deal in three or four years. In the course of his travels he generally acquires some knowledge of one or two foreign languages; a knowledge, however, which is sel-dom sufficient to enable him either to speak or write them with pro-priety. In other respects he commonly returns home more conceited, more unprincipled, more dissipated, and more incapable of any serious application either to study or to business, than he could well have become in so short a time had he lived at home. By travel-ling so very young, by spending in the most frivolous dissipation the most precious years of his life, at a distance from the inspec-tion

consumption, and the foreign trade of consumption to the carrying trade. In the home-trade his capital is never so long out of his sight as it frequently is in the foreign trade of consumption. He can know better the character and situation of the persons whom he trusts, and if he should happen to be deceived, he knows better the laws of the country from which he must seek redress. In the carrying trade, the capital of the merchant is, as it were, divided between two foreign countries, and no part of it is ever necessarily brought home, or placed under his own immediate view and com-mand. The capital which an Amsterdam merchant employs in carrying corn from Konnigsberg to Lisbon, and fruit and wine from Lisbon to Konnigsberg, must generally be the one-half of it at Konnigsberg and the other half at Lisbon. No part of it need ever come to Amsterdam. The natural residence of such a merchant should either be at Konnigsberg or Lisbon, and it can only be some very particular circumstances which can make him prefer the residence of Amsterdam. The uneasiness, however, which he feels at being separated so far from his capital, generally determines him to bring part both of the Konnigsberg goods which he destines for the market of Lisbon, and of the Lisbon goods which he destines for that of Konnigsberg, to Amsterdam: and though this necessarily subjects him to a double charge of load-ing and unloading, as well as to the payment of some duties and customs, yet for the sake of having some part of his capital always under his own view and command, he willingly submits to this extraordinary charge; and it is in this manner that every country which has any considerable share of the carrying trade becomes always the emporium or general market for the goods of all the different countries whose trade it carries on. The mer-chant, in order to save a second loading and unloading, endeavours always to sell in the home-market as much of the goods of all those different countries as he can, and thus, so far as he can, to

and controul of his parents and relations, every useful habit which the earlier parts of his education might have had some ten-dency to form in him, instead of being rivetted and confirmed, is almost necessarily either weakened or effaced. Nothing but the discredit into which the universities are allowing themselves to fall, could ever have brought into repute so very absurd a practice as that of travelling at this early period of life. By sending his son abroad, a father delivers himself, at least for some time, from so dis-agreeable an object as that of a son unemployed, neglected, and going to ruin before his eyes.
                     SUCH have been the effects of some of the modern institutions for education.
                     DIFFERENT plans and different institutions for education seem to have taken place in other ages and nations.
                     IN the republics of antient Greece, every free citizen was instruct-ed, under the direction of the public magistrate, in gymnastic exer-cises and in music. By gymnastic exercises it was intended to har-den his body, to sharpen his courage, and to prepare him for the fatigues and dangers of war; and as the Greek militia was, by all accounts, one of the best that ever was in the world, this part of their public education must have answered completely the purpose for which it was intended. By the other part, music, it was pro-posed, at least by the philosophers and historians who have given us an account of those institutions, to humanize the mind, to soften the temper, and to dispose it for performing all the social and moral duties both of public and private life.
                     IN antient Rome the exercises of the Campus Martius answered the same purpose as those of the Gymnazium in antient Greece,

and they seem to have answered it equally well. But among the Romans there was nothing which corresponded to the musical edu-cation of the Greeks. The morals of the Romans, however, both in private and public life, seem to have been not only equal, but, upon the whole, a good deal superior to those of the Greeks. That they were superior in private life we have the express testimony of Polybius and of Dionysius of Halicarnassus; two authors well acquainted with both nations; and the whole tenor of the Greek and Roman history bears witness to the superiority of the public morals of the Romans. The good temper and moderation of con-tending factions seems to be the most essential circumstance in the public morals of a free people. But the factions of the Greeks were almost always violent and sanguinary; whereas, till the time of the Gracchi, no blood had ever been shed in any Roman faction; and from the time of the Gracchi the Roman republic may be considered as in reality dissolved. Notwithstanding, therefore, the very respect-able authority of Plato, Aristotle, and Polybius, and notwith-standing the very ingenious reasons by which Mr. Montesquieu endeavours to support that authority, it seems probable that the musical education of the Greeks had no great effect in mending their morals, since, without any such education, those of the Ro-mans were upon the whole superior. The respect of those antient sages for the institutions of their ancestors had probably disposed them to find much political wisdom in what was, perhaps, merely an antient custom, continued without interruption from the ear-liest period of those societies to the times in which they had arrived at a considerable degree of refinement. Music and dancing are the great amusements of almost all barbarous nations, and the great accomplishments which are supposed to fit any man for enter-taining his society. It is so at this day among the negroes on the coast of Africa. It was so among the antient Celtes, among the antient Scandinavians, and, as we may learn from Homer, among

the antient Greeks in the times preceding the Trojan war. When the Greek tribes had formed themselves into little republics, it was natural that the study of those accomplishments should for a long time make a part of the public and common education of the people.
                     THE masters who instructed the young people either in music or in military exercises, do not seem to have been paid, or even appointed by the state, either in Rome, or even in Athens, the Greek republic of whose laws and customs we are the best informed. The state required that every free citizen should fit himself for defending it in war, and should, upon that account, learn his military exercises. But it left him to learn them of such masters as he could find, and it seems to have advanced nothing for this purpose but a public field or place of exercise, in which he should practise and perform them.
                     IN the early ages both of the Greek and Roman republics, the other parts of education seem to have consisted in learning to read, write, and account, according to the arithmetic of the times. These accomplishments the richer citizens seem frequently to have acquired at home by the assistance of some domestic pedagogue, who was generally either a slave or a freed-man; and the poorer citizens in the schools of such masters as made a trade of teaching for hire. Such parts of education, however, were abandoned altogether to the care of the parents or guardians of each individual. It does not appear that the state ever assumed any inspection or direction of them. By a law of Solon, indeed, the children were acquitted from maintaining in their old age those parents who had neglected to instruct them in some profitable trade or business.
                     IN the progress of refinement, when philosophy and rhetoric came into fashion, the better sort of people used to send their chil-dren

to the schools of philosophers and rhetoricians, in order to be instructed in those fashionable sciences. But those schools were not supported by the public. They were for a long time barely tole-rated by it. The demand for philosophy and rhetoric was for a long time so small, that the first professed teachers of either could not find constant employment in any one city, but were obliged to travel about from place to place. In this manner lived Zeno of Elea, Protagoras, Gorgias, Hippias, and many others. As the demand increased, the schools both of philosophy and rhetoric became stationary; first in Athens, and afterwards in several other cities. The state however seems never to have encouraged them further than by assigning to some of them a particular place to teach in, which was sometimes done too by private donors. The state seems to have assigned the Academy to Plato, the Lyceum to Aristotle, and the Portico to Zeno of Citta the founder of the Stoics. But Epicurus bequeathed his gardens to his own school. Till about the time of Marcus Antoninus however, no teacher ap-pears to have had any salary from the public, or to have had any other emoluments, but what arose from the honoraries or fees of his scholars. The bounty which that philosophical emperor, as we learn from Lucian, bestowed upon the teachers of philosophy, probably lasted no longer than his own life. There was nothing equivalent to the privileges of graduation, and to have attended any of those schools was not necessary, in order to be permitted to prac-tise any particular trade or profession. If the opinion of their own utility could not draw scholars to them, the law neither forced any body to go to them, nor rewarded any body for having gone to them. The teachers had no jurisdiction over their pupils, nor any other authority besides that natural authority which superior virtue and abilities never fail to procure from young people towards those who are entrusted with any part of their edu-cation.
                     
                        

AT Rome, the study of the civil law made a part of the edu-cation, not of the greater part of the citizens, but of some par-ticular families. The young people however, who wished to acquire knowledge in the law, had no public school to go to, and had no other method of studying it than by frequenting the company of such of their relations and friends, as were supposed to under-stand it. It is perhaps worth while to remark, that though the laws of the twelve tables were many of them copied from those of some antient Greek republics, yet law never seems to have grown up to be a science in any republic of antient Greece. In Rome it became a science very early, and gave a considerable degree of illustration to those citizens who had the reputation of under-standing it. In the republics of antient Greece, particularly in Athens, the ordinary courts of justice consisted of numerous and therefore disorderly bodies of people, who frequently decided almost at random, or as clamour, faction, and party spirit hap-pened to determine. The ignominy of an unjust decision, when it was to be divided among five hundred, a thousand, or fifteen hundred people, (for some of their courts were so very numer-ous) could not fall very heavy upon any individual. At Rome, on the contrary, the principal courts of justice consisted either of a single judge, or of a small number of judges, whose characters, especially as they deliberated always in public, could not fail to be very much affected by any rash or unjust decision. In doubtful cases, such courts, from their anxiety to avoid blame, would naturally endeavour to shelter themselves under the example or precedent of the judges who had sat before them either in the same or in some other court. This attention to practice and precedent necessarily formed the Roman law into that regular and orderly system in which it has been delivered down to us; and the like attention has had the like effects upon the laws of every other country where such attention has taken place. The supe-riority of character in the Romans over that of the Greeks, so

much remarked by Polybius and Dionysius of Halicarnassus, was probably more owing to the better constitution of their courts of justice, than to any of the circumstances to which those authors ascribe it. The Romans are said to have been particularly distin-guished for their superior respect to an oath. But the people who were accustomed to make oath only before some diligent and well informed court of justice, would naturally be much more attentive to what they swore, than they who were accustomed to do the same thing before mobbish and disorderly assemblies.
                     THE abilities both civil and military of the Greeks and Romans will readily be allowed to have been at least equal to those of any modern nation. Our prejudice is perhaps rather to over-rate them. But except in what related to military exercises, the state seems to have been at no pains to form those great abilities: for I cannot be induced to believe that the musical education of the Greeks could be of much consequence in forming them. Masters, however, had been found, it seems, for instructing the better sort of people among those nations in every art and science in which the circumstances of their society rendered it necessary or conve-nient for them to be instructed. The demand for such instruction produced, what it always produces, the talent for giving it; and the emulation which an unrestrained competition never fails to excite, appears to have brought that talent to a very high degree of perfection. In the attention which the antient philosophers excited, in the empire which they acquired over the opinions and principles of their auditors, in the faculty which they possessed of giving a certain tone and character to the conduct and conversa-tion of those auditors; they appear to have been much superior to any modern teachers. In modern times, the diligence of public teachers is more or less corrupted by the circumstances, which render them more or less independent of their success and repu-tation in their particular professions. Their salaries too put the private teacher, who would pretend to come into competition with

them, in the same state with a merchant who attempts to trade without a bounty, in competition with those who trade with a con-siderable one. If he sells his goods at nearly the same price, he can-not have the same profit, and poverty and beggary at least, if not bankruptcy and ruin, will infallibly be his lot. If he attempts to sell them much dearer, he is likely to have so few customers that his circumstances will not be much mended. The privileges of graduation, besides, are in many countries necessary, or at least extremely convenient to most men of learned professions, that is, to the far greater part of those who have occasion for a learned education. But those privileges can be obtained only by attend-ing the lectures of the public teachers. The most careful attendance upon the ablest instructions of any private teacher, cannot always give any title to demand them. It is from these different causes that the private teacher of any of the sciences which are com-monly taught in universities, is in modern times generally con-sidered as in the very lowest order of men of letters. A man of real abilities can scarce find out a more humiliating or a more unprofitable employment to turn them to. The endowments of schools and colleges have in this manner not only corrupted the diligence of public teachers, but have rendered it almost impossible to have any good private ones.
                     WERE there no public institutions for education, no system, no science would be taught for which there was not some de-mand; or which the circumstances of the times did not render it, either necessary, or convenient, or at least fashionable to learn. A private teacher could never find his account in teach-ing either an exploded and antiquated system of a science acknow-leged to be useful, or a science universally believed to be a mere useless and pedantic heap of sophistry and nonsense. Such systems, such sciences, can subsist no where but in those incor-porated societies for education whose prosperity and revenue are in a great measure independent of their reputation, and alto-gether

independent of their industry. Were there no public insti-tutions for education, a gentleman, after going through with application and abilities the most complete course of education, which the circumstances of the times were supposed to afford, could not come into the world completely ignorant of every thing which is the common subject of conversation among gen-tlemen and men of the world.
                     THERE are no public institutions for the education of women, and there is accordingly nothing useless, absurd, or fantastical in the common course of their education. They are taught what their parents or guardians judge it necessary or useful for them to learn; and they are taught nothing else. Every part of their education tends evidently to some useful purpose; either to im-prove the natural attractions of their person, or to form their mind to reserve, to modesty, to chastity, and to oeconomy: to render them both likely to become the mistresses of a family, and to behave properly when they have become such. In every part of her life a woman feels some conveniency or advantage from every part of her education. It seldom happens that a man in any part of his life derives any conveniency or advantage from some of the most laborious and troublesome parts of his education.
                     OUGHT the public, therefore, to give no attention, it may be asked, to the education of the people? Or if it ought to give any, what are the different parts of education which it ought to attend to in the different orders of the people? and in what manner ought it to attend to them?
                     IN some cases the state of the society necessarily places the greater part of individuals in such situations as naturally form in them, without any attention of government, almost all the abili-ties and virtues which that state requires, or perhaps can admit

of. In other cases the state of the society does not place the greater part of individuals in such situations, and some attention of government is necessary in order to prevent the almost entire corruption and degeneracy of the great body of the people.
                     IN the progress of the division of labour, the employment of the far greater part of those who live by labour, that is, of the great body of the people, comes to be confined to a very few simple operations; frequently to one or two. But the under-standings of the greater part of men are necessarily formed by their ordinary employments. The man whose whole life is spent in performing a few simple operations, of which the effects too are, perhaps, always the same, or very nearly the same, has no occasion to exert his understanding, or to exercise his invention in finding out expedients for removing difficulties which never occur. He naturally loses, therefore, the habit of such exertion, and generally becomes as stupid and ignorant as it is possible for a human creature to become. The torpor of his mind renders him, not only incapable of relishing or bearing a part in any rational conversation, but of conceiving any generous, noble, or tender sentiment, and consequently of forming any just judgement concerning many even of the ordinary duties of private life. Of the great and extensive interests of his country, he is altogether incapable of judging; and unless very particular pains have been taken to render him otherwise, he is equally incapable of defend-ing his country in war. The uniformity of his stationary life naturally corrupts the courage of his mind, and makes him regard with abhorrence the irregular, uncertain, and adventurous life of a soldier. It corrupts even the activity of his body, and renders him incapable of exerting his strength with vigour and perseverance in any other employment than that to which he has been bred. His dexterity at his own particular trade seems in this manner to be acquired at the expence of his intellectual,

social, and martial virtues. But in every improved and civilized society this is the state into which the labouring poor, that is, the great body of the people, must necessarily fall, unless government takes some pains to prevent it.
                     IT is otherwise in the barbarous societies, as they are commonly called, of hunters, of shepherds, and even of husbandmen in that rude state of husbandry which precedes the improvement of manufactures, and the extension of foreign commerce. In such societies the varied occupations of every man oblige every man to exert his capacity, and to invent expedients for removing difficul-ties which are continually occurring. Invention is kept alive, and the minds of men are not suffered to fall into that drowsy stupidity which in a civilized society seems to benumb the under-standing of almost all the inferior ranks of people. In those bar-barous societies, as they are called, every man, it has already been observed, is a warrior. Every man too is in some measure a statesman, and can form a tolerable judgement concerning the interest of the society, and the conduct of those who govern it. How far their chiefs are good judges in peace, or good leaders in war, is obvious to the observation of almost every single man among them. In such a society indeed, no man can well acquire that improved and refined understanding which a few men sometimes possess in a more civilized state. Though in a rude society there is a good deal of variety in the occupations of every individual, there is not a great deal in those of the whole society. Every man does, or is capable of doing, almost every thing which any other man does or is capable of doing. Every man has a considerable degree of knowledge, ingenuity and invention; but scarce any man has a great degree. The degree, however, which is commonly possessed, is generally sufficient for conducting the whole simple business of the society. In a civilized state, on the contrary, though there is little variety in the occupations of the

convert his carrying trade into a foreign trade of consumption. A merchant, in the same manner, who is engaged in the foreign trade of consumption, when he collects goods for foreign markets, will always be glad, upon equal or nearly equal profits, to sell as great a part of them at home as he can. He saves himself the risk and trouble of exportation, when so far as he can, he thus converts his foreign trade of consumption into a home-trade. Home is in this manner the center, if I may say so, round which the capitals of the inhabitants of every country are continually cir-culating, and towards which they are always tending, though by particular causes they may sometimes be driven off and repelled from it towards more distant employments. But a capital em-ployed in the home-trade, it has already been shown, necessarily puts into motion a greater quantity of domestick industry, and gives revenue and employment to a greater number of the inha-bitants of the country, than an equal capital employed in the foreign trade of consumption: and one employed in the foreign trade of consumption has the same advantage over an equal capital employed in the carrying trade. Upon equal, or only nearly equal profits, therefore, every individual naturally inclines to employ his capital in the manner in which it is likely to afford the greatest support to domestick industry, and to give revenue and employ-ment to the greatest number of the people of his own country.
               SECONDLY, every individual who employs his capital in the support of domestick industry, necessarily endeavours so to direct that industry, that its produce may be of the greatest possible value.
               THE produce of industry is what it adds to the subject or ma-terials upon which it is employed. In proportion as the value of this produce is great or small, so will likewise be the profits of the employer. But it is only for the sake of profit that any man em-ploys

greater part of individuals, there is an almost infinite variety in those of the whole society. These varied occupations present an almost infinite variety of objects to the contemplation of those few who, being attached to no particular occupation themselves, have leisure and inclination to examine the occupations of other people. The contemplation of so great a variety of objects necessarily exer-cises their minds in endless comparisons and combinations, and renders their understandings in an extraordinary degree both acute and comprehensive. Unless those few, however, happen to be placed in some very particular situations, their great abilities, though honourable to themselves, may contribute very little to the good government or happiness of their society. Notwithstanding the great abilities of those few, all the nobler parts of the human cha-racter may be in a great measure obliterated and extinguished in the great body of the people.
                     THE education of the common people requires, perhaps, in a civilized and commercial society, the attention of the public more than that of people of some rank and fortune. People of some rank and fortune are generally eighteen or nineteen years of age before they enter upon that particular business, profession, or trade, by which they propose to distinguish themselves in the world. They have before that full time to acquire, or at least to fit themselves for afterwards acquiring, every accomplishment which can recommend them to the public esteem, or render them worthy of it. Their parents or guardians are generally sufficiently anxious that they should be so accomplished, and are in most cases willing enough to lay out the expence which is necessary for that purpose. If they are not always properly educated, it is seldom from the want of expence laid out upon their education; but from the improper application of that expence. It is seldom from the want of masters; but from the negligence and incapacity of the masters who are to be had, and

from the difficulty, or rather from the impossibility which there is in the present state of things of finding any better. The employ-ments too in which people of some rank or fortune spend the greater part of their lives are not, like those of the common people, simple and uniform. They are almost all of them extremely com-plicated, and such as exercise the head more than the hands. The understandings of those who are engaged in such employments can seldom grow torpid from want of exercise. The employments of people of some rank and fortune, besides, are seldom such as har-rass them from morning to night. They generally have a good deal of leisure, during which they may perfect themselves in every branch either of useful or ornamental knowledge of which they may have laid the foundation, or for which they may have acquired some taste in the earlier part of life.
                     IT is otherwise with the common people. They have little time to spare for education. Their parents can scarce afford to main-tain them even in infancy. As soon as they are able to work, they must apply to some trade by which they can earn their subsistence. That trade too is generally so simple and uniform as to give little exercise to the understanding, while at the same time their labour is both so constant and so severe, that it leaves them little leisure and less inclination to apply to, or even to think of any thing else.
                     BUT though the common people cannot in any civilized society be so well instructed as people of some rank and fortune, the most essential parts of education, however, to read, write, and account, can be acquired at so early a period of life, that the greater part even of those who are to be bred to the lowest occupations, have time to acquire them before they can be employed in those occu-pations. For a very small expence the public can facilitate, can encourage, and can even impose upon almost the whole body of

the people, the necessity of acquiring those most essential parts of education.
                     THE public can facilitate this acquisition by establishing in every parish or district a little school, where children may be taught for a reward so moderate, that even a common labourer may afford it; the master being partly, but not wholly paid by the public; because if he was wholly, or even principally paid by it, he would soon learn to neglect his business. In Scotland the establishment of such parish schools has taught almost the whole common people to read, and a very great proportion of them to write and account. In England the establishment of charity schools has had an effect of the same kind, though not so universally, because the establish-ment is not so universal. If in those little schools the books by which the children are taught to read were a little more instructive than they commonly are; and if, instead of the little smattering of Latin, which the children of the common people are sometimes taught there, and which can scarce ever be of any use to them, they were instructed in the elementary parts of geometry and mechanics, the literary education of this rank of people would perhaps be as complete as it is capable of being. There is scarce a common trade which does not afford some opportunities of apply-ing to it the principles of geometry and mechanics, and which would not therefore gradually exercise and improve the common people in those principles, the necessary introduction to the most sublime as well as to the most useful sciences.
                     THE public can encourage the acquisition of those most essential parts of education by giving small premiums, and little badges of distinction, to the children of the common people who excel in them.
                     THE public can impose upon almost the whole body of the people the necessity of acquiring those most essential parts of education, by obliging every man to undergo an examination or probation in them

before he can obtain the freedom in any corporation, or be allowed to set up any trade either in a village or town corporate.
                     IT was in this manner, by facilitating the acquisition of their military and gymnastic exercises, by encouraging it, and even by imposing upon the whole body of the people the necessity of learn-ing those exercises, that the Greek and Roman republics maintained the martial spirit of their respective citizens. They facilitated the acquisition of those exercises by appointing a certain place for learning and practising them, and by granting to certain masters the privilege of teaching in that place. Those masters do not ap-pear to have had either salaries or exclusive privileges of any kind. Their reward consisted altogether in what they got from their scho-lars; and a citizen who had learnt his exercises in the public Gym-nasia, had no sort of legal advantage over one who had learnt them privately, provided the latter had learnt them equally well. Those republics encouraged the acquisition of those exercises by bestow-ing little premiums and badges of distinction upon those who excel-led in them. To have gained a prize in the Olympic, Isthmian or Nemaean games, gave illustration not only to the person who gained it, but to his whole family and kindred. The obligation which every citizen was under to serve a certain number of years, if called upon, in the armies of the republic, sufficiently imposed the necessity of learning those exercises without which he could not be fit for that service.
                     THAT in the progress of improvement the practice of military exercises, unless government takes proper pains to support it, goes gradually to decay, and, together with it, the martial spirit of the great body of the people, the example of modern Europe suffi-ciently demonstrates. But the security of every society must always depend, more or less, upon the martial spirit of the great body of the people. In the present times, indeed, that martial spirit alone,

and unsupported by a well disciplined standing army, would not perhaps be sufficient for the defence and security of any society. But where every citizen had the spirit of a soldier, a smaller stand-ing army would surely be requisite. That spirit besides would neces-sarily diminish very much the dangers to liberty, whether real or imaginary, which are commonly apprehended from a standing army. As it would very much facilitate the operations of that army against a foreign invader, so it would obstruct them as much if unfortu-nately they should ever be directed against the constitution of the state.
                     THE antient institutions of Greece and Rome seem to have been much more effectual for maintaining the martial spirit of the great body of the people than the establishment of what are called the mili-tias of modern times. They were much more simple. When they were once established, they executed themselves, and it required little or no attention from government to maintain them in the most perfect vigour. Whereas to maintain even in tolerable execution the complex regulations of any modern militia, requires the conti-nual and painful attention of government, without which they are constantly falling into total neglect and disuse. The influence besides of the antient institutions was much more universal. By means of them the whole body of the people was completely instructed in the use of arms. Whereas it is but a very small part of them who can ever be so instructed by the regulations of any modern militia; except, perhaps, that of Switzerland. But a cow-ard, a man incapable either of defending or of revenging himself, evidently wants one of the most essential parts of the character of a man. He is as much mutilated and deformed in his mind as another is in his body, who is either deprived of some of its most essential members, or has lost the use of those members. He is evidently the more wretched and miserable of the two; because happiness and

misery, which reside altogether in the mind, must necessarily depend more upon the healthful or unhealthful, the mutilated or entire state of the mind, than upon that of the body. Even though the mar-tial spirit of the people were of no use towards the defence of the society, yet to prevent that sort of mental mutilation, deformity and wretchedness which cowardice necessarily involves in it, from spread-ing themselves through the great body of the people, would still deserve the most serious attention of government; in the same man-ner as it would deserve its most serious attention to prevent a leprosy or any other loathsome and offensive disease, though neither mortal nor dangerous, from spreading itself among them; though per-haps no other public good might result from such attention besides the prevention of so great a public evil.
                     THE same thing may be said of the gross ignorance and stupidity which, in a civilized society, seem so frequently to benumb the understandings of all the inferior ranks of people. A man, with-out the proper use of the intellectual faculties of a man, is, if pos-sible, more contemptible than even a coward, and seems to be muti-lated and deformed in a still more essential part of the character of human nature. Though the state was to derive no advantage from the instruction of the inferior ranks of people, it would still deserve its attention that they should not be altogether uninstructed. The state, however, derives no inconsiderable advantage from their instruction. The more they are instructed, the less liable they are to the delusions of enthusiasm and superstition, which, among igno-rant nations, frequently occasion the most dreadful disorders. An instructed and intelligent people besides are always more decent and orderly than an ignorant and stupid one. They feel them-selves each individually more respectable, and more likely to obtain the respect of their lawful superiors, and they are therefore more disposed to respect those superiors. They are more disposed to

examine, and more capable of seeing through, the interested com-plaints of faction and sedition, and they are, upon that account, less apt to be misled into any wanton or unnecessary opposition to the measures of government. In free countries, where the safety of government depends very much upon the favourable judgement which the people may form of its conduct, it must surely be of the highest importance that they should not be disposed to judge rashly or capriciously concerning it.
                  
                  
                     ARTICLE III. Of the Expence of the Institutions for the Instruction of People of all Ages.
                     
                     THE institutions for the instruction of people of all ages are chiefly those for religious instruction. This is a species of instruc-tion of which the object is not so much to render the people good citizens in this world, as to prepare them for another and a better world in a life to come. The teachers of the doctrine which con-tains this instruction, in the same manner as other teachers, may either depend altogether for their subsistence upon the voluntary contributions of their hearers; or they may derive it from some other fund to which the law of their country may entitle them; such as a landed estate, a tythe or land-tax, an established salary or stipend. Their exertion, their zeal and industry, are likely to be much greater in the former situation than in the latter. In this respect the teachers of new religions have always had a considerable advantage in attacking those antient and established systems of which the clergy, reposing themselves upon their benefices, had neglected to keep up the fervour of faith and devotion in the great body of the people; and having given themselves up to indolence, were become altogether incapable of making any vigorous exertion in defence even of their own establishment. The clergy of an esta-blished and well endowed religion frequently become men of learn-ing and elegance, who possess all the virtues of gentlemen, or which

can recommend them to the esteem of gentlemen; but they are apt gradually to lose the qualities, both good and bad, which gave them authority and influence with the inferior ranks of peo-ple, and which had perhaps been the original causes of the success and establishment of their religion. Such a clergy, when attacked by a set of popular and bold, though perhaps stupid and ignorant enthusiasts, feel themselves as perfectly defenceless as the indolent, effeminate, and full-fed nations of the southern parts of Asia, when they were invaded by the active, hardy, and hungry Tartars of the North. Such a clergy, upon such an emergency, have commonly no other resource than to call upon the civil magistrate to perse-cute, destroy, or drive out their adversaries as disturbers of the public peace. It was thus that the Roman catholic clergy called upon the civil magistrate to persecute the protestants; and the church of England to persecute the dissenters; and that in general every religious sect, when it has once enjoyed for a century or two the security of a legal establishment, has found itself incapable of making any vigorous defence against any new sect which chose to attack its doctrine or discipline. Upon such occasions the advan-tage in point of learning and good writing may sometimes be on the side of the established church. But the arts of popularity, all the arts of gaining proselytes, are constantly on the side of its adversaries. In England those arts have been long neglected by the well-endowed clergy of the established church, and are at present chiefly culitvated by the dissenters and by the methodists. The independent provisions, however, which in many places have been made for dissenting teachers, by means of voluntary subscriptions, of trust-rights, and other evasions of the law, seem very much to have abated the zeal and activity of those teachers. They have many of them become very learned, ingenious, and respectable men; but they have in general ceased to be very popular preachers. The methodists, without half the learning of the dissenters, are much more in vogue.
                     
                        

IN the church of Rome the industry and zeal of the inferior clergy is kept more alive by the powerful motive of self-interest than perhaps in any established protestant church. The parochial clergy derive, many of them, a very considerable part of their subsistence from the voluntary oblations of the people; a source of revenue which confession gives them many opportunities of improv-ing. The mendicant orders derive their whole subsistence from such oblations. It is with them, as with the hussars and light infantry of some armies, no plunder, no pay. The parochial clergy are like those teachers whose reward depends partly upon their salary, and partly upon the fees or honoraries which they get from their pupils, and these must always depend more or less upon their industry and reputation. The mendicant orders are like those teachers whose subsistence depends altogether upon their industry. They are obliged, therefore, to use every art which can animate the devotion of the common people. The establishment of the two great mendicant orders of St. Dominick and St. Francis, it is observed by Machiavel, revived, in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the languishing faith and devotion of the catholic church. In Roman catholic countries the spirit of devotion is supported altogether by the monks and by the poorer parochial clergy. The great dignitaries of the church, with all the accom-plishments of gentlemen and men of the world, and sometimes with those of men of learning, are careful enough to maintain the necessary discipline over their inferiors, but seldom give themselves any trouble about the instruction of the people.
                     
                        "MOST of the arts and professions in a state," says, by far the most illustrious philosopher and historian of the present age, "are of such a nature, that, while they promote the interests of the society, they are also useful or agreeable to some individuals; and in that case, the constant rule of the magistrate, except,

perhaps, on the first introduction of any art, is, to leave the profession to itself, and trust its encouragement to the indivi-duals who reap the benefit of it. The artizans finding their profits to rise by the favour of their customers, increase, as much as possible, their skill and industry; and as matters are not disturbed by any injudicious tampering, the commodity is always sure to be at all times nearly proportioned to the demand.
BUT there are also some callings, which, though useful and even necessary in a state, bring no advantage or pleasure to any individual, and the supreme power is obliged to alter its conduct with regard to the retainers of those professions. It must give them publick encouragement in order to their subsistence; and it must provide against that negligence to which they will naturally be subject, either by annexing particular honours to the profes-sion, by establishing a long subordination of ranks and a strict dependance, or by some other expedient. The persons employed in the finances, fleets, and magistracy, are instances of this order of men.
                           IT may naturally be thought, at first sight, that the eccle-siastics belong to the first class, and that their encouragement, as well as that of lawyers and physicians, may safely be entrusted to the liberality of individuals, who are attached to their doctrines, and who find benefit or consolation from their spiritual ministry and assistance. Their industry and vigilance will, no doubt, be whetted by such an additional motive; and their skill in the profession, as well as their address in governing the minds of the people, must receive daily increase, from their increasing practice, study, and attention.
                           
                              

a capital in the support of industry; and he will always, there-fore, endeavour to employ it in the support of that industry of which the produce is likely to be of the greatest value, or to exchange for the greatest quantity either of money or of other goods.
               BUT the annual revenue of every society is always precisely equal to the exchangeable value of the whole annual produce of its in-dustry, or rather is precisely the same thing with that exchangeable value. As every individual, therefore, endeavours as much as he can both to employ his capital in the support of domestick industry, and so to direct that industry that its produce may be of the greatest value; every individual necessarily labours to render the annual re-venue of the society as great as he can. He generally, indeed, neither intends to promote the publick interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it. By preferring the support of domestick to that of foreign industry he intends only his own security; and by directing that industry in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends only his own gain, and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention. Nor is it always the worse for the society that it was no part of it. By pursuing his own interest he frequently promotes that of the society more effectually than when he really intends to promote it. I have never known much good done by those who affected to trade for the publick good. It is an affec-tation, indeed, not very common among merchants, and very few words need be employed in dissuading them from it.
               WHAT is the species of domestick industry which his capital can employ, and of which the produce is likely to be of the greatest value, every individual, it is evident, can, in his local situation, judge much better than any statesman or lawgiver can do for him.

BUT if we consider the matter more closely, we shall find, that this interested diligence of the clergy is what every wise legislator will study to prevent; because in every religion except the true, it is highly pernicious, and it has even a natural tendency to pervert the true, by infusing into it a strong mixture of super-stition, folly, and delusion. Each ghostly practitioner, in order to render himself more precious and sacred in the eyes of his retainers, will inspire them with the most violent abhorrence of all other sects, and continually endeavour, by some novelty, to excite the languid devotion of his audience. No regard will be paid to truth, morals, or decency in the doctrines inculcated. Every tenet will be adopted that best suits the disorderly affections of the human frame. Customers will be drawn to each conven-ticle by new industry and address in practising on the passions and credulity of the populace. And in the end, the civil magistrate will find, that he has dearly paid for his pretended frugality, in saving a fixed establishment for the priests; and that in reality the most decent and advantageous composition, which he can make with the spiritual guides, is to bribe their indolence, by assigning stated salaries to their profession, and rendering it superfluous for them to be farther active, than merely to prevent their flock from straying in quest of new pastures. And in this manner ecclesiastical establishments, though commonly they arose at first from religious views, prove in the end advantageous to the political interests of society.
                        
                     
                     BUT whatever may have been the good or bad effects of the independent provision of the clergy; it has, perhaps, been very seldom bestowed upon them from any view to those effects. Times of violent religious controversy have generally been times of equally violent political faction. Upon such occasions each political party has either found it, or imagined it, for its interest to league

itself with some one or other of the contending religious sects. But this could be done only by adopting, or at least by favouring, the tenets of that particular sect. The sect which had the good fortune to be leagued with the conquering party, necessarily shared in the victory of its ally, by whose favour and protection it was soon enabled in some degree to silence and subdue all its adversaries. Those adversaries had generally leagued themselves with the enemies of the conquering party, and were therefore the enemies of that party. The clergy of this particular sect having thus become complete masters of the field, and their influence and authority with the great body of the people being in its highest vigour, they were powerful enough to over-awe the chiefs and leaders of their own party, and to oblige the civil magistrate to respect their opinions and inclinations. Their first demand was generally, that he should silence and subdue all their adversaries; and their second, that he should bestow an independent provision on themselves. As they had generally contributed a good deal to the victory, it seemed not unreasonable that they should have some share in the spoil. They were weary besides of humouring the people, and of depending upon their caprice for a subsistence. In making this demand there-fore they consulted their own case and comfort, without troubling themselves about the effect which it might have in future times upon the influence and authority of their order. The civil magi-strate, who could comply with this demand only by giving them something which he would have chosen much rather to take or to keep to himself, was seldom very forward to grant it. Necessity, however, always forced him to submit at last, though frequently not till after many delays, evasions, and affected excuses.
                     BUT if politics had never called in the aid of religion, had the conquering party never adopted the tenets of one sect more than those of another, when it had gained the victory, it would proba-bly

have dealt equally and impartially with all the different sects, and have allowed every man to chuse his own priest and his own religion as he thought proper. There would in this case, no doubt, have been a great multitude of religious sects. Almost every different congregation might probably have made a little sect by itself, or have entertained some peculiar tenets of its own. Each teacher would no doubt have felt himself under the necessity of making the utmost exertion, and of using every art both to preserve and to increase the number of his disciples. But as every other teacher would have felt himself under the same necessity; the success of no one teacher, or sect of teachers, could have been very great. The interested and active zeal of religious teachers can be dangerous and troublesome only where there is either but one sect tolerated in the society, or where the whole of a large society is divided into two or three great sects; the teachers of each sect acting by concert, and under a regular discipline and subordination. But that zeal must be altogether innocent where the society is divided into two or three hundred, or perhaps into as many thousand small sects, of which no one could be considerable enough to disturb the publick tranquillity. The teachers of each sect, seeing themselves sur-rounded on all sides with more adversaries than friends, would be obliged to learn that candour and moderation which is so seldom to be found among the teachers of those great sects, whose tenets being supported by the civil magistrate, are held in veneration by almost all the inhabitants of extensive kingdoms and empires, and who therefore see nothing round them but followers, disciples, and humble admirers. The teachers of each little sect, finding themselves almost alone, would be obliged to respect those of almost every other sect, and the concessions which they would mutually find it both convenient and agreeable to make to one another, might in time probably reduce the doctrine of the greater part of them to that pure and rational religion, freefrom every mixture of absurdity, imposture, or

fanaticism, such as wise men have in all ages of the world wished to see established; but such as positive law has perhaps never yet establish-ed, and probably never will establish in any country: because with regard to religion, positive law always has been, and probably always will be, more or less influenced by popular superstition and enthusi-asm. This plan of ecclesiastical government, or more properly of no ecclesiastical government, was what the sect called independents, a sect no doubt of very wild enthusiasts, proposed to establish in England towards the end of the civil war. If it had been esta-blished, though of a very unphilosophical origin, it would probably by this time have been productive of the most philosophical good temper and moderation with regard to every sort of religious prin-ciple. It has been established in Pensylvania, where, though the quakers happen to be the most numerous sect, the law in reality favours no one sect more than another, and it is there said to have been productive of this philosophical good temper and mode-ration.
                     BUT though this equality of treatment should not be productive of this good temper and moderation in all, or even in the greater part of the religious sects of a particular country; yet provided those sects were sufficiently numerous, and each of them consequently too small to disturb the publick tranquillity, the excessive zeal of each sect for its particular tenets, could not well be productive of any very hurtful effects, but, on the contrary, of several good ones: and if the government was perfectly decided both to let them all alone, and to oblige them all to let alone one another, there is little danger that they would not of their own accord subdivide themselves fast enough, so as soon to become sufficiently numerous.
                     IN every civilized society, in every society where the distinction or ranks has once been completely established, there have been

always two different schemes or systems of morality current at the same time; of which the one may be called the strict or austere; the other the liberal, or, if you will, the loose system. The former is generally admired and revered by the common people: The latter is commonly more esteemed and adopted by what are called people of fashion. The degree of disapprobation with which we ought to mark the vices of levity, the vices which are apt to arise from great prosperity, and from the excess of gaiety and good humour, seems to constitute the principal distinction between those two opposite schemes or systems. In the liberal or loose system, luxury, wanton and even disorderly mirth, the pursuit of pleasure to some degree of intemperance, the breach of chastity, at least in one of the two sexes, &amp;c. provided they are not accompanied with gross indecency, and do not lead to falshood or injustice, are generally treated with a good deal of indulgence, and are easily either excused or pardoned altogether. In the austere system, on the contrary, those excesses are regarded with the utmost abhorrence and detestation. The vices of levity are always ruinous to the common people, and a single week's thoughtlesness and dissipation is often sufficient to undo a poor workman for ever, and to drive him through despair upon committing the most enormous crimes. The wiser and better sort of the common people, there-fore, have always the utmost abhorrence and detestation of such excesses, which their experience tells them are so immediately fatal to people of their condition. The disorder and extravagance of several years, on the contrary, will not always ruin a man of fashion, and people of that rank are very apt to consider the power of indulging in some degree of excess as one of the ad-vantages of their fortune, and the liberty of doing so without censure or reproach, as one of the privileges which belong to their station. In people of their own station, therefore, they regard such excesses with but a small degree of disapprobation, and cen-sure them either very slightly or not at all.
                     
                        

ALMOST all religious sects have begun among the common people, from whom they have generally drawn their earliest, as well as their most numerous proselytes. The austere system of morality has, accordingly, been adopted by those sects almost con-stantly, or with very few exceptions; for there have been some. It was the system by which they could best recommend themselves to that order of people to whom they first proposed their plan of reformation upon what had been before established. Many of them, perhaps the greater part of them, have even endeavoured to gain credit by refining upon this austere system, and by carrying it to some degree of folly and extravagance; and this excessive rigour has frequently recommended them more than any thing else to the respect and veneration of the common people.
                     A MAN of rank and fortune is by his station the distinguished member of a great society, who attend to every part of his con-duct, and who thereby oblige him to attend to every part of it himself. His authority and consideration depend very much upon the respect which this society bears to him. He dare not do any thing which would disgrace or discredit him in it, and he is obliged to a very strict observation of that species of morals, whe-ther liberal or austere, which the general consent of this society prescribes to persons of his rank and fortune. A man of low condition, on the contrary, is far from being a distinguished member of any great society. While he remains in a country village his conduct may be attended to, and he may be obliged to attend to it himself. In this situation, and in this situation only, he may have what is called a character to lose. But as soon as he comes into a great city, he is sunk in obscurity and darkness. His conduct is observed and attended to by nobody, and he is therefore very likely to neglect it himself, and to abandon himself to every sort of low profligacy and vice. He never emerges so effectually from this obscurity, his conduct never excites so much

the attention of any respectable society, as by his becoming the member of a small religious sect. He from that moment acquires a degree of consideration which he never had before. All his brother sectaries are, for the credit of the sect, inte-rested to observe his conduct, and if he gives occasion to any scandal, if he deviates very much from those austere morals which they almost always require of one another, to punish him by what is always a very severe punishment, even where no civil effects attend it, expulsion or excommunication from the sect. In little religious sects, accordingly, the morals of the common people have been almost always remarkably regular and orderly; generally much more so than in the established church. The morals of those little sects indeed have frequently been rather dis-agreeably rigorous and unsocial.
                     THERE are two very easy and effectual remedies, however, by whose joint operation the state might, without violence, correct whatever was unsocial or disagreeably rigorous in the morals of all the little sects into which the country was divided.
                     THE first of those remedies is the study of science and philo-sophy, which the state might render almost universal among all people of middling or more than middling rank and fortune; not by giving salaries to teachers in order to make them negli-gent and idle, but by instituting some sort of probation, even in the higher and more difficult sciences, to be undergone by every person before he was permitted to exercise any liberal profession, or before he could be received as a candidate for any honour-able office of trust or profit. If the state imposed upon this order of men the necessity of learning, it would have no occasion to give itself any trouble about providing them with proper teachers. They would soon find better teachers for themselves than any whom the state could provide for them. Science is the

great antidote to the poison of enthusiasm and superstition; and where all the superior ranks of people were secured from it, the inferior ranks could not be much exposed to it.
                     THE second of those remedies is the frequency and gaiety of public diversions. The state, by encouraging, that is by giving entire liberty to all those who for their own interest would attempt, without scandal or indecency, to amuse and divert the people by painting, poetry, music, dancing; by all sorts of dramatic repre-sentations and exhibitions, would easily dissipate in the greater part of them that melancholy and gloomy humour which is almost always the nurse of popular superstition and enthu-siasm. Public diversions have always been the objects of dread and hatred, to all the fanatical promoters of those popular fren-zies. The gaiety and good humour which those diversions inspire were altogether inconsistent with that temper of mind, which was fittest for their purpose, or which they could best work upon. Dramatic representations besides, frequently exposing their artifices to public ridicule, and sometimes even to public execration, were upon that account more than all other diversions the objects of their peculiar abhorrence.
                     IN a country where the law favoured the teachers of no one religion more than those of another, it would not be necessary that any of them should have any particular or imme-diate dependency upon the sovereign or executive power; or that he should have any thing to do either in appointing or in dismissing them from their offices. In such a situation he would have no occasion to give himself any concern about them, further than to keep the peace among them in the same manner as among the rest of his subjects; that is, to hinder them from persecuting, abusing, or oppressing one another. But it is quite otherwise in countries where there is an established or

governing religion. The sovereign can in this case never be secure, unless he has the means of influencing in a considerable degree the greater part of the teachers of that religion.
                     THE clergy of every established church constitute a great incor-poration. They can act in concert, and pursue their interest upon one plan and with one spirit, as much as if they were under the direc-tion of one man; and they are frequently too under such direc-tion. Their interest as an incorporated body is never the same with that of the sovereign, and is sometimes directly opposite to it. Their great interest is to maintain their authority with the people; and this authority depends upon the supposed certainty and importance of the whole doctrine which they inculcate, and upon the supposed necessity of adopting every part of it with the most implicit faith, in order to avoid eternal misery. Should the sovereign have the imprudence to appear either to deride or doubt himself of the most trifling part of their doctrine, or from humanity attempt to protect those who did either the one or the other, the punctilious honour of a clergy who have no sort of dependency upon him, is immediately provoked to proscribe him as a profane person, and to employ all the terrors of religion in order to oblige the people to transfer their allegiance to some more orthodox and obedient prince. Should he oppose any of their pretensions or usurpations, the danger is equally great. The princes who have dared in this manner to rebel against the church, over and above this crime of rebellion, have generally been charged too with the additional crime of heresy, notwithstanding their solemn protestations of their faith and humble submission to every tenet which she thought proper to prescribe to them. But the authority of religion is superior to every other authority. The fears which it suggests conquer all other fears. When the autho-rised teachers of religion propagate through the great body of the

people doctrines subversive of the authority of the sovereign, it is by violence only, or by the force of a standing army, that he can maintain his authority. Even a standing army cannot in this case give him any lasting security; because if the soldiers are not foreign-ers, which can seldom be the case, but drawn from the great body of the people, which must almost always be the case, they are likely to be soon corrupted by those very doctrines. The revolutions which the turbulence of the Greek clergy was continually occasion-ing at Constantinople as long as the eastern empire subsisted; the convulsions which, during the course of several centuries, the tur-bulence of the Roman clergy was continually occasioning in every part of Europe, sufficiently demonstrate how precarious and inse-cure must always be the situation of the sovereign who has no pro-per means of influencing the clergy of the established and govern-ing religion of his country.
                     ARTICLES of faith, as well as all other spiritual matters, it is evident enough, are not within the proper department of a tempo-ral sovereign, who, though he may be very well qualified for pro-tecting, is seldom supposed to be so for instructing the people. With regard to such matters, therefore, his authority can seldom be sufficient to counterbalance the united authority of the clergy of the established church. The public tranquillity, however, and his own security, may frequently depend upon the doctrines which they may think proper to propagate concerning such matters. As he can seldom directly oppose their decision, therefore, with proper weight and authority, it is necessary that he should be able to influ-ence it; and he can influence it only by the fears and expectations which he may excite in the greater part of the individuals of the order. Those fears and expectations may consist in the fear of depri-vation or other punishment, and in the expectation of further pre-ferment.
                     
                        

The statesman, who should attempt to direct private people in what manner they ought to employ their capitals, would not only load himself with a most unnecessary attention, but assume an authority which could safely be trusted, not only to no single person, but to no council or senate whatever, and which would no where be so dangerous as in the hands of a man who had folly and pre-sumption enough to fancy himself fit to exercise it.
               TO give the monopoly of the home-market to the produce of domestick industry, in any particular art or manufacture, is in some measure to direct private people in what manner they ought to employ their capitals, and must, in almost all cases, be either a useless or a hurtful regulation. If the produce of domestick can be brought there as cheap as that of foreign industry, the regulation is evidently useless. If it cannot, it must generally be hurtful. It is the maxim of every prudent master of a family, never to at-tempt to make at home what it will cost him more to make than to buy. The taylor does not attempt to make his own shoes, but buys them of the shoemaker. The shoemaker does not attempt to make his own cloaths, but employs a taylor. The farmer at-tempts to make neither the one nor the other, but employs those different artificers. All of them find it for their interest to employ their whole industry in a way in which they have some advantage over their neighbours, and to purchase with a part of its produce, or what is the same thing, with the price of a part of it, whatever else they have occasion for.
               WHAT is prudence in the conduct of every private family, can scarce be folly in that of a great kingdom. If a foreign coun-try can supply us with a commodity cheaper than we ourselves can make it, better buy it of them with some part of the pro-duce of our own industry, employed in a way in which we have

IN all christian churches the benefices of the clergy are a sort of freeholds which they enjoy, not during pleasure, but during life, or good behaviour. If they held them by a more precarious tenure, and were liable to be turned out upon every slight disobligation either of the sovereign or of his ministers, it would perhaps be impossible for them to maintain their authority with the people, who would then consider them as mercenary dependants upon the court, in the sincerity of whose instructions they could no longer have any confidence. But should the sovereign attempt irregu-larly, and by violence to deprive any number of clergymen of their freeholds on account, perhaps, of their having propagated, with more than ordinary zeal, some factious or seditious doctrine, he would only render, by such persecution, both them and their doc-trine ten times more popular, and therefore ten times more trou-blesome and dangerous than they had been before. Fear is in almost all cases a wretched instrument of government, and ought in par-ticular never to be employed against any order of men who have the smallest pretensions to independency. To attempt to terrify them serves only to irritate their bad humour, and to confirm them in an opposition which more gentle usage perhaps might easily induce them either to soften or to lay aside altogether. The violence which the French government usually employed in order to oblige all their parliaments or sovereign courts of justice to enregister any unpo-pular edict, very seldom succeeded. The means commonly em-ployed, however, the imprisonment of all the refractory members, one would think were forcible enough. The princes of the house of Steuart sometimes employed the like means in order to influence some of the members of the parliament of England; and they generally found them equally intractable. The parliament of Eng-land is now managed in another manner; and a very small expe-riment which the duke of Choiseul made about twelve years ago upon the parliament of Paris, demonstrated sufficiently that all the

parliaments of France might have been managed still more easily in the same manner. That experiment was not pursued. For though management and persuasion are always the easiest and the safest instruments of government, as force and violence are the worst and the most dangerous, yet such, it seems, is the natu-ral insolence of man, that he almost always disdains to use the good instrument, except when he cannot or dare not use the bad one. The French government could and durst use force, and therefore disdained to use management and persuasion. But there is no order of men, it appears, I believe, from the experience of all ages, upon whom it is so dangerous, or rather so perfectly ruinous, to employ force and violence, as upon the respected clergy of any established church. The rights, the privileges, the personal liberty of every individual ecclesiastic, who is upon good terms with his own order, are even in the most despotic governments more respected than those of any other person of nearly equal rank and fortune. It is so in every gradation of despotism, from that of the gentle and mild government of Paris, to that of the violent and furious govern-ment of Constantinople. But though this order of men can scarce ever be forced, they may be managed as easily as any other; and the security of the sovereign, as well as of the public tranquillity, seems to depend very much upon the means which he has of managing them; and those means seem to consist altogether in the preferment which he has to bestow upon them.
                     IN the antient constitution of the Roman catholic church, the bishop of each diocese was elected by the joint votes of the clergy and of the people of the episcopal city. The people did not long retain their right of election; and while they did retain it, they almost always acted under the influence of the clergy, who in such spiritual matters appeared to be their natural guides. The clergy, however, soon grew weary of the trouble of managing them, and

found it easier to elect their own bishops themselves. The abbot, in the same manner, was elected by the monks of the monastery, at least in the greater part of abbacies. All the inferior ecclesiasti-cal benefices comprehended within the diocese were collated by the bishop, who bestowed them upon such ecclesiastics as he thought proper. All church preferments were in this manner in the dis-posal of the church. The sovereign, though he might have some indirect influence in those elections, and though it was sometimes usual to ask both his consent to elect, and his approbation of the election, yet had no direct or sufficient means of managing the clergy. The ambition of every clergyman naturally led him to pay court, not so much to his sovereign, as to his own order, from which only he could expect preferment.
                     THROUGH the greater part of Europe the Pope gradually drew to himself first the collation of almost all bishopricks and abba-cies, or of what were called Consistorial benefices, and afterwards, by various machinations and pretences, of the greater part of infe-rior benefices comprehended within each diocese; little more being left to the bishop than what was barely necessary to give him a decent authority with his own clergy. By this arrangement the con-dition of the sovereign was still worse than it had been before. The clergy of all the different countries of Europe were thus formed into a sort of spiritual army, dispersed in different quarters indeed, but of which all the movements and operations could now be directed by one head, and conducted upon one uniform plan. The clergy of each particular country might be considered as a particular detach-ment of that army, of which the operations could easily be sup-ported and seconded by all the other detachments quartered in the different countries round about. Each detachment was not only independent of the sovereign of the country in which it was quar-tered, and by which it was maintained, but dependant upon a

foreign sovereign, who could at any time turn its arms against the sovereign of that particular country, and support them by the arms of all the other detachments.
                     THOSE arms were the most formidable that can well be imagined. In the antient state of Europe, before the establishment of arts and manufactures, the wealth of the clergy gave them the same sort of influence over the common people, which that of the great barons gave them over their respective vassals, tenants, and retain-ers. In the great landed estates which the mistaken piety both of princes and private persons had bestowed upon the church, juris-dictions were established of the same kind with those of the great barons; and for the same reason. In those great landed estates, the clergy or their bailiffs could easily keep the peace without the sup-port or assistance either of the king or of any other person; and neither the king nor any other person could keep the peace there without the support and assistance of the clergy. The jurisdictions of the clergy, therefore, in their particular baronies or manors, were equally independent, and equally exclusive of the authority of the king's courts, as those of the great temporal lords. The tenants of the clergy were, like those of the great barons, almost all tenants at will, entirely dependent upon their immediate lords, and therefore liable to be called out at pleasure, in order to fight in any quarrel in which the clergy might think proper to engage them. Over and above the rents of those estates, the clergy possessed, in the tythes, a very large portion of the rents of all the other estates in every kingdom of Europe. The revenues arising from both those species of rents were, the greater part of them, paid in kind, in corn, wine, cattle, poultry, &amp;c. The quantity exceeded greatly what the clergy could themselves consume; and there were neither arts nor manufactures for the produce of which they could exchange the surplus. The clergy could derive advantage from this immense

surplus in no other way than by employing it, as the great barons employed the like surplus of their revenues, in the most profuse hospitality, and in the most extensive charity. Both the hospitality and the charity of the antient clergy, accordingly, are said to have been very great. They not only maintained almost the whole poor of every kingdom, but many knights and gentlemen had frequently no other means of subsistence than by travelling about from mona-stery to monastery, under pretence of devotion, but in reality to enjoy the hospitality of the clergy. The retainers of some parti-cular prelates were often as numerous as those of the greatest lay-lords; and the retainers of all the clergy taken together were, per-haps, more numerous than those of all the lay-lords. There was always much more union among the clergy than among the lay-lords. The former were under a regular discipline and subordina-tion to the papal authority. The latter were under no regular dis-cipline or subordination, but almost always equally jealous of one another, and of the king. Though the tenants and retainers of the clergy, therefore, had both together been less numerous than those of the great lay-lords, and their tenants were probably much less numerous, yet their union would have rendered them more for-midable. The hospitality and charity of the clergy too, not only gave them the command of a great temporal force, but increased very much the weight of their spiritual weapons. Those virtues procured them the highest respect and veneration among all the inferior ranks of people, of whom many were constantly, and almost all occasionally, fed by them. Every thing belonging or related to so popular an order, its possessions, its privileges, its doc-trines, necessarily appeared sacred in the eyes of the common people, and every violation of them, whether real or pretended, the highest act of sacrilegious wickedness and profaneness. In this state of things, if the sovereign frequently found it difficult to resist the con-federacy of a few of the great nobility, we cannot wonder that he

should find it still more so to resist the united force of the clergy of his own dominions supported by that of the clergy of all the neighbouring dominions. In such circumstances the wonder is, not that he was sometimes obliged to yield, but that he ever was able to resist.
                     THE privileges of the clergy in those antient times (which to us who live in the present times appear the most absurd) their total exemption from the secular jurisdiction, for example, or what in England was called the benefit of clergy; were the natural or rather the necessary consequences of this state of things. How dangerous must it have been for the sovereign to attempt to punish a clergy-man for any crime whatever, if his own order were disposed to protect him, and to represent either the proof as insufficient for convicting so holy a man, or the punishment as too severe to be inflicted upon one whose person had been rendered sacred by reli-gion. The sovereign could, in such circumstances, do no better than leave him to be tried by the ecclesiastical courts, who, for the honour of their own order, were interested to restrain, as much as possible, every member of it from committing enormous crimes, or even from giving occasion to such gross scandal as might disgust the minds of the people.
                     IN the state in which things were through the greater part of Europe during the tenth, eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and for some time both before and after that period, the constitu-tion of the church of Rome may be considered as the most formi-dable combination that ever was formed against the authority and security of civil government, as well as against the liberty, reason and happiness of mankind, which can flourish only where civil government is able to protect them. In that constitution the grossest delusions of superstition were supported in such a manner by

the private interests of so great a number of people as put them out of all danger from any assault of human reason: because though human reason might perhaps have been able to unveil, even to the eyes of the common people, some of the delusions of superstition; it could never have dissolved the ties of private interest. Had this constitution been attacked by no other enemies but the feeble efforts of human reason, it must have endured forever. But that immense and well built fabric, which all the wisdom and virtue of man could never have shaken, much less have over-turned, was by the natural course of things, first weakened, afterwards in part destroyed, and is now likely, in the course of a few centuries more, perhaps to crumble into ruins altogether.
                     THE gradual improvements of arts, manufactures and com-merce, the same causes which destroyed the power of the great barons, destroyed in the same manner, through the greater part of Europe, the whole temporal power of the clergy. In the produce of arts, manufactures and commerce, the clergy, like the great barons, found something for which they could exchange their rude produce, and thereby discovered the means of spending their whole revenues upon their own persons, without giving any considerable share of them to other people. Their charity became gradually less extensive, their hospitality less liberal or less profuse. Their retainers became consequently less numerous, and by degrees dwindled away altogether. The clergy too, like the great barons, wished to get a better rent from their landed estates, in order to spend it, in the same manner, upon the gratification of their own private vanity and folly. But this increase of rent could be got only by granting leases to their tenants, who thereby became in a great measure independent of them. The ties of interest, which bound the inferior ranks of people to the clergy, were in this man-ner gradually broken and dissolved. They were even broken and

dissolved sooner than those which bound the same ranks of people to the great barons: because the benefices of the church being, the greater part of them, much smaller than the estates of the great barons, the possessor of each benefice was much sooner able to spend the whole of its revenue upon his own person. During the greater part of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries the power of the great barons was, through the greater part of Europe, in full vigour. But the temporal power of the clergy, the absolute command which they had once had over the great body of the people, was very much decayed. The power of the church was by that time very nearly reduced through the greater part of Europe to what arose from her spiritual authority; and even that spiritual authority was much weakened when it ceased to be supported by the charity and hospitality of the clergy. The inferior ranks of people no longer looked upon that order, as they had done before, as the comforters of their distress, and the relievers of their indigence. On the contrary, they were provoked and disgusted by the vanity, luxury, and expence of the richer clergy, who appeared to spend upon their own pleasures what had always before been regarded as the patrimony of the poor.
                     IN this situation of things, the sovereigns in the different states of Europe endeavoured to recover the influence which they had once had in the disposal of the great benefices of the church, by procuring to the deans and chapters of each diocese the restora-tion of their antient right of electing the bishop, and to the monks of each abbacy that of electing the abbot. The re-establishing of this antient order was the object of several statutes enacted in England during the course of the fourteenth century, and of the pragmatic sanction established in France in the fifteenth century. In order to render the election valid, it was necessary that the sovereign should both consent to it before-hand, and afterwards approve of

the person elected; and though the election was still supposed to be free, he had, however, all the indirect means which his situation necessarily afforded him of influencing the clergy in his own domi-nions. Other regulations of a similar tendency were established in other parts of Europe. But the power of the pope in the collation of the great benefices of the church seems, before the reformation, to have been no where so effectually and so universally restrained as in France and England. The Concordat afterwards, in the sixteenth century, gave to the kings of France the absolute right of present-ing to all the great and consistorial benefices of the Gallican church.
                     SINCE the establishment of the Pragmatic sanction and of the Concordat, the clergy of France have in general shown less respect to the decrees of the papal court than the clergy of any other catholic country. In all the disputes which their sovereign has had with the pope, they have almost constantly taken party with the former. This independency of the clergy of France upon the court of Rome, seems to be principally founded upon the Pragmatic sanction and the Concordat. In the earlier periods of the monarchy, the clergy of France appear to have been as much devoted to the pope as those of any other country. When Robert, the second Prince of the Capetian race, was most unjustly excommunicated by the court of Rome, his own servants, it is said, threw the victuals which came from his table to the dogs, and refused to taste any thing themselves which had been polluted by the contact of a person in his situation. They were taught to do so, it may very safely be pre-fumed, by the clergy of his own dominions.
                     THE claim of collatinig to the great benefices of the church, a claim in defence of which the court of Rome had frequently shaken and sometimes overturned the thrones of some of the greatest sove-reigns

in Christendom, was in this manner either restrained or modified, or given up altogether, in many different parts of Europe, even before the time of the reformation. As the clergy had now less influence over the people, so the state had more influence over the clergy. The clergy therefore had both less power and less inclination to disturb the state.
                     THE authority of the church of Rome was in this state of declen-sion when the disputes which gave birth to the reformation began in Germany, and soon spread themselves through every part of Europe. The new doctrines were every where received with a high degree of popular favour. They were propagated with all that enthusiastic zeal which commonly animates the spirit of party when it attacks established authority. The teachers of those doctrines, though perhaps in other respects not more learned than many of the divines who defended the established church, seem in general to have been better acquainted with ecclesiastical history, and with the origin and progress of that system of opinions upon which the authority of the church was established, and they had thereby some advantage in almost every dispute. The austerity of their manners gave them authority with the common people, who contrasted the strict regula-rity of their conduct with the disorderly lives of the greater part of their own clergy. They possessed too in a much higher degree than their adversaries, all the arts of popularity and of gaining prose-lytes, arts which the lofty and dignified sons of the church had long neglected, as being to them in a great measure useless. The reason of the new doctrines recommended them to some, their novelty to many; the hatred and contempt of the established clergy to a still greater number; but the zealous, passionate and fanatical, though frequently coarse and rustic eloquence with which they were almost every where inculcated, recommended them to by far the greatest number.
                     
                        

AN INQUIRY INTO THE NATURE AND CAUSES OF THE WEALTH OF NATIONS.
         
            BOOK IV. Of Systems of political Oeconomy.
            
               INTRODUCTION.
               POLITICAL oeconomy, considered as a branch of the science of a statesman or legislator, proposes two distinct objects; first, to provide a plentiful revenue or subsistence for the people, or more properly to enable them to provide such a revenue or sub-sistence for themselves; and secondly, to supply the state or com-monwealth with a revenue sufficient for the publick services. It proposes to enrich both the people and the sovereign.
               THE different progress of opulence in different ages and nations, has given occasion to two different systems of political oeconomy, with regard to enriching the people. The one may be called the system of commerce, the other that of agriculture. I shall endeavour to explain both as fully and distinctly as I can, and shall begin with the system of commerce. It is the modern system, and is best understood in our own country and in our own times.
            
            
               

some advantage. The general industry of the country, being always in proportion to the capital which employs it, will not thereby be diminished, no more than that of the above-mentioned artificers; but only left to find out the way in which it can be employed with the greatest advantage. It is certainly not em-ployed to the greatest advantage, when it is thus directed to-wards an object which it can buy cheaper than it can make. The value of its annual produce is certainly more or less diminished, when it is thus turned away from producing commodities evidently of more value than the commodity which it is directed to produce. According to the supposition, that commodity could be purchased from foreign countries cheaper than it can be made at home. It could, therefore, have been purchased with a part only of the commodities, or, what is the same thing, with a part only of the price of the commodities, which the industry employed by an equal capital, would have produced at home, had it been left to follow its natural course. The industry of the country, therefore, is thus turned away from a more, to a less advantageous employment, and the exchangeable value of its annual produce, instead of being increased, according to the intention of the lawgiver, must neces-sarily be diminished by every such regulation.
               BY means of such regulations, indeed, a particular manufacture may sometimes be acquired sooner than it could have been otherwise, and after a certain time may be made at home as cheap or cheaper than in the foreign country. But though the industry of the society may be thus carried with advantage into a particular channel sooner than it could have been otherwise, it will by no means follow that the sum total either of its industry or of its revenue can ever be augmented by any such regulation. The industry of the society can augment only in proportion as its capital augments, and its capital can augment only in proportion to what can be gradually saved out of its revenue. But the immediate effect of

THE success of the new doctrines was almost every where so great, that the princes who at that time happened to be on bad terms with the court of Rome, were by means of them easily enabled, in their own dominions, to over-turn the church, which having lost the respect and veneration of the inferior ranks of people, could make scarce any resistance. The court of Rome had disobliged some of the smaller princes in the northern parts of Germany, whom it had probably considered as too insignificant to be worth the managing. They universally, therefore, established the reformation in their own dominions. The tyranny of Chris-tiern II. and of Troll archbishop of Upsal, enabled Gustavus Vasa to expel them both from Sweden. The pope favoured the tyrant and the archbishop, and Gustavus Vasa found no difficulty in establishing the reformation in Sweden. Christiern II. was afterwards deposed from the throne of Denmark, where his con-duct had rendered him as odious as in Sweden. The pope, however, was still disposed to favour him, and Frederic of Hol-stein, who had mounted the throne in his stead, revenged himself by following the example of Gustavus Vasa. The magistrates of Berne and Zurich, who had no particular quarrel with the pope, established with great ease the reformation in their respective cantons, where just before some of the clergy had, by an imposture somewhat grosser than ordinary, rendered the whole order both odious and contemptible.
                     IN this critical situation of its affairs the papal court was at sufficient pains to cultivate the friendship of the powerful sove-reigns of France and Spain, of whom the latter was at that time emperor of Germany. With their assistance it was enabled, though not without great difficulty and much bloodshed, either to suppress altogether or to obstruct very much the progress of the reformation in their dominions. It was well enough inclined too to be complaisant to the king of England. But from the circum-stances

of the times it could not be so without giving offence to a still greater sovereign, Charles V. king of Spain and emperor of Germany. Henry VIII. accordingly, though he did not embrace himself the greater part of the doctrines of the reformation, was yet enabled, by the general prevalence of those doctrines, to sup-press all the monasteries, and to abolish the authority of the church of Rome in his dominions. That he should go so far, though he went no further, gave some satisfaction to the patrons of the reformation, who having got possession of the government in the reign of his son and successor, completed without any dif-ficulty the work which Henry VIII. had begun.
                     IN some countries, as in Scotland, where the government was weak, unpopular, and not very firmly established, the reforma-tion was strong enough to overturn, not only the church, but the state likewise for attempting to support the church.
                     AMONG the followers of the reformation, dispersed in all the different countries of Europe, there was no general tribunal which, like that of the court of Rome, or an oecumenical coun-cil, could settle all disputes among them, and with irresistable authority prescribe to all of them the precise limits of orthodoxy. When the followers of the reformation in one country, therefore, happened to differ from their brethren in another, as they had no common judge to appeal to, the dispute could never be decided; and many such disputes arose among them. Those concerning the government of the church, and the right of conferring eccle-siastical benefices, were perhaps the most interesting to the peace and welfare of civil society. They gave birth accordingly to the two principal parties or sects among the followers of the refor-mation, the Lutheran and Calvinistic sects, the only sects among them, of which the doctrine and discipline have ever yet been established by law in any part of Europe.
                     
                        

THE followers of Luther, together with what is called the church of England, preserved more or less of the episcopal go-vernment, established subordination among the clergy, gave the sovereign the disposal of all the bishopricks, and other consistorial benefices within his dominions, and thereby rendered him the real head of the church; and without depriving the bishop of the right of collating to the smaller benefices within his diocese, they, even to those benefices, not only admitted, but favoured the right of presentation both in the sovereign and in all other lay-patrons. This system of church government was from the beginning favourable to peace and good order, and to sub-mission to the civil sovereign. It has never accordingly been the occasion of any tumult or civil commotion in any country in which it has once been established. The church of England in particular has always valued herself, with great reason, upon the unexceptionable loyalty of her principles. Under such a govern-ment the clergy naturally endeavour to recommend themselves to the sovereign, to the court, and to the nobility and gentry of the country, by whose influence they chiefly expect to obtain preferment. They pay court to those patrons, sometimes, no doubt, by the vilest flattery and assentation, but frequently too by cultivating all those arts which best deserve, and which are therefore most likely to gain them the esteem of people of rank and fortune; by their knowledge in all the different branches of useful and ornamental learning, by the decent liberality of their manners, by the social good humour of their conversation, and by their avowed contempt of those absurd and hypocritical austerities which fanatics inculcate and pretend to practise, in order to draw upon themselves the veneration, and upon the greater part of men of rank and fortune, who avow that they do not practise them, the abhorrence of the common people. Such a clergy, however, while they pay their court in this manner to the higher ranks of life, are very apt to neglect altogether the means of maintaining

their influence and authority with the lower. They are listened to, esteemed and respected by their superiors; but before their inferiors they are frequently incapable of defending, effectually and to the conviction of such hearers, their own sober and mo-derate doctrines against the most ignorant enthusiast who chuses to attack them.
                     THE followers of Zuinglius, or more properly those of Calvin, on the contrary, bestowed upon the people of each parish, whenever the church became vacant, the right of electing their own pastor; and established at the same time the most perfect equality among the clergy. The former part of this institution, as long as it remained in vigour, seems to have been productive of nothing but disorder and confusion, and to have tended equally to corrupt the morals both of the clergy and of the people. The latter part seems never to have had any effects but what were perfectly agreeable.
                     AS long as the people of each parish preserved the right of electing their own pastors, they acted almost always under the influence of the clergy, and generally of the most factious and fanatical of the order. The clergy, in order to preserve their influence in those popular elections, became, or affected to become many of them, fanatics themselves, encouraged fanaticism among the people, and gave the preference almost always to the most fanatical candidate. So small a matter as the appointment of a parish priest occasioned almost always a violent contest, not only in one parish, but in all the neighbouring parishes, who seldom failed to take party in the quarrel. When the parish happened to be situated in a great city, it divided all the inhabitants into two parties; and when that city happened either to constitute itself a little republic, or to be the head and capital of a little republic, as is the case with many of the considerable cities in Switzerland and Holland, every paltry dispute of this kind, over and above

exasperating the animosity of all their other factions, threatened to leave behind it both a new schism in the church, and a new faction in the state. In those small republics, therefore, the magistrate very soon found it necessary, for the sake of preserving the public peace, to assume to himself the right of presenting to all vacant benefices. In Scotland, the most extensive country in which this presbyterian form of church government has ever been established, the rights of patronage were in effect abolished by the act which established presbytery in the beginning of the reign of William III. That act at least put it in the power of certain classes of people in each parish to purchase for a very small price the right of electing their own pastor. The constitution which this act established was allowed to subsist for about two and twenty years, but was abolished by the 10th of queen Ann, ch. 12. on account of the confusions and disorders which this more popular mode of election had almost every where occasioned. In so ex-tensive a country as Scotland, however, a tumult in a remote parish was not so likely to give disturbance to government, as in a smaller state. The 10th of queen Ann restored the rights of patronage. But though in Scotland the law gives the benefice without any exception to the person presented by the patron; yet the church requires sometimes (for she has not in this respect been very uniform in her decisions) a certain concurrence of the peo-ple, before she will confer upon the presentee what is called the cure of souls, or the ecclesiastical jurisdiction in the parish. She sometimes at least, from an affected concern for the peace of the pa-rish, delays the settlement till this concurrence can be procured. The private tampering of some of the neighbouring clergy, sometimes to procure, but more frequently to prevent this concurrence, and the popular arts which they cultivate in order to enable them upon such occasions to tamper more effectually, are perhaps the causes which principally keep up whatever remains of the old fanatical spirit, either in the clergy or in the people of Scotland.
                     
                        

THE equality which the presbyterian form of church govern-ment establishes among the clergy, consists, first, in the equality of authority or ecclesiastical jurisdiction; and, secondly, in the equality of benefice. In all presbyterian churches the equality of authority is perfect: that of benefice is not so. The difference however, between one benefice and another, is seldom so consi-derable as commonly to tempt the possessor even of the small benefice to pay court to his patron, by the vile arts of flattery and assentation, in order to get a better. In all the presbyterian churches, where the rights of patronage are thoroughly esta-blished, it is by nobler and better arts that the established clergy in general endeavour to gain the favour of their superiors; by their learning, by the irreproachable regularity of their life, and by the faithful and diligent discharge of their duty. Their patrons even frequently complain of the independency of their spirit, which they are apt to construe into ingratitude for past favours, but which at worst perhaps is seldom any more than that indiffer-ence which naturally arises from the consciousness that no further favours of the kind are ever to be expected. There is scarce perhaps to be found any where in Europe a more learned, de-cent, independent, and respectable set of men, than the greater part of the presbyterian clergy of Holland, Geneva, Switzer-land, and Scotland.
                     WHERE the church benefices are all nearly equal, none of them can be very great, and this mediocrity of benefice, though it may no doubt be carried too far, has, however, some very agreeable effects. Nothing but the most exemplary morals can give dignity to a man of small fortune. The vices of levity and vanity necessarily render him ridiculous, and are, besides, almost as ruinous to him as they are to the common people. In his own conduct, therefore, he is obliged to follow that system of morals which the common people respect the most. He gains their esteem

and affection by that plan of life which his own interest and situa-tion would lead him to follow. The common people look upon him with that kindness with which we naturally regard one who approaches somewhat to our own condition, but who, we think, ought to be in a higher. Their kindness naturally provokes his kindness. He becomes careful to instruct them, and attentive to assist and relieve them. He does not even despise the prejudices of people who are disposed to be so favourable to him, and never treats them with those contemptuous and arrogant airs which we so often meet with in the proud dignitaries of opulent and well-endowed churches. The presbyterian clergy, accordingly, have more influence over the minds of the common people than per-haps the clergy of any other established church. It is accordingly in presbyterian countries only that we ever find the common people converted, without persecution, completely, and almost to a man, to the established church.
                     IN countries where church benefices are the greater part of them very moderate, a chair in a university is generally a better establish-ment than a church benefice. The universities have, in this case, the picking and chusing of their members from all the churchmen of the country, who, in every country, constitute by far the most numerous class of men of letters. Where church benefices, on the contrary, are many of them very considerable, the church natu-rally draws from the universities the greater part of their eminent men of letters; who generally find some patron who does himself honour by procuring them church preferment. In the former situa-tion we are likely to find the universities filled with the most emi-nent men of letters that are to be found in the country. In the lat-ter we are likely to find few eminent men among them, and those few among the youngest members of the society, who are likely too to be drained away from it before they can have acquired expe-rience

and knowledge enough to be of much use to it. It is ob-served by Mr. de Voltaire that father Porrée, a jesuit of no great eminence in the republic of letters, was the only professor they had ever had in France whose works were worth the reading. In a country which has produced so many eminent men of letters, it must appear somewhat singular that scarce one of them should have been a professor in a university. The famous Gassendi was, in the beginning of his life, a professor in the university of Aix. Upon the first dawning of his genius it was represented to him that by going into the church he could easily find a much more quiet and comfortable subsistence, as well as a better situation for pursuing his studies; and he immediately followed the advice. The observation of Mr. de Voltaire may be applied, I believe, not only to France, but to all other Roman catholic countries. We very rarely find, in any of them, an eminent man of letters who is a professor in a university, except, perhaps, in the professions of law and physic; professions from which the church is not so likely to draw them. After the church of Rome, that of England, is by far the richest and best endowed church in Christendom. In Eng-land, accordingly, the church is continually draining the universities of all their best and ablest members; and an old college tutor, who is known and distinguished in Europe as an eminent man of letters, is as rarely to be found there as in any Roman catholic country. In Geneva, on the contrary, in the protestant cantons of Switzerland, in the protestant countries of Germany, in Hol-land, in Scotland, in Sweden, and Denmark, the most eminent men of letters whom those countries have produced, have, not all indeed, but the far greater part of them, been professors in universities. In those countries the universities are continually draining the church of all its most eminent men of letters.
                     IT may, perhaps, be worth while to remark, that, if we except the poets, a few orators, and a few historians, the far greater part

of the other eminent men of letters, both of Greece and Rome, appear to have been either public or private teachers; generally either of philosophy or of rhetoric. This remark will be found to hold true from the days of Lysias and Isocrates, of Plato and Aristotle, down to those of Plutarch and Epictetus, of Suetonius and Quintilian. Several of those whom we do not know with certainty to have been public teachers, appear to have been private tutors. Polybius, we know, was private tutor to Scipio Aemilia-nus. Dionysius of Halicarnassus, there are some probable reasons for believing, was so to the children of Marcus and Quintus Cicero. To impose upon any man the necessity of teaching, year after year, any particular branch of science, seems, in reality, to be the most effectual method for rendering him completely master of it him-self. By being obliged to go every year over the same ground, if he is good for any thing, he necessarily becomes, in a few years, well acquainted with every part of it: and if upon any particular point he should form too hasty an opinion one year, when he comes in the course of his lectures to re-consider the same subject the year thereafter, he is very likely to correct it. As to be a teacher of science is certainly the natural employment of a mere man of let-ters; so is it likewise, perhaps, the education which is most likely to render him a man of solid learning and knowledge. The medio-crity of church benefices naturally tends to draw the greater part of men of letters, in the country where it takes place, to the employment in which they can be the most useful to the public, and, at the same time, to give them the best education, perhaps, they are capable of receiving. It tends to render their learning both as solid as possible, and as useful as possible.
                     THE revenue of every established church, such parts of it ex-cepted as may arise from particular lands or manors, is a branch, it ought to be observed, of the general revenue of the state, which

is thus diverted to a purpose very different from the defence of the state. The tythe, for example, is a real land-tax, which puts it out of the power of the proprietors of land to contribute so largely towards the defence of the state as they otherwise might be able to do. The rent of land, however, is, according to some, the sole fund, and, according to others, the principal fund, from which, in all great monarchies, the exigencies of the state must be ultimately supplied. The more of this fund that is given to the church, the less, it is evident, can be spared to the state. It may be laid down as a certain maxim, that, all other things being supposed equal, the richer the church, the poorer must necessarily be, either the sove-reign on the one hand, or the people on the other; and, in all cases, the less able must the state be to defend itself. In several protestant countries, particularly in all the protestant cantons of Switzerland, the revenue which antiently belonged to the Roman catholic church, the tythes and church lands, has been found a fund sufficient not only to afford competent salaries to the established clergy, but to defray, with little or no addition, all the other expences of the state. The magistrates of the powerful canton of Berne, in particular, have accumulated out of the savings from this fund a very large sum, supposed to amount to several millions, part of which is deposited in a public treasure, and part is placed at interest in what are called the public funds of the different indebted na-tions of Europe; chiefly in those of France and Great Britain. What may be the amount of the whole expence which the church, either of Berne, or of any other protestant canton, costs the state, I do not pretend to know. By a very exact account it appears, that, in 1755, the whole revenue of the clergy of the church of Scotland, including their glebe or church lands, and the rent of their manses or dwelling houses, estimated according to a reasonable valuation amounted only to 68,5141. 1s. 5d. 1/12. This very mode-rate revenue affords a decent subsistence to nine hundred and forty-four

every such regulation is to diminish its revenue, and what diminishes its revenue, is certainly not very likely to augment its capital faster than it would have augmented of its own accord, had both capital and industry been left to find out their natural employments.
               THOUGH for want of such regulations the society should never acquire the proposed manufacture, it would not, upon that account, necessarily be the poorer in any one period of its duration. In every period of its duration its whole capital and industry might still have been employed, though upon different objects, in the manner that was most advantageous at the time. In every period its revenue might have been the greatest which its capital could afford, and both capital and revenue might have been augmenting with the greatest possible rapidity.
               THE natural advantages which one country has over another in producing particular commodities are sometimes so great, that it is acknowledged by all the world to be in vain to struggle with them, By means of glasses, hotbeds, and hotwalls, very good grapes can be raised in Scotland, and very good wine too can be made of them at about thirty times the expence for which at least equally good can be brought from foreign countries. Would it be a reasonable law to prohibit the importation of all foreign wines, merely to encourage the making of claret and burgundy in Scotland? But if there would be a manifest absurdity in turning towards any em-ployment, thirty times more of the capital and industry of the country, than would be necessary to purchase from foreign countries an equal quantity of the commodities wanted, there must be an absurdity, though not altogether so glaring, yet exactly of the same kind, in turning towards any such employment a thirtieth, or even a three hundredth part more of either. Whether the ad-vantages which one country has over another, be natural or ac-quired,

ministers. The whole expense of the church, including what is occasionally laid out for the building and reparation of churches, and of the manses of ministers, cannot well be supposed to exceed eighty or eighty-five thousand pounds a year. The most opulent church in Christendom does not maintain better the uni-formity of faith, the fervour of devotion, the spirit of order, regu-larity, and austere morals in the great body of the people, than this very poorly endowed church of Scotland. All the good effects, both civil and religious, which an established church can be sup-posed to produce, are produced by it as completely as by any other. The greater part of the protestant churches of Switzerland, which in general are not better endowed than the church of Scotland, produce those effects in a still higher degree. In the greater part of the protestant cantons, there is not a single person to be found who does not prosess himself to be of the established church. If he professes himself to be of any other, indeed, the law obliges him to leave the canton. But so severe, or rather indeed so oppres-sive a law, could never have been executed in such free countries, had not the diligence of the clergy before-hand converted to the established church the whole body of the people, with the excep-tion of, perhaps, a few individuals only. In some parts of Swit-zerland, accordingly, where, from the accidental union of a pro-testant and roman catholic country, the conversion has not been so complete, both religions are not only tolerated, but established by law.
                     THE proper performance of every service seems to require that its pay or recompence should be, as exactly as possible, propor-tioned to the nature of the service. If any service is very much under-paid, it is very apt to suffer by the meanness and incapacity of the greater part of those who are employed in it. If it is very much over-paid, it is apt to suffer, perhaps, still more by their negligence and idleness. A man of a large revenue, whatever may

to his profession, thinks he ought to live like other men of large revenues; and to spend a great part of his time in festivity, in vanity, and in dissipation. But in a clergyman this train of life not only consumes the time which ought to be employed in the duties of his function, but in the eyes of the common people destroys almost entirely that sanctity of character which can alone enable him to perform those duties with proper weight and authority.
                  
               
               
                  PART IV. Of the Expence of supporting the Dignity of the Sovereign.
                  
                  OVER and above the expence necessary for enabling the sovereign to perform his several duties, a certain expence is requisite for the support of his dignity. This expence varies both with the different periods of improvement, and with the different forms of government.
                  IN an opulent and improved society, where all the different orders of people are growing every day more expensive in their houses, in their furniture, in their tables, in their dress, and in their equipage; it cannot well be expected that the sovereign should alone hold out against the fashion. He naturally, therefore, or rather necessarily becomes more expensive in all those different articles too. His dignity even seems to require that he should become so.
                  AS in point of dignity, a monarch is more raised above his subjects than the chief magistrate of any republic is ever supposed to be above his fellow citizens; so a greater expence is necessary for sup-porting that higher dignity. We naturally expect more splendor in the court of a king than in the mansion-house of a doge or burgo-master.
               
               
                  

                  CONCLUSION.
                  THE expence of defending the society, and that of supporting the dignity of the chief magistrate, are both laid out for the general benefit of the whole society. It is reasonable, therefore, that they should be defrayed by the general contribution of the whole society, all the different members contributing, as nearly as possible, in proportion to their respective abilities.
                  THE expence of the administration of justice too may, no doubt, be considered as laid out for the benefit of the whole society. There is no impropriety, therefore, in its being defrayed by the general contribution of the whole society. The persons, however, who give occasion to this expence are those, who, by their injustice in one way or another, make it necessary to seek redress or protection from the courts of justice. The persons again most immediately bene-fited by this expence, are those whom the courts of justice either restore to their rights or maintain in their rights. The expence of the administration of justice, therefore, may very properly be defrayed by the particular contribution of one or other or both of those two different sets of persons according as different occasions may require, that is, by the fees of court. It cannot be necessary to have recourse to the general contribution of the whole society, except for the conviction of those criminals who have not them-selves any estate or fund sufficient for paying those fees.
                  THOSE local or provincial expences of which the benefit is local or provincial (what is laid out, for example, upon the police of a parti-cular town or district) ought to be defrayed by a local or provincial revenue, and ought to be no burden upon the general revenue of the society. It is unjust that the whole society should contribute towards an expence of which the benefit is confined to a part of the society.
                  
                     

THE expence of maintaining good roads and communications is, no doubt, beneficial to the whole society, and may, therefore, without any injustice, be defrayed by the general contribution of the whole society. This expence, however, is most immediately and directly beneficial to those who travel or carry goods from one place to another, and to those who consume such goods. The turn-pike tolls in England, and the duties called peages in other coun-tries, lay it altogether upon those two different setts of people, and thereby discharge the general revenue of the society from a very considerable burden.
                  THE expence of the institutions for education and religious instruction, is likewise, no doubt, beneficial to the whole society, and may, therefore, without injustice, be defrayed by the general contribution of the whole society. This expence, however, might perhaps with equal propriety, and even with some advantage, be defrayed altogether by those who receive the immediate benefit of such education and instruction, or by the voluntary contribution of those who think they have occasion for either the one or the other.
                  WHEN the institutions or public works which are beneficial to the whole society, either cannot be maintained altogether, or are not maintained altogether by the contribution of such particular mem-bers of the society as are most immediately benefited by them, the deficiency must in most cases be made up by the general contribution of the whole society. The general revenue of the society, over and above defraying the expence of defending the society and of supporting the dignity of the chief magistrate, must make up for the deficiency of many particular branches of revenue. The sources of this general or public revenue, I shall endeavour to explain in the following chapter.
               
            
            
               

               CHAP. II. Of the Sources of the general or publick Revenue of the Society.
               
               THE revenue which must defray, not only the expence of defending the society and of supporting the dignity of the chief magistrate, but all the other necessary expences of govern-ment, for which the constitution of the state has not provided any particular revenue, may be drawn, either, first, from some fund which peculiarly belongs to the sovereign or commonwealth, and which is independent of the revenue of the people; or, secondly, from the revenue of the people.
               
                  PART I. Of the Funds or Sources of Revenue which may peculiarly belong to the Sovereign or Commonwealth.
                  
                  THE funds or sources of revenue which may peculiarly belong to the sovereign or commonwealth must consist either in stock or in land.
                  THE sovereign, like any other owner of stock, may derive a revenue from it, either by employing it himself, or by lending it. His revenue is in the one case, profit; in the other, interest.
                  THE revenue of a Tartar or Arabian chief consists in profit. It arises principally from the milk and increase of his own herds and flocks, of which he himself super-intends the management, and is the principal shepherd or herdsman of his own horde or tribe. It is, however, in this earliest and rudest state of civil government

only that profit has ever made the principal part of the public revenue of a monarchical state.
                  SMALL republics have sometimes derived a considerable revenue from the profit of mercantile projects. The republic of Hamburgh is said to do so from the profits of a public wine cellar and apothe-caries shop See Memoires concernant les Droits &amp; Impositions en Europe: tome 1. page 73. This work was compiled by the order of the court for the use of a commission employed for some years past in considering the proper means for reforming the finances of France. The account of the French taxes, which takes up three volumes in quarto, may be regarded as perfectly authentic. That of those of other European nations was com-piled from such informations as the French ministers at the different courts could procure. It is much shorter, and probably not quite so exact as that of the French taxes.. The state cannot be very great of which the sove-reign has leisure to carry on the trade of a wine merchant or apo-thecary. The profit of a public bank has been a source of revenue to more considerable states. It has been so not only to Hamburgh, but to Venice and Amsterdam. A revenue of this kind has even by some people been thought not below the attention of so great an empire as that of Great Britain. Reckoning the ordinary dividend of the bank of England at five and a half per cent. and its capital at ten millions seven hundred and eighty thousand pounds, the neat annual profit, after paying the expence of manage-ment, must amount, it is said, to five hundred and ninety-two thousand nine hundred pounds. Government, it is pretended, could borrow this capital at three per cent, interest, and by taking the management of the bank into its own hands, might make a clear profit of two hundred and sixty-nine thousand five hundred pounds a year. The orderly, vigilant and parsimonious administration of such aristocracies as those of Venice and Amsterdam, is extremely proper, it appears from experience, for the management of a mer-cantile project of this kind. But whether such a government as that of England; which, whatever may be its virtues, has never

been famous for good oeconomy, which in time of peace has gene-rally conducted itself with the slothful and negligent profusion that is perhaps natural to monarchies; and in time of war has con-stantly acted with all the thoughtless extravagance that democra-cies are apt to fall into; could be safely trusted with the ma-nagement of such a project must at least be a good deal more doubtful.
                  THE post office is properly a mercantile project. The govern-ment advances the expence of establishing the different offices, and of buying or hiring the necessary horses or carriages, and is repaid with a large profit by the duties upon what is carried. It is perhaps the only mercantile project which has been successfully managed by, I believe, every sort of government. The capital to be advanced is not very considerable. There is no mystery in the business. The returns are not only certain, but immediate.
                  PRINCES, however, have frequently engaged in many other mercantile projects, and have been willing, like private persons, to mend their fortunes by becoming adventurers in the common branches of trade. They have scarce ever succeeded. The pro-fusion with which the affairs of princes are always managed, renders it almost impossible that they should. The agents of a prince regard the wealth of their master as inexhaustible; are careless at what price they buy; are careless at what price they sell; are careless at what expence they transport his goods from one place to another. Those agents frequently live with the profu-sion of princes, and sometimes too, in spite of that profusion, and by a proper method of making up their accounts, acquire the fortunes of princes. It was thus, as we are told by Machiavel, that the agents of Lorenzo of Medicis, not a prince of mean abilities, carried on his trade. The republic of Florence was several times obliged to pay the debt into which their extrava-gance

had involved him. He found it convenient, accordingly, to give up the business of merchant, the business to which his family had originally owed their fortune, and in the latter part of his life to employ both what remained of that fortune, and the revenue of the state of which he had the disposal, in projects and expences more suitable to his station.
                  NO two characters seem more inconsistent than those of trader and sovereign. If the trading spirit of the English East India company renders them very bad sovereigns; the spirit of sove-reignty seems to have rendered them equally bad traders. While they were traders only, they managed their trade successfully, and were able to pay from their profits a moderate dividend to the proprietors of their stock. Since they became sovereigns, with a revenue which, it is said, was originally more than three millions sterling, they have been obliged to beg the extraordinary assistance of government in order to avoid immediate bankruptcy. In their former situation, their servants in India considered themselves as the clerks of merchants: In their present situation, those servants consider themselves as the ministers of sovereigns.
                  A STATE may sometimes derive some part of its public revenue from the interest of money, as well as from the profits of stock. If it has amassed a treasure, it may lend a part of that treasure, either to foreign states, or to its own subjects.
                  THE canton of Berne derives a considerable revenue by lending a part of its treasure to foreign states, that is, by placing it in the public funds of the different indebted nations of Europe, chiefly in those of France and England. The security of this revenue must depend, first, upon the security of the funds in which it is placed, or upon the good faith of the government which has the management of them; and, secondly, upon the certainty or pro-bability

of the continuance of peace with the debtor nation. In the case of a war, the very first act of hostility, on the part of the debtor nation, might be the forfeiture of the funds of its creditor. This policy of lending money to foreign states is, so far as I know, peculiar to the canton of Berne.
                  THE city of Hamburgh See id. ibid. has established a sort of public pawn-shop, which lends money to the subjects of the state upon pledges at six per cent. interest. This pawn-shop or Lombard, as it is called, affords a revenue, it is pretended, to the state of a hundred and fifty thousand crowns, which, at four and sixpence the crown, amounts to 33,750 l. sterling.
                  THE government of Pensylvania, without amassing any trea-sure, invented a method of lending, not money indeed, but what is equivalent to money, to its subjects. By advancing to private people, at interest, and upon land security to double the value, paper bills of credit to be redeemed fifteen years after their date, and in the mean time made transferable from hand to hand like bank notes, and declared by act of assembly to be a legal tender in all payments from one inhabitant of the province to another, it raised a moderate revenue, which went a considerable way towards defraying an annual expence of about 4500 l. the whole ordinary expence of that frugal and orderly government. The success of an expedient of this kind must have depended upon three different circumstances; first, upon the demand for some other instrument of commerce, besides gold and silver money, or upon the demand for such a quantity of consumable stock as could not be had without sending abroad the greater part of their gold and silver money, in order to purchase it; secondly, upon the good credit of the government which made use of this expedient; and, thirdly, upon the moderation with

which it was used, the whole value of the paper bills of credit never exceeding that of the gold and silver money which would have been necessary for carrying on their circulation had there been no paper bills of credit. The same expedient was upon different occasions adopted by several other American colonies; but, from want of this moderation, it produced, in the greater part of them, much more disorder than conveniency.
                  THE unstable and perishable nature of stock and credit, how-ever, render them unfit to be trusted to as the principal funds of that sure, steady, and permanent revenue, which can alone give security and dignity to government. The government of no great nation, that was advanced beyond the shepherd state, seems ever to have derived the greater part of its public revenue from such sources.
                  LAND is a fund of a more stable and permanent nature; and the rent of public lands, accordingly, has been the principal source of the public revenue of many a great nation that was much advanced beyond the shepherd state. From the produce or rent of the public lands, the antient republics of Greece and Italy derived for a long time the greater part of that revenue which defrayed the necessary expences of the commonwealth. The rent of the crown lands constituted for a long time the greater part of the revenue of the antient sovereigns of Europe.
                  WAR and the preparation for war, are the two circumstances which in modern times occasion the greater part of the necessary expence of all great states. But in the antient republics of Greece and Italy every citizen was a soldier, who both served and prepared himself for service at his own expence. Neither of those two circumstances, therefore, could occasion any very consider-able expence to the state. The rent of a very moderate landed

is in this respect of no consequence. As long as the one country has those advantages, and the other wants them, it will always be more advantageous for the latter, rather to buy of the former than to make. It is an acquired advantage only, which one artificer has over his neighbour, who exercises another trade, and yet they both find it more advantageous to buy of one ano-ther, than to make what does not belong to their particular trades.
               MERCHANTS and manufacturers are the people who derive the greatest advantage from this monopoly of the home market. The prohibition of the importation of foreign cattle, and of salt provisions, together with the high duties upon foreign corn, which in times of moderate plenty amount to a prohibition, are not near so advantageous to the graziers and farmers of Great Britain, as other regulations of the same kind are to its merchants and manu-facturers. Manufactures, those of the finer kind especially, are more easily transported from one country to another than corn or cattle. It is in the fetching and carrying manufactures, accord-ingly, that foreign trade is chiefly employed. In manufactures, a very small advantage will enable foreigners to undersell our own workmen, even in the home market. It will require a very great one to enable them to do so in the rude produce of the soil. If the free importation of foreign manufactures was permitted, several of the home manufactures would probably suffer, and some of of them, perhaps, go to ruin altogether, and a considerable part of the stock and industry at present employed in them, would be forced to find out some other employment. But the freest im-portation of the rude produce of the soil could have no such effect upon the agriculture of the country.
               IF the importation of foreign cattle, for example, was made ever so free, so few could be imported, that the grazing trade of Great

estate might be fully sufficient for defraying all the other necessary expences of government.
                  IN the antient monarchies of Europe, the manners and customs of the times sufficiently prepared the great body of the people for war; and when they took the field they were, by the con-dition of their feudal tenures, to be maintained either at their own expence, or at that of their immediate lords, without bring-ing any new charge upon the sovereign. The other expences of government were, the greater part of them, very moderate. The administration of justice, it has been shown, instead of being a cause of expence, was a source of revenue. The labour of the country people for three days before and for three days after harvest, was thought a fund sufficient for making and maintain-ing all the bridges, highways, and other public works which the commerce of the country was supposed to require. In those days the principal expence of the sovereign seems to have consisted in the maintenance of his own family and houshold. The officers of his houshold, accordingly, were then the great officers of state. The lord treasurer received his rents. The lord steward and lord chamberlain looked after the expence of his family. The care of his stables was committed to the lord constable and the lord marshal. His houses were all built in the form of castles, and seem to have been the principal fortresses which he possessed. The keepers of those houses or castles might be con-sidered as a sort of military governors. They seem to have been the only military officers whom it was necessary to maintain in time of peace. In these circumstances the rent of a great landed estate might, upon ordinary occasions, very well defray all the necessary expences of government.
                  IN the present state of the greater part of the civilized mo-narchies of Europe, the rent of all the lands in the country,

managed as they probably would be if they all belonged to one proprietor, would scarce perhaps amount to the ordinary revenue which they levy upon the people even in peaceable times. The ordinary revenue of Great Britain, for example, including not only what is necessary for defraying the current expence of the year, but for paying the interest of the public debts, and for sink-ing a part of the capital of those debts, amounts to upwards of ten millions a year. But the land-tax, at four shillings in the pound, falls short of two millions a year. This land-tax, as it is called, however, is supposed to be one-fifth, not only of the rent of all the land, but of that of all the houses, and of the interest of all the capital stock of Great Britain, that part of it only excepted which is either lent to the public, or employed as farming stock in the cultivation of land. A very considerable part of the pro-duce of this tax arises from the rent of houses, and the interest of capital stock. The land-tax of the city of London, for example, at four shillings in the pound, amounts to 123,399 l. 6s. 7d. That of the city of Westminster, to 63,092 l. 1s. 5d. That of the palaces of Whitehall and St. James's, to 30,754 l. 6s. 3d. A certain proportion of the land-tax is in the same manner assessed upon all the other cities and towns corporate in the kingdom, and arises almost altogether either from the rent of houses or from what is supposed to be the interest of trading and capital stock. According to the estimation, therefore, by which Great Britain is rated to the land-tax, the whole mass of revenue arising from the rent of all the lands, from that of all the houses, and from the interest of all the capital stock, that part of it only excepted which is either lent to the public or employed in the cultivation of land, does not exceed ten millions sterling a year, the ordinary revenue which government levies upon the people even in peaceable times. The estimation by which Great Britain is rated to the land-tax is, no doubt, taking the whole kingdom at an average, very much below the real value; though in several par-ticular

counties and districts it is said to be nearly equal to that value. The rent of the lands alone, exclusive of that of houses, and of the interest of stock, has by many people been estimated at twenty millions, an estimation made in a great measure at ran-dom, and which, I apprehend, is as likely to be above as below the truth. But if the lands of Great Britain, in the present state of their cultivation, do not afford a rent of more than twenty mil-lions a year, they could not well afford the half, most probably not the fourth part of that rent, if they all belonged to a single pro-prietor, and were put under the negligent, expensive, and oppres-sive management of his factors and agents. The crown lands of Great Britain do not at present afford the fourth part of the rent which could probably be drawn from them if they were the pro-perty of private persons. If the crown lands were more extensive, it is probable they would be still worse managed.
                  THE revenue which the great body of the people derives from land is in proportion, not to the rent, but to the produce of the land. The whole annual produce of the land of every coun-try, if we except what is reserved for seed, is either annually consumed by the great body of the people, or exchanged for something else that is consumed by them. Whatever keeps down the produce of the land below what it would otherwise rise to, keeps down the revenue of the great body of the people still more than it does that of the proprietors of land. The rent of land, that portion of the produce which belongs to the proprietors, is scarce any where in Great Britain supposed to be more than a third part of the whole produce. If the land, which in one state of cultivation affords a rent of ten millions sterling a year, would in another afford a rent of twenty millions; the rent being, in both cases, supposed a third part of the produce; the revenue of the proprietors would be less than it otherwise might be by ten millions a year only; but the revenue of the great body of the peo-ple

would be less than it otherwise might be by thirty millions a year, deducting only what would be necessary for seed. The popu-lation of the country would be less by the number of people which thirty millions a year, deducting always the seed, could maintain, according to the particular mode of living and expence which might take place in the different ranks of men among whom the remain-der was distributed.
                  THOUGH there is not at present, in Europe, any civilized state of any kind which derives the greater part of its public revenue from the rent of lands which are the property of the state; yet, in all the great monarchies of Europe, there are still many large tracts of land which belong to the crown. They are generally forest; and sometimes forest where, after travelling several miles, you will scarce find a single tree; a mere waste and loss of country in respect both of produce and population. In every great monarchy of Europe the sale of the crown lands would produce a very large sum of money, which, if applied to the payment of the public debts, would deliver from mortgage a much greater revenue than any which those lands have ever afforded to the crown. In coun-tries where lands, improved and cultivated very highly, and yielding at the time of sale as great a rent as can easily be got from them, commonly sell at thirty years purchase; the unimproved, unculti-vated, and low-rented crown lands might well be expected to sell at forty, fifty, or sixty years purchase. The crown might imme-diately enjoy the revenue which this great price would redeem from mortgage. In the course of a few years it would probably enjoy another revenue. When the crown lands had become private pro-perty, they would, in the course of a few years, become well-improved and well-cultivated. The increase of their produce would increase the population of the country, by augmenting the revenue and consumption of the people. But the revenue which the crown

derives from the duties of customs and excise, would necessarily increase with the revenue and consumption of the people.
                  THE revenue which, in any civilized monarchy, the crown de-rives from the crown lands, though it appears to cost nothing to individuals, in reality costs more to the society than perhaps any other equal revenue which the crown enjoys. It would, in all cases, be for the interest of the society to replace this revenue to the crown by some other equal revenue, and to divide the lands among the people, which could not well be done better, perhaps, than by exposing them to public sale.
                  LANDS, for the purposes of pleasure and magnificence, parks, gardens, public walks, &amp;c. possessions which are every where consi-dered as causes of expense, not as sources of revenue, seem to be the only lands which, in a great and civilized monarchy, ought to belong to the crown.
                  PUBLIC stock and public lands, therefore, the two sources of revenue which may peculiarly belong to the sovereign or common-wealth, being both improper and insufficient funds for defraying the necessary expense of any great and civilized state; it remains that this expense must, the greater part of it, be defrayed by taxes of one kind or another; the people contributing a part of their own private revenue in order to make up a public revenue to the sovereign or common-wealth.
               
               
                  PART II.
                  Of Taxes.
                  THE private revenue of individuals, it has been shewn in the first book of this inquiry, arises ultimately from three different sources; Rent, Profit, and Wages. Every tax must finally be paid

from some one or other of those three different sorts of revenue, or from all of them indifferently. I shall endeavour to give the best account I can, first, of those taxes which, it is intended, should fall upon rent; secondly, of those which, it is intended, should fall upon profit; thirdly, of those which, it is intended, should fall upon wages; and, fourthly, of those which, it is intended, should fall indifferently upon all those three different sources of private revenue. The particular consideration of each of these four diffe-rent sorts of taxes will divide the second part of the present chap-ter into four articles, three of which will require several other sub-divisions. Many of those taxes, it will appear from the following review, are not finally paid from the fund or source of revenue upon which it was intended they should fall.
                  BEFORE I enter upon the examination of particular taxes, it is necessary to premise the four following maxims with regard to taxes in general.
                  I. THE subjects of every state ought to contribute towards the support of the government, as nearly as possible, in proportion to their respective abilities; that is, in proportion to the revenue which they respectively enjoy under the protection of the state. The expence of government to the individuals of a great nation, is like the expence of management to the joint tenants of a great estate, who are all obliged to contribute in proportion to their respective interests in the estate. In the observation or neglect of this maxim consists what is called the equality or inequality of taxation. Every tax, it must be observed once for all, which falls finally upon one only of the three sorts of revenue above-men-tioned is necessarily unequal, in so far as it does not affect the other two. In the following examination of different taxes I shall sel-dom take much further notice of this sort of inequality, but shall,

in most cases, confine my observations to that inequality which is oceasioned by a particular tax falling unequally even upon that particular sort of private revenue which is affected by it.
                  II. THE tax which each individual is bound to pay ought to be certain, and not arbitrary. The time of payment, the manner of payment, the quantity to be paid, ought all to be clear and plain to the contributor, and to every other person. Where it is other-wise, every person subject to the tax is put more or less in the power of the tax-gatherer, who can either aggravate the tax upon any obnoxious contributor, or extort, by the terror of such aggrava-tion, some present or perquisite to himself. The uncertainty of taxation encourages the insolence and favours the corruption of an order of men who are naturally unpopular, even where they are neither insolent nor corrupt. The certainty of what each indivi-dual ought to pay is, in taxation, a matter of so great importance, that a very considerable degree of inequality, it appears, I believe, from the experience of all nations, is not near so great an evil as a very small degree of uncertainty.
                  III. EVERY tax ought to be levied at the time, or in the manner in which it is most likely to be convenient for the contributor to pay it. A tax upon the rent of land or of houses, payable at the same term at which such rents are usually paid, is levied at the time when it is most likely to be convenient for the contributor to pay; or, when he is most likely to have wherewithal to pay. Taxes upon such consumable goods as are articles of luxury, are all finally paid by the consumer, and generally in a manner that is very con-venient for him. He pays them by little and little, as he has occasion to buy the goods. As he is at liberty too either to buy or not to buy as he pleases, it must be his own fault if he ever suffers any considerable inconveniency from such taxes.
                  
                     

IV. EVERY tax ought to be so contrived as both to take out and to keep out of the pockets of the people as little as possible, over and above what it brings into the public treasury of the state. A tax may either take out or keep out of the pockets of the people a great deal more than it brings into the public treasury, in the four following ways. First, the levying of it may require a great number of officers, whose salaries may eat up the greater part of the produce of the tax, and whose perquisites may impose another addi-tional tax upon the people. Secondly, it may obstruct the indu-stry of the people, and discourage them from applying to certain branches of business which might give maintenance and employ-ment to great multitudes. While it obliges the people to pay, it may thus diminish, or perhaps destroy some of the funds, which might enable them more easily to do so. Thirdly, by the forfei-tures and other penalties which those unfortunate individuals incur who attempt unsuccessfully to evade the tax, it may fre-quently ruin them, and thereby put an end to the benefit which the community might have received from the employment of their capitals. An injudicious tax offers a great temptation to smug-gling. But the penalties of smuggling must rise in proportion to the temptation. The law, contrary to all the ordinary princi-ples of justice, first creates the temptation, and then punishes those who yield to it; and it commonly enhances the punishment too in proportion to the very circumstance which ought certainly to alleviate it, the temptation to commit the crime See Sketches of the History of Man, page 474. &amp; seq.. Fourthly, by subjecting the people to the frequent visits, and the odious exami-nation of the tax-gatherers, it may expose them to much unneces-sary trouble, vexation, and oppression; and though vexation is not, strictly speaking, expence, it is certainly equivalent to the expence at which every man would be willing to redeem himself from it. It is in some one or other of these four different ways that taxes are frequently so much more burdensome to the people than they are beneficial to the sovereign.
                  
                     

THE evident justice and utility of the foregoing maxims have recommended them more or less to the attention of all nations. All nations have endeavoured, to the best of their judgement, to render their taxes as equal, as certain, as convenient to the contri-butor, both in the time and in the mode of payment, and, in proportion to the revenue which they brought to the prince, as little burdensome to the people as they could contrive. The follow-ing short review of some of the principal taxes which have taken place in different ages and countries will show that the endeavours of all nations have not in this respect been equally successful.
                  
                     ARTICLE I. Taxes upon Rent. Taxes upon the Rent of Land.
                     
                     A TAX upon the rent of land may either be imposed according to a certain canon, every district being valued at a certain rent, which valuation is not afterwards to be altered; or it may be imposed in such a manner as to vary with every variation in the real rent of the land, and to rise or fall with the improvement or declension of its cultivation.
                     A LAND tax which, like that of Great Britain, is imposed according to a certain invariable canon, though it should be equal at the time of its first establishment, necessarily becomes unequal in process of time according to the unequal degrees of improve-ment or neglect in the cultivation of the different parts of the country. In England, the valuation according to which the different counties and parishes were assessed to the land-tax by the 4th of William and Mary was very unequal even at its first establishment. This tax, therefore, so far offends against the first of the four maxims above-mentioned. It is perfectly agreeable to the other three. It is perfectly certain. The time of payment for the tax, being the same as that for the rent, is as

convenient as it can be to the contributor. Though the landlord is in all cases the real contributor, the tax is commonly advanced by the tenant, to whom the landlord is obliged to allow it in the payment of the rent. This tax is levied by a much smaller number of officers than any other which affords nearly the same revenue. As the tax does not rise with the rise of the rent, the sovereign does not share in the profits of the landlord's improvements. The tax, therefore, does not discourage those improvements, nor keep down the produce of the land below what it would otherwise rise to. As it has no tendency to diminish the quantity, it can have none to raise the price of the produce. It does not obstruct the indus-try of the people. It subjects the landlord to no other inconve-niency besides the unavoidable one of paying the tax.
                     THE advantage, however, which the landlord has derived from the invariable constancy of the valuation by which all the lands of Great Britain are rated to the land-tax, has been principally owing to some circumstances altogether extraneous to the nature of the tax.
                     IT has been owing in part to the great prosperity of almost every part of the country, the rents of almost all the estates of Great Britain having, since the time when this valuation was first established, been continually rising, and scarce any of them having fallen. The land-lords, therefore, have almost all gained the difference between the tax which they would have paid, according to the present rent of their estates, and that which they actually pay according to the ancient valuation. Had the state of the country been different, had rents been gradually falling in consequence of the declension of cultiva-tion, the landlords would almost all have lost this difference. In the state of things which has happened to take place since the revo-lution, the constancy of the valuation has been advantageous to the landlord and hurtful to the sovereign. In a different state of things

Britain could be little affected by it. Live cattle are, perhaps, the only commodity of which the transportation is more expensive by sea than by land. By land they carry themselves to market. By sea, not only the cattle, but their food and their water too must be carried at no small expence and inconveniency. The short sea between Ireland and Great Britain, indeed, renders the importation of Irish cattle more easy. But thought the free importation of them, which was lately permitted only for a limited time, were rendered perpetual, it could have no considerable effect upon the interest of the graziers of Great Britain. Those parts of Great Britain which border upon the Irish sea are all grazing countries. Irish cattle could never be imported for their use, but must be drove through those very extensive countries, at no small expence and in-conveniency, before they could arrive at their proper market. Fat cattle could not be drove so far. Lean cattle, therefore, only could be imported, and such importation could interfere, not with the interest of the feeding or fattening countries, to which by reducing the price of lean cattle, it would rather be advantageous, but with that of the breeding countries only. The small number of Irish cattle imported since their importation was permitted, together with the good price at which lean cattle still continue to sell, seem to demonstrate that even the breeding countries of Great Britain are never likely to be much affected by the free importation of Irish cattle. The common people of Ireland, indeed, are said to have sometimes opposed with violence the exportation of their cattle. But if the exporters had found any great advantage in continuing the trade, they could easily, when the law was on their side, have conquered this mobbish opposition.
               FEEDING and fattening countries, besides, must always be highly improved, whereas breeding countries are generally un-cultivated. The high price of lean cattle, by augmenting the value

it might have been advantageous to the sovereign and hurtful to the landlord.
                     As the tax is made payable in money, so the valuation of the land is expressed in money. Since the establishment of this valuation the value of silver has been pretty uniform, and there has been no alteration in the standard of the coin either as to weight or fineness. Had silver risen considerably in its value, as it seems to have done in the course of the two centuries which preceeded the discovery of the mines of America, the constancy of the valuation might have proved very oppressive to the landlord. Had silver fallen considerably in its value, as it certainly did for about a century at least after the discovery of those mines, the same constancy of valuation would have reduced very much this branch of the revenue of the sovereign. Had any considerable alteration been made in the standard of the money, either by sinking the same quantity of silver to a lower denomination, or by raising it to a higher; had an ounce of silver, for example, instead of being coined into five shillings and twopence, been coined either into pieces which bore so low a denomination as two shillings and seven-pence, or into pieces which bore so high a one as ten shillings and fourpence, it would in the one case have hurt the revenue of the proprietor, in the other that of the sovereign.
                     IN circumstances, therefore, somewhat different from those which have actually taken place, this constancy of valuation might have been a very great inconveniency, either to the contributors, or to the commonwealth. In the course of ages such circumstances, how-ever, must, at some time or other, happen. But though empires, like all the other works of men, have all hitherto proved mortal, yet every empire aims at immortality. Every constitution, there-fore, which it is meant should be as permanent as the empire itself, ought to be convenient, not in certain circumstances only,

but in all circumstances; or ought to be suited, not to those circum-stances which are transitory, occasional, or accidental, but to those which are necessary and therefore always the same.
                     A TAX upon the rent of land which varies with every variation of the rent, or which rises and falls according to the improvement or neglect of cultivation, is recommended by that sect of men of letters in France, who call themselves, the oeconomists, as the most equitable of all taxes. All taxes, they pretend, fall ultimately upon the rent of land, and ought therefore to be imposed equally upon the fund which must finally pay them. That all taxes ought to fall as equally as possible upon the fund which must finally pay them, is certainly true. But without entering into the disagree-able discussion of the metaphysical arguments by which they sup-port their very ingenious theory, it will sufficiently appear from the following review, what are the taxes which fall finally upon the rent of the land, and what are those which fall finally upon some other fund.
                     IN the Venetian territory all the arable lands which are given in lease to farmers are taxed at a tenth of the rent Memoires concernant les Droits. p. 210,241.. The leases are recorded in a public register which is kept by the officers of revenue in each province or district. When the proprietor cultivates his own lands, they are valued according to an equitable estimation and he is allowed a deduction of one-fifth of the tax, so that for such lands he pays only eight instead of ten per cent. of the supposed rent.
                     A LAND-TAX of this kind is certainly more equal than the land-tax of England. It might not perhaps be altogether so certain, and the assessment of the tax might frequently occasion a

good deal more trouble to the landlord. It might too be a good deal more expensive in the levying.
                     SUCH a system of administration, however, might perhaps be contrived as would in a great measure both prevent this uncertainty and moderate this expence.
                     THE landlord and tenant, for example, might jointly be obliged to record their lease in a public register. Proper penalties might be enacted against concealing or misrepresenting any of the condi-tions; and if part of those penalties was to be paid to either of the two parties who informed against and convicted the other of such concealment or misrepresentation, it would effectually deter them from combining together in order to defraud the public revenue. All the conditions of the lease might be sufficiently known from such a record.
                     SOME landlords, instead of raising the rent, take a fine for the renewal of the lease. This practice is in most cases the expedient of a spendthrift, who for a sum of ready money sells a future reve-nue of much greater value. It is in most cases, therefore, hurtful to the landlord. It is frequently hurtful to the tenant, and it is always hurtful to the community. It frequently takes from the tenant so great a part of his capital, and thereby diminishes so much his ability to cultivate the land, that he finds it more difficult to pay a small rent than it would otherwise have been to pay a great one. Whatever diminishes his ability to cultivate, necessarily keeps down below what it would otherwise have been the most important part of the revenue of the community. By rendering the tax upon such fines a good deal heavier than upon the ordinary rent, this hurtful practice might be discouraged to the no small advantage

of all the different parties concerned, of the landlord, of the tenant, of the sovereign, and of the whole community.
                     SOME leases prescribe to the tenant a certain mode of cultivation, and a certain succession of crops during the whole continuance of the lease. This condition (which is generally the effect of the landlords conceit of his own superior knowledge, a conceit in most cases very ill founded) ought always to be considered as an additional rent; as a rent in service instead of a rent in money. In order to discourage the practice, which is generally a foolish one, this species of rent might be valued rather high, and consequently taxed somewhat higher than common money rents.
                     SOME landlords, instead of a rent in money, require a rent in kind, in corn, cattle, poultry, wine, oil, &amp;c. others again require a rent in service. Such rents are always more hurtful to the tenant than beneficial to the landlord. They either take more or keep more out of the pocket of the former than they put into that of the latter. In every country where they take place, the tenants are poor and beggarly, pretty much according to the degree in which they take place. By valuing, in the same manner, such rents rather high, and consequently taxing them somewhat higher than common money-rents, a practice which is hurtful to the whole community might perhaps be sufficiently discouraged.
                     WHEN the landlord chose to occupy himself a part of his own lands, the rent might be valued according to an equitable arbitra-tion of the farmers and landlords in the neighbourhood, and a moderate abatement of the tax might be granted to him in the same manner as in the Venetian territory; provided the rent of the lands which he occupied did not exceed a certain sum. It is of import-ance that the landlord should be encouraged to cultivate a part of

his own land. His capital is generally greater than that of the tenant, and with less skill he can frequently raise a greater pro-duce. The landlord can afford to try experiments, and is generally disposed to do so. His unsuccessful experiments occasion only a moderate loss to himself. His successful ones contribute to the improvement and better cultivation of the whole country. It might be of importance however, that the abatement of the tax should encourage him to cultivate to a certain extent only. If the landlords should the greater part of them be tempted to farm the whole of their own lands, the country, (instead of sober and industrious tenants, who are bound by their own interest to cultivate as well as their capital and skill will allow them) would be filled with idle and profligate bailiffs, whose abusive management would soon degrade the cultivation and reduce the annual produce of the land, to the diminution, not only of the revenue of their masters, but of the most important part of that of the whole society.
                     SUCH a system of administration might perhaps free a tax of this kind from any degree of uncertainty which could occasion either oppression or inconveniency to the contributor; and might at the same time serve to introduce into the common management of land, such a plan or policy as might contribute a good deal to the general improvement and good cultivation of the country.
                     THE expence of levying a land-tax, which varied with every variation of the rent, would no doubt be somewhat greater than that of levying one which was always rated according to a fixed valuation. Some additional expence would necessarily be in-curred both by the different register offices which it would be proper to establish in the different districts of the country, and by the different valuations which might occasionally be made of

the lands which the proprietor chose to occupy himself. The expence of all this, however, might be very moderate, and much below what is incurred in the levying of many other taxes which afford a very inconsiderable revenue in comparison of what might easily be drawn from a tax of this kind.
                     THE discouragement which a variable land-tax of this kind might give to the improvement of land seems to be the most im-portant objection which can be made to it. The landlord would certainly be less disposed to improve when the sovereign, who contributed nothing to the expence, was to share in the profit of the improvement. Even this objection might perhaps be obviated by allowing the landlord, before he began his improvement, to ascertain, in conjunction with the officers of revenue, the actual value of his lands according to the equitable arbitration of a certain number of landlords and farmers in the neighbourhood equally chosen by both parties; and by rating him according to this valuation for such a number of years, as might be fully sufficient for his complete indemnification. To draw the attention of the sovereign towards the improvement of the land, from a regard to the increase of his own revenue, is one of the principal advantages proposed by this species of land-tax. The term, there-fore, allowed for the indemnification of the landlord ought not to be a great deal longer than what was necessary for that pur-pose; lest the remoteness of the interest should discourage too much this attention. It had better, however, be somewhat too long than in any respect too short. No encitement to the atten-tion of the sovereign can ever counter-balance the smallest discou-ragement to that of the landlord. The attention of the sovereign can be at best but a very general and vague consideration of what is likely to contribute to the better cultivation of the greater part of his dominions. The attention of the landlord is a particular and minute consideration of what is likely to be the most advan-tageous

application of every inch of ground upon his estate. The principal attention of the sovereign ought to be to encourage, by every means in his power, the attention both of the landlord and of the farmer; by allowing both to pursue their own interest in their own way, and according to their own judgment; by giving to both the most perfect security that they shall enjoy the full recompence of their own industry; and by procuring to both the most extensive market for every part of their produce in conse-quence of establishing the easiest and safest communications both by land and by water, through every part of his own dominions, as well as the most unbounded freedom of exportation to the do-minions of all other princes.
                     IF by such a system of administration a tax of this kind could be so managed as to give, not only no discouragement, but, on the contrary, some encouragement to the improvement of land, it does not appear likely to occasion any other inconveniency to the landlord, except always the unavoidable one of being obliged to pay the tax.
                     IN all the variations of the state of the society, in the improve-ment and in the declension of agriculture; in all the variations in the value of silver, and in all those in the standard of the coin, a tax of this kind would, of its own accord and without any atten-tion of government, readily suit itself to the actual situation of things, and would be equally just and equitable in all those dif-ferent changes. It would, therefore, be much more proper to be established as a perpetual and unalterable regulation, or as what is called a fundamental law of the common-wealth, than any tax which was always to be levied according to a certain valuation.
                     SOME states, instead of the simple and obvious expedient of a register of leases, have had recourse to the laborious and expensive

one of an actual survey and valuation of all the lands in the country. They have suspected, probably, that the lessor and lessee, in order to defraud the public revenue, might combine to conceal the real terms of the lease. Doomsday book seems to have been the result of a very accurate survey of this kind.
                     IN the antient dominions of the king of Prussia the land-tax is assessed according to an actual survey and valuation, which is reviewed and altered from time to time Memoires concernant les Droi
                              •
                           s, &amp;c. tome i. p. 114, 115, 116, &amp;c.. According to that valua-tion the lay proprietors pay from twenty to twenty-five per cent. of their revenue. Ecclesiastics from forty to forty-five per cent. The survey and valuation of Silesia was made by order of the present king; it is said with great accuracy. According to that valuation the lands belonging to the bishop of Breslaw are taxed at twenty-five per cent. of their rent. The other revenues of the ecclesiastics of both religions, at fifty per cent. The commande-ries of the Teutonic order and of that of Malta, at forty per cent. Lands held by a noble tenure, at thirty-eight and one-third per cent. Lands held by a base tenure, at thirty-five and one-third per cent.
                     THE survey and valuation of Bohemia is said to have been the work of more than a hundred years. It was not perfected till after the peace of 1748, by the orders of the present empress queen Id. p. 83,84.. The survey of the dutchy of Milan, which was begun in the time of Charles VI. was not perfected till after 1760. It is esteemed one of the most accurate that has ever been made. The survey of Savoy and Piemont was executed under the orders of the late king of Sardinia Id. p. 280, &amp;c. also p. 287, &amp;c. to 316..
                     
                        

IN the dominions of the king of Prussia the revenue of the church is taxed much higher than that of lay proprietors. The revenue of the church is, the greater part of it, a burden upon the rent of land. It seldom happens that any part of it is applied towards the improvement of land; or is so employed as to con-tribute in any respect towards increasing the revenue of the great body of the people. His Prussian majesty had probably, upon that account, thought it reasonable that it should contribute a good deal more towards relieving the exigencies of the state. In some countries the lands of the church are exempted from all taxes. In others they are taxed more lightly than other lands. In the dutchy of Milan, the lands which the church possessed before 1575, are rated to the tax at a third only of their value.
                     IN Silesia lands held by a noble tenure are taxed three per cent. higher than those held by a base tenure. The honours and pri-vileges of different kinds annexed to the former, his Prussian majesty had probably imagined, would sufficiently compensate to the proprietor a small aggravation of the tax; while at the same time the humiliating inferiority of the latter would be in some measure alleviated by being taxed somewhat more lightly. In other countries the system of taxation, instead of alleviating, aggravates this inequality. In the dominions of the king of Sardinia, and in those provinces of France which are subject to what is called the Real or predial taille, the tax falls alto-gether upon the lands held by a base tenure. Those held by a noble one are exempted.
                     A LAND-TAX assessed according to a general survey and valua-tion, how equal soever it may be at first, must, in the course of a very moderate period of time, become unequal. To prevent its becoming so would require the continual and painful attention of government to all the variations in the state and produce of

every different farm in the country. The governments of Prussia, of Bohemia, of Sardinia, and of the dutchy of Milan, actually exert an attention of this kind; an attention so unsuitable to the nature of government, that it is not likely to be of long conti-nuance, and which, if it is continued, will probably in the long-run occasion much more trouble and vexation than it can pos-sibly bring relief to the contributors.
                     IN 1666, the generality of Montauban was assessed to the Real or predial taille according, it is said, to a very exact survey and valuation Id. tome ii. p. 139, &amp;c. By 1727, this assessment had become altogether unequal. In order to remedy this inconveniency, government has found no better expedient than to impose upon the whole generality an additional tax of a hundred and twenty thousand livres. This additional tax is rated upon all the different districts subject to the taille according to the old assessment. But it is levied only upon those which in the actual-state of things are by that assessment under-taxed, and it is applied to the relief of those which by the same assessment are over-taxed. Two districts, for example, one of which ought in the actual state of things to be taxed at nine hundred, the other at eleven hundred livres, are by the old assessment both taxed at a thousand livres. Both these districts are by the additional tax rated at eleven hundred livres each. But this additional tax is levied only upon the district undercharged, and it is applied altogether to the relief of that over-charged, which consequently pays only nine hundred livres. The government neither gains nor loses by the additional tax, which is applied altogether to remedy the inequalities arising from the old assessment. The application is pretty much regulated according to the discretion of the intendant of the generality, and must, therefore, be in a great measure arbitrary.
                     
                        

of uncultivated land, is like a bounty against improvement. To any country which was highly improved throughout, it would be more advantageous to import its lean cattle than to breed them. The province of Holland, accordingly, is said to follow this maxim at present. The mountains of Scotland, Wales, and Northumberland, indeed, are countries not capable of much im-provement, and seem destined by nature to be the breeding coun-tries of Great Britain. The freest importation of foreign cattle could have no other effect than to hinder those breeding countries from taking advantage of the increasing population and improve-ment of the rest of the kingdom, from raising their price to an exorbitant height, and from laying a real tax upon all the more improved and cultivated parts of the country.
               THE freest importation of salt provisions, in the same manner, could have as little effect upon the interest of the graziers of Great Britain as that of live cattle. Salt provisions are not only a very bulky commodity, but when compared with fresh meat, they are a commodity both of worse quality, and as they cost more labour and expence, of higher price. They could never, therefore, come into competition with the fresh meat, though they might with the salt provisions of the country. They might be used for victualling ships for distant voyages, and such like uses, but could never make any considerable part of the food of the people. The small quantity of salt provisions imported from Ire-land since their importation was rendered free, is an experimental proof that our graziers have nothing to apprehend from it. It does not appear that the price of butcher's-meat has ever been sensibly affected by it.
               EVEN the free importation of foreign corn could very little affect the interest of the farmers of Great Britain. Corn is a much more bulky commodity than butcher's-meat. A pound of

                        Taxes which are proportioned, not to the Rent, but to the produce of Land.
                        TAXES upon the produce of land are in reality taxes upon the rent; and though they may be originally advanced by the farmer, are finally paid by the landlord. When a certain portion of the produce is to be paid away for a tax, the farmer computes, as well as he can, what the value of this portion is, one year with another, likely to amount to, and he makes a proportionable abate-ment in the rent which he agrees to pay to the landlord. There is no farmer who does not compute beforehand what the church-tythe, which is a land-tax of this kind, is, one year with another, likely to amount to.
                        THE tythe, and every other land-tax of this kind, under the appearance of perfect equality, are very unequal taxes; a certain portion of the produce being, in different situations, equivalent to a very different portion of the rent. In some very rich lands the produce is so great, that the one half of it is fully sufficient to replace to the farmer his capital employed in cultivation, together with the ordinary profits of farming stock in the neighbourhood. The other half, or, what comes to the same thing, the value of the other half, he could afford to pay as rent to the landlord, if there was no tythe. But if a tenth of the produce is taken from him in the way of tythe, he must require an abatement of the fifth part of this rent, otherwise he cannot get back his capital with the ordinary profit. In this case the rent of the landlord, instead of amounting to a half, or five-tenths of the whole produce, will amount only to four-tenths of it. In poorer lands, on the con-trary, the produce is sometimes so small, and the expence of culti-vation so great, that it requires four-fifths of the whole produce to replace to the farmer his capital with the ordinary profit. In this

case, though there was no tythe, the rent of the landlord could amount to no more than one-fifth or two-tenths of the whole produce. But if the farmer pays one-tenth of the produce in the way of tythe, he must require an equal abatement of the rent of the landlord, which will thus be reduced to one-tenth only of the whole produce. Upon the rent of rich lands, the tythe may some-times be a tax of no more than one-fifth part, or four shillings in the pound; whereas, upon that of poorer lands, it may sometimes be a tax of one-half, or of ten shillings in the pound.
                        THE tythe, as it is frequently a very unequal tax upon the rent, so it is always a great discouragement both to the improvements of the landlord and to the cultivation of the farmer. The one cannot venture to make the most important, which are generally the most expensive improvements; nor the other to raise the most valuable, which are generally too the most expensive crops; when the church, which lays out no part of the expence, is to share so very largely in the profit. The cultivation of madder was for a long time con-fined by the tythe to the United Provinces, which, being presbyte-rian countries, and upon that account exempted from this destructive tax, enjoyed a sort of monopoly of that useful dying drug against the rest of Europe. The late attempts to introduce the culture of this plant into England, have been made only in consequence of the statute which enacted that five shillings an acre should be received in lieu of all manner of tythe upon madder.
                        AS through the greater part of Europe, the church, so in many different countries of Asia the state, is principally supported by a land-tax, proportioned, not to the rent, but to the produce of the land. In China, the principal revenue of the sovereign consists in a tenth part of the produce of all the lands of the empire. This tenth part, however, is estimated so very moderately, that, in many pro-vinces,

it is said not to exceed a thirtieth part of the ordinary pro-duce. The land-tax or land rent which used to be paid to the Mahometan government of Bengal, before that country fell into the hands of the English East India company, is said to have amounted to about a fifth part of the produce. The land-tax of antient Egypt is said likewise to have amounted to a fifth part.
                        IN Asia, this sort of land-tax is said to interest the sovereign in the improvement and cultivation of land. The sovereigns of China, those of Bengal while under the Mahometan government, and those of antient Egypt, are said accordingly to have been ex-tremely attentive to the making and maintaining of good roads and navigable canals, in order to increase, as much as possible, both the quantity and value of every part of the produce of the land, by procuring to every part of it the most extensive market which their own dominions could afford. The tythe of the church is divided into such small portions, that no one of its proprietors can have any interest of this kind. The parson of a parish could never find his account in making a road or canal to a distant part of the country, in order to extend the market for the produce of his own particular parish. Such taxes, when destined for the main-tenance of the state, have some advantages which may serve in some measure to balance their inconveniency. When destined for the maintenance of the church, they are attended with nothing but inconveniency.
                        TAXES upon the produce of land may be levied, either in kind; or, according to a certain valuation, in money.
                        THE parson of a parish, or a gentleman of small fortune who lives upon his estate, may sometimes, perhaps, find some advantage in receiving, the one his tythe, and the other his rent, in kind.

The quantity to be collected, and the district within which it is to be collected, are so small, that they both can oversee, with their own eyes, the collection and disposal of every part of what is due to them. A gentleman of great fortune, who lived in the capital, would be in danger of suffering much by the neglect, and more by the fraud of his factors and agents, if the rents of an estate in a distant province were to be paid to him in this manner. The loss of the sovereign, from the abuse and depredation of his tax-gather-ers, would necessarily be much greater. The servants of the most careless private person are, perhaps, more under the eye of their master than those of the most careful prince; and a public reve-nue, which was paid in kind, would suffer so much from the mis-management of the collectors, that a very small part of what was levied upon the people would ever arrive at the treasury of the prince. Some part of the public revenue of China, however, is said to be paid in this manner. The Mandarins and other tax-gatherers will, no doubt, find their advantage in continuing the practice of a payment which is so much more liable to abuse than any payment in money.
                        A TAX upon the produce of land which is levied in money, may be levied either according to a valuation which varies with all the variations of the market price; or according to a fixed valua-tion, a bushel of wheat, for example, being always valued at one and the same money price, whatever may be the state of the mar-ket. The produce of a tax levied in the former way, will vary only according to the variations in the real produce of the land, according to the improvement or neglect of cultivation. The pro-duce of a tax levied in the latter way will vary, not only accord-ing to the variations in the produce of the land, but according to both those in the value of the precious metals, and those in the quantity of those metals which is at different times contained in

coin of the same denomination. The produce of the former will always bear the same proportion to the value of the real produce of the land. The produce of the latter may, at different times, bear very different proportions to that value.
                        WHEN, instead either of a certain portion of the produce of land, or of the price of a certain portion, a certain sum of money is to be paid in full compensation for all tax or tythe; the tax becomes, in this case, exactly of the same nature with the land-tax of England. It neither rises nor falls with the rent of the land. It neither encourages nor discourages improvement. The tythe in the greater part of those parishes which pay what is called a Modus in lieu of all other tythe, is a tax of this kind. During the Maho-metan government of Bengal, instead of the payment in kind of a fifth part of the produce, a modus, and, it is said, a very moderate one, was established in the greater part of the districts or zeminda-ries of the country. Some of the servants of the East India com-pany, under pretence of restoring the public revenue to its proper value, have, in some provinces, exchanged this modus for a pay-ment in kind. Under their management this change is likely both to discourage cultivation, and to give new opportunities for abuse in the collection of the public revenue, which has fallen very much below what it was said to have been when it first fell under the management of the company. The servants of the company may, perhaps, have profited by this change, but at the expence, it is pro-bable, both of their masters and of the country.
                     
                     
                        Taxes upon the Rent of Houses.
                        THE rent of a house may be distinguished into two parts, of which the one may very properly be called the Building rent; the other is commonly called the Ground rent.
                        
                           

THE building rent is the interest or profit of the capital expended in building the house. In order to put the trade of a builder upon a level with other trades, it is necessary that this rent should be suf-ficient, first, to pay him the same interest which he would have got for his capital if he had lent it upon good security; and, secondly, to keep the house in constant repair, or, what comes to the same thing, to replace, within a certain term of years, the capital which had been employed in building it. The building rent, or the ordinary profit of building, is, therefore, every where regu-lated by the ordinary interest of money. Where the market rate of interest is four per cent. the rent of a house which, over and above paying the ground rent, affords six, or six and a half per cent. upon the whole expence of building, may perhaps afford a sufficient profit to the builder. Where the market rate of interest is five per cent. it may perhaps require seven or seven and a half per cent. If, in proportion to the interest of money, the trade of the builder affords at any time a much greater profit than this, it will soon draw so much capital from other trades as will reduce the profit to its proper level. If it affords at any time much less than this, other trades will soon draw so much capital from it as will again raise that profit.
                        WHATEVER part of the whole rent of a house is over and above what is sufficient for affording this reasonable profit, naturally goes to the ground-rent; and where the owner of the ground and the owner of the building are two different persons, is, in most cases, completely paid to the former. This surplus rent is the price which the inhabitant of the house pays for some real or supposed advantage of the situation. In country houses, at a distance from any great town, where there is plenty of ground to chuse upon; the ground rent is scarce any thing, or no more than what the ground which the house stands upon would pay if employed in

agriculture. In country villas in the neighbourhood of some great town, it is sometimes a good deal higher; and the peculiar conve-niency or beauty of situation is there frequently very well paid for. Ground rents are generally highest in the capital, and in those par-ticular parts of it where there happens to be the greatest demand for houses, whatever be the reason of that demand, whether for trade and business, for pleasure and society, or for mere vanity and fashion.
                        A TAX upon house-rent, payable by the tenant and proportioned to the whole rent of each house, could not, for any considerable time at least, affect the building rent. If the builder did not get his reasonable profit, he would be obliged to quit the trade; which, by raising the demand for building, would in a short time bring back his profit to its proper level with that of other trades. Neither would such a tax fall altogether upon the ground rent; but it would divide itself in such a manner as to fall, partly upon the inhabitant of the house, and partly upon the owner of the ground.
                        LET us suppose, for example, that a particular person judges that he can afford for house-rent an expence of sixty pounds a year; and let us suppose too that a tax of four shillings in the pound, or of one-fifth, payable by the inhabitant, is laid upon house-rent. A house of sixty pounds rent will in this case cost him seventy-two pounds a year, which is twelve pounds more than he thinks he can afford. He will, therefore, content himself with a worse house, or a house of fifty pounds rent, which, with the additional ten pounds that he must pay for the tax, will make up the sum of sixty pounds a year, the expence which he judges he can afford; and in order to pay the tax he will give up a part of the additional conveniency which he might have had from a house of ten pounds a year more rent. He will give up, I say, a part of

this additional conveniency; for he will seldom be obliged to give up the whole, but will, in consequence of the tax, get a better house for fifty pounds a year, than he could have got if there had been no tax. For as a tax of this kind, by taking away this parti-cular competitor, must diminish the competition for houses of sixty pounds rent, so it must likewise diminish it for those of fifty pounds rent, and in the same manner for those of all other rents, except the lowest rent, for which it would for some time increase the com-petition. But the rents of every class of houses for which the com-petition was diminished, would necessarily be more or less reduced. As no part of this reduction, however, could, for any considerable time at least, affect the building rent; the whole of it must in the long-run necessarily fall upon the ground-rent. The final pay-ment of this tax, therefore, would fall, partly upon the inhabitant of the house, who, in order to pay his share, would be obliged to give up a part of his conveniency; and partly upon the owner of the ground, who, in order to pay his share, would be obliged to give up a part of his revenue. In what proportion this final payment would be divided between them, it is not perhaps very easy to ascer-tain. The division would probably be very different in different circumstances, and a tax of this kind might, according to those different circumstances, affect very unequally both the inhabitant of the house and the owner of the ground.
                        THE inequality with which a tax of this kind might fall upon the owners of different ground rents, would arise altogether from the accidental inequality of this division. But the inequality with which it might fall upon the inhabitants of different houses would arise, not only from this, but from another cause. The proportion of the expence of house-rent to the whole expence of living, is different in the different degrees of fortune. It is perhaps highest in the highest degree, and it diminishes gradually through the infe-rior

degrees, so as in general to be lowest in the lowest degree. The necessaries of life occasion the great expence of the poor. They find it difficult to get food, and the greater part of their little revenue is spent in getting it. The luxuries and vanities of life occasion the principal expence of the rich; and a magnificent house embellishes and sets off to the best advantage all the other luxuries and vanities which they possess. A tax upon house-rents, therefore, would in general fall heaviest upon the rich; and in this sort of inequality there would not, perhaps, be any thing very unreasonable. It is not very unreasonable that the rich should contribute to the public expence, not only in proportion to their revenue, but something more than in that proportion.
                        THE rent of houses, though it in some respects resembles the rent of land, is in one respect essentially different from it. The rent of land is paid for the use of a productive subject. The land which pays it produces it. The rent of houses is paid for the use of an unproductive subject. Neither the house nor the ground which it stands upon produce any thing. The person who pays the rent, therefore, must draw it from some other source of revenue, distinct from, and independent of, this subject. A tax upon the rent of houses, so far as it falls upon the inhabitants, must be drawn from the same source as the rent itself, and must be paid from their revenue, whether derived from the wages of labour, the profits of stock, or the rent of land. So far as it falls upon the inhabitants, it is one of those taxes which fall, not upon one only, but indifferently upon all the three different sources of reve-nue; and is in every respect of the same nature as a tax upon any other sort of consumable commodities. In general there is not, perhaps, any one article of expence or consumption by which the liberality or narrowness of a man's whole expence can be better judged of, than by his house-rent. A proportional tax upon

this particular article of expence might, perhaps, produce a more considerable revenue than any which has hitherto been drawn from it in any part of Europe. If the tax indeed was very high, the greater part of people would endeavour to evade it as much as they could, by contenting themselves with smaller houses, and by turning the greater part of their expence into some other channel.
                        THE rent of houses might easily be ascertained with sufficient accuracy, by a policy of the same kind with that which would be necessary for ascertaining the ordinary rent of land. Houses not inhabited ought to pay no tax. A tax upon them would fall alto-gether upon the proprietor, who would thus be taxed for a subject which afforded him neither conveniency nor revenue. Houses inha-bited by the proprietor ought to be rated, not according to the expence which they might have cost in building, but according to the rent which an equitable arbitration might judge them likely to bring, if leased to a tenant. If rated according to the expence which they may have cost in building, a tax of three or four shil-lings in the pound, joined with other taxes, would ruin almost all the rich and great families of this, and, I believe, of every other civilized country. Whoever will examine, with attention, the dif-ferent town and country houses of some of the richest and greatest families in this country, will find that, at the rate of only six and a half, or seven per cent. upon the original expence of building, their house-rent is nearly equal to the whole neat rent of their estates. It is the accumulated expence of several successive genera-tions, laid out upon objects of great beauty and magnificence, indeed; but, in proportion to what they cost, of very small ex-changeable value.
                        GROUND-RENTS are a still more proper subject of taxation than the rent of houses. A tax upon ground-rents would not

wheat at a penny is as dear as a pound of butcher's-meat at four-pence. The small quantity of foreign corn imported even in times of the greatest scarcity, may satisfy our farmers that they can have nothing to fear from the freest importation. The average quantity imported, one year with another, amounts only, according to the very well informed author of the tracts upon the corn trade, to twenty-three thousand seven hundred and twenty-eight quarters of all sorts of grain, and does not exceed the five hundredth and seventy-one part of the annual consumption. But as the bounty upon corn occasions a greater exportation in years of plenty, so it must of consequence occasion a greater importation in years of scarcity, than would otherwise take place. By means of it, the plenty of one year does not compensate the scarcity of another, and as the average quantity exported is necessarily aug-mented by it, so must likewise, in the actual state of tillage, the average quantity imported. If there was no bounty, as less corn would be exported, so it is probable that one year with another, less would be imported than at present. The corn merchants, the fetchers and carriers of corn, between Great Britain and foreign countries, would have much less employment, and might suffer considerably; but the country gentlemen and farmers could suffer very little. It is in the corn merchants accordingly, rather than in the country gentlemen and farmers, that I have observed the greatest anxiety for the renewal and continuation of the bounty.
               COUNTRY gentlemen and farmers are, to their great honour, of all people, the least subject to the wretched spirit of monopoly. The undertaker of a great manufactory is sometimes alarmed if another work of the same kind is established within twenty miles of him. The Dutch undertaker of the woollen manufacture at Abbeville, stipulated that no work of the same kind should be established within thirty leagues of that city. Farmers and country

raise the rents of houses. It would fall altogether upon the owner of the ground-rent, who acts always as a monopolist, and exacts the greatest rent which can be got for the use of his ground. More or less can be got for it according as the competitors happen to be richer or poorer, or can afford to gratify their fancy for a parti-cular spot of ground at a greater or smaller expence. In every country the greatest number of rich competitors is in the capital, and it is there accordingly that the highest ground-rents are always to be found. As the wealth of those competitors would in no respect be increased by a tax upon ground-rents, they would not probably be disposed to pay more for the use of the ground. Whe-ther the tax was to be advanced by the inhabitant or by the owner of the ground, would be of little importance. The more the inha-bitant was obliged to pay for the tax, the less he would incline to pay for the ground; so that the final payment of the tax would fall altogether upon the owner of the ground-rent. The ground-rents of uninhabited houses ought to pay no tax.
                        BOTH ground-rents and the ordinary rent of land are a species of revenue which the owner, in many cases, enjoys without any care or attention of his own. Though a part of this revenue should be taken from him in order to defray the expences of the state, no discouragement will thereby be given to any sort of indu-stry. The annual produce of the land and labour of the society, the real wealth and revenue of the great body of the people, might be the same after such a tax as before. Ground-rents, and the ordinary rent of land, are therefore, perhaps, the species of reve-nue which can best bear to have a peculiar tax imposed upon them.
                        GROUND-RENTS seem, in this respect, a more proper subject of peculiar taxation than even the ordinary rent of land. The ordi-nary rent of land is, in many cases, owing partly at least to the

attention and good management of the landlord. A very heavy tax might discourage too much this attention and good manage-ment. Ground-rents, so far as they exceed the ordinary rent of land, are altogether owing to the good government of the sove-reign, which, by protecting the industry either of the whole people, or of the inhabitants of some particular place, enables them to pay so much more than its real value for the ground which they build their houses upon; or to make to its owner so much more than compensation for the loss which he might sustain by this use of it. Nothing can be more reasonable than that a fund which owes its existence to the good government of the state, should be taxed peculiarly, or should contribute something more than the greater part of other funds towards the support of that govern-ment.
                        THOUGH, in many different countries of Europe, taxes have been imposed upon the rent of houses, I do not know of any in which ground-rents have been considered as a separate subject of taxation. The contrivers of taxes have, probably, found some difficulty in ascertaining what part of the rent ought to be consi-dered as ground-rent, and what part ought to be considered as build-ing rent. It should not, however, seem very difficult to distinguish those two parts of the rent from one another.
                        IN Great Britain the rent of houses is supposed to be taxed in the same proportion as the rent of land, by what is called the annual land tax. The valuation, according to which each different parish and district is assessed to this tax, is always the same. It was ori-ginally extremely unequal, and it still continues to be so. Through the greater part of the kingdom this tax falls still more lightly upon the rent of houses than upon that of land. In some few districts only, which were originally rated high, and in which the

rents of houses have fallen considerably, the land tax of three or four shillings in the pound, is said to amount to an equal propor-tion of the real rent of the houses. Untenanted houses, though by law subject to the tax, are, in most districts, exempted from it by the favour of the assessors; and this exemption sometimes occasions some little variation in the rate of particular houses, though that of the district is always the same.
                        IN the province of Holland Memories concernant les Droits, &amp;c. p. 223. every house is taxed at two and a half per cent. of its value, without any regard either to the rent which it actually pays, or to the circumstance of its being tenanted or untenanted. There seems to be a hardship in obliging the pro-prietor to pay a tax for an untenanted house, from which he can derive no revenue; especially so very heavy a tax. In Holland, where the market rate of interest does not exceed three per cent. two and a half per cent. upon the whole value of the house, must, in most cases, amount to more than a third of the building-rent, perhaps of the whole rent. The valuation, indeed, according to which the houses are rated, though very unequal, is said to be always below the real value. When a house is rebuilt, improved, or enlarged, there is a new valuation, and the tax is rated accord-ingly.
                        THE contrivers of the several taxes which in England have, at diffe-rent times, been imposed upon houses, seem to have imagined that there was some great difficulty in ascertaining, with tolerable exact-ness, what was the real rent of every house. They have regulated their taxes, therefore, according to some more obvious circum-stance, such as they had probably imagined would, in most cases, bear some proportion to the rent.
                        THE first tax of this kind was hearth-money; or a tax of two shillings upon every hearth. In order to ascertain how many

hearths were in the house, it was necessary that the tax-gatherer should enter every room in it. This odious visit rendered the tax odious. Soon after the revolution, therefore, it was abolished as a badge of slavery.
                        THE next tax of this kind was, a tax of two shillings upon every dwelling house inhabited. A house with ten windows to pay four shillings more. A house with twenty windows and upwards to pay eight shillings. This tax was afterwards so far altered, that houses with twenty windows, and with less than thirty, were ordered to pay ten shillings, and those with thirty windows and upwards to pay twenty shillings. The number of windows can, in most cases, be counted from the outside, and, in all cases, without entering every room in the house. The visit of the tax-gatherer, therefore, was less offensive in this tax than in the hearth-money.
                        THIS tax was afterwards repealed, and in the room of it was established the window tax, which has undergone too several alte-rations and augmentations. The window tax, as it stands at present, (January, 1775) over and above the duty of three shillings upon every house in England, and of one shilling upon every house in Scotland, lays a duty upon every window, which, in England, aug-ments gradually from two-pence, the lowest rate, upon houses with not more than seven windows; to two shillings, the highest rate, upon houses with twenty-five windows and upwards.
                        THE principal objection to all such taxes is their inequality, an inequality of the worst kind, as they must frequently fall much hea-vier upon the poor than upon the rich. A house of ten pounds rent in a country town may sometimes have more windows than a house of five hundred pounds rent in London; and though the inhabitant of the former is likely to be a much poorer man than that of the latter, yet so far as his contribution is regulated by the

window-tax, he must contribute more to the support of the state. Such taxes are, therefore, directly contrary to the first of the four maxims above mentioned. They do not seem to offend much against any of the other three.
                        THE natural tendency of the window-tax, and of all other taxes upon houses, is to lower rents. The more a man pays for the tax, the less, it is evident, he can afford to pay for the rent. Since the imposition of the window-tax, however, the rents of houses have upon the whole risen, more or less, in almost every town and village of Great Britain with which I am acquainted. Such has been almost every where the increase of the demand for houses, that it has raised the rents more than the window-tax could sink them; one of the many proofs of the great prospe-rity of the country, and of the increasing revenue of its inha-bitants. Had it not been for the tax, rents would probably have risen still higher.
                     
                  
                  
                     ARTICLE II. Taxes upon Profit, or upon the Revenue arising from Stock.
                     
                     THE revenue or profit arising from stock naturally divides itself into two parts; that which pays the interest, and which belongs to the owner of the stock; and that surplus part which is over and above what is necessary for paying the interest.
                     THIS latter part of profit is evidently a subject not taxable directly. It is the compensation, and in most cases it is no more than a very moderate compensation, for the risk and trouble of employing the stock. The employer must have this compen-sation, otherwise he cannot, consistently with his own interest, continue the employment. If he was taxed directly, therefore, in proportion to the whole profit, he would be obliged either to

raise the rate of his profit, or to charge the tax upon the interest of money; that is, to pay less interest. If he raised the rate of his profit in proportion to the tax, the whole tax, though it might be advanced by him, would be finally paid by one or other of two different sets of people, according to the different ways in which he might employ the stock of which he had the manage-ment. If he employed it as a farming stock in the cultivation of land, he could raise the rate of his profit only by retaining a greater portion, or, what comes to the same thing, the price of a greater portion of the produce of the land; and as this could be done only by a reduction of rent, the final payment of the tax would fall upon the landlord. If he employed it as a mercantile or manufacturing stock, he could raise the rate of his profit only by raising the price of his goods; in which case the final pay-ment of the tax would fall altogether upon the consumers of those goods. If he did not raise the rate of his profit, he would be obliged to charge the whole tax upon that part of it which was allotted for the interest of money. He could afford less interest for whatever stock he borrowed, and the whole weight of the tax would in this case fall ultimately upon the interest of money. So far as he could not relieve himself from the tax in the one way, he would be obliged to relieve himself in the other.
                     THE interest of money seems at first sight a subject equally capable of being taxed directly as the rent of land. Like the rent of land it is a neat produce which remains after completely compensating the whole risk and trouble of employing the stock. As a tax upon the rent of land cannot raise rents; because the neat produce which remains after replacing the stock of the farmer, together with his reasonable profit, cannot be greater after the tax than before it: so, for the same reason, a tax upon

the interest of money could not raise the rate of interest; the quantity of stock or money in the country, like the quantity of land, being supposed to remain the same after the tax as before it. The ordinary rate of profit, it has been shewn in the first book, is every where regulated by the quantity of stock to be employed in proportion to the quantity of the employment, or of the business which must be done by it. But the quantity of the employment, or of the business to be done by stock, could nei-ther be increased nor diminished by any tax upon the interest of money. If the quantity of the stock to be employed, therefore, was neither increased nor diminished by it, the ordinary rate of profit would necessarily remain the same. But the portion of this profit necessary for compensating the risk and trouble of the employer, would likewise remain the same; that risk and trouble being in no respect altered. The residue, therefore, that portion which belongs to the owner of the stock, and which pays the interest of money, would necessarily remain the same too. At first sight, therefore, the interest of money seems to be a sub-ject as fit to be taxed directly as the rent of land.
                     THERE are, however, two different circumstances which render the interest of money a much less proper subject of direct taxa-tion than the rent of land.
                     FIRST, the quantity and value of the land which any man possesses can never be a secret, and can always be ascertained with great exactness. But the whole amount of the capital stock which he possesses is almost always a secret, and can scarce ever be ascertained with tolerable exactness. It is liable, besides, to almost continual variations. A year seldom passes away, fre-quently not a month, sometimes scarce a single day, in which it does not rise or fall more or less. An inquisition into every man's private circumstances, and an inquisition which, in order to

accommodate the tax to them, watched over all the fluctuations of his fortune, would be a source of such continual and endless vexation as no people could support.
                     SECONDLY, land is a subject which cannot be removed; whereas stock easily may. The proprietor of land is necessarily a citizen of the particular country in which his estate lies. The proprietor of stock is properly a citizen of the world, and is not necessarily attached to any particular country. He would be apt to abandon the country in which he was exposed to a vexatious inquisition, in order to be assessed to a burdensome tax, and would remove his stock to some other country where he could either carry on his business or enjoy his fortune more at his ease. By removing his stock he would put an end to all the industry which it had maintained in the country which he left. Stock cultivates land; stock employs labour. A tax which tended to drive away stock from any particular country, would so far tend to dry up every source of revenue, both to the sovereign and to the society. Not only the profits of stock, but the rent of land and the wages of labour, would necessarily be more or less diminished by its removal.
                     THE nations, accordingly, who have attempted to tax the revenue arising from stock, instead of any severe inquisition of this kind, have been obliged to content themselves with some very loose, and therefore more or less arbitrary estimation. The extreme inequality and uncertainty of a tax assessed in this man-ner, can be compensated only by its extreme moderation, in consequence of which every man finds himself rated so very much below his real revenue, that he gives himself little distur-bance though his neighbour should be rated somewhat lower.
                     BY what is called the land-tax in England, it was intended that stock should be taxed in the same proportion as land.

When the tax upon land was at four shillings in the pound, or at one-fifth of the supposed rent, it was intended that stock should be taxed at one-fifth of the supposed interest. When the present annual land-tax was first imposed, the legal rate of in-terest was six per cent. Every hundred pounds stock, accord-ingly, was supposed to be taxed at twenty-four shillings, the fifth part of six pounds. Since the legal rate of interest has been reduced to five per cent. every hundred pounds stock is supposed to be taxed at twenty shillings only. The sum to be raised, by what is called the land-tax, was divided between the country and the principal towns. The greater part of it was laid upon the country; and of what was laid upon the towns, the greater part was assessed upon the houses. What remained to be assessed upon the stock or trade of the towns (for the stock upon the land was not meant to be taxed) was very much below the real value of that stock or trade. Whatever inequalities, therefore, there might be in the original assessment, gave little disturbance. Every parish and district still continues to be rated for its land, its houses, and its stock, according to the original assessment; and the almost universal prosperity of the country, which in most places has raised very much the value of all these, has rendered those inequalities of still less importance now. The rate too upon each district continuing always the same, the uncertainty of this tax, so far as it might be assessed upon the stock of any individual, has been very much diminished, as well as ren-dered of much less consequence. If the greater part of the lands of England are not rated to the land-tax at half their actual value, the greater part of the stock of England is perhaps scarce rated at the fiftieth part of its actual value. In some towns the whole land-tax is assessed upon houses; as in Westminster, where stock and trade are free. It is otherwise in London.
                     
                        

IN all countries a severe inquisition into the circumstances of private persons has been carefully avoided.
                     AT Hamburgh Memoires concernant les Droits, tome i. p. 74. every inhabitant is obliged to pay to the state, one-fourth per cent. of all that he possesses; and as the wealth of the people of Hamburgh consists principally in stock, this tax may be considered as a tax upon stock. Every man assesses himself, and, in the presence of the magistrate, puts an-nually into the public coffer a certain sum of money, which he declares upon oath to be one-fourth per cent. of all that he possesses, but without declaring what it amounts to, or being liable to any examination upon that subject. This tax is gene-rally supposed to be paid with great fidelity. In a small republic, where the people have entire confidence in their magistrates, are convinced of the necessity of the tax for the support of the state, and believe that it will be faithfully applied to that purpose, such conscientious and voluntary payment may sometimes be expected. It is not peculiar to the people of Hamburgh.
                     THE canton of Underwold in Switzerland is frequently ravaged by storms and inundations, and is thereby exposed to extraordi-nary expences. Upon such occasions the people assemble, and every one is said to declare with the greatest frankness what he is worth, in order to be taxed accordingly. At Zurich the law orders that in cases of necessity every one should be taxed in proportion to his revenue; the amount of which he is obliged to declare upon oath. They have no suspicion, it is said, that any of their fellow citizens will deceive them. At Basil the principal revenue of the state arises from a small custom upon goods ex-ported. All the citizens make oath that they will pay every three months all the taxes imposed by the law. All merchants and even all inn-keepers are trusted with keeping themselves the

gentlemen, on the contrary, are generally disposed rather to promote than to obstruct the cultivation and improvement of their neigh-bours farms and estates. They have no secrets, such as those of the greater part of manufacturers, but are generally rather fond of communicating to their neighbours, and of extending as far as possible any new practice which they have found to be advan-tageous. Pius Questus, says old Cato, stabilissimusque, minime-que invidiosus; minimeque male cogitantes sunt, qui in eo studio occupati sunt. Country gentleman and farmers, dispersed in dif-ferent parts of the country, cannot so easily combine as merchants and manufacturers, who being collected into towns, and accustomed to that exclusive corporation spirit which prevails in them, na-turally endeavour to obtain against all their countrymen, the same exclusive privilege which they generally possess against the inhabitants of their respective towns. They accordingly seem to have been the original inventors of those restraints upon the im-portation of foreign goods, which secure to them the monopoly of the home market. It was probably in imitation of them, and to put themselves upon a level with those, who, they found were disposed to oppress them, that the country gentlemen and farmers of Great Britain so far forgot the generosity which is na-tural to their station, as to demand the exclusive privilege of supplying their countrymen with corn and butcher's-meat. They did not perhaps take time to consider, how much less their interest could be affected by the freedom of trade, than that of the people whose example they followed.
               TO prohibit by a perpetual law the importation of foreign corn and cattle, is in reality to enact, that the population and industry of the country shall at no time exceed what the rude produce of its own soil can maintain.
               
                  

account of the goods which they sell either within or without the territory. At the end of every three months they send this account to the treasurer, with the amount of the tax computed at the bottom of it. It is not suspected that the revenue suffers by this confi-dence Id. tome i. p. 163, 166, 171..
                     To oblige every citizen to declare publickly upon oath the amount of his fortune, must not, it seems, in those Swiss cantons, be reckoned a hardship. At Hamburgh it would be reckoned the greatest. Merchants engaged in the hazardous projects of trade, all tremble at the thoughts of being obliged at all times to expose the real state of their circumstances. The ruin of their credit and the miscarriage of their projects, they foresee, would too often be the consequence. A sober and parsimonious people, who are strangers to all such projects, do not feel that they have occasion for any such concealment.
                     IN Holland, soon after the exaltation of the Iate prince of Orange to the stadtholdership, a tax of two per cent. or the fiftieth penny, as it was called, was imposed upon the whole substance of every citizen. Every citizen assessed himself and paid his tax in the same manner as at Hamburgh; and it was in general supposed to have been paid with great fidelity. The people had at that time the greatest affection for their new government, which they had just esta-blished by a general insurrection. The tax was to be paid but once; in order to relieve the state in a particular exigency. It was, indeed, too heavy to be permanent. In a country where the market rate of interest seldom exceeds three per cent. a tax of two per cent. amounts to thirteen shillings and fourpence in the pound upon the highest neat revenue which is commonly drawn from stock. It is a tax

which very few people could pay without encroaching more or less upon their capitals. In a particular exigency the people may, from great public zeal, make a great effort, and give up even a part of their capital in order to relieve the state. But it is impossible that they should continue to do so for any considerable time; and if they did, the tax would soon ruin them so completely as to render them altogether incapable of supporting the state.
                     THE tax upon stock imposed by the land-tax bill in England, tho' it is proportioned to the capital, is not intended to diminish or take away any part of that capital. It is meant only to be a tax upon the interest of money proportioned to that upon the rent of land; so that when the latter is at four shillings in the pound, the former may be at four shillings in the pound too. The tax at Hamburgh, and the still more moderate taxes of Underwold and Zurich, are meant, in the same manner, to be taxes, not upon the capital, but upon the interest or neat revenue of stock. That of Holland was meant to be a tax upon the capital.
                     
                        Taxes upon the Profit of particular Employments.
                        IN some countries extraordinary taxes are imposed upon the profits of stock; sometimes when employed in particular branches of trade, and sometimes when employed in agriculture.
                        OF the former kind are in England the tax upon hawkers and pedlars, that upon hackney coaches and chairs, and that which the keepers of ale-houses pay for a licence to retail ale and spirituous liquors. During the late war, another tax of the same kind was proposed upon shops. The war having been undertaken, it was said, in defence of the trade of the country, the merchants,

who were to profit by it, ought to contribute towards the support of it.
                        A TAX, however, upon the profits of stock employed in any parti-cular branch of trade, can never fall finally upon the dealers (who must in all ordinary cases have their reasonable profit, and, where the competition is free, can seldom have more than that profit) but always upon the consumers, who must be obliged to pay in the price of the goods the tax which the dealer advances; and generally with some over-charge.
                        A TAX of this kind, when it is proportioned to the trade of the dealer, is finally paid by the consumer, and occasions no oppression to the dealer. When it is not so proportioned, but is the same upon all dealers, though in this case too it is finally paid by the consumer, yet it favours the great, and occasions some oppression to the small dealer. The tax of five shillings a week upon every hack-ney coach, and that of ten shillings a year upon every hackney chair, so far as it is advanced by the different keepers of such coaches and chairs, is exactly enough proportioned to the extent of their respective dealings. It neither favours the great, nor oppresses the smaller dealer. The tax of twenty shillings a year for a licence to sell ale; of forty shillings for a licence to sell spirituous liquors; and of forty shillings more for a licence to sell wine, being the same upon all retailers, must necessarily give some advantage to the great, and occasion some oppression to the small dealers. The former must find it more easy to get back the tax in the price of their goods than the latter. The moderation of the tax, however, renders this inequality of less importance, and it may to many people appear not improper to give some discouragement to the multiplication of little ale-houses. The tax upon shops, it was intended, should be the same upon all shops. It could not well have been otherwise. It

would have been impossible to proportion with tolerable exactness the tax upon a shop to the extent of the trade carried on in it, without such an inquisition, as would have been altogether insup-portable in a free country. If the tax had been considerable, it would have oppressed the small, and forced almost the whole retail trade into the hands of the great dealers. The competition of the former being taken away, the latter would have enjoyed a mono-poly of the trade; and like all other monopolists would soon have combined to raise their profits much beyond what was necessary for the payment of the tax. The final payment, instead of falling upon the shopkeeper, would have fallen upon the consumer, with a considerable over-charge to the profit of the shopkeeper. For these reasons, the project of a tax upon shops was laid aside, and in the room of it was substituted the subsidy 1759.
                        WHAT in France is called the personal taille is, perhaps, the most important tax upon the profits of stock employed in agricul-ture that is levied in any part of Europe.
                        IN the disorderly state of Europe during the prevalence of the feudal government, the sovereign was obliged to content himself with taxing those who were too weak to refuse to pay taxes. The great lords, though willing to assist him upon particular emergencies, refused to subject themselves to any constant tax, and he was not strong enough to force them. The occupiers of land, all over Europe, were the greater part of them originally bond-men. Through the greater part of Europe they were gradually eman-cipated. Some of them acquired the property of landed estates which they held by some base or ignoble tenure, sometimes under the king, and sometimes under some other great lord, like the antient copy-holders of England. Others, without acquiring the property, obtained leases for terms of years of the lands which they occu-pied

under their lord, and thus became less dependent upon him. The great lords seem to have beheld the degree of prosperity and independency which this inferior order of men had thus come to enjoy, with malignant and contemptuous indignation, and wil-lingly consented that the sovereign should tax them. In some coun-tries this tax was confined to the lands which were held in property by an ignoble tenure; and, in this case, the taille was said to be real. The land-tax established by the late king of Sardinia, and the taille in the provinces of Languedoc, Provence, Dauphiné, and Brittany; in the generality of Montauban, and in the elections of Agen and Condom, as well as in some other districts of France, are taxes upon lands held in property by an ignoble tenure. In other countries the tax was laid upon the supposed profits of all those who held in farm or lease lands belonging to other people, whatever might be the tenure by which the proprietor held them; and in this case the taille was said to be personal. In the greater part of those provinces of France, which are called the Countries of Elections, the taille is of this kind. The real taille, as it is imposed only upon a part of the lands of the country, is necessa-rily an unequal, but it is not always an arbitrary tax, though it is so upon some occasions. The personal taille, as it is intended to be proportioned to the profits of a certain class of people, which can only be guessed at, is necessarily both arbitrary and unequal.
                        IN France the personal taille at present, (1775,) annually imposed upon the twenty generalities, called the Countries of Elections, amounts to 40,107,239 livres, 16 sous Memoires concernant les Droits, &amp;c. tome ii. p. 17.. The proportion in which this sum is assessed upon those different provinces, varies from year to year, according to the reports which are made to the king's council concerning the goodness or badness of the crop, as well as other circumstances which may either increase or diminish their

respective abilities to pay. Each generality is divided into a cer-tain number of elections, and the proportion in which the sum imposed upon the whole generality is divided among those different elections, varies likewise from year to year, according to the reports made to the council concerning their respective abilities. It seems impossible that the council, with the best intentions, can ever pro-portion with tolerable exactness, either of those two assessments to the real abilities of the province or district upon which they are respectively laid. Ignorance and misinformation must always, more or less, mislead the most upright council. The proportion which each parish ought to support of what is assessed upon the whole election, and that which each individual ought to support of what is assessed upon his particular parish, are both in the same manner varied, from year to year, according as circumstances are supposed to require. These circumstances are judged of, in the one case, by the officers of the election; in the other by those of the parish; and both the one and the other are, more or less, under the direc-tion and influence of the intendant. Not only ignorance and mis-information, but friendship, party animosity, and private resent-ment, are said frequently to mislead such assessors. No man sub-ject to such a tax, it is evident, can ever be certain, before he is assessed, of what he is to pay. He cannot even be certain after he is assessed. If any person has been taxed who ought to have been exempted; or if any person has been taxed beyond his proportion, though both must pay in the mean time, yet if they complain and make good their complaints, the whole parish is reimposed next year in order to reimburse them. If any of the contributors become bank-rupt or insolvent, the collector is obliged to advance his tax, and the whole parish is reimposed next year in order to reimburse the collector. If the collector himself should become bankrupt, the parish which elects him must answer for his conduct to the receiver-general of the election. But, as it might be troublesome for the

receiver to prosecute the whole parish, he takes at his choice five or six of the richest contributors, and obliges them to make good what had been lost by the insolvency of the collector. The parish is afterwards reimposed in order to reimburse those five or six. Such reimpositions are always over and above the taille of the particular year in which they are laid on.
                        WHEN a tax is imposed upon the profits of stock in a particular branch of trade, the traders are all careful to bring no more goods to market than what they can sell at a price sufficient to reimburse them for advancing the tax. Some of them withdraw a part of their stocks from the trade, and the market is more sparingly sup-plied than before. The price of the goods rises, and the final pay-ment of the tax falls upon the consumer. But when a tax is im-posed upon the profits of stock employed in agriculture, it is not the interest of the farmers to withdraw any part of their stock from that employment. Each farmer occupies a certain quantity of land, for which he pays rent. For the proper cultivation of this land a certain quantity of stock is necessary; and by withdraw-ing any part of this necessary quantity, the farmer is not likely to be more able to pay either the rent or the tax. In order to pay the tax, it can never be his interest to diminish the quantity of his produce, nor consequently to supply the market more sparingly than before. The tax, therefore, will never enable him to raise the price of his produce, nor to reimburse himself by throwing the final payment upon the consumer. The farmer, however, must have his reasonable profit as well as every other dealer, otherwise he must give up the trade. After the imposition of a tax of this kind, he can get this reasonable profit only by paying less rent to the land-lord. The more he is obliged to pay in the way of tax, the less he can afford to pay in the way of rent. A tax of this kind imposed during the currency of a lease may, no doubt, distress or ruin the

farmer. Upon the renewal of the lease it must always fall upon the landlord.
                        IN the countries where the personal taille takes place, the farmer is commonly assessed in proportion to the stock which he appears to employ in cultivation. He is, upon this account, frequently afraid to have a good team of horses or oxen, but endeavours to cultivate with the meanest and most wretched instruments of hus-bandry that he can. Such is his distrust in the justice of his asses-sors, that he counterfeits poverty, and wishes to appear scarce able to pay any thing for fear of being obliged to pay too much. By this miserable policy he does not, perhaps, always consult his own inte-rest in the most effectual manner; and he probably loses more by the diminution of his produce than he saves by that of his tax. Though, in consequence of this wretched cultivation the market is, no doubt, somewhat worse supplied; yet the small rise of price which this may occasion, as it is not likely even to indemnify the farmer for the diminution of his produce, it is still less likely to enable him to pay more rent to the landlord. The public, the far-mer, the landlord, all suffer more or less by this degraded cultiva-tion. That the personal taille tends, in many different ways, to discourage cultivation, and consequently to dry up the principal source of the wealth of every great country, I have already had occasion to observe in the third book of this inquiry.
                        WHAT are called poll-taxes in the southern provinces of North America, and in the West India islands, annual taxes of so much a head upon every negro, are properly taxes upon the profits of a certain species of stock employed in agriculture. As the planters are, the greater part of them, both farmers and landlords, the final payment of the tax falls upon them in their quality of land-lords without any retribution.
                        
                           

TAXES of so much a head upon the bondmen employed in cul-tivation, seem antiently to have been common all over Europe. There subsists at present a tax of this kind in the empire of Russia. It is probably upon this account that poll-taxes of all kinds have often been represented as badges of slavery. Every tax, however, is to the person who pays it a badge, not of slavery, but of liberty. It denotes that he is subject to government, indeed, but that, as he has some property, he cannot himself be the property of a master. A poll-tax upon slaves, is altogether different from a poll-tax upon freemen. The latter is paid by the persons upon whom it is im-posed; the former by a different set of persons. The latter is either altogether arbitrary or altogether unequal, and in most cases is both the one and the other; the former, though in some respects un-equal, different slaves being of different values, is in no respect arbi-trary. Every master who knows the number of his own slaves, knows exactly what he has to pay. Those different taxes, however, being called by the same name, have been considered as of the same nature.
                        TAXES upon the profits of stock in particular employments can never affect the interest of money. Nobody will lend his money for less interest to those who exercise the taxed, than to those who exercise the untaxed employments. Taxes upon the revenue arising from stock in all employments, where the government attempts to levy them with any degree of exactness, will, in many cases, fall upon the interest of money. The Vingtieme or twentieth-penny in France, is a tax of the same kind with what is called the land-tax in England, and is assessed, in the same manner, upon the revenue arising from land, houses, and stock. So far as it affects stock, it is assessed, though not with great rigour, yet with much more exactness than that part of the land-tax of England which is imposed upon the same fund. It, in many cases, falls altogether upon the inte-rest

of money. Money is frequently sunk in France upon what are called Contracts for the constitution of a rent, that is, perpe-tual annuities redeemable at any time by the debtor upon repay-ment of the sum originally advanced, but of which this redemption is not exigible by the creditor except in particular cases. The ving-tieme seems not to have raised the rate of those annuities, though it is exactly levied upon them all.
                     
                  
                  
                     APPENDIX to ARTICLES I. and II.Taxes upon the capital Value of Land, Houses, and Stock.
                     
                     WHILE property remains in the possession of the same person, whatever permanent taxes may have been imposed upon it, they have never been intended to diminish or take away any part of its capital value, but only some part of the revenue arising from it. But when property changes hands, when it is transmitted either from the dead to the living, or from the living to the living, such taxes have frequently been imposed upon it as necessarily take away some part of its capital value.
                     THE transference of all sorts of property from the dead to the living, and that of immoveable property, of land and houses, from the living to the living, are transactions which are in their nature either public and notorious, or such as cannot be long concealed. Such transactions, therefore, may be taxed directly. The trans-ference of stock or immoveable property from the living to the living by the lending of money, is frequently a secret transaction, and may always be made so. It cannot easily, therefore, be taxed directly. It has been taxed indirectly in two different ways; first, by requiring that the deed, containing the obligation to repay, should be written upon paper or parchment, which had paid a

THERE seem, however, to be two cases in which it will generally be advantageous to lay some burden upon foreign, for the encou-ragement of domestick industry.
               THE first is when some particular sort of industry is necessary for the defence of the country. The defence of Great Britain, for example, depends very much upon the number of its sailors and shipping. The act of navigation, therefore, very properly endeavours to give the sailors and shipping of Great Britain the monopoly of the trade of their own country, in some cases, by absolute prohibitions, and in others by heavy burdens upon the shipping of foreign countries. The following are the principal dispositions of this act:
               FIRST, all ships, of which the owners, masters, and three-fourths of the mariners are not British subjects, are prohibited, upon pain of forfeiting ship and cargo, from trading to the British settlements and plantations, or from being employed in the coast-ing trade of Great Britain.
               SECONDLY, a great variety of the most bulky articles of im-portation can be brought into Great Britain only, either in such ships as are above described, or in ships of the country where those goods are produced, and of which the owners, masters, and three-fourths of the mariners are of that particular country; and when imported even in ships of this latter kind, they are subject to double aliens duty. If imported in ships of any other country, the penalty is forfeiture of ship and cargo. When this act was made, the Dutch were, what they still are, the great carriers of Europe, and by this regulation they were entirely excluded from being the carriers to Great Britain, or from importing to us the goods of any other European country.
               
                  

certain stamp-duty, otherwise not to be valid; secondly, by re-quiring, under the like penalty of invalidity, that it should be recorded either in a public or secret register, and by imposing cer-tain duties upon such registration. Stamp-duties and duties of registration have frequently been imposed likewise upon the deeds transferring property of all kinds from the dead to the living, and upon those transferring immoveable property from the living to the living, transactions which might easily have been taxed directly.
                     THE Vicesima Hereditatum, the twentieth penny of inheritances, imposed by Augustus upon the antient Romans, was a tax upon the transference of property from the dead to the living. Dion Cassius Lib. 55. See also Burman de Vectigalibus pop. Rom. cap. xi. and Bouchaud de l' impôt du vingtieme sur les successions., the author who writes concerning it the least indistinctly, says, that it was imposed upon all successions, legacies and dona-tions, in case of death, except upon those to the nearest relations, and to the poor.
                     OF the same kind is the Dutch tax upon successions Memoires concernant les Droits, &amp;c. tom. i. p. 225.. Colla-teral successions are taxed, according to the degree of relation, from five to thirty per cent. upon the whole value of the succession. Testamentary donations or legacies to collaterals, are subject to the like duties. Those from husband to wife, or from wife to hus-band, to the fiftieth penny. The Luctuosa Hereditas, the mourn-ful succession of ascendents to descendents, to the twentieth penny only. Direct successions, or those of descendents to ascendents, pay no tax. The death of a father, to such of his children as live in the same house with him, is seldom attended with any increase, and frequently with a considerable diminution of revenue; by the loss of his industry, of his office, or of some life-rent estate, of which he may have been in possession. That tax would be cruel and oppressive which aggravated their loss by taking from them any part

of his succession. It may, however, sometimes be otherwise with those children who, in the language of the Roman law, are said to be emancipated; in that of the Scotch law, to be foris-fami-liated; that is, who have received their portion, have got fami-lies of their own, and are supported by funds separate and inde-pendent of those of their father. Whatever part of his succes-sion might come to such children, would be a real addition to their fortune, and might, therefore, perhaps, without more incon-veniency than what attends all duties of this kind, be liable to some tax.
                     THE casualties of the feudal law were taxes upon the trans-ference of land, both from the dead to the living, and from the living to the living. In antient times they constituted in every part of Europe one of the principal branches of the revenue of the crown.
                     THE heir of every immediate vassal of the crown paid a cer-tain duty, generally a year's rent, upon receiving the investiture of the estate. If the heir was a minor, the whole rents of the estate, during the continuance of the minority, devolved to the superior without any other charge, besides the maintenance of the minor, and the payment of the widow's dower, when there hap-pened to be a dowager, upon the land. When the minor came to be of age, another tax, called Relief, was still due to the superior, which generally amounted likewise to a year's rent. A long minority, which in the present times so frequently disburdens a great estate of all its incumbrances, and restores the family to their antient splendor, could in those times have no such effect. The waste, and not the dis-incumbrance of the estate, was the common effect of a long minority.
                     BY the feudal law the vassal could not alienate without the consent of his superior, who generally extorted a fine or com-position for granting it. This fine, which was at first arbitrary, came in many countries to be regulated at a certain portion

of the price of the land. In some countries, where the greater part of the other feudal customs have gone into disuse, this tax upon the alienation of land still continues to make a considerable branch of the revenue of the sovereign. In the canton of Berne it is so high as a sixth part of the price of all noble fiefs; and a tenth part of that of all ignoble ones Memoires concernant les Droits, &amp;c. tom. i. p. 154.. In the canton of Lucerne the tax upon the sale of lands is not universal, and takes place only in certain districts. But if any person sells his land, in order to remove out of the territory, he pays ten per cent. upon the whole price of the sale Id. p. 157.. Taxes of the same kind upon the sale either of all lands, or of lands held by certain tenures, take place in many other countries, and make a more or less considerable branch of the revenue of the sovereign.
                     SUCH transactions may be taxed indirectly by means either of stamp-duties, or of duties upon registration; and those duties either may or may not be proportioned to the value of the subject which is transferred.
                     IN Great Britain the stamp-duties are higher or lower, not so much according to the value of the property transferred, (an eighteen penny or half crown stamp being sufficient upon a bond for the largest sum of money) as according to the nature of the deed. The highest do not exceed six pounds upon every sheet of paper, or skin of parchment; and these high duties fall chiefly upon grants from the crown, and upon certain law proceedings; without any regard to the value of the subject. There are in Great Britain no duties on the registration of deeds or writings, except the fees of the officers, who keep the register; and these are seldom more than a reasonable recompence for their labour. The crown derives no revenue from them.
                     
                        

IN Holland Id. tom. i. p. 223, 224, 225. there are both stamp-duties and duties upon regi-stration; which in some cases are, and in some are not proportioned to the value of the property transferred. All testaments must be writ-ten upon stampt-paper, of which the price is proportioned to the property disposed of, so that there are stamps which cost from three-pence, or three stivers a sheet, to three hundred florins, equal to about twenty-seven pound ten shillings of our money. If the stamp is of an inferior price to what the testator ought to have made use of, his succession is confiscated. This is over and above all their other taxes on succession. Except bills of exchange, and some other mercantile bills, all other deeds, bonds and contracts, are subject to a stamp-duty. This duty, however, does not rise in proportion to the value of the subject. All sales of land and of houses, and all mortgages upon either, must be registered, and, upon registration, pay a duty to the state of two and a half per cent. upon the amount of the price or the mortgage. This duty is extended to the sale of all ships and vessels of more than two tons burthen, whether decked or undecked. These, it seems, are considered as a sort of houses upon the water. The sale of moveables, when it is ordered by a court of justice, is subject to the like duty of two and a half per cent.
                     IN France there are both stamp-duties and duties upon regi-stration. The former are considered as a branch of the aides or excise, and in the provinces where those duties take place, are levied by the excise officers. The latter are considered as a branch of the domaine of the crown, and are levied by a different set of officers.
                     THOSE modes of taxation, by stamp-duties and by duties upon registration, are of very modern invention. In the course of little more than a century, however, stamp-duties have, in Europe, become almost universal, and duties upon registration

extremely common. There is no art which one government sooner learns of another than that of draining money from the pockets of the people.
                     TAXES upon the transference of property from the dead to the living, fall finally as well as immediately upon the person to whom the property is transferred. Taxes upon the sale of land fall altogether upon the seller. The seller is almost always under the necessity of selling, and must, therefore, take such a price as he can get. The buyer is scarce ever under the necessity of buying, and will, therefore, give only such a price as he likes. He considers what the land will cost him in tax and price toge-ther. The more he is obliged to pay in the way of tax, the less he will be disposed to give in the way of price. Such taxes, therefore, fall almost always upon a necessitous person, and must, therefore, be frequently very cruel and oppressive. Taxes upon the sale of new-built houses, where the building is sold without the ground, fall generally upon the buyer, because the builder must generally have his profit; otherwise he must give up the trade. If he advances the tax, therefore, the buyer must gene-rally repay it to him. Taxes upon the sale of old houses, for the same reason as those upon the sale of land, fall generally upon the seller; whom in most cases either conveniency or necessity obliges to sell. The number of new built houses that are annu-ally brought to market, is more or less regulated by the demand. Unless the demand is such as to afford the builder his profit, after paying all expences, he will build no more houses. The number of old houses which happen at any time to come to market is regulated by accidents of which the greater part have no relation to the demand. Two or three great bankruptcies in a mercan-tile town, will bring many houses to sale, which must be sold for what can be got for them. Taxes upon the sale of ground-rents fall altogether upon the seller; for the same reason as those

upon the sale of land, Stamp duties, and duties upon the regi-stration of bonds and contracts for borrowed money, fall alto-gether upon the borrower, and, in fact, are always paid by him. Duties of the same kind upon law proceedings fall upon the suitors. They reduce to both the capital value of the subject in dispute. The more it costs to acquire any property, the less must be the value of it when acquired.
                     ALL taxes upon the transference of property of every kind, so far as they diminish the capital value of that property, tend to diminish the funds destined for the maintenance of productive labour. They are all more or less unthrifty taxes that increase the revenue of the sovereign, which seldom maintains any but unproductive labourers, at the expence of the capital of the people which maintains none but productive.
                     SUCH taxes, even when they are proportioned to the value of the property transferred, are still unequal; the frequency of trans-ference not being always equal in property of equal value. When they are not proportioned to this value, which is the case with the greater part of the stamp-duties, and duties of registration, they are still more so. They are in no respect arbitrary, but are or may be in all cases perfectly clear and certain. Though they sometimes fall upon the person who is not very able to pay; the time of payment is in most cases sufficiently convenient for him. When the payment becomes due, he must in most cases have the money to pay. They are levied at very little expence, and in general subject the contributors to no other inconveniency besides always the unavoidable one of paying the tax.
                     IN France the stamp-duties are not much complained of. Those of registration, which they call the Contrôle, are. They give occasion, it is pretended, to much extortion in the officers of the

farmers general who collect the tax, which is in a great measure arbitrary and uncertain. In the greater part of the libels which have been written against the present system of finances in France, the abuses of the contrôle make a principal article. Uncertainty, however, does not seem to be necessarily inherent in the nature of such taxes. If the popular complaints are well founded, the abuse must arise, not so much from the nature of the tax, as from the want of precision and distinctness in the words of the edicts or laws which impose it.
                     THE registration of mortgages, and in general of all rights upon immoveable property, as it gives great security both to creditors and purchasers, is extremely advantageous to the pub-lic. That of the greater part of deeds of other kinds is frequently inconvenient and even dangerous to individuals, without any advantage to the public. All registers which, it is acknow-ledged, ought to be kept secret, ought certainly never to exist. The credit of individuals ought certainly never to depend upon so very slender a security as the probity and religion of the inferior officers of revenue. But where the fees of registration have been made a source of revenue to the sovereign, register offices have commonly been multiplied without end, both for the deeds which ought to be registered, and for those which ought not. In France there are several different sorts of secret registers. This abuse, though not perhaps a necessary, it must be acknowledged, is a very natural effect of such taxes.
                     SUCH stamp-duties as those in England upon cards and dice, upon news-papers and periodical pamphlets, &amp;c. are properly taxes upon consumption; the final payment falls upon the per-sons who use or consume such commodities. Such stamp-duties as those upon licences to retail ale, wine and spirituous liquors, though intended perhaps to fall upon the profits of the retailers, are

likewise finally paid by the consumers of those liquors. Such taxes, though called by the same name, and levied by the same officers and in the same manner with the stamp-duties above men-tioned upon the transference of property, are however of a quite different nature, and fall upon quite different funds.
                  
                  
                     ARTICLE III. Taxes upon the Wages of Labour.
                     
                     THE wages of the inferior classes of workmen, I have endea-voured to show in the first book, are every where necessarily regulated by two different circumstances; the demand for labour, and the ordinary or average price of provisions. The demand for labour, according as it happens to be either increasing, stationary, or declining; or to require an increasing, stationary, or declining population, regulates the subsistence of the labourer, and determines in what degree it shall be, either liberal, moderate, or scanty. The ordinary or average price of provisions determines the quantity of money which must be paid to the workman in order to enable him, one year with another, to purchase this liberal, moderate, or scanty subsistence. While the demand for labour and the price of provisions, therefore, remain the same, a direct tax upon the wages of labour can have no other effect than to raise them some-what higher than the tax. Let us suppose, for example, that in a particular place the demand for labour and the price of provi-sions were such as to render ten shillings a week the ordinary wages of labour; and that a tax of one-fifth, or four shillings in the pound, was imposed upon wages. If the demand for labour and the price of provisions remained the same, it would still be necessary that the labourer should in that place earn such a subsist-ence as could be bought only for ten shillings a week, or that after

paying the tax he should have ten shillings a week free wages. But in order to leave him such free wages after paying such a tax, the price of labour must in that place soon rise, not to twelve shillings a week only, but to twelve and sixpence; that is, in order to enable him to pay a tax of one-fifth, his wages must necessarily soon rise, not one-fifth part only, but one-fourth. Whatever was the proportion of the tax, the wages of labour must in all cases rise, not only in that proportion, but in a higher proportion. If the tax, for example, was one-tenth, the wages of labour must necessarily soon rise, not one-tenth part only, but one-eighth.
                     A DIRECT tax upon the wages of labour, therefore, though the labourer might perhaps pay it out of his hand, could not pro-perly be said to be even advanced by him; at least if the demand for labour and the average price of provisions remained the same after the tax as before it. In all such cases, not only the tax, but something more than the tax, would in reality be advanced by the person who immediately employed him. The final payment would in different cases fall upon different persons. The rise which such a tax might occasion in the wages of manufacturing labour would be advanced by the master manufacturer, who would both be entitled and obliged to charge it, with a profit, upon the price of his goods. The final payment of this rise of wages there-fore, together with the additional profit of the master manufac-turer, would fall upon the consumer. The rise which such a tax might occasion in the wages of country labour would be advanced by the farmer, who in order to maintain the same number of labourers as before would be obliged to employ a greater capital. In order to get back this greater capital, together with the ordinary profits of stock, it would be necessary that he should retain a larger portion, or what comes to the same thing, the price of a larger portion, of the produce of the land, and consequently that he

should pay less rent to the landlord. The final payment of this rise of wages, therefore, would in this case fall upon the landlord, together with the additional profit of the farmer who had advanced it. In all cases a direct tax upon the wages of labour must, in the long run, occasion both a greater reduction in the rent of land, and a greater rise in the price of manufactured goods, than would have followed from the proper assessment of a sum equal to the produce of the tax, partly upon the rent of land, and partly upon consumable commodities.
                     IF direct taxes upon the wages of labour have not always occa-sioned a proportionable rise in those wages, it is because they have generally occasioned a considerable fall in the demand for labour. The declension of industry, the decrease of employment for the poor, the diminution of the annual produce of the land and labour of the country, have generally been the effects of such taxes. In consequence of them, however, the price of labour must al-ways be higher than it otherwise would have been in the actual state of the demand: and this enhancement of price, together with the profit of those who advance it, must always be finally paid by the landlords and consumers.
                     A TAX upon the wages of country labour does not raise the price of the rude produce of land; for the same reason that a tax upon the farmers profit does not raise that price.
                     ABSURD and destructive as such taxes are, however, they take place in many countries. In France that part of the taille which is charged upon the industry of workmen and day-labourers in country villages, is properly a tax of this kind. Their wages are computed according to the common rate of the district in which they reside, and that they may be as little liable as possible to any over-charge, their yearly gains are estimated at no more than two

THIRDLY, a great variety of the most bulky articles of im-portation are prohibited from being imported, even in British ships, from any country but that in which they are produced; under pain of forfeiting ship and cargo. This regulation too was probably intended against the Dutch. Holland was then, as now, the great emporium for all European goods, and by this regulation, British ships were hindered from loading in Holland the goods of any other European country.
               FOURTHLY, salt fish of all kinds, whale-fins, whale-bone, oil and blubber, not caught by and cured on board British vessels, when imported into Great Britain, are subjected to double aliens duty. The Dutch, as they are still the principal, were then the only fishers in Europe that attempted to supply foreign nations with fish. By this regulation, a very heavy burden was laid upon their supplying Great Britain.
               WHEN the act of navigation was made, though England and Holland were not actually at war, the most violent animosity subsisted between the two nations. It had begun during the government of the long parliament which first framed this act, and it broke out soon after in the Dutch wars during that of the Protector and of Charles the IId. It is not impossible, therefore, that some of the regulations of this famous act may have proceeded from national animosity. They are as wise, however, as if they had all been dictated by the most deliberate wisdom. National ani-mosity at that particular time aimed at the very same object which the most deliberate wisdom would have recommended, the dimi-nution of the naval power of Holland, the only naval power which could endanger the security of England.
               THE act of navigation is not favourable to foreign commerce, or to the growth of that opulence which can arise from it. The

hundred working days in the year Id. tom. ii. p. 108.. The tax of each individual is varied from year to year according to different circumstances, of which the collector or the commissary, whom the intendant appoints to assist him, are the judges. In Bohemia, in consequence of the alteration in the system of finances which was begun in 1748, a very heavy tax is imposed upon the industry of artificers. They are divided into four classes. The highest class pay a hundred florins a year; which, at two and twenty-pence halfpenny a florin, amounts to 9l. 7s. 6d. The second class are taxed at seventy; the third at fifty; and the fourth, comprehending artificers in vil-lages and the lowest class of those in towns, at twenty-five florins Id. tom. iii. p. 87..
                     THE recompence of ingenious artists and of men of liberal pro-fessions, I have endeavoured to show in the first book, necessarily keeps a certain proportion to the emoluments of inferior trades. A tax upon this recompence, therefore, could have no other effect than to raise it somewhat higher than in proportion to the tax. If it did not rise in this manner, the ingenious arts and the liberal professions, being no longer upon a level with other trades, would be so much deserted that they would soon return to that level.
                     THE emoluments of offices are not, like those of trades and professions, regulated by the free competition of the market, and do not, therefore, always bear a just proportion to what the nature of the employment requires. They are, perhaps in most coun-tries, higher than it requires; the persons who have the admini-stration of government being generally disposed to reward both themselves and their immediate dependents rather more than enough. The emoluments of offices, therefore, can in most cases very well

bear to be taxed. The persons, besides, who enjoy public offices, especially the more lucrative, are in all countries the objects of ge-neral envy; and a tax upon their emoluments, even though it should be somewhat higher than upon any other sort of revenue, is always a very popular tax. In England, for example, when by the land-tax every other sort of revenue was supposed to be assessed at four shillings in the pound, it was very popular to lay a real tax of five shillings in the pound upon the salaries of offices which exceeded a hundred pounds a year; those of the judges and a few others less obnoxious to envy excepted. There are in England no other direct taxes upon the wages of labour.
                  
                  
                     ARTICLE IV. Taxes which, it is intended, should fall indifferently upon every-different Species of Revenue.
                     
                     THE taxes which, it is intended, should fall indifferently upon every different species of revenue, are capitation taxes, and taxes upon consumable commodities. These must be paid indif-ferently from whatever revenue the contributors may possess; from the rent of their land, from the profits of their stock, or from the wages of their labour.
                     
                        Capitation Taxes.
                        CAPITATION taxes, if it is attempted to proportion them to the fortune or revenue of each contributor, become altogether arbi-trary. The state of a man's fortune varies from day to day, and without an inquisition more intolerable than any tax, and renewed at least once every year, can only be guessed at. His assessment, therefore, must in most cases depend upon the good or bad hu-mour of his assessors, and must, therefore, be altogether arbitrary and uncertain.
                        
                           

CAPITATION taxes, if they are proportioned, not to the sup-posed fortune, but to the rank of each contributor, become alto-gether unequal; the degrees of fortune being frequently unequal in the same degree of rank.
                        SUCH taxes, therefore, if it is attempted to render them equal, become altogether arbitrary and uncertain; and if it is attempted to render them certain and not arbitrary, became altogether un-equal. Let the tax be light or heavy, uncertainty is always a great grievance. In a light tax a considerable degree of inequality may be supported; in a heavy one it is altogether intolerable.
                        IN the different poll-taxes which took place in England, during the reign of William III. the contributors were, the greater part of them, assessed according to the degree of their rank; as dukes, marquisses, earls, viscounts, barons, esquires, gentlemen, the eldest and youngest sons of peers, &amp;c. All shopkeepers and trades-men worth more than three hundred pounds, that is, the better sort of them, were subject to the same assessment; how great so-ever might be the difference in their fortunes. Their rank was more considered than their fortune. Several of those who in the first poll-tax were rated according to their supposed fortune, were afterwards rated according to their rank. Sergeants, attornies, and proctors at law, who in the first poll-tax were assessed at three shillings in the pound of their supposed income, were afterwards assessed as gentlemen. In the assessment of a tax, which was not very heavy, a considerable degree of inequality had been found less insupportable than any degree of uncertainty.
                        IN the capitation which has been levied in France without any interruption since the beginning of the present century, the highest orders of people are rated according to their rank by an invariable

tarif; the lower orders of people, according to what is supposed to be their fortune, by an assessment which varies from year to year. The officers of the king's court, the judges and other officers in the superior courts of justice, the officers of the troops, &amp;c. are as-sessed in the first manner. The inferior ranks of people in the provinces are assessed in the second. In France the great easily submit to a considerable degree of inequality in a tax which, so far as it affects them, is not a very heavy one; but could not brook the arbitrary assessment of an intendant. The inferior ranks of people must, in that country, suffer patiently the usage which their superiors think proper to give them.
                        IN England the different poll-taxes never produced the sum which had been expected from them, or which, it was supposed, they might have produced, had they been exactly levied. In France the capitation always produces the sum expected from it. The mild government of England, when it assessed the different ranks of people to the poll-tax, contented itself with what that assessment happened to produce; and required no compensation for the loss which the state might sustain either by those who could not pay, or by those who would not pay, (for there were many such), and who, by the indulgent execution of the law, were not forced to pay. The more severe government of France assesses upon each generality a certain sum, which the intendant must find as he can. If any province complains of being assessed too high, it may, in the assessment of next year, obtain an abatement propor-tioned to the over-charge of the year before: But it must pay in the meantime. The intendant, in order to be sure of finding the sum assessed upon his generality, was impowered to assess it in a larger sum, that the failure or inability of some of the contributors might be compensated by the over-charge of the rest; and till 1765, the fixation of this surplus assessment, was left altogether

to his discretion. In that year indeed the council assumed this power to itself. In the capitation of the provinces, it is observed by the perfectly-well informed author of the Memoirs upon the impositions in France, the portion which falls upon the nobility, and upon those whose privileges exempt them from the taille, is the least considerable. The largest falls upon those subject to the taille, who are assessed to the capitation at so much a pound of what they pay to that other tax.
                        CAPITATION taxes, so far as they are levied upon the lower ranks of people, are direct taxes upon the wages of labour, and are attended with all the inconveniencies of such taxes.
                        CAPITATION taxes are levied at little expence; and, where they are rigorously exacted, afford a very sure revenue to the state. It is upon this account that in countries where the ease, comfort, and security of the inferior ranks of people are little attended to, capitation taxes are very common. It is in general, however, but a small part of the public revenue, which, in a great empire, has ever been drawn from such taxes; and the greatest sum which they have ever afforded, might always have been found in some other way much more convenient to the people.
                     
                     
                        Taxes upon consumable Commodities.
                        THE impossibility of taxing the people, in proportion to their revenue, by any capitation, seems to have given occasion to the inven-tion of taxes upon consumable commodities. The state not knowing how to tax directly and proportionably the revenue of its subjects, endeavours to tax it indirectly by taxing their expence, which, it is supposed, will in most cases be nearly in proportion to their

revenue. Their expence is taxed by taxing the consumable com-modities upon which it is laid out.
                        CONSUMABLE commodities are either necessaries or luxuries.
                        BY necessaries I understand, not only the commodities which are indispensibly necessary for the support of life, but whatever the custom of the country renders it indecent for creditable people, even of the lowest order, to be without. A linen shirt, for ex-ample, is, strictly speaking, not a necessary of life. The Greeks and Romans lived, I suppose, very comfortably, though they had no linen. But in the present times, through the greater part of Europe, a creditable day-labourer would be ashamed to appear in public without a linen shirt, the want of which would be supposed to denote that disgraceful degree of poverty, which, it is presumed, no body can well fall into without extreme bad conduct. Custom, in the same manner, has rendered leather shoes a necessary of life in England. The poorest creditable person of either sex would be ashamed to appear in public without them. In Scotland, custom has rendered them a necessary of life to the lowest order of men; but not to the same order of women, who may, without any discredit, walk about bare-footed. In France, they are necessaries neither to men nor to women; the lowest rank of both sexes appearing there publicly, without any discredit, sometimes in wooden shoes, and sometimes bare-footed. Under necessaries, therefore, I comprehend, not only those things which nature, but those things which the established rules of decency have ren-dered necessary to the lowest rank of people. All other things, I call luxuries; without meaning by this appellation, to throw the smallest degree of reproach upon the temperate use of them. Beer and ale, for example, in Great Britain, and wine, even in the wine countries, I call luxuries. A man of any rank may, without

any reproach, abstain totally from tasting such liquors. Nature does not render them necessary for the support of life; and custom no where renders it indecent to live without them.
                        AS the wages of labour are every where regulated partly by the demand for it, and partly by the average price of the necessary articles of subsistence; whatever raises this average price must ne-cessarily raise those wages, so that the labourer may still be able to purchase that quantity of those necessary articles which the state of the demand for labour, whether increasing, stationary, or declining, requires that he should have See Book I. Cap. 8.. A tax upon those ar-ticles necessarily raises their price somewhat higher than the amount of the tax, because the dealer, who advances the tax, must generally get it back with a profit. Such a tax must, there-fore, occasion a rise in the wages of labour proportionable to this rise of price.
                        IT is thus that a tax upon the necessaries of life, operates ex-actly in the same manner as a direct tax upon the wages of labour. The labourer, though he may pay it out of his hand; cannot, for any considerable time at least, be properly said even to advance it. It must always in the long-run be advanced to him by his imme-diate employer in the advanced rate of his wages. His employer, if he is a manufacturer, will charge upon the price of his goods this rise of wages, together with a profit; so that the final payment of the tax, together with this over-charge, will fall upon the consumer. If his employer is a farmer, the final payment, to-gether with a like over-charge, will fall upon the rent of the landlord.
                        IT is otherwise with taxes upon what I call luxuries; even upon those of the poor. The rise in the price of the taxed commodities,

will not necessarily occasion any rise in the wages of labour. A tax upon tobacco, for example, though a luxury of the poor as well as of the rich, will not raise wages. Though it is taxed in England at three times, and in France at fifteen times its original price, those high duties seem to have no effect upon the wages of labour. The same thing may be said of the taxes upon tea and sugar; which in England and Holland have become luxuries of the lowest ranks of people; and of those upon chocolate, which in Spain is said to have become so. The different taxes which in Great Britain have in the course of the present century been im-posed upon spirituous liquors, are not supposed to have had any effect upon the wages of labour. The rise in the price of porten, occasioned by an additional tax of three shillings upon the barrel of strong beer, has not raised the wages of common labour in London. These were about eighteen-pence and twenty-pence a day before the tax, and they are not more now.
                        THE high price of such commodities does not necessarily di-minish the ability of the inferior ranks of people to bring up families. Upon the sober and industrious poor, taxes upon such commodities act as sumptuary laws, and dispose them either to moderate, or to refrain altogether from the use of superfluities which they can no longer easily afford. Their ability to bring up families, in consequence of this forced frugality, instead of being diminished, is frequently, perhaps, increased by the tax. It is the sober and industrious poor who generally bring up the most numerous families, and who principally supply the demand for useful labour. All the poor indeed are not sober and industrious, and the dissolute and disorderly might continue to indulge them-selves in the use of such commodities after this rise of price in the same manner as before; without regarding the distress which this indulgence might bring upon their families. Such disorderly per-sons,

however, seldom rear up numerous families; their children generally perishing from neglect, mismanagement, and the scanti-ness or unwholesomeness of their food. If by the strength of their constitution they survive the hardships to which the bad conduct of their parents exposes them; yet the example of that bad conduct commonly corrupts their morals; so that, instead of being useful to society by their industry, they become public nuisances by their vices and disorders. Though the advanced price of the luxuries of the poor, therefore, might increase somewhat the distress of such disorderly families, and thereby diminish some-what their ability to bring up children; it would not probably diminish much the useful population of the country.
                        ANY rise in the average price of necessaries, unless it is com-pensated by a proportionable rise in the wages of labour, must necessarily diminish more or less the ability of the poor to bring up numerous families, and consequently to supply the demand for useful labour; whatever may be the state of that demand, whether increasing, stationary, or declining; or such as requires an in-creasing, stationary, or declining, population.
                        TAXES upon luxuries have no tendency to raise the price of any other commodities except that of the commodities taxed. Taxes upon necessaries, by raising the wages of labour, necessarily tend to raise the price of all manufactures, and consequently to diminish the extent of their sale and consumption. Taxes upon luxuries are finally paid by the consumers of the commodities taxed, without any retribution. They fall indifferently upon every species of revenue, the wages of labour, the profits of stock, and the rent of land. Taxes upon necessaries, so far as they affect the labouring poor, are finally paid, partly by landlords in the dimi-nished rent of their lands, and partly by rich consumers, whether

landlords or others, in the advanced price of manufactured goods; and always with a considerable over-charge. The advanced price of such manufactures as are real necessaries of life, and are destined for the consumption of the poor, of coarse woollens, for example, must be compensated to the poor by a farther advancement of their wages. The middling and superior ranks of people, if they under-stood their own interest, ought always to oppose all taxes upon the necessaries of life, as well as all direct taxes upon the wages of labour. The final payment of both the one and the other falls altogether upon themselves, and always with a considerable over-charge. They fall heaviest upon the landlords, who always pay in a double capacity; in that of landlords, by the reduction of their rent; and in that of rich consumers, by the increase of their ex-pence. The observation of Sir Mathew Decker, that certain taxes are in the price of certain goods sometimes repeated and accumu-lated four or five times, is perfectly just with regard to taxes upon the necessaries of life. In the price of leather, for example, you must pay, not only for the tax upon the leather of your own shoes, but for a part of that upon those of the shoe-maker and the tanner. You must pay too for the tax upon the salt, upon the soap, and upon the candles which those workmen consume while employed in your service, and for the tax upon the leather, which the salt-maker, the soap-maker, and the candle-maker consume while em-ployed in their service.
                        IN Great Britain, the principal taxes upon the necessaries of life are those upon the four commodities just now mentioned, salt, lea-ther, soap, and candles.
                        SALT is a very antient and a very universal subject of taxation. It was taxed among the Romans, and it is so at present in, I be-lieve, every part of Europe. The quantity annually consumed by

interest of a nation in its commercial relations to foreign nations is, like that of a merchant with regard to the different people with whom he deals, to buy as cheap and to sell as dear as possible. But it will be most likely to buy cheap, when by the most perfect free-dom of trade it encourages all nations to bring to it the goods which it has occasion to purchase; and, for the same reason, it will be most likely to sell dear, when its markets are thus filled with the greatest number of buyers. The act of navigation, it is true, lays no burden upon foreign ships that come to export the produce of British industry. Even the antient aliens duty, which used to be paid upon all goods exported as well as imported, has, by several subsequent acts, been taken off from the greater part of the articles of exportation. But if foreigners, either by prohibitions or high duties, are hindered from coming to sell, they cannot always afford to come to buy; because coming without a cargo, they must lose the freight from their own country to Great Britain. By diminishing the number of sellers, therefore, we necessarily diminish that of buyers, and are thus likely not only to buy foreign goods dearer, but to sell our own cheaper, than if there was a more perfect freedom of trade. As defence, however, is of much more importance than opulence, the act of navigation is, perhaps, the wisest of all the commercial regulations of England.
               THE second case, in which it will generally be advantageous to lay some burden upon foreign for the encouragement of domestick industry, is, when some tax is imposed at home upon the produce of the latter. In this case, it seems reasonable that an equal tax should be imposed upon the like produce of the former. This would not give the monopoly of the home market to domestick industry, nor turn towards a particular employment a greater share of the stock and labour of the country, than what would naturally go to it. It would only hinder any part of what would naturally

any individual is so small, and may be purchased so gradually, that nobody, it seems to have been thought, could feel very sensibly even a pretty heavy tax upon it. It is in England taxed at three shillings a bushel; about three times the original price of the com-modity. In some other countries the tax is still higher. Leather is a real necessary of life. The use of linen renders soap such. In countries where the winter nights are long, candles are a necessary instrument of trade. Leather and soap are in Great Britain taxed at three halfpence a pound; candles at a penny; taxes which, upon the original price of leather may amount to about eight or ten per cent; upon that of soap to about twenty or five and twenty per cent; and upon that of candles to about fourteen or fifteen per cent; taxes which, though lighter than that upon salt, are still very heavy. As all those four commodities are real necessaries of life, such heavy taxes upon them must increase somewhat the expence of the sober and industrious poor, and must consequently raise more or less the wages of their labour.
                        IN a country where the winters are so cold as in Great Britain, fuel is, during that season, in the strictest sense of the word, a necessary of life, not only for the purpose of dressing victuals, but for the comfortable subsistence of many different sorts of workmen who work within doors; and coals are the cheapest of all fuel. The price of fuel has so important an influence upon that of labour, that all over Great Britain manufactures have confined themselves principally to the coal countries; other parts of the country, on account of the high price of this necessary article, not being able to work so cheap. In some manufactures, besides, coal is a ne-cessary instrument of trade; as in those of glass, iron, and all other metals. If a bounty could in any case be reasonable, it might per-haps be so upon the transportation of coals from those parts of the country in which they abound, to those in which they are wanted.

But the legislature, instead of a bounty, has imposed a tax of three shillings and three-pence a ton upon coal carried coastways; which upon most sorts of coal is more than sixty per cent. of the original price at the coal-pit. Coals carried either by land or by inland navigation pay no duty. Where they are naturally cheap, they are consumed duty free: Where they are naturally dear, they are loaded with a heavy duty.
                        SUCH taxes, though they raise the price of subsistence, and con-sequently the wages of labour, yet they afford a considerable reve-nue to government, which it might not be easy to find in any other way. There may, therefore, be good reasons for continuing them. The bounty upon the exportation of corn, so far as it tends in the actual state of tillage to raise the price of that necessary article, produces all the like bad effects; and instead of affording any reve-nue, frequently occasions a very great expence to government. The high duties upon the importation of foreign corn, which in years of moderate plenty amount to a prohibition; and the abso-lute prohibition of the importation either of live cattle or of salt provisions, which takes place in the ordinary state of the law, and which on account of the scarcity is at present suspended for a limited time with regard to Ireland and the British plantations, have all the bad effects of taxes upon the necessaries of life, and produce no revenue to government. Nothing seems necessary for the repeal of such regulations, but to convince the public of the futility of that system in consequence of which they have been established.
                        TAXES upon the necessaries of life are much higher in many other countries than in Great Britain. Duties upon flour and meal when ground at the mill, and upon bread when baked at the oven, take place in many countries. In Holland the money price of the bread consumed in towns is supposed to be doubled by means of

such taxes. In lieu of a part of them, the people who live in the country pay every year so much a head, according to the sort of bread they are supposed to consume. Those who consume wheaten bread, pay three gilders fifteen stivers; about six shillings and nine-pence halfpenny. These, and some other taxes of the same kind, by raising the price of labour, are said to have ruined the greater part of the manufactures of Holland Memoires concernant les Droits, &amp;c. p. 210,211.. Similar taxes, though not quite so heavy, take place in the Milanese, in the states of Genoa, in the dutchy of Modena, in the dutchies of Parma, Placentia, and Guastalla, and in the ecclesiastical state. A French author Le reformateur. of some note has proposed to reform the finances of his country, by substituting in the room of the greater part of other taxes this most ruinous of all taxes. There is nothing so absurd, says Cicero, which has not sometimes been asserted by some phi-losophers.
                        TAXES upon butchers meat are still more common than those upon bread. It may indeed be doubted whether butchers meat is any where a necessary of life. Grain and other vegetables, with the help of milk, cheese, and butter, or oil where butter is not to be had, it is known from experience, can, without any butchers meat, afford the most plentiful, the most wholesome, the most nourish-ing, and the most invigorating diet. Decency no where requires that any man should eat butchers meat, as it in most places requires that he should wear a linen shirt or a pair of leather shoes.
                        CONSUMABLE commodities, whether necessaries or luxuries, may be taxed in two different ways. The consumer may either pay an annual sum on account of his using or consuming goods of a certain kind; or the goods may be taxed while they remain in the hands of the dealer, and before they are delivered to the consumer. The consumable goods which last a considerable time before they are consumed altogether, are most properly taxed in the one way.

Those of which the consumption is either immediate or more speedy, in the other. The coach-tax and plate-tax are examples of the former method of imposing: The greater part of the other duties of excise and customs, of the latter.
                        A COACH may, with good management, last ten or twelve years. It might be taxed, once for all, before it comes out of the hands of the coach-maker. But it is certainly more convenient for the buyer to pay four pounds a year for the privilege of keeping a coach, than to pay all at once forty or forty-eight pounds additional price to the coach-maker; or a sum equivalent to what the tax is likely to cost him during the time he uses the same coach. A service of plate, in the same manner, may last more than a century. It is certainly easier for the consumer to pay five shillings a year for every hundred ounces of plate, near one per cent. of the value, than to redeem this long annuity at five and twenty or thirty years pur-chase, which would enhance the price at least five and twenty or thirty per cent. The different taxes which affect houses are cer-tainly more conveniently paid by moderate annual payments, than by a heavy tax of equal value upon the first building or sale of the house.
                        IT was the well known proposal of Sir Mathew Decker that all commodities, even those of which the consumption is either imme-diate or very speedy, should be taxed in this manner; the dealer advancing nothing, but the consumer paying a certain annual sum for the licence to consume certain goods. The object of his scheme was to promote all the different branches of foreign trade, particu-larly the carrying trade, by taking away all duties upon importa-tion and exportation, and thereby enabling the merchant to employ his whole capital and credit in the purchase of goods and the freight of ships, no part of either being diverted towards the

advancing of taxes. The project, however, of taxing, in this man-ner, goods of immediate or speedy consumption, seems liable to the four following very important objections. First, the tax would be more unequal, or not so well proportioned to the expence and consumption of the different contributors, as in the way in which it is commonly imposed. The taxes upon ale, wine, and spirituous liquors, which are advanced by the dealers, are finally paid by the different consumers exactly in proportion to their respective consumption. But if the tax was to be paid by pur-chasing a licence to drink those liquors, the sober would, in propor-tion to his consumption, be taxed much more heavily than the drunken consumer. A family which exercised great hospitality would be taxed much more lightly than one which entertained fewer guests. Secondly, this mode of taxation, by paying for an annual, half-yearly, or quarterly licence to consume certain goods, would diminish very much one of the principal conveniencies of taxes upon goods of speedy consumption; the piece-meal payment. In the price of three-pence halfpenny, which is at present paid for a pot of porter, the different taxes upon malt, hops, and beer, together with the extraordinary profit which the brewer charges for having advanced them, may perhaps amount to about three halfpence. If a work-man can conveniently spare those three halfpence, he buys a pot of porter. If he cannot, he contents himself with a pint, and, as a penny saved is a penny got, he thus gains a farthing by his temperance. He pays the tax piece-meal, as he can afford to pay it, and when he can afford to pay it; and every act of payment is perfectly voluntary, and what he can avoid if he chuses to do so. Thirdly, such taxes would operate less as sumptuary laws. When the licence was once purchased, whether the purchaser drunk much or drunk little, his tax would be the same. Fourthly, if a workman was to pay all at once, by yearly, half-yearly, or quarterly payments, a tax equal to what he at present pays, with little or no inconveniency, upon all the diffe-rent

pots and pints of porter which he drinks in any such period of time, the sum might frequently distress him very much. This mode of taxation, therefore, it seems evident, could never, without the most grievous oppression, produce a revenue nearly equal to what is derived from the present mode without any oppression. In several countries, however, commodities of an immediate or very speedy consumption are taxed in this manner. In Holland, people pay so much a head for a licence to drink tea. I have already men-tioned a tax upon bread, which, so far as it is consumed in farm-houses and country villages, is there levied in the same manner.
                        THE duties of excise are imposed chiefly upon goods of home produce destined for home consumption. They are imposed only upon a few sorts of goods of the most general use. There can never be any doubt either concerning the goods which are sub-ject to those duties, or concerning the particular duty which each species of goods is subject to. They fall almost altogether upon what I call luxuries, excepting always the four duties above-mentioned, upon salt, soap, leather, candles, and, perhaps, that upon green glass.
                        THE duties of customs are much more antient than those of excise. They seem to have been called customs, as denoting cus-tomary payments which had been in use from time immemorial. They appear to have been originally considered as taxes upon the profits of merchants. During the barbarous times of feudal anar-chy, merchants, like all the other inhabitants of burghs, were con-sidered as little better than emancipated bondmen, whose persons were despised, and whose gains were envied. The great nobility, who had consented that the king should tallage the profits of their own tenants, were not unwilling that he should tallage likewise: those of an order of men whom it was much less their interest to

protect. In those ignorant times it was not understood that the profits of merchants are a subject not taxable directly; or that the final payment of all such taxes must fall, with a considerable overcharge, upon the consumers.
                        THE gains of alien merchants were looked upon more unfavour-ably than those of English merchants. It was natural, therefore, that those of the former should be taxed more heavily than those of the latter. This distinction between the duties upon aliens and those upon English merchants, which was begun from igno-rance, has been continued from the spirit of monopoly, or in order to give our own merchants an advantage both in the home and in the foreign market.
                        WITH this distinction the antient duties of customs were im-posed equally upon all sorts of goods, necessaries as well as luxuries, goods exported as well as goods imported. Why should the dealers in one sort of goods, it seems to have been thought, be more favoured than those in another? or why should the merchant exporter be more favoured than the merchant importer?
                        THE antient customs were divided into three branches. The first, and perhaps the most antient of all those duties, was that upon wool and leather. It seems to have been chiefly or alto-gether an exportation duty. When the woollen manufacture came to be established in England, lest the king should lose any part of his customs upon wool by the exportation of woollen cloths, a like duty was imposed upon them. The other two branches were, first, a duty upon wine, which being imposed at so much a ton, was called a tonnage; and, secondly, a duty upon all other goods, which being imposed at so much a pound of their supposed value, was called a poundage. In the forty-seventh year of Edward III.

a duty of six-pence in the pound was imposed upon all goods exported and imported, except wools, wool-fells, leather, and wines, which were subject to particular duties. In the fourteenth of Richard II. this duty was raised to one shilling in the pound; but, three years afterwards, it was again reduced to six-pence. It was raised to eight-pence in the second year of Henry IV.; and in the fourth year of the same prince, to one shilling. From this time to the ninth year of William III. this duty continued at one shilling in the pound. The duties of tonnage and poundage were generally granted to the king by one and the same act of parliament, and were called the Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage. The subsidy of poundage having continued for so long a time at one shilling in the pound, or at five per cent.; a subsidy came, in the language of the customs, to denote a general duty of this kind of five per cent. This subsidy, which is now called the Old Subsidy, still continues to be levied according to the book of rates established in the twelfth of Charles II. The method of ascertaining, by a book of rates, the value of goods subject to this duty, is said to be older than the time of James I. The new subsidy imposed by the ninth and tenth of William III., was an additional five per cent. upon the greater part of goods. The one-third and the two-third subsidy made up be-tween them another five per cent. of which they were proportion-able parts. The subsidy of 1747 made a fourth five per cent. upon the greater part of goods; and that of 1759, a fifth upon some particular sorts of goods. Besides those five subsidies, a great variety of other duties have occasionally been imposed upon parti-cular sorts of goods, in order sometimes to relieve the exigencies of the state, and sometimes to regulate the trade of the country, accord-ing to the principles of the mercantile system.
                        THAT system has come gradually more and more into fashion. The old subsidy was imposed indifferently upon exportation as well

as importation. The four subsequent subsidies, as well as the other duties which have since been occasionally imposed upon particular sorts of goods, have, with a few exceptions, been laid altogether upon importation. The greater part of the antient duties which had been imposed upon the exportation of the goods of home produce and manufacture, have either been lightened or taken away alto-gether. In most cases they have been taken away. Bounties have even been given upon the exportation of some of them. Draw-backs too, sometimes of the whole, and, in most cases, of a part of the duties which are paid upon the importation of foreign goods, have been granted upon their exportation. Only half the duties imposed by the old subsidy upon importation are drawn back upon exportation: but the whole of those imposed by the later subsidies and other imposts are, upon the greater part of goods, drawn back in the same manner. This growing favour of exportation, and discouragement of importation, have suffered only a few exceptions, which chiefly concern the materials of some manufactures. These our merchants and manufacturers are willing should come as cheap as possible to themselves, and as dear as possible to their rivals and competitors in other countries. Foreign materials are, upon this account, sometimes allowed to be imported duty free; Spanish wool, for example, flax, and raw linen yarn. The exportation of the materials of home produce, and of those which are the pecu-liar produce of our colonies, has sometimes been prohibited, and sometimes subjected to higher duties. The exportation of English wool has been prohibited. That of beaver skins, of beaver wool, and of gum Senega, has been subjected to higher duties; Great Britain, by the conquest of Canada and Senegal, having got almost the monopoly of those commodities.
                        THAT the mercantile system has not been very favourable to the revenue of the great body of the people, to the annual pro-duce

of the land and labour of the country, I have endeavoured to shew in the fourth book of this inquiry. It seems not to have been more favourable to the revenue of the sovereign; so far at least as that revenue depends upon the duties of customs.
                        IN consequence of that system, the importation of several sorts of goods has been prohibited altogether. This prohibition has in some cases entirely prevented, and in others very much dimi-nished the importation of those commodities, by reducing the importers to the necessity of smuggling. It has entirely prevented the importation of foreign woollens; and it has very much di-minished that of foreign silks and velvets. In both cases it has entirely annihilated the revenue of customs which might have been levied upon such importation.
                        THE high duties which have been imposed upon the importa-tion of many different sorts of foreign goods, in order to dis-courage their consumption in Great Britain, have in many cases served only to encourage smuggling; and in all cases have reduced the revenue of the customs below what more moderate duties would have afforded. The saying of Dr. Swift, that in the arithmetic of the customs two and two, instead of making four, make sometimes only one, holds perfectly true with regard to such heavy duties, which never could have been imposed had not the mercantile system taught us in many cases to employ taxation as an instru-ment, not of revenue, but of monopoly.
                        THE bounties which are sometimes given upon the exporta-tion of home produce and manufactures, and the drawbacks which are paid upon the re-exportation of the greater part of foreign goods, have given occasion to many frauds, and to a species of smuggling more destructive of the public revenue than

               CHAP. I. Of the Principle of the commercial, or mercantile System.
               
               THAT wealth consists in money, or in gold and silver, is a popular notion which naturally arises from the double function of money, as the instrument of commerce, and as the measure of value. In consequence of its being the instrument of commerce, when we have money we can more readily obtain whatever else we have occasion for, than by means of any other commodity. The great affair, we always find, is to get money. When that is obtained, there is no difficulty in making any sub-sequent purchase. In consequence of its being the measure of value, we estimate that of all other commodities by the quantity of money which they will exchange for. We say of a rich man that he is worth a great deal, and of a poor man that he is worth very little money. A frugal man, or a man eager to be rich, is said to love money; and a careless, a generous, or a profuse man, is said to be indifferent about it. To grow rich is to get money; and wealth and money, in short, are in common language con-sidered as in every respect synonymous.
               A RICH country, in the same manner as a rich man, is sup-posed to be a country abounding in money; and to heap up gold and silver in any country is supposed to be the readiest way to enrich it. For some time after the discovery of America, the first en-quiry of the Spaniards, when they arrived upon any unknown coast, used to be, if there was any gold or silver to be found in the neighbourhood. By the information which they received, they judged whether it was worth while to make a settlement there, or if the country was worth the conquering. Plano Carpino, a monk

go to it from being turned away by the tax, into a less natural direction, and would leave the competition between foreign and domestick industry, after the tax, as nearly as possible upon the same footing as before it. In Great Britain, when any such tax is laid upon the produce of domestick industry, it is usual at the same time, in order to stop the clamorous complaints of our merchants and manufacturers, that they will be undersold at home, to lay a much heavier duty upon the importation of all foreign goods of the same kind.
               THIS second limitation of the freedom of trade according to some people should, upon some occasions, be extended much further than to the precise foreign commodities which could come into competition with those which had been taxed at home. When the necessaries of life have been taxed in any country, it becomes proper, they pretend, to tax not only the like necessaries of life imported from other countries, but all sorts of foreign goods which can come into competition with any thing that is the produce of domestick industry. Subsistence, they say, becomes necessarily dearer in consequence of such taxes; and the price of labour must always rise with the price of the labourers subsistence. Every com-modity, therefore, which is the produce of domestick industry, though not immediately taxed itself, becomes dearer in consequence of such taxes, because the labour which produces it becomes so. Such taxes, therefore, are really equivalent, they say, to a tax upon every particular commodity produced at home. In order to put domestick upon the same footing with foreign industry, therefore, it becomes necessary, they think, to lay some duty upon every foreign commodity, equal to this enhancement of the price of the home commodities with which it can come into com-petition.
               
                  

any other. In order to obtain the bounty or drawback, the goods, it is well known, are sometimes shipped and sent to sea; but soon afterwards clandestinely re-landed in some other part of the country. The defalcation of the revenue of customs occa-sioned by bounties and drawbacks, of which a great part are obtained fraudulently, is very great. The gross produce of the customs in the year which ended on the 5th of January, 1755, amounted to 5,068,000l. The bounties which were paid out of this revenue, though in that year there was no bounty upon corn, amounted to 167,800l. The drawbacks which were paid upon debentures and certificates to 2,156,800l. Bounties and drawbacks together amounted to 2,324,600l. In consequence of these deductions the revenue of the customs amounted only to 2,743,400l.: from which deducting 287,900l. for the expence of management in salaries and other incidents, the neat revenue of the customs for that year comes out to be 2,455,500l. The expence of management amounts, in this manner, to between five and six per cent. upon the gross revenue of the customs, and to something more than ten per cent. upon what remains of that revenue, after deducting what is paid away in bounties and drawbacks.
                        HEAVY duties being imposed upon almost all goods imported, our merchant importers smuggle as much, and make entry of as little as they can. Our merchant exporters, on the contrary, make entry of more than they export; sometimes out of vanity, and to pass for great dealers in goods which pay no duty; and sometimes to gain a bounty or a drawback. Our exports, in consequence of these different frauds, appear upon the custom-house books greatly to overbalance our imports; to the unspeak-able comfort of those politicians who measure the national pros-perity by what they call the balance of trade.
                        
                           

ALL goods imported, unless particularly exempted, and such exemptions are not very numerous, are liable to some duties of customs. If any goods are imported not mentioned in the book of rates, they are taxed at 4s. 9d. 9/20 for every twenty shillings value, according to the oath of the importer, that is, nearly at five subsidies, or five poundage duties. The book of rates is extremely comprehensive, and enumerates a great variety of arti-cles, many of them little used, and therefore not well known. It is upon this account frequently uncertain under what article a particular sort of goods ought to be classed, and consequently what duty they ought to pay. Mistakes with regard to this sometimes ruin the custom-house officer, and frequently occasion much trouble, expence and vexation to the importer. In point of perspicuity, precision and distinctness, therefore, the duties of customs are much inferior to those of excise.
                        IN order that the greater part of the members of any society should contribute to the public revenue in proportion to their respective expence, it does not seem necessary that every single article of that expence should be taxed. The revenue which is levied by the duties of excise is supposed to fall as equally upon the contributors as that which is levied by the duties of customs; and the duties of excise are imposed upon a few articles only of the most general use and consumption. It has been the opinion of many people that, by proper management, the duties of cus-toms might likewise, without any loss to the public revenue, and with great advantage to foreign trade, be confined to a few articles only.
                        THE foreign articles of the most general use and consumption in Great Britain, seem at present to consist chiefly in foreign wines and brandies; in some of the productions of America and the West Indies, sugar, rum, tobacco, cacao-nuts, &amp;c. and in

some of those of the East Indies, tea, coffee, china-ware, spiceries of all kinds, several sorts of piece goods, &amp;c. These different articles afford perhaps at present the greater part of the revenue which is drawn from the duties of customs. The taxes which at present subsist upon foreign manufactures, if you except those upon the few contained in the foregoing enumeration, have the greater part of them been imposed for the purpose, not of re-venue, but of monopoly, or to give our own merchants an advantage in the home market. By removing all prohibitions, and by subjecting all foreign manufactures to such moderate taxes as it was found from experience afforded upon each article the greatest revenue to the public, our own workmen might still have a considerable advantage in the home market, and many arti-cles, some of which at present afford no revenue to government, and others a very inconsiderable one, might afford a very great one.
                        HIGH taxes, sometimes by diminishing the consumption of the taxed commodities, and sometimes by encouraging smuggling, frequently afford a smaller revenue to government than what might be drawn from more moderate taxes.
                        WHEN the diminution of revenue is the effect of the diminu-tion of consumption, there can be but one remedy, and that is the lowering of the tax.
                        WHEN the diminution of revenue is the effect of the encou-ragement given to smuggling, it may perhaps be remedied in two ways; either by diminishing the temptation to smuggle, or by increasing the difficulty of smuggling. The temptation to smuggle can be diminished only by the lowering of the tax; and the difficulty of smuggling can be increased only by establishing that system of administration which is most proper for prevent-ing it.
                        
                           

THE excise laws, it appears, I believe, from experience, ob-struct and embarrass the operations of the smuggler much more effectually than those of the customs. By introducing into the customs a system of administration as similar to that of the excise as the nature of the different duties will admit, the difficulty of smuggling might be very much increased. This alteration, it has been supposed by many people, might very easily be brought about.
                        THE importer of commodities liable to any duties of customs, it has been said, might at his option be allowed either to carry them to his own private warehouse, or to lodge them in a warehouse provided either at his own expence or at that of the public, but under the key of the customhouse officer, and never to be opened but in his presence. If the merchant carried them to his own private warehouse, the duties to be immediately paid, and never afterwards to be drawn back; and that warehouse to be at all times subject to the visit and examination of the customhouse officer, in order to ascertain how far the quantity contained in it corresponded with that for which the duty had been paid. If he carried them to the public warehouse, no duty to be paid till they were taken out for home consumption. If taken out for exportation, to be duty-free; proper security being always given that they should be so exported. The dealers in those particular commodities, either by wholesale or retail, to be at all times subject to the visit and examination of the customhouse officer; and to be obliged to justify by proper certificates the payment of the duty upon the whole quantity contained in their shops or warehouses. What are called the excise duties upon rum im-ported are at present levied in this manner, and the same system of administration might perhaps be extended to all duties upon goods imported; provided always, that those duties were, like the duties of excise, confined to a few sorts of goods of the most

general use and consumption. If they were extended to almost all sorts of goods, as at present, public warehouses of sufficient extent could not easily be provided, and goods of a very delicate nature, or of which the preservation required much care and attention, could not safely be trusted by the merchant in any warehouse but his own.
                        IF by such a system of administration smuggling to any con-siderable extent could be prevented even under pretty high duties, and if every duty was occasionally either heightened or lowered according as it was most likely, either the one way or the other, to afford the greatest revenue to the state; taxation being always employed as an instrument of revenue and never of monopoly; it seems not improbable that a revenue at least equal to the present neat revenue of the customs might be drawn from duties upon the importation of only a few sorts of goods of the most general use and consumption; and that the duties of customs might thus be brought to the same degree of simplicity, certainty and precision, as those of excise. What the revenue at present loses by drawbacks upon the re-exportation of foreign goods which are afterwards re-landed and consumed at home, would under this system be saved altogether. If to this saving, which would alone be very considerable, was added the abolition of all bounties upon the exportation of home-produce, in all cases in which those bounties were not in reality drawbacks of some duties of excise which had before been advanced; it cannot well be doubted but that the neat revenue of customs might after an alteration of this kind be fully equal to what it had ever been before.
                        IF by such a change of system the public revenue suffered no loss; the trade and manufactures of the country would certainly gain a very considerable advantage. The trade in the commodities

not taxed, by far the greatest number, would be perfectly free, and might be carried on to and from all parts of the world with every possible advantage. Among those commodities would be comprehended all the necessaries of life, and all the materials of manufacture. So far as the free importation of the necessaries of life reduced their average money price in the home-market, it would reduce the money price of labour, but without reducing in any respect its real recompence. The value of money is in proportion to the quantity of the necessaries of life which it will purchase. That of the necessaries of life is altogether independant of the quantity of money which can be had for them. The re-duction in the money price of labour would necessarily be attended with a proportionable one in that of all home-manufactures, which would thereby gain some advantage in all foreign markets. The price of some manufactures would be reduced in a still greater proportion by the free importation of the raw materials. If raw silk could be imported from China and Indostan duty-free, the silk manufacturers in England could greatly undersell those of both France and Italy. There would be no occasion to prohibit the importation of foreign silks and velvets. The cheapness of their goods would secure to our own workmen, not only the possession of the home, but a very great command of the foreign market. Even the trade in the commodities taxed would be carried on with much more advantage than at present. If those commodities were delivered out of the public warehouse for foreign exportation, being in this case exempted from all taxes, the trade in them would be perfectly free. The carrying trade in all sorts of goods would under this system enjoy every possible advantage. If those commodities were delivered out for home-consumption, the im-porter not being obliged to advance the tax till he had an oppor-tunity of selling his goods either to some dealer, or to some con-sumer, he could always afford to sell them cheaper than if he had

been obliged to advance it at the moment of importation. Under the same taxes, the foreign trade of consumption even in the taxed commodities, might in this manner be carried on with much more advantage than it can at present.
                        IT was the object of the famous excise scheme of Sir Robert Walpole to establish, with regard to wine and tobacco, a system not very unlike that which is here proposed. But though the bill which was then brought into parliament, comprehended those two commodities only; it was generally supposed to be meant as an introduction to a more extensive scheme of the same kind. Faction, combined with the interest of smuggling merchants, raised so violent, though so unjust, a clamour against that bill, that the minister thought proper to drop it; and from a dread of exciting a clamour of the same kind, none of his successors have dared to resume the project.
                        THE duties upon foreign luxuries imported for home-consump-tion, though they sometimes fall upon the poor, fall principally upon people of middling or more than middling fortune. Such are, for example, the duties upon foreign wines, upon coffee, chocolate, tea, sugar, &amp;c.
                        THE duties upon the cheaper luxuries of home-produce de-stined for home-consumption, fall pretty equally upon people of all ranks in proportion to their respective expence. The poor pay the duties upon malt, hops, beer, and ale, upon their own con-sumption: The rich, both upon their own consumption and upon that of their servants.
                        THE whole consumption of the inferior ranks of people, or of those below the middling rank, it must be observed, is in every

country much greater, not only in quantity, but in value, than that of the middling and of those above the middling rank. The whole expence of the inferior is much greater than that of the superior ranks. In the first place, almost the whole capital of every country is annually distributed among the inferior ranks of people as the wages of productive labour. Secondly, a great part of the revenue arising both from the rent of land and from the profits of stock, is annually distributed among the same rank, in the wages and maintenance of menial servants, and other unproduc-tive labourers. Thirdly, some part of the profits of stock belongs to the same rank, as a revenue arising from the employment of their small capitals. The amount of the profits annually made by small shopkeepers, tradesmen, and retailers of all kinds, is every where very considerable, and makes a very considerable portion of the annual produce. Fourthly, and lastly, some part even of the rent of land belongs to the same rank; a considerable part to those who are somewhat below the middling rank, and a small part even to the lowest rank; common labourers sometimes pos-sessing in property an acre or two of land. Though the expence of those inferior ranks of people, therefore, taking them indi-vidually, is very small, yet the whole mass of it, taking them collectively, amounts always to by much the largest portion of the whole expence of the society; what remains of the annual produce of the land and labour of the country for the consumption of the superior ranks being always much less, not only in quantity but in value. The taxes upon expence, therefore, which fall chiefly upon that of the superior ranks of people, upon the smaller portion of the annual produce, are likely to be much less pro-ductive than either those which fall indifferently upon the expence of all ranks, or even those which fall chiefly upon that of the inferior ranks; than either those which fall indifferently upon the whole annual produce, or those which fall chiefly upon the larger por-tion

of it. The excise upon the materials and manufacture of home-made fermented and spirituous liquors is accordingly, of all the different taxes upon expence, by far the most productive; and this branch of the excise falls very much, perhaps principally, upon the expence of the common people. In the year which ended on the 5th of July, 1775, the gross produce of this branch of the excise amounted to 3,314,223l. 18 s. 10¾d.
                        IT must always be remembered, however, that it is the luxurious and not the necessary expence of the inferior ranks of people that ought ever to be taxed. The final payment of any tax upon their necessary expence would fall altogether upon the superior ranks of people; upon the smaller portion of the annual produce, and not upon the greater. Such a tax must in all cases either raise the wages of labour, or lessen the demand for it. It could not raise the wages of labour, without throwing the final payment of the tax upon the superior ranks of people. It could not lessen the de-mand for labour, without lessening the annual produce of the land and labour of the country, the fund from which all taxes must be finally paid. Whatever might be the state to which a tax of this kind reduced the demand for labour, it must always raise wages higher than they otherwise would be in that state; and the final payment of this enhancement of wages must in all cases fall upon the superior ranks of people.
                        FERMENTED liquors brewed and spirituous liquors distilled, not for sale, but for private use, are not in Great Britain liable to any duties of excise. This exemption, of which the object is not to expose private families to the odious visit and examination of the tax-gatherer, occasions the burden of those duties to fall frequently much lighter upon the rich than upon the poor. It is not, indeed, very common to distill for private use, though it is

done sometimes. But in the country, many middling and almost all rich and great families brew their own beer. Their strong beer, therefore, costs them eight shillings a barrel less than it costs the common brewer, who must have his profit upon the tax, as well as upon all the other expence which he advances. Such families, therefore, must drink their beer at least nine or ten shillings a barrel cheaper than any liquor of the same quality can be drunk by the common people, to whom it is every where more convenient to buy their beer, by little and little, from the brewery or the ale-house. Malt, in the same manner, that is made for the use of a private family, is not liable to the visit or examination of the tax-gatherer; but in this case the family must compound at seven shillings and sixpence a head for the tax. Seven shillings and sixpence are equal to the excise upon ten bushels of malt; a quantity fully equal to what all the different members of any sober family, men, women, and children, are at an average likely to consume. But in rich and great families, where country hospitality is much practised, the malt liquors consumed by the members of the family make but a small part of the consumption of the house. Either on account of this composition, however, or for other reasons, it is not near so common to malt as to brew for private use. It is difficult to imagine any equitable reason why those who either brew or distill for private use, should not be subject to a composition of the same kind.
                        A GREATER revenue than what is at present drawn from all the heavy taxes upon malt, beer, and ale, might be raised, it has frequently been said, by a much lighter tax upon malt; the opportunities of defrauding the revenue being much greater in a brewery than in a malt-house; and those who brew for private use being exempted from all duties or composition for duties, which is not the case with those who malt for private use.
                        
                           

WHETHER taxes upon the necessaries of life, such as those in Great Britain upon malt, beer, soap, salt, leather, candles, &amp;c. necessarily raise the price of labour, and consequently that of all other commodities, I shall consider hereafter, when I come to treat of taxes. Supposing, however, in the mean time, that they have this effect, and they have it undoubtedly, this general enhancement of the price of all commodities, in consequence of that of labour, is a case which differs in the two following respects from that of a particular commodity, of which the price was enhanced by a particular tax immediately imposed upon it.
               FIRST, it might always be known with great exactness how far the price of such a commodity could be enhanced by such a tax: but how far the general enhancement of the price of labour might affect that of every different commodity, about which labour was employed, could never be known with any tolerable exactness. It would be impossible, therefore, to proportion with any tolerable exactness the tax upon every foreign to this enhancement of the price of every home commodity.
               SECONDLY, taxes upon the necessaries of life have nearly the same effect upon the circumstances of the people as a poor soil and a bad climate. Provisions are thereby rendered dearer in the same manner as if it required extraordinary labour and expence to raise them. As in the natural scarcity arising from soil and cli-mate, it would be absurd to direct the people in what manner they ought to employ their capitals and industry, so it is likewise in the artificial scarcity arising from such taxes. To be left to accommo-date, as well as they could, their industry to their situation, and to find out those employments in which, notwithstanding their un-favourable circumstances, they might have some advantage either in

IN the porter brewery of London, a quarter of malt is com-monly brewed into more than two barrels and a half, sometimes into three barrels of porter. The different taxes upon malt amount to six shillings a quarter; those upon strong beer and ale to eight shillings a barrel. In the porter brewery, therefore, the different taxes upon malt, beer, and ale, amount to between twenty-six and thirty shillings upon the produce of a quarter of malt. In the country brewery for common country sale, a quarter of malt is seldom brewed into less than two barrels of strong and one barrel of small beer; frequently into two barrels and a half of strong beer. The different taxes upon small beer amount to one shilling and four-pence a barrel. In the country brewery, therefore, the different taxes upon malt, beer, and ale, seldom amount to less than twenty-three shillings and four-pence, frequently to twenty-six shillings, upon the produce of a quarter of malt. Taking the whole kingdom at an average, therefore, the whole amount of the duties upon malt, beer, and ale, cannot be estimated at less than twenty-four or twenty-five shillings upon the produce of a quarter of malt. But by taking off all the different duties upon beer and ale, and by tripling the malt-tax, or by raising it from six to eighteen shillings upon the quarter of malt, a greater revenue, it is said, might be raised by this single tax than what is at present drawn from all those heavier taxes.

                              

                              
                                  
                                 l.
                                 s.
                                 d.
                              
                              
                                 In 1772, the old malt tax produced
                                 722,023
                                 11
                                 11
                              
                              
                                 The additional
                                 336,776
                                 7
                                 9¾
                              
                              
                                 In 1773, the old tax produced
                                 561,627
                                 3
                                 7½
                              
                              
                                 The additional
                                 278,650
                                 15
                                 3¾
                              
                              
                                 In 1774, the old tax produced
                                 624,614
                                 17
                                 5¾
                              
                              
                                 The additional
                                 310,745
                                 2
                                 8½
                              
                              
                                 In 1775, the old tax produced
                                 657,357
                                 —
                                 8¾
                              
                              
                                 The additional
                                 323,785
                                 12
                                 6¼
                              
                              
                                  
                                 4) 3,835,580
                                 12
                                 —¾
                              
                              
                                 Average of these four years
                                 958,895
                                 3
                                 —3/16
                              
                              
                                 In 1772, the country excise produced
                                 1,243,128
                                 5
                                 3
                              
                              
                                 The London brewery
                                 408,260
                                 7
                                 2¾
                              
                              
                                 In 1773, the country excise
                                 1,245,808
                                 3
                                 3
                              
                              
                                 The London brewery
                                 405,406
                                 17
                                 10½
                              
                              
                                 In 1774, the country excise
                                 1,246,373
                                 14
                                 5½
                              
                              
                                 The London brewery
                                 320,601
                                 18
                                 —¼
                              
                              
                                 In 1775, the country excise
                                 1,214,583
                                 6
                                 1
                              
                              
                                 The London brewery
                                 463,670
                                 7
                                 —¼
                              
                              
                                  
                                 4) 6,547,832
                                 19
                                 2¼
                              
                              
                                 Average of these four years
                                 1,636,958
                                 4
                                 9½
                              
                              
                                 To which adding the average malt tax, or
                                 958,895
                                 3
                                 —3/16
                              
                              
                                 The whole amount of those different taxes comes out to be
                                 2,595,853
                                 7
                                 9 11/16
                              
                              
                                 But by tripling the malt tax, or by raising it from six to eighteen shillings upon the quarter of malt, that single tax would produce
                                 2,876,685
                                 9
                                 —9/16
                              
                              
                                 A sum which exceeds the foregoing by
                                 280,832
                                 1
                                 2 14/16
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           

UNDER the old malt tax, indeed, is comprehended a tax of four shillings upon the hogshead of cyder, and another of ten shillings upon the barrel of mum. In 1774, the tax upon cyder produced only 3083 l. 6 s. 8 d. It probably fell somewhat short of its usual amount; all the different taxes upon cyder having that year pro-duced less than ordinary. The tax upon mum, though much heavier, is still less productive, on account of the smaller con-sumption of that liquor. But to balance whatever may be the ordinary amount of those two taxes; there is comprehended under what is called The country excise, first, the old excise of six shil-lings and eight-pence upon the hogshead of cyder; secondly, a like tax of six shillings and eight-pence upon the hogshead of verjuice; thirdly, another of eight shillings and nine-pence upon the hogshead of vinegar; and, lastly, a fourth tax of eleven-pence upon the gallon of mead or metheglin: The produce of those different taxes will probably much more than counter-balance that of the duties imposed, by what is called The annual malt tax, upon cyder and mum.
                        MALT is consumed not only in the brewery of beer and ale, but in the manufacture of low wines and spirits. If the malt tax was to be raised to eighteen shillings upon the quarter, it might be necessary to make some abatement in the different ex-cises which are imposed upon those particular sorts of low wines and spirits of which malt makes any part of the materials. In what are called Malt spirits, it makes commonly but a third part of the materials; the other two-thirds being either raw barley, or one-third barley and one-third wheat. In the distillery of malt spirits, both the opportunity, and the temptation to smuggle, are much greater than either in a brewery or in a malt-house; the opportunity, on account of the smaller bulk and greater value of the commodity; and the temptation, on account of the superior

height of the duties, which amount to 2 s. 6 d. upon the gallon of spirits. By increasing the duties upon malt, and reducing those upon the distillery, both the opportunities and the temptation to smuggle would be diminished, which might occasion a still further augmentation of revenue.
                        IT has for some time past been the policy of Great Britain to discourage the consumption of spirituous liquors, on account of their supposed tendency to ruin the health and to corrupt the morals of the common people. According to this policy, the abatement of the taxes upon the distillery ought not to be so great as to reduce in any respect the price of those liquors. Spirituous liquors might remain as dear as ever; while at the same time the wholesome and invigorating liquors of beer and ale might be con-siderably reduced in their price. The people might thus be in part relieved from one of the burdens of which they at present complain the most; while at the same time the revenue might be considerably augmented.
                        THE objections of Doctor Davenant to this alteration in the present system of excise duties, seem to be without foundation. Those objections are, that the tax, instead of dividing itself as at present pretty equally upon the profit of the maltster, upon that of the brewer, and upon that of the retailer, would, so far as it affected profit, fall altogether upon that of the maltster; that the maltster could not so easily get back the amount of the tax in the advanced price of his malt, as the brewer and retailer in the ad-vanced price of their liquor; and that so heavy a tax upon malt might reduce the rent and profit of barley land.
                        NO tax can ever reduce, for any considerable time, the rate of profit in any particular trade, which must always keep its level

with other trades in the neighbourhood. The present duties upon malt, beer, and ale, do not affect the profits of the dealers in those commodities, who all get back the tax with an additional profit, in the enhanced price of their goods. A tax indeed may render the goods upon which it is imposed so dear as to diminish the con-sumption of them. But the consumption of malt is in malt liquors; and a tax of eighteen shillings upon the quarter of malt could not well render those liquors dearer than the different taxes, amounting to twenty-four or twenty-five shillings, do at present. Those liquors, on the contrary, would probably become cheaper, and the consumption of them would be more likely to increase than to diminish.
                        IT is not very easy to understand why it should be more difficult for the maltster to get back eighteen shillings in the advanced price of his malt, than it is at present for the brewer to get back twenty-four or twenty-five, sometimes thirty shillings, in that of his liquor. The maltster, indeed, instead of a tax of six shillings, would be obliged to advance one of eighteen shillings upon every quarter of malt. But the brewer is at present obliged to advance a tax of twenty-four or twenty-five, sometimes thirty shillings, upon every quarter of malt which he brews. It could not be more inconvenient for the maltster to advance a lighter tax, than it is at present for the brewer to advance a heavier one. The maltster doth not always keep in his granaries a stock of malt which it will require a longer time to dispose of, than the stock of beer and ale which the brewer frequently keeps in his cellars. The former, therefore, may fre-quently get the returns of his money as soon as the latter. But whatever inconveniency might arise to the maltster from being obliged to advance a heavier tax, could easily be remedied by granting him a few months longer credit than is at present com-monly given to the brewer.
                        
                           

NOTHING could reduce the rent and profit of barley land which did not reduce the demand for barley. But a change of system which reduced the duties upon a quarter of malt brewed into beer and ale from twenty-four and twenty-five shillings to eighteen shillings, would be more likely to increase than diminish that demand. The rent and profit of barley land, besides, must always be nearly equal to those of other equally fertile and equally well cultivated land. If they were less, some part of the barley land would soon be turned to some other purpose; and if they were greater, more land would soon be turned to the raising of barley. When the ordinary price of any particular produce of land is at what may be called a monopoly price, a tax upon it necessarily reduces the rent and profit of the land which grows it. A tax upon the produce of those precious vineyards, of which the wine falls so much short of the effectual demand, that its price is always above the natural proportion to that of the produce of other equally fertile and equally well cultivated land, would necessarily reduce the rent and profit of those vineyards. The price of the wines, being already the highest that could be got for the quantity com-monly sent to market, it could not be raised higher without dimi-nishing that quantity; and the quantity could not be diminished without still greater loss, because the lands could not be turned to any other equally valuable produce. The whole weight of the tax, therefore, would fall upon the rent and profit; properly upon the rent of the vineyard. When it has been proposed to lay any new tax upon sugar, our sugar planters have frequently complained that the whole weight of such taxes fell, not upon the consumer, but upon the producer; they never having been able to raise the price of their sugar after the tax higher than it was before. The price had, it seems, before the tax been a monopoly price; and the argument adduced to show that sugar was an improper subject of taxation, demonstrated perhaps that it was a proper one; the gains of monopolists, whenever they can be come at, being cer-tainly

of all subjects the most proper. But the ordinary price of barley has never been a monopoly price; and the rent and profit of barley land have never been above their natural proportion to those of other equally fertile and equally well cultivated land. The different taxes which have been imposed upon malt, beer, and ale, have never lowered the price of barley, have never re-duced the rent and profit of barley land. The price of malt to the brewer has constantly risen in proportion to the taxes im-posed upon it; and those taxes, together with the different du-ties upon beer and ale, have constantly either raised the price, or what comes to the same thing, reduced the quality of those commodities to the consumer. The final payment of those taxes has fallen constantly upon the consumer, and not upon the pro-ducer.
                        THE only people likely to suffer by the change of system here proposed, are those who brew for their own private use. But the exemption which this superior rank of people at present enjoy from very heavy taxes which are paid by the poor labourer and artificer, is surely most unjust and unequal, and ought to be taken away, even though this change was never to take place. It has probably been the interest of this superior order of people, however, which has hitherto prevented a change of system that could not well fail both to increase the revenue and to relieve the people.
                        BESIDES such duties as those of customs and excise above-men-tioned, there are several others which affect the price of goods more unequally and more indirectly. Of this kind are the duties which in French are called Peages, which in old Saxon times were called duties of Passage, and which seem to have been originally established for the same purpose as our turnpike tolls or the tolls upon our canals and navigable rivers; for the maintenance of the road or of the navigation. Those duties, when applied to such purposes, are

most properly imposed according to the bulk or weight of the goods. As they were originally local and provincial duties, appli-cable to local and provincial purposes, the administration of them was in most cases entrusted to the particular town, parish, or lord-ship, in which they were levied; such communities being in some way or other supposed to be accountable for the application. The sovereign, who is altogether unaccountable, has in many countries assumed to himself the administration of those duties; and though he has in most cases enhanced very much the duty, he has in many entirely neglected the application. If the turnpike tolls of Great Britain should ever become one of the resources of govern-ment, we may learn, by the example of many other nations, what would probably be the consequence. Such tolls are no doubt finally paid by the consumer; but the consumer is not taxed in proportion to his expence when he pays, not according to the value, but ac-cording to the bulk or weight of what he consumes. When such duties are imposed, not according to the bulk or weight, but ac-cording to the supposed value of the goods, they become properly a sort of inland customs or excises, which obstruct very much the most important of all branches of commerce, the interior com-merce of the country.
                        IN some small states duties similar to those passage duties are im-posed upon goods carried across the territory, either by land or by water, from one foreign country to another. These are in some countries called transit-duties. Some of the little Italian states, which are situated upon the Po, and the rivers which run into it, derive some revenue from duties of this kind, which are paid altoge-ther by foreigners, and which are perhaps the only duties that one state can impose upon the subjects of another without obstructing in any respect the industry or commerce of its own. The most important transit-duty in the world is that levied by the king of Denmark upon all merchant ships which pass through the Sound.
                        
                           

SUCH taxes upon luxuries as the greater part of the duties of customs and excise, though they fall indifferently upon every dif-ferent species of revenue, and are paid finally, or without any retri-bution, by whoever consumes the commodities upon which they are imposed, yet they do not always fall equally or proportionably upon the revenue of every individual. As every man's humour regulates the degree of his consumption, every man contributes rather according to his humour than in proportion to his revenue; the profuse contribute more, the parsimonious less, than their proper proportion. During the minority of a man of great for-tune, he contributes commonly very little by his consumption to-wards the support of that state from whose protection he derives a great revenue. Those who live in another country contribute no-thing by their consumption towards the support of the government of that country in which is situated the source of their revenue. If in this latter country there should be no land-tax, nor any con-siderable duty upon the transference either of moveable or of im-moveable property, as is the case in Ireland, such absentees may derive a great revenue from the protection of a government to the support of which they do not contribute a single shilling. This inequality is likely to be greatest in a country of which the go-vernment is in some respects subordinate and dependent upon that of some other. The people who possess the most exten-sive property in the dependent, will in this case generally chuse to live in the governing country. Ireland is precisely in this situation, and we cannot therefore wonder that the proposal of a tax upon absentees should be so very popular in that country. It might per-haps be a little difficult to ascertain either what sort, or what degree of absence should subject a man to be taxed as an absentee, or at what precise time the tax should either begin or end. If you ex-cept, however, this very peculiar situation, any inequality in the contribution of individuals, which can arise from such taxes, is

much more than compensated by the very circumstance which occa-sions that inequality; the circumstance that every man's contribution is altogether voluntary; it being altogether in his power either to consume or not to consume the commodity taxed. Where such taxes, therefore, are properly assessed and upon proper commodi-ties, they are paid with less grumbling than any other. When they are advanced by the merchant or manufacturer, the consumer, who finally pays them, soon comes to confound them with the price of the commodities, and almost forgets that he pays any tax.
                        SUCH taxes are or may be perfectly certain, or may be assessed so as to leave no doubt concerning either what ought to be paid, or when it ought to be paid; concerning either the quantity or the time of payment. Whatever uncertainty there may sometimes be, either in the duties of customs in Great Britain, or in other duties of the same kind in other countries, it cannot arise from the na-ture of those duties, but from the inaccurate or unskilful manner in which the law that imposes them is expressed.
                        TAXES upon luxuries generally are, and always may be, paid piece-meal, or in proportion as the contributors have occasion to purchase the goods upon which they are imposed. In the time and mode of payment they are, or may be, of all taxes the most con-venient. Upon the whole, such taxes, therefore, are, perhaps, as agreeable to the three first of the four general maxims concerning taxation, as any other. They offend in every respect against the fourth.
                        SUCH taxes, in proportion to what they bring into the public trea-sury of the state, always take out or keep out of the pockets of the people more than almost any other taxes. They seem to do this in all the four different ways in which it is possible to do it.
                        
                           

the home, or in the foreign market, is what in both cases, would evidently be most for their advantage. To lay a new tax upon them, because they are already overburdened with taxes, and because they already pay too dear for the necessaries of life, to make them likewise pay too dear for the greater part of other commodities, is certainly a most absurd way of making amends.
               SUCH taxes, when they have grown up to a certain height, are a curse equal to the barrenness of the earth and the inclemency of the heavens; and yet it is in the richest and most industrious coun-tries that they have been most generally imposed. No other coun-tries could support so great a disorder. As the strongest bodies only can live and enjoy health, under an unwholesome regimen; so the nations only, that in every sort of industry have the greatest natural and acquired advantages, can subsist and prosper under such taxes. Holland is the country in Europe in which they abound most, and which from peculiar circumstances continues to prosper, not by means of them, as has been most absurdly supposed, but in spite of them.
               As there are two cases in which it will generally be advantage-ous to lay some burden upon foreign, for the encouragement of domestick industry; so there are two others in which it may some-times be a matter of deliberation; in the one, how far it is proper to continue the free importation of certain foreign goods; and in the other, how far or in what manner it may be proper to restore that free importation after it has been for some time interrupted.
               THE case in which it may sometimes be a matter of deliberation how far it is proper to continue the free importation of certain foreign goods, is, when some foreign nation restrains by high duties or prohibitions the importation of someof our manufactures into

FIRST, the levying of such taxes, even when imposed in the most judicious manner, requires a great number of custom-house and excise officers, whose salaries and perquisites are a real tax upon the people, which brings nothing into the treasury of the state. This expence, however, it must be acknowledged, is more mode-rate in Great Britain than in most other countries. In the year which ended on the fifth of July, 1775, the gross produce of the different duties, under the management of the commissioners of excise in England, amounted to 5,479,695l. 7s. 10d. which was levied at an expence of little more than five and a half per cent. From this gross produce, however, there must be deducted what was paid away in bounties and drawbacks upon the exportation of exciseable goods, which will reduce the neat produce below five mil-lions. The levying of the salt duty, an excise duty, but under a different management, is much more expensive. The neat revenue of the customs does not amount to two millions and a half, which is levied at an expence of more than ten per cent. in the salaries of officers, and other incidents. But the perquisites of custom-house officers are every where much greater than their salaries; at some ports more than double or triple those salaries. If the sala-ries of officers, and other incidents, therefore, amount to more than ten per cent. upon the neat revenue of the customs; the whole expence of levying that revenue may amount, in salaries and perquisites together, to more than twenty or thirty per cent. The officers of excise receive few or no perquisites; and the admini-stration of that branch of the revenue, being of more recent esta-blishment, is in general less corrupted than that of the customs, into which length of time has introduced and authorised many abuses. By charging upon malt the whole revenue which is at present levied by the different duties upon malt and malt liquors, a saving, it is supposed, of more than fifty thousand pounds might be made in the annual expence of the excise. By confining the

duties of customs to a few sorts of goods, and by levying those duties according to the excise laws, a much greater saving might probably be made in the annual expence of the customs.
                        SECONDLY, such taxes necessarily occasion some obstruction or discouragement to certain branches of industry. As they always raise the price of the commodity taxed, they so far discourage its consumption, and consequently its production. If it is a commo-dity of home growth or manufacture, less labour comes to be employed in raising and producing it. If it is a foreign commo-dity of which the tax increases in this manner the price, the com-modities of the same kind which are made at home may thereby, indeed, gain some advantage in the home market, and a greater quantity of domestic industry may thereby be turned towards pre-paring them. But though this rise of price in a foreign commo-dity may encourage domestic industry in one particular branch, it necessarily discourages that industry in almost every other. The dearer the Birmingham manufacturer buys his foreign wine, the cheaper he necessarily sells that part of his hardware with which, or, what comes to the same thing, with the price of which he buys it. That part of his hardware, therefore, becomes of less value to him, and he has less encouragement to work at it. The dearer the con-sumers in one country pay for the surplus produce of another, the cheaper they necessarily sell that part of their own surplus produce with which, or, what comes to the same thing, with the price of which they buy it. That part of their own surplus produce becomes of less value to them, and they have less encouragement no increase its quantity. All taxes upon consumable commodities, therefore, tend to reduce the quantity of productive labour below what it otherwise would be, either in preparing the commodities taxed, if they are home commodities; or in preparing those with which they are purchased, if they are foreign commodities. Such taxes too

always alter, more or less, the natural direction of national indu-stry, and turn it into a channel always different from, and gene-rally less advantageous than that in which it would have run of its own accord.
                        THIRDLY, the hope of evading such taxes by smuggling gives frequent occasion to forfeitures and other penalties, which entirely ruin the smuggler; a person who, though no doubt highly blameable for violating the laws of his country, is frequently incapable of violating those of natural justice, and would have been, in every respect, an excellent citizen, had not the laws of his country made that a crime which nature never meant to be so. In those cor-rupted governments where there is at least a general suspicion of much unnecessary expence, and great misapplication of the pub-lic revenue, the laws which guard it are little respected. Not many people are scrupulous about smuggling when, without per-jury, they can find any easy and safe opportunity of doing so. To pretend to have any scruple about buying smuggled goods, though a manifest encouragement to the violation of the revenue laws, and to the perjury which almost always attends it, would in most countries be regarded as one of those pedantic pieces of hypo-crisy which, instead of gaining credit with any body, serve only to expose the person who affects to practise them, to the suspicion of being a greater knave than most of his neighbours. By this indul-gence of the public, the smuggler is often encouraged to continue a trade which he is thus taught to consider as in some mea-sure innocent; and when the severity of the revenue laws is ready to fall upon him, he is frequently disposed to defend with vio-lence, what he has been accustomed to regard as his just property. From being at first, perhaps, rather imprudent than criminal, he at last too often becomes, one of the hardiest and most deter-mined violaters of the laws of society. By the ruin of the smug-gler,

his capital, which had before been employed in maintaining productive labour, is absorbed either in the revenue of the state or in that of the revenue-officer, and is employed in maintaining unproductive, to the diminution of the general capital of the society, and of the useful industry which it might otherwise have maintained.
                        FOURTHLY, such taxes, by subjecting at least the dealers in the taxed commodities to the frequent visits and odious examination of the tax gatherers, expose them sometimes, no doubt, to some degree of oppression, and always to much trouble and vexation; and though vexation, as has already been said, is not strictly speaking expence, it is certainly equivalent to the expence at which every man would be willing to redeem himself from it. The laws of excise, though more effectual for the purpose for which they were instituted, are, in this respect, more vexatious than those of the customs. When a merchant has imported goods subject to certain duties of customs, when he has paid those duties, and lodged the goods in his ware-house, he is not in most cases liable to any further trouble or vexa-tion from the custom-house officer. It is otherwise with goods subject to duties of excise. The dealers have no respite from the continual visits and examination of the excise officers. The duties of excise are, upon this account, more unpopular than those of the customs; and so are the officers who levy them. Those officers, it is pretended, though in general, perhaps, they do their duty fully as well as those of the customs; yet, as that duty obliges them to be frequently very troublesome to some of their neigh-bours, commonly contract a certain hardness of character which the others frequently have not. This observation, however, may very probably be the meer suggestion of fraudulent dealers, whose smug-gling is either prevented or detected by their diligence.
                        THE inconveniencies, however, which are, perhaps, in some degree inseparable from taxes upon consumable commodities, fall as

light upon the people of Great Britain as upon those of any other country of which the government is nearly as expensive. Our state is not perfect, and might be mended; but it is as good or better than that of most of our neighbours.
                        IN consequence of the notion that duties upon consumable goods were taxes upon the profits of merchants, those duties have, in some countries, been repeated upon every successive sale of the goods. If the profits of the merchant importer or merchant manufacturer were taxed, equality seemed to require that those of all the middle buyers, who intervened between either of them and the consumer, should likewise be taxed. The famous Alcavala of Spain seems to have been established upon this principle. It was at first a tax of ten per cent. afterwards of fourteen per cent. and is at present of only six per cent. upon the sale of every sort of property, whether moveable or immoveable; and it is repeated every time the pro-perty is sold. Memoires concernant les Droits, &amp;c. tom. i. p. 455. The levying of this tax requires a multitude of revenue officers sufficient to guard the transportation of goods, not only from one province to another, but from one shop to another. It subjects not only the dealers in some sorts of goods, but those in all sorts, every farmer, every manufacturer, every merchant and shop-keeper, to the continual visits and examination of the tax gatherers. Through the greater part of a country in which a tax of this kind is established, nothing can be produced for distant sale. The produce of every part of the country must be propor-tioned to the consumption of the neighbourhood. It is to the Alcavala, accordingly, that Ustaritz imputes the ruin of the manu-factures of Spain. He might have imputed to it likewise the declen-sion of agriculture, it being imposed not only upon manufactures, but upon the rude produce of the land.
                        IN the kingdom of Naples there is a similar tax of three per cent. upon the value of all contracts, and consequently upon that

of all contracts of sale. It is both lighter than the Spanish tax, and the greater part of towns and parishes are allowed to pay a composition in lieu of it. They levy this composition in what manner they please, generally in a way that gives no interrup-tion to the interior commerce of the place. The Neapolitan tax, therefore, is not near so ruinous as the Spanish one.
                        THE uniform system of taxation, which, with a few excep-tions of no great consequence, takes place in all the different parts of the united kingdom of Great Britain, leaves the in-terior commerce of the country, the inland and coasting trade, almost entirely free. The inland trade is almost per-fectly free, and the greater part of goods may be carried from one end of the kingdom to the other, without requir-ing any permit or let-pass, without being subject to question, visit or examination from the revenue officers. There are a few exceptions, but they are such as can give no interruption to any important branch of the inland commerce of the country. Goods carried coastwise, indeed, require certificates or coast-cockets. If you except coals, however, the rest are almost all duty-free. This freedom of interior commerce, the effect of the uniformity of the system of taxation, is perhaps one of the prin-cipal causes of the prosperity of Great Britain; every great country being necessarily the best and most extensive market for the greater part of the productions of its own industry. If the same free-dom, in consequence of the same uniformity, could be extended to Ireland and the plantations, both the grandeur of the state and the prosperity of every part of the empire, would probably be still greater than at present.
                        IN France, the different revenue laws which take place in the different provinces, require a multitude of revenue officers to sur-round, not only the frontiers of the kingdom, but those of almost each particular province, in order either to prevent the

importation of certain goods, or to subject it to the payment of certain duties, to the no small interruption of the interior com-merce of the country. Some provinces are allowed to compound for the gabelle or salt-tax. Others are exempted from it altoge-ther. Some provinces are exempted from the exclusive sale of tobacco, which the farmers-general enjoy through the greater part of the kingdom. The aides, which correspond to the excise in England, are very different in different provinces. Some pro-vinces are exempted from them, and pay a composition or equi-valent. In those in which they take place and are in farm, there are many local duties which do not extend beyond a particular town or district. The Traites, which correspond to our cus-toms, divide the kingdom into three great parts; first, the pro-vinces subject to the tarif of 1664, which are called the pro-vinces of the five great farms, and under which are compre-hended Picardy, Normandy, and the greater part of the interior provinces of the kingdom; secondly, the provinces subject to the tarif of 1667, which are called the provinces reckoned foreign, and under which are comprehended the greater part of the fron-tier provinces; and, thirdly, those provinces which are said to be treated as foreign, or which, because they are allowed a free commerce with foreign countries, are in their commerce with the other provinces of France subjected to the same duties as other foreign countries. These are Alsace, the three bishopricks of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, and the three cities of Dunkirk, Bayonne, and Marseilles. Both in the provinces of the five great farms, (called so on account of an antient division of the duties of customs into five great branches, each of which was originally the subject of a particular farm, though they are now all united into one) and in those which are said to be reckoned foreign, there are many local duties which do not extend beyond a particular town or district. There are some such even in the

provinces which are said to be treated as foreign, particularly in the city of Marseilles. It is unnecessary to observe how much both the restraints upon the interior commerce of the country, and the number of the revenue officers must be multiplied, in order to guard the frontiers of those different provinces and districts, which are subject to such different systems of taxation.
                        OVER and above the general restraints arising from this com-plicated system of revenue laws, the commerce of wine, after corn perhaps the most important production of France, is in the greater part of the provinces subject to particular restraints arising from the favour which has been shewn to the vineyards of particular provinces and districts, above those of others. The provinces most famous for their wines, it will be found, I be-lieve, are those in which the trade in that article is subject to the fewest restraints of this kind. The extensive market which such provinces enjoy, encourages good management both in the cultivation of their vineyards, and in the subsequent preparation of their wines.
                        SUCH various and complicated revenue laws are not peculiar to France. The little dutchy of Milan is divided into six pro-vinces, in each of which there is a different system of taxation with regard to several different sorts of consumable goods. The still smaller territories of the duke of Parma are divided into three or four, each of which has, in the same manner, a system of its own. Under such absurd management, nothing but the great fertility of the soil and happiness of the climate could pre-serve such countries from soon relapsing into the lowest state of poverty and barbarism.
                        TAXES upon consumable commodities may either be levied by an administration of which the officers are appointed by govern-ment,

and are immediately accountable to government, of which the revenue must in this case vary from year to year, according to the occasional variations in the produce of the tax; or they may be lett in farm for a rent certain, the farmer being allowed to ap-point his own officers, who, though obliged to levy the tax in the manner directed by the law, are under his immediate inspection, and are immediately accountable to him. The best and most frugal way of levying a tax can never be by farm. Over and above what is necessary for paying the stipulated rent, the sala-ries of the officers, and the whole expence of administration, the farmer must always draw from the produce of the tax a certain profit proportioned at least to the advance which he makes, to the risk which he runs, to the trouble which he is at, and to the knowledge and skill which it requires to manage so very complicated a concern. Government, by establishing an administration under their own immediate inspection of the same kind with that which the farmer establishes, might at least save this profit which is almost always exorbitant. To farm any con-siderable branch of the public revenue, requires either a great capi-tal or a great credit; circumstances which would alone restrain the competition for such an undertaking to a very small number of people. Of the few who have this capital or credit, a still smaller number have the necessary knowledge or experience; an-other circumstance which restrains the competition still further. The very few who are in condition to become competitors find it more for their interest to combine together; to become co-partners instead of competitors, and when the farm is set up to auction to offer no rent, but what is much below the real value. In countries where the public revenues are in farm, the farmers are generally the most opulent people. Their wealth would alone excite the public indignation, and the vanity which almost always accompanies such upstart fortunes, the foolish ostentation

with which they commonly display that wealth, excites that indig-nation still more.
                        THE farmers of the public revenue never find the laws too severe, which punish any attempt to evade the payment of a tax. They have no bowels for the contributors, who are not their sub-jects, and whose universal bankruptcy, if it should happen the day after their farm is expired, would not much affect their in-terest. In the greatest exigencies of the state, when the anxiety of the sovereign for the exact payment of his revenue is necessarily the greatest, they seldom fail to complain that without laws more rigorous than those which actually take place, it will be impossible for them to pay even the usual rent. In those moments of public distress their demands cannot be disputed. The revenue laws, therefore, become gradually more and more severe. The most sanguinary are always to be found in countries where the greater part of the public revenue is in farm. The mildest, in countries where it is levied under the immediate inspection of the sovereign. Even a bad sovereign feels more compassion for his people than can ever be expected from the farmers of his revenue. He knows that the permanent grandeur of his family depends upon the prosperity of his people, and he will never knowingly ruin that prosperity for the sake of any momentary interest of his own. It is otherwise with the farmers of his revenue, whose grandeur may frequently be the effect of the ruin, and not of the prosperity of his people.
                        A TAX is sometimes, not only farmed for a rent certain, but the farmer has, besides, the monopoly of the commodity taxed. In France, the taxes upon tobacco and salt are levied in this manner. In such cases the farmer, instead of one, levies two exorbitant profits upon the people; the profit of the farmer, and the still more exorbitant one of the monopolist. Tobacco being

their country. Revenge in this case naturally dictates retaliation, and that we should impose the like duties and prohibitions upon the importation of some or all of their manufactures into ours. Nations, accordingly, seldom fail to retaliate in this manner. The French have been particularly forward to favour their own manufactures by restraining the importation of such foreign goods as could come into competition with them. In this consisted a great part of the policy of Mr. Colbert, who, notwithstanding his great abilities, seems in this case to have been imposed upon by the sophistry of merchants and manufacturers, who are always demand-ing a monopoly against their countrymen. It is at present the opinion of the most intelligent men in France that his operations of this kind have not been beneficial to his country. That minister by the tarif of 1667, imposed very high duties upon a great num-ber of foreign manufactures. Upon his refusing to moderate them in favour of the Dutch, they in 1671 prohibited the importation of the wines, brandies, and manufactures of France. The war of 1672 seems to have been in part occasioned by this commercial dispute. The peace of Nimeguen put an end to it in 1678, by moderating some of those duties in favour of the Dutch, who in consequence took off their prohibition. It was about the same time that the French and English began mutually to oppress each other's industry, by the like duties and prohibitions, of which the French, however, seem to have set the first example. The spirit of hos-tility which has subsisted between the two nations ever since, has hitherto hindered them from being moderated on either side. In 1697 the English prohibited the importation of bonelace, the manufacture of Flanders. The government of that country, at that time under the dominion of Spain, prohibited in return the importation of English woollens. In 1700, the prohibition of importing bonelace into England, was taken off upon condition that the importation of English woollens into Flanders should be put on the same footing as before.
               
                  

a luxury, every man is allowed to buy or not to buy as he chuses. But salt being a necessary, every man is obliged to buy of the farmer a certain quantity of it; because if he did not buy this quantity of the farmer, he would, it is presumed, buy it of some smuggler. The taxes upon both commodities are exorbitant. The temptation to smuggle consequently is to many people irresist-able, while at the same time the rigour of the law, and the vigi-lance of the farmer's officers, render the yielding to that tempta-tion almost certainly ruinous. The smuggling of salt and tobacco fends every year several hundred people to the gallies, besides a very considerable number whom it sends to the gibbet. Those taxes levied in this manner yield a very considerable revenue to government. In 1767, the farm of tobacco was lett for twenty-two millions five hundred and forty-one thousand two hundred and seventy-eight livres a year. That of salt, for thirty-six mil-lions four hundred and ninety-two thousand four hundred and four livres. The farm in both cases was to commence in 1768, and to last for six years. Those who consider the blood of the people as nothing in comparison with the revenue of the prince, may perhaps approve of this method of levying taxes. Similar taxes and monopolies of salt and tobacco, have been established in many other countries; particularly in the Austrian and Prussian dominions, and in the greater part of the states of Italy.
                        IN France, the greater part of the actual revenue of the crown is derived from eight different sources; the taille, the capitation, the two vingtiemes, the gabelles, the aides, the traites, the domaine, and the farm of tobacco. The five last are, in the greater part of the provinces, under farm. The three first are every where levied by an administration under the immediate in-spection and direction of government, and it is universally acknow-ledged that in proportion to what they take out of the pockets of the people, they bring more into the treasury of the prince than

the other five, of which the administration is much more wasteful and expensive.
                        THE finances of France seem, in their present state, to admit of three very obvious reformations. First, by abolishing the taille and the capitation, and by increasing the number of vingtiemes, so as to produce an additional revenue equal to the amount of those other taxes, the revenue of the crown might be preserved; the expence of collection might be much diminished; the vexation of the inferior ranks of people, which the taille and capitation occa-sion, might be entirely prevented; and the superior ranks might not be more burdened than the greater part of them are at present. The vingtieme, I have already observed, is a tax very nearly of the same kind with what is called the land-tax of England. The bur-den of the taille, it is acknowledged, falls finally upon the proprie-tors of land; and as the greater part of the capitation is assessed upon those who are subject to the taille at so much a pound of that other tax, the final payment of the greater part of it must likewise fall upon the same order of people. Though the number of the vingtiemes, therefore, was increased so as to pro-duce an additional revenue equal to the amount of both those taxes, the superior ranks of people might not be more burdened than they are at present. Many individuals no doubt would; on account of the great inequalities with which the taille is commonly assessed upon the estates and tenants of different individuals. The interest and opposition of such favoured subjects are the obsta-cles most likely to prevent this or any other reformation of the same kind. Secondly, by rendering the gabelle, the aides, the taxes upon tobacco, all their different customs and excises uniform in all the different parts of the kingdom, those taxes might be levied at much less expence, and the interior commerce of the kingdom might be rendered as free as that of England. Thirdly, and lastly,

by subjecting all those taxes to an administration under the imme-diate inspection and direction of government, the exorbitant profits of the farmers general might be added to the revenue of the state. The opposition arising from the private interest of individuals, is likely to be as effectual for preventing the two last as the first men-tioned scheme of reformation.
                        THE French system of taxation seems, in every respect, inferior to the British. In Great Britain ten millions sterling are annually levied upon less than eight millions of people, without its being possible to say that any particular order is oppressed. From the collections of the abbe Expilly, and the observations of the author of the Essay upon the legislation and commerce of corn, it appears probable that France, including the provinces of Lorraine and Bar, contains about twenty-three or twenty-four millions of people; three times the number perhaps contained in great Britain. The soil and climate of France are better than those of Great Britain. The country has been much longer in a state of improvement and cultivation, and is, upon that account, better stocked with all those things which it requires a long time to raise up and accumulate, such as great towns, and convenient and well-built houses, both in town and country. With these advantages it might be expected that in France a revenue of thirty millions might be levied for the support of the state, with as little inconveniency as a revenue of ten millions is in Great Britain. In 1765 and 1766, the whole reve-nue paid into the treasury of France, according to the best, though, I acknowledge, very imperfect accounts which I could get of it, usually run between 308 and 325 millions of livres; that is, it did not amount to fifteen millions sterling; not the half of what might have been expected, had the people contributed in the same propor-tion to their numbers as the people of Great Britain. The people of France, however, it is generally acknowledged, are much more

oppressed by taxes than the people of Great Britain. France, how-ever, is certainly the great empire in Europe which, after that of Great Britain, enjoys the mildest and most indulgent government.
                        IN Holland the heavy taxes upon the necessaries of life have ruined, it is said, their principal manufactures, and are likely to discourage gradually even their fisheries and their trade in ship building. The taxes upon the necessaries of life are inconsiderable in Great Britain, and no manufacture has hitherto been ruined by them. The British taxes which bear hardest on manufactures are some duties upon the importation of raw materials, particularly upon that of raw silk. The revenue of the states general and of the different cities, however, is said to amount to more than five millions two hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling; and as the inhabitants of the United Provinces cannot well be supposed to amount to more than a third part of those of Great Britain, they must, in proportion to their number, be much more heavily taxed,
                        AFTER all the proper subjects of taxation have been exhausted, if the exigencies of the state still continue to require new taxes, they must be imposed upon improper ones. The taxes upon the necessaries of life, therefore, may be no impeachment of the wisdom of that republic, which, in order to acquire and to maintain its independency, has, in spite of its great frugality, been involved in such expensive wars as have obliged it to contract great debts. The singular countries of Holland and Zealand, besides, require a considerable expence even to preserve their existence, or to prevent their being swallowed up by the sea, which must have contributed to increase considerably the load of taxes in those two provinces. The republican form of government seems to be the principal sup-port of the present grandeur of Holland. The owners of great capitals, the great mercantile families, have generally either some

direct share, or some indirect influence in the administration of that government. For the sake of the respect and authority which they derive from this situation, they are willing to live in a country where their capital, if they employ it themselves, will bring them less profit, and if they lend it to another, less interest; and where the very moderate revenue which they can draw from it will pur-chase less of the necessaries and conveniencies of life than in any other part of Europe. The residence of such wealthy people ne-cessarily keeps alive, in spite of all disadvantages, a certain degree of industry in the country. Any public calamity which should destroy the republican form of government, which should throw the whole administration into the hands of nobles and of soldiers, which should annihilate altogether the importance of those wealthy merchants, would soon render it disagreeable to them to live in a country where they were no longer likely to be much respected. They would remove both their residence and their capital to some other country, and the industry and commerce of Holland would soon follow the capitals which supported them.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               

               CHAP. III. Of publick Debts.
               
               IN that rude state of society which precedes the extension of commerce and the improvement of manufactures, when those expensive luxuries which commerce and manufactures can alone in-troduce, are altogether unknown, the person who possesses a large revenue, I have endeavoured to show in the third book of this inquiry, can spend or enjoy that revenue in no other way than by maintaining nearly as many people as it can maintain. A large revenue may at all times be said to consist in the command of a large quantity of the necessaries of life. In that rude state of things it is commonly paid in a large quantity of those necessaries, in the ma-terials of plain food and coarse cloathing, in corn and cattle, in wool and raw hides. When neither commerce, nor manufactures furnish any thing for which the owner can exchange the greater part of those materials which are over and above his own consump-tion, he can do nothing with the surplus but feed and cloathe nearly as many people as it will feed and cloathe. A hospitality in which there is no luxury, and a liberality in which there is no ostentation, occasion, in this situation of things, the principal expences of the rich and the great. But these, I have likewise endeavoured to show in the same book, are expences by which people are not very apt to ruin themselves. There is not perhaps any selfish pleasure so frivolous, of which the pursuit has not sometimes ruined even sensible men. A passion for cock-fighting has ruined many. Bu
                     •
                   the instances, I believe, are not very numerous of people who have been ruined by a hospitality or liberality of this kind; though the hospitality of luxury and the liberality of ostentation have ruined many. Among our feudal ancestors, the long time during which

estates used to continue in the same family sufficiently demonstrates the general disposition of people to live within their income. Though the rustic hospitality constantly exercised by the great land-holders may not to us in the present times seem consistent with that order which we are apt to consider as inseparably connected with good oeconomy, yet we must certainly allow them to have been at least so far frugal as not commonly to have spent their whole income. A part of their wool and raw hides they had ge-nerally an opportunity of selling for money. Some part of this money perhaps they spent in purchasing the few objects of vanity and luxury with which the circumstances of the times could furnish them; but some part of it they seem commonly to have hoarded. They could not well indeed do any thing else but hoard whatever money they saved. To trade was disgraceful to a gentleman, and to lend money at interest, which at that time was considered as usury and prohibited by law, would have been still more so. In those times of violence and disorder, besides, it was convenient to have a hoard of money at hand, that in case they should be driven from their own home they might have something of known value to carry with them to some place of safety. The same violence which made it convenient to hoard, made it equally convenient to conceal the hoard. The frequency of treasure trove, or of treasure found of which no owner was known, sufficiently demonstrates the frequency in those times both of hoarding and of concealing the hoard. Treasure-trove was then considered as an important branch of the revenue of the sovereign. All the treasure-trove of the kingdom would scarce perhaps in the present times make an important branch of the revenue of a private gentleman of a good estate.
               THE same disposition to save and to hoard prevailed in the sove-reign, as well as in the subjects. Among nations to whom com-merce and manufactures are little known, the sovereign, it has

already been observed in the fourth book, is in a situation which naturally disposes him to the parsimony requisite for accumulation. In that situation the expence even of a sovereign cannot be directed by that vanity which delights in the gaudy finery of a court. The ignorance of the times affords but few of the trinkets in which that finery consists. Standing armies are not then necessary, so that the expence even of a sovereign, like that of any other great lord, can be employed in scarce any thing but bounty to his tenants, and hospitality to his retainers. But bounty and hospitality very seldom lead to extravagance; though vanity almost always does. All the antient sovereigns of Europe accordingly, it has already been observed, had treasures. Every Tartar chief in the present times is said to have one.
               IN a commercial country abounding with every sort of expensive luxury, the sovereign, in the same manner as almost all the great proprietors in his dominions, naturally spends a great part of his revenue in purchasing those luxuries. His own and the neighbour-ing countries supply him abundantly with all the costly trinkets which compose the splendid, but insignificant pageantry of a court. For the sake of an inferior pageantry of the same kind, his nobles dismiss their retainers, make their tenants independent, and be-come gradually themselves as insignificant as the greater part of the wealthy burghers in his dominions. The same frivolous passions which influence their conduct influence his. How can it be supposed that he should be the only rich man in his dominions who is insensible to pleasures of this kind? If he does not, what he is very likely to do, spend upon those pleasures so great a part of his revenue as to debilitate very much the defensive power of the state, it cannot well be expected that he should not spend upon them all that part of it which is over and above what is necessary for supporting that defensive power. His ordinary expence be-comes

equal to his ordinary revenue, and it is well if it does not frequently exceed it. The amassing of treasure can no longer be expected, and when extraordinary exigencies require extraordinary expences, he must necessarily call upon his subjects for an extraor-dinary aid. The present and the late king of Prussia are the only great princes of Europe who, since the death of Henry IV. of France in 1610, are supposed to have amassed any considerable treasure. The parsimony which leads to accumulation has become almost as rare in republican as in monarchical governments. The Italian republics, the United Provinces of the Netherlands, are all in debt. The canton of Berne is the single republic in Europe which has amassed any considerable treasure. The other Swiss republics have not. The taste for some sort of pageantry, for splendid buildings, at least, and other publick ornaments, fre-quently prevails as much in the apparently sober senate-house of a little republic as in the dissipated court of the greatest king.
               THE want of parsimony in time of peace, imposes the necessity of contracting debt in time of war. When war comes, there is no money in the treasury but what is necessary for carrying on the ordinary expence of the peace establishment. In war an establish-ment of three or four times that expence becomes necessary for the defence of the state, and consequently a revenue three or four times greater than the peace revenue. Supposing that the sovereign should have, what he scarce ever has, the immediate means of augmenting his revenue in proportion to the augmentation of his expence, yet still the produce of the taxes from which this increase of revenue must be drawn will not begin to come into the treasury till per-haps ten or twelve months after they are imposed. But the moment in which war begins, or rather the moment in which it appears likely to begin, the army must be augmented, the fleet must be fitted out, the garrisoned towns must be put into a posture of defence;

that army, that fleet, those garrisoned towns must be furnished with arms, ammunition and provisions. An immediate and great expence must be incurred in that moment of immediate danger, which will not wait for the gradual and slow returns of the new taxes. In this exigency government can have no other resource but in borrowing.
               THE same commercial state of society which, by the operation of moral causes, brings government in this manner into the ne-cessity of borrowing, produces in the subjects both an ability and an inclination to lend. If it commonly brings along with it the necessity of borrowing, it likewise brings along with it the facility of doing so.
               A COUNTRY abounding with merchants and manufacturers, necessarily abounds with a set of people through whose hands, not only their own capitals, but the capitals of all those who either lend them money, or trust them with goods, pass as fre-quently, or more frequently, than the revenue of a private man, who, without trade or business, lives upon his income, passes through his hands. The revenue of such a man can regularly pass through his hands only once in the year. But the whole amount of the capital and credit of a merchant who deals in a trade of which the returns are very quick, may sometimes pass through his hands two, three, or four times in a year. A country abounding with merchants and manufacturers, therefore, neces-sarily abounds with a set of people who have it at all times in their power to advance, if they chuse to do so, a very large sum of mo-ney to government. Hence the ability in the subjects of a com-mercial state to lend.
               COMMERCE and manufactures can seldom flourish long in any state which does not enjoy a regular administration of justice, in which the people do not feel themselves secure in the possession of

THERE may be good policy in retaliations of this kind, when there is a probability that they will procure the repeal of the high duties or prohibitions complained of. The recovery of a great foreign market will generally more than compensate the transitory inconveniency of paying dearer during a short time for some sorts of goods. To judge whether such retaliations are likely to produce such an effect, does not, perhaps, belong so much to the science of a legislator, whose deliberations ought to be governed by general principles which are always the same, as to the skill of that in-sidious and crafty animal, vulgarly called a statesman or politician, whose councils are directed by the momentary fluctuations of affairs. When there is no probability that any such repeal can be procured, it seems a bad method of compensating the injury done to certain classes of our people, to do another injury ourselves both to those classes and to almost all the other classes of them. When our neighbours prohibit some manufacture of ours, we generally pro-hibit, not only the same, for that alone would seldom affect them considerably, but some other manufacture of theirs. This may no doubt give encouragement to some particular class of workmen among ourselves, and by excluding some of their rivals, may en-able them to raise their price in the home market. Those work-men, however, who suffered by our neighbours prohibition will not be benefited by ours. On the contrary, they, and almost all the other classes of our citizens will thereby be obliged to pay dearer than before for certain goods. Every such law, therefore, imposes a real tax upon the whole country, not in favour of that particular class of workmen who were injured by our neighbours prohibition, but of some other class.
               THE case in which it may sometimes be a matter of deliberation how far or in what manner it is proper to restore the free impor-tation of foreign goods, after it has been for some time interrupted,

their property, in which the faith of contracts is not supported by law, and in which the authority of the state is not supposed to be regularly employed in enforcing the payment of debts from all those who are able to pay. Commerce and manufactures, in short, can seldom flourish in any state in which there is not a certain degree of confidence in the justice of government. The same confidence which disposes great merchants and manufac-turers, upon ordinary occasions, to trust their property to the pro-tection of a particular government; disposes them, upon extraor-dinary occasions, to trust that government with the use of their property. By lending money to government, they do not even for a moment diminish their ability to carry on their trade and manufactures. On the contrary, they commonly augment it. The necessities of the state render government upon most oc-casions willing to borrow upon terms extremely advantageous to the lender. The security which it grants to the original creditor, is made transferable to any other creditor, and, from the universal confidence in the justice of the state, generally sells in the market for more than was originally paid for it. The merchant or monied man makes money by lending money to go-vernment, and instead of diminishing, increases his trading capi-tal. He generally considers it as a favour, therefore, when the administration admits him to a share in the first subscription for a new loan. Hence the inclination or willingness in the subjects of a commercial state to lend.
               THE government of such a state is very apt to repose itself upon this ability and willingness of its subjects to lend it their money on extraordinary occasions. It foresees the facility of bor-rowing, and therefore dispenses itself from the duty of saving.
               IN a rude state of society there are no great mercantile or manufacturing capitals. The individuals who hoard whatever

money they can save, and who conceal their hoard, do so from a distrust of the justice of government, from a fear that if it was known that they had a hoard, and where that hoard was to be found, they would quickly be plundered. In such a state of things few people would be able, and nobody would be willing to lend their money to government on extraordinary exigencies. The sovereign feels that he must provide for such exigencies by saving, because he foresees the absolute impossibility of borrowing. This foresight increases still further his natural disposition to save.
               THE progress of the enormous debts which at present oppress, and will in the long-run probably ruin all the great nations of Europe, has been pretty uniform. Nations, like private men, have generally begun to borrow upon what may be called personal credit, without assigning or mortgaging any particular fund for the payment of the debt; and when this resource has failed them, they have gone on to borrow upon assignments or mortgages of particular funds.
               WHAT is called the unfunded debt of Great Britain, is con-tracted in the former of those two ways. It consists partly in a debt which bears or is supposed to bear no interest, and which resembles the debts that a private man contracts upon account; and partly in a debt which bears interest, and which resembles what a private man contracts upon his bill or promissory note. The debts which are due either for extraordinary services, or for services either not provided for, or not paid at the time when they are performed; part of the extraordinaries of the army, navy, and ordnance, the arrears of subsidies to foreign princes, those of seamens wages, &amp;c. usually constitute a debt of the first kind. Navy and exchequer bills, which are issued sometimes in pay-ment of a part of such debts, and sometimes for other purposes;

constitute a debt of the second kind; exchequer bills bearing in-terest from the day on which they are issued, and navy bills six months after they are issued. The bank of England, either by volun-tarily discounting those bills at their current value; or by agreeing with government for certain considerations to circulate Exchequer bills, that is, to receive them at par, paying the interest which happens to be due upon them, keeps up their value and facili-tates their circulation, and thereby frequently enables government to contract a very large debt of this kind. In France, where there is no bank, the state bills (billets d'etat) See Examen des Reflexions politiques sur les finances. have sometimes sold at sixty and seventy per cent. discount. During the great re-coinage in king William's time, when the bank of England thought proper to put a stop to its usual transactions, exchequer bills and tallies are said to have sold from twenty-five to sixty per cent. discount; owing partly, no doubt, to the supposed instability of the new government established by the revolution, but partly too to the want of the support of the bank of England.
               WHEN this resource is exhausted, and it becomes necessary, in order to raise money, to assign or mortgage some particular branch of the public revenue for the payment of the debt, government has upon different occasions done this in two different ways. Some-times it has made this assignment or mortgage for a short period of time only, a year or a few years, for example; and sometimes for perpetuity. In the one case the fund was supposed sufficient to pay, within the limited time, both principal and interest of the money borrowed. In the other it was supposed sufficient to pay the interest only, or a perpetual annuity equivalent to the interest, government being at liberty to redeem at any time this annuity upon paying back the principal sum borrowed. When money was raised in the one way, it was said to be raised by anticipation; when in the other, by perpetual funding, or, more shortly, by funding.
               
                  

IN Great Britain the annual land and malt taxes are regularly anticipated every year, by virtue of a borrowing clause constantly inserted into the acts which impose them. The bank of Eng-land generally advances at an interest, which since the revolution has varied from eight to three per cent. the sums for which those taxes are granted, and receives payment as their produce gra-dually comes in. If there is a deficiency, which there always is, it is provided for in the supplies of the ensuing year. The only considerable branch of the public revenue which yet remains unmortgaged is thus regularly spent before it comes in. Like an unprovident spendthrift, whose pressing occasions will not allow him to wait for the regular payment of his revenue, the state is in the constant practice of borrowing of its own factors and agents, and of paying interest for the use of its own money.
               IN the reign of king William, and during a great part of that of queen Anne, before we had become so familiar as we are now with the practice of perpetual funding, the greater part of the new taxes were imposed but for a short period of time, (for four, five, six, or seven years only) and a great part of the grants of every year consisted in loans upon anticipations of the produce of those taxes. The produce being frequently insuffi-cient for paying within the limited term the principal and interest of the money borrowed, deficiencies arose, to make good which it became necessary to prolong the term.
               IN 1697, by the 8th of William III. c. 20. the deficiencies of several taxes were charged upon what was then called the first general mortgage or fund, consisting of a prolongation to the first of August, 1706, of several different taxes, which would have expired within a shorter term, and of which the produce was accumulated into one general fund. The deficiencies charged upon this prolonged term amounted to 5,160,459 l. 14s. 9¼d.
               
                  

IN 1701 those duties with some others were still further pro-longed for the like purposes till the first of August, 1710, and were called the second general mortgage or fund. The deficien-cies charged upon it amounted to 2,055,999 l. 7s. 11½d.
               IN 1707, those duties were still further prolonged, as a fund for new loans, to the first of August, 1712, and were called the third general mortgage or fund. The sum borrowed upon it was 983,254 l. 11s. 9¼d.
               IN 1708, those duties were all (except the old subsidy of ton-nage and poundage, of which one moiety only was made a part of this fund, and a duty upon the importation of Scotch linen, which had been taken off by the articles of union) still further continued, as a fund for new loans, to the first of August, 1714, and were called the fourth general mortgage or fund. The sum borrowed upon it was 925,1761. 9s. 2¼d.
               IN 1709, those duties were all (except the old subsidy of ton-nage and poundage, which was now left out of this fund alto-gether) still further continued for the same purpose to the first of August, 1716, and were called the fifth general mortgage or fund. The sum borrowed upon it was 922,029 l. 6s. od.
               IN 1710, those duties were again prolonged to the first of Au-gust, 1720, and were called the sixth general mortgage or fund. The sum borrowed upon it was 1,296,552 l. 9s. 11¾d.
               IN 1711, the same duties (which at this time were thus subject to four different anticipations) together with several others were continued for ever, and made a fund for paying the interest of the capital of the South Sea company, which had that year ad-vanced to government, for paying debts and making good defi-ciencies, the sum of 9,177,967 l. 15s. 4d. the greatest loan which at that time had ever been made.
               
                  

BEFORE this period, the principal, so far as I have been able to observe, the only taxes which in order to pay the interest of a debt had been imposed for perpetuity, were those for paying the interest of the money which had been advanced to government by the Bank and East India company, and of what it was expected would be advanced, but which was never advanced, by a pro-jected land-bank. The bank fund at this time amounted to 3,375,027l. 17s. 10½d. for which was paid an annuity or interest of 206,501l. 13s. 5d. The East India fund amounted to 3,200,000l. for which was paid an annuity or interest of 160,000l.; the bank fund being at six per cent. the East India fund at five per cent. interest.
               IN 1715, by the first of George I. c. 12. the different taxes which had been mortgaged for paying the bank annuity, together with several others which by this act were likewise rendered per-petual, were accumulated into one common fund called The Aggregate Fund, which was charged, not only with the payment of the bank annuity, but with several other annuities and bur-dens of different kinds. This fund was afterwards augmented by the third of George I. c. 8. and by the fifth of George I. c. 3. and the different duties which were then added to it were likewise rendered perpetual.
               IN 1717, by the third of George I. c. 7. several other taxes were rendered perpetual, and accumulated into another common fund, called The General Fund, for the payment of certain an-nuities, amounting in the whole to 724,849l. 6s. 10½d.
               IN consequence of those different acts, the greater part of the taxes which before had been anticipated only for a short term of years, were rendered perpetual as a fund for paying, not the capital, but the interest only, of the money which had been bor-rowed upon them by different successive anticipations.
               
                  

HAD money never been raised but by anticipation, the course of a few years would have liberated the public revenue, without any other attention of government besides that of not overloading the fund by charging it with more debt than it could pay within the limited term, and of not anticipating a second time before the ex-piration of the first anticipation. But the greater part of European governments have been incapable of those attentions. They have frequently overloaded the fund even upon the first anticipation; and when this happened not to be the case, they have generally taken care to overload it by anticipating a second and a third time before the expiration of the first anticipation. The fund becoming in this manner altogether insufficient for paying both principal and interest of the money borrowed upon it, it became necessary to charge it with the interest only, or a perpetual annuity equal to the interest, and such unprovident anticipations necessarily gave birth to the more ruinous practice of perpetual funding. But though this practice necessarily puts off the liberation of the public revenue from a fixed period to one so indefinite that it is not very likely ever to arrive; yet as a greater sum can in all cases be raised by this new practice than by the old one of anticipations, the former, when men have once become familiar with it, has in the great exigencies of the state been universally preferred to the latter. To relieve the present exigency is always the object which principally interests those immediately concerned in the admini-stration of public affairs. The future liberation of the public revenue, they leave to the care of posterity.
               DURING the reign of queen Anne, the market rate of interest had fallen from six to five per cent. and in the twelfth year of her reign five per cent. was declared to be the highest rate which could lawfully be taken for money borrowed upon private security. Soon after the greater part of the temporary taxes of Great Britain had been rendered perpetual, and distributed into the Aggregate, South Sea, and General Funds, the creditors of the

publick, like those of private persons, were induced to accept of five per cent. for the interest of their money, which occasioned a saving of one per cent. upon the capital of the greater part of the debts which had been thus funded for perpetuity, or of one-sixth of the greater part of the annuities which were paid out of the three great funds above mentioned. This saving left a considerable surplus in the produce of the different taxes which had been accu-mulated into those funds, over and above what was necessary for paying the annuities which were now charged upon them, and laid the foundation of what has since been called the Sinking Fund. In 1717, it amounted to 323,434l. 7s. 7½d. In 1727, the in-terest of the greater part of the public debts was still further re-duced to four per cent.; and in 1753 and 1757, to three and a half and three per cent.; which reductions still further augmented the sinking fund.
               A SINKING fund, though instituted for the payment of old, facilitates very much the contracting of new debts. It is a sub-sidiary fund always at hand to be mortgaged in aid of any other doubtful fund, upon which money is proposed to be raised in any exigency of the state. Whether the sinking fund of Great Britain has been more frequently applied to the one or to the other of those two purposes, will sufficiently appear by and by.
               BESIDES those two methods of borrowing, by anticipations and by perpetual funding, there are two other methods, which hold a sort of middle place between them. These are, that of borrowing upon annuities for terms of years, and that of borrowing upon annuities for lives.
               DURING the reigns of king William and queen Anne, large sums were frequently borrowed upon annuities for terms of years, which

were sometimes longer and sometimes shorter. In 1693, an act was passed for borrowing one million upon an annuity of fourteen per cent. or of 140,000l. a year for sixteen years. In 1691, an act was passed for borrowing a million upon annuities for lives, upon terms which in the present times would appear very advan-tageous. But the subscription was not filled up. In the following year the deficiency was made good by borrowing upon annuities for lives at fourteen per cent. or at little more than seven years pur-chase. In 1695, the persons who had purchased those annuities were allowed to exchange them for others of ninety-six years, upon paying into the Exchequer sixty-three pounds in the hun-dred; that is, the difference between fourteen per cent. for life, and fourteen per cent. for ninety-six years, was sold for sixty-three pounds, or for four and a half years purchase. Such was the sup-posed instability of government, that even these terms procured few purchasers. In the reign of queen Anne, money was upon different occasions borrowed both upon annuities for lives, and upon annuities for terms of thirty-two, of eighty-nine, of ninety-eight, and of ninety-nine years. In 1719, the proprietors of the annuities for thirty-two years were induced to accept in lieu of them South-sea stock to the amount of eleven and a half years pur-chase of the annuities, together with an additional quantity of stock equal to the arrears which happened then to be due upon them. In 1720, the greater part of the other annuities for terms of years both long and short were subscribed into the same fund. The long annuities at that time amounted to 666,821l. 8s. 3½d. a year. On the 5th of January, 1775, the remainder of them, or what was not subscribed at that time, amounted only to 136,453l. 12s. 8d.
               DURING the two wars which begun in 1739, and in 1755, little money was borrowed either upon annuities for terms of years, or

upon those for lives. An annuity for ninety-eight or ninety-nine years, however, is worth nearly as much money as a perpetuity, and should therefore, one might think, be a fund for borrowing nearly as much. But those who, in order to make family settle-ments, and to provide for remote futurity, buy into the public stocks, would not care to purchase into one of which the value was continually diminishing; and such people make a very considerable proportion both of the proprietors and purchasers of stock. An annuity for a long term of years therefore, though its intrinsic value may be very nearly the same with that of a perpetual annuity, will not find nearly the same number of purchasers. The sub-scribers to a new loan, who mean generally to sell their subscription as soon as possible, prefer greatly a perpetual annuity redeemable by parliament, to an irredeemable annuity for a long term of years of only equal amount. The value of the former may be supposed always the same or very nearly the same, and it makes therefore a more convenient transferable stock than the latter.
               DURING the two last mentioned wars, annuities either for terms of years or for lives were seldom granted but as premiums to the subscribers to a new loan, over and above the redeemable annuity or interest upon the credit of which the loan was supposed to be made. They were granted, not as the proper fund upon which the money was borrowed; but as an additional encouragement to the lender.
               ANNUITIES for lives have occasionally been granted in two different ways; either upon separate lives, or upon lots of lives, which in French are called Tontines, from the name of their in-ventor. When annuities are granted upon separate lives, the death of every individual annuitant disburthens the public revenue so far as it was affected by his annuity. When annuities are

is, when particular manufactures, by means of high duties or prohibitions upon all foreign goods which can come into compe-tition with them, have been so far extended as to employ a great multitude of hands. Humanity may in this case require that the freedom of trade should be restored only by slow gradations, and with a good deal of reserve and circumspection. Were those high duties and prohibitions taken away all at once, cheaper foreign goods of the same kind might be poured so fast into the home market, as to deprive all at once many thousands of our people of their or-dinary employment and means of subsistence. The disorder which this would occasion might no doubt be very considerable. It would in all probability, however, be much less than is commonly ima-gined, for the two following reasons:
               FIRST, all those manufactures, of which any part is commonly exported to other European countries without a bounty, could be very little affected by the freest importation of foreign goods. Such manufactures must be sold as cheap abroad as any other foreign goods of the same quality and kind, and consequently must be sold cheaper at home. They would still, therefore, keep possession of the home market, and though a capricious man of fashion might sometimes prefer foreign wares, merely because they were foreign, to cheaper and better goods of the same kind that were made at home, this folly could from the nature of things extend to so few, that it could make no sensible impression upon the general employment of the people. But a great part of all the different branches of our woollen manufacture, of our tanned leather, and of our hard-ware, are annually exported to other European countries without any bounty, and these are the manufactures which employ the greatest number of hands. The silk, perhaps, is the manufacture which would suffer the most by this freedom of trade, and after it the linen, though the latter much less than the former.
               
                  

granted upon tontines, the liberation of the public revenue does not commence till the death of all the annuitants comprehended in one lot, which may sometimes consist of twenty or thirty per-sons, of whom the survivors succeed to the annuities of all those who die before them; the last survivor succeeding to the annui-ties of the whole lot. Upon the same revenue more money can always be raised by tontines than by annuities for separate lives. An annuity, with a right of survivorship, is really worth more than an equal annuity for a separate life, and from the confidence which every man naturally has in his own good fortune, the principle upon which is founded the success of all lotteries, such an annuity generally sells for something more than it is worth. In countries where it is usual for government to raise money by granting annuities, tontines are upon this account generally pre-ferred to annuities for separate lives. The expedient which will raise most money, is almost always preferred to that which is likely to bring about in the speediest manner the liberation of the public revenue.
               IN France a much greater proportion of the public debts con-sists in annuities for lives than in England. According to a memoir presented by the parliament of Bourdeaux to the king in 1764, the whole public debt of France is estimated at twenty-four hundred millions of livres; of which the capital for which annuities for lives had been granted, is supposed to amount to three hundred millions, the eighth-part of the whole public debt. The annuities themselves are computed to amount to thirty millions a year, the fourth part of one hundred and twenty millions, the supposed interest of that whole debt. These esti-mations, I know very well, are not exact, but having been pre-sented by so very respectable a body as approximations to the truth, they may, I apprehend, be considered as such. It is not the different degrees of anxiety in the two governments of France

and England for the liberation of the public revenue, which occa-sions this difference in their respective modes of borrowing. It arises altogether from the different views and interests of the lenders.
               IN England, the seat of government being in the greatest mer-cantile city in the world, the merchants are generally the people who advance money to government. By advancing it they do not mean to diminish, but, on the contrary, to increase their mercantile capitals; and unless they expected to sell with some profit their share in the subscription for a new loan, they never would subscribe. But if by advancing their money they were to purchase, instead of perpetual annuities, annuities for lives only, whether their own or those of other people, they would not always be so likely to sell them with a profit. Annuities upon their own lives they would always sell with loss; because no man will give for an annuity upon the life of another, whose age and state of health are nearly the same with his own, the same price which he would give for one upon his own. An annuity upon the life of a third person, indeed, is, no doubt, of equal value to the buyer and the seller; but its real value begins to diminish from the moment it is granted, and continues to do so more and more as long as it subsists. It can never, therefore, make so convenient a transferable stock as a perpetual annuity, of which the real value may be supposed always the same, or very nearly the same.
               IN France, the seat of government not being in a great mercan-tile city, merchants do not make so great a proportion of the peo-ple who advance money to government. The people concerned in the finances, the farmers general, the receivers of the taxes which are not in farm, the court bankers, &amp;c. make the greater part of those who advance their money in all public exigencies. Such people are commonly men of mean birth, but of great wealth, and fre-quently

of great pride. They are too proud to marry thir equals, and women of quality disdain to marry them. They frequently resolve, therefore, to live bachelors, and having neither any fami-lies of their own, nor much regard for those of their relations, whom they are not always very fond of acknowledging, they desire only to live in splendor during their own time, and are not unwil-ling that their fortune should end with themselves. The number of rich people, besides, who are either averse to marry, or whose condition of life renders it either improper or inconvenient for them to do so, is much greater in France than in England. To such people, who have little or no care for posterity, nothing can be more convenient than to exchange their capital for a revenue, which is to last just as long as, and no longer than, they wish it to do.
               THE ordinary expence of the greater part of modern govern-ments in time of peace being equal or nearly equal to their ordi-nary revenue, when war comes they are both unwilling and unable to increase their revenue in proportion to the increase of their ex-pence. They are unwilling, for fear of offending the people, who, by so great and so sudden an increase of taxes, would soon be dis-gusted with the war; and they are unable, from not well know-ing what taxes would be sufficient to produce the revenue wanted. The facility of borrowing delivers them from the embarrassment which this fear and inability would otherwise occasion. By means of borrowing they are enabled, with a very moderate increase of taxes, to raise, from year to year, money sufficient for carrying on the war, and by the practice of perpetual funding they are enabled, with the smallest possible increase of taxes, to raise annually the largest possible sum of money. In great empires the people who live in the capital, and in the provinces remote from the scene of action, feel, many of them, scarce any inconveniency from the

war; but enjoy, at their ease, the amusement of reading in the news-papers the exploits of their own fleets and armies. To them this amusement compensates the small difference between the taxes which they pay on account of the war, and those which they had been accustomed to pay in time of peace. They are commonly dissatisfied with the return of peace, which puts an end to their amusement, and to a thousand visionary hopes of conquest, and national glory, from a longer continuance of the war.
               THE return of peace, indeed, seldom relieves them from the greater part of the taxes imposed during the war. These are mort-gaged for the interest of the debt contracted in order to carry it on. If, over and above paying the interest of this debt, and defraying the ordinary expence of government, the old revenue, together with the new taxes, produce some surplus revenue, it may perhaps be converted into a sinking fund for paying off the debt. But, in the first place, this sinking fund, even supposing it should be applied to no other purpose, is generally altogether inadequate for paying, in the course of any period during which it can reasonably be expected that peace should continue, the whole debt contracted during the war; and, in the second place, this fund is almost always applied to other purposes.
               THE new taxes were imposed for the sole purpose of paying the interest of the money borrowed upon them. If they produce more, it is generally something which was neither intended nor expected, and is therefore seldom very considerable. Sinking funds have gene-rally arisen, not so much from any surplus of the taxes which was over and above what was necessary for paying the interest or an-nuity originally charged upon them, as from a subsequent reduc-tion of that interest. That of Holland in 1655, and that of the ecclesiastical state in 1685, were both formed in this manner. Hence the usual insufficiency of such funds.
               
                  

DURING the most profound peace, various events occur which require an extraordinary expence, and government finds it always more convenient to defray this expence by misapplying the sinking fund than by imposing a new tax. Every new tax is immediately felt more or less by the people. It occasions always some mur-mur, and meets with some opposition. The more taxes may have been multiplied, the higher they may have been raised upon every different subject of taxation; the more loudly the people complain of every new tax, the more difficult it becomes too either to find out new subjects of taxation, or to raise much higher the taxes already imposed upon the old. A momentary suspension of the payment of debt is not immediately felt by the people, and occa-sions neither murmur nor complaint. To borrow of the sinking fund is always an obvious and easy expedient for getting out of the present difficulty. The more the public debts may have been accu-mulated, the more necessary it may have become to study to reduce them, the more dangerous, the more ruinous it may be to misapply any part of the sinking fund; the less likely is the public debt to be reduced to any considerable degree, the more likely, the more certainly is the sinking fund to be misapplied towards defraying all the extraordinary expences which occur in time of peace. When a nation is already overburdened with taxes, nothing but the necessities of a new war, nothing but either the animosity of national vengeance, or the anxiety for national security, can induce the people to sub-mit, with tolerable patience, to a new tax. Hence the usual mis-application of the sinking fund.
               IN Great Britain, from the time that we had first recourse to the ruinous expedient of perpetual funding, the reduction of the pub-lic debt in time of peace, has never borne any proportion to its accumulation in time of war. It was in the war which began in 1688, and was concluded by the treaty of Ryswick in 1697, that the foundation of the present enormous debt of Great Britain was first laid.
               
                  

ON the 31st of December, 1697, the public debts of Great Bri-tain, funded and unfunded, amounted to 21,515,742l. 13s. 8½d. A great part of those debts had been contracted upon short anti-cipations, and some part upon annuities for lives; so that before the 31st of December, 1701, in less than four years, there had partly been paid off, and partly reverted to the public, the sum of 5,121,041l. 12s. 0¾d.; a greater reduction of the public debt than has ever since been brought about in so short a period of time. The remaining debt, therefore, amounted only to 16,394,701l. 1s. 7¼d.
               IN the war which began in 1702, and which was concluded by the treaty of Utrecht, the public debts were still more accumu-lated. On the 31st of December, 1714, they amounted to 53,681,076l. 5s. 61/12d. The subscription into the South Sea fund of the long and short annuities increased the capital of the public debts, so that on the 31st of December, 1722, it amounted to 55,282,978l. 1s. 35/6d. The reduction of the debt began in 1723, and went on so slowly that, on the 31st of December, 1739, during seventeen years of profound peace, the whole sum paid off was no more than 8,328,354l. 17s. 113/12d. the capital of the public debt at that time amounting to 46,954,623l. 3s. 47/12d.
               THE Spanish war, which began in 1739, and the French war which soon followed it, occasioned a further encrease of the debt, which, on the 31st of December, 1748, after the war had been concluded by the treaty of Aix la Chapelle, amounted to 78,293,313l. 1s. 10¾d. The most profound peace of seventeen years continuance had taken no more than 8,328,354l. 17s. 113/12d. from it. A war of less than nine years continuance added 31,338,689l. 18s. 61/6d. to it See James Postlethwaite's history of the public revenue..
               DURING the administration of Mr. Pelham, the interest of the public debt was reduced, or at least measures were taken for reduce-ing

it, from four to three per cent.; the sinking fund was increased, and some part of the public debt was paid off. In 1755, before the breaking out of the late war, the funded debt of Great Britain amounted to 72,289,673l. On the 5th of January, 1763, at the conclusion of the peace, the funded debt amounted to 122,603,336l. 8s. 2¼d. The unfunded debt has been stated at 13,927,589l. 2s. 2d. But the expence occasioned by the war did not end with the conclusion of the peace; so that though on the 5th of Janu-ary, 1764, the funded debt was increased (partly by a new loan, and partly by funding a part of the unfunded debt) to 129,586,789l. 10s. 1¾d. there still remained (according to the very well informed author of the Considerations on the trade and finances of Great Britain) an unfunded debt, which was brought to account in that and the following year, of 9,975,017l. 12s. 215/44d. In 1764, therefore, the public debt of Great Britain, funded and unfunded together, amounted, according to this author, to 139,561,807l. 2s. 4d. The annuities for lives too, which had been granted as premiums to the subscribers to the new loans in 1757, estimated at fourteen years purchase, were valued at 472,500l.; and the annuities for long terms of years, granted as premiums likewise, in 1761 and 1762, estimated at 27½ years purchase, were valued at 6,826,875l. During a peace of about seven years continuance, the prudent and truly patriot administra-tion of Mr. Pelham, was not able to pay off an old debt of six millions. During a war of nearly the same continuance, a new debt of more than seventy-five millions was contracted.
               ON the 5th of January, 1775, the funded debt of Great Britain amounted to 124,996,086l. 1s. 6¼d. The unfunded, exclusive of a large civil list debt, to 4,150,236l. 3s. 117/8d. Both together, to 129,146,322l. 5s. 6d. According to this account the whole debt paid off during eleven years profound peace amounted only to 10,415,474l. 16s. 97/8d. Even this

small reduction of debt, however, has not been all made from the savings out of the ordinary revenue of the state. Several extraneous sums, altogether independant of that ordinary revenue, have contributed towards it. Among these we may reckon an additional shilling in the pound land tax for three years; the two millions received from the East India company, as indemnification for their territorial acquisitions; and the one hundred and ten thousand pounds received from the bank for the renewal of their charter. To these must be added several other sums which, as they arose out of the late war, ought perhaps to be considered as deductions from the expences of it. The prin-cipal are,

                     
                         
                        l.
                        s.
                        d.
                     
                     
                        The produce of French prizes
                        690,449
                        18
                        9
                     
                     
                        Composition for French prisoners
                        670,000
                        0
                        0
                     
                     
                        What has been received from the sale of the ceded islands
                        95,500
                        0
                        0
                     
                     
                        Total,
                        1,455,949
                        18
                        9
                     
                  
If we add to this sum the balance of the earl of Chatham's and Mr. Calcrast's accounts, and other army savings of the same kind, together with what has been received from the bank, the East India company, and the additional shilling in the pound, land tax; the whole must be a good deal more than five millions. The debt, therefore, which since the peace has been paid out of the savings from the ordinary revenue of the stage, has not, one year with another, amounted to half a million a year. The sinking fund has, no doubt, been considerably augmented since the peace, by the debt which has been paid off, by the reduction of the redeemable four per cents. to three per cents. and by the annuities for lives which have fallen in, and, if peace was to continue,

a million perhaps might now be annually spared out of it towards the discharge of the debt. Another million, accordingly, was paid in the course of last year; but, at the same time, a large civil list debt was left unpaid, and we are now involved in a new war which, in its progress, may prove as expensive as any of our former wars. The new debt which will probably be con-tracted before the end of the next campaign, may perhaps be nearly equal to all the old debt which has been paid off from the savings out of the ordinary revenue of the state. It would be altogether chimerical, therefore, to expect that the public debt should ever be completely discharged by any savings which are likely to be made from that ordinary revenue as it stands at pre-sent.
               THE public funds of the different indebted nations of Europe, particularly those of England, have by one author been repre-sented as the accumulation of a great capital super-added to the other capital of the country, by means of which its trade is ex-tended, its manufactures multiplied, and its lands cultivated and improved much beyond what they could have been by means of that other capital only. He does not consider that the capital which the first creditors of the public advanced to government, was, from the moment in which they advanced it, a certain por-tion of the annual produce turned away from serving in the function of a capital, to serve in that of a revenue; from main-taining productive labourers to maintain unproductive ones, and to be spent and wasted, generally in the course of the year, without even the hope of any future reproduction. In return for the capital which they advanced they obtained, indeed, an annuity in the public funds in most cases of more than equal value. This annuity, no doubt, replaced to them their capital, and enabled them to carry on their trade and business to the same or perhaps to a greater extent than before; that is, they were enabled either

to borrow of other people a new capital upon the credit of this annuity, or by selling it to get from other people a new capital of their own, equal or superior to that which they had advanced to government. This new capital, however, which they in this manner either bought or borrowed of other people, must have existed in the country before, and must have been employed, as all capitals are, in maintaining productive labour. When it came into the hands of those who had advanced their money to govern-ment, though it was in some respects a new capital to them, it was not so to the country; but was only a capital withdrawn from certain employments in order to be turned towards others. Though it replaced to them what they had advanced to government, it did not replace it to the country. Had they not advanced this capital to government, there would have been in the country two capitals, two portions of the annual produce, instead of one, em-ployed in maintaining productive labour.
               WHEN for defraying the expence of government a revenue is raised within the year from the produce of free or unmortgaged taxes, a certain portion of the revenue of private people is only turned away from maintaining one species of unproductive labour, towards maintaining another. Some part of what they pay in those taxes might no doubt have been accumulated into capital, and consequently employed in maintaining productive labour; but the greater part would probably have been spent and consequently em-ployed in maintaining unproductive labour. The public expence however, when defrayed in this manner, no doubt hinders more or less the further accumulation of new capital; but it does not ne-cessarily occasion the destruction of any actually existing capital.
               WHEN the publick expence is defrayed by funding, it is defrayed by the annual destruction of some capital which had before existed

SECONDLY, though a great number of people should, by thus restoring the freedom of trade, be thrown all at once out of their ordinary employment and common method of subsistence, it would by no means follow that they would thereby be deprived either of employment or subsistence. By the reduction of the army and navy at the end of the late war more than a hundred thousand soldiers and seamen, a number equal to what is employed in the greatest manu-factures, were all at once thrown out of their ordinary employ-ment; but, though they no doubt suffered some inconveniency, they were not thereby deprived of all employment and subsistence. The greater part of the seamen, it is probable, gradually betook themselves to the merchants service as they could find occasion, and in the mean time both they and the soldiers were absorbed in the great mass of the people, and employed in a great variety of occupations. Not only no great convulsion, but no sensible dis-order arose from so great a change in the situation of more than a hundred thousand men, all accustomed to the use of arms, and many of them to rapine and plunder. The number of vagrants was scarce anywhere sensibly increased by it, even the wages of labour were not reduced by it in any occupation, so far as I have been able to learn, except in that of seamen in the merchant ser-vice. But if we compare together the habits of a soldier and of any sort of manufacturer, we shall find that those of the latter do not tend so much to disqualify him from being employed in a new trade, as those of the former from being employed in any. The manufacturer has always been accustomed to look for his subsistence from his labour only: the soldier to expect it from his pay. Appli-cation and industry have been familiar to the one; idleness and dis-sipation to the other. But it is surely much easier to change the direction of industry from one sort of labour to another, than to turn idleness and dissipation to any. To the greater part of manufactures besides, it has already been observed, there are other

in the country; by the perversion of some portion of the annual produce which had before been destined for the maintenance of productive labour, towards that of unproductive labour. As in this case, however, the taxes are lighter than they would have been, had a revenue sufficient for defraying the same expence been raised within the year; the private revenue of individuals is neces-sarily less burthened, and consequently their ability to save and accu-mulate some part of that revenue into capital is a good deal less impaired. If the method of funding destroys more old capital, it at the same time hinders less the accumulation or acquisition of new capital, than that of defraying the public expence by a revenue raised within the year. Under the system of funding, the frugality and industry of private people can more easily repair the breaches which the waste and extravagance of government may occasionally make in the general capital of the society.
               IT is only during the continuance of war, however, that the system of funding has this advantage over the other system. Were the expence of war to be defrayed always by a revenue raised within the year, the taxes from which that extraordinary revenue was drawn would last no longer than the war. The ability of private people to accumulate, though less during the war, would have been greater during the peace than under the system of funding. War would not necessarily have occasioned the destruc-tion of any old capitals, and peace would have occasioned the accumulation of many more new. Wars would in general be more speedily concluded, and less wantonly undertaken. The peo-ple feeling, during the continuance of the war, the complete burden of it, would soon grow weary of it, and government, in order to humour them, would not be under the necessity of carry-ing it on longer than it was necessary to do so. The foresight of the heavy and unavoidable burdens of war would hinder the

people from wantonly calling for it when there was no real or solid interest to fight for. The seasons during which the ability of private people to accumulate was somewhat impaired, would occur more rarely, and be of shorter continuance. Those, on the contrary, during which that ability was in the highest vigour, would be of much longer duration than they can well be under the system of funding.
               WHEN funding, besides, has made a certain progress, the mul-tiplication of taxes which it brings along with it sometimes im-pairs as much the ability of private people to accumulate even in time of peace, as the other system would in time of war. The peace revenue of Great Britain amounts at present to more than ten millions a year. If free and unmortgaged, it might be sufficient, with proper management and without contracting a shilling of new debt, to carry on the most vigorous war. The private revenue of the inhabitants of Great Britain is at present as much encum-bered in time of peace, their ability to accumulate is as much impaired as it would have been in the time of the most expensive war, had the pernicious system of funding never been adopted.
               IN the payment of the interest of the public debt, it has been said, it is the right hand which pays the left. The money does not go out of the country. It is only a part of the revenue of one set of the inhabitants which is transferred to another; and the nation is not a farthing the poorer. This apology is founded altogether in the sophistry of the mercantile system, and after the long examination which I have already bestowed upon that system, it may perhaps be unnecessary to say any thing further about it. It supposes, besides, that the whole public debt is owing to the inha-bitants of the country, which happens not to be true; the Dutch, as well as several other foreign nations, having a very considerable

share in our public funds. But though the whole debt were owing to the inhabitants of the country, it would not upon that account be less pernicious.
               LAND and capital stock are the two original sources of all re-venue both private and public. Capital stock pays the wages of productive labour, whether employed in agriculture, manufactures, or commerce. The management of those two original sources of revenue belongs to two different setts of people; the proprietors of land, and the owners or employers of capital stock.
               THE proprietor of land is interested for the sake of his own revenue to keep his estate in as good condition as he can, by build-ing and repairing his tenants houses, by making and maintaining the necessary drains and enclosures, and all those other expensive improvements which it properly belongs to the landlord to make and maintain. But by different land-taxes the revenue of the landlord may be so much diminished; and by different duties upon the necessaries and conveniencies of life, that diminished revenue may be rendered of so little real value, that he may find himself altogether unable to make or maintain those expensive improve-ments. When the landlord, however, ceases to do his part, it is altogether impossible that the tenant should continue to do his. As the distress of the landlord increases, the agriculture of the country must necessarily decline.
               WHEN by different taxes upon the necessaries and conveniencies of life, the owners and employers of capital stock find, that what-ever revenue they derive from it, will not, in a particular country, purchase the same quantity of those necessaries and conveniencies, which an equal revenue would in almost any other; they will be disposed to remove to some other. And when, in order to raise those

taxes, all or the greater part of merchants and manufacturers, that is, all or the greater part of the employers of great capitals, come to be continually exposed to the mortifying and vexatious visits of the tax gatherers; this disposition to remove will soon be changed into an actual removal. The industry of the country will neces-sarily fall with the removal of the capital which supported it, and the ruin of trade and manufactures will follow the declension of agriculture.
               To transfer from the owners of those two great sources of reve-nue, land and capital stock, from the persons immediately interested in the good condition of every particular portion of land, and in the good management of every particular portion of capital stock, to another sett of persons, (the creditors of the public, who have no such particular interest) the greater part of the revenue arising from either, must, in the long-run, occasion both the neglect of land, and the waste or removal of capital stock. A creditor of the public has no doubt a general interest in the prosperity of the agri-culture, manufactures, and commerce of the country; and con-sequently in the good condition of its lands, and in the good ma-nagement of its capital stock. Should there be any general failure or declension in any of these things, the produce of the different taxes might no longer be sufficient to pay him the annuity or in-terest which is due to him. But a creditor of the public, con-sidered merely as such, has no interest in the good condition of any particular portion of land, or in the good management of any particular portion of capital stock. As a creditor of the public he has no knowledge of any such particular portion. He has no inspection of it. He can have no care about it. Its ruin may in most cases be unknown to him, and cannot directly affect him.
               THE practice of funding has gradually enfeebled every state which has adopted it. The Italian republics seem to have begun it.

Genoa and Venice, the only two remaining which can pretend to an independent existence, have both been enfeebled by it. Spain seems to have learned the practice from the Italian republics, and (its taxes being probably less judicious than theirs) it has, in pro-portion to its natural strength, been still more enfeebled. The debts of Spain are of very old standing. It was deeply in debt be-fore the end of the sixteenth century, about a hundred years before England owed a shilling. France, notwithstanding all its natural resources, languishes under an oppressive load of the same kind. The republic of the United Provinces is as much enfeebled by its debts as either Genoa or Venice. Is it likely that in Great Britain alone a practice, which has brought either weakness or de-solation into every other country, should prove altogether inno-cent?
               THE system of taxation established in those different countries, it may be said, is inferior to that of England. I believe it is so. But it ought to be remembered, that when the wisest government has exhausted all the proper subjects of taxation, it must, in cases of urgent necessity, have recourse to improper ones. The wise republic of Holland has upon some occasions been obliged to have recourse to taxes as inconvenient as the greater part of those of Spain. Another war begun before any considerable liberation of the publick revenue had been brought about, and growing in its progress as expensive as the last war, may, from irresistable necessity, render the British system of taxation as oppressive as that of Hol-land, or even as that of Spain. To the honour of our present system of taxation, indeed, it has hitherto given so little embar-rassment to industry, that, during the course even of the most ex-pensive wars, the frugality and good conduct of individuals seems to have been able, by saving and accumulation, to repair all the breaches which the waste and extravagance of government had

made in the general capital of the society. At the conclusion of the late war, the most expensive that Great Britain ever waged, her agriculture was as flourishing, her manufacturers as numerous and as fully employed, and her commerce as extensive, as they had ever been before. The capital, therefore, which supported all those different branches of industry, must have been equal to what it had ever been before. Since the peace, agriculture has been still further improved, the rents of houses have risen in every town and village of the country, a proof of the increasing wealth and reve-nue of the people; and the annual amount of the greater part of the old taxes, of the principal branches of the excise and customs in particular, has been continually increasing, an equally clear proof of an increasing consumption, and consequently of an in-creasing produce, which could alone support that consumption. Great Britain seems to support with ease, a burden which, half a century ago, nobody believed her capable of supporting. Let us not, however, upon this account rashly conclude that she is capa-ble of supporting any burden; nor even be too confident that she could support, without great distress, a burden a little greater than what has already been laid upon her.
               WHEN national debts have once been accumulated to a certain degree, there is scarce, I believe, a single instance of their having been fairly and completely paid. The liberation of the public revenue, if it has ever been brought about at all, has always been brought about by a bankruptcy; sometimes by an avowed one, but always by a real one, though frequently by a pretended pay-ment.
               THE raising of the denomination of the coin has been the most usual expedient by which a real public bankruptcy has been dis-guised under the appearance of a pretended payment. If a sixpence,

for example, should either by act of parliament or royal procla-mation be raised to the denomination of a shilling, and twenty six-pences to that of a pound sterling; the person who under the old denomination had borrowed twenty shillings, or near four ounces of silver, would, under the new, pay with twenty sixpences, or with something less than two ounces. A national debt of about a hundred and twenty-eight millions, nearly the capital of the funded and unfunded debt of Great Britain, might in this manner be paid with about sixty-four millions of our present money. It would indeed be a pretended payment only, and the creditors of the public would really be defrauded of ten shillings in the pound of what was due to them. The calamity too would extend much further than to the creditors of the public, and those of every private person would suffer a proportionable loss; and this without any advantage, but in most cases with a great additional loss, to the creditors of the public. If the creditors of the public indeed were generally much in debt to other people, they might in some measure compensate their loss by paying their creditors in the same coin in which the public had paid them. But in most countries the creditors of the public are, the greater part of them, wealthy people, who stand more in the relation of creditors than in that of debtors towards the rest of their fellow citizens. A pretended payment of this kind, therefore, instead of alleviating, aggravates in most cases the loss of the creditors of the public; and with-out any advantage to the public extends the calamity to a great number of other innocent people. It occasions a general and most pernicious subversion of the fortunes of private people; enriching in most cases the idle and profuse debtor at the expence of the industrious and frugal creditor, and transporting a great part of the national capital, from the hands which were likely to encrease and improve it, to those which are likely to dissipate and destroy it. When it becomes necessary for a state to dissipate and destroy it. When it becomes necessary for a state to

declare itself bankrupt, in the same manner as when it becomes necessary for an individual to do so, a fair, open, and avowed bank-ruptcy is always the measure which is both least dishonourable to the debtor, and least hurtful to the creditor. The honour of a state is surely very poorly provided for, when, in order to cover the disgrace of a real bankruptcy, it has recourse to a juggling trick of this kind, so easily seen through, and at the same time so extremely pernicious.
               ALMOST all states, however, antient as well as modern, when reduced to this necessity, have, upon some occasions, played this very juggling trick. The Romans, at the end of the first punic war, reduced the As, the coin or denomination by which they computed the value of all their other coins, from containing twelve ounces of copper to contain only two ounces; that is, they raised two ounces of copper to a denomination which had always before expressed the value of twelve ounces. The republic was, in this manner, enabled to pay the great debts which it had contracted with the sixth part of what it really owed. So sudden and so great a bankruptcy, we should in the present times be apt to imagine, must have occa-sioned a very violent popular clamour. It does not appear to have occasioned any. The law which enacted it was, like all other laws relating to the coin, introduced and carried through the assembly of the people by a tribune, and was probably a very popular law. In Rome, as in all the other antient republics, the poor people were constantly in debt to the rich and the great, who, in order to secure their votes at the annual elections, used to lend them money at exorbitant interest, which, being never paid, soon accumulated into a sum too great either for the debtor to pay, or for any body else to pay for him. The debtor, for fear of a very severe execu-tion, was obliged, without any further gratuity, to vote for the candidate whom the creditor recommended. In spite of all the

laws against bribery and corruption, the bounty of the candidates, together with the occasional distributions of corn, which were ordered by the senate, were the principal funds from which, during the later times of the Roman republic, the poorer citizens derived their subsistence. To deliver themselves from this subjection to their creditors, the poorer citizens were continually calling out either for an entire abolition of debts, or for what they called New Tables; that is, for a law which should entitle them to a complete acquittance, upon paying only a certain proportion of their accu-mulated debts. The law which reduced the coin of all denomina-tions to a sixth part of its former value, as it enabled them to pay their debts with a sixth part of what they really owed, was equiva-lent to the most advantageous new tables. In order, to satisfy the people, the rich and the great were, upon several different occa-sions, obliged to consent to laws both for abolishing debts, and for introducing new tables; and they probably were induced to con-sent to this law, partly for the same reason, and partly that by libe-rating the public revenue, they might restore vigour to that govern-ment of which they themselves had the principal direction. An operation of this kind would at once reduce a debt of a hundred and twenty-eight millions to twenty-one millions, three hundred and thirty-three thousand, three hundred and thirty-three pounds, six shillings and eight-pence. In the course of the second punic war the As was still further reduced, first, from two ounces of copper to one ounce; and afterwards from one ounce to half an ounce; that is, to the twenty-fourth part of its original value. By combining the three Roman operations into one, a debt of a hundred and twenty-eight millions of our present money, might in this manner be reduced all at once to a debt of five millions, three hundred and thirty-three thousand, three hundred and thirty-three pounds, six shillings and eight-pence. Even the enormous debt of Great Britain might in this manner soon be paid.
               
                  

BY means of such expedients the coin of, I believe, all nations has been gradually reduced more and more below its original value, and the same nominal sum has been gradually brought to contain a smaller and a smaller quantity of silver.
               NATIONS have sometimes, for the same purpose, adulterated the standard of their coin; that is, have mixed a greater quantity of alloy in it. If in the pound weight of our silver coin, for exam-ple, instead of eighteen penny weight, according to the present standard, there was mixed eight ounces of alloy; a pound sterling, or twenty shillings of such coin, would be worth little more than six shillings and eight-pence of our present money. The quan-tity of silver contained in six shillings and eight-pence of our pre-sent money, would thus be raised very nearly to the denomination of a pound sterling. The adulteration of the standard has exactly the same effect with what the French call an augmentation, or a direct raising of the denomination of the coin.
               AN augmentation, or a direct raising of the denomination of the coin, always is, and from its nature must be, an open and avowed operation. By means of it pieces of a smaller weight and bulk are called by the same name which had before been given to pieces of a greater weight and bulk. The adulteration of the standard, on the contrary, has generally been a concealed operation. By means of it pieces were issued from the mint of the same denominations, and, as nearly as could be contrived, of the same weight, bulk, and appearance, with pieces which had been current before of much greater value. When king John of France See du Cange Glossary, voce Moneta; the Benedictine edition., in order to pay his debts, adulterated his coin, all the officers of his mint were sworn to secresy. Both operations are unjust. But a simple augmenta-tion is an injustice of open violence; whereas an adulteration is an injustice of treacherous fraud. This latter operation, therefore, as

collateral manufactures of so similar a nature, that a workman can easily transfer his industry from one of them to another. The greater part of such workmen too are occasionally employed in country labour. The stock which employed them in a particular manufacture before, will still remain in the country to employ an equal number of people in some other way. The capital of the country remaining the same, the demand for labour will likewise be the same, or very nearly the same, though it may be exerted in different places and for different occupations. Soldiers and sea-men, indeed, when discharged from the kings service, are at liberty to exercise any trade, within any town or place of Great Britain or Ireland. Let the same natural liberty of exercising what species of industry they please be restored to all his majesty's subjects, in the same manner as to soldiers and seamen; that is, break down the exclusive privileges of corporations, and repeal the statute of apprenticeship, both which are real encroachments upon natural liberty, and add to these the repeal of the law of settlements, so that a poor workman, when thrown out of employment either in one trade or in one place, may seek for it in another trade or in another place, without the fear either of a prosecution or of a removal, and neither the publick nor the individuals will suffer much more from the occasional disbanding some particular classes of manufacturers, than from that of soldiers. Our manufacturers have no doubt great merit with their country, but they cannot have more than those who defend it with their blood, nor deserve to be treated with more delicacy.
               To expect, indeed, that the freedom of trade should ever be entirely restored in Great Britain, is as absurd as to expect that an Oceana or Utopea should ever be established in it. Not only the prejudices of the publick, but what is much more unconquerable, the private interests of many individuals irresistably oppose it. Were the

soon as it has been discovered, and it could never be concealed very long, has always excited much greater indignation than the former. The coin, after any considerable augmentation, has very seldom been brought back to its former weight; but after the greatest adulterations it has almost always been brought back to its former fineness. It has scarce ever happened that the fury and indignation of the people could otherwise be appeased.
               IN the end of the reign of Henry VIII. and in the beginning of that of Edward VI. the English coin was not only raised in its denomination, but adulterated in its standard. The like frauds were practised in Scotland during the minority of James VI. They have occasionally been practised in most other countries.
               THAT the public revenue of Great Britain can ever be com-pletely liberated, or even that any considerable progress can ever be made towards that liberation, while the surplus of that revenue, or what is over and above defraying the annual expence of the peace establishment, is so very small, it seems altogether in vain to expect. That liberation, it is evident, can never be brought about without either some very considerable augmentation of the public revenue, or some equally considerable reduction of the public expence.
               A MORE equal land-tax, a more equal tax upon the rent of houses, and such alterations in the present system of customs and excise as those which have been mentioned in the foregoing chapter, might, perhaps, without increasing the burden of the greater part of the people, but only distributing the weight of it more equally upon the whole, produce a considerable augmentation of revenue. The most sanguine projector, however, could scarce flatter himself that any augmentation of this kind would be such as could give any reasonable hopes either of liberating the public revenue alto-gether,

or even of making such progress towards that liberation in time of peace, as either to prevent or to compensate the further accumulation of the public debt in the next war.
               BY extending the British system of taxation to all the different provinces of the empire inhabited by people either of British or Eu-ropean extraction, a much greater augmentation of revenue might be expected. This, however, could scarce perhaps be done, consist-ently with the principles of the British constitution, without admit-ting into the British parliament, or if you will into the states gene-ral of the British Empire, a fair and equal representation of all those different provinces, that of each province bearing the same proportion to the produce of its taxes, as the representation of Great Britain might bear to the produce of the taxes levied upon Great Britain. The private interest of many powerful individuals, the confirmed prejudices of great bodies of people seem, indeed, at present, to oppose to so great a change such obstacles as it may be very difficult, perhaps altogether impossible, to surmount. With-out, however, pretending to determine whether such a union be practicable or impracticable, it may not, perhaps, be improper, in a speculative work of this kind, to consider how far the British system of taxation might be applicable to all the different provinces of the empire; what revenue might be expected from it if so applied, and in what manner a general union of this kind might be likely to affect the happiness and prosperity of the different pro-vinces comprehended within it. Such a speculation can at worst be regarded but as a new Utopia, less amusing certainly, but not more useless and chimerical than the old one.
               THE land-tax, the stamp duties, and the different duties of customs and excise, constitute the four principal branches of the British taxes.
               
                  

IRELAND is certainly as able, and our American and West Indian plantations more able to pay a land-tax than Great Bri-tain. Where the landlord is subject neither to tithe nor poors rate, he must certainly be more able to pay such a tax, than where he is subject to both those other burdens. The tithe, where there is no modus, and where it is levied in kind, diminishes more what would otherwise be the rent of the landlord, than a land-tax which really amounted to five shillings in the pound. Such a tithe will be found in most cases to amount to more than a fourth part of the real rent of the land, or of what remains after replacing compleatly the capital of the farmer, together with his reasonable profit. If all moduses and all impropriations were taken away, the complete church tithe of Great Britain and Ire-land, could not well be estimated at less than six or seven mil-lions. If there was no tithe either in Great Britain or Ireland, the landlords could afford to pay six or seven millions additional land-tax, without being more burdened than a very great part of them are at present. America pays no tithe, and could therefore very well afford to pay a land-tax. The lands in America and the West Indies, indeed, are in general not tenanted or leased out to farmers. They could not therefore be assessed according to any rent-roll. But neither were the lands of Great Britain, in the 4th of William and Mary, assessed according to any rent-roll, but according to a very loose and inaccurate estimation. The lands in America might be assessed either in the same manner, or according to an equitable valuation in consequence of an accurate survey, like that which was lately made in the Milanese, and in the dominions of Austria, Prussia, and Sardinia.
               STAMP-DUTIES, it is evident, might be levied without any variation in all countries where the forms of law process, and the deeds by which property both real and personal is transferred, are the same or nearly the same.
               
                  

THE extension of the customhouse laws of Great Britain to Ireland and the plantations, provided it was accompanied, as in justice it ought to be, with an extension of the freedom of trade, would be in the highest degree advantageous to both. All the invidious restraints which at present oppress the trade of Ireland, the distinction between the enumerated and non-enumerated com-modities of America, would be entirely at an end. The coun-tries north of Cape Finisterre would be as open to every part of the produce of America, as those south of that cape are to some parts of that produce at present. The trade between all the different parts of the British empire would, in consequence of this uniformity in the customhouse laws, be as free as the coast-ing trade of Great Britain is at present. The British empire would thus afford within itself an immense internal market for every part of the produce of all its different provinces. So great an extension of market would soon compensate both to Ireland and the plantations, all that they could suffer from the increase of the duties of customs.
               THE excise is the only part of the British system of taxation, which would require to be varied in any respect according as it was applied to the different provinces of the empire. It might be applied to Ireland without any variation; the produce and consumption of that kingdom being exactly of the same nature with those of Great Britain. In its application to America and the West Indies, of which the produce and consumption are so very different from those of Great Britain, some modification might be necessary, in the same manner as in its application to the cyder and beer counties of England.
               A FERMENTED liquor, for example, which is called beer, but which, as it is made of melasses, bears very little resemblance to our beer, makes a considerable part of the common drink of the people in America. This liquor, as it can be kept only for a few

days, cannot, like our beer, be prepared and stored up for sale in great breweries; but every private family must brew it for their own use, in the same manner as they cook their victuals. But to subject every private family to the odious visits and examination of the tax gatherers, in the same manner as we subject the keepers of alehouses and the brewers for public sale, would be altogether inconsistent with liberty. If for the sake of equality it was thought necessary to lay a tax upon this liquor, it might be taxed by taxing the material of which it is made, either at the place of manufacture, or, if the circumstances of the trade ren-dered such an excise improper, by laying a duty upon its importa-tion into the colony in which it was to be consumed. Besides the duty of one penny a gallon imposed by the British parliament upon the importation of melasses into America; there is a provincial tax of this kind upon their importation into Massachusets Bay, in ships belonging to any other colony, of eight-pence the hogshead; and another upon their importation, from the northern colonies, into South Carolina of five-pence the gallon. Or if neither of these methods was found convenient, each family might compound for its consumption of this liquor, either according to the number of persons of which it consisted, in the same manner as private families compound for the malt-tax in England; or accoding to the different ages and sexes of those persons, in the same manner as several different taxes are levied in Holland; or nearly as Sir Mathew Decker proposes that all taxes upon consumable com-modities should be levied in England. This mode of taxation, it has already been observed, when applied to objects of a speedy consumption, is not a very convenient one. It might be adopted, however, in cases where no better could be done.
               SUGAR, rum, and tobacco, are commodities which are no where necessaries of life, which are become objects of almost uni-versal consumption, and which are therefore extreamly proper sub-jects

of taxation. If a union with the colonies was to take place, those commodities might be taxed either before they go out of the hands of the manufacturer or grower; or if this mode of taxation did not suit the circumstances of those persons, they might be deposited in public warehouses both at the place of ma-nufacture, and at all the different ports of the empire to which they might afterwards be transported, to remain there, under the joint custody of the owner and the revenue officer, till such time as they should be delivered out either to the consumer, to the merchant retailer for home consumption, or to the merchant exporter; the tax not to be advanced till such delivery. When delivered out for exportation, to go duty free; upon proper secu-rity being given that they should really be exported out of the empire. These are perhaps the principal commodities with regard to which a union with the colonies might require some considerable change in the present system of British taxation.
               WHAT might be the amount of the revenue which this system of taxation extended to all the different provinces of the empire might produce, it must, no doubt, be altogether impossible to ascertain with tolerable exactness. By means of this system there is annually levied in Great Britain; upon less than eight millions of people, more than ten millions of revenue. Ireland contains more than two millions of people, and according to the accounts laid before the congress, the twelve associated provinces of America contain more than three. Those accounts, however, may have been exaggerated, in order, perhaps, either to encourage their own people, or to intimidate those of this country, and we shall suppose therefore that our North American and West Indian co-lonies taken together contain no more than three millions; or that the whole British empire, in Europe and America, contains no more than thirteen millions of inhabitants. If upon less than

eight millions of inhabitants this system of taxation raises a re-venue of more than ten millions sterling; it ought upon thirteen millions of inhabitants to raise a revenue of more than sixteen millions two hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling. From this revenue, supposing that this system could produce it, must be deducted, the revenue usually raised in Ireland and the planta-tions for defraying the expence of their respective civil govern-ments. The expence of the civil and military establishment of Ireland, together with the interest of the public debt, amounts at a medium of the two years which ended March, 1775, to something less than seven hundred and fifty thousand pounds a year. By a very exact account of the revenue of the principal colonies of America and the West Indies, it amounted, before the commencement of the late disturbances, to a hundred and forty-one thousand eight hundred pounds. In this account, however, the revenue of Maryland, of North Carolina, and of all our late acquisitions both upon the continent and in the islands, is omitted, which may perhaps make a difference of thirty or forty thousand pounds. For the sake of even numbers therefore, let us suppose that the revenue necessary for supporting the civil government of Ireland, and the plantations, may amount to a million. There would remain consequently a revenue of fifteen millions two hun-dred and fifty thousand pounds, to be applied towards defraying the general expence of the empire, and towards paying the public debt. But if from the present revenue of Great Britain a mil-lion could in peaceable times be spared towards the payment of that debt, six millions two hundred and fifty thousand pounds could very well be spared from this improved revenue. This great sinking fund too might be augmented every year by the interest of the debt which had been discharged the year before, and might in this manner increase so very rapidly, as to be sufficient in a few years to discharge the whole debt, and thus to restore compleatly the at present debilitated and languishing vigour of the empire.

In the meantime the people might be relieved from some of the most burdensome taxes; from those which are imposed either upon the necessaries of life, or upon the materials of manufacture. The labouring poor would thus be enabled to live better, to work cheaper, and to send their goods cheaper to market. The cheap-ness of their goods would increase the demand for them, and consequently for the labour of those who produced them. This increase in the demand for labour, would both increase the numbers and improve the circumstances of the labouring poor. Their consumption would increase, and together with it the revenue arising from all those articles of their consumption upon which the taxes might be allowed to remain.
               THE revenue arising from this system of taxation, however, might not immediately increase in proportion to the number of people who were subjected to it. Great indulgence would for some time be due to those provinces of the empire which were thus sub-jected to burthens to which they had not before been accustomed, and even when the same taxes came to be levied every where as exactly as possible, they would not every where produce a revenue proportioned to the numbers of the people. In a poor country the consumption of the principal commodities subject to the duties of customs and excise is very small; and in a thinly inhabited country the opportunities of smuggling are very great. The con-sumption of malt liquors among the inferior ranks of people in Scotland is very small, and the excise upon malt, beer, and ale, produces less there than in England in proportion to the numbers of the people and the rate of the duties, which upon malt is dif-ferent on account of a supposed difference of quality. In these particular branches of the excise there is not, I apprehend, much more smuggling in the one country than in the other. The duties upon the distillery, and the greater part of the duties of customs,

in proportion to the numbers of people in the respective countries, produce less in Scotland than in England, not only on account of the smaller consumption of the taxed commodities, but of the much greater facility of smuggling. In Ireland, the inferior ranks of people are still poorer than in Scotland, and many parts of the country are almost as thinly inhabited. In Ireland, therefore, the consumption of the taxed commodities might, in proportion to the number of the people, be still less than in Scotland, and the facility of smuggling nearly the same. In America and the West Indies the white people even of the lowest rank are in much better circumstances than those of the same rank in England, and their consumption of all the luxuries in which they usually indulge themselves is probably much greater. The blacks, indeed, who make the greater part of the inhabitants both of the southern colonies upon the continent and of the West Indian islands, as they are in a state of slavery, are, no doubt, in a worse condition than the poorest people either in Scotland or Ireland. We must not, however, upon that account, imagine that they are worse fed, or that their consumption of articles which might be subjected to moderate duties, is less than that even of the lower ranks of people in England. In order that they may work well, it is the interest of their master that they should be fed well and kept in good heart, in the same manner as it is his interest that his working cattle should be so. The blacks accordingly have almost every where their allowance of rum and of melasses or spruce beer, in the same manner as the white servants; and this allowance would not probably be withdrawn, though those articles should be sub-jected to moderate duties. The consumption of the taxed commodi-ties, therefore, in proportion to the number of inhabitants, would probably be as great in America and the West Indies as in any part of the British empire. The opportunities of smuggling, indeed, would be much greater; America, in proportion to the

extent of the country, being much more thinly inhabited than either Scotland or Ireland. If the revenue, however, which is at present raised by the different duties upon malt and malt liquors, was to be levied by a single duty upon malt, the opportunity of smuggling in the most important branch of the excise would be almost entirely taken away: And if the duties of customs, instead of being imposed upon almost all the different artioles of impor-tation, were confined to a few of the most general use and con-sumption, and if the levying of those duties was subjected to the excise laws, the opportunity of smuggling, though not so entirely taken away, would be very much diminished. In consequence of those two, apparently, very simple and easy alterations, the duties of customs and excise might probably produce a revenue as great in proportion to the consumption of the most thinly inhabited pro-vince as they do at present in proportion to that of the most po-pulous.
               THE Americans, it has been said, indeed, have no gold or silver money; the interior commerce of the country being carried on by a paper currency, and the gold and silver which occasionally come among them being all sent to Great Britain in return for the commodities which they receive from us. But without gold and silver, it is added, there is no possibility of paying taxes. We already get all the gold and silver which they have. How is it possible to draw from them what they have not?
               THE present scarcity of gold and silver money in America is not the effect of the poverty of that country, or of the inability of the people there to purchase those metals. In a country where the wages of labour are so much higher, and the price of pro-visions so much lower than in England, the greater part of the people must surely have wherewithal to purchase a greater quantity,

officers of the army to oppose with the same zeal and unanimity any reduction in the number of forces, with which master manu-facturers set themselves against every law that is likely to increase the number of their rivals in the home market, were the former to animate their soldiers in the same manner as the latter enflame their workmen to attack with violence and outrage the proposers of any such regulation, to attempt to reduce the army would be as dangerous as it has now become to attempt to diminish in any respect the monopoly which our manufacturers have obtained against us. This monopoly has so much increased the number of some particular tribes of them, that, like an overgrown stand-ing army, they have become formidable to the government, and upon many occasions intimidate the legislature. The member of parliament who supports every proposal for strongthening this mo-nopoly, is sure to acquire not only the reputation of understanding trade, but great popularity and influence with an order of men whose numbers and wealth render them of great importance. If he opposes them, on the contrary, and still more if he has authority enough to be able to thwart them, neither the most acknowledged probity, nor the highest rank, nor the greatest publick services can protect him from the most infamous abuse and detraction, from personal insults, nor sometimes from real danger, arising from the insolent outrage of furious and disappointed monopolists.
               THE undertaker of a great manufacture who, by the home markets being suddenly laid open to the competition of foreigners, should be obliged to abandon his trade, would no doubt suffer very considerably. That part of his capital which had usually been employed in purchasing materials and in paying his workmen, might, without much difficulty, perhaps, find another employment. But that part of it which was fixed in workhouses, and in the in-struments of trade, could scarce be disposed of without considerable

if it was either necessary or convenient for them to do so. The scarcity of those metals, therefore, must be the effect of choice, and not of necessity.
               IT is for transacting either domestic or foreign business, that gold and silver money is either necessary or convenient.
               THE domestic business of every country, it has been shewn in the second book of this inquiry, may, at least in peaceable times, be transacted by means of a paper currency, with nearly the same degree of conveniency as by gold and silver money. It is con-venient for the Americans, who could always employ with profit in the improvement of their lands a greater stock than they can easily get, to save as much as possible the expence of so costly an instrument of commerce as gold and silver, and rather to employ that part of their surplus produce which would be necessary for purchasing those metals, in purchasing the instruments of trade, the materials of cloathing, several parts of houshold furniture, and the iron-work necessary for building and extending their settlements and plantations; in purchasing, not dead stock, but active and productive stock. The colony governments find it for their interest to supply people with such a quantity of paper-money as is fully sufficient and generally more than sufficient for transacting their domestic business. Some of those governments, that of Pensylvania particularly, derive a revenue from lending this paper-money to their subjects at an interest of so much percent. Others, like that of Massachuset's Bay, advance upon extraordinary emergencies a paper-money of this kind for de-fraying the public expence, and afterwards, when it suits the conveniency of the colony, redeem it at the depreciated value to which it gradually falls. In 1747 See Hutchinson's History of Massachuset's Bay, Vol. II. Page 436. &amp; seq. that colony paid, in this man-ner, the greater part of its public debts, with the tenth part of

the money for which its bills had been granted. It suits the con-veniency of the planters to save the expence of employing gold and silver money in their domestic transactions; and it suits the conve-niency of the colony governments to supply them with a medium, which, though attended with some very considerable disadvantages, enables them to save that expence. The redundancy of paper mo-ney necessarily banishes gold and silver from the domestic transac-tions of the colonies, for the same reason that it has banished those metals from the greater part of the domestic transactions of Scot-land; and in both countries it is not the poverty, but the enter-prising and projecting spirit of the people, their desire of employ-ing all the stock which they can get as active and productive stock, which has occasioned this redundancy of paper money.
               IN the exterior commerce which the different colonies carry on with Great Britain, gold and silver are more or less employed, exactly in proportion as they are more or less necessary. Where those metals are not necessary, they seldom appear. Where they are necessary, they are generally found.
               IN the commerce between Great Britain and the tobacco colo-nies, the British goods are generally advanced to the colonists at a pretty long credit, and are afterwards paid for in tobacco, rated at a certain price. It is more convenient for the colonists to pay in tobacco than in gold and silver. It would be more convenient for any merchant to pay for the goods which his correspondents had sold to him in some other sort of goods which he might happen to deal in, than in money. Such a merchant would have no occasion to keep any part of his stock by him unemployed, and in ready money, for answering occasional demands. He could have, at all times, a larger quantity of goods in his shop or warehouse, and he could deal to a greater extent. But it seldom happens to be con-venient

for all the correspondents of a merchant to receive pay-ment for the goods which they sell to him, in goods of some other kind which he happens to deal in. The British merchants who trade to Virginia and Maryland happen to be a particular sett of correspondents, to whom it is more convenient to receive payment for the goods which they sell to those colonies in tobacco than in gold and silver. They expect to make a profit by the sale of the tobacco. They could make none by that of the gold and silver. Gold and silver, therefore, very seldom appear in the commerce between Great Britain and the tobacco colonies. Maryland and Virginia have as little occasion for those metals in their foreign as in their domestic commerce. They are said, accordingly, to have less gold and silver money than any other colonies in Ame-rica. They are reckoned, however, as thriving, and consequently as rich as any of their neighbours.
               IN the northern colonies, Pensylvania, New York, New Jersey, the four governments of New England, &amp;c. the value of their own produce which they export to Great Britain is not equal to that of the manufactures which they import for their own use, and for that of some of the other colonies to which they are the carriers. A balance, therefore, must be paid to the mother country in gold and silver, and this balance they generally find.
               IN the sugar colonies the value of the produce annually exported to Great Britain is much greater than that of all the goods imported from thence. If the sugar and rum annually sent to the mother country were paid for in those colonies, Great Britain would be obliged to send out every year a very large balance in money, and the trade to the West Indies would, by a certain species of politi-cians, be considered as extremely disadvantageous. But it so hap-pens, that many of the principal proprietors of the sugar planta-tions reside in Great Britain. Their rents are remitted to them in

sugar and rum, the produce of their estates. The sugar and rum which the West India merchants purchase in those colonies upon their own account, are not equal in value to the goods which they annually sell there. A balance, therefore, must generally be paid to them in gold and silver, and this balance too is generally found.
               THE difficulty and irregularity of payment from the different colonies to Great Britain, have not been at all in proportion to the greatness or smallness of the balances which were respectively due from them. Payments have in general been more regular from the northern than from the tobacco colonies, though the former have generally paid a pretty large balance in money, while the lat-ter have paid either no balance, or a much smaller one. The diffi-culty of getting payment from our different sugar colonies has been greater or less in proportion, not so much to the extent of the balances respectively due from them, as to the quantity of uncul-tivated land which they contained; that is, to the greater or smaller temptation which the planters have been under of over-trading, or of undertaking the settlement and plantation of greater quantities of waste land than suited the extent of their capitals. The returns from the great island of Jamaica, where there is still much uncul-tivated land, have, upon this account, been in general more irre-gular and uncertain than those from the smaller islands of Barba-does, Antigua, and St. Christophers, which have for these many years been completely cultivated, and have, upon that account, afforded less field for the speculations of the planter. The new acquisitions of Grenada, Tobago, St. Vincents, and Dominica, have opened a new field for speculations of this kind; and the returns from those islands have of late been as irregular and uncertain as those from the great island of Jamaica.
               IT is not, therefore, the poverty of the colonies which occasions, in the greater part of them, the present scarcity of gold and silver

money. Their great demand for active and productive stock makes it convenient for them to have as little dead stock as possible; and disposes them upon that account to content them-selves with a cheaper, though less commodious instrument of com-merce than gold and silver. They are thereby enabled to con-vert the value of that gold and silver into the instruments of trade, into the materials of cloathing, into houshold furniture, and into the iron work necessary for building and extending their settle-ments and plantations. In those branches of business which can-not be transacted without gold and silver money, it appears that they can always find the necessary quantity of those metals; and if they frequently do not find it, their failure is generally the effect, not of their necessary poverty, but of their unnecessary and exces-sive enterprize. It is not because they are poor that their payments are irregular and uncertain; but because they are too eager to become excessively rich. Though all that part of the produce of the colony taxes, which was over and above what was necessary for defraying the expence of their own civil and military establish-ments, were to be remitted to Great Britain in gold and silver, the colonies have abundantly wherewithal to purchase the requisite quantity of those metals. They would in this case be obliged, indeed, to exchange a part of their surplus produce, with which they now purchase active and productive stock, for dead stock. In transacting their domestic business they would be obliged to employ a costly instead of a cheap instrument of commerce; and the ex-pence of purchasing this costly instrument might damp somewhat the vivacity and ardour of their excessive enterprize in the improve-ment of land. It might not, however, be necessary to remit any part of the American revenue in gold and silver. It might be remit-ted in bills drawn upon and accepted by particular merchants or companies in Great Britain, to whom a part of the surplus produce of America had been consigned, who would pay into the treasury the American revenue in money, after having themselves received

the value of it in goods; and the whole business might frequently be transacted without exporting a single ounce of gold and silver from America.
               IT is not contrary to justice that both Ireland and America should contribute towards the discharge of the public debt of Great Britain. That debt has been contracted in support of the government established by the revolution, a government to which the protestants of Ireland owe, not only the whole authority which they at present enjoy in their own country, but every secu-rity which they possess for their liberty, their property, and their religion; a government to which several of the colonies of America owe their present charters, and consequently their present consti-tution, and to which all the colonies of America owe the liberty, security, and property, which they have ever since enjoyed. That public debt has been contracted in the defence, not of Great Bri-tain alone, but of all the different provinces of the empire; the immense debt contracted in the late war in particular, and a great part of that contracted in the war before, were both properly con-tracted in defence of America.
               BY a union with Great Britain, Ireland would gain, besides the freedom of trade, other advantages much more important, and which would much more than compensate any increase of taxes that might accompany that union. By the union with England, the middling and inferior ranks of people in Scotland gained a com-plete deliverance from the power of an aristocracy which had al-ways before oppressed them. By a union with Great Britain the greater part of the people of all ranks in Ireland would gain an equally complete deliverance from a much more oppressive aristo-cracy; an aristocracy not founded, like that of Scotland, in the natural and respectable distinctions of birth and fortune; but in

the most odious of all distinctions, those of religious and political prejudices; distinctions which more than any other animate both the insolence of the oppressors and the hatred and indignation of the oppressed, and which commonly render the inhabitants of the same country more hostile to one another than those of different coun-tries ever are. Without a union with Great Britain, the inhabi-tants of Ireland are not likely for many ages to consider themselves as one people.
               NO oppressive aristocracy has ever prevailed in the colonies. Even they, however, would, in point of happiness and tranquillity, gain considerably by a union with Great Britain. It would, at least, deliver them from those rancorous and virulent factions which are inseparable from small democracies, and which have so frequently divided the affections of their people, and disturbed the tranquillity of their governments, in their form so nearly democra-tical. In the case of a total separation from Great Britain, which, unless prevented by a union of this kind, seems very likely to take place, those factions would be ten times more virulent than ever. Before the commencement of the present disturbances, the coercive power of the mother country had always been able to restrain those factions from breaking out into any thing worse than gross bru-tality and insult. If that coercive power was entirely taken away, they would probably soon break out into open violence and blood-shed. In all great countries which are united under one uniform government, the spirit of party commonly prevails less in the remote provinces, than in the center of the empire. The distance of those provinces from the capital, from the principal seat of the great scramble of faction and ambition, makes them enter less into the views of any of the contending parties, and renders them more indifferent and impartial spectators of the conduct of all. The spirit of party prevails less in Scotland than in England.

In the case of a union it would probably prevail less in Ireland than in Scotland, and the colonies would probably soon enjoy a degree of concord and unanimity at present unknown in any part of the British empire. Both Ireland and the colonies, indeed, would be subjected to heavier taxes than any which they at present pay. In consequence, however, of a diligent and faithful appli-cation of the public revenue towards the discharge of the national debt, the greater part of those taxes might not be of long conti-nuance, and the public revenue of Great Britain might soon be reduced to what was necessary for maintaining a moderate peace establishment.
               THE territorial acquisitions of the East India company, the un-doubted right of the crown, that is, of the state and people of Great Britain, might be rendered another source of revenue more abundant perhaps than all those already mentioned. Those coun-tries are represented as more fertile, more extensive; and in pro-portion to their extent much richer and more populous than Great Britain. In order to draw a great revenue from them, it would not probably be necessary to introduce any new system of taxation into countries which are already sufficiently and more than suffi-ciently taxed. It might perhaps be more proper to lighten than to aggravate the burden of those unfortunate countries, and to en-deavour to draw a revenue from them, not by imposing new taxes, but by preventing the embezzlement and misapplication of the greater part of those which they already pay.
               IF it should be found impracticable for Great Britain to draw any considerable augmentation of revenue from any of the re-sources above-mentioned; the only resource which can remain to her is a diminution of her expence. In the mode of collecting and in that of expending the public revenue; though in both

there may be still room for improvement; Great Britain seems to be at least as oeconomical as any of her neighbours. The mi-litary establishment which she maintains for her own defence in time of peace, is more moderate than that of any European state which can pretend to rival her either in wealth or in power. None of those articles, therefore, seem to admit of any consider-able reduction of expence. The expence of the peace establish-ment of the colonies was, before the commencement of the pre-sent disturbances, very considerable, and is an expence which may, and if no revenue can be drawn from them, ought cer-tainly to be saved altogether. This constant expence in time of peace, though very great, is insignificant in comparison with what the defence of the colonies has cost us in time of war. The last war, which was undertaken altogether on account of the colonies, cost Great Britain, it has already been observed, upwards of ninety millions. The Spanish war of 1739 was prin-cipally undertaken on their account; in which, and in the French war that was the consequence of it, Great Britain spent up-wards of forty millions, a great part of which ought justly to be charged to the colonies. In those two wars the colonies cost Great Britain much more than double the sum which the na-tional debt amounted to before the commencement of the first of them. Had it not been for those wars that debt might, and probably would by this time have been compleatly paid; and had it not been for the colonies, the former of those wars might not, and the latter certainly would not have been undertaken. It was because the colonies were supposed to be provinces of the British empire, that this expence was laid out upon them. But countries which contribute neither revenue nor military force to-wards the support of the empire, cannot be considered as pro-vinces. They may perhaps be considered as appendages, as a sort of splendid and showy equipage of the empire. But if the

empire can no longer support the expence of keeping up this equi-page, it ought certainly to lay it down; and if it cannot raise its revenue in proportion to its expence, it ought, at least, to accommodate its expence to its revenue. If the colonies, not-withstanding their refusal to submit to British taxes, are still to be considered as provinces of the British empire, their defence in some future war may cost Great Britain as great an expence as it ever has done in any former war. The rulers of Great Britain have for more than a century past amused the people with the imagination that they possessed a great empire on the west side of the Atlantic. This empire, however, has hitherto existed in imagination only. It has hitherto been, not an empire, but the project of an empire; not a gold mine, but the project of a gold mine; a project which has cost, which continues to cost, and which if pursued in the same way as it has been hitherto, is likely to cost immense expence, without being likely to bring any profit; for the effects of the monopoly of the colony trade, it has been shewn, are, to the great body of the people, mere loss instead of profit. It is surely now time that our rulers should either realize this golden dream, in which they have been indulg-ing themselves, perhaps, as well as the people; or, that they should awake from it themselves, and endeavour to awaken the people. If the project cannot be compleated, it ought to be given up. If any of the provinces of the British empire cannot be made to contribute towards the support of the whole empire, it is surely time that Great Britain should free herself from the expence of defending those provinces in time of war, and of supporting any part of their civil or military establishments in time of peace, and endeavour to accommodate her future views and designs to the real mediocrity of her circumstances.
            
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         
            

loss. The equitable regard, therefore, to his interest requires that changes of this kind should never be introduced suddenly, but slowly, gradually, and after a very long warning. The legislature were it possible that its deliberations could be always directed, not by the clamorous importunity of partial interests, but by an extensive view of the general good, ought upon this very account perhaps, to be particularly careful neither to establish any new monopolies of this kind, nor to extend further those which are already established. Every such regulation introduces some degree of real disorder into the constitution of the state, which it will be difficult afterwards to cure without occasioning another dis-order.
               HOW far it may be proper to impose taxes upon the importation of foreign goods, in order, not to prevent their importation, but to raise a revenue for government, I shall consider hereafter when I come to treat of taxes. Taxes imposed with a view to prevent, or even to diminish importation, are evidently as destructive of the revenue of the customs as of the freedom of trade.
            
            
               

            BOOKS printed for and sold by T. CADELL, in the Strand.
            
            
               QUARTO.
               The HISTORY of ENGLAND, from the Invasion of Julius Caesar to the Revolution: A new Edition, printed on fine Paper, with many Corrections and Additions, and a compleat Index, by DAVID HUME, Esq. 8 Vols. Royal Paper, 7l. 7s.
               
                  *⁎* Another Edition on small Paper, 4l. 10s.
               
                  *⁎* Another in 8 Vols. 8vo, 2l. 8s.
               ESSAYS and TREATISES on several Subjects, with an Index, by DAVID HUME, Esq. 2 Vols. Royal Paper, 1l. 16s.
               The WORKS of ALEXANDER POPE, Esq. with his LIFE, by Dr. RUFFHEAD, 5 Vols. 5l. 5s.
               The WORKS of the late Right Honourable HENRY ST. JOHN, Lord Viscount BOLINGBROKE, containing all his Political and Philosophical Works, 5 Vols. 5l. 5s.
               The WORKS of HENRY FIELDING, Esq. with an ESSAY on the GENIUS and LIFE of the Author, by ARTHUR MURPHY, Esq. 4 Vols. 5l. 5s.
               The HISTORY of the LIFE of HENRY II. by GEORGR Lord LYTTEL-TON, 4 Vols. 4l. 14s. 6d.
               The HISTORY of SCOTLAND, during the Reigns of Queen MARY, and of King JAMES VI. till his Accession to the Crown of England, with a Review of the Scottish History previous to that Period; and an Appendix, containing ORIGINAL PAPERS, by WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D. 2 Vols. the 5th Edition, 1l. 10s.
               
                  *⁎* Another Edition in 2 Vols. 8vo, 12s.
               The HISTORY of the REIGN of the EMPEROR CHARLES V. with a View of the Progress of Society in Europe, from the Subversion of the Roman Empire to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century, by WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D. embellished with Four Plates, elegantly engraved, 3 Vols. 3l. 3s.
               
                  *⁎* Another Edition in 4 Vols. 1l. 4s.
               A BIOGRAPHICAL HISTORY OF ENGLAND, from EGBERT THE GREAT to the Revolution, consisting of Characters disposed in different Classes, and adapted to a Methodical Catalogue of engraved British Heads, intended as an Essay towards reducing our Biography to a System, and a Help to the Know-ledge of Portraits, by the Reverend J. GRAINGER, 4 Vols. 2l. 12s. 6d.
               
                  *⁎* Another Edition in 4 Vols. 8vo. 1l. 4s.
               The HISTORY and ART of HORSEMANSHIP, by RICHARD BERENGER, Esq. 2 Vols. illustrated with Copper-plates, 2l. 2s. bound.
               MEMOIRS of GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND, from the Dis-solution of the last Parliament of CHARLES II. until the Sea Battle off LA HOGUE, by Sir JOHN DALRYMPLE Baronet, 2d Edition, 2 Vols. 2l. 6s.
            
         
      
   


sent ambassador from the king of France to one of the sons of the famous Gengis Khan, says that the Tartars used frequently to ask him if there was plenty of sheep and oxen in the kingdom of France. Their enquiry had the same object with that of the Spaniards. They wanted to know if the country was rich enough to be worth the conquering. Among the Tartars, as among all other nations of shepherds, who are generally ignorant of the use of money, cattle are the instruments of commerce and the measures of value. Wealth, therefore, according to them, con-sisted in cattle, as according to the Spaniards it consisted in gold and silver. Of the two, the Tartar notion, perhaps, was the nearest to the truth.
               MR. Locke remarks a distinction between money and other moveable goods. All other moveable goods, he says, are of so consumable a nature that the wealth which consists in them cannot be much depended on, and a nation which abounds in them one year may, without any exportation, but merely by their own waste and extravagance, be in great want of them the next. Money, on the contrary, is a steady friend, which, though it may travel about from hand to hand, yet, if it can be kept from going out of the country, is not very liable to be wasted and con-sumed. Gold and silver, therefore, are, according to him, the most solid and substantial part of the moveable wealth of a nation, and to multiply those metals ought, he thinks, upon that account, to be the great object of its political oeconomy.
               OTHERS admit that if a nation could be separated from all the world, it would be of no consequence how much, or how little money circulated in it. The consumable goods which were cir-culated by means of this money, would only be exchanged for a greater or a smaller number of pieces; but the real wealth or

               CHAP. III. Of the extraordinary Restraints upon the Importation of Goods of almost all Kinds, from those Countries with which the Balance is supposed to be disadvantageous.
               
               TO lay extraordinary restraints upon the importation of goods of almost all kinds, from those particular countries with which the balance of trade is supposed to be disadvantageous, is the second expedient by which the commercial system proposes to in-crease the quantity of gold and silver. Thus in Great Britain higher duties are laid upon the wines of France than upon those of Portugal. German linen may be imported upon paying certain duties; but French linen is altogether prohibited. The principles which I have been examining, took their origin from private interest and the spirit of monopoly: those which I am going to examine from national prejudice and animosity. They are, accordingly, as might well be expected, still more unreasonable. They are so, even upon the principles of the commercial system.
               FIRST, though it were certain that in the case of a free trade between France and England, for example, the balance would be in favour of France, it would by no means follow that such a trade would be disadvantageous to England, or that the general balance of its whole trade would thereby be turned more against it. If the wines of France are better and cheaper than those of Portugal, or its linens than those of Germany, it would be more advantageous for Great Britain to purchase both the wine and the foreign linen which it had occasion for of France, than of Portugal and Ger-many. Though the value of the annual importations from France would thereby be greatly augmented, the value of the whole annual importations would be diminished, in proportion as the French

goods of the same quality were cheaper than those of the other two countries. This would be the case, even upon the supposition that the whole French goods imported were to be consumed in Great Britain.
               BUT, secondly, a great part of them might be re-exported to other countries, where, being sold with profit, they might bring back a return equal in value, perhaps, to the prime cost of the whole French goods imported. What has frequently been said of the East India trade might possibly be true of the French; that though the greater part of East India goods were bought with gold and silver, the re-exportation of a part of them to other countries, brought back more gold and silver to that which carried on the trade than the prime cost of the whole amounted to. One of the most important branches of the Dutch trade, at present, consists in the carriage of French goods to other European countries. A great part even of the French wine drank in Great Britain is clandestinely imported from Holland and Zealand. If there was either a free trade between France and England, or if French goods could be imported upon paying only the same duties as those of other Euro-pean nations, to be drawn back upon exportation, England might have some share of a trade which is found so advantageous to Holland.
               THIRDLY, and lastly, there is no certain criterion by which we can determine on which side what is called the balance between any two countries lies, or which of them exports to the greatest value. National prejudice and animosity, prompted always by the private interest of particular traders, are the principles which generally di-rect our judgement upon all questions concerning it. There are two criterions, however, which have frequently been appealed to upon such occasions, the custom-house books and the course of ex-change.

The custom-house books, I think, it is now generally ac-knowledged, are a very uncertain criterion, on account of the inac-curacy of the valuation at which the greater part of goods are rated in them. The course of exchange, at least, as it has hitherto been estimated, is, perhaps, almost equally so.
               WHEN the exchange between two places, such as London and Paris, is at par, it is said to be a sign that the debts due from Lon-don to Paris are compensated by those due from Paris to London. On the contrary, when a premium is paid at London for a bill upon Paris, it is said to be a sign that the debts due from London to Paris are not compensated by those due from Paris to London, but that a balance in money must be sent out from the latter place; for the risk, trouble, and expence of exporting which, the pre-mium is both demanded and given. But the ordinary state of debt and credit between those two cities must necessarily be regulated, it is said, by the ordinary course of their dealings with one another. When neither of them imports from the other to a greater amount than it exports to it, the debts and credits of each may compensate one another. But when one of them imports from the other to a greater value than it exports to it, the former necessarily becomes indebted to the latter in a greater sum than the latter becomes in-debted to it: the debts and credits of each do not compensate one another, and money must be sent out from that place of which the debts over-balance the credits. The common course of ex-change, therefore, being an indication of the ordinary state of debt and credit between two places, must likewise be an indication of the ordinary course of their exports and imports, as these necessa-rily regulate that state.
               BUT though this doctrine, of which some part is, perhaps, not a little doubtful, were supposed ever so certain, the manner in which the par of exchange has hitherto been computed, renders uncer-tain every conclusion that has ever yet been drawn from it.
               
                  

WHEN for a sum of money paid in England, containing, accord-ing to the standard of the English mint, a certain number of ounces of pure silver, you receive a bill for a sum of money to be paid in France, containing, according to the standard of the French mint, an equal number of ounces of pure silver, exchange is said to be at par between England and France. When you pay more, you are supposed to give a premium, and exchange is said to be against England, and in favour of France. When you pay less, you are supposed to get a premium, and exchange is said to be against France, and in favour of England.
               BUT, first we cannot always judge of the value of the current money of different countries by the standards of their respective mints. In some it is more, in others it is less worn, clipt, and otherwise degenerated from that standard. But the value of the current coin of every country, compared with that of any other country, is in proportion, not to the quantity of pure silver which it ought to contain, but to that which it actually does contain. Before the reformation of the silver coin in king William's time, exchange between England and Holland, computed, in the usual manner, according to the standards of their respective mints, was five and twenty per cent. against England. But the value of the cur-rent coin of England, as we learn from Mr. Lowndes, was at that time rather more than five and twenty per cent. below its standard value. The real exchange, therefore, may even at that time have been in favour of England, notwithstanding the computed exchange was so much against it; a smaller number of ounces of pure silver, actually paid in England, may have purchased a bill for a greater number of ounces of pure silver to be paid in Holland, and the man who was supposed to give, may in reality have got the premium. The French coin was, before the late reformation of the English gold coin, much less worn than the English, and was, perhaps, two or

three per cent. nearer its standard. If the computed exchange with France, therefore, was not more than two or three per cent. against England, the real exchange might have been in its favour. Since the reformation of the gold coin, the exchange has been con-stantly in favour of England, and against France.
               SECONDLY, in some countries, the expence of coinage is defrayed by the government, in others, it is defrayed by the private people who carry their bullion to the mint, and the government even de-rives some revenue from the coinage. In England, it is defrayed by the government, and if you carry a pound weight of standard silver to the mint, you get back sixty-two shillings, containing a pound weight of the like standard silver. In France, a duty of eight per cent. is deducted for the coinage, which not only defrays the ex-pence of it, but affords a small revenue to the government. In England, as the coinage costs nothing, the current coin can never be much more valuable than the quantity of bullion which it actually contains. In France, the workmanship as you pay for it, adds to the value, in the same manner as to that of wrought plate. A sum of French money, therefore, containing a certain weight of pure silver, is more valuable than a Sum of English money contain-ing an equal weight of pure silver, and must require more bullion, or other commodities to purchase it. Though the current coin of the two countries, therefore, were equally near the standards of their respective mints, a sum of English money could not well pur-chase a sum of French money, containing an equal number of ounces of pure silver, nor consequently a bill upon France for such a sum. If for such a bill no more additional money was paid than what was sufficient to compensate the expence of the French coin-age, the real exchange might be at par between the two countries, their debts and credits might mutually compensate one another, while the computed exchange was considerably in favour of France.

If less than this was paid, the real exchange might be in favour of England, while the computed was in favour of France.
               THIRDLY, and lastly, in some places, as at Amsterdam, Ham-burgh, Venice, &amp;c. foreign bills of exchange are paid in what they call bank money; while in others, as at London, Lisbon, Antwerp, Leghorn, &amp;c. they are paid in the common currency of the coun-try. What is called bank money is always of more value than the same nominal sum of common currency. A thousand guilders in the bank of Amsterdam, for example, are of more value than a thousand guilders of Amsterdam currency. The difference between them is called the agio of the bank, which, at Amsterdam, is gene-rally about five per cent. Supposing the current money of two countries equally near to the standard of their respective mints, and that the one pays foreign bills in this common currency, while the other pays them in bank money, it is evident that the computed ex-change may be in favour of that which pays in bank money, though the real exchange should be in favour of that which pays in cur-rent money; for the same reason that the computed exchange may be in favour of that which pays in better money, or in money nearer to its own standard, though the real exchange should be in favour of that which pays in worse. The computed exchange, before the late reformation of the gold coin, was generally against London with Amsterdam, Hamburgh, Venice, and, I believe, with all other places which pay in what is called bank money. It will by no means follow, however, that the real exchange was against it. Since the reformation of the gold coin, it has been in favour of London even with those places. The computed exchange has gene-rally been in favour of London with Lisbon, Antwerp, Leghorn, and, if you except France, I believe, with most other parts of Europe that pay in common currency; and it is not improbable that the real exchange was so too.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           

                           
                              Digression concerning Banks of Deposit, particularly concerning that of Amsterdam.
                           THE currency of a great state, such as France or England, generally consists almost entirely of its own coin. Should this currency, therefore, be at any time worn, elipt, or otherwise degraded below its standard value, the state by a reformation of its coin can effectually re-establish its currency. But the currency of a small state, such as Genoa or Hamburgh, can seldom consist altogether in its own coin, but must be made up, in a great mea-sure, of the coins of all the neighbouring states with which its in-habitants have a continual intercourse. Such a state, therefore, by reforming its coin, will not always be able to reform its currency. If foreign bills of exchange are paid in this currency, the uncertain value of any sum, of what is in its own nature so uncertain, must render the exchange always very much against such a state, its cur-rency being, in all foreign states, necessarily valued even below what it is worth.
                           IN order to remedy the inconvenience to which this disadvanta-geous exchange must have subjected their merchants, such small states, when they began to attend to the interest of trade, have frequently enacted, that foreign bills of exchange of a certain value should be paid, not in common currency, but by an order upon, or by a transfer in the books of a certain bank, established upon the credit, and under the protection of the state; this bank being al-ways obliged to pay, in good and true money, exactly according to the standard of the state. The banks of Venice, Genoa, Amster-dam, Hamburgh, and Nuremberg, seem to have been all originally established with this view, though some of them may have after-wards

been made subservient to other purposes. The money of such banks being better than the common currency of the coun-try, necessarily bore an agio, which was greater or smaller, accord-ing as the currency was supposed to be more or less degraded below the standard of the state. The agio of the bank of Hamburgh, for example, which is said to be commonly about fourteen per cent, is the supposed difference between the good standard money of the state and the clipt, worn, and diminished currency poured into it from all the neighbouring states.
                           BEFORE 1609 the great quantity of clipt and worn foreign coin, which the extensive trade of Amsterdam brought from all parts of Europe, reduced the value of its currency about nine per cent. below that of good money fresh from the mint. Such money no sooner appeared than it was melted down or carried away, as it al-ways is in such circumstances. The merchants, with plenty of currency, could not always find a sufficient quantity of good money to pay their bills of exchange; and the value of those bills, in spite of several regulations which were made to prevent it, became in a great measure uncertain.
                           IN order to remedy these inconveniencies, a bank was established in 1609 under the guarantee of the city. This bank received both foreign coin, and the light and worn coin of the country at its real intrinsic value in the good standard money of the country, deduct-ing only so much as was necessary for defraying the expence of coinage, and the other necessary expence of management. For the value which remained after this small deduction was made, it gave a credit in its books. This credit was called bank money, which, as it represented money exactly according to the standard of the mint, was always of the same real value, and intrinsically worth more than current money. It was at the same time enacted, that

all bills drawn upon or negociated at Amsterdam of the value of fix hundred gilders and upwards should be paid in bank money, which at once took away all uncertainty in the value of those bills. Every merchant, in consequence of this regulation, was obliged to keep an account with the bank in order to pay his fo-reign bills of exchange, which necessarily occasioned a certain de-mand for bank money.
                           BANK money, over and above both its intrinsic superiority to currency, and the additional value which this demand necessarily gives it, has likewise some other advantages. It is secure from fire, robbery, and other accidents; the city of Amsterdam is bound for it; it can be paid away by a simple transfer, without the trouble of counting, or the risk of transporting it from one place to another. In consequence of those different advantages, it seems from the beginning to have borne an agio, and it is ge-nerally believed that all the money originally deposited in the bank was allowed to remain there, nobody caring to demand pay-ment of a debt which he could sell for a premium in the market. By demanding payment of the bank, the owner of a bank credit would lose this premium. As a shilling fresh from the mint will buy no more goods in the market than one of our common worn shillings, so the good and true money which might be brought from the coffers of the bank into those of a private person, being mixed and confounded with the common currency of the country, would be of no more value than that currency, from which it could no longer be readily distinguished. While it remained in the coffers of the bank, its superiority was known and ascertained. When it had come into those of a private person, its superiority could not well be ascertained without more trouble than perhaps the difference was worth. By being brought from the coffers of the bank, besides, it lost all the other advantages of bank money;

its security, its easy and safe transferability, its use in paying fo-reign bills of exchange. Over and above all this, it could not be brought from those coffers, as it will appear by and by, without previously paying for the keeping.
                           THOSE deposits of coin, or which the bank was bound to re-store in coin, constituted the original capital of the bank, or the whole value of what was represented by what is called bank mo-ney. At present they are supposed to constitute but a very small part of it. In order to facilitate the trade in bullion, the bank has been for these many years in the practice of giving credit in its books upon deposits of gold and silver bullion. This credit is generally about five per cent. below the mint price of such bullion. The bank grants at the same time what is called a recipice or re-ceipt, intitling the person who makes the deposit, or the bearer, to take out the bullion again at any time within six months, upon re-transferring to the bank a quantity of bank money equal to that for which credit had been given in its books when the deposit was made, and upon paying one-fourth per cent. for the keeping, if the deposit was in silver; and one-half per cent. if it was in gold; but at the same time declaring, that in default of such pay-ment, and upon the expiration of this term, the deposit should belong to the bank at the price at which it had been received, or for which credit had been given in the transfer books. What is thus paid for the keeping of the deposit may be considered as a sort of warehouse rent; and why this warehouse rent should be so much dearer for gold than for silver, several different reasons have been assigned. The fineness of gold, it has been said, is more difficult to be ascertained than that of silver. Frauds are more easily practised, and occasion a greater loss in the more precious metal. Silver, besides, being the standard metal, the state, it has been

poverty of the country, they allow, would depend altogether upon the abundance or scarcity of those consumable goods. But it is otherwise, they think, with countries which have connections with foreign nations, and which are obliged to carry on foreign wars, and to maintain fleets and armies in distant countries. This, they say, cannot be done, but by sending abroad money to pay them with; and a nation cannot send much money abroad, unless it has a good deal at home. Every such nation, therefore, must endeavour in time of peace to accumulate gold and silver, that, when occasion requires, it may have wherewithal to carry on foreign wars.
               IN consequence of these popular notions, all the different nations of Europe have studied, though to little purpose, every possible means of accumulating gold and silver in their respective countries. Spain and Portugal, the proprietors of the principal mines which supply Europe with those metals, have either prohibited their expor-tation under the severest penalties, or subjected it to a considerable duty. The like prohibition seems antiently to have made a part of the policy of most other European nations. It is even to be found, where we should expect least of all to find it, in some old Scotch acts of parliament, which forbid under heavy penalties the car-rying gold or silver forth of the kingdom. The like policy antiently took place both in France and England.
               WHEN those countries became commercial, the merchants found this prohibition, upon many occasions, extreamly inconvenient. They could frequently buy more advantageously with gold and silver than with any other commodity, the foreign goods which they wanted either to import into their own, or to carry to some other foreign country. They remonstrated, therefore, against this prohibition as hurtful to trade.
               
                  

said, wishes to encourage more the making of deposits of silver than of those of gold.
                           DEPOSITS of bullion are most commonly made when the price is somewhat lower than ordinary; and they are taken out again when it happens to rise. In Holland the market price of bullion is generally above the mint price, for the same reason that it was so in England before the late reformation of the gold coin. The difference is said to be commonly from about six to sixteen stivers upon the mark, or eight ounces of silver of eleven parts fine, and one part alloy. The bank price, or the credit which the bank gives for deposits of such silver (when made in foreign coin, of which the fineness is well known and ascertained, such as Mexico dollars) is twenty-two gilders, the mark; the mint price is about twenty-three gilders; and the market price is from twenty-three gilders six, to twenty-three gilders sixteen stivers, or from two to three per cent. above the mintprice. 
                                 The following are the prices at which the bank of Amsterdam at present (Sep-tember, 1775) receives bullion and coin of different kinds.
                                 
                                    
                                       SILVER.
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                       Mexico dollars
                                       Gilders. B—22 per mark.
                                    
                                    
                                       French crowns
                                    
                                    
                                       English silver coin
                                    
                                    
                                       Mexico dollars new coin
                                       21 10
                                    
                                    
                                       Ducatoons
                                       3
                                    
                                    
                                       Rix dollars
                                       2 8
                                    
                                 
                                 Bar silver containing 11/12 fine silver 21 per mark, and in this proportion down to ¼ fine, on which 5 gilders are given.
                                 Fine bars, 23 per mark.
                                 
                                    
                                       GOLD.
                                        
                                    
                                    
                                       Portugal coin
                                       B—310 per mark.
                                    
                                    
                                       Guineas
                                    
                                    
                                       Louis d'ors new
                                    
                                    
                                       Ditto old
                                       300
                                    
                                    
                                       New ducats
                                       4 19 8 per ducat.
                                    
                                 
                                 Bar or ingot gold is received in proportion to its fineness compared with the above foreign gold coin. Upon fine bars the bank gives 340 per mark. In general, how-ever, something more is given upon coin of a known fineness, than upon gold and silver bars, of which the fineness cannot be ascertained but by a process of melt-ing and assaying.
                               The Proportions between the bank price, the mint price, and the market price of gold bullion, arenearly thesame. A person can generally sell his receipt for the difference between the mint price of bullion and the market price. A receipt for bullion is almost

always worth something, and it very seldom happens, therefore, that any body suffers his receipt to expire, or allows his bullion to fall to the bank at the price at which it had been received, either by not taking it out before the end of the six months, or by neg-lecting to pay the one-fourth or one-half per cent. in order to ob-tain a new receipt for another six months. This, however, though it happens seldom, is said to happen sometimes, and more frequently with regard to gold than with regard to silver, on ac-count of the higher warehouse-rent which is paid for the keeping of the more precious metal.
                           THE person who by making a deposit of bullion obtains both a bank credit and a receipt, pays his bills of exchange as they be-come due with his bank credit; and either sells or keeps his re-ceipt according as he judges that the price of bullion is likely to rise or to fall. The receipt and the bank credit seldom keep long together, and there is no occasion that they should. The person who has a receipt, and who wants to take out bullion, finds al-ways plenty of bank credits, or bank money to buy at the ordi-nary price; and the person who has bank money, and wants to take out bullion, finds receipts always in equal abundance.
                           THE owners of bank credits and the holders of receipts con-stitute two different sorts of creditors against the bank. The holder of a receipt cannot draw out the bullion for which it is

granted, without re-assigning to the bank a sum of bank money equal to the price at which the bullion had been received. If he has no bank money of his own, he must purchase it of those who have it. The owner of bank money cannot draw out bul-lion without producing to the bank receipts for the quantity which he wants. If he has none of his own, he must buy them of those who have them. The holder of a receipt, when he purchases bank money, purchases the power of taking out a quantity of bullion, of which the mint price is five per cent. above the bank price. The agio of five per cent. therefore, which he commonly pays for it, is paid, not for an imaginary, but for a real value. The owner of bank money, when he pur-chases a receipt, purchases the power of taking out a quantity of bullion of which the market price is commonly from two to three per cent. above the mint price. The price which he pays for it, therefore, is paid likewise for a real value. The price of the receipt, and the price of the bank money, compound or make up between them the full value or price of the bullion.
                           UPON deposits of the coin current in the country, the bank grants receipts likewise as well as bank credits; but those re-ceipts are frequently of no value, and will bring no price in the market. Upon ducatoons, for example, which in the currency pass for three gilders three stivers each, the bank gives a credit of three gilders only, or five per cent. below their current value. It grants a receipt likewise intitling the bearer to take out the num-ber of ducatoons deposited at any time within six months, upon paying one-fourth per cent. for the keeping. This receipt will frequently bring no price in the market. Three gilders bank mo-ney generally sell in the market for three gilders three stivers, the full value of the decatoons if they were taken out of the bank; and before they can be taken out, one-fourth per cent. must be

paid for the keeping, which would be mere loss to the holder of the receipt. If the agio of the bank, however, should at any time fall to three per cent. such receipts might bring some price in the market, and might sell for one and three-fourths per cent. But the agio of the bank being now generally about five per cent. such receipts are frequently allowed to expire, or as they express it, to fall to the bank. The receipts which are given for deposits of gold ducats fall to it yet more frequently, because a higher ware-house-rent, or one-half per cent. must be paid for the keeping of them before they can be taken out again. The five per cent. which the bank gains, when deposits either of coin or bullion are allowed to fall to it, may be considered as the warehouse-rent for the perpetual keeping of such deposits.
                           THE sum of bank money for which the receipts are expired must be very considerable. It must comprehend the whole origi-nal capital of the bank, which, it is generally supposed, has been allowed to remain there from the time it was first deposited, no-body caring either to renew his receipt or to take out his deposit, as, for the reasons already assigned, neither the one nor the other could be done without loss. But whatever may be the amount of this sum, the proportion which it bears to the whole mass of bank money is supposed to be very small. The bank of Amsterdam has for these many years past been the great warehouse of Europe for bul-lion, for which the receipts are very seldom allowed to expire, or, as they express it, to fall to the bank. The far greater part of the bank money, or of the credits upon the books of the bank, is supposed to have been created, for these many years past, by such deposits which the dealers in bullion are continually both making and withdrawing.
                           NO demand can be made upon the bank but by means of a recipice or receipt. The smaller mass of bank money, for which the receipts are expired, is mixed and confounded with the much

greater mass for which they are still in force; so that, though there may be a considerable sum of bank money, for which there are no receipts, there is no specific sum or portion of it, which may not at any time be demanded by one. The bank cannot be debtor to two persons for the same thing; and the owner of bank money who has no receipt cannot demand payment of the bank till he buys one. In ordinary and quiet times, he can find no dif-ficulty in getting one to buy at the market price, which generally corresponds with the price at which he can sell the coin or bullion it in titles him to take out of the bank.
                           IT might be otherwise during a public calamity; an invasion, for example, such as that of the French in 1672. The owners of bank money being then all eager to draw it out of the bank, in order to have it in their own keeping, the demand for receipts might raise their price to an exorbitant height. The holders of them might form extravagant expectations, and, instead of two or three per cent. demand half the bank money for which credit had been given upon the deposits that the receipts had respectively been granted for. The enemy, informed of the constitution of the bank, might even buy them up in order to prevent the carry-ing away of the treasure. In such emergencies, the bank, it is supposed, would break through its ordinary rule of making pay-ment only to the holders of receipts. The holders of receipts, who had no bank money, must have received within two or three per cent. of the value of the deposit for which their respective re-ceipts had been granted. The bank, therefore, it is said, would in this case make no scruple of paying, either with money or bul-lion, the full value of what the owners of bank money who could get no receipts, were credited for in its books; paying at the same time two or three per cent. to such holders of receipts as had no bank money, that being the whole value which in this state of things could justly be supposed due to them.
                           
                              

EVEN in ordinary and quiet times it is the interest of the holders of receipts to depress the agio, in order either to buy bank money (and consequently the bullion, which their receipts would then enable them to take out of the bank) so much cheaper, or to sell their receipts to those who have bank money, and who want to take out bullion, so much dearer; the price of a receipt being generally equal to the difference between the market price of bank money, and that of the coin or bullion for which the receipt had been granted. It is the interest of the owners of bank money, on the contrary, to raise the agio, in order either to sell their bank money so much dearer, or to buy a receipt so much cheaper. To prevent the stock jobbing tricks which those opposite interests might sometimes occasion, the bank has of late years come to the resolution to sell at all times bank money for currency, at five per cent. agio, and to buy it in again at four per cent. agio. In consequence of this resolution, the agio can never either rise above five, or sink below four per cent. and the proportion between the market price of bank and that of current money, is kept at all times very near to the proportion between their intrinsic values. Before this resolution was taken, the market price of bank money used sometimes to rise so high as nine per cent. agio, and sometimes to sink so low as par, according as opposite interests happened to influence the market.
                           THE bank of Amsterdam professes to lend out no part of what is deposited with it, but, for every gilder for which it gives credit in its books, to keep in its repositories the value of a gilder either in money or bullion. That it keeps in its repositories all the money or bullion for which there are receipts in force, for which it is at all times liable to be called upon, and which, in reality, is conti-nually going from it and returning to it again, cannot well be doubted. But whether it does so likewise with regard to that part

of its capital, for which the receipts are long ago expired, for which in ordinary and quiet times it cannot be called upon, and which in reality is very likely to remain with it for ever, or as long as the States of the United Provinces subsist, may perhaps appear more uncertain. At Amsterdam, however, no point of faith is better established than that for every gilder, circulated as bank mo-ney, there is a correspondent gilder in gold or silver to be found in the treasure of the bank. The city is guarantee that it should be so. The bank is under the direction of the four reigning burgo-masters, who are changed every year. Each new sett of burgo-masters visits the treasure, compares it with the books, receives it upon oath, and delivers it over, with the same awful solemnity, to the sett which succeeds it; and in that sober and religious country oaths are not yet disregarded. A rotation of this kind seems alone a sufficient security against any practices which cannot be avowed. Amidst all the revolutions which faction has ever occasioned in the government of Amsterdam, the prevailing party has at no time accused their predecessors of infidelity in the administration of the bank. No accusation could have affected more deeply the reputa-tion and fortune of the disgraced party, and if such an accusation could have been supported, we may be assured that it would have been brought. In 1672, when the French king was at Utrecht, the bank of Amsterdam paid so readily as left no doubt of the fide-lity with which it had observed its engagements. Some of the pieces which were then brought from its repositories appeared to have been scorched with the fire which happened in the town-house soon after the bank was established. Those pieces, therefore, must have lain there from that time.
                           WHAT may be the amount of the treasure in the bank is a ques-tion which has long employed the speculations of the curious. No-thing but conjecture can be offered concerning it. It is generally reckoned that there are about two thousand people who keep

accounts with the bank, and allowing them to have, one with ano-ther, the value of fifteen hundred pounds sterling lying upon their respective accounts, (a very large allowance) the whole quantity of bank money, and consequently of treasure in the bank, will amount to about three millions sterling, or, at eleven gilders the pound ster-ling, thirty-three millions of gilders; a great sum, and sufficient to carry on a very extensive circulation, but vastly below the extra-vagant ideas which some people have formed of this treasure.
                           THE city of Amsterdam derives a considerable revenue from the bank. Besides what may be called the warehouse-rent above-men-tioned, each person, upon first opening an account with the bank, pays a fee of ten gilders; and for every new account three gilders three stivers; for every transfer two stivers; and if the transfer is for less than three hundred gilders, six stivers, in order to discou-rage the multiplicity of small transactions. The person who neg-lects to balance his account twice in the year forfeits twenty-five gilders. The person who orders a transfer for more than is upon his account, is obliged to pay three per cent. for the sum over-drawn, and his order is set aside into the bargain. The bank is supposed too to make a considerable profit by the sale of the foreign coin or bullion which sometimes falls to it by the expiring of re-ceipts, and which is always kept till it can be sold with advantage. It makes a profit likewise by selling bank money at five per cent. agio, and buying it in at four. These different emoluments amount to a good deal more than what is necessary for paying the salaries of officers, and defraying the expence of management. What is paid for the keeping of bullion upon receipts, is alone sup-posed to amount to a neat annual revenue of between one hundred and fifty thousand and two hundred thousand gilders. Public utility, however, and not revenue, was the original object of this institu-tion. Its object was to relieve the merchants from the inconveni-ence of a disadvantageous exchange. The revenue which has ari-sen

from it was unforeseen, and may be considered as accidental. But it is now time to return from this long digression, into which I have been insensibly led in endeavouring to explain the reasons why the exchange between the countries which pay in what is called bank money, and those which pay in common currency, should generally appear to be in favour of the former, and against the latter. The former pay in a species of money of which the intrin-sic value is always the same, and exactly agreeable to the standard of their respective mints; the latter in a species of money of which the intrinsic value is continually varying, and is almost always more or less below that standard. But though the computed exchange must generally be in favour of the former, the real exchange may frequently be in favour of the latter.
                           [End of the Digression concerning Banks of Deposit.]
                        
                     
                  
               
               THOUGH the computed exchange between any two places were in every respect the same with the real, it would not always fol-low that what is called the balance of trade was in favour of that place which had the ordinary course of exchange in its favour. The ordinary course of exchange might, indeed, in this case, be a tolerable indication of the ordinary state of debt and credit between them, and show which of the two countries usually had occasion to send out money to the other. But the ordinary state of debt and credit between any two places is not always entirely regu-lated by the ordinary course of their dealings with one another, but is influenced by that of the dealings of both with many other countries. If it was usual, for example, for the merchants of England to pay the goods which they buy from Hamburgh, Dant-zick, Riga, &amp;c. by bills upon Holland, the ordinary state of debt and credit between England and Holland would not be entirely regulated by the ordinary course of the dealings of those two coun-tries with one another, but would be influenced by that of Eng-land with those other places. England might, in this case, be annually obliged to send out money to Holland, though its annual

exports to that country exceeded the annual value of its imports from it, and though what is called the balance of trade was very much in favour of England.
               HITHERTO I have been endeavouring to shew, even upon the principles of the commercial system, how unnecesary it is to lay extraordinary restraints upon the importation of goods from those countries with which the balance of trade is supposed to be disad-vantageous.
               NOTHING, however, can be more absurd than this whole doc-trine of the balance of trade, upon which, not only these restraints, but almost all the other regulations of commerce are founded. When two places trade with one another, this doctrine supposes that, if the balance be even, neither of them either loses or gains; but if it leans in any degree to one side, that one of them loses, and the other gains in proportion to its declension from the exact equi-librium. Both suppositions are false. A trade which is forced by means of bounties and monopolies, may be, and commonly is dis-advantageous to the country in whose favour it is meant to be esta-blished, as I shall endeavour to shew hereafter. But that trade which, without force or constraint, is naturally and regularly car-ried on between any two places, is always advantageous, though not always equally so, to both.
               BY advantage or gain, I understand, not the increase of the quantity of gold and silver, but that of the exchangeable value of the annual produce of the land and labour of the country, or the increase of the annual revenue of its inhabitants.
               IF the balance be even, and if the trade between the two places consist altogether in the exchange of their native commodities, they will, upon most occasions, not only both gain, but they will gain equally, or very near equally: each will in this case afford a market for a part of the surplus produce of the other: each will

THEY represented, first, that the exportation of gold and silver in order to purchase foreign goods, did not always diminish the quantity of those metals in the kingdom. That, on the contrary, it might frequently increase it; because if the consumption of foreign goods was not thereby increased in the country, those goods might be re-exported to foreign countries, and being there sold for a large profit, might bring back much more treasure than was originally sent out to purchase them. Mr. Mun com-pares this operation of foreign trade to the seed time and harvest of agriculture. "If we only behold," says he,  "the actions of the husbandman in the seed time when he casteth away much good corn into the ground, we shall account him rather a madman than a husbandman. But when we consider his labours in the harvest, which is the end of his endeavours, we shall find the worth and plentiful increase of his actions."
               
               THEY represented, secondly, that this prohibition could not hinder the exportation of gold and silver, which, on account of the smallness of their bulk in proportion to their value, could easily be smuggled abroad. That this exportation could only be prevented by a proper attention to, what they called, the balance of trade. That when the country exported to a greater value than it imported, a balance became due to it from foreign nations, which was neces-sarily paid to it in gold and silver, and thereby increased the quan-tity of those metals in the kingdom. But that when it imported to a greater value than it exported, a contrary balance became due to foreign nations, which was necessarily paid to them in the same manner, and thereby diminished that quantity. That in this case to prohibit the exportation of those metals could not prevent it, but only, by making it more dangerous, render it more expensive. That the exchange was thereby turned more against the country which owed the balance, than it otherwise might have been; the merchant who purchased a bill upon the foreign country being

replace a capital which had been employed in raising this part of the surplus produce of the other, and which had been distributed among, and given revenue and maintenance to a certain number of its inhabitants. Some part of the inhabitants of each there-fore will indirectly derive their revenue and maintenance from the other. As the commodities exchanged too are supposed to be of equal value, so the two capitals employed in the trade will, upon most occasions, be equal, or very nearly equal; and both being employed in raising the native commodities of the two countries, the revenue and maintenance which their distribution will afford to the inhabitants of each will be equal, or very nearly equal. This revenue and maintenance, thus mutually afforded, will be greater or smaller in proportion to the extent of their dealings. If these should annually amount to an hundred thousand pounds, for example, or to a million on each side, each of them would afford an annual revenue, in the one case, of an hundred thousand pounds, in the other, of a million, to the inhabitants of the other.
               IF their trade should be of such a nature that one of them ex-ported to the other nothing but native commodities, while the returns of that other consisted altogether in foreign goods; the balance, in this case, would still be supposed even, commodities being paid for with commodities. They would, in this case too, both gain, but they would not gain equally; and the inhabitants of the country which exported nothing but native commodities would derive the greatest revenue from the trade. If England, for exam-ple, should import from France nothing but the native commodi-ties of that country, and, not having such commodities of its own as were in demand there, should annually repay them by sending thither a large quantity of foreign goods, tobacco, we shall suppose, and East India goods; this trade, though it would give some revenue to the inhabitants of both countries, would give

more to those of France than to those of England. The whole French capital annually employed in it would annually be distri-buted among the people of France. But that part of the English capital only which was employed in producing the English commo-dities with which those foreign goods were purchased, would be annually distributed among the people of England. The greater part of it would replace the capitals which had been employed in Virginia, Indostan, and China, and which had given revenue and maintenance to the inhabitants of those distant countries. If the capitals were equal, or nearly equal, therefore, this employment of the French capital would augment much more the revenue of the people of France, than that of the English capital would the revenue of the people of England. France would in this case carry on a direct foreign trade of consumption with England; whereas England would carry on a round-about trade of the same kind with France. The different effects of a capital employed in the direct, and of one employed in the round-about foreign trade of consumption, have already been fully explained.
               THERE is not, probably, between any two countries, a trade which consists altogether in the exchange either of native commo-dities on both sides, or of native commodities on one side and of foreign goods on the other. Almost all countries exchange with one another partly native and partly foreign goods. That coun-try, however, in whose cargoes there is the greatest proportion of native, and the least of foreign goods, will always be the prin-cipal gainer. If it was not with tobacco and East India goods, but with gold and silver, that England paid for the commodities annually imported from France, the balance, in this case, would be supposed uneven, commodities not being paid for with commo-dities, but with gold and silver. The trade, however, would, in this case, as in the foregoing, give some revenue to the inhabitants

of both countries, but more to those of France than to those of England. It would give some revenue to those of England. The capital which had been employed in producing the English goods that purchased this gold and silver, the capital which had been distributed among, and given revenue to certain inhabitants of England, would thereby be replaced, and enabled to continue that employment. The whole capital of England would no more be diminished by this exportation of gold and silver, than by the expor-tation of an equal value of any other goods. On the contrary, it would, in most cases, be augmented. No goods are sent abroad but those for which the demand is supposed to be greater abroad than at home, and of which the returns consequently, it is expect-ed, will be of more value at home than the commodities export-ed. If the tobacco which, in England, is worth only a hundred thousand pounds, when sent to France will purchase wine which is, in England, worth a hundred and ten thousand pounds, the exchange will augment the capital of England by ten thousand pounds. If a hundred thousand pounds of English gold, in the same manner, purchase French wine which, in England, is worth a hundred and ten thousand, this exchange will equally augment the capital of England by ten thousand pounds. As a merchant who has a hundred and ten thousand pounds worth of wine in his cellar, is a richer man than he who has only a hundred thousand pounds worth of tobacco in his warehouse, so is he likewise a richer man than he who has only a hundred thousand pounds worth of gold in his coffers. He can put into motion a greater quantity of industry, and give revenue, maintenance, and employ-ment, to a greater number of people than either of the other two. But the capital of the country is equal to the capitals of all its different inhabitants, and the quantity of industry which can be annually maintained in it, is equal to what all those different capi-tals can maintain. Both the capital of the country, therefore,

and the quantity of industry which can be annually maintained in it, must generally be augmented by this exchange. It would, indeed, be more advantageous for England that it could purchase the wines of France with its own hardware and broad-cloth, than with either the tobacco of Virginia, or the gold and silver of Brazil and Peru. A direct foreign trade of consumption is always more advantageous than a round-about one. But a round-about foreign trade of consumption which is carried on with gold and silver, does not seem to be less advantageous than any other equally round-about one. Neither is a country which has no mines more likely to be exhausted of gold and silver by this annual exportation of those metals, than one which does not grow tobacco by the like annual exportation of that plant. As a country which has where-withal to buy tobacco will never be long in want of it, so nei-ther will one be long in want of gold and silver which has where-withal to purchase those metals.
               IT is a losing trade, it is said, which a workman carries on with the alehouse; and the trade which a manufacturing nation would naturally carry on with a wine country, may be considered as a trade of the same nature. I answer, that the trade with the alehouse is not necessarily a losing trade. In its own nature it is just as advantageous as any other, though, perhaps, somewhat more liable to be abused. The employment of a brewer, and even that of a retailer of fermented liquors, are as necessary divisions of labour as any other. It will generally be more advantageous for a workman to buy of the brewer the quantity he has occasion for than to make it himself, and if he is a poor workman, it will ge-nerally be more advantageous for him to buy it by little and little of the retailer, than a large quantity of the brewer. He may no doubt buy too much of either, as he may of any other dealers in his neighbourhood, of the butcher, if he is a glutton, or of the draper, if he affects to be a beau among his companions. It is

advantageous to the great body of workmen notwithstanding, that all these trades should be free, though this freedom may be abused in all of them, and is more likely to be so, perhaps, in some than in others. Though individuals, besides, may sometimes ruin their fortunes by an excessive consumption of fermented liquors, there seems to be no risk that a nation should do so. Though in every country there are many people who spend upon such liquors more than they can afford, there are always many more who spend less. It deserves to be remarked too that, if we consult experience, the cheapness of wine seems to be a cause, not of drunkenness, but of sobriety. The inhabitants of the wine countries are in ge-neral the soberest people in Europe; witness the Spaniards, the Italians, and the inhabitants of the southern provinces of France. People are seldom guilty of excess in what is their daily fare. Nobody affects the character of liberality and good fellowship, by being profuse of a liquor which is as cheap as small beer. On the contrary, in the countries which from either excessive heat or cold produce no grapes, and where wine consequently is dear and a rarity, drunkenness is a common vice, as among the northern nations, and all those who live between the tropicks, the negroes, for example, on the coast of Guinea. When a French regiment comes from some of the northern provinces of France, where wine is somewhat dear, to be quartered in the southern, where it is very cheap, the soldiers. I have frequently heard it observed, are at first debauched by the cheapness and novelty of good wine; but after a few months residence, the greater part of them become as sober as the rest of the inhabitants. Were the duties upon foreign wines, and the excises upon malt, beer, and ale, to be taken away all at once, it might, in the same manner, occasion in Great Britain a pretty general and temporary drunkenness among the middling and inferior ranks of people, which would probably be soon followed by a permanent and almost universal

sobriety. At present drunkenness is by no means the vice of peo-ple of fashion, or of those who can easily afford the most expen-sive liquors. A gentleman drunk with ale, has scarce ever been seen among us. The restraints upon the wine trade in Great Britain besides, do not so much seem calculated to hinder the people from going, if I may say so, to the alehouse, as from going where they can buy the best and cheapest liquor. They favour the wine trade of Portugal, and discourage that of France. The Portuguese, it is said, indeed, are better customers for our manufactures than the French, and should therefore be encou-raged in preference to them. As they give us their custom, it is pretended, we should give them our's. The sneaking arts of un-derling tradesmen are thus erected into political maxims for the conduct of a great empire: for it is the most underling tradesmen only who make it a rule to employ chiefly their own customers. A great trader purchases his goods always where they are cheapest and best, without regard to any little interest of this kind.
               BY such maxims as these, however, nations have been taught that their interest consisted in beggaring all their neighbours. Each nation has been made to look with an invidious eye upon the prosperity of all the nations with which it trades, and to con-sider their gain as its own loss. Commerce, which ought naturally to be, among nations, as among individuals, a bond of union and friendship, has become the most fertile source of discord and animosity. The capricious ambition of kings and ministers has not, during the present and the preceeding century, been more fatal to the repose of Europe than the impertinent jealousy of merchants and manufacturers. The violence and injustice of the rulers of mankind is an ancient evil, for which, I am afraid the nature of human affairs can scarce admit of a remedy. But the mean rapacity, the monopolizing spirit of merchants and manu-facturers,

who neither are, nor ought to be the rulers of man-kind, though it cannot perhaps be corrected, may very easily be prevented from disturbing the tranquillity of any body but themselves.
               THAT it was the spirit of monopoly which originally both in-vented and propagated this doctrine, cannot be doubted; and they who first taught it were by no means such fools as they who be-lieved it. In every country it always is and must be the interest of the great body of the people to buy whatever they want of those who sell it cheapest. The proposition is so very manifest, that it seems ridiculous to take any pains to prove it; nor could it ever have been called in question had not the interested sophistry of merchants and manufacturers confounded the common sense of mankind. Their interest is, in this directly opposite to that of the great body of the people. As it is interest of the freemen of a corporation to hinder the rest of the inhabitants from employing any workmen but themselves, so it is the interest of the merchants and manufacturers of every country to secure to themselves the monopoly of the home market. Hence in Great Britain and in most other European countries the extraordi-nary duties upon almost all goods imported by alien merchants. Hence the high duties and prohibitions upon all those foreign manufactures which can come into competition with our own. Hence too the extraordinary restraints upon the importation of almost all sorts of goods from those countries with which the ba-lance of trade is supposed to be disadvantageous; that is, from those against whom national animosity happens to be most vio-lently inflamed.
               THE wealth of a neighbouring nation, however, though danger-ous in war and politicks, is certainly advantageous in trade. In a

state of hostility it may enable our enemies to maintain fleets and armies superior to our own; but in a state of peace and commerce it must likewise enable them to exchange with us to a greater value, and to afford a better market, either for the immediate produce of our own industry, or for whatever is purchased with that produce. As a rich man is likely to be a better customer to the industrious people in his neighbourhood, than a poor, so is likewise a rich nation. A rich man, indeed, who is himself a manufacturer, is a very dangerous neighbour to all those who deal in the same way. All the rest of the neighbourhood, however, by far the greatest number, profit by the good market which his ex-pence affords them. They even profit by his underselling the poorer workmen who deal in the same way with him. The ma-nufacturers of a rich nation, in the same manner, may no doubt be very dangerous rivals to those of their neighbours. This very competition, however, is advantageous to the great body of the people, who profit greatly besides by the good market which the great expence of such a nation affords them in every other way. Private people who want to make a fortune, never think of retir-ing to the remote and poor provinces of the country, but resort either to the capital or to some of the great commercial towns. They know, that where little wealth circulates there is little to be got, but that where a great deal is in motion, some share of it may fall to them. The same maxims which would in this man-ner direct the common sense of one, or ten, or twenty indivi-duals, should regulate the judgement of one, or ten, or twenty millions, and should make a whole nation regard the riches of its neighbours, as a probable cause and occasion for itself to acquire riches. A nation that would enrich itself by foreign trade is certainly most likely to do so when its neighbours are all rich, industrious, and commercial nations. A great nation surrounded

on all sides by wandering savages and poor barbarians might, no doubt, acquire riches by the cultivation of its own lands, and by its own interior commerce, but not by foreign trade. It seems to have been in this manner that the ancient Egyptians and the modern Chinese acquired their great wealth. The ancient Egyp-tians, it is said, neglected foreign commerce, and the modern Chinese, it is known, hold it in the utmost contempt, and scarce deign to afford it the decent protection of the laws. The modern maxims of foreign commerce, by aiming at the impoverishment of all our neighbours, so far as they are capable of producing their intended effect, tend to render that very commerce insigni-ficant and contemptible.
               THERE is no commercial country in Europe of which the approaching ruin has not frequently been foretold by the pre-tended doctors of this system, from an unfavourable balance of trade. After all the anxiety however which they have excited about this, after all the vain attempts of almost all trading nations to turn that balance in their own favour and against their neigh-bours, it does not appear that any one nation in Europe has been in any respect impoverished by this cause. Every town and coun-try, on the contrary, in proportion as they have opened their ports to all nations; instead of being ruined by this free trade, as the principles of the commercial system would lead us to ex-pect, have been enriched by it. Though there are in Europe, indeed, a few towns which in some respects deserve the name of free ports, there is no country which does so. Holland, perhaps, approaches the nearest to this character of any, though still very remote from it; and Holland, it is acknowledged, not only derives its whole wealth, but a great part of its necessary subsistence, from foreign trade.
               
                  

THERE is another balance indeed, which has already been ex-plained, very different from the balance of trade, and which, according as it happens to be either favourable or unfavourable, necessarily occasions the prosperity or decay of every nation. This is the balance of the annual produce and consumption. If the exchangeable value of the annual produce, it has already been observed, exceeds that of the annual consumption, the capital of the society must annually increase in proportion to this excess. The society in this case lives within its revenue, and what is annually saved out of its revenue, is naturally added to its capi-tal, and employed so as to increase still further the annual pro-duce. If the exchangeable value of the annual produce, on the contrary, fall short of the annual consumption, the capital of the society must annually decay in proportion to this deficiency. The expence of the society in this case exceeds its revenue, and necessarily encroaches upon its capital. Its capital, therefore, must necessarily decay, and together with it, the exchangeable value of the annual produce of its industry.
               THIS balance of produce and consumption is entirely different from, what is called, the balance of trade. It might take place in a nation which had no foreign trade, but which was entirely separated from all the world. It may take place in the whole globe of the earth, of which the wealth, population, and improve-ment may be either gradually increasing or gradually decaying.
               THE balance of produce and consumption may be constantly in favour of a nation, though what is called the balance of trade be generally against it. A nation may import to a greater value than it exports for half a century, perhaps, together; the gold and silver which comes into it during all this time may be all im-mediately sent out of it; its circulating coin may gradually decay,

obliged to pay the banker who sold it, not only for the natural risk, trouble and expence of sending the money thither, but for the extraordinary risk arising from the prohibition. But that the more the exchange was against any country, the more the balance of trade became necessarily against it; the money of that country becoming necessarily of so much less value, in comparison with that of the country to which the balance was due. That if the exchange between England and Holland, for example, was five per cent. against England, it would require a hundred and five ounces of silver in England to purchase a bill for a hundred ounces of silver in Holland: that a hundred and five ounces of silver in England, therefore, would be worth only a hundred ounces of silver in Holland, and would purchase only a proportionable quan-tity of Dutch goods: but that a hundred ounces of silver in Hol-land, on the contrary, would be worth a hundred and five ounces in England, and would purchase a proportionable quantity of English goods: That the English goods which were sold to Holland would be sold so much cheaper; and the Dutch goods which were sold to England, so much dearer, by the difference of the ex-change; that the one would draw so much less Dutch money to England, and the other so much more English money to Holland, as this difference amounted to: and that the balance of trade, therefore, would necessarily be so much more against England, and would require a greater balance of gold and silver to be ex-ported to Holland.
               THOSE arguments were partly solid and partly sophistical. They were solid so far as they asserted that the exportation of gold and silver in trade might frequently be advantageous to the country. They were solid too in asserting that no prohibition could prevent their exportation, when private people found any advantage in ex-porting them. But they were sophistical in supposing, that either

different sorts of paper money being substituted in its place, and even the debts too which it contracts in the principal nations with whom it deals may be gradually increasing; and yet its real wealth, the exchangeable value of the annual produce of its lands and labour may, during the same period, have been increasing in a much greater proportion. The state of our North American colonies, and the trade which they carried on with Great Britain, before the commencement of the late disturbances, may serve as a proof that this is by no means an impossible supposition.
            
            
               CHAP. IV. Of Drawbacks.
               
               MERCHANTS and manufacturers are not contented with the monopoly of the home market, but desire likewise the most extensive foreign sale for their goods. Their country has no jurisdiction in foreign nations, and therefore can seldom procure them any monopoly there. They are generally obliged therefore to content themselves with petitioning for certain encouragements to exportation.
               OF these encouragements what are called Drawbacks seem to be the most reasonable. To allow the merchant to draw back upon exportation, either the whole or a part of whatever excise or in-land duty is imposed upon domestick industry, can never occasion the exportation of a greater quantity of goods than what would have been exported had no duty been imposed. Such encourage-ments do not tend to turn towards any particular employment a greater share of the capital of the country, than what would go

to it of its own accord, but only to hinder the duty from driving away any part of that share to other employments. They tend not to overturn that balance which naturally establishes itself among all the various employments of the society; but to hinder it from being overturned by the duty. They tend not to destroy but to preserve, what it is in most cases advantageous to pre-serve, the natural division and distribution of labour in the society.
               THE same thing may be said of the drawacks upon the re-expor-tation of foreign goods imported; which in Great Britain generally amount to by much the largest part of the duty upon importation. Half the duties imposed by what is called the old subsidy, are drawn back universally, except upon goods exported to the British plan-tations; and frequently the whole, almost always a part of those imposed by later subsidies and imposts. Drawbacks were, per-haps, originally granted for the encouragement of the carrying trade, which, as the freight of the ships is frequently paid by fo-reigners in money, was supposed to be peculiarly fitted for bring-ing gold and silver into the country. But though the carrying trade certainly deserves no peculiar encouragement, though the motive of the institution was, perhaps, abundantly foolish, the institution itself seems reasonable enough. Such drawbacks cannot force into this trade a greater share of the capital of the country than what would have gone to it of its own accord, had there been no duties upon importation. They only prevent its being excluded altogether by those duties. The carrying trade, though it deserves no preference, ought not to be precluded, but to be left free like all other trades. It is a necessary resource for those capitals which cannot find employment either in the agriculture or in the manufactures of the country, either in its home trade or in its foreign trade of consumption.
               
                  

THE revenue of the customs, instead of suffering, profits from such drawbacks, by that part of the duty which is retained. If the whole duties had been retained, the foreign goods upon which they are paid, could seldom have been exported, nor consequently imported, for want of a market. The duties, therefore, of which a part is retained, would never have been paid.
               THESE reasons seem sufficiently to justify drawbacks, and would justify them, though the whole duties, whether upon the produce of domestick industry, or upon foreign goods, were always drawn back upon exportation. The revenue of excise would in this case, indeed, suffer a little, and that of the customs a good deal more; but the natural balance of industry, the natural division and distribution of labour, which is always more or less disturbed by such duties, would be more nearly re-established by such a regulation.
               THESE reasons, however, will justify drawbacks only upon ex-porting goods to those countries which are altogether foreign and independent, not to those in which our merchants and manu-facturers enjoy a monopoly. A drawback, for example, upon the exportation of European goods to our American colonies, will not always occasion a greater exportation than what would have taken place without it. By means of the monopoly which our merchants and manufacturers enjoy there, the same quantity might frequently, perhaps, be sent thither, though the whole duties were retained. The drawback, therefore, may frequently be pure loss to the revenue of excise and customs, without altering the state of the trade, or rendering it in any respect more exten-sive. How far such drawbacks can be justified, as a proper en-couragement to the industry of our colonies, or how far it is

advantageous to the mother country, that they should be exempted from taxes which are paid by all the rest of their fellow subjects, will appear hereafter when I come to treat of colonies.
               DRAWBACKS however, it must always be understood, are useful only in those cases in which the goods for the exportation of which they are given, are really exported to some foreign country; and not clandestinely reimported into our own. That some drawbacks, particularly those upon tobacco, have frequently been abused in this manner, and have given occasion to many frauds equally hurtful both to the revenue and to the fair trader, is well known.
            
            
               CHAP. V. Of Bounties.
               
               BOUNTIES upon exportation are, in Great Britain, fre-quently petitioned for, and sometimes granted to the produce of particular branches of domestick industry. By means of them our merchants and manufacturers, it is pretended, will be enabled to sell their goods as cheap or cheaper than their rivals in the foreign market. A greater quantity, it is said, will thus be export-ed, and the balance of trade consequently turned more in favour of our own country. We cannot give our workmen a monopoly in the foreign, as we have done in the home market. We cannot force foreigners to buy their goods, as we have done our own coun-trymen. The next best expedient, it has been thought, therefore, is to pay them for buying. It is in this manner that the mercan-tile system proposes to enrich the whole country, and to put money into all our pockets by means of the balance of trade.
               
                  

BOUNTIES, it is allowed, ought to be given to those branches of trade only which cannot be carried on without them. But every branch of trade in which the merchant can sell his goods for a price which replaces to him, with the ordinary profits of stock, the whole capital employed in preparing and sending them to mar-ket, can be carried on without a bounty. Every such branch is evidently upon a level with all the other branches of trade which are carried on without bounties, and cannot therefore require one more than they. Those trades only require bounties in which the merchant is obliged to sell his goods for a price which does not replace to him his capital, together with the ordinary profit; or in which he is obliged to sell them for less than it really costs him to send them to market. The bounty is given in order to make up this loss, and to encourage him to continue, or perhaps to be-gin, a trade of which the expence is supposed to be greater than the returns, of which every operation eats up a part of the capi-tal employed in it, and which is of such a nature, that, if all other trades resembled it, there would soon be no capital left in the country.
               THE trades, it is to be observed, which are carried on by means of bounties, are the only ones which can be carried on between two nations for any considerable time together, in such a manner as that one of them shall always and regularly lose, or sell its goods for less than it really costs to send them to market. But if the bounty did not repay to the merchant what he would otherwise lose upon the price of his goods, his own interest would soon oblige him to employ his stock in another way, or to find out a trade in which the price of the goods would replace to him, with the ordi-nary profit, the capital employed in sending them to market. The effect of bounties, like that of all the other expedients of the mer-cantile system, can only be to force the trade of a country into a

channel much less advantageous than that in which it would natu-rally run of its own accord.
               THE ingenious and well informed author of the tracts upon the corn trade has shown very clearly, that since the bounty upon the exportation of corn was first established, the price of the corn exported, valued moderately enough, has exceeded that of the corn imported, valued very high, by a much greater sum than the amount of the whole bounties which have been paid during that period. This, he imagines, upon the true principles of the mer-cantile system, is a clear proof that this forced corn trade is bene-ficial to the nation; the value of the exportation exceeding that of the importation by a much greater sum than the whole extraor-dinary expence which the publick has been at in order to get it exported. He does not consider that this extraordinary expence, or the bounty, is the smallest part of the expence which the exporta-tion of corn really costs the society. The capital which the far-mer employed in raising it must likewise be taken into the account. Unless the price of the corn when sold in the foreign markets re-places, not only the bounty, but this capital, together with the ordinary profits of stock, the society is a loser by the difference, or the national stock is so much diminished. But the very reason for which it has been thought necessary to grant a bounty is the sup-posed insufficiency of the price to do this.
               THE average price of corn, it has been said, has fallen consider-ably since the establishment of the bounty. That the average price of corn began to fall somewhat towards the end of the last cen-tury, and has continued to do so during the course of the sixty-four first years of the present, I have already endeavoured to show. But this event, supposing it to be as real as I believe it to be, must have happened in spite of the bounty, and cannot possibly have happened in consequence of it.
               
                  

IN years of plenty, it has already been observed, the bounty, by occasioning an extraordinary exportation, necessarily keeps up the price of corn in the home market above what it would naturally fall to. To do so was the avowed purpose of the institution. In years of scarcity, though the bounty is frequently suspended, yet the great exportation which it occasions in years of plenty, must frequently hinder more or less the plenty of one year from relieving the scarcity of another. Both in years of plenty, and in years of scarcity, therefore, the bounty necessarily tends to raise the money price of corn somewhat higher than it otherwise would be in the home market.
               THAT, in the actual state of tillage, the bounty must necessarily have this tendency, will not, I apprehend, be disputed by any rea-sonable person. But it has been thought by many people, that by securing to the farmer a better price than he could otherwise expect in the actual state of tillage, it tends to encourage tillage; and that the consequent increase of corn may, in a long period of years, lower its price more than the bounty can raise it in the actual state which tillage may, at the end of that period, happen to be in.
               I ANSWER, that this might be the case if the effect of the bounty was to raise the real price of corn, or to enable the farmer with an equal quantity of it to maintain a greater number of labourers in the same manner, whether liberal, moderate, or scanty, that other labourers are commonly maintained in his neighbourhood. But neither the bounty, it is evident, nor any other human institution, can have any such effect. It is not the real, but the nominal price of corn only, which can be at all affected by the bounty.
               THE real effect of the bounty is not so much to raise the real value of corn, as to degrade the real value of silver; or to make an equal quantity of it exchange for a smaller quantity, not only of

corn, but of all other commodities: for the money price of corn regulates that of all other commodities.
               IT regulates the money price of labour, which must always be such as to enable the labourer to purchase a quantity of corn suf-ficient to maintain him and his family either in the liberal, mode-rate, or scanty manner in which the advancing, stationary, or de-clining circumstances of the society oblige his employers to main-tain him.
               IT regulates the money price of all the other parts of the rude produce of land, which, in every period of improvement, must bear a certain proportion to that of corn, though this proportion is different in different periods. It regulates, for example, the money price of grass and hay, of butcher's meat, of horses, and the maintenance of horses, of land carriage consequently, or of the greater part of the inland commerce of the country.
               BY regulating the money price of all the other parts of the rude produce of land, it regulates that of the materials of all manufac-tures. By regulating the money price of labour, it regulates that of manufacturing art and industry. And by regulating both, it regulates that of the compleat manufacture. The money price of labour, and of every thing that is the produce either of land or labour, must necessarily either rise or fall in proportion to the mo-ney price of corn.
               THOUGH in consequence of the bounty, therefore, the farmer should be enabled to sell his corn for four shillings the bushel in-stead of three and sixpence, and to pay his landlord a money rent proportionable to this rise in the money price of his produce; yet, if in consequence of this rise in the price of corn, four shillings will purchase no more goods of any other kind than three and six-pence

would have done before, neither the circumstances of the farmer, nor those of the landlord, will be in the smallest degree mended by this change. The farmer will not be able to cultivate better: the landlord will not be able to live better.
               THAT degradation in the value of silver which is the effect of the fertility of the mines, and which operates equally, or very near equally, through the greater part of the commercial world, is a matter of very little consequence to any particular country. The consequent rise of all money prices, though it does not make those who receive them really richer, does not make them really poorer. A service of plate becomes really cheaper, and every thing else re-mains precisely of the same real value as before.
               BUT that degradation in the value of silver which, being the effect either of the peculiar situation, or of the political institu-tions of a particular country, takes place only in that country, is a matter of very great consequence, which, far from tending to make any body really richer, tends to make every body really poorer. The rise in the money price of all commodities, which is in this case peculiar to that country, tends to discourage more or less every sort of industry which is carried on within it, and to enable foreign nations, by furnishing almost all sorts of goods for a smaller quantity of silver than its own workmen can afford to do, to undersell them, not only in the foreign, but even in the home market.
               IT is the peculiar situation of Spain and Portugal, as proprietors of the mines, to be the distributors of gold and silver to all the other countries of Europe. Those metals ought naturally, there-fore, to be somewhat cheaper in Spain and Portugal than in any other part of Europe. The difference, however, should be no

more than the amount of the freight and insurance; and, on ac-count of the great value and small bulk of those metals, their freight is no great matter, and their insurance is the same as that of any other goods of equal value. Spain and Portugal, there-fore, could suffer very little from their peculiar situation, if they did not aggravate its disadvantages by their political institutions.
               SPAIN by taxing, and Portugal by prohibiting the exportation of gold and silver, load that exportation with the expence of smug-gling, and raise the value of those metals in other countries so much more above what it is in their own, by the whole amount of this expence. When you dam up a stream of water, as soon as the dam is full, as much water must run over the dam-head as if there was no dam at all. The prohibition of exportation can-not detain a greater quantity of gold and silver in Spain and Por-tugal than what they can afford to employ, than what the annual produce of their land and labour will allow them to employ, in coin, plate, gilding, and other ornaments of gold and silver. When they have got this quantity the dam is full, and the whole stream which flows in afterwards must run over. The annual exportation of gold and silver from Spain and Portugal accordingly is, by all accounts, notwithstanding these restraints, very near equal to the whole annual importation. As the water, however, must always be deeper behind the dam-head than before it, so the quantity of gold and silver which these restraints detain in Spain and Por-tugal must, in proportion to the annual produce of their land and labour, be greater that what is to be found in other countries. The higher and stronger the dam-head, the greater must be the difference in the depth of water behind and before it. The higher the tax, the higher the penalties with which the prohibition is guard-ed, the more vigilant and severe the police which looks after the execution of the law, the greater must be the difference in the
