P P I T -P I P L E S

F
Mi 0 R A L

AND
POLITICAL SCIENCE; BEING CHIEFLY A
RETROSPECT of LECTURES delivered in the COLLEGE

of EDINBURGH.
BT ADAM FERGUSON, L.L.D W F.R.S.E.

LATE PROFESSOR OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY.

I N TT O SOLUMES.
IHuc enim pertinet, animal hoc providun, fagax, multiplex, acutum, memlor, plenum rationis et confilii, quem vocamus homincm, praclara quadam conditionC generatum cfe a fummo Dco. CIC. Dn LEGG. Cap. VII.

VO L. II.

E D I N B U R GH: ?.RINTED 1FOR A. STRAH-AN AND T. CADELL, LONDON; AND W. CRE.ECH, EDINBURGH.

I DCC XCII.



CO N T EN TS

OF TIIE
SECOND VOLUME.


Of Moral Law, &c.



Of the Specific Good incident to Human Nature.

SECT. I. INTRODUCTION. - Page SECT. II. Of pleasure and pain. - .
SECT. III. Of beauty and (dformiry, excellence and defe&. - 22
SECT. IV. Of virtue and vice. - 4
SECT. V. Of prosperity and adversity, or the gifts of fortune. -47
SECT. VI. Of happiness and misery. - - 57
SECT. VII. Of the aftual measures and sources of good and evil in human life. 7o SECT. VIII. Of the fame subjea continued. - - 84


Of the Fundamental Law of Morality, its inmediiate Applications and Sandcions.

Snlcr I. Of he lw.v, or firfn lpi::cipl:- of efli:ntion in tlic cllihrtier of m.l. 1
SC-CT. IL. Of the firfl. mand mo01: tc.ll.r.l ipp'i:.'tioII of notr.1l l.s. - I

SciCT. IIr. Of the difliculy which has arisen in accounting for moral approbation. P. 16
Of the difficulty of reconciling the different judgements of men relating to the moirality of external antions. - - 135

SECT. V. Of the fundamental rules of morality relating to external acrions. 149
SECT. VI. Of the fame subjcd continued. - - - 155
Sacr. VII. Of the unequal degrees of merit and demerit in external actions. I59
SECT. VilI. Of the obligations and fanClions of moral law. - - 6

.

Of Jurisprudence, or Compulsory Law. Part I.

SECT. I. Of the principle of compulsory law. - 179
SECT. II. Of the term right in its mofl general acceptation. - - 184
SECT. III. Of the law of defence in general. - - 88
SECT. IV. Of the general titles under which the rights of man may be clafled. I90
SECT. V. Of rights original. - 196
SECT. VI. Of rights adventitious. - - 198
SECT. VII. Of the diflerent sources of adventitious rights. - 200
SECT. VIII. Of occupancy and the species of right that may result from it. 203
SECT. IX. Of labour and the species of right that may result from it. - 207
SECT. X. Of contract, or the principle of conventional obligation. - 214
SECT. XI. Of the lawis of convention, derived from the foregoing principle. 226
SECT. XII. Of the specific obligations andc rights that refule from contrat. 236
SECT. XIII. Of forfeiture and the species of right which results from it. 248

C H A P. IV.

Of Jurisprudence. Part IT.

RefpeAing the Defences of Men.

s
SECT. I. Of the means that may be opposed to injustice in general. - 257
HLcr. II. Of the law of defence, in the cafe of tingle persons, firangers, and unconineced. - - - 63

,rcT. Ilr. Of the cafe of fellow citizens. -- 270
SECr. IV. Of the cafe of nations. - 293
:-,cr Vi, Of the fimer ftbijca continuet, - 3




Of Moral Ation and the CharaCeriftics of a Virtuous and Happy Life.

SECT. I. Of virtue as distinguishable from the the effeas of compulsory law. Page 3 r 5
SECT. II. Of the occasions and characters of human ation in general. 323
SECT. III. Of the charateriftics of prudence. - -332
SECT. IV. Of the charaaeriftics of goodness or j ufice. - 349
SECT. V. Of the charaderiftics of temperance. - - 38
SECT. VI. Of the charaleriftics of fortitude. - 391
SECT. VII. Concluding observations. - - - 4



Of Politics.

SECT. I. Introdu&ion. - - 407
SECT. II. Of the people confidered in refped to numbers. - 409
SECT. III. Of the manners or political character of the people. - 413
SECT. IV. Of the wealth of the people. - - 420
SECT. V. Of the revenue of the ifate. 43r SECT. VI. Of the fame subjeCt continued. - 447
SECT. VII. Of civil or political liberty. - 457
SECT. VIII. Of liberty as it may be affected by the exercise of the legisative power. 467
SECT. IX. Of the judicative power. - - 476

SECT. X. Of the executive power. 4- 48
SECT. XI. Of national felicity. - 495

ERRATA. VOL. II.
Page 89. . 2. for flatcs read flakes. Page 319. Note, at bottom, dde Rex vixit male, Ibid. Note,for ferva read lria ;for defcccrant 364. 1. I5. for principle read principal.
r,. defeccrunt ;for contendant ,. contelndunt. 387. 1. . fir will read will.
92. 1. 27. for fake read the f.kc. 414. I. 6. for I ,ind It.
168. Note, jbr aflriniimius rtad afitingimur. 442. . 26. i/dr being.
199. I. penult, for relation read relations. 448. 1. 21. dz. , 2Id, Or.
224. I. .

. fr ientiment rtad lictimcits. .68.



PRINCIPLES or MORAL AND POLITICAL SCIENCE.

P A R T IL.
Of Moral Law, or the Diflintion of Good and Evil, and its Syflematic Applications.

C H A P. I.
OF THE SPECIFIC GOOD INCIDENT TO HUMAN NATURE.

S E C T I O N I.

Introdutilon.

TIHE diftintion of physical and moral science has been tfated 
PART I.
in the former part of this work; the one being occupied in folving questions of theory or sac, the other in solving queflions of rv right: But, notwithstanding the proposed method required that questions of fad, or mere explanation, should be confidered aVoL, II. A part I C: 
part from questions of etfimation and choice; yet the good 
CHAP.I. f which man is susceptible, and the evil to which he is exposed, having frequently occurred, as sacs of the greateft importance relating to him; and the advancement of moral science itself having made a considerable article in the history of his pursuits and attainments; it was impossible not to touch upon there subjects, in laying the foundation of this more particular difcuflion, in which we are now to proceed.

Having, however, in the former part, chiefly attended to the fats constituent of man's actual slate, and serving to form his capacity and give intimation of his future prospects; we are now, in the continuation of our method, come to a point at which the diftinaion of good and evil, and its applications, are the dired and immediate objeds of our inquiry. But as in the past, where the statement of faA was the principal obje&, we could not always with-hold some view to its consequence; so now, although our principal objedt is to pursue the inference to be drawn from .fads already flated; yet, as we may, by referring to former observations, sometimes incur the charge of repetition; it is hoped that the favour, due to a subjeA so important, may plead in excuse of the necessary references, even if they should be repeated.

Science, in every application of the term, implies the knowledge of some one or more general principles with their applications, whether in direting the will, or in explaining appearances, and connecting together our conceptions of things.

The specific principle of moral science is some general expreflion of what is good, and fit to determine the choice of moral agents in the detail of their condut.

To investigate such a principle relating to man, it will be ne- 
PART Ileefiary to recollea what is known of himself; and of the fituation in which he is placed. Our information is to be collected from his experience of what is agreeable or disagreeable to him, and the result will amount to a choice of that, on which he is chiefly to rely for his happiness, and to a caution against that, of which he is chiefly to beware as leading to misery.

These first and principal points of choice or rejection being fixed, the lines of moral wisdom and precept will flow from them in every direction, whether leading to the discernment of perfonal qualities, the foundations of law, manners, or political eftablifhments.

The diftindion of good and evil originates in the capacity of enjoyment and suffering. Insomuch that, without the intervention of mind, or some feeling nature, all the varieties of matter and form besides, would be indifferent. Good may be defined, that which being enjoyed constitutes happiness; and evil, that which being incurred constitutes misery.

Philosophers of old employed themselves chiefly in search of a supreme good; and the term was familiar in the language of their times. We are told of two principal opinions which were entertained on this subjed. One, that pleasure, another, that virtue was the chief good. But as the patrons of the first could not propose to afterr, that all pleasures were equal, no more could the other mean, that virtue was not a pleasure. They were agreed indeed in the general afrertion, that what they termed virtue was the only secure and true source of enjoyment; but they defcribA 2 ed 
 ed their virtues differently. Though to both it was a state of 

SCT. I. tranquility and exemption from fear and sorrow, this exemption y.¥'rv was fhppofed by the one to be obtained by a seclusion from care, and by indifference to all the concerns of mankind, whether private or public. By the other, virtue was supposed to consist in the affectionate performance of every good office towards their fellow creatures, and in full resignation to providence for every thing independent of their own choice. Their different schemes of divinity clearly pointed out their opposite plans of morality also.
Both admitted the existence of God. But to one the deity was a retired eflence enjoying itself, and far removed fiom any work of creation or providence *.

The other confidered deity as the intelligent principle of existence and of order in the universe, from whom all intelligence proceeds, and to whom all intelligence will return; whose power is the irresistible energy of goodness and wisdom, ever present and ever active; bellowing on man the faculty of intelligence, and the freedom of choice, that he may learn, in acting for the general good, to imitate the divine nature; and that, in refped to events independent of his will, he may acquiesce in the determinations of providence. " How great is the privilege of man," fays Antoninus, " to have it in his power to do what God will approve, and " to receive with complacency whatever God shall ordain."

In conformity with there principles, one fed recommended feclufion * Oninis enim, per fe, divum natura, necefse'ft Inmnortali avo funmma cum pace fruatur, Semota ab noflris rebus, fejunctaque longe Nam privata dolore omni, privata periclis, Ipfa fliis pollnis opibus, niliil iindiga 1noi ri, Jec bene promcritis capitur nec tangitur ira.

clufion from all the cares of family or slate. The other recom- 

mended an active part in all the concerns of our fellow-creatures, 




and the fleady exertion of a mind, benevolent, courageous, and temperate. Here the feds essentially differed, not in words, as is sometimes alledged, but in the views which they entertained of a plan for the conduct of human life and the choice of their actions.
The Epicurean was a deserter from the cause of his fellow-creatures, and might jutly be reckoned a traitor to the community of nature, of mankind, and even of his country, to which he owed his protection.

The Stoic enlisted himself, as a willing initrument in the hand of God, for the good of his fellow-creatures. For himself, the cares and attentions which this objec required, were his pleafures; and the continued exertion of a beneficent affetion, his welfare and his prosperity.

It is by no means indifferent what opinions we fiall entertain on there fubjecds. Good and evil are known or apprehended by us under a variety of denominations. And happiness or misery are fuppofed.to be constituted by the distribution of there in our lot. If the things we term good be inconsistent one with another, it is surely of consequence to the most unthinking mind to ascertain where the preference is due; and, when this point is determined, to avoid the diftradion of a doubtful choice on any particular occasion. If, on the contrary, the objeds stated under the denomination of good, when well underflood, coincide in their effects, it is rcafbnable that we trace them to this point of coincidence, and reft the projec of happiness or safety, not on any partial and exclusive 'selection ; but on the proper use and conduct of the whole.

The 
 The terms in common use under which we diftinguilh the 
CHAP . I. fubjeCs of desire and aversion, are chiefly P/eafure and Tain, Beau
_F--V- ty and Deformity, Excellence and DefeS, Virtue and Vice, Trofperity and Advetfity; or, in a form more comprehensive, and arising from the distribution of there, Happiness and Misery.
Under one or other of these titles we shall probably find every constituent of good or of evil; and, in following the track of ordinary experience or reason, arrive at a final decision of what is best for mankind, and establish a principle of estimation and choice, upon which to determine every question of right or propriety relating to the affairs of men.





S E C T I 0 N II
Pain, or Thints agreeable and dfagreeable in generalR this title will occur to be mentioned pleasures and 
 sense, of affection and paiion, of active exertion 

and conduct. 

Pleasure and pain, for the most part, are co-relative terms: Where any circumstance is pleasant, the privation of it is painful; and, conversely, where any circumstance is painful, exemption from it is pleasant. Upon this account, when we have specified the one, it will not always be necessary to mention the other.

In the actual arrangements of nature, throughout the animal kingdom, things salutary are pleasant, and things pernicious are painful. Pleasure is made an inducement to the performance of those funtions, which are required to preservation or well being; and pain is employed as a warning to avoid the occasions of deftruction or harm.

When a certain end is obtained in the use of a pleasure, it is observed that the inducement to any farther exertion in that parLr~\j ticular instance is withdrawn; and attempts to prolong or continue the gratification, as they might be pernicious, so they are attended not only with satiety, but even with disgust and pain.

As in this wife and beneficent intitution of nature, to preserve her works, there are pleasures attending all the ordinary and salutary functions of animal life, there are pains, also, which attend whatever is pernicious to the animal frame; and the final cause or purpose is evidently the fame in both; that is, by inviting to what is salutary, by deterring from what is pernicious, to excite the languid animal to what is useful; and to rouse the suffering animal to such efforts as may be effectual to remove the: occasion of harm; and, in either way, to consult his safety.

For this purpose, although the occasions of pain, like the occafions of pleafrule, may be temporary, yet, as it is neceflary that the pain should continue until the cause of harm be removed, or even that the pain fiould increase while the cause of harm is increasing, or the danger to animal life is augmented; there appears to be a sufficient reason why sufferings, -incident to the animal firame, should in many inflanices be of longer duration, and greater intensity, than the corresponding enjoyments or pleasures which arc deftiued to recommend the ordinary functions of life.

It appears, therefore, with refped to animals in general, that the purpole of nature in the distribution of fcnfation, is to provide for the safety of the individual, and the fucceflion of the firecics, at the fame time that an cflablilliment is made for cnjoy3 mentI

ment, so far as is consistent with these ends. In this diitribu- 

tion, there is a present restraint from what would be painful in 
the future; and a present direcion to what may contribute to v.w future enjoyment, as well as safety: And there is a sufficient reward for the performance of fundtions which enter into the course of a regular and well ordered life. The individual, in general, is kindly ainufed and gratified in the ac of preserving himself and continuing his species, and the gratification or amusement, in the cafe of mofl animals, is fitted to occupy a confiderable part in the duration of life.

Man is susceptible of animal pleasure and pain, in a manner which argues the purpose of nature refpeding him, to be nearly the fame as with reifect to other beings endowed with life. He also is deflined to do what is necessary for his preservation: but the mere gratifications of appetite which serve to obtain this purpose, are not fitted to occupy an equal portion of his time; and more is left, in his cafe, to the operation of principles in which he stands distinguished from other parts of the animal kingdom.
XWhen his preservation is secured, the life he preserves frill requires to be otherwise occupied. Like the other animals, he enjoys his food, the supply of his wants, and the gratification of various appetites. But no one ever thought of prolonging the gratifications of hunger, for instance, so as to pass a life of enjoyment at table, as obme animals appear to do in the use of food, at their stall or their pafiure.

If man were not too proud for such a choice, nature has not qualified him to persist in it. The pleafurcs of sense are merely occasional and temporary. They are, in their nature also, mixed and alloyed witl pain. Animals arc to be deterred B soLn 
from what is hurtful, as well as allured to what is salutary; and 

SECT. II. man himself, with all his knowledge of the end in view, muff be 'r\v ^ prompted, in the detail of his aAions, by the admonitions of pain as well as pleasure.

The feeling, which prepares the animal sense to be gratified in the supply of a want, is more or less a feeling of pain; and enjoyment is a mere relief from this feeling. Attempts to prolong the gratification beyond its natural period, bring a new fpecies of pain, in the effect of satiety. Still more, excess of any kind is producive of suffering and harm: So that this source of enjoyment is ever impure, either in refpea to the pain that precedes it, or in refpec to the difgufft and harm that may follow from the unguarded pursuit of enjoyment.

\Vhilff men, therefore, may admire the order of nature in this particular, and comply with it as an article of good sense and propriety, few, who are engaged in the specific purluits of human life, look upon the pleasures of mere sense as matters of principal regard. Moss men become comparatively indifferent to their perfonal accommodations, in proportion as they are engaged in bufiness, either private or public; or in the view of objects that firongly affect them, in behalf of their own honour and interelf, or in the cause of their family, their friend, or their country.

To the other animals, as well as to man, mere exercise is grateful; and the efforts they are led to make for the preservation of life are, on this account, in part, conifituent of their ordinary pleasures. The ends, to which their active pursuits are direcled, are fubjets of hope; and give joy in the profplcc, as well as in the attainment or use. And, although the corrcefoncling appre3 henfions, henfions of ills to be feared, may anticipate the sufferings of for- 

row, yet the system of animal life, in general, is so arranged, 




that, in the exertions required to felf-prefervation, the pleafur- w\
able prevail over the painful; and the general aspea of living nature is expressive of alacrity and joy.

The powers of reflection in the mind of man, that enable him to anticipate the future, as well as to recal the pal, qualify him to enjoy, or expose him to susser, from this quarter, in a much higher degree than any of the other animals. Hence arise the variety of his passions, hope and fear, joy and grief. The foundation of hope is the expectation of some good that is future, and therefore probably in some degree an occasion of fear also. Grief has reference to some evil endured; fear, to an evil apprehended.
Either is a painful state of the mind, in actual distress, or in anxiety and solicitude, disqualified for any present enjoyment beyond what mere hope can supply: But, with refpec to the objects, whether of hope or of fear, the molt agreeable slate of the mind is alacrity in the reasonable exertions they suggest, and in the use of means to obtain or avoid them, which providence has put in our power.

Security is, of all circumstances, the moit conducive to pleasure. Hence the value which po/.eion acquires in pafling into property, that is, in being secured: and the molt agreeable slate of the mind, in this refped, is the consciousness of a blessing of which neither chance nor caprice can deprive us. A blessing which consists alone in the chearful performance of what we are entrusted to do, and in contentment with the scene of action in which we are placed.

B ' Man, 
PART 31 Man has mutch of his employment, as well as the gratifications 

SECT. iII of sense furnifled to him by the concerns of of his animal life. In ~r", there consist that complicated object which he terms his interest; and from thence arise many of the occasions on which he is employed for himself, for his country, and his friend.

The materials, which he firives to amass for his own use, serve him also as the means of beneficence to his fellow creatures. In his intelligent or diftinaive characer, his occupations multiply and vary indefinitely; and the mere supplies of animal life are to him of less consequence, than the exertions of mind in which they engage him. In there his ingenuity and his affections are agreeably engaged in forming his designs, in recolleding his experience of the past, in conducting the present, and in preparing for the future.

It has been well observed, that every exercise of the human faculties, into which malice or fear do not enter as motives, and every exercise which is not carried to some pernicious extreme of fatigue, is in its own nature agreeable *.

" The necessity of a&ion," fays the Rambler, " is not only " demonfrable fiom the fabric of the body, but evident from "observation of the universal practice of mankind t, who, for "the preservation of health," (he should have said for pleafihre,)
" in those whose rank and wealth exempts them from the necel" fity of lucrative labour, have invented sports and diversions, 5' though not of equal use to the world with manual trades, yet of * V. Theorie des Sentimens Agrccble, e See Rambler No. 36.

"of equal fatigue to those who pracife them; and differing on- 

" ly from the drudgeily of the husbandman or manufaturer, 




C as they are a6s of choice, and therefore performed without the s~r-"painful sense of compulsion. The huntfinan rifes early, pur" sues his game through all the dangers and obftruaions of the "chace, swims rivers, and scales precipices, till he returns home ( no less larraffed than the soldier, and has perhaps incurred " sometimes as great hazard of wounds or death; yet he has no " motive to incite his ardour; he is neither fubjecd to the comn"mands of a general, nor dreads any penalties for neglect and disobedience; he has neither profit nor honour to expect from "his perils and his conquests; but toils without the hope of mu"ral or civic garlands, and must content hIimfelf with the praise ( of his tenants or companions."

" But, such is the constitution of man," continues the fame author, " that labour may. be filled its own reward; nor will any ' external incitements be requisite, if it be confidered how much " happincfs is gained, and how much misery is escaped by fre"quent and violent agitation of the body."

This author, in other parts of his work, or throughout the general firain of the whole, represents human life as a firing of iliufions, a transition from hope to hope, never from enjoyment to enjoyment: It is pleasant, therefore, to find him acknowledge a source of present enjoyment, even amidcf drudgery, toil, and dan.ger, so frequently flated by himself as contictuents of misery: It is pleasant to find him acknowledge, that, even labour is its own reward ; and, in this flep at least, lead the way to an opinion, that all the exercises of a manly, and beneficent mind, though a species of labour, may also be their own reward, and not the IcG

PART I[. less a reward to him who labours in them, that he may be a&ing CHArP. I under the influence of an aftection, also, in its own nature comSacG,. 11.
.,-'-v- placent and agreeable.

Even the vulgar are aware that to be happy, they muff be employed, or have something to do; and it is obvious to the most superficial observer; that life is agreeable chiefly to those, who, being engaged in tome juss and honourable pursuit, in any laudable profession, public trust, or employment, do not embarrass themselves with any thing beyond the discharge of their duty. In contrast with these, we may place the examples of others who are ever so intent on the future as to negleCt the present. Who {lirink from the duties of their station, under the notion of trouble, who decline any concern in the welfare of others, as an avocation from the care of their own. They would have something to do: But seem to think that their occupations flould approach the nearest that is possible to idleness. They fly from business; for it seems to be a taik. They do not confider how they may benefit others ; for, that were to neglect themselves: but they swim rivers and scale precipices, because they are at liberty to do so, and because they can afford the expence of horses and dogs.

Living natures in general are diftinguiflled by the exertions they are qualified and difiofed to make. Man, as we observed, ltands foremolt in this difliinction. His exitlence consists in a Series of actlive exertions, and he enjoys the exercise of his faculties in the conduct of affairs, and in bufnefs, no less than in what he is pleased to term anmufement and paltime.

Benevolence is an active principle, and an agreeable slate of the mind, rendering the presence and welfarc of other men an occnaron occasion of pleasure, and fitting the individual to his relation in 

fraternity of natures like his own. 1 he pleasures of society are 


S c.CT. I[.

the exercises of a social nature. They mix with the functions of animal life, and are, in reality, the principal cause of many enjoyments which are supposed to result from the gratifications of fenCe. The pleasures of the table, for instance, are more those of society than of gratified appetite. Whence it is else that the meal, when taken alone is a mere fipply of neceflity; but in company, and in the gaiety of sociable intercourse, is of so much confideration among the enjoyments of life ?

To be enployed is agreeable; but employments differ no less than sensations. The employments of a mild and benevolent asfecion are placid and happy. Those of a rancorous and malicious temper are convulsive and wretched.

Many of the objects which we endeavour to obtain in human life, like the game that is pursued by the hunter, are chiefly to be valued for the chace they occasion. But it is not, therefore, indifferent on what object we bellow our labour. As things visionary or impracticable lead to certain mortification and disappointment, so things depending on chance, or the will of other men, if conceived to be necessary, expose to like disappointment; or, under the apprehension of adverse events, are the occasions of continual anxiety, dependence, and fear.

Things that are not of themselves of any absolute value, but exist merely in being compared with what is poflefed by other men, as domin;ion, precedence, and rank, renowzn, and celebrity ; even riches and fortune, beyond a hat is neceflary to flubfiflence and well-being, engage us in pursuits that are not only precarious in the event, but in their nature ibljccts of competition, jealousy PA.-T 11. jealousy, envy and malice. The operation of parties in these purG AP. I.

CAPT.l suits are mutual impediment and mutual offence; and the Xrxj efforts of one to better himself is confidered as an act of hoftility, or carries the aspea and the insertion of malice to others.

Malice is known to be a slate of extreme suffering or pain; it operates abroad in pernicious effects, and appears on the countenance in peculiar features of deformity and horror. It has perhaps no other source in the human mind, than this unhappy choice of an objet, in which the prosperity and success of one is disappointment and detriment to another. Or if this unhappy choice be sufficient to account for malice, we are forbidden by reason to look for any other cause. It is a maxim in reafbn, that no more causes are to be assigned, than exist in nature, and are sufficient to account for the phenomena X.

We may therefore venture to assume, that malice is no where inftintive, but must have proceeded originally upon some -preconceived notion of competition, of harm to one from the welfare of another, of provocation or fear; and is therefore, for the most part, entertained in the form either of Envy, Reveine, or Yealozfy.

These are the great sources of misery to mankind. Envy is pain infliced by another's good. Revenge is pain to be removed or alleviated, only by another's suffering. And JealoufJ is pain suffered under the apprehension of what another may do or may have done: All of them susceptible of unequal degrees ; but in the slightest degree unhappy, and in the highest degree conftitu*3.%2~~~~~~~ ~~~ent * Vide Newtoni Principia, lib. 3. ab initio.

ent of extreme virulence and of anguish, to which the pretence 

and welfare of a fellow creature alone, may give occasion; and, SCAP. i SscT. I[.

from which a being, who is doomed to society, has no means of ok escape, but by removing the evil of his own disposition.

Besides the propensity of man to join the herd of his species, a disposition, which operates even with the malevolent, and is common to all the gregarious animals; the candid have, in their minds, a principle of affection, and love; a capacity of goodness by which they are disposed or qualified, in different forms, to make a common cause with their fellow-creatures: The distress of another is to them an occasion of commiseration or pity; his welfare an occasion of complacency and joy. To thefociable nature of man, the joint exertions or struggles of numbers in the fame cause together, bring into actual exertion, the highest powers of enjoyment as well as of action.

Commiseration or pity, being a participation ofdiflrefs, implies suffering, and yet is known to be agreeable; insomuch, that the humane do not wish to be relieved oftheirpain otherwise thanby the relief they can give to those they commiserate or pity. They regret the suffering of others; but enjoy their own sympathetic emotions; willingly ihed the tears of compassion, and in this feel, with the poet, that, The broadefl mirth unfeeling folly wears, Is not Jo Jfweet as virtue's very tears.

Pity is prevented, in particular circumtfances, by the prevalence of other paflions, whether indignation, resentment, or fear.
Jllndinaion hardens the heart against those who suSer for any VOL. IL. C fliagrant 
 flagrant crime; resentment against those who have given provo"

SHcAP. I. cation; and fear, though not a disposition to a& offensively, yet vrow hardens the heart against the feelings of candour or pity, more perhaps than any otherpaffion: Hence, among the evils of cowardice we may justly reckon cruelty to the vanquished, no less than inability to contend with those that refilt, or who alarm our fears.

Commiseration or pity, in the candid mind, is beflowed indifcriminately and universally on the innocent who suffers: But benevolence, in its other forms, is particular in its choice, and implies predilecion for an objeC; whether the companion with whom we are familiar, the friend we love, or the country to the %ervice of which we are devoted.

An agreeable intercourse may have place, even with persons unknown; or is easily formed, amidst the first or most general appearances of intelligence and fairness of disposition. The manners of the candid, even among strangers, constitute a mutual exchange of good offices, and in human life are an ordinary and continual source of agreeable sentiments.

In friendflip, benevolence is the engagement of choice, and renders every interest mutual to the parties concerned. The asfetion in which it consists, and the confidence it inspires, conftitute a principal source of security and pleasure.

Over and above there operations of a benevolent affection, man is qualified to entertain the fame disposition, in a form yet more comprehensive. The collective body of men in a country or nation is, to its own members, an object of the moll ardent affecion.

While While the citizen reveres the inititutions and the laws of his coun- 

try, while he rejoices in its prosperity, and laments the calamity or CH.AP LT
distress which befals it, he is often made to forget himself, and to ysacrifice his own interest or safety as an individual, to that of the community inwhich he is included. Interest is frequentlyfuppofed to be the ruling passion of mankind; yet this sacrifice of interest and of life, to the objects of public affection, is frequently made; and, under national establishments that are happily constituted, is not above the reach of ordinary men.

The general tendency of benevolence, like that of the animal propensities, is to preserve the human race, and to render man useful to his fellow creatures; but, while the selfish principles operate to the preservation of the whole, by preserving or consulting the safety of individuals apart, benevolence forms a general band of connection, and is at once a commonofburce of enjoyment and pleasure to many. It renders the participation of other men, in the favours of providence, an occasion of fatisfadion and joy.
While it teems to render the humane a servant to the distressed; the affecionate devoted to the interest of his friend and his country; it renders this fervice,and this devotion also, a principal source of enjoyment to himself: differing from the gratifications to which any mere animal propensity is competent, in being exempt from satiety, and in being fitted, by occupying indefinite portions of time, to fill up the duration of human life, and to become not only the spring of particular and occasional aCtion, but the source and constituent of felicity to those who aCt. So much that, in the course of a sociable and beneficent life, and in the offices of private friendship, or of public fRation, a person may occupy with satisfaction every moment that can be spared from the necessities of his own condition.

C z But, PARtT. II. Butt over and above the pleasurable or painful fate of our feeTl CRAP.I.

S . ings, which arise from the proper or improper discharge of our Y~ ~animal functions; from the purpose to which we employ our faculties, and the manner in which we are affected towards our fellow-creatures; these very circumstances become, by refleion, the source of additional enjoyment or fiiffering. Confcioufilefs of propriety, in the conduct of our natural propensities; attainments of knowledge, or intelleEtual ability; integrity, can.dour, and good-will to our fellow-creatures, are sources of the purest fatisfacóion and pleasure. The confcioufilefs of brutality, folly, cowardice, malice, or guilt, on the contrary, is constituent of extreme suffering, in the feelings of flame, and remorse.

It is supremely agreeable to perceive, in the works of nature.

the marks or expreflions of wisdom and goodness, on which we may rely for the happy difpoG1l of all things: And. we may conclude, from the whole of these particulars, that the preferable pleasures of human life consist in sobriety, benignity of temper, or good will to mankind, and beneficent actions, with a perfect confidence in the ,wisdom and goodness of Providence.

The contemplation of beauty and excellence, in whatever subje&, is matter of delight, and forms an agreeable state of the mind.
The obtrusion of ugliness or defect is of a contrary nature : And there are sources of enjoyment and futffering peculiar to man. He alone, among the living natures known to us, appears sensible to the diflinctions of beauty and deformity, of excellence or dcfccA; and he alone, for ought we know, apprehends any gradation of worth in the scale of being. He alone applies the canons of excellence and dcfcd, of merit and demerit, to hiinflf, and to his fcllow-crcaturcs ; finding a most agreeable iate of his mind in the the consciousness of integrity and justice, or the most painful 

and diftrefling reflections in the consciousness of wickedness, de- 

basement, and folly. Complacency and peace of conscience are ^-v expressions of the one; {hame, remorse, and despair, are exprefsions of the other.

The fool may enjoy his folly, and the madman may enjoy his frenzy; but no one will congratulate the persons who are so asfeted with pleasure. The enjoyments of human nature require the warrants of reason and truth; and no person, in his senses,.
can be reconciled to a state, in which he knows his own character to be marked with deformity, meanness, or vice, nor think that he can be truly happy, in the absence of every good quality which can be required to adorn or perfect his nature.

The foundations of a pleasure, so essential to ha-ppiness, merit a separate consideration in the following fedtions.

s'T CnN



S E .C T I 0 III.

Of Beauty and Deformity, Excellence and Defeft.

 T
IN the rational nature of man, there are principles which do not SECT. III. terminate merely in sensibility to pleasure and pain, or in mere active exertions; but consist in a kind of censorial infpedion, over the general tenor of enjoyments and actions; serving to diflinguifh, among pleasures, the elegant and beautiful from the inelegant and deformed; and, among specimens of existence, the persec or excellent, from the defe6ive or imperfect. Such is the discriminating power of intelligence, by which the qualities of things are estimated; by which unequal measures of worth are conceived, and the gradations of excellence assigned in the scale of being.

In the exercise ofthefe reflex and censorial powers, there is great enjoyment and suffering, according as the objects of them are happily or miserably distributed to ourselves or others. Dif git?, indignation, remorse, and fl/ame, are among the pains of which which they render us susceptible; delight, eJfeem, approbation, 

confidence, love, and peace of mind and ofconscience, are among their 



gratifications, or happy effeas. St.

In the discernment of external obje&ts, there arises a Sentiment, which may be expressed in terms of praise or blamre, of eftimation or contempt; and which frequently conflitutes, or sensibly modifies, the general affection of the mind, in respect to the diftinCion of good and evil; for, as good is pleasant, so, also in many instances, is it estimable: As evil is painful, so also is it, in many instances, vile and contemptible.

Of these sentiments, the specific occasions or objets are termed beauty and deformity, excellence and defet.

To perceive beauty or excellence, is to admire or efteemn: And, least there expreflions, which are applicable to fubjecs of the highest nature, flould appear too strong, when applied to matters of inferior consideration, in which some degree of beauty neverthelefs may be admitted; let it be remembered, that it is the fpecies of sentiment, not any measure of the emotion, or degree of merit in its objec, which we are now about to confider.

Admiration and esteem, like benevolence and love, are agreeable sentiments; so much, that, to admire or elteem and to be pleased with an objec, are expressions often mutually fubflituted one for the other.

We are pleated with beauty and excellence; we are displeased with deformity and defect: But all that pleases is not beautiful or excellent; nor all that displeases, deformed or defective. We know 
 know not, however, frequently, how otherwise to express the ,STcT. . pleasure we take in any fubjedl, than by pronouncing it excellent \^Y\^ or beautiful; nor how to express the displeasure we feel, otherwise than by pronouncing the cause of it, ugly or defective. The wonderful organ of human language does not always serve the purpose of discrimination, even where it is of the mofi real importance to state the fubjeas of consideration apart.

We may, nevertheless, endeavour, in this place, to confider beauty and excellence, as distinguishable from other causes of pleasure, by the specific accompanyment of esteem or preference, to which, even if no one should admire, we conceive the object entitled; and to confider deformity and defed as diftinguiflhable fromothercaufes of painby a peculiar fentimentof disapprobation or contempt; of which we conceive them to be proper objects, even if the world should not perceive the defec or the deformity.

These specific Sentiments, differing either in refped to the occafion on which they arise, or the degrees of intensity with which they are felt, have, in every language, a variety of appellations or names. In our language, approbation and diaipprobation, efleem or admiration, opposed to indifference, di/ruft, or contempt, make a part of the terms by which we express them.

The ingenious author of some Essays on the Nature and Principles of Taste, has observed, that material fubjets give fenfation and perception of reality; but no emotion or sentiment of beauty or deformity, except so far as they are afrociated with some object of affccion, whether character or disposition of mind; chcarfulnefs or melancholy, wisdom, goodness, or power.

2 If ' Mr Alif£,n, If a subjed please, in consequence of its being associated with 
PART H.



some objet of esteem, the delight it affords is properly enough 
classed with the species of sentiment which we are now confider- _v ing; but if it be associated only with utility, safety, or joy, it may please in consequence of this association: But the compound so made up is not any more a subjed of admiration or esteem, than is the pleasurable circumstance by which it is recommended.

Attempts have been made to resolve this principle ofefteem or admiration into tome of the other principles or forms of proceeding, equally familiar in the operations of the human mind; and consequently, to account for the use of there terms, without the necessity of supposing that there is in nature any diftin&ion of excellence, or in us any diftindive faculty by which it is known.
And it should follow, from any theory of this fort, that, in reality, we mistake for esteem some other operation or affecion of mind: but, in such fubflitutions of one species of affection for another, it does not appear that any advantage is gained. We neither can resolve the sentiment of admiration or esteem into any thing better known than itself, nor the good qualities of mind, into any thing that, being more in our power, may hlew us a readier way to the improvement of our nature.

We fiall, therefore, be contented with giving to the sentiments which beauty or excellence occasions, some one of their ordinary names of preference, whether delight, approbation, or esteem.
The fubjets of beauty and excellence thermfclves, in the mean D time, 
PART. Ir. time, though thus agreeing in the class of Sentiments to which sHer. 11. they give occasion, seem to be disjoined in nature; or by us, at leait, to be conceived apart. Beauty is Sometimes said to cover defects; and excellent qualities are said to be concealed under apparent deformities. Beauty frequently strikes, from the firfi and more obvious aspeCt of things; excellence is to be colleced by observation of their eflential qualities. Every person, that enters a room, preSents at once the beauty of which he is poifefled. His excellence, in the mean time, or essential good qualities, are to be known only upon farther acquaintance. These epithets, however, in proportion as the fubjeas of them come to be underflood, gradually approach in their applications, and seem at last to unite in the fame thing. When apparent beauty is found to conceal defecs, it ceases to be admired, or even incurs contempt.
When apparent deformities are found to conceal eflential good qualities, we not only cease to contemn, but, from a principle of retributive justice, are the more inclined in the sequel to admire that we at first overlooked the value of our object, whether person or thing: So that the progress of intelligence in the discernment of excellence and beauty seems to terminate in a point, which unites these epithets into one general ground of preserence; and which, in that cafe, we shall perhaps be more inclined to express in the terms of perfection and excellence, than in that of elegance or beauty, which frill carry a reference to firit and external appearances.

In the system of nature, there is a beauty that belongs to the mechanical, to the - vegetable, the animal, and intelledual kingdoms.

In the mechanical kingdom, the principal, if not the Colc conltituent ftituent of beauty, as the Tere Busier has well observed, is order; 
PART IL



or, as the fame author farther explains this term, the apt combina- 
tion of parts, whetherJimultaneous or /fuccejive, for the attainment '^vof a beneficent purpose.

Mere matter, though perceivable by sense, is in itself indifferent to any affeAion of the mind, except so far as some objec of afetion is associated with it. With an apt combination of parts for a beneficent purpose, are associated the supreme objects of admiration, love, and refped; viz. vwidom, goodness, and power.
The afrociation is not casual, or derived from mere analogy or likeness, but fromthe essential and inseparable relation of cause and effet.

The system of nature is sublime in refpea to the might of its Author. It is beautiful, with respect to the regular fitness of parts for the attainment of their ends, and in refpec to the beneficent purpose which they are fitted to serve. The latter circumstance, above all, is efiential to their beauty.

The fruits of continual exertion, without the regularity that proceeds from a well-concerted design, as in the meaningless activity of children and restless animals, overturning and displacing whatever comes in their way, produces disorder, confusion, and extreme deformity: The regular tradesman shudders at their being admitted into his work-ihop.

A design at the fame time may be perceptible; but, ifdirecled by folly or malice, it is an objec of difgufl or of reprobation, not of admiration or cileem. The figures of birds, beasts, cones, or pyramids, cut out of an evergreen, in the antiquated garden, have D 2 mark marks of design; but frivolous, and contemptible. The piece of CHUA. I.
SE.CT. Ill latuary, of which we are told, in the bull of Phalaris, or in the wr- Apiga or spouse of Nubis, mayhave beenexquifite inthe workmanflip; but the design washideous orcruel: And, as the mere indication of mind is. ambiguous, the indication of perfidy and malice is horrid; beneficence alone, direded by wisdom, is supremely beautiful.

In the material system of nature, the beneficent purpose of its Author is manifest in the accommodations provided for beings diflinguifhed by their organization, or beings endowed with life.
These, in our terrestrial world, are plants, animals, and men.
The elements are disposed to promote the vegetation of plants; and these to furnish their subsistence and place of abode to animals; and the whole to furnish the materials of supply, and the subjeds of thought and contemplation to the living and intelligent nature of man.

In the living kingdom of animals, the fame beneficent purpose, while it extends to the general fyflem, partly terminates also in the animal himself. He is made that he may be gratified, as well as that he may gratify others; and both are essential to the excellence and beauty of his frame: For this his organization is admired, and the prosperous tfate of that organization is so much valued, under the denomination of health.

With refpecA to man, also, the beneficent purpose of nature, so far as we are yet qualified to discern it, terminates in himself; not in the individual confidered apart, but in the subserviency of many to the common cause of the whole. The individual is made that he maybe gratified; but his chief gratification is made to to consist in beneficence, or a participation in the welfare of man- 
PART :iT.
kind. He is an acive power in nature, which cannot suspend CSAc. Ir its exertions, without incurring a state of weariness, suffering, uv./J
and disgust. He is a beneficent power in nature, to whom benevolence is pleasure, malevolence is pain; and who cannot willingly forsake the paths of beneficence, without incurring the chastisement of remorse. His beauty and excellence is a participation, however faintly obtained, of that wisdom and goodness which constitute the splendor and majesty of the works of God.

To perceive beauty, in any material fubje&, is to perceive indications of wisdom and goodness; and, if we are asked, why wisdom and goodness flould be admired ? we may answer, For a reason like to that for which pleasure is coveted; because in itself defireable and good. While other things are desired or esteemed on account of the pleasure they give, or the excellence they constitute, pleasure and excellence are themselves desired or efReemed, on their own account.

In the scale of natures susceptible of excellence or perfection intelligence is supreme, and wisdom and goodness are the fupreme perfections of intelligent being. Their presence, when suggested by the order of nature, awakening the sentiments of adniration, are termed beautiful; but, in the mind itself to which they belong, are more properly termed its excellence, perfection, or merit. Folly and malice, on the other hand, may, in a figurative stile, be termed the deformities of mind; but are more properly referred to the predicaments of defect, guilt, and demerit.

From the whole, there is rcafon to believe, that beauty whienc real 
 real may be' resolved into excellence and, that deformity may be C HAP. I resolved into defect; the one an essential diftincion of good, and 8Ec,. III.

.-y--~ the other of evil: That both, or either, can have existence in mind alone; so that, in this queflion, man is doubly interested: He is concerned in the existence of excellence or beauty, as presenting him with an agreeable object of contemplation and love; but more especially as constituting an admirable slate or condition of nature, attainable by himself.

In the human figure, there is one beauty of form in the ftructure of its organs, or in the found state or configuration of the whole person, indicating exquisite design, wisdom, and goodness, of the Maker.

There is another beauty, consisting in the aspea and exprefsion of the mind, that occupies and actuates this created frame, indicating good sense, equanimity, and benevolence of temper.

In both, it is the beauty of mind that firikes through the form of a work, or the asped of a person: The wisdom and goodness of the Creator, in the one; or the good meaning and temper of his creature, in the other.

Where one of these beauties exists, in any degree, the other may be sensibly wanting. Thus, we are familiar with instances, in which personal defecs are compensated with a favourable expreflion and benevolence of asped; or inflances in which natural advantages are deformed by an aipedt of vanity, malice, or folly.

The antient artifls, in the fcaturcs of Medura, though a Fury, a feigned feigned to themselves the most perfect form; or supposed her 

countenance to be cast in the most exquisite mold of natural beau- SCH. IIr ty; but of an aspeC, derived from the temper within, so terrific and hideous, as to appal the most daring, and even to turn those on whom the looked into stone.

Mind, we have reason to believe, predominates in nature; so that, in a comparative survey of all that exists, whatever is not mind would be as nothing.

It is heat, we are told, that gives spring and agitation to the mechanical world. Remove this ingredient, and all matter would freeze into one solid mass, and become the formless repository of inertia, darkness, and death.

In the fame manner, and with still greater confidence, may we not fay, it is mind that strikes out from the forms of body, in the lovely aspeCts of excellence and beauty ? And it is the diversity of operating minds, in such forms of matter, that gives the diftinction of beauty and deformity to fubjecs otherwise, in their own nature, indifferent.

What were millions, and myriads of millions, of corpuscular particles afiembled in the body of the fun, without the benignant power that renders him the source of heat and of light to furrounding worlds ? What were these worlds without the beneficent impulse that gives them motion, and retains them in their orbits, at a proper diltance from the source of light and of heat ? And what could avail their motions, without this combination of elements on their globes, that fit them for the rcfidence of living natures ?

"The PIARr II. The fame thing, multiplied through innumerable systems, owes 

SECT. IIL its magnificence to the greatness of might and of thought, that J'x. adts in the formation and conduct of such boundless scenes of existence.

The diftinaion of excellence and defecr, so obvious to man in the contemplation of his own nature, and fb easily transferred by association to any of his works or external circumstances, is the radical principle of elevation or progreflion in the human mind, to which there is ever presented, as an object ofdefire, Something higher and better than is poffeIfed at present. This principle, in all its forms, proceeds upon some pre-conceived notion of absolute or comparative excellence, in refped to which the mind is never disposed to acquiesce in its present attainment. Birth, fortune, power, and other constituents of rank, are the circumstances in which the vulgar of every condition strive to excel one another. The dwelling, the furniture, the equipage, and the table of the rich, flatter his vanity more than his sense of pleasure; and stir the emulation more than the appetite of those who admire his condition.

Whoever would govern mankind, if he can command their conception of what is excellent, or lead them to associate honour with the task he wouldhave them to perform, will find no farther difficulty, in procuring from them every sacrifice of pleasure, interest, or safety. This, as we have formerly observed, is the honest man's integrity, and the gentleman's honour, which neither will forego to preserve his fortune or his life. It is the soldier's glory, which renders danger and hardflip agreeable; it is the martyr's crown, which renders extreme suffering, and the profpcCt of death, an occasion of triumph and joy.

On On a subjea of so great importance, and offuch powerful 




effed1s in human life, it behoves us to examine our opinions, and SCCT. III
to be well founded in the conceptions, to which we thus furren- A_
der and deliver up all the other powers of our nature. If there be an excellence or beauty, specific to man, we may presume that, in the contemplation and pofTefiion of it, his supreme good, the most agreeable slate of his nature, and the happiest course of his life is likely to consist.


Of Virtue and Vice.

cHPART W Hen, in the manner of last feAion, we have resolved the excellence and beauty of this created frame into the wisdom and _wrv goodness of God; and return from this contemplation of nature to confider, what is the specific excellence of man; we must recognize in him at once a constitution or form received from his Maker, and together with the gifts of intelligence and free will, a personage and character to be ascribed to himself. In refpea to either, he is distinguished in nothing so much as in this power and disposition to perceive. with delight, an intelligent and beneficent Author in the system of things around him. Were he thus to judge of any human production, his perception of beauty in the work would argue some participation in the genius of its Author. May we not therefore, conceive, that his admiration of what appears in the universe of God, implies some qualification to participate in the godlike principles of beneficence and wisdom. In this system, of which he is a part, the measures of providence are taken, and the design is carried into execution; he too is defiined to ad; But when we confider the magnitude of 1 this this system, and in how many ways, of which he cannot trace 

any tendency to the purpose of universal good, he himself may be affected, his concurrenceinthe design is likely to be merely passive, or rv sofar only as to make him bear with complacency what the general order requires, rather than to call upon him for any ative exertiondireaed to apurpofe so far extended beyond his comprehension.

Even when we confider the world of men and animals, how far extended beyond the reach of any aAive interposition of the individual for its general good, we muff suppose that the character of goodness, applicable to man, in refpet to this objed also, consists in pious resignation to the will of God; or, at most in perfect good will to mankind, in every instance in which the active power of an individual can apply. Fortunately for him, when heads in particular instances, for his friend, his neighbour, his country, or for any of the human race, there occurs, an occafion to praAife and to promote that mutual affection, fidelity, justice, and humanity, which in faA are a common blessing to mankind; insomuch, that for him to adopt and to communicate the effect of these characters, is to aca for the good of his fellow-creatures; and, so far he becomes an able and a willingn iftrument in the hand of God for the beneficent ends of his providence.

The meritof this character, however, is more a subjeA of confcioufnefs, orintuitive judgement, than ofdifculfionor reasoning; and theywho are, in common life, most decided in their choice of good acions, proceed upon the ground of their affections and sentiments, more than upon any information derived by investigation or research. In attempts at science, however, we muff descend to particulars, and endeavour to collect, by induction from the E 2 phenomena 
phenomena of that nature we are confidering, what may be its 
CHAP.I. destination, and what the standard by which its worth is to be ^\,\i eefimated.

Among subjects organized, we have already observed that man is diftinguifled as living and active; among the living and aAive, he is distinguished as intelligent; or endowed with powers of difcernment, apprised of the distinction of good and evil, and invested with freedom of choice. Among the gregarious animals, he is diftinguiflled as associating and political, and conscious of his flation as a member in the community of his fellow creatures. The order of nature itfelfis in a certain degree manifest to him; he is fitted to hold communication with its Author, to apprehend his will, and to become a willing instrument in promoting the ends of his government.

In tfriving to conceive the destination offuch a being, we may with great confidence rejea the idea of its being limited to the preservation of mere animal life, or even, as Epicurus assumed, to the, poffefiion of mere pleasing thoughts or sensations of any fort.
There is an adive charaAcr to be fu stained, and a part to be filled up; firft,inthecommunityof men,who are partners in thejointcaufe of humanity andjuftice. There is a world ofitill and living nature, in the midst of which this active being must acquit hinmfelf, with sensibility in refiped to some, and with circumspection and care refpeócing the whole. There is a commanding order of things, to which he must accommodate himself, which he is required to study, and concerned to know; and to which, even where it exceeds his comprehension, he must with fubmillion surrender his will.

To fill up such a part are requiredfgill, diccernment, or knowledge, fit dlif/fitio, application, and foce: Hence the four cardinal dinal virtues, celebrated in the schools of philosophy, Wrdom, 

Justice, Temperance, and Fortitude. 




Wisdom is the virtue of intelligence, or. a just discernment of the considerations on which we are to rely for happiness, and the .undisturbed possession of the faculties which are given for the government, of life. Man, in his character of intelligent being, is active in .a form, and to an extent, greatly superior to any of the other animals. Every quality of his nature is an energy, not a quiescent mode of exiflence; and, whatever be the limits within which he is destined to exert his faculties, within the fame limits, and in the fame form of active exertion, are to be found his excellencies and defeCts, his enjoyments and iufferings.

The lot of man is not, like that of the other animals, at once co.mpletely. furnihed by nature; he is invested with powers, and left toemploy them for his own advantage, or that of his fellowcreatures. He merits the praise of wisdom, or he incurs the imputation.of folly, according to the use which he makes of his intelligent faculties; and in this, perhaps, gives the first and most firiking specimen of the excellence or defect, of which he is susceptible. His powers of conception, when well employed, lay the foundations of wisdom; when misapplied or neglected, lay the foundations of folly; and so far present him to his fellowcreatures, as an object either of efleem and respeCt, or of contempt and derision.

With the exception of a few determinate inflintis,fuch as direct him on particular occafionsto themeans offelfprefervation,or fich as connet, the individual with his kind, man, we have observed, is left to follow the dictatcs of his own obfcrvation, discernment and experience.

PART 11. experience. In nonage or infancy, indeed, he is committed to the SECAT. lI discretion of his parent; but, in the more advanced periods of rYv / life, he is committed to his own. His instincts and appetites are feldomtohim,as they are to the other animals, determinate guides in the application of means to the attainment of his end, or seldom secure him inthe proper choice and measure of his gratifications.
When urged by hunger, though in the midst of plenty, if the fruit or species of food presented to him be new or untried, he imuft proceed with caution in the use of it, and examine well, before he ventures to taste; much more before he ventures to feed on viands unknown, though of the fairest appearance.

Although his gratifications, like those of the other animals, when the purpose of nature is served, frequently determine or pall on the sense; and satiety, even in his cafe, might be fufficient to guard him against excess; yet he is, by an error of his imagination, frequently led to exceed even these limits, and to seek for pleasure, where it is not any longer to be found, in the objec of afatiated appetite. In him,therefore, the defeAs of mitninsC
mufft befupplied by reflection; and, heis tobe taught, by experience and observation alone, to distinguish the real sources of permanent happiness.

As to man, therefore, the errors of his own imagination, as well asthedefecs of hisintind, are occasions of evil, they are tobefupplied orcorreócedbytheproper use of his intelligent powers. And it may be aflred, Are we to confider the intelligence of man as a mere subftitute forthecorreanefs of choice to which the other animals are formed by nature,and to estimate its value, by its apparentdefRination to do for him what inftinC, and the want of imagination, have done for the brutes ? This were to suppose him destined to attain, tain, by a tedious and uncertain process, that of which other ani- 
PART. Ir.
mals are at once possessed by the suggestion of a specific propenfi- SCEHC
ty The bee,' without any other diretion than this, con- ,' '
struts his cell upon a model which the most perfect science of mechanism cannot improve; and posseses that flill, from the first, which in the human species, many ages and successive trials are required to obtain.

Animals, in general, whatever be their diftination, are enabled to fulfil it at once. They acquiesce in their state, or enjoy its advantages, without any sense of its wants or defects. Man, at his outset, beingworfe provided thanany other animal, is accordingly not disposed to acquiesce in his primary slate. The wants or defeces of his first condition seem, in the exercise of his faculties, to press him with all the force of necessity; but, after his first wants or defects are supplied, fancy succeeds to necessity; and, whatever supply he may have gained, or accommodation provided for himself, he is Rill urged with a desire of somewhat beyond the present attainment, and is as little disposed to acquiesce in the highest, as in the lowest slate of his animal accommodation. The spur of impatience to better himself, which, in his rudest condition appears necessary to his preservation, continued on to his slate of highest attainment, seems to form in him a principle of progrefflon, of indefinite or endless extent. He is made intelligent, not merely that he may be able to procure a supply to his animal wants, but his animal wants appear to be multiplied, and his fancy rendered insatiable, that he may find an early scope for the exercise of his intellectual powers, and, by the indefinite pursuit of their ends, make that progress in knowledge, which constitutes so essential a part in the excellence or persection, of which his mind is susceptible.

We- may thus collect the specific excellence of any nature, from S CAP.I its capacity, and from the direction of its progress; and that of wegy^ man, in particular, from his capacity of receiving infdrmation, of improving in discernment and penetration, and from the progress he is qualified to make in these particulars. In him, tihemere continuance of life is a course of observation, and repeated' occasion, on which to exercise those faculties of the mind, which improve in being employed.

Man becomes powerful in the fyflem of nature, in proportion as he becomes knowing or wife: And the species, in this particular, seems well apprised of the standard by which to ascertain its own merits or defects. Signal ability and underfianding are admired, comparative incapacity, and dulness are despised. And there is, therefore, in refped to him no difficulty in collecting the grounds of efeem or contempt, whether we confider a priori what is suited to his destination, or attend to the reception which his qualities meet with in the estimation of his kind.

Philosophers have thought, that every subjec of commendation, to which human nature is competent; every virtue and every constituent of happiness, might be comprised under the title of wi/dom, or the excellence of intelligent being; that, on the contrary every subjeA of dispraise or contempt, every vice and every charaRter of misery, might be comprised under the title of Jolly: But, it is not neceflary, nor perhaps even expedient, thus to force the attributes of human nature, under single appellations, however comprehensive or general. Although it is both wife and profitable to love our fellow creatures, we can Ino more become friend, in the mere fiarch of wifdcom, than we can in search of our interest. Our conflitution -2^~~~~~ in~mufi must have the ingredient ol nformed may improve upon this principle of nature, and 
learn to direct it aright. \

" There are good qualities," fays the Duke de la Rochefoucault, " which degenerate into faults when they are natural, and " others which are never perfect when they are acquired. It is " necessary, for instance, that we should become by reflection " sparing of our money and of our confidence; on the contrary, we should by nature be furnished with benevolence and va" lour." The understanding at the outset has its perfctdion to acquire; the heart is good by the inspiration of nature.

But, in whatever terms we propose to express the standard of estimation relative to man whether wzvdorn, virtue, or goodness of heart, there are various conditions required to the performance of his part, and which muff occur in every statement of qualities, that constitute the specific excellence or perfection of his nature. He is formed for society, and is excellent in the degree in which he possesses the qualifications of an associate and a friend. He is excellent, in the degree in which he loves his fellow creatures; he is defective, in the degree in which he hates them, or is indifferent to their welfare. Benevolence, therefore, is a principal excellence of human nature; and malice an article of extreme vileness or defec. These are the great sources of merit and demerit; of justice and beneficence, on the one hand; of wrong, iniquity, and cruelty, on the other ; a diifintion, to the reality of which mankind in all ages have borne the strongest teflimony: To which, on the one band, they have paid the highest tribute of cfteem and of love ; and, on which, on the other, they have poured forth the highest micafures of contempt and deteflation.

VoL. II. F V'ith 
PART Il. " With refpeA to Temperance, it is a beautiful part, we may again SoCT. TV&. 5i've, in the ceconomy of animal life, that things pernicious are ^Ye painful, and things salutary are pleasant; that even things falutary and pleasant, in the proper use of them become painful, in the abuse, or when carried to excess. Under this constitution of nature, the mere animals are safely directed through life; but man's animal frame is either originally less perfect in this refpedt, or is disturbed by the operations of a fancy, which lead him to look for enjoyments beyond the foundations which nature has laid.

By nature, the gratifications of appetite are occasional, and do not occupy any improper portion of time; but the voluptuary conceives them as a source of continued enjoyment: And fenfuality is a distemper of the imagination, not a disorder in the ballance which nature has established between the animal and the rational part of man's constitution. The voluptuary does notenjoy more than the abstemious ; but he employs more of his time in vain attempts to restore a satiated appetite, and to render that continual, which nature has ordained to be occasional and temporary, As great inequalities of character and estimation result fromn the different degrees in which men avoid the habits of debauchery on the one hand, or gain the habits of a just application to the better pursuits of a rational nature, on the other ; there is, in this particular, much room for wisdom, and much danger from folly. In this, as in many other instances, man is leftined by nature to govern himself, or to make the best of materials which become pernicious, if he abuse or neglect them; and which, to tccure the proper use of them, require his utmost attention andc care.

virtue, among the aCive'qualifications of man, may be referred to the title of application; for the pursuit, which the tenr perate withholds from the mere objecAs of animal gratification W
may be applied to the better and more worthy objects of human life, Sensuality, indeed, for the moss part, is selfish and more solicituois about the gratifications of appetite, than about the concerns of other men; and temperance being an exemption, at least from this principle of felfifhnefs, lays open the mind of man to those incitements of benevolence and candour, from which the difinterefted are prepared to aa. Temperance, therefore, in this point of vi,. . lft, may be reckoned among the primary excellencies of human nature; intemperance or sensuality may be reckoned among its most real defects.

With refped to Fortitude, the fourth in the enumeration of cardinal virtues, we may observe that, in every active nature, besides the disposition, the application, and the measure of ikill, in refped to which such natures may be unequally estimated, there is a measure of force also required to support their adive exertions, and a measure of weakness sufficient to frustrate the purpose of nature, or to betray the confidence that may be placed in the highest measures offkill and of good disposition.

Force of mind has a peculiar reference to the tfate of man, to the difficulties, hardships, and dangers, in the midst of which he is delfined to ad. In the support of what is honourable andjuft, he has sometimes occasion to susser what is inconvenient or painful to his animal frame. In elpoufing the cause of the j.ust, he may incur the animoGty and opposition of the wicked.

F 2 In FART iI. In performing the offices of beneficence to others, he may en
counter with hardihip or danger to himself.

But this circumstance, which seems to reitrain or limit his activity, serves rather to whet his spirit, and increase his ardour in the performance of worthy ascions. The difficulty he surmounts becomes an evidence of the disposition which he approves, and actually endears the object for whose fake he exposes himself. Hence it is, that ingenuous minds are confirmed in the love of virtue, in proportion as it becomes a principle of elevation, of heroism, or magnanimity. These, it is scarcely necefTary to observe, are primary topics of praise, and principal excellencies of human nature, while pufilanimity and cowardice are amongst the lowest subjeds of contempt.

From these particulars, then, we may colle: that the excellence of a man includes the following particulars: WYifdom, or skill to chufe, and to accomplish what he ought to attempt; a benevolent afie7ion, which wisdom is fitted to direc; an application of mind, which inferior considerations cannot divert from its purpose; and a force, which opposition, difficulty, or danger, cannot difinay. And, as the excellent man is wife, beneficent, courageous, and temperate; the defective, on the contrary, is foolish, malicious, cowardly, and sensual. The wife chufe, among their ends, what is best; among the means they employ, what is molt effectual.
The benevolent are committed to theirbefi affedlions; thecourageous are exempted firom the ftffering and the weaknes of fear; the temperate reserve their faculties, and their time, for the best and worthieff occupations of their nature ; and, if from this flatement of the excellence to which human nature is competent, we look back to what has been already obflrved on the illbjec ofpleafure and and pain, we Ihall have reason to conclude, that the Author of 
PART 1L
nature has not only made that most agreeable which is most fa- cATP. I.
lutary; but that more especially conflituent of happiness, which, -y in the estimate of human qualities, is also most excellent, or most highly esteemed.

To be conscious of excellence, from the very nature of approbation and esteem, is a state of enjoyment; and, to be conscious ofvilenefs or defecS, a state of suffering: Or, if these sentiments could be suppressed, still, the constituents of man's specific excellence, T/Iifdom, i7zt/ice, Temperance, and Fortitude, apart from any reflections they may bring, are in themselves, either an exemption from pain, or an acceflion ofpleafure. And providence seems to intend, that this distinCtion, which is the source of elevation, integrity, and goodness, in the mind of man, should be the guide, by which he is most securely led to the highest enjoyments, to which his nature is competent. The excellence and beauty he admires may become an attribute of his own mind; and, whether in reflection or acdion, constitute the most agreeable state of his nature.

If we thus figure to ourselves an aCive intelligent being in the best state of which he is susceptible; this, in refpec to him is to be virtuous. Or, if we lhould be disposed to confider even the excellent mind, in relpedt to its external relations and effeds rather than in refped to its own constitution, we may observe, that the wife, the courageous, the temperate, and the benevolent, are of all others most likely to stand well-affecedl to their fellow-creatures, to the universe, and to the Creator of the world; that none are so likely to recognize the providence and moral government of God, or to fettle religion itself on its best foundations of integrity 
 grityand goodness. But before we proceed to slate the conclusion of 
this argument, in any general exprefiion of the supreme good to W>^v^ which human nature is competent, it is proper to take into our account also, what may occur of prosperity, or of thofeexternal advantages in which the gifts of fortune consist.rosperity and Adversity, or the Gifts and rivations of Fortune, 0o this title may be referred health, Jlrength, birth, riches, and 
PART. Ii.
i- 

tuation or rank in society. The possession of them is coveted, 
and the privation is shunned, for reasons peculiar to each.

Health is to the animal frame, what wisdom and goodness are to the intellecual nature of man, its found and perfect slate.
Strpenth is also the measure of animal power, in surmounting difficulties, and performing the labours that require it. Birth constitutes rank, apart from any consideration of fortune or perfonal qualities. Riches consist in the store which is provided for the supply of animal wants, accommodation, or ornament.

The reasons for which these advantages are severally coveted are extremely ob l'ous. Health is an exemption from the susserings incident to difletfe; and it is a fitness of the living frame for 
 for all its adive exertions. It enhances the value of life, as im
CHAP.. plying all the principles of life in their state of greatest ad~v">>. vantage. This blessing, however positive as it may appear to be, is most sensibly felt in the privation of. it. Ill health and difease greatly increase the difficulties which patience and fortitude have to encounter, and tend to weaken or disqualify the mind for the practice of these virtues.

Strength of body is in some measure an appurtenance of health.

It is unequal in the make of different persons ; but is most entire in any given confcitution, in the most prosperous state of the animal functions. So far as the constituents of wealth are necessary to the preservation of animal life, their value is evidently commenfurate to that of life itself: But it is difficult to draw the line of separation betwixt convenience and absolute necessity, or between articles of convenience and those of mere decorum and fancy. There is a gratification proposed in the use of all or any of them separately, which gives rife to a hasty presumption that men are happy in proportion as they have accummulated the means of such gratifications. The rich can purchase the services of the poor, obtain their attendance and refpeA; and by these circumltances seem to rank in a superior station. Birth is attended with similar advantages; and, although it may have originated in the riches, as well as some heroic diftindion of ancestors, at some distant period, is nevertheless by a wonderful caprice in the imaginations of men, reckoned the more illustrious the farther back that its source, or the original merit from which it is derived is retired fiom the fight.

The possession or privation of these advantages depend upon circumstances which mankind cannot command, nor even enuI nlaerate: merate: They are therefore, independent of the human will. They 

form the occasions on which a person may adopt a proper or im- 




proper conduct; and for this he is accountable, although he is no ways accountable for the event that may follow fi-om his best endeavours. Happily for mankind, in this distribution of their trust, it is observed, even to a proverb, that they are happy or miferable, not in proportion to the measure in which they possess or are deprived of external advantages, but in proportion to the temper of their own minds, the conduct which they themselves have adopted, and the use which they make of the means with which they are furnished by providence.

To the person who abuses his health, it is no advantage ; because he has taken occasion from it to. give scope to his folly or his vice. And if it has encouraged or supported him in the practice of either, although to another it might be the occasion of good, to him it is at least the occasion of evil. To preserve, under the disadvantage of ill health, equanimity and a temper undisturbed; to flbmit with chearfulnefs to the restraints which disease. may impose, serves to disarm this enemy, or render his pretence an occasion of good to the person who can thus acquit himself properly.

The effeds of disease in different persons are no doubt unequal; and in some inflances, whether owing to comparative weakness of mind, or intensity of suffering, it is no doubt sufficient to deprive animal life of its value: But this is rarely the lot or condition of man; nor is it that, against which a person, who would avoid the evils of human life, is most concerned to be on his guard. " You " are afraid officknefs, poverty, and death," fays Epicetus; " but, "if you had been afraid of fear itself, you would have flewn yourse]f better apprised of your real enemy." Difcafe of the G mind 
 mind is more to be dreaded than that of the body: For one that 

is affliced with a gangrene of the flefl, thousands incur the ganLlv\^ grene of envy and malice, or are bloated with vanity and folly.

Bodily strength, as well as health may be abused; and, to those who confider it as an article of vanity, is for the most part an occafion of brutality and extreme folly. Joined to ffrength of mind, it may qualify the hero to ac his part in the field, or in scenes of violence: But strength of mind without it can find many subftitutes; and the herdic part may be acted as well on the sick man's litter as on the warrior's horse.

Riches, it cannot be doubted, derive their value from the use to which they may be employed, in preserving, accommodating, or adorning the state of man, in profit to ourselves or beneficence to others. With riches, as well as birth, there is an association of personal excellence, tending to constitute a superiority of eftimation or rank; and, with poverty, there is an association of comparative defect or meanness. The first accordingly is from a defire of preferment ardently coveted; the other, under a notion of degradation, is carefully flunned.

Among rude nations, although property be acknowledged and unequally distributed, its principal use being to secure the neceffaries of life, and this use being obtained, without being rich, it is difficult to perceive in what consists the advantage of wealth.

A Hottentot," fays Sparman, "is rich, in proportion to the number " of his cattle: But the richest is cloathed, fed, and attended, no bet" ter than the poor; more trinkets ofbrafs, ofihells, orbeads; morefat " in dressing his viLcuals, or in anointing his body: The honour "01or " or advantage of being able to maintain more servants and cow- 

"herds. And the divine pleasure of doing good to his fellow 




" creatures, is that which constitutes the diftintion of rank Sc..
"in this simple race of men."

In the competitions of vanity, riches are more an obje& of oftentation than of enjoyment or use; but, in the breast of the miser, they are associated with safety more than with either of the former considerations. Persons of this description, we are told, even in the midst of plenty, are haunted with the fear of want, whilst they hoard up riches, they refrain from the use of them; and, inflead of affeCting the rank which their wealth might bestow, still cling to their fuppoled pledge of security, under the aspeA ofmeannefs and poverty. Enjoyment, however, is the charm with which riches are supposed to attrat the wishes of ordinary men. It is the spur, under which mankind have striven to improve and to extend all the' arts which tend to the accumulation of wealth.. It is that which caufeth the poor to look up to the rich with sentiments of admiration or envy, and caufeth the rich to look down on the poor with contempt or pity.

But with refpec to enjoyment, there is good reason to believe, that habit reconciles mankind, or renders them indifferent nearly alike to their refpe&ive fortunes. It is not doubted, that the meal of the peasant is equally reliihed with that of his lord; that sleep on a straw matrass is no less undisturbed than on a bed of down, or under a canopy of state: Insomuch that contentment, or the want of it, indifferent conditions of life, are even to a proverb observed to be equal. If the poor be haunted with wiflhes for somewhat beyond his present condition, £o also is the rich; and it is probable that the comforts of either G 2 would 
would -be moroe felt in the privation than in the acaual use. The C1A1IP.A. ordinary course of life appears indifferent: They are pleased 

i t1chiefly with -accessions that seem to exceed, or displea'sed with privations that impair the advantages -to which they are accuftomed.

Occasional privations, at the fame time, even of what are -tought the essential comforts of life, -are endured with alacrity and cheerfulness in the midit of any ardent pursuit, whether of business or sport. The ibldier is chearful in the midst of hardship or toil, or in the face of danger, encountered in discharging the honourable duties of his flation. The -hu-ntfmnan incurs almost equal danger with equal alacrity; and, whatever his hardihips may be, has not -any pretence for complaint, because they are voluntary. Compared to either, the ordinary life of-a beggar, which is ever looked on with contempt or pity, -is 'easy, afflluent, and secure.

The enjoyments or sufferings, which we commonly :acr-ibe to riches or poverty, are in reality, in a great measure, derived from the unequal degrees of consideration or esteem with which they are attended. The soldier and the gentleman hunter either gain, or do not lose in point of rank, by the hardships or privations of-eafe -to which they submit. The one is actually raised in his own, and in the efteemn of others, by the danger he bravers; The other too is no way degraded, or rather maintains his ltation by lis contempt of repose, and by his parade of horses and dogs, which makes a part of the diflindion he enjoys among his neighbours.

Nothing is better established in reason, than that the value of external circumf-ances depends on the degree in which they are z~~~~~~2 iC~~~~~~tbfelt.

felt. Prosperity is of no value, to those who 'feel it not; or to 
PARTr 1I.
whorm it only ministers 'ah occasion of peeviflinefs and dif- 


conteiit. -Advetifity is o 'evil 'to those, who -'uffer nothing from ' _r'
it; or who atre 'contented and chearful, in the midst of supposed distress. And, ifthere were no other reason to deny the certainty 'of any effet from external circumfiances, the unsettled opinions of-men, refpediing the happiness of different fituationg, are fuflicient to shew that experience does not warrant our fuppofition of happiness or misery, attached to any particular meafures of fortune. Some conceive happiness to be the lot of those, who are placed in the higher ranks of life; others believe it to be the portion of those who remain in the lower ranks; and many beli'eve, that both are miftaken,-that it belongs to the middle station, 'equally remote from the excesses of luxury, or the pressure of want. In 'the mean time, wherever folly, malice, cowardice, and debauchery are found, there is suffering and mifery to be found also. There are not the necessary appurtenances of any fitnation, whether middling, high, or low; nor is any situation securely exempt from them. The opposite virtues of wisdom, goodness, temperance, and fortitude, are equally a blessing in every situation, wherever they are found; whether on 'the throne of Aurelius, in the servitude 'of Epitetus, or any interme'diate tfation: And, as there is scarcely a situation to be found, in lwhich the four and malignant 'do not complain; no more is there a situation in which the good humoured and chearful are not content.

From these and other appearances, it should seem, that although providence has deflined human life to pass away in the practice of arts ; in transactions and pursuits, which relate to the gifts of fortuhe, as to their immediate object ; that ncverthelefs there is not any prccife meafuire of these gifts required, to enable the 
the pofteflor to pass his time agreeably. To be reasonably and 

SECT V. properly occupied about them is enough: but this occupation rev- may take place in any state of their distribution; and, although it seems to be the institution of nature, relating to mankind, that their adcive exertions fllould originate from the want of a supply to their animalneceffities; yet is it provided, also, that their felicity fllould be a quality of their own affedions and adions, not of the supply they have obtained; that it should not depend on events, or on circumstances in which the conditions of men are so unequal, and so little at their own command.

In confidering man's place and diftintion in the system of nature, we have had occasion to observe; that, being disposed to enjoy his own acive exertions, and to improve by the exercise of his faculties, many apparent comparative defeds of his animal frame, and the wants to which he is fubjeted, have a signal propriety in his lot. To him, difficulty, delay, and danger, are the occasions of ingenuity, perseverance, and courage. He is mafler of his own adtions; but the circumstances, in which he isto ad, arewifely withheldfromhis disposal. Forit beingthenature of an active disposition to press towards every advantage; and to haften the removal of every obftrueion, and of every inconvenience; if this could be done by a wish, there would not any longer be an occasion for adive exertions: And if, on the contrary, the laws of nature were inscrutable, and events no way affected by any means in the power of man to employ, there would be nothing for him to fludy and nothing to be done.

The scene of nature, indeed, is in both these refpecs well suited to man. The powers that operate connot be controuled by his will; but the laws, according to which they proceed, may be known, and ineafures taken to influence the result of their operations, tions. He is encouraged to ply his industry and his skill; and 

his work is not accomplished in single efforts. Upon a difap- 




pointment, he must renew his endeavours; and, even when molt rw/
successful, repeat or follow them up with somewhat farther in the line of his pursuits. The mixed scene ofdifappointment and success ever presents him with a spur to his exertion, with admonitions to care, and incitements to industry, with encouragements to hope or apprehensions of failure; and, furniifhes him with occasions, and with the materials of beneficence to others, as'
well as of profit to hinifelf.

It is particularly happy, in refpea to this institution of his nature, that the conduA, tranfadion, and intercourse, in which the materials of art engage mankind, are agreeable to their aAive disposition, while the measure in which these materials accrue to any one, is in some measure indifferent. All the belt or the worst affections or passions of the human mind, are to be found indifferently wherever mankind are placed. As the active scenes of life may be supported by the healthful and vigorous, the virtues of equanimity, patience, and fortitude, may be practifed by those who labour under all the infirmities of disease or a sickly constitution. As candour and humanity may be practifed by the powerful, towards those who depend on them; so may the corresponding virtues of refped and good will be pratifed by the dependent towards their superiors. Although the gifts of fortune are to those who possess them materials of beneficence, yet they are not the sole materials, nor is this use of them limited to any measure or degree of the possession. The poor man who kindly shews the benighted traveller on his way, may have done an office of more real moment, than fortune may have given the rich occasion to perform in any circumstance of his life. The greatest 
PART. Il. greatest benefa6cors to mankind have been poor; and the great
CHAP.I. eft benefits have been done by with-holding, not by lavishing S/~s" the communications of wealth. Socrates. and Epaminondas, even in times when poverty was frequent, were distinguished among their fellow citizens, by this disadvantage: But the one, by his superior abilities, not only saved his country from a foreign yoke, but raised it to a pitch of glory, which filled the mind of its citizens with sentiments of elevation and of honour. From the other originate the pursuits of moral wisdom, in which all the nations who spoke the language of his country became so eminent; and to him, perhaps, we owe that we are now employed, not in gratifying a mere curiosity, in matters over which we have not any controul; but in fludying the powers of our own nature, the province in which they ought to be exerted.

It was by with-holding, not by an easy payment of a. trifling tax, that Hampden laid the foundations of that political freedom which his country now enjoys: And we may conclude, from the whole of these observations on the gifts of fortune, that they are valuable only in the use which is made of them; and that the proper use is equally valuable in whatever measure those gifts are beflowed or with-held. Providence, in our apprehension has, indefinitely varied the situations of men.: But to an. observer, who can penetrate through the first appearance of things, there is a. condition common to all mankind; that is, a fit scene in which they are to ad, and a felicity to be obtained, by proper aCtion.





Of HappincS and Miery.

IN the variety of denominations which we have been confidering, 

whether pleasure, virtue, or projperity, the objec of those who 

employ these terms, is to mark, in particular instances, the object S >. .
Of choice; or, in the greatest possible measure of all these particulars united together, to express what they conceive to be happiness.

If we have understood the terms aright, and fairly eftimated what is best, in the different denominations of good, and what is worst, or most to be dreaded, under the different denominations of evil, the conclusion of reason, as formed in the consideration of any article apart, will be the fame throughout: That the preferable pleasure, as well as the highest merit, is found in the course of a virtuous life; and the pain most to be dreaded, or the specific defea or debasement of human nature, consists in folly, malice, or cowardice. The gifts of fortune have their use in H being 
 being the means of life and the instruments of virtue, or in fur

SECT. V1. nifing a scene for the exercise of good sense and beneficence; but kr^vw-> they are so far from being an occasion of good to those who abuse them, that this abuse contaminates every other source of enjoyment, disappoints the mind of its better and higher qualifications, impairs its faculties, and multiplies its sufferings and its defecas.

The only question that remains therefore is, under what title we are to felec this supreme or principal good, which is the genuine standard of estimation to mankind, whether under the title of pleafit'e, the proper uses offortune, or virtue.

The general term, Pleasure, includes many particulars of unequal value, and in common language is employed frequently to signify sensuality and dissipation, in contradiftinaion to business or any serious application of the mind. It behoves us, therefore, to specify our pleasure, before we refer to it as the object of choice.
And when we have done so, the particular we have feleced, not pleasure at large, is the proper flandard ofeftimation.

Happiness has its feat in the temper, or is an agreeable state of the mind; and cannot always be confidered as a proper use of external advantages; for it does not always proceed to the production of any external effect. As virtue is the preferable pleasure, so is it also the proper use of the fortune or situation in which we are placed. It is best, then, that we fix our attention immediately on the real good qualities of our own nature, and the virtuous life they support, as the constituents of happiness; and that we confider the debasements of folly, malice, cowardice, intemperance, and a vicious life, as the constituents of misery.

3

Whether Whether these be the sole constituents of happiness or misery, 




we need not be anxious to enquire; for the choice on every oc- SC P. VI.
cafion will be the fame, whether we confider them as the sole or TV
the principal species of good and of evil.

It is of little moment to be told of a good, which we cannot command, or of an evil which we cannot avoid. Our objeA in every cafe, is to make such a choice of the things which are in our power, that is, of our own conduct and actions, as to do the best which the cafe can admit for ourselves or our fellow creatures.

Every circumfiance, in the lot of man, evinces the cafe of a being destined to bear an active part in the living system, to which he belongs. His very subsistence requires such a part.
To obtain it, he must study the laws of nature, invent and practife a variety of arts. He is born in the society of his parents; and, for a considerable period of his life, owes, not only his wellbeing, but his preservation also, to their unwearied and anxious care. So soon as he is fit to act for himself, he is urged, by the most ardent and irresistible pafions, to become the parent of a family in his turn; a condition in which' affections are experienced, more powerful than interest or felf-prefervation. The company of his fellow creatures is ever required to his fatisfadion or pastime. He may be unsociable, but is not solitary; even to behave ill, he must be in society; and if he do not ad from benevolence, he will act from interest to over-reach, or fromambition to command his fellow creatures, or from vanity to be admired, even by those whom he neither esteems nor loves. To such a being, it were vain to prescribe retirement from the cares -H 2 of 
 of human life. If he is not engaged as a friend, he will be SCE-P. .I baited as an enemy; and, if his mind have not the confiderat-,r tions of juilice, humanity, and public good, to occupy him, it will fink into a degree of brutality or languor, the reverse of that tranquillity of mind, andofthofe agreeablethoughts, andemotions which Epicurus proposed to cultivate, in a slate of seclusion from the concerns of society, whether private or public.

Nature has made the subsistence, the safety, and accommodation, of human life to depend upon certain external circumftances and poffeflions, to which men, accordingly, with good reason, direct their attention. They are the objets of art and induftry, and furnish the occasion of invention, and other trials of genius to the mind of man, which is ever busy, and which is at once gratified and improved, by its active exertions.

Many of its efforts are employed in guarding or in accumulating external possessions. The event, or the measure of success, we have observed, is precarious; and, on the whole, independent of this circumstance, mankind exhibit very unequal degrees of happiness or misery. They are happy in applying to their object with proper measures of wisdom, diligence, benignity and forti.
tude. They are miserable in folly, slothfulness, malice, intemperance, or cowardice; but in the different measures in which they attain to the gifts of fortune have equal opportunities for either. It is by the part which he ads, or has ated, that a person is happy or miserable, not by the event of his pursuit, or by the measure of external advantage he has gained: for we muf forever repeat, that, under very great inequalities in refpeA to these advantages, there arc equal examples of enjoyment or of fufferingn 3 It It is happy therefore to fullfil the destination of nature; to ply 


the industry, the invention, theftudy whichfhe has made neceflary 
to our wellbeing; to embrace the objeds of that social affection v '
with which she has inspired our minds; and to confider, that as our state of greatest prosperity, in which we are most effectually employed with benignity towards our fellow creatures, and fubmifsion to the will of God, in whatever he has assigned for our lot.

The happy, under every event, whether of success or disappointment, proceed with alacrity in the difchargeof such offices, and in the pursuit of such objedts as the occasion suggests. The miserable, in profpericy, swell into insolence; or, upon a reverse of fortune, fink into despair, and neglec the good which is in their power, because there is another supposed good which they cannot command.

What is the lesson of reason then to the poor man, who complains of his lot, or rather who enquires what, in the situation which providence has assigned to him, is required to be happy ?
He may be told, " Providence has given to you, and to all other t men, a set of wants; and it is the will of providence that you "proceed to supply them: Be diligent, industrious, and frugal: " Do whatever the present moment requires with benignity and ' fortitude. There are the constituents of happiness, and not " less in your power than they are in the power of your richest "neighbour."

This temper of mind, however, under the flocks of adversity to which men are subjet in the ordinary pufuits of life, may be supposed to be of difficult attainment. It is, nevertheleis, attained by numbers, who, in their ordinary condition, pofeifs the gifts of fortune in lower measures, than that to which many, who fink under strokes of adversity are acually reduced. At any rate, the person who does not possess the virtues which contfitute happiness, must not complain of their inefficacy; for they cannot be supposed to have effect, where they do not exist.

It may not perhaps be asked, what will make the rich man happy ? for he is supposed to be sufficiently happy in being rich.
He must not be dismissed, however, under this apprehension, untill his own sense of the matter is taken. It is probable, that he will deny he is rich; that he will be found to have wants no less numerous than those of his poorer neighbour. Under this aspec of his slate, the lesson ofwifdom to him is precisely the fame as to the former. Be diligent, induRtrious, and frugal, refpeling the management of your own affairs: be candid, ingenuous and humane in your tranfadions with others. Fear not that the event will be such as to deprive you of these blessings: They are the greatest of which human nature is susceptible; and providence has given a place for the enjoyment of them in the lituation of the rich as well as in that of the poor.

If the rich man should acknowledge that he has not any wants; but in this very circumstance should find a source of diflrefs, which is not uncommon in the cafe of those who, as they are pleased to express it, have nothing to do: the misery of such perIbns, they may be told, is not an excess of riches, but a defec of underfianding, and a corruption of heart. The first attempts to correc2 such folly are made in recourse to multiplied amusements and paflimcs; and we mufi, indeed, prefer any species of harmlces divcrfion to the devouring tooth of lifllefs pride, peeviflinefs, or Imel ncholy 3 But it should fceen, that, to a person in this situation ation, it might soon be made evident, that offices of benefit to mankind should be a more effectual amusement to himself, than SECT. I, any mere trifling pastime, which is not attended with any effect v whatever beyond the amusement of the present hour.

If the sick man should complain of his lot, or desire to know by what means he may escape from his sufferings, he may be told to get well as soon as he can; and if this ihould appear to be mockery; because his grievance actually consists in his not being able to get well; on this supposition, the best thing he can do, is manfully to bear what cannot be helped. Fortitude may not eradicate pain; but is surely the belt and happiest expedient to which the sufferer can have recourse in his state; and may, in fad, to the strenuous mind, conflitute a greater blessing, than even that of being exempted from pain. In striving to find an expression or rule by which to diftinguifll the happy, we may venture to asfume two general propositions.

I. The first is, That happiness, whatever be its cause, is itself an attribute of the mind.

II. The second is, That a person, when said to be happy, can justify this assertion only in proportion as his enjoyments are habitual, lasting, and conceived to be secure.

The first of these propositions is too evident to need much illustration; and it is only by a figure offpeech, which in rhetoric is termed the abuse of words that we ever seem to express a contrary opinion. Happiness is peculiar to sentient beings; or is proper 
 proper to mind, the great receptacle of enjoyment and suffering, as 


T cr. VI. well as perfection and defec. When we fay of an external fituati__Y^ on, that it is a happy one, we mean to affirm only, that it is fit to produce happiness in the mind that enjoys it; and thus, by a well known figure, put the supposed cause for the effet.

But in what concerns the mind of man, external causes have not any necessary effe6t. The most fortunate circumstances which imagination can suggest do not produce any agreeable asfecion in the mind of the peevifl or melancholy ; and many circumflances of apparent distress do not fret or discompose the contented and chearful.

Reason, then, teems to require, that we correct this abuse of language; and reserve the appellation of happiness for mind, to which alone it is applicable, and in which it forms the diflindion -of goodness and worth.

In the mean time, it is not disputed, that external circumflances have their value, although they are not sufficient to secure the happiness of those who are placed in them. They include the ordinary means of subsistence and felf-prefervation, and have therefore a value commensurate to the value of life itself, which cannot be preserved without them. But this value, great as it may seem, is still undetermined, until the nature of that life which is preserved shall be specified. It may be happy, and it may be miserable; and, although nature has wifely given an inftincive desire to preserve it upon either supposition, and the objed of infiint is life; yet the sole object of reason is happinefo; and mere life, or the means that preserve it, apart from this object is of a value yet ambiguous or uncertain.

So: So far, there will not probably be any difference of opinion; 


. 


but, if merely to live be no more than a capacity either of happi- 
ness or of misery, we shall be ready to enquire what are the additions which life may receive, that will render it happy on the one hand, or miserable on the other ?

To this queflion, answers will be given as various as the conceptions or ruling passions of men. It is a maxim, that Tafies are not to be contested; and, on the subjeL of happiness, it is scarcely permitted for one man to prescribe for another. To the vulgar, happinels appears to be the portion of the young, the gay, and the prosperous. It flrinks from the touch of the laborious, the severe, and the thoughtful. It is the ilate of a moment. The fame person may be happy or unhappy, and pass from one state to the other as quick as the successions of thought. The boy seeks it at play, and the man ofbufinefs in some event, on which his hopes are suspended.

To such minds the event, while in expectation, gives a profpea of happiness; but, upon its arrival, generally disappoints the hopes which it gave: And they are the happiest amongst ordinary men, who do not dwell upon such disappointments, but at the close of any one pursuit, adopt some new one with equal alacrity.

Is man, therefore, doomed to reft the happiness of every present moment, on the prospect of some future event, which upon trial is found to be illusive ? This, in fact, is the cafe with many of those who have devoted themselves to what they are pleased to call the serious concerns of human life, profit, preferments, or famne; 
 fame; and yet there are persons who have no such serious objeds 
in view, who, without regard to the future, enjoy the exercises 
hr^- 'and occupations of the present hour. Such are the huntsman in his chace; companions in their conversation or play: in all of which the end or the flake is a trifle. But exercises of the mind or the body are highly agreeable, and " labour itself," in the words of the Rambler, " is its own reward."

To a mind conscious of this law of its nature, the objec, it may be thought, should be to exert itself properly upon all occafions; to propose reasonable ends, but never to fink under 'any event, nor even to incur any grievous disappointment, so long as the mind finds occasion to employ itself properly..

The exercises of good sense and of wisdom are, in their own nature, agreeable. They proceed upon a just discernment of objeds, and do not give way to illusive hopes or unmanly fears.
As it is the excellence of a social being to be the friend of thore with whom he associates; so the love of mankind is to man, as such, the principal source of enjoyment albfo Courage and fortitude, being the excellencies of an adlive nature destined to ply in the midst of difficulties, dangers, and hardships, are, to the person who is endowed with them, not less a security for the poifeflion of all the faculties which nature has furnished for such occasions, than an exemption from fear; and an alleviation of the suffering which hardfiip or danger produces, in the timorous or desponding mind.

It may be thought, perhaps, that exemption fiom difficulty or danger is preferable to resolution or force of mind ; and it may may be thought wiser to leek for places of safety from which the PRT II.
causes of fear being removed, there is not any occasion to ex- 

ercife the virtues of intrepidity or courage. r The wife, no doubt, will avoid unnecessary occasions of susfering or of danger; but there, notwithstanding, are, by the appointment of providence, sometimes a part of his lot : And if the fearful could remove every real cause of alarm from human life, where is the place of security in which the coward will not figure to himself objects of fear and distrust ? Where is the bed of roses on which the Sybarite will not find the doubled leaf? Or where are the circumstances of affluence and ease to which the difcontented and the peeviflh may not impute the sufferings of his own fretful temper ?

The virtuous are not deceived, when they avoid the excess of an animal gratification, or reject sensuality as their guide to enjoyment. It is well known, that temperance is eligible, as the proper ceconomy even of animal pleasure; and, the more that such pleasure is valued, the more we lhould value those habits of lite, which preserve the animal organs in a proper state of enjoyment. But temperance is the economy of pleasure, still, in a higher sense than this: It is the economy of the wife; who, knowing the higher purpose of his nature, will not fubinit to beflow an improper part of his time or attention on objecs of inferior consideration or value.

To the second proposition, then, we may fubloin, as its application and its comment, That happiness is constituted in the mind, by the continued habits of wisdom, benevolence, fortitude, .and temperance: And the reader may be addrefled, nearly in the I 2 fame 
 fame terms which the emperor Antoninus addressed to himself; HEA P. V " If you discharge your present duty with diligence, resolution, -Y"_,/ " and benignity, without any bye views; if you adhere to this, "without any farther desires or aversions; completely satisfied " in discharging your present offices, according to nature, and " in the heroic sincerity of all your professions, you will live hap'pily. Now, your doing this none can hinder."

This account of happiness does not preclude any reasonable attention to the ordinary concerns of human life. Nay, requires such attention, as part of the offices of a man, and in the performance of which his happiness confifRs. It precludes only so much dependance of mind on the events of fortune, as disable it for the proper discharge or continuance of its office, with refpet to these or any other object ofreafonable care.

It were unhappy to neglect any means that might tend to obtain the proper end you propose: but it is more unhappy to be so affected with any event whether adverse or prosperous, as to become unfit to continue or repeat the exertions of a diligent and beneficent mind. Such exertions are the foundation on which you are to reft for happiness. Events you may endeavour to obtain or provide ; but they may also happen contrary to your wishes; and your happiness cannot consist in events which you cannot bring about, although it may, and aCtually does, consist in the temper you command and the part you at, through all the variety of events to which you are exposed.

On this subjet, good fJefe need not charge itself with the paradox, which, we are told, was mantained by ostentatious zealots, whether of the Epicurean or the Stoic school, that all external 3 siLtations Situations are equal; and, that the perfec man would be equally 

happy in the bull of Phalaris, as on a bed of roses. 




Fortitude, of a very inferior measure to this, is surely a valuable quality; but, in whatever measure or degree a wife man posiess it, he will not, without necessity, or some adequate inducement, run himself into sufferings of any fort. Such pain or inconvenience, as he has acually incurred, he will be happy to endure, without repining at providence, or intermitting the exercife of his mind and his faculties. If he be in prosperity, he will think the happy part committed to his choice is moderation, equanimity, and beneficence; if, in adversity, the fame virtues still remain to be exercised in the manner which the occasion, prescribes.





S E C T I 0 N VII.

Of the aElcal MeaJfres and Sources of Good and Evil in hzuman Lfe.

 T HE value of virtue, as we have endeavoured to define it, will 
not be questioned: For who can doubt the value of a wisdom, SEcr. VII.
S<Cv-VI which cannot err; of a temper, which is ever joyful and serene, in its exertions for the good of mankind; of a temperance, which no allurement of false pleasure can mislead; or, of a fortitude, which no difficulty or danger can embarrass or appal? This, we may be told, is first to imagine perfect happiness, and then to give it the name of virtue; whilst the whole is ideal, and never realized in the cafe of any human creature.

Such, indeed, is the nature of abftraa science, we systematize our own thoughts, leaving the application to be separately made.
On the subjcd of moral>, more elpecially, we propose to inquire, not what men acually are; but what they ought to be, or what are the ideas, upon which they may, and ought to determine their choice in particular inflances. But, although this be a susficicnt answer to the objetlion which is foietimcs made to moral science, science. as a scheme of visionary and unattainable perfection. It PA RT II
may not be improper to confider what are termed virtues and vices ATP.VIrT.
in the minds of ordinary men; with their various degrees and oc- tv j cafions, in order to shew that there is not any intention to obtrude definitions and divisions for historical sacs; and even, that the imprascicability of perfect virtue is no reafbn why we should abate our endeavours to do well. 'Perfeation is ever to be aimed at, even by those who incur defects; and defeRs alwa.ys to be Ihunned, even by those who come the farthest short of petfec7ion. If the moralist is not to enjoin perfttion, he muff do, what of all things is most contrary to reason, recommend defefls. The conditions of men are extremely unequal ; yet, no one is so high in the scale of being, as that he may not move a ftep higher, and no one so low, as that he may not get into the way of advancement. Although he may not attain to all the perfections of the wife as defcribed in any of the antient sects of philosophy; yet he mray not incur all the mistakes of the foolish, and the fewer the better. Happinefs,it ihould seem from the observations of the last and tome of the preceding fedions, is a term of. praise equivalent to merit, and consisting in the uniform tenor of a virtuous life: But, as honeJly consists in meaning wieill *, it lhould also seem that happiness is within the competence of every human creature: Whence is it, then, in any instance so imperfectly obtained ?. And whence is it, that so many complain it is placed beyond their reach ? They surely do not confider it as an attribute of their own will and affections.

Men of speculation have riflEed a conjecture, that all the difference of genius or characer, which have appeared in the world 3 may : .Laudanl,,.'qtti vello fit f.tis.

may be traced to some casual fuggeftionof Sentiment or thought; 

or to some specific occasion, that stirred the peculiar passion, and k-v- routed the original effort, which, continued into habit, gave the individual his bias to a distinguishing cast of genius or characer through life t. But, without pretending, in this manner, to level the original diftindions of nature, we may venture to assume, that men are much affeCted by early impreflions; and continue to take much of their characters from the notions they entertain, and the habits of thinking they have acquired.

As we may know what a person thinks from his actions, so we may guess how a person will act, from our knowledge of his habitual ways of thinking, let it be conceived, that to live virtuously is to be happy, that to have an evil or malicious thought is misery; and let these ideas be ever present to the mind, as the idea of his treasure is ever present to the miser, or the importance of his own person is ever present to the coxcomb; and the apprehension of a happiness so constituted, will amount to a steady principle of integrity and beneficence; as their refpeaive habits of thinking are, to the miser, and the coxcomb, the essence of avarice, impertinence, and folly.

Self-conceit muff appear in ostentation, or in a continual obtrufion on the notice of other men. The admiration of birth and fortune, in one class of men, may betray itself in pride and contemptuoufiefs, in another class, may appear equally in envy and malice, or in servility or meanness. The temper also re-acs upon the judgement. The chearfulare inclined to think of gay subjects; the melancholy, to entertain gloomy apprehensions of things; as the I' IHelvetius de L' Esprit.

the courageous are inclined to confide in their fellow creatures, 

and the cowardly are inclined to distrust them. 


We are disposed towards the objecs around us, either as the other animals are disposed towards the objedcs of sense, by an original instinct, or blind propensity of nature, or by a relation, peculiar to intelligent being, that of the conception we have formed, or the habit of thinking we have acquired.

Such is the foil, in which the moralist is destined to fow,to plant, and to make his trial of what can be reaped; without being discouraged, because the full bloom of terrestrial paradise is not every where, or perhaps not any where, to be seen on the earth; and the fairest fruits come, mixed with the noisome productions of the wilderness.

Moral science operates for our good, only by mending our conceptions of things, and correAing or preventing the errors from which moral depravity or misery proceeds. The very appellation of good, though no more than a name habitually beflowed upon its subjed, has great effec, on particular occasions, in warping the judgement, and in direting the choice. It was for this reason, probably, that philosophers of old appeared so anxious to fix the application of terms, as well as to store the mind, with just conceptions. They proposed, that the firfc principle of morality fllould eradicate every false apprehension on the subjed of good and evil; and so become sufficient to give ajuft direCtion to the will and affecsions, wherever they proceed on the pre-conceived notion of things.

Epicetus seems to reft the foundations of virtue and happiness on the proper difcernlnent and choice of objeds, which are in VTor. I. K our 
 our own power, in contradistinction to things which are not in 
CHAP.Vl. our power. Among the things in our own power, he reckons 'v ' " our opinions, our pursuits, our desires, and aversions; and, in a word, whatever are our own actions." Among the things not in our own power, he reckons " body, property, reputation, c' command, and, in a word, whatever are not our own aAions "."
Attachment to the first, and indifference to the second, are, according to him, the essence of wifdonl and happiness.

It is surely happy for any one to be conscious that the best things are in his own power: But, in this, the vulgar are frequently deceived; and recur to fortune, as more in their power, than the attainments of a happy mind. They seek for happiness in external accommodations, rather than in any quality or condition of their own nature: and seem to think external circumstances more in their power, than their own acions; or, what is worse, think their own acions of value, only so far as they asset their fortune.

To this ground of diftinAion, which is laid by Epidetus, we may subjoin another, relating to the fame fubjecds; but taken from a different consideration of them, that is, from the confideration of their value, whether real or supposed, which is in some instances abjolute, in other instances merely comparative. Among things of aboflute value, are to be reckoned chiefly the habits of a virtuous life, intelligence, benevolence, temperance, and fortitude ; or, in short, the good qualities which form the best condition of human nature; and which they, who poflefs them, enjoy the more that others partake of the iame bleflings. Among advantages " EiltIct. Encllh dliol, cap. I. Mrs. C.artcr's trallQ.ition.

tages merely comparative, on the contrary, we may reckon pre- 

crdence, and Juperiority, whether of riches or power; and, in a 

word, all the circumstances, in refpet to which the elevation of a, one is deprejzion to another.

In a former fedion, there was an attempt to account for the origin of malice, from an error or defed of understanding, in admitting advantages or disadvantages which are merely comparative, as principal constituents of happiness or misery. Under this apprehension, although a person were by nature disposed to benevolence, he is, by the interference of interests, checked in the effet of this disposition. And, among parties so stated, the celebrity of one being obscurity to another, or the precedence and preferment of one being degradation to the other, they are, in the midst of such pursuits, naturally rivals and competitors, and have more frequent occasions of hatred and distrust than of confidence or good will *. "The king t," fays Baffompierre, "after " he had given the command of his army in Italy to his brother, "bethought him how much the glory to be won in that service " would obscure his own; and, so powerful is jealousy, even a"mong relations, that he took this so firongly into his head, or " rather into his heart, as to deprive him of reft." In this rage for comparative advantages, the success of one is disappointment to another; and the industry of one to better himself a scheme of hostility to those who must fink under his elevation.

From this source are derived, jealousy, envy, and malice, those K 2 waters See Sc. of the Origin of Evil.
t Lewis XIII. and XV.

PART IL waters of bitterness, which flow so plentifully in human life.
SCHC T.iI The wretch, whose principal aim is to surpass other men, joins to k-r\ fufpence, hinderance, disappointment, mortification, and all the the evils of a precarious fortune, the impoflibility of extricating himself, without a total reverse of all his imaginations and thoughts. To become candid and humane, he must change objecs of his hatred and distrust into objedts of good will and benevolence; and confider his fellow creatures in society, as the procurers of much convenience and benefit to himself, not merely as rivals and competitors, under whose prosperity or elevation of rank he is doomed to fink, or incur degradation.

Purify the mind of this taint, and most of the evils in human society are done away. Desire would be placed chiefly on those things which are of absolute value; which any one may possess in thehigheft degree, without detriment to another; or rather, which, being in the possession of one, prove an aid to others in the attainment of like bleflings.

The reputation of virtue, like celebrity in any other way, may engage men in competition and rivalfhip; but virtue itself is promoted by the prevalence of virtue in the world. The lamp of wifidom is lighted by communication with the wife; and benevolence is inspired in the society of the benevolent. Fortitude and temperance gain strength by example. Whoever can reft upon these qualities of supreme value, as the constituents of happiness, finds no occasion on which to feel the unhappy paflions which terminate in malice. He is gratified in the welfare of other men; and wishes for their elevation in goodness and virtue, as he wifnes for the rising of the fun upon the world, as a common belnefit to all who partake in his influence.

3 Antoninus Antoninus was happy, not in wearing the purple, nor in pof- 
PART II

fessing the throne of Cefar; but in the attainments of a iteady 

and beneficent mind. In these he was no man's rival, and was v ready to lhare every blessing, even with those who attempted to supplant him in the empire *.

We err, in deriving the corruptions, which are imputed to great cities and courts, from the love of pleasure, and from the profusion of wealth, with which the love of pleasure is gratified.
The mere voluptuary is innocent, compared to those who are deeply infected with malice, envy, and pride; a generation of evils begot upon emulation, competition, or the apprehension of comparative advantages, whether precedence, titles, or wealth.
Wherever the roots of such evil are planted, the concourse and assemblage of men, from which we should otherwise expeat the praCtice and improvement of every social disposition, but renders the growth of malevolence more copious and rank. Competitors for the lustre of equipage and dress, might have fiept in quiet, or enjoyed tranquillity, at their return from a brilliant assembly, if the lustre of some other person had not proved an eclipse to theirs; or, if his equipage and liveries had not appeared to surpass their own, and to carry away from them the attention of the world.

We may therefore admit, that such errors of the imagination are constituent of moral weakness, and scarcely separable from actual depravity of the heart. If no external confequencc fhotlld follow, we may thank the administration of regular govcrment, which * See his Rcconmcineultiolns to the Senate in behalf of Cafflus.

which checks the tendency of unhappy passions; and applaud the SEC. VI. eftablifled decency of manners, which require certain measures /V or appearances of candour to be preserved, even between parties at variance with one another; and which not only conceal the torment of unhappy passions, but tend, in some degree also, to conciliate good will, by inspiring forbearance, where the tendency of competition is to awaken jealousy, or hatred, and give occasion to offensive behaviour.

The great weight of corruption, proceeding from the jealousy of competitors for riches, power, and court favour, without the counterpoise of external restraints, from decency and good manners, funk the capital of the Roman empire, and the palace of Caesar, into scenes of the most atrocious brutality, perfidy and cruelty: And, it mufft be confessed, that the consideration of such consequences would be sufficient to warn us against like notions of good and evil: or, if men were to form their opinions, not on the evidence of fad, but on the grounds of expedience; nothing can be more evident, than that a conception of happiness, in things out of our own power, or in things of which others are in haste to prevent our enjoyment, by flepping before us, muff be attended with fruitless longings, heart burnings, jealousy and malice. But, if such be the nature of good, relating to us, philosophers, it will be said, may dispose of names as they may think proper, and call any gift of fortune indifferent; but they themifelves will not be the less desirous to pofTefs it.
Nor can men be required to have any other conception of good and evil, than what the real asped of things in nature serves to suggest.

So much is admitted; and the question relating to what is good, whatever whatever notion of things it be most expedient for us to entertain, 

muit recur for solution to the tribunal of fat and experience. 


Let the fad therefore decide! Are men happy or miserable, in the precise degree of their good or ill fortune ; or of their precedence to others ? If so, fortune and precedence are the sole good.
But, if men are found equally happy, or equally miserable, under great varieties of rank and fortune, it is evident that the measure of happiness or misery is not to be taken from thence; and that a wife man will not adopt an opinion, nor countenance a form of expreflon, at once inexpedient and contrary to fact.

In fixing the notions of good, it is not wife to rely for happiness, on things which are not in our own power; on things which are not of any absolute value; but, which please only by comparison with what other men possess, and which therefore engage us in a competition and firife, adverse to the belt and happiest.
qualities of our nature.

Neither is it wife to rely for happiness on the mere pofeffion.

of things, which may be well or ill used, and which, in being abused, are no less the occasion of misery, than in being properly used they are the occasion of happiness.

As happiness is a condition of the affections and temper, mere external situation is not to be confidered as any part of it, farther than the external circumstance is ableto produce that internal con-dition, or happy state of the mind.

The Stoics, proceeding upon one or otler of there maxims, limited the appellation of good to virtue, that of evil to vice alone.

~~~~~~3 TU~~~IJnder 
 Under this limitation, their famous paradox, that pain is no SECT. VII. evil, and the gifts offortune indiferent, meant no more, than that Gs.v. -there was not any moral turpitude in pain; and that the gifts of fortune neither exclude, nor secure, the poffeflion of virtue.
This, indeed, they confidered as sufficient consolation to those who labour under any external inconvenience, whether of adverfity or pain.

As a material on which virtue may operate; as an inflrument of beneficence; as a flake, for which men are to play, and become gainers or losers for themselves or others in the game of human life, they allowed that external possessions have their use, and that they merit the attention of the wife: but to rely on them in any determinate measure. for happiness they mantained to be extreme folly. In pursuance of this docrine, they would not prostitute the denomination of good to any thing that was not virtue; nor permit any thing to be called evil that was not vice; and would not have a man set his heart, or rely for happiness, upon any thing beyond his own province of responsibility or conduct. In this manner they firove to cultivate an elevation of mind which would not owe its good to any contingent circumfiance, nor to any will but its own. They would set at defiance the events of fortune or the caprice of other men. They would not be in fear of any adversity which could not hinder their ading a virtuous part; nor be flattered with a prosperity which could add nothing to the merit of a virtuous life.

The Peripatetics were content to remain on a ftep below these high pretensions. They too held virtue to be the supreme good, and had just maxims of integrity and honour, but comparatively enfeebled enfeebled, as the Stoics alledged, with a notion that even these de- 
 pended on fortune for part of their effects. While they assumed CAP. I.

SEc'. VII.

virtue, or a laudable part to be aced in the community of mankind as the supreme good; and reprobated the recluse tranquility, or selfish enjoyments of the Epicurean, as poison to the foul of man, and death to his best and happiest affedions; whilst they allowed, that the highest measure of fortune never could be brought into competition with any consideration of justice or duty; they still required prosperity, to compleat the felicity even of a virtuous life.

In this argument, the Stoics, though charged with paradox, and themselves the more ordinary butts of ridicule, yet turned this weapon against their antagonits : " You allow," they said, " that " virtue is the constituent of happiness, and even that fortitude " is a virtue; and yet to complete that happiness, you require a " fortune, which virtue despises, and an ease- in which fortitude is not required. You tell us of a good which the thief may " steal from his neighbour; which the miser may lock up in his 6 coffers from all the world; which the glutton may devour at " a meal; which may be denied to the worthy, and lavifled on " the vile. You preach up moderation, and even abstinence, " with refped to this good. You own it is mean to be solicitous " about it; and noble to despise it. You call that a good, therefore, " of which the contempt is wisdom and honour; of which the "privation did not marr the happiness of Epaminondas and " Socrates; nor secure the condition of Darius or Croesus. The " wife man, they said, will acquit himself properly with refpe't ' to the gifts of fortune; but, for his happiness, will rely upon " what he himself does ; not upon what he possesses; upon the I, "general 
 " general resolution, integrity and goodness which are his own; 
 not upon the caprice of other men, nor. upon the measure or 
"degree in which the materials on which he is to work falls to "his hlare."

This may well be confidered as a degree of perfection, far raifed above the ordinary slate of human nature: It is, nevertheless, that, for which it was given, a noble idea, upon which the ingenuous mind cannot too nearly form itself.

Men very commonly susser themselves to depend, for present comfort, upon some diflant object, or the hopes which they entertain of the future. This is no more than a habit of thinking; yet it may produce frivolity and weakness, if not depravity of mind, or neglec of duty. The future seldom comes up to the expectations that were formed of it: But it is the nature or characler of feeble minds, notwithstanding the fallacy ofpaft expectations, to apprehend a ,future, on which, to the neglec of present objects or duties, they still continue to rely.

Material fubjeas, or external circumitances of any kind, except so far as they assec the organs of sense with pleasure or pain, are in their own nature indifferent; and, if beyond this they excite desire or aversion in the mind, it is by means of some quality, whether of good or evil, honour or dcihonour, which are not inherent to the subjec itself; but afrociatec with it, in the conception which the mind entertains. The miser has afrociated happiness with money, in his conception of riches ; and is infatiable of wealth. The usurper has associated honour with power or dominion; and Rficks at no means, whether ofinfinuation or force to obtain his end.

.X~~~
i cZV1~~Whatever Whatever be the habitual conception, and the habitual pursuit, 
PARTr I.



these form the ruling affeaion or passion of the human mind: If 
the objec, in itself, were fitted by nature to excite such affeCion '.Y.
or passion, as the juice of an orange produces the sensation of sweet, the affetions or passions of all men, like the sensation produced on their palate, would be the fame. But, while sensations are uniform, conceptions are various; one person hopes for what, to another, is an objecd of fear: Insomuch, that many have thought themselves justified in concluding, from these appearances, that there is not in reality any standard, by which to rectify or to fix the apprehensions of men. But, as we have found the distinction of good and evil sufficiently efiablifhed in the nature of things, we have only to apply this diftintion, in order to correct any mistake or false apprehension, respeCting the subjeCs of estimation or choice; and, in our endeavour so to profit by the exercise ofreafon, consists the fruit of that information on the subjeCt of good and evil, which it is the objeC of moral science to obtain or convey.


The fame SubjeS continued.
*A ·Ss pey eiaoras 'xaxss xa a aYOCbss fyeirO EIV Ia : T&5 SE ayvowmCe avspatoNSas~l 3vx Scciu5s Kgexjair^w.

to avoid the imputation of visionary chemes, it be required 

to keep in view the adcual slate of men's minds, as well as the ab"b-rT'^ firaA idea of what they ought to be, we may continue to offer a specimen of the opinions, or habits of thinking, in which the characers of men commonly originate; trusting that a few examples may be sufficient to lead every person in pursuing the fame trad of observation for himself.

There are persons, we know, who do not so much reprobate the vices to which mankind are fubjcq, as depreciate human nature ture itself. This is an unhappy turn of thought, tending to itifle 

the sentiments of humanity or good will towards others, and to S
check the efforts of any ingenuous endeavour in the person who would improve himself. Man is formed to take part in the common cause of his fellow creatures; and he suffers in thinking meanly of their nature: He is formed for progression; and is frufirated in having his pretensions itated so low as to check his exertions. Men will not attempt what they think is altogether visionary and beyond their reach: But, in the gradation of human character, there are every where faults to be corrected, and improvements to be made, of which the finalleft possible effect is ever preferable to none. Socrates believed that men might be disposed to mutual beneficence, and that numbers were so difposed. Aristippus conceived that all pretensions to the-love of others were false; and that every one proposed to be of use only to himself. The one was inclined, by his conception, to benevolence and magnanimity; the other to felfifhnefs and distrust.

There is an error seemingly opposite to this depreciation of human nature; but, in its defecs, also productive of misery. Such is an overweaning conception or imagination of what men actually are, producing an ill founded confidence in the supposed prevalence of generosity, magnanimity, truth, and sincerity, of which the undiftinguiihing assumption not only exposes the mind to folly, disappointment, and other effects of mistake; but leads, in the sequel, to the very opposite extreme of distrust of mankind, and despair of virtue.

To the well-informed and the well-difpofed, virtue is not the less real that vice is frequently opposed to it. The mixed fccncs of human life are its proper flation. Here, it is equally fignalizr,~~~~n ~~cd 
 ed in withfianding the evil, as in co-operating with the good; CHCAPv. and its happiness depends, not upon the content or participation '-xvi 'of others, but on the degree in which it exerts itself.

It is unhappy to reft our choice of good qualities on the supposition that we are to meet with corresponding qualities in other men; to apprehend that candour and humanity are due only to the candid and the humane; or, that want of merit in others will dispense with that justice or liberality of condud, which it is our happiness to maintain for ourselves.

In consequence of such conceptions, we sometimes repent of the good we have done, when, (as we suppose), the parties concerned appear unworthy of kindness: And, in such insfances, the rule of our conduct is taken from what others deserve, not from what is becoming in ourselves. Want of merit in the world is alledged, as an excuse for indifference to mankind; and what is perhaps in us a desire to shift our own duty, is mistaken for the severity of virtue. Instead of ingenuous adors, we become squeamish observers of other men; and, taking offence at their behaviour, indulge animofities little short of malice.

It is unhappy to confider perfecion, more as the flandard by which we may cenfire others, than as the rule by which we are to conduct ourselves.

We are by nature enabled to conceive a measure of excellence beyond what we are able to attain. This, when the flandard is applied to ourselves, may become a source of indefinite progrefsion; but, when applied only to other men, is a pretence for invidious dious censure; insomuch that, a principle, which ought to incite 

in us the choice of good qualities, and a disposition to correct our 




own faults, is employed only as an occasion of contempt or malice towards our fellow creatures. Every ill disposition is unhappy; but the misery is then the most complete, when ill difpofitions set up for censure, and aflume the pretence of holy zeal, or concern for what is right.

It is a wretched opinion, that happiness confilfs in exemption from labour, or in having nothing to do.

This opinion is taken up, perhaps, from the abuse of words, when we contraat the enjoyment of some supposed good with the expectation and pursuit of it. In this contrail, we fancy that enjoyment begins only when labour has ceased; and, in this apprehension, the world is full of expedants, who think, that their happiness is deferred by the labours and toils they undergo in finishing the tafil which Providence has prescribed to them. They sigh for relief fiom trouble, and sometimes obtain it; when, fortunately for the instruction of mankind, they show, by their example, that the languors of in-occupation are more grievous than toil.

The wis' to have nothing to do, is most excufeable in persons who, having labours prescribed by necessity, are frequently urged on to fatigue. The powers of human nature are limited. and require alternate periods of repose as well as exertion ; but, as the too long continuance of labour is grievous, so the continuance of inaAion, beyond the time that is required for repose, is attended with a wearincfs and languour, no lets diflrcfsful than fatigue.

'Fhic 
 The notion, that happiness confiis in relief from any active SECT.VII. engagements, is easily accounted for, also, in the cafe ofthofe ./YV-- who, having a talk to perform, never engage in it willingly. The talk poflibly confines them, and prevents their application to any thing else, while it does not supply those real exertions of mind, which never fail to make the time that is well employed pass away with delight. The person who is thus confined, without being occupied, mistakes his aversion to confinement for an aversion to business; and his longing for a change of occupation he mistakes for a dislike to exertion. Thus, while the school-boy is confined on his form, his heart and his mind are in the playfield. As he does not apply to his lesson, nor even attend to it, while he reads it, he is only confined, not occupied. What we term his aversion to application, and his longing for the hour of dismission, is an ardor for employment; and, in facd, when free to chufe for himself, he betakes him to a labour, in which every muscle of the body, and every faculty of the mind, is firained or exerted to obtain the objeA of some hazardous or toilsome contest.

It is thus common, through life, to be reluctant in business, and fond of amusement: But, while in declining business men seem to reckon any kind of employment a grievance, they, by recourse to hazardous sports and diversions, make ample consefflon that some kind of ative and even serious engagement is indifpenfably neceflary.

The diflincion between business and amusement is perhaps not easily fettled, or consists intirely in this, that business is prescribed by some consideration of interest or duty; and amusement is taken up, in the beginning at leafl, without any such serious concern.

But But if bufnefs be diftinguiihed by the importance of the object, on 

which it proceeds, amusement soon becomes insipid, unless means SHAPi. V
are found sufficiently to interest the mind, and exercise its faculties.
This end, indeed, is obtained by the votaries of play, in creating to themselves a rilk, which far exceeds that of the merchant in the adventures of his trade, or those of the politician in his prorpeds of elevation or power. The hazards incurred by either are infipid, compared to the chances of loss or gain, in which the finished gamester is known to involve himself. Nor is this a refinement only of polished ages. The mere savage, after he is stript of all his other possessions at the gaming table, closes the scene with a throw, on which he flates the freedom of his person *.

Business, to those who are really occupied, may have all the qualities of an agreeable pastime. If it be a diligent performance of the offices incumbent on a man of integrity and virtue, it will join the fatisfaaion of a mind conscious of duty, to that of a mind employed in the exercise of its faculties, and exempt from fear, malice or remorse. So that, to those who decline business for the fake of amusement, it may be laid, that they reject what is fitted to employ them agreeably; and in order to quicken the feelings of a mind which is become languid for want of employment, betake themselves to pursuits in which they become a prey to evil passions. Such is the effect of dissipation, a weakness of the mind which loaths its best occupations, as the sickly stomach is found to loath the most wholesome food.

We may conclude, therefore, that the love of amusement is VOL. IL. M unhappy, * Aleam (quod mirere) fobrii inter ferva exercent, tanta lucrandi perdendive temeritatc, ut cum omnia dcfeccrant, extremo ac novillimo jaclu, de libertate et de corpore contendant. 'ACIT. tie Moribus Grmnan. c. 24.

 unhappy, if it proceed from a notion, that any thing can amuse SC AP'r. . us better than the duties of our station, or that any employment /-rx>v is more to be wished for than that precisely which in the present moment has fallen to our share. If any one have formed such a notion, he may be told to beware of it. It will disqualify him for his best enjoyments and embitter his life with peevishness and melancholy.

It is unhappy to conceive beneficence as an effort of felf-denial; or to conceive that we lay our fellow creatures under great obligations, by the kindness we do them.

This notion refers chiefly to acas of charity or liberality; mn which the beneficent gives to another what might be of use to himself. It were vile to be insensible of such merit; but the person, who gives such proofs of goodness, is himself the last to over-rate its value. " If I have done a kindness to my fellow creatures", fays Antoninus; " is not this itself my benefit? let me "not forget it, nor ever cease to do such things".

To the fame effect, alfo,we may transcribe the following pafTage: " There are some who, when they have done you a good office, "are apt to remind you of it. Others do not mention what they "have done; but have it uppermost in their thoughts, and confider you as their debtor. A third fort do not seem to know "what they have done; but are like the vine which produces its "grapes, and has done, when it hath yielded its proper fruit.

" As the horse when he has finilhed his course; the hound, " when lie has ended his chacc; the bee, when it has made its "honey; fb lie, who is truly a man, perforln a good oflice, 3 '' withollt " without any noise ; and proceeds to the next that occurs to be 
PART. 1I.
" done, as the vine, in its proper season, renews its foliage and 


SiEc.VIII

" its fruit. We ought to be of the number of those, who do S'.I
" not seem to know the good they have done: Nay but ought <' we not to be conscious of beneficent intentions ? Is it not the " property of a social being, to wish well to his fellow creatures.
" Yea, so help me God, to desire, too, that his fellow creatures " should be sensible of his beneficence ? What you fay is true, " yet, if you misapprehend what I said above, you will belong "to one of the former classes, and be among those who are led " aside from perfection by specious reasons. But, if you are "willing to observe the diftindion, that is made between those " first classes and the others, do not be afraid that it will cause " you to fail in any social aAion *".

If virtue, whatever be its external mode of exertion, be itself the excellence or good of human nature, (and we do wrong if we admit of any thing else as virtue) or, if it be, in the intellectual world, what health, and strength, and beauty, are in the animal kingdom ; there is no reason to apprehend, that a fellow creature is obliged to us for being virtuous, any more than he would be obliged to us for being in health.

The offices of a found mind are as natural to the virtuous, as those of a found body are to the healthy. The humane and the candid can never cease to perform the offices of humanity, and candour, although they do not confider, in what degree others may be obliged to them for so doing.

M2 I
* Anton. lib. v. c. 6.

PART IL. It were unhappy to confider virtue as a tafl, confiting ofex

SEc.VIII. ternal performances, enjoined under the fanaion of rewards and w.r\v,'w punishments. We can no more become benevolent, from the hope of reward, or the fear of punishment, than we can posess ourselves of fortitude from the love of ease or aversion to trouble. The ingenuous and high minded believes the reality of future rewards and punifihments; but, if they are any thing different from the poiTefilon or privation of that goodness, to which he aspires, they are mere acceifaries to the considerations from which he ads; they may be useful, in restraining a criminal disposition, but are not necefrary, in direcing or forming the virtuous to his duty ; much less, is a regard to them an essential constituent of his cha-radter.

If the future lot of the righteous be happy, his present condition in the pracice of virtue is so also; and it were absurd, surely, to conceive that a person muff not prefer the good which he may now enjoy, but for fake of a good which he is to enjoy hereafter.

It is unhappy to admit of any consideration in competition with our real good. " There is hardly a man to be found," fays an ingenious observer*, " who would not rather be in pain, to appear "happy, than be really happy, to appear miserable." So familiar are the examples of paradox, even in the conceptions of the vulgar. As they examine their own aspeA by refledCion from a mirror, they judge of their own condition by reflection from other men's thoughts; consult the opinion of others, rather than their own feelings; prefer consideration, or the reputation of worth, to worthiness itself; and do not so much confider how far they dcfervc praise, as how far they polcfs it.

This.
* The Tatler..

This is beginning the work of felicity at the wrong end; la- 




bouring for a fuperftrucure before they have laid a foundation; 
and striving to produce a shadow without any substance.

All men would be happy. The most erroneous paflions miflead from this object only by mistake; and, it is to mistake their own aim, when they would produce abroad the appearance of happiness, before they have poifefled it in the qualities of their own minds. The reality will not fail to carry its external appearances; or, if it ihould be unobserved or mistaken, the disadvantage is comparatively of small account.

It is sufficient refpeA to the opinions of other men, that we are pleased with their testimony, without sacrificing the consciousness of an ingenuous mind to what the world may think, or without preferring the appearances of merit to the real though silent poffeflion of it.

In this, the mistake is doubly to be regretted, as it implies the substitution of a false object for the true one, and the substitution also of what is precarious, and depending on the caprice of others, what is matter of anxiety and disappointment, for an attainable and secure possession. Such is the choice which the vain-glorious has made, in preferring the opinions of other men to the poffeflion of real good qualities in himself, which he might cultivate fecurely, and on which he might rely without any hazard of a difappointment.

It is unhappy to depend for enjoyment on what we cannot command, or to fix our dcfircs on what is beyond our reach.

Thus, 
 It were unhappy to confider virtue as a talk, consisting of ex

SEc.VIII. ternal performances, enjoined under the fantion of rewards and rY" punishments. We can no more become benevolent, from the hope of reward, or the fear of punishment, than we can possess ourselves of fortitude from the love of ease or aversion to trouble. The ingenuous and high minded believes the reality of future rewards and punishments; but, if they are any thing different from the possession or privation of that goodness, to which he aspires, they are mere acceffaries to the considerations from which he ads; they may be useful, in restraining a criminal disposition, but are not neeeffary, in directing or forming the virtuous to his duty ; much less, is a regard to them an essential constituent of his charader.

If the future lot of the righteous be happy, his present condition in the pradtice of virtue is so also; and it were absurd, surely, to conceive that a person mufl not prefer the good which he may now enjoy, but for fake of a good which he is to enjoy hereafter.

It is unhappy to admit of any consideration in competition with our real good. " There is hardly a man to be found," fays an ingenious observer*, " who would not rather be in pain, to appear " happy, than be really happy, to appear miserable." So familiar are the examples of paradox, even in the conceptions of the vulgar. As they examine their own aspeA by reflection from a mirror, they judge of their own condition by reflection from other men's thoughts; consult the opinion of others, rather than their own feelings; prefer consideration, or the reputation of worth, to worthiness itself; and do not so much confider how far they dcefrve praise, as how far they polfffs it.

Tlis.
" Tilu al'nler,.

This is beginning the work of felicity at the wrong end; la- 




bouring for a fuperftrucure before they have laid a foundation; 
and striving to produce a shadow without any substance.

All men would be happy. The most erroneous passions miflead from this object only by mistake; and, it is to miflake their own aim, when they would produce abroad the appearance of happiness, before they have possessed it in the qualities of their own minds. The reality will not fail to carryits external appearances; or, if it lhould be unobserved or mistaken, the disadvantage is comparatively of small account.

It is sufficient refpeA to the opinions of other men, that we are pleased with their testimony, without sacrificing the consciousness of an ingenuous mind to what the world may think, or without preferring the appearances of merit to the real though silent poffeflion of it.

In this, the mistake is doubly to be regretted, as it implies the substitution of a false objec for the true one, and the substitution also of what is precarious, and depending on the caprice of others, what is matter of anxiety and disappointment, for an attainable and secure possession. Such isthe choice which the vain-glorious has made, in preferring the opinions of other men to the pofieffion of real good qualities in himself, which he might cultivate fecurely, and on which he might rely without any hazard of a difappointment.

It is unhappy to depend for enjoyment on what we cannot command, or to fix our dcfires on what is beyond our reach.

Thus, -PART IF. Thus, it were'unhappy for the labouring man, to long for ex

SECT. VII. emption from labour. It were unhappy, in the poor, to aim at nov^ appearing like the rich; to long for an equipage, a retinue, a palace, a table; and think himself excluded froin happiness, in being deprived of these things.

Ambition, or the unwearied desire of something higher than we possess at present, is a principle well suited to the nature of man; and it is, in some one or other of its applications universal to mankind. If it apply to invigorate the practice of virtue, and the exercises of a mind, ingenuous, candid, and humane, this every one has in his power. If it apply to the conduct of ordinary business, whether private or public, still the person so engaged may be well employed for the present; and, if he complain of misery in the absence of his obje&, we may venture to quefiion the wisdom or the temper of his mind.

The ingenuous, the strenuous, and ardent, though we should suppose them not to reflect on the merit of the part which they are acting, are happy in the very exercise of their difpoiitions and powers; and this is so far from being inconsistent with the pursuit of an object, that it requires, or pre-supposes some objet to engage the mind, and give occasion to the exercise of its faculties.

" That the mind of man," fays the Rambler, " is never fa" tisfied with the objecs immediately before it, but is always " breaking away from the present moment, and losing itself in " schemes of future felicity, and that we forget the proper use of ' the time now in our power, to provide for the enjoyment of "that " that which perhaps may never be granted us, has frequent- 

"ly been remarked; and, as this pratice is a commodious sub- S

"jeA of raillery to the gay, and of declamation to the serious, it v/
" has been ridiculed with all the pleasantry of wit, and exagge"rated with all the amplifications of rhetoric. Every instance, " by which its absurdity might appear most flagrant, has been " icudioufly collected; it has been marked with every epithet of " contempt, and all the tropes and figures have been called forth "against it.

Censure is willingly indulged, because it always implies " some superiority: Men please themselves with imagining that "they have made a deeper search, or wider survey, than others, '" and deteted faults and follies, which escape vulgar obfervation," &c.

" This quality of looking forward into futurity," continues the fame author, " seems the unavoidable condition of a being, " whose motions are gradual, and whose life is progressive: As " his powers are limited, he mutt use means for the attainment of " his end, and intend firit what he performs last; as, by conti" nual advances from his first stage of existence, he is perpetually varying the horizon of his profpeas, he must always discover ' new motives of action, new excitements of fear, and allure"ments of desire.

"The end, therefore, which at present calls forth our efforts ",will be found, when it is once gained, to be only one of the means to some remoter end. The natural flights of the human 1' mind arc not from pleasure to pleasure, but from hope to '' hope.

" I-e 
 " He that direcs his steps to a certain point must frequently SECT.VIII. turn his eyes to that place which he firives to reach. He that INs " undergoes the fatigue of labour mufi solace his weariness with "the contemplation of its reward."

So far this author seems to contend for a reliance on the future, as the principal conftittent of present happiness; and it may be difficult to combat any folly, if this Hercules with his club flands in the way to defend it. He may, however, be quoted against himself. "Labour," as he has stated in another place, " is its own reward;" and, in the sequel of the paflage now quotel, he owns, " that some caution against keeping our view " too intent upon remote advantages, is not without its useful" ness"

It is the object of reason, in this matter, to distinguish the objecs to which our views may be safely directed, from those which mislead our desires, and furnish nothing to gratify the mind for the present, besides a vain expecation of the future.

Of the latter kind, are all those objects, which are so far out of our power, that we cannot form any reasonable plan of exertion or application in the pursuit of them. To indulge in the hope or desire offuch things, is that cause of misery, which we are now confidering. Under its effects, the misguided mind is urged by a sense of its wants, but is precluded from any agreeable exercise offaculties, or of power to obtain their supply.

With a better choice of an object, the cafe may be different.
A person may direct hisJieps to a certain point, and frequently 3 turn turn his eyes to that place which hefjrives to reach, while his walk 

is pleasant, and the exercise it gives him is eligible, upon its own SCAT.VI I.
account.

Nor is this any great effort of philosophy, or aim at perfection: It is common in human life, in all its innocent or rational pursuits: It is the course in which men have enjoyed the exercise of their faculties, and by that exercise improved their powers; in which they have been led to observe the system of nature around them, to extend their knowledge, and to multiply arts, whether lucrative or agreeable. It is in the present occupation of their nature they find occasion, whether for opposition or concert, and have their abilities or their disposition to beneficence brought to the test. So that, in numbering the blessings of human life, we may venture to reckon the ad of pursuing its objed, as of more value than the objec pursued; and may rely much more, for happiness, upon the means which are employed for the attainment of our end; than we are to rely upon the end itself, even when obtained: Insomuch that, if any person looking forward to the future is unhappy for the present, we may venture to affirm, either that he has mistaken his object, and fixed his desires on that which does not admit of his taking any reasonable meafures for the attainment of it; or, that if his objed be reafonable, and such as he may pursue with advantage, he has certainly failed in the proper exercise of his faculties, in that course of industry and diligence, which his objet prescribes: Insomuch, that raillery and cenJuire too are very properly applied to those, who, ever intent on thejuture, are unableto enjoy the preJent.

Whatever be the end, which persons of this description propose to thcmfelvcs, their present sufferings imply sloth, ill temper, and VOL. 11 N pusillanimity, 
 pusillanimity; either a want of proper exertion for the attainment CHAI. I. of their end, or the wrong choice of an end which does not ad
SECT. VIII. t w '-y-i mit of any reasonable exertion.

Wherever the faculties are reasonably exerted, if to this we join the exercise of good affections, the sense of innocence and beneficence, magnanimity, courage and temperance, the one an exemption from unreasonable fear, the other an exemption from brutal excesses, the cause of happiness is present, and does not depend upon any thing future.

Persons blessed with alacrity and goodness of disposition, are thus happy in the course of their ordinary pursuits ; and, even while their object is distant. So the boy is gratified at his play, the gentleman at his sport, the plowman at his labour, the tradesman in his workshop, the soldier on his march, the statesman in his office; and each, proportioned to-his alacrity, and to the application he gives to his business. So that, in censuring those who, from their attention to the future, are unhappy at present, it is not the ordinary state of a man, or of a progressive being, that we censure; it is the vice, and the folly of those, who, from sloth or the defects of temper, are disqualified to employ them1elves well for the present.

It were unhappy to think ourselves unable to tfruggle with difficulties, under which others appear to be much at their ease.

In refpec to what nature will bear, one person may serve as a model to another; and teach hint what he may endure or perform. The pecvifli may be apprized of his own ftrcngth, by the example example of numbers who are chearful under hardships, no way 

less grievous than those which cause him to repine. 




Man is not formed to acquiesce in any precise situation. In the befl, he finds something to do; and, in the worst, is then only unhappy, when he suffers his courage and powers of exertion to be overwhelmed. While he exerts himself to remove an inconvenience, he ought to be so far patient under it, as, in his endeavours to procure relief, fully to possess himself and his faculties.

In the variety of conditions incident to mankind, refpeaing the measure of their external supplies and accommodations, we may accordingly observe a wonderful latitude, in the measure of hardfiip or inconvenience to which they can submit, joined with a continual desire of improving their condition, even when at the best. Here is contentment joined to impatience, of that with which they are content. Both are necessary qualifications of man's progressive nature: The disadvantages, under which he labours in any one state of his fortunes, do not disqualify him from proceeding with alacrity, diligence, and ability, in mending his condition; nor does any advantage he ever has gained so far content him, as to terminate any farther exertion of his faculties.

This happy mixture of fortitude under present inconvenience, with a vigorous effort of mind, for the removal of it; although the just balance of temper be frequently overset in the minds of particular men, is, nevertheless, a general charaferiftic of the human species.

The weak are querulous and peevish in their prefint situation, N 2 yet 
 yet do not exert themselves to remove the cause of their susser

SECT.VIII. ing. They fee numbers, on every fide, who bear such a lot as theirs with indifference, and yet are pleated to think themselves singularly wretched. They are so, no doubt; but it is a wretchednefs of temper and opinion, not of external condition.

In such instances, firequently, the mind is wounded, rather in its conception of dignity,, than in its sensation of harm, from the actual effeca of external circumstances. Certain privations are conceived to effect a diminution of rank; and the very pride, which is offended in this diminution, disables the sufFerer from endeavouring to procure his relief. Pride is supine, fullen, and listless; in many other refpets, a principle of misery or sussering; and, in this, a disqualification for any of the efforts, which are required to reform either the characer of the man, or to remove any cause of complaint from abroad.

There are ways of thinking, which mislead and tend to corrupt whole nations at once. False notions of religion, which interpose the authority of -God in behalf of any frivolous or cruel practice; systems of bigotry and intollerance, which set mankind at variance, and lead to persecution and mutual deltruction, on the score of difference in matters of faith or worship; false notions of honour, which promote quarrels, distrust, and mutual wrongs; false notions of liberty, that indispose men to subordination, or public order; false notions of government, that fubfiitute force and discretionary power, for law and jutfice; false notions of rank that attach elevation to mere birth and fortune, exclusive of merit; or that proceed on a notion of eminence, which no public service or lufire of characer can fipply. Under such apprchcnfions, a diflindion or supposcd elevation of rank, which ought ought to incite the mind to noble acions, serves to discourage 

those who would aspire to real greatness; and flatter those who 




think themselves great, with the notion of an exemption from w o the necessity of merit, or of any good quality whatever.

From the example of mankind, in numberless initances, the importance of opinion or habitual conception is obvious. The person who habitually conceives that the church yard is haunted, or that goblins ply in the dark, trembles with fear, where another having no such conception is calm and undisturbed; and the mind, in either cafe, may be said to be the author of its own good, or its harm. The one may susser himself to be infected with that weakness, or the other may be correAed of it, according as they negle& or employ their reason to its proper use.

The opinions which tend to happiness are the reverse of those which tend to misery. In treating of the one, we naturally reser to the other. In opposition to that corrupt itate of apprehension, in which the diftintions of fortune are substituted for those of merit and demerit, we may observe it is happy to be guided in our estimation of persons not by fortune and fashion, but by the merit of intelligence, probity, equanimity, and candour.

In matters of mere inclination or will, it is natural to become in ourselves what we admire in other men. And persons, to whom the standard of estimation is personal worth, have already received the bias of an ingenuous mind to integrity and honour; so much, that toefteem and to love those virtues in others, amounts nearly to a poffeflion of them in ourselves.

To be ready, on all occasions, with difccrnment and truth, in inatterl, 
 matters of duty, to tfate to ourfelves,-This is what I have to do, 
and this is the part for which I am responsible; with a habit of 
-¥'.~ limiting our own desires to a full and perfect discharge of the office so assigned us, is rather indeed the essence of happiness than a mere conception tending to obtain it.

All men partake in the concerns of ordinary life, and cannot without absurdity neglect their own subsistence and accommodation, the ceconomy of their fortune, the settlement of their families, the defence and welfare of their country; but happy are they who, in such matters, can diftinguifli the part afligned to themselves from the part which Providence has reserved to itself.
To man it is given to exert his natural powers with diligence, benignity, and courage; but the event, in every transaCtion is at the disposal of Providence; and the happiest conception or habit of thinking, of which man is susceptible, is, that the part assigned to him may be equally supported under every change of events, and that events do but form a change of the situation in which he is to adt. Let him sincerely lament the misfortune of his friend or his country; but let him be ready, also, with all his ability, to retrieve such misfortunes.

Life itself, with all its supports, is-precarious and temporary.

The longest liver muff die, and the florteft liver can do no more.
For us, it is happy to know, that our concern is to conduct ourselves well through life, whether it be short or long. Benevolence and courage are sufficient to happiness; malice and cowardice constitute misery, whether the life in which they are incurred be of long or short duration.

It is happy to conceive the integrity, diligence, and fidelity, which which are in our own power, though unobserved by others, as 

the completion of good to ourselves. It is happy to conceive the SEAcT.V I.
debasements of a malicious and cowardly nature, not as matters w of degradation merely in the opinion of other men, but as in themselves the completion and essence of all the evil to which we are exposed.

In the relations of mankind, the brother cannot rightly at the part of a stranger, the citizen the part of an alien, nor the individual, confidered apart from every particular relation, rightly forget that he is a man, and has a common cause with mankind.
On this subjeCt, everyjuft conception is produdcive of happiness, and leads the individual to confider himself as surrounded with objects of affection, and the affetion he bears in his mind as the principal excellence of his own nature.

It is happy to know, that the cause ofjuftice and goodness is secured by infinite wisdom and power; to conceive ourselves as instruments in the hand of God, to be employed for the good of his creatures, and our happiness as confitfing in the willing consent of our minds to be so employed.

The adorable perfecions of God inspire a confidence, a veneration, and love ; which amount, at the fame time, to a conviction, that goodness and wisdom, even in such measures of them as are communicable to created beings, are of the highest value; and the affecion they inspire is in itself a disposition to receive the communication of them.

It i- happy, in every place, to carry in our thoughts, that we are in the situation in which it is the cwill of God that we should 3 act; 
 aa; and that to ad, in such situations, with diligence, integrity, 
and good will to mankind, is the part he requires of us.
S$CT.VlII.

Whoever thus habitually thinks or conceives of himself, is poffefled of religion, virtue, and happiness. This no one can procure for another. It is left by the Almighty for every one only to procure it for himself. Aurelius accordingly procured it for himself, but could not for his son. With this unhappy person, notions imbibed among the meaner domestics of the palace precluded the inftrutions of the father and of the friend.

If happiness were an attainment of the mind, to be acquired as a science or an art is learnt from a master, the teacher might justly be confidered .as the vicegerent of God; and no place could contain the numbers that would flock to his school. But, in this theAlmighty has delegated his power to every person only refpeding himself: But he has provided a discipline, in the result of which, perhaps, even the most depraved may, in the end, become willing to avail themselves of the truit which the Author of their nature has reposed in them. When error, and folly, and profligacy, drained to the bottom of the cup, shall have led the mind to nauseate the draught, better thoughts may arise, and man, thoroughly apprised of what is evil, may become willing to remove it, and intentionally work himself into habits of what he conceives to be good.

Such may be, respeCting the most refiratory fubjedCs, the cffeA of a moral government, which aCually operates in the nature of things, and in a manner of which we have formerly endeavoured to remark obme particulars. Reason and knowledge may halten its effccAs; and for this purpose our feeble cndeavours to to ered the fabric of science, that they who retort to it may pro- 
PART. Ii.
ceed on a just knowledge of their place and destination in the 



system of nature. 

The happy, without incurring either dejection or pride, from events whether prosperous or adverse, rely chiefly on what is ofabsolute value, health of body and soundness of mind; and may reckon, as their highest privilege, the power to preferye, in all the varieties of fortune, a disposition, candid, fearless, temperate, and just. Even among the gifts of fortune, they can observe and enjoy matters of absolute value, in respect to which there is no possible ground of interference or competition: Such are the bleflings which nature has equally provided for all men: The water of the fountain, or of the running stream; the light of the fun; and the vital air of the atmosphere; existence itself, in ihort, or admifsion to behold this magnificent scene of the univerfe;-compared to which, any or all the comparative fuperiorities of one man to another disappear, and are as nothing. Society itself is felt, by the happy, as a common blessing to all its members; and, like the air they breathe, equally necessary to the rich, who would avail themselves of the labour and skill of others, as it is to the poor, who would obtain the reward of their labour.

0 






( I7 )

C H A P. II.
OF THE FUNDAMENTAL LAW OF MORALITY, ITS IMMEDI
ATE APPLICATIONS AND SANCTIONS.

S E C T ION I.
 or firfl Trinciple of Efimation in the Character of Maseparately examining the nature of good and evil, under the 
titles ofplea/ure and pain, of beauty and deformity, of excellence and 
 defecl, virtue and vice, of happine/s and miJery; we have endea- 
voured to arrive at some general conception of what is belt for mankind.

O 2 Thefc T II. These articles we have found to differ chiefly in words, but in 

SECT. 1. matter and fubfiance to be nearly the fame. The fame qualities -Y*'X of zvifdom, goodne/s, temrperance, andfortituzde, which conflitute the excellence of human nature, are consfituents also of its beauty and its happiness. The opposite qualities of olly, malice, debauchery, and cowardice, which constitute its defed, conflitute also its deformity, or turpitude, and its misery.

The different appellations in quellion have a reference to different afpeds, under which the subjed may be confidered. Beauty and deformity have a reference to the qualities of good and evil, in refped to their first appearances or asped. Excellence and defe,- virtue and vice, have a reference to their reality in the charader. Happiness and misery have a reference to the itate of enjoyment or suffering, which they conflitute in the mind.

If we fliould endeavour to concentrate this description, or reduce this enumeration of qualities, to some one general principle the most likely to unite the whole, we should be limited in our choice, probably, to one or other of the qualities firli mentioned, in the estimate of charaders ; that is, either to wv/donm, or goodness.

The other two qualities, whether of temperance or fortitude, confidered apart, are less likely to secure the whole. Temzperance, confidered as mere abflinence from improper gratifications, without any positive direction of the mind to a better purpof ; or confidered as restraint from evil, without the formation of a difposition positively good, would constitute a very imperfecl model of excellence or felicity.

Fortitude, confidered as a mere force of mind, without anspecification of a choice or direction, in which that force ifould be employed, might be exerted equally for a wrong as for a right -v purpose; and courage, prompted by folly might be employed for the deftruation of its owner, like the brutal itrength of that wreffler ; who could tear open the cleft of a tree, but who could susser himself at the fame time, to be caught in it.

The term equivalent to wisdom, among the antients, was employed by them to comprehend every article of praise, and enabled them also to comprise the laws of morality in the single recommendation of this quality. In our translation of that term, however, the sense is more limited; and, were we to slate wisdom as the fundamental principle of morality, we should be thought to substitute a prudential choice of our interests for what ought to be matter of affection, and the effusion of a benevolent heart. Mere prudence is an excellence of the understanding only; but virtue includes, as a preferable consideration, the energy and diretion of an amiable and happy disposition.

It is well known that, to secure a proper choice of conduct, on all occasions, good affection or disposition is not less neceffary, than able judgement: Nay, we may be convinced, from experience, that persons of common understanding, with fit difpositions, are less apt to err on trying occasions, than the ablest understanding unsupported by any goodness of heart; or than mere understanding, warped as we may suppose it to be in the defec of good dispositions, by motives of a different tendency.

If I Milo of Crotona.

 If we are, therefore, to contract our description of happiness, 

SECT. I or reduce it to a point, around which the most valuable qualities <^/~\ A of human nature are likely to be collected, we may venture to select that of goodness, or benevolence, as the molt likely to serve our purpose; and, by way of principal or fundamental law of moral vwifdom, may assume, that the greatest good incident to human nature is the love of mankind.

The diffirent forms or afpeds of this disposition, as it may be exercised in pity to the distressed, or in candour and humanity indiscriminately towards all men; as it may be exercised in the mutual confidence of friends, or in the love of a citizen to his country, have been already stated; and although, in this place, its designation in the mind of a man be taken from his relation to mankind, a title under which are comprehended objecs the most intimate to him, and the leait likely to be mistaken by him; yet, the disposition so charaCerifed is in reality a susceptibility of just affection towards every object, whether of pity, refpedt, or veneratiq.n; whether the lowest or the highest that can enter the thoughts of a well disposed and a happy mind.

The love of mankind, on every arduous occasion is an aid to the judgement, in directing the conduct which a wife man is defined to hold: In difficult situations, it is a noble support of courage.
Even the timorous become bold under the instigation of a warm or generous aftrect-ion; the humane, by habits of benevolence, are iecured againit the effect of dilpofitions comparatively inferior or mean; and ordinary men, when routed to feelings of gencrofity or pity, remain insensible to the allurements of inferior plealfrc, or the ilffc'rings of pain.

 therefore, may in some degree be confidereas a principle of wisdom, of fortitude, and temperance; and, as it either inspires or requires for its support every other good >
quality of human nature, we cannot greatly err, in affuming it as the fundamental or primary objec of moral law. Its external effects, expressions, or appearances, are the supreme objecs of esteem and complacency; and its reverse, cruel infenfibility, and malice, recollected in ourselves, or observed in others, are the supreme objects of remorse, of indignation and hatred.

Hence it is, that the murderer is the common object of deteftation to himself and all men; and without waiting for the conviction of external evidence, is so often betrayed by the horrors of remorse which affect his own mind.



S E C T I N II.

Of the firt and more general Applications of Moral Law.

 THE applications of a physical principle are made, either to the 
 formation of theories, and the explanation of phenomena; or to 
-Y,, the production of effeas, and the practice of arts.

Physical science is fruitful of arts, or enables the person who is acquainted with the operative laws of nature, to direct its operations to his own purpose. Moral principle being a just conception or adequate expression of what is good, is fruitful of wisdom and proper conduct. Its first application is to form the temper, to correct false apprehensions of things, to confirm the truth, to cultivate just affection, and to direct the energy of a strenuous mind in external actions, and to induce and confirm all the habits of a virtuous life.

There is one point of view in which the sciences, whether phyfical or moral, unite their effects. That point to which they feverally verally tend, when physical science becomes comprehensive of 

the order of nature, or lays open the view to infinite goodness and 




wisdom ; and moral science, abftraaing from local forms and ob- wv fervances,becomes in the mind a principle of extenfivebenevolence, by which the individual fates himself as a part in the order of nature, and entirely devoted to the will of its Author.

In these points of view, science may be confidered as the higheft attainment of created intelligence, and its nearest approach to a communication with the supreme Creator; an approach, in which, through the medium of knowledge, it receives an impression, and contemplates a form of beauty, the most likely to command its affections.

The diftindions, which we have been confidering, of enjoyment and uffering, of excellence and defed, of happiness and miery, subsist in the mind, and may be conceived as properties of mind, abfiraaed from any external effec or appearance whatever.

At the fame time, as every property of the human mind is a modification of an adive animal, as well as of an intelligent being, as it is a measure of power, or a direction of will, forming the energy of a nature so mixed, and of which the effects must appear wherever the living nature is destined to range or to ply its exertions, we cannot suppose the mind to possess any quality, whether of excellence or defet, that is not attended with a suitable consequence in the tranfadions of life.

Hence it is, that the animal and physical acfions of men present an objedt of moral discernment, and furnifli subject s of commendation and censure, more obvious to most men than even the VOL, I[. P qualities PARr II. qualities of mind itself, when they attempt to conceive such 

CHAPT. 1. qualities apart from external expressions or effec'ts: And, as men, ~\,'P/ in some inflances, do not appear to be assured even of their own thoughts, until they have put them in words; so they are, with much better reason, doubtful of what may be the qualifications of any other person, until he has given to his thoughts and difpositions their effect in his conduc.

- Virtue, therefore, in the mixed nature of man, is at once a condition of his mind, an aspee and carriage of his person, and an ordinary series of adtion, fitted to his situation, as the member of a community, in which the conduc of every particular person contributes its flare to the good or the evil incident to the whole.

So far the subjeCt admits of a general flatement, in which there is no difficulty. In the more particular treatment of it, however, some difficulties have arisen, which it may be proper to slate, before we enter on the detail of moral obligations and duties.

These difficulties relate to the phenomenon of moral approbation, confidered as a subjec of theory; or to the different opinions of men, on the subjed of moral actions and duties, confidered as a flandard of estimation for mankind.

Relating to these subjects, we may enquire, first of all, upon what principle men proceed, in efimating the morality of actions ? Next, Whence the difference of opinion, on the subjea of moral duties ? Whence the real gradations of merit and demerit ?
And, from the observations that may occur, endeavour to col, lcA

leA some fundamental rule or canon of estimation, refpeaing the 

morality of external acions, and the propriety of manners, be- 




fore we proceed to confider the variety of fanaions, under which v such ations are required; or before we enter on the separate departments of science, to which the fludy of morality refers, under the titles ofjuri/prudence, casuistry, and politics.

Of the Difficulty which has arien in accounting for Moral 4pprobation.

 IF, according to the result of our enquiries on the subjea of 
 good and evil, what is required as the excellence or virtue of hu
SCv man nature, also confRitute happiness; and if vice, on the contrary, is to be dreaded as the constituent of misery; there cannot be any doubt of the choice to be made.

But virtue, even to those who are far from confidering it as happiness, is still matter of esteem and respect; and vice, even where the vicious are conceived to possess the good things of this life, is reprobated and condemned: Insomuch, that virtue is approved even by those who depart from it; and vice is disapproved even where it is embraced.

This sentiment, therefore, is of a peculiar nature, not a specimen of mere desire and aversion, directed to a particular objeet; but a censorial ad in the mind of man, having cognizance of a right or a a wrong in the measure or tendency of his own desires or aver- 

sions, even when they have most entirely determined his will. 




Doator Clarke, and some others, confidering virtue as the fitness of man's charater and practice to his own frame, and to his place in the system of nature; and, confidering reason or understanding itself as competent to observe the fitness of things, have assumed human reason as the principle of moral discernment.

This system is nearly the fame with that which, making virtue to consist in the conformity of will to truth, makes reason also the arbiter of right and wrong, as of truth and error.

But these systems have been rejected, as unfit to explain the phenomenon of moral approbation; which, being itself an assection or sentiment of the mind, must be derived from a principle to be fought for among the considerations that influence the will, not among the perceptions of mere intelligence, which go no farther than to remark the existence of things.

Upon this ground, men of speculation have had recourse to various considerations of utility, private or public; offymnpathy, and of moralfenfe; to account for the approbation or disapprobation of actions which they themselves or others perform.

The investigation and application of any one of these principles, joined to the refutation of others, has amounted to treatises, and led to discussions of great length. But the utmost that can be done in this place and in a mere summary slate of so much argument, is to enumerate a few of the principal theories; and endeavour 
 deavour to extricate the mind from the perplexity, which so many 
 discordant accounts of the fame subjed may occasion.

In the mean time, the Regulue Philofophandi, or canons of reason, as they are prescribed in other examples of physical inveftigation, must be fuRtained in this *.

I. We are not to aji1gn, as the caus-e of any appearance, what is not itfeif known as a Jfat in nature.

Upon this principle, we reject hypothesis, or the mere fuppofition of a cause, of whose existence we have not any previous knowledge; as the vortex of Des Cartes is rejeded in accounting for the planetary revolutions.

On this rule, it is probable that none of our theorists will trespass; for, although iome have proposed to account for intelligence itself on the supposition of some occult configuration or motion of material atoms, constituting reflection and thought; yet, as the mind, when so constituted, ever ats upon some confideration known to itself, it is impossible to think of explaining an ad of the mind, in any particular instance, without recurring to some one or other of the considerations, on which the mind is generally known to proceed.

II. We are not to deduce effec s from caumfs, which, though real, are unfit to produce the effec7.

In the conneetion ofcaufe and effec/, in contradiftindion to a mere fortuitous contiguity of circumstances, there is supposed a continual :1 Vide Ncwtoni Principii, lib. iii. ab initio.

continual or inseparable accompanyment of one with the o- 

ther. Wherever the cause exists, there muff the effed exist also. 




And the converse. They are ever to be found together, and in wthe fame proportions.

Upon these principles, acual utility, whether private or public, will not account for the phenomenon of moral approbation.

For, apart at least from any private utility, it must be acknowledged that men approve of virtue, as it was exhibited in scenes long since past, and on occasions in which they could not possibly have any private or interested concern.

The sentiment of approbation, therefore, is certainly not proportioned to the private benefit actually received from the action approved, by the person who approves.

Utility, as it concerns mankind indiscriminately, and without any limitation of persons and times, is certainly more likely to account for this phenomenon.

Virtue is no doubt of a nature to be useful to mankind; but if, under the title of utility, as is probable, we refer to the external effects of virtue, we ihall not find moral approbation keep pace with the aCtual measure of benefit mankind received from this or any other cause.

There are many examples of great utility, in which no subjet of moral approbation is conceived. Land is fertile; a tree is fruitful; a ftcer performs much useful labour; yet, in these there is no subjec of moral esteem. The supposed cause, contrary 
PARTI. trary to rule, is found to exist in many fich inflances, without 
CHAP .IL producing the effect it is brought to explain.

In answer to this objection, it used to be admitted, by the author of this system, " that moral approbation does not extend to "matters of mere physical utility ; or is limited to mind, and its " aive exertions." This limitation, accordingly, may be admitted: But acual utility, even in affections of mind, does not always amount to a fubje .of moral approbation. What more useful in nature, than the disposition of every man to preserve himself; for, on this the safety of the whole depends: Yet its most reasonable effeAs are merely tolerated, seldom applauded as virtue, and often reprobated as felfiihnefs and vice.

This effe&, also, of moral approbation is Sometimes found without the acual utility which is supposed to be its cause.

The mere attempts of a virtuous man to serve his friend, or his country, is an object of moral esteem; not only where he may have failed in his purpose, but even where the event may have been calamitous to himself, or to others. The person, who dies with his friend, in attempting to save him; the person who finks under the ruins of his country, in striving to preserve it; is no less an obje& of moral approbation, than the most successful adventurer in either cause. And, if success, for the moif part, give lustre to enterprize, the tender melancholy that arises from a tragic event, is well known'alfo to enforce the love of virtue, without regard to utility, of which the idea is excluded by the want of success.

It appears plain from there inflances, that moral approbation, 3 though though limited to the exertions of mind, yet does not accompany 
PART. IT.
every useful exertion; nor even where it applies, does it re- 
 

quire any actually useful effect. The will alone is sufficient Y
to procure it: This, in other words, is to admit that benevolence, not acual utility, is the objet of moral approbation: And, concerning this, most parties may be agreed. Even Mr Hutchison, who assumed a moral sense, as being a specific faculty, required to distinguish between moral good and evil, confidered benevolence, nevertheless, as the essence of moral good, or that quality which mankind, by their sense of right and wrong, are enabled to difIinguiih as good.

The benevolent will concur, one with another, in every thing that is for the benefit of mankind; but, in accounting for moral approbation, we must still return to the consideration of that peculiar sentiment of estimation, of which virtue is the objeca.
And the whole must end in a confession, that virtue, of which a principal part is benevolence, is estimable in itself, not merely as the means of obtaining any other end.

If, in the term utility, we include whatever is beneficial, or tends to the benefit of mankind, then is virtue iffelf, or its conftituents of wvifdom, goodness, temperance, and fortitude, the greatest good of which human nature is susceptible: And we only risk misleading the mind from its principal objet, by substituting utility for the more proper expression of a blefling important to the person whose character it is, more than even tothofe on whom any of its external effects are beflowed.

It were prepofierous to cxprefs the value of happiness, by calling 
 ling it useful. Or, if a person who is happy in himself be SHAP rIl thereby disposed to be useful to others, it were prepoRterous to weY-\ fay, that the happiness of one person is valuable only so far as it is useful to another.

Virtue is, no doubt, supremely useful, even in the ordinary sense of this term. Justice, liberality, and charity, appear in adts of beneficence; and render those who are inclined to practife them, the guardians and friends of their fellow creatures.
Even what we term acs of prudence, fortitude, or temperance, though teeming to terminate in the welfare of the person adting, are in fad preservatives of good order, and contribute to the welfare of mankind. The benevolent man is the more serviceable to his fellow creatures, that he is in himself prudent, fober, and intrepid. The opposite vices are deftruaive, pernicious, or unserviceable.

This tendency of virtue has been set forth in colours of glowing and superior eloquence *.

The external effe&s of virtue are acknowledged; but we cannot suppose that the sentiment of love, or refpe&, of which virtue is the objea, is refolveable into a mere consideration of convenience or profit; nor can we overlook its value in conflituting the worth and felicity of those by whom it is possessed, for the fake of a convenience it may procure to others, who, without any merit of their own, may wiflh to derive benefit from the external effets of merit in other men.

Upon * Sce HIime's Moral Eflays.

Upon this principle of utility, the diftinsion of right and 




wrong appears to be resolved into a mere difference of tendency, 
or external effea in the ations of men. In another ingenious rWr attempt to explain the fame phenomenon, the approbation of virtue is resolved into /ympathy, or what may, for ought we know, be a kind of accidental humour in those who approve or condemn a supposed virtuous or vicious action.

Synmpathy, in common language, is limited to commiseration or pity; but, has of late, by men of speculation, been extended to sentiments of congratulation also. It may be supposed either merely inftinAive, and a contagion of sentiment, as when without any knowledge of a cause, we laugh with those who laugh; become gay with the joyful; or fad with the melancholy: Or it may be supposed to proceed from a conception of the occasion or caufewhether joyful, provoking, or melancholy, that is the motive of ation, or objet ofpaffion. And it appears to be in this last sense, that Jympathy is assumed as the principle of moral approbation.

When the observer feels, in a certain degree, the passion or motive by which another is atuated, upon a supposition that the fame thing had happened to himself; this participation of sentiment is supposed to constitute approbation. Thus, when a person complains or exults, if the observer, upon a slate of the cafe, partake in his sorrow or his joy, it is said, that he cannot but approve of it.

If the joy or grief exceed what the observer can go along with, it is condemned as weakness or levity: if it fall short of what the obfervcr is disposcd to feel, it is condemned as insensibility: if 4Q2 nearly 
PART IL: nearly what he himself would feel in a similar cafe, it is efleemed 

SECT. IIi or refpeted as proper; and so on of every other paflion or senti\vYv ment appearing in the conduc of human life.

It may be difficult, in this account of the matter, to fix where the moral quality resides; whether in the person observed, in the observer, or in neither separately, but in the mere concurrence of one with another.

This last, indeed, or a mutual sympathy, may imply that the parties are satisfied with one another; but, in the sense of all mankind besides, their agreement may be wrong: And, if the action of one person need the sympathy of another to justify it, we are still to enquire in what manner is that sympathy itself evinced to be right.

This theory proceeds upon an assumption, that to partake in any passion or sentiment, or to be conscious that we ourselves fliould, in like circumstances, be so affected, is to approve of the motive to action, and to approve of its effects: But it is acknowledged, on all hands, that approbation or disapprobation is a fpecific sentiment, not a species or degree of any other sentiment: That it concerns the right or wrong of other passions, whether original or sympathetic, and therefore enabling the mind, on occafion, to pronounce of sympathy itself, whether it be proper or improper.

If, in judging of this theory, we recur to the maxims of reason already cited A, wef.all find them violated in this, no less than in * Rcgulax Pliilofophandi Ncwtoni.

in the assumption of utility, for a principle of moral approbation. 

That is, the effec will be found without the fuppofedcaufe, and the 
.
cause will be found without its supposed effec. In refped to acts of <\
uncommon bravery, we admire the more for being conscious that we ourselves could not have done so much. Although we are conscious that, in extreme indigence, we ourselves must have asked for relief, yet we do not admire a beggar. Although we are conscious that with money we ourselves should have bought an estate, yet we do not admire the purchaser. Although we sympathize very feelingly with the admirer of a fine woman, we do not mistake his passion for virtue, any more than we mistake for generosity the choice made by him who bought an estate. There is sympathy, as well as utility, without approbation; and there is approbation without either; for we Sometimes have an idea of what we ought to have done, or to have felt, as very different from the part which we aAually take in the feelings of other men. And it is remarkable that sympathy ihould be then only equivalent to approbation, when we sympathise with the benevolent, the disinterested, the courageous, and the just.

But, if it ihould be acknowledged, that, to partake in the sentiment of another is to approve, and not to partake is to disapprove of his conduct, it remains, upon this system, to be flated, by what sympathy it is that we judge of ourselves.
If, by the actual participation of others in our sentiments and acions ;-it should follow, that, in adtions concealed from the world, there flould be no conscience of right or wrong; or that, in aAions submitted to vulgar judgement, we flould be in great danger of error ; the multitude is often ill informed, and otherwife ill qualified to judge of merit. And this indeed is so far acknowledged, . acknowledged, in forming the theory in question, that virtue is not I
referred to the test of actual sympathy, but to the test of a fympaw>r\ thy, imagined and feleCed in the cafe of a well informed and impartial observer.

Here too there is a masterly tone of expreflion *; and, if eloquence were the test of truth, no want of evidence to obtain belief: But, in this reference to a supposed well informed and impartial observer, there is an implied confession, that there is some previous standard of estimation, by which to fele& the judge of our acions; and this standard, by which we are enabled to feled an impartial and well informed fpeAator, to whose judgement we refer, or by which we are enabled to judge of sympathy itself, as well as of every other acion or passion, is that principle of moral approbation, of which we are now in search.

This is not merely a question of fact, as in other examples of physical theory: For we do not enquire what men aAually do in any number of instances; but what they ought to do in every inflance ? what is the principle of moral discernment on which they may safely proceed, whether in judging of others, or in chusing for themselves ?

Sympathy is no doubt a part in the social nature of man. Individuals mutually bestow, and delight to receive it; but, like every other natural disposition, it is susceptible of abuse, and by no means a safe or an adequate principle of estimation. As the presumptuous appreciate others by their own standard, the weak and dependent rife or fall in their own esteem, according to the value that is put upon them by others; but neither one nor the other, surely, should be set up as the models of perfection to mankind.

It * Vide Smith's Theory of Moral Sentiments.

It is difficult to name the power by which man is enabled to 




distinguish between right and wrong, without recurring to the ge- S T. ilI.
neric appellation of. ome of his other faculties, asfen/e, perception, vrv or judgement. This power has accordingly been termed a moral sense, or a sense of moral good and evil; and the name has led to an hypothesis or supposition, that as nature, in the cafe of different animals, has superadded to the other principles of sensitive life, some peculiar faculty ofJecing, Jmell, or feeling, as in the lynx's eye, the hound's rioftril, or the spider's touch; as to other qualities of the loadstone, are joined the magnetic polarity and the affinity to iron: So, to the mind of man, over and above the powers cognitive and active, the Maker has given a power judicative, refpeting the merit or demerit of character, and approving or disapproving even the dispositions, from which the moral conduct proceeds,, Lord Shaftesbury sometimes uses the term moral sense, as expreffive of a conscious discernment of moral good and evil, but seems to refer to the fad merely without any thought of an hypothefis to account for the phenomenon of moral approbation.
It was enough, in his apprehension, that the diftintion of moral excellence is real, and that we are by our nature well qualified to perceive it. In this, also, the seas of antient philosophy seem to have acquiesced, without requiring any other account of the matter.

If it be understood, therefore, that difficulties arising on the question of theory, relating to the explanation of the phenomenon of moral approbation, do not amount to any degree of uncertainty in the fact ; and, if it be admitted that moral right and wrong are of the most serious consequence to mankind ; the faculty, .by which we perceive the opposite conditions of men in 3 thi s 1 this particular, may be known by any name that does not tend SEAT. II.I t confound the subjea with others of a different nature.

If moralsenfe, therefore, be no more than a figurative exprefsion, by which to distinguish the discernment of right and wrong, admitting this to be an ultimate fa: in the contfitution of our nature; it may appear nugatory to dispute about words, or to require any other form of expreflion than is fit to point out the faAt in question. And if this fad, though no way susceptible of explanation or proof, being uniform to a great extent in the operations or nature, is itself a law, not a phenomenon; it may no doubt serve as a principle of science, to account for appearances that result from itself, and to diret the pradice of arts throughout the departments in which it prevails.

Thus the laws of motion, gravitation, cohesion, magnetzfm, electricity, fluidity, elasticity, and so forth, which are not explicable upon any principle previously known in nature, are nevertheless received as unquestionable sacs, and with great advantage pursued to their consequences in the order of things. In this pursuit they furnish at once a secure diretion to the pradice of arts, and the most fatisfaaory account of appearances in the terreitrial and solar systems.

Men of speculation were sometimes amused with conjeAures, refpeaing the cause of gravitation, and the intimate nature of other phyjical lawIs; but science made little progress, while these were confidered as phenomena to be explained, and not as principles of science applicable to explain their diversified effeds throughout the physical system.

3 Such Such, also, we may suppose to be the fate of theory, when em- 


ployed to explain the law of estimation in the mind of man. The 
existence of this law is known, as the existence of mind itself is sv known, without any thing previously understood, from which to infer or explain it, or on which toreft our belief of its truth. Its applications, in our judgement of manners, are no less proper than the application of any physical law in accounting for its own fpecific appearances. They enable the moralist, in particular inftances, to ascertain what is good for mankind; and to form a regular system of moral estimation and precept, throughout all the subdivisions of law, of manners, or political in/fitutions.

We may, or may not, conceive the power of discerning between excellence and defe&, as a faculty inherent to intelligent being. To fuchbeing, indeed, it appears essential to be conscious of himself; and in his attainments, whether actually varied,or only conceived to be variable, it may be essential that he confider unequal degrees of excellence and defeR, as measures of the good or the evil of which he himfelfis susceptible. Created intelligence may advance in the use of this discerning faculty, and have a continued approach to the model of divine wisdom; a termination from which its diflance may diminifl, but at which it never can arrive.

The essence of almighty God we must conceive to be most simple ; being that which necessarily exists from eternity. Of his supreme intelligence, we have full evidence in the system of nature; and of his diftinguifhling the opposite conditions of moral good and evil, there is equally irresistible proof.
The diftinlcion of excellence and defcet originates in the unequal R conditions 
PART 1I. conditions of mind, and the discernment of such condition is not CHCAP. I only peculiar, but necessary also to the course which created beings , _r~ of this order are defiined to run. Hunger and thirst, or any other incitement to self preservation, is not more efTential to the animal frame, than the preference of what is perfec, to what is defective, is to the constitution of mind: It is a preservative of reason, a main spring of exertion, and a princple of advancement, in the track of intelligent nature.

H-ence it is that numbers of men, who are far from conceiving virtue as the constituent of happiness, nevertheless confider it as the constituent of excellence and perfection, which they behold with refpec' and esteem.

Man alone in this animal kingdom, for ought we know, apprehends thegradationof excellence in thefcaleofbeing; and, thoughall men are agreed upon the reality of a comparative eminence, in the ascending steps ofthis scale, it may be difficult to assign the principle of estimation, so as tojuftify the preference which is given to one order of being above another. Mr Buffon ascribes this preference to the greater number of relations, which certain orders of being bear to the system of nature around them ". " In the multitude of things " presented * Dans la soule d' objets que nous prefente ce vafte globe dont nous venous de faire la description, dans le nombre infini des differentes prodlutions, dont fa surface eft couverte et peuplie, les animaux tiennent le premier rang, tant par la conformity qu' ils ont avcc nous, que par la fuperiorite que nous leur connoiffons fur les etres vegitans ou inanimes. Les animaux out par leurs fens, par leur forme, par leur movement, bcaucoup plus de rapports avec les choses que les environnent, que n' en ont les vcgetaux; ceux-ci par leur developpcment et par leur diflcrcntes parties, on't aunfl une plus grand nombre dle rapports avec les objets extericurs, que n' en ont les mineraux ou les picrrcs, que n' onl aucune forte du vie ou die movement, ct c'ei. par ce plus grand nombre de rapports que 1' animal fit recllcinent au dellis du vegetal, ct Ic vegctal " presented on this globe; in the infinite number of different 

" productions, with which its surface is covered or peopled, the 

" animals," he observes, " occupy the first orthe highest rank, ,T.V
"c whether by their resemblance to us, or by the superiority L which we perceive in them, to the vegetable or inanimate na" tures. The animals, by their make and by their sensitive and " moving powers, have many more relations to the fubjeas a6 round, than the vegetables have. These, in their turn, by the " unfolding of their parts; by their figure, their organization, "and growth, have many more relations than the minerals, or 6 any mere lifeless mass of matter. And it is by virtue of this " greater number of relations, that the animal is superior to the " vegetable; and the vegetable is superior the mineral. Even we " ourselves, confidered in refpet to the material part of our a frame, are not otherwise superior to the animals, than by a " few relations more, such as accrue to us from the use of the ' hand and the tongue; and, though all the works of God are ( in themselves equally perfect, yet, in our way of conceiving " them, the animal is most compleat; and man the mafler-piece " of all."

This is, perhaps, the firit attempt that ever was made to give a reafonb why animals are reckoned of a higher order than plants, and these of a higher order than minerals or unorganized matter of any fort. And though no one disputes this order of things, yet this attempt to explain it will scarcely appear fatisfadory. Many will vcgetal nu tIceflis du mineral. Nous mcme, a nc confiiIercr que la partie materielle dc noitre ctrc, nous ne f11 mnl e n:udcilr ties anirinauxl que par c clqucqus rapports tlc pinis, tlis iquec ccux que ous tld, nent: Ia la.inuc et 1a minll ; ct cloitjlll les oiivr.igts dl Crc :.ilcur foit cn cux -mcmes tos cg:ailmcmnt parf.iit. I' limal , si'

ai l , i l, tlc IlcIn (1d'
:'l'Icrc( voiri I')ouvr.agc plus co:nplct i' l .l :lurc, c ] ,'r10 1i e n llt l c'. lrclf ' our ! '.

 will be ready to alk, why estimation ihould keep pace with the c 1p'. 1r. number of relations, which a subjea bears to other parts of the /-y'v- world around. One relation, compleatly and beneficently adjusted, may be preferable to many. And, if a beneficent purpose can be obtained by one relation, however simple, the multiplication must appear rather a defec than a beauty. It appears, indeed, that where a number and variety of expedients or relations are wanting to obtain a purpose, the disposition and ability to combine such a variety to one common beneficent end, is a great perfection in the power by whom such arrangementis made.
When man has formed to himself any number of relations to the fubjets around him, such as he bears to the field he has cultivated, the city he has built, the work of any kind he has performed, the law or institution he has adopted; in such relations, indeed, the superiority of his own nature appears: But, in what his Maker has done for him, or for the other animals; in what is done for plants and minerals, it is the majesty of God that we revere; and the relations of things merely inanimate serve only as the fleps, by which we are led to contemplate the wisdom and goodness of the first cause.

In this sense, we already observed, beauty and excellence are ascribed to material fubjeds. And the inequality of rank which appears so real in the system of things, is a mere gradation of the lufire or effect, with which intelligence, or its principal features of goodness and wisdom, are made to appear in the different orders of being. The eloquent naturalist, cited above, seems to drop his arithmetic of relations, when he confiders the pre-eminence of intelligent forms: in the system of nature. For he applies it only to the material part of man; and, in reality, mere number of relations could ill account for the fuperiority of any nature whatever; as the relation between any 3' two two species of being must be mutual, and in point of number at 

least the fame; for so many relations as man has to the system ECAP. II.
of nature around him so many precisely muff the system of na- ->
ture have to him. But no one ever questioned the pre-eminence of intelligent being; ever required an account to be given of it; or desired to know by what faculty it is perceived. Dimenfions are meafired by some flandard quantity of the fame dimension; length, by some standard mreafure of length; and solid content, by some itandard measure of solid dimension; and why not intelligence, also, by some flandard conception of intelligent nature. The degrees to be estimated consist in variable measures of wisdom and goodnes ; and whoever has an idea of these, will judge accordingly of the specimens that approach to the itandard, or of the defecs that come short of it.

Some who have carried the analogy of animal sense and perception into this subjed, have flarted a question, whether moral excellence be not a secondary quality; that is, like the perception of smell, found, or tafle, if it may not proceed from a cause in nature very different from that we conceive * ? But in the esteem of wisdom and goodness, there is not any danger that the quality we conceive is different from the quality that exists, as our conception of found is different from a tremor in the particles of air: for it is the very existing thing itself of which we have a conception, taken indeed from feeble, occasional, and passing fpecimens, but easily abftraded by us from their defecs and imperfeclions, to serve as a flandard of estimation for what we propose as the model of excellence, wherever our judgement applies or wherever a choice is to be made.

It · Vide Lord Kamcs' M\oral EfTys.

 If we are alked, therefore, what is the principle of moral ap

probation in the human mind, we may answer, It is the Idea ~s'-r' of perfecion or excellence, which the intelligent and associated being forms to himself; and to which he refers in every sentiment of esteem or contempt, and in every exprefflon of commendation or censure.

Nay, but mankind are not agreed on this subjet; they differ no less in what they admire, than in what they enjoy. The idea of pefeAion no doubt may be afflciated with fubjeds divested of merit: But notwithstanding the effeA of such association in warping the judgement, virtue is approved as the specific perfection or excellence of man's nature; and as no one ever inquired why perfeAion should be esteemed; it is difficult to conceive why they should look for any other account of moral approbation than this.

From the predilections of birth and fortune,sew, if any, are altogetherblind to the diftintions of wisdom and folly, of benevolence and malice, offobriety and debauchery, of courage and cowardice.
And if these characters of mind could be perceived without the intervention of external signs; the difference of judgement on the fubjecAs of moral good and evil would, in a great measure diffappear; or there, would not be so much diversity of opinion as we observe amongst men, concerning the forms or description of virtue. But the external actions which may result from any given disposition of mind being different in different instances, may occasion a difference of judgement, or a variety of custom and manners ; and fuggell the ncccflity of a principle or fiandard of cflimation, on which their rate of merit or demerit may be aIfecly clabWlilhcd. eV accordingly proceed to the consideration of thcfle particulars.

Of the Dificulty of reconciling the different Judgements of Men relating to the Morality of External .A4ions.

VW HEN the reality of any moral diftinaion is questioned, 

we naturally refer to the general sense of mankind on the subjea. 

To give this evidence, however, its full effet, in supporting the 
reality in question, it is supposed, that mankind ought to be unanimous in their verdied, and agree, not only in admitting, that there is a diftinclion, but agree also in the description of fubjets, or in the choice of particulars, to be ranged under the opposite predicaments of moral good and moral evil.

If men, it may be alleged, have a disposition to felea objets of commmendation and censure, and yet are not agreed in their choice, we must suppose their difference of judgement to arise, not from a want of disposition in them to find out the truth, but from the want of a sufficient difference in the nature of things to lead or to cflablilh their judgement.

Sceptics PA RT 11. Sceptics, accordingly, in-order to repel the evidence of reality 

SECT. IV. in matters of moral diftindsion, refer to the contradictory notions <v ~of mankind, on the subjea of manners.

" Mankind," they observe, " blame in one person, and in one " cafe, what they applaud in another. Thus, to deceive or to ' kill is in one instance condemned, in another is applauded or "permitted. What is held forth as a subjea of praise in one age or country, is overlooked or neglected in another. What, in "one age or nation, is permitted as allowable or innocent, in an" other is reprobated and abhorred, under some denomination " of impiety, incest, or blasphemy %.

" Certain forms of behaviour, forms of expression or gesture, are in one country, or amongst one set of men, required to "good manners, or received with complacency; whilst they are "confidered as an unpardonable injury or insult in other na"tions, or in other companies.

In one nation, we are told,it is reckoned an at of filial piety " for a son to kill his superannuated parent; in other countries, " this, though we flould suppose it to be done with content of the " person suffering, would be detested as a molt horrid instance " of murder and parricide.

" The definitions of crimes vary in the laws of different counC tries: Insomuch, that what is destined to revere puniflment in one w Profana illic omnia, qua; apud nos sacra; rurfurn conceffa apud illos, quxc nobis incclta.

Tacitus de Judreis, Ijilt. lib. v. c. 4.

" one country,is suffered, in another, to efcapewithimpunity,even 

" without censure. Thus, theft, which was punished at Athens, 



" was encouraged in Sparta. CV

' All men are loud in commendations of virtue; but observe " their applications of this term, how different in the detail of " particulars? Among the antientRomans it meant valour a"lone. Among the Jews it meant zeal for their own institutions, " and animosity to the reft of mankind. Among housewives it "means ceconomy and notable industry In Italy it means a taste for antiquities, and curiosities of nature or art."

From the whole of these instances it is proposed to infer, that there is not any certain rule of approbation or disapprobation respeding the manners or behaviour of men. And notwithftanding the essential felicity and merit of wisdom and goodness as qualities of intelligent being, it must be allowed to follow from such varieties of apprehension, refpeding the morality of external acion, that the diftin&ion of right and wrong cannot be taken from the mere physical action itself, or that mere external movements of the body have not the fame power to command our moral feelings, as they have to command our perception of their form and physical effet.

When the ihutters of a window are opened, and the light is admitted, every objed in the room is illuminated; vision is diftinC to all who have organs of fight, and the perceptions of magnitude, figure, and colour are the fame to every one present.
When certain tremors are produced in the air, every ear is struck with the sensation of found; and however one person may differ from another in his conjedures refpeAing its cause, or even reVOL. IL S fpcicing 
PART I. fpessing the musical effed, the tone produced is the fam'e .

o eVery 
 , SHCT IA. one by whom it is heard.

The fame thing may be said with relation to the form and consequence of any aCion or movement of the body. All who are present perceive the fame physical operation, and the fame continuance or change of condition in the subjea affected by such operation. A life may be taken away or preserved in their fight, and there is no difference of perception refpeaing the physical cause or thephyfical consequence. May we not presume, therefore, that if moral right and wrong were equally apart'in the form of an aAion, as is the physical description of it, the perceptions of men in this refpec' also would be equally uniform.

The contrary, however, is observed to be true. The fame physical ation in one initance is applauded as a virtue, in another instance is reprobated as a crime; or rather, to speak with more propriety, where the physical aCtion is the fame, the moral a6tion is altogether different; aid is an objedt of approbation or disapprobation, corresponding to that difference of the moral quality.

For an example,tin which the physical ation may, in repeated instances, continue the fame, while the moral acion is extremely different; we may suppose the death of a iman, 'ffected with a sword, in the manner in which executions in omne countries are performed; in which affaflinations are committed; and battles are fought. In all these instances the physical acion may be precisely the fame, and every fpeCator have the fame perception of it; but the moral adion may be, and frequently is, extremely different.

To To devise the death of a man is criminal in the robber, who, 


to strip the traveller of his properity, attacks him on the high 
way. It is criminal in the faffin, who, from jealousy, revenge ~
or malice prepense in any other form, lays a snare for the life of his neighbour. But in a person who defends himnfelf, in a judge who has condemned a criminal, or in the officer who conducts the-execution of ajufi sentence, the fame physical ation may be innocent; may be the discharge of a duty, or an ad of public juflice. In a soldier, who, at the hazard of his own life, kills the enemy of his country, the material effect produced is precifely the fame, with that which is criminal in the affaifin or in the robber. But the moral action in these instances is extremely different: In te rt t eteeme the fir it is eteemed a of thei merit, in the others it is condemned as of the most atrocious guilt.

Under this teeming difference of judgement refpe&ing the fame acion, there is actually no more difference refpeaing the moral apprehension than there is refpeding the physical effe&.
While every one perceives that a man is killed, every one perceives also that the assassin or the robber did wrong in killing him; that the soldier a&ing in defence of his country, or the officer of justice in execution of a legal sentence, did right. In the assassin or robber this physical at was an aa of malice or rapacity; in the judge, magistrate, or soldier, it was an ad of public justice or heroic valour: And mankind, we may repeat, are as little at variance with refpedt to the moral quality of the adtion in either cafe, as they are with refpea to the mere form or description of the physical operation.

We are familiar with this diftindion between the physical and S 2 the 
 the moral action, under a variation of circumstances which diS
ersify the cafe: And though .the difference of judgement is more yv>r ·striking in such instances than it is in any other; yet no one thinks himself authorised from thence to question the reality of moral diftintions. There are indeed no specimens of moral good and evil more striking than those which are presented by the- fame physical ation, performed by different persons and in different circumflances; from the motives of benevolence and duty, on the one hand, or of malice and depravity on the other.

Every one is aware of the different judgements to be given where the cafes are different; and togive the variety of judgement an appearance of contradiction in the estimate of moral good and evil, we must have recourse to examples less familiar and in which we are less qualified to distinguish the moral from the physical qualities of an aAion. We are at a loss, for inflance, when we are told, that what is punished as a crime in one country is rewarded or commended as a duty in another; because we are not qualified to perceive in what manner the moral acion, under a different set of manners from our own, should be differently underflood, or in what manner the fame moral action flould result from physical performances extremely different.

This defed, however, may be easily supplied, if we confider, firit of all, that men have different opinions refpeding external objeas, and in one country value that as an honour or a benefit, which in another is rejeded as pernicious, or as an insult: Farther, that many of the actions of men are confidered more as exprejfons of what they mean or intend, than as operations materially beneficial or hurtful. In the first instance, men proceed upon on different notions of what is beneficial or hurtful. In. the o- 

ther they express or interpret their intentions differently. 

In some countries honour is associated with suffering, and it is reckoned a favour to kill, rather with circumstances of torture than otherwise. This is confirmed in our account of the manners of some American nations; and irt the fortitude with which an Indian matron submits to extreme suffering by fire on the funeral pile of her deceased husband. She courts the flames, with a zeal and enthusiasm more ardent than that with which Ihe resorts to the bridal bed, or should mount the throne of fiate in a terrestrial kingdom. Whatever conceptions mankind may have formed of external objeAs and circumstances, as matters of desire or aversion, it is natural for the benevolent to do what he himself and the world around him conceive as a benefit, and to avoid doing to others what they, or he himself, conceives as harm or an insult: And as it is a maxim in law " Volenti non fit injuria"; so it is naturally apprehended, under a variety of opinions refpeaing external objects, that it is beneficent to treat every person in the manner which he himself conceives to be beneficial or kind.

The safety and the justice of this maxim, refpeaing matters of a certain consequence to the welfare of mankind, may no doubt be questioned; and errors of choice, where they do not proceed from malice may be imputed to folly; butthe rulethat every one is tobe fervedor obliged in his own way, ought not to be questioned re fpefing matters of indifference, or of small moment. These are varioufly employed by nations, as the signs or expreflions of good or ill disposition; in the fame manner as, in the use of language, words, 
 words, or articulate founds, are adopted as the signs or expreflions CHaP. 1i.
SECTP. \I. of meaning, intention, or will.

Of this fort, no doubt, is much of the form and ceremonial of common life. It is the form of refpea in Europe to uncover the head: In Japan, we are told, the corresponding form is to drop the flipper, or to uncover the foot. The physical aAion in thlefe instances is different, but the moral aaion is the fame. It is an ad of attention and respect; dispositions equally acceptable, whether expreiled in words, gestures, or signs of any other fort.

Persons, unacquainted with any language but their own, are apt to think the words they use, natural and fixt expressions of things; while the words of a different language they confider as mere jargon, or the result of caprice. In the fame manner, forms of behaviour, different from their own, appear offenlive and irrational, or a perverse substitution of absurd for reasonable manners.

To the ignorant or to the proud, who confider their own cuftoms as a standard for mankind, every deviation from that standard is confidered, not as the use of a different language and form of expression, but as a defeC of reason, and a deviation from propriety and correctness of manners.

Among the varieties of this fort we find actions, gestures, and forms of expression, in their own nature indifferent, entered into the code of civil or religious duties, and enforced under the strongest sanctions of public censure or esteem, or under the strongest denunciations of divine indignation or favour.

x Numberlcfs Numberless ceremonies and observances are adopted in the ri- 


CHaP. I.

tual of different seCs, for the-fame reason that words are adopted 
in the vocabulary of different languages, though with a different V
effect on the minds of ordinary men.

In religion, the rite is supposed to be prescribed by the fame -authority to. which the forms of devotion are addressed. The neglec of it is supposed to constitute offence before that tribunal whose condemnation is fatal. The substitution of- any other rite is supposed to be profane, or an unpardonable insult to the object of worship. Under these apprehensions, arbitrary :signs of devotion are supposed essential to religion; and devia'-tions from the eflablifled pracice, or any variation in the use of such' figns,-is pursued with that vengeance which the zealot thinks necessary to recommend him to God.

In many examples of this fort; as in the use of different languages, the people- have not a different meaning, but merely a difference of the founds in which their meaning is expreifed; so in the-rites of devotion or worship, they admit a variety, not of .the sentiment but of the external performance, which they employ as a sign. or expreflion. And if in the different forms and ceremonies, which they pradife, in their own nature indifferent or innocent, they equally mean to acknowledge and to adore the intelligent power and moral government of God; the zeal with which they condemn and persecute one another, on account of such difference of forms and ceremonies, is no way more rational, than it would be to.fofter national animosity on the score of a different.language or accent of speech.

This 
 words, or articulate founds, are adopted as the signs or expreflions SECT. I. of meaning, intention, or will.

Of this fort, no doubt, is much of the form and ceremonial of common life. It is the form of refpe& in Europe to uncover the head: In Japan, we are told, the corresponding form is to drop the flipper, or to uncover the foot. The physical ation in these instances is different, but the moral adion is the fame. It is an aA of attention and refped; dispositions equally acceptable, whether expressed in words, gestures, or signs of any other fort.

Persons, unacquainted with any language but their own, are apt to think the words they use, natural and fixt expressions of things.; while the words of a different language they confider as mere jargon, or the result of caprice. In the fame manner, forms of behaviour, different from their own, appear offensive and irrational, or a perverse substitution of absurd for reasonable manners.

To the ignorant or to the proud, who confider their own cuftoms as a standard for mankind, every deviation from that standard is confidered, not as the use of a different language and form of expression, but as a defeCt of reason, and a deviation from propriety and correanefs of manners.

Among the varieties of this fort we find ations, gestures, and forms of expression, in their own nature indifferent, entered into the code of civil or religious duties, and enforced under the strongest fanstions of public censure or efleem, or under the strongest denunciations of divine indignation or favour.

Numberless ceremonies and observances are adopted in the ritual of different seas, for tie-fame reason that words are adopted in the vocabulary of different languages, though with a different effec on the minds of ordinary men.

In religion, the rite is supposed to be prescribed by the fame authority to which the forms of devotion are addressed. The neglect of it is supposed to confitute offence before that tribunal whose condemnation is fatal. The substitution of' any other rite is supposed to be profane, or an unpardonable insult to the object of worship. Under these apprehensions, arbitrary :signs. of devotion are supposed essential to religion; and deviat-ions from the established pracice, or any variation in the use of such' signs, is pursued with that vengeance which the..zealot thinks. necessary to recommend him to God.

In many examples of this fort; as in the use of different languages, the 'people- have not a different meaning, but merely a difference of the founds in which their meaning is expressed; so in the-rites of devotion or worship, they admit a variety, not of .the sentiment but of the.external. performance, which they employ as a sign- or expression. And if in the different forms and ceremonies, which they pradife, in their own nature indiffeient or innocent, they equally mean-to acknowledge and to adore the intelligent power and moral government of God; the zeal with which they condemn andi persecute one another, on account of such difference of forms and ceremonies, is no way more rational, than it would beto.fofter national animosity on the score o.a different language or accent of speech.

This PARPT I. This use of external aAion, as a sign for the purpose of mere 
SECT. IV. expression, is not confined to observances in their own nature ^vo altogether indifferent: Men freely incur physical inconvenience for the fake of supposed moral good; and acions, in their phyfical tendency acually pernicious or useful, are often more confidered in refpet to the meaning and intention of those who perform them, than in refpea to the actual benefit or harm, which they are supposed to produce. A kind intention, made known in any trivial matter, operates more powerfully on the affecions, than gifts of the greatest moment, bestowed in a manner less gracious, or less expreflive of kindness.

Injuries are not always measured by the aAual harm which is done, nor malicious intention inferred in the highest degree, from the nature of the weapon with which a person is assaulted. A
gentleman in modern Europe, as we have formerly observed, is more offended with the stroke or threat of a flick, than with the wound of a sword.

These are no more than instances of the power of opinion, and habits of thinking, by which things, in their own nature agreeable or disagreeable, are associated in the fame conception with feelings and qualities of the mind with which they have not any neceffary or original connection.

From the whole of there observations, then, we may conclude, that, without any variation in the ideas of excellence and defet, men may vary in their judgement of external ations. A different person, or the fame person in different circumstances, may at differently, and in this there is nothing to unsettle the judgement ment of moral riht-and wrong. Different opinions relating, to 

external effecas, whether supposed beneficial or hurtful, may lead SCA""Pi" r men, with the fame candid or malicious intention, to' ad and to -/-rv judge very differently. Any adtion, that is confidered merely or chiefly as an expression of will or meaning, may be differently understood in the form of different countries; and in none of these instances is there implied any difference of apprehension relating to the intimate nature of moral good and evil. The first may be termed a difference of the cafe ; the second a difference of opinion; and the third a difference of interpretation.

What is observed of a difference in the laws of different countries, or in the terms of a different language, will be equally found not to affeca-the original or the essential diftindion of moral right and wrong.

We are not to exped, that the laws of any country are to be framed as so many lessons of morality, to inftrud the citizen how he may aA the part of a virtuous man. Laws, whether civil or political, are expedients of policy to adjust the pretensions of parties, and to secure the peace of society. The expedient is accommodated to special circumstances, and calculated to repress the specific disorders peculiarly incident to particular situations.

The higher duties of morality, beneficence, and fortitude can seldom if ever be made the subjed of law. The vilest of moral depravities, envy, and malice, can only be refrained from a few of their overt or most flagrant effects. The law must be contented to restrain such open and flagrant disorders ; and, where the people arc prone to any particular ipecies of irregularity, the law may be VO.I. II. T Ifccially 
PART Il. specially directed to reform it, or even with greater severity pu
nifh, the first approach to such irregularities, and treat such apSLcT. IV.
_TY^'v proaches as a greater crime than even the perpetration of greater evils, to which the people are less disposed, and from which the public therefore has less to apprehend.

In some of the smaller flates of Italy, where family feuds and quarrels so often prevailed, it was made capital, we are told, to shed a single drop of blood in the streets. Where frauds committed on the revenue are more frequent, and more to be apprehended than private robberies, the law naturally direas its severity to the quarter from which the public interest is molt deeply annoyed. And its enacments are to be confidered, not as infirusions of morality, but as the convention of parties particularly situated, and mutually engaged to support the cause of a community, depending on circumstances peculiar to their own situation.

If the law, in this manner is to be confidered as a local expedient provided for the welfare and peace of communities; the language of the people, we may believe, is not always calculated to express the mere abftraac diftinstions of right and wrong ; but to discriminate virtue and vice under such diversities of external form, as they most frequently take in particular circumstances, and under specific fyflems of manners. Fortitude is made to express not mere strength' of mind in the abftrald; but has a reference, at the fame time, to the particular and more ordinary form in which there is occasion to exercise this virtue; whether in heroic patience or military valour. Goodness is not employed to express benevolence in the abflral, but has a rfclrence to the form in which there is the most fi-equent occasion to pracait beneficence, 3 lwhcther whether in charity to the poor, and in relieving the distressed; or in 
PART I r.
aas of public service, and private humanity or candour. 


In every language there is a multiplicity of terms in which general praise and blame are expressed; but of such terms it is observed, that no two are synonymous. There is implied in every term of praise a complication of circumstances. In some principal parts of the combination the terms agree, but in some other part, perhaps, in some minute circumstance of the occasion on which the good qualities are displayed, or of the effect they produce, the meaning of the term is, in some degree, diversified, so that any one of the terms so diftinguified cannot, with propriety, be substituted one for another. Honesty cannot be subftituted for probity, however nearly approaching in their meaning; nor is goodness with propriety fubitituted for either.

In the general appellation of a. good man, beside the more important conditions of humanity, faithfulness, and beneficence,.
which recommend one man to another, there is, in particular Situations, some reference to particular circumstances, to which persons in those situations have peculiar occasion to attend; as, among merchants, the qualities of punctuality and regard to credit, which mutually recommend the parties in their dealings with one another ; in literary societies, learning and genius ; in national councils, and public assemblies, masterly judgement, andt powerful expreflion; in warlike nations, manhood and military valour ; and men, in all these different instances, beRlow the general term of praise, with a particular implication of the circumfiance peculiarly required in their own condition.

Words derived from the fame flock, and palling into dlifeT 2 rent 
 rent languages, thus aflume, in some particular refpe&s, a difleHcAP, t. rent meaning in the application made of them by different na~"v~ tions. As from the honeJium of the Romans, is derived the bonefly of the English, and the honettete of the French; but whoever should translate the one into the other, would lose the meaning of his original, and substitute different circumstances of commendation, in pafiing from one language to another; not because these nations have different ideas of what is commendable; but because they have come to express different articles of commendation in a term of the fame origin.

What is commended by one nation in any given term of praise, is commended by another in a different one; and they disagree in the use of words, not in conceiving the diftinaions of right and wrong; for each is ready to acknowledge the value of what the other commends, as soon as he understands the meaning of the word in which it is commended.





S E C T IO N V.

Of the Fundamental Rules of Morality relating to External Alions.

THE first law of morality, relating to the mind and its assec- 
 tions, requires the love of mankind as the greatest good to which 




human nature is competent: If it should appear that mankind SCV
are not agreed in the description of external actions that flow from this principle, nor in the choice of favours to be expected from the beneficent, it may be asked, by what rule is the friend of mankind to conduct himself ? What is the harm from which he is to abstain, and what the good office which he is to perform to his fellow creature ?

To this question we may answer, in general. that, notwithfianding the varieties of manners, in different ages and nations, and the different interpretation of favours or offences, which in the stile of declamation, may be made to appear so formidable and so perplexing, in the choice of virtuous actions; yet, that mankind in reality do not so far miltake the pernicious for the useful, 
useful, nor the deftrutive for what tends to their preservation, SECA. V. as that the beneficent needs to be at a loss, in determininig what v-ve - is in him a natural effea of benevolence or of good will to his fellow creatures. In every particular society, these points are settled; and few have occasion to transfer their beneficence from one scene to another, in which the constituents of a benefit are differently conceived or differently understood.

Notwithstanding the diversity of opinions which men may be supposed to entertain, with refpe& to the morality of particular aAions, yet, in every age and nation, in every rank and condition of men, there is a rule of propriety, which, though it may be different in different instances, is to each the canon of eftimation, and the principle from which they are to judge. Admitting such differences, then, as they assea particular articles of propriety, this may be laid down as a law of external acion for mankind ;-That, in matters physically indifferent or of small moment, men are to observe the rules established in their own country or in their own condition; as they speak its language and wear its dress: That, in judging of behaviour, in other countries, or in other situations, they are not to estimate proprieties of conduct by the standard of their own manners or cuStoms; but, to allow every nation the free and diftindive use of its own.

This rule applies chiefly, if not wholly, to matters of propriety, decency, and common civility; with refpea to which, it is obvious, that as the objea is to do what is inoffensive, what is agreeable or obliging, it is proper that the person, aAing in matters physically indifferent or of finall moment, lhould consult the opinions of tlofe he would oblige rather than his own.

Even,.

matters not altogether physically indifferent, and i. IT


refpec to which unequal degrees of conveniency or inconvenen- 
cy may be apprehended in the pratice of different nations; it sv would be an error in point of propriety if any one should deviate from the manners of his own country, under pretence that he meant to fubititute what he thought an improvement. He might, in the fame manner, apprehend, that the language of his own country were inferior to that of a neighbour, or the faflion of its dress less convenient; but, any extreme or singular affectation of thus deviating from what is common in such matters, under the notion of exhibiting somewhat superior, is ever itigmatized, or is confidered as the mark of a fool or a coxcomb.

Where nations, or different ranks and conditions of men, vary from one another in such immaterial forms and observances, they are said to differ in point of manners; and, as they are severally to be judged of by the tfandard of their own custom or practice, none has a right to apply that itandard, in eitimating the manners of others. This rule may be applied, not only to matters purely arbitrary, like the forms of salute, or the titles of address, but even to all those matters, to which men though not originally indifferent, are in effed by cuflom or habit, reconcileable, or attached. Though to others from an opposite custom and habit, such examples may appear awkward or absurd, it is not to be expeled of persons in any particular age, nation or rank, that they should have any apprehension in such matters different from that of their own nation, condition, or age.

Men of all ages and nations however have been generally difposed 
 posed to trespass on this rule, and to judge of other men by the SeCP. V Iftand'ard of their own manners and customs. This error is equal
wtx-.~ ly the concomitant of ignorance and of national pride, and few are qualified to diftinguifi what is essential in the character of nations from what is an article of variable, inflitution or custom, and though supposed erroneous, yet consistent with the noblest qualities of the mind. Homer sung of great men, who performed for themselves the functions of butcher and cook, and who served up the mess on which their guests and themselves were to feed; He is therefore faidby a late celebrated wit, to have sung ofcoarfe or inelegant heroes *: But the manners of men are variable in different ages; and the fame virtues and vices, the fame elevation or meannefs,may be exhibited under this or any other variety of manners. The moral of Homer has accordingly been equally admired by those who could hire butlers and cooks to serve them, as by others who themselves dressed and served up their own provisions. In this matter the Roman critic appears to have differed from the French one.

Trojani belli fcriptorem, maxime Lali, Dum tu declamas Rome, Prwne/fe relegi; Qoui quidfit pulchrum, quid turpe, quid utile, quid non, Plenius ac melius Chryfippo et Crantore dicit.

This latitude of judgement, however, relating to the variety of manners, which may be admitted, as consistent with equal or superior degrees of merit in different nations, hath limits bcyond which it cannot be safely carried. Should we suppose a nation to reject what is evidently salutary, and to prefer a cufloin 3 which D* "D' avoir chant, des heros grollierG." This cxprcflion is to be found fomcwhere in Voltairc's W'orks.

which is pernicious; this, no doubt, would come under the de- 


CH1AP. Ir.

nomination ofabfurdity and folly, rather than a mere variety of SEcr'. V
manners: It would furnifl other nations with a subjeC ofjuft ri- _r., dicule or censure, andjuftify the individual, when better informed, in counteracting the practice of his own age or country. The virtuous citizen in such instances strives to preserve his country, although the practice in faihion should tend to its ruin.

Virtue is so far from being valuable, merely on account of its external effets, that the greatest and most beneficial effet it can produce is the communication and propagation of virtue itself; " You will serve your country more," fays Epicetus, " by raising "the fouls, than by enlarging the habitations of your fellow citi" zens." And this is the greatest benefit. which any man can receive from his virtuous neighbour, that he become, like him, wife, courageous, temperate, beneficent, and just.

'Fashion sometimes leads to effeminacy, servility, prodigality, and debauchery. Where nations differ from one another in these refpeds, they are justly said to exhibit, not a difference of manners' merely, but certain degrees of corruption and depravity.
If they should be ignorantor insensible of the pernicious tendency of what they do, even this ignorance or insensibility is a heavy article in the charge of corruption or vice to which they are exposed, and it must be admitted, that the singularity of an individual, which in any instance of mere arbitrary manners were an error and a blemiih, would in such instances as these be a merit and a just topic of praise. .-i'ong the /ailhlefjaithful only he, is made the diflindcion of an angel of light *.

It muff no doubt therefore be eftabliflhed as a rule of action, U that * See Paradifc Lolt.

CAR-T II. that wherever the manners of our country are dangerous to its safeS
ty or have a tendency to. enfeeble or to corrupt the minds of men; .jvMyL to deprive the citizen of his rights; or the innocent of his fecurity; it is our duty to do what is for the good of our fellow creatures, even in opposition to the fashion and cutlomn of the times in which we live..

Some rites in religion, as well as observances in the ceremonial of life, are of a nature physically indifferent, and fit to be retained as mere arbitrary signs or expressions of the affection, which religion or good manners require. But, as there is a merit in resifting pratices extremely inconvenient, though required under the notion of good manners; so there is wisdom in abstaining from ads of cruelty, though required under the notion of devop tion or fantity.

The human sacrifice performed, or the cruel persecutions thathave been prafticed under this notion, did not proceed, like the voluntary sufferings of the enthusiast, upon an idea, that it was good for himself to susser; but upon an idea, that the Deity who requires such victims is jealous, vindicive, and cruel; or is to be gratified with the inflicion of human misery: And such practices,. therefore, are to be counteracted, not merely as a mintake of what is beneficial or salutary, but as a corruption of religion itself; and as a substitution of malice or cruelty, where the mind fhfould be taught only to form to itself models of perfection and.
goodness, as incitements, to veneration and love.





E C T I ON VL

Of the fame Subjet, continued.

IT is observable that, in many things, whether useful or ne- CAP.RT I
ceffary there is a certain measure to be kept preferably to any 
other whether greater or less. The less is defective, and in- '
adequate to the occasion, the greater is excessive and erroneous.
The just mean is learnt by experience; and, when known, is the proper objea of choice.

It is not uncommon to confider virtue itself as a mean between two extremes towards either of which any deviation from the middle path is vice. Thus liberality is confidered as a mean betwixt prodigality and avarice; bravery as a mean betwixt temerity and cowardice; temperance as a mean betwixt hurtful abflinence and pernicious excess.

U z 
 JEst modus in rebus, fitnt certi deniquefines, 

SE

I uos ultra citraque nequiit conjIfere re7tum *.

This method is adopted in one of the most elegant and master-.

ly produAions of antiquity, on the subjec of ethics or manners t; and there is no doubt, that propriety of conduct may be rendered perceptible and evident, not only when single actions are separately described, but also when placed in contrast with any deviation from what is right, whether on the fide of defqea or excess.

Such illustrations, however, if useful in treating of the external effeAs of virtue, may rather serve to mislead, in confidering the excellency or depravity of mind, from which those esfeds proceed.

Wisdom and goodnef are absolute, not relative, fubjeds of etfeem. There may be a. defeS of either, but no excejs.. In the defects of intelligence; there is folly; but, in the highefl measure of which it is fufceptible,.there is no blameable extreme of wisdom. There is no extreme ofjuftice; nor in. the mind, be the quality of whatever denomination,, is there any. extreme of what.
is right.

In practice, indeed, beneficent intention. may produce too, much or too little effect. The proper medium or mean, betwixt the extremes, to be found by observation or experience, is itself * Horace.
- Aristotle's Ethics.

itself derived from a previous knowledge of what is right,; and 
PART I.
is not by any means to be confidered as an original standard of SECrT. Vh choice,. even in matters of external convenience..

Mediocrity is certainly, not always upon its own account, an object of estimation. In matters, rather ornamental than neceffary to human life, it is the reverse of a commendation. In matters of genius, for instance, whether poetry, eloquence, politics,.
or zwar, it is better not to have any pretensions, than to have a mediocrity, which is likely to engage the person poffiefed of it in a.
course, of which he is not likely to attain the end. It is better to follow tamely in the track of others, than to affect the command, or the display of abilities, which mislead or disgust the more, that they substitute a mediocrity of effect, where an. exertion of the.
highest degree is required.

Wherever the mean betwixt two extremes is the preferable objec of choice, it seems to be fixed by its comparative utility, not by any original perception of merit; in mediocrity itself, confidered apart from its use. In the extreme of too little, there is a deset of utility; in the extreme of too much the excess is pernicious: And the salutary, or most useful measure, is that which determines the middle way to be chosen between the extremes: So that we are to look for the rule, by which this mean is to be. diftinguifhed, and the very consideration which recommends it in the circumtfance of its absolute utility,, or fitness to serve the purpose of nature.

If the ill effect of extremes suggest' the expedience of recurring to the proper mean in every instance of human conduct, oime apprehension of the proper measure or end of action is neceifary to 
 to point out the evil of extremes, which confifi in a deviation CH:AP. I from the middle path towards either fide, of excess, or of defe&.

Eie-'._' And, if the consideration of extremes serves to illustrate the mean betwixt them, it is evident that the knowledge of that mean is required to point out the boundaries beyond which all that ;eceeds, or falls ihort, is in extreme, and pernicious.





S E C T.. I 0 N VI

f the unequal Degrees of Merit and Demerit in External AiioRs.
presence of that quality which, whatever it beis the object of moral approbation; demerit, on the contrary, is the absence of such quality; or the presence of any quality V
which is. the object of disapprobation.

From the observations, that have occurred under a few of the'

preceding titles, it should appear,. that neither mediocrity of esfe", sympathy of feelings, nor actual utility, is the specific obje& of moral approbation; that moral good and evil are peculiar to mind; and that the merit of an acion, or the objec of moral approbation in any acion, is the pretence of qualities which conftitute the specific excellence of mind : Such are wsidotm, goodneJfs temperance, and fortitude. That efforts of benevolence, or good will to mankind, properly supported with intellecual ability, application, and resolution, constitute ations morally good. That 2. wralice, 
 malice, however ' direAed or supported, cohftitutes an aCfioa 

.-SECVII. Imorally evil.

-This diflinedion is, to us, not only matter of perception and ,discernment, but awakens a Sentiment or pafion, by which we ;are disposed to accumulate good on the good, and evil on the evil.
While we perceive that beneficence is a blessing, we would willing-y confer additional blessings. Perceiving that malice is a curse, we would willingly infliA additional suffering. This sentiment is partly implied or expressed in the terms of merit .and demerit.

That the good deserves to be rewarded, and the evil to 'be punifhed, is an apprehension which we are born to entertain, and is juflly confidered as a symptom or earnest of the moral government of God, under which men being inspired with a disposition -to difiributive justice, become instruments of Providence for its actual effect. This disposition operates most powerfully, perhaps, in its animosity to what is wrong. The right is firm upon its own foundation, and needs not the prop of extraneous reward; while the wrong seems to call for interposition, to prevent, repel, or repair its effecs.

:Hence it is that wrongs are diftinguified under their refpective denominations of guilt or demerit, more precisely, perhaps, than the opposite degrees of merit. The rigrt, however, also has its gradations, and the accions of men their unequal measures of approbation or efteern. Actions, which indicate good will to mankind in the highest degree, are those commonly which we conceive to be of the highest mtnrit; as the effects of malice pre.penfe are, on the contrary, of the highest dtemerit; and thus the presence of good or ill disposition is not only attended with mo2 ral ral approbation or disapprobation; but the measure of the effect, 

in such instances, is also ever found in just proportion to that of SCEHCA.
the cause.

Perfeveiance in the exercise of any good disposition, is admitted as an evidence of its power; or is the indication of a mind exempt from those pafflons or views which occasionally mislead the will, or interrupt the tenour of a virtuous conduct.

Hence it is, that a beneficent course of life, uniformly pursued; that duties performed in the midst of difficulty, danger, or unmerited obloquy, in the midst of allurements, that wouldfeduce, in the midit ofpain oruffering, that would depress the mind, or daunt the resolution, as they carry evidence of a disposition proportionally vigorous and unihaken, are justly estimated of the highest merit.

Hence it is also, that fuperitious Afceticks having a view to the circumitances that would prove the force of a virtuous affection, if any such actually existed, while they withdraw from the world, and fiun every occasion on which good difpositions towards mankind are exerted, mistake fasting, abtinence, and corporal penances, for articles of merit towards God. They attach the efleem that is due to merit to the circumflances of difficulty or suffering, in which merit if real might shine out with advantage; but which voluntarily incurred, and without any rational object, only give evidence of mifapprehension and folly.

Besides the immediate effets of wisdom and benevolence, which form the higeft order in the scale of merit, there are articles of inferior consideration, such as propriety, decency, civility and X politeness, 
 politeness, which may proceed from a disposition or habit of 

SEcr. Vli. doing that which is agreeable, or of avoiding that which is of' fenfive to others; a disposition in its own nature exquisitely amiable, and whose effeCs are esteemed proportionally to the evidence they bear of its reality; although, from the mere occafions on which it is exerted, the highest measure of virtue could not be inferred.

In comparing such examples together, we find, though without any precise diftintion of name, a gradation in the scale of merit, by which men in the course of life are unequally the objects of approbation-or esteem.

At the fame time, there is a corresponding gradation in the scale of demerit, which is not perhaps more obvious; but is thought to require a more pointed discrimination of names, such as those of crimes, offences, and faults.

Crimes, or actions of the highest demerit, are such as proceed from malice, under any of its ordinary forms, whether of envy, emulation, jealotzfy or revenge; or such as proceed from any habit or passion, as from covetou/nefs, sensuality, or ambition, in gratifying of which the criminal has occasion deliberately to trespass on the rights, or to disturb the. peace of his fellow creatures.

When the crime proceeding from one or other of there motives is committed under circumstances of peculiar trust, or againfl persons peculiarly entitled to refpea and affetion, the atrocity of guilt or degree of demerit is rated accordingly; and pernicious actions, performed deliberately, intentionally or knowingly, though not originally fuggcfted by malice,'yet as they imply great defedc defec of the opposite good dispositions of humanity or candour, 

and thereby give evidence of great depiavity, have a correspond- 



ing degree of demerit.

The person who without having entertained any malice, nevertheless deliberately kills that he may. rob, is jufly reckoned guilty of murder; and he who knowingly performs an action pernicious to his neighbour, though only from a motive of interest or conveniency to himself otherwise allowable, is nevertheless in such intfances, justly reckoned guilty of a heinous crime.

As persons thus deliberately offending are not likely, from mere recollection, to repent of the actions, which, under a recolleded perception of their pernicious nature, they already performed; the peace of society, and the safety ofinnocence, require, that fu ch persons flould be restrained by the fear of punishment; and, if not reclaimable, that they flhould be removed by exile or death from the society they disturb or moles..

What in the scale of reprobation is qualified with the more venial name of offence, may, in Tefpe& to the external effet, be equally hurtful with what is derominated a crime.

Under this title of an offence, the peace of society may be difturbed, or a citizen may susser in his person or effects ; but when this proceeds not from malice, nor from an ordinary habit of indifference to the rights of others, but from a fudderi and occasional emotion or paflion, which may hurry a mind, otherwise difpofed to innocence and good will, into an action pernicious or hurtful to those whom it may concern, the demerit is proportionally alleviated.

X 2 Such 
 Such offenders, on the returns of refletion, are capable of 

SECT. VII. sincere repentance, and they may be reclaimed by such measures '..vY' of punishment or animadversion as awaken their remorse, and put them on their guard against like flips oftemper or effects of provocation.

Under the latter denomination of a fault, we may conceive, and often have occasion to admit, a lower degree of demerit than is implied in either of the former titles. Of this a person may be guilty, if, from ignorance or inadvertency, he shall be the cause of harm to his fellow creatures, although he have not either the deliberate intention of the criminal, nor the unruly passon of the offender.

Faults of inadvertency, or of ignorance may have unequal degrees of demerit. Where the cafe by its general importance, or by any peculiar circumflances of personal concern calls up the attention in a special degree, znadvertency is proportionally inexcufeable, and may jufily incur high measures of punishment.

Ignorance of what, by the general condition of our nature, by our profession, or by any peculiar opportunities of inftrucion, we ought specially to know, becomes faulty in proportion as these circumstances accumulate.

On this account it is a just maxim in the cognizance of crimes, that ignorance of the faa7 may be admitted as a plea of innocence, but that ignorance of the law never can be admitted to juflify what is illegal. Thus a person, who, in lhooting his arrow to a diflance, shall wound his fellow creature, may plead his his ignorance of thefaR, or his ignorance that there was any 

person in the way -of being so wounded; but he cannot plead 
ignorance of the law, or that he did not know it was a crime to Hri injure or wound lis fellow creature.

The law of nature, suggested by the regard which-a man naturally has for mankind, cannot be supposed unknown, without an implication of the greatest depravity; and if any one, accused of an ation pernicious to his neighbour, should plead that he did not know it was wrong to do harm, he would, in that very plea, eftabliih a heavier charge of depravity against himself, than any occasional or transient action could imply.

The fum of this argument is, that although external- actions confidered apart from will, intention, or difpofiion of mind, like mechanical causes of any other fort, may be productive of benefit or harm; yet they do not appear to be veiled with any moral quality, until the movement performed -is traced to its connection with the disposition of mind from which it proceeds. This is admitted not only with refpet to involuntary or convulsive motions, in which the arm of one man, in a fit, may be so thrown about as to wound another: It is admitted, also, with refped to voluntary actions, in which a person may casually, or without any blameable inadvertency be the physical cause of -harm to another.

The diftintion of moral good and evil cannot be ascertained in the.dtfcription of mere external action; nor can the merit or demerit of a man be known until he has acted. Insomuch, that although in abftracion we may take asunder, and slate apart, qualities of the mind and movements of the body, yet these in 3 reality 
 reality are combined together in the conception which men. mu
 tually form of their moral diftincions.


Wisdom and goodness are the constituents of merit; proper and.

beneficent acions are the evidence of wisdom and goodness. A
series of beneficent actions implies benevolence; a series of pernicious actions implies malice; proper conduct implies wisdom; improper conduct implies folly: And, wherever wisdom and goodness exist, proper and beneficent conduc will follow, as the tree produces its fruit, or the cause in any other inflance is followed by its effect.

External action, confidered as a feature of the human character, or as an emanation of good or ill disposition, is a proper subjet of moral approbation or censure, or comes properly within the direction of moral government or law.

The fame law, that recommends the love of mankind as an excellence and a blessing to the mind of man, must likewise recommend beneficent actions under the predicament of moral duty; and the law which reprobates malice muff reprobate pernicious actions also.

When we have thus traced the approbation of external aclions to that wisdom and goodness, which is the source of such actions, we may suppose a question to be put on the subjeC of moral action, the fame as that we fippofed on the subjeCt of natural beauty; If external actions be approved on account of the wifdomr and goodness from which they proceed, on what account are wisdom and goodness themselves approved ? And we may repeat, That wifdlom and goodness are approved on their own account: Or, if this anfwcr fliold not be fatisfilctory, we may change the terms, and fay, That wisdom and goodness are approved approved as contfituents of perfection and happiness, and in this 
PART IL
terminate our series of reasons, which, however continued through CA-P. II.



any number of fleps, must lead at last to Something that is efti- _v mable on its own account.

The husbandman values a manure becaufe-it promotes the sertility of his land. He values fertility on account of its produce; the produce on account of its application to the purposes of subfiflence and accommodation; and these on account of their essec in preserving life; and if he values life, on account of the happiness of which it is fuceptible, still in the end there must be some consideration that is valued on its own account. No series in human affairs is infinite, and every choice which is made of-one thing on account of another, implies, that there is Somewhere, and however remote from the present ground of our choice, an objec that is actually valuable upon its own account.

In -the scale of created beings the intelligent is supreme, and approaches nearest to the eternal source of exitfence and exceellence. If intelligent beings themselves may be unequal, and rife above one another in their unequal approaches to Supreme wisdom and goodness, such gradations acknowledged amount to an acknowledgement also. that in perfed intelligence there is an excellence or a good which is in itself the Supreme objet of veneration and love.





S E C T I N VIIL

Of the Obligation and Sanc7ions of Moral Lawu.

 MORAL law in the most general form, as has been already 

stated, is an expreflion of what is good, and therefore an objec v,~v of choice.

To every rational choice there is an obligation and a fanEnion.

These terms are not synonymous: and yet their distinction is more easily understood than expressed in any other form of words.

Obligation, in the original sense of the term, seems to imply some tie or bond, ' which is incurred by the person obliged; while fanstion implies the consideration by which he is induced to * Obligatio efl juris vinculum, quo, neceflitate aftringimus alicujus rei folvende fecundum noftre civitatis jura.

Infl. Just. lib. III. titulo decimo quarto.

to fulfil that bond. So that, in making a free choice, the reality 

of a good forms the obligation, and the consequence to be 
apprehended forms the fancion. - Or, if a person should vV
fay, that he is 'not obliged to chute what is good, and may, if it so please him, prefer misery to happiness, he may be told, that this is' not the, language of intelligence ; nor can it be seriously held by any one who takes the words in their ordinary meaning.

To the question, therefore, that may arise in this place, Why any one should chute to be virtuous rather than vicious ? It may be answered; Because virtue is happiness, vice is misery; and in this contrast is implied at once all the good of which human nature is susceptible, and all the evil to which it is exposed. In what, therefore, we may be aiked, does integrity differ from what is so loudly complained -of under the notion-of felfihnefs ? In nothing but in that which is of all others the most eflential diftinction,-the wisdom of a choice which is made by the one, and the folly of the other. Those we call selfish endeavour to suppress the belt and happiest sentiments of their nature, and become difaffeced or indifferent to their fellow-creatures; while the virtuous have a common cause with mankind; and, being secure in the enjoyments of an affecdionate temper, partake in the good which providence has dispensed to the whole; and are ever happy in promoting the fame end to the utmost of their power.

Some writers on the subjet of morality, and lawyers for the most part, confider obligation as resulting from the command of a superior, and the fanclion, or cause of compliance, as resulting from the power of that fluperior to enforce his commands.
They are used to confider laws that may be enforced ; and in their Y notion 
 notion of moral obligation, would recur to an authority that is 
 fit to enforce the observance of moral duties.


Buit power employed to determine the will of a free agent mufi operate in presenting motives of choice; in presenting happiness as the reward of fidelity, and misery as the punishment of neglect: And whether this be done by so ordering the nature of things, that virtue shall be its own reward, and vice its own punilhment; or whether it be done by a subsequent ad of will and discretion, in rewarding the -good and punishing the wicked, in a way not previously conneced with the part they have acted, the reality of the obligation, and the sanction is the fame: For if, in the nature of things, moral good be constituent of happiness, and moral evil of misery, what can Almighty power do more to determine the choice of the one and the rejection of the other ? If we conceive any sanction of moral law as different from this, it muff however terminate in the fame effect. For what are the honours and rewards which men bestow upon virtue, or the chains and imprisonment which they award to the wicked ? What is the heaven which religion decrees to the one, or the hell which is provided for the others ? but happiness and misery in other terms, or terms, if you will, in which every one is left to conceive what will operate most on his own apprehensions and feelings.

In the cafe of man, surely, it requires no great effort of underflanding to perceive that widlom, benevolence, temperance, and fortitude are happy qualities; that malice, folly, and cowardice are wretched.

And if it flould be thought necessary to confider moral law as the command of a superior, this may be done without departing fr oll from that original docArine of nature we have ftated,-that moral 
'
good is the pecific excellence and felicity of human nature, and moral 

depravity itsfpecific defeA and .wretchednejs. S

The Sovereign of the universe,. by having made things as they'

are, has given his command, and promulgated his law in behalf of morality; and in every instance of conformity to his law, and in every infraction of it, continues to apply the fandion of happiness and misery. Wisdom, benevolence, fortitude, and temperance, he has said shall be the constituents of happiness; folly, malice, cowardice, and debauchery flall be the constituents of debasement and misery. We may therefore chute to treat of moral obligation as the tie of reason, to prefer what is highly valuable in itself and eligible upon its own account; or we may treat of this obligation as the tie of reason, binding the creature to obey his Creator, in making a choice, in fupport'of which the Creator has exerted, and will continue to. exert, his fovereigpower.

In chufing what is morally good, it is happy to know that we.

obey our Creator; and in obeying our Creator, it is happy to know, that what he commands is the specific good, and felicity of our nature.

To separate these considerations were doubtless of ill effect; and the fanAions of morality would be less powerful upon either principle apart, than they are upon the foundations of both united. Merely to obey. without a sense ofgoodnefs and rectitude in the command, would be greatly llort of that duty which we owe to our beneficent Maker; and the love of virtue is no doubt greatly encouraged by the consideration, that Almighty power, in the eftabliflied order of things, is exerted in its favour.

Y i In 
 In- the genuine alliance of religion and morality, the wisdom 

SErT.VIII. and goodness, which we perceive to be the constituents of hapw ^v piness, are likewise enjoined by the sovereign command of God.

They are preVented to our thoughts, as attributes of the Supreme Being himself, and as' forming in him the objects of reverence and of love; and our'own capacity of attaining, in any degree, to a participation of there qualities is confidered as the highest perfecion or prerogative of our nature.

To the ingenuous mind this constitutes the obligation, and the fanltion, whether of religion itself; or of moral duty. If we should be disposed farther to enquire; by what fandion the profligate may be reclaimed from their profligacy, or by what means those who are disposed to the commission of crimes may be.
acually restrained from disturbing the peace of society ? the anfwer may be difficult.

Mankind from age to age have laboured upon this subject; have urged the reasons of morality; have denounced the vengeance of God against iniquity; have held up the sword ofjuftice, and threatened to exterminate the wicked; and all this, though no doubt with great effect, fill without being able to reclaim the depraved from their vices, or to prevent the commission of crimes.

Happiness is mifunderfsood; religion-is flighted, the movements ofjuftice are flow, and defer the infliction of punishment, till after the wrong is committed.

Men have the concerns of animal life, as well as those of inn.~~~~~~~~~~3 ~telligent telligent being, to care for; and, however evident the co-incidence 




of happinefs-and of duty, neither the degree of this evidence, nor 
that of any other fac,.is at- all times sufficient to guard the imagi- Y
nation against the admiflion of false apprehensions.

In the conceptions of ordinary men, there are advantages, whether of wealth or pleasure, which it is their interest or passion to obtain: But there are means seemingly effectual to obtain these advantages, fromwhich they conceiveit their duty to refrain. They are tempted by the end; they are restrained by the law of morality, which forbids the means. While they continue to think in this manner, the obligation and the fantion of the moral law may, in their apprehension, be either the consciousness of what is right and wrong; the general esteem or contempt of mankind; the awe in which they stand of the supreme Being; or the arm of the magistrate, which is lifted up to prote& the innocent againit the wrongs which they are disposed to commit: So that, in this view of the matter, and as conceived by ordinary men, the fandions of morality may be enumerated under the titles of co7lfcience, public repute, compulory law, and religion.

With refpedt to the first, it may be observed, that persons who diftinguifl between their interest, on the one hand, and their duty on the other, frequently conceive there objeds to be in oppofstion, and fit to diftrad their choice. They frequently feel the consideration of their interest more cogent than that of their duty, but still do not confound these confiderations together, nor lose the fenfe-of moral obligation while they trespass on the maxims of moral law. In departing from their duty, they are fill conscious of its reality, and affecLed with remorse and fllame: So that the fandion of conscience is entire, even when it is negledccl.

It 
 It were irrational in a man to hurt himself; and the neglect of 

this rule is marked with a consciousness of folly. But it has pleased wv ej the Almighty, that we flould hold every person under a different form of obligation required to consult the welfare, or to abstain from the offer of harm to his neighbour. This form of obligation perceived carries with it the fandcion of innocence, amounting to a high measure of fatisfacion in the consciousness of integrity, and a high measure of remorse, of dissatisfaction, and suffering, in-the consciousness of any criminal trespass on the rights of a fellow creature.

With this, in some degree, is conneAed the fanedion of public.

repute also, in which every person apprehends that he is an objeA of esteem or reprobation to other men.

As man is formed for society, he is juffly made to enjoy or to.

susser under the approbation or disapprobation of other men, as.
well as under his own. The complacency, therefore, of his fellow creatures, who esteem and who confide in him, or the aversion with which they reprobate or shun him, are powerful accefsaries to conscience in urging its ditates.

Many articles of decency, or even propriety of manners, are derived from cuflom, or the arbitrary conceptions of men, relating to such matters. For the observance of these articles, public repute is the peculiar fandion. The observance of some determinate forms is of great consequence to public order; and individuals, even in matters of indifference, must not think themselves at liberty to flight the authority of their age and country, in the forms of behaviour, which they are required to observe.

States ]

States or regular communities also have their rights, which they 




are prepared to maintain by force. They have their laws to 
which the magistrate is empowered to compel obedience. For 'V'
these purposes the community is armed, fortresses are built, and military forms, eftabliihed. Tribunals are erected for the trial of crimes; officers are entrufled with public force; chains, fezterx, and publicpriJons,'and the other apparatus of coercion, are provided for the guilty. In these institutions, there is a fandion of force to support the obligation to innocence, to preserve the public peace, and to secure the harmless in the poffeflion of his rights.
Such may be termed the fantion of compulsory law, which, though not in every inflance proper to obtain ats of beneficence, yet in every inflance is applicable to refirain the commission of crimes.

In aid of the magistracy, also, in every well ordered community, inflitutions of religion are wifely adopted, and the authority of religion is impressed on the minds of men. by solemn rites significant of the presence of God and the homage which is due to him.

We may avoid for the present entering into any question relating to the abuse of such intfitutions, whether to the purposes of public tyranny or private gain. We confider them only with a view to their proper use in confirming the obligations to innscence and duty.

Man, we have had occasion to observe, is formed for religion as well as society. I-le is capable of perceiving universal intelligence in the fabric of the universe. '-le perceives in the predi3 ledio 
 leAion forjuftice and innocence, in the horrors at guilt which SHcAPI. are imprelied on his own mind, the will of that fovereign'au^,~v~\ thority which reigns in the system of nature. To him the confcioufiefs of integrity and goodness is peace and amity with God: The confcioufiiefs of depravity and wickedness is rebellion and enmity ; the one rendering existence itself a blessing, in the confidence of present and future protection; the other rendering. life itself a curie, under the horrors of present remorse, and the fear or apprehension of future and impending evils.

Such is religion in the form of mere reflexion as it operates in the mind; in, the form of a public establishment it operates in the manner of compulsory law, with the denunciations of future punifhment and the hopes of future reward. But the government of God, more comprehenlive than the government of man, extends to the mind as well as to external actions, and carries the application of compulsory law to restrain not only the overt acts of iniquity, but even the thoughts, wishes or purposes which may lead to such external effecs; requiring such a guard upon the mind itself as may suppress the first approaches to evil, and induce habits of innocence and of virtue.

Just religion, betides its effects as a restraining principle is in itfelfa source of elevation and ofgoodnefs in the mind of man. In what is the love of God different from the love of goodness itself ?
Or in what is the desire to at a part agreeable to the Supreme Being different from that elevation of mind with which the worthy aspire to perfedion ?

In this enumeration of sanctions, or motives to determine the virtuous choice, included in the general and comprehensive diftindlion tinaion of good and evil. We have mentioned those of confci- PAR'r 1.


ence, of public repute, of religion, and compul/ory law. 

Such then we may conceive to be the practical obligations of men, and such to be the fanstions to which they either do, or ought to, recur in fettling the tenor of their affecions and of their conduat .

In the farther arrangement of our subject, we may avail ourselves of a division that naturally arises from the consideration of these different fantions, and may confider the requisitions of compulsory law; or rights to be supported by force, apart from the maxims of beneficence and duty, which are urged by the other considerations now mentioned. The first will extend to every cafe in which force or compulsion may be properly employed.
The second, to those cafes in which the obligation of moral duty, however strong. cannot properly be enforced, and muff be left to the free will of the agent.

The first may be termed jurisprudence; the second cafulfry, or that part of moral science which relates to action and the characteriftics of a happy life. And to these may be subjoined, under the title of politics, the discussion of material queflions, relating not merely to men as members of society, but to the society itself, in respeCt to its institutions and forms. And under one or other of these titles may be comprised all that yet remains to be done in observance of the method which has been proposed for this work.

Z 


" Juris precepta funt licc: Honefle vivcre, alterum non ledere; fuum cuiqtie ,*ribucreI

Intl. Just. lib. i. par. 3.







C 179 )

CH A P. lIT, OF JURISPRUDENCE OR COMPULSORY LAW.

PART FIRST.

S E CTION I.

Of the Principle of Compulsory Law.

IT is a well known faE, that mankind sometimes employ force 

to obtain the observance of moral laws, and that the right to SlAT. I.
compel the performance of a duty, though not universal in every wv/
cafe, is, at least, in some instances fully acknowledged.

We are now to inveitigate and to ltate the principle from which this right in any cafe can be derived.

2Z 2 It I

 It may be observed, that in all the inflances in which the right SCT. I. of one man to compel another is acknowledged, compulsion,
r-vy-' either in its immediate operation, or in its final effe&, is an ad of defence.

The Sovereign employs force to defend his country against foreign enemies, or to make reprisals for a wrongthat is donetohis subjects. Themagiltrate employsforcetoreprefs crimes; thecitizen to defend his dwelling or his person. And even in exacting the payment of a debt; or in requiring the performance of a contrat, there is no more than an exacion of what is justly due; or, as we shall have occasion to evince, no more than an ad of defence on the part of the exa6tor, maintaining a right of which he is already in possession.

The great principle of morality extends to beneficence, as well as innocence; but from this account of the circumflances in which compulsion is applicable, the principle of compulsory law is limited to the repulsion of wrongs, and to that part in the objec of the moral precept above cited, which forbids one person to be the author of harm to another *.

In search of this or any other principle in nature, by whatever steps we proceed, we must arrive at last at something that is selfevident. And such we may fay is the maxim, That every innocent per/on may defend hinmelf; to which we may join what is equally evident, that every one having power, may employ it in defence of any other innocent person.

To the purpose of defence a sufficient measure of force is required Altcruin non lxdcere.

quired, and in many initances is the only means that can be 

successfully employed. A person disposed to commit an injury 




may not be persuaded to desist from his purpose; nor can he be <
eluded perhaps by any artifice or stratagem; it remains therefore that a force superior to his may be the only means sufficient to restrain him.

In every cafe of defence, force is employed to secure the innocent, rather than to obtain, from those who would injure him, the discharge of a duty. And the specific end of compulsory law being to repel a wrong, the means are adequate and just.

But if any one, instead of disputing the legality of force in a cafe of defence, should contend, that it is not peculiar merely to such cafes, but may be employed, not only in defending a right, but in obtaining any other end beneficial to mankind; that as religion and virtue are confessedly of the highest value, every esfectual means, and force no less than any other, may be employed to obtain them, whether by propagating faith towards God or charity towards men.

These no doubt are blessings, in obtaining of which no effeAtual means are to be spared; but if we wish to promote the cause of religion and virtue, means are to be employed which, inform, the mind, conciliate the affections, and gain the will. To these purpofesfbrce is inadequate. Its effets, on the contrary, are to render the understanding less docile, and to alienate the mind. And it must be rejected as an inflrument ofinftruCion or moral improvement; because it would be irrational to employ means which have a tendency adverie to lhepurpofeforwhich they are employed.

Nay, but force is competent to obtain, even fiom those against whom.

 whom it is employed, the external fruits of faith and charity ! To SCHcI. II this it may be answered, That if these fruits be required as a moral <vy..V good in those who are made to yield them, the reality of any such good may be queflioned; or rather it is evident, that a forced performance of supposed good works does not constitute any good in him who is compelled to perform them. Virtue cannot be forced. It is voluntary, or it does not exist. Faith is sincere; or its profession is a mere hypocrisy.

If the fruit of good works be required in one man for the benefit of another; it is evident that force cannot bejuftly employed for this purpose. Benefits extorted byJorce are robberies, not aas of beneficence.

We may conclude, therefore, that the use of force, which is admissible in the cafe of defence, whether immediate or remote, is also limited to such cafes; and that although men are bound, under every other fanAion of duty, to avoid being authors of harm, yet, that they are, in this duty of abstaining from harm, peculiarly repressible by force also: And from this we may safely assume, that the right of defence is theJpecific principle of compulfory law.

In treating of this fubjeit, accordingly, we are not so much to confider the obligation under which every person lies to be innocent, as to confider the right which every person has to defend himself, and his fellow creature, by every effecdual means in his power.

This right amounts to a permission of whatever may be neceffary to safety, but does not contain any positive injundlion to do all that may be wanted for this purpofc. A person attacked 3 in in his person may kill the aggreflor; but is not required to do 



so much. C . 1.



In the application of our principle, therefore, we endeavour to point out how far the right of defence extends, but do not, in any cafe whatever, pretend to lay the person who defends himself or his neighbour, under any tie of necessity to go to the utmost extent. The citizen, it is admitted,, may kil the housebreaker who alarms his dwelling in the night, but is not required to proceed so far: Nay, on the supposition that he may defend himself and his dwelling, without having recourse to this extremity, he is by the law of nature acually restrained from it.

In conceiving ajuft andcompleataAof defence,we mufi suppose some thing that is to be defended or maintained v and specify the means that may be lawfully employed for this purpose.

That which a person may lawfully defend or maintain is termed his right. The circumstances- under which a right is exposed or invaded may point out the means which are adequate and necessary to its preservation; and the subjec ofjurifprudence or compulsory law, so conceived, admits of being divided into two principal parts, of which one relates to the rights of men, the other to the means of defence.





S E C T I O N II.

Of the Term Right in its most General Acceptation.

 THIS term is sometimes an adjective, employed to distinguish SECP. II. the quality of an ation that is proper or morally good; and, in '~drW this sense, to ascertain what is right, is to apply the principle of moral law to the particular subjea in question.

In our present inquiry, the term right has a different meaning: It is a substantive, the name of a thing, or relation of a person to a thing, and not the mere quality of-an action. It may be reckoned among the fubjeas which are not susceptible of a foimal definition. But, we may recur to the cafes in which it is supposed to exist, and leave the mind to colleCt its meaning from a consideration of the point, to which it refers in all the cafes enumerated.

Thus, a person has a right to the use of his faculties and powers; he has a right to enjoy the light of the fun, and the air 3 of of the atmosphere; he has a right to the use of his property, and 

the fruits ofhis labour. These, are felf-evidentpropofitions, and Ca I'
the meaning of the term right, which occurs in all of them, may _
be collected from its uniform signification in each. Agreeably to this rule, right is the relation of a person to a thing in which no alteration ought to be made, without his own consent.

In this circumlocution, the names ofperfon and thing imply, that a right is the appurtenance of a person, 'or of a being vested with choice and volition, and has reference to the will of such person refpeding the objec of his choice. This objeAc may subsist in the person himself, in his lot or possession, or in any constituent of his being or state whatever.

It is a part in the social nature of man, that rights are to different menmutually objects ofconfideration and acknowledgement.

The concern of a person in his own right, is implied in the principle of felf-prefervation; his concern in the rights of others is implied in the principle offociety, or in the sympathy of man with his fellow creatures.

Wrong is the violation of right; and, the fame concern which interests the mind in the preservation of the one, is a cause of resentment on occasion of the other.

There may be a claim orpretenfion without a right; but a right, whatever be the subjed to which it refers, is exclusive, and susficient to set aside every fuppofeable claim or pretension to the fame fubjedt.

A a Although 
- Although numbers at once may lay claim to a right, there cati 

SECT II. be no more than one to whom it is due; and the objedt of dif>vWY^ cuffion, under opposite claims, is to determine with whom the right lhall be found to exist: So that, although the right of any two or more persons may be questioned, or their pretensions remain undecided, yet every question of right implies, that a just title, wherever it be found, is exclusive of every other claim or pretension whatever.

Although, therefore, in the loose application of words, or in common language, we sometimes use the terms right, claim, or pretension promiscuously; yet, in propriety of expreflion, it is well known, that there may be a pretension or a claim where there is no right, and that a right may remain unclaimed and undecided.

From inattention to the propriety of language, or from a with to make way for a favourite tenet, by the help of some ambiguity, it has been said, that in the state of nature, or prior to convention, all men had equal rights to all things; the meaning must be, that, prior to convention, no right was ascertained; and that as no person had any right, so all men were equal in this refpe&.
How far the position is true even in this sense we ihall have occafion to confider.

In the mean time, we assume, that the right of one person precludes a fuppofeable right in any other person to the fame fubjedt: And so far it is proper that the term be understood, before we proceed to confider the different denominations under which rights may be known. As they differ in refpc to the subjecs jedts in which they are constituted, so they differ also in refpet. 

to the origin or source from which they are derived. 

Among the sources of right we shall find, that the law of defence itself may be numbered; and, upon this account,. before we proceed to confider the diflinction of rights, especially in refpee to their origin, it may be proper to frate the law of defence in its most general terms, as a source to which among others we may have occasion to recur in treating this part of our subjed.


Of the Law of Defence in Generals CHP II ACCORDING to the law of defence a right may be maintained SECT. III. by any means which are ejfeSual and necefary for this purpose.

It were irrational to employ means ineffectual, and it might be cruel in some instances to employ feyerities that might have been spared.

If means are supposed to be necessary, it is implied that the end cannot be obtained without them; and to suppose that a defence is allowed, and yet that the necessary means are prohibited would be to suppose, that the law of nature is inconsistent with itself; proposes the end, and yet forbids the pursuit.

It is true, that in some cafes the necessary means may be so severe, and even so deftrudive to the party against whom they are are employed, that humanity revolts against the use of them ; and- 

persons ofa certain mild disposition may submit to harm, rather 



than employ, for defence, measures of any cruel effed to which vo'w the aggressor may have exposed himself.

In the contest, of parties even the aggressor does not immediately forfeit every right; and there are accordingly limits to the very means of defence that may be employed against him ; but the forbearance of any necessary means of defence however severe, is a voluntary effort of goodness in the person wronged, not such a conceflion as the aggressor may claim as a right due to himself.

As the law of defence, therefore, permits the use of any means which are necessary, so it allows to the person against whom they are employed, an exception in the want ofnecefllty, when means tdeftrutive or harmful are unnecessarily employed againit -him. -'

The objec of law being to maintain a right, every excess .

of harm beyond what is necefiary for this purpose is itself an injury, and gives to the party, suffering under it, a right of defence.
So much is implied in the terms effectual and neccjfary, by which the means of defence are characterized.

Under the general notion of safety are included not only the repufion of a wrong that is offered, but likewise the prevention of a wrong that is apprehended, and the reparation of a damage that has been done; so that the law of defence consists of three clauses.

r/l, That a wrong apprehended may be prevented.

I~X ,~~ 2i2d 
 d, That a wrong offered may be repelled.


.-- -_ 3d, That reparation may be exated of a damage received.

According to the firfl clause, every party may provide himself with the necessary precautions against the harm to which he may think hirnfelf exposed.

According to the second, he may repel an assault, or turn away from himself an evil that is intended or dreaded.

According to the third, he may compel the injurious to make reparation: And in this last clause particularly are found certain claims of right which we are not qualified to discuss, except so far as the clause itself is stated and understood.

It is to be remembered also, that in every queflion of right men are permitted to act as auxiliaries as well as principals, and that where a third party interposes, the law of nature, in all its limitations and clauses, and in every cafe of defence, applies equally to the one as to the other.





S E C T I O N IV.

Of thegeneral titles under which the Rights of Men may be clafed.

IN a fubje& familiar and obvious to every person there is more 

danger that we overlook what is evident, than what may require 

investigation and research. 

After having assumed as a felkevident maxim, that a person may defend himself, it appears unnecessary to subjoin, or it is rather a repetition of the fame thing in other words, to fay, that he may defend his person, the limbs and organs of his body, and exercise the faculties of his mind.-Yet these, in pursuing our subjed methodically. we {hall have occasion to cite; and much depends on their being kept in view, when we would discuss certain questions relating to the origin as well as progress of justice in the affairs of men.

These are original appurtenances of human nature or infiparable from it, and the maxims ofjuftice relating to there subr~~~~~~~~t ~jcds PAR1 II. jedAs imuft- have been coeval with the fubjeds, and inseparable 
 from human nature also.


There cannot therefore have been a time in which man had yet to acquire his right of defence in refpeA to the particulars mentioned, nor a time in which it was not just to refped the person of a man, as much or more than to refpea his poffeflion or his estate.

In this view of the matter, juflice cannot be said to be an artificial virtue, any more than the person of a man to which it refers is artifical. And no time can be afligned for the commencement of a person's right to defend himself different from the time at which he began to exist. In every state of his existence, by whatever name we call it, whether the Rate of nature, the Rate of society or convention, as every one had a right to defend himself, so in every one it would have been wrong to invade that right.

It is absurd therefore to allege, that in any Rate of mankind all men had equal rights to all things, or that the right of any one to defend his own person took its rife from convention. It is indeed probable, that such a doArine never would have been advanced, nor would juflice in the most general and comprehensive terms have been supposed to be an artificial or adventitious virtue; if reasoners had not overlooked the felf-evident rights of the person, and carried their view at once to matters of property in which the right is confefiedly artificial or adventitious.

With refped to fubjetds of poffeflion or property, it is admitted, that until they were possessed by some one, they were open to to any one, and became matter of just possession to the first oc- 


.
cu.pier, 

To there only Mr Hobbes seems to have adverted, when he fays, that in the slate of nature " all men had equal rights to all " things;" and the meaning must be, that no one had any right to any thing until he had occupied it: That occupancy was equally open to all men; but he ought to have subjoined, that after a subjec was fairly possessed, no one had a right to disturb the first occupier in his use of the Iubjetc.

The undeniable evidence of obvious and uncontrovertable truths makes it absurd or impertinent to slate them for information, or in the form of discovery ; but to assume principles, or to adopt conclusions in direc contradiction to such obvious truths may indeed have the merit of novelty, or seem to proceed from profound observation, but is certainly in a much higher degree absurd than the repetition of any truth, however obvious and previously known.

To guard against the first of there errors we may be obliged to incur the second, a'nd attempt the enumeration of rights even under titles to which the attention of all mankind might be taken for granted, without any mention of them.

On this account, then, we begin with observing, that the rights of men may be confidered, either in refpe2 to their subjed, or in refpe& to their origin.

Confidered in refped to their fubje&, they are by lawyers fomce times termed perj/onal and real '.

VoL,. I. B b Confidered * See Blackflone's Commentaries on the Laws of England.

 Confidered in refpe6 to their origin, they may be termed :na.

SECT. 1V. tural and artificial; or, in terms perhaps less apt to be mistaken, '.va ooriginal and adventitious.

Personal rights subsist in the person, and relate to the con-.

ftituents of his nature and frame. Such are the limbs and organs of the body, and the faculties of the mind, with the uses of both, Such is life itself, freedom of innocent ation, and enjoyment of what, without injury to another, is fairly occupied.

Persons are diftingified in'the terms of law under the names of persons natural and persons artficial. The individual is a person natural; corporations, ifates, or any plurality of men adcing collecively, or under any common direCtion, are persons artificial.

In persons of the latter description, political forms, and the conflituent members of the body politic, analogous to the frame and organic parts of the natural body, may be confidered as matter of personal right to the community.

Rights real subsist in things separate from the person, provided they may become fubjeds of exclusive or incompatible use.
Such is the right which a person obtains to the clothes with which he is covered, or to the ground or other subject which he has fairly possessed.

Real rights, or the right to things, may be referred to three principal heads: 'Toq/e4ion,--Troperty,-and Command.

~~~~~~~3 ~~The The right of poseJion subsists only so long as the thing is in 


C'AP. III.

acual use, and may therefore be transient or subjea to intermif- 
sion.

The right of property is exclusive, and continues even during the intermiflions of aAual use; it continues therefore until it has ceased with consent of the proprietor.

The right to command refpeds the services or the obedience supposed due from one person to another.

Rights confidered in refpea to their source, being original or adventitious, it is of moment with refpet to the firif to specify their subjed ; and with refped to the second, to ascertain the titles on which they are founded.





S.s E. C T. I O N V.

Of .Rights Original 
 HE fubjets of original right, being coeval with man, muff 
.
SECT. V. be limited to the constituents of his nature, or the common -'-v-' appurtenances of his kind.

Original rights are therefore personal, and express what every one from his birth is entitled to defend in himself, and what no one has a right to invade in another.

These rights may be modified by alienation or consent ; but, prior to convention of any fort, remain entire, and in one person exactly correspond to those of another.

The existence of every such right is felf-evident: It may be overlooked from inadvertency or design, but being once flated cannot be controverted.

~~~~~~~3 ~Mr Mr Hobbes in laying the foundation of his system appears to 


 have overlooked the original rights of the person: But if they had 
been stated to him, or if he had been asked, whether every person in his supposed slate of nature had not a right to preserve himself ? or whether any person had a right to destroy his innocent neighbour ? it is difficult to conceive, that a person, who acknowledges the obligation of-oneman to keep faith with another, should not acknowledge also his obligation to abstain from any harm to his person.





S 'E C T I N VI.

Of Rights Adventitious.

 IN the term adventitious is implied a preceding period of existCIIA?. III.
SECT.VI. ence, however short, in which the thing adventitious was yet -^
r ' future; a time in which it began to be, and a subsequent period -of its continuance.

In the first period of man's existence, he had his original rights; in a second period those rights may be modified by his own consent, or new rights accrue to him from some aA of his own, or the voluntary deed of some other person concerned.

Original rights are recognised upon being merely flated; adventitious rights require to be supported by evidence, in which the manner of their acquisition is to be cited and confidered.

When a person lays claim to the exclusive use of any subjed, or requires the service and obedience of other men, he may be alked, asked, whence his right is derived ? or by what evidence he is en- 

abled to support his claim? Such right, however fairly conlitu- 




ted, is fiill matter of difcuflion, and the objec of science, in eve- v ry such discussion, is to ascertain by what means a fubje&, not originally matter of right to any one, may become so to some one; or, in other words, if a claim should be laid to any such right, it is material to know by what evidence it may be evinced or supported.

As rights personal, agreeably to the definition which hath been given of them, for the most part are original, or coeval with the existence of the person, so the rights real, such as po/ffie.on, property, or command, are, for the most part adventitious, and may begin ta exist at any period subsequent to the existence of the person and the thing to which they relate; and, as both the person and the thing might have continued to exist, without any apprehended relation of one to the other, we are in the following sections to enquire whence such relation may have arisen; how they are constituted, and how they are to be verified in any particular instance.





Of the difrent Sources of Adventitious -ights.

BEFORE we proceed to affirm whence an adventitious right 

SECT. VII. may arise, it is proper to observe negatively, that it cannot arise ~'^Y . from any ass of injuftite or wrong; nor be contfituted where the thing is impoflible or not real.

Injuflice or wrong has reference to a person injured or wronged, who may defend himself; and to a person committing an injury, or doing a wrong, who, inflead of reaping benefit from his wrong, exposes himself to susser whatever may be necessary to repel his injurious attempt; or whatever may be neceflary to obtain reparation of the harm he may have done.

This negative propofiion were too obvious to need being formally flated, if it were not neceflary to correct a common solecifin in language, by which we are told of the right of conqiiefl, arising from a successful application of mere force, without regard gard to the justice or injuflice of the cause in which that force was 



emp.loyed, 

Where conquest is matter of right, there inuft be supposed a previous title to; the subjeC conquered; and, if such title be verified, the conaqueft amounts to no. more than a. just poffeffon obtained by force..

To this negative proposition, that right cannot arise to an injurious person. from the wrong he has comnmitted ; we ma.y subjoin what is equally evident, that no title, can arise to what is not poflible or not real.

Where either the thing or the person has no existence, there cannot be any relation; Upon this ground, we shall have occasion to observe, that although parties stipulating what is impoflible may, by such proceeding, give rife to tome claim in the one against the other, yet. that there cannot be any obligation to the performance of any such article, however directly stipulated.

In treating the history of adventitious rights, there are two questions which may be separately discussed. The first question relates to things which, prior to the origin of the right in queftion, had not become matter of right to any one ; and the objeEt of science is to ascertain by what means a thing till then open to the first occupier, may have become a matter of exclusive right to some particular person. The second question relates to the transfer or conveyance from one person to another of a right previoufly supposed to exist in the person by whom the conveyance is made.

C c To Res nullius.

202 PRINCIPLES OF MORAL

PART I. To the firit of thefe.queftions we may answer in general, that 

SECT. VII. things belonging to no one may become matter of right to sN.J forne one, either by mere occupancy, or in consequence of labour employed to improve or accommodate the subjed to use. To the second question, we may answer, in like general terms, that a right may be conveyed from one person to another by convention or forfeiture.

We are, therefore, in the following fetions, to define the titles of occupancy, labour, convention, and forfeiture ;and to apply the law of acquisition, founded in there several titles, to the specific rights originating in this law or determinable according to this rule.





: : '

. '.... A , -..

... . :., '; ! S E C T I O N VII.

Of Occupnancy, and the Species of Right that may result from it.
OCCUPANCY is the relation of a person to a thing, such, that 
PART II

.

no other person can use the fame thing without molestation or 
detriment to the occupier.

In this manner a person may occupy the unappropriated ground on which he reposes himself, the spring at which he drinks, or the cover to which he has betaken himself as a ihelter from the storm. In any of these inflances, an attempt to use the fame thing may harm or molest the occupier. He may therefore defend himself againfi any such attempt; or in other words, he has an exclusive right to the. subjeA in question, so long as he continues to occupy it, or retains his poffeflion.

This right, however, does not extend to the prohibition of any aA by which the occupier is not any way diflurbed or aggrieved: S6' that the occupier cannot justly resist another using the fame C c 2 thing 
PART I.
:, thing'wi'th hiimfe;f, if this may' be done without any de'rimnent;.t C-1xP. z! him. -Every -one may breathe the eair of the atmofplhere',enjoyr * r _
, the light and heat of the fun, pass on the highway, and navigate the high Tea with mutual :reed'm from :harm or 'moleftation. ' : .

·, ' 7;.( ' ':"-" "D; .ir' .;C, The right that results from occupancy is no more :than:that -of pofleffion, beginning and ceasing with the at of occupying the subjec to the extent described: So that, as this right does not extend to the prohibition of any ad5 by which the occupier is not aggrieved, it evidently does not preclude any one from refting on the fame ground after the first occupier has removed from it; nor preclude a second person from drinking of the fame spring, after the first has ceased drinking; or from having recourse to.
the fame cover, after it has been abandoned by a former occupier.

As the effet of occupancy, therefore, ceases with the acAual'

uife, it does not amount to property, or to any right supposed to continue during the intermilfion of fiich aAual use.

No right in one person to command the services of another can arise from any title of occupancy, supposed to take place without the content of the person whose services are required. To occupy the service of another without his consent, implies the use of force to obtain filch service. Force so employed amounts to an injury; and, instead of conffituting a right, may be resifted on the moss evident principles of the law of felf-defence.

It is jufly held to be a public interest, that fair poffeflion in every instance floucl be as little precarious as possible; and upon ' this thisJ-aoeunst mankind.willingly enter, into .cqnventionas,Jy which 
PARTI1.
fair pofeffiion of a certain, duration is admitped as, property. "
r, r t S -fII.

t ~:;N ;', ,'., ,'. ,,,.; j . ......... .......

........

. .Y .'...........'1..............; *.................................

...

.*

...*

, *. : ,.., /.2q r-!£.

iThe !durationn of fuch-,pofreffion in the. laws, of different cpun- ".....

tries is termed prescription, and was unequal in the jurisprudence of different nations, and in refpea to the occupancy of different fubj.els. ..-By:, the. antient law of the Romans, refpeiding some fubjedts,, a fair poffefeion of three years amounted to prefcription.- In our law -and respecting the subjec of land.eftate, forty years fair posse'ssion is required to the fame effect.

It is a maxim in the law of nature felf-evident and uncontroverted, that all fubjeas unoccupied and unappropriated are open to the first occupier. If, therefore, by the state of nature, it be meant to design a state in which nothing is yet occupied or apprdpriated; or if we hold the negation of any right to be an equality of right,. as if we flould fay, that the dead are all equally aiive; or that such as have nothing are allequally rich ; the maxim of Mr Hobbes may be admitted, so far as it relates to matters of adventitious right:" That in the state of nature all men had "equal right to all things."

There could be no rule, by which to fettle any rights which did not exist; but, with refpet to the existing rights of the person coeval with human nature, there certainly was an existing rule, That no one was entitled to injure or moles his neighbour. To this rule mankind have at all times resorted; and by this rule they have generally been governed, notwithstanding the occafional irruptions of force and violence. When they are at any time in a slate of war, this proceeds not from the want of an amicable rule, by which to decide their differences, but from the influence of 
 of passion or error, which inclines Come one or more of the parSEC.V. Il ties to infringe the rule.

Mr Hobbes seems to make the state of war to consist, not so much in adcual hostility, as in the want of any rule by which differences could be amicably terminated, and in the necessary reference of parties to the decision of force alone: But it is evident that the slate of war thus defined did never actualIy exist; and that, in the rnidft of hostilities seemingly the most implacable, nations refer to a standard of right, according to which they plead that the quarrel should be amicably terminated in their own favour.

Mankind, in every state, not only had original rights of the person, but could not continue to exist without proceeding to occupy and possess the means of subsistence and accommodation; and without being engaged in tranfations which amountedto some species of convention or bargain: So that the supposition of a slate, prior even to the origin of adventitious rights, must -. -have been of so short a duration as to resemble an abftraacion of the mind, in which co-existent circumstances are separately conceived; rather than a period of history, during which they actually existed apart.





F: ECT IO N IX.

Of Laborr, and the Species of Right that results from it.

LABOUR, confidered as the origin of a right, is an effort, by pr IL.
prove any unoccupied and unappropriated subjeC. SECT. IX, It is evident that, by the law of nature, a person is not permitted to labour on a subjec occupied, because his labour may be a detriment to the occupier; nor is he permitted to labour on a fubje. appropriated without the content of the proprietor.

Under this title of labour is supposed an effort producyive of some permanent effet, tome fruit 6f invention, of ikill, or of power any way applied; and the labourer having, by the law of nature, an original right to the use of his talents or powers, has, by evident consequence, a right to the effeas produced by any of their applications.

. As 
 As the right of poffeflion continues during the continuance of 
 occupancy, so the right acquired by labour continues together wryi with the subjed produced, and belongs to the producer, until he himfelffhall consent to forego, or transfer it to another.

The right, therefore, which is thus acquired, comes up to the idea of property. It is a right, in the labourer, to the exclusive use of his powers, and of their lawful effects, even during the intermiffions of that use, The right acquired by labour does not determine with possession: This may be discontinued during any period, and may be resumed again: If the subjea be moveable, and during any time mislaid, it may be recovered wherever it is found; if in the pofsession of another, that other may be lawfully forced to restore it.

It may be argued, however, that as the right of property thus originating in labour is limited to the actual effec which that labour has. produced; and, as it is not in the power of man to produce any substance, he cannot by his labour acquire a property in any such fubjedt whatever. Human labour may combine materials together, or give to a substance some new modification or form; and so far the right of the labourer extends: But, as the fubflance itself is not an effee of his labour, whenever he fliall cease to use it, the substance shall be open to the first occupier.

If any dificulty be supposed to arise from such fubtilties of argufnentation, it may be removed by observing, that, although the tlie right of a labouret may exteind only to the form, modifica- PA-RT IL
tion, or improvement, hehas-made, not to the subjed or substance 

which exists itndependent: of his labour ; yet, if no one can occupy SkI.
that, fubjedt or fubflance,. without encroaching upon his right to the modification or improvement, it is evident-,that, ii defeiding his right to the modification, he may exclude every person from occupyiig the substance of which the form or improvement is his' property.

The savage who has wrought a piece of wood into the form of a bow, in-maintaining his right to the form, neceflarily excludes every other person fron the use of the wood. The husbandman, who, in breaking up uncultivated land, has acquired a right to the fruits. of his culture, must, in order to' preserve his right, exclude every other person from occupying the earth or stone of the foil to which his culture has been applied, although he has not in reality produced those substances.

The plea of right resulting from: labour is limited to the right of property alone. When applied to any other species of right, whether a right of possession, or a right to- command,; it is either not necessary, or not adequate. It is not neceflary to constitute a right of poffefion ; nor is it adequate to establish the claim of one perfdn to a right in the services of another.

Poffeflion is valid, because the occupier muff not be diffturbed.

although he may not have bestowed any labour on the fubjedt in possession. Labour, therefore, is not necessary to eftablilh this species of right.

As to the fecoid, or the right to commantd ; if it be D d alked 
PART. IL. aiked, whether this may not result from labour ? -We muff answer'
 in the negative; for, although one person may have taken pains kvY-\ to qualify another for the performance of some specific service; yet we mufft contend, that no right to his service can be founded on this plea. Labour employed by one on the person of another, without his own consent, may be an injury, and cannot be the foundation of a right. If applied with his consent, but without any flipulated conditions, the person to whom any new art is thus communicated, retains all his personal rights, and cannot jutly be forced to work for another. " If you taught me an art, might "such a person plead with his instructor, without having ftipu" lated that 1 ihould employ it for you, it mufi be underitood "that I am free to employ it for myself." Gratitude may incline him to make some return to a benefactor; but the demand of a return may cancel that obligation; and, in answer to such a demand, the apprentice may plead: " If you taught me an art, " that I might employ it for yourself, you cannot plead a benefit "intended to me, nor lay claim to my gratitude; or, if you in" tended a benefit to me, you muit leave me to enjoy its fruits."

A person may innocently labour upon the property of another, without knowing it to be already appropriated. He may give a new form; he may compose a mixture, of which the materials, either entirely, or in part, belong to some other person. In all these instances, the decision of the law of nature is clear and peremptory, that no one is bound to susser a diminution of his right from the ad of another, however free from guile or finiiter intention.

As the party, acting however without guile or malice, cannot be charged with injutfice, the law of nature awards, that the right right of any other party concerned ihould be preserved or reflor- 

ed, with the least possible detriment to the fair and innocent deal- 




er: And this is wifely provided for, in the conventional law of v every well ordered community. But the rule that is adopted, in adjusting the relative claims of parties, on such occasions, may vary at the discretion of those on whom the pradice of law depends. According to the law of the Romans, property thus brought in to dispute, was sometimes made to follow the original subjec, and sometimes the specification or form beflowed upon it. When the materials, as in the cafe of bullion wrought into plate, could be restored to their pristine form, the property was awarded to him to whom the bullion belonged. Where the fpecification, or new form, was of a certain value compared to the subjed on which a work was performed, as in the cafe of a piture, compared to the canvas on which it is painted,.
or in the cafe of a writing compared to the paper or vellum on which it is executed, there the material, from favour to the art which was pradifed upon it, was adjudged to be the property of the artist. Where fubjeas, belonging to two or more different persons, were unwarily mixt by either of them, and could not be again separated, it was awarded, that the mixture should be divided among the parties concerned, in proportion to the fliare of materials which each had in the composition or mixture ; and the least inconvenient manner of terminating a dispute was, in this manner, intended, or provided for in these different infsances.

Labour constitutes a right to property in the effed, which that labour has produced. Although there may have been labour, therefore, in any particular cafe, if there be no permanent effóet, there is no subjea of property. Mariners may have navigated the lea; they may have traversed new and unappropriated islands.; but, if thelandis no way changed bythcir labour; the earth, no more I) d 2 than 
 than the trackless ocean, can become a subjed of property to the CRAP. III. person by whom it is merely traversed.


It is nevertheless a custom of some standing, among the nam.

tions of Europe, to claim the dominion of newly discovered lands or islands, as founded in prior discovery, and confirmed alone by iymbolical forms or aas of possession; such as- the ereding of columns, with dates and inscriptions recording the claim of the obvereign, in whose behalf it is made.

- So far as any number of nations have been in.pratice of claiming and acknowledging rights, founded in such forms as these, they mull be underflood to have entered into a fair convention, respecting such fubjecs. A mere symbolical occupancy is valid againft those who have repeatedly availed themselves of the fame plea, and who are. therefore come under an obligation to give way to it in their turn. It is a plea sufficient to exclude those who have agreed to be excluded by it, but not to exclude any firanger who is not a party to any convention in the cafe, whether express or tacit; much less a plea sufficient to deprive the nafive, however rude ,or barbarous, of the inheritance or possession to which he is born.

The right of the claimant, therefore, among the nations of Europe, upon the ground of discovery or symbolical possession, is matter of convention merely among such nations; and cannot be derived, either from the principle of occupancy, or the principle of labour, at least, until the fubje& is adually occupied, or, from the labour bestowed upon it, has received some adtual change or improvement.

3 Suteh Such are the ways in which a subjeC, the right of no one, * 


CHAP.AIII, may become the right of oJme one; either while he occupies it, 
or in consequence of the effea he has produced in it by his labour.

It remains, that we confider by what means the right of one person may be transferred to another, as in convention or forfeiture.

Res nnllins.





S E C T I 0 N X.

Of Contra7t, or the Principle of conventional Obligation.

 A CONVENTION, or contrat, is the mutual content of parties to 
 conflitute, transfer, or reduce a right.


Where two or more persons, therefore, are consenting to the fame or to mutual articles of agreement, they come refpietively or mutually under the obligation of contract.

This obligation, in the cafe of mutual content, is universally acknowledged, or universally pleaded by those who exac the performance of a bargain: Insomuch, that even they who overlook every other foundation of right, acknowledge compact as fufficient to support all the claims of juflice in civil or political society.

The obligation of compact, therefore, mull either be felf-evident, or must be derived from some very obvious and felf-evident ~I~~~~~~ ~~~principlc.

principle. Mr Hobbes denies the existence of any right prior to 

convention; but, it most be owned, that if in this, his opinion CECAT. X
bears hard upon human nature, in denying the original rights of v men, he is exceedingly prompt to sustain the effec of convention in creating every right which men have occasion to plead in society; and his proceeding is to the following purpose.

The first requisite, according to him, in eflablifhing any principle of law with which men are bound to comply, is: " That every " man diveIt himfelfof the right he hath to all things by nature *; " or, as he himself interprets, the supposed right of all men to "all things, it being in effect, as he acknowledges, no better than " if no man had a right to any thing t." The first requisite, in establishing a law of nature, is, that all men consent mutually, that for the future there shall be such a thing as right; " but," continues he, " as this content were utterly vain and of none effet, if this " also were not a law of the fame nature, that every man is ob"liged to Rfand to and perform these covenants he maketh ;"
it appears necessary to establish this obligation in general, before tie content of parties can be supposed to eftablifli it in any -particular inflance.

The breach or violation of covenants, according to this celebrated writer, is thefirfl species of injury; but, to a person who denies the previous existence of injury, in the harm that may be done to the person of a man; it may be difficult to show how.
injurycommencesin this form,andnoother. If hedeny that, prior to convention, * Dc Corporc Politico, Part l 11 Ch;p. iii. Sect. r.

t Ibid. SeC . 2.
t. Ibid. Chap. iii. Sec6. 1.

 convention, there is any obligation to abftaitn from harm; if he 
CHAP-. I1." admits that the violent may wound with his sword; that the inv~ryj fidious may ensnare with his cunning.; why -not that the faith-: less may, to procure an advantage to himself, Letray the confidence he has been able to obtain.

To solve this problem, he has recourse to the following process of reasoning: Not to perform what is contraled for, being what all men call an injury, he proves performance to be binding, because non-performance is an abfiurdity in aEizon, as felf-contradi'lioo is ani abfirdity in argument: "For, as he which is driven to contradict " an assertion by him before maintained, is said to be reduced to " an absurdity, so he that through passion doth or omitteth that " which before he promised to do, or not to omit, is said to com:- mit injustice, and there is in every breach of covenant- a con"' tradiction so called.-He that violateth a covenant, willeth the " doing and not doing of the fame thing at the fame time, which " is a plain contradiction *."

Here, it must be confessed, the argument is diftindly stated; the obligation of contract, and with it, according to this author, all the positive rights of men, are made to reft on the merit of consistency, in preference to inconsistency or felf-contradi&ion.
It were irrational to fay and unsay the fame thing.; therefore, rational beings are bound in their actions to be consistent with' their sayings; that is to fay, they are bound to objerve their contrals.
To do otherwise, would be to unsay in their actions, or in neglet of performance what they had previously said, in terms of a bargain, or in expressions of content.

Such * Ibid. Sct'. 2.

ill accounts for the indignation witwhich a breach offaithis universally confidered by-mankind. He who breaks faith may incur the charge of inconsistency it is true; but how different from the charge of perfidy or trea/bn. The traitor next to the murderer is reckoned the most odious among criminals, and the argument now fiated from Mr Hobbes is the less fit to support the obligation of contrac, or to account for the sentiments with which breach of faith is reprobated, that it would equally apply to evince an obligation where none is admitted, and to fix a criminal imputation where the passions relent; and where a person once inclined to the commiftion of a crime flirinks from guilt and returns to innocence.

Thus,upon the principle of confiftency,as flated by this author, a person having once expressed an intention refpeaing a matter in which he himself alone is concerned, would be bound to fulfil his intention, whatever reason or consideration may have occurred to the contrary. If a person, for instance, has one proposed in his own mind, or mentioned in his talk an intention to carry his goods to market, he is no longer at liberty to withhold them.
If he has threatened to kill his neighbour, his benefactor, or his parent,. he is not at liberty to retraA or to change his mind. In any supposed cafe of this fort, however, mankind would confider the threat as a crime, and the failure of performance, not as a breach of faith, but as the relenting of a mind which had yet some remains of ingenuity, a sense of innocence, and some difposition to atone for the guilt of having ever entertained so atrocious a purpose.

In this account of moral obligation colleced from the ordinary E e sense 
 sense of mankind, we find a clear apprehension of right and wrong HCHA. III. prior to convention. We find an acknowledgment, that conven
^rv ttion itself may be wrong; the completion of it worse; and the breach of it right. As he who has engaged or bargained to commit a murder incurs a certain measure of guilt in the bargain he has made; this measure of guilt he would greatly augment by preserving consistency, or by proceeding. to fulfil his bargain; and under such an unhappy engagement his duty manifestly is to become inconsistent, and to decline the performance.

Some writers who have employed their ingenuity to a better purpose, and who think more favourably of man's physical state than the last we have mentioned, seem willing, nevertheless, to reft the obligations of men in society more upon convention than is necessary; and to reason from this topic of contract, in cafes to which the great injunction of natural law to abfiain from harm is at least equally obvious and equally applicable.

Society itself is by such writers confidered as the refuIt of a bargain, and the relative duties of men in society are traced up to a supposed original compat, on the articles of which volumes have been written*. The intention of writers, in this form of their argument, is no doubt favourable to mankind, and the hypothesis of a conditional obligation is by them recurred to, merely in order that none of the parties in civil society may pretend a right to enjoy his peculiar advantage, without fulfilling also the condition to which he is peculiarly bound, or without contributing what is due from himself, in return for what he expedcs to receive from another. Thus, allegiance and protection being tated, as the reciprocal - Vide Contrat Social of Rousseau.

ciprocal flipulations of magistrate and subjed, the one is not to 

expect allegiance, without adminiftring protection, nor the other to 

expe& proteAion without the proper returns of allegiance. and duty. I '

Were we to enumerate all the obligations of men in society, we should find many, no doubt, which arise from convention express or tacit; but, it is far from being necessary or expedient to refer the whole to this title. The obligation to abstain from harm, and the right of every individual, to the utmost of his power, to defend himself and his fellow creatures, are prior to convention, and are indeed the foundation upon which conventional obligation itself is established.

- Whoever has power may employ it in defending the innocent; and so far, the magistrate having the sword in his hand need not enquire whether the criminal that offends against the peace of his country, has agreed to abfiain from crimes, or has agreed to submit to punishment. In repressing the crimes, and in. giving examples to deter others from the commiflion of them, the magifirate does no more than what every other person, prior to convention, and to the extent of his power, is entitled to do.

But, when the magistrate assumes tohimfelf alone the prerogative of employing force for the repression of crimes; when he tells the injured, that he must not attempt to do himfelfright, but must have recourse to the protection eftabliihed by law; when he requires the fubjedt to part with his fubftance,to defray the expence of a public service; when he assumes the right to positive command, in requiring the innocent to serve his country, as well as in requiring the injurious to abstain from harm; there, no doubt, he must be able to plead a special institution or convention, to which the people have agreed.


I Laws and iniitutions, in every'community, contain: articles of agreement entered into by the parties with whomthey originated, .---- and by their posterity who accede to them ; but such agreements are all of them posterior to the existence of society; and not the foundations upon which society was originally ereAed. 'The esfential obligations of men in society are founded in what nature has done for them, not in what they themselves have agreed to.
perform; and such obligations can receive no confirmation or fanAion from the supposition of a contrac which is merely sictitious, or which did not exist.

The humane author of the treatise on crimes-and' punifliments , founding even the right to punish crimes on a supposed original!
compact, and applying a well known maxim of law,, that comrn 'pads are to be ftridly interpreted, denies any right in the magiCf trate to inflicd punishments more severe than are neceflary to ob'tain the purpose for' which parties contracted; that is, more severe than is necessary to restrain crimes, and to keep the peace offociety.
For this being the obje of parties in forming their compaCt, so far, he argues, every' person in society may be supposed to have acceded to. the contract, and no farther. This, however, is :rio more than a circuitous way of asserting, that the state or its, ma-giftrates have no right to punilh any crime, farther than is neceffary for their own defence, or the defence of the cause entrulted to their charge ; a maxim that does not require consent to make it binding,' but is implied in the first principle of natural. law, which limits the means of defence within the bounds of what.is necessary for the preservation or recovery of a right.

1~i~~~ ~T , Bar'.If * The Marquis Bccarilo.

If we muff admit the supposition of an original compacl; like a PRTII"

bond .of copartnery, constituting the foundation 'of»fociety,-and 
the first charter of rights to its members ;- as there is nov record of the articles originally framed, there must. now be, inferred from the principles of natural right; for we have no oither source -from which to derive information of what men were likely to :have stipulated or agreed to perform.in a period of which no. vefr .tige remains. .

In the first treaty of peace, by which. men. agreed to live in society together, we are told, accordingly, that they mufft have ftipulated. to abstain from- harm. But whence this information, we may ask-?. Not from, the record of any such stipulation.! Nay, but it may be assumed. from the manifest equity and reason 'of the supposed article. This is, firif, to alledge that a person is bound to be just, because he has bargained' to be so;. and, next,-to presume that he has bargained to abstain from harm, because. it is; just that he do so..

- If we are to suppose, with Mr Hobbes, or as is, in some mea'sure, implied in his refting all the obligations of men in society.
upon a fuppofecl original compaqt, that there is no right and ,no.
obligation prior to convention; it will be difficult, surely, as. the example of Mr Hobbes himfelfwill show, to find a foundation upon which the obligation of contra6t itself may reft.. If-contrat"
be the sole foundation of right, all that, is commonly said of an inherent right in every person to defend himself, or. of an obliga.
tion corresponding to this right on every person .to abstain from harm, mufft. be renounced. The diftinAion, supposed between rights original and adventitious, must be dropt. All the rights of men, whether personal or, real, ate adventitious, and begin with, 
 with the.confent of one man not to disturb the pofleffion of ano
 ther; and, in ihort, no man is obliged, even in the latest hour of wvars' society, to abstain from harm, except so far as by some species of compad he has bound himself so to do.

Such consequences, however, are sufficiently absurd to justify our rejeding the principle on which they are founded; and are probably far from the thoughts of many, who assume the social comjpare, as a Jiflion of law, upon which to reft their decisions in particular instances. To this principle, at any rate, we cannot have recourse in fixing the grounds of conventional obligation. That a compac may be binding, we muff suppose some previous foundation upon which its obligation may reft, whether the consistency to which Mr Hobbes refers, or the original right of every person to defend himself, to which we have so often referred in these disquisitions.

If the rule that forbids the commiflion of harm, or the principle of nature, on which is founded a right of defence, can be applied to the cafe of parties, so far pledging or accepting a faith which is pledged to them, as that, by the breach of this faith they may injure or be injured; it will follow, that they ought to- refrain from that injury; or may repel it,by obliging the party contrading to fulfil the terms of his contract.

By the law of nature, every party may defend his estate from every invasion that is made to impair it. Of the state which may be thus defended, men derive part from the hand of their Maker, which is accordingly to them matter of original right; part from their own a& and deed, as in the cafe of occupancy or labour, already recited; and we may now subjoin, that they 1 : derive derive part of their state also from the engagements in which others 

are bound to them ; or from the faith that others have plighted. aCHP 11I.

-'' ' SCT:X.._

The servant is secure in the engagement of a maiter to pay his wages; the master relies for his accommodation on the engagement of the servant to do his work. The landlord is rich in the engagement of tenants to pay his rents; the tenant bellows his labour, and scatters his feed, trusting to the lease he has received from the landlord.. Even the miser himself, who is disposed to hoard up his wealth, may not have a tingle penny or article of value in his pofleffion. He is rich in the capacity merely of a creditor, and in holding others obliged to pay the principal and interest, in which they are indebted by bond to him.

Such credit, in one man towards another, is -a part of their social nature; and the person who is disposed to abuse his credit may wound or defiroy, by means of that instrument, no less than by the arm of violence, or the sword which he wields in his hand.

If it be admitted, that men are by nature disposed mutually to give and to receive information; that where they have no special cause of diftrufi, they rely on the informations, aflurances, or promises which they receive from others; and that great part in the conduct of every person is determined by informations or ,asfurances so received. If the bewildered traveller, in the dark, turns 'confidently to the right, when he is told that there is a precipice on, the left, it must evidently follow, that to mislead him, or to occasion his harm, by any misinformation, would be equally criminal, as to occasion that harm by any other means.

Hence 
 .Hence we may conclude, that a person being made to rely on 
 the content of another, to constitute or to reduce a right, is not k-001 bound to susser by the other's breach of faith; but may proceed on the principle offelf-defence, to force the performance of a promise which makes a part of his itate; and the principle upon which a person, who has come under any engagement, may be forced to fulfil that engagement, is the fame with that maxim, on which he may be forced to abstain from injury, or harm of any other kind; insomuch, that the first principle of compulsory law, which is in appearance merely prohibitory, may branch into a variety of duties or obligations to do, or to omit to do, whatever may be a fit matter of stipulation betwixt any two or more parties concerned.

To fail in the discharge of such duties is, on many occasions at leaf, termed perfidy or breach of faith, and confidered with a higher degree of abhorrence, than even the injuries that are done by open force. This may, no doubt, proceed from circumstances peculiar to fraud and deceit. The traitor must have carried the maik of innocence to have obtained credit; he has stolen an advantage which he had not the courage openly to force. The contrait of fraud with the mask of innocence, which it wears, the cowardice which is imputed to the person who assumes that mark in order to wound, combine together in awakening the peculiar sentiment of indignation and hatred, with which perfidy or breach of faith is confidered; and which, though they do not make any addition to what is at present the object of our discussion, namely, the rightof every person to defend himfelfagainft such wrongs; yet they they tend greatly to evince that the source of conventional obli- 

gation is much more deeply laid than the mere consistency of CHCP. IIr words and actions, upon which it is founded by the philosopher nr now mentioned.


Of the Laws of Convention derivedfrom theforegoing Trinciple.

PART. 11. FROM the account which has been given of conventional right 

SECT. XI. and obligation, it appears that compact, in every instance, implies '. >-'v a plurality of parties, one at least who comes under an engagement, and one or more to whom the engagement is made, and who accept of it. The first may be termed the party contraCting, the other the party accepting.

In many bargains, the parties may be mutually contracting and accepting; as when one party binds himself to convey a property, accepting a price, and the other binds himself to pay the price, accepting the property. But it is not, at present, or in the prosecution of this argument, neceliary to confider the parties to a double capacitm the principle itatecl, it is evident, that to give a supposed compact the effeEt which we have ascribcd to it, in confsituting a a ight, on the part of one, 

ther, it is necessary that the accepting party mfould be made to 
expec a performance, and that the contracting party should have intentionally done somewhat sufficient to give such expectation.

Without an expecation formed, there is no object of exaction; and, without a person who has intentionally given cause for that expectation, there is no one against whom the exaction may be enforced.

Agreeably to this decision, it appears, that, although the contraAing party may have done what was sufficient to create an expedation, yet if the other party mhould not, at the fame time, do what is sufficient to make known his acceptance, there is in reality no obligation to perform.

The tranfadtion, upon this last supposition, amounts to no more than an offer; and, as the party offering has no intimation of its being accepted, he is at liberty to change his mind, or may have recourse to some other party willing to accept of the offer he has made.

It follows, also, that as a supposed contraAing party is notbound to performance, where acceptance is not sufficiently notified, no more is he bound to fulfil any fali expedations for which he has not laid a foundation.

Upon the principle of convention, so explained, we may ground the following law: That, To co5i/itute a valid contracl, is required the mutual cotfent of parties, acfing freely, and in the exercie of their rational.faculties; F f 2 and 
 and- withfuch means of communication as are fuffcient to make known 
 their thoughts and intentions. :. . :.,, ,. .


In the municipal law of different countries, the forms. ofr convention are prescribed, as in bonds, bills, or promiory notes, which constitute a debt; deeds of conveyance, articles offale, and so forth.
So that, upon the disagreement of parties, the question at issue may be determined by a third party; that is, by the judge before whose tribunal the reality of the obligation may come to be tried, and who must colle& the sense of parties from the form in which they were pleased to express their agreement. But, as the prefcribed form may' ometimes have been observed, where there is nevertheless sufficient cause to set aside the contrat, such cause may be taken into consideration, under the title of an exception, and is often sufficient to repel the plea of the party, who claims the performance of an article, however Stipulated in the legal form.

Such exceptions, in the municipal law of any country, are or may be enumerated under the titles of incapacity,force, fraud, injuflice, and impossibility.

Incapacity may be pleaded against the validity of an obligation, when it appears, that the party, supposed to have consented, was not in the exercise of his reason at the time. Force may be pleaded, when he was known not to ac freely; and fraud, when he was known to be deceived; more especially if the force or the fraud had been employed by the person who afterwards claims performance of the article so obtained.

These exceptions are matter of just and necefTary confideration in courts of law, as ajudge, if directed merely by the forms prescribed, prescribed; might be milled to fuftain'an obligation where it is not 

properlyconftituted. But,in discussions ofthelaw ofnature, where S
a contramt is supposed to consist, not in any prescribed form or mode of expreflion, but in the mutual aflent of parries, aling freely and in the exercise of their reason, the exceptions of force and fraud are precluded in the definition itself; and, where the sac does:not correspond to the definition, what we contend for is not an exception, by which to set aside a contract supposed to subsist, but is a negative plea, by which we deny that any contract ever did exist.

The insane or incapable can raise no expecation. A peifon forced or deceived into a bargain, cannot be expected to fulfil that bargain, when he is at liberty, or has detected the fraud that was employed to' mislead him. He may confider the person who employed such means to circumvent him, as guilty of an injury; and may think himself entitled to reparation, inflead of being bound to perform the articles of a bargain so obtained.

There may, however, be a real aiTent of parties to an article of compact which may afterwards appear to be either injurious to the right of some third party, or in the nature of things impofiible; and in every such cafe, there is a real ground of exception, even upon the general assumptions of the law of nature.

The exception of injuflice may be pleaded to flop execution of an article injurious to a third party, and that of impqgibility to save the party contracing from fruitless attempts to perform what cannot be done.

Under these titles of injuilice and impoqfibility, confidered as exceptions to a contrat, a variety of cafes may be supposed.

3 'i1f 
 xfi, That neither party, at the time of itipulating, was aware CH.P. 11I.
SECT. XI. of the ijufJiice or impojibility. In this cafe the decision is, that L-->-- both parties are bound to drop their petenfions as soon as the exception is known.

A second cafe may be supposed, where only one of the parties, at the time of stipulating, knew of the exception. If the contrafting party alone knew that he was engaging himself to commit an aA of injujlice, he is injurious to the party against whom the wrong is directed. If he alone knew that the performance was impoi/ble, he is unjust to the party accepting, in whom he has endeavoured to raise a vain expectation.

If the party accepting alone, knew that the performance would be unjust, he is, in accepting the offer, injurious to the party likely to susser. If he alone knew that the performance to which he engaged another, was in the nature of things impoflible, his acceptance of such engagement was an injury to the person whom he induced ignorantly so to engage himself in fruitless attempts.

A third cafe may be supposed in which both parties knew of the exception at the time of making their agreement. If the article stipulated was by both parties known to be injurious to a third party, the agreement amounted to a conspiracy against the person concerned. If the article was known by both parties to be impossible at the time of stipulating, there may have been a purpofc, by such sham tranfa&ion, to impose upon some third party, or else the proceeding must be judged altogether irrational and absurd.

In every contract must be supposed a sufficient mode of communication munication between the parties. Language, whether in speech 


'

or writing is the most common, but any other means of ex- 
prefflion, supposed to be mutually understood, will be equally r.y-'
sufficient upon the principles of the law of nature, to establish a conventional, obligation, or right; geefures of any fort understood as signs of declaration or assent; a continued course of action; even single actions may, upon this principle, not only be conceived to express a meaning, but are actually sustained as sufficient expressions .of assent before the courts of law in every civilized nation.

Hence the effea of custom every where admitted as part of the common or the municipal law. Hence the obligation contrated by a shopkeeper, to fell the goods in his shop to those who will pay his price, and the obligation of a person who takes the goods, to pay that price. Hence the obligation of an inn-keeper to accommodate passengers; and the obligation on passengers to pay their bill; although neither one nor the other made any verbal declaration to that effect.

In the ordinary course of things, we look to the future as a continuation of the pait, and confider the custom of the country in which we reside, as an assurance of the terms on which we live with the people of that country.

It is evident in particular, that custom may be pleaded against those who take the benefit of it, where it is favourable to themselves; and who, therefore, may be reasonably supposed willing, in their turn, to comply with it, where it is favourable or beneficial to others.


CHAP.R II In this manner conventions are tacitly formed, and the laws SECTr. XI. of every country consists more of customary practice, established '>_'- by repeated decisions, than of statute or express confiitution of any fort.

It is a maxim of natural justice, that every party observing a custom, in those refpecs in which it is burdensome to himself, is entitled in his turn to expect the observance of it also in those refpeas in which it is beneficial. A person bearing the public burdens of the state, is entitled to its protection ; and a sovereign, granting proteaion, is entitled to allegiance and support.

Convention, though not the foundation or cause of society, as implied in the term of original compa-t, may be supposed almost coeval with. the intercourse of markind. Men do not move in the fame company together, without communications of mind; or intention. These communications become objecs of mutual reliance, and even that party may be charged with breach of faith who has belied the expectations he gave by his amicable looks or pacific behaviour. From the first steps, therefore, that are made in society, conventions may be supposed to go on accumulating in the form ofpracice, if not in the form of statute or express inftitution.

Political eftablifnments, in many instances, originate in force, and prerogatves are assumed which in the first exercise of them were manifeff violations of right. process of time. or at least in the succession of a few ages, acquire the habits of their situation; and succeeding generations may bciled to orms that were forced on their ancestors. They adopt as a custom, and willingly submit to conditions which owed ed their first imposition perhaps to violence. In such cafes, we 


CIAP. Ill, are not always to look -back to the origin of a custom or prac- 
tice, in order to judge of its validity. If it be such as the mind ve of man may by habit be reconciled to, and willing to adopt, it becomes binding on those who have availed themselves of the cuftom, where it is favourable to themselves; and are therefore fairly understood to adopt the conditions of it, where these conditions are reciprocally favourable to others.: Succeeding generations of men are supposed to be comprehended under certain legal eftablifliments, by the deed and inftitution of their ancestors. This is not ftrilly true. Every citizen, as he comes of age, enters upon a scene which his ancestors had prepared for him, but of which the conditions as binding on him cannot be ratified by any one besides himself. He mixes in society, where these conditions are already ratified by others; and he himself in complying with them, and in reaping the benefit of them, gives such assurance of his willingness to accede to the terms already prescribed in his country, as amounts to a ftfficient ratification of the fame terms on his own part. So that citizens, in every regular community, are bound, not by the institution of their anceflors on which they were not consulted, but b'y the consent which they themselves have given. by availing theimfelves of the benefits which result from such institutions.

To the question, therefore, whether persons of one age can bind their poetcrity in ages that follow ? we may answer in the negative. But succeeding ages, nevertheless, becomec bound in acceding to the terms on which they live with their fellow citizens.

TVOL. 1I G g I

1PART 11. In judging of an inflitution, we may repeat, that we are not'fo SECT. XI. much to look to its origin as its actual nature. - Compliance extorted by force does not amount to convention; but justice itself sometimes needs to be enforced, and the wisest institutions, at the time of their first admission, may have been the fruits of compulfion: But, if in the sequel, an establishment be found acceptable, and favourable to the interests of mankind, they do well to abide by it, and, while they do so, no individual can remain in his country, and take the benefit of its laws, without being bound to obey them in his turn.

Thus, it becomes evident, that as it were absurd in science,, like Mr Hobbes, to overlook the original rights of men; so it were no less absurd, like visionary theorifis, in any question of law or state, to refer to mere original rights, as the sole ground of decision. It were absurd, after a person had bought an estate, to rejea the conveyance that was made to him, in order to judge of his title, on such principle of right merely as may be supposed to precede the institution of property.

But, if want of content, in one age,will not preclude the obligation of compac on succeeding ages, or on those who in the fequel voluntarily accede to a practice, no more will the content of anceflors, with whom a pratice originated, bind their pofterity, or those who in the sequel refuse their assent; and, if an institution, however willingly adopted by a former age, prove in the sequel a mere abuse; if it be a continued exercise of injutfice and wrong, supported by force on the one part, and a continued series of suffering and relucant compliance on the other; fulch praAices, however long continued, as they are never ratified by content, they are never cftablifhled on the foot of customary i.~~~~~~~~1 ~praAice, pradtice, nor do they obtain the force of convention. The op- 

pressed, even after any indefinite period of oppression are free to 




procure relief by such means as they are enabled to employ for _r that purpose.

Of thefpecifc Obligation; and Rights that result f-om Contra7.

J 
PART PI1 IEN may bind themselves by contraic to do, or to onit to do, SECT. XII. whatever is within the compass of their will, and not contrary to 'Vr-j tdhe right of any other person; but in matters, concerning one person, which no way depend on the content of another, compaA were misplaced, and cannot have any effect.

In seizing upon things which are open to tle sirs occupier, the conient of others is not required; or, in other words, the right of poflEffion results from occupancy alone, apart from any content.

Poflfsion is fllort of property; because, if the pofiffor £nould cease to occupy a ilibjed, he has not any right to exclude another fiom its use. When rclinquiflhed, it is open again to the firfl occupicr, whether the person who formerly pofliced it, or any one elfc.

This This defec, in the right of poffeflion, may be in part supplied 


by the content of all the parties, who had access to the subjet, at 
the time it has ceased to be occupied. And thus, a right of pro- -Y
perty in one person, may be pleaded against all tho-e who consented to forgo their right of occupancy. With respect to such as consent to the property, it is matter of convention; and the person, in whose favour they have given their content, has so far acquired an exclusive right, that, upon any discontinuance of the use, he may refumre it, or even recover his uibject, if found in the pofsession of those who resigned their right of occupancy in his favours, But this right, which is exclusive with refpedt to those, whether few or many, who have confented-to exclude themselves, can never of itself amount to an absolute property, or be exclusive with refpeat to all mankind.

Were we therefore to admit the principle afliimed by Mr Hobbes, that originally all men had equal rights to, all things, and that compat alone could give exclusive right to any thing, it should follow, that universal consent was necessary to give abfolute property, or to conltitute a right special and exclusive in any one to the sole use of the subjec to which he laid claim; and wee might infer, on the fame principle, that, as no such universal consent has ever been obtained, no right of property is yet fully conftituted: MIoreover, that as such universal content never can be obtained, we might alto infer, that the existence of a right, in any one person, exclusive of all other men, is impossible, and that men fill remain, and muff for ever remain, in that original late, in which all Ien had an eqlual right to all things; and iare atclally in a slate of war, to which they arc condemned by the want of any.
amicable rule by whlich to adjulli their di/fcrcnccs.

Althougth 

h Although the idea of universal consent be altogether visionary 
 r SECT. XII yet no one will deny that there is such a right as property, which <r/Wy may originate in the labour bellowecd upon a subjeCt unoccupied and unappropriated. And that when property has thus accrued to any one, it may by compact be conveyed to any other, and continue to pass through any indefinite number of hands.

With refpet to property, therefore, the effect of compac is not the institution of a right, but the conveyance from one to another of a right previously instituted.

Property determines on the death or derelicion of the proprietor. In either cafe, the subjea is open to the first occupier.

Among rude or savage nations, property being attached, for the most part, to moveable articles, as arms, furs, dre/s, or utesjils of any fort; and the principal sign of property being the actual use of the subjeA in which it is conflituted, such articles, when found in the absence of any person who claims the use of them, are readily treated as res nullius, or as things open to the first occupier. Hence, much of the rapacity or injustice which is imputed to men in this slate.

A conveyance of property implies dereliction, but is not complete, without delivery into the hands of the person, in whose favour the conveyance is made. Were a subject merely relinquiflled, it would become open to the first occupier. The person, for whom the property was deflined, might have an action against the former proprietor for not fulfilling his deed of conveyance; but but not againfl a third party, who, proceeding to occupy .the sub- 


CHAP.A'ILr jed relinquished, had not come under any obligation to deliver 
it to lim.

Upon this ground it is obferved,that the mere law of nature will not support a legatee, in claiming the poffeflion of an inheritance from any third party, who may have occupied it on the death of the teftator.-His action could lie only against the person, whose consent he could plead; but that person is no more, and, upon his demise, the subjea in question became open to the firfl occupier, who may not have consented to put the fuppofed-legatee in possession.

But such questions, in the ordinary course of things, are for the most part precluded. Even among rude nations, where property is least established, the family of a person deceased are naturally the firit occupiers of his effeds; and inheritance gets a footing, not upon any principle of right excluding the first occupier, but upon a principle of fad, that the family of the deceased are, for the most part, actually in pofleflion.

Among nations more advanced in the progress of property and: of arts, the will of a person deceased is admitted as a sufficient ground of conveyance to the legatee. This favour is due to the induflry, with which property is acquired; and it has a salutary tendency, among commercial nations, to reward and encourage that induRtry. Upon this footing, the effedt of a last will is derived fiom convention, fich as the living have admitted; not from the destination of a person who is no more, and against whom no action at law can be raised.

A claim of right, founded in compact, is valid only againfl the party 
 party contrating; and the right pertains only to the party acceptCHp. '1I. ing. Such only as have at once a right, in the subjec of compact, i . .Ji and power to dispose of it, are competent to an effecual at of conveyance.

As every person may perform what Jervices he thinks proper, and has power to dispose of his services by previous consent; perfonalfervice is the principal and immediate objeEt of convention.
al obligation.

The right to commnand we have observed, cannot arise from occupancy or fiom labour bestowed. It may arise by co!/fent so far as one person may, by compact, bind himself to obey the commands of another. Thus the artizan has right to the service of his apprentice upon the ground of his indenture. The master has a right to the labour of a fervant'he has hired, and persons ftipulating the performance of any tail; or the supply of any commodity, have a right to all the effects of their contrac.

In the fame manner, we are told that the right of government is founded in the concz/nt of the people; and this though true in many rcfpecs is not true in all. It is true in refipec to all the positive fkrvices and contributions due fioml the subject. If in there the rights of government are questioned they must be evin-ced on the principle of convention exprtcf or tacit: For on that principle alone the right of command can be eflablilhed. The consent of those by whom governiment was fiirf acknowledged is firequent.
ly cxpreitci in formlal capitulations, charters or Iatutes ; and the conleiit of thofi over whom it continues to be exercielle, though tacit, is no less real firom age, to age in the continued acceptance of protection in return for allegiance ancl politica.l duties. 13t a right right to protect the innocent or to restrain crimes, which the ma- 

giflrate by his power,alone,is in condition to exercife,he is likewise s

entitled to hold on the principle of the law of defence alone, and 'yo reed not recur to any supposed content of the people to abitain from crimes.

Amidst the relations in which mankind are placed, by agreement either express or tacit, it may be asked, whether upon the principles of the law of nature the relation of matter and slave, can be justly admitted ?

This relation is understood to be the fame with that of proprietor to the fubjedc of his property, * and seems to have originated in violence or force, and not in content. Barbarous nations make war to enslave their captives, and dispose of them at market, like cattle or other fubjedts of property.

Violent institutions, we have observed, if they be such as men in the sequel are reconciled to, and willingly adopt, may become matter of fair convention and be established in custom. Hlow far the dinftitution of slavery may come under this description is the question which we are now confidering.

It cannot be doubted, that persons may be found under the denomination of slaves, as much in appearance reconciled to their slate, as men are ever observed to be in any other condition of H h life: *K In the language of the Roann law a slave was said to be a ihing and not a per.
on. Servits non ft persona fed res.

ART' II. life: Shall we therefore suppose them to have given their concIcrp. 111. sent to servitude in the full extent of that term ?


To this queRion, we may answer in the negative, for manifold reaforns.

Firi, If the nominal slave may in faa be reconciled to the fpecific command or treatment he has experienced; and, if he be supposed by tacit consent to have agreed to submit to such treatment, the master must be supposed also to have agreed not to change that treatment for any other. The slave has not yet experienced, nor has the master yet attempted, all the uses that may be made of a property; and what has not at all been praaifed, cannot be justified upon the foundation of custom. What has never been tried, cannot be matter of usage. So much for the condition of slaves, who are in appearance reconciled to their lot.

In other infiances, it is well known, that slaves, tho' under good tfage patient and traCtable, are yet by extreme severities driveninto a sense of injury and resentment, which is inconfiftentwith the fuppofition of assent to the pretended condition of unlimited fubjedion.
The inj ured feels himself to be a person, and not a thing; and, tho'
he may seem to content in terms to put his services, his person, and his life, at the discretion of another, yet he cannot abide the essecs of capricious cruelty, without a pungent sense of his wrongs, and a just effort of nature to defend himself. Such sentiments are in reality what charaderife a person, and place him in contradiftintion to a thing or subjeA of property.

The The contrac of mafler and slave, if any such were supposed to 


.

exist, is such, on the part of the slave, as is not consistent with 
free will or the exercise ofreafon. It is the resignation of every 'v thing, in exchange for nothing.

If any one should formally stipulate to forego his right of defence, and debase his mind to the sufferance of every ad of injuftice, this were to betray the want of reason, or at least to betray ignorance of the sense in which terms were employed to ensnare him. If such a compact therefore, were pleaded as the ground of an obligation to unlimited servitude, it should undoubtedly be set aside under the exception offraud on the part of the supposed mafier, or of i/anity on the part of the supposed slave.

But what is fill more than this, a slave, according to the definition adopted, where the institution of slavery took place, and agreeably to the practice of purchase and sale, eftablifled in the market for slaves, is confidered as a thing, and not a person. The supposition is impossible, and cannot be realized by the content of any party, even relating to himself. He may content to do what another commands, within the limits ofpoffibility; but mufl continue to be a person, having original if not acquired rights, and inspired by nature with a disposition to revolt, whenever he is galled with the sense of insufferable injury or wrong.

The claim of a master or proprietor is founded, perhaps, with more plausible appearances, on the fuppofecl forfeiture of personal rights, when the reparation of a wrong may support the exaction of Servitude: A title which yet remains to be confidered, and is the IubjecC of the feRion that follows.

H I1 2 Tan 
 In the mean timne the references which. we have repeatedly SC.T. XII. made to the prerogatives of government, and the allegiance of L---* f£uabjetls, may seem fit rather- to start questions, and form difficulties, than to solve them: And we ought not perhaps- to difminifs this queflion, relating to the specific obligations and rights that result from compact, without endeavouring to bring into onme clear point of view the several questions that mayarife, refpecat ing the rights and obligations of men, under any form of subordination or political infittution.

In the firfc place, we may venture to rejec the idea of an origiginal compac7, as it is assumed, either in. the formation of society itself, or in the establishment of any aAual government:. For men must have been already together in society, in order to form any comnpad, and muff have been in the pratice to move in a body, before they can have concerted together for any purpose whatever. And we are juitified, by the history of mankind, in affmn.-ng, That, some species of government being necessary to the peace of society, Providence has kindly ordained, that wherever there is a society, there should be government also, subjed to such correction as the grievances, men experience under it, may lead them to apply "

It is neverthelefa.a manifest principle in the law of nature; th.at a right to command, or an obligation to obey, beyond what is required to the mere prevention of harm, can be founded in consent. alone. The powerful have a right to command any pertbn to abflain from harm ; but not to do any positive fcrvice. There may be a power, therefore, without any right of command to this extent; and, where any such power is cxercifed. it may, in the language * See Iliftory of Political Arts, vol. Ift.

language of Englifli law, be termed a governmlent. de faFto, 


.
though not a government dejure. 

There is indeed, byinftitution of Providence, and by an original diftindion of dependance and power, in every society, a government de jacfo. And the fame may become a government dejure, also, if the parties concerned, upon trial of the situation in which they find themselves placed, agree to the conditions which are required in the exercise of government. If the subj-ed, for inflance, agree to accept of protection, in return for the positive contributions and services required to public safety; in order to make such agreement binding on every individual, it is true that each, on his own part, mufi have aCtually given his consent: For, by the law of nature, no one is engaged by compact, without a content given by himself in person, or by his agent commissioned.
for this purpose.

We may be aflked, then, under what government did the people aflemble in a body, to give the content necelTary to found such a plea ofright to command them ? We may answer: No vhere-.
And yet this is the only plea upon which the right to command can be supported: We are therefore. bound to verify the plea, before we can urge it in behalf of any government whatever.

The content, upon which the right to command is founded may not be prior to the eflabillfhment ofgovernment; but may be obtained under the reasonable exercise of a actual power, to which every person within the community, by accepting of a cnftomarv proteclion, becomes bound to pay the cuflomary allegiance ani ilbrmiflilon. Here is a compact ratified by the leafl amibiguous of all signs, the whole pra.&ice, or continued obftirvance of an oi^ dilry 
 dinary life. The conditions here are ratified, in every age, and by SHAP. Xl. every individual for himself; not merely Stipulated, in any remote srY age, and for a posterity over which the contracting party had not any controul.

It may still, however, be afited, to what length the acquiefcence of parties will carry the rights and obligations, whether of the governing or governed. May the subjet be supposed to acquiefce in discretionary power, or the magistrate entitled to claim unlimited submission? The answer here is the fame as was given to the question of property in a master over his slave. Agreements made known by customary practice can extend only to such pratice, and will not justify any violent ads of discretion of either fide. And even with refpedt to practice, if any a& of injuftice were ever so often repeated, it is not in the nature of things, that the injured should content to be wronged, or agree to place himself at discretion in the power of the injurious. And, if injuries are committed, the continuance of injustice is a mere accumulation of wrongs, not a form of procedure, upon which any right can be founded.

No consent can be pleaded for the exercise of discretionary power in the magiflrate over the subjed, any more than for the existence of property in the master over the slave; because neither can befuppofedto know the condition to which hecontents; and the compat, in either cafe, would imply an act of insanity, or a refignation of every thing in exchange for nothing. As ats of diforder and licence, on the part of the fubjedt, cannot be juflified on the precedent of any acual disorder, no more can adCs of tyrrany and oppression, on the part of government, receive any fanction firol'. any previous prad.ice or abuse of the fame kind.

I-ierc Here, then, we reft the Speculative dodrine, which is no more 

than this, that every party in society may, by mutual praaice, ac- 




quire a right to whatever is pracicable, and a matter of fair agree- -v .
ment; but not to what is wrong, or inconsistent with the safety of mankind. And it is the wisdom of nations, so far to define every right by actual statute, as in every particular question to exclude as much as possible, the influence of passion or partial interest, whether of the governing or governed.

The claim of a right to govern at discretion, or of a priviledge to obey at discretion, before either have any effed, is a mere form of words. And, if exercised only in aCts of beneficence and duty, the discretion in either cafe, would be applauded and loved; but, in acs of disorder and outrage, becomes the claim of a right to do wrong, which is a solecism in terms, and.
absurd.





S E CT IO N XIII.

Of Forfeiture, and the Species of Right vwhich results from it.

BY the law of nature; when a wrong is apprehended, it may SECT.XIII. be prevented; when an injury is offered, it may be repelled; 't~'Yv and, when a damage is incurred, reparation may be exated from the injurious party: Sothat; as a person may bind himself by consent or compact to do; or to omit to do whatever is specified in terms of agreement, so a person, having done an injury, may become bound, in terms of the law of defence, to do, or to supply to the injured party, whatever may be necessary to repair the .damage he has done.

This obligation, on the part of the person who has done a wrong, may be termed forfeiture; and the party having incurred this obligation may become bound to surrender to the injured party, under the title of reparation, what was before his own right.

In pursuing the objec of defence, the party attacked or aggrieved is entitled, by any means efhfccual and necefiary, to prefcrve serve or to recover his state. He has a right to the ufc of means 

which are effectual, but not to the use of means which exceed what 
CHAP.XIIIis necessary, in one cafe, to repel the attack, that is made upon yV
him, or, in another cafe, to repair the damage he has sustained.

These limitations, in the right of defence, are evidently founded in the law of nature; although it may be difficult, in particular instances, to fix or to ascertain their application by any precise rule.

A person, whose right is invaded, may think it necessary to em-.

ploy all his powers in their utmost extent, to repel the invasion; and he may have incurred an injury in his person, in his honour, or in his reputation, of which it may be difficult to estimate the measure, or to adjust the reparation. Even in the cafe of trespass, on fubjeas of real right, as in matters of possession or property, the alarm may not be proportioned to the value of the subjed invadedl, nor can the measure of injury be always ascertained by the quantity oflofs sustained. Theintentionormind with which an attack is made, is often more alarming than the material loss to be apprehended; and insult, in the manner of invasion, may be more injurious than the physical harm it occasions.

With refpet to the variety of cafes that may thus occur, we muif be contented to observe, in general, that a person may be bound, to replace, from his own property, the lots he may have occasioned in the property of another; and that, in cafe of any material damage, he may be bound to render personal services, where he has not effects to answer his forfeiture.

If the injury he has committed assea the good name or reputaI i tion 
 tion of another, he is bound to retradc his calumnies, in the man
 ner most effedual to repair the wrong ie has done.

If he have not only impaired the state of the person wronged, but given just ground of alarm, also, on the subjed of his future behaviour, he is bound to admit of such precaution, as may be sufficient to guard against the danger of which he has given a just apprehension, And the injurious, in particular instances, is justly exposed to such punishment or suffering, as may be neceffary to deter himself or others from repeating the offence.

Nature has happily inspired the mind of man with indignation or resentment of wrongs; and this sentiment may quicken the arm of public juflice: But to render the exercise of public vengeance, and the infliction of punishment agreeable to the principle of natural law, it ought not to exceed the allowable means of defence; or be any other than a reasonable expedient for the suppression of crimes; and this principle contains in itself the rule upon which a just gradation of punishment should be accommodated to the variety and gradations of guilt.

In the first place, as the terms right and wrong are correlative, it may be observed, that where a person has not done a wrong, he cannot be said to have forfeited a right; or in other words, as wrong implies some culpable acion, no forfeiture can ensue where there is no culpability or blame.

Agreeably to this maxim, involuntary or casual incident,, of any fort, although it may be the cause of harm to any one who is placed within reach of its effeis, yet is it to be confidered, not as a wrong, but as a misfortune, equally an objed of regret to the doer, as to the sufferer; and to both equally an objeCt of fu.

ture ture precaution. If a person, for instance, should, by falling 

from a height, hurt or damage the person or property of another, CHCATPIIII
in the way, it is evident, that by such misfortune he might be- ~ -L
come an object of pity, but not of resentment, that the damage sustained could not be imputed to him, nor the reparation of it in justice be exaded from him. So that, although there may be damage, if there be not a crime, there is no just occasion for the inflition of punishment.

In the Roman law, a person was responsible for the trespass committed by his beast, as well as for a trespass committed by himself; but this is just so far only as the damage sustained from a beast, otherwise lawfully kept and useful, could be imputed to negled or culpable inattention, on the part of the owner.

It was admitted, that the owner ought to guard against such trespasses as it was the nature of his beast usually to commit.
These he might foresee, and was bound to prevent: But, if an animal should depart from the usual track of his nature, and trefpass in a manner that was not to be expected from him; if a cow, instead of a trespass on the pasture or standing corn of a neighbour, should, contrary to the natural infina of such animals, become carnivorous, and devour the young of a neighbouring herd: Here the damage could not be imputed to the owner, as the prevention of it could not fall within the province of any ordinary or reasonable degree of care or attention.

The decision of law, in this cafe, evidently proceeds upon a principle, that forfeiture is proportioned to the degrees of demerit, and we may add, that measures of puniflnment, authorised by the law of nature, ought to be regulated upon the fame principle.

Ii 2 To 
 To crimes which originate in malice, or in any deliberate pur
 pose of guilt, sufficiently frong to break through the refiraints of 
wy*re^' conscience or of public repute, a proportional defence and correction must be applied. Where society is alarmed by overt ads of malice or deliberate guilt. sufferings may be justly inlicaed that may strike even the obdurate with awe and terror; or, if the life or liberty of the guilty person should be inconsistent with the public safety, he may no doubt, bejuftly removed by exile or by death.

Offences that arise from sudden gusts of passion, may be restrained or corrected by punishments of inferior degree.

Faults of ignorance or inattention may be corrected by better information, admonition, or even by the experience of an evil thereby incurred.

One order or description of men may be restrained by the fear of ihame or dishonour; to reifrain another pecuniary fine or bodily sufferings may be requisite; and it is not at all necessary, that we should recur to convention, in order to reft upon this basis the obligation of the magistrate not to confound unequal measures'
of guilt or public alarm in the promiscuous application of extreme punishment to offences unequally heinous, or unequally incorrigible; nor is it neceflary to recur to convention, in order to found the right of the subject to plead his exemption, in every cafe where unnecessary or disproportional degrees of severity are employed againft him, We have flated forfeiture among the sources of adventitious rights; and, in confidering what species of right may result from thence, may proceed to obfcrve,.that forfeiture cannot, like occupancy pancy or labour, give title to a subje5t, in which no one before had 
PART IT..
any right. The person forfeitingmuft forfeit only what was his 

own, some poffeflion or property which he may be forced to re- v sign, or some fevice which he may be forced to perform.

It is farther evident, on the principle of the law of nature, that nothing can be lawfully seized or forced, under the title of forfeiture, except it be of a nature fit to repair or to compensate a damage done, and that more cannot be exaced than is necessary for this purpose. This is implied in the general clause of the law of nature, which limits the means of defence to what is esfecaual and neceflary.

A loss of property may be repaired, by an equivalent in property, or service performed. Even injuries which cannot be repaired in kind, as the loss of a limb or bodily organ, may receive some compensation; and alarms may be quieted by some adequate measure of punishment, having a tendency for the future to restrain such crimes. But it is evident, that, in the clause now cited is implied a prohibition of cruelties or ineffcctual feverities, which have not a tendency to repair or to compensate the damage suffered, nor to restrain the repetition of guilt.

Fror hence also we may conclude, that although a person may have forfeited his poffcffion, his property, or his labour, to any amount, yet no one can forfeit all his personal rights, or fiom a perf/n become a thzin or ifbjcc't of property. Criminals. accordingly, in t! e policy of some nations, are condemned to labour, or to confinement for life. In this, however, it is not pretended, that their nature is chainged from a perfbn to a thing, or to a subjec of property. Capricious cruelties having no tendency to prevent EPART 1I. prevent or to redress a wrong, are unlawful even with refpea to SECAT.XIi those who have trefpalfed on the rules ofjuftice.

Among nations of old, captives or prisoners of war were generally sent to the market, or retained as slaves; and from hence was derived the maxim of the Roman law, that a person might become a slave, upon the principle of the law of nations *.

We may admit, that th6fe nations justly confidered individuals as involved in the guilt of their country, as often as a just reparation of wrongs was withheld. But, even upon this supposition, they greatly over-rated the forfeiture; or condemned their captives to a privation, which they had not incurred. They had undoubtedly a right to detain them during the continuance of a war, that they might not return to strengthen their enemy. They had a right to exaA from them any useful service, which they were in condition to perform, towards repairing the wrongs done by their country: Butas this proceeds upon a supposition, that their country had committed an injury, and refused to make reparation, the cafe of every captive was not the fame; and the injurious, who enslaved the fubjees of a nation they had injured, were doubly in the wrong.

We may admit, perhaps, that a person, either in the wrongs done by himself, or as involved in the wrongs done by his country, may incur a forfeiture, such as, that after he has bellowed the labour of a whole life in endeavours to repair it, the effeA may still ' Servus fit jure genLtium.

ftilI be inadequate; and we may admit as an inference from this 
.

supposition, that the claim of right acquired on the part of the in- ScHT.XIIl.
jured, and the obligation incurred on the part of the injurious, r may amount to service for life; but an obligation to service for life is yet far short of slavery.

In the first place, it is limited to such useful performance, as the: captive is able to render, and excludes the inflition of capricious severities, that have no tendency to repair the damage done.

In the discharge of his obligation, the captive is flated as a person and as a moral agent, who, if he be not willing, may be forced to do what is necessary to repair the wrong committed, butnothing more.

In the next place, as the law of nature supposes the person ferv-
ing, yet possessed of all those rights, of which the forfeiture has, no tendency to effeca the reparation in question, it is implied in.
the fame law, that, as often as those rights are invaded, he is entitled to repel the aggression, and to defend himself.

It is still more evident, that no one can be a slave by birth; for;.

even if he were bound to remain in the state of his parent, yet the fate of the parent does not appear, upon any principle of the law, of nature, to amount to slavery, or the privation of every personal right; but, even if this privation could be supposed to have been incurred by any convention or forfeiture, on the part of the parent, the child at his birth is innocent or disengaged, and born to, the poffeflion of all his personal rights.

from the whole, then, we mufi conclude, that the relation of 3 mailcr.

 master and slave is the result of violence, and cannot have arisen, SECTH. XIL like poffeflion, property, or lawful command, upon any just title '- of occupancy, labour, convention, or forfeiture.

A person condemned to service may accommodate himself to such services as he has been made to perform aid to such treat nent as he has been used to receive: But this cannot be interpreted as the conceflton of a right to impose unlimited burdens, or a right to treat him with boundless severities.

One order of men may plead the expediency of holding another in servitude; but men have not a right to impose upon others whatever is expedient to thermfelves; and we must fill conclude, that as no man is by nature the property of another, no more can he become so in any of the ways in which the right of property is acquired.

The conditions of men may be unequal, to any extent; and it may, in various ways, become the lot of one to render service to another: But the law of nature ever prescribes limits ofjuftice or humanity, to the advantage which any one may take of the relation in which he stands to his fellow creature.

So far we have enumerated the rights of men, whether original or adventitious, and have enumerated albo the sources from which adventitious rights are derived or begin to exist, and the means by which they may be conveyed from one to another. It remains that we confider the law of nature, in refped to the second part of its applications, that by which it is proposed to regulate the defences of men.

2. C H- A P.







(. 257 )

CH A P. IV.

OF J UR I S P R U D EN C E, 
PART SECOND, RESPECTING THE DEFENCES OF MEN.

E C T I O N I

Of the Means that may be opposed to Injuflice in general.

HAVING specified a variety of rights, under the different titles 

of petfonal and real, of original and adventitious, with the diffe- CHP. IV.



rent ways in which rights of the latter denomination may be acquired, we proceed next to confider the means by which a right may be defended or mantained.

K k Under 
 Under this title, the laws of war among nations will form a C1AP. IV.
SEC T. IV principal object of consideration and discussion; but as every per<v\ fton having a right, is entitled to some adequate means of defence, we shall ltate the law in its moAt comprehensive form, in which the rights and defences of tingle parties and of fellow citizens are included, no less than those of nations or separate communities.

We have observed, as the first and moss general statement of the law of nature relating to this fubje t; that a right may be maintained; or, in other words, that a wrong may be prevented, an assault repelled, and damage repaired, in any way, that may be effedual and necessary against the injurious party.

In the farther application of this law we are to confider the variety of persons and circumfiances to which it may relate.

Varieties of persons may be comprehended under the titles of perJbns single, frangers to one another, and unconnected; under the title of fellow citizens, and Jeparate nations, or the members of which separate nations are compoted.

The circumstances under which a right is exposed or invaded, may direc us to the means of defence which may be refpedively proper or sufficient on such occasions. In one set of circumstances, or on one occaion, periuafion may be sufficient; in another it may be required to employ deception or ilratagem;; and in a third it may be neceihary to employ force, at any hazard of fiffering to the injurious parry. The means of defence, therefore, may be enumerated under the titles ofperfiUfion, deception, and force. The firflmay take place among friends; the two last 2,zs~~~~~~~ ~~~~arc are lawful only upon the supposition of enmity, and are termed 
PART I.


hoJ/ilitles. SE



5Per/iafon consists in the use of argument, representation or rational inducement of any fort, to obtain the content of the party with whom it is employed. To distinguish persuasion from deception, it is necessary that it Should be limited to the use ofconfiderations founded in truth, or believed by the person who uses them to be of real moment in deliberating on the fubiject refpeding which they are offered. To disguise or conceal the truth, to misrepresent any important circumitance relating to it, or to impose with fallacious argument, is rather to deceive than to perfuade.

Under this limitation, perf/iajon may be employed to obtain a favour no less than to defend or maintain a right; and as they who may be persuaded to do right are not to be confidered as irjurious or maliciously inclined, they are not objecs of punishment, whether punishment be confidered as an example to deter the injurious, or as a precaution to guard against any future criminal attempts.

Persuasion is amicable; but where amicable means are not susficient to preserve a right, h/7filities no doubt are lawful; and among there artifice or deception where sufficient, may be chosen as the least hurtful to the person againit whom it is employed.

Deception or misinformation, in the nature of things, even apart from distant consequences, is pernicious; and to employ it without necessity is an injury. The person against whom it is so employed has iLbhjcct of well-founded complaint ; or may demand r k[ 2· information 
 information of the truth as his right. Even a person who SECH. IV. is put upon his defence, may rejeA the use of disguise or decepcYu tion, as dishonourable means of iafety to himself: But we are not enquiring, in this place, what is the molt honourable part for the injured to ad, but what the supposed injurious person may claim as a right, refpeaing the use of means to be employed against himself.

It is admittted, among the modern nations of Europe, that requifition of right, manifejto, and solemn declarations of war, should precede hoJtilties, or the actual use of force. Disguises and artisices, nevertheless, in certain negociations or tranfadions of state, are employed to gain an advantage, perhaps, without any supposed infringement of this rule.

There is, indeed, a general disposition to reprobate artice or deceit, even when employed to repel an injury, or to frufirate a malicious intention. This proceeds upon an aflociation of baseness or cowardice with every ad of dissimulation or falsehood, which we accordingly reprobate under the denomination of treachery: But this appellation no more applies to the use of stratagem in repelling an injury, than the term murder applies to the use of a sword or deadly weapon in repelling an alrault on the person or property of an innocent man. Ifa person, adcing in his own defence, may receive an afafifin on the point of his fiord, how can it be supposed, that he may not withhold information from him, or even by misinformation mislead him from the execution of his malicious purpose.

The affaflin who pursues an innocent person, in order to murder him, may no doubt be lawfully told, that the person he tecks is is gone to the right, when he is aCtually gone to the left. In this 


'

manner, deception or stratagem is universally admitted as just on 

the principles of the law of nature; and, although persons who consult the reputation of bravery may think that open force is preferable to deception or disguise of any fort; yet, upon the general principle, that rights are to be defended by means the leaR
hurtful to the persons againat whom they are employed, deception and artifice is in general to be preferred to the use of adual force.

The use offorce, it is true, may not always be more severe or destructive in its effecs than the use of deception; but, as force repelled by force is likely to proceed to the highest extremities, it is justly placed as the last resort of the injured in defending their rights, and not to be employed where it is safe to rely on perfuasion or stratagem.

Under this title of force may be included not only the use of arms and accual violence, forcible restraint, and the inflicCtion of punilhment, but even threats, or the denunciation of violence, which may operate on the fears of those against whom they are employed.

Such being the gradation of means, that may be employed in defence of a right, the law of nature is modified, in particular circumstances, by a regard to the choice which is to be made of such means, according to the degree in which they are severally effecual or necessary.

In the applications of this law, also, regard must be had to the dcfcription and relation of perlbns, whethelr frangers and unconrcw7ed, 
 necked, fellow citizens, fparate natiozs, or the members of which eSECr. IV. parate nations are composed.

Of the law, as it applies to the cafe of persons so diversified, it is proposed to offer a few of the molt necessary observations, in the following feations.





S E C T I 0 N IL
Of the Law of Defence, in the Cafe offingle Persons, Strangers and unconneattd.

THE parties to whom the law of defence is to be applied in this 

section, are termed single, because we mean not to confider pecu- 

liarities incident to collective bodies, confidered as such. They S 'v are termedflrangers and unconntSea, because we mean nor, in deciding any queflion that may arise between them, to take into our account the effecd of any previous convention either express or tacit.

In supposing such parties, we abstract from all the peculiarities which occur in the cafe of fellow citizens, under the effect of their municipal laws, civil or political inflitutions. We abftrad from the peculiarities which diversify the cafe of separate nations, modified as it is by previous treaties, claims, or conventions, or by the mode in which collective bodies are made up of the members which severally compose them.

The.

 The cafe, then, which we are now to confider, is supposititious, 

SICTr. 11. and a mere abflradion. So that, in this point of view, the cirL-'-*- cumfrances of a cafe, which in nature arejoined with many other particulars, are to be stated apart, and separately confidered. Such abftratCions are ufefulin argument; but must not, or ought not to be miltaken for matters of fat.

This caution has not always been observed, in treating of the abltradion which we have now made. The cafe of parties, ftrangers and unconneded, has been termed the slate of nature, and even mistaken for historical fad : But, in applying the law of nature to this supposition, it is not by any means necessary to admit, that the whole of the human species ever consisted of parties unconneded, or that men ever existed in a state of individuality, or in a state of estrangement of one from all mankind. The purpose of science is effedually served, by supposing two or more parties so unconneced, although neither be supposed unconneded with the whole species.

The term,/tate of nature, as equivalent to the abftracion which we now make, has been employed by writers, who do not by any means seem disposed to favour the aflimption ofeftrangement from his kind, as the natural itate of man. Dr Blackstone, among others, has made use of that term in the following passage: " If "a man," he fays, " were to be in a state of nature, unconneA" ed with other individuals, there would be no occasion for any other laws than the law of nature and the law of God ; neither " could any other law poflibly exist." But he afterwards subjoins: "Man was formed for focicty;. and, as is demonfirated "by " by the writers on this subjed. is neither capable of living alone, 

" nor indeed has le courage to do it *."

The slate of nature, then, according to this learned and judicious writer, is not the natural flare of man, but a mere abftradion made for the fame purpose for which abftracions are commonly made in the pursuit of science; that we may have a diftina view of certain considerations separately taken, before we'proceed to view them as combined in the aggregate forms under which they are acua]ly presented in nature.

Man, even in his physical lfate, exhibits a fum of many fimultaneous circumflances, whether original and coeval with his being, or, what is nearly the fame thing, immediately consequent upon it. He has occupied something that is useful to him, and has a right of poffeflion; he has laboured to some purpose, and has a right of property; he is a father or a child, the member of a family or some larger society; and the simplest movement he can have made with his fellow creatures, may amount to convention, or some adventitious modification of his original obligations and rights. So that we thall find no actual period ofhiflory in which we can apply the reasonings of this fedion to the species at large, or to any considerable numbers of men.

We may suppose two persons, at the fame time, cast aflhore on some desert island, and such is perhaps the only poflible cafe in which our supposition can be realized ; and our question at present with refped to it is not, what would be mutual inclinaVOL. IS. L 1 tion * Conm,. on the Laws of England. Introd. Scnl. 2.

PART 11.- tion of such persons at their firit meeting, whether to co-opeCH Pp. LV rate as friends, or to encounter as enemies ? This question is no 
A _--^ doubt of consequence in forming our notion of man's deflination, whether to peace or to war, to society or solitude: But that the dccifion in such a cafe might apply to human nature in its fimplefl state ; it might be necefTr-y to set apart any previous effeds of experience or habit, by which either of the parties separately, or both, might be previously disposed to ad a part which nature would not have fuggefled to them prior to such experience or habit.

It cannot be doubted, that in so forlorn and disastrous a slate, each would rather meet with a friend than an enerny, and each would rather make a friend of the person he casually met than an enemy. There is, however, reason to believe, from the principle of caution with which human nature is endowed, even in childhood, and which experience may dired, but does not remove, that such persons would approach one another with mutual circumfpedion and caution, each rather with fear of what he himself might susser, than with any disposition to annoy his fellow creature ; and universally it may be assumed perhaps, that the earlieft sensation of human nature, as Montesquieu has observed, is rather a feeling of weakness and a need of support, than a feeling of strength or a disposition to provoke animosity.

But whatever may be the solution of this or any such physical question, our objec at present is not to determine, what the parties in such a cafe might be inclined to do, but what each would have a right to do for his own preservation and defence. We would slate the decifons of the law of nature on a supposition of the simplest cafe, in which parties are vefled merely with their original rights and the means of defence with which they are ac3 companied: companied: Our decisions; therefore, upon this supposition can 

be little more than a repetition of what has been already flated in 
'the general enunciation of the law; whether respecting the rights of which man is born in possession, or which he is competent to acquire, and the general permission of means effectual, so far as they are necessary for the prefervtion of such rights.

Together with the original appurtenances of human nature, life, limb, and faculty, we mupt likewise admit all those rights, which, even acing separately and unconnetedly, the individual may acquire for himself. We must suppose him entitled to defend not only his organs and powers, but the fruits and effects of them also; entitled to defend his possession, as first occupier of any subjea that accommodates him; or his property in a subjed, as having employed labour to meliorate or to procure it: So that, together with his rights of original poffeflion, he is entitled also to defend his right, to make acquisitions by labour, convention, or otherwise.

If, in the midst of rights so defined, one party shall commit an injury, or give just cause of alarm to another, this other is entitled to his defence and is not restrained in the choice of means, by any consideration betide the general provision of the law of nature already flated; a provision which admits that effectual means may be used, but in which unnecessary ats of cruelty or severity, with refpec to those against whom such means may be employed, are ftriAly prohibited.

Upon the supposition of a difference subsisting between parties otherwise strangers and unconnected, or what is called the Itate of nature, it is sometimes asked, who is to judge or to decide L 1 2 beween.

 between parties in this stare? This in effect is firfl to suppose, 
 that parties having no convention are amenable to no juriSdiction tCa-'-- inferior to the tribunal of God, and afterwards to enquire to what human jurifdidcion such parties are subjed.

They may or may not submit to an arbiter at pleasure; and, though nature has limited the means of defence to those which are necessary, the observance of this limitation, together with the exercise of every other right, would in fact depend on the difcretion and candour of the parties themselves; a cafe in which no provision being made against the paflions or mistakes of men, applications of the law of nature, however clear in theory,.might be very lame and imperfeCt in practice; and such condition of parties, if ever realized, should be deplored as calamitous, or expofcd to much inconvenience and evil.

The inconvenience would suggest, for its remedy, recourse to the judgement and arbitration of some third party, more impartial than either of the persons more immediately concerned. The utility of tome permanent recourse of this fort, would naturally lead to political infsitution, and the establishment of ordinary jurifdidion and protecing power: bo that, while we suppose men to be aflociated from their birth, or otherwise cast into groups together, every difference or dispute would suggest the necessity or utility of political eftablifllment.

Society is the natural fRate of man, and political society is the natural result of his experience in that state of bociety to which he is born. This is not the experience of single persons, or offingle ages. It is an experience, which began with the commencement of every society, and can end only with its final extintion. Political litical effabliflments, accordingly, which began to be formed in 

in the first and simplest ages, continue in a state of gradual for- 




mation, as the experience of every age directs, to the latest period s at which states or communities, in the course of things, are -allowed to arrive.

The people in republics, in the last as well as the first sage of their political union, are devising rules by which to govern themselves.

The monarch continues to fettle terms, on which he proposes to diftribure rewards and punifiments, honour or diigrace, among his fubjecds. And the defpotical master continues to make known the advantage he proposes to himfelfor his people from the exercise of his power; whether in the gratification of a divine benevolence, that of Antoninus; or in the gratification of a brutal appetite like and passion, like those of Caligula and Nero.





S E C T I O N I.

Of the Cafe of fellow Citizens.


 T HS cafe is indefinitely varied in the multiplicity of political SECT. III. forms. Our objec, with respeCt to it, is to enumerate, in general terms, the principal parties of which every political society consists; and to state the obligations and rights, which are eflential to their relation, as members of the fame community.

Civil society is not improperly termed a state of convention; for, although men are acAually in society together, before they enter into any form of bargain or compac; yet, every flep that is made, in the concourfe-of numbers, tends to convention. Every practice continued into cuflom, is fairly interpreted as the faith of parties plighted for the observance of it; and the members of every society, even of the shortest duration, become invested with rights, or fubjeded to obligations, founded in bome ipecies of contraa express or tacit.

But But we now cease to enquire in what form the civil or politi- 


cal compact is ratified, whether by practice, capitulation, or tfa- 

tute. These are the proper study of professional lawyers, to Sa.
whom the supreme authority of their refpeaive communities is the ultimate rule in adjusting the obligations and rights of men.

To the citizen of every particular community, the specific law of his own country is the tenure by which he holds his rights, and the measure of obligations which he is bound to fulfil; but, however the civil institution, in any particular instance, may appear to depart from the law of nature, by adopting modifications, which in their first assumption were optional to the parties concerned; yet, as such modifications are founded in convention, there is not any species of obligation or rightacftually valid in any community, that may not be traced to this its foundation in the law of nature.

There are certain relations of men essential to every fociety.or community confidered as such; and there are certain obligations and duties which may not only be traced to their foundations in the law of nature, but which are to be confidered as immediate objects of that law, and placed, as we now propose to place them, among the cafes to which the law of nature is immediately applicable.

Under every political eflablifhment, there is a relation of magiJrate and i/hije(, and a relation of lellow citizens, which, however diversified in particular intfances, are nevertheless in a certain abftrad point of view common to every etlablifllment, and eflential to the nature of political society itself.

It PtART IL It is our object, at present, therefore, to slate the relative conditions SEC r. III of magistrate and subjec, and the relative condition of fellow sub^~sr'_ jeets in the most general terms, so as to comprehend the obligations and rights which enter into the nature of political society itself confidered as such, without attempting to specify the peculiarities, by which the relations of men, in different inflances, may be diversified.

It is the condition of the magiflrate, in his most abstract point of view, to govern and to protect the subjed: It is the condition of the subject to be governed and protected.

It is the mutual condition of fellow citizens, in the fame abitrad point of view, to be vested with rights, in regard to which they are to one another reciprocal objects of consideration or refpe6t: It is implied, in the character which is common to them all as fellow citizens, that, if any difference arise between them, they recur to the judgement of the magifirate, and that. whereever his interposition can be obtained, and may be effectual for the prevention or redress of wrongs, they are to refiain fiom any application of force on their own part, and to acquiesce in such means of defence, as the magistrate is duly bound to employ for their protection.

The citizen, therefore, in preserving his rights amidst the collifions of different claims and pretensions, resigns into the hands or the magifirate the weapons of defence, which, upon the fuppofition of pdrlierl /'rnger and ulconlnec1ed,, we found the individual entitled to use for himself. And the magiflrate may not only employ the authority with which he is veled, so as to defend the inno3 cent, cent, but lies under an express obligation, so to employ it: whilst 

every other citizen, whatever be the means of defence with which 




he is casually furnished, is restrained from the use of them, pro- s--, vided the interposition of the magistrate can be obtained for his safety.

These are conditions implied in every political eflablifiment, and without which society either cannot be preserved, or cannot be said to have received any political form.

In these conditions, however, the obligations and rights of the parties, so general and so necessary, are derived fiom convention alone. The magistrate has agreed to protect the subjed, otherwise is not bound to this any more than to any other act of beneficence which he may perform at discretion. The citizen has agreed to abide by the judgement of the magistrate, and to refrain from any attempt to do himself right, where the interpofition of the magistrate can be obtained for that purpose; and, although the form, in which such agreements are entered into in different communities, may vary indefinitely, yet the compact, in refpet to its general result, is the fame in every instance; and the parties may equally plead their conventional rights and reciprocal obligations in every community.

We have already had occasion to observe. that the right of the magistrate to interpose in the defence of the innocent, or in the repression of crimes, does not need the fantion ofcompacd, in order to eftablifli it; for this right is common to him, with every other person having power, in whatever manner that power may be conflituted, whether in the strength of his arm, or in the cooperation of numbers that obey his commands.

VOL. IT. M in 1n 
PART Il. In what, then, we may be asked, is the right of the magistrate CH.P. IV.
SECT. III. conventional and peculiar to himself? It is conventional and pecu--" ' liar, in sofar as he alone is entitled to employ his power to this effell, and so far as every other person isreftrained from like application of power, wherever recourse can be had to that of the magistrate. In the absence of the magistrate, or where his aid cannot be obtained, the subjea may defend himself and his fellow citizens; and every individual man, to the utmost of his power, may interpose in the prevention of crimes.

The right of the inagiftrate, therefore, to repress crimes, and to protedt the innocent is prior to convention. His obligation, at the fiame time, not to employ means unnecessarily deftrudive or isvere, even against the person who has incurred his opposition or his censure, is also prior to convention; and there is, as we obleirved upon the foundations of the law of nature, prior to any concert or agreement of parties, a rule for the application of various restraints, and the gradation of punishments.

Crimes, we have observed, are unequally pernicious and dangerous, and unequally alarm the community. The more forcible efforts of defence are justified by the higher degree of alarm which the crime is naturally fitted to give. Some disorders are more easily restrained than others ; and to these an inferior meailre of punilhinent being sufficient, the magistrate is not entitled, by the law of nature, to employ punishments of superior degree.

Different descriptions of men, we have observcd, are governed by different motives. The law of nature will not authorise, with refpet to any one class or order of men, an higher mcafure of pu:2 lifmllelt, nifhment, than is sufficient to restrain them . The fear of torture 
PART IL
or death may be necessary to restrain those who are infenibl.e to 
any other considerations ; while shame, or the fear of.difgracc a- ry lone, may be sufficient to restrain, or to reclaim another order or class of the people.

As nations, by tfatute or .custom, are found to depart from the conditions which the law of nature, prior to convention, has imposed; so they have seldom been found to observe any regular gradation of punishments, or at least to remain within the bounds w\hich simple juflice, in every particular cafe, would prescribe.
They have departed from the law of nature, in the terms of their convention or praaice; and, in the result, sometimes find themselves engaged in forms of administration no less inexpedient than cruel an4 unjust.

If, to the maxims of firin law we may be allowed to subjoin considerations of expedience, it is evident that, by withholding diftincRions in the measure of punishment, we inure the minds of men to confound the higher and lower measures of guilt.
And, if a criminal be to incur the higher measure of puniflment, even for crimes of a lets heinous nature, his cafe, in proceeding to infringe the law, is the fame as if no puniflhments were to be inflidled for the higher crime; and he will therefore prefer it to the lower, if his temptations incline him so to do.

By the law of nature, a magitfrate, in restraining a crime, may proceed to the use of means that may be necessary for that purpose; but this law, infleal of being strained to the utmost pitch of severity, ought rather to give way to considerations, which hut~

M m z nanity 
 manity no leTs than expedience, in many inflances, will fug
 g 
The conceptions of men, on the gradations of demerit and criminality, may be greatly affected by the promiscuous application ofpunifllments. And, although the principle of defence, ftf-itly applied, wouldjuftify that measure ofpunifhment, whatever it may be, which is necefTary to repress the crime, yet prudence, as well as humanity, would in some instances reject this authority, and reprobate the application of a punishment, against which human.
nature would revolt more than even against the crime itself A licentious intercourse of the sexes is highly pernicious, and the highest measure of punishment might perhaps be necessary, and still ineffectual to repress it entirely; but it is evident that, if the punishment of murder were to be applied in this cafe, the remedy or the antidote might be more fIocking to human nature, and even more pernicious to mankind, than the evil itself.

It may be more difficult to restrain a theft committed under the pressure of famine or want, than one committed for gain. It may be more difficult fUill to restrain a theft committed for the relief of a perifling family, than one committed for the supply of perfonal want; yet human nature must revolt at the supposed application of stria law in such cafes; and indeed it is admitted, in the ordinary jurisprudence of all nations, that the extreme neceffity of one person may so far supersede the right of another, as to disarm the power that is provided in civil society to enforce this right.

To succeed in establishing ajuft gradation ofpunifiments, we mull mulR come with reluctance to the ife of extreme severities and a- 

void a precipitant application of punishment in the treatment of 




the lower offences. When flight offences are punished too severe- vm ly, it becomes difficult properly to increase the measure of punifhment for the higher crimes. When under the Roman empire, for inflance, a farcafin on the person of the emperor was punished with death ; it was not pofible to find a proportionate degree of severity for the crimes of perfidy or murder.

But whatever may be the gradation of punifiments adopted, it is evident that the higher measure of suffering, may on occasion, be necessary, and cannot be replaced by the lower or any intermediate degree. There may be crimes, we have observed, bearing evidence of a disposition so depraved, and in appearance so incorrigible, that it may be necessary, by exile or death, to remove the criminal from the society whose peace he alarms, And even, according to the circumstances of his crime, it may be necefiary to distinguish this sacrifice with peculiar marks of reprobation and horror, to operate as an example against the indulgence offimilar dispositions in other men.

It is no doubt poflible in the application of puniflhments to err on the fide of remiffiiefs as well as rigour. Mercy to the alatflin is cruelty to the innocent, who may be exposed to susser by the commiflion of his crimes.

We hear offovereigns to whom the executive powers of law are committed, who, either from miflaken lenity, or friom an apprehension of romcwhat too sacred in the life of man to be taken awayby any human authority, have declared against capital punifliments; or resolvcd. for a time to fuipend the iufe of them. The ol-bjjc PARr II. objeel of government, in the mean-time, is not mercy to criiliCHAFP. 1. nls, but the repression of capital crimes which indanger thelife Sc; "Y' as well as other rights of the innocent. And there is surely no wisdom in declaring that criminals alone, for the future, fiall take the ife of a fellow creature. If the life. of a man is too Eacred to be taken by any human authority, what is the innocent traveller to do, when attacked on the high way with weapons that threaten his life ? what is the fRate to do, when invaded .by a soreign enemy, who forces his way by the deftru6tion of all that oppose him ? What is the soldier to do, when he finds himself under the neceflity to kill, that he may not be killed ? .In hort, what is the niagiftrate himself to do, when he finds the lives of innocent fubjeas in danger from the profligacy of disorderly persons. who are. ready to sacrifice the peace of their country to the gratification of their vicious paflions ? If a life mulf be exposed, either that of the innocent at the discretion of criminals, or that of criminals at the judgement of the magistrate, it is surely evident on whom the choice Ihould fall.

We plead for a just gradation of punifmient, not that the guilty may escape, but that the innocent may be safe, and that no one may be exposed to greater severity than he has actually incurred by his crimes.

From the whole of this argument, then, it appears, that the law of nature, where there is no convention to the contrary, limits the right of the magistrate to the use of such means as are necessary to the defence of the innocent or the prevention of wrongs; that all restraints or severities, employed beyond there limits, arc unlawful; and that, even prior to convention, a rule may be found upon which to erec a just gradation of punifliments.

Although Although convention be not necessary to authorise the ma- 
PART. TI.

giftrare in the discharge of his duty for the repreflion of crimes; SACT. III.
itis by convention that he alone is inverted with the exclusive prero- J
gative of inrerpofing at all times in defence of the innocent. In every well ordered community his powers are acknowledged or in ftituted expressly for this purpose, and fellow citizens are underflood to have agreed to refer their differences to a judge, to forgo the use of force in themselves, and recur to the magistrate for protection.

This fundamental convention of fellow citizens is that which essentially diftinguilies their cafe from that which was confidered in the lait fe£ion. It is that which constitutes the specific advantage of those who have the benefit of political establishments.

The citizen, even when injured, must not do himself right; but must have recourse to the protection of the magistrate for this purlpole.

There are, hovever, exceptions to this salutary rule ; either where, in the nature of things, the interposition of the magiflrate cannot be obtained to prevent a wrong, or where the injury, once sufferec, cannot be repaired by the utmost exertions of his powver.
In every fuclh cafe the fpiit of political institution, which is inspired by a concern for innocence, requires, that the innocent lhould be allowed to defend himself. If this were refuited him, the society to which he has recourse for protection would in fadc become a snare, in which he would be exposed to fufl-'r without any hopes of redress.

It is admitted accordingly, th.t any one ai1Tuclrecl int. hii ;: 
 bitation, or in his person has a right to repel the assault. The 
 maxims of law in different countries may be unequally favour
able to this act of defence, requiring unequal degrees of caution in proceeding to the last extremities. In some it is required, that a person aflaulted should endeavour to escape before he repels force with force: But as an attempt to escape may in some circumftances augment the danger to which the person assaulted is exposed, it appears unjust and cruel to expose him to this additional hazard; and the humanity which seemed to take part with the aggreflor, is indeed more properly due to the person attacked, who ought certainly to be indulged in defending himself at any necessary hazard to the person who aflails him.

A woman who is forcibly attacked in her chastity, or a man who is put to the trial of personal estimation or honour, may receive an injury, which the utmost power of the magistrate cannot afterwards repair. The exception is accordingly admitted, in favour of the private right of defence, on such occasions.

Among these modes of attack, there is a singular species of injury, owing its effect to the caprice of manners in modern times; but of which the effect is extremely revere and injurious, not fifceptible of any legal measurement, nor repairable by all the power of the magistrate.

In consequence of this singular caprice, altogether unknown to the celebrated nations of antiquity, not only aspersions of character, but any single term of reproach, or geflure of insult, so far impairs the eflimation or credit of the person who suffers them; that, if the breach be not repaired, in the way which caprice also directs, he becomes an outcafl from the society, in which his condition dition depends on the esteem in which he is held. Applications PARr i.
to the courts ofjuftice, for reparation, would only increase the S
dishonour. False aspersions may be removed by the clearefl evi- Gdence of truth; but this would not remove the dishonour of having suffered them to be made. An accusation may be known to be true or false; its effect, however, in this cafe, does not depend upon the degree in which it is believed, but upon the degree of tameness with which it is received. Even calumny hurts, not by the imputation of any criminal charge, but rather by the imputation of cowardice, implied in the manner of receiving it; and the defence which caprice has provided for this mode of attack, is a display of courage, not a refutation of any false accusation. The accusation may be true; but the courageous vindicates his honour: The accusation may-be false; but the coward is overwhelmed with disgrace. Even the injured is denied the use of firatagem or surprise, in his own defence.
He must meet his antagonist, however injurious, upon equal terms; and, if he would preserve his honour, muff pass through the hazard of a single combat for that purpose. His charad-er for integrity may be blasted or entire; but his estimation, in point of honour, is independent of either condition.

In this example, the deviation from reason is monllrous; but the dignity ofjuftice is made to stoop to the caprice of fafhion; and, so long as the private injury is suffered to have its essect, and the petulance or folly of one person may drive another from his place in society; so long as the magistrate cannot preserve the citizen in his state; so long the injured citizen mufl be allowed to defend himself, and to adopt the only means which are esfecAual for that purpose.

VOL. Ir. N To PARr 11. To reform this abuse, has been justly confidered as an object C.iHkp. IV
SECr II. of great importance in the policy of modern nations: But at-*-.- tempts to this purpose have begun, perhaps, at the wrong end, by denunciations of severity against those who, finding their honour invaded, take the ordinary way of preventing or repairing the wrong with which they are attacked. If men are by vulgar capri-ce made accefible to an injury of the mofi serious nature, to an injury which the magistrate cannot repair, it is by no means just to restrain them from the only means of defence that is left in their power. This being evident to the general sense of mankind, the only effect of severities denounced by the law, in most countries, against the injured, as well as the aggrefror, has been to oblige courts ofjuftice to fall upon measures to evade the rigour of that very law they are required to apply.

If any thing could be done, to deprive unmerited affronts of their efficacy in the opinion of those who determine what fliall be a gentleman's reception in the world, the evil might probably soon give way, and the sensibility of honour be changed into a contempt of offences which are now admitted to have the most fatal cites.

We sometimes congratulate ourselves on the influence of this practice, as it tends to polish our manners, and restrain the violent fiom offensive brutalities, to which paflions may lead in the intercourse of society. We do not confider, however, that we owe our sensibility to such offences to the imputation of cowardice, which is made to accompany the sufferance of them; and that, without this imputation, unmerited infhlts would pass in society, like the noise of a scold, in which no one is ever pleased to to think himself affronted, and which he therefore hears with 

contempt or indifference CHP. I1I.



-wCrimes that proceed from the affectation of bravery, 'are not to be repressed by the fear of punifllment. The threats of law, in such cafes, give the quarrelsome a double opportunity of diftinguiiling himself. He braves his antagonist, and he braves the law. Even if he should be puniflled, his fufferingdoes not degrade him in the opinion of the people; for the people, like himself, admire bravery, even where it tends to disturb the public peace.

Absurdity is more likely to cure itself, by being suffered to incur its extreme, than by being kept within certain bounds, which serve to conceal the extent of its folly; and duelling, like other fafllions, is likely to wear itself out when it becomes an affectation of the vulgar, and ceases to diftinguifl those who are termed men of fashion.

If there be in our times a progress towards this point of reformation, we have reason, in the mean time to regret the condition of those, perhaps the least deserving of any such fate, who may susser under the prevalence of a folly, of which they cannot always avoid the effecs.

Were the law to diftinguifll the aggrefbr, in the first approachi to a quarrel, just marks of disgrace affixed to the person in whom the offence originated, might perhaps inspire every party with caution to avoid a quarrel, and have better effcis than any fbri:lLc ircllraints applied to check the afflccation of courage. It is not va-lour to Ibrave dil grace; and, if the law fhlould colndemn 1an ;r'clllr' to oifmc lecics of infamly, the faillion of fUckini) for loN n l2 1;;-'

nour, by rashness in giving provocation, might be restrained by S(Apc .
I . the profpet of an opposite effec.

It might be difficult, indeed, in many cafes, to fix the charge of aggressor upon either of the parties in a quarrel: But the belt effect of law is not merely to give the decision where an occasion of trial has arisen, but to prevent such occasions, from an apprehenlion of a decision that may be given. All that the law, indeed, can do, is to lay down a rule, and leave juries to apply it to the bell of their judgement, on the circumstances of every particular cafe. The rule, even before it is applied, would have its effect on the minds of those who are exposed to get into quarrels, and who, by avoiding the imputation of being the first aggrefior, might prevent the first steps towards an offensive dispute.

Juries, too, in some instances, might be able to fix the charge of aggreffior, so as to increase the effect of the law by real examples of ignominy and disgrace. We pity the person who is forced into a quarrel, to vindicate his honour; but we detest the bully who is ever forward in giving rife to such quarrels; and any disgrace which the law might award for such characters would be supported by the general opinion and consent of all reafonable men.

These are queflions of political wisdom, rather than of ftrica law; but are flared with advantage, when the laws to which they refer are under consideration.

Such, then, we may conceive to be the prerogative of a magiftratc, in refhraining crimes and offences. It is in part prior to convention, and a concomitant merely of his power. It is limitI c(l ed to him alone, by the convention of fellow citizens, in which PARiTr i 


they have agreed to wave their right of personal redress, and re- 
cur to established tribunals for judgement in their differences, and to the power of the magistrate for his protecion, in maintaining or in recovering a right; a convention, the articles of which, in whatever form they be stipulated, whether of statute or customary practice, are eiential to the relation of fellow citizens in every cafe whatever; still admitting, indeed, the exceptions we have mentioned in cafes to which the interposition of the magistrate cannot be effectual, or cannot extend.

Members of the fame community are thus understood to have their conventional obligations, relating not only to matters of right and wrong that may come into question between them, but also in relation to certain poftive duties which they owe to the community, and of which the magistrate is appointed to infped the performance.

Political establishments cannot subsist without the support of their members, contributing either by their means or by their personal services to the public defence, or to the arrangements which may be neceflary for public prosperity. In the very nature of political focicty, therefore, convention to this amount is implied.

Under this general title of political convention, may be included every law and eftabliflied custom relating to the prerogative of the magistrate, whether supreme or subordinate, or relating to the privilege of the subjed, of whatever rank or condition.

There 
 There are, in most communities that have made any progress 

SECT. 11L in political arts, certain primary articles, which may be termed Yr> fundamental laws of the consfitution. In these articles the description of the sovereign power, whether a King, Nobles, or majority of the people, is either given or aflumed. The powers to be exercised, and forms of proceeding are ascertained. The immunities, as well as the duties of the subjed, are specified.

Such fundamental laws, or conventions, are neither the foundations upon which society was originally formed, nor do they always follow soon after its firfl institution. They come in the sequel of circumstances into which men have pafied, without any view to political establishments, as in the sequel of casual subordination of ranks, arising from personal qualities, birth, education, orfortune: They are sometimes the result of amicable deliberations, and sometimes such as prevaling parties may have obtained by force. Mankind are known to live for many ages in society together, before they are sensible of the inconveniences, whether arising from the abuse of prerogative or the abuse of privilege, for which political law is intended as a remedy. The evils have bometimes taken a deep root, before the attempt is made to remove them ; and civil war is frequently the prelude to the eftablifilment of order upon any permanent footing. Thus the great charter in England; many of the political capitulations in Germany, the pacification of parties at Rome, and what may be termed the fundamental political law in the instance of many other flates, was the result of war or contention that arofc afcer many ages ofbociety had elapscd.

Political efcablifllncents in f ne ilanccs appearl to have no oiier folundatiothn thanui (lonf , or a Iucccflion ofads whichl imply, X that.

that parties acquiesce, in the state of their country, or in the 

forms according to which its affairs proceed; and in justifying 
the exertions of government in such instances for promoting the Y
public welfare, we seldom look farther than to the aAual tendency of administration to the public advantage.

It is a part in the social nature of man, to hold the adcion of a fellow creature, as jultified on the principle of benevolence, made known in acts of public utility; but any claim of right to extort benefits, cannot, prior to convention, be admitted, without leading to consequences extremely dangerous and hurtful to the cause of society. If benefits were to be enforced, beneficence would cease to be known as a virtue, and what ought to be a voluntary ad of good will would become the effect of mere compulsion.

The use of compulsion, upon the principle of mere utility, would become a very dangerous precedent. The powerful could easily obtrude this plea, wherever they thought proper to exert their violence, and under pretence of extorting public benefits, the greatest of public -evils might arise in a want of security to those very rights which government itself is eflabliffied to maintain. The people is not safe, if the magistrate may not only, restrain crimes and difbrders, but also exac contribution and actual service, beyond what he is authorised to demand by special contract, statute, or custom.

Any right in the magistrate or sovereign to exaC contribution, or politive service of any fort, fiom the fblject, being founded in convention alone; we may conicler the differcnt constitutions ofgovernllcnt as b no any compacts diver-fifed in the terms; orasfo many barg ails in which the parties are varioully bound, or in which, in.

 in returnfor what they are engaged to perform, they accept of un

SHer. IT. equal conditions. The terms may be unequally expedient; unew\^-r 4qually favourable to any of the parties, or to human nature in general. They may have been suggested by the relation in which parties were occasionally placed, as when the prerogatives of monarchy or aristocracy arose by degrees from the continued diftinCtion of families, and the advantage of hereditary possession.

The terms to which some of the parties submit may have even been imposed by actual force; but in all communities, so far as a right to enforce the performance of public service is supposed, we mufl be able to derive this right, either from the original principle of self defence, or from the principle of contract, on which alone one human creature is bound or may be forced to serve another.

It may asked, then, on what principle of justice are we to reft the exercise of compulsory law, in the cafe of governments which are known to have originated, and which continue to subsist, in force or violence alone ? On this foundation it is admitted, that no conventional right can arise. But it is well known in the history of nations, that at one time the leader has forced his followers to submission; that at another time the follower has extorted privilege fiom his leader; that conditions so obtained have been exprefred in statute, or gone into customary practice; and that the effects of compulsion have thus become articles of a legal constitution, of which the validity is never questioned by any of the parties concerned.

The possibility offuch a cafe has been already stated, in confidering custom as one of the forms in which conventional obligations tions 'arise. A condition, at first imposed by force may be 

such, it was observed, as that men;fhall be reconciled to it, conti- 




nue- to observe it willingly and freely, insomuch, that a person L
conforming to it, on his own part, has the most reasonable expectations of a suitable return in the. conduct of others.

This reasoning, however, will not apply, where any party in society assumes to itself an advantage, or fubjeds any other to inconvenience of such a nature,as that,although compliance may continue to be forced; yet the sufferer is not reconciled to his condition, nor ever willingly contents to the observance of it.
He does no more than he is forced to do; and the violence to which he submits, in every subsequent period of a mere impofition, has the fame character of usurpation which it had at the first. Such, no doubt, is the character of defpotical tyrrany, by whatever party it be assumed, or exerted in discretionary ads of injustice or cruelty, over the persons and properties of other men.

Under this title of continued usurpation, we have already ftated the claims of a master, refpeating his supposed property in the person of a slave; a claim which, we observed, cannot be founded on any principle of justice acknowledged in the law of nature.

A people, in the fame manner, from considerations of danger, may submit to the claims oftyrrany, whether usurped by the leader of a military band, or by the majority of a disorderly people, and they may acquiesce in one species of evil from the apprehension of a worse; but such government,whether of long or of short duration, we may observe, in answer to any of the questions now or formerly stated, is not founded in any maxim of right whatever. The 0 o principles 
PART lI. ' in returrnfdf what they are engaged to perform, they accept ofunScAT. IV. equal conditions. The terms may be'unequally expedient; unewv * -qually favourable to any of the parties, or to human nature in ge-, neral. They may have been suggested by the relation in which parties were occasionally placed, as when the prerogatives of monarchy or aristocracy arose by degrees from the continued diftintion of families, and the advantage of hereditary possession.

The terms to which some of the parties submit may have even been imposed by actual force; but in all communities, so far as a right to enforce the performance of public service is supposed, we must be able to derive this right, either from the original principle of self defence, or from the principle of contract, on which alone one human creature is bound or may be forced to serve another.

It may asked, then, on what principle ofjuffice are we to reft the exercise of compulsory law, in the cafe of governments which are known to have originated, and which continue to subsist, in force or violence alone ? On this foundation it is admitted, that no conventional right can arise. But it is well known in the history of nations, that at one time the leader has forced his followers to fubmiflion; that at another time the follower has extorted privilege from his leader; that conditions so obtained have been expressed in statute, or gone into customary pradice; and that the effects of compulsion have thus become articles of a legal constitution, of which the validity is never questioned by any of the parties concerned.

The possibility of such a cafe has been already flated, in confidering custom as one of the forms in which conventional obligations tions tarife. A condition, at firif imposed by force may be 

such, it was observed, as that men shall be reconciled to it, conti- 




nue. to observe it willingly and freely, insomuch, that a person .
conforming to it, on his own part, has the most reasonable expectations of a suitable return in the conduct of others.

This reasoning, however, will not apply, where any party in society assumes to itself an advantage, or fubjeds any other to inconvenience of such a nature,as that, although compliance may continue to be forced; yet the sufferer is not reconciled to his condition, nor ever willingly contents to. the observance of it.
He does no more than he is forced to do; and the violence to which he submits, in every subsequent period of a mere impofition, has the fame character of usurpation which it had at the first. Such, no doubt, is the charaAer of defpotical tyrrany, by whatever party it be assumed, or exerted in discretionary ads of injustice or cruelty, over the persons and properties of other men.

Under this title of continued usurpation, we have already ftated the claims of a master, refpedting his supposed property in the person of a slave; a claim which, we observed, cannot be founded on any principle of justice acknowledged in the law of nature.

A people, in the fame manner, from considerations of danger, may submit to the claims oftyrrany, whether usurped by the leader of a military band, or by the majority of a disorderly people, and they may acquiesce in one species of evil from the apprehension of a worse; but such government,whether of long or of short duration, we may observe, in answer to any of the questions now or formerly stated, is not founded in any maxim of right whatever. The 0 o principles PAR II. principless of human nature, liowever long ftifed by violence, SAC. :iL are ever repugnant to such usurpations; and, like the force .~-%V ' of a spring wound up, 'fill exert a pressure against the power that restrains them. Hence, in perfeA consistence with natural justice, though not always-with prudence or expedience, we may vindicate the sudden or gradual reform of abuses, which for ages may have pofiefled. in appearance the authority of law and political infiitution.

When we look back to the origin of government, as there is no where an original right of one person to command another, except so far as is necessary to restrain him from. harm, we have recourse to convention as the only principle upon which a right.
to command can accrue to one, or an obligation to- obey can be incurred by another.

Prior to such convention, we fay, that' rovereignty is lodged in the multitude; but, when we bring these words to the tell of any rational application, they amount to no more than this, that, prior to convention, every one has a right to dispose of himself, so far as is consistent with the safety of others: And that the multitude have this right, because made up of individuals, each of whom is possessed of it; but, in what form the multitude is to exercise it, as a colleAcive body, must depend on agreement to which individuals assent. Prior to convention, the majority has not any right to command the minority, more than any one individual has to command another.

In the abith'adt decisions of natural law, refpeding the obligation of reciprocal contracts, the failure of one party dissolves the obligation of another. So far, the matter is adjusted, in words even between the sovereign and subjed. In prac'ice, a too, too,- the sovereign has a ready provision made to enforce the 


Cal.v. 1V.

rights ;of government against the refraaory fubjeat, and the S PCT. T1.
-aghts of one, individual against the wrongs of another; but, vswhen the prerogatives which are given for protection, are employed to oppress, what new power can be found to redress the grievance? It is necessary, perhaps, that law should be silent on this head, or take its precautions in wife limitations of government rather than propose to resist its abuse.

This is accordingly the great problem of political wisdom, and ;a principal test of national felicity- But after all that can be contrived, or deliberately thought of, for -this purpose, something must be left to the powerful inftinds of nature. When the multitude, whose interelts so much it is to have a fettled government, tear down the power by which themselves are protected, we muff suppose that they are either seized with madness, or that by wrongs they are driven to despair. In either cafe, maxims of science and reason. or principles ofjuftice are inculcated in vain. The reasoner is every where surrounded with precipices. If he maintain, that the people, in every cafe, should obey, he delivers over the subjet to be oppressed and injured at difcretiol.

If he admit that the people, in any cafe, may resist; as there is none but the party himself to judge of the cafe, all government will teem to be held at the discretion of those who ought to obey it.

So far are we from being able to state any speculative or abftraa position that may not be abused. And so far are we left to the powerful inftinas of nature, for our diretion in matters of the greatefl moment. When the florm threatens, the benighted traveller will take flelter wherever he can find it; and, when rhe roof cracks over his head, he will fly from under it into the 0 o 2 mid l 
 midst of the storm. He need not recur to any maxim of law for 
 this purpose: The power of necellity is superior to law; and the wow inflint of nature drives to its end, with a force which speculative maxims can neither withstand nor diret.

Attempts to find any regular counterpoise to the weight of defpotifin, when every ordinary form is warped to the purpose of injulfice, have perplexed the most ingenious minds, or Sometimes suggested a docrine which can scarcely be applied beyond the form of words in which it is flated. That, as power originates with the multitude, that is, with the individuals of whom the multitude is composed, they have a right to reclaim it, wherever it is abused; or, if they are bound by the terms of a political contract, to submit to government; these terms are reciprocal, and the contract may be broken of either fide: If on that of the : overeign, the power is again that of the multitude, and may be . recalled.

Such maxims in speculation cost nothing but the words in which to express them; but, in practice, we muit remember, that, as the multitude never can be assembled, this maxim in esfed puts the sword in the hands of every individual, to employ it for himself. And the fate of mankind, in such inltances, must depend on what we term accident, or the character of those who gain the ascendant, or are able to prescribe new forms ofprpceeding, after numbers are tired of the disorders which have attended the suspension of the old.





S E C T O N IV.
L

Of the Cafe of Nations.

THE human species, though disposed to associate, is disposed to 

separation also. It is ever found in divisions and compartments, 

under the denomination of families, tribes, nations, or hordes. v~.
And of there the very least are rarely, without compulsion, or some urgent considerations of safety or expedience, made to coalefce in greater numbers, or, beyond the ties of acquaintance or consanguinity, submit to aa under any common direcion.

There is, however, in the nature of things, sufficient provision made to assemble the species, or to form the combination of indefinite numbers.

Men are, by their dispositions and their faculties, qualified to make the necefiary arrangements for the conduct of society however enlarged. And, however relu&ant in every fuccefilvc flop, they actually pass over the bounds of personal acquaintance or Qa personal 
 personal relation and numbers, however unknown to one another, 
CHAP.IV. ufffer themselves to be formed into nations and empires of the .SY> 1 greateit extent.

But, with refped to the objecs of our present diffcuflion, any Jeparate company or society of men aming under a common direEfion, may be termed a nation: For any plurality of men so united, in the language of lawyers, is an artificial person, having power to act, and rights to defend.

In the intercourse of separate nations there being no government or common magistrate to whom they are subjec, their cafe is, or may be nearly the fame with that which was supposed in a preceding fedion under the relation of parties irangers and unconneSted. They are subjet to the law of nature alone, however it may be modified by special conventions, and the law'of nature for this reason is also termed the law of nations. In their differences or disagreements they may appeal to the judgement of neutral powers; but if a difference is not otherwise removed, they may have recourse to war and the decision of arms.

The law of nations, which proceeds upon the supposition of peace when their is no existing offence, proceeds upon the supposition of war when differences arise that cannot be otherwise reconciled ; and is therefore, relatively to such occasions, termed also the law of peace and of war.

The last of these titles is that under which the learned Grotius has treated of the law of nature; and persons who have recourse to this author will have occasion to feledt fiom his redundancy what is necessary rather than to seek for additional information on the subject. Possessed of thejuft principle of cbmpulfory law, he he has applied it in a most ample detail, but so intermixed with 

quotations from the cuflom and practice of different ages, with C^. IV.
considerations of duty, as well as right; that his work becomes -r'
a system of ethics, and the history of opinions and customs, rather than a simple dedution and application of the principles of conpulfory law. His quotations, indeed, are interesting, so far as we are concerned to. know what men and nations have thought and praftifed, on the subjet of their mutual obligations and rights; although their opinions are not of sufficient authority in eftabliihing the principles, or in directing the applications of justice.

The most admired nations of antiquity were erroneous in their docrines,. and unfortunate in their praAcices relating to this important subjee. In war, the hostilities they praflifed were often unnecessarily deftrudive; and the servitude to which they deftined their captives was altogether unfounded on any principle of juflice. So that, what we have to learn from the example they have set in there particulars, is rather what we ought to avoid, than what we may imitate or quote as authority in decisions of natural law.

We are, in this refpeó, certainly more happy in modern times.

War is made with little national animosity, and battles are fought without any personal exasperation of those who are engaged : So that partiesl are, almnot in the very heat of a contest, ready to liften to the dictates of humanity or rcafon; and there is no branch of pracical justice, which we may rccommend with more hopes of success, than that which reflrains nations at war, from unnccefitary severities against one another.

The EAR 1. The artificial persons, of whom we are now to treat, confider

S<:'.' [V. ed internally, or in refpen to their conflituent members, consist A'n.' of fellow citizens, magifirates, and fubjeds: Confidered externally, or in respect of one nation to another, they have their separate rights, whether original or acquired; may avail themselves of such rights; and guard them, by such means as are in their power, againft any species of infringement or wrong.

Among the rights of nations, acquired or adventitious, may be reckoned the Stipulations of treaty, or the conditions of acknowledged custom. These several articles of right, every nation lies under an obligation to observe, refpeding its neighbour, and is entitled to maintain refpeAing itself. In their disputes, they may have recourse to persuasion or reason; but, if reason should fail, their final resort is to stratagem or force.

Such is the state of war between nations; a state in which itis allowed, that former conventions cease to be binding, and that a nation aggrieved may avail itself of every means in its power to obtain redress; but, if the grounds of war be lawful, on the fide of the one party, they must be unlawful on the part of the other; and all that we fay, concerning the rights of war, in the application of force, is true only upon the supposition that the grounds of the war itself are just: Insomuch that, in stating the maxims of law, on this fubje&, we endeavour to express only the rights ofthofe who are entitled to plead the juflice of their cause.

Wars may originate in rapacity, emulation, or malice, in error or tifapprehenfion of right; they may be of indefinite continuance, or even form the ordinary slate of contiguous nations. The fadt in in these refpeds, is matter of history, and admits of indefinite PAR rI.
variations; but we are, in this place, to confider merely upon SECat. Iv.what supposition the ad ofhoftility, in any one nation, may be -v just; to what extent lawful hostilities may be carried, or within what limits they are circumscribed, even to nations who are entitled to use them in the highest degree : But, before we proceed to this principal objec of disquisition, it is proper to confider queftions which relate particularly to the cafe of nations, as they are, in their manner of adcing or suffering, diftinguifihed from single men.

As the persons of whom we are now to treat, include a plurality of individuals, having each a principle of willa and activity centered in himself, as well as a common cause, in which the members composing the community may jointly a't, or susser in a body; two principal questions may arise concerning them: First, what actions, proceeding from the members of a community, are to be confidered as acs of the community itself? And, secondly, In whose person may the community be supposed to receive an injury; and from whom, in cafe of an injury received, may the community exac repation?

To the fitrft question, we may answer, That the sovereign of the slate, of whatever description, whether a monarch or national assembly, is ever supposed to ac for the community, and his actions are ever chargeable as aCtions of that body of which he is the head. In his title of sovereignty is implied a general flbftitution of his acAs, for aCts of that nation, of which the supreme direction is committed to him. To this we may add, that the action of any individual, if employed by the fovercign, or colnlmil: P p sioned 
 sioned by the public so to act, or if generally understood to aa CH AP. V. for his country, will also involve, as a party in all his proceedings, .ryw the community to which he belongs.

But, as private citizens may offend against the peace of their own country, as well as against that of a foreign nation, flates are not answerable for the offence of particular fubjedts, farther than they previously authorise their conduct, or avow and proteat the offender after the fat. Thus, pirates committing depredations on the high seas, are confidered as private criminals, and amenable to the penal laws of their own country, whilst letters of marque, or private ships of war, authorised by public commission, or publicly received into port with their prizes, and protected in the uife of them, are justly confidered as involving their country in the hostilities they have committed, whether unlauvfUl or juzlty pi ovoked.

To the second question, wre may answer, That a nation may receive an injury in the person or effects of any citizen: That, in the cafe of wrongs so received, the injured party may exact reparation. and make reprisals on the person or effects of any subjec or member of the injurious nation: And, in refpe& to both quefcions, it is evident, that as a nation may be chargeable with a wrong committed by any of its members, whether authorised or merely protected, so the injurious nation may be coerced or forced to make reparation by means that immediately af-ctd the privatc interest of any of its citizens, as well as by means that assea the community at large; insomuch, that the law of defence, in is application to the cafe of nations, will bear, that a conmulunity iljured, whethler in any of its public intcrefis, or in the pcrfo'i person of any of its members, has a just claim to redress, and 

may make reprnfals on the public, or on the persons and effets S CAP 1V
of any or all the members of the offending nation. r Vi, VK. i( N



S E C T I 0 N V.

The fame Subjedl continued.

PART 1I. A national councils are composed of members differing in their 
CHAP IV. opinions and dispositions; and often flucuatingin their resolutions, SECT. V according to the influence of contending parties, communities cannot be known to one another, as individuals are known, under any permanent characer of tried affection and fidelity. Nations are, therefore, almost in every instance, mutual objeds ofjealousy and diflruft; and must think themselves safe so far only, as they are severally in condition to maintain their refpecive rights.
They must keep a watchful eye on the powers by which they may be annoyed from abroad, no less than attend to the means of dcfence with which they are furnished at home. Their independance must cease to exist, the moment it is held at the disfretion of any foreign power: what a neighbour, therefore, is about to gain, may be to them no less a fubjcdc of alarm, than what they thcmfblvcs are about to lose; and a war may be juflly underI talken, taken, by one state, to check the dangerous progress of another; 

as well as to make any other provision necessary to its own pre- 

servation.

This may render the question of right and wrong between nations extremely complicated, and suspend or perplex the decisions ofj uftice refpeiing the cause of a war.

In cafes of manifest aggrefflon the right of nations, like that of individuals, to defend themselves is obvious, and injustice in the first ftep of the war communicates a like character of wrong ;to every succeeding operation in the conduct of it; but in questions of mere caution or diflruft, it is difficult to determine how far one nation may justly oppose the progress of another, and in doing so be fuppofedto ad on principles ofmeredefence;or at what precise point they may be said to ad offensively, and to become aggreiTors in any quarrel that may arise between them.

The Romans may have been vindicated in requiring the Carthaginans to evacuate Sicily and Sardinia, but not in taking pofsession themselves of those islands, much less afterwards in requiring the Carthaginians to remove their city to an inconvenient distance from the Lea.

In questions of this kind men of the greatest integrity may bL

partial to their own country, and such is the force with which nature has direcred rival nations to pull against one another, that it would be dangerous in the councils of either to effccA an impartial part; while an cnemy is flriking, the sword of a fiiend nmol not be held in fifpencc.

In 
 In the quarrels of nations, therefore, much allowance is to be 

SECT. V. made for the mistake or misapprehension of parties, and even for t__> ithe caution with which it is proper, in national councils, to guard against the claims of a rival, even if he should appear to be supported by justice., If one nation employ force in support of its claims, however just, the nation attacked is entitled to resist every attempt to reduce it under the power of another; and is not safe, even in making a j uft conceflion, while its powers of defending itself are brought into hazard.

For these reasons, we may wave the question of justice, in the cause of a war, as depending on the actual circumstances of the particular cafe, and confider nations, acing without guile or premeditated malice of either fide, as entitled to the privileges of a fair defence.

The means of defence were, in a former feaion, referred to three separate titles, pelfuafion, Jiratagemn, and force.

The firit, it was said, may be employed among friends, and in obtaining a favour, as well as in repelling an injury. In cafes where it may be used with success, or where it may be safe to warn an enemy of a claim, that may be supported by force againft him, it is no doubt required, that proper representations should be made, as the least hurtful means that can be employed in urging a claim of right.

The Romans, for the most part, by previous complaint and requisition of their right, proposed to ifanLtify their cause, and to I give give at least an appearance ofjuftice to the hostilities which they 

were about to commence. The manifesto and declaration of war, 




which generally precedes hostilities in modern Europe, may be V
practised with the fame effect; but they are not ftrlCly required by the law of nature, in every cafe whatever. A nation that has taken the advantage offurprife, in committing an injury, cannot complain if the fame advantage be taken of itself in making reprifals.

Declarations may operate merely as a warning to put the injurious party on his guard, and enable him the better to perfit in the wrong he has done, a supposition on which the praAice is not at all necessary, or derivable from any principle of natural justice.

Among nations, however, like those of Europe, in which the fubjeds of different states are involved together in commercial connexions, and though innocent of any public wrong, are so much exposed to susser by the errors of those who govern their refpeCive countries, it is at leafd humane, if not in ifrid law required, that a certain warning of their danger should precede the actual hostilities by which they are exposed to susser, and of the causes of which they are perfedly innocent.

This consideration, it is hoped, may long recommend the practice of declaring war before the atual commencement of holtilities, among the modern nations of Europe, who, indeed, by the continuance of it, and by cullom, have given the expecation of it in some mcafure the authority of convention or compaA.

Strnatajem 
 Stratagem, implying some species of deception, is more the reSHAP. IV. fort of an enemy than of a friend. It may be employed in mifwJv^ leading the injurious from his aim, or in obtaining from him concefflons which he might not otherwise be willing to make.

On this fubjest, we have already confidered the scruples that may arise refpeting the use of deception, and the preference which the brave may give to the use of open force, even in obtaining redress of their wrongs; but we did not find, that the injurious can take any just exception to the use of Jlratagem, or complain that he is deceived when the effed is merely to counterac the wrong he commits. There is, however, one form in which deception is reprobated by mankind in general, even in the midit of hostilities, and under the utmost animosity of a national contest.

Althoughit be allowed to mislead an enemy by false appearances, and even by false informations, it is not allowed to enter into illufive treaties, or to stipulate articles for the fake of an advantage to be gained by a subsequent breach of faith.

It is allowed that hostilities cancel the obligation of preceding conventions, but not the obligation of treaties that may be entered into after commencement of a war. Hence.the sacred regard that is paid to cartels, refpeding the treatment or exchange of prisoners, the capitulations or treaties of surrender which take place in the midst of military operations, the quarter granted to an enemy who lays down his arms, or the fieedom that is given to a prisoner, upon his parole of honour not to fcrve until he is fairly exchanged.

these instances, the faith plighted, though even to an enemy, and under the operation of force, is held, by the general con- lent of all civilized nations, to be sacred in the highest degree. -The obligation, though poflibly not founded in the principle of ftrid law, certainly refts on a principle of humanity, absolutely necessary to the welfare of mankind, as without it, the calamities of war, once begun, could scarcely ever be brought to an end.
Peace itself refts upon the faith of a treaty concluded, while nations were yet at war; and, if it were admitted that such treaties could be entered into, and concluded merely to deceive an enemy, and draw him into a snare, it is evident, that the only means left to mankind, by which to flop the issues of blood, without the sinal extermination of an enemy, would be cut off, and two nations at war would be obliged to persist in hoflilities to the utter deftrucion of one or the other.

On this ground, breach of faith, even during war, is reprobated among civilized nations; and indeed, the advantage that might be derived from it, in any particular instance, would be more than counterbalanced by the general distrust which the faithless would incur, in cafes where it might be their interest to have credit given to their declarations or professions.

Force is the ordinary and ultimate resort of nations who cannot fettle their differences upon amicable terms. But, even in this last resort, the law of nature, we have observed, directs a choice to be made offuch means, as being effectual, are least hurtful to the parties against whom they are employed. The effec to be aimed at is the redress of a wrong; and any harm done, even to VO. I. Q.q an 
 an enemy, beyond what is necessary to this effec, we have observed, SeCH. V. is itself a wrong, and by the law of nature forbidden.

In applying this maxim to the cafe of nations at war, or in determining what may be lawful in the choice of hostilities, we are to confider the object in view, and the state into which it is proposed to reduce an injurious party, in order to obtain the ends of justice.

Whatever may have been the subjed in contest, the immediate objed of hftilities employedby either party, is to reduce an antagonift to a Rtate of concession, so that he, may no longer resist what is claimed as a right. This is the situation into which one party is reduced by a defeat; and the advantage gained by it accrues to the other, by having vanquilhed his enemy.

The first or immediate object of military operations, then, being to obtain the viAory, a second is, to employ the advantage gained, so as to preserve, secure, or recover the right which was originally in question. And the state of war between nations may may be divided into two periods; the firit, that which precedes; the second, that which comes after the vicory. In the first period, parties are still contending; in the second, one or other is in condition to enforce his demands, or both, tired of the contest, wifi for an accommodation.

With refpea to the firit period, or during the contest of parties, it is evident, that as hostilities are lawful only in preserving a right, or in obtaining wrong; so, in the choice of hostilitics, such only are to be deemed lawful as are necessary to obtain the vidcorhis This maxim in Speculation is bundantly clear, but in practice 


it is often difficult to apply it; for, while one party resists or 
presses with all his force, and takes every opportunity to flrength- V
en himself and to weaken his antagonist, the other party will think himself juflified in employing every means in his power to counterac operations, of which he knows not the precise extent.

Contending nations, for the most part, thus urged by an apprehension of what an enemy may be devising against them, proceed at once to extremities; use weapons and engines the nmoft deftrucive, and employ means the molf likely to reduce their enemy to submission, without any Scrupulous enquiry into the degree in which such means may be necessary, provided they are likely to be effecual for obtaining the purpose to which they are employed.

It is happy in the practice of nations when means of a.

deftrudive nature, such as the use of poisoned weapons, infeding the springs or supply of provisions, breach of faith, or any other deftrudive measures, tending to surprise an enemy, without giving him the option of submission, are so far reprobated, as that neither party thinks of employing them, nor apprehends that they are ever to be employed against himself. In favour of such practice the law of nature is clear and peremptory: That the party attacked ought, if pofible, to have open before him the extent of his danger, as that alone may be fuflicient to obtain the conccflion which conflitutes the end of the war.

,Qq 2 During During the period of contest, to whatever extremity an enemy 

SECT. V that refilts may be urged, it is evident, from the general prin _-wa/.J ciple which limits the operations of war to such means as are necessary to obtain the viaory, that an enemy who submits or yields, is thereby entitled to quarter. The end of the war, with refpea to him, is already obtained; and to refute quarter, is justly confidered amongst civilized nations as an obje3 ofdeteftation and horror, Prisoners taken in the course of a war are, agreeably to the diCtates of natural law, disarmed and secured, that they may not return to strengthen the enemy: But as cruelties pradCifed towards them have not any tendency to procure or to haften the victory, it is not lawful to withhold subsistence or reasonable accommodation in the manner of treating them.

The expence of fubfifling prisoners of war may indeed become an addition to the damage already sustained from an enemy, and may accordingly become ajuft matter of charge against the party whose wrongs give rife to the contest; but against whomsoever this question may be decided, it is evident, from the general observations already made, relating to the faith that is to be kept even with an enemy, that cartels or treaties of any fort, for the mutual accommodation of prisoners, are matters of strict obligation.

We speak not now of the regard which brave men and virtuous citizens mutually have for one another, though engaged on oppofite fides of a national quarrel. This is an article not of Rtrict law, but of personal generolity, of poliflcd manners, or of can2 dour, dour, honourable for those who observe it rather than matter of 

right, which may be always exated by those towards whom it is 



observed.

It is a well known maxim in the law of nature, that injurious parties have no right to exac the performance of any promise they may have extorted in pursuance of a wrong previously done.
Thus a robber, who has taken a traveller's money on the high way, if he flould extort a promise of secrecy, has no right to exad the performance of such promise.

Upon this principle it should seem, that, in the course of a war, engagements contracted with the injurious party are not binding; or do not bestow any right on such injurious party to exact the performance.

Notwithflanding the evidence of this maxim, nations, moved by the consideration of its fatal consequences, have almost univerfally consented to forego the exceptions of force or injustice'
otherwise valid, to repel the obligation of treaties entered into during the continuance of a war, and have consented to hold the faith of such treaties equally, if not more sacred than that of convention even between nations at peace. It is on the faith of this content, that the afperities of war are foftcned towards individuals, that the prevailing party, on every particular occasion, may refrain from unnecessary severity towards an enemy, may spare the vanquished, and release the captive. Upon the faith of this maxim, even during the animofities of war, a way is kept open for the return of peace; and the party aggrieved, even having an enemy in his power. is prevailed upon to sheathe the sword, and rely upon a promise of that enemy to repair the wrong 
 During the period of contest, to whatever extremity an enemy C i-AP. IV.
SECT. V that refills may be urged, it is evident, from the general prinr/'-y'' ciple which limits the operations of war to such means as are necefary to obtain the victory, that-an enemy who submits or yields, is thereby entitled to quarter. The end of the war, with refpe& to him, is already obtained; and to refuse quarter, is justly confidered amongst civilized nations as an object ofdeteftation and horror, Prisoners taken in the course of a war are, agreeably to the dictates of natural law, disarmed and secured, that they may not return to itrengthen the enemy: But as cruelties praftifed towards them have not any tendency to procure or to haften the viAory, it is not lawful to withhold subsistence or reasonable accommodation in the manner of treating them.

The expence of subsisting prisoners of war may indeed become an addition to the damage already sustained from an enemy, and may accordingly become ajuft matter of charge against the party whore wrongs give rife to the contest; but against whomsoever this question may be decided, it is evident, from the general observations already made, relating to the faith that is to be kept even with an enemy, that cartels or treaties of any fort, for the mutual accommodation of prisoners, are matters of ftrii obligation.

We speak not now of the regard which brave men and virtuous citizens mutually have for one another, though engaged on op.
polite fides of a national quarrel. This is an article not of ftrid law, but of personal generoiiry, of polifled manners, or of can2 dour, dour, honourable for those who observe. it rather than. matter of 

right, which may be always exaCed by those towards whom it is 



observed. Sr It is a well known maxim in the law of nature, that injurious parties have no right to exadc the performance of any promise they may have extorted in pursuance of a wrong previously done.
Thus a robber, who has taken a traveller's money on the high way, if he fllould extort a promise of secrecy, has no right to exaft the performance of such promise.

Upon this principle it should seem, that, in the course of a war, engagements contracted with the injurious party are not binding; or do not bestow any right on such injurious party to exaA the performance.

Notwithstanding the evidence of this maxim, nations, moved by the consideration of its fatal consequences, have almof.r univerfally consented to forego the exceptions of force or injustice'
otherwise valid, to repel the obligation of treaties entered into during the continuance of a war, and have consented to hold the faith of such treaties equally, if not more sacred than. that of convention even between nations at peace. It is on the faith of this content, that the afperities of war are softened towards individuals, that the prevailing party, on every particular occasion, may refrain from unnecessary severity towards an enemy, may spare the vanquished, and release the captive. Upon the faith of this maxim, even during the animofities of war, a way is kept open for the return of peace; and the party aggrieved, even having an enemy in his power. is prevailed upon to fleathe the sword, and rely upon a promise of that enemy to repair the wrong P T II. wrong he has done, and to preserve the peace undiiturbed for the CGH.,.IV. future.


It is evident, in the abffrac point of view, that while parties are at war, it is lawful to assist the innocent; but, that any person giving aid to the guilty, becomes an accomplice in his crime.
Upon this principle, parties at war, asserting their claim of right against an enemy, have an equal claim against the auxiliary, or againft any nation giving refuge, protection, or support to an enemy; but parties, unconcerned, may repel the attempts which are made to engage them in a quarrel, refpeaing which they are disposed to preserve their neutrality.

Neither of the parties at war may lawfully seize the effects of a neutral person, in order to employ them against his enemy; but, if the effeds of a friend are deffined for the use of an enemy, and are such as may enable him the better to carry on the war, they may be lawfully seized.

If an enemy receive protection in the port or fortress of a neutral power, he may be lawfully pursued, and forced even in that retreat. With refped to such matters, however, contiguous nations having frequent intercourse, whether in peace or war, by their ordinary practice, give fandion to customs, in some inftances unequally agreeable or disagreeable to the original tenets of natural law.

the modern nations of Europe, the effecs of a friend going to an enemy may be seized, if they are such as would enable that enemy the better t n the war; and the cffeds effeCts of an enemy may be seized on board the ship of a friend, 



provided the ship is restored with freight and other expences. 

In the operations of war at land, an enemy may be pursued into the territory, and forced to surrender in the fortress of a neus tral power; but, in the operations of war by lea, neutral ports are held to be sacred, and the protetion they give is extended to Lome indefinite distance, at which their signals can be understood, or to which guns from the shore may be supposed to reach.

In this diftinaion, which is made between the liberties that'

may be taken with the land fortresses and Lea ports of an enemy, the rule is no doubt capricious, and the reverse of that which the law of nature seems to inculcate. By the maxims of this law, an injured party may pursue his redress by any means which are consistent with the safety of others who are not concerned in the wrong of which he complains. There is, or may be, evident rea-son to bar his entrance into the territory of a neutral power, or to, bar his laying siege to a fortress in which an enemy may have ta-ken refuge, as this cannot be done without damage to -the territory on which he enters, or demolition to the works he would force; but there is no reason why he may not approach the coast or enter the port of a neutral power, and there force his antagonist, by means which no way assea the interest of the neutral party in.
question. The only probable reason that can be afligned for the origin of this diftindion is, that neutral powers are better prepared to keep the peace of their ports against the force of intruders by sea, than they are prepared to keep the peace of their territory against the force of great powers collected to make war on their fiontiers; that therefore they urge their right in the one cafe,.
:.ld forgo it in the other..

Suclih 
PART. I Such are a few of the principal points to which the law of na

SCT. V. ture applies, in what we flated as the firit period of a war, while _'/'~Y'n parties yet contend for the ascendant or the victory. If the events of the war nave been such as incline either or both parties to make the concessions necessary to an accommodation, they are come to the second period, in the sequel of victory, which was supposed to be the first or immediate objedt of hostilities.

In this state of parties, the victor has acquired a power to enforce his right, but, refpeding the cause or subje&t of the quarrel, does not become vefled with any right that did not originally subsist, or that has not arisen in the way of additional claim of compensation for the damage sustained in the course of the war.

The victorious, if his general claim be just, is now in condition to enforce it; he is in condition, also, to enforce compensation for whatever he may have suffered in vindicating his right; and may lawfully require securities, or take precautions for his future safety. But, as the success of arms cannot change wrong into right, and as the innocent is not less entitled tojuflice, for being unable to resist the violence that is offered to him, any supposed right of conquest, arising from the success of a war, is a mere folecifin in language, and the reverse of any just tenet of natural law.

The fortune of war is Sometimes favourable to the injurious, and may place either of the parties concerned in poffeflion of advantages which they have not any right to retain, either in virtue of their original claim, in virtue of compensation for damage sustained in the war, or as securities required to their future safety.
On these suppositions, conquest can bestow no right i and it is fbrtunate tunate in the practice of nations, when, either from a principle 

of moderation, or from an apprehension that neutral powers might 


SE-CT. V.

interpoie to check the abuse of their advantages, they employ their ry conquefis only to secure themselves in the polfeffion of their rights.

Among other advantages of civilization and public juflice in modern Europe, we have reason to congratulate ourselves -upon this, that conquests are seldom undertaken, and acquisitions feldom retained, except updn the ground of some plausible or probable claim, on which the subjea in question was originally feized or demanded.

R r /





( 3X5 )

CH A P. V.
OF MORAL ACTION, AND THE CHARACTERISTICS OF A VIKR
TUOUS AND HAPPY LIFE.

Of Virtue, as diflingulJhable from the EffeSs of Compulsory Law..
manner, as has been attempted in the two laschapters, we may trace the outlines of jurisprudence or compul- fory law from a first principle in nature, as we pursue a series of -v>
mathematical theorems from an axiom or definition previously assumed or underflood. Our theories, in either cafe, no way asfed the the physical state of things otherwise than they are apR r 2 plicable 
 applicable by assumption of circumstances, or by some degree of SJCAP. V. approximation in the cafes which actually take place.

The object of compulsory law is defence; and to obtain this end force is perfecAly adequate: But the objec of morality in general is different: It is to inspire virtuous dispositions, and render that frate of the person we would defend not only secure, but otherwife eilentially happy.

When the law is thus conceived, as divided into two separate tables; the one containing a prohibition of wrongs, the other requiring positive acts of beneficence, the fandions are supposed to be distinguishable also, under titles of perse& and imperfect obligation. The use of words is .no doubt in some measure arbitrary; but it ought not to be implied in any words we employ, that a rule, merely becauSe it may be enforced, is in any degree more binding than the consideration of what is in itself an article of wisdom, as constituent of good to mankind.

Justice is said to be the object ofcompulfory law; and it is so, no doubt, in refpedt to many of its external effects: But, confidered as an article offupreme felicity to the person who willingly observes it. justice is no less above the reach of compulsion; than is the whole of that guardian afficdion, which renders man towards his fellow creatures not only unwilling to be the cause of harm, but active also in yielding the fruits of beneficence. The person who abslains fiom harm, merely because he may be forced to do so, is in no degree comprehended under any description of virtue, and in respeCt to the good at which morality aims, may be confidered as a wretch and an outcast from mankind.

3 Force Force may operate in practice, by presenting evils which deter 


from iniquity; but vice itself is a greater evil than any that force 

can inflict; and the obligation to humanity and candour, there- fore, is as perfect as the fear of evil or the consideration of human felicity can make it. A person who deliberates on the choice of his conduct, will not always find himself more powerfully determined to respect what may be called the right of one fellow creature, than he is to relieve the distress, or cordially to embrace the merits of another '. An orphan, it is said, was found almost naked, lying on the grave of his parent, of whom he had been recently deprived; the person who found him, we shall suppose, was passing to an appointment, at which he was about to discharge a debt: But this object fixed his mind; he employed his money in procuring relief and protection for him; and his creditor for the time was disappointed. Will any one reprobate this act of humanity, as interfering with a matter of more perfect obligation ? Even the courts of law, as we have had occasion to observe, can admit the extreme neceflity of one peribn as valid to suspend the right of another. Thus, a person about to perifli for want of food, is allowed to save himself by recourse to the property of another; and the plea of humanity is held to be more sacred than that of an absolute and exclusive right. Vhy flould not humanity therefore be enforced? If it be the primary good incident to human nature, why should it not be obtained by any means the most effecual for this purpose? There is not, indeed, any reason why it flould not be effectually obtained; and if force could be effectual to inspire benevolence, even * Vid. Prix (dlifribuis ct propofcs par Ia Socictc Royale d' Agriculture, dans fa fcancc publi(quc tniiue a l>.aris c 3 Dccembre, 1791.

 even the sword and the- mace ihould be employed to make men 
love one another. But benevolence is a modification of will, Amp which no application of force can procure: Even the external effet, if obtained in this manner, would lose the character of virtue. A beneficent action, which, when free, is liberality or charity on the part of those who practise it, would, under the application of force, be changed into extortion or robbery on the part of those who should so exac the performance of it for their own advantage. To bestow the felicity of a willing mind, force is not only inadequate, but, by alienating the affections of those againfi whom it is employed,wouldhavea contrary tendency.

All that the magistrate can do in this matter is, by shutting the door to disorder and vice, to endeavour to fifle the ill dispositions of men; and by securing the paths of integrity, and marking them with considerations of distinction and honour, to facilitate and encourage the choice of virtue, and to give scope to the belt difpositions which nature has furnilhed, or which the ingenuous mind is able to cultivate in itself.

We are now to confider not the applications of force, but the felicity of a willing mind. What is the bell and most happy condition of human life ? What most agreeable to the law of God and the general sense of men ingenuous and. well informed ? The confiderations which lead to this choice, if benevolence be supposed to need any excitement to its own pursuits, have been already enumerated under the titles of conscience, religion, and.public rputle.
But these may not be sufficient without all the other accompaniments of a well informed, as well as benevolent mind.

ConJcience, indeed, for the most part will approve the acls of 3 beneficence beneficence and reprobate the effeAs of malice: But piejudice, 

on particular occasions, may assume the name of conscience. 




And men are not always virtuous in doing what they themfelvs ry conceive to be right. A person who has incurred a mifchivous error, may have his own approbation, while he is in reality an obje& ofjuft deteRation and horror; and the merit he assumes to himself in the face of better information, argues a mind depraved at once in its judgements as will as affections. Even the furious zealot who is pleaSed to inculcate his doctrines under terrors of the rack and the fire, may think that he is acive in the cause of truth, or in propagating a faith which is necessary to the salvation of mankind. Or the Mufsleman, who thinks it a duty, -;hen the standard of Mahomet is eredced, to plunge his dagger in the breast of any Jew or Chriflian that is within his reach, may flatter himself that he has the fanaion of conscience for the outrage he commits on humanity and justice.

Under the title of public repute, or a deference to the sense of mankind, we may in general be directed to a harmless and beneficent course of life; but not always securely to this effect.
Vain glory and mean popularity are Sometimes grafted on this principle, and as often mislead the condut of men, or embitter the moments of life with jealousy or disappointment. In private the silence of fame is often the belt repute, as at Athens, that woman was said to merit the highest praise of whom no rumour either good or bad ever went abroad *. And to the father of a family also, who, by the conftitutiori of his country, is neither a flatefinan * Vid. Thucidides lib. ii. co 45. Rex vixit male qui natus morienfque fefellit.

PART IT. ftaefiman nor a wariour, nor placed in any public profession, SECT. I. the silence of fame is itself a laudable diftindion *.

Under the title of religion we admire and love the conceiveable perfedions of the supreme Being: But bigotry and fuperflition may assume the name of religion, and substitute ads of opprefsion and cruelty towards men for ads of duty towards God.

We mutt not therefore trust to whatever may bear the name of religion or conscience, or to what may have a temporary vogue in the world for our direction in the paths of a just and manly virtue. Every advantage of a benevolent mind and well informed understanding are conducive to this purpose, and the charaderiftics of a virtuous life, frequently revolved in the mind may have a salutary tendency to the fame effed. To delineate the features of virtue is an agreeable talk, and, when happily performed, is favourably received by mankind. Even they who in pradice are least observant of the models presented to them, nevertheless bear witness to the truth of an observation which Cicero has quoted from Plato. That if virtue could be rendered maniJeJl to the eyes of men, it ,would excite the Nec vixit male qui natus rnorienfque fefe!lit.

Upon this idea of a virtue retired in modest silence and indifference to fame, there is wanting for the inftrution of mankind, a biographical collcfion containing exam.
pies of men who havebeen able to fill up the years of a happy life with occupations annd duties which gave continual fatisfacRion, without any wifl to extend their celebrity.
It might be difficult indeed to colled materials for such a work, and few are enough lovers of mankind and indifferent to fame to be qualified for the execution of it. If vIr Additon had betaken liimfclf to this task, his country that owes him so mluch would have owed him still more than for any of his acual fcrviccs.

the most wonderful pa^on of love and desire of u.wfdonm . Its lessons 

are happily received through the channels of ingenuous literature C HAP. V.
and the fine arts, no less than in the way of formal inftrucion. r Of the first, there are many proofs in the works of diflinguifled genius, whether, ancient or modern in which qualifications dwIhich serve to accomplish the author serve also to inftruc the world *. Of the other, there are also valuable remains of antiquity in the Memorabilia of Socrates; the Ethics ofAriftotle; the offices of Cicero; and still more in the remains of Epitetus and Marcus Aurelius. In our own language also there are many valuable compositions on the subjec. Some on that of manners, and the ordinary concerns of human life, having appeared periodically at different times of this century, frill continue to be read with more than the pleasure of novelty. Others that have been delivered by persons in holy orders, and in the discharge of their sacred functions. With these, in any instance, I do not compete: But in my attempt to touch this copious subjec, of which I cannot by any means hope to fill up the detail; I am ambitious to show that there is a science of manners or of Ethics, no !ess than of Jurisprudence or of Politics, and for this purpose S s would + Forman quidem ipfam, Marce fill ; & tanquam faciem honefii vides, que, si oculis cerneretur, mirabiles ainores, ut ait Plato, excitaret fapientia, Cic. de OJf ficiis, lib. i. c. 5.

* Scribendi rede fapere eft et principium et sons.

Rem tibi Socratic- poterunt ofnendere charta, Verbaque proviilmir rem non invita fequentur.
Qui didicit patrii quid debeat et quid amicis; QuIo (it anore parens, quo fiater amandus et hofpcs; Qod fit conlir-ipti, (quod judicis officium, qux: Partes in bcllurn ifli; ducis ille prorc<co Rcdcre perimTru fcit convcnliclntia cuiquc.

.ART II. would willingly point out a method, bywhich to derive the SECT. I. offices or duties of a virtuous life from principles at once so ~'~ comprehensive and unqueffionably evident, as to enable every person to fill up the detail for himself.





S E C T I 0 N Ir.

Of the Occafjons and Charac7ers of Human Altoi'n in general.

WE have laboured in former fedions, to have the characters, 

whether good qualities, or defects of mind diftincly conceived, as CIAP. V.
constituting, on the one hand, the happiness and good, or, on the 
other, the misery and ill, of intelligent being. In these charadcers' ,- '
of the mind subsists the diftindion of good and evil. Corporeal adions are diftinguiflled only as their effecls and external exprefsions.

So much to be observed is perhaps neceflary to a right underftanding of the subjed. At the fame time, it must be admitted, that any individual mind, however possessed of its higheft perfections, if, without means of communication with other minds, would be no more than a single and separate existence, not a member in any community of beings; not active to any beneficent purpose; nor even having any scope for the exercise of its best dispositions and faculties.

S s z The 
PART. 11. The Author of nature, so far as we know, has not so disjoined 

SCCT. II. individuals from one another in any part of his works. There '.'vow. is an affinity and combination of minds, as well as of material substances. The chain of communication extends from one to many, fiom species to species, and even fiom world to world, throughout the intellectual as well as material system of nature.
In our limited views of the intellectual world, there is a medium, through which individuals give and receive intimation of their meaning, and on which they jointly work with mutual difpofitions to concert or opposition. How this chain of communication may be formed, betwixt intelligent beings different from man, or how it may be supplied in a slate any way different from the present, we know not; but, in the present condition of man's intelligent being, his communication with other minds is esseced by means of his animal frame. Through this medium, minds mutually know and are known to one another. Among the fubjees that affect the animal nature, they find confsituents of interest or self preservation, on which they are industrious.
They encounter with one another in the fame or opposite pursuits, and find materials that may be employed as means of beneficence or harm, of co-operation and opposition, according as they are disposed to adt the partof friends or of enemies.

We have already indulged the idea, that this scene of animal life, is but the opening of a boundless course, in which man is deftined to pursue the objecs of his intelligent nature : By means of animal perceptions, the first rays of information or knowledge are made to. dawn upon his foul; he is made to perceive the world in which he is a part; and, in the edifice of nature, in which he is ]odlgcj lodged is not, like the other animals, merely an indweller; but is 

partly let into the reason of its contrivance, not merely urged by in- CHIAP. V.
ftin&, but qualified to deliberate on the choice of his ations, whe- - _
ther in obtaining a convenience to himself, or in procuring a benefit. to his fellow creatures.

These occasions of aCtion, making so material an article in the history of the human species, have been already stated; and the pursuits or exertions of mind, to which they give rife, have been enumerated under the refpetive titles of arts, commercial, political, and intelleclual. The first are employed on fubjets required to supply the wants and necessities of animal life; the second relate to the order offociety, or the relations of men acting in collective bodies; and the third relate to the exercises and attainments of mind, in the use and improvement of its diftinAive powers.

When, in the sequel of this ltatement, we confider how far the intellectual powers of man are short of the degrees which he himself is able to conceive, we were naturally led to suppose, that there are, in the universe of God, much higher forms of intelligence than his. At the fame time, we cannot but think, that even he is of no mean rank in the scale of being; for to him is allotted one of the primary planets, and what, under this title, may be reckoned a seventh part of this solar or planetary world. Here, then, is a mighty apparatus made for his accommodation; and our belt way of reconciling so much consequence in the system of nature, with so much littleness in the present attainments osman, is,'by supposing this terrestrial sphere which he occupies, and probably many such, to be nurseries for the great world of intelligent being: And in this supposition we may learn to refi)ec the present scene of things, however fecmingly fiivolous, as a prelude to 3 t hl 
PART Il. the higher parts of a drama, for which men are deilined to prepare SCHCAT. V. in palling through the offices, employments, and duties of the vrYowk1 present life.

Under one or other of the titles now mentioned, and formerly treated more at large, we may suppose the present occasions of human action to be comprehended; and, if it be good for man to aA his part, it is certainly required, in .constituting that good, that the occasions of action mhould be attended to, and well underfiood. The external Situations of men may be varied indefinitely, by the unequal pof/eflion of things conducive to convenience or self preservation, or by the unequal distribution of materials on which the powers of wisdom and goodness may be employed; and we may know that happiness or misery is not proportioned to the measure in which such things are poffiefed, but to the right or wrong use of them, and to the wisdom or folly of the part which is aded with refpca to them. Yet, as the work is not likely to be well executed where the materials are neglected, philosophy, which bids us attend to our duty, as the principal object in human life, has no tendency to make us overlook .or neglect the occafions to which the propriety of our conduct relates.

In general it is supposed, that means are fnbordinate to the end, for which they are employed; and from this rule it fhllould follow, that the industry and ingenuity, the sobriety and fortitude, prafifed by a man in the pursuits of fortune;. that the benevolent affeCtion, exercised in adcs of liberality or charity, ihould be of inferior consideration to the wealth which he means to acquire in thie one cafe, or to the favour and relief which he means to, bhctow in th.e other. In the estimate of human concerns, howCVCe'

ever, the contrary is true. Where human virtue is the means, 

and external advantage the end, we know from experience, that ScAP. V.
the means are of more Value than the end, and constitute the -x happiness of human life, in.whatever measure the end be obtained, or even where in the event it is frustrated. To this purpose, it is observed by Cato, in Cicero's dialogue concerning the fupreme good, that, although human ation is directed to certain external ends of accommodation or safety, which he enumerates, yet that, from the action itself there results a confideracion of much greater moment, than the end or purpose to which the action itself was directed A. In the productions of men, materials are oflefs value than the ingenious design and execution of the work. And in acts of good will to mankind, the external effeA
is inferior to the affection of a generous and beneficent heart.

The great object of reason, however, in there observations, is not to detach men from a proper attention to the occasions of action, but to qualify them, however the scenes may differ, to ac their part with propriety, or to prevent them from thinking that their good consists in mere situation, or in the materials they employ; and not in the nature of the part which they themselves are free to ad, in every situation, and with refpea co any material.

To few it is left to determine what course of life they shall pursue. The conduct of patrimonial interests, the cares of family, the duties of public or private station, are to most men fuffioient to mark the line or direction in which they are to pass through * Cicero de Finiibus, lib. iii. cnp. 6.

 through life. But, to bear the chara&ers of an ingenuous or hap

py mind, it is not necesSary that the situation or line of life should wer-. be £pecifically adapted. This blessing is attainable in every fituation, and is the gift of God to every rational creature who knows how to discharge the present duties of his station with diligence, benignity, and courage.

Different institutions of society engage their members in different pursuits. Under some institutions, it is the prevailing object of paflion to become rich; in others, to obtain precedence and titles, or to make a ihow of rank and fortune derived from ancestors. In others, it is the prevailing passion to be diftinguiihed in the classes of statesmen, of warriors, or orators. But in the scene of human life, be it constituted by whatever direcion of public opinion, the wife, the ingenuous, and the beneficent will frill find their place; and it were dangerous or absurd to waste, in vain expostulations, the spirit, which ought to operate in the belt use of our situation, whatever it may be.

In a little village of the Alps, the attendants of Caesar could perceive that even there, as well as at Rome, there might be 'parties and a contest for rank: And he himself could there also apprehend the usual objects of his ambition, superiority of power, in refpea to which, he would rather be thefiry? in that village than thefkcond at Rome. In every department of human life, if there be a vice to be flunned, there is also a virtue to be pradifcd; and what every man is chiefly concerned to know, is that, even in his village, or in his place, there is occasion to exercise the character of a noble and ingenuous mind, as well as a danger to be incurred on the fide of folly and of vice.

Philofoplicrl.

Philosophers would variously teach us; Come to refer our actions, 
PART I.

Ct


and to limit ourviews, to privateor separate gratifications; to court 
an exemption from care and solicitude on the concerns of other men; and to fill up the moments of life with the least poflible trouble or avocation from our own personal slate and enjoyments, But nature seems to require that we seek for the interesting scenes of human life; that we confider our own, and the cause of mankind, as common; that we confider our sociable dispositions as the better part of ourselves; and that we willingly seize the occasions which exercise the powers of a wife and beneficent mind.

Reason, pretended or real, may thus dispose or indispose us for the scene which providence has opened before us. But nature'
has provided, that the individual can no where shake himself loose of his species, and that if he does not bear his part in society as a friend, he must susser as an enemy.

The vefiel, on board of which all men are embarked, mutt be managed and wrought by the common skill and labour of the crew, and none can be indulged in exemptions, which, if all were to plead and obtain, would end in the ruin and deftruaion of the whole. " I would reap," fays Aristippus, " what other people " sow, I would enjoy my pleasures in a city which others have "built, and labour to preserve". This confidered as the choice of an individual may be cunning; but offered as a scheme of philosophy for mankind, is more absurd than language can express. If the slothful mariner, in his wisdom, fly fiom tLe helm or hfrink from his watch on the deck, what is to become of the vessel in which he is embarked, and in which the scene of his T t private 
 private enjoyments, or interests, however real, is likely upon this 
plan to be of short continuance.


Animals are observed to have their- native propensities, from which there results a diftindtive asped and manner of life.
This observation will apply no less to man. He tools distinguished from his birth. He is destined to know himself, to observe and to chufe among the ends of pursuit, and his asped is different according to the choice he has made, and according to the ability or temper with which he persists in that choice.

Every situation may try the fiill of the person who is placed in it; may try his disposition to beneficence, or his neglect of other men, his fortitude and his application to objects that merit the principal flareofhis attention. Skill, dipo/ition, application, andforce, are accordingly the qualifications to which we referred, as requifites in the formation of an adcive character. And, with a view to which, morality has been divided into a corresponding number of parts or branches, which are termed the Cardinal Virtues, to wit, prudence or wilfdom, goodness orjuflice; temperance and fortitude. This arrangement of the subjed is familiar in common language, as well as in the schools of morality, and points out a method in which we may continue to pursue what remains to be observed on the external charad6eriftics of a virtuous life.

7Wisdom is the virtue or excellence of the understanding, by which a person is rkilful in the choice of his objedts, and in the means of obtaining his end.

Goodnef is the excellence or virtue of a good difpoition, firom which men venerate the rights and feel for the sufferings of their fellow fellow creatures, from which they are averse to be the authors 

of harm, from which they are ever faithful and true to the expeAa- S

tions they have raised, and ever ready, by aats of kindness and vY/
good will, to prevent even the wishes of those who by nature or accident are made to depend on their will.

7emperance is the proper choice of our pursuits and applications ; or such a measurement and regulation of inferior gratifications and desires as is consistent with the higher and better occupations of our rational nature.

Fortitude is that firength of mind which enables the virtuous man to withstand opposition, to contend with difficulty, and to possess himself in the midst of danger. It is the foundation of'
magnanimity, which, when a person is called upon to perform any of the more arduous duties of life, inspires a courage superior to the consideration of inferior interests or concerns. Its principle in the mind is an essential constituent ofhappinefs; not only as it qualifies men to encounter with ease any real difficulty, distress, or danger, but as it is an antidote to those imaginary fears and mis-apprehensions which constitute weakness, and a principal article of meanness or suffering.

Such being the cardinal virtues, forming what we may confider as the first and most general arrangement of the moral duties, we proceed to confider their consequences, or the more particular habits and exertions in which they severally consist. In doing this, the first or most general title in each division will serve as a principle, from which the inftrudions of moral propriety relating to the several parts may be drawn.


Of the CharaSerfiics of Prudence or Wisdom.

 W ISDOM being a discernment of the ends which we ought to citap. V.
SCleT. II pursue, and of the means moit effecual for the attainment of rvu' them, it ihould seem to include every virtue. For, on the fovereign direction of a mind perfectly apprised of its good, and of the manner in which that good is to be secured, we may safely rely for the retitude and propriety of our conduc in every inDance.

Wisdom was accordingly so confidered by the antient philofophers; and, in the imaginary description of a wife man, every conceivable perfection of human nature was included.

We are thus disposed, for the molt part, to simplify our conceptions, and to seek for tome fundamental principle from which, if we secure it, every other requisite will follow; but the reality of any such principle, even in the government of human nature, xay may be doubted. The love of mankind, which we have affum- 

ed as the nearest approach to a general principle of virtue, re- 

quires the direction of wisdom and the support of courage. SEc. L
Wisdom also requires the reality of a benevolent affetion, which even the befi discernment of what ought to be done, on particular occasions, cannot supersede.

Among the happiest effeas of wisdom, we may reckon the proper diretion which a benevolent disposition itself may receive towards the attainment of its end; but if in this, wisdom or prudence is ~subservient to goodness, the benevolent affections are often the best security that judgement itself thall not err: For they often lead to the genuine point of integrity and honour, when a cold discernment of what is proper for the occasion might fail of its aim.

Wisdom, Rated as one among the cardinal virtues, refers chiefly to those duties which refult:from reflection, and which terminate in preserving the state and character of the individual unimpaired, Such are decency, propriety, iodeJiy, oeconomy, deci/ion, and caution.

These being the characaeriftics of prudence, and the external marks of a confidlerate mind, or the effects of habit acquired, together with experience in the progress of reason, they are among the virtues which the Duke de la Rochefoucault supposes to owe their merit to reflection, and to embellifl a charaCter the more for being acquired. But, even here, there is a partiality to natural, parts, of which, under the notion of superior genius or great ability, men court the reputation, even where they incur its neglect or acknowledge its abuse. It is that which is supposed to give to the 
 the ftatefinan or warrior his superior lufire; that which elevates E
CHAP II* the orator, the poet, and fine artist of every description, above the .-~,.v ordinary ranks of men; and we have the folly frequently to eftimate a merit which ought to consist in a proper use of our faculties, by the mere pofiefiion of a talent, with too little regard to the salutary effecs which it ought to produce.

The value of wisdom, however great, is more evident perhaps in its contrast with folly, than when separately stated. " A fool,"
fays La Bruyere, " cannot look, nor Rand, nor walk like a man "of sense. The contrast thus appears in the most trivial, as well " as most important occasions of human life, in every feature of " the countenance, and every action and gesture of the body.
" The fool is mortified in being told of his folly, and feels the " imputation of it as a grievous reproach."

WVhat then are these characters. When we attempt to analyfe them, the diftincion, ihould appear to arise, on the one hand, from a discernment of what ought to be done, and from a habit of doing it; on the other, from a mistake, or want of discernment of the objeCt, of the occalion, and 6f the place, or from a habit of being occupied on occasions of serious business with objets of inferior value. Such is the folly of the coxcomb, the vain-glorious, the avaricious, the spendthrift, and the prodigal, the contemptuous, and the proud.

Wisdom is the discernment of what a man ought to wifli for himself, for his friend, for his country, and for mankind. And supposing a disposition to at well in all there relations, it is the ability with which lie may acquit himfilf well on the different 3 occasions occasions to which they give rife. It has, in every person,' a par- 

ticular reference to the conduc of his own affairs. He may, in- S:T.AP- I
deed, confider his benevolence, or good will towards others, as one \
of the most important articles in the predicament of what belongs to himself; but such affedions belong more properly to their feparate articles of goodness orjuitice.

Decency, confidered apart from every other principle of moral obligation, though an article of wisdom, is that of which the external or physical effects are ofleaft imoment to human life. It is direded chiefly to save appearances, and gives evidence of a mind cautious to avoid what is evil, in matters which, either by opinion, custom, or natural sensibility, are rather offensive than hurtful to others. Its rules, therefore, are prohibitory, and its offices sometimes consist in avoiding before others, what, when alone, may be innocent, or perhaps i-eceffary.

There are men, who, under an affectation of being superior to trifles, susser themselves to trespass on the rules of decency; but offence unnecessarily given to our fellow creatures, whatever be the manner of it, is not a trifle; and the poet has justly observed that " Want of deceicy is want of sense." The observance of this duty, as it is dictated either by the inftiriis of nature, or by the cultom of our country, is important, as the presence of one man is important to another, and the reception which a person meets in society is important to himself The objects of prohibition, which come under this article, might be summed up under three titles, nudity, filth, and obfcenty ; but of there the boundaries are sufficiently marked in the cuflom or manners of every nation orage; and togointoany detail with rcifpe to 
 to them would be, in rome measure to offend against the duty SHAT. V. which we mean to enjoin.

Propriety is the suitableness of action to the person who ads; to the occasion; and to the place: so that, although it comprehends decency, because what is proper is also decent, it proceeds upon a principle yet more extensive and less depending on local apprehenfions and cufloms. Indecency is chargeable only in the prefence of others; impropriety may be incurred by a person when alone, as often as he neglecs what is due to himself or to his fellow creature, or as often as he incurs what is unsuitable to the part he has to sustain, either in refpeC to rank, profefion, or age.

There is a propriety, as well as decency, in all the external effects of virtue: In all the effects, for instance of good sense, benevolence, and resolution, these are proper to human nature as such, and constitute the principal graces or recommendations of the human characer; but it is proper to limit our observations on this article of propriety, to particulars which are derived from this confideration alone.

Among'the proprietes ofhigh rank, we may reckon the conditions which are peculiarly requisite to preserve refpet; that reserve which avoids improper familiarities; that candour, which guards against petulance, contemptuoufnefi, affetation, orfcorn.

It is proper, that the claim to superior refped flhould be supported byfuperior accomplishments of manners and candour; by a superior tfeadinefs and moderation in all occasional emotions and passions, whether ofjorrow, anger, mirth, orjoy.

Tile The genuine expreflions or effets of refpet constitute the 




proprieties of inferior flation, in its relation to that which is 
superior. -.

Refped naturally carries,a mixture of good will and affetion, which breaks forth in the well regulated plainness of truth, rather than in flattery or continual assent. There is a certain ingenuity.
required to render a person capable of affection and refpe&t It begins with giving a dignity to the manners of those who are poffedfed of it, and its attentions bear the molt honourable teftimony to the elevation of those towards whom it is dire&ed.

The conceflions of the servile are the effects of baseness, interef,.

orfear, and are proper objetes of dil-rufi, not of predileslion, or favour.

In the society of ingenuous men, however unequal in point of rank, there is a candour, which, in respeCt to freedom, in refped to the disposition to oblige, to receive, and to give information, tends to bring the parties on a foot of equality. It is indeed impossible that, in the societies of men, atual advantage of any fort; should cease to have its effe6t; but, in the. company of the wife, there is no formal intention to extend, nor any jealous anxiety to support that effect; and the difiindtions' of rank appear more in the attention of the superior to encourage, and in the inferior not to abuse that. freedom of conversation, which constitutes the.
charm of society.

Professions too have their proprieties, which are ever required, not only in formal and professional appearances, but even in the U u moil 
 most familiar and unguarded moments of life. -This- might SCHOA. IV be illuitrated by referring to the sentiments of men refpeting.
weY\ the proprieties of character, in different instances ; but the example of what is commonly required to the propriety of manner, in those who are vested with holy orders, may be sufficient.
While others are indulged in harmless levities, persons of this profefiion ihould be at all times not only innocent, but considerate to avoid even the slightest approach to offence.

Among the proprieties of age we may reckon,. that diffidence is proper to youth, resolution to manhood, and tranquillity to the last flages of life. The young are yet learning to be men, and ought not to assume the confidence of manhood, until they have laid the foundations on which. it may securely reft.

In manhood, it is proper that a person enter on his part with decision and resolution..

In old age, the vivacity with which pafflons operate in youth or manhood being impaired by the experience or the decline: of years, obj.ects appear in their comparative measures of importance; and the deliberate mind of the aged is better prepared to. inform.
and to advise than to. ad..

MIodely seems to be akin to diffidenae, and; they are i£ometines mistaken one for the other;. but they are plainly diftina. The decisive and resolute may be modest, but are not diffident.

Modesty is the proper measure of our claim or pretension to, consideration or preference relatively to other men. It is a, guard gurad which wisdo.m sets over the conceptions ofperfonal impor- 

tance, in which every person apart is apt to assume too Mn'tih for 

himfe i. 

himself. -
This conceit or conception of importance, when not properly restrained, is, in the language of a neighbouring country, termed./flfvove *. From this motive, the fool is at all hazards inclined to bring himself forward into view, and not only to avail himself of.any advantage he may have, but to affect more than is real. He is ready to abate of the candour which he owes to others, while he exceeds in the measure of consideration which he claims for himself.

Modefly is founded in natural disposition, as well as in reflection or reason, and therefore holds a middle place among the different kinds of virtue distinguished in the pafTage that has been formerly quoted from the Duke de la Rochefoucault. The natural disposition to this virtue, as well as to justice, is benevolence or the love of mankind. Hence men owe to nature their disposition to receive with favour the pretensions of others, and to rejoice at advantages superior to their own; while they learn from experience to guard against the effecs of partially to themselves, and to avoid intruding their own advantages, however real, upon the attention of others.

Self-defence, in the cafe of an attack, will justify the modest in a fair and manly representation of their rights, but does not authorise unprovoked or unnecessary ostentation of what they possess ; of what they have done; or of what they have suffered; much less the affctation of sentiments or qualities.by which they U u 2 would * Amour proprc.

 would deceive the world into a belief of their own consequence, ·SECT'. 1 beyond its ea afure eafreor degree.

*-e' \ I.
"

Oeconomy is the proper use of what fortune has bellowed, whether in the fruits of labour or inheritance.

The term is Sometimes 'employed as synonymous with parcimony' or frugality; and these, indeed, are the oeconomy of certain conditions, but no more than a particular form of this virtue accommodated to fmali resources. In great fortune, the proper ceconomy is not parcimonious, but sumptuous and libe ral.

In every estate, no 'doubt, it is proper ceconomy to accommodate expence or consumption to the supply which fortune asfords. The most ample supply may be exceeded by a wafle that is not refrained within proper limits: So that, whether to the poor or to the rich, the neglec of ceconomy will have its pernicious effects. If, to the poor, fortune be no more than the means of subsistence, a frugal use of such means is necessary to felf-preferation. If, to the rich, it constitute rank and power, a proper adjustment of expence to the measure of fortune is in their cafe necessary, to avoid dependance and degradation.

Moralilfs have talked to much of the vanity of fortune, and of its inefficacy to happiness, that they may be fufpedóed of encouraging a dangerous neglect of affairs; a neglec by which the labourer may incur indigence and beggary; the trader incur bankruptcy; and those of the highest rank incur much embarrassment, or fink from their flation.

It It were indeed far from wisdom not to avoid such confe- 
PART.-II'



quences ;-but if, notwithstanding every reason able effort of dili- 
gence to avoid them, they should be incurred, wisdom no doubt A'
has its offices in that as in every other emergency. In every event, diligence, equanimity, and fortitude, continue to be the highest measure of happiness of which any given state is fufceptible.

Whether any one has strength sufficient, as the philosophers of old conceived or feigned of the 9Wije Man, to be as happy under a disagreeable reverse of fortune as in the highest profperity, may be quetfioned;. and every one may answer from an estimate of the strength of his own mind: But it cannot be doubted that the wife will endeavour to avail himself of his faculties, of his temper and resolution, in the manner most likely to support him, and to repel this or any other cause of distress to which he may be exposed. But if philosophy have taught him to believe, that virtue alone is happiness, he must not forget upon any event which befalls him, that the proper use of his fortune is a virtue, and therefore a part, at least, in that very happiness on which he is taught to rely ; so that whoever neglects the proper ceconomy of his affairs, whether he err with the miser in penury, or with the spendthrift in prodigality, cannot plead the authority of philosophy for the folly he commits in either extreme.

The folly of the miser consists in the admiration of riches, without availing himfelfcftheir use, whetherin accommodation to himfelfor in benefit to others, or rather itconfifts in sacrificing every advantage of wealth to the passion of merely securing the poffeflion.
The folly of the spendthrift proceeds from the opposite defec't; from a disposition, 
disposition to waste in the gratifications of vanity and sensuality 

SCcT. III or from a disposition to riik in hazardous adventures, whether of *vxj business or play, the means of subsistence, the securities of inde~

pendance, or rank, and the materials of beneficence.

The vain expend their fortunes, and part with them in order to prove the poifietion. The sensual multiply expensive contrivances to procure an enjoyment which palls on the sense the more it is courted, or which, carried to extremes, impairs the faculties of the mind, and begets inattention to affairs. In those who depend on their labour for subsistence, sensuality is an improperconsumption of what they acquire: It occasions a waste of time and forms a habit of indolence and sloth, the reverse of that induflry on which the success of their labour depends.

The wants of nature are easily supplied, and the gratification of uncorrupted appetite is fully consistent with the higher and better pursuits of human life: But the voluptuary in acquiring habits inconsistent with these pursuits, is debauched by his imagination rather than by the force of his appetite, or by the solicitations of sense. Appetite is confined within narrow limits, and would leave the mind at leisure to employ itself otherwise, if it were not prevented by the seeking for continued enjoyment where it is not to be found; and in which imagination, because it never is gratified, is always insatiablt to anity and sensuality. dangerous adventures in business or play are most likely to mar the difiofition to ceconomy, or lead to the improper uses of wealth. The produce of chance is generally sudden, and, when great, takes the minds of ordinary men unprepared for the proper ufc of what they may have gained. The metimes extreme as 

well as sudden. When favourable they intoxicate, and easily 
plunge those on whom they have fallen into farther and flill more vinconsiderate adventures; and scarcely admit of any bounds to their course, short of some fatal reverie, which cuts off the source even of any farther adventure, and leads to despair.

In the enumeration of virtues which belong to the understanding, or to the Superintending exercise ofwifdom, were mentioned decision, and caution, habits of a seemingly opposite tendency,, but equally necessary to obtain the ends of prudence.

DeciJon is a seasonable and resolute- choice ofwhat the occasion'

requires. In the defed of this virtue, and by improper delays,.
every opportunity is loft, and every measure comes too late.
Wavering and fluctuation in the execution of any purpose are equal to a total inaction, or, by improper delay until the occafionl is past, incur the double disadvantage of a labour bestowed, and of its disappointment or loss.

Every art may have its deliberations, and the artist will decide'

with advantage in proportion to his skill in the particular department to which he is bred. The decision which wisdom requires is a part in the business of mankind; aeque pauperibus prodefJ, locupletibus tque; and although a certain felicity of decision in great affairs is the peculiar character of superior genius, yet the steps.
of integrity that do not waver in the conduct of human life, are'
attainable by such. faculties of reason as ordinary men posess.

Cicero apprehends, that the questions on which we may hefitate in our ordinary conduct may be extended to five in number; FART II. ber; of which only three had been mentioned by Panetius, whose CH,]. V.
SECT III. method he professes to follow in treating this subjea of offices \'T- or moral duties. The firif question is, Whether the adion proposed be right or wrong ? The second, Whether it contribute to our interest ? And the third may arise where interefs seems to interfere with duty, if it should be made a question which to preser ? To these three he subjoins the two following; first: Of two things that are praise worthy, which flould be preferred? 2d, i r, of two things supposed to be useful, which is most for our interest ?

In queflions of the first kind, relating to right and wrong, conscience is the arbiter, and is for the most part ever ready to decide. Benevolence will lead us to aim at effects which tend to the good of mankind; and a principal object of deliberation in such cafes is to distinguish with judgement, in what we may actually serve our fellow creatures, by contributing to their safety, their welfare, their inftruaion, and the good order of the societies to which they belong.

Questions of comparative utility, whether refpeaing our own advantage or that of other men, are often more problematical than mere questions ofjuflice or right. Such questions occur in private and in public affairs, in the tranfaiions of merchants, in the conducd of armies, in the deliberation of senates and councils of slate. In all these departments genius or natural ability is conspicuous ; but in every measure of natural ability, there is recourse to experience; and inftrudtion, which being necessary even to the most able, may bring accessions of wisdom also to those who are by nature of inferior capacity.

The The question, of a choice to be made betwixt interfering con- 




fiderations of interest and duty, is not to be admitted upon any 
principle of morality; and although we sometimes feel for the r prefon who is required to make great sacrifice of interest to the observance of his duty, we acknowledge the evidence he gives, in making that choice, of decided integrity and virtue ; but fiould scarcely admit of an excuse if he had aced otherwise.

As to the additional questions proposed by Cicero, they coincide nearly with the two first queflions which had been proposed by Panetius the original whom he professes to follow. Upon the fame principle, by which we determine what is right in contradiftindion to what is wrong, we may determine what is moit firiAly binding when we are prefied by calls of duty, of which only one in some particular circumstances can be answered. And in questions of comparative utility, we must proceed in determining what is most useful, upon considerations which lead us to diftinguifll the opposite measures of profit and lots.

Difficulties of choice are often great in questions that admit of delay and of the most deliberate discussion, but fill greater in cafes that come by surprise and require immediate decision.
These are the trials of superior genius, requiring even together with that natural advantage the proper ufe,.of experience; and as experience is necefTary in the exertions of the highest capacity, so it may be useful to the lowest, and furniih that measure of prudence and wisdom of which ordinary men are hufceptible.
From the experience of the pall, men are qualified to forccaft what is likely to happen in the future. And may thus be prepared for difficulties, or reaIdy to decide upon theml before thcy arrive.

V ol.. It. x Ev nts, 
PART 1I. Events, indeed, in the course of human affairs, are never de

SECT. 11. terminable in the fame manner with the events that regularly vvrj£ succeed one another in the mechanical system of nature. We know precisely at what hour the fun will rife to-morrow, but what action the caprice of thought and passion may lead a human creature to perform, at that or any other hour, is more than human foresight can reach, with any confidence above that of mere conjeAure.

Where events are contingent, it is an objec of prudence to admit into our account the different emergencies that may pofsibly happen, and to fettle what our judgement and resolutions should be on the different suppositions which our experience may lead us to make; so that even in cafes of apparent surprise we may, in some degree, have the advantage of premeditation and deliberate choice.

Caution consists in a proper attention to the difficulties likely ta arise in any business or pursuit in which we are about to engage.
It is a principal feature of prudence, and what indeed in a great measure engrosses the name. We forecast the difficulty and expence of an undertaking, that we may not engage in what is above our strength. We attend to the characters of those with whom we are about to act, or whom we are about to employ; that we may not confide in persons who, either from want of capacity or good faith, are unfit to. be trusted.

The paths of human life are firewed with difficulties, and the cautious endeavour to foresee them, not that they may in every instance avoid, but that theymaybe the better prepared to encounter them. The virtue which they pradtife is to be carefully diflinguifhlcd(

guifhed, from the weakness by which the timid or irresolute de- 
PART IT
cines every duty, and in proportion as it appears to be hazardous 
or difficult. Caution is, in contracliftincdionto this weakness, a Sr resolute purpose of action, and a colleted slate of the mind in which difficulties are foreseen, and proper measures are taken to surmount them.

As it is virtuous and noble to proceed in our duty, undismayedby difficulty or danger, so it is wife to forecast the circumstances in which we are about to engage, that we may be prepared to acquit ourselves properly. Inthis refpeA caution is not an attribute of fear, but is conneted with intrepidity, contfancy, perseverance, and a temper undisturbed in the course we have chosen to pursue, in all matters alike, whether trivial or important.

Such is the lesson which Epidetus would teach us to apply on occasions, however trivial. that may poftibly try the temper. As an example, he refers to the public baths which were generally crouded at Rome by a promiscuous concourse of people. " When " you are going about any action," he fays, " remind yourself " of what nature the action is . If you are going to bathe, re"present to yourself the things which usually happen in the " bath; some persons puflhing and crouding, some dashing the " water, others giving abusive language, and others flealing; " and thus you will more safely go about the action *".

The objec of caution, according to this celebrated moralist, is not to prevent our engaging in aCtions that are proper for us to perform, but to enable us to conduCt ourselves properly in the X x 2 duties See Mrs Carter's Trannlation of Epitlctus.

 duties to which we are called by justice, humanity, expedience 
or necessity, however attended with difficult, hazardous, or difY-yua ' agreeable circumstances.



S E C T I N IV.

Of the CharaSceryitcs of Goodness, or Jf7licc.

AS iWifdom is the specific atrribute of Intelligence; GoodneJf is 

the attribute of mind also beneficently disposed towards others. 




WVe may conceive intelligent beings employed on the fubjeds of thought, either without encountering any objecs of affection; or, without having any concern in the itate of such objects, farther than to ascertain their reality; to diftinguifl their qualities; and to class them under general or specific appellations: In either cafe, this supreme order of intelligent nature would prelent but a partial view ofitfelf. But, if we should suppose an individual who is part of a community, yet indifferent to the charater of his fellow creature, or indifferent to the good or the ill of which they are susceptible; in fucl a person, we Ihould lill not perceive any thing to be loved, and scarcely to be admired, even in the poiTefion of the higlheft mncafires of penetration, memory, or o*tcr con P.ituents:s of intell.CtluCal power.

Or Or if we flould proceed from the supposition of indifference to PEAT V' that of malice and cruelty, or if we fould suppose intelledtual a, SECT. IV. bility employed to devise mischief, and to sport with the afflitiions V of others ; intelligence itself, or ingenious device, thus perceived only in the abuse of it, would be an objec not of indifference, but ofdeteflation and horror.

Intelligence on the contrary, that is busy in observing just objects of affecdion, and possessed of a sensibility, to which no being iufceptible of happiness or misery is indifferent; a mind, which is ingenious in performing aas of beneficence, hears that charadcer of goodness of which the veftiges-are so deeply marked in the order of nature itself, and of which the participation is so eflential to that virtue of which we would now enumerate the branches or efe'cts.

This in the idiom of our language is termed, the virtue of the Leart; in the language of a neighbouring nation, joined with a just elevation of nature, it is termed the nobleness of the forul (La beaute de 1' ame;) and is indeed the principal grace of the human character; whether in the conduA of life, or in the productions of genius. Hence the sovereignty of Homer among the poets of every age; the high rank of Efchylus, Sophocles, and Euripides among the tragic poets; of Tacitus among the hiflorians; of Shakespeare, and Milton among the poets of our island; of Plato, Antoninus, and Montesquieu among the philosophers of every age.

To these may be emphatically applied the adage of Chremes, in crence ; I am a man, and nothing human is indTerent to me *.

Wherever * Ilomo fimn ; humani nilhil a me alinnurn puto.

Wherever men of this genius touch on the concerns of man- cPART I.: kind, the most lively colours of good and evil are brought into 
view; and what they themselves feel on the subjed, is, without' _Y-..
any formal recommendation communicated to others t. Without this advantage, the brightness of mere wit however dazzling, is but transient; and seldom outlives the period of its novelty: With it works of ingenuity keep poffeftlon of the heart, and retain their powers undiminiihed from age to age; in these the innocent and the just can recognize his patron, or his friend; and enjoys a participation of sentiments, in which he finds his nature raised to a Species of godlike benevolence to the world around him.

Goodness in the conduct of life, is an aversion to be the cause of harm; it ig veneration and love to the worthy; it is candour, and a desire to redeem the most defeAive; it is pity to the diftrefled, and congratulation to the happy; it is that disposition, from which a man, observing the rights of his fellow creatures, shuns every violation of them with the most sacred regard; from which he feels for their sufferings, and is ever ready to relieve them; fi-om which he is faithful arid true to his profeflions, or engagements, and ever ready, by ads of kindness and good will, to.

prevent, t To him the mighty mother did unveil.

Her awful Face: The dauntless child Stretched forth his little arms, and smiled.
This pencil take, fle said, whose colours clear Richly paint the vernal year: Thine too these keys immortal boy: This can unlock the gates of joy; Of horror that, and thrilling fears, Or ope the sacred source of sympathetic tears.

Gray',' Ode on the Prov'r/; f P cer''y.

 prevent or to outrun the wiflles of those who by nature or acci

SEHCT I. dent are placed within reach of his influence.

The duties of goodness, confidered in refpec to their principle, may be classed under two divisions; of which the one includes all the modifications of Innocence, of which we have fuppofed the faneion to admit the applications of compulsory law; the other comprehends all the modifications of Beneficence, from which the applications of compulsory law are excluded.

There is a certain magnanimity with which the noble minded, in refpec to the good offices required from their fellow creatures, limit their own pretensions to the mere effects ofjuftice and of truth; but in performing such offices on their own part, confider the highest acs of generosity and kindness as no more than the discharge of a debt that is due to mankind.. While they confider as benefaCtors to themselves, and fully entitled to efteem and gratitude, the person who is cautious of harm, and who respeCts the rights of his fellow creatures, they are ever ready to prevent the desires, or anticipate the wiihes of those who are placed in their way.

In referring to the offices of goodness, as they may be separately comprised under the titles of Innocence and Beneficence, we may confider Fidelity, Veracity, Civility as modifications of the first; Tiety, TePjonal Attachments, Gratitude, Liberality, Charity and Tolitcncfs as modifications of the secon in xtending this title to all the offices of civil and political society, it will include the reciprocal duties of magiflrat.
m]iiu:..it munity of which he is a member. These may be termed the pu- 
PART. I1.
blic offices of goodness; and to compleat the enumeration of its 
branches or parts will come to be stated in their place.

With refpea to fidelity, confidered as an article of mere innocence, we may refer to what has been already observed on the principle of convention; that to break faith is an injury to the person with whom it was plighted. And it is an injury which the innocent will avoid, from motives of mere humanity, without regard to the fanaion of compulsory law, or the force that may be justly applied to obtain the performance of a contract.
The faithful, accordingly, carry the observance of this duty into many tranfacions which the arm of the magistrate cannot reach.
They would feel themselves chargeable with guilt if they neglected to fulfil, so far as may be in their power, any expecation which they have occasionally raised, or if they fliould fail in the discharge of a trust for which any one has been reasonably made to rely on them.

As error and mistake are in the nature of things pernicious, as they weaken or mislead the mind, and in the conduCt of life may produce indefinite mischief; veracity too, as well as fidelity, is to be reckoned among the necessary conditions of a virtuous life.
This duty is to be observed not only where the immediate effets of mistake are detrimental, in refpeA to the estate or fortune of the person deceived, but even where by misrepresentation or exaggeration it tends to asset the mind with false conceptions of things whether momentuous or trivial. The innocent abides by the truth, because it would be a crime to deceive any one to his hurt. A man of fnfe will not deceive, because it were folly to Y y discredit 
 discredit himself; and if fidion were indifferent to any of thefi ClcrAP IV. effects, it is at least impertinent and idle.


This duty of veracity, however, does not exclude the use of fable, parable, or supposition, employed in illustration of any moral or physical truth, nor does it preclude the use of profefied fiction, as in poetry, to multiply agreeable and rational conceptions of the imagination, without any intention to obtrude fable for truth, or fidion for reality.

It is not necessary to observe perhaps that the innocent, whose veracity is guarded by the single consideration, that it were injurious to mislead the conceptions of other men in any cafe whatever, will refrain with detestation from the least approach to calumny or false aspersion on the name and reputation of his neighbour. Aversion, to be the author of harm, will not only reitrain him from propagating invidious reports, but will inspire him with mercy even to thole of whom the conduc may have been offensive; he will not press down the load of reproach even Where it has been incurred, and will strive to hide the error that Is pafl, or the fault that may in the future be corrected.

Candour also is truth, but it is the truth that proceeds from humanity and fairness of mind ; it is the just allowance which is given to the pretensions or merits of other men, even in circumflances, which to the uncandid would render them objects of hatred, as well as opposition.

The candid would conduc competition, and even refentmen itfclf, with the least ponible detriment to those who are the ob-t jerts of either. I-e will admit a fail, even where it is unfavours~r .~lc~able able to his own claims. He will be more guarded in censuring 

an opponent than even an indifferent perfon.-Where it is not CAP. V.
necessary to blame, he will be silent; where praise is due, he '
will acknowledge it; and will distrust any prepossession in himself by which he may be inclined to exaggerate the faults of an enemy.

At the fame time, unfincere and affeded commendation of those we inwardly hate or despise, is not entitled to the praise of candour. This virtue is an effort of truth and veracity as well as beneficence. It spurns the unworthy, and scorns the affectation of lenity that is assumed from weakness, or employed by cunning, the better to ensnare or circumvent an opponent.

In competitions of interest, the generous and the humane are seldom vehement; in competitions of esteem, they are not apt to be jealous; and the security with which the candid proceeds, is generally proportioned to his magnanimity, and his desire to poffess the constituents of real merit in himself, rather than to derive, whether in reputation or profit, the external fruits or effects of consideration from others.

Ci'vility is a guarded behaviour to avoid offence even in the inferior concerns of human life. It is commonly joined with politenefs in the character of good breeding, and these virtues or accomplishments are so far connected as they are both the effects of goodness, obferveable in matters supposed to be comparatively of linall moment. They are however frequently and not improperly distinguished. The civil avoids to give offence, or any pofitive molestation in the ordinary concourse of men; the polite endeavours to furnifll matter of fatisfaAion and pleasure. The Yy2 fy it 
 first therefore is an article of mere innocence, the other aspires to 
effedts of beneficence and positive service.


The civil are careful not to offend by any effects of inattention or neglec, by any contemptuous reception of what others think or feel ,whether by contradiction unnecessarily harsh, by any insult of vanity, affecation of precedence, or superiority of any fort. When ungracious office is necessary, they endeavour to perform it in the least painful manner, and qualify accidental offences with the most unfeigned desire to atone for them.

Where good understanding and good disposition are united, civility will not be wanting. It is not the exclusi-ve appurtenance of any rank or condition, but the feature of considerate humanity, wherever it be found: It diitinguifhed the keeper of the prison at Athens, in adminiflering the poison to Socrates*, no less than the great emperor Aurelius, in his ordinary manner-: To him nothing was indifferent in the conduct of life; and even a lesson of civility he had received was reckoned among the favours of Providence; not rudely to criticife ' The particulars here alluded to, are told by Plato in the Phaedo nearly as follows, After Socrates came from the bath, he was feated, and continued silent, when the keeper.accofted him in these words, " I know Socrates, that you will not blame me; " but those who are in fault, and whose orders I am bound to obey. In you I have " always met with humanity and mildness of temper, very different from most cl"
" those who are sent to this place. In doing my duty, I am commonly treated with " rage and curses; but, I have not this to expeat from you; I trust you know what " my orders are; it is now time to take the draught; and so farewell, be recon" cilcd as you may to what cannot be helped." In fa-ying this, he turned about to depart, and burst into tears. Ilow civil the man is! said Socrates, It was thlis he would frequently come to amufl me with his tallk, and strove to oblige mc; ;and now how kin(lly his tears are flIed : But let us mind hit, direcions. Io Crito, it ;':i drauglit b. miscd, cause it to be brought.

ticife any solecism or impropriety of expression or pronuncia- 

tion; but in continuing the conversation, to pronounce the word 



' again, in a proper manner, either by way of answer or enquiry; _,c'.

or as if to confirm what was said, and not as anxious about the " expression; or in short, by some other skilful address to set the "person right "." But, with whatever degree of simplicity it may operate, it is still pereceptible to those who can distinguish the genuine, tho' seemingly feeble or negligent expressions of a benevolent mind. The ingenious peasant is civil, no less than the well educated gentleman, if together with a disposition not to offend, there be understanding to diftinguifl what would be offensive: But where either of these qualifications is wanting, men are apt to measure the obligations of duty by the mere external effec, and either do not know in what they are rude, or think themselves entitled to do or to fay whatever does not materially asseA the person or property of those with whom they converse.

Civility is a habit very generallyacquired in the practice offociety,.

where experience and knowledge of the world conspire to enforce the duties of good sense and of innocence. Here it may be confidered as artificial, and they who are disposed to violate the rules of good breeding accordingly charge the well bred with infincerity or falsehood. In their opinion, rudeness alone is sincere ; andi a mannerly attention not to offend in trifles, a mere mall- of hypocrify.

The rude who are so apt to think an attention to others the eftcC.

of hypocrisy or falsehood, are equally inclined to confider the civilities which arc paid to themfclves, as a tribute of confllcration (V lit.

 due to their personal importance or special merit; but the crimes 
of rapine and murder are not a more certain, though a more perSzcT. IV. .

a _ ~nicious evidence of a base and ungenerous mind.

Civility, confidered merely as the habit of avoiding offence, is the first and most indifpenfible part of good breeding; and may give to a conversation in which there is no solicitude to please, or design to flatter, all the form which is necessary to render it highly agreeable as well as inftrudive.

So far this branch of goodness, confifling in reluctance to be the author of harm, may appear to be a mere negation of evil, an exemption from malice, or any of its external effects; but when we confider, among the general duties of candour, what a guard is necessary to secure the mind against the formation of prejudices; to secure it against the effects of real or apparent provocation; or what force of mind is required to preserve it untainted with jealousy or envy, in the competitions of men, as well as to prevent any external effed of these malignant dispositions; it is evident, that the modifications of innocence are not to be supported without high measures of regard, and good will to mankind. It is even easier on many occasions to perform the most splendid acts of beneficence, than it is upon all occasions to maintain this uniform tenor of an innocent and unoffending life.

Beneficence, nevertheless, is supposed to be raised a ftep higher in the scale of the virtues than mere innocence, which terminates in refraining from harm. The catalogue of the blessed is accordingly made up by the poet, of such, as bypofitive efforts of benevolence benevolence or magnanimity have promoted the progress, or 

contributed to the welfare of mankind. 




Among the modifications of benevolence, piety to Almighty God, is justly entitled to the first, and the highest place.

This affetion of mind is susceptible of indefinite gradations, beginning in this its highest pitch, modified by veneration only, without the possibility of any beneficent effet towards its objet, and descending from thence, to what may be confidered as its ordinary tenor among created beings, where the objec, though esteemed or refpeaed, may also on occasion inspire tenderness, or move commiseration and pity.

Wherever true benevolence operates, and the being of God is perceived, there piety to him must operate also; not as a principle of beneficence towards its object, but as the first and most esfential form of an affeAion, of which the objecs are wisdom and goodness in the degree, whether supreme or Subordinate, in which they are conceived to exist.

This affection constitutes religion in the human mind, and has its external expreflions and effecs also. It is naturally expressed in terms, and in rites of adoration. " What else can I, " fays Epitetus, a lame old man do, but sing hymns to God. If " I were a nightingale, I would ad the part of a nightingale: "If I were a swan, the part of a swan. But since I am a reaf ionable creature, it is my duty to praise God. 'This is my bu.
finess; * HIic manus ob patriam pugnindo vuliera paffi, Quique pii vates, ct lhlocbo ligna canebnilt, ]nvelitas aut qui vitani cxcolucre per artes, ()uillqu fuli meinorcs alios fccre cmerelndo.

V,"irgil, Lib. 6to.

 " finess,, I do it. Nor will I ever desert this post as long as it is 
CHAP- V.- g vouchsafed me; and I exhort you to join in the fame song *."


lj ' It has a natural effect in rendering man the friend of mankind, ,being the family of a common parent, to whom the highest duty, that .can be rendered is beneficence to the creatures he has made: So that the man who flates himself as a willing instrument in the hand of his Maker for the good of his fellow creatures, is he whose piety renders the most acceptable service to God.

Although piety in its proper acceptation is a sentiment of religion, the term is nevertheless, by a kind of figure, employed to signify any high measure of veneration or love which we pay to any of our fellow creatures who are raised above the ordinary rank of men in our veneration or esteem. Thus it is piety in the child to love his parent. It is piety in the dutiful citizen to love and refpec the j ut and beneficent magistrate who, more by his wisdom and his care than by his power, appears to be the vicegerent of God.

But in every infsance of good will to men, the effeCs of a benevolent disposition may reach the objec of it in beneficent and positive services; and may be confidered among the charaaeriftics of asocial attachment, upon whatever ground of connection it be formed.

Under this title we may confider the relations of consanguinity, of neighbourhood or acquaintance, as well as attachments of predilection and choice, more properly termed the connection of fiicnds.

Carter's translation, Book i.. 1the relation of consanguinity men are not at liberty to chufe 

their objets. They may be associated together without esteem, 
affecion, or confidence: yet there are certain duties which God 's and nature seem to require in the benevolent towards his kindred, although he may not apprehend any personal merit on which to ground any particular esteem or affetion.

The child cannot chufe what fort of parent he would have, nor are the wifles of the parent always gratified in the character of his child. Brothers are placed in the fame rank together by the appointment of nature, in which their choice is not consulted; yet in all these instances there is a duty which nature has imposed, and in exemption from which, even the plea of demerit in the person to whomn the duty refers cannot be admitted. The parent must not abandon or neglect even his profligate child, nor the child fail in attention and refped to the parent, even of whose failings and weaknesses he is most sensible. Brothers must not shrink from one another, even in cafes of high demerit, nor leave, as a firanger might be left, even the guilty to perish unaflifted under the effects of his guilt. The ties of consanguinity seem to be intended by nature as a special bond of society by which the dulleft of men are mutually pointed out to one another as objects of conii!:ration, even if they fliould not be sensible to the ties of humanity or merit under which they are placed to other men.

This principle, indeed, is perhaps more firequently abused as a source ofundue partiality to those of our own kindred, or as afource of ur:c;andid animosity to others or neglect of their merits, than it is ever nitirely wanting in the disposition of individuals towards VOL. I[. Z z the 
 the family of which they are members, and in whose fate they 
are themselves in some measure involved.


Among the examples of personal attachment, that which proceeds on the sympathy of affetions directed to the fame worthy objeds ; on the predilection of merit and unlimited confidence, is that which peculiarly merits the appellation of FriendJhip, and in which the parties may be said figuratively to have but one heart, one mind, and one interest.

In forming this connection the highest measures of probity are required. Virtue, operating in the minds of different men, may concur in all its external effecs, but folly and vice are jarring and incongruous principles, which, in the degree in which they take place, render men unworthy and incapable of this facred connecion.

Intimacies of a different kind, consisting merely in acquaintance, or in a habit of associating together, are commonly enough known under the title of friendship: But the maxims or precepts which are applicable to one measure or degree of connection cannot be safely or properly transferred to another. There cannot be any reserve, for instance, in that entire affection and confidence which we suppose betwixt friends, and no limit to their friendly exertions, without a breach or forfeiture of the rights which friendship implies. In connections of inferior degree, it may be sufficient not to offend or not to neglect the uruies of iumanity which occasions present; In this inflance, a, nore active principle is required, and the occasions of personal iervice not only taken when offered, but industriously fought for.

We We are told of a maxim which rome of the wife have prefcrib- 
PART 1.
ed, and others have reprobated: " Live with your friend as with 


'4 - 

" one who may become an enemy". This maxim is prudent in the ST V
occasional co-operations of interest or party. The person who supports me to day, because it is his interest to do so, may.wifl.
to overthrow me to morrow, if an opposition ofintereft should take place. It may be prudent, therefore, not to furnish him as a friend with arms, which he may afterwards turn against me as an enemy. But this maxim, applied to the cafe of parties united by mutual conviction of unalterable worth, entire affection, and unlimited confidence, would be altogether preposterous, and cannot be adopted without discontinuing the connecion of friendihip, or tifling the affecion in which it consists.

Friendihip or intimacy, of whatever degree, presupposes acquaintance or rome occasional conneCtion, in which the parties have an opportunity of being mutually known. Among such connections, Con/anguinity no doubt is one, under which parties have occasion to give the most sensible proof of the degree in which they are mutually or severally qualified to become objects of confidence and affection. Nature has given to the parent a predilection for his child, which affections of the purest friendship may equal, but cannot exceed; and the return on the part of the child, being the natural recoil of the most tender affection, is scarcely avoidable; but still sentiments of this nature are distinguishable from the attachments founded in the preference of esteem and the freedom of choice. The friend who has mistaken his object, and become attached to a person unworthy of his affection, may become cold and indifferent as boon as he has detected his error ; but the parent weeps when he has made such a discovery Z z 2 refjpcAing 
 refpeCing his child, and the child is abashed when he cannot 
vindicate the character of his parent.


The fortunes of men are sometimes involved in those of their kindred: Although we distinguish therefore the specific principle of consanguinity from indiscriminate affection and good will to mankind, yet it appears, that nature in planting the instinctive asfecRions which unite the members of a family together, and which may extend to a numerous kindred, has in this manner, sown the feeds of a boundless society. Or seeming only to connec individuals of a narrow circle together, has formed a chain, whose links being continued in every direction, extend far beyond where personal acquaintance or choice would reach.

Happiness, we have had occasion to observe, is an attribute of the mind, and benevolence, in the several forms of which it is capable, is a principle constituent of this attribute or condition of mind. It is happy to meet with an object of affection. It is happy to perceive the returns of confidence and love. The external effets and expreflions of such reciprocal dispositions in the minds of men are highly agreeable, and may be of the greatest use; but till, in eitimating the happiness of friendship, we return to the mutual affection itself which takes place between friends, and is the principal constituent of its value. The external effecs of benevolence may be intermitted for want of occafion, but the affection itself cannot grow cold without causing the enjoyment it brings to cease.

In confidering connections of choice, the first subject of cafuiftry or moral inflruction mufi relate to the choice itelf, or the difccrnment of its proper object.

As As the proofs of merit may be slowly collected, it is evident, 
PART. ir.



that confidence of the highest degree is to be cautiously given, 
and in the result of time and continued experience. The first re- 'y¥quifite in the charater of a friend, doubtless, is probity and good intention. Intimacy with the profligate is a snare to the innocent.

A second quality, and likewise in a high degree necessary, is underfRanding, or what is commonly termed good sense. 1 he society of fools is the accumulation of folly. Whoever is deficient in point of judgement or understanding may hurt where he means to serve, and often from mere weakness of mind, without any intention to betray, fails in the trust which is reposecd in hiim.

The ingenuous will value the affection of his friend more than any of its external effeas ; but in gratifying the sense of his own mind, will be ever attentive to observe in what manner he may be useful to his friend, and it is in bearing the important character of a beneficent and trusty aflociate, that persons are most likely to win the affeAion and confidence of those with whom they are deffined to act.

The worth of a man is made known by its extcrnal effects ; ant though external effect is subordinate in value to the affection of mind, yet neither this nor any other connection in the -minds of men could exist otherwise, than by means of the external efltcht and appearanccs which cause themn to be mutually known.

To a young man, who complained that he had no friends, and w'r3

 was generally neglected, " Confider," said Socrates, "what CScA. IV " are your own merits. Are you of such value to mankind, as that ScTr. IV.

vvY " any one should single you out as an object of prediledion and " friendship ? If you were of such value, the world knows its in"terests too well, to neglect or overlook you. Shew yourself a"ble and willing to act the part of a friend, you will find many "to solicit your favours, and some who will deserve your high' eft confidence."

A person, who in the manner of this young man laid claim to the attention and friendship of others as matter of interest to himself, was very properly called upon to confider in what degree he bestowed upon the interest of others that consideration which he required to his own; but the fires of affection and benevolence, which are kindled in the human breast on occasion of external marks of affection and good will, greatly surpass in value those external occasions on which they are kindled.

Gratitude, the third article in our enumeration of the characteriftics of beneficence, is in the mind of the grateful the sense of a benefit received, and among the external duties of life it is an effort to repay with affection the favours which have been done.

Benefits may take place between firangers and persons un_

known, and may proceed from any occasional emotion of good will or compassion, as well as from established sentiments of perfonal attachment. But wherever an aA of kindness is done, a proper return is conceived to be due; it is conceived to be due to a flranger or person unknown, who has done a good office, even more than to a relation or a friend.

As the sense of an injury done to ourselves is different from the I sentiment sentiment of indignation at wrongs in general, so the sense of a PAR'r II.
benefit received is different from the general approbation or es- CHcP IV.
teem of beneficence; and where acual favours are conferred, we conceive a species of debt to be contracted by the person who has received the obligation; we Sometimes pass from the idea of a debt of gratitude, as it is sometimes called, to the requisition of penal flatutes by which we would enforce the discharge of it.
Such we are told was the policy of some ancient nations, who in their wisdom, "highly worthy of imitation," did not neglect to punish the ungrateful, any more than those who were guilty of any other crime pernicious to society.

There is not however sufficient reason to believe, that such was ever the adcual policy of any nation whatever. Such a policy would tend to place the relation of parties who bestowed or accepted a benefit upon a very different footing from that upon which beneficence and even gratitude are supposed to proceed.
Where the law would enforce the returns of good will, it would be difficult to diftinguifhi an ad of kindness from an intereited loan; or the acceptance of a favour from the contracting of a debt. For this purpose of law the precise value of a benefit ought to be fixed, in order to estimate the return; and the prosped of gain, or the necessity of compliance, substituted for kindness in the exchange of good offices, would totally alter the nature both of the benefit and of the return. A benefit offered might be confidered as a snare to be carefully shunned, until the measure of the expeced return was ascertained; and in this manner, what ought to be the spontaneous effcds of benevolence could not be distinguished from the traffic of interef, In 
 In r-efpecC to this duty ofgratitzude, tlerefore, as well as in respect 

Sic'r IV. to every other act of beneficence, the necessity of keeping diftincd '-~ the fandions of morality from those of compulsory law is extremely evident. We enforce the payment of a debt, that persons in pofl'efion of property may be safe to lend; but we only commend or enjoin the duties of gratitude, that the benevolent assections may have their natural ;cope in the societies of men.

Whloever tr-ives to enhance the value of a benefit which he himself may have done, and urges the claim of gratitude too far, offends againt i-he moral principle of beneficence,notlefs than he who appears insensible of the kindness he has received, and there is not in the nature of things furer evidence of a mind that deserves no return, than that of upbraiding others with the benefits which we Iuppose ourselves to have conferred.

Liberality is a characer of unreserved beneficence in matters agreeable or obliging to others. It is a natural, effect of difintereftednefs or cordial affection, but is observed to be unequal in persons perhaps originally of equal good dispositions, when warped by different habits in different conditions of life. Men become illiberal in a state of dependence, under personal awe and under the neceflity of attending to fordid or trivial confiderations. They escape this defet in opposite circumstances, of indcpendance, fi-eecom, or exemption from fordid concerns: And there is a certain force of mind above it in all situations.

The cflfe of external condition is to give scope to original diilofition, not to infjpire it. Ihe country gentleman, without any uncommondegrees ofgencrofity, surrounds his dwcllinii, with pilcafilcre pleasure grounds, and substitutes ornament for gain. He would 

make every one feel, in the manner of expending his fortune 


ScrT. IV.

how little he regards the returns of profit. And yet, even in this, he retains what may be termed a fordid prediletion for subjects which he is pleased to call his own. Beauty is no man's property, and may be made to pervade the face of a country without regard to this circumstance. The liberal may bestow it on fubjets of public concern, on high-ways, bridges, barren hills covered with wood, andopublic places adorned with monuments of diflinguifhed men or distinguished events; and all this without expecing any returns of admiration or profit.
As the Almighty makes his fun to fline on the evil and on the good, the liberal is not checked by any supposed want of merit in mankind; he can restore a plantation which the mifchievous idler has destroyed: restore its number on the mile-stone which has been defaced, or repair the parapet which has been broke down.

Such might be termed the luxury of a liberal mind in great wealth: But liberality is not, as we are Sometimes inclined to suppose, peculiar to the rich, nor limited to the bestowing of gifts or the conferring of favours. A person may be liberal in his commendations of merit, in his conceflions to a rival, in his manner of treating an enemy, in his neglect of petty advantages, in his impartial and indiscriminate attention to persons entitled to his regard, and in the general frankness of manner with which he transacts any business, without jealousy or mean diltruft, and without any harth interpretation of the words or acions of those with whom he is concerned. IIe may be liberal in doing with a cordial alacrity even what the law would oblige him to do.
The character of liberality, in Ihort, is that freedom and nobleVOL. 11. A a a nets 
 ness of manner with which the ingenuous upon every occaflon 
do what is right; not as a part they have fludied, or a task to 
_ which they submit, but as a part which is natural to them, and as a pleasure in which they indulge themselves without design or reflection.

The proceedings of a liberal mind at the fame time are the expressions of an upright intention; and far from being indifcrinmi nate in the choice of their objects, the liberal spurn and awe the unworthy with the fame irrefiftable effect that they gain or encourage persons of an opposite charadter; they appear indeed to be secured from mirtake in the choice of their objects, only by a kind of inftindive discernment, without difficulty, hesitation, or anxious reflection..

Charity is the character of beneficence exhibited in. relieving the distressid. It proceeds from that specific form of benevolence which is termed commiseration or pity. As the distresses of men are various, the motives of humanity in the different tranfactions of life-may operate to a variety of effects. From fuch.motives the generous victor may spare the vanquished and release the captive, as the charitable will feed the hungry, clothe the naked, or visit the sick.

In the variety of distresses incident to human life, the rich may have their share and their claim to.relief as well as the poor; though in the common use of this term, it is limited to those ads of beneficence which the rich are peculiarly in condition to perform, and of which the poor may receive the benefit.

Wherever Wherever property is established, it comes of course to be un- 




equally distributed. It accumulates in the possession of some, and 
is entirely wanting to others. As this inequality may be traced to vo its origin in the unequal dispositions of men to industry and frugality, as well as more casual advantages, so it serves to maintain, in the most prosperous and wealthy societies, some remains of that necessity which nature has intended for the species as a spur to their industry and incentive to labour. If the wealthy are relieved from the necessity of toil, or may chufe the objects of their pursuit, the poor still remain subjea to this neceflity; and few are exempted from every application that may contribute to enlarge the stock or promote the welfare of their community.

The inferior ranks of men, even where they are not urged by neceflity, are, by ambition, and by friving to gain for themselves the advantages which they observe in the possession of the rich, excited to promote or increase the wealth of their country.

As we may venture to assume that the wealth of nations consifts in the labour of the poor, or in the industry and ingenuity of those who are desirous to make for themselves acquisitions of fortune; so to the poor, health, strength, and whatever else qualifies men for daily labour and successful pursuits, are the inheritance which nature has provided, and the use which they make of that inheritance is the source of wealth and prosperity to the community of which they are members.

If the use of industry or labour could be entirely superseded in any society, or, in other words, if the poor could be supported .3 A a a z gratuitously, 
 gratuitously, this would be to fruitrate the purpose of nature, in 
rendering toil and the exercises of ingenuity necessary to man; verbi it would be to cut off the sources of wealth, and, under pretence of relieving the diftrefled, it would be to reject the condition upon which alone Nature has provided, that the wants of the species in general fiall be relieved.

For there reasons, poverty alone is far from being a sufficient recommendation to charity, and the undiftinguifhing practice of this virtue would be highly pernicious; as by enabling the poor to subsist in idleness, it would deprive them of one great prefervative of their innocence, and a principal constituent of happi.
ness, the habit of regular industry; and deprive the community of its best resource, the labour of its members.

It is a wife maxim therefore in every -well ordered society, that no person able to earn his bread, fliould be maintained gratuitoufly; that the feeble should be assisted in supporting themselves, but that they only who have no bread, and are unable to earn it, flould be maintained by charity. This indeed is a condition to which the industrious poor, or such as depend for subfiftence on their daily labour are frequently reduced; whether by old age, disease, or misfortunes. In every such cafe, they have a claim not only upon the humanity and compassion of the rich, but upon the juflice and good policy of their country also.

Their claim upon the humanity of those who have it in their power to relieve them, is doubtlcef irresistible; but it is of too ferious and important a nature in the view of good policy, to relt the provision of the ncceffitous poor entirely upon this principle.

As As the labour they bellow when able to work, may be conrider- PAtrT IT.
ed as employed in the public service; it is but just, that the pub- 




lic ihould charge itself with the care of those, who by age or miffortunes are become unable to subsist themselves.

In whatever manner public provision is to be made for the neceffitous poor, whether by Hospitals and places of public reception, or by distributing the supplies of necessity to the private habitations of those who are entitled to receive them, is a question rather of public ceconomy and good policy, than of moral duty.

We may however observe on this fubjedt, that where the public has provided most effectually for the relief of iuch neceflities as are publickly known, itill much remains to be done in private charity; there must still be many persons who, although they cannot or will not eftablifl their claim to a public support, may be so well known to individuals, as to entitle them to all the attention which humanity and compassion can befiow. In such cafes frequently the benevolent have an opportunity to tafle the sweetest fruits of beneficence, where it is at once proper to bestow, and to conceal its effecs.

Beneficence, under most of the characters we have now mentioned, whether friezlu/Ijip, gratitude, liberality,, or charilt, may be fuppoled productive of some material eefet, and be sensibly ufi:ful to those who are the objects of it. The benevolent affections, however, may subsist where such effects are seldom wanted, and where good will, esteem, or the manners they produce, are neverthclcis the principal ftirce of enjoyment: Andt goodnels may operatc with signal advantage, where the ef-ect is no more than the exprcfllon by which the beneficent intcntion is known.

Goodlncf, 
 Goodness, we have observed, in the form of civility, may be con

SECT. IV. fidered as an article of mere innocence, or the effec of a difpofi' - ~tion to avoid offence. In the form of politeness, it is a positive disposition to oblige; a disposition, in the exercise of which the benevolent find occasion of good offices, where neither the profit, nor the safety, nor the personal accommodation of parties are at tfake. It my operate on every occasion, in efforts of attention, good will and refpe&t; when we confer, or when we withhold the objects of choice or request. The first is done with a liberal promptitude, the other with an unaffeced regret.

The polite is attentive to the habits, expectations, and feelings of those with whom he converses: He would prevent their requests, by anticipating the effects; and would conceal his own wants, where the knowledge of them might importune or distress those to whom he is unwilling to be troublesome.

The-duties of politeness, compared with-thofe of other virtues, carry the idea of flight obligation. They are termed good manners, because we confider the manner more than the effect, and they are supposed to terminate in some trifling forms, which any one that is willing may acquire by rote. There are no doubt some pretensions to good breeding, of which these observations are true, but confidered as an article of beneficence, there is not any duty in which good sense, sincere benevolence, and candour are more necessary.

Without discernment, the affeCtation of politeness becomes a source of molestation and trouble; without benevolence, it is a mere ostentation of superior breeding. Its forms, like the words of of a language, may have been arbitrary in the original use of 

them, but when established, convey the meaning of persons, who SHAc. IV.
speak, in a way that entitles them to esteem and confidence, or, on the contrary, renders them objecs of disgust or offence.

As the language, so the manners of particular societies may difser; and as a person may not be able to speak with propriety where the language is foreign to him, so he may not appear with accompliihed politeness where he is unacquainted with the ordinary forms of behaviour, or where le is altogether unpractifed in the oblervance of them.

Whatever the habits of society may be in. such matters,. they are no' doubt soonest and most effedually acquired where the intercourse of men is most close and frequent; and the manner of this intercourse, confidered apart from any actual effet, is supposed most important.

From this consideration it appears that the name of politeness, both in Greek and in Latin, took its origin from an idea, that to be polite was to have the manners of the town, in contradiftinction to those of the country *..

Apart from the consideration that the feelings and wishes of men may be better understood in the habits and manners of one society, than they are in those of another; it is certain, that where societies differ in point of manners, on whichever fide the advantage of superior intelligence may lie, persons of the best difposition * In Greek the polite was tcrmed ArIos, and in Latin Urbaztn,; and from the i.!.ter of these terms, we confider urbanity in contradiftinition to rusticity.

 position may appear defeCtive in politeness, where the manner of CHat,. V.
SC1cT. 1V. shewing it is not famliliar to them; but this no more incapaci.
ksr'a tates the peasant for politeness in the city, than the citizen for politeness in the country. If the peasant appears rustic in the town, the citizen may appear frivolous, ignorant, or affected in the country; and of the two that person is most deficient in breeding, who is farthest gone in the mistake, that the local habits of a society to which he himself is accustomed, are the ftandard of good manners to mankind.

The real standard of manners, so far as it can be collected fiom external expressions, is the ingenuity, candour, and dilpofition to oblige, from which those manners proceed.

The habits which the mind may have acquired in those important refpeds, may be traced to the objects ofefliunation, which men in different societies have been led to adopt. In societies where men are taught to confider themselves as competitors, and every advantage they gain as comparative to that of some other person, the conscientious may be faithful and true to his engagements, in what he is pleased to think matters of real concern; but the emulation in which he has been nursed is a fretful paflion; and politeness, under its influence, cannot be any other than an effect of disguise. The interefled and fordid make no allowance for good or ill offices that neither fill nor empty the pocket.
Wkith such persons as these, even virtue itfelfis illiberal, and kindness unmannerly.

For this character ofgoodnefs, which is diftinguifed in the offices of mere good breeding, it should leem, chat we imuft refort to the company of thoie who are Icaft actuated by fordid cares, cares, by personal jealousies, or by any consideration of interest 
PART. 11.
which in the ordinary society of men can be brought into question. 




In company of this fort, men are accustomed to lay a proper itrefs _
on the effecds of good sense and benevolence, however little their fortunes may be affeled by them. Whilit in societies of a different description, they run the hazard of an opposite character; may be just and beneficent in what they term articles of moment, but from an affected indifference, or real insensibility to whatthey confider as matters of inferior value, are fullen, contemptuous, or negligent on may occasions, on which benevolence and good will might contribute essentially to the happiness of human life.

Men are thus likely to be polite where the habits of life are likely to be liberal; that is, where benevolence is not ftifledby fordid cares, oppreaffed with dependence, awed by subjection or mean apprehensions of danger. We are to look for this character, therefore, in the higher ranks of life, or to hold the defect least excufable if it be wanting there. It is not indeed a necessary accompaniment of riches or luxury; it is found amidst the poverty of rude nations, and in the society of men leait acquainted with the arts of accommodation. There ignorance of the ordinary conitituents of interest secures the mind from the meanness of fordid and illiberal competitions, and the very savage, exempted firom the teasing regards of personal vanity by his passion for the real and superior diftintions of courage and fortitude, preserves, we are told,* in the society of his equals, a good breeding and refpeAful attention that is not excelled in the higher circles of polifled society. It is part of his dignity to remain unmoved by novelties, to be serious and courteous in his ordinary manners, B b b and * Vid. Cllarlevoix's account of thc original Natives of North Anmerica 
 poftion may appear defective in politeness, where the manner of 

SECT. V. flmewing it is not familiar to them; but this no more incapaci.

ry~ tates the peasant for politeness in the city, than the citizen for politeness in the country. If the peasant appears rustic in the town, the citizen may appear frivolous, ignorant, or affeded in the country; and of the two that person is most deficient in breeding, who is farthest gone in the mistake, that the local habits of a society to which he himself is accustomed, are the flandard of good manners to mankind.

The real standard of manners, so far as it can be collected from external expressions, is the ingenuity, candour, and difpofition to oblige, from which those manners proceed.

The habits which the mind may have acquired in those important refpeds, may be traced to the objecs of eftiination, which men in different societies have been led to adopt. In societies where men are taught to confider themselves as competitors, and every advantage they gain as comparative to that of some other person, the conscientious may be faithful and true to his engagements, in what he is pleated to think matters of real concern; but the emulation in which he has been nurted is a fretful passion; and politeness, under its influence, cannot be any other than an effect of disguise. The interefled and fordid make no allowance for good or ill offices that neither fill nor empty the pocket.
'With such persons as these, even virtue itfelfis illiberal, and kindness unmannerly.

For this character of goodness, which is distinguished in the offices of mere good breeding, it should 1'eem, that we muff reIort to the company of those who are lcall actuated by fordid cares, cares, by personal jealousies, or by any consideration of interest 

which in the ordinary society of men can be brought into question. 




In company of this fort, men are accustomed to lay a proper stress on the effects of good sense and benevolence, however little their fortunes may be affeded by them. Whilst in societies of a different description, they run the hazard of an opposite character; may be just and beneficent in what they term articles of moment, but from an affeded indifference, or real insensibility to whatthey confider as matters of inferior value, are fullen, contemptuous, or negligent on may occasions, on which benevolence and good will might contribute essentially to the happiness of human life.

Men are thus likely to be polite where the habits of life are likely to be liberal; that is, where benevolence is not ftifledby fordid cares, oppreaffed with dependence, awed by subjection or mean apprehensions of danger. We are to look for this character, therefore, in the higher ranks of life, or to hold the defec least excufable if it be wanting there. It is not indeed a necessary accompaniment of riches or luxury; it is found amidst the poverty of rude nations, and in the society of men least acquainted with the arts of accommodation. There ignorance of the ordinary constituents of interest secures the mind from the meanness of fordid and illiberal competitions, and the very savage, exempted from the teasing regards of personal vanity by his passion for the real and superior distinctions of courage and fortitude, preserves, we are told,* in the society of his equals, a good breeding and refpeAful attention that is not excelled in the higher circles of poliflied society. It is part of his dignity to remain unmoved by novelties, to be serious and courteous in his ordinary manners, B b b and * Vid. Cllirlevoix's account of the original Naltivs of North Anmerice, 
 and he is no less agreeable and insinuating in the character of a 
friend, than he is terrible and dangerous in that of an enemy.


To need nothing and to possess eyery thing are, perhaps, equally favourable to that liberality and politeness of manners which we commonly confider rather as the polish, than as the essential conlituent of goodness. The naked inhabitant of the Pelew Islands accordingly appeared to posess all the attention to oblige, and all the relu&ance to intrude or importune, which, in the polite circles of Europe, distinguish the accomplished gentleman.

To what purpose then, it may be alked, should we know all this; if the models of good behaviour may be taken even from those who are least inftruted in the use of them.

Men are happy sometimes in the absence of incentives to evil: But where evil obtrudes, it is the nature of man to aa from what he knows to be good, and in opposition to what he conceives to be evil. Where he cannot be ignorant, it is proper he Should not be deceived, and where his virtue is in question, he should be accustomed to revolve in his mind the real constituents of a virtuous life.

The observations now made on the charaaeriftics of justice and goodness, relate to human nature at large, in whatever relation of fellow citizen, or alien, of inagiftrate, or subjet. As the benevolent will be humane to his fellow creature in every relation, in that of fellow citizen he will be candid and beneficent; in that of magistrate he will be diligent and inflexibly just; in that of subjed he will be refpedful and orderly.

Tor To these we allude under title of the public offices or duties 

ofjuftice and goodness, comprehending protection on the part of 




the magistrate, allegiance on the part of the subjed, and public spirit the common duty of citizens in every rank or condition of life.

The relations of men in society, confidered in refped to their origin, are frequently casual. In their progress they acquire the force of convention; and as constituting the form on which the peace and wellfare of society depends, are to the benevolent the most real and the principal objedcs of attention and refpedt.

The dutiful and just citizen may on occasion confider what lhe has a right to enforce, that he may exac no more; but does not so much confider what he him self may be forced to do, as what in goodwill to his fellow creatures, he ought to perform.

On the part of the subjea, and under the title of Allegiance, are included Fidelity, Deference, and Submijion to the will of the Sovereign or Magistrate. This is the head of the society, and is therefore an oltenfible or principal object of that affection we bear to the society itself; his virtues are the securities and bleflings; his authority is the source of peace andgood order to the whole.

Unhappy is that fubje&, who can mistake for Liberty, a difrefpct to the person of the magistrate; and who can perceive no beauty in the gradation of influence, or diftincion of ranks, in wvhich providence has made the order of society to confifl.

B 1 b 2 Equall y 
PART iI. Equally unhappy on the other part, is that magistrate or foveS(IcT. IV. reign, who can mistake the intitutional powers of his Situation sv~ for a concession of property to him in the persons, effects, or services of the people. He has power indeed to do harm, as well as good; but this is not peculiar to him; the robber and the aflaffin partakes in it with him, and with this single difference, that the latter in his attempt to do wrong exposes himself more; and where the mischief is equal, is to the whole amount of his courage the better man. But as the actions of men in every relation are mutually important, and as every one has it in his power, so no one is exempt from hazard or risk in his attempt to do harm. The tyrant is fearful in the midIt of his guards, and many of his cruelties are mere acs of precaution against the resentment he has already incurred.

But if power be Sometimes observed to corrupt those who are entrusted with it, the benevolent magistrate or sovereign has greater advantages towards forming his mind to humanity andjuftice, than those of more private flation. The concerns of his fellow creatures are more immediately his own: The commonwealth upon one account or other, is ever present to his mind: The prosperity of the people is prosperity to him; and the disposition most natural for him to feel, is that of a parent towards the family in whose welfare his own is involved.

The force with which he is armed, is that of the community, and reminds him of the use to which it should be employed.
If there be a law of Nature or State on which he founds his prerogative, the fame law is no leTs sacred in its application to the privilege or protection of the meanest citizen.

.3 Public Public spirit, or the preference of public to partial confide- 




ration, is a duty incumbent on every member of the community 
alike. w'

Under every form of a society, the individual does a real service to the public by the reasonable and proper care of his own preservation, by attention to the welfare of his family, and by a diligent observance of what belongs to his rank, his profeflion, or condition of life. An immediate view to the public is unequally required under different constitutions of government; most under democratical governments; and least under absolute monarchies, where public deliberations are limited to the councils of a Prince.
But wherever just precautions are taken in the national establishment for the safety and wellfare of the people, it is happy for every individual to know and enjoy the advantages of his own situation, without giving way to that restless spirit, which in the absence of any real grievance would aim at fanciful refinements of.
Law or State.







Of the Charaierftics of Temperance.

 THIS virtue, in the general description of it, implies that difen
gagement from mean pursuits and gratifications, which gives to SECT. V. the mind full command of its faculties in the preferable occupations of a rational nature. It is the peculiar attribute of a being, in which animal and intellectual powers unite, and is the proper adj uftment and effect offuchpower in the general tenor of a happy life.

Mere animals when compared to man, we have observed, proceed more by regulated infiindcs leading to the specific materials which they have occasion to use, and terminating in a measured application or enjoyment of these materials. They seldom err in the choice of their objects, and seldom exceed in the measure of their gratifications; whereas the principle of animal appetite in human nature, though inftincive also, and equally correct in the end for which it is given, is less circumfcribedin the use of means, or is more fubjct to err under the influence of imagination or opinion ; these when miftakcn for rcfobn, serve only to miflc:la ?, the the animal dispositions, which they assec to guide: Insomuch, that 

when the conceptions of mind are false, the animal appetites are the 



more apt to go wrong for being joined with an intellecual principle.

To man therefore, neither the first conceptions of his mind, nor the inftints of his animal frame are a sufficient guide to the course of life he ought to pursue. These conceptions and inftints are themselves a province fubjeted to the superintending power of intelligence, and requiring to be governed with circumfpetion and caution.

This mixt nature of man is beautifully allegorised by Plato, under the image of a Team,in which animals prone to the earth, or wild beafis of a spirit, fiery, restive, and unruly are yoked together with coursers of a celestial breed: These struggle to maintain a better or more elevated course, than that into which they are dragged, whether downwards or astray, by the others with which they are combined in the team.

To whatever length we may pursue this allegory, we must observe, that among the animal appetites there is not any one fuperfluous, nor any one which should be entirely suppressed. The frame of nature is beautifully confiruaed, and its movements make an admirable part in the order of things. There is no reason to reprobate any of its enjoyments merely as such.

Mankind indeed, in different ages or nations have varied in.

their conceptons on this subjed. They would repress one sett of animal enjoyments, and authorise another. If in one quarter of the globe, the gratifications of the table arc left at discretion, those of the sexes are restrained. Or if under the sanCtion of religion, certain meats and the use of fermented liquors arc prohibited ; polyga nmy 
 polygamy, or a kind of fyfematic debauch of the rexes, is admit
CHAP . V ted as a privilege of the true believer.

VWhether men derive their apprehenfidn in such matters, as they sometimes derive their conception in other fubjeds, fromthe fuggelion of occasions which we do not perceive, and which we therefore, term caprice; or whether they are led by considerations of expedience and utility peculiar to their climate, or manner of life, the conceptions themselves, when generally entertained, give rife to maxims of decency which are no doubt to be treated with that refped which individuals ever owe to the manners of their refpetive times and countries. And although men of reflection may diflinguifh what is arbitrary in the manners of those with whom they live, they are not on this account by any means entitled to neglea the obfervarice of them.

The informations of reason are not sufficient to dired the steps of ordinary men; nor are the marks which cuflom has affixed in particular situations to give warning of the dangers to which morality is exposed, altogether superfluous, even to men of fuperior discernment and wisdom.

It is however proper to observe in charaderifing the virtue of temperance, that in the general application of its rules to mankind, it is not limited by the local or temporary apprehension of any nation or age: That it is not to be defined by the peculiar restraint or indulgence which is adopted in the East or in the Weft, but is such a freedom of mind from the dominion of inferior appetites and habits, as enable the person poflefied of it to pursue the better occupations of a beneficent and intelligent jnind, The The cardinal virtues, we have observed, may be comprised un- 




der the denominations of Jkill, diljpoition, application, and force. CSET. V.
tiJfdom is the skill of the virtuous to obtain the ends of benefi- cence; Goodnejs is the disposition to purlue these ends and so far as the animal appetites unrestrained might impede the mind in its better pursuits; Temperance may be confidered as essential to the application or diligence required in performing the duties of a virtuous life.

Under habits of sensuality, whether in deviling the means of enjoyment, in urging enjoyment itself to satiety, or in attempts to restore the satiated appetite, there is a necefary waste of time.
And in the diminution of health, or intellectual faculty impaired by debauch, a disqualification ensues for any better application of mind: So that man, without a proper guard upon himself in this particular, might be entirely diverted from the objects of his rational nature, deprived of his understanding, or funk into a state of brutality more disorderly than is any where else exhibited in the animal kingdom..

Mere forbearance or ascetic severity, however, is not fuficient to prevent or to correc this evil. Abstinence may be extremen and no lets than the opposite vice of excess, enfeeble the living fi-ame and impair the energy of the rational powers ; nor is mere fbbriety, however regulated, fiflicient in this important respect to completc the merit of a virtuous charaaer. The inifer is fober from penury, or that he may save hlis money; the fhia'per is fober, that he may succeed iln Ifoe firoke of his art, and overeach or circumvent thole who are lets guarded in their manner oflifb, VOL. 1[. C Cc c T

 To have the merit of temperance, it is necessary that the sup

SEcP. V. posed recess from animal gratifications ihould be employed in a better way; in a diligent discharge of ordinary duties; in purfuing a rational course of life, and in the exercises of intelligence which lead to the attainments of wisdom and promote the progrefs which human nature is destined to make.

Temperance, therefore, may be confidered as consisting of two branches, sobriety or reflraint from excess, and application or a proper direction of mind. To the first are opposed Debauchery and Senfitality; to the second Dinpation or Sloth.

To a person apprised of the higher enjoyments and occupations of a rational nature, it is not difficult to restrain the mere animal appetites within reasonable bounds. Their gratifications are not in tleir nature calculated to occupy a long or improper portion of time. When their purpose is obtained, they cease to importune; nature gives warning of approaching excess in feelings of satiety, disgust, or of positive pain; and although the glutton, without attending to these admonitions, may hurry his meal into surfeit or fatal excess; yet, in general, mere appetite is not the source from which intemperance is most likely to arise.

Sensuality is a disorder of the mind; it results from the imagination, and is a project of obtaining a continual enjoyment wvhere nature has given no more than a capacity of occasional and temporary pleasure.

An agrceable infiltion is fitt-ed by nature to allure the ani;::1 to lcrfobrml the fl ions which arc required for the prclirvation vation of her work. But attempts to prolong or to accumulate 

such pleasures, for the moR part wear out or impair the very fa- 


SEc'i. V.

culty by which they might be enjoyed at their reafbnable periods ; -.' J
or if this eiFect Illould not follow, the intervals of mere sensual gratification require to be supplied by some amusement or pastime of a different kind, as conversation, exercise, or play: So much, that if the voluptuary appears to pass his time agreeably, his principal enjoyments are of a nature very different from those of any mere sensuality, and actually consist in applications or exercifes that amuse the mind.

Under this imposition of fancy, or misapplication of language, which refers all human as will as animal enjoyment to sense, it is not uncommon to call that a life of animal pleasure, which is in sac a life of mental occupation or social anufement; and although the specific enjoyment of human nature on many occasions consists in its being rationally employed, it is common to confider the more serious engagements of life as an oppreflion or interruption to pleasure.

In consequence of such misapprehensions men. are doubly mifled, they are turned away from that which constitutes the merit and felicity of their nature, to objets which are inadequate to their purpose ; and which, to fill up the moments of human life agreeably, must be pieced out with what they term amusements, and which are in reality mental engagements, though of a value inferior to those which they rejec as a burden.

The disposition of human nature in the mean time is favourable to the attainment of proper habits, if we are successful in removing those which are improper. An exemption from sloth nccefihrily implies activity: We can fiarcely refrain from one C c c 3 Ic.

 set of pursuits without betaking ourselves to some other; so that .
S(sT. V. mere relief from the habits of sensuality, or the longings for aniir>v' mal pleasure, may of itself lead to better applications of mind.

Mlany circumstances concur to recommend beneficence, and to interest men in the welfare of their fellow creatures ; and if they be not debauched by habits of a different tendency, they are likely to move in the track of their duty as the most natural path in which they fliould go.

The greatest danger to which the ingenuous are exposed in making a choice of their active engagements, is that of neglecing business for the fake of mere amufernent or paflime, in which, without finking into sloth or sensuality, they form habits of diffipation equally fatal to the higher and better engagements ofthe mind. They lose the faculty of'ferious exertion, and shrink from any thing that has the asped of business, as the sickly stomach loaths the appearance of wholesome food.

As it is difficult to ascertain the distinction betwixt amusement and business, the one by a very natural figure is easily fubftituted for the other. Thus " Bufine/," fays Sir William Temple, "is the tlivifion of man ;" and there is no doubt, that persons who betake themselves with alacrity to any serious occupation, thereby are more effectually amused or diverted than those who affect a life altogether composed of dissipation and pastimes.

The human mind is not amused without an object, and the nearer that its object, in the interefl it creates or the ardour it excites, approaches to what arc termed the important afflirs of IiF,, the more cffietual the anmufieent or pleasure it brings. The dillfpa'ted, accordingly, while they fly from bufnefs as an application of too too serious a nature, find some other interest or paflion to corn- 

'mand their attention ; and are in sac the more entertained, that 




their faculties are intensely employed, and their affedtions warm- .
ly engaged.

The gamester hazards his fortune, or the hunter exposes his life; and both, in order to be amused, require the highest measures of exertion, of eagerness, and agitation of mind. When familiarity with an object has lessened the ardour it brings, they seek for occasions to renew their interest, and to awaken their passion: They strive to do for themselves what nature has fufimciently done for the whole of the human race; they create a necessity of labour, and an occasion for the exertion of their powers. Of this fort, the huntfmnan may observe that nature has stored human life with abundance of game; and the gamester may observe, that she has proffered to mankind in every situation, a stake for which they may play; and if they are pleased to join the satisfaction of promoting the welfare of others with that of preserving and accommodating themselves, they will find little occasion to rack their invention for pastime or concerted amusements; nor will they be led to imagine any thing more pleasant to be done, than that which they are in the present moment, and by the proprieties of their station called upon to do.

This were the genuine result of temperance; a well direCted acivity of mind, exempted from the dreams of the voluptuary, or the difi iiation of the idle. It would confifl in a proper use of what is prepared for the purposes of animal life, and in the habit of applying to what are the proper engagements or occun.ations of a. rational nature.

CART. IV In youth, we are for the most part unwilling to apply to any Scr. V. thing that does not promise immediate gratification or pleasure: L/v^ And this disposition, if indulged, leads to a habit of dissipation for life: It lays the foundation of a frivolous manhood, and a wretched old age, about to depart from the paths of this mortal scene without leaving any honourable track behind. It were happy, if in youth we could be persuaded, that the care of parents and tutors to give proper habits of application, though at firit difgreeable, is in the way to future fatisfaaion and pleasure; or if we could be made sensible at this time of life, that we are not more interetfed to acquire knowledge, or receive information, than we are to form habits of diligence,. and a just direction of the mind to the pursuit of those pleasures, which are at once henourable, permanent, and just.





S E C T I 0 N VI.

Of the Charac7er/ics of Fortitude.
To the requisites of an acive charaaer, which we have been 
PART II



confidering, it is necessary to subjoin that of a forcible or resolute 
mind : Under this title, Fortitude is required to fill up the fum of v'x the virtues.

In mere body, there is a force constituted by resistance to change; in animal life, it is courage and muscular strength; in free agents, it is a determinate choice of conduct unaltered by difficulty, fuflering, or danger.

It is not required that the resolute mind should be insensible to the warnings which, in the form of pain, nature has given of the ills to which the animal nature is exposed, nor does it require the negleA of such warnings, or of the means that may be employed 'or safety in consequence of them; but as the duties of human life eSrequently call upon the virtuous to pass throughi nconvenicn-% ties, 
 cies, and to incur danger or pain in the conduct of some worthy 
CHAPp V. pursuit, the quality of a mind possessed of itself, and undifturb,- --- ed in the exercise of its faculties is required to complete the charaCter of virtue.

In this fccne of difficulty and danger, the acRor cannot proceed with a mind that is deficient in fortitude, any more than the archer can ihoot with a bow that wants elasticity or itrength.

Among the principal characeriftics of this virtue may be reckoned Rejol;tion, Intrepidity, Patience, and Constancy.

In all these instances, no doubt, force of mind, like strength of body, may be employed to an ill, as well as to agood purpose; but as mere abfiincnce from animal pleasure, without a proper application of mind to better pursuits, does not constitute temperance, so neither does exemption from fear or impatience conftitute the virtue of fortitucie.

The ignorant are sometimes fearless, because they know not their danger. The criminal is daring, from the force of some vicious pafion ; but fortitude is the itrength of integrity that is 'fuftered by a conscience void of offence, and is as far removed fr-onm the audacity or impudence of the profligate, as it is from rthe bat:ncLfs of the coward.

F.s,'.;z: cn is the courage with which the virtuous proceeds in his colribc of' bCnIeficceI towards his fiiend, his country, or his icllow crcauCre, in any circulmflances that require his aid. It was rn ily cxl'rd'ldcl by the three ili-aelites, in answer to the king of a')) Ion wvlwo tlireatlenlcd to c.al. theml into the imidfl of a 1)urnI In, ing fiery furnace, if they did not worship the golden image which 

he had set up: And who is that God, he said, " that shall deliver SCAP. V.
"you out of my hands?"" We are not careful, they said, Ne- vC
" buchadnezar to answer thee in this matter: If it be so, the God " ,whom weferve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, " and he will deliver us out of thine hand, 0 King; but if not, be it " known unto thee, 0 King, that we will notferve thy Gods nor " worjhip the golden image which thou hayt set up". Here was a resolution expressed not in the confidence of escape or safety, but in the sentiment of a daring integrity which no menace could shake. And the benevolent is resolute when a friend or an innocent sufferer requires his aid, because affefion or commiferation is more powerful than interest or even felf-prefervation.
And the fame virtue of fortitude may be known, though with legs evidence and on flighter occasions, by the voluntary hazard of suffering, or inconvenience in the discharge of any duty whatever.

Intrepidity is tranquillity and presence of mind in the midst of danger. It is opposed to that perturbation offear or terror by which the weak minded are disqualified to acquit themselves properly or to extricate themselves from the dangers in which they are involved. Without intrepidity, enterprise is rashness, and serves only to lead the feeble minded into situations in which they are not qualified to ad.

As the intrepid continue to possess themselves or to have the use of their faculties in the midst of danger, intrepidity is not only an exemption from the sufferings of fear or terror, but is the best security also against the evils with which any danger is supposed to threaten. It enables the person alarmed to take the best D d d measures 
 measures for safety, or to employ the best and most vigorous SECHA. V means of refinance.


In proportion as we are ardent in the cause of our fellow creatures, we are less apt to be disturbed by considerations of inconvenience or danger that asset ourselves ; so much that a generous or tender affeAion is itself in fbme measure a principle of fortitude, and prepares the mind for a courageous discharge of its duty.
The female parent, even in the most timorous species of animals, is observed to be bold and fearless in defence of her young.

For the poor 'wren, 'The mofl diminutive of birds, wiillfight (Her young ones in her neJf,) againji the owl '.

And it is under a sense of indignation at the commission of iniquity, or in the ardour of enthusiasm for the good of their country, that men are observed to make the greatest efforts of intrepidity and courage: In so much, that as fortitude is a necefiary support in every virtuous enterprize, the consciousness of integrity, and a generous resolution, is the true incentive to courageous and ardent exertion of mind.

Patience may have a reference to any adual suffering from which there is not an immediate prospect of relief. The patient endures what cannot be helped without exasperating the fore with the fruitless irritations of a peevifli and fretful disposition.

In ' Shakcfpeare in Macbeath.

In the order of nature, and in directing the animals to the PAST IL

means of their own preservation, pain is employed perhaps with 
more power and efficacy even than pleasure. External causes that v threaten to wound or to hurt, give warning by the infliction of pain: Diseases that announce the profpeat of Death give an alarm in the fame manner; and the suffering is made to increase while the danger continues, or is not to be removed but by a removal of the cause that annoys.

According to this general law of nature, no living creature is exempted from pain; but to acknowledge the beneficent purpose for which it is inflicted, and to employ the mind without peevishness -or discontent, to obtain that purpose is a principal charaaerifiic of that virtue of fortitude which we are now confidering.

Patience in suffering, like intrepidity in danger, is the best alleviation of the evil to which it refers, and that which enables the mind to make the molt successful efforts in obtaining relief.

The effe&c of pain in causing diffrefs is in a great measure proportioned to the apprehension with which it is received. The timorous patient flirinks from the surgeon's knife before it has touched his fore, and has already suffered in imagination before the sense could be affected. The fearless on the contrary are hardy in bearing what they disdain to fear. The mind, it is well known, under any vehement emotion of affection or passion is insensible to wounds or pain, and even the diftrefTed may be diverted from their sufferings by any objecA that warmly interelfs the D d d 2 mlind 
 mind. Patience therefore, we may believe, is greatly aided by 
CHAP,.V. an exemption from fear. And this virtue is impaired by me8ECT. VI.
kty,/ lancholy or other peevish and fretful passions, even more than by any defec of firmness or strength in the animal frame.

Sentiment and occupation of mind, suspend the effea of mere sensation, while a certain vacancy of thought, and habitual indifference to objecs that give any ardour to the mind, leave it entirely to be occupied by the slightest feelings of bodily sense.

To correct the foul therefore of its weaknesses, whether fear or melancholy; to set the order of nature in its proper light; to occupy the mind with this and other objects of a just affection, appear to be the proper means to strengthen it in bearing the inconveniences and pains to which human life is exposed.

Patience, it must be confeiled, in many instances appears to be the gift of nature; but in whatever measure it be given, it may frill be improved by those who are sensible of its value, and who do not easily forego what they admire and wish to possess. The martyr and the hero are no doubt Supported in teeming paroxyfms of suffering, by the sense of honour they have attached to the part they perform.

ConJfancy is that force of mind by which we persevere in pursuits properly begun, or engagements properly made. It is opposed to wavering or unneceflary fluctuation of choice.

An ill choice ought no doubt to be correcled. But in order to prevent the necessity of change, proper caution ought to be employed before we form our engagements. There is a time for deliberation, deliberation, and then it is proper to give every consideration its 

due regard. A choice well made is the proper antidote to wa- CSEHcT. A
vering and inconstancy, which proceed from the want of any Cfixt conception of the object at which we aim; and which conflitutes a weakness of mind subjet to disgust or weariness from any difficulty or disappointment for which we are not fully prepared. The inconstant are known to drop even the pursuits in which they are successful in order to exchange them for somewhat else, which they have not tried, and of which the principal recommendation is that of being new. They are of course by too frequent a change of their objecs unable to effect any valuable purpose whatever.

To persist in our engagements is often a material article ofjuftice, and a matter of right which the parties concerned are entitled to exac. To persevere without wavering or disgust in pursuits which are properly chosen is necessary to the success of them.
For this reason, even if a better choice ihould appear than that which we have actually made, it is seldom wife to change a pursuit in which we have made any considerable advance, to begin another in which all our labours are again to be renewed.

But this virtue of fortitude, which lays the foundation of all the proprieties we have mentioned, whether, re/olution, intrepidity, patience, or conJfancy, has a value in itself, independant of the purpose which it enables the person possessed of it to pursue and obtain. It is, in many inflances, an exemption from suffering or an alleviation of pain. It opens the mind to the influence of its best affections, and gives it the possession of itself and its faculties on trying occasions.

Fear 
PARTr 11. Fear next to malice is the greatest bane to the human heart; it 

SECT. VI. is a state of suffering, degradation, and weakness, or adifqualificas'," on tion for the practice of any virtue. The coward is too anxious for himself to entertain any generous affection for others, and too feeble in his resolution to give any adequate effect to the purpose he forms. He is mean and abject in adversity, insolent in profperity, and cruel in urging the effect of his jealousy or fears againft any object of there passions, which he may have got in his power.

There are no conditions of the mind that appear more evidently in the person, than those opposite characters of a resolute and cowardly nature. The one bears the aspeC of elevation, even in the retreats of modesty, or in the midst of adversity ; the other is presumptuous, or abjec, merely as the occasion gives or withholds the advantages of fortune, which he is ever ready to feel and to abufe. The prepossession of mankind, therefore, in favour of courage, and in contempt of cowardice is well founded in nature; the first no doubt may be abused, and the latter may serve on occafion to render men tractable and submissive to the powers by which they are governed; but, as we are not to reject a blessing merely to avoid the abuse of it, neither are to adopt a great evil for the fake of a trifling convenience.

Courage, it is true, may be abused ; it is neverthclefs, though not an absolute security against ill dispositions and vicious habits, an aptitude for all the nobler affections of the human heart, as well as a force by which the mind is enabled to support itself in the pur(uit of its worthiest objects.

We We have observed, that a generous affection is in some mea- 
PART. r.

sure a principle of courage; the converse also is true; the cou- 
rageous, in proportion as they are secure upon their own account, ''
have minds susceptible of a proper concern for others; and the benevolent become insensible of personal inconvenience or danger, in proportion as they are engaged in the exercise of beneficent affeCtion towards their fellow creatures: Insomuch, that the characters ofgenerofity and courage are in their nature allied, and in their exertions mutually strengthen or confirm each other.
Magnanimity is the joint result of both, it is the effeca of goodness and probity, raised above the consideration of interests, of dangers, or fuffierings, which are apt to embarrass the condut of ordinary men. The magnanimous fleer through impediment or danger, at which the ordinary pilot would lower his fails; they turn upon an enemy, from whom the ordinary warrior would retreat; they spare the vanquished, whom the ordinary victor would facrifice to his fears or resentments; they commend an oponent, to whom an ordinary rival would not allow any merit; and that elevation of mind which they possess, is, at once, a principal foundation and a support of all the virtues.

The ingenuous, by aspiring to what is noble, is led to practise the virtues which constitute the excellence of human nature, and by his refblution and force of mind supports the efforts, and persifts in the course of life into which he is led by his best difpofitions.





S E CT I O N VII.

Concluding Observations.

 W E have thus, in pursuance of the method proposed at the out
CHAP.V. set of this work, attempted to state the atual diftintion of man SYT.V in the system of nature; his powers of discernment and choice; his pursuits and attainments, the progress he is fitted to make, and of which the direction and effec for the present is committed to himself; but of which the final termination is, we trust, far removed from his view.

We have inquired, how far any diftinlion of moral good and evil is manifest to such powers of perception as ours, and coincides with the diftinaion of enjoyment and suffering, of perfection and defed, of which our nature is susceptible; and last of all have confidered in what form the diftindion of good and evil should operate in the choice and external actions of men; from the whole ofthefe fans and observations itriving to evince, that, as there is in the frame of man a state of Health, Strength, and Beaui tty ty, eligible upon its own account; so there is in the forin of his intel- 

ligent being, and in the pursuits of his active life, a scheme of iy- CHAT. Vi dom, GoodneJ/, Temperance, and Fortitude, which, apart from any rev consideration of the past or the future, is in the present, and in every moment of his existence the preferable itate of his nature.

But in return for such labours as these, we may be told, that we only perpetuate the mistake which is common to many, who, in amusing themselves and others with such inquiries, have formed schemes of perfection, to be admired indeed; but far above the reach of mankind. That, as in our general account of perfection we far exceed what human nature is fit to attain, so in the detail of our precepts and rules, we would substitute a concerted manner, for the principles of benevolence and wisdom, which when present supersede the necessity of rules, and when wanting, are ill supplied by any ritual or external forms of behaviour: That in talking so much of virtue, we fland aloof from the world in which it ought to be pradtifed, and aflume the importance of wisdom in mere words and technical forms of expression. It was thus, we may be told that philosophers in antient times affeCed a language, a manner, and dress peculiar to their refpedive feds; and hung out the supposed colours of wisdom, with little regard to its real pofieffion or use.

This charge may be true of many, and the error pointed out in it is a just object of caution to every one who would avail him1clf of the fruits of a scientific education, without incurring its abuse. The ancient feds in philosophy, have been likened to the modern feds of religion rather than to the varieties of opinion in matters of philosophy that have been entertaiuied in moldern times. Sedaries are ever ready to value themselves more on their proffflion of faith, than on their pradicc; and are E c ' fonctcr 
 fonder of any mnyftery or paradox they have adopted, than of the 
plainest and most important dictates of reason or goodfenfe. We 
- i~ must not however confound under this censure those examples of sublime and accomplifled virtue, which shone forth amidfi the pretensions and ridiculous formalities with which philosophy in the persons of many of its professors may have been disgraced.
It was in the reign of Aurelius, that Lucian gave loose to his fatire on this subject, and it was by this philosopher, in return for his ingenuity, chat he was proteted and employed in the provinces.

It inuft indeed be admitted, that to erea philosophy into a prosession, of which the votary is diffinguiflable from the reft of mankind, otherwise than by a superiority which good education may give in any department of life, and by a blameless or beneficent intercourse with other men, is to miflake its nature. In the school, and in our attempts to think comprehensively and juffly, we are led into system ; but in reaping the fruits of a culture thus applied to the mind, it may be expected that on every particular occasion we should acquit ourselves properly, without any formal display of our general knowledge. It were piteous indeed, to carry nothing with us from hence into the world, but formal pretensions and technical terms. To this the manners of the world are fortunately repugnant, and perhaps lead to an error in the opposite extreme, that of aflfeing indifference to considerations of virtue, which we inwardly and justly esteem. To talk of morality in the fashionable world', is said to be quoting the ten commandments.
And pretensions are so far fromnbeing received as merit, that perfois of the mofl honourable nature do well to avoid any unnecessary parade of their principles or system of adion.

A

* i 1 rc tilh author alludcs to what was a fafliion in his own times, although it mny tnow eIh.ips bi clhanlljd.

A person who has learned his exercises, may be known by his 


'carriage, without retaining the itiffnefs or formality of the school; S CT.V. V.
and his movements, when most graceful, appear to be the efFecs of mere inattention and negligence. Nor need we scruple to carry this observation lby analogy into the moist serious considerations of a manly and beneficent life. Virtue itfelfis then most perfeX, when it does not appear to have been learned or assumed as a merit; but is such as the person who praAifes it cannot depart from, even in the most negligent moments of life: This, however, we must not suppose to be the fruit of aAual negled or indifference to what is right: The master artist, in every infiance, derives the accompliflled freedom of his calling, not from the negligence with which he seems to practise it, but from an accornplifhled underfranding of its graces, and a habit of correAtnefs carefully acquired in practice: And the manners of an accomplished man in beneficence and candour, however little it may be necessary to difplay the system he has formed on these fubjedCs, must not be entrusted to chance.

PerfeAion is no where to be found lfort of the infinite mind; but progression is the gift of God to all his intelligent creatures, and is within the competence of the lowest of mankind. There needs not the genius of Hannibal or Scipio to detea the faife notion of happiness, of honour, or personal diitinlion, whichi miflead the fool and the coxcomb. Men of humble capacity may learn to think jullfy on these fubjeds : And as far as wifstom depends on a just conception of familiar objcls, it is the nature of created mind in the course of experience and observation to improve its sagacity, and to make continual approach to the higheft mrcafure of intclletual ability of which it is fufccptible. The E e c 2 vorld 
 world is far from being so unreasonable, as to expect from every 

individual the utmost perfedlion of which human nature is susk-.v^>^ ceptible; nor of any individual, in every action of his life, a full display of all the good qualities of which he himself is pofleffed.
But the virtue of goodness, whether operating in mere innocence, or in beneficence, is surely improveable, if not actually acquired by habit.

It is that which we commonly enough express in the distinctive denomination of a gentleman, when employed as a term of praise; it implies a certain caution to avoid what is hurtful, or offnfive to others, liberality, and humanity, or attention to oblige, and to anticipate the wifles of the modest and unafliming. The conversation of gentlemen is accordingly a scene of satisfation and ease, not of strife, and competition for superiority: And this we impute to their breeding, and to the lessons of a dignified rank, not to any original difference of disposition- or temper.

The attainments of men are actually unequal, and the individual differs from himself, at different periods of his life.

Whether the inequalities of men, as some have alledged, may be traced to mere casual circumstances, engaging them in different efforts and pursuits, may be left undetermined. Or without venturing an assertion so little susceptible of proof, we cannot doubt, that if the fame person differs fiom himself at different times, it is in consequence of the efforts he makes, or neglects to make, and of the habits of thinking or of acting he has formed. Good offices conciliate the minds of men ; and .to have lived with the beneficent and the candid, tends to inspire benevolence and can1don r.

It It is a vulgar obiervation, that we are inclined to love those on 


whom we have conferred a benefit, more than those from whom 
we have received one. And the interpretation of this fat is vJ
somewhat malicious; to wit, that we are more tenacious of the obligations we have laid upon others, than of those which have been laid on ourselves. But in whatever way it be understood, the fact is important. Every one has it in his power to do a good office, though not always to receive one; and according to this observation therefore, has that in his power which is most effectual to his own happiness, or the goodness of his own difpofitions.

Fortitude and temperance grow upon the mind, in the continued pratice of there virtues. The veteran becomes calm in the midst of a hardship, or danger, to which he is accustomed.
And the strenuous mind, in any worthy pursuit, becomes fuperior to the allurements of pleasure, or the languors of sloth.

We have thus, on the supposition of an improveable nature in man, endeavoured to specify what he has to vwifl for himself, for his f'iend, and for mankind. And the model proposed for him cannot be improper, if it lead him to fliun any evil to which he is alcually cxpofed, or to attain any good which is placed 'within his reach.

It flill remains for a subjea of separate inquiry, to confider ·ztjhat the citizen has to wifj sori his country. And what is that public good, which in every community ought to be the object of political institution, and which, when obtained, ought to reconcile every individual to his slate in society, whether it be his lot to govern, or be governed.

CIAIP.





( 47 )

C H A P. VI.

F P o L. T I C S.
S E C T I 0 N I.

Introduction.
W E have already confidered society and government, or na- 


CHIAP. VI.

tional establishments, in refpe6 to their origin and their progress, SEaT. I.
we are now to confider them in refpet2 to the good and evil of rvY
which they are fuceptible, or the comparative advantage in refpet to which they are unequal, 'Under 
PART. IT. Under this notion we may treat of Population, /Manners, and SECT. I. Wealth, of Civil and Political Liberty, with all its accompany^" mnents in raising the characer and genius of a people.

Opinions on the subjec1 of public, no less than of private good are of much importance to mankind. As error and mistake, relating to the one, involve the mind in folly, fuftering, and diffappointment; so, in relation to the other, they would involve whole nations in disorder and riot, or in scenes of degradation and oppreflion.





S E C T IO N Ii.

Of the Teople confidered in RefjecS to Numbers.

THI E goodness of God is manifest in the form and extent of 

his works. Of there, so far as they are known to us, the most CIAP. V.



excellent is man, exhibiting the effects of Divine Goodness in the _,, multitude of his species, and in the laws of nature, which are eflablifled for their preservation, accommodation and increase.

The number in which we flhould wifi mankind to exist, is limited only by the extent of place for their residence, and of'provision sufficient for their subsistence and accommodation; and it is indeed commonly observed, or admitted, that the numbers of mankind in every situation do multiply up to the means of their fubfiftencc.

To extend these limits is good ; to narrow or contract them is evil; but although the increase of numbers may be thus conlilcrcd as an objct of defirc, and although we may wifl, in every F1 fs inflance, P. RT. 1I. inflance, that the people should multiply, yet it does not follow, SECT. 7I. that we ought to wish the species thus indefinitely multiplied, D»-"vo- to be united also into one and the fame community.

The formation of families, and the continuance of their mnembers together for a certain time, are physically necessary to the preservation of the human race; but the union of numberless families into one society, is so far from being equally necelTary, that the number of families so united may be reduced indefinitely, in a perfect consistence with every advantage of the mere social life.

But nature, in giving to man the highest place in the scale of active existence has multiplied the occasions on which he is to exert both his animal and his intelligent powers. Besides the physical wants and necessities, which are left for him to supply, besides the advantages which are left to be gained by his industry and his application, the very vices and follies incident to one part of the species, create employment for another, and the divilions of men mutually furnish objects of caution, and occasions of action, from which no part is exempted, and ori which every separate society must regulate its eftablifiments, and eflimate the value of its numbers.

Mankind are exposed to dissention and quarrels, whether from the influence of irregular paflions or miflaken apprehensions of right and wrong. And as the possibility of discord and war is thus entailed upon human nature, no nation, however inoffcnfive in its own purposes, or however wife in its measures, is entitled to think itself exempted from the common lot of mankind; or to to suppose that its rights are safe without the precautions that are 

necefiary to secure them. Sc AT.V.

Siicr. t1.

In this point of view, we may confider the increase of the human species not only as an object of general benevolence, but as a matter of expedience also in the cafe of every particular frate. We may wifl that our country should be populous; or increase in numbers indefinitely, the better to sustain the national contests in which they may be engaged.

In every nation, the people may be confidered in two respects.

First, as forming the object for whose fake the society is inftituted, and for whose fake it ought to be preserved.

And next, as affording the means by which the society is so formned and preserved.

In the first point of view, -Salus populi, fuprema lex eflo, is the.

fundamental principle of political science. If the people be happy, we have no title to enquire to what other purpose they serve, for this itself is the purpose of all human eftabliflhments.

At the fame time, the people may be confidered as the strength and support of their community; and although, in the first point of view, every interest is subordinate to theirs, yet in this second point of view, they must accommodate themselves to the interefls of slate ; and if there be any paradox in this manner of stating the ilbjcl, it ariics from our confidering the end of political cilablinhimnts, and the means of obtaining that end, as separate r diflindl, \whereas tihey arc in this cafe the fiule.

F f f 2 Eflabliflnments 
PART HI Eftabliflments are meant for the good of the people, and the CrHA V. ¥I.
SCrT. -1. people also serve to support their eftabliflment. The greatest ---i' X measure of happiness bestowed on the people, is that by which they are the means of making a happy community; and if the members of a community accommodate themselves to what is bell for the state, this is no more than to be, and to do, what is molt for their own preservation and welfare.

If the citizen on occasion must submit to personal hardship for the benefit of his country, uch in fadr is to him the occasion on which he is to reap the happiest fruits of his nature, magnanimity, benevolence, and fortitude. It is good for his country to be safe, and it is fiill more so for him to be an instrument in obtaining that safety. If it be the lot of the vine to bear a fruit for its owner, fertility and abundance of clusters is the prosperity and beauty of the plant that comes so loaded to the vintage.

The people confidered as the vital blood of a nation, if they are fitted by their characer to supply that part, have a value proportioned to their numbers; or if the numbers be given, we are to estimate their value, from the measure of life and of ftretgth, which they bcftow on their country.





S E C T I O N Il.

Of the Mll.sZanners, or Tolitical Charac7er of the People., \VE are not under this title, to repeat tle general descriptions 
PART I.
of virtue and vice. These we observed, may operate in any si- 



tuation, or on any materials: They may operate in public or in . r .^
private life, in prosperity or adversity, refpeding matters of property or eJtiration, matters of private or public concern.

To distinguish the political from the moral charadRer, we must recolleCd, that although a man may be virtuous or vicious in any situation, and conversant in any materials, yet there are, in relation to circumstances and manner of life, certain habits which enable those who are poffefTed of them to give to their virtues the proper effect in their particular cafe, or in the treatment of matters, in which they arc particularlyconcerned. A scholar or a merchant, may be each in his way a person of great sense and integrity; but tlh one is not therefore qualified for a counting room, nor the other for' place at college. VWhere habits proper to the political fnte are ob--
3 taeincd, 
 tained, they constitute the value of a political charaAer ; or where 
.
SECT. II. the people are by contrary habits disqualified to maintain the kwr\^ political form of the community, or to pursue the objecs of state; their numbers may be great, but they are not of proportional value to the nations they constitute.

I m ay be observed, that mankind in the result of the politi-.

cal arts to which they are led by the exigencies of society, arrive at different eftabliflments, whether simple or mixt. They are led by their situation also to pursue a variety of objecAs, in which the pacific or military arts may prevail, and the estimable character of the people in the political point of view is their fitness to reap, to preserve, and to improve the advantages of their own intlitutions; and to fuppprt their country in pursuit of its refpective objects. Under establishments, therefore, in which the people are differently governed, or have formed themselves into a governing power; and in nations differently occupied, whether in commerce, or war; and engaged in the practice of specific arts, whether lucrative or liberal, suitable habits, though various in different inflances, give to the people a political value proportioned to their numbers.

In states of a democratical form, and small extent, where the people may be destined to govern and to defend themselves, the habits of the statesman and the warrior are required as ordinary accomplihmnents of the citizen; and the individual is entitled to cftimation, only in proportion as he pofieffes these habits. Authority and power are entrusted in the hands of particular persons, but every citizen equally retains his claim to ftch occasional trust. There is a fjirit of equality therefore, an attention and i ze l!

zeal for public concerns, which make an essential part in the ha- 

bits of such a people. CeI .4P V

>CT V

If the citizen under a demo'cratical government submit to resign his pretensions, he betrays the right of every other peribn in the state, while he surrenders his own. If he aim at any afcendant, or Superiority of fortune, different from the effe&t offuperior ability and virtue, his pretensions become inconsistent with public order and safety.

In proportion, therefore, as we suppose individuals in such instances not qualified to preserve their station, not disposed in their turns to obey without meanness, and to command without infolence; the community, instead of increasing its strength by multiplying its numbers, actually tends to its ruin. Want of numbers might expose such a state to be overwhelmed by an external power; but the want of a fit character, in public spirit, ability, and vigour, prepares the Rate from within for immediate fubversion, as a fabric is prepared to tumble or fall into ruin by the weakness or decay of the parts that compote it.

The manners of men may vary without inconvenience in republics of adifferent description. In ariftocraticalormixed government, for instance, certain cafualor hereditary diftinetions of fortune beingadmitted, the inferior may yield and the superior assume a comparative advantage in perfect consistence with the order eftabliflled. Nay, in proportion to the inequalities acknowledged, there is a habit of the person fitted to the rank, and in every condition a suitable character or manner. The habits of Ration are necefary to qualify the citizen to sustain the part which is afligned to himSclf. Elevation and dignity arc suited to the rank in persons of one PA rTr IT. one condition, deference and refpecl are suited to the rank in those 
CHAP.VI. of another; and without suitable diftincRions of character diffe./YX. 'rent orders of men would be difqlualified for their situations, and a community fb made up of discordant parts would be unfit to .tmaintain the cftablilhment in which the public order consists.
The utmost to be expeced among citizens in this state of difparity is that the fhperior fiould, by his noble qualities, merit the respect which is paid to him ; or earn the returns of affeAion and -gratitude by the good he performs.

Under monarchies, w!r .her absolute or mixed, the scale of subordination may be farther extended ; or the extremes of high and low much farther removed fi-om each other than they are in republics of any fort; while the interval between these extremes is filled up w-ith many flow and insensible gradations. Under such institutions, accordingly, equality may be altogether unknown; the habit of individuals may be in every instance either to yield or to assume a superiority. And these habits of subordination, of precedence, or deference, are necefsTary to give the people their value in the different ranks they are defined to hold.

Under all or any of there varieties, a people disqualified to preserve the political form of their country, nobles without beneficence, elevation or dignity, inferiors without refpea or fubmifsion; instead of giving national strength proportioned to their numbers, would prove the immediate source of weakncfs, or lead to revolutions of uncertain or dangerous issue.

But while we thus contend for propriety of manners adapted to the conllittioo n of slate, it mufl be obfcrvcd, that, if there b1>

be any political eflabliflment raised upon a plan of injurious 
 usurpation on the part of those who govern, and proceeding upon 
a debased and abject spirit of submission on the part of those who D-O
are governed, it were absurd to ascribe any merit, under the notion of a political value, to the habits which might be required to preserve such a system. The form itself we must confider as an abuse or a calamity, and for the fake of mankind must contend, that manners suited to preserve it are evil. That manners, on the contrary, which dispose the people to revolt, and overthrow such governments at the expence of any temporary hardfllips, are necefiary to obtain or restore the bleflings of national peace dilturbed by the continual, though unresisted wrongs to which the fabjea is exposed.

This description is perhaps too nearly verified, where the relation of sovereign and fubjecct is conceived on the models of mafler and slave, where the one is conceived to be a property and holds his poffeflions and his life, not upon conditions that may be supposed merely unequal; but without the observance of any condition at all, and at the will .f the other, by whom the difcretion is frequently abused. The value of the people, in such inflances, is to be estimated from their qualifications to repel such pretensions, and from the energy with which they recur to a form more confiflent with juflice and the good of mankind.

Amidst the varieties of political characler, nations differ also in refpec to the objects on which they are chiefly intent: One nation is intent upon commerce, or huficd with the arts of fubfiflencc and accommodation : another has its existence to contend for at the edglfe of the frvordl is there fore intent upon the arts of war, and the advant;ages to be gained or Joli in the contell with its neighVoL .
II. 0 o bours 
PART IT. bours. In either cafe, the fitness of men to promote the pro
SECT. 1ll1 fperity, or to watch over the safety of their country, is an es;_ - ential circunflance in eflimating the political value of their numbers.

Commercial nations have not any interest in the increase of population, except in so far the people are indufirious, or pofleffed of folne profitable art. The idle, -the profligate and the prodigal become, in proportion to their numbers, a source of pu.
blic distress and calamity.

Warlike hordes, on the contrary, would multiply warriors, not traders or pacific inhabitants. The Romans, in the first slate of their principality or republic, hastened their population by the indiscriminate admiflion of firangers to a participation of all their political rights. They had no occasion to make any feledion of those, they were to admit on the rolls of their people; for all the hordes in their neighbourhood from which their numbers could be supplied were warriors like themselves, and every acceflion to their number from the nations around them, was an addition to their military lifts.

W'hile flates are thus intent upon any particular objed, they appear to estimate the character of their people upon a partial model; and so far, no doubt, it is partial as they limit their notions of virtue to the tranfaicions in which they themselves are engaged, or to the forms according to which they themselves are accuflomr ed to proceed: But to such partialities we muf ftiubmit in eflimating the comparative merit of nations, and in judging of the lustre which individuals may have cast around them in their refpective tive ages. Human nature no where exists in the abftraa, and PARr IL
human virtue is attached, in every particular instance, to the use 

of particular materials, or to the application of given materials SEw.
to particu

Of the Wealth of the People.

 W E may confider national wealth in refpeó to the purpose it 
 serves, while in the polfeffion of the people; or in respeCt to SECIV. that which it serves, in the form of a revenue to the state employed to defray public and national expences of government, defence, or chargeable inffitutions of any fort.

Wealth, as it may be referred to the firfl of there purposes, and is in the possession of the people, is the subjed of this section; as it may be referred to the second purpose of revenue to to the fiate, will be the subjea of that which follows.

The first and most eifential purpose of wealth is the subsistcnce and accommodation of uiful men; and its value is to be estimated from the numbers it will fcrve to subsist and accomnmodate ;-furnifling at the fame time, the means of lucrativc cnterprifi for the accumulation of more wealth, or the reprolducion duacion of that which is necefTari.ly consumed. These are pur- 

poses which it serves best, not in the coffers of the tate, or at the 

disposal of those who are supposed to a& for the community, but v in the management of the frugal and industrious proprietor; or laid out on the principle of private interest, and with a view to private gain.

In refped to national wealth, frates may rate their prosperity, not so much by the fums they are enabled to levy in the form of revenue, as by that wealth which, in consistence with public service, they are enabled to leave in the hands of the induftrious citizen. In his hands it is employed to its best uses, the rearing of a family, the establishment of manufa&cure, the purchase of materials and other articles, in the outlay of a lucrative and prosperous trade.

The constituents of wealth are more or less quickly consumed in the rife. The fullest granary and the amplest store of commodities are, within a limited period, exhausted in-the consumption of a people; and their wealth is to be estimated, not from the state of their magazines or stores at any particular time, but from the sources of reproduction and continual supply, by which the abundance they enjoy is increased or perpetuated.

The source of supply which nature has provided for man, in any given situation of climate or foil, is labour. Without this, in refpeEc to him, the land is every where barren, and materials of cvery fort are too rude for his use. The wealth of the citizen is measurable by the quantity of labour he can employ. If he can command the labour of others, he may difpcnfc with his own; but, to enable one pcrlbn to obtain the labour of another, ii: [: 
 neceufary that the one flouldc e able to pay the hire of that la
 bour; and that the other should be in need to receive that hire.

If all men were equally rich, every one might be willing to pay the hire of labour, while no one would be willing to labour for hire: But, as labour is neceflary to supply the consumptions of life; on the supposition of equal riches, every one would be reduced to labour for himself; and thus a supposed equality would reduce the fortune of every person to the fruit merely of his own labour, and, in fact, would be to render every person alike and equally poor.

The antient republics, amongfL whom it was propofed,in some inflances, to equalize the fortune of citizens, had recourse to the labour of slaves, and the objec, without this provision, would have been altogether chimerical and wild.

Nature seems to have ordered, that, in proportion as men Ihall depart from their original poverty, they llall depart also firom that original slate of equality, in which itwas necessary for every individual to labour for himself.

The unequal capacities and various dispositions of men; covctoufnefs and frugality, in one; neglet and diilipalion, in others; unequal ability, application, and success in the pralcce oi the lucrative arts, have ever, in the progreis of wealth, been accompaialcd with a distinction in the fortunes of men ; so that, while i.mnc are in a condition to command the labour of many, ochcrs remain without any other poilcIlion than the immediate fiuits of their ~~~~~O\'Vll~. ~Fro F1rom From a difference of fortune there rcfults a difference of eftima- 
PART IL

tion and rank; and to those who would emerge from the lower 
Rtation, there is a motive of ambition joined to that of neceflity, in promoting the pra&ice of arts: So that nations who are forward in the accumulation of wealth, proceed in it with a double ardour from the effeC of advances they have already made; and thus owe, in a great measure, to the inequalities of fortune, what sprang originally from necessity, the application of that labour by which articles of confunuption are reproduced, and the sources of wealth are enlarged.

In this state of unequal fortune, one man has the means of projecting and executing a lucrative enterprise; numbers of others feel the neceflity of committing their labour to his direclion; and what he gains, even while it remains in his own polffetion, goes into the mass of national wealth.

Skill, experience, and a sleight in the application of labour, contribute greatly to the success of it, or to the accumulation of its fiuits. To promote these advantages, the division and the fibdivision oftafils are highly conducive: A person who has to work but in one single material, will soon come to understand his department better, than if he had to do with a number of different lhbjeCts that would tend to diffract his attention, and embarrass his thoughts. Whoever operates but to one single effect, and obtains that effeCt by repeating without variation one single movement of the hand or the foot, will become mailer of his talk in a shorter time, and will practifi it with less interruption, than if he had to pass through a variety of operations; were obliged fircquently to change his tools; and at every fhccellive part of his work were required to praclife a different fpccics of Ikill.

Among: PA ,. l. Among the circumstances, therefore, which were formerly tSc r. IV. nmentioned, as attending the progress of commercial arts, none is '- of nlore confequencc to their advancement, than the reparation of callings, and the subdivision of each into a convenient number of dilferent branches. This lessens the difficulty of every appren.
ticelhip, and greatly increases the produce of any given number of hands. A fit aflortment of persons, of whom each performs but a part in the manufacture of a pin, may produce much more in a given time, than perhaps double the number, of which each was to pioduce the whole, or to perform every part in the confiruction of that diminutive article. But to this separation of tafls, as well as to circumstances in the original lot of man, it was observed, that commerce, or the exchange of commodities, was necessary. A person who performs but one species of labour, and obtains what is not the whole or perhaps is not any part of his own consumption, must have a facility in exchanging what he has produced for the other commodities which his occasions require, but which he is not equally in a condition to fabricate for himself.

With the benefit of commerce, or a ready exchange of commodities, every individual is enabled to avail himself, to the utmost, of the peculiar advantage of his place; to work on the peculiar materials with which nature has furnilhed him; to humour his genius or disposition, and betake himfclf to the task in which he is peculiarly qualified to succecd. The inhabitant of the mlountain may betake himself to the culture of his woods, and rhlc manufacture of his timber ; the owner of paflurc lands may betakel himself to the care of his herds; tiec ownerl of the cl;iyIit to the manufacturc of his pottery; and the lhufbandlln;i to tlhi'

the culture of his fields, or tle rearing of his cattle: And any 

one commodity, however it may form but a fmiall part in the 
whole accommodations of human life, may, under the facility of ,-y commerce, find a market in which it may be exchanged for what will procure any other part, or the whole : So that the owner of the clay pit, or the induflrious potter, without producing any one article immediately fit to supply his own necessities, may obtain the pofllflon of all that he wants. And commerce, in which it appears that commodities are merely exchanged, and nothing pro.duced, is nevertheless in its cffeccs very produciive; because it miniiters a facility and an encouragement to every artifl, in multiplying the productions of his own art; thus adding greatly to the mass of wealth in the world, in being the occasion that much is produced.

In trade, the profit of one is not, as sometimes supposed, necefiary lois to another; or rather, commerce being the exchange of what may be spared for what is wanted, and this a mutual convenience to all the parties concerned, is equally gain and profit to all.

The principle of trade is private interest, the fartheflt pofllbl removed fiomi public spirit, or any concern for a common cause; yet, so far as wealth, in the pofieflion of the people is a benefit to the Rlate, private interefi in trade operates with the least erring direcion for the public benefit, and is secure of its purpose, where public councils would miitake or miss of their aim.

The trader, no doubt, may err in the pursuit of his gain; but the principle from wh\lich he altcs is so exquisitely fenlible to lit experience of prolit or lols, that the Ilcfl os of that Cxle ioice Vol.. II. 1 h h I Jc'ldo 
 seldom need to be repeated: The first loss is sufficient to correct 
CHAP.VI. the error of the trader, and he runs with irresistible avidity k'"vY.' wherever it appears that profit is to be made. The slate may do much to protet, or even to aid him, but not in the way of exciting his ardour, or in directing its application.

It is a primary object of government, on this and many other accounts, to secure the property of its subje&s, to protect the induftrious in reaping the fruits of his labour, in recovering the debts which are julfly due to him, and in providing for the fair decision of questions that may arise in the intercourse of trade.

For the encouragement of commerce, in particular, it is wife to facilitate communications by commodious high ways, inland and sea navigations, and every other conveniency that tends to lessen the difficulty of removing commodities from the place in which they are produced to that in which they are wanted. This is the principal aid which commerce requires. Ministers of Rtate have had their predilections; some for manufacture, others for agriculture; some for foreign, others for domestic trade, and it is not uncommon to imagine, that either is profitable only in proportion as the commodity of the merchant brings money, or filver and gold in return.

In speculation we wish to simplify our objects, and would propose to set the whole machine of human life in motion, by touching some key, or by pulling a particular firing. Some would encourage manufacuures, in order to furnish the husbandman with a ready market for the produce of his farm ; and take this way to encourage the culture of land. Others are inclined to adopt 1 th:11

the converse of this expedient; or increase the produce of land, 

in order to feed the manufaCurers at a cheaper rate: At the fame 
CHAP.P Vl time, it is evident, that, if the itate can procure any special aid v-p or inftrueion to either, that this aid ought to be direcly applied where it is supposed to be of use, and not left to wait the recoil of encouragement or inftruaion from a different quarter.

Errors of administration are frill more pernicious, as a late ingenious author has fully demonstrated -*, where, apart from any consideration of public fafety,they tend to check one article of trade in favour of another, or ad upon a principle of predilecion for exportation or importation, in preference of one to the other.

With refpe& to the comparative importance of the home and foreign trade, it is evident, that a person having a redundancy of any commodity, and not able to find what he wants in exchange for it, in the dwelling of his nearest neighbour, muff go farther, and even if necessary to the territory of a separate sovereign.

A market that is not to be found in the neighbouring village may be found in some city or difrria at a distance; and a commodity which can neither be produced nor vended in one latitude, may be produced or find its market in a different one. If in the search of this market, the trader is led to the dominions of a sovereign different from his own, he is said to go into foreign trade. If all the parties live in the territories of the fame fovereign, the commerce between them, however remote from each other, is fiill domestic or internal. But this circumstance, it fioulcl seem, does not assed the preference to be given to one branch of I-I h h 2 trade * Smith on the Wealth of Nations.

. trade over another, farther than as a preference is clue to the neal.
' clt and re.dicetfi market, as being attended with the leani expcnce '~'-rx., of libour or carriage, and the leait delay of returns.

It is evident that, where a redundant commodity cannot be diifofi.cd of at home, the producer is intererfed to have it carried abroad, or presented wherever he can find a market; that, where the commodity he wants cannot be obtained at home, he is intcrefled to have it fiom abroad, or firom whatever quarter it can be procured. But the necessity of foreign commerce, in either way, may diminifl as the territory of the state extends ; ifbthat finall iatces may be in continual need of commerce with foreigners, while great empires, like the globe of the earth itself, have a fufi-cienc range for every species of trade within themselves.

VWhere silver and gold, or money, is more wanted than other commodities, commerce willnaturally take its direction to the quarter in which these are to be had in return ; but, where other commodities are more wanted than gold or silver, there will be itnt for a supply of the more pressing neceflity; and there would be no profit in retaining them if other commodities are more ufCful than they are.

One article of policy connected with commerce, and in which the authority of state is supposed to be neceflary, is the eflay and coinage of money, to serve as a flandard of valuation and medium of exchange. Commerce may originate in what is termed barter, in which the parties mutually give and take the articles which they have to fiarc, in exchange for thole they want. The hufsiandiman may have given his nieafrl-c of corn in exchange 5i±r the yard of the manufalcurcr's cloth, without any ianclrd o.t of valuation betides what is afixed by the want or exigency of the PaTr II.
several parties. Even where the parties in trade recur to a patri- 



cular commodity as a common flancard of valuation in their va- S~.-.[V
rious tranfiltions, they may themftlves estimate the quantity and quality of the tfandard, as well as that of the comlmolditics they are to appreciate by a reference to its value; but rlany inconveniences are avoided by flec(ing the precious metals as the flandard of valuation, and fill farther inconvenience is avoided by the just interpofiion of government to ascertain, by a mark of public authority, the fincnefs and quantity of the species v;hich is to pass in circulation. This is the objct of coinage, and a principal article in the policy of nations, relating to commerce or the operations of trade.

It is well known that even the precious metals, however fitted to represent a great value in finall bulk, nevertheless may become too unwieldy for quick circulation, and for repeated transfers of property, when the tranGfactions of commerce come to be widely extended, and great remittance of money required in payments.
That, in this cafe, where public or private credit is sufficiently established, promifibry notes, or obligations to pay, may pass through many tranfiCtions, and for a time fuperfecte the ne-ccflity of aaual payment, while the money lies ready to, anf\ver the demand, at the place froml which the promifilry note was illiecl.

In this matter, it is a sacred objecR of policy to keep faith with the creditor; and, where the credit of slate is interposed, and to give ready protection to the citizen where any abuse in the circulation of paper or promillbry notes can bc dreaded.

3a l-ere 
Here then, or in refpea to the accumulation of wealth, we 

SCT. IV.' may venture to reft the estimate of national felicity: First, on /-vx. the labour of the people, or the degree in which that labour is productive; next, on the species of commodity produced, and its fitness to fubfifl and accommodate the greatest number of valuable citizens and useful hands; and, last of all, on the freedom of trade, and the equal protection given to the people in every bianch of commerce unrestrained and unforced, with this single exception, that where in the course of trade advantages may arise, or inconveniences be incurred, refpeeting the safety or defence of the commonwealth, in every such cafe, fafety-is to be preferred to profit; and the public defence being a primary objec of public attention, and an object for which states must be prepared to incur indefinite expence, it is an object for which also they must be willing on occasion to forgo their profits, and to embrace the less profitable branch of trade in which men are formed for the public service, in preference to the more profitable branch in which this advantage is not to be obtained. Hence the wisdom of encouraging seamanship in maritime nations, and the wisdom of guarding, in every state, the manners of a brave and ingenuous people, in preference to their numbers or wealth.





S E C T I O N V.

of the Statewealth of the people, according to the observations of last 
ting 

quantity, continually perishing, and continually reproduced. Its 
sources are the labour employed in agriculture and manufature.
Its issues are the consumption made by the people, and the expences incurred by the state. Its increase or diminution depends on the proportion which the supply bears to the waste or consumption.

The first and principal use of wealth is the fubfiflence and accommodation of the people: But there is another, if not included in this, at least necessary to obtain its end; the support of government in the discharge of its necessary fundions, as in difpensing the law, in preserving the peace at home, in guarding againft danger from abroad, or in any other objea of adminiftration calculated for the general benefit of the community.

In PA.XRT. I- In what manner a public revenue is to be conifituted for these Ci-iaP. VI.
Si1c'r. V. purposes is matter of very important concern. It is under\i'ood to come into the management of those who are intrusted with government, and is that on which the spirit of liberty has most cause to be jealous; in which the supposed interests of the governing and the governed are foonefc at variance; and in which the tyrant has most immediate occasion to abuse his power.

In rude and barbarous lhordes, numbers of men appear to be united merely as making up the train of a leader. \hatever be their purfaits or refburces, the leader is supposed to preside in the one, and to enjoy a principal fliare of the other.

In the first wars of the Romans, every citizen kept the field at his own expence, or served the public from the fame flock with which he supported himfclfand his family. If the leader, in condudting the public service, incurred a greater expence than any of his followers, he was enabled to discharge that expence by means of the fame advantages which procured him the afcIenlant he enjoyed. And in his cafe, to-employ the spoils of one enemy, in waging war with another, was at once to have a public revenue, and to be cntrufecd with its application.

In the firPi difribution of property, individuals are likely to lhare in proportion to their power. The leader or iobvcr'irl of the coimmunity, together with his power, has a claim to wvht lmay enable him to Ipport his rank, and to cdi 'e its funtii;; andm the demelne appropriated to him is u!l(ndrflOOd, at the b.!::'.
time, to be his private cflae, and the revenue of the commo:1-1wcalth.

as well as principalities, have had part of theipublic revenue constituted in fubjeCs reserved for the communi- ty, or set apart from the property of any individual, for this pur- SA
pose. Such were the mines which were wrought for the ifate of Athens; the pasture lands of Campania, and other fubjeds which were let for the republic of Rome.

The kings in ET.rope have 'their forests or demesne lands, which are so many remains of the funds from which the state of a feudal sovereign was maintained, as that of his vassals was supported from their refpeaive fiefs.

In the progress of nations, however, -the demesne of the fovereign has been found till less and less adequate to the public expence. While other fubjeds of property in private hands are improved or rendered producive; the royal forest in their neighbourhood continues to be waste; and government, taught to rely on other and more copious resources, has long confidered the demesne of the sovereign as a mere article of state and pleasure to the prince, or as the means of liberality towards those in his favour.

As private interest is the great principle of lucrative arts or accumulation of wealth, it is material to the prosperity of nations, in this article, that every subjed susceptible of improvement {hould be appropriated or pass into private hands, who may turn it to the highest account: Insomuch that the idea of a public demesne, as men advance in flill and industry, is justly exploded, or exchanged for a contribution, or taxes to be levied from the labour or eitates of the people.

VOL. I. LI i T.

 It is just, and in every community matter of tacit, if not of ex

SECT. V press agreement, that every one who partakes in the benefit of a ---' public establishment should bear a part in the expence it incurs, On this principle is founded the obligation of the subjea to contribute his flare to the revenue of the state; and, on this principle, a revenue wifely conflituted may, in the progress of national.
wealth, without any public oppression, be made to keep pace with the growing exigencies, the growing numbers, riches, and frugality of the people.

Taxes, for this purpose, may be laid in different ways, and follow the rates of property in different fubjeAs and effects.

They may be laid in the form of affeffinent on the rents of land, or other sources of private returns.: They may be laid on goods as they pass in commerce; or they may be laid on articles of consumption in the actual use.

In judging of the absolute or comparative expedience of taxes diverfifled in any of these ways, the following maxims may be asfumed.

First, That the real exigencies of the state are to be provided for at any hazard or expence to the fubjeó. The interests of the state and of the people, when well underitood, are the fiame. The first interest of the people is that every one fllould be protected; and the first interest of the tate is, that it Ifiould be in condition to afford protection. Whatever may have been in faA the origin of government, upon this principle alone, the solicitude with wh.lch which it is adliniftered, and the refped that is paid to it by the PrAlT Ir.
people are founded. C P. V1.

Secondly, it may be assumed, That the private estate of the subjed is in no cafe to be unnecessarily taxed, under pretence of a public concern. The establishments of a great people may contain a variety of departments, and lead to applications of revenue useful and proper, in a variety of different ways; but beyond these limits, it is evident, that, to tax the people were to rob them of their property, to take from industrious hands what may go into the hands of the prodigal; or, instead of a source of farther wealth to the community, prove an occasion of abuse or a walte, for which the commonwealth is to receive no compenfa.tion or supply.

In the third place, it may be assumed, That, as it is a principal object of government to secure the property of the subjec against every invader, care should be taken, in the form of taxation, to fix the limits of public exaction, so as no way to impair the security of the subjed, in the possession of what he has left; that, while he is required to contribute a part of his labour to the public expence, the extent of this demand Ihould be well ascertained, and no admifion be given to arbitrary impositions, which might render the fortune of the subjec in any degree precarious. It is in the confidence of a security of property that the labourer toils to obtain it, and chearfully contributes a part of his gains to ensure the remainder.

It is difficult to obtain security on this point wherever the ibvcrcign, conceiving his own intereit as diftinii froin that of the 1 i i 2 people, 
 people, is at the fame time empowered to impose taxes by his SCHA. VI. own prerogative, and without their consent.

A prerogative of this extent, wherever it be lodged, whether in the hands of a monarch, a senate, or democratical assembly, except so far as bodies of the two last descriptions are supposed to to tax themselves, is not confifent with the liberty of those over whom it is exercised. In a monarch, it leads to the defpotifin of one; in a senate, to the despotism of a few; and, even in a democratical assembly, when exercised over fubjec-provinces, is the despotism of many; and, for this very reason, is the more oppreffive and the less restrained, than it is in either of the two former instances. Thus the Athenians oppressed their allies, or £maller states in dependance upon them, under pretence of exacting the quota of each in support of the common cause; and the Romans, while they exempted themselves from taxes, suffered their provinces to be oppressed with every mode of vexation.

In the fourth place, it is evident, that no tax fllould be laid on in such a manner as to drain the source from which it is derived.
The labourer ought not to be interrupted or disabled in the performance of his labour. The trader ought not to be robbecL
of his tfock; nor the landholder difpoffeffed of his land. Eachl may be required to contribute a part of his returns; but this lhould be clone in perfect consistence with the safety of that subjed from which his returns are derived.

In the fifth place, it may be afiumed, That not only every real grievance, but every apparent one also, and whatever is likely to be felt as such in the imposition of taxes, is to be avoided.

Thc The public and its members ought to be confidered as parties 

in the fame common cause, and flarers in the fame common ad- 




venture. It is the interest of the state, that it should be chearful- Srv ly served and supported; that nothing flould take place in the exaAions of revenue or of public service which has a tendency to alienate the minds of the people; that, in the choice of taxes, those ought to be preferred which are least likely to be felt as a grievance. For this reason, probably, the most prosperous flates have indefinitely varied the forms of taxation, so that by raising some part, though not the whole, from any particular quarter, they have avoided laying a burden to be felt as a grievance, upon any particular class or order of the people.

Customs fall ultimately upon the consumer of the goods for which they are paid. Perhaps all taxes fall ultimately upon those who may themselves -be made to pay, but who have not the means of recovering any part of what they have paid, by imposing any terms for that purpose upon others. Whoever lives on his rent, and buys every article of consumption, without having ought to fell, comes under this description. It is contended, therefore, in speculations on public oeconomy, that taxes of every kind, however immediately constituted, fall ultimately on the produce of land. This is probably a mistake; for every other person that lives on a taxable income, and by the consumption of taxable goods, without having any to fell, must bear a proportional part of the burden, as well as the person whose rent is from land. But, even if the revcrfe were admitted, it would be far from expedient to apply to the landholder diretly for the supply of a whole revenue to the slate. Were this measure to be taken, the whole -urdcnl would apparcntly, as well as really, lie upon one cla's of tlr~c t~A1T 11. the people; and even if the load should continue to be support:ET.HAP. ed by this class, it would nevertheless, from its immediate pressure .-H-- and apparent partiality, be confidered as an insufferable grievance, and become a continued source of complaint.

It is material, therefore, in conformity to the maxim now fiated, that taxes, wherever they may ultimately fall, should be diverfisied in refpea to the fubjeds taxed, and the tax gatherer have immediate recourse for payment to all orders of the people, that the whole may, at least in appearance, if not in reality, bear a proportional fihare of the burden.

In this manner, and through a succession of ages, a revenue of the greateit extent may be raised gradually and almost infenfibly, so as scarcely to occasion any complaint of a grievance but from those who induflrioufly speculate on the whole amount, and indulge apprehensions of what may be the ultimate result of its progress.

The policy to which this maxim refers has been adopted by sovereigns of almost every description, whether they meant to charge their people with heavy burdens in the most artful manner, or to provide for the real exigencies of slate in the manner that would be leafl felt as a grievance. This consideration, while it may influence the choice of a tax, ought to influence also a choice of the manner in which taxes are to be levied, or made esfectual, with the lcaft cause of complaint on the part of the subject.

Taxes, we fippofe, may be levied, either by officers in the pay of the public, or by persons who farm the revenuc at a dctcrmiIna tc nate rate. In general it has been observed, that taxes let to farm 

are more oppressive than those which are levied by public corn- 
mission or revenue officers. 
It is not difficult to perceive whence it should arise, that a revenue let to farm is more oppressive than one that is collected by officers in behalf of the public. A farm of revenue is commonly let to the highest bidder. The sovereign stipulates for a certain fum to be paid into the public coffers, without any risK from the negligence or failure of those who are employed in the colletion, or from the infolvence of those from whom it is due. The farmer rents the subjec but for a limited period; and ats in that period under the impulse of a temporary interest, and at the hazard of exhausting the source of future revenue, while he reaps the present. He naturally proceeds with the illiberal severitics of a private concern, having in his view to obtain tome adequate return for his risk and trouble, as well as to make up the fum he is bound to pay to-the Rate. His concern in the matter is temporary, and he labours to make immediate gain for himself, however it may asseA the permanent interests of the public. He calls upon the sovereign to support his exaAions, under pain of sussering him to fail in performing his engagements; and,l under this pretence, the public authority is of course employed to enforce the vexations of private rapacity.

\Where, on the contrary, officers are employed with fixt salaries.

to colled the duties which are required by the public, thece oiTlcers being restrained from exacting more than the public has inposed, and though called to a firic account of what they have received, answerable only for the diligent and ftithful dicthar.,ce of 3 their 
their own duty, they are not interefied to urge the public exac

SECT. V. tions to any cruel or oppressive extent.

Taxes are of different denominations, taken either from the subjed on which they are imposed, or from the manner in which they arelevied. They may be reduced to five titles, capitation, as/fefment, monopoly, cu/lo7.s, and exc/e. The two first are exaded from the person or the estate of the fubjeel; the other three are exac2ed from commodities in sale or consumption.

Capitation is a tax on the person, and when not modified by any diftintion of poor or rich, is supposed to fall equally on both.
This may be the first rude device of an arbitrary master, who, not being willing to embarrass himself with diftindions, would arrive at the end of his government in the shortest way %. It were absurd to exact no more from the rich than the poor can pay.
And it would be cruel to extort from the poor as much as the rich may without inconvenience afford. Capitation were in either way unjust and impolitic, either unproductive or cruel. It has indeed seldom or ever been exemplified in this extreme. The most arbitrary and inconsiderate master is aware of its defects, and aims at some diftindion, by which he would make the wealthy contribute in some proportion to their means. In a plan of capitation, for instance, projeded for a neighbouring kingdom, it was * The Turkifli governor in the island of Cyprus levies a poll tax from every inhabi.

tant, without diftincqion of persons; and, by way of additional revenue, fi)n.
times repeats the exaction from persons of a particular name, whether George, J7ames, or *Thomias. And, we may believe, when such is his humlour, may adn a name or two nlorc. 'Thl labour of thinlinig feeis to be the principal diflrefs from which these otliers flu-ink.

3farili's lTavels into C.)prui and Sa'rin.

was proposed to range the people into fix classes, and to fix a pro- 

portional rate for each. Such an arrangement, however, would 


S eT. V.

serve only to diminish the evil, not to remove it entirely. Within each of the classes considerable varieties of fortune must have been admitted, and great injustice would still take place in the exaction of equal rates from persons of unequal wealth, though of the fame clafy.

Were we to suppose a capitation or poll-tax to be freed of all its defects, by a perfect adjustment of the exaction to the means of those on whom it is laid, this in fad would be to change it into that form of taxation which we would express under the name of afleffinent.

Under this title we may include every species of tax, in which a due proportion to the means or estate of the subje&t is aimed at.
Such, in particular, is the nature of the land tax in Great Britain.

The rent of land is of all others the most palpable fulbjed of assessment; but this form of taxation may with great justice be made to comprehend the rent of houses or tenements of any fort, which yield an ordinary return to the owner.

Property in money or flock is leTs easily ascertained. The very attempt, in the cafe of a merchant, might be attended with much inconvenience, or improperly disclose the secrets of trade. His flock is fluctuating. It is riflced upon uncertain events; and, at particular times, it may be doubtful whether his fortune is not greatly reduced, or whether he is not upon the eve of recovering his risk with great profit. Free and trading nations, therefore, may wifely forego the application even of VOL.II. K k k aireffiment, 
 aflTffinents, where the indiscriminate extension of such a tax SHCAP. V. might check the efforts of trade, on which the increase or preferva-rv tion of national wealth so much depends.

Monopoly is the exclusive privilege of buying or felling a commodity, from which it is proposed to levy a tax.

Whoever has the sole privilege of buying may buy at his own price, and will give no more than what enables the feller to bring his goods to market. If he also have have the sole privilege of vending, he will exacs as much as the confuner can be made to pay, without discouraging him entirely from the use of the commodity. With these advantages, the dealer may make indefinite profit in the result of his trade. When the sovereign takes such a monopoly to himself, or lets it to farm, as has been done in many states, refpeaing salt, tobacco, and other commodities, he obtains by such means a considerable revenue, limited only by his regard to what the people may susser from an immoderate exacion upon a commodity of general use, or by the danger of suppressing that use altogether, if the profit attempted to be made amounts to a prohibition. The Roman state, at a very early period of its history, took or let to farm the monopoly of salt The fame measure has been repeated in different nations of Europe and Asia, and is extended to a variety of other fubjedCs.

Among the objections to this mode of taxation may be reckoned the necessity with which sovereigns of almost every cenomination must feel themselves, being obliged to farm their monopolies, and thereby expose their people to all the vexations which accompany this mode of levying a tax, joined to the peculiar vexation of of being prohibited from filpplying themselves with an ufcful or 

neceTfary article, at the easiest rate. SCHP. VI

SE cr. V.

The effect of monopoly, otherwise, may be the fame either with that of a capitation tax, or of a fair affeffinent. A monopoly of the mere necefTaries of life, or of any commodity which the poor must consume, at least, equally with the rich, has all the cruel effecAs of indiscriminate capitation or poll tax; whereas the monopoly of any commodity of which men proportion the use to their means of procuring it, such as are matters of luxury or fuperfluous accommodation, has the effect of assessment so as to fall chiefly on the rich; or, if it fall upon persons of unequal condition, it may do so in just proportion to their fortune, or to their consumption of the article taxed.

But, in general it may be observed, that, if commodities are to be taxed, the form of customs or excise is preferable to that of monopoly.

The revenue of cufloms consists in certain rates exacted for goods as they are passing in commerce. They are exacted at toll-bars, at the entry to markets, at the gates of cities, or at sea ports.

The exaction of customs, no doubt, is an interruption to commerce, and as such is avoided by nations whose principal trade consists in the carriage of goods.

Customs are commonly advanced by the merchant, but confidered by him as a part in the cost of his goods, and to be recovered with profit in the sale of his commodity ; so that taxes of K k k 2 this 
 this fort acAually fall upon the consumer. By either merchant 
CHAP.V. or consumer, however, they are less felt as a grievance than any SEvCT. ' other form of taxation. The merchant submits to pay custom, because he hopes to recover that and every other part of his advance with profit. The consumer is almost insensible of it, be.
cause it is paid as a part of the price of the commodity, which he fieely buys, and from the use of which he is free to refrain whenever he becomes unwilling to pay the price.

As goods in commerce pass through a number of hands, and are paid for, successively by different traders, it is evident that the earlier any custom is paid to the revenue, in the tranimiffion of articles from the hands of the producer to those of the consumer, the heavier will that duty fall on the latter, as he will be made to refund with profit the advance which every intermediate trader has made; and the more will what he is made to pay, in consequence of a duty so early advanced, exceed what actually pasfes into the coffers of the Rate. To obviate this and some other inconveniences, supposed peculiar to the revenue of customs, the duties of excise have in ofme cafes been preferred.

The excise, when flated in contradiftindion to cutfoms, is a duty exacted from commodities in the adual use, and paid, not by the merchant, in any Rfage of the trade, but by the confumer.

In this form of a duty, all interruptions to commerce are propofed to be avoided, and the duty Limply exacted from the consumer, without any accumulation of impositions on the cost of the article. In nations, however, where the fubjecct is fond of his imnmunity, nity or exemption from the controul and inflpeaion of govern- 

ment, it is difficult to inflitute a revenue of excite, in the perfect CA P. 'V
form of its definition, as a tax levied fromn the confiimer. The citizen exposed to such exacion would be aggrieved, in having his dwelling always laid open to the intrusion of the revenue ofsicer, and his manner of life fubjeted to infpetion. To avoid these inconveniences, the excise in Great Britain is no more than an approximation to the model proposed under this title. It is a duty exadred not from the consumer, but from the producer or last vender of the commodity; who, on account of the profits to be made by his trade, may submit to the inconvenience of having it infpeded.

Another occasion of dislike, which, in this island, is taken to the revenues of excite, is more accidental. The first duties of this kind, that were fettled on the crown, were given in lieu of certain feudal rights which the king was entitled to exercise at difcretion; and it was thought reasonable that their equivalent should be administered in the fame manner with that part of the former revenue for which it was substituted. It is accordingly administered by a revenue board; and questions that arise with refpeC to it, are decided by commiflioners, without admitting the subjed to a trial at common law. The excise laws, accordingly, being supposed lets favourable to the people than those by which their rights are adminiflered, in other instances, are confidered with peculiar dislike.

But apart from there considerations which are peculiar to the free spirit of this constitution, the merit of excite, like that of any other tax im-posed on commodities, whether levied by monopoly or customs, is mcafurable by the nature of the comnodity on which PARr. II. which the duty is paid. It may be a tax either on the poor or on the rich separately, or on all the different ranks and conditions _yv of men, according to the degree in which they consume the commodity taxed.

No revenue can be considerable, that is derived only from a few, or from a particular class of the people. In the choice of articles to be taxed, therefore, fubjeAs of very general consumption, if made to pay what even the poor can afford at the rate of their own consumption, and which in the greater or increasing confunption of the rich may amount to a payment proportioned to their fortunes, is no doubt the preferable objea of taxation, whether in this form of excise or any other.





S E C T I O N VI.

The fame Jubjec7 continued.
a public revenue be constituted, whethein all or any of the ways now mentioned, a question still re- mains, In what manner the public resources are to be applied to ,-'"Y
the occasional exigencies of the state ?

An ordinary expence is to be provided for, from Come ordinary fund; but sudden or extraordinary occasions require some immediate or extraordinary supply; and it is an important queftion in the administration of public revenue, In what manner this supply is to be obtained, whether by calling upon the subje&, at every particular emergency, to contribute proportionally to the occasion; by having a treasure reserved from the savings of an ordinary income; or, last of all, by anticipating a future revenue in money borrowed, and chargeable with interest on some public fund?

There IA'RT II. There is no doubt that contributions proportioned to the oc'SrFc. VIl cafion, if these could be always obtained, would be the mos provv-~.-a per and safest manner of accommodating revenue to the variable exigencies of the state. In this manner, persons entrusted with government might be retrained from engaging in projects of expence beyond their means or resources. Perpetual taxes would not be imposed for temporary or precarious advantages; nor would the errors of a passing age leave, for a monument of its misconduct or misfortune, an unneceflary burden to be borne by posterity. But it may not be pracicable, on every emergency, and on those even the most pressing, to find a supply fully adequate to the occasion; and a nation thus trulRing its safety to the supply of the moment, would be exposed to much difadvantage, and even danger.

The occasions on which a people are likely to be called upon to contribute most largely, are the very times in which their means are the moit likely to be impaired, or they themselves precluded from the command of them. Such might be the cafe in time of invasion by a foreign enemy; when lands are laid wafie; when the stock of the husbandman and manufacturer is carried off or deflroyed; or even in cafe of war at a distance, or when the channels of trade are obftruted or turned away from their usual course, and the returns of profit are interupted or rendered precarious. In all fich cafes, no revenue fuddcenlj constituted can be equal to the occasion.

The provident rfatefman, therefore, we may fuppofc, would be prepared for for such an emergence in one or other of the ways rwe have mentioned; that is, he would manage his ordinary in2 COllIC

come in such a manner as to have some savings reserved in his 

coffers to meet such extraordinary occasions ; or he would bor- CHTIA. VI

SE cl:. VI.

row upon credit from the few who are in condition to lend what the public may not then be in condition to advance; but which it may be in condition to repay in a more favourable time.

The firit of these pratdices, in amafing a treasure hath been adopted by sovereigns in many Ilates both ancient and modern. It is peculiarly adapted to the charader of a prince, who is able in ordinary times to stretch the resources of his people to their utmost, or who is entitled at discretion to call upon them to contribute what he has not any immediate occasion to expend.

If indeed the ordinary revenue is such as the people can eafily supply, and the saving proceeds rather from the moderation and wife oeconomy of the sovereign, than from his rapacity in extorting from the people more than is consistent with their profperity to give; in such a cafe, the formation of a treasure by public saving is unquestionably a wife measure, and sovereigns are entitled to refped in proportion as they pur!iue it steadily and successfully.

In pursuit of this meafurc, however, it is aflunmed, that more niay at all times be exacted fiomn the people than there is any inmmediate or present occasion to expend ; that a capital or 'fock, equal to the publicfavings may be withdrawn fiomu the lucrative nradc of the fi!bjcEt, and lie unlc nployed in the coflC'r.s of thc flatc.
.ut to wt tiidraw any part of thel public lock, in tllis ni. an.nr, fl'o m ,ublilic use, is no doubt anl incolnvfcni1nce ; and it vSwill lie tiic more ;tfi1l) ly felt, in proportion as th!c p ol I
::;. indullfriu -, ::11l tt iV oi..11. , ]1 I ;i;;; 
PART. V. lified to improve the flock in their hands, by employing itin the C n _~ p. ; "!.

c ,-. ir hire of ufectul labour.

The objecions thus flated to either of the two former ways of adminiflcring a revenue, whether by making demands, on every emergency, proportioned to the occalion; or, by hoarding at one time lwhat may be wanted at another, may be removed by adopting the method which has been mentioned in the third place, viz. that of borrowing a capital for any sudden or extraordinary caf ; and, by creating a fund, or impoling a tax no more than lui'icient to pay the intcreil of the debt so contracted.

In this praclice, the len: er is tempted by the equitable or lucrative terms which are offered to him ; the public is tempted by the convenience of obtaining great fuins, adequate to the occasion, upon the credit of a fmrall or inconsiderable tax, government, at the fame time, reserving the option of paying up the capital at a convenient time, or leaving the fund allotted to pay the intcreft in a transferable form, all parties are fully accommodated.

The creditor, although the public debt flould not be paid, may recover his capital at pleasure by the sale of his flock: But the continuance of this practice requires that the good faith of thle public flould be known, and a perfect confidence established in the security it has given. The practice is therefore most likely to ficcecd, where the people, by themselves or their reprefentatives, have a lhare in the government, and are confilted particularly in what relates to the revenue of their country. As their consent is required t tohe levying of taxes, they are likely to preser a finall tax, though with the burden of a perpetual annuity, to heavy taxes for the prlcint, without any such burden. ! 1
-, d!er der such constitutions of government, while the public at large 

become debtor, some part of that public also becomes the creditor, CIAP. Vy.

S F c T. V1.

and in this capacity is deeply interetled in having the public faith ftriEly ob served.

* y this expedient, nations are qualified, on great occasions, to make exertions proportioned to their credit, .and may fometiines overwhelm an enemy of superior strength, whose coffers are drained, and who has not an equal access to this resource.

For this reason nations who have ample credit will ever be tempted to employ it, and proceed in accumulating debt bo long as the increase of their wealth enables them to provide for the supply of funds on which the public credit may be securely eftablilhed.

This policy, however is supposed liable to peculiar objection, and is indeed threatened with evils of a very serious nature. It opens a new species of trade in the transfer of public funds attended with profit and loss to individuals, but unlike the employment of flock in manufacture or commerce, which tends to the increase of national wealth, itrefembles rather the viciflitudes of a gaming table, turning the industry and skill of those concerned into instruments of mutual deftrudion, by which they would prey upon one another ; so that, whoever gains, the public is fiure to lose to the amount of a labour which is so mifilpplied. The more that the public funds increafdl, the more scope is given to thi s ruinous branch of traffic; and the ftrcets of a capital, inltcad of the concourse of a busy people, who are labouring to increase the wealth of their country, exhibit crouds of adventurcrs who arc lhafcning to partake of its fjoil-. They lcnd, not: L 1 1 tC

 to accommodate their country, but'to make profit on every occa
 sion of public expcnce or calamity.
Sxc'r. VI.

The ftatefinan, in the mean time, is tempted by the facility of borrowing to be lavili of the public credit. The monied min encourage him, that they themselves may have lucrative bargai ns; and they from wxhom a tax is to be levied prefer a light burden in which their posterity is to bear a part, to one more heavy, of w hich they themselves muff have borne the intire load.

A national debt may be increased almost insensibly, while the means and the strength of the people continue to grow; but no progress in human affairs is infinite, and whatever may be the strength of a people, a load that is continually growing muff overwhelhn them at last; or, to speak without a figure, the interest of a debt that is continually accumulating must come in the end to equal, or even to exceed, all the funds which can be found for payment of its interest.

Upon this account, it is a wife policy to eftablifli some form, in which a debt that is gradually increasing, by recourse to the public credit on every accidental occasion, may also be gradually diminifiling, in times of respite from every iuch occasion.

It may happen fortunately for nations in which the measure of borrowing is adopted, that the interest of money, by the accumulation of unemployed capital, may be considerably reduced; and in this cafe the public, by borrowing at a reduced interefl to pay off the original debt, may considerably diminifli the annuity vlhich they were originally bound to pay. In tlis nmanner, whlil the clapital of the debt in Great Britain was increaring, lthe anunity, nuity, by a mere reduction of interest, was kept from increaflng, 

in the fame proportion. An original interest, in some inflances, CHIAP. VI'
of eight per cent. being reduced to three, it may happen that, Sc-. V
while the capital of a debt is doubled, the annuity receives no increase, or may even be reduced.

So far, however, it appears from the whole of there obfervations, that states, in adopting any specific form in the adminiftration of revenue, are exposed to peculiar inconveniencies or difficulties; and it is probable, that no two Rates can with equal advantage have recourse to the fame expedients. One slate may not be exposed to any such great or sudden emergency as may not provide for by an effort made on the occasion; and, in such cafe, it is undoubtedly expedient to accommodate the supply to the service for which it is wanted.

As every Rfate may to a certain extent proceed in this manner, and on many occasions find a supply proportioned to the exigence of the cafe, it is undoubtedly wife, so far as is practicable, to accompany every emergence with a suitable provision, while, at the fame time, care may be taken to have some treasure relerved in the coffers of the state, for occasions which cannot thus be provided for by occasional supplies. Thus, the Romans who had repeatedly suffered under sudden invasions from the warlike nations of Gaulic extraction, residing within the Alps, had a facredc treasure reserved, which it was deemed profane to touch, but in cafi of iome such alarm from that quarter as threatened the public with immcdiate deftrucAion.

Nootwithflanding thcfE maxims, it mufi also be admitted that, where itatcs are fortunately circuLtlanced with rcfjict to ctr.'it, I ntlC, PA;.x I. and, by means of this advantage, are able to maintain their ifate 
aglaintf nations otlherwife more powerful than themselves, it were S:c'r. VI.

no doubt impolitic in them, to forgo their advantage, or to susser themlflvcs to be overwhelmed, rather than employ a fpccific means of defence which they in a particular manner have in their power.

But, without dwelling any longer on the comparison of diff.
rent forms for the adminifiration of revenue, we may ojferve, that the wifdomi of any public expence is to be estimated by the occasion on which it is made; and public profit or loss from any adventure is to be measured by the return which it brings, whether adequate or unequal to the cofl.

An expence, in whatever manner it be provided for, whether by savings made of the past, or by anticipations of a future revevenue; or, in whatever manner it be disbursed, if it either were unnecessary, or did not bring a proper return, is to be confidered as an article of public loss.

On the contrary, an expence which is necelTary to public safetv, or which brings an overbalance of gain, in whatever manner the supply be obtained, may be confidered as part in the course of a prosperous nation. Not only positive acquisitions, but losfcs avoided, and the maintenance of a people in their progreflive courle of improvement, may be stated in account againil the debt which is incur'cd, and be fuiflcient to create a balance in favour of the nation by whom it is contractecl. Mere debt, therefore, is -not to bc confi(lcred as an article of loGs, or even inconvcnience l'which thc national gtin may not amlply coinpenfttc. Nor arc 'Vi; we rahilly to conclude, that a nation is the poorer for every arti- 

cle of debt it has contracted, until we have confidered to what 




cffect the money so procured has been expended, and whether the E,-r public advantages-gained by means of it are.fully adequate to the riflk and the cost.

At the fame time, admitting this rule to be followed in the estimate of profit and lots, whether from money spent or borrowed, the peculiar effec of a national debt contracted is merely to trani.fer exifling property or revenue, from the person who formerly consumed it, to a person who now receives it in the form.
of interest for his money. In this form, the property is at once ofufe and transferable with more ease than in any other form whatever. To the flockholder it joins the convenience of a bank with the profit of a mortgage, and is of great benefit to the trader at every little interval at which his money is unemployed. We cannot doubt, therefore, apart from the advantage of credit in the public operations of a people, that it is a public benefit also to have part of the national property in this transferable form: How much, it may be difficult to determine. It may, no doubt, with advantage, be increased to a certain degree; but not indefinitely.
And it is wife, as the public occasions may tend to accumulate debt, that there should be a public regulation also, tending to diminifl it *. In this manner, the balance of universal order is beautifully preserved throughout the system of nature T.

W5here -X As in the comminiion for managing a finking fund.

I- TUle influx of rivers is balanced by cvaporation from tlhe f:a ; nndl he proj[ ile i ltmlfc of pl;lllt is ciliLcunfcribicd withiin certain bounds by cc r rcs.

PART IT. Where the money wanted cannot be raised within the year, it may nevertheless be raised within a limited period, if the fund v X- - ,provided should be sufficient not only to pay the interest, but also to extinguifli the debt within a specified time.

S IE C T I ( N



S E C T I O N VII.

Of Civil or Political Liberty.

T HERE is a meaning annexed to liberty which is highly inte- 
PART ILr refting to every ingenuous mind. Its votaries are supposed to 




have a common cause with their fellow creatures, and ever oc- -Sv.
cupy a distinguished rank in the lift of the heroes. It is thus that Pelopidas and Thrafybulus, Dion, Cato, and Brutus, rife above the level even of eminent men. It inspires magnanimity and noblenefs of mind; at the fame time, like every other objec that greatly concerns mankind, certain misapprehensions of it, or false pretensions to it, give occasion to great abuse. The zealot for liberty has run into the wildest disorders; and adventurers, under pretence of promoting it, have found their way to the most violent and pernicious usurpations *.

Mmm On * To this we ascribe the Tribunitian disorders at Rome, and the usurpations of Cacefr and Cromwell, &c.

 On a subjeA so interetling, we are deeply concerned to have SEC.VII. just information; and, as the substitution of a false idol for this GoV _ objec& of ardent devotion has led to such fatal extremes, we are no less concerned to reprobate the idol with horror, than we are with fond devotion to reverence the genuine object of worship; and may very properly, in our way to the formation of a just notion of liberty, begin our researches by observing what it is not.

Far fetched knowledge is not the most useful, either in the formation of theories, or in the conduCt of life; and it is in the common course of things we must look for the rule to direct us in either. It is also in the most common or vulgar errors we have to dread the greatest danger to the peace and welfare of mankind.
H-owever persons of reflecRion, therefore, may think it idle to wafle time in correcing such errors, we must attend to the common notions of men, refpecing a matter in which the plurality of voices may often prevail over reason and good sense.
TJpon this account we may be allowed to observe, in the outset, that liberty or freedom is not, as the origin of the name may seem to imply, an exemption from all restraint, but rather the most effectual application of every just reteraint to all the members of a free slate, whether they be magistrates or fubjeAs.

It is under a just restraint only that every person is safe, and cannot be invaded, either in the fieedom of his person, his property, or innocent acion. If any one were unrestrained, and might do what he pleaSed, to the fame extent also every one else must be expoled to susser whatever the free man of this defcription were inclined to inflid; and the very ufuipation of the most outrageous outrageous tyrant is no more than a freedom thus assumed to PArT 1I.

hn! ~~~~ifS'^~~ elf ~



Under this rniftake, the.vulgar conceive a zeal for liberty to consist in opposition to government; take part with every refractory subjeA; and seem to think that whatever impairs the power of the magiltrate must enlarge the freedom of the people. It is material, then, to remember that every person whatever, no leTs than the magistrate, if not properly restrained, may trespass on the liberty of his fellow creature ; and that the establishment of a just and effetual government for the repression of crimes, is of all circumstances in civil society, the mofi essential to freedom: That every one is justly said to be free in proportion as the government under which he resides is sufficiently powerful to protect him, at the fame time that it is sufficiently restrained and limited to prevent the abuse of its power. This is the roof under which the free citizen takes flelter from the storm of injustice and wrong; and he is no less concerned to know that the roof is tight and sufficient to repel the storm, than he is to know that it is well supported and secured from falling on his head.

We are safe, then, to define liberty, the operation of just government, and the exemption from injury of any fort, rather than merely an exemption firom restraint; for it adtually implies every just restraint. It must be admitted, at the fame time, that to a being whose acdive exertions are a principal source of his enjoyments, restraint, if capricious or unjust, may be confidered among the first of his grievances; and there is no infringerment of liberty more sensibly felt than a teazing imposition of frivolous obfcrM m m 2 vances, PA RT. TI. vances; or an arbitrary restraint imposed on the harnilefs purfuuii SECT. VI. of an ordinary life.: It is highly grateful to the human mind to pursue its innocent eourfe undireced and uncontroulled. It is even flattered with the imagination of romantic scenes, in which nature is free; nor bound to any task; not responsible to any authority; not hampered by any forms; and left to purfute the object of the moment in the way that the present moment suggests. This we conceive to be the Itate of the savage in his forest, conneced only with the objects of his affecion or choice; and, even in his engagements with those he loves, released from any sense of awe, controul, or restraint, whatever.

From this state of supposed perfect freedom, we apprehend that every flep which is made towards a political establishment must be to the individual a surrender of some original right; but we are disposed to apologise for the conceflion a free citizen has made, by stating the sacrifice of a part as necessary to secure the remainder.

Liberty, therefore, if most perfed in the condition of the savage, it fliourd eem from this account of the matter, is at least insecure; and this circumstance overthrows the very idea of that freedom which consists in the secure enjoyment of rights. The savage may, if he will, retire from the haunts of his fellow creatures, and avoid them as he himself is avoided by those animals of which he is disposed to make a prey. But, while he lives within reach of other men, he himself if weak may be a prey to the strong; or,. if individually strong, he may still be a prey to numbers, if perchance they should combine against him. His fieedom, then, is precisely no more than a privilege to deny himself all the corn2, forts, forts of a marn,in order to avoid the inconveniencies of a-dangerous 

neighbourhood: Or,iffecurity be necessary toliberty,in what man- CH"P Vi ner, we may ask, can he at once possess and secure his comforts ? V
Only by the concert of many, mutually to defend one another, and for this purpose to ad under a common direction. This, in other words, is to form a political establishment; and so far mankind universally proceed to adopt some species of polity upon the suggestion of nature, or theearly lessons of experience in ages otherwife rude.

Now, it may be asked, what has the individual surrendered in coming under such an establishment ? the freedom of retiring from his kind, flall we fay, and of relinquishing all the comforts of society ? But this he has in faa no where surrendered. This fort of freedom is still entire to the citizen of London and Paris, as much, as to the original inhabitant of Canada or Labrador.
But the subj-ea of any regular government will scarcely think it a privilege that he may, if it so please him,, relinquiih all the comforts and securities of life under the notion of recovering the original freedom of his kind. Security, in faa, is the essence of freedom; and, if security is to be obtained under political eftablifhment alone, there alone also is freedom obtained: and, in repairing to this shelter, when properly instituted, the savage surrenders nothing, or rather in the acquisition of fecurity.acquires every thing.

Freedom or liberty, then, we may conceive to be the genuirn fruit of political effablifhment: But, where the fruit is wanting, the tree is jufily accursed for its barrenness, or torn up by the roots for its yielding a poifoninfteadofa wholesome food. When liberty is confidered as the cause of the innocent against the guilty, or of the weak against the strong, and awakens the heart again f 
 against insult and wrong, we may easily account for the ardent CHCAP.VI and enthufiatic affe&ion with which it is embraced by every 
yverb) ingenuous mind. Mere reitraint, however injurious, is but one species of wrong, and would form but a partial account of the evils which render the tyrant so much an object of indignation to mankind.

But to the negative proposition thus stated, that liberty does not consist in mere exemption from refRraint, we may fubjoin.another, That it does not consist in the equality of fation or fortune.
In this sense, liberty were a mere chimera or vision, never realized in the slate of mankind. The nations who contended most for the equality of citizens, in admitting the institution of slavery, trespassed most egregiously on the equality of mankind.

Nay,but we shall be told,that all men were originallyequal. This, in regard to property, can mean only, that, when no one had any thing, all men were equally rich: But even this is no more than fancied equality in a single point. In refpec to sex and age, tfrength of body and mind, individuals are destined to inequality from their birth; and, almost in the firft-feps of society, bear the diftincions which industry and courage give in the different attainments of men, and lead in the sequel to all the varieties of profession and fortune.

The only refped in which all men continue forever to be equal, is that of the equal right which every man has to defend himself; but this involves a source of much inequality in refped to the things which any one may have a right to defend. As every one originally had a right to preferve'himfelf in the just use of his limbs, organs, and faculties, he has also a right to what there may may jutly procure for him; he has a right to engage himself in 

any bargain or compact, and to stipulate for himself any fair con- 


SFcT.VII.

dition; he has a right to acquire by his labour any unappropriated fubjecd, or any subjet appropriated with consent of the former proprietor. In the exercise of there rights, the conditions of men, whether in refpeA to pofeflions, or in refpea to their mutual conceffions.pr claims offervice, may become unequal to any fair amount; and it is not possible to prevent the inequality of condition in the fortunes of men, without violating the first and common principles of right in the most flagrant manner.

Whilit we admit, therefore, that all men have an equal right to defend themselves, we must not mistake this for an assumption that all men must have equal things to defend, or that liberty flould consist in firipping the industrious and the skilful, who may have acquired much, to enrich the lazy and profligate, who may have acquired nothing, or who may have wafted allthey could reach. It is inpoffible to restrain the influence of superior ability, of property, of education, or the habits of station. It is impoffible to prevent these from becoming in some degree hereditary; and of consequence it is impossible, without violating the principles of human nature, to prevent some permanent diftinAion of ranks: And, if this were poflible, it is far from expedient in the circumstances of human life. In these inequalites we find the first germe of subordination and government so necessary to the safety of individuals and the peace of mankind; and in these also we find the continued incentive to labour and the pratice of lucrative arts.

As liberty consists in the communication of safety to all,nothing could be more repugnant to it than the violation of right in any part, in order to level the whole. It is true that great inequalities X of 
 of fortune are adverse to some species of political institution; that C'HAP. VI.
SCT. VII. great diiindtions of rank, founded in birth alone, to the exclurY_ sion of merit, or to the suppression of all the efforts of distinguished ability in public service, is a corruption fatal to mankind; that unrestrained possession of arbitrary power of any fort, is for the fake of liberty and justice, to be carefully watched and flopped short of the extreme to which it may tend: But, as every one has a right to the condition in which, by the ordinary course of human nature, he is fairly placed, in which he is no way injurious to his fellow creatures, it must follow that liberty, in every particular infiance, must consist in securing the fairly acquired conditions of men, however unequal.

Diftindions of fortune may give rife to a reparation of ariftocratic and popular faclions, or a supposed opposition of interests, in the different orders of a people; and we will have occasion to observe that neither is safe without such a ihare in the government as may enable them to defend themselves, or put a negative on any measures which might be prejudicial to their refpedive interests. Both the high and the low, however, frequently aspire to. the government of their country. The one is said to contend for authority, subordination, and power; the other for liberty, immunity, or privilege: But liberty is far from being sa'fe in the exclusive prevalence of either. This will not be disputed relating to the unrefirained prevalence ofariftocratic authority. But it is no less true, that liberty does not consist in the prevalence of democratic power. 'I he violence of popular afTemblies and their tumults need to be restrained, no less than the pafilons and uulrpations of any other power whatever; and there is indeed no species of tyrrany under which individuals are lels lase than under that of a majority or prevailing ficUion of a corrupted people.

From IFrom these observations, upon the whole, it appears, that liber- 
PART I.

ty consists -in the security of the citizen against every enemy, whe- S V

C I. VI.

ther foreign or .domestic, public or private, from- whom; without <vo any provision being made for his defence, he-might-be.expofed to wrong or. oppression of any fort: And the first requisite, it should leem, towards obtaining this security, is the existence :of an esfetive government to wield the flrength of the community against foreign enemies, and to repress the commission of wrongs at home. Under this protetion, indeed, there may be danger from the very power which is established to afford it; but, without some fuich provision, there cannot be any degree of safety whatever. .

In pursuing this idea of liberty, therefore, through the several circumstances that may be neceflary to give it reality and effect, we have to confider, in the first place, what may be necessary to give an eflabliihment efficacy in restraining the disorder of the subjea: Next, what precautions may be neceirary in the inftitution of power,, to prevent the abuses that may be apprehended in the discharge of its functions.

There functions, we may conceive under three separate titles, legiflatioit, jurij2iiciozn, and the execution of the law, or concluc7Z
oj the national Jorce. And, corresponding to there functions, in every political eftabliihment, three diftint powers may be confidered; namely, the legf/lative, the judicative, and the executive. With respect to each of there, liberty requires that the powers Ihould be effectual to the eftablilhmncnt and preservation of order on the part of the lubjedt, and that it fllould be so exerVOL. IL. N n n cifed 
cifed on the part of the magistrate, as not to offer any injustice or Sc-T.VI. wrong to the people.

In farther treating of liberty, therefore, we are to confider the inflitutions of government required for the discharge of the principal funtions now enumerated, and providing at the 'fame time for the efficacy of power, and the safety of those who might be exposed to susser from its abuse.






Of Liberty as it mnay be afneed by the Exercie of the eegflative Tawer.

LAW is the sovereign will to which every part of the commu- 

nity must conform itself. That power, therefore, whether single 

or combined of many parts, which gives law to the community, 
mnuft be supreme; and, when its will is declared, cannot admit of any controu], without a diflolution of the political frame.

Upon this ground, liberty seems to require that every member of the commonwealth should have access, before the law is enated, to guard himself against any wrongs to which he may be exposed from the admission of any partial regulation; or. in other words, that the people of every separate order or rank, however diftinguifled by fortune, flould each have an acive fllare in the legislature of their country.

At 
 At the fame time, if this be admitted, it should seem to follow SECTHAPVI that liberty must be confined to a few democratical flates, in !- .--» which alone it is possible to comply with this condition. And so indeed, among antient nations, liberty was supposed peculiar to republics, and to those especially in which the sovereignty was exercised by the collective body of the people. Upon this ground, the republics of Greece and Italy were, with a few exceptions, diftinguifled from the reft of the world.

But the practice of representation, so happily introduced in some modern nations, though not of so great extent as to admit of their people being collecively aflembled, has removed this difficulty, and enabled every order of the state, if not collectively, at least by deputation, to take a part in the legislature of their country, and to have a vigilant eye on the proceedings of the whole.

What renders this expedient, of trufling the interests of many to a few, a sufficient security to the people who rely on it, is that their representative, by being a person of the fame mind and interest with themselves, and himself included in every ac of legiflation, is likely to'proceed as his constituents would do in his place. In whatever manner the representative be singled out, if he bear there qualifications, human nature does not seem, in flares of considerable extent, to admit of any greater security to liberty than this.

It may be thought that elecion is the most likely, if not the only way offecuring tlefe qualifications in the person who is to represent the people; but, if the roll of the citizens be sufficiently purged of all persons unfit or unworthy to partake in the legislaturc lature of their country, the representative might no doubt with- 
PARTIL.
out any danger be drawn by lot. 




But here we may be told, " That more is required to com" plete the advantage of a form in which citizens aa by repre" fentation: That it is not enough the representative partake in " the interest of those he represents: That he ought to feel him" self in the exercise of a trust committed to him by the confi" dence and good will of his fellow-citizens, and be led to act " from affecion in return for their esteem." This, indeed, however little it may be necessary to secure his regard for an interest in which he himself partakes, is the true slate of a man and a citizen acting for the welfare of his country.

With this, also, it may farther be urged, " That every flatute 6 being a treaty or act of convention between the parties concerned, and, like any other compat, is binding only upon "those who in person, or by their- commiflioners, have given ' their assent; the representative muff have an express commiflion " or deputation, entitling him to bind his confrituents before he s can fubjeet them to any condition in the form of law; and that ' in ats of legislation, every individual has a right to name his " representative, or, if this right be withheld from him, that he is " not bound by any deed which may follow."

Upon this plea of absolute right in every individual to be bound only by his own assent, itfhould be allowed that, prior to convention, a people cannot be bound to any aA in which they are not unanimous. WVh:re any individual diflents, he does more than withhold his agreement. he declares a repugnance: But when a plca thus amounts to iomething that has never been realized in -he 3 shi fory 1'ARtI iI. history of mankind, flill more, if its object be such as cannot be >:l:t.. VI. realized, there is reason not only to doubt its validity, but actually ,./T'--, to confider it as altogether nugatory and abfird.

Laws are every where acknowledged to be binding on persons who are never called upon to give their assent, either by themselves or their representatives. And where it is proposed to have a general assent, still the assemblies which are held for this purpose are partial, and far fiom admitting every subjed, without exception, for whom the law is to be made. One of the sexes, though by nature vefied with every right; and a great part of the other sex, upon an arbitrary diftindion of nonage f, are excluded altogether; many are kept away by disability of health or decline of age; yet, it never was supposed, in any cafe whatever, that these are to have a dispensation from the law. Even of the few who attend deliberative or eleEtive assemblies, it seldom happens that the whole is unanimous. And if the majority in faa overule the minority, this prior to convention is a mere effeCt of power, not matter of right. The majority is no more than a government defac7o, until the people at large, finding their account in the observance of tome such rule, and every individual, in his turn, availing himself of his advantage in being of the majority, by his acquiescence, gives it a right of convention in the fame manner as any other acual government receives the anCtion of compaCt, and becomes binding on those who avail themselves of the benefit it beflows.

3 Prior The period of nonage has been varied from i8 to 21 and 25 years, and is in r nlity arbitrary. One person may have more fcnlf under 20 than another at 40 or 6c, or any other time of his life ; but, as children are iincapable of public trull, it is neccf'nry that there fliould be a rule in this matter to which all nmuif conform, Prior to convention, every one has a right to govern himself; 

but not to govern any one else. The government of others, then, 


prior to convention, is not matter of right to any one; although l -~j to have government, and this purged of every person incapable or unworthy of the trust, is matter of expedience to every one. And under every wife political establishment it becomes a queflion, who may be safely entrusted with legislative power ? for surely the indiscriminate right of every one, whether capable and worthy, or incapable and unworthy, cannot by any means be admitted.

While we suppose the people, therefore, to partake in the legiC
lature of their country, whether collectively or by representation, a variety of questions are still open to discussion: ift, Who are to be admitted on the rolls of the people, and to have a deliberative or elective voice ?

2d, In the cafe of a people too numerous to meet in any one body, in what divisions are they to aa ?

These questions, even under establishments the most favourable to public liberty, have been decided as chance would have it. In all the ancient republics, the class of free citizens was but a small part of the whole number that was fubjeat to the law. At Athens, the moll democratical of all the ancient republics, not a third; and at Rome, flill in a smaller proportion. Even the citizens, so reduced in their proportion to the whole number of men in the community, were never in faa collectively alTembled. At Athens, of about two hundred and eighty four thoufind fouls, including siee citizens, aliens, and slaves, no more than five tiloulian commonly met in the Ecclesia or national afembly ; a proportion rather iPR.r lr. rather to be confidered as a representation than a collective body.
 At Rome, the people dispersed over the country towns and the __- provinces were, in the fame manner also, casually represented in the comtia by such as fi-equented the ftieets of the capital. In the cafe of Athens, io far as concerned the free citizens, being about 84,000, the representation may have been adequate and safe: Five thousand citizens, inhabitants of the city,cafually taken from the whole,and making laws for themselves and the community,were no way likely to-invade the rights of the multitude; although, fromn their democratical spirit, they too often invaded the rights of particular citizens, diftinguifled by their fortunes, or even by their merit. The casual representation which took place at Rome was much less adequate or safe. The disorderly inhabitants of the town gave law to their fellow citizens as well as to their fubjets and allies of the provinces.

In modern Europe, we are every where happily rid of that diftindtion of free man and slave, which in antient times excluded so many of the human species at once from any means of defending themfelves,in forming'the laws towhichthey werefubjed. Buteven here, and where the spirit of political eftabliflhmentis moit favourable to public liberty, there are still considerable exclusions from the political meetings of the people, whether for police or elecRion.
Not to mention again the exclusion of women and children, there is in every country a diftiniion of denizen and alien, by which many inhabitants are excluded from any flarc in the government to which they are fubjeet. In thelittle canton of Schweitz, the master and his firvant unyoke their team, and go to the national assembly together: But still the alien inhabitant must abide by refolutions in which he has no part. In the firfl attempts of the irench Revolution to equalize the rights of men, a certain though a very small cenius was required, to entitle the citizen to a vote at PARr IT.
elections. In a subsequent appointment this census was dropped 

but frill those who are to be governed by the law exercise their dif- r cretion, and menial servants are excluded. In Great Britain, a certain census * is required, together with some circumstances of freehold and burgers qualification. And even, notwithstanding these qualifications, certain officers of the executive power, as being dependant on a part of the community diflinA from the commons, are, by recent laws, excluded from a vote at the election of commoners to serve in parliament. But, notwithstanding these exclusions, the liberty of the subjea is more secure perhaps than it ever has been under any other human eftablifliment. And if any one plead that, being excluded from a vote at eledions, he is not bound by the laws to which the people aftent by representation, his plea may be admitted, and he is at liberty to withdraw from the influence of these laws: But, while he remains within the precints to which they extend, and continues to take the benefit of them, he is not at liberty to counteracd- or to disturb the order of things eftablifhed. The public, to avoid a special discussion of the franchises of every individual; and the return of fich difcuffions,on every particular occafion,have fettledgeneral rules for the better government of the country': And, if there rules carry an exclusion to any individual,he neverthelefbowestothatlawthe fame obedience that he owes VoL.11. Ooo to * DiftinCqions of rank, for the molt part, are taken from birth or property; and we may censure the rule, but cannot reverse it. It is even fortunate for mankind that a foundation of subordination is laid, too obvious to le overlooked by the dullelt of men, or by those who fland nmoit in need of being governed. But, though property sometimes overpower both ability and every other merit, yet there are occasions in which it must give way to cither. At eledions and country metillgs, men of fortune predominate; but arlices arc conmanldeid and flates are governed by men of ability.

PA RTI II. to every other law of which he enjoys the effeAd and protec

SECT.V \! tion.

But, in refpe& to there exclusions, and in refpec to other particulars, in matters of particular form, there is a confideriable latitude, within which varieties are found that do not eflentially affect the liberties of mankind. As to the separate divisions, in particular, in which a numerous people may assemble for any purpose of itate, they have for the most part been casual; as were the tribes or Curia at Rome; the tythings, hundreds, parishes, counties, and borroughs, in Great Britain.
Such divisions may be unequal; and yet, .in perfet confluence with freedom, have equal voice in the deliberative or elecive proceedings of their country. The liberties of mankind do not totter upon a single point of support: They make for themselves a large and capacious base, under a variety of forms, in which men itill find themselves in condition to defend their rights. All that can be said in the matter is, that, if any people were to make up anew the rolls of their citizens, or to set off the divisions in which they were to aa, the rolls ought to be made up with the feweft exclusions, and the divisions set off with the greatest equality, confitent with reason and public safety. Where people indeed ac by representation, their liberty depends more upon the character of the representative, than upon the form of proceeding, or the number of persons who are admited to vote at elections; and when this matter is fettled upon any footing that is safe, Stability is of more consequence than any advantage to Ilunmanum efl crrarc.

to be gained by change. Too much fluauation, or frequent 
PART I.
transition from one set of rules to another, is, of all circum- 

stances, the least consistent with that sense of security in which l the poffefiion and enjoyment of liberty consists.

Of the Yudicative Tower.

 I
CHAP VI. iT is congenial to the nature of intelligent being, that the scene SECT. IX in which he is to act flould be governed by fixed and determinate laws, either obvious, or scrutable by the faculties with which he is furniihed. Such, accordingly, is the scene prepared for man in the system of nature.

It is also essential to the liberties of a people, that their rights should be defined in well known and permanent regulations, from which the citizen may know his condition, without consulting the caprice or uncertain will of any person whatever. As for this purpose there is required a legislature the most likely to form impartial laws, so also is required a judicature the imot likely to give these laws their proper eficA.

*1

In whatever manner the powers of state be distributed, that 


 which gives law to the whole, we have observed, must be fu- 
preme; and though, by this circumstance, the legislative power cannot admit of controul, either in the application or interpretation of its own enatments, yet it is perhaps by this very circumstance, in ordinary cafes, disqualified to exercise, in consistence with the safety of the people, either the judicative or executive powers.

It were dangerous to allow of any latitude or any exercise of discretion, in the application of law. This is the tenure by which every citizen holds his right; and it were nugatory to fay, that the tenure of law were secure, if it might be interpreted and applied at discretion. But it is impoflible to separate the idea of discretionary power from that of the sovereign or supreme legislature. Persons invested with sovereignty, and inured to conmand, will not easily submit to be restrained by rules which, thoughjuft in the principle, may, in particular cafes, appear inexpedient. The discretion that was exercised in framing the law will incline even those by whom it was framed, under the influence of sentiments or passions that may arise on particular occafions, to dispense with the rule which they themselves had-enaAed. And if the law be departed from, in any cafe whatever, the citizen is ob far aggrieved, or becomes insecure of his tenure.

If the legislature be cornpofed of members collected fiom the different orders of the community, as the safety of these difTcrcut orders seem to require, there is indeed, even from such aflnmblage of powers concentrated in the fame assembly, les abuse to be apprehended in the application as well as cnacmlcnlt of n2~~~~ d1:l~~i~the 
PART. TI. the law. But such numerous afTemblies- are peculiarly apt to 

SCAT. IVX. enter into the passions and interefis of a particular cafe, to com\ ',r municate paffon by contagion, and to become eager in the pursuit of any object, by mere sympathy or participation of zeal; so that one or other of the parties, to whom a law should apply, in a particular cafe, may be liable to susser by the heat or passion of a moment, a tenure which of all others is the least secure by which any right can be held.

A person may be qualified to hold a place in the Iegiflature of his country, by merely partaking in the interest or concern of the order or claPs of men he represents, or of which he makes a part; and he may provide for the safety of his constituents, by refuting his assent to whatever is inconsistent with his own : But to exercife the office of judge, more may be necessary; an equal concern for the rights of all parties, and an adequate knowledge of the laws in which those rights are defined.

Where the laws, therefore, are greatly multiplied, as is generally the cafe under institutions of freedom, the study of law becomes the object of a separate profession; every one, whose right in a particular cafe is brought to the test of law, has recourse to the assistance of learned counsel; and, as in the contest of parties each may have recourse to partial counsel, it is necessary that the public also should have counsel retained for law and justice.

Such we may conceive to be the charalcer in which official judges are appointed, under every well regulated government.

As judgement, in any one instance, may be subje6t to error, O£'

or incline to abuse, it is proper that there fllould be courts of- 

appeal, and means of review; or, in cafe of apprehended cor- 
ruption, it is proper that the official judge flould be responsible vr-.
to some tranfcendant jurifdidion which may take cognizance of his conduct, and restrain a crime which would involve the whole community at once in its consequences. Here the legifla.
ture itself must interpose; and, if for no other reason than this, ought not, in the previous Rteps of a suit, to charge itself with the functions of judicative power.

In legislation, citizens assemble with a professed intention to promote or to guard their own interests, or those of their refpecdive orders; and, even in the exercise ofjudicative power, it may not be possible to exclude the consideration of peculiar interests, even from those who fit in judgement on the rights of fellow citizens: But, if any interest is to be admitted in the tribunals of justice, it flould certainly be no other than the general interest of the people at large; an interest which is equivalent to justice itself; which requires that no right flould be violated, or that no violation of right ihould escape punishment.

This, in fad, is an interest which the impartial citizen has in every question of law. If crimes may be committed, and a wrong may be done to any one, it may be done to himself. If an innocent person may susser under pretence of a criminal charge, such a charge, in the next instance, may be brought against himself.
If crimes are not restrained, or if criminals are suffered to escape, the innocent citizen may confider every criminal so discharged as an enemy let loose against himself and his family.

It 
 It appears, then, that a person so affeled is equally qualified 

SECT. X. for the judicative as for the legislative trust:. He has every ilv'r-j ducement to judge fairly, to the utmost of his ability, in every question of civil or penal jurifdiAion. He may need the aliftance of learned counsel, or of the official judge, in directing the forms of procedure, in bringing questions to iflue, or in pronouncing the sentence of law; but, where evidence is brought before him, and the circumstances of a cafe are fairly stated, he is fully competent, as in the ordinary affairs of human life, to perceive the reality of a fad, or to pronounce of a deed that has been done, whether it be guilt or innocence.

Such, indeed, is the description and funAtion of juries in the tribunals of some modern nations, who have fortunately in this instance refined on the pracice of feudal establishments, by which questions of right or criminal charge, in particular instances, were referred to the judgement of a few felea men from the vicinage. The occasional tribunal so composed is termed a Jury, because its members are sworn to determine truly in the questions which come to be tried before them. The oath of the juror may no doubt be held in part a security for the truth of his verdiCt; and a like security might be had, by administering a similar oath to the official judge: But the specific security which is had in this cafe arises, not from the fandion of an oath, but from the characer and condition of the juror equally interested in civil questions, to support every right, and to restrain every wrong, and, in penal questions, to protea the innocent, however accufed, and to punifli the guilty, however supported.

That That this character, indeed, may be realized in every instance, 

it is proper that a lift, colleced indiscriminately fron the vicinage 


SEcl. IX.

in which any question has arisen, should be purged of all partial i w counsel, by challenge of the magistrate or of the parties conccrned, until they who are inclosed for trial ihall be free from any exception, whether ofreafon or nameless distrust, that may lie against them.

Men taken, for the occasion, from the mere ordinary walks of life, may be ill qualified to unravel the intricacies of of a judicial cafe; but, in this, it is the funtion of the official judge to afftif them. Law is devised for the people; and as, in the accumulation of its forms, there may be introduced a number of technical .rmills, with which lawyers alone are familiar, it is right that in every particular trial they should be brought back, if possible, to the use of a language which all men underhand. This is the tenure by which every citizen holds his right; and it is proper that it fiould not be wrapped up in obscurities. The official judge partakes in the magistracy, and may be infeced with its specific prepoffereions against the subjet. If his condud occasion any sus'picion of this fort, the power of a jury is on this account also wifely interposed to prevent its effects. And upon the whole we may venture to assume, that a tribunal so constituted gives to the citizen, in the possession and exercise of his rights, all the security which it is possible to obtain through the medium of any human eftabliflment.

After all, it is possible that, in thus attempting to fix canons of estimation in matters of political inflitution, we may be partial to those of our own country, and miflake the forms to IP p p which P ART II. which we ourselves are accustomed for the models of reason and 
 wisdom. It is, however, fortunate for a country to have in
ftitutions which can be so mi-flaken by those who experience their cffects.



Of the Executiv.' Power.

WVIHEN a people is orderly, and affairs proceed with little in- 
PART I.
terpofition of government, we may be apt to imagine that they 

might do without it: But the happiest effea of government is Y
to prevent disorders, not to redress them. And when we confider the mixture of ill disposition, folly, or mistake, that is ever inherent to human nature, the more probable inference from the cafe of a people at reft, is, not that government is needless, but that they are well or happily governed. The citizen must not imagine that law is unnecessary to him, because he has not had any occasion to recur to its protecion. This want of occasion is itself the greatcftproof of its energy. Were this energy witheld for a moment, the finalleft leaven of depravity, in any part of the focicty, would £oon dcflroy the peace of the whole; and, by a licence to crimes on the one hand, and to private refcntment on the other, would toon make a fcenc of confusion and riot. Lven where the inclination Ppp2 to PA.RT II. to evil is leafs frequent, if it atually exist in any part, the whole CITA. VI. must be on their guard.


Among the advantages to be reaped from society, therefore, one, and a principle one, is, That numbers of innocent men, by uniting their forces, may be secure of their rights to a degree that could not be obtained by any single person asding alone for himself. Under such .combination properly direCed, ;the community is secure ag:,intt any foreign enemy, and the individual is secure against any wrongs to which he is exposed from the commiilion of crimes.

To wield the national force for these purposes is the office of executive power; and the citizen knows not of any consideration more essential to his liberty, than that there hould be such a power fully adequate to the purpose for which it is established.
It is like the roof, by which those who take shelter under it are protected from the lorm: It is the molt essential part of their dwelling, and for the support of which the walls and other parts of the building are chiefly contrived.

It were a great error, therefore, in the zealot for liberty, to set himself against the formation of an executive government, ftfficient to combine the firength of the people, and to enforce the obP:rvance ofjuflice in every part of the community.

At the fame timie, if we suppose that a power which is eflabliilhed for these purposes were employed to violate the rights it ought to protect, there is no cafe more fatal to the liberties of the people : For, on this fiuppofition, the arm which ought to defend is Itidf the force that invades. The remedy is become the difbafc; land(

and the roof, under which flelter is taken from a form, threatens 

a ruin more dreadful than the itorm it was intended to repel. 




In refpec2 to the executive power, therefore, in whatever form it be etablifled, itis equally the interest of the citizen that it should be irresistible in every aca of justice, and that it should be refrained in every commission of wrong. And in this consists the great problem of political wisdom for securing the liberties of the people, which are equally exposed in the licence of the subjet against the magistrate, as in the licence of the magistrate against the subjeA.

Of the funcions of executive power, Come are in continual exertion; others, whether casual or periodical, are only occasional.
Some require great secrecy and dispatch; others admit of being publicly known, and may be the better direced for having been publicly discussed.

Funtions of so different a nature may be discharged with advantage, by powers differently conftrudled, and under different forms of proceedure.

Matters of an ordinary and public concern, such as the adminiftration of revenue, or the internal policy and government of a country, may be treated of in numerous councils, and taken up at regular periods, or at any convenient times.

Affairs that may come by surprise, and that require dispatch, may be committed to single men, as they are, in republics of finall extent, commonly entrusted to magiitrates elected at (Ieterminate periods: And, in iLch cafis, the albufcs of power may be guard2 cCd PARr IT. ed against by limiting its administration, as at Venice, or by 
 florteening its duration, as in other frnall republics of Italy.

It being the intereit of the citizen, that the executive government employed in the defence of his rights should, in that exercise of it, be altogether irresistible; it is required, of course, that no other person within the state, no faCtion or partial combination whatever, should be able to withstand the power of the magistrate when fairly exerted.

In republics uncorrupted, the eleclive magistrate is, by the respect which every citizen bears to the majesty of the commonwealth, sufficiently supported to enable him to suppress every diforder to which any private faction or party may be inclined.

But, in republics greatly corrupted, facion and party often become too powerful for the legal authority, and the private citizen is sometimes exposed to injuries which the usual forms of the state cannot restrain. To remedy the defects of government, in such cafes, the people have had recourse to the temporary eftablifliment of extraordinary powers, as that of the decemvirs, or of diStators, at Rome. But, in times of great corruption, the remedy has proved worse than the disease. The decemvirs abused and attempted to prolong their discretionary power, and the dictatorihip ended in the usurpation of perpetual defpotifiln:-An emergence, indeed, which among many others in a corrupted slate may appear at the instant to be the least of its evil; as at Rome, the usurpation of Cafar may have appeared a less evil than the dangerous tumults which were employed in the contests of Clodius and Milo.

o^~~~~ s Wrl~~~In In Rates of the greatest extent, the citizen, either by himself 
PARTII.
or his representative, may have such a share in the legislature as 



may secure him from any encroachment on his rights in the w form of law; but, without a sufficient executive power, he may not be secure of the right which law confers upon him; or he may susser from the crimes which become frequent under the licence which attends a weak government.

In great empires, there is a danger of disunion and difmemberment of provinces, as well as disorder and licence of individuals; and, to preserve the peace and give effec to the laws, in every corner of such a dominion, it is perhaps necessary to veff the executive power with all the prerogatives and influence of monarchy, and to take in aid of its authority whatever is fit even to impose upon the imaginations of men, the lustre of birth, the splendour of a court, as well as extensive patronage, and the command of a military force. So armed, the sovereign may be able to repress every disorder, and to overcome the resistance of any party, or combination that may be formed to disturb the public peace. And with these advantages, no doubt, he may be in condition to preserve the rights of the citizen; but he may also, if not properly restrained, be in condition to invade those rights; and hence the difficulty of arming the executive power with adequate force, and at the fame time of reserving a fuflicient security .gaiinft the abuse of that force, or to eitablifli such a relation bet:ween the executive and legislative powers, as that neither shall, without proceeding to violence, encroach upon the functions or rights of the other ; or that, in cafe of violence, the nmolt daring luutrpation fllould feel itself wcak in proportion as it ventures to ihock the general fcnfe of the people.


PAicr. II. For the first of these purposes, it is necessary that every branch 
of the legislature fllould have all the power that is necessary to pre/'yx'_o serve its own privileges; should be perfectly free and unawed in its deliberations; and, though not in condition to obtain every article of law that may be proposed for its own advantage, that it ihould have a negative upon every article from which it apprehends a diminution of its rights. So far also it is proper that the executive power should have a voice in the legislature; or, in other words, that to prevent encroachments upon its just prerogative, or any diimnution of that energy which ought to be exerted for the safety of the people, it ought to have a negative upon every ad that may tend to such consequence.

It is essential to liberty, that, in matters to which the foresight of legislature can reach, the operations of power ihould be nothing more than the execution of law.

In refpea to this objedc, wherever the people of every denonomination, by themselves or their representatives, have a deliberative and negative voice in the legislature, they seem to have all the security that human nature can give: In the firic place, a security that there ihall be laws, according to which the executive power is to govern and that these laws shall be equitable or just refpeding the subject. And so far we have already, in what is observed on the  pointed out the most effectual iecurities against the abuses of executive government also.
Still farther, if the people in their legislative capacity retain the privilege of constituting and granting the public revenue, while while they are careful to 

they may charge it with conditions sufficient to prevent its mif- 
application, or even withold it entirely, when they apprehend an .
abuse.

In refpet to judicature, when the very persons who are most interested that no right flall be infringed, that no innocent man {hall susser, and no guilty person escape, are themselves the persons called upon to interpret and apply the law, the security of the citizen, whether in civil or criminal cafes, appears to be complete; so that, in what has been observed on the institutions of judicature as well as legislature, the most effectual securities against abuses of the executive power have been already pointed out.

But there is nothing perfect in human affairs; and all the fundtions to which we have referred under the titles of legislation, jurifdiaion, and execution, though necessary to' the safety of the people, are all of them subjeC to abuse, if not by their reparations rendered a mutual counterpoise, or a restraint from the errors to which they may be severally subjea. If any person or elafs of persons, having a partial interest, were entruiled at once with the legislative and judicative power, that interest might be expeced to prevail in the spirit and tendency of every law, or warp every judgement in the application of it.
And if the executive power, which is necessarily partial, lliould have the whole legislature and judicature, no civil liberty could poflibly exist. Partial laws, in this cafe, according to Montesquieu, would be enaled in order to be partially applied and executed; and errors coimmitted in one form could not receive correcion in any fubfequcat form of proceeding in the state.

Q. Q-(q But PA1wr. II. For the first of these purposes, it is necessary that every branch S ECHA. . of the legislature should have all the power that is neceflary to pre-vvYw serve its own privileges; Ihould be perfectly free and unawed in its deliberations; and, though not in condition to obtain every article of law that may be proposed for its own advantage, that it lhould have a negative upon every article from which it apprehends a diminution of its rights. So far also it is proper that the executive power should have a voice in the legislature; or, in other words, that to prevent encroachments upon its just prerogative, or any diimnution of that energy which ought to be exerted for the safety of the people, it ought to have a negative upon every aA
that may tend to such consequence.

It is essential to liberty, that, in matters to which the foresight of legislature can reach, the operations of power should be nothing more than the execution of law.

In refpeE to this objea, wherever the people of every denonomination, by themselves or their representatives, have a deliberative and negative voice in the legislature, they teem to have all the security that human nature can give: In the first place, a security that there shall be laws, according to which the executive power is to govern and that there laws shall be equitable or just refpeting the subje&t. And so far we have already, in what is observed on the filbjed of legislature and judicature, pointed out the most effectual securities againtf the abuses of executive government also.

Still farther, if the people in their legislative capacity retain the privilege of confitiuting and granting the public revelle, while while they are careful to make it sufficient for purposes of slate PARr 11.
they may charge it with conditions sufficient to prevent its mif- 

application, or even withold it entirely, when they apprehend an /
abuse.

In respect to judicature, when the very persons who are most interested that no right fllall be infringed, that no innocent man {hall susser, and no guilty person escape, are themselves the perfbns called upon to interpret and apply the law, the security of the citizen, whether in civil or criminal cafes, appears to be complete; so that, in what has been observed on the institutions of judicature as well as legislature, the most effectual securities against abuses of the executive power have been already pointed out.

But there is nothing perfect in human affairs; and all the functions to which we have referred under the titles of legislation, jurifdition, and execution, though necessary to' the safety of the people, are all of them subjed to abuse, if not by their reparations rendered a mutual counterpoise, or a restraint from the errors to which they may be severally subjea. If any person or class of persons, having a partial interest, were entruiled at once with the legislative and judicative power, that interest might be expeced to prevail in the spirit and tendency of every law, or warp every judgement in the application of it.
And if the executive power, which is necessarily partial, should have the whole legislature and judicature, no civil liberty could possibly exist. Partial laws, in this cafe, according to Montesquieu, would be enaaed in order to be partially applied and executed; and errors commnitted in one form could not receive correction in any fubfequcnt form of proceeding in the state.


SHAP. Vi But, although such dangerous accumulations of power be aCrc'r. X.
C!jv{ voided, and the great principles of order, resulting from the just authority of government and the privileges of the people, be admitted in form, they are not in effec secure otherwise than as the forces of the state are properly adjusted to give them esec'. Law without force, is no more than a dead letter; and force, if improperly lodged, will frustrate all the precautions of a legal eftablifilinent. It is not less dangerous in the hands of a profligate rabble who would level the conditions of men, than it is in the hands of an usurper who would render them fubjeca to his will. In order to obviate the danger from either of these quarters, the fame guard that is or ought to be set over the sources of the legislative power, namely, that every refpeaable order in the state may have a proper share in it, and every improper person be excluded from the trust, ought also to be set over the distribution of arms or of force in the community. Where the law originates, there also is the proper depositary of the national force; and whoever has not the proper interest in the laws of his country is but ill entrusted with its defence.

In ordinary times, military service, like the profefflons of law, divinity, or medicine, may be entrusted to persons who make it an honourable calling. But, it does not by any means follow, that they who have a real stake in the preservation of an order established ihould forego the use of arms, and profess their inability to defend themselves or their state upon any emergence whatever.
Or, if this flhould be thought necessary, at any period of national progress, we cannot any longer be at a lots to account for the viciflitudes ciflitudes of human affairs, or the fatal reverses in which the 

eflabliflled order of ranks is sometimes overturned *. 


The magistrate, in republican governments, is called to account at the expiration of his office; and even the monarch, whose office does not expire but with his life, may be called to account in the person of his ministers: But the ultimate and essential fecurity to liberty, or guard against the disorders which are equally fatal to the state of the magistrate as to the privilege of the people, is the character to be retained by those who have any considerable itake in the welfare of their country, a characer by which they are qualified, in the last resort, to defend as well as to fulfil the ties of their flation. Public benefits enjoyed by one order of the community, and the defence of them entrusted to another, is indeed an abuse, against which mankind have not perhaps yet any where found'a permanent guard.

Such, however, are part of the reflections into which we are led in search of means for the preservation ofjuft government, as well as precautions, which render executive power in the most exten.five dominions, confiitent with the freedom of the people.

Upon the faith of such expedients as we have now mentioned, we may venture to deny that defpotifin is necessary to the prefervaQ q 2 tion ' The present order of things in Europe originated in the afccndance of persons having arms in their hands. What was originally a cavalier or military horseman, is now a gcntleman ; and, in the conRitution of our own country, members returnable from the counties to parliament, as appears from the remaining form of the writ addrcflcd to fleriffs for this purpose, were to be military l.; none being thought worthy f pl:lce in the councils of slate, but such as were armed for its defence.

*1- lfii's glalio cilan::;.

 tion of order in the most extensive dominions. It is indeed more EHAP. X. difficult to preserve liberty in great empires, than in states of a i*tYv moderate extent; because they who are entrufled with the necessary powers, in such inflances, ever itruggle against the precautions of freedom as inconsistent with the energy of government.

For this reason, it is a principal interest of the citizen that the extent of his country should remain within reafbnable bounds, accessible tojuftice in all its parts, without the exercise of a force dangerously constituted even for the authority that employs it, and too often understood to be turned at discretion against those it is destined to protect.

The security ofjuftice is, in every slate, the great interest of all parties, whether the governing or the governed; and whoever wishes to have it in his power to do wrong, whether the subjea who would be exempt from the restraints of government, or the magistrate who would be exempt from the restraints of law, however little either propose to use his exemption, may, from the very desire to possess it, be confidered as an enemy to mankind.







Of National Felicity.

IN this attempt to solve the political problem, refpecing what 

the citizen ought to wifli for his country, we have not entered 




into any discussion of the comparative advantage of different L/
forms of government, as they are commonly enumerated, under the titles of democracy, arifocracy, or monarchy. In the first, the sovereignty is exercised by a majority of the people in their collective aflemblies ; in the second, by a part or superior class of the people, hereditary or eleQive; and, in the third, by a monarch or single person, conducting his adminitfration by proper officers, and agreeably to general rules or fixed laws which he himfilf may have laid down.

To these legal forms susceptible of juflice and wisdom, other three have been sometimes added; namely, Ochlocracy, in which the people govern by tumults rather than regular assemblics. O)li,;rchy, in which a few, without any genuine title of eflimation or election, usurp the government. And Tyr2 ranFt}

 r1am, in which a tingle person governsaccording to his occasional 

SEcr. XI. will, without any fixed rule or general laws. These, indeed, arc ~-'~Y\ rather the abuses nearefl to each of the regular forms, than conflitutions hlaving any pretence to the choice or approbation of ~mannkilnd in any cafe whatever.

It appears to be the will of providence, that wherever there is society there ioould be government alo ; and, whatever be the governmIent , it is the nature of man to accommodate himielf to its brlms, not always indeed with perfect contentment, nor always the revcirfi; but lie is affectcd in this, as in other parts of his lot, according to the humour he is in, not according to any precise iLate of his fortune.

Monarchy lias its admirers, as well as democracy; and it were vain, in most inflances, to propose to the subject of either a fudden change fiom the one to the other. Each is best fitted byhis inclina.tions and his habits to the situation in which he is educated.
It nma therefore be a!ked, to what purpose perplex ourfelvcs with quefiuuns on a subjeCt in which our state is already determined? We come with our schemes of what is best for mankind, like an architec't with llis pIan after the house is built, and the lodger fitted to lis mind. To dislodge him for the fake of eventual improvements, wvould be at leait to incur immediate calamity anddiflrefs, without any ailurance of future advantage.

To the question, that may be aflkcd in any particular cafe, To what govcrnn elt we should have rccourfie, or under ,swhat roof we should lodge ? The first ailfwecr, no doubt is. the frejc:It.' Nnay, but the prefint government may have its (tcfcths, ;:: tl.c aill O)r roof of the building in which we lodge lmay be itiliutsiiciut, inufficient, or threaten to fall on our heads. Then, fct about 

the necessary repairs. In refpea to your dwelling, the walls may 


SEc'r. XL.

be renewed or rebuilt in parts successively; and, in reFrect to the v administration of government, grievances may be rcdreffed. But, in refpet to the one, it is a wife maxim; Beware you take not away lb much of your /upports at once as t thathe rooj may fall in: Or, in refpedt to the other, Beware you do not overthrow so much of your government at, once as that the innocent have no protection against those who may be disposed to the commission of crimes, This caution, indeed, it may be difficult to apply in every cafe.

In some inflances, it may be laid of our dwelling, that the roof is actually falling, and the whole must be taken down: In refpecd to our political situation, that the oppression of a despotic power, whether in the person of one or many, is incorrigible, and must be cut short at once; for, while any measure of such power remains, no reform can be obtained.

It is indeed the nature of extreme evil to be surrounded with calamities on every fide; insomuch that, in guarding against mifchief of one kind, some other must be incurred. And, although it may happen that the last remedy of a political evil, like a chirurgical operation, may be attended with mere pain than was infliaed by the disease in any equal portion of time, ftil! the operation nevertheless is to be preferred to a perpetuity of the complaint.

As to the choice of a political eftablifliient, could we suppose na-p tions aaing wifely in pursuit of public order and freedom,as defined in the foregoing fiections, it is probable they would proceed to iomewhat different fronm either of the simple forms we have mentioned.

2 ' h 
 The members of any community have never been found in such 
a.ftate of equality as not to have a diftinfion of ranks, to the 
k./v--. safety of which it is required that they should have each a diftinctive share in the legislature of their country. Nor is it safe for the subjet, of any denomination or class, to commit the enactment, as well as the execution of the law to any single power.
Hence we may assume, that, in pursuit of the political advantage in queflion, a fortunate people will adopt some mixed rather than any of the fimnple forms.

The character of government is frequently taken from the executive power; and this, in consistence with all the advantages we have mentioned, may be either a feleA council, or magistrate; a single person or monarch, hereditary or elective: And nations governed by any such powers have not occasion to change them, if at the fame time they are fortunate in the conatitution of the collateral, legislative, and judicative forms.

Where this is the cafe, there is greater danger from change than from any trivial inconvenience attending the actual order of things. And it may be safely afumned as a maxim under every establishment whatever, That the present order, if tolerable, is to be preferred to innovation, of which, even in very small matters, it may be difficult, and is often above the reach of human wisdom, to foresee all the consequences or effects.

Grievances. nevertheless, under the fairest government, may take place, and muff be redressed; and whoever has a grievance to plead mufl be heard; whilit he who, without any complaint of grievance, has gone forth in search of speculative melioration, or improvement, not al)olurtcly required to the safety of his country, try, is to be dreaded as a mot 'dangerous enemy to the peace of PAR I1.
mankind. He would, without neceflity, unsettle the minds of 
men on a point on which it is highly expedient they should never be unsettled, to wit, the reality of an acual authority to which they are bound to submit in all cafes that concern, the peace and good order of their country.

Here, however, it mufl be admitted that, where men are leat disposed to innovation, changes imperceptibly arise, whether in the ordinary course of things, as in the progress of arts, or in the fucceflon of events, And, as men are tle actors in this political scene, whether seemingly itationary or transient, it behoves them to know the good of which they are susceptible, and the evil to which they are exposed. The sceptic may contest any serious diftin.ion in this matter; and, as men are so variously accommodated, insist that every' age or nation fmould be left to please itself. The slave, we are told, is often more chearfu! and gay than his master, and the filbjee of absolute monarchy more undisturbed, than the citizen of a fair republic: And if we reason froim the taftes of men, we mufl leave every one to chufe for himself. This is pleaded in martters of private as well as public felicity; but, so long as humain nature has its visible destination, in the perfection or excellence of which it is fiufeptible, wemuft be allowed to fcrutinize the taftes as well as the attainments of men.

When, under one fpecics of eftabliflhment, we obfervc the persons and poflffions of men to be secure, and their genius to profper,; under another, prevalent disorder, infhlt, and wrong, with a continual degradation or fuppreflon of all the talents of men, we cannot be at a loss on which to bellow t the preference.

VOrCL. II, r r Fr 
For forms of government let fools contef : 
 The bel t? adniinif/er'd is always belt.
SEcr. XI.

Thus sings the poet: But, in order to juffify the charge of folly he has brought in this couplet, he ought to have sung also, that one form of government is as likely to be well administered as another; or that men are no way the safer for having it in their power to check the infringements which may be attempted on their rights.

If it be required to continue this argument beyond what has been already offered on the subjea of population, national refources and liberty; a few observations may be indulged on the subjects of wealth, public peace, and good order, on which men are commonly inclined to estimate the felicity of nations.

Of these, indeed, some may be confidered as the symptoms, others as the invariable constituents of national happiness.

Wealth is at least the symptom of national felicity, so far as it argues the presence of industry, frugality, and skill, with the fecurity of property, and a regular administration of juJtice. These are the appurtenances of public virtue, and, as such, the conftituents of good to mankind.

But, if we suppose wealth to come from any other source than there; or, to come as it does to conquering nations, by rapine, and to thecourts and capitals of great empires, by the oppression of provinces; it is not, in refpet to its source, or in refped to the effects it is likely to produce, either symptomatic, or productive of any national good whatever.

As As riches give scope to evil paflions, and, where obtained by 
PART II



injustice, argue the pretence of such passions, they are a symptom Sc'r. XV
of misery rather than of happiness: They are produAcive of pro- x digality, licentiousness, and brutal sensuality. Such was the misery, not the felicity of Rome, become the capital of a great empire, a centre to which the wealth] of nations was colleced, and at which it was consumed in gross sensuality, or in cruel and idle ostentation of power.

It were folly, therefore, to felicitate a nation on the measure of its opulence, the extent of its territory, the multiplicity of its conquests, or the profusion of wealth that may run to waste in its capital, without regard to the origin or use of these advantages.

The tendency of human affairs in the result of prosperity, indeed, is to enlargement of empire; and it is difficult to restrain this tendency without a rifle of misfortune on the opposite extreme. In the contest of nations, it happens sometimes that, of contending parties, either must conquer or be conquered; but it is evident that although, in the struggle of two or more nations for security or independence, the event may give to either a dangerous ascendant; yet they ought not to indulge a wish beyond that of safety to themselves. And, in the midst of such dangers, the best doctrine that can be inculcated on the minds of men, is a decided opinion that conquest is no advantage to those who make it, any more than to those over whom it is made.

War is justly avoided, and peace among mankind is admitted to be a supreme object of consideration and desire: But we must not therefore enjoin it as an article of wifldom for nations to dif2 continue P'ARr It. continue their military policy, and to neglect preparations for their .SEAP. XI. own defence. These are often the surest preservatives of peace, and, Ls joined to a Scrupulous attention to abstain from wrongs or unneceffary provocations,are all that the most pacific nation can do to avoid.
the mischiefs of war. Peace is recommended as an article of wisdom; and the wife do not recur to war as the means ofacquifition, but as the means of preservation or safety. But war may be necefary, although it be not desirable on its own account; and it were folly, in reasoning of mankind, to confider the time of necelTry war among nations as a period of misery, or the time of peace as of course a season of happiness. In either conjuditre, the vices and follies of men may predominate ; but, in either conjuncAure, also, men have occasion to exercise their best affections and faculties: and, by this alone, the prevalence of good or illt of public happiness or misery, can safely be determined. It is the will of providence, that men have occasion sometimes to maintain the cause of their country against its enemies; and, in so doing, the virtues of human nature are its happiness, no less than they are so in reaping the fruits of peace.

\Vith respeCt to internal tranquillity, it is surely a bleffmg for citizens to be exempt from injury, be the quarter from which it come what it may; and this alone is .o enjoy peace. But, to be exposed to wrongs, without any power of defence or refitance, is not peace, but war that broods on the mind with animofities of the most rancorous kind. Such a war in the dominions of defpotical empire is termed peace and tranquillity; but the wrong that is done in such inflanccs to the passive sufferer, like every other evil, is just so much the worse that nothing is cone to counteract or redrcfs it.

The The war that fubfilts in defpotical governments, between the op- 




pressor and the oppressed, consists of injury, indeed, all of one fide; SGT. XL.
but, in having wrongs endured without remedy is so far from approaching to peace, that the necessity of tame and helpless fubmifsion imposed by the party oppressing on the party oppressed, is either felt as an accumulation of injuries, of which the first aggreffion is but a part; or, in being tamely endured, and received with sentiments of fear rather than resentment, it compleats the debasement of those by whom it is suffered.

It is not so much the physical evil which a tyrant may inflict either in respect to the person or property of his subject, that aggrieves the liberal mind, as the idea held forth under the defpotical government, that, whilst one has a right to inflict such evils, the other is bound to' susser at discretion. The disciplined foldier or sailor is exposed to fuffcr much more from an enemy than from the mort revere or capricious will of an officer who is disposed to abuse his command; yet he contends against an enemy with an alacrity and even gaiety of spirit and of courage, while he finks, under the caprice of the other with dejecion and sorrow.

The pretension of a right in any one to absolute dominion, or to a property in his fellow creature, was the evil fiom which Cato withdrew atUtica, and from which the worthiest citizens of Rome, under the fuccefrors of CEfar, continued to withdraw, aster repeated endeavours to reconcile themselves to the fiation in which they were placed. " It does not become me to defer any " longer," said Aruntius, who, being threatened with a profecution from the agents of Tiberius, was importuned by his fiiends to await the end to which the declining age of the tyrant was fait approachilgr, 
 approaching, "I have already delayed too long in the midst of SHAP. VI. ' dangers, insults, and the mockery of justice. If I should furY ^ " vive the old age of one tyrant, what better profpet awaits me ' in the youth of his successor *."

It was the idle assumption of discretionary power, originally, perhaps, in matters of finall moment, not any flagrant ads of oppreflion or cruelty, that routed the spirit of our ancestors to a revolt, which, after afucceffion of mutual provocations, and the interference at last ofdefperate adventurers, ended in the murder of one of the most innocent of our kings.

The claim of a right to govern at discretion, until it have produced some effeC, may be no more than a form of words: If it operate only in ads of beneficence, such discretion is beloved, and is indeed vested in every person alike; but, so soon as it appears in mischief, the pretence of a right to do wrong is absurd; and any tfch assumption, with the profped of indefinite abuse, is itfelfan ad ofhoftility against which the spirits of men revolt more than againft any physical harm that may proceed from violence or occafional passion.

Next to the intire absence of hotfility, or a perfed exemption from injuries, we may reckon among the constituents of peace the just powers of redress, or even resistance, which the constitution of just government employs in behalf of the injured.

The passions of men may produce assault and provocation, under any system of human policy; but, in mere assault, there is but one injury, of which the cffed is greatly abated in being resistible, as well as in the means of reparation which are provided.
Y Tacit. Annal. lib. vi. c. 48.

vided. And we are not to estimate the evils incident to society 

Ib much from the personal sufferings that may be occasionally in- 




curred even under the freest government, as from the suppression o of every claim to redress which compleats thetyrrany that is exercifed by a defpot,or by the disorderly tumults of a corrupted people.

Men are deflined to play in human life for manifold Rtakes of unequal importance. The merchant plays for profit, and is exposed to loss. The warrior plays for vicory or conquest, and exposes his life. Every one who would better his situation in point of fortune, preferment, or honour, hangs in fufpence between the opposite events of success or disappointment. What was tfaked among the ancients, in their national quarrels, was of greater importance than is riflced at war by the officer or soldier in any modern nation of Europe. When captives or prisoners of war were retained in servitude, or sent to the market for slaves, the soldier exposed not only his life but his personal freedom also. This violation of natural law was enforced by the Romans in all their wars, and by the Greeks put in practice in their contests not only with barbarous nations, but even with one another.
" During the Peloponefian war," fays an eminent writer, " and " for many years after its conclusion, all the different repub" lics of Greece were, at home, almost always diftraded by the " most furious factions, and abroad involved in the most fangui'nary wars, in which each fought not merely superiority of do" minion,but either compleatly to extirpate all its enemies,or what was not lets cruel,to reduce them into the vilest of all states, that " of domestic slavery; andto fell them, man, woman,and child,like " so many herds of cattle to the highest bidder in the market."

If ' Vid. Theory of MIoral Sentimcnts, by A, SMIT-r,.

P^ART T. If, from this account of the Greekst it be proposed to infer Si-. X tlhat they were a wretched people, there is reason to queflion the <-~-,r- truth of any such inference, The fortunes of men do not always decide of their feelings. Cervantes, we are told, wrote his adc ventures of Don Qlixote in a prison ; and, from so vigorous ar exercise of all his faculties in that situation, we have reason to conclude that a person may be in jail without being wretched, The human mind gave firilar proofs of felicity no where more conspicuous than in Greece. And if humnan life be compared to a game, it was played among ancient nations, and among ihe Greeks in particular, upon a stake no less indeed than is stated ia the above pafiTge, of freedom as well as life. But their example ihould lead us to think that the spirits of men are not greatly damped by the rif les which they are made to run in the service of their country. The first citizens in every Grecian fRate, with thi profpet- of eventual slavery before them, took their poll with ala*
crity in the armties that were formed for the defence or advancernent of their country: And in no quarter of the world was the muilitary character held in higher efteern. Tho(e nations, at the finme time, in other refpe¢ts, carried marks of felicity fiperior towhat has cver been displayed in any other quarter of the world or age of mian kind. In tlheir very language, there is evidence of genius, or intel1
icChial ability,fuperior to that of other nations. The order andform of their expretffon kept pace with the order and difcrinination of fiubicjs to be exprcled, with all the pofllble varieties of relatiol, and with all the fubtilitics of thoughlt and fentimnent, beyond what is exemplified in any other klnown iniftance. hey led tlh way also in all tle forms of literary comn!)ptfition or lifi:oulrf, i1

er lwhich the humanr ei's in difil:vycd.. TI'ihir poet:s, litlo-, Sln., ora.tors, and! moril's, , prce(:dcd thl(i oflother natio.1, ad rcniU

remain unequalled by those that came after them. Their fculp- 
PARTr Ii tors, painters, andarchitects, excelled those of every other nation; :
and the fame genius which rose towards every object, in which ',/
excellence or beauty could be required or exhibited, gave also the moit masterly examples of civil, political, or military virtues; and, in the whole, gave the most irrefragable evidence of minds no way funk by the sense ofoppreffilon, or the gloomy profped of hazards impending from the loTs of liberty, or the fear of slavery to which they were exposed. The ease and alacrity with which they moved on the highet steps of the political, the moral ,and intellectual scale, abundantly shewed how much they enjoyed that life and freedom, of which theywere so worthy, and which they so freely risked in the service of their country. And if the hazard of blessings which they flaked in every public contest had at all any effel on their minds, their example may serve to prove,that men are not unhappy in proportion to the flake for which they contend; or, perhaps, what is verified in the cafe of other players as well as in theirs, that persons who are used to a high stake cannot condescend to play for a lower; or that he who is accustomed to contend for his freedom or his life can scarcely find scope for his genius in matters of a lower concern.

A warden of the Fnglifh marches, upon a visit to the court of Scotland, before the acceflion of James to the throne of England, said he could not but wonder how any man could submit to so dull a life as that of a citizen or courtier: That, for his own part, no clay ever part in which he did not pursue tome one for his life, or in which he himself was not pursued for his own. It is the degradation of fear, the guilt of injuflice or malice, to which the mind of man never can be reconciled; not the rifls to which the liberal may be exposed in defending his country, or in withstanding iniquity.

Vol. II. S s s We 
 We are, for the most part, ill qualified to decide what is happy S EC. XI. or miserable in the condition of other men at a distance. The in,-~- conveniences, which we fee, may be compensated in a way which we do not perceive. And there is in reality nothing but vileness and malice that cannot be compensated in some other way. Even those we call slaves are amused in the performance of their task, and, when it is over, are observed to be playfome and chearful beyond other men. They are relieved of any anxiety for the future, and devolve every care on their master.

We estimate the felicity of ages and nations by the seeming tranquillity and peace they enjoy; or believe them to be wretched under the agitations and troubles which sometimes attend the poffeflion of liberty itself. Under this apprehension the forms of legislature we have proposed implying numerous aNfemblies, whether colleEtive or representative, may be censured as exposing men to all the inconveniencies of faction or party division; but, if these inconveniencies are to be dreaded, they neverthelefs may be fairly hazarded, for the fake of the end to be obtained in free governments, the safety of the people, and the fcope.which is given to all the refpedable faculties of the human mind.

If we have not miflaken the interests of human'nature,they consift more in the exercises of freedom, and in the pursuits of a liberal and beneficent foul, than in the pofeffion of mere tranquillity, or what is termed exemption from trouble. The trials of ability, which men mutually afford to one another in the collisions of free society, are the leflons of a school which Providence has opened for mankind, and are well known to forward, inftcad of impeding their their progress in any valuable art, whether commercial, elegant, 

or political. 




Under the last of these titles, more especially, we had occasion to observe, that the most important objects of human concern, and the most improving exercises of ability, are furnished to the members of a free state *: And we may now also assume that forms of government may be estimated, not only by the actual wisdom or goodness of their administration, but likewise by the numbers who are made to participate in the service or government of their country, and by the diffusion of political deliberation and function to the greatest extent that is confitent with the wisdom of its administration.

WVhile those who would engross every power to themselves may gravely tell us, that the public good consists in having matters ordered in the manner they conceive to be right, we may venture to tell them in return, that it consists frill more in having proper numbers admitted to a share in the councils of their nation: That, although the proverb in a particular instance fiould fail, and the multitude of councilfor once be inferior in wisdom, yet the multitude of council is really in itself a greater public advantage, than the talents of any single person, however great, can otherwife procure for his country. Single men may chute a measure or conduct a particular service, better than might be obtained in any concourse of numbers: But numbers do more in a fucceflion of ages, than any single man could obtain; and man nature is more interested in having nations formed to the charaCter of manhood and public virtue, than it is in any particular measure of conduct, or the most successful attainment of any particular obj e&.

Ss s 2 We x See Vol. I. Scaion, Of the Political Arts.

'TVe are sometimes checked in the commendation of free confti

SJCT. Xr tutions of government, by an obfcrvation that party divisions are Ax. ni-moft flagrant in such instances, and the turbulence of free flates is contrasted with the seeming tranquillity of defpotical government, as an evidence that it it happier for mankind to be governed at discretion, than to be indulged with freedom, or be admitted to any filare in the government of the community of which they are members. But we have already confidered what is to be thought of a peace or tranquillity, which consists of injury all of one fide, and which is followed by the denial of redress or impoflibility of reliftance. *

.Wherever men are free to think and to ace, errors will be incurred, and wrongs will be committed: But the error that results from the freedom of one person is best correced by the wisdom that results from the concurring freedom of many. And the crimes of a few lose their effect in the resistance they meet with, or in the means of redress that is provided for them: But for the errors or crimes of a despotic matter, or the violence of a disorderly populace; there is neither correction nor redress: It is sedition, or herefy,_or madness, to dispute their opinions, or to resist their power.

In free states, even where men do not ad from any culpable defect of understanding or criminal lifpofition, they are seldom all of one mind, on any fubiject whatever. The conversation of good men very often takes the form of debate or controverfy; and it is indeed in this form they are molt likely to receive from one another mutual inftrudion and improvement of thougilt.

thought. The freedom of conversation, therefore, whether re- 


CHtAp, VI
lating to matters of public deliberation or private concern, is at S'eAr. XLT
once a symptom of jus as well as of-vigorous government: And _ron this fihbjec we may venture to observe, by the way, that the zealots for liberty fonmetimes mistake their aim in supposing that they cannot exceed in weakening the powers of the magiftrate, or in taking measures to restrain him, by which they would icarcely leave him enough for the suppression of crimes. So reduced, he is jealous of the most innocent freedoms, and dreads a too familiar infpeaion of his measures as want of refpea to his person or his state. Hence the citizen is obliged to be more guarded in his talk at Berne or at Venice, than he was at Paris, even when the Bastile remained yet undemoliflhed. In vigorous governments, whether pure or mixed, and under the adiminifiration ofmagiftrates who have nothing to fear from the discussion of private companies, or even the impertinence of mistaken censure, there is frequently great freedom of speech as well as thought.

It has been observed, in a former part of this work, that it is wifely ordered.in this school of intelligence, which is opened for man in the scene of nature, that there fliould be obstructions and difficulties to be met with, adequate to the power with which he is furnished, and fitted to give these powers their full exertion, whether in producing mere physical effects, in carrying his fellow creatures along with him, or in surmounting the impediments which they mutually furnifhl in the course of their oppositions.
And in closing our view ofthe-fubljeA we may now observe, that the congregation of men is not, in any instance, to be confidered as an aggregate of flill or quicfcent materials, but is a convocation of living and aCtive natures: That the order of which ~~~~~~~~3 ~~they C they are susceptible is not merely, like flones'in a wall or an arch, ScT. X. that of relative position and place, but of aAivity, and of co-opera'--V'" tion in different fundtions, or of balance, counterpoise, and mutual correcion, where the operation of any single power might be partial and wrong, but the general result is salutary and jutl.

Such is the living order of nature throughout; and the amount of this argument, relating to the felicity of nations, may be fummed up in there comprehensive though vague expreflions, That the felicity of nations is proportioned to the degree in which every citizen is safe; and is most perfect where every ingenuous or innocent effort of the human mind is encouraged; where government devolves on the wife; and where the innoffenfive though weak is secure.

In societies that approach the nearest or recede the farthest from this description, the individual may, in his own part, be either wretched or happy. Clodius was a wretch in the abuse of a freedom which he took up in the midst of disorder and faction ; and Helvidius or Thrafea was happy, though under a tyrrany by which their country was oppressed. Every one indeed is ananswerable only for himself; and, in preserving the integrity of one citizen, does what is required of him for the happiness of the whole.

s M.EVMh BR.ITAN
T HE EN D.
