A-L O N Z O,.

A
TRAGEDY.

IN FIVE ACTS.

As it is performed at the
THEATRE-ROYAL, DRURY-LANE.

BY THE

AUTHOR OF DOUGLAS.
Et mentrm ~frixit patrie pittatiJ imago. VIRGIL.

D U B L I N:
Printed for W. WILSON, No. 6, in Dame-ltret.

MDCC,LXXIII.
go!d b G. WA iLS, 1 , WOOD-QUAY.

# ACT I.

ALO N Z 0.
TRAGE D Y.

A C T I.

SCENE I.
A hall in the palace of tie kings of Spain-

ORMISINDA. TERESA.
Orm. H IS roll contains the secret of my life,

And of the fatc: My maniage with

Alonzo,

The story of my son, my injured child,
Bred in a desert, tho' the heir of Spain.
To thee, my faithful friend, my lov'd Teresa I
This precious record I conmnit. Oh ! keep it
Floun fight of human eye, till better times:
For still I hope that better times may come,
Tho' not to me, to this afflicted land.
My hand hath signed it, anti my ac to day
Shall give it faith and credence with mankind.
This will explain the mnyflery of my fate,
And tell the world why Ormifinrla died

[Gives the writing.]

Ter. Do not too soon defp ir.
Orm. I. ait the la!t
Decisive moment. But to guard my fcul

B ASginlt

Against the sallies of a rash despair,
Agi:c the weakness which attends surprise,
I have forecat whatever may befal,
And fram'd to the event my firm resolve.
This is the day appointed for the combat,
Between a Moorifl and a Christian knight,
To end the warsof Spain, and fix the fate
Of the contending nations.

Ter. Antient times,

If talesof'anient timesmay'be believ'd,
Have known such combats. In her infant state,
Againit her rival Alba, Rome was p!edg'd
As now Afturia is: But later times
Afford no parallel.

Orm. There never was,

Nor will there ever, while the world endures,
Be found a parallel to my dif'refs-
I am the vidor's prize-whoe'er prevails
He gains the princess, and the crown of Spain.
Such isthe solemn treaty, sworn, confirui'd,
By every rite, which either nation owns.
Mean while I am Alonzo's wedded wife-
I ama mother-by the sale Alonzo,
Whe from his hate to meabandons Spain,
Which he alone can save. No other arm
Can match Mirmallon's force. Proud of his frcngth
Already in the lifts the Moorexults,
Secure of victory. The setting fun
Concludes the dreadful period of fufpence,
And death alone from infamy can save me.

Ter. He yet may come. Far in the Nubian wilds,

That guard the secret sources of the Nile,
Velafco found the chief. The wind offpring,
The contant East, this year forgot its season,
And only since this moon her light renew'd,
Began to blow upon the vwecrn shore.
On that I build a hope.

Or. I have no hope!

Review the story of my life, Teresa,
And by the past conjecture of the future.'

First

First my lamented brother, blindly led
By proud Ramirez, quarrell'd with Alonzo,
Then by Alonzo's sword Ramirez fell.
For that offence to banislmlent condemn'd,
Alonzo won me to accept his hand
Before he left thiskingdom. Since that time,
What I have fuffer'd, Heav'n, and you can tell.
It was the fifth, a memorable day,
After our marriage, when he fail'd to come,
At the appointed place to meet his bride.
Then 'midst my fear, anxiety, and sorrow,
For only de-,h I thought, or dangerous harm,
Could keep him from my arms, amaz'd I heard
That he was gone for Aia.' To this hour,
Ev'n to this present hour, no cause af.ign'd
But there diftraded lines long after rent:
"Thou never hialt behold Alonzo more;
"The foul, foul cause thy guilty conscience knows."
My conscience knows nocaufe, so help me Heav'n,
Now, in my utmost need, this dreadful day,
When I muftl ruggle with despair and Death,
To keep myself a chaste, a blameless wife,
And to my silent grave the secret bear,.
That my dear son and his may live to wield
The sceptre of his fathers !

Ter. To this hour,
Thy husband knows not that he is a father.

Orm. His ears, his eyes are fliut. Oft'have I ent

Letters, that would have picrc'd an heart of stone;
Pleading for pity, begging but to know,
Wherein I had unwittingly offended:
But every letter, with unbroken feal,
To me return'd. He will not read one word
From my detested hand,

TOt. 'Tis very strange,

And much unlike the way of other men.
For tho' they are inconstant in their love,
There is a course and procelf in the change.
Ardent at firif, their ardor lass not long
With rafy, full, secure pofleffion cloy'd,

B z Their

4
Their pallion palls, and cold indlilfcrerce coilss,
As chilly autumn hteals on fumnler's primc,
Making the green leaf yellow. Then it is
I'hat some new beauty takes their roving eves,
And fires theirfancy with untalted charils.
But in a molient, from excess of love,
'I'o the extreme of hate Alonzo pass'd
W ithout a cause. Nor did another come
Between thee and the current of his lovc.
'Tis moon-struck inadnefs, or the dire efict
Of incantation, charm, compulsive spell,
By magic faten'd on his wretched foul.
It can be nothing else. li r it

Orm.

He Ihuns all woman-kind. Iis life is lpent
In war and in devotion. When the fidll
Is won, the warrior lays aside his spear,
Takes up the pilgrim's tass, and a l alone,
Obfcur'd in homely weeds, he bends his courif
T'o some remote, religious, holy place,
Where he exceeds the tiritelft penitent,
In penances fevereand fad aufte,ity.
Sonietimes in deeper melancholy wrapt
He loaths the light of man, and to the cliffs

lO hoarv Caucasus or Atlas flies,
\Vl' ere all the dreary winter he remains,
And, desolate, delights in desolation.
My faithful servant Juan saw hi!( once
Upon the ledge of Atlas; on a rock
Betide the empty channel of a brook,
He stood and gaz'd intent a cataraa
Which, as it tumbled from a cliH, the blail
Had caught mid-way, and froze before it fell.
luan drew near and cdll'd. Ile turn'd about,
Look'd at him fora-fpace, then wav'd him back,
And mounting swiftly funk behind thehill.
Wan was his face, and like a statue pale !
His eve was wild and haggard ! Oh ! Teresa,
Aimid't my woes. my liferies, my v wrongs'
Mv bofcm bleeds for hint !

I..

Tir. Something there is

Mvleriouu an i unfathonlab.e hcre,
V\ hich palnTs humnan wintfon to divine.
The hand of f.ate is on the cu tain nov'.
\Within my bl-ast a fill pei suasion dw- li,
That in the litts :\lnro will appear.
BehoIld in haste the king )'cu tlather con s,
And fricts the niefiengr of welco:me tidings.

Ener the King.

King. 1 come in this alarming hour, :.; chill,

To pour a ray of comfort on thy heart.
A valiant Moor, once captive of my fwcrd,
And ever since, my firm but secret friend,
Acquaints me that a champion is at hand,
Shunning those honors which the Moors would pay:
Dark and referv'd he travels thro' their towns
Without a name, I judge it is Alonzo,
For the description belf accords with him.
Scorning hisfoes, offended with hi; friends,
Shrouded in angerand in deep disdain,
Like rome prime planet in eclipse he moves,
Gaz'd at and sear'd.

Orm. It is ! It is Alonzo !

Welcome, most welcome, in whatevcr shape.
The hero comes to save his native land,
To save the honor of the Chri:tian nanie,
And o'er the fading crelcent of the Moor
Exalt the holy cross.

King. And, ev'n as thine

Is the confentitg voice ofall the land.
The hope of Spain on brave Alonzm retts.
In this I fee the ruling hand ot hev'n,
Which to its o.-n ttcenal purpf.; !eads.
By winding paths, the ftcps of erringnman !
Painful it were to speak of those events
Sad and difatirous which hae laid us lov.
Unj'utiY! wasA.\onzo bar ili'.i hence,
Ar.l happily the hero i.ow r-turns.

B; Fcr

Ic' since my son, your valiant brother, fel
V\ith an inlparial mind I have enqiir('
And trac'd the (tory of Alonzo's birth.
lie is the offspring of our antient kings,
'IThe rightfui heir ofRiccaredo's line,
Called the Catholic, who reign'd in Spain
Befcre the firtll invaion of the Moors.
Loit in the gen'ral wreck, buried and hid
Beneath the ruins cf a fallen fate,
(bfcure, unknown, the royal infant lay,
When I, indignant of a foreign yoke,
In wild Afturia rose agiinft tbtMoors.
The righteous cause prevail'd; the baffled foe
Petir'd, and left us and our inountains free.
The grateful people chose their leader king.
I knew rot ther, nir did iy pe.ople know,
Ought of Albno.

Orm. Ihave heard him own

Thr iufiice of thy title toconimand
And rule t!.e iate thy valor had reftor'd.
E'r.nuhb , heraid, resuiin'd for 1biu to conquer:
The fertile provinces of ample Spain,
WhI.ch liill te 3Moor usurps.

King. Of all mankind,

He is the chiapion whom my foul desires
Tlis day to fight for Spain and for my daughter;
Net only for his great renown in arms,
But for his birth, his lineage, and his blood.
If his unconquer'd aim in fight prevails,
The antient monarchy Ihall rife ag.in,
In all its fpleudor and extent of empire.
The firealns of royal blood divided now,
Shall roll a tide united thro' the land.

Orm. Thy heart dilates with pleaing hcpts, my

father!

And fond anticipates its own desire.
But who can tell the purpose of Alonzo
His firange approach no friendly aspect kears:
He comes the foe determin'd of the Mcors,
But not to us a friend.

inerg.

King. Cf that no fear.

1 know hill pru;i, imper.ous, and fierce,
Haughty of heart, and high of hand : Too prompt
On all occasions to appeal to arms.
But he was ever gentle to my daughter
The proud Alonzo bow'd the knee to thee.
At his departure I obferv'd thy grief,
And in my mind-

(A trumtet foavuds.)

Orm What means that ihmaut of war ?
King. The trumpet founds to arms.

(Enter a Mlnger.)

M1J7. Thy prefe.ce, Sir,

Is at the camp requir'd. Both nations arm,
And rus to battle: Loud the Moors compklin
Of violated faith. A Spanish knight
They fay has broke the treaty, and attack'd
Their bands of peace secure.

King. 'Tis basely done !

Command my guards to meet me at the gate.
Farewel.

[Exit ibe Kieg:

Tsr. Who can this headstrong warrior be

Too well Alonzo knows the laws of war,
Too much reveres the treaty seal'd and sworn,
To make a rafi attempt upon the Moors.

Or:,s. If it is he, 'tis no deliberate ac,

No treacherous intention to afrail
The Moors unguarded. Yet it may be he:
My mind misgives me that it is Alonzo.
Ill would his swelling spirit brook the figt
Of Mooriis tents and arms on yonder plain.
If as he pass'd, one flighting word ',as dropi,
With tenfold scorn to that he would reply,
Nor heftate alone to draw his sword
Amidst an host of Moors.

Ter. Theclamour finks.
Whate'er it was, the tumult is appeas'd.

B4 Ar

And now what does my Ormilinda think
Of my predit'ions ?

Crm. Oh ! my dear Teresa

Thy fond dtfre to cLear my hopeless heart
Mia:es thee forever to my mind present
The fairelt fide of things.

-Ttr. Ha ! dofl thou doubt

Still of his coming?

Orca. No, I think 'tis he;

But hope and fear alternate sway my mind:
Lilie light and hade upon a waving field
Coursing each other, when the flying clouds
Now hide and.now reveal the fun of heav'n.
I tremble for the ifue of the combat
Ar.d if my lord nlou!d, as I hope, prevail,
I tremble for myself: Afraid tifee,
Tho' sick with firong impatience to behold him,
And learn why he forsook his Ormifinda.
He fays I know the. cause. Oh! most unjust !
Vas it because I lov'd him to excess,
Altho' his title shook my father's throne ?
WVas it because join'd my fate to his,
And fondly chose to wed a bauiflh'd man ?
Fw. such are 'ny demerits.

'er-. ' 'Tis but vain

T.cus to torment thyself, and rack thy mind
W'i: fad conjctures, at a time like this,
When the rcalitv will soon be known.

Orm.. I know one thing that's real, 'tisa fault,

An imperfection which I cannot cure;
Sixteen long years are pa fGnce I beheld him,
Ard grief and care, those tenants that deface
' he !td ar.d weary mansion thev inhabit,
Have dwelt with me. Am I not alter'd much?
The ghot and lhadbw of what once I was?

'er. No,: Ormifinda, 1 perceive no change;

That in the least impairs thy lovely fcrm.
The beam that gilds the early morn of youth
Yields to the fplendorof a riper hcur:
The rose that:was so fair in bud. is blown;

And

And grief and care, tho' they have dwelt with thee,
Have left no traces of their visitation,
But an impreflion sweet of melancholy
Which captivates the foul. Unlkilful they
Who drers the queen of love in wanton similes:
Brightest lie fliines amidst a low'r of tears;
The giaces that adorn her beadty most,
Are softness, sensibility, and pity.

Orm Oh ! how ingenious thou art, Teresa,

How subtle to elude my finile fears !
Still they advance and gather round my heart,
If nothing can recal Alonzo's love,
Let him but own his son, and Ill renounce
The title of his wife, and of a queen
Then in a convent hide me and iny sorrows.
The saddest sifter of the holy train,
Whose watchful zeal prevents the midnight Bell,
Shall find' me kneeling dn themarble fibor.
Oh! it will be the luxury of grief,
To weep incessant in the vaulted cell,
To lift my hands, and fend my vows to heav'n,.
Invoking ev'ry power'that dvells above,
To guard and blers my hulband,and my son !
Perhaps some friend, niot likely :my Tercfa;
When I am. quite forfake'n-and forgot.
By all the world,, wililll remeniber me ;-
Will come and tell me of Alonzo's wars'.
Tell how my boy in his first battle fought,.
At once the rival of his father'. fame.

K. A!T
· S 1~.-/~¢ I

# ACT II.

A C. T It.
SCENE I.
En!ir the King an, a l4oor oficer, ;tuh AMeai and

Slaniards.
K IN G.
H AMET, impartial justice fliall be done,

And thou I know as jufily wilt report it

Thou art the friend of peace.

Hamen. Therefore 1 fought

This office; for in yonder camp, 0 ! King,
Some counsellors there are who urg'd the Caliph
To take advantage o' this fair occasion
And hold the treaty void.

King. That I believe,

But with your aid I hope to disappoint themin
My guards are gone to bring th' offender hither.

Hamnt. Yonder they come, and thro' their files I fee
A prifcner.

[Enter Guards withb ajoerg man arnmed.

King Ha ! by Heaven, he's but a youth,

A teardlets boy, and like a woman fair.
He moves my pity much. Unhappy youth !

[To the prificr.

Art thou the chief of that unruly band,
Who broke the treaty and assail'd the Moors ?

Youth. No chief, no leader of a band am I.

The leader of a band insulted me,
And those he led basely aflail'd my life;
With bad success indeed. If felf-defence
Be criminal, 0 King ! I have offended.
King. ['o lIunet.] With what a noble confidence

he speaks !

See what a spirit thro' his blulhes breaks !
Observe him, Hamct.

Hamet. I am six'd upon him.
Kizg. Didf thcu alone engage a band of Moors

And

ar.d make such havoc ? Stre it cannot be.
Recall thy scattered thoughts. Nothing advance
Which proof may overthrow.

Youth. What I have fai.l

No proof can overthrow. Where is the n:an,
Who speaking trom himfelt; not l'om reports
And tumors idle, will Iland forth and fay
I was not single when the Moors ,ttack'd me?

Ham. I will not be that Iman, tho' I conlses,

That I came hither to accuse thee, Youth !
And to demand thy punilhment.-I brought
The tale our foliers told.

rYthb. The tale was falle.
Hlarnt. I thought it true; but thou hail ihook n:v

The feal of truth is on thy gallant for;:, [faith.
For none but cowards lie.

Kirg. Thy ftoy tell,

With every circumfiance which may explain
The seeming wonder; how a single man
In such a strife could. land ?

Yruh.. 'T ill cease to be

A wonder, when thou hear'st the flory told.
''his morning on my road to Oviedo
A while 1 halted near a Mkooriill post.
Of the commander I enquir'd my way,
And told my purpose, that I came to fee
The famous combat. With a scornful fitile,
With taunting words and geflures he repl;ed,
Mocking my youth. Advis'd me to return
Back to my father's house, and in the lig
To dance with boys and girls. He added too
That I Ihould fee no combat. That no knight
Of Spain durit meet the champion of the Moors.
Incens'd 1 did indeed retort his scorn.
The quarrel grew apace, and I defied him,
To a green hill, which rose amidst the plain,
An arrow's flight or farther from his polt.
Alone we sped: at once we drew, we fought.
The Moorifil captain fell. Enrag'd his men
Flew to revenge h;ideath. Stcure they ca:re

Eac-

1. A LO n Z 0.

Each w;:h lhis U!:clt fFeed. Those who carce sirs
Single I met and flew. More weary grown
'The ress togethcr join'd, and all at once

l:aii'd :::e. 'Ihen I nhd no topes of life.

Eu: fudtenlv a troop cf Spar;inrds came
And cbhrg'd my fges, wvho did not lorg fufiain
The llock, bLt fld, a.nd ca!ried to their camp
That falie repcrt whLich thuj, O King ! hall heard.

K'rg. Now by my ficcpter, and my sword, I fwcar,

Thou art a notle youth. An angd's voice
Cou!d .ct cctnmmard a more implicit faith
Than thou from ire balt gali'd. What thinktl thou,
Is he nct greatly wrong'd ? [Hamet ?

iran.iir. IBy Allah ! yes.

The voice of truth and innocence is bold,
Ar.d never yet could guilt that tore affuine.
I take my leave impatient to return,
And :aiisfy .ny friends that this brave youth
Was not th' aggrcffur.

K'rg. I expe& no !ess
Frcm gen'rcus Hamet.

[Fxit Hamet and Mcorr.

iK-^n. Tell me, wondrous Youth !

For much I long to know; what is thv name ?
Who are thy parents ? Since the Mocr prevail'd,
The cottage and the cave have oft' concealt'
From hcftile hate the nbleft blood of Spain:
Thy spirit fpcak for thee. T hou art a iltoot
Of some illufirios flock, fonme noble house
Whose fortunes with. their falling country fil.

ruith. -Alberto is my name. I draw my birth

From CgtalWia; in the mountains there:
My fatbhex4.ells, and for his own domains
Pays tribute to the Mocr. He was a soldier;
Oft' I have heard him es your battles speak,
Of Cavadonga's and Olallcs' field.
But ever since I-can remenmbr ought,
His chief employment arc; delight have been
To train me to the ule and; lore of arms;
Ia n a.ial eaucif. we p!i. the day; ..·,'

M orning

Morning and evening, Rill the theme was war.'
He bred me to endure the funiier's heat,
And brave the winter's cold: To swim across
The headlong torrent, when the floals of ice
Drove down the dream. To rule the fiercef-fReed .
That on our mountains run. Nofavagebeaft
The foref yields that I have not cncountei'd.
Mean while my bosom beat for nobler game; ;
I long'd in arms to meet the foes of Spain .
Oft I implor'd my father to permit mie, .
Before tlhe truce was made, ro Join the holt.
He said it mull not be, I was too )oung
For the rude service of these trying times.

King. Did he permit you now ?
Alb. . A firangeadvenrure .

Forc'd me from home. Not many days ago, ;
When hunting in the woods, 1 heard a voice, .
A woman's voice, calling aloud for help. ,
I rufh'd into the thicket; there I saw
A Moorish Lord, for brutal licence fain'd,
Who lhamefully abus'd a rural maid
Of Spanifl race. I free'd her fron'.his arms.
The Moor spake not a word, but mad with rage ..
Snatch'd up his lance, which food against a tree,
And at me flew. I turn'd his point afidei,
And with a flenderjavelin, pierc'd his heart.
I hallened home, but did not find my father';,
Nor was it safe to wait for his return.
I took the fairell armour in the hall,
And hitber bent my course. The rell thou know'ft.

King. Thou art a prodigy, and fill'ti my mind

With thoughts profound and expectation high.
When in a nation, humbled by the will
Of Providence, beneath an haughty foe,
A person rifes up, by nature reard,
Sublime, above the level of mankind;
Like that bright bow, the hand of the mold Higi
Ber.e:: in hec wat'ry cloud : He is the sign
Of rolp'rous change and inrerpofing Heavn:
Andthou, ifrightl read--- ..

- , UJ,

(Eater MU5enger.)

Mtff. The champion, Sir,

Who comes to fight for Spain; is near at'hand: -
One of our kcours has seen him and his train,
But brings a Rrange report, which damps the heart
Of every Spaniardc It isnot Alonzo.

Kisg. What say's thou ? God of heaven! Not Alonzo!
Who is he then ?

MasJ. That is not fully known

Clad in the flowing veflure of the.eaft,
A Perfan turban on his bead he wears,
Yet he's a chrifian knight- To mark hisfaith,:
Holy, and adverse to hlhammed's law,
Before his steps a silken banner borne
Streams in the wind, and Rlews a golden cross.

Kiig. Send cut another scout.
AMis. Theere not time-
To go and to return..

Kimg. Begone, begone,-.

And let me be obyd. Als! mry hopes.
Arevanaii'd like a dream..

dAi. I grieve to fee-
The king afliaed.'

King. Ah ! Thol dor not know:
How deep these tidings strike.

l./ Is not the king.

Free to accept or to refuferthe aid.
This tranger offers?

King. If I am, what then ?
Ald. Be not offended,' Sir, at my.prefumprior,.

For from my heart I speak, a loyal heart,
True to my foT'leiga and my-native land.
If this is not Alonzo, why thould he,.
Or any stranger fight the cause of Spati ?
Are there not warriors born of Spanilh race,.
Who court the combat ?

King. To my words attend.
The Mooril champion is of great reovan; -

In

In dtature like the giant race os.o, ,
Like Anak's true, oi Ttan's fabled fS 's. .
Against the foe nor sword nor spear be lifti, '
But in his might fecire, a mace he wields,
Whose sway refillefs breaks both lhield and arm,
And crushes head and helmet. Thus he lights,
Whose fatal prowed turn'd the doubtful scale
Of three fucceiv batties. He is deem'd
Invincible but by Aloozo'a arm :
Therefore out warriors, tho' they know no fear,
Nor fear of ought that can themselves befal,
Anxious for Spain, to great Alonzo yield,
And on his valour reft.

Ab. Oft' have f beard

My father speak of brave Alonzo's deeds
What can with-hold bin when his country calls
Perhaps the last of combats.he has fought,
And in the silent tomb the hero relix.
But, since he's bfenr, from whatever cause,

! let no stranger knight his place afiume,

To bring dilsonour an the Spanilb name.
If this gigantic champion of the Moots,
Clad in the glory ofhis'battlesiwon,:
Dazzles the warriors, and confounds theirvalour;
Let me, tho' young inarmsa the conatb claim,
On me his fame has no imprefiion made.
111 meet the giant with a fearless heart.
It beats for battle now. Oft have 1 kill'd
The wolf, the boar, and the wild monntainbull,
For sport and pattime. Shall this Moorifi dog
Refill me fighting in my country's cause

King. By beaven and earth, thou mov'ft me much

Have Rirr'd the embers of my youthful fire. [thy words
Thou mak'ft me wish 1 could recal those days;i :

, ..

When of an age like thine, and not unlike'
To thee in face and form, I rais'd the spear
Againsi the Moor, in Cava's bloody field.
Then by my hand the great Alchmmon&fell,
The ftrerigth and Fillar of the Caliph'a hoff.
Then I was fit to meet Mir nallon's arm.

But

But now, miy hairs are grey, my lleps are f.or..
My Ivword delcending breaks the fhlield no nmo :
Our foes ha e known it long.

,l',b. 0! King, thou art

Thy country's great deliv'rer, and the sole
Rellorer of the fate. Pelagio's fame
Shall never die: Rut let thy counsel now
(As oft thy valour) lave this land from Ihame.
Let not a foreign warrior rake the ield,
And snatch the glory front the lance of Spain.

Kirg. Mv voice alone calnot determine that.

The council fit alfembled near the lilts,
To them 1 will prelent thee. If this knight
Unknown, who from that distant region ccmes,
Where the blight fun lights op his golden lamp,
Bears not fonme high pre-eminence about hinm,
Which marks him out our furell fifetl choice,
Mv voice is for a Spaniard, and for thee!

.tib. Upon my knees, that ne'er were bow'd before

To mortal man, I thank thee,!

Kiag. Rife, Alberto!

To im no tharks are due. A. greater king,
The king of Kings, Ideeul hatr cholen thee
To be the chairlpiori ot his law divine.
Againtt the Inridel.-If not for this,
For fomn great purpole fitre thou art ordaina.
Bred in the desert, and by heav'n endued
\,ith force anc vrlor. narvelloully great,
Conducled by a hand unseen, thyfeif
Not knowing whither,. and this-day produc'd
Before the nations.

.A/. Ah ! my foul's on fire!

Should fitch a glorions destiny be mine!
May I intreat to go without delay ?
I fear Come gallant warrior may Itep forth.
And claim the fight before me..

Air g. Stay, Sebaflinn,
And to my daughter tell what has befall'n.

[Exfunt King cnd AlbertF.

(Mart

(.l:'. ct$ Ssl'fi an. )

Ilo(,w an? cl;.,niiT malk tiln awful day .
W\hat mul the Plircefs fuIttr W' \eli I know
That file above all others v i.n'd Alonzo.

Inttr Oillifinda and TIclrta.

Ter. It is a sa!fe report. In tinmes like these

'The miniis of men are credulous and weak:
To rumor's ilifting Illit they bow and bend,
Iike corn of slender iced to -verv wind.
Thou know'ft that from the Eafi Alonzo cones
Might not the hafly ineflenger Irifalke
For him some turban'd warnior of his train ?

Orm. 0 ! good Sebastian, canit thou tell me ought '

Is it Alonzo ?

Seb. If report speaks truth,

And so the King believes, 'tis not Alonzo.

Orm. Then I am loft, Teresa.
Ter. Haft thou heard,

If not Alonzo, who this firanger is?

Seb. His garb bespeaks him native of the Eil.

But from whatever clime the warricr comes,
I hope, my P;incets ! that he comes in vain.
Another warrior, and of Sparifh race.
Now claims the combat for his native land.
Orm. Of Spanith race? M ho is this Knight of

Spain ?

Stb A wonder ! never was his equal seen,

For daring valour and address in arms.
He has nor vet attain'd the prime of you:h,
His look partakes more of tie boy than man,
But he hath vanquili'd men. This day the Moors
Have felt his hand.

Orm. Ha ' Is it he, St-'jafian,
\VWho was the author of the late alaim

Sb. The fame.
Orm. And whence dcLs this yourg hero come'

s* d',

Se&as From Catalonia. In the deferrs there

His fire, obhcure, thbo once a warrior, dwells.

Orn. From Catalonia! In the delert bred!'

Teresa ! All that's possible I fear:
What if this youth-

Ter. [To Orx ] O! thihk how many youths

Of Spanifl race in Catalonia dwell.
Be recolle8dd whilU 1 alt SebaRian
A queflion that at once all doubt rfolue~.
[7tSó.] Ha this youth- no nane-? Haft thou no

beard

How he is call'd ?

Set. He cals hiismfelfAlberto.
Or,. Mother of God !
Tr.- ['To lr.

ler 1wate i-- Te Prioefs grieves,

That Spain depriv'd of great Alonzo's aid, [Si Sct]
Should reft her safety on a ifipwlia's arm.

Orm. No jdge of.rriors or of coIbats I;.

But sure this youth, tho' neer so braeand bold,
Of tender yers, who bat not reach'd his prime,
Is most unfit to cope with firong Miralloe.

S,6. - Heroei ri~ . ot be iudgd by common rules,

Irregular like comets in their conrfe,
Who can compute the period when they: fine?'
Lady ! If thou had'st fen this gallant youth,
If thou had'l heard him, when obli'd to fpeat,
In elfdefence, he told-his amnd'rous deeds,
-As if he thought them nothing.: Thy faint heart
Would fromi is fir he canghr-the flame of hope;.
Thou would'st, even as thy royal father did,.
Believe be was-created.nd ordain'd,
By Heav'n fipreme, the champion of his countryL

7er. Sebafian, go, and find this gallant youth.

Tell him, the Princess, partial toihe.brave,
Desires his preftece.

Stb. Gladly I obey, [Exit SEB.J
Ora. He's gone. Now I may speak. My son!

my son !

My hope, my comfort, in defpir annd death !
The only lar in my dark i'- tht-lhone ! Mu

Mud

Must thy unhappy moter jive to fee
Thy light extinguiih'd I willnot permit
This most unequal combat. I'll proclaim
My fatal flory, and declare his birth.

Ter. Think what mu¢ follow. Absolute perdition
Orm ' f's not his death perdition? Can he meet

The Moor and live ? How hIould his tetdir youth
Refill the giant, who.hasoverthrows
Squadrons entire, and trampled on the necks
Of firnieft warriors ?

Ter. "Tia not yet deceed

That he fhail fight thle Mopr. The stager knight,
Who was at firit nmifakea for Alopzw,
Comes not.fp far, without a name in arms,
To gain the fuffrge of the Pers of Spa .
When once t4,q:tapii.kor» w, :' i

Orm. . Ter&r nr ....

My fate has filr onget' rtnor held.,, .
From bad to worse. When I hbfrnld oIy.nand
To one difaler, th ga greatr came.
I had made deatf f m.ulir; to ay:thJoait i
! could embrace the fpere liks fred : .
But flill I kept a iqgTrogf my heart l
Safe and untobh'd. - My derp child ;wa ethere
Amidst the ruins of the wife. ad queen,
The mother Rood ficure. O.tbw Alonzo!'
If yet thine'eyes behold ihe light of day, .' '
What sorrow and remorse mnul be thyFportmon,
When:thou .Oalt hear-Now promise me, TereLa,
That when my fort *d I are' id in:dul ' '
(For each event aelerates»our doom) '
Thou wilt seek out and find this cruel man.
Tell him how Spain, the kingdom of his fathers.
By him deserted, was for ever lo0::.
How hiforfaken wife in honour died-
But that's not imur--for me he will not mourn.
Then tell him of his ftn, so wring his.heart I .
Truly describe the boy how brave he was I
How beautiful ! -how from the cloud obscure
In which his carefutoaother had involv'd him,

He

He bur1l the champion of his native Tand..
Then tell him how the spring ng hero fell
Beneith a tronger arm. fighting for Spain,
And for his mother; fghting with e foe .
His father Ibould hnve fcughr, nd cduld have van-

quilh'd!

ITr.-. Stbfiiancomes.. '
'

Eattr SBASTIAsr.

Sb. All is revera'd again:

The stranger knight is for Abdallah known,
The Perflan prince, Alonzo's chosen friend,
His only equal in the fthife of arms.
To him the combat is decided.

Ora. ' . . * I Iknow

His ilory welli he is the Sophy's soh;, - -
The eldell born and Persia's rightful heir -
But by his imother's zeal -aChnftian bred:
True to his faith, he loft his father's throne.
Wht fays he ofiAlonzo .?..

St&b. · Sent.byhim,

The brave Abdillah comes to fight for Spiin.'
They narch'd to-geter, fros. the falls of Nile
To Damietta. There a wound'recefv'd
In Asia' warabrokeout, and forc'd:Alonio,
Full of regret, in Egypt to remain.
His friend for him appear. The king, thy father,
Withall his peers, in honour of the prince,
Go forth to meet him.

Orm. - Haft thou seen Alberto
Stb. I have,. and told him what I had in charge;

Then haflen'd hither to report these tidinigs,-
At which Alberto droops.'

Tir. Return, I pray,.

To my apartment guide the young Alberto.
The princess will be there. [Exit Scb.'

Did not I fay,

Aonzo never would abandon Spain .
Abdallah cotnes.to conquer in his name.
Now I can read the ch'rafers of fate, -
And fpellthe will of Heav'.. This boy of vours

Will

# ACT III.

Will win your husband back. When he beholds
The image of his valdur so express,
His heart will nelt.-' The husband and theofathcr
Will rufli upon hiiii ith.a'flood of joy.

Orn. Is he not'like hin ? Mark his'coming forth!

Behold Alonzo in his daring Ton !.
Full of the spirit of his warlike fire,
His birth unknown, he felt his princely mind,
Advanc'd undaunted on the edge of, war,
And claim'd the post of danger for his own.

Ter. A mother's tongue.cannot exceed the tiuth

In praising him. There never wasa prince,
Since old Iberia firIt excell'd in arms,
Broke out with.fo much lustre on niankind.
But in this interview, with prudence check
The transport of affection from thy son.
Cautious conceal the secret of his birth.
SafeRl he is, while to himself unknown.

Orm. How could his faithful guardian let him go

Perhaps that faithful guardian lives no mote.:

Ter. Alberto willinform thee.
Orm. Not Alberto
Alonzo is his name. I goto meet him. [Exeunt ]

ACT III.

SC ENE N E
A view of thecountry near the city.

Enter A B DAL L A H.

!CITY ! once the feat of all I lov'd I
0 ! hills and dales I haunts of my youthful days I

O ! scenes well known!. unalter'd you remain.
But I approach you with an alter'd mind,
Hate what I lov'd, arid loath whit I defir'd.
Intolerable Rate! My foul is void ! '
A chaos without form. Why, nature, why I
Art thou so watchful o'er the brutal tribes,
And yet so careless of the human race.

: !-. . , ,si

By cetain infRint beafs and birds discern
Their proper food: For them the fairest fruit
Untouch'd, if pois'nous, withers on the bough:
But man, by a fair outside, fill deceiv'd,
And by his boasted reason more betiay'd,-
Gives the affedion of his foul to beauty,
Devours the deadly bane.

Ener VELASCO.

My Lord! Thy people,
Where thou commanded'fl, halt, and wait thy coming.

Aid. 'Tis well ! I wilh'd to speak with thee alone.

Vclafco! tho' to thee but little known,
I did in part reveal my secret foul,
Told thee the feign'd Abdallah was Alonzo.
Further than that, thou haft not fought to know.
Tho' many a lonely hour we two have worn
On sea and liore, that some men would have thought
Moftopportune.

Vel. My Lord ! There are some men

Who havingonce been trutled with a little,
Avail themelves of that, some more to learn
And penetrate the bosom of a friend,
Even with the wedge his uneasiness had furnilh'd-
Such men flouldnotbe truted.

Abd. True, Velafco

But thou art not like them: I have obferv'd thee,
Warm in affefioa, but in temper cool:
A fleady judgment guides thee thro' the world.
Thy gen'rous mind pursues the path of honour,
Unbiafs'd and unmov'd.

'el. From early youth,

The chosen confident of my companions,
I never yet from perdy betry'd,
From babling vanity, ivulg'd a secret.

Abd. I-have a tale to tell, that will amaze,

Confound, and ffrike thee dumb. The deserts valt
Of Afit and of Africa have heard it.
The rocky cliffs of Caucacus and Atlas
Have echo'd my complaints: But never yet -The

The human ear receiv'd them. Thou tal heard
Already more than ever mortaldid.
Thou know'ft the princess'?

Vel. Olm.inda !
Abd. Her.
Iel. Not many of the court have been more honour'd

With oppormnities to know her worth:
And there is none who more her worth reveres.

Abd. Her worth rThou may'st as well reverea fiend,

The blackelt fiend; that dwells, in burning hell,
*Is not more oppofii: to.all that's good
Than Ormilitlda.

rt.
" What a strain is this ?
Ad. 'Tis true, by every high and holy name,

That binds a soldier's and'a prince's vow:
I swear, Velafco, Ihe's the vilest woman
That e'er difgrac'd her sex. The most abandon'd,
The hardieft, most determin'd inher'vice,
That ever wrong'd a fond believing heart.

Vel. Great God !
Add. You fart and Ihudder like a man
Struck with a heavy blow;

yde. And so I am.
Abd. And now you lift your eye-lids up and flare

With looks full of conjecture and fiifpicion,
As if you doubted of my fober mind.
I am not mad, Vela(co, tho' sometimes
I have been near, yes, very near to madness;
By that bad woman craz'd.

el. 0 ! Would to heav'n -

That this affliting moment of mylife
Were a delirons dream I Unreal all
That's heard and spoken now I But how, my Lord,
Art thou so much affected by her crimes ?

Abd. I am her husband.
I'el. Heav'n for that be prais'd i
Abd. How dar'ft thou thus profane the name of heav'n
And mock my misery ? Thou art mad, I think;
The frenzy which thou wifhed'ft has come upon thee..
Beware, for if this extafy endures

My

My sword secures thy silence.

el. ' 0! forgive me,

Noble Alonzo, royal, 1 fould fay,.
Doubly my master now. There's dot a man,
Whose veins contain one drop of Spanilh blood,
Who does not with thee wedded to the princess.
And for her virtue! Thou haft long been absent
And know'ft not what an angel's life fle leads
Referv'd, retir'd, and fad. I'll flake my foul,
Some villain has belied thy faithful wife,
And fnar'd thy easy faith.

dJd. Take heed, take heed!

i am the villain who accuse the princess,
And thou Ihalt be her judge.

Yel. Eternal power!
What should I think of this?

11d. Liften to me.

I have perplex'd thee, and have marr'd the flory
By my abrupnefs. 'Tis a serious tfory
Not to be told in parcels and by fiarts,
As I from impotence of mind began,
But I will bear my swelling. passion down,
And utter all my (hame. Thou dolt remember
How I was banilh'd from my native land ?

Yel. For tilling young Ramirez.
Ad. At that time
I doated on the princess. She conjur'd me
With earnest pray'rs, with deluges of tears,
Not to refill her father, nor advance
My better title to the crown of Spain,
As I had once refolv'd. My rage she footh'd;.
Pride. anger, int'reft, yielded all to love.
With her I made a merit of obedience,
And pleaded so cffecually my cause,
That fte consented to a private marriage,
Before I left the kingdom. We were married,
And met together, four fucceflive nights,
In the sequestered cottage of the wood,
Behind the palace garden. 0 ! I thought
Myfelfthe happiest and the most belov'd
Of all mankind She mock'd me all the while;

Mcai

Meant me the cover of her loose amours,
A cloak to hide her fiame. 0 God I 0 God I
Did I deserve no better -

Vel. Goodmy Lord 1

What circumstance to warrant such conclufon ?
What evidence ?

Aadal. The evidence of fight-
Mine eyes beheld : I saw myself diflonour'd,

rel. Your eyes beheld I '
Abdal. By Heav'n and Hell-they'did.

The night preceding the appointed day
Of my departure, from the realm of Spain,
I flew impatient to the place of meeting,
Before the hour was come : To wear away .
The tedious time, for ev'ry minute feem'd .
An age to me, I struck into the wood
And wander'd there, frill fleering to the gate
By which Ihe was to enter. Thro' the treec
The moon full orb'd in all'her glory /hone.
My am'rous mind a sportful purpose form'd,
Unseen to watch the coming of my bride,
And wantonly furprize her. Near the gate .
There flood an aged tree. It wasa beech,
Which far and wide fretch'd forth its level'arms'
Low, near the ground, and form'd gloomy hiade.
Behindits trunk I took my secret Itand;
The gate was full in view, and the green path
On which it open'd.. There I flood awhile,
And soon I heard the turning of the.key.
My heart beat thick with joy-and forth the came:-
Not as I wilh'd: She had a minion with her;
A handsome youth was tripping by her fide,
Girt with a sword, and drefs'd in gay.attire.
He feem'd to court her, as they pass'd along,
Coy, but not angry, for I. heard her laugh.
She flung away. He follow'd, loon oe'rtook her,
Embrac'd her-

Yel. Ah ThePrincefs Ormifindat
Abdal. I drew my sword, that I remember well,
And then an-interval like death ensued.

- C Whew

When consciousness return'd I found myself
Stretch'd at my length upon the naled ground
Underthetree: My sword lay bv my fide;
The sudden Ihock, the trartfport'of my rage,
And grief, had flopt the current of my blood,
And made a paufeof life.

YVd. Alas! my Lord!

'Twas piteous indeed_ What did'f thou do,
When life and sense retum'd?

ASd. Withlifeand-fenfe, :'. -

'My rage return'd, ftlubling with hafe, I ran
To sacrifice them to myjnft revenge.
But whether they had heard my heavy fall,
Or that my death-like swoon had lasted long,
I know not, but.I never fw them more.
I fearch'd till morning; then away I went,
Refolv'd to scorn the frunmpet, and forget her.
But I have not been ible to forget
Nor to despise her.; tho' I hate-her more
Than ev'er I lovd her, ill 'her image haunts me
Where'er I go. I think of nothing else
When rm awake, and never 1hu my eyes
But ihe's the certain vision of my dream.
Sometimes, in all her loveliness lhe comes
Without her crimes: In- extfy'I wake,
And wilh the viion had endur'd for ever.
For there deceitful moments, ! my friend!
Are the sole pleasant moments whish Alonzo
For eighteen years has known. .

Fel. Within that time,.

What regions barbarous haft thou cxplor'd,
What frange vicissitudes of lifd endur'd
In afion and repoe..

Abdal. Extremes of both

I courted to relieve my worturd mind:
But the tornenter fill:my tieps attends;
Behind me mounts, when thro' the ranks of war
I drive my fiery teed; and when I feck
The hermit's cell, the fiend purfies mbthere.
Tune, which they fay the woands of passion cures

In

Ii other hearts, inflames and felten mine.
There's but one remedy.

yld. Would I could name one I
Abdal. Her life. The unflion for the ferpeht' bite

Is the fell serpent's blood. I'll have her life.
Th' adulteress with infamy /hall die,
By public justice doom'd. With this intent
Difguis'd I come. If in my proper hape
I had appear'd, alarm'd The would have fled,
And baffled my revenge.

Vet. My Lord) permit me

One thing to mention, which there eyes beheld,
Altho' it fquarcs not jull with thy opinion.

dbdal. Opinion!
Vel. Good my Lord! with patience hear.

When first I was to this employment nam'd,
Which since I.have so happily difcharg'd,
,The PrinceLs sent and call d me to her presence.
The treaty with the Moor engrofs'd her thoughts.
That fad and pensive air she always wear
Was fettled to a thicker gloom of grief,
Her voice was low and languid. Few her word,,
And the Ihort periods ended with a sigh.
But when I gave her hopes of thy return,
A sudden gleam of joy spread o'er her face,
Like morning breaking in a cloudy.fiy.
With earner voice, till rifidg as he spoke,
She urg'd dispatch, exhorted me to zeal
And perfcveranee. Never to delil ,
Till I had found thee: For her fate, he said,
The fate of Spain, depended on Alonzo.
Her passion then burst in a floodof tears
That choak'd her utterance.

Abdal. And thou didRf believe

That ev'ry word Ihe spoke was mont fincore.
How to interpret her let me infirut thee.
Whate'er he utters with unusual warmth,
As the effusion genuine of her heart,
Receive and construe in another sense
Reyerfe and opposite; for that's the truth,

C ' The

The words fhelfpoke, her sigh,, the tears Ihe-ihed
Were all from apprehension of my coming,
Not as they feem'd, for fear I (hould not come.

dl. 'Tis dreadful that.
.ital. Tishotrible, 'tis monflrous!

Wh:n I for her had. wav'd my right to reign,
The right undoubted of' the Gothic line,
And ltoop'd,,enamour'd, to that bate decree
From Spain, which banifl'd the true heir of Spain,
That flie hould pitch on me to be her fool,
And pour such infinite contempt upon me.
But four days married I Fond, to madncfs fond !
And on the very eve of my departure I
She would nr. for a tingle day refrain,.
Bat rufi'd to prolli:ution !

yl. I have heard

Stories ind tales enough of female falflood,
Same that were tnee, and others that were feign'd,
By fpitcful wits maliciously dcvis'd,
But this surpass:s all

A.Ai. Allwicked women

Compar'd with her are faints. She is a foil
To set them off, and make their foulness fair.
In her incontinence she stands unrivall'd,
Barning in fires peculiar to herself,
Phcenix in lewdnefi.

'eI. May I ask my Lord
How he intends ?-But fee the King draws near.

Ai4: He's nmucimpaird.
?el Whn foreintieion comes

In the decline of life ! 'ris like a llorm
Which in the rear of autumn flakes the tree
That frost had touch'd before ; and tfrips it bare ;-; i
Of all it's leaves.

(Erter tie KING atitb attendants.)

(As be advzccs Jfeaki to V E L A SCO.)
Krg. We thank rty care, Vclafco!

·T ABDALLAH

rluftricus Prince ! v. hmn love of giory brings
Erom regions Jb remtc-, to right for Spain,

Accept

Accept the thanks a grateful natidn pays'
To her defender. ;
. i .

Abdal. Monarch of Afuria!

The nations of the EaRt haveheaird thy praise.
Had not the hand of time unitrung thine arm,
Spain never would have fought for foreign aid
To quell hcr'foes..

Kivg. 'Tis'better far for Spain

That f am old :' For in mywiarlike'days, .
When in the prime of flow'ring y9hth I fought,
I equall'd not thy friend.' 'Above his own,
Above the flrehgth of ev'ry iortal arm
Alonzo thine exalts. '

Abdal. Three' times we fought

With equal fortune on the Wplga:s banks;
He for the Monguls, I againi th'em tlood.
But at our Ikt ericohnter, on .my helmr
His faithless blade broke thort, and'iri his hand
The useless hilt remain!d. My'fword I dropt,
And in my arms the valiant chief embrac'd.
Our friendship thus commenc'd, and since that time -
We have been brothers sworn, and leagu'd in arm's
-Alonzo, fighting in my cause, receiv'd
That wound which now detains him from.the field.
Urg'd by affeCtion, and by honor bound,
For him I come against the foes of Spain.
But of myself more than cnbugh'is said; .
'Tis time to aEt. The Moorilh knight, I hear.
Is in the lifts already.

King. ' Prince of Persia !'
The terms to thee are known.

Addal The firl of men'

With pride such honors might from' Spain receivei.,
But never can these honors grace Abdalla'-.
Long since my heart and hand iiere'giv'n away;'
And tho' the cullom of the EaR permits
Unnumber'd consorts, me my faith relirains
But if vicorious in the firife of death,'
I have an earneR and a jutl request
To thee,' O King! which, at a proper time,
I lhall be bold to make,

C3 Kinf

King. Whate'er it is,
I pledge my honor and my faith, to grant it.

Enter SEBASTIAN oir ALBERTO:

(ALBERTO gile on to the KING.)

King. Advance, Alberto ! to the Prince himself,
Deliver thou thy meflage and the present.

AMb. Great Sir! the Princeis Ormfinda greet#

The gen'rous champion of her country's cause,
Wilhes that viAory may fit to day,
And ev'ry day of battle, on his sword.
This coffly bracelet from her arm Ihe fends.
To prince Abdallah, to Alonzo's friend.

Abd . (Lo.g JIedfaflt on Albrto.) .The princers

is molt bountiful, as thou,

Who haft the honor to'attend her, know'}.
Her gracious present humbly I accept,
And thank her for her goodness to Alonzo,
Who will be proud to be by her remember'd.
The combat ended, I propose to pay
My homage to her beauty. Atthis time
My mind is in the lifs.--The Moorish knight
Will think me tardy. (To the King.

·ing. -Let our trumpets found
A sprightly charge. The warrior's heart beats time
To that brave music. Onward from this place
A path direc to thy pavilion leads.

(The KING turns and givs orders.)
A.dal. to ell. Another minion! View him well,

Velafco.

How insolent I See what a creRf he rears,
Elated with her favour. 0! vile woman !
Insatiate and inconstant.

eid. Ah! my Lord!

Truce with such thoughts! Sure this is not a time !
The combat claims a cool and present mind.

AMbl. Fear not'the combat.
Yel. Thou art waited for;
The King himself intends with thee to walk.

[Exerat: AMalab leking back at AlItrtu.

(Mainnt

(Martntt:ALBERTO, SEBASTIAN.)

Alb. rhat Prince of Persia is compos'd of pride;

He did not deign to look upon the pre(ent,
But fretch'd his sun-burnt hand straight out before hip,
Like a blind man, and would have Rood so hill,
Had I not made his fingers feel the pearls.
And all the while he tar'd me in the face,
As if he meant t'opprefs me with his eyre
And fright me with his fierce and uncouth looks.
I blulh'd at firit, but anger came atlaRt,
And bore me up.

Seb. Those princes of the East,

Us'd to the servile manners of their country,
Where ev'ry prostrate save adores his lord,
Without intention Shock the sons of Europe.

Alb. 0 I how unlike to him the King of Spain,

And that moR gentle Princefs,Ormifinda!
Her look, her voice, benign and mild, dispel
The awe her rank inspires, and rearfure
The modet mind. Would'f thou believe, Sebftlian,
She talk'd to me, I cannot tell how long;
Before thou cam's, and queltion'd me minutely
Howl had liv'd, how palt my youthful days ?,
I fear I was too copious in my answers.
What signifies my rural life to her
And yet ihe secm'd to liften with delight,
As if Ihc had an int'relt in my fate;
And once or twice when I of danger spoke,
From which I hardly had efcap'd with life,
Methought I saw her tremble. Much ihe blam'
My ralhncfs; yet she prais'd my courage too.
With all her tendetnefi of heart, I fee
That (he admires true valour.

Se6. So Ihe does.

The bravest knight that e'er was clad in feel,
Alonzo, was the lover of her youth:
And since he left this land she ne'er rejoic'd
But ofthefe matters I will tell thee more
At a convenient season, Let us follow,
And join the train b:fore they reach the liifs.

C4

Iw. I would not lose one moment of tis fight

For halfthe lands of Spain: Tho'I abhor
The Pefian, yet I pray devoutly for him.

(Exeunt.)

# ACT IV. SCENE I.

A C T IV. S.C.E N.E I.

The City.

Enter ORMIS[NDA nnd TERESA.
Orm. T'HIS city looks as if a pestilence

--Had fwept'the whole inhabitants away.

The solitary freets, the empty squares,
Appall me more than the deserted place..
Let us go back again. -

Ter. 'Tis time.we Ihould.

'You trembled at the howling of adog,
That broke the silence and increas'd the horror..
If we ltay here we lhall be fancy-ftruck,
Miltake Tome flatue for a pale-fac'd.ghoft,
And think it beckons with its marble arm.

Orm. Why Ihould this desolation frighten me t

Why should I fear to fee a grave-clad ghost,
Who rhay so oon be number'd with the dead,.
And be mvclf a ghof ? What noire is that?;
Did'll thou not hear, Teresa? ,

Ter. Yes, I did.

I heard an uncouth found

Orm. Uncouth indeed !

An universal groan ! Hark! there again. ,

Ter. 'is not the fame. This has another tone, -
A shout of triumph, and a hurfi of joy.. .

Orm. The combat's over,,and my fate's determin'd.

Now death or life! [TSe trumper.r aund., '-

Ter. Long may the Princess live I

And every hour be fortunate as this I
The Spanish trumpets found, the sign I know.
Thy champion has prevail'd. " Orr.

. C .

Orm. 0 gracious heav'n!
The lifts arenear, and we shall quicly learn.

Ter. Look yonder, fying fwiiter than the wind,

A horseman comes; now at the gate he lights,
And haftes across the square. It is Sebaflian.
His look, his gesture, speak his tidings good.

[Enrtr Sebastian.

Sce. Joy to the princess! Victory and peace !
The Moor is lain by brave Abdalhh's hand.

Orm. Blelt be thy tongue, Sebafian ! Thou shalt

find

Some better recompence than barren thanks
For these glad tidings. But thc gen'rous Prince
Who fought for Spain-

&rb. Safe and without a wound,

Frelh for another foe, Abdallah lhnds.
Short was the combat: Scon the boaster fell,
Who durlt defy the Chrifian world to arms.

Orm. The God of battles, whom Abdallah serves,

Has overthrown the infidc!, whose trult
Was in his own right arm.

,tb. IfI houldlive

Ten thousand years, I never could forget
The solemn prelude and the fierce encounter.
'Thou know's the place appointed for the combat,
An amphitheatre by nature for;n'd.

Orm. I Inow it well.
Seb. The hills, of various slope

And shape, which circle round the spacious plain,
Were covr'd with a multitude immense
Of either fez, ofevery age and rank,
Chriltin and Moor; whose faces and attire
Strangely diverifiled the living scene.
Within the lilts a gallery was rais'd
In which thy father and the Moorilf prince
Sate with their peers, thejudges of the field.
To them the knights with flow and lately pace
Approach'd; and bound by sacred oaths declar'd
That they no charm nor incantation us'd,
But trulledin their valour and their arms.

With

With low obeisance then.they. both fell back;
And firfl the Moor. (for he the challenge gave)
March'd to the middle of the lifted field ;
There seiz'd his ponderous mace, beneath whos

weight, . . - ,

The brawny bearer bow'd; and round his head,
Like a light foil, he flourifh'd it i air. .
On him with different thoughts the dations gaz'd.
But suddenly aflalh'oflightand flanie -
Struck ev'ry'eye from brave Abdallah's.hield,
Cover'd till. then. 'Twas made.of polish'd feel,.
Which Ihone like adamant.; -and to a point
Rose in the centre, slanting on each ide.
This shield the Persian Prince advancing bore-
On his left arm outftretch'd, and in his right,
Thrown back a little, gleam'd a pointed. word;.
Erect and high the bold Mirmallon Rood,
And flernly ey'd his near approaching foe.
Then forward (prung, and on theflaming Ihield!
Difcharg'd a mighty blow, enough to crush
A wall, or split a rock. The Spaniards gaves
A general groan.

Orm. That was the dreadful found

We heard, Teresa.

Seb. Glancing from the lhield,

Aside the mace descended. Then enragd,
Once more the Moor his thund'ring weapon:rar'd,
In slept the Prince, and raising high his shield,
Midway he met the blow; and with the frengtl .
And vigour of his arm, obliquely down .
The pond'rous mace ha drove. Then quick as.

thought,

His better hand and foot at once advancing,.
Plung'd in Mirmallon's throat his thirfly blade;.
The giant tagger'dfor a little lpace;
Then fallingiook the earth. The Chriiians.rais'd'
A shout that rent the air. Away I came,.
Happy to be the bearer of such tidings. [Tratre

Orm. Behold, they come in triumph from the field.
O ! glorious man! And yet forgive me,.Heav'n,

Igrudge.

I grudge the conqueR to Alonzo's friend,
And wivf Alonzo in Abdallah's place.

Erter ife KINc, ABDALLAH, VELASCO,

ALBERTO, &C.
.Ad. [To Velafco.] See where he Hands. -0 Hea-

vens !

Vel. My Lord Alonzo,

Compose thy thoughts.

.dd. Behold her how ihe looks,

As if he knew no ill. That harden'd heart
Against remorse and fear and Ihame is arm'd;
But I /hall wring it now.

King. Daughter, draw near !

This godlike Prince all reconpence disclaims,
Save thanks from Spain. The pleating talk be thine
To greet the saviour of thv native land,
And speak our gratitude.

Orm. No words can speak

Thegratitude 1 feel. Believe it great
As my deliverance, vast as my diltrefs !
Like fad Andromeda, chain'd to the rock
I flood a living prey, when this brave Prince,
Came like another Perseus from the lky,
And fav'd me from deltruEion. I forget,
Wrapt in mvfelf, the charge my father gave
To thank the saviour of my native land;
Another voice shall give thee thanks for Spain,
Alonzo's voice /hall thank thee for his country,
His friends, his people-fav'd.

Ad. Ah! ifI hear (ade.)

This syren longer, he will charm my rage;
But I remember where I heard her last.
Princess of Spain ! I merit not thy praise.
Sent by Alonzo to this land I came:
What has been done, for him I haveperform'd.
Now of his promise I remind the King
To grant me one request.

King. Speak ! It is granted.
Orm. Ifl conjeture right, even that requelt

WilLprove one favour more Cn Spain conferr'd.
dba. Perhaps it may.

K:KS-

King. Proceed illutrious Prince! :
And make me happy to fulfil thy wiih.

Abd. Not for'myfelfI speak, but for my. friend;

And in his name, whose person I fuflain,
I ark for jultice on a great offender.
King. Thou im.alt have ample and immediate

juRlice.

Nor favour nor affinity, hall flcreen
The guilty person, .Prince; why'art-thou troubled?
Thou Ihak'ft from head to foot.. Thy quiv'ring lip
Is pale with paflion. On;thyforehead ta'nd
Big drops. Almighty God! What dreadful birth'
Do these strong pangs portend? :

A6d. The guilty person,

Whom with a capital,offence I charge,
Stands by thy fide .

King. My daughter!
Abd. Yes! thy daughter!

'Tis her I mean, the Princess Ormifinda.
Here in the presence of the Peers of Spain,
I charge her with a crime, whose doom the laws
Of Spain have wrote in blood:. Adultery.
I read astonishment in every face !
Who would fulpea that one so highly born, '
With ev'ry outward mark of virtue grac'd,
Had giv'n her honour to a.worthlefs wretch,
And driv'n a noble husband to despair '

King. Am I awake! Is this the light of day ?

Art thou, O! Prince, with sudden frenzy seiz'd ?
Or is the madness mine ? Renown'd Abdallah !
What answer can be made to such a charge ?
This itrange demand ofjuflice on my daughter,
For an offence that she could not commit ?
My daughter ne'er was married,

Abdal. Ask her that ?

Hear iflhe will deny-lhehas a hulband?

King. My child, thou art amaz'd !
Orm No, not so much

As thou wilt be my father, when thoujhear'fl
Thy daughter's tongue confels flic:has - hjlband.

aing. Haft thou a husband! God of heav'n and

earth! -

Since thou hall thus diflembled with 'thy father,
Perhaps thou hal deceiv'd thy husband too.
Who is thy hulband ? Speak ?

Orm. The PrinceAlonzo. *
Kixg. And aftthou been o long in ecret wedded?
'Tis eighteen years since hedeparted hence.

Orm. 0 ! I have reason to remember that.

There is no calendar so jus and true -
As the fad mem'ry of a wife forsaken.
The years, the months, the weeks, the very days,
Are reckon'd, regiler'd, recorded there !
And of that period I could cite such times,
So dolorous, ditirefsful, melancholy,
That the bare mention of them would excite
Amazement how I live to tell the tale.
But I forget the present in the pas.
No wonder, for this moment is the firfe
That opes the sluices of a heart o'ercharg'd,
And burlting with a flood of grief conceal'd.
- But I muff turn me to another theme.

The earnest eyes of all are bent on me,
Watching my looks, and prying to discern
Symptoms of innocence or signs of guilt.
Hear then the frank confeflion of my foul:
I have tranfirefs'd.

Kig. Stain of a noble race!
Doff thou avow thy crime ?

Onm. Miltake me not,

I have tranfgrefs'd my duty to my father:
Without his knowledge, and againt his will,
Mov'd by a tender lover's parting tears,
I join'd myself in wedlock to Alonzo.
My king, my father, pardon the offence,
Which againf thee I own I have committed:
But may I ne'er of God or man be pardon'd,
Nor friend nor father ever pity me,
If I have fwerv'd one flep from virtue's path,
Or broke the smalleR parcel of thatvow
Which binds a faithful wife ! O ! Prince of Persia!

¢ 21'1Thou

Thou art the etR bs friends add benefaLcors;
Thou com'ft to end mniy hof diflrating woes,
And to dispel th' impenetrable cloud
That darken'd}lH Ay das. .'Nowl shall know
Why I have beeri abandon'd and forsaken,
Why I have been'dettteded and defpis'd,
As never woman was · Proceed; my Lord,
And whilt thbo keenly dofl aflail my life,
And, dearer far, my.honor and my fame,
Secure in innocence,'I ll'calmly hear.
From thee, I hope, the end of all my cares.

Aidal. Even.thus Alonzo told me the would speak,

And thus proclaim her innocence.

Orm. Did he ?

O ! would to heav'n Alonzo heard me now
Fearless defend his honorand mybwn !
My voice, which once was mafic to his ear,
Like David's harp which footh'd the gloomy king,
Would charm his malady, would drive away
The evil spirit, and call back again
The better genius of his early days.
O ! thou that wert so good, so great ! admir'd
Of all mankind ! my lov'd, my loft Alonzo!
For thee, in this humiliating hour,
More than myfelfI mourn.

Abdal (Halfafide.) Eternal Power !

To whom the secrets of all hearts are known !
Hear, hear this woman, and between us judge
'Tis notmy business to contend with words,
These are the conquering armsof womankind.
A nobler course of trial lies before me:
In a wrong'd hulband's name I charge thislady -
With infidelity; and crvie the doom
Of law upon her head. If any knight,
Spaniard or franger, dares alert her cause,
Let him and- forth, and take my gauntlet up;
Which on the ground I throw, my gage to prove
That Ihe is false to honor and Alonzo.

Orm Before the gage of death is lifted up,
Hear me one moment. By Alonzo sent,

Thou

Thou com'ft inftruaed in Alonzo's wrongs.
Let me conjure thee then, by all that's dear,
By all that's sacred to the great and brave,
Thy mother's memory, thy consort's fame,
Not on a gen'ral charge, obscure and vague,
To which there is no answer but denial,
To found the claim of combat: Single out
What circumltance thou wilt of special note,
Offuch a kind as may be tried and known
For true or false Tell us at least his name
With whom Alonzo's wife her honor Rain'd,
And let us be confronted.

[Young Alberto fJepfirtb.

Xib. Heaven forbid

That thou ihould'ft be confronted with a villain.
Princess of Spain! Be sure some wretch there is,
Some renegado, false to God and man,
Suborn'd, and ready with a lying tongue,
To second this brave Prince who wrongs thy fame,
And wounds thy modest ear. Too much by far
Already thou halt heard. Pretended Prince!
For there is nothing royal in thy foul!.
Thou bale defamer of a lady's name !
I take thy gauntlet up, and hold it high
In scorn, and fierce defiance, to thy face,
My gage to prove thy accusation falle,
And thee, the author of a talc invented
To rob a noble lady of her fame.

Orr.. Where am I now What lhall I do, Teresa ?

fTr. The God of Heav'n diret thee!
Adal. Boy.l To thee

I answer nothing. I fufpet the cause
Or thy presumption, and could wifi that Spain
Had giv'n a worthier vifim to my sword. [WYalis ade.

Orn. 0 ! valiant youth! much am.i bound to thee:

But have reasons that import the state,
Which fall, whatever is my fate, be known,
And own'd hereafter to be great and weighty,
Why I decline th' affifance of thy sword.

Ts

If this appeal to combat is the law,
And I can find no champion butAlberto,
Without the chance of comnbat let me fall,
For I will not accept-

Alb. Recall these words,

Too gen'rous Princess ! I can read thy thoughts:
Thou think'lf my youth unequal to the foe;
Thou fear'fl the weakness of Alberto's arm.
My fRrength exceeds the promise of my years.
Oft have I bent the bow, and drawn the sword,
Nor fly my lhafts, nor falls my sword in vain. '
This day againfl a troop alone I fought;
But never did I fight in such a cause,
Nor was I e'er so certain to prevail.
A fire divine invades my zealous brealt '
I feel the force of legions in mine arm.:
Thy innocence has made thy champion frong !
The God of battles is our righteous judge;
And let the cause be tried. - .

[A warrior armed, with his helmet on, fep:

forth.]

War. But not by thee I

Thy father's voice forbids, too daring youth I
Stand back, and let thy maller in the art
Of war, now claim the combat for his own.
My liege I

Ring. That voice I know Th figure too

Resembles much a chief, lamented long
As slain in battle.

War. I am he, Cofollo.

'Tis true, 0 I king! that on the field I fell,'
Fighting for Spain. Howl was fav'd from death,
And where, for many years I have remain'd,
This is no time to tell. This hour demands
A soldier's speech, brief prologue-to his deeds.
On me, proud Pefrian I turn thy gloomy eyes,
Hear me, and let thy ready sword reply.'
With hell-born malice, level'd atherlife,
Thou haft desain'd a Princess, honour'd, lov'd, '
By all, who virtue or fair honour love.

The

The fell Hyaeaa, native of thy land).
Has not a voice or heart more false thanthine,
Thou counterfeit of truth I whom I defy
To mortal combat, and theproofof arms.
Thy full-blown fame, thy uncxhanfled' frength,
Deceitful confidence, I laugh tofcorn;
The conquering cause is mine. .

./3. My lord, the King .

And ye his counsellors for wisdom. fai'd.I
You will not furepcrmit this good old man,
By fond affe&ion for his foni impell'd,
To meet so fitrn a foe. His hoary. head,.
His v.ither'd veins, are.fmptoms of decay.
Lean not upon a reed which timehath bruiis'd,
Nor truat the life and honour of the PrincefT
To the weak arm f age. ..

. -

Ada/l. I'll fight you both, . .: .

Father andt-on at once. ..Together.corne :....
Tongue-valiant men ! and tsyAbdallah'ann.
rll have itfo; for-both ofyou have.dar'd,
Ignoble as you are, to match yourselves
Againit a Prince who moves not in your sphere,
And utter words for which such blood as yours
Is poor atonement.. .

Cost. Ev'ry word thou fpeaik'a

Isinfoentandfalfe.. Son ofalave!
For ealfern monarchsbuy withbgold their brides,
The blood by thee defpis'd, flows from a source
Purer than thine and nobler.

Ab. Nay, my father!

That's said too far:. Fierce and disdainful Prince,
Vain is the offer which thy. passion makes.
Perhaps the conqueror of the Moor may find
One Spaniard is enough.

Cft. A father'-right

Unmov'd I claim, and with determin'd voice
Forbid the combat.

Ang. Hence let us retire

To the pavilion. There our peersnfll judge
Of-yourprcteafiong. [Excrt King and Spaniards.

Abdal.

A/dal. Coihe'with me Velafco.

[Exrent Abdallah andVelafco:

(Manent ORMISfNDAAnjd: TERESA.)

Orm. My thoughts are of-my son. Mine own elate

Is defp'rate. The huband whom-I lov'd,.
On whom Idoated,.anl:fronr whom.I fuffer'd,
What never woman with such patience bore,
Conspires againl miy honour and my life;
Long cherilh'd hope, farewel' : ";

Ter. To guard thy son -

.

Defend thylilf; and, to' preientthe combat,
In thy demand'perrift. Call theaccufer.
To circumfiance of.proof. That is the thread
To lead us thro' this'labyrinth.perplex'd.
Nor has the Persian thy demand/rtfus'd.

Orm. He had not time-to speak. Alberto's voice

Broke in likethunder in his mother's cause.
Amidfl the anguish of my tortur'd heart,
My foul exults, Teresa I in my son !
When in the pride of valour forth he came,
And for my fake defied the bold Abdallah,
His loak (he feem'd a cherub in my eyes I)
His voice (at every word my bosom yearn'd !)
Transported me so much, that I forgot
His tate and mine, and had well nigh sprung forth
To clasp my blooming hero in my arms.

Ter. No wonder that his mother's foul was mov'd:

His brave demeanor the fpecators charm'd.
Valour, which Iheds a glory round the head
Of age and ruggedness ; how bright its beams
When in the lovely front of youth they Ihine !

Orm. I've heard of strange and perilous essays

To try the pureness offufpefed virtue.
I'll undergo whate'er can be devis'd.
By ordeal trial let my faith be prov'd.
Blindfold, barefooted, on the fmoaking foil,
With red hot plough-lhares spread, I'll walk my way;
Plunge in the boiling oil my naked arm,
But will not risk my young Alonzo's life.
The Moorilh hof hangs o'er our heads no more.

The

The heir of Spain hall for himself be known,
Alonzo's son.

TEr. He will not be allow'd

Alonzo's son, nor yet the heir of Spain,
Whilt slander's breath sullies his mother's fame.

Orm. Now thou hail touch'd a firing to whose deep

found

A mother's heart replies. My son ! my son I
I weigh thy virtues down, hang on thy life,
Attaint thy blood, thy.birth, thy right to reign !-
The birds of prey that dwell among the rocks,
The savage beats that thro'the deserts roam,
The monlters of the deep, their offspring love,
And to preserve their lives devote their own,
Athwart the gloom, I fee a flafi. of light,
That opens the horizon. I descry
A hand that points a high and lofty path
Which Iwill boldly tread. Now to my father.
Upon my knees his aid I'll firt implore. [Exuat.

a

# ACT V. SCENE I.

ACT V. SCENE I.

ABDALLAH and VELASCO.
tyd. [)EFORE this day she ne'er beheld the boy.

Far from this place in Catalonia bred,

He came to fee the famous combat fought.
'Twas he, my Lord, who. flew the Moorilh chief,
And in his own defence fitch wonders wrought.
'That acfion to the Princess made him known,
The reft in honour of his valour follow'd.

Abdal. 'How dost thou know ?
Vel. With admiration struck,

When he food forth and bray'd a foe, like thee,
Ofdivers persons curious I enquir'd,
Who, and from'whence he was.

Abdal. Pity it were

To hurt the tripling. 'Tisa noble boy.
I love the outbreak of his Spanifi fire
Againlt the'Moors.

Yel. Ay, and against Abdallah,

Whom antient fame and recent glory rais'd,
Above all mortal men. Sparethisyoung plant,
Who makes so fair a flioot.

Adal. How can I spare him ?

Should their elecion fend him to my sword,
How, good Velafco ?

yel. When the peers return,

The King, the Princess, with theirchampion chosen,
Then to the wond'ring audience, in the face
Of her that's guilty, let my Lord relate
The truth.mark'd story he to me has told.

Detetkd

DeteAed thus, confounded, and furpris'd,
Pierc'd with a thousand eyes, that gaze upon her,
And dart conviction; can Ihe still deny,
And by denial, make her guilt ambiguous ?
But if'her sex's genius is so frong,
That (he the port of innocence maintains,
And, from the fulness and excess of vice,
Derives a boldness, that may look like virtue,
Then let the sword decide.

dal. ' What you propose

Isworth the ia I am noth to .fill
The young Alberto's or Coftollo's blood:
For they deserve no harm. Ev'n you, my friend,
Before my hand unclafp'd the book of Ihame,
Her champion would have been.

Pd. Again the world.
Abcbl. I will adopt the counsel of Velafco,

And probe more deeply fill her feftcr'd mind.
I fee 'tis better that mhe should confess
Her guilt, than with her vanquilh'd champion fall,
By doomof law, protesting to the lift
Her innocence.

,cl. Better a thousand times.

Her dying voice would {hake the hearts of men,
Aud echo thro' the world.

Adal. Behold the King.

And young Alberto marching by his fide
As if he trod on.air.

Yd. See Ormifinda
With folded hands implores her lift'ning fire.

Enter the King, Ormifinda, Teresa, Alberto,

Coftollo, cr.
Kirg. The peersof Spainhave judg'd. Stand forth,

Alberto !

Behold the champion of my daughter's fame.
Before the trumpet's voice unfheaths the sword
Which one of us (hall never (heath again,
Permit me, Prince of Persia, to intreat
A moment's audience. Not from fear I speak,
The cause I fight for, and the mind I bear,
Exalt me far above the thoughts of danger; But

But from a conscious fcnfe Of what is due
To thee, renown'd Abdallah. In. the heat
Of our contention, if my tongue has utter'd
One word offcnfive io thy noble ear,
Which might have been omitted, and the tone
Of firm defiance equally preferv'd;
For that I afc forgivene s. . '

Abdal. Less Imark'd

The manner than the matter of thy speech:
If thou dolt need forgiveniefs, freely take it,

King. 'Twas generoufly'ak'd, and nobly granted:

Such courtesy with valour ever dwells:
Let me too crave for a few words thine ear.
Throughout the trying bus'nefsof this day,
Thou art my witness, that my mind upright
Has never been by pow'rful nature bent,
Nor fway'd to favour an opinion form'd,
By long habitual and accultom'd love:
ButI with equal hand the balance held
Between thee and my child.

Abdal. Thou haft indeed. ·-
It is but jullice that Ifhould declare it.

King. Then to thy caidour let me now appeal,

And beg of thee to grant me one requelt,
Which I do not, but might perhaps, command.

Abdal. What is it?
King. I have fearch'd-my haplef child,

Ev'n to the pith and marrow of her foul,
Have touch'd her to the quick. She never Ihrinka
Nor wavers in the least. Perhaps, my Lord
Some fool officious, or tome wretch that's'worfe,
(If there is ought comes between man and wife.
That's more pernicious than a medling fool)
Some falie designing friend has wrong'd her fame,
And pour'd.his poison in Alonzo's ear.
If thou wilt give some scope to her defence,
And bring the charge from darknefi into light,
Then Ihe lhall forthwith answer on the spot
Where now he tfands before us.

Orm. If I fail

To clear my fame ev'n in Abdallah's fight;
If but one dark suspicious speck remains
To make mine honour dim, letme be held
Guilty of all. Before-hand I rnounce-
The right of combat, and submit to die.

AEidd. Thy wifl is fatal, but it fiall be granted,
This infant too.

Orm. BlelEngs upon thy head !

Ten thousand blessings ! 0 ! thou doftlnot know
How happy thou hat made me. On my breast
A mountain lay: Thy hand has heav'd it off,
And now I breathe again.

Atdsl. 0woman womanman !

A little way from hence my people ait;
With them remains a necefiary witness.
Thither I go, and quickly, will return
To ring thy knell. [Exit Abdallah,)

Or. The knell of all my woes !

Mv heart knacks at my fide, as if 'twould burst
Itdlf a'paiage outwards. Yet a while;
Poor fuff'ring heart, and thou shalt beat no more.
Shoitly for whit I am I flall be known:
Then let my doom be fquar'd to my desert
Without indulgence.

Irg. I can trult thee, now:

Thine eye secure beams innocence and honour.
Thou art my daughter fill .

dAl. I fear, O King !

Some practice vile, iome infamous imposture,
Supported by talie witness. Still I wiih
The fair decision of the honest sword.

Erter ABDALLAH ii a SftniJb Drejf as ALONZO.
Kirg. God of my foul ! What mockery is this .
Uniefs my eyes deceive, me 'is Alonzo.

Orm. My hulband ! Ah ! [Runs to embrace him,

be repulrer er.]

Ala. Away thy hulband's lhame.
Shame to thy sex, reproach of womankind

Orx.

Orm. 0 Ihield me, Heaven ! Abdalah was Alonzo,
Alon. To heav'n appeal not.
Orm. I appeal to Heav'n,
JuRice on earth will come too late for me.

#King. Haft thou no other witncfs than thyfelf?[ToAlorn.
Alon. I have no other,. and none else require.
King. Unfeeling man, to trifle with our sorrows,

And like a pageant play a mimic scene:
This is thy hatred of Pelagio's house,
Thy palfion toconfound a rival race.
Would I were young again I

Ab. Defend thyself. [Eo dlonzo.]

I can no longer hold me'from thy breast.
Pel. Sound, trumpet, found 'and :Heav'n defend

the right I
Alon. His blood be on your heads. [Draing bisfiord.

[Ormifinda tbrons berflf bktsten tbeir/words.]

Orm. Hold! Strike thro'me

You know not what you do, unhappy both I
This conibat'muWhot, nor it-ihall'not be.
The Sun'in'Heav'n would backward turn his.coufe,
And dhrink from such a fpetacle as'this,
More horrid than the banquet of Thyefies.
You have no quarrel. I'll remove the cause.
A Roman matron, to redeem her fame,
Before her hulband's and her father's.eycs
Plung'd in her breast the Reel. [Stabs berfelf, andfall,]

King. 01 Defp'rate deed I
What fury urg'd thy hand ?

Orm. Condemn me not.

There was no other way to fave-but that
Must not as yet be told. My hulband! hear
My dying voice I mylateft words believe,
Whose truth my blood hath seal'd: Im innocent.
As I for mercy hope at that tribunal
Where I flall soon appear, Inever wrong'd thee.
When that is manifelt, remember:me
As love like mine deferv'd, and'to this youth,
Who is-
. AIon. Who is this youth I All-feeing God I
A secret horror comes upon my foul.
Who is this youth! .Orm.

D

Orr.. He is thy son.
A'sn. My son!
Orr:. Whom thy forsaken wife in torrow bore, ;

And gave in fecretto CofloHo's care.

. b. Art thou my mother! Dolt thou die for me
Ore. I die with pleasure to be just to thee.

0! if that Power which did inspire my foul
T o rust between your swords, would let me live,
To prove my innocence. Alonzo fpcak !
WhilfR I have breath to answer.

Alsn. Tho'difarm'd

And foften'd, even if guilty to forgive thee,
Thy folemri call I inthndy obey.
That night appointed for our lall farewel,
That fatal night for ever curst-- thou know'lt
What happen'd then. ..

Orm. I know thou didRf not come,

Forlorn thou lefted'l me.

Aime. Thou waflnot forlorn,

In the dark wood with thee there was a youth.
Orr. (4Aftr.ap use. 0 Oheaven and earth, a youth!

It was Terefi.

Alcn. Tercfa!
Ter. Yes, that memorable-night,

My brother's sword and helmet plum'd I wore. [foul.

iAk/. Great God! the snares of hell have caught my
Ter. The night before, the Princess, as she went,

Was fright'ned in the wood, and laffumed
That warlike form to ser.-

dls. No matter why ?
J saw thee then, and thought thee what thou feem'dft.

Aing. She's innocent; like gold try'din thefire,
Her honor shines Would I had died for thee!

[T OR.M SINDA.
Crm. Why didR thou never'till this moment speak ?

- . ..- [To ALONZO.

Bso. Becaufc rm born and deftin'd'to perdition.

Had I a voice like Etna when it roars;
For in my brealt is pent as hot a fire:
rd fpet in fimes.

Ors. My Lord! Al/n.

Al/n. Do not forgive me '

Do not oppress me with such tender looks:
I *ill not be forgiven. ; -. i.

[ORMIS. raising berfelf andfJritrbixg olt ber armur.

Orm. Come to my arms

And let me sooth thine anguish. Had I been
What I to thee appear'd, thy rage was just.
A Spaniard's temper, and a Prince's pride,
A Lover's pallion, and a Hulband'shonor,
Prompted no le. . .:

A/on. Hear, men and angels hear.
.Let me fall down and worlhip. -

[frov W bifelf into her arm.

Oh I loved thee I
I lov'd thee all the while, to madness loved.

Orm..My hulband ! dear as ever to my heart 1

In my lad moments dear I

Alon. My heart is torn

My head, my brain I How bler I might have been!t
With such a wife, with such a foil!

Ormn. To him.

Pay all the debt of love thou ow'ft to me:
Einbrace thy fin before mine eyes are clos'd:
Let me behold him in his father's arms.

Alon. Thou brave defender of thy mother's fame I
Orm. He's gentle too; his foul dissolves in grief.
Alon. My falt'ring tongue dares scarcely call thee for.
Can'1t thou endure the touch of such a father?

./i. My burgling heart, amidf its grief is proud

Of such a father Let rne clasp thy knees,
And help to reconcile thee to :hyfelf. [Thy embrace.

Orm. This pleasing fight ufbdues the pains of death;
My son !

Alb. My mother, Oh ! .
Orm. Mydeareft hulband-
Alon. What would'st thou fay. Alas! thine eye

Thy voice begins to fail. - [grows dim;

Orm. Remember me

When I am dead; .remember how I lov'd you.
And thou, Alonzo, live.to guard thy son,
To fix the Spanish scepter in-

D z [Diet looWing at herfon

Alonzo raiwfiait, qvitb ói: et:jixttd np OrmiT.
A.d. My father!

Under thy gather'd brows I fee defpir:
Have pity on thy son, who liv'd o.long
In total ignorance of what he was:
Who has already seen one parent die,
And for the fad survivor trembles now,
My mother's last requet !

Alos. I'm mindful of it

And to her sacred memory will bejuft.
Hanr not on me, my son I o to the King
And pay thy duty there. [tfe King emract Alberto.

Kirg. vy child, iny all!
I lov'd thee at firfl fight.

i-. '"'is well; 'tis well.

The gecd old King hath till some comfort left.
Nov. is mv time. [Draws bisvrd

Oft have I lltrck -ith thee,

rut neve: flruc; foe with better vwill
, :-m n :-.'
: ;- yfclf. [Stalsr bimilfandfai.

,L' SCO, COS.TELLO. Alas!

:.,r :.'.- '.i'v: this I sear'd.
: -;,,., v... ^od cause to fear. I would

L, i'i *'
: r .:-, if 1 with horor cou'd have liv'd.

it:.! ih; faihers ,re renown'd in arms

',he v-lour cf our w r i.i e

race i; thine:
BRut *.uar.d ain:: the impulse of their blood.

- by my fate.

dl. '.h;u rmigh'ft have liv'd,

Rnovrn'd Ailnzo; erve I forgave
And pitied thee.

.ion. I aia mrrejuft than thou-

For did r. ,t forgive, nor would I live,
Upon the il'r.s of other-ren; their pit---
Fareel, .my ifn ! 0! Ormifinda, Itay
'Till I o'ertake thee. Dit.

(ifb King to ALBEItTO.)

Pel. Dwell not on this fight,
Prince of Afuria ! leave the fene of sorrow..

¢ . S..
i\:to,

# ADVERTISEMENT.

ADVE R T IS EM ENT.

HE author of the-following Tragedy, has,
in his former attempts of the fame kind,

avoided to trouble the reader with either dedication
or preface. His chief reason for declining this com-
mon mode of appearing before the public, was the
neceflity, which it would lay him under, of speaking
concerning himself and his works. The success of
Alonzo calls upon him to depart from his former plan;,
and to break that silence, which might now be reck.
oned arrogant, and even ungrateful, to those, from
whom he in a great measure derivies his success. ''

He embra:es" with: pleasure, this 'occasion, to

acknowledge ii's obligatiohs' to THE MANAGERS
of the theatre, whose friendly, anxioys, and acive zeal
he hath so often experieniced: To THE PERFORMERS,
who have so firenuouly. contended with each other,
in their very generous' endeavours t( embellifl the re,
presentation of the' piece: To' MRs. BARRY-but
the public voice has 'exalted HER '.above his praifc:
Yet he claims thde inerit f h'aving;'before others, ob-
served her now vallowed and tiriivalled excellency-
From the colour of the dawvn, he foretolithebrightnefs
of the day.

For MRS. BARRY'he wrote the, partobfOrmifinda,

and the most flatteiing ciicumtan'ce' to'him, in the
success of his pfay, is' the :bniverfalidplnion, vouch
ed, not only by, the ioude' applaupe that ever ihook
the IRage, but by the greatest efufion of tears) that the
AcTREss'fo mnuc exalted.nTHE CHARACTaE, that
ihe exceeded all imagination,,ind reached the summit
of perfcttiona;- - ....
:.

# PROLOGUE.

PR O L 0 G U E

Spoken by Mr. PALMER.
y H1 HLS ardot Zealfor India's Rtformation,

Haltefir thS Spirit of a gentros Namim;

Whbibf Patriots ofpreftttedLaks comlain,
Ad Co~rtiers Bribey to Excfs arraign;
qTh Maxims of Bngdal finlrk the Stage,
T3r Pots aro cY r SlaVs from Age to Age.
iite Eafltrn Princ in this Hosfeyou ft,
STe Shbabs, and Nabos offuppiant Wit;
Earb Bardlbi Prfetnt bring:, 'wht be drawm near,
Pitbh Progue rfIt, be foot s our gracious Ear;
We tipecyr Clmeng yvilfin to Dal,
For tbo' de/fptic,-gentl in your Sway.
Tbtfe teofcio*a Wall if thy cou'd speak wvo'd tell,
Hwfevldom by yeor Dom, a Poetfell:
YTur Mer ftfufirds teb Critics Las,
Tour Heart arepartil, to an Author's Cause.
Pkai'd witb/fw Lords, content with our Conditiao,.
gai.fcijour Charter 'et will ner petition.
If certain FOls, Pl l fts aus a Committee,
(Liel that wbicb latelj .teVIidthe City)
WEo withbutfpcial Leave of our Direiors,
dt tbe Stage Door ~ l enter as lftipeors;
.atb ' tthir Htarts qvre arm'd with triple Braf/i.

bnro' oar reiifling Scesl,thty could notpaf.
Ljcns and Draigmu tco keep watch and ward,
Witceba aid GGjs the awfdl trance guard ;
tero v who mock the pointed Sword are here,.
.dnl dfperate Heroints 'bo know no Fear;
f as Rimnaldofiat achb Ma ojbaldprvte,
bratv the Terrors of the incharted Grove,

Scrt

Here on this Spot,. the Center o ofur State,
Here on this very Spot thy'd mttt their Fatt.
The Prompter giuves the Sign, and down tby go
Alive defcnding to the Shades below.
To.you 'whofi Empirefiillmay Heav'n maintain,
Who here by antimnt Right and Custom reign,
Our Lions ouch, our Dragons profratefall
Witches and Ghosts ocy your potent Call.
Our Heroinefiaile onyoit 'with all tieir Might,
Our oldeftt Heroes tremble in our- Sight,
Evtn now with anxious Hearts thby watchyour Eyrs.
Shbouldyou btfrown, eve bravt ALONZO it.

DRAMATIS PER:SO N;A.

: ..
.. .;

M E N.

KING, Mr. AicKiN.
ALONZO, Mr, REDDISH.
ALBERTO (bisfJn) Mr. CLINCH.
COSTOLLO, Mr. J. AicKiNl.
SEBASTIAN, Mr. PALMER.
HAMET, Mr. WRIGHT.
VELASCO, Mr. JEFFERSON.
MESSENGER, Mr. J. BANNISTER,

W O M E N.

ORMISINDA, Mrs. BARRY.
TERESA, Miss MANSELL.

Officers and Attendants, &c.

.-^s "'

# EPILOGUE.

E P L 0-G U E.:

-. .{}e

Spok¢e by M , B4Yv.
qrHO' lately dewA a, Pr.ines,. awid of Spai,,

T I am np Gho/f, but ileJh-nd Blood again ! '

No time to change this Drefl, it is expedient,
Ipas for Briti/h, and your moe. obedient.

Haw happy, Ladies, -or us all-That we,

Born in this Ijle, by agna Charta free,
Arnotlike Spanib fives,kept underLockand y. :
The Spaniard now, is not like him of ore, .. "
sIho in his whijier'dface, his Titles bore.!
Nor Joy, nor Vengeance made him fmileor grin
Six'd were his Features, tho' the Dvil within!
He, uwhen once jealous, to wah out the Stain,
Stalk'd home,flabb'd MIadam, andJlalk'd out again.
Thanks to the times, this Dagger-drawing pm.ion,
Thro' poli/h'd Europe, is quite out of Falhon,
Signor Th' Italian, quick offight andlhearttg,
Once ever lijYning, andf'o ever leering,
To Cara Spofa, now politely kind,
He, heft of Hu'ands, is both deaf and blind.
Mynheer the Dutchman, with; his. ober pace,.
W/hene'er he finds his Rib has wanted Grace,
He fels no Branches fproutingfrom his Brain,
But Calculation makes of Loss and Gain,
And when to part with her, occasion's ripe,
Mynheer turns out mine Frow, andfnmokes his pipe.
IYhenabrifk Frenchman's Wife is giv'n to prancing,
It never fpols his Singing or his Dancing:
Madame, you falfe-de tout mon Cceur-.diru;
Begar you Cocu me, I Cocu you.-

Re,.

He, trjours gai, diJpeli each jelous, ap'our,
Takes Snufffings Vive amour, and cuts a Caper.
As for John Bull-nst he in upper Life,
But the plain Englijbman, who loves his Wife;
IYhen honest Jbhn, lfay, has got his doubts,
Hefullen grows, scratches his head, and pouts.
What is the matter with you, Love ? Cries She;
Are you not well, my Dearest ? Humph Cries He''
You're such a Brute -But, Mr. Bull, I've done:
And if l am a Brute--Tfhf mlad me one ? .
You know my tendernefs-my heart's too full,
Andfo'r mynhe ad-I thank you, 'Mrs. Bull.
O you base Man !-Zounds, Madam, there's no
ShefalIsaweepmg, and b fallsa.fwearing: [bearing,

IVith Tears and Oaths, ihe Stsore domeflie ends. 1

The Thuider dies away, the rain descends, .
She fobs, he mlts, and then tbey kis and Friends. 3
YVhatever'eaf! thebf modrn Modes may bring,
A little Jealou/y is no bad thing:
7o met-who fpeakfrom Nature unrefin'd,
Jealus7 is the Bellos of the Mind.
Touch tt but gently, and it warms defre, )
If handled roughly, yen are all on Fire !
-If it jands.iitl, A.feP.ion ufl. expire!
This Truth, no true p hiloopher can doubt, '
j'Ybate'r ocu d.-let nlt the Flame g .rat.

i' ' -: ; .

·. . .
.
