re, /t ),.4;,/& A

-'Fbli-h-d

I''DeC·--: 1ms

-J

I·

/*cer
/ 0 ( /// st *rv / / < 7 7 ety

i ~~ ~ d~le

1.8P--~- Dec^

1792.--~i

v71

DO dL S;

an9B" LS/" d

TRAGED~ ~ ~Y.

BYSZ y~JOHN HO1VIE.

~s performedd at the 'Theatres Royal of

LONDON~a AN-D EDINVBURGH,

NON EGJO SUM VATES, SED PRISCI CONSCIUS lEVI.

Had some good angel op'd to me the Book
O~f Providence, and let me read my life ;
My heart haJd broke, when I beheld the sum
Of' ills, which one by one I have endur'd.
--But God, whose ministers good angels are,
Hanth shut the book, in mercy to mankind.

~EDI~I "INBURG ~H:

Parintedfor ronN BEUGo, ENGRAVER, and sold by

- -----ALL THE BOOKSELLERS. --a

Anno £79>.

. AR ,sr9
L' 0 0

-

s*J

;?

.
. 0

of "

D>OUe G LA- S.

THE Circumrtances which attended the publication
of this Tragedy mark so strongly the character of
the age, and of the country in wrhich it appeared,
that they ought never to be forgotten. It w-as re,-
presented in the Edinburgh~ Theatre, at the close of
the jrear 1756, under the management of MTr. Digges,
who h7imself performz~ed the part of DOUGLAS. T'he
orthodox, both clergy and laity, in that city, and
throughout all Scotl~and, w~ere instantly alarmed. It
appeared to them a strange, and almost unaccountable
p~hoenome~non, that a minister of their church should
have been guilty of the crying sin of writing- one of
the mostC beaut);ifu dlraJmaic ~performances in the E~ng-
lish langruag-e. Inflammatory pamphlets, addvertsise-
ments, and handbills appeared. T~he presbytery of
Edinburgh denounced seven clergymen, who had
been present at the exhibition of the tragedy, to the
several presbyteries in which they resided. These
gentlemen confessed thie criminality of their own
conduct, submitted withl humility to the censures of
the church, and were forgiven. One of them, a
Smehnber of the presbytery of Edinburgh, was sus-
pended for some time, with every mark of disgrace,
fr-om the exercise of his ecclesiastical functions, al-
though he pleaded in alleviation of the charge,---"( that
"L he had gone to the play-house only once, and en-
"L deavoured to conceal himself in a corner, to avoid
"L giving offtnce; expressing his deep sorrow for what
6C he hiad done, and firm reso~lution to be rare Cir-

.All 2C3I~'~ ~ I ~I~; 6

"' cumspect for the future." ~Another of these gentle-
men, Der. Carlisle, a friend of the Author, who ven-
tured to attempt only a partial and faint vindication
of himself, was prosecuted in full-form., The Ar-
ticles of the Libel against him were three---his hav-
Ing gone into the company of Players---his directing
them during the rehearsal-- and, lastly, his having
been present at the representation of a tragedy,
which, in the -opinion of the Reverend Divines of
those days, contains dreadful oaths and mock pray-
ers, and encourages suicide. The cause went thro'
all the courts up to the General Assembly, and Dr.
Carlisle every wPhere met with censure and rebuke
from his incensed breth~ren.

In the mean time, the Alrch-offehnder, the ac-

ecomplished Author of all this scandal to the pious,
wtas commanded to appear bef'ore his presbytery at
Haddington, on the 5th April 1137. He obtained
a delay to the Ist of MJay thereafter, and during this
interval his tragedy wias presented with great ap-
plause at London in Covent-garden Theatre. Find-
ing it impossible to soften the stern spirit of the
Presbyterian Church, he' thought proper, in order
to avoid a formal degradation from his office, to
preach to his congregation at Athelstonford, his
f'arewrell sermon, which is said to have drawn tears
from the eyes of the people; and two days thereaf·
ter, he resigned his charge to his presbytery at Had-
din gton.

Notwithstanding all this, howvever, w-hen wre re-

gard M~r. HoyME as holding a place among the list
of British Poets, his destiny has been fortunate and
happy. A pension from the Crowvn, which he ob-

tained by means of the late E. of BUTE, and' the place
of Scots Conservator at Campvere, wh-ich he was
permitted to -dispose of to advantage, amply consoled
him for the 14~ss of the very moderate emoluments of
a Scotch minister. H~e has also enjoyed a singular
piece of felicity, which falls to the lot of few. He
has not only seen his reputation flourish in his own.
days, but he has even lived to see the narrow preju-
dices of his country pass away. The Clergy of the
Church of Scotland, who once persecuted Mr. Home,
now reg·%rd it: as one of the highest honours of their
order, to have numbered among its members the Au-
thor of the Tragedy of DOUGLAS.

It may perhaps be proper to add, as a curious

fact, that notwithstanding the great inte~rest of the
lAuthor, IVir. GuARRcK refused to bring forward this
tragedy at Drury-lane as too simple and undramatic.
But this celebrated performers had the mortificatiorr
to see it immediately introduced at Covent-gardena
with the greatest success; a success that seems ra-
ther to increase than to diminish by the course of

years.

A3

# PROLOGUE SPOKEN BY MR. SPARKS.

PR~O LO G UE

SPOKEN BT 1VIR, SPAR2KS.

LY ancient times, when Bri'tain's trade wras arms,
And the loa'd music of her youth, alarms ;
A godl-lke ralce sustain'd fazir Elngland's fame :
Wh~o has not heardL ofg~allant Piercf's name ?
APy, and ofDourglas? Such /lustrious foes
In r·ival Rompe and Carthage never rose !
Friom age to age brzght shone ttie Biriish fre,
A'nd every he'OroWaS a hero's sire.
When powerfrl fate decreed one warri'or's doom,
Up sprung the phoenix from his father's tomnb.
But.t Aditt~t thtose generous rivau~ls fought and fell,
Th~ose generous rivals lov'd each other wrell :
Tho'~ many a bloody f~eld was lost and wuon,
N\othing in Bate, in honour all was done.
WAi~~ : Pezrcy wIrong'd, deffgd his pri~nce or peers,
,9 f rma the Dogla~ls wizth the Scottish spears;
Anrd,iriPken~'~ pod Douglas matae his King hris foe,
~or Douglas, Piercy bent his Engl'ish bow.
ExpeRl'd their native homes by adverse fate,
Th~ey knock'd alternate at each other's gate :
Then blam'd thbe castle, at thep midnzight h~ourP,
IFor him whose arms had shook its frmzest towerT.

This mg~-ht a Dousglas your proteEio'n caimas;

~A wifL· ! a mother ! pity's softest names :
Th~e story of her woes indrulgent hear,
And grant your· suppliant all she begs, a tear :
In confdence she begs, and! hop~es to fnda-
Each Engish breastr, like noble Piercy:~, kindi.

# PROLOGUE SPOKEN AT EDINBURGH.

PROLOG U~E

SP OK E N AT E)INVB UR G I.

IN days of class'c fa~me, when Persia'~s L~ord.
Oppos'd his millions to the Grecian swuord,
dFlourish'd the state of Athens, small her store,
Rugged her foil, and rocky was her shore,
Like Coledoinira's : yet she gain'd a name
That stands ulnrivall'd in the rolls of fame.

Such proud pre-emtinence not cualour gavue,

(For who than Spanrta's dauntless sons more brave F2)
But lTearning, and the loave of every art,
That vir~gina Pallas and the muse impart.

Above th~e rest th5e Tragic 1Muse admair'd

Each Attic breast with noblestpassion fr'd.
In peace their poets with their her~Poes shar'd
Glory, the her~o's and the bard's reward.r~
The Tragic MWuse each glorious record kept,
Andi, o'er the kings she conquer'd, Athens wrept j{.

Here~ let me cease, impatient for the scene,

To you I need not praise the rragzic weeen :
Oft has this audience soft compassion shown
To woes of heroes, heroes not their own.
This nzght our scenes no common tear demand,
He comnes, thF~e hero of your nrative land !
DOUGLAS, a nZmne throusgh all due world renown'd,
SA Hrame tha~t rouses like the trumpet's sound !

Oft havue your fathers, prodigal of Afe,
A Douglas follo~w'd' through the bloody strife ;
Hosts hazve been known as that dread name to yield,
~And, Doucglas dead, his name bath won the feld.

11 See the Perjai of Amcbylan,

# DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

Listen attentihee to th~e var'ious tale,

2Mark if the aurthor's kindred fe~eing: faIl ;
Swcay'd by alternate hop~es, al~ternate fears,
Hie waits the test of your congenial tears.
If they shall ~ow, back to the Muse he flzes,
And btds your heroes in surccessionf ris-e ;
Collects th~e coanal'ring warriPors as they roam,
Dougl7as assures them of a wdbcome homne.

D RA MAT IS P ER SOqN AE.

1)rury-lane. Cove~nt-Garvden. EdinburghQ.

1VIE N.

LoanD RAN'DOLPrr, Mr. Aicken. Mtr. Farren. Mr. Bell.
GLENALVON, - - Mr. Palmer. Mr. Harley Mlrr. Woods.
NoRvAL, - - - M1r. Bensley.~ M -.Aicken. Mr. S.KIemble.
D)OUGLAs, - - - Mr. Kemble. Mr. Holman. Mr. Kemble.

WOdE N.

LrAnYRANDOorPn, Mrs.Siddons. Mrs. Pope. Mrs. Siddons.
ACNNA, ·I - i Mrls. Ward. M~rs. REock. EMrs. Woods.

* 'The passagesomtitted in representation are maarked by inuer tcd commas."

# ACT I.

## SCENE — The Court of a Castle surrounded with Woods.

~ACT I.

SCENE-·--Th Cwe~rt of a Casstle starronrnrded with Wood;~

Elnter r.Aer RANnoLPe.

Ya8 w5~oods and w~ilds, w~hose melancholy gloota
Accords. with my soul's sadness, and draws forth
The voice of sorrow from my bursting heart,
Farewj~ell a wihile : I will not leave yTou lonlg;
For in your shades I deem some spirit dwells,
Wiho from the chiding stream, or groaning oak,
Still hears and answers to Mdatilda's moan.
O Douglas ! D~ouglas ! if departed ghoasts
Ahre e'er permitted to review this world,
W-ithin the circle of that wrood thou art,
And with the passion of immlortals hear'st
Mky lamentation : hear'st thy wretched wvife
WJeep for her husband slain, haer infa3nt lost.
M vy b~rother's timeless death I seem to moura,
Weaho perish'd with thee on this fatal day :
To thee I lift my voice ; to thee address
The plaint which mortal ear has never heard.
O disregard me not ; though I am call'd
Anoth~er's now, my heart is wholly thine.
Incapable of change, affection lies
B~uried, my Doug~las, in thy bloody grave.

But Randolph comes, whom fate has made my Lord,
To chide my anguish, and defraud the dead.

Enter RANDOLPH.,

RAN. Again these weeds of woe ! say, do st thou well
To feed a passion which consumes thy life ?
The living claim some duty; vainly thou
B1estow'st thy cares upon the silent dead.

LADY RAN. Silent, alas ! is he for whom I mourn :

Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives.
' This fatal day stirs my time-settled sorrow,
' Troubles afresh the fountain of my heart.

' RAN. WChen was it pure of sadness ! These bilack

wTeeds

L Express the woonted colour of thy mind,
' For ever dark and dismal. Seven lon~g years
' Are pass'd, since we were join'd by sacred ties :
' Clouds all the while have hung upon thy 'erow,
' Nor broke, nor parted by one gleam of joy.
' Timlie, that 1 :s out the trace of deepest anguish,
SAs the sea smooths the prints made in the sand,
' H7-as past o'er thee mn vain.

' LADY RAN. r Ilf time to come

SShould prove as ineffectual, yet, iny Lord,
SThou canst not blame me. When our Scottish youth
'Vy'd with each other for my luckless love,
' Oft I besought them, I- implor'd them all
' Naot to assail me with my father's aid,
' Naor blend their better destiny with mine.
' FIor melancholy had congoeal'd my blood,
' And froze affectiopn in my chilly breast.
' At last my Sire, rous'd wthrla the base attempt
' To force me from him, which thou rend'redst vain,
6 To his own daughter bow'd his hoary head,
' Ebesought me to commiserate his age,

' And vow'tid he should not, could not die in peace,
' Unless hfe saw me wedded, and secur'd
' Fromn violence and outrage. Then, my Lord !
' In my extreme distress I call'd on thee,
' Thee I bespake, profess'd my strong desire
' To lead a sin gle, solitary life,
' And begg'd thy nobleness not to demand
' Her for a wife whose heart was dead to love.
' H~ow thou persisted'st after this, thou know'st,
' And must: confess that I am not unjust,
N \or more to thee than to myself injurious.
L RAN. That I confess j yet ever must regret
SThe grief I cannot cure. W~ould thou wert no~t
SCompos'd of grief and tenderness alone,
SBut had'st a spark of other passions in thiee,
SPride, anger, vanity, the strong desire
SOs admiration, dear to woman-kind;
SThese might-ee~ntend with, and allay thy gr-isf,
A'~s meeting tides and currents smooth ouL ·t~h.

'LADY RAN. To such a cause the human mind oft owes

' Its transient calm, a calm I envjr not.

RAN. Sure thou art not the daughter of Sir 1Val-

colm :

Strong was his rage, eternal his reseigtment :
For when thy brother fell, he smil'd to hear
That Douglas' son in, the' same field was slain.

LADY RAN. Oh!i rake not up the ashes of my fathers:

I~mplacable resentment was their crime,
;BAnd grievous has the expiation been.

Contending with the Douglas, gallant lives
Of either house were lost ; my ancestors
Compell'd, at last, to leave their ancient seat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
No heir is left. Had they not been so stern,
I had not been the last of all my race.

us.T Thy grief wrests to its purposes my words.

I ncenve ask'd of thee that ardent love
W~hich in the breasts of fancy's children burns.
Decent affection and complacent kindness
WVere all I wisch'd for ; but I wish'd in vain.
HIence with the less regret my eyes behold
The storm of war that gathers o'er this land :
If I sh~ould perish bgi the Danish sword,
Matilda wNould not shed one tear the more.

LADY RAN. Thou do'st not think so: woeful as I am,

I love thy merit, and esteem thy virtues.
But whither goest thou now ?

us., Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on the tip-toe stands
Of expectation, and impatient asks
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell,
The Danes are landed.

~LADY* RAN. O, may adverse winds,

Far from the coast of Scotland, drive their fleet !
And every soldier of both hosts return
In peace and safety to his pleasant home!i

usN. Thou speak'st a wornan''s, hear a warrior's

wish :

Right from their native land, the stormy north,
aa~y the wind 'blow, till every keel is fix'd
Immoveable in Caledonia's strand !
Then shall our foes repent their bold rnvasion,
~And roving armies shun the fatal shore.
* LADY RAN. W~ar I detest ; but, war with foreign foes,

' W~hose manners,1anguag·, and whose looks are strange,
' Is not so horrid, nor to me so hateful,
' As that: which with our neighbours oft we wage.
' A river here, there an ideal 1)ne
· ]By fancy drawn, divides the sister kingdoms,
' On each side dwells a people similar,

SAs twins are to each other 5 valiant: both i
B~~oth for their valour famous throl' the world.
' Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
' And, if they must have war, wage distant war,
' But w~ith each other ~fight in cruel conflict.
'G~allant in strife, and noble in their ire,
' The battle is their pastime. They go forth
' G~ay in the morning, as to summer sport ;
' Whrden ev'ningf comes, the glory of the morn,
' The youthful warrior is a clod of clay.
SThus fal1the prime of either hapless land :
A ~nd such the fr-uit of Scots and Eng~lish wars.

'RAN. I"ll hear no more : this melody would makre
A
t soldier drop his sword, and do~f his arms,
SSit down and weep the conquests he has made;
' Yea, (like a monk,) sing rest and peace in heav'n
' To souls of w~arriors in hi~s battle slain.'
Lady, farewell: I leave thee not alone;
Y onder com-es one whose love makes duty light.[Ex~t'r.

Entter ANNA.

ANN. F~orgive the rashness of your Anna's love :

UJrg'd by affection, I: have thus presum'd
To interrupt your sojitary thoughts;
A~nd warn you of the hours that: you neglect,
CAnd lose in sadness.

LAD)Y RAN. So to lose my hours

Is all the use I wish to make of time.

ANN. To blame thee, Lady, suits not with my state :

SBut sure I am, since deathn frst prey'd on7 man,
Ne~ver did sister thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been ·if you had lost,
I:n early youth, the husband of your heart ?

LAnY usN. Oh !
ANN. Have I distress'd you with officious love,

And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate ?

Forgive me, Lady : humble tho' I am,
The minld I bear partakes not of my fortune :
So fervrently I love you, t~hat to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

LADY. RAN. W~hat power directed thy unconscious

tongue

To speak as thou hast done ? to name- *-

ANN. I know not :

But since my words have made my mistress tremble,
I. will speak so no more : but silent mix
My tears with hers.

LADY RAN. NJo, thou shalt not be silent.

I'll trust thy faithful love, and thou shalt be
Henceforth th' instructed partner of my woes.
But what avails it ? Can thy f~eble pity
Roll back the flood of never-ebbing time ?
Compel the earth and ocean to give up
Their dead alive ?

ANN. W~hat mleans my noble mistress ?
LAoY RAN. Didst thou not ask ·what had my sor-

rows been,

If I in early youth had lost a husband ?-
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'sd,
Mangl'd with wounds, the husband of my youth ;
~And in some cavern of the ocean lies
MNy child and his. -

ANN. O ! Lady, most rever'd !

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words h
Deign to unfold.

LAnY RAN. Alas ! an ancient feud,

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decr~eed,
That my brave brother should in battle save
The life of Douglas' son, our house's foe :
The youthful warriors vow'd eternal friendship.

Tso see the vaunted sister of his friend,
Impatient, Douglas to Balarmo came,
Under a borrowv'd name.--My heart he gain'd i
Nor did I long refuse: the hand he begg'd :
M~y brother's presence authoriz'd our marriage.
Three wreeks, three little weeks with wings of down,
Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd lord was casl'd
To fight his facher's battles ; and with him,
In spite of' all mny tears did Maalcolm go.
Scarce wrere they gone, when my stern sire was told
Thnat the false strang-er was Lord Douglas' son.
Frantic with rage thne B~aron drew his sword
Ahnd question'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
KZneeling beneath his sword, falt'ring I took
APn oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
1Ved one of Do-uglas' name. Sincerity !
Tkhou first of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thy~ onward' path, altho' the earth should gape,-
And from the gulph of hell destruction cry,
To take dissimulation's winding way.

ANN. Alas ! howvs few of womnan's f~earful kind

Durst own a truth so hardy i

LADYP RAN. Th<: fist truth

Is easiest to avow. This mloral learn,
This precious moral from my tragic tale.---
I~n a few days the dreadful tidings came,
.That Douglas and my brother both were slain.
M/y lord ! my life ! my husband !--mighty God I
W Ahat had I done to merit such af~iction ?

ANN. M/y dearest Lady ! M Iany a tale of tears

I've listen'd to; but never did I hear
A tale so sad as this.

LADY RAN. In the first days

Of my distracting grief, I found myself--
As women wish to be who love their lords.

But who durst: tell my father ?The good priest
WVho join'd our hands, my brother's ancient tutor,
WJith his lov'd M~alcolm, in the battle fell :
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On slence aZnd concealment I resolv'd,
Till time should make my father's fortune mine.
That very night on which my son was born,
MCy nurse, the on~ly confident I had,
Set out with h~im to reach her sister's house:
B~ut nurse, nor infant have I ever seen,
O)r heard of, Anna, since that fatal hour.
l' My murder'd child i--had thy fond mother fear'd
' The loss of thee, she had loud fame defy'd,
' Despis'd her father's rag( her father's grief,
' And wander'd with thee th~ro' the scorning world.'

ANw. Not seen or heard of ! then perhaps he lives.
LADY RAN. Nol~. It was dark December : wind and rain

Had beat all night. Across the Carron lay
The destin'd road i and in its swrelling flood
My faithful servant perish'd with my child.
c O ! hapless son of a most hapless sire !--
* But they are both at rest; and I alone
a Dwell in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk,
' Lik~e a guilt-troubl'd ghost, my painful rounds :'
Nor has despiteful fate pe~rmitted me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Tho" dead to love, I: was compell'd to wed
Randolph, who snatch'd me from a villain's arms ;
And Randolph now possesses the domains,
That by Sir Malcolm's death on me devolv'd;
Domains, that should to Douglas' son have giv'n
A baron's title, and a baron's power.
' Such were my soothing thoughts, wchile I bewrail'd2
' The slaughter'd father of a son unborn.
< And when that son came, Zlke a ray from hleav'n,

SWhich shines and disappears ; alas ! my child I
'How long did thy fond mother grasp the hope
SOs having thee, she knew not how, restor'd.
' Year after year hath worn her hope away;
' But left still undiminish'd her desire.

* ANN. 'The hand that spins th' uneven thread of life,

' 111ay smooth the length that's yet to come of yours.

C LADY RAN, NMOt in this world: I have consider'd well

" Its various evils, and on whom they fall.
' Alas ! how oft does goodness wound itself,
' And sweet affection prove the spring of woe !'
O ! had I dy'd when my lov'd husband fell !
Had some good angel op'd to me the book
Of EProvidence, and let me read my life,
Mly heart had broke, when I beheld the sum
O1f ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

ANs. That. God, whose ministers good angels are,.

H~lath shut the book, in m~ercy to mankind;
But we must leave this theme ; Glenalvon comes :
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitherwards he slowly stalks his way.

LADY RAN. I: will avoid him. An ungracious person

Is doubly irksome in an hour like this.

ANN. Why speaks my lady thus of Randolph's heir ?
LADY RAN. ]Because he's not the heir of Randolph's

virtues.

Subtle and shrewd! he offers to mankind
Anl artificiaLimage of himself:
And he with ~ase Canl vary to the taste
Of different men, its features. ' Self-denied,
SAnd m~aster of his appetites he seems :
SBut his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,
SWatches twPeize unseen the wish'd-for prey,
' N~ever were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
' ALSs in Glenalvon's unrelenting mind.

B3

Yet he is brave and politic in in war,
And stands a oft in these unruly times.
W~hy I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter,
Stay, and detain him till I reach the castle.

[IExit Lady Randolph.

AmN. O happiness ! where art thou to be found ?

I see thou dwellest not w-ith birth and beauty,
Tho' grac'd with grandeur and in wealth arrry'd :
Nror dost thou, it would seem with virtue dwell ;
Else had this gentle lady miss'd thee not.

Einter GLENA~LVON.

GLEN. Wuahat dost thou muse onl, meditating maid ?~

Like some entranc'd and visionary seer,
On earth thou stand'st, thy thoughts ascend to ~heave n.

ANN. W~ou'd that I were, e'en as thou say'st, a seer,

To have my doubts by heavenly vision clear'd !

GLEN. W~hat dost thou doubt of ? what hast thou to do

T~ith subjects intricate ? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be question'd : think of these good gifts;
And then thy contemplations will be pleasing.

ANN. Let women view yon monument of woe,

~Then boast of beauty : who so ~fair as she ?~
But I must follow : this revolving day
Awakes the memory of her ancient woes.

[Exit AQnna,

GLENALVON JO/fiS.

So !-LEady Randolph shuns me aby and by
I911 woos her as the lion wooes his brides.
T'he deed's a-doing now, that makes me lord i
Of these rich vallies, and a chief of power.
TPhe season is most apt : my sounding steps
Wirll not be heard amnidst the din of arms.
Randolph has liv'd too long : his better fatce
H-;ad the ascendant once, and kiept me down :
When I had feiz'd the dame, by chance he came,

# ACT II.

## SCENE, — A Court, etc.

Rescu'd, and had the lady for his labour.
I 'scap'd unknown : a slender consolation !
Heav'n is my witness· that I do not love
To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvest. Y~et I am not safe :
By love or something like it, stung, inflam'd,
Madly I blabb'd my passion to his wife,
And she has thireaten'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will I do not know :
But well I know the Baron's wrath is deadly.
I will not live in fear : the man I dread
Is as a D3ane to me : ay, and the man
'Who stands betwixt me and my chief desire.
NUo bar but he: She has no kinsman near 5
Nbo brother in his sister's quarrel bold ;
And for the righteous cause, a stranger's cause,
I know no chief that will defy Glenalvon.

SCENEt--~A COUPrly etc.

Enter Servants and Stranger at one door, and LAnye

RANDOLPH and ANNA at another.

LADY RANDOLPK.

TVHAT means this clamour ? Stranger, speak secure;

P Hlast thortheen wrong'd ? have these rude men pre-

sum'd

To vexr the weary traveller on his way ?

Isl SERV. By us DO Stranger CVer Suffer'd wrong :

This man with outcry wild has call'd us forth j
So sore afraid he cannot speak his fears.

Enter LORD RANDOLPH andr a 'Youn g Man, wuith th~eir

sloords drawrn and bloody.

x.AnY KAN. Not vain the stranger's fears ! how fares

my Lord.

usI. That it fares well, thanks to this gallant youth,

W~hose valour sav'd me from a wrestched death !
As down the winding dale I walk'd alone,
At the cross way four armed men attack'd me;
Rovers, I judge, from the licentious camp ;
WTho would have quickly laid Lord Randolph lowP,
Had not this brave and generous` stranger come,
Like my good angel, in the hour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my foes his own.
They turn'd upon him ; but his a £ive arm
Struck to the ground, from whence they rose no more,
T7he fiercest two:; the others fled amain,
~And left him master of the ;bloody field.
Speak, Lady Randolph; upon beauty's tongue
Dwell acc~ents pleasing to th~e brave and bold :
Speak, noble dame, and thank him for thy lord.

LnY RAN. My Lord,I cannot speak what now Ifeel.

1V~y heart o'erflows with gratitude to heaven,
And to this noble youth, who; all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
NJor paus'd at peril s but, humanely brave,
Fought on your fide against such fearful odds.
Have you yet learn'd of him whom we should thank ?
WCAhom~ call the saviour of Lord Rando '~s lif~e ?Z

RAN. I ask'd that question, and he answer'd not :

But Imust know, who my deliverer is. [To the/lranger.

SmR. A low-born man, of parentage obscure,

Who nought can boast but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

RAN. WJhoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled·

B~y the great King of kings ! thou art ordain'd

And stampt a hero, by the sovereign hand
Of nature !--Blush not, flower of modesty
As well as valour, to declare thy birth,

smR. Mjy name is Nodrval : on the Grampian hills

Mdy father feeds his flocks ; a fru-gal swain,
WChose constant cares were to increase his store,
Anld keep his only son, myself, at hom~e:
For I had heard of battles, and I long'd
T-lo followm to the field some wNarlikre lord :
And heaven soon granted what my sire deny'd.
This moon which rose last night, round as my shield,
Had not y et fill'd her horns, when, by her light,
A band olf fierce barbarians' from the hills.,
Rush'd like a torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. T'he shepherds fled
For safety and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
H~over'd about the enemy, and mark'd
The road they took 3 then hasted to my friends,
WThom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
I met advancing. The pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook the spoil-encumber'dt foe.
We fought and conquer'd ; E'er a sword was drawn,
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Wiho wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Returning hor~ne in triumph, I disdait'"d
The shepherd's slothful life; and having heard
T'hat our good king had sumrnon'd his bold peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron side,
I left my father's ho~use, and took with me
A chosen servant to condudt my steps :-
Yon trembling coward, who forsook his master.
Journeying with this intent, I pass'd these towers,
And, heaven-directed, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

RAN. THe ;S RS wise RS brave. R7S ever tale

W~ith such a gallant modesty rehears'd ?-
My brave deliv'rer ! thou shalt enter now
A nobler list ; and in a monarch's sight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame.
I will present thee to our Scottish king,
Whnose valiant spirit ever valour lov'd.
~Ha ! my M~atilda ! wherefore starts that tear ?'

L.AnY RAN. I cannot say : for various affe~tions,

And strangely mingled, in my bosom swell;
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
I joy that thou art safe:; and I admire
H~im and his fortunes, who hath wroughit thy safety ;
Yea, as my mind predidis, with thine his own. 2
Obscure and friendless, he the army sought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Resolv'd to hunt for fame, and w sword
To gain distindlion which his birth deny'd.
In this attempt unknown he might have perish'd,
And gain'd, with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now, grac'd by thee, his virtue serv~es no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope,
He stan'ds conspicuous : fame and great renown
Are brought within the compass of his sword.
On this my mind refltected, whilst you spoke,
And bless'd the wonder-working Lord of heaven.

Ras. ]Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts !

M.IIy deeds shall follow where thou point'st the way.
Next to myself, and equal to Glenalvon,
In honour and command shall Nlorval be.

NoRw.r I know not how to thank you. Rude I am

In speech and manners : Necver till this hour
Stood I in such a presence; yet, my Lord,
There's something in my brealst, which makes me bold
To say, that Norval ne'er will shame thy favour.

LADY RANT. I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thfou shalt be
MPy knight ; and ever, as thou didst to-day,
W~ith happyT valour guard the life of Randolph.

usN. Well hast thou spoke. Let me forbid reply :

CTo Norval.

W~e are thy debtors still; thy high desert
Oe'rtops our gratitude. I must proceed,
Ats was at first intended, toa.the camp.
Some of my train, I see, are speeding hither,
Impatient, doubtless, of their lord's delay.
Go with me, Norval, and thine eyes s~hall see
The chosen warriors· of thy native land,
W~ho languish for the fight, and beat the air
WYith brandish'd swords.

NoRV. · Let us begone, my L~ord.
RAs. [To Lacdy Randolph.] About the time that

the declining sun

Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hill suspend,
ExpeBt us to return. This night once more
WCithin these walls I rest; my tent I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepare the feast.
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
He in th-e eve of battle may resign
SHimself to social pleasure : sweetest then,
WVhen danger to a soldier's soul endears
The human joy that never may return.

[Exeunt Randolph and Naorv5at

I.ADY RAN. HIis parting words have struck a fata)
St ruth.
O, Douglas ! Douglas ! tender was the time
W~hen we two parted, ne'er to meet again !
How many years of anguish and despair
H-3as heaven annex'd to these swift-passing houns
Of love and fondness ! Thaen my bosom's flame,

*Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of fear
' R.eturn'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.'

AN., May gracious heaven pour the sweet balm of

peace

Into the wounds that fester in your breast !
For earthly consolation cannot cure them.

LADY RAN. One only cure can heaven itself bestow ;-
A grave-that bed in which the weary rest.
Wretch that I am! A las!i why am I so ?
AC~t every happy parent I repine !-
]Howr blest the mother of you gallant N~orval!i
She for a living husband bore her pains,
And heard him bless her when a man was born :
She nurs'd her smiling infant on her breast,
Trended the child, and rear'd the pleasing boy :
She, with affection's triumph, saw the youth
In grace and comeliness surpass his peers:
WC'hilst I to a dead husband bore a son,
And to th~e roaring waters g~ave my child.

ANm. Alas ! alas ! why will you thus resume

Your grief afr-esh ? r thought that gallant youth
W~ould for a while have won you from your woe.
On him intent you gazed, with a look
Much more delighted than your pensive eye
Has deign'd on other objeAs to bestow.

LADY RAN. Delighted, say'st thou ? OhZ even there

i~~ ~F mmne eye

o,"~und fuel for my life-consumring~ sorrow.
1 thr'ought, that had the son of JDouglas liv'd,
He mI-ight have been like this young gallant stranger,
And pair'd with him in features and in shape.
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
MLy boy with blooming NoJrval might have numb3er'd.
W~hilst· thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell
Ona my sad h~eart, and kindled up a fondness

For this younag stranger wand'ring from hris home,
And like an orphan cast upon--my care.
I will protect thee, (said I to myself, )
WVith all my power, and grace with all my favour.

ANN. Sure hleaven will bless so gen'rous a resolve.

Yi~ou must, my noble dame, exert your power i
You mxust awake : devices will be fram'd,
And arrows pointed ·at the breast of Norval.
·LADSY RAN. G-lena2~lvo's false and crafty h~ead will work

Against a rival in his kinsman's love,
ILf I deter him not : I only can.
BSold as hre is, Glenalvon will bewtare
How he pulls down the fabric that I raise.
I'll 'oe the artist of young Norval's fortune.
"'Tis pleasing to admire i most apt was I
STo this affection in my better days;
T hough now I: seem to you shrunk up, retirsd
" Within the narrow compass of my woe.
H ave you not sometimes seen an early flower
O pen its bud, and spread its silken leaves,
T~o catch sweet airs, and odours to b~est~pw;
T hen, by thre keen blast nipt, pull in its leaves,
A tlnd, though still living, die to scent and beauty ?
Emlrblem of me : afffiction, like a storm,
H B~ath kili'd the for ward blossom of my hieart.''

Enater GLENALVON.

CLEN.W~%here ismy dearest kinsman, noble Randolph? ,
LAny RAN. Have you not heard,. Glenalvon, of the3

base-

GLEN. I have ; and that the v~ill~ains may not 'sc~ape,

W'5ith a strong band I have begrirt th~e wood :
If they lurk there, alive they shall be taken,
A~nd torture force from them th' important secret,
WThether some £oe of Randolph hir'd their swords,
Oar if-

LADY' RA'N. r~That carbe becomes a k~insman's love.

I hav·e a counsel for Glenalvon's ear. [Ex~cit Anna.

GL"'N. To him your counsels always are commands.
LADY RACN. I have not found so : thou art k~nown to me.
CLEN. BnOWn
LA4DYl RANu. And most certcain is my cause ofknowledge.
GLEN.What do yo~u know ? By the most blessed cross,

You much amaze me. No created being,
YSiourself except, durst thus accost Glenalvon.

LADY RAN. Is guilt so bold ? and dost thou make a merit
Of thy pretended meekness ? This to me,
W~ho, with a gentleness which duty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd, what, if divulg'd,
WTould make thee nothing; or, what's worse than that,
An outcast beggar, and unpity'd too:
For mortals shudder at a crime like thine.

GLEN. TThy virtue awes me. First of womankind !

Permit me yet to say, that the fond man
W~hom love transports beyond strict virtue's bounds,
If he is brought by love to misery,
In fortune ruin'rd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpity'd cannot be. Pity's the alms
WThichE on such beggars freely is beffow'd;
Foer mortals know that love is still their lord,
And o'er th'eir vain resolves advances still:
As fire, when kindl'd by our: shepherds, moves
Throu~gh the dry? heath before the fanningf wind.

LADY RAhN. Res~erve these accents for some'other ear.

To love's apology I listen not.
Mar~k thlou my words; for it; is meet thou should'st.
His bravte deliv'rer Randolph here retains.
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well;
4Eut, at ·thy peril, prarctise ought against him.
Let not thy jealousy attempt to shakie
ACnd loosen the good root he has in Randolph;

WChose favourites I know th~ou hast supplanted.-
Thou look'~st at me, as if thou fain would'st pry
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
Thle friendless stranger my protection claims :
His friend I am, and be not t~hou his foe. · [Exit,.

atLss. C~hild that I was, to start: at my own sha,-

d 0w,

And be the shallow fbol of coward conscience !
I am not what I have been : what I should be.
~The darts of destiny have almost pierc'd
My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends and religious tales,
I should coinclude ·there wtas an arm above
T~hat foughti against me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch myself, the subtle snare I set.
W~hy, rape: and murder are not simple means !
. T~h' imperfect rape to Randolph gave a spouse;
Ahnd the intended mrurder in~troduc'd
A favourite to hide th~e sun from me;
ALnd, worst of all, a rival. Burning hell!i
This were thy centre, if IL thought she lov'd him f

; 'Tis certai jshe contemns me a nay commands me,

And waves the flag; of her d~ispleasure o'er me,/
In his behalf. And shall I thus. be brav'd ?
Curb'd, as she calls it, by dam~e chastity ?
Infernal fiends, if any ·fiends there are
Mdore fierce than hate, ambition, and revenge,
Rise up, and fill my bosom with your fires
And policy remorseless!i ' Chance may spoil
bA single aim; but perseverance must
:Prosper at last. For chance and fate are words:
SPersistive wisdom is the fate of man.'
D~arkly a project peerbupon my mind,

C z

# ACT III.

## SCENE, — A Court, etc. as before.

Like the red moon when rising in the east,
Cross'd and divided by strange-colour'd clouds.
1'11 seek the slave who came wvith Norval hith~er,
And for his cowardice was spurnaed from him·.
Pvye known a follower's rankled bosom breed
Venom most fatal to his heedless lord.

AhCT IPII.

SCENE, --A Courtd, etc. as befo~re.

E~nter ANNA.

rnH vassals, grief ! great nature's order break,
And change the noon-tide tEo the midnight hour.
WVhilst Lady Randolph sleeps, I will walk forth,
And taste the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers be ! Ye ministers
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,
Ahngels and seraphs who delight in goodness,
1Forsake your skies, and to her couch descend !
There from her fancy chace those dismal forms
That haunt her waking ; her sad. spirit charm
W7ith images celestial, such as please
The blest above upon their golden beds.

Enter Servant.

stay. One of the vile assassins is secur'd.

'We: found the villain lurking in the wood :
WTith dreadful im recations he denies
Atll knowledge of the: crime. But thkis is not
His first essay : these jewels were conceal'd
In the most secret places of his garment ;
Belik~e the spoils of some thai he has murder'd.

aaN. Let me look on them. H-a i here Is a heart,

TIhe chosen crest of Douglas' valiant name !
These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch.

[Exit Anna.

Enter Servants witht a Prisoner.

PRas. I know no more than does the child unborn

Of what you charge me with.

Ist SERV. 'lOu sRTJ So, Sir !

But torture soon shall make you speak the truth.
Behold, the lady of Lord Randolph comes :
Prepare yourself to meet her just revenge.

Enter LADY RANDOLPu and ANNA.

ANN. Summon your utmost fortitude, before

You speak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
A9re nlow at stake. TFhinkc of the fatal secret,
WT;hich in a moment fromt your lips may fly.

LAQDY RAN. Thou shalt b~ehold me, with a desperate

h~eart,

Hear how the infant perpish'd.· See, he kneels.

[ The Prisoner knpeeLs

PRas. H-eaven bless that countenance so swteet and~jl

mild I

A~ judge like thee makes innocence more bold :
O save me, lady ! from these cruel men,
WVho have attack'd and seiz'd me; who accuse
Mb~e of intended murder. APs I hope
For mercy at the judgment seat of H-eaven,
The tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
Is not more innocent than I[ of murder.

Lany RAN. Of thiS mnan's guilt what proof can ye

produce ?

Ist SERV. WCCe found him lurking in the hollow glen.

WThen viewr'd and call'd upon, amaz'dl he fled :
Wc7e overtook himr, and enquir'd fr~om whence
~And w~hat: he was : Hle said he cai~itagom far,
~And wAas upon his journey to the camp 7t.,~~·

C3

Not satisfied with this, we search'd his clothes,
And found these jewels, whose rich value plead
IV~Iost powerfully against him. Haprd he seems,
And old in villainy. Permit us ·t'r
Hlis stubborness against the torturek~force.

prts. O, gentle lady ! by your lord's dear life,

'Which these w~eak; hands, I swear, did ·ne'er assailg
Ahnd by your child~ren's welfare, spare my age !
Let.not the iron tear mny ancient joints,
~And my grey hairs bring to the grave with pain.

LAD~Y RAN. AccouZnt for these 3 thine own they can-

not be :

For these, I say : be stedfast to the truth;
D~etected falsehood is most certain death.

[ Anna remaoves th5e servants, and ne~turnms

PRus. Alas ! I'm sore beset ! Let never man,

For sake of lucre, sin against his soul !
Eternal justice is in this most just I
I, guiltless now, must former guilt r-eveal.

LADY RAN. O ! Anna, hear !--Once more I charge

thee speak

The truth direct; for these to me foretel,
APnd certify a part ·of thy narration ;
Wi~ith which, if the remainder tallies not,
An instant and a dread~ful death abides thee.

PRas. Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speakr to you as just

As if you were the minister of heaven,
Sent down to search the secret sinls of men.--
Some eigh~teen years ago I rented land
Of brave Sir M~alcolm, then 1Balarmo's lord;
But falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
All that I had, and then turn'd me and mine,
(Four helpless infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel by the rivJer's side

Receiv'd us :· there hai-d labour, and the skill
In fishing, which was formerly my sport,·
Supported life. Whilst thus we poorly liv'd,
One stormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof :
RBed came the river down, and loud and oft
The angry spirit of the water shriek'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry ·~
Of one in jeopardy. I: rose, and ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool,
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within ~
M~y reach, whatever floating thing the stream
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd ; the person lost :
But, lookiing sad and earnest on the waters,
By the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round,
A basket : soon I, drew it to the ban-k;,
And, nestled curious, there an infant lay.

LADY RAN. Whas he alive ?l
PR-is. He was.
LADY RAN. Inhuman that thou ~art !

How could'st thou kill what waves and tempests

spar'd ?-

PRas. I was not so inhuman.
LA9DY RA~N. IDidst thou not ?
ANN. MVy noble mistress, you are mov'd too 4such,

This man has not the aspect of stern murder :
Let him go on ; and you, I hope, will hear
Good tidings of your kinsman's long lost child.

miPas. The needy man who has known better days,

One whom distress has spited at the world,
Is he whom tempting Fiends would pitch upon
T'o do such deeds as make the prosperous moen
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them.a
,And such a man was I : a man declin'd,
W5ho saw7 no end of black adversity :

Yet, for~the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have touch'd that infant with a hand of harm.

LADY RAN. Ha ! dost thou say so ? Then perhaps he

lives !

mi1s. Not many days ago he was alive.
x.AnY RAN. O God of heaven! Did! he then dfie so

lately ?

PRus. I did not say he died; I hope he liv-es.

Not many days ago these eyes beheld
H~im, flourishing in youth, and health, and beauty.

LADY RAN. W5rhere is he now ?
PRas. _ Alas ! I know not where.
LADY RAN. Oh, fate ! I fear thee still. Thou riddler,

speak

?Direct and clear, else I will search thiy soul.

' ANN. IPermit me, ever honour'd i Keen impatience,
T'phough hard to be restrain'd, def`eats itself.-'3
Pursue thy story with a faithful tongue
TSo the last hour that thou didst keep the child.

PRas. Fear not my faith, though I must speak my

sh ane .

'Within the cradle where the infant lay
W9as stow'd a mighty store of gold and jewels ;
Tempted by which, we did resolve to hide,
From all the world this wonderful ezvent,
Aind like a peasant breed the noble child.
Tphat none might mark the change of our estate,
Wre left the country, travell'd to the north,
Bought flocks and herds, and gradually brought forths~
Our secret wealth. But G~od's all-seeing eye
Beheld our avarice, and smote us sore.
For, one by one, all. Our own children died ;
And he, thle stranger, sole remain'd the heir
Of w~hat indeed was his.. Fain then wrould I,
WVho with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,

~Have trusted him, now in the dawn of youth,
'With his own secret : but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil. never would consent.
M7ieanwhile the stripling grew in years and beauty;.
And, as we oft observ'd, he bore himself,
NIot as the offsprirg of our cottage blood;
For nature wTill break out : mild wit~h the mild,
BIut wvith thie forward he was fierce as fire,
And night and day· he talk'ld of wrar and arms,
I set myself against his w4arlike bent ;
But all in vain; for wrhen a desperate band
OSif rob-bers from the savage mountains came--

unP anN. Eternal Providence ! ~What is thy· name ?
Pras. My name is NsORVAL ; and my name he bears.
LADY RAN. ~'Tis he, i tis he himself it is my son i

O, sovereign mercy ! 'twas my child I sawJ !-
Nao wonder, Anna, that my bosom burn'd.

ANN. Just are your transports : 'ne'er was woman's

heart

' Prov'd w-ith such fierce extremes. High-fated dame !'
But yet remember that you are beheld
By servile eyes : your gestures may be seen
Impassion'd strange ; perhaps your words o'erheard.

I.AnY R,4N. Well dost thou counsel, Anna, Heaven

bestowv

On me that wisdom which my state requires !
' ANN. The1 moments of deliberation pass,

'A ad soon you must resolve. This useful man
C Must be dismiss'd in safety, e'er my lord
' Shall with his braive d~eliverer return.'

pras. If I, amidst astonishmnnent and fear,

Have of your words and gestures rightly judg'd,
Thou art the daughter of m~y ancient master ;
The child I rescu'd from the flood is thine.

I.AnY RAN. WSith thee dissimulation now were vain.,

I am indeed the daughter of Sir ~Malcolm;
The child thou rescu'dst from the flood is mine.

rals. ]Blest be the hour that made me a poor man !

My poverty has sav'd my master's house !

LADY RAN. Tlhy words surprise me : sure thou dost

not feign !

TPhe tear stands in thine eye : such love from thee
Sir Malcolm's house deserv'd not, if aright
Thou told'st the story of thy own distress.

PRas. Sir M~alcolm of our barons was thle flower j

The fastest friend, the best, the kindest master.
But ah!i he knewv not of my sad estate.
After that battle, where his gallant son,
Y5our own brave brother, fell, the good old lord
~Grew desperate And reckless of the world :
Ahnd n~ever, as he erst was wont, went forth
Tso overlook the conduct of his servants.
By them I was thrust out, and them I blame.
Maay heaven so judge me as I judg'd my master !
A9nd God so love me as I love his race !

LADY RAN. His race shall yet reward thee. OZn thy

faith 5

Depends the fate of thy lov'd master's house.
Rememnb'rest thou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the clefts of Carron ?

PRas. I remember

The cottage of the clefts.

LADY RAN. 'Tis that I meanP.

There dwells a man of venerable age,
Who in my father's service spent his youthr :
Tell him I sent thee, and with him remain,
'Till I shall call upon thee to declare,
Before the king and nobles what thou now
TSo me hast told. N~o morepbut this, and thou

-·Shalt live in honour all thy future dayls )
Thy son so long shall call thee father still,
Ahnd all the land shall bless the syan who sav'd
The son of D~ouglas, and Sir M/alcolm'ls heir.
Remember well my words; if thou shouldst meet
Him whom thou call'st thy son, still call him so;
And mention nothing of his nobler father.
PRas. Fear not that I shall mar so fair an harvest,
By putting in my sickle ere 'tis ripe.
Why did I leave my 'home and ancient dame ?~
To find the youth, to tell him all I knew,
And make hirix wear these jewels in his arms,
Which might, I thought, be challeng'd, and so bring
To light the secret of his noble birth.

[ aLad Randol ph goes towulards ~the servsants.

LADY RAN. This man is not the assassin you suspected,

Tho' chance combin'd some likelihoods against him.
He is the faithful bearer of the jewels
tro their right owner, whom in haste he seeks.
'Tis meet that you should put him on his way,
Since your mistaken zeal hath dragg'd him hither.

[ ExEunti Strange~r anrd Servants.

M~y faithful Anna ! dost tho~u share my joy ?
I know thou dost.-Unparallel'd event !
Reaching from heaven to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings to me my son !
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's fathner,
~ccept a widow's and a mother's thanks
rfor such a gift !--What does my Anna think
Of the young eaglet of a valiant nest ?
How soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his fate had thrown

h.1m,

And tower'd up to the region of his sire.

AmN. H-ow fondly did your eyes devour the boy !

Mysterious nat~ure, with the unseeni cord
Of powerful instinct, drew you to your own.

LADY RAN. The ready story of his birth believ'd

Suppress'd my fancy quite ; nor did he owe
To any likeness my so sudden favour :
But now I long to see his face again,
Examine every feature, and Eind out
Th~e lineaments of Douglas, or my own.
But most of all I long to let him know
W~ho hiis true parents are, to clasp his necki,
And tell him all the story of his father.

ANN.1V~ith wary ·cautioil you must bear yourself

In public,1lest your tenderness break forth,
And in observers stir conjectures strange.

' For if .a cherub in the shape of woman
' Should wralk this world, yet defamation would,
' Like a vile cur, bark at the angel's train.-'
To-day the baron started at your tears.

LAny BNa. He did so,Anna! W 7ell hy mistress knows
If the least circumstance, mote of offence,
Should touch the baron's eye, his sight would be
'With jealousy disorder'd. But the more
It does behove me instanit to declare
The birth of Daouglas, and assert his rights.
This night I purpose with my son to meet,
Rieveal the secret, and consult writh him:
For wise he is, or my fond judgmnent errs.
As he does now, so look'd his noble father,
Array'd in nature's ease : his mien, his speech,
T~Bere sweetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those trivial mortals who seem always wise.
But, when the matter mnatch'd his mighty mind,
U~p rose the hero ; on his piercing eye
Sat observation ; on each glance of thought
Decision follow'd, as the thunderbolt

Pursues the flash.

ANN. That: demon haunts you stilll:

Behold Glenalvon.

LADY RAN. prOW I shun him not.

T'his day I brav'd him in behalf of Norval j
Perhaps too far j at least my nicer fears
For Douglas thus interpret.

Enlter GLENALVON.

GLEN. Nloble dame i

TPhe hov'ring D)ane at last his men hath landed :-
N~o band of pirates ; but a mighty host,
TFhat come to settle where their valour conquers;
TIo win a country, or to lose th~emselves.

LADY RAN. But Whence comes this intelligence, Glen-

alvon ?~

GLEN. A nimble courier sent from yonder camp,

To hasten up the chieftains of- the north,
Inform'd me, as he past, that the fierce Dane
H-3ad on the eastern coast of Ltothian landed,
N ~ear to that place where the sea-rock immense,
A ~mazing· Bass ! looks o'er a fertile land.
' L93v RAN. Then must this western array march to

join

SThze viarlike troops that guard Edina's tow'rs.

' GLEN. Beyond all question. If impairing time
SHas not eff'ac'd the image of a place,
SOnce perfect in my breast, there is a wild
v~Vhich lies to westward of that mighty rock,
A tnd seems by nature formed for the camp
' Of water-wafted armies, whose chief strength
' L;ies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse :
' If martial skill directs the Danish lords,
C There inaccessible their army lies
' To our swift-scow'ring horse; the bloody fieldr
' Must man to man, and foot to foot be fought.'

LADY RAN. Hrow many mothers shall bewail their

s ons!

Hfow many widows weep their husbands slain !
Ye dames of Denmark ! even for you I feel,
Who, sadly sitting on the sea-beat shore,
Long look for lords that never shall return.

GL~EN. Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian sword

WC'idow'd the north. T'he children of the slain
Come, as I hope, to meet their father's fate.
Trhe monster WTar, with her infernal brood,
Loud-yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
A~re objects suited to Glenalvon's soul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death ;
Reproach more piercing than the pointed· sword.

LADY RAN. I scorn thee not, but when I ought to.

scorn ;

N'or e'er reproach, but when insulted virtue
Against audacious vice asserts herself.
I own thy worth, Glenalvon; none more apt
Thian I to praise thine eminence in arms,
APnd be the echo of thy martial fame.
N~o longer vainly feed a guilty passion :
Go and pursue a lawful mistress, Glory i
Uepon the Danish crests redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the shield of Randolph.

GLEN. One instant stay, and hear an alter'd man.

~When beauty pleads for virtue, vice abash'd
Flies its' own colours, and goes o'er to virtue. ae
I am your convert ; time will shew how truly :
YTet one immediate proof I mean to give--
'That youth~, for whom your ardent zeal to-day
Somew~hat too hnaughtily defy'd your slave,
A"midst the shock of armies I'll defend,
A~nd turn death from him with a guardian arm.
Ssdate by uze, my bosom maddens not

' At the tumultuous uproar of the field.'

untY aw4. AcCt thus, Glenalvon~, and I am thy f'riend:

Eut. that'ts thy least: reward. Believe me, Sir,
The truly generous is: the truly wise ;
Ahnd he who loves not othe-rs, lives unb-lest.

[Exit Lady Randolph,

GLEN. AmenF2 ! and virture -is its owvn rew~tard !--

I think that I have hit the very tone
In whichi she loves to speak. H-oney'd assent,
Hdow pleasant art thou to· thnetseofa
And woman also ! Flattery direct -
Rarely disgusts. They little know mankind
W~ho doubt its operations. ' Tis my krey,
And opes the wicket of the human heart.
How far I have succeeded now, I k~now not:
YI~eti I incline to thinkr her stormy virtue
Is lull'd a whnile. 'Tgis her alone I fear.
W~hilst she and Ranadolph live, and live in faith
Ahnd amnity, uncertain is my tenure.
' Fate <Per my head suspends djsgrace and death,.
C By thnat weak hair, a peevishn female's will.
' I am not idle; but the ebbs and flows
' Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated.'
That slave of N~orval's I. have found most apt 1
I: shew'Jd him gold, and he has pawn'd his soul
To say and swear whatever I suggest.
N~orval, I'm told, has that alluring look,
' Twixt man and woman, which I have observ'd.
To charm the nicer and fantastic dames,
W~ho are,·like Lady Randolph, full of virtue.
lIn raising Randolph's jealousy, I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom errs,
WTho thinks the worst he can of womaankind. [Exi~,·

# ACT IV.

## SCENE, — A Court, etc. as before. Flourish of Trumpets.

ACT IV.

scaNs,---A' Court, etc. as before. Flourish of Trumipets.

Enater RANDOLPH atte~nded.

RAN. SUMMON an hundred horse by brea~k of day,

To wait our pleasure at the castle gate.

Elnter LADY RANDOLPH.

LADY RAN. Alas ! iiny Lord ! I've heard unwelcome

news ;

Tfhe Danes are landed.

RAN. Ay; no inroad this

O~f the N~orthum-obrian bent to take a spoil:
N\o sportive war; no tournament essay
Of some young knight resolv'd to break a spear,
And stain with hostile blood his maiden arms.
The Danes are landed : WYe must beat them lback,
Or live tite slaves of Denmark.

LADY RAy. Dreadful~times !
RAN. Thk fenceless villages are all forsaken:

The tremblitag mothers, and their children lodg$'d,
In wall-girt towers and castles; whilst the men
Retire indignant, Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return.

LADY RAN. immenSe, aS fame reports, the Danish host !
am1. Wer'e it as numerous as loud fame reports' c,

An army knit like ours would pierce it throug~h :
"Brothers, that shrink not froma each other's side,
And fond companions, fill our warlike files :
For.his dear offspring, and the wife he loves,
The husband and the fearless fathrer arm.
In vulgar breasts heroic ·ardour burns,
Aind thle poor peasant mates his daring lor-d,.

LADY RAN. IMden'S minds are temper'd, likre their

swords, for war :

LovJers of danger, on destruction's brink
They joy to rear erect their daring: forms.
Hence early graves ; hence, the lone widow's life ;
And the sad mother's ~grief-embitter'd age.--l
Wdhere is our gallant guest ?

RAs. D~own in the vale

I left him, managing a Siery steed,
W~hose st~ubborness had foi~l'd the strength and skill
O~f every rider. But behold he comes
In earnest: conversation with Glenalvon.

Enter NOwnA anld GL;ENALVON.

Glenalvon ! with the lark -arise ; go forth,
And lead my troops that lie in yonder vale :
Private I travel to the royal damp.
Nyorval, thoul goest with me. ~But say, young man i
Wh~Tere didst thou learn so to discourse of war,
And in such terms, as I o'erheard: to-day ?'
WT;ar is no village science, nor its phrase
A language taught among the shepherd swains.-

h'oii. Small is the skill my Lord delights to praise

I'n himr he favoucrs.-H~-ear froml whence it camne.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the most remote
And inaccessible by shepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
AB hermit liv'd; a melancholy man,
Whro was the wonder of our wand'ring swains,
Au~stere and lonely, cruel to himself,
Did they report him : The cold earth hzis bed,
WSater his drink, his food the shepherd's aims.
I went to see him, and my heart was touich'd
Writh reverence and w~ith pity. M~ild he sp:r0:e,
And, entering on discoure, such stories tol.d
As4 madle me oft revisit~ his sad cell ;

IFor he had been a soldier in his youth,
And fought in ·famous battles, when the peers
Of Europe, by the bold Godfredo led,
Against th' usurping infidel display'd
T'he blessed cross, and won the Holy Land.
P~leas'd with my admiration, and tlhe fire
His speech struckr from me, the old man would shake
His years away, and act his young encounters :
Then, having shew'd his wounds, he'd sit, him down,
.And all the live-long day discourse of war,
To help my fancy, in the smooth green turf
He cut the figures of the marshall'd hosts ;
D~escrib'd the motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,
T'he square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm :
JFor all that ·Saracen or Christian knew
Of war's vast art, was to this hermit known.

usN. Why did this soldier in a desert hide

Those qualities that should have grac'd a camp ?

NoRV. That too at last I learned. Unhappy man !

Returning homewards by MR/essina's port,
Loaded: with -wealth and honours brave'ly won,
A rude and boist'rous captain of the sea
Fasten'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they foug~ht :
The stranger fell, and with his dying breath
D~eclar'd his name and lineag~e-MnIighty Power !
The soldier cried, my brother ! O, my brother!
EAns usL. His brother I
NORV. Yes , of the same parents born :

Hisg; only brother. They exchang'd forg~iveness y
And happy, in my mind, was he that dy'd ;
For many deaths has the survivor suffer'd.
In1 the wild desert on a rock he sitp,
Or on some nameless stream's untrodden banks,
Andc ruminates all day his dreadful ,Fate.

At times, alas ! not in his perfect mind,
Holds dialog~ues with his lov'd brother's ghost;
And oft each night forsakes his sullen couch,
Tdo makie sad orisons for him he slew.

LADYr RAN. TO What mysterious WOeS are mortals

born !-

In this dire tragedy, were there no more
Unhappy persons ? Did the parents live ?

E;oR. NTo they were dead : kind heav'n had clos'd

their eyes

Before their son had shed his brother's blood.

LADY RAN. H~ard is his fate i for he was not to blame.

There is a destiny in this strange world,
WIhich oft decrees an undeserved doom:=
Let schoolmen tell us why.--From whence these

sounds ?Z [Trumpets at a distance

Enter an Officer.

onS. My lord, the trumpets of the troops of Lorn :

TFhe valiant leader hails the noble Randolph.

RAN. Mine ancient guest ! does he the warriors lead ?

Hlas DIenmark roussd the brave old knight to arms ?

ove. No : worn with warfare, he resigns the sword.

H-is eldest hope, the valiant John of Lornl,
NaowF leads his kindred bands.

RAN. Glenalvon, go :

W~ith hos~pitality's most strong request
Entreat the chief. [Exit Glenalvon.

oFF. Myp lord ! requests are vain.

Hae urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foe's approach.

RAN. M/ay victory sit on the warrior's plume !

Eravest of men ! his flocks and herds are safe;
Remote from war's alarms his pastures lie,
By mountains inaccessible secur'd i
'Yet foremost he into the plain descends,

3Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the ancient wvorld ;
C~ontemners they of indolence and gain ;
But still, for love of glory ·and of arms,
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift
Against each strong antagonist the spear--
I'll go and press the hero to my breast.

[Exit Randolph.

LADY RAN. The soldier's loftiness, the pride and

pomp

Investing awful war, Norval ! I see,
Transport thy youthful mind.

NoRV. ACh ! should they not ?

B5lest be the hour I left my father's house i"
I might have been a shepherd all my days,
And stole obscurely to a peas~ant's grave.
N~ow, if I live, with mighty chiefs I stand ;
iAnd, if I. fall, with nozble dust I lie.

LADY RAN. There is a gen'rous spirit in thy breast,

T~hat could have well sustain'd a prouder fortune.
This way with me : under~yon spreading beech,
U~nseen, unheard, by human eye or ear,
I will amaze thee with a wond'rous tale.

NoRV. Let there be danger, lady, with the secret,

That I may hug it to my grateful heart,
A8nd prove my faith. Command my sword, my life;
These are the sole possessions of poor Norval.

LADY RAN. KnIow'st thou these germs ?
NoRV. Idurst I believe mine eyes,

I'd say I knew them, and they were my father's.

Lany RAN. Thy father's, say'st thou~ ? Ah ! they

were thy father's i

NORV. I saw them once, and curiously enquir'd

O~f both my parents, whence such splendor came ?~
But I was checka'd, and more could never learn.

LADY RAN. Thenlearn of me, thou art not Norval's son.
NORV. N\ot NVorval's son !
LADY RAN. NOr Of a Shepherd sprung.
NoRV. Lady, who am I then ?
LADY RAN. NVoble thou art ;

For noble was thy shre !

NORV. I will believe-

O, tell me far~ther ! Say, who was mly father ?

LADY RAN. .DOUGLAS
NoRV. Lord Douglas ! whom to-day I saw ?~
LAny RAN. IHis younger brother.
NoR. . And in yonder camp ?
L AnY RAN. Alas i
NOwV. You make me tremble--Sighs and tears!--

Lives my brave father ?'

LADY RA9N. Ah ! too brave indeed :

He fell in battle e'er thyself was born.

NoRV. Ah me, unhappy ! e'er myself was born !·-

But does my mother live ? I may conclude
~From my own fate, her portion has been sorrow.

LAnv RAN. She lives; but wastes her life in constant

woe,

W~eeping her husband slain, her infant lost.

NoRV. You that are skill'd so well in the sad story

Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their destiny, now have compassion
Ifpon the offspring of the friends you lov'd;
O ! tell me who and where my mother is.
O~ppress'd by a base world, perhaps she bends
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief ;
And, desolate, implores of heaven the aid
Her son should give. It is, it must be so-
Yrour countenance confesses that she's wretched.
O ! tell me her condition! Can the sword--
WhVlo shall resist me in a parent's cause ?'

LADY RAM. Thy virtue ends her wroes-Mly son !

my son !

I am thy mother, and the wife of Douglas !

[ Falls u~pon his neck.

Naxy. O heau'n and earth ! how wondrous is my fate !

Art thou my mother ? Ever let me kneel.

I.AnY RAN. Image of Douglas ! fruit of fatal love !

All that I owe thy sire, I pay to thee.

NoRV. Respect and admiration still possess me,

Checking the love and fondness of a son :
Yet I was filial to my humble parents.
But did my sire surpass the rest of men,
As thou excellest all of womankind ?

x.AnY am. Arise, my son I In me thou dost behold

T'he poor remains of beauty once admir'd i
The autumn of my days is come already;
For sorrow made my summer haste away.
Y~et in my prime I equall'd not thy father x
3His eyes were like the eagle's, yet sometimes
Likrer the dove's; and, as he pleas'd, he won
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

NoRV. How did he fall ? Sure 'twas a bloody field

When Douglas died. O ! I have much to ask.

LAer RAN. H~ereafter thou shalt hear the lengthen'dh

tale

Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
At present this : T~ho~u art the rightful heir
Of yonder castle, and the wide domains
WVhich now Lord Randolph, as my husband, holds. f
But thou shalt not be wrong'd; I have the power
To right thee still. Before the king I'll kneel >
And call Lord Dougl-as to protect his blood.

NoRV. The blood of Douglas will protect itselfr.
LADY RAN. But we shall need both friends and favour,

boy,~

To wrest thy lands and lordship from the gripe
Of Randolph and his kinsman. Yset I thnink
May tale will move each gentle heart to pity;
Mly life- incline the virtuous to believe.

NoRV. To be the son of Douglas, is to me

Inheritance enough. D~eclare my birth,
And in the field I'11 seek for fame and fortune.

LAny Ram. Thou dost not know what perils and in-

j ustice

Await the poor man's valour. O, my son !
The noblest blood of all the land's abash'd,
Having no lacquey but pale poverty.
Too long hast thou been thus attended, Douglas !
Too long hast thou been deem'd a peasant's child.
The wanton heir of some inglorious chief
Perhaps has scorn'd thee in the youthful sports;
Whilst thy indignant spirit swell'd in vain !
Such contumely thou no more shalt bear;
But how I purpose to redress t~hy wrongs
M~Iust; be hereafter told. Prudence directs
That we should part before yon chiefs return.
Retire; and from thy rustic follower's hand
R~eceive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to see thee, dictated before
TFhis casual opportunity arose
Of private conference. Its purport mark s.
For as I there appoint, we meet again.
~Leave me, my son ! and frame thy manners still
To Norval's, not to noble ]Douglas? state.

NoRV. I will remember. Wh~ere is Norval now ?

That good old man.

LADY RAN. At hand, conceal'd he lies,

An useful witness. But beware, my son,
Of yon Glenalvon : In his guilty breast.

Resides a villain's shrewdness, ever prone
To false conjecture. He hath griev'd my heart.

NOwV. Has he, indeed ? Then let yon false Glenalvon

Beware of me. [IExZit Douglas.

LADY RAN. There buzrst the smothier'd flame.

O ! thou all righteous and eternal King !
W~ho Father of the fatherless art call'd,
Protect my son ! Thy inspiration, 1Lord !
H~ath £11l'd his bosom with that sacred fire
W~hich in the breast of his forefathers burn'd :·
Set him on high, like them, that he may shine
The star and glory of his native land !
Then let the minister of death descend,
And bear my willing spirit to its place.--
Yonder they come. How do bad women Eind
Unchanging aspects to conceal their guilt,
~When I, by reason and by justice urg'd,
Full hardly can dissemble with these men
In nature's pious cause ?

Emer~, RADOoLPH and GLENALVON.

RAN. You' gallant chief,

Of arms enamour'd, all repose disclaims.

LADY RAN, Be DOt, my Lord, by his example sway'd.

Arrange' the business of to-morrow now;
And when you enter, speak of war no more.

[Exeit Lady Randolph.

RA4N.'Tis so,by Heav'n! her mien, her voice, her eye,

And her impatience to be gone, confirm it, a

GLEN. He parted fr-om her now : Behind the mount,

Amongst the trees, I saw him glide along.

RAN. For sad seqluester'd virtue she's renown'd!i
GLEN. 10st tru~e, my lord.
Ran. YSet this disting~uish'd dame

Invites a youth, th' acqluaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight houzr,

This assignation (shews a letter) the assassin freed,
Her manifest affection for thre youth,
M~ight breed suspicion in a husband's brain,
WChose gentle consort all for love had wedded :
Mu~chi more in mine. MIatilda never lov'd me.
Let no man, after me, a woman wed,
W~hose heart he knows he has not 3 thoughi she brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry :
For, let her seem like the nig~ht's shadowy queen,
Cold and contemaplative,-h~e cannot trust her :
She may, she will, bring shame and sorrow on him;
The worst of sorrows, and the worst of shames !

GLE N. YTield n ot, my lord, to su:ch afi~icting thought s

But let the spirit of an husband sleep,
Till your own senses make a sure conclusion.
This billet must to blooming N~orval go.
Aht the nexzt turn awaics my trusty spy :
I'll give it him refitted for his master.
In the close thibke~t: ake your secret stand :
Th'le moon shines bright, and your own eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

usN. Thou dost: counsel wcell.
GLEN. Permit me now to make one slight essay,

O~f all the trophies which vain mortals boast,
By w~it, by valour, or by wisdom won,
The first and fairest, in a young man's eye,
Is w~oman's captive heart. Successful love
WTith glorious fumes intoxicates the mind !
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves,
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

R AN. And what avails t'his maxim ?
GLEN. Muchi, my lord!

Wriithdraw a little : I'll accost young Nor val,
And with ironical derisive counsel
Explore his spirit. If he is no more

Thilan hcumble NhJorval, by thy favour rais'd,
B3rave aS he is, he'll shrinki astonish'd fromr me :
Buzt if he be· the favourite of the fair,
Lov'd by the first of" Caledonia's dames,
Hie'! turn upon me~u, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.

ass. 'Tis sh~rewidly thourght.
GLEN. W~hen we grow loud, draw near. Buot let myr

lord

His rising w~ratlh restrain. [Exuit Randolph,

·GLEN· 'Tis strange, by, heav-en !

That she should run full tilt her fond career,
To~ one so little know~n. She too, that seem'd
Pure as the wvinter stream, whfen ice emboss'd
T'Vhitens its course. Even I did thinki her chaste,
Wj-hose charity exiceeds not. Precious sexi !
Whose deeds lascivious pass Glenalvon's thoughts !

Enter h'oav,45.

His port I love ; he's in a proper mij0d
T-o chide the thunder, if at him it roar'd.
Has Norval seen the troops ?

NowV. The setting sun

Wi;Tth yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale;
A~nd as the warriors movi'd, eac~h polish'd helm,
Corslet, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.
The hill .they c~limb'd 5 and, haltinoo at its top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they seem'd
An host angelic, clad in burning arms. ;:

GLEN. T~hou talk')st it well ; no leader of our host

In sounds mnore lofty speaks of glorious war.

INoR. If I shall e'er acquire a leader's name,

My~g speech will be less ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
vents itself freely; since no part is mine
Of' praise pertaining to the great ine arms.

GLEN. JYOU Wrong y ~ul~relf, b~vrae Sir· ounr martial~

deeds

Ha've rak'd thee with the great ; bu~t mar-k me Nor vaS)
L~ord Randolph's favour now exalts your youth
Above his veteran-rs of famotus service.
Let me, who know these soldiers, counsel you :
Give ~them all honour; seem not to comrmand i
Else th~ey will scarcely brook ~your late sprung powe·~r,
W~·hich nor- alliance props, nor birth adorns.

NowK. Sir, I have been accustom'id all my dlays

TSo hear and speak the plain and simpjle tr-uth :
And though I have been told that there are men ·
KT~ho bo~rrowv frendshfip's tongue to speak~ their scorn,
Yet in such language I am little skill'd.
Thf'erefore I -thank Glenalvon fo~r his cournsel,
Although it sounded harshly. WEShy remind
Mte of my birth obscure ? W~Chy slur my power-
TWith such contemptuous terms ?

GLEN,- Idid n~ot mezan

To gall your pride, whnich now I see is g~reat.

NoRV. MIy pride i
GL-N. · Suppress it as you wish to prosper.

Your pride's exrcessive. Y~et, for R andolph's sake,
I will not leave you to its rash direction.
If thus you. swell, and fr-own at high-born men,
Will high-born men endure a shepherd's scorn ?

Noxy. ~A shepherd's scorn !
G~LEN. Yes i if you presume

To bend on soldiers these disdainful eyes,
As if you took the measure of their minds,
And said in secret, you're no match for me ;
'What will become of you ?

NoRV. If this were told !-- [Asidei

Hast thou no fears for thy presumptuous self ?

GLE~N. Ha ! dost thou threaten me ?

Ez

r, ~NoR. Didst thou not hear ?

exLEw. Unwillingly I did; a nobler foe

. [a~d not been.question'd thus. But such as thee--

Noxy. WThorm dost thou think me ?
GLEN. NOr V R.
NoRV. So I am--

And wh~o is Norval in Glenalvon's eyes ?

-GLEN. A peasant's son, a wandering beggar-bol &

At best no more, even if he speaks the truth.

NoRy. False as thou art, dost thou suspect my truth .Z
GLEN. Thy truth!i thou'rt all a lie; and false as hell
Is the vain glorious tale thou toldst to Randolph.

NowV. If I were chain'd, unarm'dl, and bedrid old,

Perhaps I should revile : but as I am,
I have no tongue to rail. The humble N~orval
Is of a race who strive not but with deeds.
1Did I not ~fearto freeze thy shallow valour,
And make thee sink too soon beneath my sword,
I'd tell thee what thou art : I knowv thee well.

GLEN. DOSt thou not: know Glenalvan, born to corm-

mand!

Tets thousand slaves like thee !--

NORy. Villain, no more !~

,Draw and defend thy life. I did design
TSo have defy'd thee in another cause :
But heaven accelerates its vengeance on thee.
Now for my- own and Lady Randolph's wrongs.

~Enter RANDoLPra.

usA. Hold, I command you both. The man that

stirs

M11akes me his foe.

NOw.I Another voice than thine

That threat had vainly sounded, noble Randolph.

GL]EN, Hear him, my Lord a he's wond'rous conde-

scending% i

IV~ark the humility of shepherd Nlorval !

NORy. NJow you may scoff in safety. [TSheaths his SwLordj.
usN. Speak not thus,

Taunting each other 3 but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel -, then I judge betwixt you.

NowI. Nay·, my good lord, thto' I revere you much,

M~ty cause I plead not, nor demand your judgmtent.
I1 blush to speak; I will not, cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words that I from him have borne.
To the liege lord of my dear native land
I owe a subject'Ps homage : but ev'n hiim
And. his high arbitration I'd reject.
WFithin my bosom reigns another lord ;
HMonour, sole judge and umpire of itself.
If mry free speech offend you, noble Randolph,
Revoke· youar favours and let. Naorv~al go
H-ence as he came, alone, but not dishonour'd.

RAN. TITus far I'll mediate with imp3artial voice,

T'he ancient foe of Caledonia's land
NCbow waves his banners o'er her· frighted fields.
S~uspend your purpose, till your country's arms
Repel th-e bold invader : then decide
Thne private quarrel.

GLEN. I agree to this.
NoRv. ~And I.·

Enter Servant.

SERV. The banquet waits.
RAN. We come.[CExit with servant.
GL EN' laOr al,

L~et not our variance mar the social h-our,
Nor wrong the hospitality of Randolph.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkrld hate,
Shall1stain my countenance. Smooth thou thy browp;
Nor let our $trife disturb thie gentle dame.

E 3

# ACT V.

## SCENE, — The Wood.

NOR~. Think not so lightly, Sir, of my resentment:

When we contend again, our strife is mortal.

A-CT V.

SCENE,---The WCood.

Enter novatLAs.

Tms is the place, the centre-of the grove ;
Here stands the oak, the monarch of the wood.
How sweet and solemn is this mridnight scene !
The silver moon, unclouded, holds her way
Through skies where I could count each little star.
The fanning west wind scarcely stirs the leaves.
The river, rushing o'.er its pebbled bed,
Imposes silence with a stilly sound.
In such a place as this, at such an hour,
If ancestry can be in ought believ'd,
D~escending spirits have convers'd with man,
And told the secrets of t~he world unknown.

Enter OLD NORVAL.

OLB NoV. 'Tis he. But what if he should chide

me hence ?

His just reproach I fear. [Douglas turns anfd sees him]l

Forgive, forgive.

Can'st: thou forgive the man, the selfish man,
Who bred Sir Malcolm's heir a shepherd's son ? e

DOUG. Kne'el not to me: thou art my father still;

Thy wish'd-for presence now completes my joy.
Vyrelcome to me; my fortunes thou shalt share,
~And ever-honour'd with thy D~ouglas live.

o. Konv. And dost thou call me father ? O my son !

I think that I could die to make anendis

For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
WC~hich in the wilderness so long conceal'd
The blossom of thy youth.

DOUG. Not WorSe the fruit,

Thiat in the wilderness the blossom blow'd.
Amongst the shepherds, in the humble cot,
I learn'd some lessons, which I'll not forget
Wh~en I inhDabit: yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; and when my vassals bow,
NEorval shall smooth the crested pride of Douglas.

o. NoR. Let me but live to see thine exaltation ! -

Yet grievous are my fears. O leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

Doua. W~hy should I leave them ?
0. NoRV. Lord Randolph and his kinsman seek your

life.

DOUG. HE-ow know'st thou that ?
0. N oR. I will inform you how.

'When evening came, I left the sqcred place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And fondly trod in each accustom'd path
That to the castle leads. WVhilst thus I rang'd,
I[ was alarm'd with unexpected sounds
Of earnest voices. On the persons came :
Un-seen I lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other as they talk'd; Lord Randolph this,
And that Glenalvon : still of you they spoke,
IAnd of the lady : threat'ning was their speech,
Though but imperfectly my ear could hear it.
'Twas strange, they said, a wonderful discov'ry j
Atnd ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

DOUG. Revenge ! For what ?
0. NoRV. For being what you are,

Sir Malcolax's heir ; Hfow else have you offended &

WCahen they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there sat musing how I best might find
M~eans to inform you of their wicked purpose;
But I could think of none. At last, perplex'd,
I issued forth, encompassing the tower
WVith msiny a weary step and wishful look,
N~ow Providence hath brought you to my sight,
]Let not your too courageous spirit scorn
TFhe caution which I give.

DOUG. I SCOrn it DzOt.

May mother warn'd me of Glenalvon's baseness :
But I will not suspect the noble Randolph.
In our encounter with the vile assassins
I mark'd his brave demeanor; him I'll trust,

0. NoRV. I fear you will, too far.
DOUG. Here in this place

I wait my mother's coming : she shall know
WhVat thou hast told; her counsel I: will follow:
And cautious ever are a mother's counsels.
You must depart; your presence may prevent:
Our interview.,

0. Kowv. My blessing rest upon thee i

O may heav'n's hand, which sav'd thee from the wave
And -frorm the sword of foes, be near thee still,
Turning mischance, if ought hangs o'er thy head,
All upon mine ! [E~rit.

DOUrG. He loves me like a parent )

And must not, shall not, lose the son he loves,
Although his son has found a nobler father.--
Eventful day, how hast thou chang'd my state !
Once on the cold and winter-shaded: side
Of a bleak hill, mischance had rooted me,
N~ever to thr~ive, child of another soil.
Transplanted now to the gay sunny vale,
Likre the green thorn of May Imy fortune flowers.

YTe glorious stars i highl heav'n's resplendent'--- hot
To whom I: oft have of my lot complain'd,
H-ear and record my soul's unalter'd wish !
Dead or alive, let me be but renown'd.
MT~ay heav'n inspire some fierce gigantic D~ane
To give a bold defiance to our host !
Before he speaks it out, I will accept :
Like Douglas conquner ! or, like ~Doug~las die.

Enter LADY RANDOLPH.

LADY firA. Ml~y son ! I heard a voice·-
DOUG. 1110 VOICE WaS mine,
L AnY am. D8idst thou complain aloud to Nt~ature's

ear,

That thus in dusky shades at midnight hours,
By stealth the mother and the son should meet.

[ Embracinag hzim.

DOUG. NO : on this happy day, this better birth-day,

My thoughts and words are all of hope and joy.

LADY RAN. Sad fear and melancholy still divide

The empire of my- breast with hope and joy.
Now hear what I advise.

DOUG. First, let HIC tell

W~hat may the tenor of your counsel chnange.

LADY RAN. My heart forebodes some evil.
coUG. TiS DOt good--

A4t eve, unseen by Randolph and Glenalvon,
The good old Nosrval in the grove o'erheard
,Their conversation : oft they mention'd me
WCi'th dreadful threat'nings; you· they sometimes

nam'~d.

'Twas strange, they said, a wonderfuzl discov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

LaDv RAN. D~efend us, gracious God ! we are betray'd,
They have found out the secret of thy birthi.
It must be so. That is the great discov'ry.

Sir M~alcom's heir is comle to claim his own ;
A~nd they will be reveng'd. Perhaps e'en now,
Atrm'd and prepar'd for murder, they but wait:
A darker and more silent 'hour, to break
Into the chamber where they think thou sleep'st.
TShis momaent,this, heav'n hath ourdain'd to save thee i
Fly to the camp, my son !

Dova. And leave you he~re ?~

No : To the castle let us go together ;
Cazll up the ancient servants of your house,
Who in their youth did eat your father's bread ;
Th~en tell thlem loudly that I am your son.
If in the breasts of men one spark remains
Of sacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your cause will arm. I ask but few
To drive those spoilers from my father's house.

LADY RAN. O nature, nature ! what can check thyt

force ?

Thou genuine offsIpring of the daring Douglas I
But rush not on destruction : save thyself,
And I am safe. To me they mean no harm.
T~hy stay brit risks thy precious life in vain.
That winding path conducts thee to the river.
Cross where thou seest a broad and beaten way,
WFhich, running eastward, leads thee to the camp.
Instant demand adraittance to Lord ]Douglas.
Shew him these jewels which his brother wore.
Thy look, thy voice, wrill make him feel the truth,
'Which I.by certain proof will soon confirm,

nowir. I yield me, and obey: But yet my heart

Bleeds at this parting. Something bids me stay
And guard a mother's life. Oft have I read
Of wond'rous deeds by one bold arm atchiev'd.
Our foes are two; no more; let me g. forth,
A4nd see if any shield can guard Glenalvan.

L.AD amh. If thou regard'st thy mother, or rever'st

Thy father's mem'ry, think of this no mor~e.
One thing I have to say before we part :
Long· wert thou lost; and thou art found, my childe
I~n a most fearfuil season. Wt5ar and battle
I: have great cause to dread. Too well I see
WVhich way the current of thy temper sets.
To day I've found thee. Oh i my long; lost hope !
]If thou to giddy valour giv'st the rein,
To morrow I may lose my son for ever.
"The love of thee, before thou saw~'st the light,
Sustain'd my life when thy brave father fell.
If thou shalt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In thlis waste world ! My son. remember me !

noUG. qhat Shall I say ? how can I: give you comfort ?

Tlhe God of battles ofT my life dispose
As may be best for you ! for whose dear sake
I will not bear myself as I resolv'd.
But yet consider, as no vulgar name,
That which I. boast, sounds amongst mairtial men,
How will inglorious caution suit my claim ?Z -
The post of fate unshrinking I maintain :
Mly country's foes must witness who I am.
On the invaders' heads I'll prove my birth,
Till friends and foes confess the genuine strain.
If in this strife 1 fall, bl~ame not your son,
W~ho, if he lives not honour'd, must not live.

LAv BAN. I will not utter what my bosom feels.

Too well I love tlhat valour whicht I warn.--
Farewell my son!i my counsels are but vain ) [Emnbracing.
Atnd as high heav'n hath will'd it, all must be. [~Separat~e.
Gaze not on me; thclou wilt mristiake the path s
I'll point it out again.

rust as they are aeparatingr, enter fr~om the w~ood, RAs-

DOLPs and GLENALVON.

E AN. Not in her presence.

N]ow

GLEN. I'm prepar'd.
RAN. No : I command thee stay.

I go alone : it never shall be said
T~hat I took odds to combat mortal man.
The noblest vengeance is the most complete.

[Exzit Randolph:,

('Glenalvon makes sompe steps to the same side of the

stag~e, listens, anzd speaks.]

GLEN, Demons of death come settle on my sword,

And to a double slaughter guide it home !
T~he lover and the h~usband both muzst die.

[ Rand 01ph brehind the scenes.

RA4N. Draw, villain ! draw.
DOUG, (wZithou1t) Assail me not, Lord Randfolph;

Not, as thou lov'st thyself. [ClaShing~ ofSwOrdLS.

[Glenalvon rusnningp out.

GLEN. Now, is the timne.

Enter LADY RANDOLPH at the opposite side of the sag,'rrP

faint and breathle~ss.

LADY R AN. Lord Randolph, hear me; all shall be

thine own :

But spare ! O, spare my son !

Enter DOUGLAS wiith a SwuordZ; in ea hband.

DOU G. M/y mother's voice i

1j can protect thee still.

LADY RAQN. I-e liVes, he lives :

For this, for this to Hleav'n eternal praise !
3But surre I saw thee fall.

DOUG. It waiis Glenalvon,

Just as m~y arm had master'd Randolph-'s sw~ord,
Th~e villain came beh~ind me ) but I slew him.

LArY RAm. Bethind t~hee ! Ah ! thou'rt w~counded :

O my child,

HB-ow pale thlou look'st !-APnd shall I lose thee now ?

Dnov. Do not despair : I feel a little faintness;

I hope it will not last. [Leans up~on his scuordJ.

LBDr RAN. There is no hope !
Anud we must part ! the hand of death is on thee !
O my beloved child ! O Douglas ! 1Douglas i

[ D~ouglas ,oro w~ing mo2re and m7ore fait.l

comr. Too soon w~e part : I have not long been

D~ouglas ;

O~ destiny ! · hard~ly thou deal'st with me:
Clouded and hid, a stranger to mzyself,
In low and poor obscurity I liv'd.

LXnY ams. H~as heav'n preserv'd thee For an end

0000c. O, hand I fall'n as my brave fathers fell,

'Turning with great effort the tide of battle !
Like2 them I should h-ave smil'd and welco~m'd death.
But thus to perish by a villain's hand,
Cut off fromr nature's anld from glory's course i
Wh~lich never mortal wvas so fond to run.

LAnP RAN. Hlear, Justice ! hear ! stretch thy aven-

ging arm. [Douglas falls

D000. Unk;now~n I die. NIo tongue shall speak; of

me. I

Some noble: spirits, judging by themselves,
Mtay yet con~jecture what i m~ig~ht hlavYe prov'd,
,snd think life only wanting to my fame.
Bu3t w;Vho shlall comfort thee ?

~LADY RAN. CeSpair ! despair!
DOU~G. O, had it pleas'd high heav'n to let: me I~ve

A little while ! M-----n y eyes th~at gaze on thee
GrowV dim apace !-M~3y mother !-Oh ! my mother !

[ DLes.

E~nter RAND)OLPH arid ANNA.,

usN. Thy words, the w~ords of truth, have pierc'd~

my heart.

I am the stain of knighthood~ and of arms.
Oh ! if my brave deliverer suirvives
Tfhe traitor's sword·

ANN. Alas'! look~ there, my lord !
aAN. The mother and her son! H ow curst I ·amn I
W~as I the cause ? No: I was not the cau~se.
Yon matchless villain did seduce my soul
To frantic jealousy.

ANN. M~y lady lives :

The ag~ony of grief hath but suppress'd
A while her powers.

RAN. But my deliv'rer's dead !-

SThe wor'ld did pace esteem Lord Randolph well;
' Sincere of heart, for spotless honour fam'd :
' And in rny early days, glory I, gain'd
' Beneath the holy banner of the cross.
' Now past the noon of life, shame comes upon me;
' Reproach, and infamy, and public hate,
' Are near at hand ; for all mankind will thinki
' That Randolph basely stabb'd Sir Mlalcolm's heir.'

[Lady Randolph recovering~.

LADY RAN. WVhere am I now ? Still in this wrretch-

ed wcPorld !

Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine.
" My youth was worn in anguish; but youth's strengtt·
' WVith hope's assistance, bore the brunt of sorrow ;
' Aind train'd me on to be the object now,
' On wvhich omnipotence displays itself,
' Making a spectacle, a tale of me,
' To aw~~e its vassal, man.'

RAN. O misery !---

Amicst thy raging grief I must pro~claim

M~y innocence.

LADY RAN. Thy innocence !
Ra~ AN.A' guilt

Is innocence compar'd with what thou thin'k'st it.

LADY RAN. OFthee I think not. WMhat have I to do

Wt~ith thee, or anly thing ?--My son i my son!
Myf~ beautiful ! my brave ! how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy valour ! my fond heart
O'erflow'dl this day with transport, when I thought
OPs growing old amidst a race of thine,
W7Jho might make uIp to me their father's childhood,
ACnd b~ear my brother's and my husband's name :
Now all my hopes are dead !--A little while
Wras l a wife 1 A mother not so long r
WChat am I now ?-I know But I: shall be
That only wLhilst I please; for such a son
And such a husbaand make a woman bold. [Runs our.

RAN. Follow her, Anna: I myself would follow I

But in this rage she must abhor my presence.

CExit Anna.

En;tfer OLD NORVAL.

o. NoRV. I heard the voice of woe : heav'n guard

my child i

RAN. Already is the idle gaping crowd,

The spiteful vulgar, come to gaze on Randolph.
Begone !

0. NowV. I fear thee not. I will not go.

~ Tere I'll remain. I'm an accomplice, lord 1
WVith thee in murder. Yes; my sins did help
To crush down to the ground this lovely plant.-~
O noblest youth that ever yet was born !
Sweetest and best, gentlest and bravest spirit
T'hat ever blest the world !--Wrretch that I am,
WhEo saw that noble spirit swell and rise
.Above the narrow limits that confin'd it,

F z

Y4et: never w~as byr all thy virtues won,
To do thee justice, and reveal the secret,
WThich, timely knowfn, had rais'd thee far ab~ove
The villain's sn are. Oh ! I am punish'di now i
These are the hairs that should have strew'~d the ground,
And not the lockis of D~ouglas.
[ Tears his hair, and throw~zs himself upon the bodS o~f

D ouglas.

RaK. I know thee now v: ' Thy boldness I forgive a

M 1~y crest is fall'n.' For thee I will appoint
~A place of rest, if grief w~ill let thee rest.
I w~ill rewrard, although I cannot punish.
Curst, curst Glenalvon , he escap'd too wenl,
Though slain and bafRl'd by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the last,
Cuarsing his conqueror, th~e felon dly'd.

~Enter ANNJA.

ANN. MCly Lord i my Lord !
RAN. Speak : I can hear of hor~ror.
ANN. Horror, indeed !
R.AN. M$~atilda ?r---
nNx.~ Is 1 no moe.

She ran, shie flewr like lightning up the hill,
N~or halted till the precipice she gain'd,
Beneath whrose low'ring topt the river falls
Ingulph'd. in rirtred rockis : thither she came,,
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong dow~n·Ie-L1--- B

us9. 'rvTwas I! a~las ! 'twars I

That fill'd her breast w-ith fury , drove her downn
Thle precipice of death ! W5retch1 that I am I

iaSN. O had you seen her last despairing look; !

U~pon the brink shie stood, and cast her eyes
Down onr the dceep: then lifting up her head
Anld her wh;ite hands to heav'n, seemring to say,

WThy am 1 forc'd to this ? she plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

RAN. I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the passion of my soul.
aPeace in this wvorld I never can enJoy.
*These wounds the gratitude of Randolph gave :
They speak aloud, and with the voice of fate
D~enounce my doom. I am resolv'd. I'll go
Straigrht to the battle, where the man that makes
IVe turn aside, must threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy mistress, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
Wiith cost and pomp upon her funerals wait;
For Randolph hopes he never shall return.

[Exeunt.%

# EPILOGUE.

AN1 Epiologue I ask~d; bxut not onte word
Our- bard w~lil wrivte. He~ vow-s Srtis mzost absurrd
W;itzh comnic wit to contradi'ct the strain
Of TragedyI and manke your sorrowsr vain.
Sadly he says, tha~t pity is the best,
Th~e noblest passion Of the huma72n breast ;
For wzhen zis sacred streamls the heart o'erf-o~w,
In gushes pleasur~e wc~ih the talde owoe ;
And~l whven its rIaveIS retire, like thkose of Nile,
Thecy leave Gbehnd them~ such ai g~olden soil,
That1 there the Zvir'tues~ wiU~lthoult cUre gro~W,
The~re the sweet blossams o~f afction blo~w.
CTheSe we~re hiS .WOrd~s, cvid of del'uszive art ;
I felt themn ; for" he SPOke! them ~fr.om hiS heart,
No- r wi~i I nowo arttept, w(ith5 w~itty folly,
'To cha~ce away~ celestil ~melanchoh. 4
