I~~ '. ~
Dt oU~.G LA'~ S.

A. G. E D
'OF FIVE ACTS.

WRITTEN BT

Marke b 5the Vriations in the
MA E R's' Bo 0oX

T -TUE
jga~tre 1& BI n Cottntcitaen.

;,L ONDOJT1.
PRINTED FOR V.10 WNODE S,. W. NIC0-L l

' AND S. BLADON.
- MDCC.LX-XXIX.

i 1 - 3,

3 .&
. x .

IMMAiA COLLEGE UBRARY

FROM

rTHE BEQUEST OF
EVERT JANSEN WENDEU

t18

c The Reader is desired to obifrve, that the Passages
omitted in the Representation at-the Theatre, are
here preserved, and marked with inverted Commas;
as at Line lo to 9 in Pagc.,

'"..- vrF

# PROLOGUE.

P R 0 L 0 G U E.
-JN anient times, vwhen Britain's trade wvas arms,

And the lov'd music of her outh, alarms ;

Agod-like'racelf.ifain'dfair England's fame:
Who .as niot heardof gallant PER CY's name ?
Ay, and ofDouGLAS? .Such-illiflriou foes
In. rival Rome and Carthage never Me !
From age to age 'brighJt /ho the British fire,
And every ho as ero

wa 'sfire .

When polwerfulfate decreed one-ivarrior's dsm, -
(Jpfprung the phfieiix from his parent's tomb.
But 'whilf those generous rivals fjlght and fell,
'Tho geuneouss ri.valslov'd each'other 'well:
Tho' manys a bloody field tras loft and 'owo,
Nothing in b'hate, in honour all 'was dose.
When PERCY 'wroNg'd defied his prince or peers,
Faf 'came the DOUGLAS, ,with'his Scottifhfpears;
And, uhen proud DOUGLAS made his King hisfoe, -
For DOUGLAS, PEicY bent his Englifli bovw,
Expell'd their native ,home'Ay adz'erfe-falie
They ;bock'd alternate at each other's gate
Then'blaz'd the a, t ithe d ,ight hour,
For him 'whose arms had/hook itsfirsmefi tIzv'r.

*'This night a Do v c L.Asyr pSoleRionlaimt;
A 'wife! a mother! Pity'Jsfoftie natame
The Jory of her waoesitndulgent.hear,
And grantQourfitrppliant all /he;begs, a tear.
In confidetice / e begs; and hoses. to sird *.i
Each English bea, elike owble PERc Y'; kia'. -

- , .1, ; - .C . . ' n at
* / "C 4' A¢;. ' - Dramatis

# Dramatis Personæ.

Dramatis Persona.

M E N. 4t D'rity Lane. CoIveIt Gatlrder. Hay.Market.

Lord Randolph,- - Mr. AICKIN. Mr.WR.ouaI-ToN. MrAICKIN.

Glenalvon; -- Mr. PALle.E. Mr. AICKIN. Mr. WtLLIAMsoI.

Norval. Douglas, - Mr.KEMnILe. Mr. LewIS. Mr. ILIr.

OldeNorval - -- Mr. BENSLEY. Mr. HENDiRSON. Mr. BENSLEY.
Officer, - -,- Mr.PHILLIMOXB. Mr. THnoMsoN. Mr. PHILLIMORE.

WOME.N.

5lady Randolph . Mrs. SIs. rSI

S. s. CRAWFORo. Mrs. FARREN.
nna "" - - - Mrs. WARD. Mrs MORTON. Mrs. INCHBALD.

Stranger, Servants.. &c..

t

# ACT I.

D Q U G L I '-S.

. \

A C T I.
SCENE, The Court of a Cafjle firrounded' jith Yodi..

Enlter Lady Randolph.

YE woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom
Y Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth
The voice offorrow from my buriling heart, i
Farewel a while; I will not leave you long;
For in your (hades I deem some spirit dwells,
Who from the chiding dream, or groaning oak,
Still hears, and answers to Matilda's moan.
O Douglas! Douglas if departed gholts
Are e'cr permitted to review this world,
Within the-circle of that wood thou art,
And with the paflion of immortals hear'st
My lamentation: hear'st thy wretched wife
Weep for her husband slain, her infant loll.
My brother's timeless death I feemrto mourn;
Who perilh'd with thee on this fatal day.

--To-thee I lift rjoice; to thee address

The plaint whicr'tortal O.r has never heard.
O disregard me not; tho'?lam call'd - :
Another's now, my heart is wholly thine.
Incapable of change, afletion lies
Buried, my Douglas, in thy bloody grave.
But Randolph comes, whom fate has made my lord;,
To chide my anguilh, and defraud the dead ..-

A3 E3tei

Et.er Lord Randolph,
Lord Rand. Again there weeds of woe! fay, dost thoa-

well

To feed a passion which consumes thy life?
The living claim some duty; vainly thou
Beftow'ft thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady Rand Silent, alas ! is he for whom I.mourn;

Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives.
· This fatal day fitrs my time-fettled sorrow,
· Troubles afresh the fountainr of'my heart.'
Lord Rand. ' When was it pure of fadnes ! These

'black weeds

· Express the wonted colour of thy mind;
· For ever dark and dismal. Seven long years
- Afe pass'd, since we were join'd by sacred ties; -
' Clouds all the while have hung upon thy brow,
' Nor broke, nor parted by one gleam of joy.'
Time, that wears out the trace of deepest anguish,

'- I' r" e'r""nths the urints made ;i, t- ,,,-- '

Has pal o'er thee in vain.

'Lady Rand. If time to come
Should prove as ineffectual, yet, my Lord,
Thou canst not blame me. When our Scottish. youth
' Vied with each other for my luckless love,
'Oft I besought them. l implor'd them all

Not to assail me with my father's aid,
' Nor blend their better destiny with mine,
' For melancholy had congeai'd my blood,
' And froze affeetion in my chilly breast.

At latt my fire, rous'd with the base attempt
* To force me from him, which thou rend'red'ft vain,
· To his own daughter bow'd his beary head,
' Besought me to commiferate:his age,
' And vow'd he ihould not, could not die in peace,
· Unless he saw me wedded,-and fecur'd

From violence and.outrage. Then, my Lord!
' In my extreme difrefs I call'd on thee,

X Thee

Thee I befpake,-profefs'd my Itrong desire
To lead a single, solitary life,
'Anrd hegg'd thy Nobleness not to demand
Her for a wife whofe'heart was dead to love.
How thou perfiftedit after this, thou know'it,
And mulf confess that I am not unjust,
Nor more to thee than to myself injurious.
* Lord Rand. That I confers; yet ever mull regret

, The grief I.cannot cure. Would thou wert not
' Compos'd of grief and tenderness alone,
' But hadst a spark of other paflions in thee;
' Pride, anger, vanity, the itrong desire -
' Of admiration, dear to woman-kind;
These might contend with, and allay thy grief,
As meeting tides and currents smooth our firth.
' Lady Rand. To such a cause the human mind oft

owes
' Its tranfient-calm, a calm I envy not.

' Lord Rand.' Sure thou art -not the daughter of Sir

Malcolm:

Strong was his rage, eternal his resentment:
For when thy brother fell, he fmi,'d to hear
That Douglas' son in the fame field was slain.

Lady Rand. -Ohl rake not up the albes ofmy fathers:

Implacable resentment was their crime,
And grievous has'the expiation been.
Contending with'the'Douglas, gallant lives
Of either house were loft; my ancestors
Compell'd, at lat, to leave their ancient feat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
No heir is left. Had they not been so ftem,
I had not been the lat of all my race.
~Lod Rand. Thy grief wrelts to its purposes my words.
I never ask'd of thee that ardent love,
Which in the breasts of fancy's children burns.
Decent affection and complaisant kindness
Were all I wish'd for; but I wilh'd in vain.
Hence with the less regret my eyes behold
The torm of war that gathers o'er this land;

; A
. . If

If I should perilh by the Danish sword,
Matilda would not rhed one tear the more.

Lady Rand. Thou dofl not think so: woeful as I am,.

I love thy merit, and esteem thy virtues;
But whither go'f thou now ?

Lord Rand. Strait to the camp,

Where every warrior on the tip-toe (lands
Of expectation, and impatient alks
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are landed.

Lady Rand. 0, may adverse winds,

Far from the coast of Scotland drive their fleet !
And every soldier of both hosts return
In peace and safety to his pleasant home!
Lord Rand. Thou fpeak'ft a woman's, hear a warrior'

wish:

Right from their native land the fiormy north,
May the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
Immoveable in Caledonia's strand!
Then {hall our foes repent their bold invasion,
And roving armies shun the fatal shore.

Lady Rand. War I deteti: but war with foreign foes,

Whose manners, language, and whose looks are llrange,
Is not so horrid. nor to me so hateful,
As that which with our neighbours oft we wage.
A river here, there an ideal line,
By fancy drawn, divides the fifler kingdoms.
On each fide dwells a people similar,
As twins are to each other; valiant both;
Both for their valour famous through the world.
Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
And, if they mufthave war, wage distant war,
But with each other fight in cruel conflict.
Gallant inftrife, and noble in their ire,
The hattle is their paitime. They vo forth
Gay in the morning, as to fummerr port;
When evening comes, the glory of the morn
The youthful warrior is a clod of clay.
i Thus fall the prime of either hapless land;

And such the fruit of Scotch and Englilh wars.

' Lotd

* Lord Rand. I'll hear no more: this melody would

' make

, A soldier drop his sword and doff his arms,
' Sit down and weep the conquests he has made;

Yea, (like a monk,) sing reft and peace in heaven

· To fouls of warriors in his battles slain.'
Lady, farewel: I leave thee not-alone;
Yonder comes one whose love makes duty light. [Exi.,

Enter Anna.

Anna. Forgive the rashness of your Anna's love

Urg'd by affetion, I have thus prefum'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts;
And warn you of the hours that you neglek,
And lose in sadness.

Lady Rand. So to lose my hours

Is all the use I wish to make of time.

Anna. To blame thee, Lady, suits not with my state:

But furel am, since death first prey'd on man,
Never did filler thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had loft,,'
In early youth, the husband of your heart ?

Lady Rand. Oh!
Anna. Have I.diftrefs'd you with officious love,

And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate ?
Foigive me, Lady: humble though I am,
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune r
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.
Lady Rand. What power direted thy unconfcios

tongue
To speak as thou haft done ? to name-

Anna. I know not:

But since my words have made my mifltrefs tremble,
I will speak so no more but silent mix
VMy tears with her's.

Lady Rand. No thou shalt not be silent.

I'll truf thy faithful love, and thou (halt be
Henceforth th' InftruEed partner of my woes.
But what avails it? Can thy feeble pity

A 5 .Roll
t

Roll back the flood of never-ebbing time ?
Compel the earth and ocean to give up
Their dead alive ?

Anna. What means my noble miflrefs ?
Lady Rand. Didft thou not alk what had my sorrows

been?-

If in early youth had lolf a huffand ?-
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'd,
Mangled with wounds the husband of my youth;
And in some cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his.-

Anna. O! Lady, mos rever'd!

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

Lady Rand. Alas, an ancient feud,

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave br oulaverother od in bate fa
The life of Douglas' son, our house's foe:
The youthful warriors vow'd eternal friendlhip.
To fee the vaunted sifter of his friend
Impatient Douglas to-Balarmo came,
Under a borrow'd name.- My heart he gain'd;
Xor did 1 long refuse the hand he begg'd:
MI brother's presence authoriz'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little weeks, with wings of down,
Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd Lord was call'd
To fight his father's battles! and with him,
In spite of all my tears did Malcolm go.
Scarce were they gone, when my item Sire was told
That the false firanger was Lord Douglas' son.
Frantic with rage, the Baron drew his sword,
And queflion'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
Kneeling beneath his sword, fault'ring I took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
Wed one of Douglas' name. Sincerity,
Thou firit of virtues, let no mortal leave.
Thy onward path! altho' the earth fhould'gape,
And from the gulph of hell deftruaion cry
To take diflimulation's winding way.

A;la.r

Anna. Alas! how few of;woman's'feaiful kind

Durlt own a truth so hardy!

Lady Rand. The firit truth

Is easiest to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral-from my tragic tale---
In a few days the dreadful tidings came
That Douglas and my brother both were:flain.
My lord! my life! my husband!- -Mighty heaven!
What had I-done to merit fuich affliction ?

Anna. My;deareft Lady! many a tile of tears

I've listen'd to; but never did I hear
A tale so fad as this.

Lady Rand. In the firIt days

Of my diflrating grief, I found myself-
As women with to be who love their lords.
But who durst tell my father ? The good priest
Who join'd our hands, my brother's ancient tutor,
With his lov'd Malcolm, in the battle fell:
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On iilence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till time Ihould make my father's fortune mine,.-
That very night on which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confident I had,
Set out with him to reach her fifer's ho'use:
But nurse, nor infant,- have I ever seen
Or heard of, Anna, since that fatal hour.
· My murder'd child.!-had thy sonid mother sear'd
' The loss of thee, she had loud fame defy'd,
i Defpis'd her father's rage, her father's grief,
And wander'd with thee thro' the scorning world.'

rAnna. Not seen nor heard of! then perhaps he lives.
Lady Rand. No, It was dark December: wind and

rain

Had beat all night.- Across the Carron lay
The deftin'd road; and in its swelling flood
My faithful servant perith'd with my child;.

0 hapless son ! of a molt hapless. fire!---

' But they are both at reft; and I alone
* Dwell in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk,
.' Like aguilt-troubled gholt, my painful rounds;'

A6 Nor

Nor has despiteful fate permitted me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Tho' dead to love, I was compell'd to wed
Randolph, who fnatch'd me from a'villain's arms r
And Randolph now possesses the domains
That by Sir Malcolm's death on me devolv'd;.
Domains, that mfould to Douglas' son have giv'n
A Baron's tide, and a Baron's power.
* Such were my soothing thoughts, while I bewail'dc
· The flaughter'd father of a fn unborn.
' And when that son came, like a ray from heav'h.
' Which shines and disappears; alas! my child !

How long did thy fond nother grap the hope
Of having thee, the knew not how, reQftr'd.
· Year after year hath worn her hope away ;
: But left still undiminif'd her desire'

' Anna. The hand, that spins th'uneven thread oflife,.
' May smooth the length that's yet to come of your's.'

Lady Rand. ' Not in this world: I have confider.'

'well

' Its various evils, and on whom they fill.
· Alas! how oft does goodness wound itself?
* And sweet affection prove the spring of woe.'
- ! had I died when my lov'd husband fell !
Had some good angel op'd to me the book
Of providence, and let me read my life,
My heart had broke when I beheld the fi/m
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

Anna. That power, whose minifiers good'angels are,,

Hath (hut the book in mercy to mankind.
But we mufl leave this theme: Glenalvon comes:
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitherwards he 1lowly flalks his'.way.

Lady Rand. I will avoid him. An ungracious perfbn

Is doubly irksome in an hour like this.

Anna. Why speaks my Lady thus of Randolph's heir i
Lady Rand. Because he's not the heir of Randolph's

virtues.

Subtle and lhrewd, he offers to, mankind
An artificial image of himself:

And

And he with ease can vary to the tafle
Of different men, its features. ' Selfdeny'd,

And mailer of his appetites he seems:
But his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,
Watches to seize upfeen the-wiif'd-for prey,
Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
As in.Glenalvon's unrelenting mind.'
Yet is he brave and politic in war,
And ltands aloft in these unruly times.
Why I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter:
'Stay and detain him till I reach thedcatle. [Eit.

inna. 0 happiness! where art thou to be found?

I fee thou dwellet not with birth and beauty,
Tho' grac'd with grandeur, and in wealth array'd:
Nor dost thou, it would seem, with virtue dwell;
Else had this gentle Lady mifi'd thee not.

Enter Glenalvon.

Glen. What dolt thou mule on, meditating maid ?

Like some entranc'd and visionary seer
On earth thou fiand'ft, thy thoughts ascend to heaven.

Anna. Would that I were, e'en as thou fay'ft, a seer,

To have my doubts by heav'nly vifon clear'd!'

Glen. What dost thou doubtof? what haft thou to do

With fubjeas intricate ? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be queftion'd: Chink of these good gifts,
And then thy contemplations will be pleasing.

Anna. Let women view yon monument ofwoe,

Then boast of beauty: who so fair as she ?
But I mull follow; this revolving day
.Awakes the memory of her ancient woes. [Exit.

Glen. So;-Lady Randolph shuns me! by and by

I'll woo her as the lion woos his brides. -
The deed's a-doing now, that makes me lord
Of there rich valleys, and a chjef ofpower.
The season is most apt;' my founding fleps
Will not be heard amidst the din of arms.
Randolph has liv'd too long; his better fate
Had the ascendant once, and kept me down:
When I had seizd the dame, by chance became,

,Refcu'd,

# ACT II.

Refcu'd, and had the Lady for his labour;
I 'fcap'd unknown: a slender consolation!
Heaven is my witness that I do not love
To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvest. Yet I am not safe:
By love, or something like it, flung, inflam'd,
Madly I blabb'd my pafion to his wife,
And the has threaten'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will I do not know:
But well I know the Baron's wrath is deadly.
I will not live in fear:.' the man I dread

Is as aDaneto me;' he is therman
Who faands betwixt me and my chief desire.
No bar but he ;-she has no kinfman.near;
No brother in his fifler's quarrel bold;
And for the righteous cause, a firanger's cause,
Iknow no chief that will defy Glenalvon. [Exit.

A C T II,

SCENE, A C'rurt, &c.

Stranger wlithin. Oh Mercy! Mercy!
Enter Sernantr, and a Strarger at one dor, and Lndy.

Randolph and Anna at ancrter.

'Lady Randolph.

WTHAT means this clamour ? Stranger! ti1:--
vv secure;
Haif thou been wrong'd ? have there rode men prefum'd
To vex the weary traveller on his way ? '

Firfl Serv. By us no franger ever fliffer'd wrong:

-This man with outcry wild has call'd us forth! '
So fore asiaid he cannot speak his fears,

Ente

Enter Lord Randolph and: Norval. 'wih. th.eir /wordi

drawn and bloody.
Lady Rand. Not vain the itranger's fears! how fares

-my Lord? ''
Lord Rand. That it fares well thanks to this gallant

youth,

Whose valour fav'd me from a wretched death!
As down:the winding dale I walk'd alone,
At the cross way four armed men attack'd me:
Rovers, I judge, from'the licentious camp,
Who would have quickly laid Lord Randolph low,
Had not this brave and generous firanger come,
Like my good angel, in the hour of fate,
And mocking danger, made my foes his own.
They. turn'd upon him: but his aaive arm
Struck to the ground, from whence they rose no more,
The fiercest two; the others fled amain,
And left him tpafer of the bloody field.
.Speak, Lady Randolph: upon Beauty's tongue
Dwell accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
Speak, noble Dame, and thank him for thy Lord.

Lady:Raad. My Lord, I cannotfpeak what now feel.

My heart o'erflows with gratitude to heav'n
And to this noble youth, who, all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Norpaus'd at peril, but, humanely brave,
Fought on your fide, againfi such fearful odds.
Have you yet learn'd of him, whoni we fiould thank ?
Whom call th saviour of Lord Randolph's life ?

Lord Rand. I ask'd thatqueftion, and he anfwer'd not:

But I mufknow who my deliverer is. [To tlhe franger.

Norv. A low-born man, of parentage obscure,

Who nought can boast but his defireto be - '
A soldier, and to gain.a name in arms.

Lord Rand. Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled

By the great King of kings! thou art ordain'd
And fiamp'd a hero by the sovereign hand
Of Nature! bulh not, flower of modesty
As well as valour, to declare thy birth.

OArv,

Norv. My name is Norval: on the Grampian hills

My father feeds his flocks; a frugal fwaii),
Whose constant cares were to increase his tore,
And keep his only son, myself at home.
For I had heard of battles, and I long'd
To follow to the field-fome warlike Lord:
And heaven soon granted what my Sire denied.
This moon which rose lad night, round as my shield,
Had not yet fill'd her horns, when, by her light,
A band of fierce Barbarians, from the hills,
Rufh'd like a torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The Shepherds fled
For safety and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'd about the enemy, 'and mark'd
The road he took, then hafted to my friends;
Whom with a troop of fifty chosen men,
I met advancing. The pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook the fpoil-encumber'd foe.
We fought and conquer'd. Ere a sword was drawn,
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Returning home in triumph, I difdain'd
The ihepherd's slothful life: and having heard
That our good King had fummon'd his bold Peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron fide,
I left my father's, and took with me
A chosen servant to conduct my feps;-
Yon trembling coward, who forsook his master.
Journeying with this intent, 1 paftthefe towers,
And, heaven direted, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble ndE. - -

Lord Rand. He is as wife as-brave. Was ever tale

With such a gallant modeRt rehears'd?'
My brave deliverer! thou thall enter now
A nobler lift, and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize offame.
I willprefent thee to our Scottilh King,
Whose valiant spirit ever valourlov'd.
Ha! my Matilda! wherefore starts that tear?

Lady

'
'

Iady Rand. I cannot fay: for various affe&ions,

And Itrangely mingled, in my bosom swell;
Yet each of them may wellcommand a tear.
I joy that thou art safe, and I admire
Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety;
Yea, as my mind predifts, with thine his own.
Obscure and friendless, he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, and. with his sword
To gain ditlinlion which his birth deny'd.
In this attempt unknown he might have perifh'd,
And gain'd, with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee; his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope
He stands conspicuous; fame and great renown
Arp brought within the compass of his sword.
On this my mind reflected, whilit you spoke,
And blefs'd the wonder-working hand of heaven.

Lord Rand. Pious and grateful ever arethy thoughts!

My deeds shall follow where thou point'tt the way.
Next to myself, and equal to Glenalvon,
In honour and command shall Norval be.

Norv. I know not how to thank you. Rude I am

In speech and manners; never till this hour
Stood I in such a presence; yet, my Lord,
There's-fomething in my breast which makes me hold
To fay, that Norval ne'er will Shame thy favour.
Lady Rand. I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou

lihalt be

My knight; and ever, as thou didit to.day,
With happy valour guard the life of Randolph.
Lord Ramd. Well hall thou spoke. Let me forbid

reply. . [T Norval.

We are thy debtors still; thy high desert
O'ertops our gratitude. I must proceed,
As was at firt intended, to the camp.
Some of my train, I fee,, are speeding hither,
Impatient, doubtless, of their Lord's delay:
Go with me, Nontal, and thine eyes Ihall fee
The chosen warriors of thy native land,

Whr

Who Ianguifh for the fight and beat the air
With brandilh'd swords.

Nor-. Let us be gone, my Lord.
Lord Rand. [To Lady Randolph.] About the time.

that the declining fun

Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills suspend,
Expet us to return. This night once more
Within these walls I ref, my teit I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepare the'feaft.
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
He in the eve of battle may resign
Himself to social pleasure; sweetest then,
When danger to a soldier's foul endears
The human joy that never may return.

[Excunt Lord Randolph and Norval.
Lady Rand. His parting words have struck a fatal

truth -

0 Douglas! -Douglas! tender was the time
When we two parted, ne'er to meet again!
How' many years of anguish and despair
Has heav'n annex'd to those fwift-pafling hours
Of love and fondness! ' Then my bosom's flame
' Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of fear,

Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.'
' Ana. May gracious heav'n pour the sweet balm of

peace

Into the wounds that felter in your breast!
For earthly consolation cannot cure them.

Lady Rand. One only cure can heaven itsel bellow;

A grave-that bed in which the weary ret,
Wretch that I am! Als ! why am I so ?-
At every happy parent I repine!
How blet the mother of yon gallant Norval!
She for a living husband bore her pains,
And heard him bless her when a man was born:
She nurs'd her smiling infant on her breast;
Tended the child, and rear'd the pleasing boy:
She, with affetlion's triumph, saw the youth
In grace and comeliness fnarafs his peers:
Whilf I to a dead hulband bore a Ton,
And o the roaring waters gave my child.

AJna.

-,zia. Alas! alas! why will you thus resume

Your grie£afrefh? I thought that gallant youth
Would for a while have won you from your woe,
On him intent you gazed, with-a look
Much more delighted,.than your pensive eye
Has deign'd on other objets to beltow.
Lady Rand. Delighted, fay'lt thou? Oh! even there

mine eye

Found fuel for my life-confiuming forrov.
I thought, that, had the son of Douglas liv'd,
He might have been like this young gallant firanger,
And pair'd with him in features and in shape;
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
My boy with blooming Norval might have number'd.
Whilst thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness
For this young stranger, wand'ring from his home,
And like an orphari call upon my care,
I Will protect thee (said I to myself)
With all my power, and grace with all my favour.

anna. Soure ha,,?n wYi bless so generous a resolve,

You mull, my noble Dame, exert your power:
You muif awake: devices will be fram'd,
And arrows pointed at the breaff of Norval.
Lady Rand. Glenalvon's false and crafty head will

work

Againfl a rival in his kinsman's love,
If I deter him not: I only can.-
Bold as he is, Glenalvon will beware
How he pulls down the fabric that I raise.
I'll be the artif of young Norral's fortune.

'Tis pleasing to admire! most apt was I
· To this affection in my better days;

Tho' now I seem to you Ihrnnk up, recir'd
' Within the narrow compass of my woe.

Have you not sometimes seen an early flower
Open its bud, and spread its filken-leaves,
To catch sweet airs and odours to bellow;

' Then by the keen blast nipt, pull in its leaves.
' And, tho' fill living, die to scent and beauty !

' Emblem

* Emblem of me: affl&ion, like a orm,
' Hath kill'd the forward blossom of my heart.'

Enter Glenalvon.
Glen. Where is my dearest kinsman, noble Ran-

dolph ?
Lady Rand. Have you not heard, Glenalvon, of the,

base-

Glen. I have: and that the villains may not 'scape,

With a firong band I have begirt the wood.
If they lurk there, alive they shall be taken,
And torture force from them th' important secret,
Whether some foe of Randolph hir'd their swords,
Or-if -

Lady Rand. That care becomesa kiniman's love.
I have a counsel for Glenalvon's ear. [Exit Anna.

Glen. To him your counsels always are commands.
Lady Rand. I have not found so: thou art known to

me.

Gkn. Known!
Lady Rand. And most certain is my cause of know-

G/s. What do you know ? By Heav'n

You much amaze me. No created being,
Yourself except, durf thus accost Glenalvon.
Lady Rand. Is guilt so bold! and dolt thou make a

merit

Of thy pretended meekness! this to me,
Who, with a gentleness which-duty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd what, if divulg'd,
Would make thee nothing; or what's worse than that,
An outcast beggar, and unpity'd too
For mortals ihudder at a crime like thine.

Glen. Thy virtue awes me. Firtf of womankind!

Permit me yet to fay, that the fond man,
Whom love transports beyond ftrid virtue's bounds,
If he is brought by love to misery,
In fortune rumnd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpity'd cannot be. Pity's the alms
Which on such beggars freely is beRtow'd:

For

For mortals know that love is still their lord,
And o'er their vain resolves advances fRill:
As fire, when kindled by our (hepherds, moves
Thro' the dry heath against the fanning wind.

Lady Rand. Reserve these accents for Come other ear.

To love's apology I liiten not.
Mark thou my words; for it is meet thou fhouldt.'
His brave deliverer Randolph here retains.
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well:
But, at thy peril, pradife ought againit him:
Let not thy jealousy attempt to shake
And loosen the good root he has in Randolph;
Whose favourites, I know, thou haft supplanted.
Thou look's .at me as if thou fain wouldit pry
Ilto-my ;heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I.give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendless Stranger my proteAion claims:
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit.

Glen. Child that I was, to start at my own shadow,

And be the shallow fool of coward conscience!
I am not what I have been; what I should be.
The darts of destiny have almost pierc'd
My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I Ihould conclude there was an arm above,
That fought against me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch myself, the-fubtle snare I set.
Why, gape and murder are not simple means'!

'- -'~W.imperfeA rape to Randolph gave a spouse;

And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fun from me;
And, worst of all, a rival. v Burning hell!
This were thy centre, if I thought the-lov'd him!
'Tis certain she contemns me; nay commands me,
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'er me,
In his behalf. And thall I thus be brav'd'?
Curb'd, as ihe calls it, by dame chatity ?
Infernal fiends, :if any fiends ihere are
More fierce than hate, ambition, ;and revenge,

Rif -

# ACT III.

Rifeup and-fill thy bosom with your fires,
· And policy remorseless! Chance may spoil
· A single aim; but perseverance must
· Profperatlaft. Forchance and-fate are words:
' Perfifive wisdom is the fate of man.'
Darkly a project peers upon my mind,
Like the red moon when riling in the east,
Crofs'd and divided by ftrange-colour'd clouds.
I'll seek the lave who came with Norval hither,
And for his cowardice was spurned from him.
I've known a follower's rankled bofoni breed
Venom most fatal to his heedless Lord. [Exit.

A C T III.
SCENE, A Court, Cc. as bfore.

Euter Anna.
IT HY vasals, Grief! great Nature's order'break,

And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour,

Whilst Lady Randolph sleeps, I will walk forthi
And tate the air that breathes on yonder bank,,
Sweet may her slumbers be! Ye'minillers-
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,
Angels and seraphs who delight in goodness !
Forsake your skies, and to her couch descend !'-
There from her fancy chace those dismal forims '
That haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
With images celestial, such as please
Theblefs'd above upon their golden beds. -

Enter Servant.

Serv. One of the vile aflaflms isfecur'd.

We found the villain lurking:in the wood: '
With dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime, But thisis.not..
His firit essay; these jewels wereconceal'd

In

D 0 U G. L A S. 23

In the molt secret places of his garment;
Belike the spoils of some that he has murder'd.

Anna. Let me look on them., Ha! here is a heart,

The chosen crest of Douglas' valiant name!
These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch.

[Exit Anna,

Enter $eravant with the Prijoner

Pris. 1 know no more than does the child unborn
Of what you charge me with.

Fir] Ser;v. You fay so, Sir !

But forture loon Ihall make you speak the truth ·
Behold the l;ady of Lord Randolph comes:
Prepare yourfelfto meet her jut revenge.

Enter Lady Randolph and Anna,

Anna. Summon your ntmofl fortitude, before.

You speak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
Are now atflake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may.fly.
Lady Rand, Thou ihalt behold me, with a defp'rate

heart,
Hear how my infant perilh'd. See, he kneels.

-' --' ' ' [The prifiner kneets.
Prif Heaven bless that countenance, so sweet and

mildl

A judgelike thee makes innocence more bold.
0 save me, Lady, from these cruel men
Who have attacked and seiz'd me; who accuse
':,"4 f intended murder. As I hope
For mercy at the judgment-feat of Heav'n,
The tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
Is not more innocent than I of murder.
Lady Rand. Of this man's guilt what proof can ye

produce?
Sirs? Sersv. We found hin lurking in the hollow

Glynn.

When view'd and call'd upon, amaz'd, he fled.
We overtook him, andinquir'd from whence
And what he was : he said, he came from far,

And

And was upon his journey to the camp.
Not fatisfy'd with this, we fearch'd his clothes,
And found there jewels, whose rich value plead
Moffpowerfully against him. Hard he seems,
And old in villainy. Permit us try
His ftubbornefs against thetorture's force.

Prif. - entle Lady ! by your Lord's dear life'!

Which theie weak hands, I swear, did.ne'er assail;
And by your children's welfare, spare my age!
Let not the iron tear my ancientjoints,
And my grey'hairs bring to the grave with pain.
Lady Rand. Accountfor there: thine own they can-

not be:

For these, I fay: be stedfast to the truth;
Deteted fallhood is molt certain death.

[Anna removes the Servants, and returns.

Pri. Alas! I'm fore beset ! let never man,

' orfakeof lucre, fin againlthis foul.!

Eternaljuftice is in this most just!
I, guiltless now, must former guilt reveal.

Lady Rand. O! Anna, hear !-Once more, I charge

thee, speak

The truth direc: for these to me foretell.
And certify a part of thy narration;
With which if the remainder tallies not.
-An instant and a dreadful death abides thee.

Prif. Then, thusadjur'd, I'll speak to thee asjuft

As if you were the minister of heaven,
Sent down to search the. ecret fins, of men.
Some eighteen years ago,. I rented land
Of brave Sir Malcolm, then Balarmo's Lord; .
But falling to decay, his fen ants, seiz'd
All that I had, and then tur'd me and mine,
. Four helpless infants, and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel by he river's fide
-Receiv'd us- there hard labour, and the ikill
In filhing, which was formerly my sport,..
Supported life. Whilftsthusvwe poorly liv'4,
,One ftonny night,- as I ref'er well,'

;' i: Thw

The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down, and loud and oft
The angry spirit of the water fllriek'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
Of one injeopardy. I rofeand ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool,
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach whatever floating thing the lIream
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd; the person loft
But looking fad and earnest on the waters,
By the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round,
A baiket: soon 1 drew it to the bank,
And nettled curious there an infant lay.

Lady Rand. Was he alive ?
Prif. He was.
Lady Rand. Inhuman that thou art!

How couldst thou kill what waves and tempefs spar'd ?

Prif. I am not so unhuman.
Lady Rand. DidIt thou not?
Anma. My noble mistress, you are mov'd too much:

This man has not the aspet of stern murder:
Let him go on, and you, I hope, will hear
Good tidings of your kinsman's long loft child.

Pr/f. The needy man, who has known better days,

One whom distress has spited at the world,
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To-do such deeds, as make the prosperous men
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them.
And such a man was I; a man declin'd,
'tWho s.aw no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have touch'd that infant with a hand of harm.

Lady Rand. Ha! dost thou fay so ? Then perhaps he

. lives!

Prif. Not-many days ago he was alive.-
Lady Rand. 0 ! heav'nly Pow'r! Did he then die so

lately ?

' Pirf. I did not fay le died; I hope he lives.
Not many days ago these eyes beheld
}lin, flourishing in youth, and health, and beauty.

B Lady

Lady Rand. Where is he now ?
Prif Alas! I know not where.
Lady Rand. Oh ! fate, I fear thee still. Thou rid-

dler, speak
Dire& and clear; else I will search thy foul.

Ana. Permit me, ever-honour'd! Keen impatience,

'Tho' hard to be reflrain'd, defeats.itfelf.-'

Lady Rand. Pursue thy story with a faithful tongue,

To thelaft hour that thou didft keep the child.

Pri. Fear not my faith, tlo' I mutt speak my Ihame.

Within the cradle, where the infantlay,
Was flow'd a mighty flore of gold and jewels:
Tempted by which we did resolve to hide,
From all the world this wondeful event,
And like a peasant breed the noble child.
That none might mark the change of our estate,
We left the country, travel'd to the North,
Bought flocks and herds, and gradually brought forth
Our secret wealth. But God's all-feeing eye
Beheld our avarice, and smote us fore.
For, one by one, all our own children died,
And he, the Stranger, sole remain'd the heir
Of what, indeed, was his. Fain, then, would I,
Who with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
Have trufled him, now in the dawn of youth,
With his own secret: but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never would consent.
Meanwhile the firipling grew in years and beauty;
And, as we oft obfenr'd, he bore himself
Not as the offspring of our cottage blood;
For nature will break out: mild with the mild,
But with the fonrard he was fierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I fetmvfelf against his warlike bent;
But all in vain: for when a desperate band
Of robbers from the savage mountains came-

Lady Rand. Eternal Providence ! what is thy name ?
Prif My name is Nonal; and my name he bears.
Lady Rand. 'Tis he! 'tis he himself! It is my son !

O!

01! sovereign mercy! 'Twas my child I saw !
No wonder, Anna, thet my bosom burn'd.
Anna. Jlst are your transports: ne'er was woman's

' heart

' Prov'd with such fierce extremes. High fated Darne!'
But yet remember that you are beheld
Byferrile eyes; your geltures may be seen
Impaflion'd strange: perhaps your words o'erheard.

Lady Rand. Well dolt thou counsel, Anna: heav'n'

bestow
On me that wisdom which my Itate requires!

Anna. The moments of deliberation pass,

' And soon you must resolve. This useful man

'MuR be difmifs'd in safety, ere my Lord

' Shall with his brave deliverer return.'

Prif. If I, amidit astonishment and fear,

Have of your words and geltures rightly judg'd,
'Thou art the daughter of my ancient malter;
The child I refcu'd from the flood is thine.

LadyRand. With thee diflimulation now were vain.

I-am indeed the daughter of'Sir Malcolm;
The child thou refcu'dft from the flood is mine.

Prif. Blest be the hour that made me a. poor man!
My poverty hath fav'd my maiter's house !

Lady Rand. Thy words furprize me: ufre thou dost

not feign:

The tear stands inthine eye: such love from thee
Sir Malcolm's house deferv'd not; if aright
Thon told'ft the tory of thy own distress.

Prif: Sir Malcolm of our Barons was the flower;

The fhfleft friend, the belt, the.kindeft maller:
But, ah ! he. knew not of my fad eflate.
After that battle, where his gallant son,
Your own brave brother, fell, the good old Lord
Grew desperate and reckless of the world;
And never as he eri was wont, went forth
To overlook the conduct of his servants.
By them I was thrull out, and them I blame:
May heav'n fojudge me, as Ijudg'd my mailer !
And God so love me as I love his race!

' B - Lady

Lady Rand. His race shall yet reward thee. On thy

faith

Depends the fate ofthy lov'd maller's house.
Reememb'reft thou a little lonely hut,
Thatlike a holy hermitage appears
Among the clifts of Carron ?

Prif. 1 remember
The cottage of the clifts.

Lady Rnnd. 'Tis-that I mean:

There dwells a man, of venerable age,
Who in my father's service spent his youth:
Tell him I sent thee, and with him remain,
Till I fnall call upon thee to declare,
Before the King and Nobles, what thou now
Tomehaft told. No more but this, and thou
Shalt live in honour all thy future days:
Thy son so long shall call thee father still,
And all the land shall bless the man who fav'd
The son of Douglas, and Sir Malcolm's heir.
Remember well my words: if thou shouldst meet
Him whom thou call'ft thy son, frill call him so;
And mention nothing of his nobler father.

Prif. Fear not that I shall mar so fair an harvest,

By putting in my fickle ere'tis ripe.
Why did 1 leave my home, and ancient dame ?
To find the youth to tell him all I knew,
And make him wear these jewels in his arms;
Which might, I thought, he challeng'd, and so bring
To light the secret of his noble birth.

[Lad3 Randolph go s to-arids the Servants.

Lady'Razd. This man is not th' afafiin you fufpeced,

Tho' chance combin'd some likelihoods againt him.
He is the faithful hearer of the jewels
To their right owner, whom in hafe he seeks.
'Tis meet that you Ihould put him on his way.
Since your milakclt' zeal hath dragged him hither.

[Exceut l'rifoner and Seervants.

My faithful Anna, dost thou flare my joy ?
I know thou doll. Unparellel'd event !
Reaching from heav'n to earth, Jehoial's arm

Snatch'd

Snatch'd from the waves, and brings to nie my Con!
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father 4
Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
For such a gift! What does my Anna think
Of the young eaglet of.a valiant nelt ?
How soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill wherehis fate had thrown him.
And tower'd up to the region of his fire !

Aina. How fondly did your eyes devour the boy !

MyRlerious nature, with the unseen chord
Of powerful inlinft, drew you to ,lour own.

Lady Rand. The ready ltory of his birth believ'd

Supprefs'd my fancy quite; nor did he owe
To any likeness my so sudden falvur:
But now I long to fee his face again,
Examine every feature, and find out
The lineaments of Douglas, or my own.
But molR of all I long to let him know
Who his true parents are, to clasp his neck,
And tellhim all the ltory of his father.

Anna. With wary caution you mull hear yourself

In public left your tenderness break forth,
And in obfcrrers fir conjectures ftrangc.
' For, if a cherub in the shape of woman
' Should walk this world, yet defamation would,
· Like a vile cur, bark at the angel's train-'
To-day the Baron Rarted at your tears.
Lady Rand. He did so, Anna! well thy' MiRrefs

knows,

If the least circumstance, mote of offence,
Should touch the Baron's eye, his fight would be
Withjealoufy diforder'd. But themore
It does behove me instant to declare
The birth of Douglas, and assert his rights.
This night I purpose with myfon to meet,
Reveal the secret, and consult with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does now, so look'd his noble father,
Array'd in nature's ease: his mien, his speech,
Wore fveetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd

B 3 Those

Those trivial mortals who seem always wife,
But, when the mtter match'd his mighty mind,
Up rose the Hero: on his piercing eye
':t Cblervafion: on each glance of thought
Decision follow'd, as the thunder-bolt
Pursues the flash.

A.i.a. That dzmcn haunts you still:

Behold Glenalvon.

Lady Rand. Now I shun him not.

This day I brav'd him in behalf of Norval;
Perhaps too far: at lear my nicer fears
For Douglas thus interpret.

Enter Glenalvon..

Glen. Noble Dame !

The hov'ring Daneat laR his men hath landed.
No band of pirates; but a mighty host,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers;
To win a country,- or to lose themselves.
Lady Rand. But whence comes this intelligence, Gle.t

nalvon ?

Glen. A nimble courier rent-from yonder camp,

To haifen up the chieftains of the north,
Inform'd me, as he past, that the fierce Dane
Had on the eaiern coal' of Lothian landed,

Near to that place where the fea-rock immense,
Amazing base, looks o'er a fertile land.
' Lady Rard. Then mufithis western army march to

join

The warlike troops that guard Edina's tow'rs.

Glen. Beyond all question. Ifimpairing time

' Has not effac'd the image of a.place
' Once perfet in my brea&t, thereis a wild-

Which lies to wetwvard of that mighty rock,.
And seems by nature formed for.the camp,
Of water-wafted armies, whofechiefRfrength
' Lies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse .
'If martial skill direits the Danish lords,
' There inacceflible their army lies.

'To.

D 0 U G L.A Si

· To our fwift-fcow'ring horse, the bloody field
· Mult man to man, and foot to foot, be fought.'

Lady Rand. How many mothers (hall bewail their

, sons !

How many widows weep their husbands slain !
Ye dames of Denmark! ev'n for you I feel,
Who sadly fitting on the fea-beat (hore,
Long look forlords that never (hall rerurn.

Glen. Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian sword

Widow'd the north. The children of the slain
Come, as I hope, to meet their fathers' fate.
The monser w, r, with her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, andlife-ending pain,
Are objects suited to Glenalvon's foul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death:
Reproach moie piercing than the pointed sword.
Lady Rand. I scorn thee not, but when I ought to

scorn;

Nor e'er reproach, but when inrulted virtue
Against audacious vice asserts herself.
I own thy worth, Glenalvon; none more apt
Than I to praifethine eminence in arms,
And be the echo of thy martial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty passion:
Go and pursue a lawful miflrefs, Glory.
Upon the Danilh crests redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the Ihield of Randolph.

Gien. One instant flay, and hear an alter'd man;

When beauty pleads for virtue, vice abafh'd
Flies its own colours, and goes o'er to virtue.
1 am your convert; time will (hew how truly:
Yet one immediate proof I mean.to give.
That youth, for whom your ardent zeal to-day
Somewhat too haughtily defy'd your slave,
AmidRf the (hock of armies I'll defend,
And turn death from him with a guardian arm.
'.Sedate by use, niy bosom maddens not
· At the tumultuous-uproar of the field.'

Lady Rand. Ac thus, Glenalvon, and I am thy friend:
But that's thy least reward. Believe the, Sir,

B4- The

The truly generous is the truly wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblefR.

rExit Land Randolph and Anna,

G!er. Amen ! and virtue is its own reward!-

I think that I have hit the very tone
In which she loves to speak. ioney'd assent,
How pleasant art thno to the talle of man,
And woman also flattery direct'
Rarely difgurt. They little now mankihd
Who doubt its operation : 'is my key,
And opes the wicket of the human heart.
How sarI have fuccecded now I know not,
Yet I incline to think her flormy virtue
Is lull'd awhile : 'tis her alone I fear:
Whilst fne and Randolph live, and live in faith
And amity, uncertain is my tenure.

Fate o'er my head suspends disgrace and death,

' By that weak hair, a peevish female's will.

I am not idle: but the ebbs and flows

' Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated.'
That save of Norval's I have found moit apt.
I shew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his foul
To fay and swear whatever I fuggelt.
Norval, I'm told, has that alluring look,
'Twixt man and woman, which I have obfcn'd
To charm the 'nicer and fantafRic dames,
Who-are, like lady Randolph, full of virtue.
In railing Randolph's jealousy I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom errs
WIhos hinks the worst he can of womankind. [E,' t.

ACT

# ACT IV.

A C T IV.

Flotirij of Tmunlptas.
Enter Lord Randolph.

Lord Randolph.

SUMMON an hundred horse, by break of day,
J To wait our pleasure at the caftle-gate.

Enter Lady Randolph.
Lady Rand. Alas I my Lord! I've heard unwelcome

news:

The Danes are landed.

Lord Rand. Ay, no inroad this

Of the Northumhrian bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament essay
-Of some young knight refolv'd to break a spear,
And (lain with hostile blood his maiden arms.
The Danes are landed; we must beat them back,
Or live the slaves of Denmark.

Lady Rand. Dreadful times!
Lord Rand. The fenceless villages are all forsaken,

The trembling mothers and their children lodg'd
In wall-girt towers and castles; whilst the men
Retire indignant. Yet like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return.
Lady Rand. Immense, as fame reports, 'the Danifil

hodt--
Lord Rand. Were it .as numerous as loud fame

reports,

An army knit like ours would pierce it thro'
Brothers, that Ihrink not from each other's fide,
And fond companions, fill our warlike files:
For his dear offspring, and the wife he loves,
The hulhand, and the fearless father arm.
In vulgar brealls heroic ardor burns,
Arid the poor peasant mates his daringlord -

B 5 Laay

LadyRand. Men's minds are temper'd, like their

swords, forwar;

-Lovers of danger, on detruaflon's brink
They joyto rearere& their daring forms-

· Hence, early graves; hence the lone widow's life:
' And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age.'
Where is our gallant guest?

Lord Rand. Down in the vale

· I left him, managing a fiery steed,

Whose ftubbornnes had foil'd the strength and skill'
Ofeverv rider. But behold he comes,
In earnedt conversation with Glenalvon.

Eiter Norval and Glenalvon..

Glenalvon! with the lark arise; go forth,
And lead my troops that lie inyonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
Norval, thou goet with me. But fay, young man!
Where didt thou learn so to discourse of war,
And in such terms as I o'erheard to-day ?
War is no village science, nor its phrase
A language taught amongst the shepherd swains.

Norv. Small'is the fiill my Lord delights to praise-

In him he favours.-Hear from whence it came.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the most remote
And inacceflible, by Ihepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit liv'd ;a melancholy nan.
Who was the wonder of our wand:ring swains.
Austere and lonely, cruel to himself,
Did theyreporthim ; the cold earth his bed,
Water his drink, his food the shepherds' alms.
I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
With rev'rence and with pity. Mild he foake,
And, ent'ring ondifcourfe, fuchltories told
As made me oft revisit his fad cell.
For he had been a soldier in his youth;
And fought in famous battles; when the Peers
Of Europe, by the bold Godfredo led,
Againt th' usurping Infdeldifplay'd -

The

The blessed Cross, and won the HolyLand.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire '
His speech firuck from me, -the old man would. snake
His years away, and at his young encounters:
Then, having shew'd his wounds, he'd fit him down,
And all the live-long day discourse of war.
To help my fancy in the smooth green turf
He cut the figures of the marshall'd hots;
Defcrib'dthe motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm.
For all that Saracen or Chrifian knew
Of war's vast art, was to this hermit known.

Lord Rand. Why did this soldier in'a defart hide

Those qualities that thould have grac'd a camp ?

Nos-v. That too at lat I learn'd. Unhappy man

Returning homewards by Meflina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boift'rous captain of the sea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought:
The stranger fell, and with his dyingbreath
Declar'd his liame and lineage! Mighty Power!
The soldier cried, my brother! Oh ! my brother!

Lady Rand. His brother!
Norv. Yes; of the fame parents born;

His only brother. They exchang'd forgiveness:
And happy, in my mind, was he that died
For many deathsl'as the survivor fuffer'd.
In the wild defart on a rock he'fits,
Or on some nameless fiream's untrodden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times, alas! not in his perfect mind!
Holds dialogues with his lov'd brother's ghost;
And oft each night forsakes his fullen couch,
To make fad orisons for him he flew;
Lady Rand. To what mysterious woes are mortals

born!

In this dire tragedy were there no more
Unhappy persons ? did the parents live

B6 -' Rov.

tarv. No; they were dead: kind heav'n had clos'd

their eyes

Before their son had ihed his brother's blood.
Lord Rand. Hard is his fate; for he was not to

blame!

'There is a destiny in this firange world,
Which oft decrees an ondeferved doom:
Let fchoolmentellus why.-trom whence these founds?

[Tiwtcts at. a djtancr,

Enter an Officer. ·

Off. My Lord, the trumpets of the troops of Lorn:

The valiant leader hails the noble Randolph.
Lord Rav'd. Mine ancient guest! does he the warriors

lead ?

Has Denmark rous'd the brave old Knight to aims ?

Of. No; worn with warfare, he resigns the sword.

His eldest hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord Rand. Glenalvon, go.

With hospitality's moil itrong request
Intreat the chief. [Exit. Glenalvdn.

Off. My Lord, requests are vain.

I-e urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foe's approach. [E.it.

Lord Rand. May victory fit on the warrior's plume !

Bravest of men! his Rocks and herds are safe;
Remote from war's alarms his paftues lie,
By mountains inaccelfible fecur'd:
Yet foremost he into the plain dercends,
Eager to bleed in battles not his own. -
Such were the heroes of the ancient world:
Contemners they of indolence and gain; -
But till for love of glory, and of arms,
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift
Againit each strong antagonist the spear.
I'll go and press the hero to my breast. [Esit

Lady Rand. The soldiers loftiness,, the pride and

pomp

Invef.,

Invelting awful war, Norval, I fee,
Transport thy youthful mind.

Nor.v. Ah! flould they not?

Bleit be the hour I left my father's housel
I might have been a shepherd all my days,
And itole obscurely to a peasant's grave.
Now, if I live; with mighty chiefs I stand;
And, if I fall, with noble dut I lie.

Lady Rand. There is a gen'rous spirit inthy bread,

That could have well fuoiain'd a prouder, fortune.
" This way with me, under yon spreading beech,'
Since lucky chance has left us here alone,
Unseen, unheard, by human eye or ear,
I vill amaze thee with a wondrous tale.

Anrr-v. Let there be danger, Lady, with the secret,

That I may hug it to my grateful heart,
And prove my faith. Command my sword, mylife:
These are the sole possessions of poor Norval.

Lady Rand. Know'ft thou there gems ?
Nor,v. DurRi I believe mine eyes,

I'd fay I knew them; and they were my father's.
Lady Rand. Thy father's, fay'fi thou! ah ! they were

thy father's.!

Nor-j. I saw them once, and curioully inquir'd

Of both my parents, whence such splendor came ?
But I was check'd, and more could never learn.
Lady Rand. Then learn of me, thou art not Nor-

val's son.

- Norv. Not Norval's son!

'Lady Rand. Nor of a shepherd sprung.
NVrv. Lady, who am I then ?
Lady Rand. Noble thou art;
For noble was thy Sire!

Norv. I willbelieve-
O! 'tell me farther! Say who was my father ?

Lady Rand. Douglas!
Nor.v. Lord Douglas, whom to-day-I saw?
Lady Rand. His younger brother.
Sforv. And in yonder camp ?
Lady Rand, Alas !

-
* swv.

Nora. You make me tremble-- Sighs and tears I
Lives my brave father ?

Lady Rand. Ah! too brave indeed !

He fell in battle ere thyself was bom.

NIrT-. Ah me unhappy! ere I saw the light ?

But does my mother live ? I may conclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been sorrow.
Lady Rand. She lives; but waftes her life in con-

Itant woe,
Weeping her husband slain, her infant loll.

Nor-a. You that are lkill'd so well in the fad story

Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewailtheir destiny, now have compallion
Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd!
O! tell me who, and where my mother is!
Opprefs'd by a base world, perhaps ihe bends
Beneath the weight of ether ills than grief;
And, desolate, implores of heav'n the aid
Her son Should give. It is, it mut be so-
Your countenance confefles that she's wretched.
O! tell me her condition! Can the sword-
Who shall refif me in a parent's cause ?
Lady Rand. Thy virtue ends her woe! My fonr my

son!

Nora. Art thou my mother?
Lady Rand. I am thy mother, and the wife of Doug-

las! LFalls fpon his neck.
Nrrv. 0 heav'n and earth, how wondrous is my

fate!

Art thou my mother ' Ever let me kneel!

Lady Rand.- Image of Douglas ! Fruit of fatal love I

All that I owe thy Sire, I pay to thee.

No3r. Refpe& and admiration till possess me,

Checking the love and fondness of a son.
Yet Iwas filial to my humble parents.
But did my Sire surpass the reft of men,
As thou excelled all of womankind ?

Lady Rand. Arise, my son ! In me thou dost behold

The poor remains of beauty odce admit'd:
The autumn of my days is come already;

For

For sorrow made my fummr haste away.
Yet in my prime I cquall'd not thy father;
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet sometimes
Likerthe dove's; and, as he pleas'd, he won
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

Norv.. How did he fall ? Sure 'twas.a bloody field'

When Douglas died. 01 have much to ask!
Lady Rand. Hereafter thou. shalt hear the lengthen'd>

tale

Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
At present this: thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder castle, and the wide domains
Which now Lord Randolph, as my hulband, holds.
But thou (halt not be wrong'd; I have the power
To right ihee frill: before the king I'll kneel,
And call Lord Douglas to protect his blood.

iNorv. The blood of Douglas will protect itself.
Lady Rand. But we lhall need both friends and fa-

vour, boy,

To wrest thy lands and lordship from the gripe
Of Randolph and his kinsman. Yet I think.
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
My life incline the virtuous to believe.

Norv. To be the son of Douglas is to me

Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,.
And in the field 1'11 seek for fame and fortune.
Lady Rand. Thou doff not know what perils and'

injustice

Await the poor man's valour. 0! my son!
The noblest blood of all the land's abafh'd,
Having no lacqueybut pale poverty.
' Too long hat thou been thus attended, Douglas r
Too long haft thou been deem'd a peasant's child.
The wanton heir of fome'inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in the youthful sports
Whilit thy indignant spirit fwell'd invain!
.Such contumely thou no more (halt bear:
But how I purpose to redress thy wrongs
Must be hereafter told. Prudence direats
That we should part before yon chiefs return,

Retire,-

Retire, and from thy rulic follower's hand
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, dictated before
This casual opportunity arose
Of private conference. Its purport mark;
For, as I there appoint, we meet again.
Leave me, my son ! and frame thy manners still
To Norval's, not to noble Douglas' state.

*-Vr-r. I will remember. Where is Norval now
That good old man.

Lady Rand. At hand conceal'd he Ifes,

An useful witness. But beware, my son,
Of yon Glenalvon; in his guilty breads
Resides a villain's fnrewdnefs, ever prone
To falfeconjeAure. He hath griev'd my heart.

nArv. Has he indeed ? Then letyon false Glenalvon
Beware of me. [Exd.

Lad- Rand. There burfi the fmother'd flame!

0! thou all righteous and eternal King !
Who father of the fatherless art call.d;
Protecl my son !- Thy inspiration, Lord!
Hath fill'd his bosom with that sacred fire,
Which in the breasts of his forefathers burn'd:
Set him on high like them, that he may Ihine
The flar and glory of his native land!
Then let the minilter of death descend,
And bear my willing spirit to its place.
Yonder they come. How do bad women find
Unchanging afpeics to conceal theirguilt ?
When I, by reason, and by justice urg'd,
Full hardly can dissemble with these men
In nature's pious cause.

Enter Lord Randolph and Glenalvon.

- Lord Rand. Yon gallant chief,
.Of arms enamour'd, all repose disclaims.

Lady Rand. Be not, my Lord, by iis aexample

fway'd: ;

Arrange the business of to-morrow now,
And, when you enter, fpeakof wat no more, [Exit.

Iord

Lord Rand. 'Tis so, by heav'n! her mien, her voice,

her eye,

And her impatience to be gone, 'confirm it.

Glen. He parted from her now: behind the mount,

Amongst the trees, I saw him glide along.
Lord Rand. For fad, fequelter'd virtue She's re-

nown'd !

Glen. Most true, my Lord.
Lord Rand. Yet this diftinguifh'd Dame

Invites a youth, the acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This affgnation [fSews a letter] the affaflin freed,
Her manifest affetion for the youth,
Mightbreed suspicion in a husband's brain,
Whose gentle consort all for love had wedded;
Much more in mine. Matilda never lov'd me.
Let no man, after me, a woman wed,
Whose heart he knows he has not; tho' she brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry,
For let her seem, like the night's Ihadowy queen,
Cold and contemplative;-he cannot trust her:
She may, she will, bring Ihame and sorrow on him;
The worR offorrows, and the worfi of Ifames!
Gkn. Yield not, my Lord, to such afflicting

thoughts;

But let the spirit of an husband sleep,
Till your own senses make a sure conclusion.
This billet must to blooming Norval go:
At the next turn awaits my trusty spy;
I'll give it him refitted for his mafler,
In the close thicket takeyour secret stand;
The moon shines bright, and your own eyes may judge .
Of their behaviour.

Lord Rand. Thou dost counsel well.
Glen. Permit me now to make one flight essay,

Of all the trophies which vaifi mortals boaIt,
By wit, by valour, or by wisdom won,
The first and fairest in a young man's eye,
Is woman's captiveheart. Successful love

With

With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind!
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Lord Raid. And what avails this maxim !
Gln. Much, my Lord!

Withdraw a little: I'll accost young Norval,
And with ironical derisive counsel
Explore his spirit. If he is no more
Than humble Norval, by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as he is, he'll shrink allonilh'd from me:
But if he be the fav'rite of the fair,
Lov'd by the first of Caledonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.

Lord Rand. 'Tis shrewdly thought.
Glen. When we grow loud, draw near. But let my

Lord
His ri'ing wrath restrain. [Exit'Randolph,

----------'Tis strange, by heav'n !

That she Ihould run full tilt her fond career,
To one so little known. She too that feem'd
Pure as the winter fiream, when ice embofs'd
Whitens its course. EvenI did think herchafte,
Whose charity exceeds not. Precious sex !
Whose deeds lascivious pass Glenalvon's thoughts!

[Norval appears.

His port I lore; he's in a proper mood
To chide the thunder, if at him it roar'd.
Has Norval seen the troops ?

Nor-i. Tie fettingfun,

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale,
And as thewarriors mov'd, each polilh'd helm,
Cosset, orfpear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.
'Te hill they climb'd, and halting at its top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they feem'd,
An host angelic, clad in burning arms.

Glen. 1 hou talk'ft it well; no leader of our host,
In founds more lofty, speaks ofglorious war.-

NTor. If I fall e'er acquire a leader's name,
My speech willbe less ardent. -Novelty

Now

Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itelf freely; since no part is mine
Of praise pertaining to the great in arms.
Glen. You wrong yourself, brave Sir; your martial

deeds

Have rank'd you with the great: but mark me, Norval;
Lord Randolph's favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know the soldiers, counsel you.
Give them all honour; seem not to command:
Else they will fearcely brook your late sprung power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

Norv. Sir, I have been accuftom'd all my days

To hear andfpeak theplain and simple truth:
And tho' I have been told, that there are men
Who borrow friendship's tongue to speak their scorn,
Yet in such language I am little kill'd.
Therefore I thank Glenalvon for his counsel,
Altho' it founded harshly. Why remind
Me of my birth obscure ? Why flurmypower
With luch contemptuous terms ?

Glen. I did not mean

To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

Nsora. My pride ?
Glen. Suppress it as you wish to prosper.

Your pride's exceflive. Yet for Randolph's fake
I vill not leave you to its rash direcfion.
If thus you swell, and frown at high born men,
Think you they will endure a shepherd's scorn

Norv. A ihepherd's scorn I
Glen. Yes, if you presume

To bend on soldiers these disdainful eyes,
What will become of you ?

A'orv. If this were told - [fie.

Hall thou no fears for thy presumptuous self?

Glen. Ha I D6lt thou threaten me?
Norv. Didft thou not hear?
Glen. Unwillingly I did; a nobler foe
tlad not been qucftion'd thus. But. such as thee-

Noru.

Norv. Whom dolt thou think me ?
Glen. Norval.
Norv. So I am

And who is Norval in Glenalvon's eyes?

Gkn. A peasant's son, a wapd'ring beggar bov;

At best no more, even if he speaks the truth.

Ar'v. False as thou art, dost thou suspect my truth?
Glen. Thy truth! thou'rtall a lie; and faire as hell
Is the vain-glorious tale thou toldlf to Randolph.

NArsv. If I were chain'd, unarm'd, and bedrid old,

Perhaps I Ihould revile: But as I am
I have no tongue to rail. The humble Norval
Is of a race who strive not but with deeds.
Did I not fear to freeze thy ihallow valodr,
And make thee fink ioo soon beneath my sword,
I'd tell thee-what thou art. I know thee well.

Glen. Dost thou not know Glenalvon, born to com-

mand

Ten thousand slaves like thee ?

Nsrv. Villain, no more:

Draw and defend thy life. I did design
To have defied thee in another caue :
But heaven accelerates its vengeance on thee.
Now for my own and Lady Randolph's wrongs.

Entr Lord Randolph.
Lord Ra;d. Hold, I command you both. The man

that stirs

Makes me his foe.

NAroa. Another voice than thine

That threat had vainly founded, nobleRandolph.
Glen. Hear him, my Lord; he's wondrous conde-

scending !
Mark the humility of 1hepherd Norval

Norv. Now you may scoff in safety.

- [Sheaths hi/word.

Lord Rand. Speak not thus,

Taunting each other' but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel, then I jubebetwvixt you.

Noarv

Norv. Nay, my good Lord, tho' I revere you

, much,

My cause I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I blulh to speak; I will not, cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words that I from him have borne,
To the liege-lord of my dear native land
I owe a fubjeft's homage; but even him
And his high arbitration i'd reject.
Within my bosom reigns another lord;
Honour, sole judge and umpire of itself.
If my free speech offend you, noble Randolph,
Revoke your favours, and let Norval go
Henceas he came, alone, but not dithonour'd.
Lord Rand. Thus far I'll mediate with impartial

voice:

The ancient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
Suspend your purpose, till your country's arms
Repel the bold invader ; then decide
The private quarrel.

Glen. I agree to this.
Norv. And I.

Enter Servant.

Serv. The banquet waits.
Lord Rand. We come. [Exit. Randolph and Servant.
Glen. Norval,

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of Randolph.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkled hate,
Shall fain my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow;
Nor let our Itrife dilltur the gentle Dame.

Norwv. Think not so lightly, Sir, of my refentnient!
When we contend again, our frife is mortal, [Exeunt,

A C T

# ACT V.

A C T V.
SCENE, T',e U'od.

Enter Douglas.

PT HIS is the place, the centre of the grove.4.

I Here stands the oak, the monarch of the wood.-
How sweet and solemn is this midnight scene!'.)
The silver moon, unclouded, holds her ways
Thro' flies where I could count each little flarA
The fanning weft wind scarcely stirs the leaves ; :-
The river, rulhing o'erits pebbled bed, :i
Imposes silence with a stilly found.-4t
In such a place as this, at such an hour,,.
If ancestry can be in ought believ'd,-
Descending spirits have convers'd with man(-
And told the secrets of the world unknowns.

Enter Old Nonral. *
Norm. 'Tis he. But what if he should chide me

hence ?

HisjuR reproach 1. fear. [Douglas turns andfees 1i°n.
Forgive, forgive.
Canst thou forgive the man, the selfish man,
s Who bred Sir Malcolm's heir a (hepherd's son.

Doug. Kneel not to me: thou art my father frill:

Thy wih'd:f£r pretence now compleats my joy.
Welcometo me, my fortunes thou (halt share,
And ever honour'd with thy Douglas live.

Norv. And dost thou call me father ? 0 my fonl'.

I think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime.
Which in the wilderness so long conceal'd
The blossom of thy youth.

Dosg. Not worse the fruit,

That in the wilderness the blossom blow'd.
Amongst the fiepherds, in the humble cot,

I learn'd

I lear'd some lessons, which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a swain, will ever prove
'he poor man's friend; and, when my vassals bow,
Norval shall smooth the crelted pride of Douglas.

Noer. Let me but live to fee thine exaltation !

Yet grievous are my fears. 0 leave this place.
And those unfriendlytowers.

Doug. Why should I leave them ?
Nor.v. Lord Randolphand hiskinfnmn feekyourlife,
Doug. How know's thou that ?
Norv. I will inform you how.

When evening came, 1 left'the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And fondly trod in each accuftom'dpath
That to the cafle leads. Whilf thus I rang'd,
I was alarm'd with unexpected founds
Ofearned voices. On the persons came;
Unseen Ilurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other as they talk'd, Lord Randolph this,-
And that.Glenalvon: still of you they spoke,
And of the Lady: threat'ning was their speech,-
Tho' but imperfeCtly my ear could hear it.
'Twas firange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry I
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Doug. Revenge! for what?
ANor,. For being what you are;

Sir Malcolm's heir: how else have you offended?
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there fat musing how I best might find
Means to inform you of their wicked purpose.
But I could think of none: at last perplex'd,
I iffu'd forth, encompafling the tower
With many a weary ftep, and wishful look.
Now Providence hath brought you to my fight,
Let not your too.courageous fpiritfcorn
The caution which I give.

'Doug. I scorn it not.

My mother warn'd me,df Glenalvon's baseness:
But I will not fufped the noble Randolph.

/., ~
< ,~~ EIn

In our encounter with the vile affaflins,
I nark'd his brave demeanor: him I'll truf.

:Nr.-. I fear you will too far.
D:.tg. Here in this place

I wait my mother's coming: {he shall know
What thou haft told: her counsel I will follow:
And cautious ever are a mother's counsels.
You must depart; your presence may prevent
Our interniew.

NsrJ. My blessing ref upon thee;

O may heav'n's hand, which fav'd thee from the wave,
And from the sword of foes, be near thee still;
Turning mischance, if ought hangs o'er thy head,
All upon mine! - [Exit.

Dorg. He loves me like a parent;

And must not, {hall not lose the Con he loves,
Altho' his son has found a nobler father.
Eventful day ! how has thou chang'd my slate!
Once on the cold, and winter-{haded fide
Of a bleak hill, mischance had rooted me,
Never to thrive, child of another foil:
Transplanted now to the gay funny vale,
Like the green thorn of May my fortune flowers.
Ye glorious flars! high heav'n's resplendent host!
To whom I oft have of my lot complain'd,
Hear and record my foul's unalter'd wish !
Dead or alive, let me but be renown'd !
May heav'n inspire some fierce gigantic Dane,
To give a bold defiance to our host!
Before he speaks it out, I'wiltaccept;
Like Douglas conquer, or like Douglas die.

Enter Lady *Randolph.

Lady Rand. My son ! I heard a voice-
Doug. The voice was mine.
Lady Rand. Didft thou complain aloud to nature's

ear, ,

That thus in duiky (hades, at midnight hours,
'By stealth the mother and the 'on (hould meet ?

:; - . [irb[Embractig him.

~-

'
~ . ~D ong.

·Dong. No; on this happy cdy, this better birth-day,

My thoughts and words are all of'hop'e and joy.

Lady Rand. Sad fear and melancholy still divide

The empire of my breast with hope and joy.
Now hear what I advise.

Doug. First, let me tell

What may the tenor of yoir counsel change.

Lady Rand. My heart forebodes some evil!
Doug. 'Tis not good.--

At eve, unfecn by Randolph and Glenalvon,
The good old Norval in the grove o'erheard
Their conversation : oft they mention'd me
With dreadful threatnings; you they sometimes nam'd.
'Twas strange, they said, a wonderful discovery;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.
Lady Rand. Defend us, gracious God: we are be-

tray'd :

They have found out the secret of thy birth;
It mult be so. That is the great discovery.
Sir Malcolm's heir is come to claim his own;
And he will be reveng'd. Perhaps even now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for murder, they but wait
A darker and more silent hour, to break
Into the chamber where they think thou fleep'lf.
This moment, this, heav'n hath ordain'd to save thee!
Fly to the camp, my son!

Doug. And leave you here ?

No: to the calfle let us go together,
Call up the ancient servants of your house,
'Who in their youth did eat your father's bread.
Then tell them loudly that I am your son.
If in the breafs of men one spark remains
Of sacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your cause willarmi. I alk hut few
To drive those fpoilers'from my father's house.
Lady Rand. 0 Nature, Nature! what can check thy.

force ?-

Thou genuine offspring of'the daring Douglas !
But rulh not on defruclion: save thyself,
And I am safe, To me they mean no harm.

C Thy

Thy ftav but risks thy precious life in vain.
That winding path conducts thee to the river.
Cross where thou fest a broad and beaten way,
Which running eastward leads thee to the camp.
Inflant demand admittance to Lord Douglas.
Shew him these jewels which his brother wore.
Thy look, thy voice, will make him feel the truth,

hich 1 by certain proof will soon confirm.
Dalg. I yield me and obey: but yet my heart

Bleeds at this parting. Something bids me flay
And guard a mother's life. Oft have-I read
Of wondrous deeds by one bold arm atchiev'd.
Our foes are two: no more: let me go forth,
And fee if any shield can guard Glenalvon.

Lady Rand. If thou regard'ft thy mother, or rever'ft

Thy father's mem'ry, think of this no more.
One thing I have to fay before we part;
Long wert thou loft; and thou art found, my child,
In a mol fearful season. War and battle
I have great cause to dread. Too well I fee
Which way the current of thy temper sets:
To-day I've found thee. Oh! my long loft hope!
If thou to giddy valour giv'ft the rein,
To-morrow I may lose my son for ever.
The love of thee, before thou faw'ft the light,
Suflain'd my life when thy brave'father fell.
If thou ihalt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this wafle world! my son, remember me!
DoUg. What hall I fay ? how can' I give you com-

fort ?

The God of battles of my life dispose
As may be bes for you! for whose dear fake
I will not bear myself as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name
That uhich I boast founds among t martial men,
How will inglorious caution suit my claim ?
The post of fate unfhrinking I maintain.
My country's foes mist witness who I am.
On the invaders heads I'll prove my birth,
'Till friends and foes confess the genuine strain.

If

If in this trife I fall, blame not your son,
Who, if he lives not honour'd, must not live.

Lady Rand. I will not utter what my bosom feels,

Too well I love that valour which I warn.
Farewel, my son! my counsels are but vain.

[ Eibraciig.
And, as high heav'n hath will'd it, all mut h-. -

[Srparate.

Gaze not on me, thou wilt mistake the path
I'll point it out again.

- yJft as thy arefparatiig, enterfromn the wool Lrd

Randolph and Glenalvou.]

Lord Rand. Not in her presence.

Now-

Glen. I'm prepar'd.
Lbrd Rand. No: I command thee flay.

I go alone: it never Ihall be said
That I took odds to combat mortal man.
The nobldft vengeance is the molt compleat.

[Exit Lord Randolph.
[Glenalvon makesfotne Jfles tohe fame fide of ihe

Jiage, lflsins, and/peaks.]

Glen. Daemons of death, come fettle on my sword,

And to a double laughter guide it home!
The lover and the hulband both mult die.

[Lord Randolph behind lthe fienes.]

Lord Rand. Draw, villain! draw.
Doug. Assail me not, Randolph;

Not as thou lov'ft thyself. [Claiing off, wor..

Glen. [running ort.] Now is the time.
Enter Lady Randolph at the oppoitefide of the fage,faint

and breathlefis.
Lady Rand. Lord Randolph, hear me; all shall be

thine own.:
But spare! Oh, spare my son!

Cz Enter

Enter Douglas, wviih afj-,rd in each hand.

Dtug. My mother's voice!
I can protect thee still.

Lady Rand. He lives, he lives:

For this, for this to heav'n eternal praise!
Eut fire I faiw the fall.

Dtug. It was Glenalvon.

Just as my arm had mafier'd Randolph's sword,
The villain came behind me; but I flew him.
Lady Rar.d. Behind thee! Ah, thou'rt wounded ! O

my child,
How pale thou look' l! and shall I loie t-e now ?

Dsug. Do not despair: I feel a little faintness;

I hope it will not laif. [Leans upon hisfwornd.

Lady Rand. There is no hope!

And we mull part! the hand of death is on thee!
O my beloved child! 0 Douglas, Douglas!
Dsug. Too soon we part; I have not long been

Douglas.

O d-finvy hardly thou dealetl with me:
Cloeded and hid, a ltranger to myself,
In !.iw and poor obscurity I liv'd.
Liidy Rand. Has heav'n preferv'd thee for an end like

this ?

Dig. , bad I fall'n as my brave fathers fell,

Turning with great effort the tide of battle!
Like them I fnould have fmil'd and welcom'd death.
But thus to periin by a villain's hand!
Cut offfrom nature's and from glory's course,
Which neser mortal was so fond to run.
Lady Rand. Hear, jufiice! hear! stretch thy aveng-

ing arm. [Douglasfalls.

Dmog. Unknown I die; no tongue hall speak of me.

Some noble spirits, judging by'themfelves,
May yet conjecure what I might have prov'd,
And thinklife only wanting to my fame:
But who shall comfort thee . ,
Lady Rand. Despair! despair !

. Dg.

©Doug. 0 had it pleas'd high heav'n to let me live

A little while !-My eyes that gaze on thee
.Grow dim apace! my mother--Oh, my mother !

-., ~~~~~. [Die;.

- Enter.Lord Randolph and Anna.
Lord Rand. Thy words, the words of truth, have

pierc'd my heart.

I am the stain of knighthood and'of arms.
Oh ! if my brave deliverer survives
The traitor's sword-

dnna. Alas! look there, my Lord.
Lord Rad. The mother and her son! How curlt I

am !

Was I the cause? No: I was not the cause.
'Yon matchless villain did seduce my foul
To frantic jealousy.

Anna. My lady lives,:

The agony of grief hath but fuppreft
Awhile her powers.

Lord Rand. But my deliv'rer's dead !
The world did once eftcem Lord Randolph well.
Sincere of heart, for spotless honour fam'd:
And in my early days, glory 1 gain'd
Beneath the holy banner of the cross..
' Now pall the noon of life, fliame comes upon me:

Reproach, and infamy, and public hate,
Are near at hand: for all mankind will think
That Randolph barely Itab'd Sir Malcolm's heir.'

[Lady Randolph reccvering. i
Lady Rand. Where am I now ? fill in this wretched,

world ?

'Grief.cannot break a heart so hard as mine. '
' My youth was worn in anguish: but youth's strength

With hope's aflittance bore the brunt of sorrow; -
And train'd me on to be the objec now,
' On which Omnipotence displays itself,

Making a fpeftacle, a tale of me,
' To awe its vassal, man.'

.Cj Lord

Lord Rand. 0 misery !

Amidfl thy raging grief I muit proclaim

IMy innocence.
Lady Rand. Thy innocence !
Lord Rand. My guilt
Is innocence compar'd with what thou think'ft it.

Lady Rand. Of thee I think not- what have I to do

With thee oi any thing? My son! my son!
My beautiful! my brave! how fond was I
Of thee, and of thy valour! My proud heart
O'erflow'd this day. with transport, when I thought
Of growing old amilft a-race of thine,
Who might make up to me their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and my hulband's name:
Now all my hopes are dead! A little while
Was I a wife! a mother not so long!
What am I now ?-I know. - But I ihall be
That only whilll I please; for such a son
And such a husband drive me to my fate. [Runs onut

Lord Rand. Follow her, Anna: I myfelfwould follow,
But in this rage she mull abhor my presence.

[Eait Anna.

Enter Old Norval.
Narv. I hear the voice of woe; heaven guard my

child!

Lord Rand. Already is the idle gaping crowd,

The spiteful vulgar, come to gaze on Randolph.
Begone,

'r,. I fear theenot. I will not go.

Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplice, Lord,
With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help
To cruth down to the ground this lovely plant.
0 noblest youth that ever yet was born!
Sweetes and belt,. gentlest and bravelt fpiit,
That ever blefs'd the world! Wretch that I am,
Who saw that noble spirit swell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it!
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do thee justice, and revealthe fecreti

WhiCh,

Which, timely known, had rais'd thee far above
'The villain's snare! Oh! I am punifh'd now!
These are the hairs that Ihould have ftrew'd the ground,
And not the locks of Douglas.

[Tears-his hair, 'and throws himelf apotF

the body of Douglas.
Lord Rand. I know thee now: ' thy boldnes I for-

C give!.

My crest is fallen.' For thee I will appoint

.A place of reft, if grief will let thee reft.
I will reward, altho' I cannot punilhi
'Curit, curds Glenalvon, he efcap'd too well,
Tho' slain and baffled by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the las,
-Curfing'his conqueror, the felon died.

Enter Anna. .

Anna. My Lord ! my Lord !
Lord Rand. Speak: I can hear of horror.
Anna. Horror indeed!
Lord Rand. Matilda ?
Anna. Is no more;

She ran, she flew like lightning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice (he gain'd,
Beneath whose low'ring top the river falls
Ingulph'd in rifted rocks.: thither (he came,
As fearlefs.as'the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down.--

Lord Rand. 'Twas I! alas.! 'twas I

That fill'd'her'breaft with fury; drove her down
'The precipice of'death! Wretch'that I am !

Anna. 0 had you seen her.laft defpairing.lookl

'Upon the brink (he flood, and cast her eyes
Down on the deep: then lifting up her eyes
And her white hands.to heaven,. eeming to fay,
Why am. Iforc'd tothia ?r.lheplung'd.herfelf
Into the empty air.

Lord Rand. I will not vent,

In vain complaints,' the paffionof my foul ,
*'Peace in this world I never.can enjoy,

# EPILOGUE.

These wounds the gratitude of Randolph gave.
They speak aloud, and with the voice of fate.
Denounce my doom. I am refolv'd. Ill go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me turn aside mult threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful:to thy millrefs, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
With coil and pomp upon their funerals wait:
:For Randolph hopes he never lhall.irturn.

[Exeunt osr.es.

End of the Fifth At.

E PI L O GU E.

AiN Epiougue InJi'd; 3ut nss oe r)oe
Our Bard will ,write. He vo-ws 'tis m.s absurd
.WYit comic 'w.i! to coutradic the jfraios
Of Tragedy, and maze yo:rfi, rowxs 'vain.
:Sadlb he fays that pity is the bjl,
TZe nc 41btJ pu/iin of the hsozan brea/l:
.Fr 'wheu itsfacredjlreams the heart o'crfnw,
In guebs pleaflare -vith the ?ide f woe ;
Aandrvahel its swaves retire, like those of Nile,
-Thy leave behind them such a golden fiil,
That the e vrs it c re

the rts thul grow,

-Ther tbhe wet bla.Fims of afealion blow.
These -were his 'words:--oid of delusive art
Ifelt them; for bespoke themfrom his heart.
ArTor will I notw atte 'awih wilty folly,
O chafe dwy ckf:iaNl la

I N I S.
L

# BOOKS LATELY PUBLISHED.

BOOKS LATELY PUBLISHED.
I.In One Volume small 8vo. (containing near 3$oPages, illuftra-

ted by two Road Maps) price 3s. 6d. half-bound, or 4s. bound
in Red Leather, like a Pocket Book.

rpHE TR'AVELLER's COMPANION; or,
1' NEW ITINERARY of ENGLA'ND and WALES,
with Part of SCOTLAND, arranged in the Manner of
Copper-plates; being an accurate and comprehensive
View of the principal Roads in Great Britain, taken
from aftual Surveys, wherein every Obje& -worthy of
Notice is pointed out; to which are annexed the Cir-
cuits of the Judges, the-Ports from whence the Govern-
ment Packets fail, and a copious Index, where are par-
ticularized the MarketDays of each Town.

By THOMAS PRIDE and PHILIP LUCKOMBE.

,, As the Title'Page sufficiently displays the Contents

of the Book, we hall only add, that such Roads as

"we recollet seem accurately defcribed:-whence it is
" natural to form a favourable Conclufion,-with Re-
" sped to the whole."

Monthly Review, Aug. r789.

"This Traveller's Companion appears to be well ad-
apted to its Title, which is not the Cafe of all Works

"of that Kind. It not only points out every Place on
"the Road, but furnithes copious Information of each
" Objec within a considerable Difiance on each Side; a
' Circumllance in which other Books on the Subjedt
' are extremely deficient. The Attention paid to this
" Work, and the Accuracy of its Materials,-will in all

Probability meet with the Encouragement of the Pub.
' lie." Europeat Magazine, Jaue 1789.

" From the Title Page and Part of the-Preface,

" our Readers will be sufficiently. acquainted with the
"Nature of the Work and will have Reafon-to believe
"' it accurate; of its great Utility. there can be no doubt;
"and.we are happy to have it i. our Power to announce
". a Publication at once so comprehensive, so useful, and
'so cheap.

General Magazirt, May 1789

«k

a. In One Volume Quarto, price 6s. in Boards the common, and 9s.

the fine paper copies; or with the Introdu&ion f'wed, and tle
Tables pasted on Canvas, with Rdilers, price 5s. the common,
and iSs. the finer fort,
POLITICAL GEOGRAPHY, in a Set of Statif-'

tical Tables of the principal Empires, Kingdoms,

and States in EUROPE; exhibiting at one View the
grand Divisions of each Country; the Population and
Rate thereof per square Mile; the Population of capital
Towns; the armed Force, naval and military; the sinan-
cial slate in Revenue, Military Charges, general Expen-
diture, and Public Debt; the Political Conltitution, in-
cluding the form ofGovernment and Adminiflration of
Jufice; State of Religion, Literature, Agriculture,
Commerce, and Colonies, with Observations respecting
the principal Events in the Hitory of each Country.
The whole so disposed, as immediately to strike the Eye
and engage the Attention. To which is prefixed an In-
troduAion; containing, besides other Articles of useful
Information, an Account of such Coins, both real and
imaginaryn as are current in Europe, with fiort Rules
for reducing them to sterling; also the Rates of Interelt,
iUfance, and Days of Grace customary in each State, &c.

" The Tables are divided into perpendicular Co-

4, lumns, inscribed Popuelation, Armed Force, Stanr rs Si-

," nances, Political Crelitution, &c. iimilar to those little

general ables which fland at the Beginning of each
- Chapter in moit of the Geographical Books.

" The Plan is doubtless a good one, as by Infpec-

-" tion, the Information wanted, may be speedily
-" obtained: hung on Rollers, the four Tables will form
"a very useful Part of the Furniture of a Library;
· they contain the Accounts of Great Britain, Ireland,
* ' France, Spain, Germany, Adnftia, Pritjia, Palatinate of

a the Rhine and Elea te of Ravaria, EleSorate of Sax.
" CO, of HanoveriSand, .Rljia, Denmark and Aor-

' reay, Sweden, P Sgal, the Twiv Sicilies, Sardinia, the
·" Pope's State, the Republic of Venice, Poland and Lithu-
' ania, and the TnrJkih Empire."

Monthly Review, Aug. i789.

3. In One Volume Ocavo, Price 4s. in Boards, or 55. Bound.

(Illustratcd by New Mlai of the Slave Coast, comprehended
between the River Volta and Benin, with Cape Lagos.)
MEMOIRS of the Reign of BOSSA AHADEE,

King of DAHOMY, an Inland Country of

Guinea; to which are added, the Anthor's Tour to
Abomey, the Capital; and a short Account of the
African Slave Trade.

By ROBERT NORRIS.

c" The short account of the African Slave Trade an-.
nexed, is a sensible, judicious, and candid Reprefcn-

' tation in answer to those who have been so vehement

in Opposition to, and so active for the Suppression of
that Trade. On the whole, the Work certainly -
affords much Information concerning African Man-
ners and Cufloms." Montbhl Revie.w, April 1789.
4. In izmo. Price is. 6d. lewed, or as. half-bound, embellished

by a New Map of the Capital coloured, a Plan of the Royal
Exchange, and View of the Adelphi,
THE LONDON COMPANION, or, CITIZEN

and STRANGERt' GUIDE through the Metropo-

lis and its Environs; being a Lift of the various Streets,
Lanes, Squares, Courts, Alleys and Passages, with the
most remarkable Public Buildings, Offices, Places, &c.
ranged alphabetically. To which are added, the prin-
cipal Hackney Coach Fares, an Admeasurement of the
Streets, and the Rates of Watermen.

N. B. The Map and Plan may be had separate, Price

Sixpence, or One Shilling in a Cafe for the Pocket, and
One Shilling and Sixpence, on Canvas, in a Cafe.

5. In small SVo. Price Is. each fewed, or Is. 6d. half-bound,
THE LONDON DIRECTORY, containingan

alphabetical Arrangement of the Names and Re-

fidencies of the Merchants, Manul"urers, and principal
Traders, in the Metropolis and Environs; together
with Litts of the Lord Mayor andWdermen, Commis-
fioners of Customs, Excise, and Stamps, Diretors of the
great Trading Companies, Assurance and Fire Offices,
also the Firms of the different Banking IHo(fes, and a
particular Account of the Publicunds. M.\ /

** , ' \ &
t/

6. A GUIDE TO STAGE COACHES, Mails,

Diligences, 'Waggons, Carts, Coasting Venids,

B3rges, and Boats, which carry Passengers and MIerchan-
dize from London, Weftminfler, or Southwark,- to the
varnous Towns in Great Britain, describing the Number
of Miles to and Market Days of each Place, wlith the
Periods when the Carriages, Vessels, &c. set out from
the Capital and its Neighbouthood. To which are sub-
icined, a Lilt of the Proprietors of all the Waggons, and
th- Rates of Carmen.

%*' The Diretorn and Guide may be had, half-
bound or bound together, price zs. 6d.

7. In Crown Svo. price is. bound,
' THE NEW EXPOSITOR, or Spelling Book, con-

'taiining Tables of Words from two to seven Syl'ables

inclufi e; accented, explained and divided, according to
c most approved method of Pronunciation.

By JAMES ASHTOr and JOHN CLrGG.

T This Spelling Dictionary is on the whole well cx-

" ecuted, conidering the small Compass to which the
" Authors have confined themselves."

M6,...tly Review, tug.*' 1789.

S. In Three Vc!umes, ;mrn. price 7s 6d. fzwvcd, or 9s. bound,
THE FORTUNATE COUNTRY MAll), or Mc-

moirs of the Marchioness L-- V , who from

a Cottage, became a Lady of the first Qality in France,
by her steady Adherence to the Principles of Virtue and
I tonour. -
9j. in Twelve handsome VolIlm-; in izmo. ornamented with up-

vwrds of So Coper-plates, pricc-l.es. baund, on commun pa-
pcr, or 31. I:s. on royal pater, with proof imprefoils;
THE NEW ENGLISH THEATRE, containing

60 of the best Tragedies and Comedies in the Eng-

lyh Language. Each Volume has an elegant vignette
Title, and every Play, ontifpiece, rcprefenting lrik
ing Likenesses of the i'.avourite Ators and Atreffes,
designed and engraved'y the bell Artists.

*** Anyof the Plays which compose the ATert Engli,7

-7T:a!re r.ay a had separate, price 6d, on common, or
5s. on rGo,- er. y
f A
