DOUGLAS..

A

TRAGEDY.

tsitte v ,vir. mons&c.
TAKEN FROM THE 'MANAGER'S BOOK

AT THE
THEATRR ROYAL, COFENT-GARDEN.

'Lndo l

:
"Printed for. WV. CAVELL, Middle Row, Holbornm

; i c!S.^

# PROLOGUE.

PROLOGUE.

IN ancient times, when Britain's trade was arms,'
And the lov'd music of her youth alarms,
A god-like race fiftain'd fair England's fame.
Who has not heard of gallant Piercy's name.?
Ay, and of Douglas ?-Such illustrious foes
In rival Rome and Carthage never roe !
From age to-age bright hfone the Britilh fie;
And ev'ry hero was a hero's fire.
When pow'rful Fate.dccreed. one warrior's doom,
Up sprung the phoenix from his parent's tomb.
But whilst these gen'rous rivals fought'and fell,
-Thefe;great opponents iv'd each other well.!
Thi' many a. bloody field 'as loft and wop,
Nothing in hate: in honour all was done.
When Piercy wrongd, defy'd his prince or peers
Fast came the Douglas with his Scottili spears ;
And when proud Dolglas made his king his foe;
For Douglas Piercy bent his Englilh bow.
Expell'd their native homes by adverse fate,
They knock's alternate at each-other's gate:
Then blaz'd the castle, at.the midnight hour,.
For him whose arms had flook its firmefi tow'r--

This night a Douglas your protetlion claims:

A wife, a mother; Pity's softest names:
The ftoryof her woes indulgent hear,
And grant your suppliant all fle begs,-a tear.
In confidence ife begs, and hopes to find
Each Englifi breast, like noble Piercy's, kind.

cy

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

.DRALMATIS PERSONE.

MEN.

Lora PRindKh - - - - Ar. Clarke
G.ven ..vn-----. --- Mr. h'iittfiei
_.a? (Douglas) ---- AtMr. JohnjIon
LdIrva: -..---.-- - - M . Mur. rray
Ojscrr ...--------- AIr. Thom/pson.

W 0 M E N.

L.; R1r.wip --- M-rs. Popc
A, .a?! - - ----- ---- -If-s
- Ma l.

# ACT. I.

D O U G L A S;

A 'iRAGELY.

ACT. I.
SCENE, The Couit of a Castle surrounded with W'ods

Enter Lady Randolph.

Y E woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom
l Accords with my foul's fpdnefs, and draws forth
The voice of sorrow from my burrting heart,
Farewell a while: I will not leave you long;
For in your fliadcs I deem some spirit dwells,
Who, fiom the chiding itream or groaning oat,
Still hears and answers to Matilda's moan.
O Douglas I Donglas ! if departed: ghofls
Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of that wood thou art,
And, with the palfion of immortals, hear'st
Miy lamentation: heai'tl thy wretched wife
Weep for her husband slain, her infant lot.
Mly brother's timelels death 1 feein to mourn,
Who perifh'd with thee on this fatal day.
To thee I lift my voice; to thee address
The plaint which mortal ear has never heard.
O disregard me not; tho' I am call'd
Another's now, my heart is.wholly tliine.
Incapable of change, affection lies
Bury'd, my Douglas, in thy bloody grave.
But Randolph comes, whom fate has made my lord,
To chide my angiiflh, and defraud the dead.

Enter Lord Randiobh.
Lord Rand. Again these weeds of woe ! Say, dost

thou well

To feed a paftiin which consumes thy life ?
The living claim some duty; vainly thou

A 3 Beftow'ft

Beftrov'f thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady Rand. Silent, alas ! is he for whom I Wourn

Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives.

LordRand. Time, that wears out the trace of deepeif

anguish,

Has pail o'er- thee in vain.
Sure thou art not-the daughter-of Sir Malcolm:
Strong was his rage, eternal his resentment ;
For when thy brother fellhe fmil'd to hear
That Douglas'fon in the fame field was slain.

Lad Rand. Oh! rake not up the aflesnof ny fathers:

Imptaaabie resentment was their crime,
And grievous has the expiation been.
Contending with the Douglas, gallant lives
Of either house were loft; my anceflors ·
Ccmrneli'd,-at lait, to leave their:ancient feat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks ;- and now, of them
No heir is left. Had they not been so iterry,
I had not been the lat of all my race.

LordRard. Thygriefwreflstoiis purpbfesllnywords.

I never age'd of thee that ardent love
W'hich in the breasts of Fancy's-children burns.
Dezent affection and complaisant kindness
'Were all I wisi'd for; but I wifli'd in vain.
Hence, with the less regret my eyes behold
The fiorm of war that gthers o'er this land:
't- I ,ou'id perifl by the Danifl ifword,
iai ida-woaid not sied one tear the more.

La:. Rand. Thou do. nottllihk so.: 'woful as I ii,

I love thy merit, and esteem thy virtues.
]Eit h'iither-go'ft thou now ? - : '.:

Lord Rand. Straight to the camp,. - -

Where ev'ry warrior on the:tiptoe.lands '. :'
Of expectation, and impatient asks
Esch iho arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are landed. -

La,` Rand. 0, may adverse winds .

Far froni the coait of Scotland drive their fleet!
And ev'ry foidier of both hosts return
In peace and safety to his pieafant home: '

Lord Rar.. Thou fpeak'i a woman's, hear a warri-

or's wifhl:- - '
RFight from their native land, the, formy north,

... : May
- / .

May the wind blow, till iv'ry keel is six'd
Immoveable in Caledonlia's firand !
Thert fliall-o\ir foes repent:their bold invasion,
And roving armies fihun the fatal.flore.--
Lady, farewell; I leave thee not alone.;
Yonder comes one whose love makes duty light. [Exi'.

Enter Anna.

Anna. Forgive the rafneefs of your Anna's love.

Urg'd by afteition, I have thus preilm'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts,
And warn.you of the hours that you negleef,
And lose in fadnSef .

Lady Rand. So to lose my hours
Is all the use I wifi to make of time.

Anna. To blame thee, lady, suits not with my flatc:

But fire I am, since death firlf prey'd on man,
Never did filler thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had loft,
In early youth, the husband of your heart ?

Lady Rand. Oh!' .
Anna. Have I diflrefs'd you with officious love,

And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate?
Forgive me, lady: humble the' 1 am,
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune:
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

Lady Rand. What pow'r direted thy unconscious

tongue
To speak as thou haft done ? to name-

Anna. I know not:

But since my words have made my miiilefs tremble,
I will speak so no more, but fileur mix
My tears with hers.

Lady Rand. No, thou fialt not be silent.

I'll trust thy faithful love, and thou fialt be
Henceforth th'inftruted partner of my woes.
But what avails it ? ' Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never-ebbing time ?
Compel the earth and ocean to give up
Their ded alive ?

'Anna. What means my noble mifrefs ?
La,, Rand. Didft thou not ass what had iny sorrows

been ?- A

A4 If

If I in early vouth had loft an hutband ?- --,
In the cold bolom of the earth is lodg'd,:
Alangl'd :vjth wounds, the husband of my youth ;-
And in ;ome tavern of the ocean lies

Iv child and hi..-
Ansa, 0 1 lady, moIt rever'd !

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

Lady Rsad. Alas ! an ancient feud,

Heredir:.; evil vwas the source
Of my miforrunes. Ruling Fate decreed,
That my brave brother flould in battle save
The life of D :.gls' ion, our houft's foe:.
The youthful warriors vov't eternal friendfhi,.
To fee the vaunted tifter of his si iend,
Impatient Douglas to Balarmo came,
Under a bnrrow'd name.--M-- v heart he gain'd;
Nor did I long refuse the hand he btgg'd:
My brother's presence authoriz'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little weeks- with .ings of down,
Had o'er us flown, when my lo\ 'd lord was call'd
To fight his father's hat.les; and with him,
In spite of all my tears, did Malcolm go.
Scarce v.ere they gone, when my !rern fire was told
Th:tt the sa'le stranger was Lord Douglas' ifn,
Frantic with rage, the Baron drew his sword
And queftion'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
-Kneeling beneath his i'iord, falt'ring I took
An c.th equivocal, that 1 ne'er would
Wed one of Douglas' name.-Sincerity,
Thou firfl of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thy onward pi.h ! altho' the earth fhoiuld gape,
And from the gulph of hell detruffion cry
To take ditimulation's winding way.

Aena. Alas! how few of Wooman's fearful kitid
Durst own a truth so hard !

Lady Rand. The sirss truth

Is eafie.f to avow. This moral learn,:
This precious moral, f'rrn my tragic tale.--
In a few davs the dreadful tidings came,
That Douglas and my brother both were slain,
My lord . my life ! my huiband !--Mighty Heav'n !
What had I done to merit such afflittion ?

d/na. 1My dearefi lady! many a tale of tears

I'Yv

I've listened to; but never did I hear
A tale so fad as this.
-Lady Rand. In'the firRf days'
Of my diftrating-griefI found'iyfelf-
As women with to be who love their lords.
iBut who durst tell my father ? The good prielt
Whojoin'd our hands, my brother's ancient tutor,
With his lov'd Malcolm in the battle fell:
They two alone were privy to'the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till'time lhould make my father's f6rtune mine.
That very night. o whichl:my sot was bbrnl'
My nurse, the only confidant I had, :
Set out with him to reach her fifier's housed; :
But nurse nor-infant have I ever seen '
Or heard of, Anna, since that fatal hour.

Anna. Not feen'nor heard of ! then perhaps he liver
Lady Rand. No,--t was dark December; 'windtand

rain -

Had beat all night. Across the Carron lay
The-deflin'd road; and itn its swelling flood
My fiithfulrfervant perifh'd with nmychild.
Nor has despiteful fate permitted me '
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Tho',dead to love, I was compell'd to wed
Randolph, who fnatchtl me froii avillain's arms:
And Randolph now possesses the domains,
That by Sir'Malcolm's death' on rie devolv'd;
Domains that should to Douglas' son have gi'ns
A Baron's title and a Baron's pow'r.
O ! had I dy'd whe' my, iov'd hfiband fell !
Had some good angel op't t nimethe,.book
Of Providence, and let me read my life,
My heart had broke when I beheld the 'fii ' '
Of ills which, oine by one, I have endur'd.

Anna. That Pow'r, whose mifiiters'gbod angels are,

Hath fliut the book in mercy to mankind.
But we mud leave this theme :-Glenalvon comes:
I saw himr bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitherwards he flbwly:ftilks his ;way. .

Lady Rand. I will avoid hini. :An ungracious person
Is doubly irkformein an hour-like this.

Anna, Whyfpcaks rmylady thts ofRandolph's heir t

* : -'. Lai

L7.S Rand. Betaufe he's not the heir of Randolphis

virtues.

Subtle and shrewd, he offers to mankindt
An artificial image of binfelf:
And he with cale can vary to the taile
Of different men its feature'.
Yet he is brave and politic in war,
And Hands aloft in these unraly times.
WVhy I describe hin thus I'll tell hereafter:
Stay and derain him till I reach the caiele. [Exit

A-sa. 0 Happinegf I where art thou to be found

I fee thou dweilel not with birth and beatty,
Tho'grac'd with grandeur, and in wealth array'd;
Nor dof thou, it would feemr, with Virtue dwell,
Else had this gentle lady mifs'd thee not.

Enter Glenalvon.

G!en. What dofi thou mule on, meditating maid ?

L'ke some entranced and visionary seer
On earth thou ftand'i, ; thy thoughts ascend toheav'n.

.4nna. Would that I were, e'en as thou fav'ft, a seer,
To have my doubts by heav'nly vision cleard !

Glen. What dost thou doubt of? what haft thou to do

With fubjefs intricate ? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be qiueticn'd: think of these good gifts,
And then thy contemplations will be pleating.

Ana. Let wormen view Yon monument of woe,

Then boait of beamuy: wwho so fair as fie ?
But I must follow ; this revolving day
Arwakes the mem'ry of her ancient woes. [Exit.

G!kn. So !-Lady Randolph fnuns me! By and by

I'll woo her as the lion wooes his brides.
The deed's a-doiog now, that makes me lord
Of these rich val'ies, and a chief of pow'r.
The season is ito;:. apt: m y founding fieps
WVil not be hea:d anidft the din of arms.
Randolph has siv'd too long; his better fate
Had the alcendant once, and kept me down:
Wir. 1 h^d ftiz'd the dame, by chance he came,
Reicu'd, and had the lady for his labour;
I 'fcap'd unknorn : a slender consolation !
Heav'n is ny ;witnels that I do not love
To sow in peril, and let others reap
Te joctlnd haveft. LYet I am not fare

By

# ACT II.

By love, orfonmt'hinglike it, fcnRg, inflam'J;
Madly I blabb'd imy'paffio't&rlis-wife,
And she hath threatea'd 'to acquaint him of it.
The way tf-omaan's will I do-not tknow.;
But well I know the Baron'swrath is deadly.
I will not live id fear: he is the.man
Who fiands'betwikt me and 'iy chief desire :.
No barJbrt!b -ihe; tis'no kiinfman near;
No brother in hi fiiter's'quiarrel bold:
And for' the ritghteous cafe, a {ranger's cause,
I know no chief that will defy Glenalvon. '[Eit.

ACT II.

SCENE,- A Court, &c.

Siranger uith'i. Oh Meicy! Mercy'!
Enter Servants 'and a .Strnger at one Door, aud Lidy

Ruidplb ad A4nna at anor,. .

Ladj Rhindolph,

W iHAT mrea this caumour? Stranger, speak

VY'- '"secure. ' '

,
Haft thou been wvrong'd ? Have these ru'de men pre.

fiu p'd' . ..
To vex the wearytravller on his way? -

ijt &Se. By us no ftraiger ever fuffer'd w'rong,

This man, with outcry wild, has call'd.us forthT
So fore afraid,'he'cagiot speak his fears!
Enter Lord R ldblp -'nd:.Nlrval itbh tieirrftwol

draon, and bloody.

Lady Rand. Not vaii the franger'stfears !: How fares

- my lord .....
Lord Rand. That it 'fares well, 'thank's'to this,galant

yoith, .

Whose valour fav'd me from a 'wretched death !a -
As down thi winding daleI wal'k'd alone,
At the cross way'four arm'd-'en attack'd'me:
Rovers, I judge, fromnthe.liEeniious oamp,
Who would have quickly laid Lord'Randolph-low
Hal not thisbrave and gen'ioiis iranger come;

Like

Like my good angel, in the hour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my foes his own,
They turned upon him; but his adive arm
Sruck to the ground, from whence they role no more,
The fiercest two; the others fled-amain,
And left him nailer of the bloody field.-
Spe.ak, Lady Randolph: upon Beauty's tongue
Dwell accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
Speak, noble dame, and thank him for thy lord.

Lady. Rand. My lord, I cannot speak what I now

feel.

rly heart-o'erfiows With gratitude to Heav'n
And to this noble youth, who, all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but, humanely brave,
Fought on your fide against such fearful odds.
Have you yet learned of him whom we should thanki
W'hom call the saviour of Lord Randolph's life ?

Lo-J ,Rand.Iafk'd that question, and he anfwer'd note
But I mull know who my deliv'rer is. [To the grangero

Norv. A low-born man, of parentage obscure,

Who nought can boast but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Lord Rand. Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled

By the great King of kings! Thou art ordaind
And ftamp'd a hero by the fov'reign hand
Of Nature! Blnfh not, flow'r of modefly
As well as valour, to declare thy birth.

;cr-v. Ny name is Norval. On the Grampian hills

My father feeds his flocks: a frugal swain,
WVhofe contlant cares were to increase his Ctore,
And keep his only son, myself, at home;
For I had heard of battles, and I long'd
To follow to the field tome warlike lord:
And Heav'n loon gianted what my fire deny'd.
This moon, which rose lait night, round as my hield,
Had not yet fill'd her horns, when, by her light,
A band of fierce barbarians, from the hills,
Rulh'd like a-torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The shepherds fled
For safety and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'd about the enemyand mark'd
The road he took, then haftld to my friends;

Whory,

Whom with a troop of fifty chosen met,
I met advancing. The pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook the fpoil.encumber'd foe.
We fought and conquer'd. Ere a sword was drawnr
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now 1 wear.
Returning home in triumph, I difdain'd
The flepherd's slothful life; and having heard
That our good king had fummon'd his bold peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron fide,
I left my father's flock, and took with me
A chosen servant to condu&t my steps;-
Yon trembling coward, who forsook his master.
Journeying with this intent, I past there tow'is,
And, Heav'n directed, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

Lord Rand. He is as wife as brave. Was ever tale

With such a gallant modesty rehears'd ?
My brave deliv'rer ! thou si alt enter now
A nobler lift, and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame.
I will present thee to our Scottifi king,
Whole valiant spirit ever valour lov'd.-
Ha,! my Matilda.! wherefore ftarts.that tear ?

Lady Rand. I cannot lhy: for. arious affelions,

And firangely mingled, in my bosom swell;
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
I joy that thou art safe, and I admire
Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety:
Yea, as my mind.predicts, with thine his own,
Obscure and friendlels, he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, and with his sword
To gain diftintion which his birth deny'd.
In this attempt unknown he might have perifi'd,
And gain'd, with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope
He flands conipicuous; fame and great renown
Are brought within the compass of his {fvord.
On this my mind refle&cd while you spoke,
And blefs'd the wender working hand of Heav'n.

.Lord.Rand. Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts!
Bsiy deeds hlall follow where thou point'fl the way.

B Next

Net to mivfel' and equal to Glenalvon,
:il honour and comlmand falallNorval be.

J:, v. I kiin3:. not how to thank you. Rude Iam

in tpjeech and manners: never till this hour

:-ood I in such a, prcenace ; yVt, my lord,
TiLere's cbn:etiing in rriv breast which makes me bold'
r'o ihy, that Norval ne'er wvill flame thy favour.
L.:. iand. I.will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou

1 a31t be

M31- I'niht; and ever, as thou didfl to-day,
V'::'i h".pvy valour guard the life of Randolph.
Lr-;. S.Gn. \Well halt thou ipoke. Let me forbid

rcplv>. - ['To Norval.

V.'e d:e :'ny'dbtors fiill; thy high desert
C'e:;.r: our graxitude. I mull proceed,
As --^s a. fir. ; intended, to the camp,
So.e of mi train, I fee, are fpceding thither,
Imr .rient, doubtless, of their lord's delay.
Go v. i:h me, Norval, and thine eyes flall fee
T-e chcien -warriors of thy native land,

s.' h ,

'nuifh for the fight, and beat the air

;,i:h b; andih'd iwords.

Ycr. Le; us be gone, my lord.
L: r-..; R.. [Ta Lady Ran,,lF b.] About the time that

:".e dec*ining iun

":s'1 h.: b: -od orLit o'er yon hils suspend,
E.-::- u-s to return. This night once more
v. ii:in ;hefe walls I reft: my tent I pitch
To-n:mrrowv in the field. Prepare the feast.

ree i- his heart who for his country fights:
He in the eve of battle may resign
Himlse£-' o 'ocial pleasure; -fiveetell then,
V,'hcn danger to a soldier's foul endears
Tle hniman joys thatnever may return.

[Exeunt Lsrd Randolpi anld, N.orval.
Lqj; R.nd. His parting ivods have firuck a fatal

truth.

O Dauglas ! Douglas! tender was the time
W hen we t;o parted ne'er.to meet again!
How many years of anguifll and delpair
Has Heav'n annex'd to those fwift-paffing hours
Of love and fondness!
A, a. May gracious Heav'n pour the fweetbalm of

peace Into

Into the wounds that feller in your hb:'ea:t
For earthly conlnlarion can:!t cure thelm -

Lady Ranti One only cure can fteav'n itfelf.beltow,

A grave-that bed in whicl tlhe.weary rcll.
Wretch that I amn alas why am I so ?
At ev'lryhappy parent I repinte !
low blest the mother of von :lilant Norva!
She for a living hiuibnd lore her pains,
*And heard him blcfs her when.a man was born:
She nurs'd her finiling infant on hel breast;
Tended the child, and rear'd the pleating b, ;
She, with affcction's triumph, law the youth
In grace and comelinets flipafs his peers,-
Whilf I to a'dead hiuba-nd bore'a ion,
And to the r.i:rinu watersg ,;e my child.

AaIZ. -Alas! alas! why wil 'yb i-rtus riCfirm

Your grief afrefl ? I thought' thIt gallant ymont'
Would for a while have won you from your woe.
On him intent you gazed, with a look
Much more delighted than your. pnlive eye
Has deign'd on other objects to beflow.

Lady Rand. Delighted, fay'lt thou? Oh! even there

mine eye

Found fuel for my life-confuming sorrow.
I thought, that, had the ton. oF Douglas liv'd.
He might have been like this young gallant firanger,
And pair'd with him in features and in llape:
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
Miy boy with blooning Norval might have nimber'd.
Whilll thus I mrus'd, a spark fromnfancy fell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness
For this young tlrahger wand'rirg from his home;
And, like an orphan cast upon my care,
I will prote& thee (said I to mylelf)
With all my pow'r, and grace with all my favour.

Anna. Sure Heav'n will bless so gen'rous a resolve.

You muf, 'my noble.dame, exert your pow'r:
You must awake: devices will be fram'd,
And arrows pointed at the breall of Norval.

Lady Rand. Glenalvon's false and crafty head will

work

Againif a rival in his kinfian's love,
If I deter him not: 1 only can.
Bold as he is, Glenna'von will beware

B 2 How

PeV ihe pulls down the fabric that T raite.
I'll be the aptift of young Noival's fortune.

Entei Gle.nalon.

C!cn. W'here is my dearefi kinin.an, noble Randolph?
Lady Rani. Have you not heard, Glenalvon, of the

baie-

G.in. I have and that the villains may not 'scape,

With a S rong band I have begirt the wood.
If :hey irk there, alive they shall be .a'en,
Atr.d torture force from them th'important secret,
lWinhedier some foe of Randolph's hir'd their swords,
Or i:;

L.-j· Rand. That care becomes a iinfman's love.
I h-.e a coni;fel for Glenalvon's ear. [Exit Anna.

Gir. To himr vyour counsels always are commands.
L.djy Rand. I have.not found it so: thou'rt known

to me.
R.a-n. Knc .vn !
Lad Ranrd. And rrofl certain is my cafe of know-

ledge.

GlCn. V;ha2 do yoi know ? By Heav'n

You n-:mch amaze me ! No created being,
Y'<urfelfexcept, duria thus accost Glenalvon.
Ladj Rand. Is guilt so bold ? and dolt thou make a

merit

Of :hy pretended meekness thus to me,
V,'ho, with a gentle3nes which duty blames,
Has hitherto conceal'd that, if divulg'd,
V.'ooid make thee nothing; or. what's worse than that,
An cr:tcat beggar and unpity'd too!
Fcr rrortas fliudder at a crime like thine.

G.:r. Thv v:rtue a-ws me. First of woman-kind!

Pcrm.i: n;e vet to sav, that the fond man
V hom lovei ranfporti beyond firic virtne's bounds,
Ir te is bi ou ht by love to misery,
In fortne ruin d, as in mind forlorn,
Un r.:v'd cannob be. Pity's the alns
V. ich on such beggars freely is beftos'd:
For morta!s know that love is tfill their loid,
Ard o'er their vain resolves advances Itill;
As ire, when kindled by our lifepherds, moves
The' the dry, hea!t against the fanning wind.

L.:'; Kd, RndReferve there accents for lome other ear.

To

To love's apology I liften not.
Mark thou my words, for it is meet thou shouldst.
His brave deliv'rer Randolph here retains-
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well:
But at thy peril, practise aught against him:
Let not thy jealousy attempt to shake
And loosen the good root he has in Randolph,
Whose favoulites I know thou hail fnpplanted.
Thou look'ft at me as if.thou fain wouldst pry
Into my heart: 'tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendless tirangerr my protection clams;
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [E.it,

Glen. Child that I was, to lart at my own fladow,

And be the Ihallow fool of coward conscience !
I am not 1what I have been ; what I flould be.
The darts of dctliny have almoRt picrc'd
\My marble heart. ilad I one grain of faith
]n holy legends and religious tales,
I flould conclude there was an arm above,
That fought againli me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch mvfelf, the fubtie fiare I let.
Why, rape and niur-uer are not fimple.means ?
Th'imperfed rape to Randolph gave a fpouie;
And the intended nmurder introduc'd
A favourite to hilde'the fun.from nte;
Ai.d, worftofall, a rival. Burning hli! !
This were tbv centre, if I thought the lov'd himn
'Tis certain she contemns me ; nay, comn:narid nie,
Atd wavqs the flag of her dlfpl:alire o'er me
In his behalf. Anud {hill I thus he brav'd ?
Curb'd, as lie calls it, by dame Chatity ?

itfirna:fienls, ifany fiends there are
More fierce than hate, ambition, and revcnge,
Rife up and fill my bofoin with your fires.-
Darklty.a proje(t peers upon my mind,
Like the red moon, when iriling in the eafr,
Crofi'd and divided by flrange-colour'd clod':.
I'll seek the slave who came with Norval hithe;',
And for his coiwardice was fpilined from hin.
I're known a follotwe's rankled, hfoin breed
Ventom mn't 'fatal to his hecdlefs lo'd: 1 [E.r-;.

C T

# ACT III.

ACT III.
SCENE, A Court, &c. as before. -

Enter Anna.

HY vassals, Grief, great Nature's orderbreak,'
And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour.

Whilst Lady Randolph sleeps, I will walk forth,
And taste the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers be! Ye ministers-
Of gracious Heav'n, who love the human race,
Angels and-feraphs, who delight in goodness,
Forsake your tkies, and to her couch descend !
There from her fancy chace those difrial-forms
That haunt her waking; her-sad spirit charm
With images celeflial, such as please
The blefs'd above upon their golden beds.

Enter Servant.

S.r. One of the-vile affaflins is fecur'd.-

We found the villain lurking in the wood.
With dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not
His first essay: these jewels were conceal'd
In the molt lecret plates of his garment:
Belike the spoils of fomethat he has murder'd.

Anna. Let me 16ok on them. Ha! here is a heart,

The chosen cress of Douglas' valiant namie!
These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch.

' ~- -

- [Exit Anna.

Enter Servants witb the Pri/oner.

Pri; I know no more than does the child:unborh
Of what you charge me with.

fl Serv. You fay so, Sir!

But torture soon (hall make you speak the truth.-
Behold the lady of Lord Randolph comes:
Prepare yourfeli to meet her just revenge.

Enter Lady Randolph and Anna.

Anna. Summon your utmoni fortitude before;
You i/cak with himn. Your dignity, your fame -I

Is

Is now at'f ake. Think of'the atal secret;
Which in a monment from yotir lis may fly.

Lady Rand. Thou fhlht behold me.:' with a defp'rate

heart
Hear how my infant perifli'd. See, he kneels.

' [Cke priloner kne-ds.
Pry. Heav'n bless that c6ountenance so I-weet and

mild! -' .

A judge like-thee make's innocence more bold.
0 save me, lady, frommthefe cruel men'
Who have attack'd and seiz'd me; who accuse
Me of intended mirder! As I hope
For mercy at:the judgment-feat of Heav'n,
The tender lamb that never nipt the grass,
Is not more innocent than I:of mirdlr.

Lady Rand. Of this man's guilt what proof can ye

produce ?

tj Serv. We found him lurkingin the hollow glet

When view'd and call'd upnn, amaz'd lie fled.
We overtook him, and enquir'd from whence,
And wtat he was: he said he came from far,
And was upon his journey tothe camp.
Not fatisfy'd with this, we-fearch'd his clothes,
And found those jewels, whose rich value plead
Mods pow'rfully against him. Hard he seems,
And old in villany. Permit us'to try
His stubbornness againft:the torture's force.

Prf. 0 gentle lady, by your lord's dear life !

.Which these weak. hands; I swear, did ne'er assail,.
And by your childrens welfare, spare my-age! .
Let not the iron tear my ancient joints,
And my grey hairs bring to the grave with pain.
-Lady Rand. Account for these: thine:own they can.

not be: , ': -

For thefe,1I fay,.be stedfast to the truth;
Deteced falsehood is most certain death.

[Anna remoaes theJr vantr, and returnr,

Prif. Alas !. I'm fore beset! let never man,

For fake of lucre, fin againf' his foul - '
Eternal justice is in this mods ju'st i : "

. :
I, guiltless now, mutd former guilt reveal.

Lady Rand. O! Anna, hear !-Once more Icharge

thee speak

rThe

The truth dire; for these to me foretell
And certify a part of thy narration;
With which, if.the remainder tallies not,
An instant and a dreadful death abides thee.

Prif. Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speak to tbee astsju

As if you were the minister of Heav'n,.
Sent down to search the secret fins of men.-
Some eighteen years ago, I rented;land
Of brave Sir Malcolm,.then Balarmo's lord;
But falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
All that 1 had, and then turn'd .me and mine
(Four helpless infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel by.the river's fide
Receiv'd-us; there hard.labour, and my fiill
In fifling, whbch was formerly my {port,
* Supported life. Whilst thus we poorly livd,
One itormy night, as I reember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon'our roof:.
Red came the river down, and loud and oft
The angry 4pirit of the water fhriek'd.
At the dead hour of right was heard the eryi
Of one in jeopardy. I rose and ran
To where the circling-eddy of a pool,
Beneath the ford,.us'd oft to bring within
MIv reach whatever floating thing.the,ftream
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd; 'the person loft
But looking fad and earnest on the waters,
By the-moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round,
A balker. Soon I drew- it.to the hank,
And nestled curious there an infant lay.

Lord Rand. Was he alive ?
Prit. He was.
Lady Rand. Inhuman that thou art:
How couldt thouw Iill what waves.and tmepefs spar'd

Prf. I am rot so inhuman.
LadyJRald. .Didf-tho.u:not?
Anna. My noble mifirefs, you are nio.v'dtdo much;

This man has not the aspea of fiern murder:
Let him go on; and .you, I hope, will hear
Good tidings;of .yur;ktnfiman's long loft child.

Prif. The rwedymaan.whohas.known better days,

One whom distress has spited at the world
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon

To

To do such deeds as make the profp'rous men
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them.
And such a man was I; a man declin'd,
Who saw no end of black adverlity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have touch'd that infant with'a hand of harm.
Ladty Rane,. Ha ! dost thou fay fov? Then perhaps

he lives !

Prif. Not many days ago he was alive,
Laiy Rand. 0 heav'nly pow'r ! Did he then die so

lately ?

Prfif I did not fay he dy'd; I hope he lives.

Not many days ago these eyes beheld
Him flouriahin:g in youth, and health, and beauty.

Ladfy Rand. Where is he now ?
Prif. Alas i I know not where.
Lady Rand. Oh fate, I fear thee fill. Thou rid-

d'er, speak

Dire& and clear, else I will search thy foul.
Pursue thy story with a faithful tongue,
To the lall honr that thou dislil keep the child.

Pri. Fear nut my faith, tho' I mull speak my; flame.

Within the cradle where the infant lay,
1Was liow'd a mighty ltore of gold and jewels;
Tempted by which we did reiflve to hide
From all the world this wonderful event,
And like a peasant breed the noble child.
That none might mark the change of our estate,
We left the country, travel'd to the north,
Bought flocks and herds, and gradually trought forth
Our secret wealth. But God's all-feeing eye
Beheld our avarice, and smote us fore.
For, one by one, all our own children dy'd,
And he, the firanger, sole remain'd the heir.
Of what, indeed, was his. Fain, then, would I,
Who with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
Have tru'ted him, now in the dawn of youth,
With his own secret; but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never would confelit.
Meanwhile the liripling grew in years and beauty;
And, as we oft obferv'd, he bore himself
Not as the offspring of our cottage blood;
For nature will break out: mild with the mild,

But

But with the forward he was fierce as fire,
Anld n;ght and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I iet royfelf against his wralike bent,
Bit Ali in vain; for when a defp'rate band
Of iobb)ers from the savage mountairs came--

Lado RPast. Eternal Piro.idence ! twhat is thy name?
P:--. Myl name is Norval ; and my name he bears.
Lad. Rad. 'Tis he! 'tis he himfief! It is my iOn !

O ! i.s;'rign imercv ! 'tvas my child 1 óIw!
Xc w-aonder, Anna that my bosom burn'd.

.,:ra. Juit are your transports:

-'ut -et r-errmber that vou are beheld
r-' ier:ile tees; your geliures may be feet
..:-.t.p il hn.-

..; ... --'
p V'eF S;lr o r iei/arr."

Lad . Ra.d. Well dolt thou counsel, Anna: Heav'n.

bestow
O: mre that wisdom which my frate requires !

Pr/i If I, amidst aficnifhment and fear,

H.i ; of your words and gestures rightly judg'd,
Tlr._u art the daughter of my ancient mafler;
The child I reicu'-J from the flood is thine.

.1. -'Y Rard. With thee dissimulation now were vain.

I ,:- ir.deed the daughter of Sir Malcolm;
Tne child th.,u refcu'dft from the flood is mine.

P'.: B!cie he the h'uithat made me a poor man !
:y :overty hath fav'd my matler's house !
L:.* RJrd. Thy words furprize me: sure thou dost

rot feign':
T'e :ca: fitands in thine eye : such love from thee

l:- I h!oim's h.ouse deferv'd not, if aright
'T'ou toid'tI the ilorv of thy own distress.

Pr:'. Sir Malculm of our Barons was the flbw'r;

Th '. ieit friend, the befr, the kindel master:

;:: abh ! he knew not of my fad estate.
.::rer that battle where his gallant son,

Your ow-n brave brother, fell, the good old Lord
G:ew de'p'rate and wrecklefs of the world;
A: . never, ns he erst was wont, weqt forth
To overlook the condu& of his lervants.
By them I w1as thrufp out, and them I blame.
May Heav'n so judge me as I judge my mailer!

.:- God so love me as I love his race I
LR.a ;
Rad. His race thall yet reward thee. On

thv iaith

Depends

Depends the fate of thylov'd maRter's hoioe.
Remember'lt thou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the cliffs of Carron ?

PrfiJ I remember
The cottage of the clifft.

Lady Ranl. 'Tis that I mean:

There dwells a man of venerable age,
'Who in my father's fcrvice spent his youth :
Tell him I sent thee, and with him renain
Till I fiall call upon thee to declare,
Before the king and nobles, what thou now
To me hafl told. No more but this, and thou
Shalt live in honour all thy future days:
Thy ion so long ilall call thee father still,
Ant all the land fliall bless the man who fav'd
The son of Douglas, and Sir Malcolm's heir.
Remember well my words: if thou fhouidfl meet
Him whom thou call'ft thy son, fiiil call him o ;
And mention nothing of his nobler father.

Prf Fear not that I fliall mar so fair a harvell,

By putting in my ficle ere 'tis ripe.,
Why did 1 leave my home and ancient dame
To find the youth to tell hin all I kinew,
And make him wear tlhoe j.evels in his arms,
Which might, I thought, be chalieng'd, and ob bring
To light the secret of his noble bi th!

[LZtd Randlh gois road

s iwa t .b Servants.

Laidy Rand. This man i. not th'afiatsin you fillpeftzd,

Tho' chance combin'd foiie likelihoods againfr him.
He is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To their right owner, whom in h.ite he efeks.
'Tis meet'that you flooild put hin on his way,
'Since your mitalken zeal hath dragg'd him hither.

[ E::i'int 1Pri/bir antl Serv.ants.

Mly faithful Anna, dol thou ihare my joy ?
I know thou doff. Unparallcl'd event !
Reaching from heav'n to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings me to my son
Judge of the wid'ot, and the orphan's father!
Accept a widow's and a mother's thinks
For such a gift!-What does rny Anna.think
Of the young eaglet of a valiant nef ?
How soon he gaz'd on bright andt burning arms,

Spurn'd

Spurn'dthelowdunghill where his fate had thrown him.
And tow'r'd up to the region of his fire!

Anna. How fondly did your eyes devour the boy !

Myiferious Nature, with the unseen cord
Of pow'rful instinct, drew you to your own.

Lady Rand. The ready story of his birth belitv'd

Supprefs'd my fancy quite; nor did he owe
To any likenefi my so sudden favour.
But now I long to fee his face again,
Examine ev'ry feathre, and find out
The lineaments of Douglas, or my own.
But, molt of all, I long to let him know
Who his tiue parents are, to clasp his neck,
And tell him all the story of his father.

Anna. With wary caution you must bear yourfedf

In public, left your tenderness break forth,
And in obiervers stir conjeaures'frange.
To-day the Baron started at your tears.
Lady Rand. He did so, Anna! Well-thy mifirefs

knows,

If the least circamflance more of offence
Should touch the Baron's eye, his fight would be
With jealousy diforder'd.. But the more
It does behove me infiant to declare
The birth of Douglas, and aftert his rights.
This night I purpose with my son to meet,
Reveal the secret, and consult with him;

.

For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does now, so looi'ed his noble father,
Array'd in nature's ease: his mien, his speech,
Were sweetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those trivial mortals who seem always wife.
But, when the matter match'd his mighty mind,
Up rose the hero: on his piercing eye
Sat observation; on each glanceof thought
Decision follow'd, as the thunderbolt
Pursues the flash.

A.a. That d.mon haunts you fill:
Behold Glenalvon.

Lady Rand. Now I flun him not.

This day I brav'd him in behalf of Norval:-
Perhaps too far: at least my nicer feirs
For Douglas thus interpret.

Enter -

Enter Glenalvon.

Glen. Noble Dame,

The hov'ring Dane at last his men hath landed:
No band of pirates, but a mighty host
That come to fettle where their valour conquers;
To win a country, or to lose themselves.
Lady Rand. But whence comes this intelligence,

Glenalvon'?

Glen. A nimble courier, sent from yonder camp,

To haften up the chieftains of the north,
Inform'd me, as he past, that the fierce Dane
Had on the eastern coast of Lothian landed.
Lady Rand.. How many mothers fliall bewail their

sons!

How many w;idows weep their huibands slain I -
Ye dames of Denmark! e'en for-you I feel,
Who, sadly fitting on the fea-beat (hore,
Long look for lords that never shall return.

Glen. Oft has th'unconquer'd Caledonian sword

Widow'd the north. 'The children of the slain
Come, as I'hope, to meet their fathers fate.
The monfler, War, with her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are objeas fifited to Glenalvon's foul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death:
Reproach more piercing than the pointed sword.

Lady Rand. I scorn thee not, but when I ought tó

scorn; -

Nor e'er reproach, but when insulted Virtue
Against audacious Vice iaferts herielf.
I own thy worth, G!ena!von; none more apt
Than I to praise thinliee:inenee in arms;
And be the echo of tlir' m.irtial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty paflion:
Go and pursue a lawful minrefs, Glory !
Upon the Danili crests redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the fitield of Randolph.

Glen. One instant flay;'and hear an alter'd man.

When beauty pleads for virtue, vice abafh'd
Flies its own colours, and goes o6er to virtne.
I am your convert j time will lhew how truly:
Yet one immediate proof I mean to give:-
That-youth, for whom your ardent zeal to-day

C - Some-

# ACT IV.

Sohiewhat too haughtily defy'd your slave,
Amidst the /hock of armies I'll defend,
And turn death from him with a guardian arm,.

Lady Rand. Ad thus, Gle)alvon,and I am thy friend:

But that's thy least reward. Believe me, fir,
The truly gen'rous is the truly wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblelt.

[Exit Lady Rand. and Anna.

GkA. Amen! and virtue is its own reward !-

I think that I have hit the very tone
In which ihe loves to speak. Honey'd assent !
How pleasant art thou to the tafle of man
And woman also ! flattery dire&
Rarelv disgusts. They little know mankind'
Who doubt its operation: 'tis my key,
And opes the wicket of the human heart.
How far I have focceeded now I know not,
Yet I incline to think her formy virtue
Is lull'd a while': 'tis her alone I fear:
While fle and Randolph live, and live in faith
And amity, uncertain is my tenure.
That slave of Norval's I have found moit apt.
I shew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his foul
To fay and swear whatever I fuggef.
Norval, I'm told, has that alluring look,
'Twixt man and woman, which I have obferv'd "
To charm the nicer and fantastic dames,
Who are,-like Lady Randolph, full of virtue.
In raising Randolph's jealousy I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom errs
Who thinks the worf he can of womankind. [Exit.

AC T IV.

Flourifl of Trumpets.
-Eater Lord Randolpb.

Lord Randolph.
S UMMON an hundred horse, by break of day,

To wait our pleasure at the catle-,ate.

Larb

Enter Lady Randolpt.
Lady Rand. Alas, miy lord ! I've beard unwelcome

news:

The Dares are landed.

Lord. Rand. Ay, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament essay
Of some young knight refolv'd to break a spear,,
And fiin with hostile blood his maiden arms.
The Danes are landed; we must beat them back,
Or live the slaves of Denmark.

Lady Rand. Dreadful times !
Lord Rand.. The fenceless villages are all fnrfaken;

The trembling mothers and their children Indg'd
In wall-girt tow'rs and castles, whiH the ni.a
Retire indignant. Yet, like broken wtaves,
They but retire more arwf:l to retiurh.
Lar!v Rand. Iiiimenile, as f.iame reports, the Dan.ill

host-
Lord Rand. Were it as num'rous as loud fame re-

ports,

An army knit like ours would pierce it thro';
Brothers, that lirink not from each other's fide,
,And fond companions fill'our warlike files;
For his dear offspring and'the,wife he loves,
The husband and the fearless father arms.
In vulgar breafs heroic ardor burns,
And the poor peasant mates his daring lord.

Lady Rand. Meifs minds are temper'd, like thei

' words, for war;

Where is our gallant gueRt ?

Lord. Rand. Down in the vale

I left him managing a fiery steed,
Whose ltubbornnefs had foil'd the f1rength and skill
Of ev'ry rider. But behold he comes,
In earnest conversation with Glenalvon.

Enter Norval and Glenalhmn.

Glenalvon t with the lark arise ; go forth
And lead my troops that lie in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp: -
Norval, thou go'st with me. But fay, young man,
Where didst thou learn so to discourse of war,

C 2 An

And in fich terms as I o'erheard to day ?
War is n;, village Icience, nor its phrale
A language tpught among the fhlpherd swains.

Norv. Sn.,a i is the skill- ny lord delights to praifi

In hinm e tayours.-Hear from whence it came,
Bencath a mountain's bru(w, the mofn remote
'And inaccessible, by shepherds trod; ·
In a d-ep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
An hern.i Iliv'd, a melancholy man,
\Vi, wvas the xti nder of-our and'ling swains.
Au'it!e andi !,n, Iy, cruel to himself,
Did they 1 ep,'it him ; the cold earth his bed,
Wi'l:r his orink, his food the filhpherd's alms.
1 went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
-;Wih rev'rtnce and with pity. Mild be spake,
And, ern'ring on di'courie,-luch stories told
As made me oft revisit his fad cell; -
For he had been a foldit r in his youth,
And fought in famous battles, when the peers
Of Europe, by the bold Godfredo led,
Againf th'uiiurping infidel dilplay'd -
The bieffed cross, and won the Holy Land.
P.eas'd with my admiration, and the file
His fpecch tfruck from me, the old man woald shake
His years away, and ac his young encounters:
Then, having lhiew'd his wounds, he'd fit him down,
And all the live-long day diicourfe of war.
To help my fancy, in the smooth green turf
He cut the figures of the marfiall'd hofis;
Defcrib'd the motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and- the lengthen'd line,
The square, the crelcent, and the phalanx firm
For all that Saracen or Christian knew
Of war's vast art, was to this hermit known.

Lord Rand. Why did this soldier in a defart hide
Those ,aalities that should have grac'd a camp.?

ar-v. That too at last I learn'd. Unhappy man

Returning homewards by tcffina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and bbiit'rous ciptain of the sea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought:
The firanger fell, and with his dying breath
Declar'd his name and lineage ! Mighty pow'r!
The soldier cry'd Mly brother! Oh ! my brother !

Lady Rand. Eis brother!

. .,

Norv. Yes; of the fame parents born;

His only brother-they exchang'd forgivene; .
And happy, in my mind, ,was be that dy'd;.
For many deaths has the survivor fuffer'd.:
In the wild defart on a rock he fits,
Or on some nameless fiream's unt:odden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times, alas! not in his perfect mind,
Holds dialogues with his lov'd brother's ghost;
And oft each night forsakes his fullen couch,
To make fad orifous for him he lew..
Lady Rand. To what mysterious woes are mortals

born!

In this dire tragedy were there no more
Unhappy persons ? Did the parents live ?

Norv. No; they were dead: kind Heav'nhad clos'd

their eyes

Before their son had flied his brother's blood.

Lord Rand. Hard is his fate; for he was not to blame:

There is a destiny in this strange world,
Which oft decrees an undeierved doom ;
Let fchoolmen tell uswhy.-From whencethefe founds ?

[Trurtpets at a diJance.

Enter an OIfier. . .

Ojf. MyLord; the trumpetsof the troops of Lorn
Tle valiant leader hails the noble Randolph.

LordRand. Mine ancient guet ! does he the warriors

lead'?
Has Denmark r6ori'd-the brave old knight to arms ?

Of. No; worn with warfare,'he resigns thefword.

His eldeit hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord Radl. Glenalvon, go; ;

With hospitality's most strong request
Intreat the chief. - - [Exit Gn.

Off. y lord,-requefts are vain:

He urges on impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foe's approach. - [Exit

Lord Rand. May.vitory fit on the warrior's plume !

BraveR of men ! his flocks and herds are safe;
Remote from war's alarms his pafures lie,
By mountains inaccessible fecur'd;'

C3 Ye

Yet f;:remofi he into the plains descends,
F.:ger to join in battles not his own.
S wch were the heroes of the ancient world:
Con'emners they of indolence and gain;
But filil for love of glory and oft alms,
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift
Againlt each firong antagenifi the spear.
I'ij go and press the hero to my breast. [Exit.

Lady Rand. 'The iolditr's loftiness, the pride and

p.)':p

Inves;;rrg awful rwar, Norval, I fee,
Transport rhy youthful nind

orv. Ah ! flould they not ?

Blest be the hour I left my father's house !
I might have been a fl;epherd all my days,
A:d stole obfcurelv to a pealhnt's grave.
Now, if I live, with mighty chiefs 1 stand:
And,if I fali, with noble dust I lie.

La,: Ra'd. There is a gen'rous fpiiit in thy breast

That colid have well fusrain'd a prouder fortune.-
Since lu.kv chance has left us here alone,
lUnfeen, unheard, by human eye or ear,
I :.;i! amaze thee with a w.ond'i ous tale.

Noa,-. Let theree de ng-r, lady-, nith the secret,

That 1 .ay hug it to n'y grateful heart,
.And iprove my laith. (Comlr.ald my sword, my life:

a't;'. a; e thie r'lc ep!ilflio Cf poor NS'val.

/,,, RaJ d. ];imv.'st thru ltiche ge:ms ?
-\Y,or. LPist 1 bhiirve miaie tees,
I"d sav I l;ne. them, ;n d tIey' were my father 's.

i,4y Rand. Thy faher's, tay'st thou! ah! they

were thv fashei's

yor-. 1 fal them on;e, and cuiioufiy enquii'd

Of not h my par ns x, hnce ilch iplendor came;
But I was check'.!, and n.o e could never leain.

La.ly kRid. Then learn oi me, thou art not Norval's

iun.

yJr. , Not Nnrval's son '
.iyj R, n i. N or of a Phepherd fruung.
yr-:,. Lil;y, wh.o .m 1 t!ien ?
Laoly .i' . N ,ble houu art,
For ro, 'e '.va< ith lire !

K',*r I w.i hil:vc --
0 i tli me fartl'er ! Sj, who was my father ?

Lay

Lady Ratd. Douglas!
NVor-,. Lord Douglas, vwh'm to-day I saw ?
Lady Rand. I;s younger lrother.
NIor. And in ondetr camp ?
Lady Rand, Alas !
NYov. You make ne tremble-- -Sighs and tears !
Lives Imn brave father ?

Lady Rand. Ah ! too b:.ve indeed !
tIe fell in battle ere thyl)tlf was Ibrn.

Nor,'. Alh nme, unhappy ! ere I ia. the light !

But does m) morher lte ? I may conceude,
,From mly own fate. lhr porti ton has bten torrlwv.
Lady Rand. She lives; but wastes her life in con-

stant W/ie,
WTeping her liiflan'l fla'n, her inFant 1tl-t.

an,-4. You that are skill'd si) cll in this fad story

Of nmy unh.ippy pacint' ani with tears
Bew.ai their destiny, now have conipalflion
On the off.pring of the tliecsd yoli hIv'd,
O ! teil mC sho, and wihere ny niot-.er is!
Op)prels'd by a bale world, perhals lhe bends
Beneath the weight of other ills th:n grief;
And, detulale, implores of H-lav'n the aid
Her tln fthould give. It is, it munt he so-
Your ciilttenince confcflcs that lle's wretched.
O ! tll ire h:rr contitiori ! Can the sword-
Who lall refild nce in a paient's canfe ?

Lad' R7and. ' hy virtue encs her woe ! My fun ! my

fn !

hil' v. Art thou my mother ?
Lac/) R.ind. I alm tiy mother, and the wife of Doug-

la\ ! [Falli tpon his neck.
Nor-. 0 hea.v'n and earth, bow wonl'roLus is my

fate !

Art thou mry mr'ther? Ever let me knel !

Laily Rand. I nia ge of Dituglas I frlut of fatal love

All th it 1 ,iwe rhl tire', 1 pay i
n) re.

N'rr,. KRfper ?ri an liil arill.n sil poffels me,

Chlckling Ihe louv and foin(rllTi i) a ion.
Yet I was fi!lal to mr hin bl't plarcii.
Inlt (id nmy lire lih)ipals tlhe re-t ') ;.cn
As thwi, exirellet .all of r.o.lankild ?

Lady Ran,). Arll, niy l., i : in i' tlh)lu dost behold
The pour remn;i.I s of beauty once aiJul 'd ;

The

The autumn of my days is come already;
For sorrow made my fumrmer haste away,
Yet in my prime I equali'd not thy father;
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet sometimes
Like- the dove's; and, as he pleas'd, hew von
All hearts with softness, or with Ipirit aw'd.

Nor,. How did he fall ? Smle'twa, a bloody field
When DougL.s dy'd. 0 I have mu.-h to ak !

Lady Rand. Hereafter thou thalt bhar the lengthen'd

tale

Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
At present this-:hou art the rightful heir
Of yonder caiile, and the wide i.o;i.ains
Which now Lord Randolph, as my hulband, holds.
But thou ihalt not be wrong'd ; I have the pow'r
To right tee still: before the king I'll kneel,
And call Lord Douglas to protect'his blood.

Neorv. The blood of Douglas will protest itself.
Lady Rand. But we shall need bbth friends and fa-

vour, boy,

To wrest thy lands and lordship from the gripe
Of Randolph and his kinsman. Yet I think
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity;
My life incline the virtuous to believe.

Nort. To be the ion of Douglas is to me

Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in the field I'il seek for fame and fortune.
Lady Rand. Thou dost not know what perils and in-

jultice

Await the poor man's valour. - ! my son!
The noblest blood of all the land's abal'd,
Having no lacquey but pale poverty.
Too long haft thou been thus attended, Douglas !
Too long haft thou been deem'd apeafant's child.
The wanton heir of ofme inglorious chief .
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee in the youthful sports,
Whilf thy indignant spirit fwell'd in vain !
Such contumely thou no more lialt bear:
But how I purpose to redress thy wrongs
Must be hereafter told Prudence diretts
That we should part before yon chiefs return.
Retire, and from thy ruflic follower's hand
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, dictated before

This

This caCual opportunity arose
Of private conference. Iti purport mark;
For, as I there appoint, we meet again.
Leave me,.my son, and frame thy manners still
To Norval's, not to noble Douglas' slate.

Nory. I will remember. Where is Norval now,

That good old man ?

Lady Rand. At hand conceal'd' he lies,

An useful witness. But beware, my ion,
Of yon Glcnalvon., in his guilty breast
PReides a villain's isrewdnefs, ever prone
To false conje&ure. He hath griev'd my heart.

Norv. Has he indeed ? Then let yon false Glenalvon

Beware of me. [Exit.

Lad Rand. There burst the fmother'd flame

O i thou all righteous and eternal King !
Who Father of the fatherless art call'd,
Protect my on ! --- Thy inspiration, Lord,
Hath fill'd his bosom with that sacred fire
Which in the breafis of his forefathers buin'd;
Set him on high, like them, that he may Ihinc
The ttar and glory of his native land !
Then let the minister of death descend,
And bear my willing spirit to its place.
Yonder they come. How do bad women find
Unchanging aspects to conceal their guilt,
When l,-by reason ard by justice urg'd,
Full hardly can dissemble with these men
In nature's pious cause!

Enter Lord RanAolph andGlenalurn.

Lord Rand. Yon gallant chief,

Of arms enamour'd, all repose disclaims.

Lady Rand. Be not, my lord, by his example fway'd:

Arrange the bus'nefs of to-morrow now,
And, when you enter, speak of war no more. [Exit.
Lord Rand. 'Tis so, by Heav'n ! her mien, her voice,

her eye,
And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

Glen. He parted from her now. Behind the mount,

Amongst the trees, I saw him glide along.

Lord Ran. Forlad fequester'd virtue she's renown'd!
Gln. Most true, my lord.

Lord

Lord Rand. Yet this diftinguifl'd dame

Invites a youth. the acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This aGignation [feus a letter] the affaflin freed.
Her manifeil affecion for the youth
Might breed suspicion in a hutband's brain,
Whose gertle consort all for love had wedded:-
Much more in mine. Matilda never lov'd me.
Let no man, after me, a woman wed,
Whose heart he knows he has not, tho' she brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry;
For let her ieem, like the night's shadowy queen,
Cold and contemplative, he cannot trust her:
She may, file will, bring shame and f6rrow on him;
The worfi of sorrows and the worst of shames!

Glen. Yield not, my lord, to such affliting thoughts;

But let the spirit of an husband sleep
Till vour own ser.fes make a sure conclusion.
This'billet must to blooming Norval go:
At the next turfn awaits my trulry spy;
I'll give it him refitted for his master.
In the close thicket take your secret stand;
The moon shines bright, and your own eyeslmay judge
Of their behaviour.

Lord Rand. Thou doil counsel well.
Glen. Permit me now to make one flight elfay.

Of all the trophies which vain mo;tals boafl,
By wit, by valour, or by wisdom won,
The firit and faileft in a young man's eye,
Is woman's captive heart, Successful love
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind !
And the proud conq'ror in triumph moves
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Lord Rand. And what avails this maxim ?
Glen. Much, my lord !

' Withdraw a little: I'll accost young Norval,
And with ironical derisive counsel
Explore hisSpirit. If he is no more
Than humble Norval, by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as he is, he'll firink aitonifi'd from me;
But if he be the fav'rite of the fair,
Lov'd by the firfl of Caledonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.

Lord. Rand. 'Tis shrewdly thought..
Glen. When we grow loud draw near. But let nmylord

His riling wrath restrain. ' [Exit. Rand.
--------'--Tis frange, by Heav'n!
That the Ihould run full tilt her fond career
To one so little known. She too that feem'd
Pure as the winter fream, when ice embofs'd
Whitens its couife. Even I did think her chafle,
Whole charity exceeds not. Precious sex!
.Whole deeds lascivious pats Glenalvon's thoughts!

[N'orv. appears.

His port I love; he's in a proper mood
To chide the thunder, if at him it roar'd.
Has Norval seen the troops ?

Nor.v. I'he setting fun,

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale,
And as the warriors mov'd, each polish'd helm,
Corfet, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at its top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they seeni'd,
An host angelic, clad in burning arms.

Glen. Thou talk'ft it well; no leader of our hofl,
In founds more lofty, speaks of glorious war.

Nortv. If I flall e'er acquire a leader's name,

My speech will be less ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiraiion
Vents itself freely, since no part is mine
Of praite pertaining to the great in arms.

Glen. You wrong yourself, brave fir, your martial

deeds

Have rank'd you with the great; but mark me, Norval;
Lord Randolph's favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know the soldiers, counsel you:
Give them all honour; seem not to command,
Else they will scarcely brook your late sprung pow'r,
Which nor alliance props nor birth adorns.

Naorv. Sir, I have been accuflom'd all my days

To hear and speak the plain and simple truth;
And though I have been told, that there are men
Who borrow friendlhip's tongue to fpeak.their lcorn,
Yet in such language l am little /kill'd;
Therefore I thank Glenalvdn for his counsel,
Although it founded harlhly. Why remind

m

Me of my birth obihure ? Why slur my pow'r
Vi:h fich contemrptuous term ?

G.'7r. I did not mea-
To g.'l your pride, which now I fee is great.

S;:-. IMy pride
G;':.u. Sue press i; as vou wifl to prosper.

Yo;- pride's x-ce:.ive. Yet for Randolph's fake
i .:'ii nr.: ave you ro its rash direjtion.
I ::'s vOn s.eii and fro.vn at'high-born men,
T:i-;: v: :u -hev -,'i! endure a (licpherd's scorn ?

a r ., A fnephe.cl' lcorn !
G-L.I. Yies. Ir.'lu p efunme

T- b-nd on soldiers thcie diidainfuil eyes,
.v>.-..: .-ii! ! ec;t , e of vou ?

';,-. i'-: thi- were tld- - [.,Aid,.
h
' .; .) n-) .cr1 ors o. hy prefimptuous self?
'r:'7. Ha i Dof; th'u thlreaten me ?
I>\-;rv. D.' thou not hear!
G:;. 'n.'iliingiy I did: a noblerfoe
Hd?. not bten q,;rftion'd thus. But fuchas thee---

^-.-. {Whom dot thou think me ?
G.';. 'nrva!,
Try-. oam -
Ar. '.', is Norvai in Glenalvon's eyes i

G:ic. A pe!af.n's ion, a wand'ring beggar boy;
At be- no more, tven if he speaks the truth.

Ko-r,. i lfe as thou art, doR thou -ifpect my-truth?
G. -.. Iy truth 1 thon'rt al! a lie; and false as hell
Is ;he - a;ing!orious tale thru told'f to P.andolp h.

,-v-.' if Iw.ere chain'd, unarnn'd, nd bedrid old,

Perhaps I should revile: but as I am,
I have no tongue to rail. The humble Norval
Is of a race that dirive not but with deeds,
Did I not fear to freeze thy fhaiiow valour,
An.d make thee Cik too soon beneath my sword,
I'd tell thee ;hat thou art. I know thee oeell.

Gie-. Dost thou know Glenalvon, born to command
Ten thouland laves like thee ?

-.,j. Villa:,, no more:

Draw and defend thy life. I did design
To c-.'e def 'd thee in another cause;
5: Hear'n accelerates its vengeance on thee.

'o-- for m7 own and Lady Randolph's wrongs,

Eahr

Enter Lord Ranidobb.
tord Rand. Hold, I command you bath. ,The maa

that stirs
Makes me his foe.

NAorrv. Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly fo:nded, noble Randolph.

-Glen. Hear him, my lord; he's wvond'rous condc.

scending t
Mark the humility of fiepherdi Norval 1

Norrv. Now you m:y icoff in lafety.

[Shcathls h/usvord.

Lord Rand. Spe.k not thus,

Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The caus'e of quarrel, then I'll judge betwixt you.

Norv. Nay, my good lord, tho' 1 revere you much,

Mvy cause I plead iot, nor dcmand your judgment.
I lluth to speak ; I will not, cannot fpealk
Th'opprobrious words that I from him have borne.
To the liege lord of my dear native land
J owe a lubjeC's homag ; but C'cel him
And his high arbitration I'd reiec&.
Within my bfoiiin reigns an(otler lord:
Honour, ibYle judge anild u.Tpire of itself.
If n.y free fplech offend you, noble Randolph,
,Resolec your favonrs, and lct Norval go
Hlence as he came, alone, but not diihonouir'd.

Lord Rand. Thus far l'li mediate with ispart.al

voice i

The ancicrt foe of Caledonia's land
Now waveg his banners o'er her frighted fields.
SufLenid-yoir purpofi till your coultry's arms
Repel the bold inveader; theln decide
The private quarrel.

Glen. I agree to this.
Niorv. And [.

.,':tcr Scr-taNf.

Ser,. The barquet waits.
Lord Rad.'. We come [Exil Ranadolpi ant Scv.
Glen. Norvai,

Let not our varihnce mar the focia! hour,
Nor vrong the lho(pita'ity of Randolph.
Nor flowning ;ngcir, nor vet wriktle.cd hate,
Sl A!ll ir .l my cuiltcn. iis*; , r l . :i . i..

# ACT V.

-NorJetour strife disturb the gentle dame.

Nor~. Think not.fo lighty, fr, of my reteptmentt
-.Whtn we contend again, our strife is mortal. TExMn.

ACT 7r.
-SCE NE, Tre oJ10.'

Enater-Dff g.
T HIS is the place, the centre of the graOv.

Here stands the Qak, the mosoajh of tlcwoid.

How sweet and olemn is this.midnight feire,
The silver mroon, unclouded, holds berway
Thro' skies where I could o.unt each littlc star.
The fanning west wind fearcely stirs the -kavY;
The river, rulhing o'er its pebbl'd bd,
Imposes silence with a stilly found.
In such a place as this, at such an hour,
If ancestry can be in aught believ d,
Defccnding spirits have convers'dwith man,
And told the secrets of the world unknown.

Enter Old Nrval. . .
Wrm. 4Tis he. But what if he should chide Ma

bence ?

Wisust reproach I fear. [Deglas tro u #xdJ: bi.
Forgive, Forgive. -
Canst thou forgive tbe man, the felfilh man,
Who bred Sir Malcolm's heir a flepherd's foni

Doug. Kinel not to me; thou art my father still!

'Thy wiih'd-for presence now completes my or.
Welcome to me: my fortunes thou fialt share,
And ever onour'd with thy Douglas live.

N3r~. And dost thou call me father ? 0, my son,

I think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee! 'Twas my cinm.
Which in the wilderness so long conceal'd
The blossom of thy youth.

Dwr. Not worse the fruit

That oi the wilderness the blofrom blow'd. -
Amongst the Ihepherds, in the humble cot,

I learnd formeleffons, which I'llonot forget"
When l1inhabit yonder lofty tow'rs.
I, who was once a swain,. will evcr prove
The poor man's friend; and, When my vassals bow,.
Norval lhall Imooth the crested pride of Douglas.

Naerv; Let me but live to fee thine exaltation !

Yet grievous are my fears. 0 leave this place,
And thofecunfriendlytow'rs.-

Doug. Why should I leave them ?
NoMr. Lord Randolph and his kinsman seek your

life.

Doug. How. -know's thou that?
Norv. I will inform you how.

When ev'ning came I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And fondly trod in eaeh'accuffom'd path
That to the cflle leads. Whilfi thus I rang'4-
I-was alarm'd with unexpeEted founds
Of earnet voices. On the perfims came;
Unseen I lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other as they talk'l. Lord Randolph this,
And that Gtenalvon: flill of you they spoke,
And of-thelady : threat';ing was their speech,
T.ho' but imperfectly my ear could hear it.
'Twas firange they said, a wonderful discovery I
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Doug. Revenge! for what?
Nore. For being what you are,

Sir Malcolm's heir: how else have you offended ?
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there fat musing how I belt might find.
Means to inform you of their wickedlpurpofe,
But I could think of none at lafl, perplex'd,
I issued forth, encompassing the'tow'r
With many a weary ltep and wihtlul look.
Now Providence hath brought you to my fight,
Let not your too courageous spirit scorn
The caution which I give.

Doug. I scorn itiot.

My mother warn'd me of Glenalvon's baseness;
But I will not fufpe& the noble Randolph.
In our encounter w ith the vile assassins
I mark'd his brave demeanour; him I'll.truft.

NTorv. I fear you wsill too far.

- D J Des.

HD;.. Here in this plce

i ;;a ,? mother's comning: fe fllall know

,

,-hat t;nU ht her ccunfel I will follow:
And cartious ever re a mother's counlds

.

You n-. depart; your presence -riay prevent
Our in:ervie'. ,

.'-. Mi- bT-,ng reft upor thee;

o , ....-; -
e -n'i d. which fuv'd thee irom the Wravef

;.: Jo t;he fC ord of foes, be near thee itill;

' iilg n-,il if aught hangs u'er thy head,

A: -p. r. lExit,

:'.-f, .c i C es mne ike a parent;

', ;mt ^ct, ihail rr, lofc the ton he loves,

:'. .o,,h hia

! I has so nd a nobler father.
i.- -.r.-. o- ' hon I .it ;hou chang'd my state

. t colt d anci: intcr fisared f de

'a .z'k ,.ill mirch.h;nce had rooted Irme,
-\t:,c! .'O ih'ive, child of anciher foil:

T-:,.plh,,n.d nro-; to io;e gay funny vale,
1 -e. e

rni ; i orno of IaY, n.y so0 tune floterls.

Yi'

e .i rs:b h HI-tv'n' s resplendent host!
'.. :,;-..;i oft h. ave of my lot complain d,
fear a.r.l ecord n myI fcl's unalter'd x ifh

r e, It n;e but be rcnown'd .

. ; y ea;' in-ire e imne fierce giautic Dane
.e a bold dcfincc to our host i

.' ie ipt:pkl it out I ill accept;
T <:. Do;;:.E con.qner, or like Douglas die.

El..t-r La.y Ra;::0lph.

L. -.; .si. ,Iy on: 'I h eard a voic--
D-u. The voice was mine.
Lja. aJZ.Didit th.li complain.aloud to Natures
hat, t in duf fhatdesat midnight hours,

- ! t .he mother an.d, tlhez ts fliould meet

. Embracilg hhn.'

D',. No- on this appy day, this better birth-dny,
-v -t'"t'r ts and w.ords are all of hope.and joy:

L';v Sat.c . d fear asnd melancholy still divide

T*'rr.mpire oi my breait with hope and joy.
N\,.,Y h.ir what I advise.

Dc.-.. Firt, let me tell
'hat :nay the tenor of your counsel change.

Lady

i.;-y Ranl. My heart forbodes some evil i
D.,ou. 'Tisniit good----

.

At eve, tmfeeun By Randolph and Glenalvon,
The good old Norval in the grove o'erheard
Their conveifation: oft they mention'd me
W'lith dreatd ul threat'nings; you they sometimes nanm'd.
'Tfwas ftranv e they faii, a wonderful discovery !
Anel ever a3l anon they' v,'d revenge.

.Ladv Ra I ,,' De'iend' u, gracious Gbd; we are be-

tray'd: : *

'They have found out the fccret of thy:birth,
ft mirft be so. That's the great dilcovery.
sir lMalcolmi's hei is come to claim his own
A:'i l llcy will be revenge!d Perhaps e'en lonw,
i rm'd antl prepar'd for murder, they hut wait
A darker and more silent hour, to break
Into the chamber where they think thou iieep'Y.
This mroment, this, ,eav'n lath ordain'd to ft-ve thee I.
Fly to the ca'np, nmy forl !

bDi,. t And !ac:-e v\ u l:hre

No: to ihe caltic let us go-;ogcth-;r;
Cail '.il ' ancient i'rva i ts ot your honfe,
Who in tieir youth did e;at you!r father's hread,.
Then tell thiem loudliv that 1 am your -son.
i int the bralfi'o mi '- n ,nci :iplu rrlrmaina
<)f inccdi love, itdelitv, o: pi;,
.,oitle i;r yo!;r'c;'iile i'ill arm, I aRl but fcw
'l'o drlive t!hose ipoilils firo' my father's hoti'.c,

L. ;,j ta:.. 0 ..italuie, N.;ture what c;in lhec; thiy

iorce ?

t'ihou genliilt oi'-prin of thq da.ring Douglas i
'iit rt!ii nor on dcstritntfin; save tityiSltf,
And I am li fe. To te they mean Inn hiarr,.-
'T'iy stay bit ik,' thy precious life in vain, .
That winditg pat h ondui'As thee ton ;rivc;,. I
Crofs-where thou let'ft a br!ad and beaten vnay,
Which,. running eastwa-rd , icad, tllec to the camp ',-
Tnftant demand ad'n:'tance to .ord Douglat:
5;hewv him these jewels which hij brother wore
Thy look, thy voice, will make him feel the trthi'.
Which I by certain proof vwill soon confirm..

D:vg. I vieid me, and'obey: but yet yerny heart''

hleeds at this partin;r. Sonething bids me stay.
Andi guard a mot'.er'' life.' "it'h hav 1' rea''

J~. , . , :' "."it-

Ofwond'rons deeds by one bold arm atchicv'd.
Our foes are two, no more; let me go forth,
And fee if any shield can guard Glenalvon.

Lady Rand. If thou regard'ft thy mother, or rever'ft

Thy father's mem'ty, think of this no more.
One thing I have to fay before we part:-
Long wert thou loft; and thou art found, my child,
Ia a r.cf fearful season. War and battle
I have great cause to dread. Too well I fee
Which way the current of thy temper sets:
To-day I've found thee. Oh my long-lof hope
If thou to giddy valour giv'll the rein,
To-morrow I may lose my son for ever.
The love of thee, before thou faw'ft the light,
Su-air'd my life when thy brave father fell.
If thou fialt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this waste world! My ion, remember me!
Dc.g. What shall I fay ? how can I give you coo-

fort ?

The God of battles of my life dispose
As may be best for you ! for whose dear fake
I 1-iU not bear mvfelf as I refolv'd.
Bat yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boast founds amongst martial men,
Hcw v'il inglorious caution suit my claim ?
The pc.it of fate unflirinking maintain.
My courtry's foes munl ,.vitels who I am.
On the invaders heads I'il prove my birth,
'Ti'l friernd and foes confers the genuine strain.
If in this frife I fall, blame not your son,
Whho, if he lives not honour'd, mui not live.

Lar- Rand. I will not utter what my hofom fezls.

Too well I love that valour which 1 warn.
Farewell, my son I my counsels are but vain:

[Emwbri;cLg.
And, as high Heav'n hath wil''d it, all must be.

[Scparae..

Gaze notcen me, thou wilt mistake the path:
i'll point it out again.

[Jufl as try arare neparati,, enter from the ivood

Lord tiar.IdcIh and Glenahon.]

Lord Rar,;. Not in her pr
. nce'.-

Gkn.

Glcn. I'm prepar'd.
Lsrd Rand. N; I command thee stay.

I go alone: it never flall be said
That I took odds to combat mortal man,
The noblest vengeance is the molt complete.

[Ex;t.
[GIlal-a.on m. -',sfome si/ps to t'e fainc si, of the

jfagr, , an,/,feakls.]

Glen. Daemons of death, come fettle on my sword,

And to a double fiaughter guide it home!
The lover and the hufnand both must dtie.

[Lodi Randlph Ielhind t/r fcencs. ]

LordRand. Draw, villain! draw.
Doug. Aifall me not, Lord PRanrdolph;
Not as thou lov'ft tlhy)fel. [Clajhing offvords,

G;cn. [r:t::NilK, ont] Now is the time.
[ a'uor Lan3 Raniilah a! the ppofit, file of tho Jlage, faint

and rfeathlefs.]
Lady Rand. Lord Randolph, hear me; all fiall be

thine own:
But spare, 0 spare my on !

Ent cr Dczilas, ewith a f:vord in cash bland.

Doug. My mother's voice !
I can protet thee fsill.

Loty Rand. He lives, he lives:

For this, for this to Heav'n eternal pr.iife !-
But sure I saw thee fall.

Do si. It was Glenal-on.
Illt as my arm had mafter'd Randolph's sword,
The villain came behind me ; but I flew him.

Lady Rand. Behind thee! ah ! thou'rt wounded ! 0

my child,
How pale thou look'ft ! And (hall I lose thee now ?

DolI,. Do not despair ! I feel a little faintnefls
I hope it will not last. [Leans upon hisfword.

Lady Rand, There is no hope 1

And we must part! the hand of Death is on thee!
0 my beloved child ! 0 Douglas ! Douglas!

[Douglas growing more and lmore faint.
Doug. Too soon we part. I have not long been

Douglas.
O Destiny! hardly thou dealeft with me i

Clouded

Clouded and hid, a frranger to myself,
In low and p:-or obfc.irity I liv'd.

si. Ra?., Has H eav'n prcferv'd thee for an end

1ie 'h:s ?

Dcig. 0 had I fal'n ns mv hrave fathers fell,

Turning with great effort.the tide of battle,
Like threm I finuld.have finii'd and relconm'd death,
But this to periflh by a villain's hand !
C:r;t t-fom nature's an<i from g!ory's course,
;Vhich never rro tal was so fond to run.
La. Rana. Hear Jiftice i hear ! firrtch thy aveng-

in, arm ! [Dolas fail.

Do:~g. Unknown I die; no tongue fliall fpcak of mt.

Some noble spirits, jucging by themfelver,
Ma?. vrt conjietrn x hait 1 might have prov'd,
A.nti ihink lile ronh wvnring to ry far.e!
But ,-lho fiall comlfrt thee?

Lai:y Rand. Dzfp-nir ! defpiir!
Dc:g. O had it plea-'d high Heav'n to let me lis

A it iie while !--My eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apace ! my mother---Oh, nr.y mother!

[Dice.

E;ter Lord Radclpb ahild ,Ania.
Lord Rand. Thy words, -the wo dc of truth, have

pierc'd mvy heart.

I .m the "-a:i of knighthood and 'of afr.'s.

h1 if n.; brave delivrerr tirvivs
Th e troinr's fivord- - .

A::.i. Aas! lojk there, nm-y oIrd.

Lc;d ':and,. The mother and her sorn! I ow curst I

W.s I ths caule ? No; I'was not the cause.
Yin m-,a;thlcf villain did seduce my foul
T,' frantic j aTnul' .

,;a:.:a. 1My lad ives

The agony of griel hath but fwppreft
A ;.i'e her pow'rs.
Lord Rai;.' But my deliv'rer's dead 1

[Lady Randolph eco

, errig.]
L Rai; R..d.. Where am 1 now ? fiill in this wretchetd

world ?

Gref ca.nn,'t break a heart so hard as'mioie.
L-cri Rad. 0 misery!. . .

· Amidtat

Amidst thy raging grief I mua proclaim
MIy innocence.

Lay Rand. Thy innocence!
'Lerd Rani. My guilt
Is innocence compar'd with what thou think'ft it.

Lady Rand. Of thee I think not: what have I to do

With thee or any thing ? Mly son

. my son !

My beautiful! my brave ! how fond was I
Ofthee and of thy valour ! My proud heart
O'erflorx'd this day with transport, when I tbhuglt
Of growing old amidst a race of thine,
Who might make up to me their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and my huftand's name.
Now all my hopes are dead ! A little while
Was I a wife! :a mother not so long!
What am I now ?-I know- - .But I ihall be
That only whilst I plcale; for {uch a son
And filch a hulband drive me to mv fate. [Runs out.
Lord Rani. Follow her, Anna : 1 myself would follow,
But in this rage ile must abnor my presence.

[Exit Anna.

Enter Old Niorval.
Nor. I heard the voice of woe; Heav'n guard nri

child!

Lord Rand. Already is the idle gaping crowd,

The spiteful vulgar, come to gaze on Randolph.
Be gone.

Norv. .I fear thee not. I will not go.

Here I'll remaian. I'm an accompice, Lord,
With thee in murder. Yes, my lins did help
To riifh down to the ground tlis lovely piant.
O noblest youth that ever yet was horn
SweeteRt and bes, gentlest and bravelt spirit,
That ever blest the wv-rld WVretch that I an,
Who saw that noble ipirit fveil and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it!
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do thee jufice and reveal the secret
Wh',ich, timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's snare Oh ! I am punifi'd no:v ,
These are the hairs tht should have ftrew'd the ground,
And not the locks of Douglas.

[r,'onas himf.ilf uepa tkc beed of Dourglas.

Lard

A place of reft, if grief will let thee rest.
I willreward altho' I cannot'pubia'h.
CurI, curst Glenalvon, he efcap'd too well,
Tho* fain'and batled by the hand he hated.
Fo*amig with rage ahd fury to the lass,
Cursing his conqueror, the felon dy'd.

: E»tHr J#an.

A~. My Lord! my lord!
Lid Rmd. Speak; I can hear of horror.

bto. .Horror indeed !
LardR~. Matilda ?
Aum. Is no more;

She ran, she flew like lighning up the bill;
Nor halted till the p irecihe gaiii'd,
Beneath whos lowring top the river falls,.
=i'gulph'd in rifted rocks; thither Ihefcame,-
As fearlef as the eagle lights upon it~.
And headklng down--

LEr.Raid. 'Twas I! alas! 'twas I

That fill'd her breafl with fury; drove herdown
The precipice of dcath! Wretch that I arn! .

4n.ua. 0 had you seen her laR dcfpaiiog look!

Upon.the brinklhestoodt.atlcaher head.'
Down on the deep-; then lifting up her eyes-
And her white Hands to heav'n, seeming tofay,
* Why am I forc'd to this.;" the plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord Rand. I will not vent

in vain complaints, the pafllon of my foul.-
Peace in this world I never can enjoy;
These wounds the gratitude of Randolph gave.
They speaks aloud, and with the voice of fate
Denounce my doom.. Iam refolv'd. I'll go
Straight to ihe battle; where the manthat mkes--
Mc turn aside must threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy mistress, take this ring,
Full warrant of my pow'r. Let ev'ry rite
With cost and pomp upon their fno'rals wait;
For Randolph hopes he never.hall return.

*,. 5-..-' -[ETvnrt aft

Es,
'.; ; :- S.'; ,

. _- ioo THE END;
; -.-~

# EPILOGUE.

EPILOGUE.

AN Epilogue I ak'd; but not one word

Our bard will write: he vows 'tie mol abfurh .
With comic wit to contradit the train
Of tragedy, and make your sorrows vain.
Sadly he fays, That pity is the bet,
The noblest passion of the human breast;
';or when its acrcd ftrcams the heart o'eriow,
In gules pleafurewith the tide of woe;
And when its waves retire, like thofc of Nile,
They leave behind them such a golden foil,
That there the virtues without culture grow
There the sweet blossoms of affcaion blow.-
These were his words. 'Void of delufire art --
I felt them; for he spoke them from his heart.
Nor will I now attempt, with witty folly,
To chace away cdlefiial melancholy.
