/4/./3 8<&C')
DOUGLAS:

A
TRAGEDY.

As it is adted at the
THE A T R ES

IN
GREAT-BRITAIN and IRELAND.

Non ego fum vates, fed prifci confcius avi.
By the Rev. Mr. H U M E.

To which are prefixed,

I. AnAddrers to the Author. Rev. Presbytery of Edin

By David Hume Efq; burgh.
Author of the Hi(tory of III. Copy of a Declaration,
Great Britain, i'c. by the Rev. Prelbytery
U. Copy of an Admonition of Glasgow.
and Exhortation, by the

BELFAST:
Printed by and for J A M E S M A G E E, in Bridge.

fireet, M, DCC, LVIII.

# An Address from DAVID HUME, Esq; Author of the History of Great - Britain, &c. To the Rev. Mr. HUME, Author of DOUGLAS, a Tragedy.

3 ]

An A4ddrefsfrom DAVID HUME, E/ ; Author of tie

Hiflory ofGreat.Britain, &c. To the Rev. Mlr. HU :E,
Authorof DOUGLAS, a Tragedy.

My dear Sir,
IT was the Practice of the Antients to address their

Compositions only to Friends and Equals, and to

render their Dedications Monuments of Regard and
Affecion, not of Servility and Flattery. In those Days
of ingenuous and candid Liberty, a Dedication did
Honour to the Perron to whom it was addrelfed, with-
out degrading the Author. If any Partiality appeared
towards the Patron, it was at lear the Partiality of
Friendship and Affetion.

Another Instance of true Liberty, of which antient

Times can alone afford us an Example, is the Liberty
of Thought which engaged Men of Letters, however
different in their abftradt Opinions, to maintain a mutu-
al Friendhip and Regard; and never to quarrel about
Principles, while they agreed in Inclinations and Man-
ners. Science was often the Subjet of Dilputation,
never of Animosity. Cicero, an Academic, addrefled
his philosophical Treatises, sometimes to Brutus, a
Stoic; sometimes to Atticus, an Epicurean.

I have been seized with a strong Desire of renewing

there laudable PraCtices of Antiquity, by addrefling the
following Difiertations to you, my good Friend: For
such I will ever call and'elleem you, notwithltanding
the Opposition which prevails between us, with Re-
gard to many of our speculative Tenets. These Diffe-
rences of Opinion I have only found to enliven our
Conversation; while our common Paflion for Science
and Letters served as a Cement to our Friendship. I
Itill admired your Genius, even when I imagined that
you lay under the Influence of Prejudice; and you
sometimes told me, that you excused my Errors, on

A 2 Account

[ 4

Account of the Candour and Sincerity, which, you
thought accompanied them.

But to tell Truth, it is less my Admiration of your

fine Genius, which has engaged me to make this Ad-
dress to you, than my Elteem of your Charafter and
my Affection to your Person. That Generosity of
lMind which ever accompanies you; that Cordiality of
Friendlhip, that spirited Honour and Integrity, have
long interested me firongly in your Behalf, and have
made me desirous that a Monument of our mutual
Amity lhould be publickly ereced, and, if pollible, be
preserved to Posterity.

I own too, that I have the Ambition to be the first

who shall in public express his Admiration of your noble
Tragedy of Douglas; one of the molt interesting and
pathetic Pieces, that was ever exhibited on any Theatre.
Should I give it the Preference to the Merope of Massei,
and to that of Voltaire, which it resembles in its Tub.
jef; should I affirm, that it contained more Fire and
Spirit than the former, more Tendernels and Simplici.
ty than the latter; I might be accused of Partiality:
And how could I entirely acquit myself, after the Pro-
fellions of Friendtlip which I have made you ? But the
unfeigned Tears which flowed from every Eye, in the
numerous Representations which were made of it on
this Theatre; the unparalleled Command, which you
appeared to have over every Affecion of the human
Brea : These are inconteflible Proofs, that you possess
the true theatric Genius of Shakefpear and Otway, re.
fined from the unhappy Barbarism of the one, and Li-
centioufnefs of the other.

My Enemies, -you know, and I own even sometimes

my Friends, have reproached me with the Love of Para-
doxes and singular Opinions; and I expec to be exposed
to the fame Imputation, on Account of the Character,
whichI have here given of yourDouglas. I Ihall be told no
doubt, that I bad artfully chosen the only rime, when
this high elteem of that Piece could be regarded as a
Paradox, to wit, before its Publication; and that not
being able to contradict in this Particular the Sentiments
of the Public, I have, at lealt, resolved to go before

them.

them. But I (hall be amply compensated for all there
Pleafantries, if you accept this Testimony of my Re-
gard, and believe me to be, with the greatest Sinceri-
ty, Dear Sir, Your molt affit&ionate Friend, and hum-
ble Servant,

Edinb. Jan. 3, 1757. DAVID HUME.

+-^ ^--s^

+ -s^

+ -1·

+ -+ + -+-+ 4-

Copy of the Admonition and Exhortation by the Re.
verend P esbytery of Edinburgh, dated the sth Day
of January, 1757.
T H E Presbytery taking into their serious Confide-

ration, the declining State of Religion, the open

Profanation of the Lord's Day, the Contempt of public
Worlhip, the growing Luxury and Levity of the present
Age; in which so many seem Lovers of Pleasure, more
than Lovers of God : And being particularly affeped
with the UNPRECEDENTED COUNTENANCE given of
late to the Playhouse in this Place, when the State of the
Nation, and the Circumltances of the Poor, make such
hurtful Entertainments still more pernicious; judged it
their indispensable Duty to express in the most open and
solemn Manner, the deep Concern they feel on this
Occasion.

The Opinion which the Christian Church has always

entertained of Stage Plays and Players, as prejudicial to
the Interests of Religion and Morality, is well known;
and the fatal Influence which they commonly have on-
the far greater Part of Minkind, particularly the younger
Sort, is too obvious to be called in Queltion.

To enumerate how many Servants, Apprentices, and

Students in different Branches of Literature, in the City
and Suburbs, have been seduced from their proper Bu
finess, by attending the Stage, would be a painful, dif.
agreeable Talk.

The Prefbtery in the Year, 1727, when consisting of

many pious, prudent, and learned Minilters, whose
Praise is in all the Churches, being aware of there Evils,
did prepare a Paper, which was read from the fevera!

A 3 Pulpit

[ 6 ]

Pulpits within their Bounds, warning their People a.
gainft the dangerous Infe&ion of the Theatre then c.
reced there.

In the Year, 1737, the Legislature, in their great

Wisdom, did by an At of the loth of George 1I.
enat and declare, " That every Person who should,
" for Hire or Reward, a&, or cause to be afted, any
" Play, or other Entertainment of the Stage, without
" the special Licence and Authority mentioned in the
i said At, should be deemed a Rogue and a Vaga.

bond, and for every such Offence (hould forfeit the
" Sum of 5o. Sterling".

At that Time a Project was set on Foot to obtain a

licensed Theatre in this City; but the Malters and Pro.
fefflrs of the University, supported by the Magistrates,
having prepared a Petition, setting forth the dangerous
Tendency of a Play-house here, with respect to the im.
portant Interelts of Virtue and Learning, the Projec was
laid aside.

The Players, however, being so audacious as to

continue to at in Defiance of the Law, the Presbytery
did, at their own Charge, profeccte them before the
Court of Session; and prevailed in the Process. The
Players were fined in Terms of Law; and Warrants
being iflued for apprehending them, they fled from Ju-
ftice. But others came in their Place; who lince that
Time have attempted to elude the Law, by changing
the Name of the PLAYHOUSE into that of the CON-
CERT-HALL.

As such a flight Evasion, the mere Change of a

Name, could not make the fmallelt Variation in the
Nature of the Thing, the Presbytery continued to do
all in their Power, and in their Sphere, to prevent the
growing Evil; and think themselves at this Time
oudly called upon, in ONE BODY, and with ONE
VOICE, to expoflulate, in the Bowels of Love and
Compassion, with all under their Care and Infpec.
tion.

When our gracious Sovereign, attentive to the Voice

of Providence, is calling from the Throne to Humilia-
tion and Prayer, how unseemly is it for his Subjecs to

give

give themselves up to Mirth and Jollity ? When the
War in which we are engaged, and many awful Tokens
of the divine Displeasure, bespeak us, in the Language
of an inspired Writer, to redeem tie Time because the
Days are evil, should that Time be squandered away in
running the con(tant Round of foolilh, not to fay sinful
Amusements? When the Wants and Cries of the nu-
merous Poor require extraordinary Supplies, how un.
accountable is it to lavish away vast Sums for such vain
and idle Parpofes ? When the Wisdom of the Nation
has guarded the Inhabitants of this City and Suburbs
from the Infetion of the Stage, by a Plain and express
Statute; is it not a high Instance of Folly, to break
down that Barrier, and open a Door with their own
Hands for theatrical Representations which are in
many RefpeCs no less inconsistent with good Policy,
than unfriendly to Religion; and will be found soon;
er or later, to assec their temporal as well as spiritual
Interests.

On there Accounts, and for many other obvious and

weighty Considerations, the Presbytery, warmed with
ju(t concern for the Good of Souls, do in the Fear of
God, WARN, EXHORT, and OBTEST, all within theit
Bounds, as they regard the Glory of God, the Credit
of our holy Religion, and their own Welfare, to walk
worthy of the Vocation wherewith they are called, by
(hewing a sacred Regard to the Lord's Day, and all the
Ordinances of divine Inflitution; and by discouraging,
in their refpetive Spheres, the illegal and dangerous En-
tertainments of the Stage.

The Presbytery would plead with ALL in Authority,

with TEACHERS of Youth, PARENTS, and MASTERS
of Families, to restrain by every habile Method, such
as are under their Influence, from frequenting these Se-
minaries of Folly and Vice. They would particularly
hefeech the younger Part of their Flock, to beware, lefR,
by Example, or from a foolilh Delire of appearing in
the fashionable World, they be misled into such perni-
cious Snares; Snares which mutt necessarily retard, if
not entirely mar, that Progress in the refpetive Parts of
their Education, on which their future Usefulness and

A 4 Success

Success depend. And, lafly, they would intreat and obtelt
Persons of all Ranks and Conditions, that, instead of con.
tributing to the growing Licentiousness of the Age, they
may diltinguilh themselves by Ihining as Lights in the
World, being blameless and harmless, the Sons of God,
without Rebuke, in the Midlt of a crooked and perverse
Nation; :.CCUPlNG, for the great Purposes of the
Honour of God and the Good of Mankind, that Time,
that Subliance, and those other Talents which they
have received from their Lord and Malter.

On the whole, the Presbytery do, in the molt earnel

Manner, call upon all who have the Interest of Religion
at Heart, to plead fervently at the Throne of Grace,
in the prevailing Name of the great Mediator, until tle
Spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the Wilder.
nets be a fruitful Field. and the fruitful Field be count.
edfor a Forest: Then Judrment J/all dwell in the Ifil-
dernefs. and Righteoufnerf remain in the fruitful Field;
andthe WIork of Righteouftefs shall be Peace, and the
Efe Of Righteoufinie/, Quietnels and A4lurancefor ever.

The Prelbytery appoint this ADMONITION and Ex.

HORTATION to be read from all the Pulpits within their
Bounds, on the last Sabbath, being the thirtieth Day
of this Month, immediately after divine Service before
Noon.
Copy cf the Declaration of the Rev. Presbytery of Glaf

gow, dated the x4th Day February 17S7.

HE Prelbytery of Glasgow having seen a printed

TPaper, intitled, An Admonition and Exhortation
of the Reverend Presbytery of Edinburgh, which, among
other Evils prevailing, laments the extraordinary and
unprecedented Countenance given of late to the Play-
house in that City; and having good Reason to believe,
that this refers to the following melancholy but notori-
ous Sacs, that one who is a Minilter of the Church of
Scotland, did himself write and compose a Stage-Play,

intitled,

9 ]

intitled, The Tragedy of Douglas, and got it to be aced
on the Theatre at Edinburgh; and that he, with feve-
ral other Ministers of this Church, were present, and
some of them oftncr than once, at the acing of the said
Play before a numerous Audience: The Prelbytery be-
ing deeply affected with this new and Itrange Appear-
ance, think it their Duty to declare, as they hereby do,
that they agree with the Presbytery of Edinburgh in
their Sentiments with respect to Stage-Plays; and par-
ticularly that fucb Entertainments, from what has been
usually exhibited in them, and also from the dissolute
Lives (for the molt part) and infamous Charaters of
the Players, have been looked upon by the Christian
Church in all Ages, and of all different Communions,
as extremely prejudicial to Religon and Morality, as
well as hurtful to the other valuable Interelts of human
Society, by the wasteful expence of Money and Time
they have occasioned; and being convinced by long
Experience, a sure Test of the Tendency of any Action
or Pracice, how vain it is to expect such a Reformation
of the Stage as is conGftent with the Ends aforesaid;
and therefore such Entertainments should be discouraged
and laid aside: And the Presbytery further confidering,
that the unprecedented Countenance given to the Play-
house, in the Inltance mentioned, is greatly aggravated
by a late A& of Parliament, rendering the Stage (be-
cause not licensed) unlawful in Scotland, and alto from
the present Circumltances of the Nation with regard to
the War we are engaged in, the Dearth of Provisions,
and the awful Tokens of the Divine Anger against us:
They therefore hereby appoint and inltru& such of their
Members as lhall represent them in the infuing general
Aflembly of this Church, to move and infil in a regular
Manner, that the venerable Alfembly do declare, by a
publick At, their Judgment and that of this National
Church against the Entertainments of the Theatre, as
of very hurtful Tendency to the Interests of Religion
and Society. Idly, That the Assembly do ftrittly en-
quire whether the Fats above-mentioned, viz. that a
Mlinilter of this Church has composed and procured to
be a&ed on the Theatre of the Canongate of Edin -

A 5 burgh,

[ to "]

burgh, the Tragedy called Douglas, and that the Re.
presentation of the said Tragedy was attended by him
and several other Ministers, have been under the Confl.
deration of the Presbyters respectively concerned; and
whether there Ministers, having been found guilty, have
been censured as their Faults deserved ; and to give
such Directions as they in their Wisdom (hall find ne.
ceflary, that such Ministers and all others may be fenfl.
ble that the Church of Scotland will never protect her
Members in Practise so unbecoming their Charater,
and of such pernicious Tendency to the great Interefs
of Religion, Industry and Virtue. And laily, that the
Aflembly would ule their belt Endeavours to obtain
such an Explication and Enforcement of the Act of the
17th of Geo. II. anent the Play-House, as it may not
be liable to the pitiful Evalions by which it is now e.
luded.

PROLOGUE

# PROLOGUE.

PROLOGUE.

Spoken by Mr. SP ARKS.
JN antient times, when Britain's trade was arms,

And the lov'd muifick of heryouth alarms.

A god-like race fuftain'dfair England's fame;
Iho has not heard of gallant PIERCY's name;
Ay, and of DIUGLAS? Such illuf/rioos foes
In rival Rome and Carthage never rose ?
From age to age bright hone the Britih fire,
And every hero was a hero's fire.
When powerful fate decreed one warrior's doom,
Up/prung the Ph'nix from his parent's tomb.
But whilfi these generous rivals fought and fell,
These generous rivals laI'd each othet well:
Tho' many a bloody field was loft and won,
Nothing in hate, in honour all was done.
When PIERCY wrong'd, defy'd his prince or peers,
Fa/l came the DJUGLAS, with his Scottilh spears;
And, when proud DOUGLAS made his King.hisfoe,
For DOUGLAS, PIERCY bent his English bow.
Expell'd their native homes by adverfefate,
They knock'd alternate at each other's gate:
Then blaz'd the caflle, at the midnight hour,
For him whose arms hadJhook its firmefl tower.
This night a DOuGLAS your protelion claimes:;
A wife! a mother! pity's fcftefi names:
The flory of her woer indulgent hear,
Andgrant your suppliant all/he begs, a tear: '
In confidence /he begr; and hopes tofind
sAch Epglilh irvatl like neb'e PIERCY's Rind -

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

RD RAMATIS PER SON E.

LONDON. EDINBURGH. DUBLIN.

Lord RANDOLPHI Mr. RIDOUT. Mr. YOUNGER. M. DEXTER.

GLENALVON, Mr. SMITH. Mr. LOVE. -Mr. STAYLEY.

NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. BARRY. Mr. DIGGS. Mr. SHERIDAN. 7 9snY

STRANGER, Mr. SPARKS. Mr. HAYMAN. Mr. LEE.
SERVANTS.

W O M E N,

MATILDAOLS Ldy ANMrs. WOFFINGTON. Mrs. WARD. '; Mrs. KENNEDY. ///
ADO Mrs. VINCENT Mrs MiG. P P.
ANNA, Mrs. VINCENT. Mrs, HOPCINN Mils G. PaxLrps.

# ACT I. SCENE. I.

D O U G L A S::

A.
TR AGED Y.

AC T 1. SC E NE. I.
The court of a caflea, surrounded with woods.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

7E woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom.
; Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth

The voice of sorrow from my burfing heart,

Farewel a while: I will not leave you long;
For in your shades I deem some Epirit dwells,::
Who from the chiding Rieam, or groaning oaks .
Still hears; and answers to MATILDA'S moan.
0 DOUGLAS ! DOUGLAS ! If departed ghosts
Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of that wood thou art.
And with the pafion of immortals hear'st
My lamentation: hear'li thy wretched wife
Weep for her husband slain, her infant loft.
My brother's timeless death If eem to mourn,
Who perifli'd with thee on this fatal day.
To thlee I lift my voice; to thee address
The plaint which mortal ear has-never heard.
0 disregard me not; though I am call'd
Another's now, my heart is wholly thine.

Incapable

Incapable of change, affecion lies
Buried, my DOUGLAS, in thy bloody grave.
But RANDOLPH comes, whom fate has made my Lord,
To chide my anguilh, and defraud the dead.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.
Lord Ran. Again there weeds of woe! fay, do'st thou

well

To feed a paflion which consumes thy life?
The living claim rome duty; vainly thou
Beltow'lt thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady Ran. Silent, alas! is he for whom I mourn:

Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives.

Lord Ran. Time, that wears out the trace of deepel

anguili,

Has par o'er thee in vain. Wou'd thou wert not
Compos'd of grief and tenderness alone!
Sure thou art not the daughter of Sir MIALtOLM:
Strong was his Rage, eternal his resentment:
For when thy brother fell, he fniil'd to hear
That DJUGLAS' son in the fame field was (lain.

Lady Ran. Oh ! rake not up the a'nies of my fathers:

Implacable resentment was their crime,
And grievous has the expiation been.
Contending with the DOUGLAS, gallant lives
Of either house were loft; my anceltors
Compell'd, at lad,r to leave their ancient feat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
No heir is left. Had they not been so Itern,
I had not been the lalt of all my race.

Lord Ran. Thy grief wrelts to its purposes my words,

I never alkd of thee that ardent love,
Which in the breaets of fancy's children burns.
D-cent affeAion, and complacent kindness
Were all I wish'd for; but I wish'd in vain
Hence with the less regret my eyes behold
The storm of War that gathers o'er this land:
If I lhould perilh by the Danilh fiword,
MA I LD A would not (hed one tear the more.

Lady Ran. Thou do'st not think so: woeful as I an;,

I love thy merit, and esteem thy virtues.
But whither, goelt thou now ?

Lord

'

. .

. **.
'

Lord Ran. Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on the tip toe stands
Of Expectation, and impatient alks
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are landed.

Lady Rai. 0, may adverre winds,

Far from the coast of Scotland, drive their fleet!
And every soldier of both hofs return
In peace and safety to his pleasant home!
Lord Ran. Thou speak ft a woman's, hear a warrior's

wilh:

Right from their native land, the Itormy north,
May the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
Immoveable in Caledonia's brand !
Then Ihall our foes repent their bold invasion,
And roving armies (hun the fatal Ihore.

Lady Ran. War I detell: but war with foreign foes,

Whose manners, language, and whole looks are trange,.
Is not so horrid, nor to me so hateful,
As that which with our neighbours oft we wage.
A river here, there an ideal line
By fancy drawn, divides the sifter kingdoms.
On each fide dwells a people similar,
As twins are to each other, valiant both,
Both for their valour famous thro' the world;
Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
And, if they mul have war, wage diltant war,
But with each other fight in cruel conflit.
Gallant in ltrife, and noble in their ire,
The battle is their paltime. They go forth
Gay in the morning, as to summer sport:
When ev'ning comes the glory of the morn,
The youthful warrior, is a clod of clay.
Thus fall the prime of either hapless land:
And such the fruit of Scotch and English wars.
Lord Ran. 1'11 hear no more : this melody would

make

A soldier drop his swo.rd, and doffhis arms,
Sit down and weep the conquests he bad made;
Yea, (like a monk,) ling relt and peace in heav'z'n
To fouls of s arriors in his battle slain.

Lady,

Lady, farewel: I leave thee not alone;
Yonder comes one whose love makes duty light.

Enter ANNA.

Anna. Forgive the rashness of your ANNA'S love:

Urg'd by affecion, I have thus prefum'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts:
And warn you of the hours that you neglect&
And lose in sadness.

Lady Ran. So to lore my hours
Is all the use I wish to make of time.

Anna. To blame thee, lady, suits not with my Rtate:

But sure I am, since death first prey'd on man,
Never did filler thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had loft,
In early youth, the hulband of your heart?

Lady Ran. .Oh!
Anna. Have I diltreft you-with officious love,

And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate?
Forgive me, lady: humble tho' I am,
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune;
So fervently I love you, that to dry-
There piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

Lady Ran. What power directed thy unconscious

tongue
To speak as thou hall done ? to name---

Anna. I know not:

But since my words have made my miltrefs tremble ,
- I will speak so no more; but silent mix
bMy tears with hers.

Lady Ran. No, thou Ihilt not be silent.'
'll1 trult thy faithful love, and thou shalt be-
Henceforth th' inltru&ed partner of my woes.
But what avails it ? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never.ebbing time ?
Compel the earth and ocean to give up
Their dead alive ?-

Anna. What means my noble'miltrefs ?
Lady Ran. Didlt thou not alkwhat had my sorrows

been ?-

If I in early youth had loll a huiband ?--.
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'd,

Mangld'

Mangl'd with wounds, the hulband of my youth;
And in some cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his. -------

/rina. 0! lady, mol rever'd!

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

Lady Ran. Alas! an ancient feud,

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother Ihould in battle save
The life of DOUGLAS' son, ouour house's foe:
The youthful warriors vow'd eternal friendship.
To fee the vaunted filter of his friend
Impatient, DOUGLAS to Bal irmo came,
Under a borrow'd name-My heart he gain'd;
Nor did I long refuse the hand he begg'd:
My brother's presence authoriz'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little weeks, with wings of down,
Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd lord was call'd
To fight his father's battles; and with him,
In spite of all my tears, did MiALCOLMI go.
Scarce were they gone, when my Item fire was told
That the faire stranger was lord D U GA.AS' son.
Frantic with rage, the baron drew his sword
And queflion'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint, s
Kneeling beneath his sword, falt'ring I took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
Wed one of DOUGLAS' name. Sincerity,
Thou firit of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thy onward path ! altho' the earth Ihould gape,
And from the gulf of hell deltruction cry'
To take dissimulation's winding way.

Anna. Alas ! how few of woman's fearful kind

Durst own a truth so hardy!

Lady Ran. The first truth

Is ealielt to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale.--
In a few days the dreadful tidings came
That DOUGLAS and my brother both were slain.
My lord! my life! my husband !-mighty God!
What had I done to merit such afflition ?

Anna. My dearelt lady! many a tale of tears

rve

Lady, farewel: I leave thee not alone;
Yonder comes one whore love makes duty light.

Enter ANNA.

Anna- Forgive the ralhnefs of your AN N 's love:

Urg'd by affecion, I have thus prefum'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts:
And warn you of the hours that you neglect,
And lose in sadness.

Lady Ran. So to lose my hours
Is all the use I wilh to make of time.

Anna. To blame thee, lady, suits not with my slate

But sure I am, since death sirs prey'd on man,
Never did sifter thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if -you had loft,
In early youth, the hulband of your heart?

Lady Ran. Oh !
Anna. Have I diltreft you with officious love,

And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate?
Forgive me, lady: 'humble tho' I am,
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune;
So fervently I love you, that to dry-
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

Lady Ran. What power directed thy unconscious

tongue
To speak as thou hat done ? to name---

Anna. I know not:

But since my words have made my millrefs tremble ,
I will speak so no more; but silent mix
bMy tears with hers.

Lady Ran. No, thou Ihalt not be silent.'

1'11 trust thy faithful love, and thou shalt be
Henceforth th' inltrufed partner of my woes.
But what avails it ? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never.ebbing time ?
Compel the earth and ocean to give up
Their dead alive ?

Anna. What means my noble'miltrefs ?
Lady Ran. DidRf thou not alk what had my forroars

been ?-

If I in early youth had loft a hufbaud ?--
In the cold bosom of the euth is lodg'd,

Mangld

Mangl'd with wounds, the hulband of my youth;
And in some cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his. --------

Anna. O! lady, molt rever'd!

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

Lady Ran. Alas! an ancient feud,

Hereditary evil, was the source
of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother (hould in battle save
The life of DOUGLAS' son, our house's foe:
The youthful warriors vow'd eternal friendlhip.
To fee the vaunted filler of his friend
Impatient, DOUGLAS to Bal irmo came,
Under a borrow'd name.-My heart he gain'd;
Nor did I long refute the hand he begg'd:
My brother's presence authoriz'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little weeks, with wings of down,
Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd lord was call'd
To fight his father's battles; and with him,
In spite of all my tears, did MALC:)LA go.
Scarce were they gone, when my (tern fire was told-
That the faire itranger was lord D UG I.AS' son.
Frantic with rage, the baron drew his sword
And queflion'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
Kneeling beneath his sword, falt'ring I took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
Wed one of DOUGLAS' name. Sincerity,
Thou firit of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thy onward path ! altho' the earth should gape,
And from the gulf of hell destruction cry
To take diflimulation's winding way.

Anna. Alas ! how few of woman's fearful kind

Durfl own a truth so hardy!

Lady Ran. The first truth

Is eafielt to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale.--
In a few days the dreadful tidings came
That DOUGLAS and my brother both were slain.
My lord! my life! my husband !-mighty God!
What had I done to merit such afflition?

Anna. My dearet lady! many a tale of tears.

rye

I've listen'd to; but never did I hear
A tale so hard as this.

Lady Ran. In the first days

Of my difracting grief, I found myself--
As women with to be who love their lords.
But who durit tell my father? the good priest
Who join'd our hands, my brother's antient tutor,
With his lov'd MALCOLMI, in the battle fell:
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till time should make my father's fortune mine.
That very night on which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confdent I had,
Set out with him to reach her sifter's house:
But nurse, nor infant, have I ever seen,
Or heard of, ANNA, since that fatal hour.
My murder'd child !-had thy fond mother sear'd
The loss of thee, (he had loud fame defy'd,
Defpis'd her father's rage, her father's grief,
And wander'd with thee thro' the (corning world.

Anna. Not seen, or heard of! then perhaps he lives.
Lady Ran. No. It was dark December: wind and

rain

ad beat all night. Across the Carron lay
e deftin'd road; and in its swelling flood
y faithful servant perimh'd with my child.

0 hapless Ton ! of a most hapless fire!-
But they are both at reft; and I alone
Dwell in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk,
Like a guilt-troubl'd Ghost, my painful rounds:
Nor has despiteful fate permitted me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Tho'dead to love, I was compell'd to wed
RANDOLPH, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms;
And RANDOLPH now pofleffes the domains,,
That by Sir MALCOLM'S death on me devolv4;
Domains, that should to D.UGLAS' forihaYeigiv'n
A baron's title, and a baron's.power.
Such were my soothing thoughts, while I bewail'd
The flauihter'd father of a son unborn.
And when that son came, like a ray from heav'n,
Which hines and disappears; alas! my child !

i'

How long did thy fond mother grasp the hope
Of having thee, she knew not how, reftor'd.
Year after year hath worn her hope away;
But left still undimifh'd her desire.

Anna. The hand, that spins th' uneven thread of life,
May smooth the length thit's vet to come of jour's.

Lady Ran. Not in this world; I have confider'd well
Its various evils, and on whom they fall.
Alas! how oft does goodncfs wound itself?
And sweet affetion prove the spring of woe.
o! had I died when my lov'd husband fell!
Had tome good angel op'd to me the book
Of providence, and let me read my life,
My heart had broke, when I beheld the tum
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

Anna. That God, whose ministers good angels are,
Hath shut the book in mercy to mankind.
But we mufl leave thistheme: G LENALVON comes;
Ifaw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitherwards he slowly (talks his way.

Lady Ran. I will avoid him. An ungracious person
Is doubly irksome in an hour like this.

Anna. Why speaks my lady thus of RANDOLPH'S

heir ?
Lady Ran. Because he's not the heir of RANDOLPH'S

virtues

Subtle and shrewd, he offers to mankind
An artificial image of himself:
And he with ease can vary to the talte
Of different men, its features. Self.denied,
And mailer of his appetites he seems:
But his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,
Watches to seize unseen the wilh'd.for prey.
Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
As in GLENALVON'S unrelenting mind.
Yet is he brave and politic in war,
And (tands aloft in there unruly times.
Why I describe him thus Ill tell hereafter:
Stay and detain him till I reach the caltle.

[Exit. Lady RANDOLPH.

Anna. 0 happiness ! where art thou to be found ?
1 fee thou dwelled not with birth and beauty,

Tho'

Tho' grac'd with grandeur, and in wealth array'd;
Nor dolt thou, it would seem, with virtue dwell,
Else had this gentle lady mifs'd thee not.

Enter GLENALVON.

Glen. What dolt thou muse on, meditating maid!

Like some entranc'd and visionary seer
On earth-thou Rand'ft, thy thoughts ascend to heaven.

Anna. Wou'd that I were, e'en as thou fay'd, a fee(,
To have my doubts by heav'nly vision clear'd!

Glen. What dolt thou doubt of? what haRt thou to

do

With fubjeas intricate? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be quelfioned: think of there good gifts;
And then contemplations will be pleating.

Anna. Let women view yon monument of woe,

Then boast of beauty; who so fair as the ?
But I mutr follow: this revolving day
Awakes the memory of her antient woes.

[Exit ANNA,

GLENALVON filus.

So!-Lady RANDOLPH huns-me; by and by
1' woo her as the lion wooes his brides.
The deed's a doing now, that makes me lord
Of these rich valleys, and a chief of power.
The season is molt apt: my founding Iteps-
Will not be heard amidst the din of arms..
RANDOLPH has liv'd too long: his better fate
Had the ascendant once, and kept me down:
When I bad seiz'd the dame, by chance he came,
Refcu'd and had the lady for his labour;
I 'fcap'd unknown: a fender consolation !
Heaven is my witness that I do not love
To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvest. Yet I am not safe:
By love, or something like it, fRung, inflamd,
Madly I blabb'd my pallion to his wife,
And hle has threaten'd to. acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will I do not know:
But well I know the baron's wrath is deadly.
I will not live in fear: the man I dread
Is as a Dane to me; ay, and the man
Who Itands betwixt me and my chief desire.

lHo

# ACT II. SCENE I.

o bar but he; (he has no kinsman near;
o brother in his filter's quarrel bold;
nd for the righteous cause, a Itranger's cause,
know no chief that will defy GLENALVON.

* * **
# # # **** * * # * * * * *

AC T II. SCENE I.

A Court, &c.
nter Jervanti and a stranger at one door, and Lady

RANDOLP1H andANNA at another.
adJy Ran. H A T means this clamour? firanger,

V speak secure;

alt thou been wrong'd ? have these rude men prefum'd
o vex the weary traveller on his way ?

fl Serv. By us no (tranger ever fuffer'd wrong:

rhis man with outcry wild has call'd us forth;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
Enter Lord RANDOLPH and young man, with their

swords drawn and bloody.
Lady Ran. Not vain the stranger's fears! how fares

my Lord ?
Lord Ran. That it fares well, thanks to this gallant

youth,

Whose valour fav'd me from a wretched death !
As down the winding dale I walk'd alone,
At the cross way four armed men attack'd me:
Rovers, I judge, from the licentious camp,
Who would have quickly laid Lord RANDOLPH low,
Had not this brave and generous stranger come,
Like my good angel in the hour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my foes his own.
They turn'd upon him; but his active arm
Struck to the ground, from whence they rose no more,
The fiercest two; the others fled amain,
And left him mailer of the bloody field.
Speak, Lady RANDOLPH; upon Beauty's tongue'

Dwell

Dwell accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
Speak, noble dame, and thank him for thy lord.

Lady Ran. My lord, I cannot speak what now I feel

My heart o'erflows with gratitude to heav'n,
And to this noble youth, who all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but humanely brave
Fought on your fide, against such fearful odds.
Have you yet learn'd of him whom we should thank?
Whom call the saviour of Lord RANDOLPH'S life?

Lord Ran. I ask'd that queltion, and he anfwer'd not:
But I mutt know who my deliverer is. (to the Stranger.)

Strang. A low born man, of parentage obscure,

Who nought can boalt but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Lord Ran. Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled

By the great King of Kings! thou art ordain'd
And Itampt a hero by the Sovereign hand
Of nature! blulh not, flower of modesty
As well as valour to declare thy birth.
Strang. My name is NORVAL: on the Grampian

hills

My father feeds his flocks; a frugal swain,
Whose conflant cares were to encreafe his store,
And keep his only son, myself, at home.
For I had heard of battles, and I long'd
To follow to the field Come warlike lord;
And heaven soon granted what my fire denied.
This moon which rose last night, round as my shield,
Had not yet fill'd her horns, when, by her light,
A band of fierce barbarians, from the hills,
Ruth'd like a torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The Ihepherds fled
For safety, and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'd about the enemy, and mark'd
The road he took, then halted to my friends:
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
I met advancing. The pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook the fpoil-encumber'd foe.
We fought and conquer'd. Ere a sword was drawn,

An

An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Retiring home in triumph, I difdain'd
The Ihepherd's slothful life; and having heard
That our good King had fummon'd his bold peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron fide,
I left my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to conduc my steps:
Yon trembling coward who forsook his matter.
Journeying with this intent, I pall there towers,
And, heaven.direded, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

Lord Ran. He is as wife as brave. Was ever tale
With such a gallant modefly rehears'd?
My brave deliverer! thou shalt enter now
A nobler lilt, and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame.
I will present thee to our Scottilh King,
Whose valiant spirit ever valour lov'd.
Ha! my MATILDA! wherefore (farts that tear?

Lady Ran. I cannot ay : for various affections,

And RIrangelv mingled, in my bosom swell;
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
I joy that thou art safe; and admire
Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety.
Obscure and friendless, he the army fought,]
Bent upon peril, in the rage of death
Refolv d to hunt for fame, and with his sword
To gain diltintion which his birth denied.
In this attempt unknown he might have perilh'd,
And gain'd, with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope
He (lands conspicuous; fame and great renown'
Are brought within the compass of his sword.
On this my mind reflected, whilt you spoke,
And bless d the wonder-working Lord of heaven.

Lord Ran. Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts

My deeds fiall follow where thou point't the way.
Next to myself, and equal to GLENALVON,
In honour and command (hall NoRVAL be.

Norv.

Norv. I know not how to thank you. Rude I am,

In speech and manners: never till this hour
Stood I in such a presence: yet, my lord,
There's something in my brealt which makes me bold
To fay, that NORVAL ne'er will Ihame thy favour.

Lady Ran. I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou

Ihalt be

My knight, and ever, as thou didit to day,
With happy valour guard the life of RANDOLrH.

Lord Ran. Well halt thou spoke. Let me forbid re-

ply. [TaNORVAL

We are thy debtors Rill; thy high desert
O'ertops our gratitude. I mutt proceed,
As was at firit intended, to the camp,
Some of my train I fee are speeding hither,
Impatient, doubtless, of their lord's delay.
Go with me, NORVAL, and thine eyes shall fee
The chosen warriors of thy native land,
Who languilh for the fight, and beat the air
With brandifh'd swords.

Nory. Let us begone, my lord.
Lord Ran. [To Lady RANDoLPH] About the time

that the declining fun

Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills suspend,
Expe& us to return. This night once more
Within these walls I reft; my tent I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepare the feast.
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
He in the eve of battle may resign
Himself to social pleasure; fweetelt then,
When danger to a soldier's foul endears
The human joy that never may return.

Execnt RANDOLPH and NORVAL.

S C E N E II.

Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.
Lady Ran. His parting words have Itruck a fatal

truth.

0 DOUGLAS ! DOUGLAS I tender was the time
When we two parted, ne'er to meet again! '

How

.How many years of anguish and despair
Has heav'n annex'd to those swift palling hours
Of love and fondnes ! Then my bosom's flame
Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of fear,
Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.
dnna. May gracious heav'n pour the sweet balm of

peace

Into the wounds that feller in your breaf !
For earthly consolation cannot cure them.

Lady Ran. One only cure can heav'n itself beflow;-
A grave-that bed in which the weary refl.
Wretch that I am ! Alas! why am I so!
iAt every happy parent I repine!
How blelt the mother of yon gallant NORVAL !
! ie for a living husband bore her pains,
And heard him bless her when a man was born:
She nurs'd her smiling infant on her breatl:
'Tended the child, and rear'd the pleating boy:
She, with affection's triumph, saw the youth
In grace and comeliness surpass his peers:
Whilst I to a dead husband bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.

/nnra. Alas! alas! why will you thus resume

Your grief afreth ? I thought that gallant youth
Would for a while have won you from your woe.
On him intent you gazed, with a look
Much more delighted, than your pensive eye
Has deign'd on other objets to bellow.
Lady Ran. Delighted fay'lt thou ? Oh! even there

mine eye

Found fuel for my life-confuming sorrow.
I thought, that had the son of DouGLAS liv'd,
He might have been like this young gallant Stranger,
And pair'd with him in features and in /hape,
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
Mly boy with blooming NORVAL might have number'd.
Whilst thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness
For this young itranger, wand'ring from his home
And like an orphan call upon my care.
i will prote& thee, (said I to myself)
With all my power, and grace with all my favour.

B Anna.

Anna. Sure heav'i will bless so gen'rous a resolve.

You must, my noble dame, exert your power:
You mull awake: devices will be fram'd,
And arrows pointed at the breast of NORVAT.

Lady Ran. GLENALVON'S false and crafty head will

work

Against a rival in his kinsman's love,
If I deter him not: I only can.
Bold as he is, GLENALVON will beware
How he pulls down the fabric that I raile,
1'11 be the artill of young NORVAL'S fortune.
Tis pleating to admire: most apt was I
To this affection in my better days;
Though now I seem to you shrunk up, retir'd
Within the narrow compass of my woe.
Have you not rometimes seen an early flower
Open its bud, and spread its silken leaves,
To catch sweet airs, and odours to bellow;
Then, by the keen blast nipt, pull in its leaves,
And, tho' flill living, die to scent and beauty ?
Emblem of me: afflidion, like a Ltorm,
Hath kill'd the forward blossom of my heart.

Enter GLENALVON.

Glen. Where ismydearell kinfman,noble RANDOLPH?
Lady Ran. Have you not heard, GLENALVON of the

base-

Glen. I have: and that the villains may not 'scape, ..

With a Itrong band I have begirt the wood:
If thry lurk there, alive they (hall be taken,
And torture force from them th' important secret
Whether some foe of RANDOLPH hir'd their swords,
Or if-

Lady Ran. That care becomes a kinsman's love.
Ihaveacounfel for GLENALVON'S ear. (ExitANNA.)

Glen. To him your counsels always are commands.
Lady Ran. I have not found so: thou art known to

me.

Glen. Known!
Lady Ran. And molt certain is my cause of know'

ledge.

Glen. What do you know ? by the most blessed crofi,
You much amaze me. No created thing, yrelf

Yourslhl

Yourself except, durst thus accolt GLENALVON.
Lady Ran. Is guilt so bold? and dolt thou make a

merit

of thy pretended meekness ? This to me,
Who, with a gentleness which duty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd what, if divulg'd,
Would make thee nothing; or, what's worse than that,
Anoutcat beggar, and unpitied too:
For mortals Ihudder at a crime like thine.

Glen. Thy virtue awes me. First of womankind!
Permit me yet to fay, that the fond man
Whom love tranfpoits beyond trick virtue's bounds,
If he is brought by love to misery,
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpitied cannot be. Pity's the alms
Which on such beggars freely is belto'w'd:
For mortals know that love is Rill their lord,
And o'er their vain resolves advances Rill:
As fire, when kindled'by our (hepherds, moves
Thro' the dry heath before the fanning wind.

Lady Ran. Reserve there accents for rome other ear.
To love's apology I lilten not.
Mark thou my words; for it is meet thou Ihould'l.,
Hisbrave deliverer RANDOLPH here'retains,
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well:
But at thy peril, pradtife aught againit him:
Let not thy jealousy attempt to shake
And loosen the good root'he-has in RANDOLPH;
Whose favourites I know thou'ha'lt'fupplanted.
Thou look'It at me, as if thou fain would'lf pry
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
Igive this early caution, andput on
The curb, before thy-temper breaks away. .
The friendless Itranger my protecion claims:
His friend I am, and be not thou his for. [Exit.

S .E NE.- . ·.

Manet GiLE.SALYON.

Child that I was, to f(art at my own (hadow,
And be the Ihalow fool of coward conscience

B 2 Iam

# ACT III. SCENE I.

I am not what I have been; what I (hould be.
The darts of deItiny have almoli pierc'd
My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I {hould conclude there was an arm above
That fought againt' me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch my relf the subtle snare I set.
Why, rape and murder ae not simple means !
Th' imperfent rape to RANDOLPH gave a spouse;
And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fun from me;
And worR of all, a rival. Burning hell!
This were thy center, if I thought {he lov'd him!
'ris certain Ihe contemns me; nay commands me,
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'er me,
In his behalf. And Ihall I thus be brav'd ?
Curb'd, as fhe-cails it, by dame chastity ?
Infernal fiends, if any fiends there are
More fierce than love, ambition, and revenge,
Rife up and fill my boro.m with your fires
ind policy remorfelefis Chance may spoil
A single aim; but perseverance must
Prosper at alt. For ch:nce and fate are words
Perfiftive wisdom is the 'ate of man.
Darkly a proje& peers upon my mind,
Like the red moon when rising in the ealt,
Crofs'd and divided by ftrange.colour'd clouds.
I'll seek the slave who came with NORV AL hither,
And for his cowardice was spurned from him.
I've known a follower's rankled bosom breed
Venom most fatal to his heedless lord. (Exit.

A CT .III. SCENE 1.

. Cwurt: &c. as before.

óiter ANNA.
dana. T 'HY vaftals, Grief great artures ordet

1 break, And

And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour.
Whillt Lady RANDOLPH deeps I will walk forth,
And taste the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers be! Ye Ministers
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,
Angels and seraphs who delight in goddnefs!
Forsake your nkies, arid to her couch defcendd!
There from her fancy chafe those difnfial forms
That haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
With images celestial, such as pleae
The blest above upon their golden beds.

Enter SERVANTS.

Serv. One of the vile Aflalins is fecur'd.

We found the villain lurking in thewood:
With dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not
His fir[t eflay: these jewels were cdnceal'd
In the molt secret places of his garnient;
Belike the spoils of some that he has murder'd.

Anna. Let me look on them. Ha! here is a heart.

The chosen crest of DOUGLAS' Valiant name!
These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the Wt-etch.

[Exit ANNA.

Enter fervantr with a prisonet

Prif I know no more than does the child unborn

Of what you charge me with.

I# Serv. You fay so, fir l

But torture soon (hall make you (peak the truth.
Behold the Lady of Lord RANDOLPH comes;
Prepare yourself to meet her juaf Revenge.

S C E N E II.

Enter Laly RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Anna. Summon your utmost fortitude, before

You speak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
Are now at Ilake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may fly.
Lady Ran. Thou (halt behold me, with a desperate

heart,

B 3 Heat

Hear how my infant perilh'd. See he kneels.

[The prifner kneelsj.
Prif. Heaven bless that countenance, so sweet and

mild:

A judge like thee makes innocence more bold.
O save met lady ! from these cruel men,
Who have attack'd and seiz'd me; who accuse
Me of intended murder. As I hope
For mercy at the judgment-feat of God,
The tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
Is.'t more innocent than I of murder.

Lady Ran. Of this man's guilt what proof can ye

produce?
ilp Serv. We found him lurking in the hollow

Glynn,

When view'd and call'd upon, amaz'd, he fled.
We overtook him, and enquir'd from whence
And what he was: he said he came from far,
And was upon his journey to the camp.
Not satisfied with this, we fearch'd his cloaths,
And found there jewels; whose rich value plead
Most powerfully against him. Hard he seems,
And old in villainy. Permit us try
His stubbornness againlt the torture's force.

Pri. 0 gentle lady I by your lord's dear life !

Which these weak hands, I swear, did ne'er assail;
And by your children's welfare, spare my age!
Let not the iron tear my antient joints,
And my gray hairs bring to the grave with pain.

Lady Ran. Account for there : thine own they can-

not be:

For there, I fay: be ltedfall to the truth;
Deteted falsehood is molt certain death.

[ANNA remCves thie fervantr and returns.j

Pri. Alas! I'm fore beset! let never man,

For fake of lucre, fin againlt his foul!
Eternal jullice is in this molt just!
I, guiltnefs now, mull former guilt reveal.

Lady Ran. O! ANNA hear!-once more I charge

thee speak
The truth direc: for there to me foretell

And

An i c, t'y a part of thy narration;
With which if the remainder tallies not,
An inltant and a dreadful death abides thee.

Pri. Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speak to you as juRf

As if you were the minilter of heaven,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men.

Some eighteen years ago, I rented land

Of brave Sir MALCOLM, then BALARMO'S lord;
But falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
All that I had, and then turn'd me and mine,
(Four helpless infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel by the river's fide
Receiv'd us: there hard labour, and the (kill
In fishing, which was formerly my sport,
Supported life. Whilst thus we poorly liv'd,
One (lormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down, and loud and oft
Tile angry spirit of the water (hriek'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
Of one in jeopardy. I role, and ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach whatever floating thing the fiream
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd; the person loft:
But looking fad and earnef on the waters,
By the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round -
A balket: foon-I drew it to the bank,
And nestled curious there an infant lay.

Lady Ramt. Was he alive!
Pri. He was.
Lady Ran. Inhuman that thou art !
How could'lt thou kill what waves and tempests spar'd?

Pri. 1 am not so unhuman.
Lady Ran. Didlt thou not?
Anna. My noble mi(trefs, you are mov'd too much:

This man has not the aspet of ltern murder:
Let him go on, and you, I hope, will hear
Good tidings of your kinsman's long loft child.

Pri. The needy man, who has known better days,
One whom diltrefs has spited at the world,

B 4 I

Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds, as make the prosperous men
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them.
And such a man was I; a man declin'd,
Who saw no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have touch'd that infant, with a hand of harm.

Lady Ran. Ha! dolt thou fay so? Then perhaps he

lives!

Pri. Not many days ago he was alive.
Lady Ran. 0! God of heav'n ! Did he then die so

lately!

Pri. I did not fay he died; I hope he lives,

Not many days ago there eyes beheld
Him, flourishing in youth, and health, and beauty.

Lady Ran. Where is he now?
Pri. Alas! I know not where.
Lady Ran. Oh fate! I fear thee fill. Thou riddlkr,

speak
Direct and clear; else I will search thy foul.

Anna. Permit me, ever honour'd! Keen impatience,

Tho' hard to be reltrain'd, defeats itself-
Pursue thy story with a faithful tongue,
To the las hour that thou didit keep the child.

Pri. Fear not my faith, tho' I must speak my Ihame.

Within the cradle, where the infant lay,
Was fRow'd a mighty (tore of gold and jewels;
Tempted by which we did resolve to hide,
From all the world, this wonderful event,
And like a peasant breed the noble child.
That none might mark the change of our eflate,
We left the country, travell'd to the north,
Bought flocks and herds, and gradually brought forth
Our secret wealth. But god's all-feeing eye
Beheld our avarice, and smote us fore.
For one by one all our own children died,
And he, the firanger, sole remain'd the heir
Of what indeed was his. Fain then would I,
Who with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
Have trusted him, now in the dawn of youth,
With his own secret: but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never would consent.

Mean

Mean while the Itripling grew in years and beauty;
And, as we oft obferv'd, he bore himself,
Not as the offspring of our cottage blood;
For nature will break out: mild with the mild,
But with the froward he was fierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I set myself againit his warlike bent;
But all in vain: for when a desperate band
Of robbers from the ravage mountains came--- -

Lady Ran. Eternal providence! What is thy name?'
Pri. My name is NORVAL: and my name he bears.
Lady Ran. 'Tis he; 'tis he himnelf! It is my son!
O sovereign mercy! 'Twas my child I aw!
No wonder, ANNA, that my bosom burn'd.
Anna. Jult are your transports: ne'er was woman's

heart

Prov'd with such fierce extremes. High fated dame!
But yetremember that you are beheld
By servile eyes; your geftores may be seen
Impaflion'd, Itrange; perhaps your words o'erheard.
Lady Ran. Welldoftlthdu council, ANNA; Heaven,

beftoxv
On me that wiidom which my late requires!

Anna. The moments of deliberation pass,

And soon you mull resolve. This ulfeful man
Must be difmifs'd in safety, eremy lotd.
Shall with his brave deliverer returii.;

Pri. .If I, amidst altonifhment and fear,

Have of your words and gestures rigliifyjudg'd,.
Thou ait the dughter of my aritient fiimi(er;
The child I refcu'd from the fododis thine.

Lady Ran. With thee ditaiulation now were vain. -
I am indeed the daughter of Sir MAr.COLM';
The child thou refcu'dit from the flood is mine.

Pri. Blest be the hour that made me a poor man!

Mly poverty has fav'd my ma(ter's'houfe! '
Lady Ran Thy words furprize me: sure thou dost!

not feign:

The tear (ands in thine eye: such love froni'thee
Sir MAI.COLM'S house defcrv'd'not; if aright
ThAou tolfl the lory of thy 9wa diltsefs...

rtN >

Pri. Sir MlALCOLM of our barons was the flower;

The fafieft friend, the belt and kindelt master.
But ah ! he knew not of my fad ellate.
After that battle, where his gallant son,
Your own brave brother, fell, the good old lord
Grew desperate and reckless of the world;
And never, as be erlt was wont, went forth
To overlook the condu& of his servants.
By them I was thrust out, and them I blame:
May heaven so judge me as I judg'd my malter!
And God to love me as I love his race!

Lady Ran. His race shall yet reward thee. On thy

faith

Depends the fate of thy lov'J maflet's house.
Rememb'relt thou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the clifts of Carron

Pri. I remember
The cottage of the clifts.

Lady Ran. 'Tis that I mean:

There dwells a man of venerable age,
Who in my father's service spent lis youth:
Tell him I tent thee, and with him remain,
'Till I hall call upon thee to declare,
Before the king and nobles, what thou now
To me ha[ftold. No more but this, and thou
Shalt live in honour all thy future days;.
Thy son so long shall call thee father Itill,
And all the.land Ihall bless the man, who fav'd
The son of DOUGL,.S, and Sir MALCOIlI'S heir.
Remember well my words: if thou Ihoildll meet
Him whom thou call'tt thy son, fiill ca)l him so;
And mention nothing of his nobler father.

Pri. Fear not that liall mar so fair-an harvest,

By putting in my fickle ere 'tis ripc.
Why did I leave my home and antient.dame?'
To find the youth, to tell him all I knew,
And make him wear theejewels in lis arms;
Which might, I thought, be challeng'd, and fo'bring
To light the secret of hisnoble birth.

[Lady RAND .LPH g.toa' tards the Setrvani.

Lad

Lady Ran. This man is not the afffin you rurpeaed,

Tho' chance combin'd rome likelihoods against him.
He is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To their right owner, whom in halte he seeks.
'Tis meet that you (hould put him on his way,
Since your millaken zeal hath dragg'd him hither.

[Exeunt Stranger and Servants.

S C E N E III.

Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.
Lady Ran. My faithful AN.NA! dost thou [hare my

joy ?

I know thou dolt. Unparallel'd event!
Reaching from heaven to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings me to my son
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father!
Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
For iuch a gift! What does my ANNA think
Of the young eaglet of a valiant nest?
How loon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dungill where his fate had thrown him,
And tower'd up to the region of his fire.

Anna. How fondly did your eyes devour the boy!

Mylterious nature, with the unseen cord '
Of powerful initinct, drew you to your own.

Lady Ran. The ready fory of his birth believ'd -
Supprell my fancy quite; nor did he owe
To any likeness my so sudden favour:
But now I long to fee his face again,
Examine every feature,: and fiind out-
The lineaments of DOUGLAS, or thy own."
Bat molt of all, I long to'let him know
Who his true parents are, to clasp his neck,
And :ell:hin all the ltoiry of his father.

Anna. With weary caution you mul bear yourself'

In public, left your tenderness break forth;
And in observers flir conjeaures Itrange.
For, if a cherub in the shape of a woman
Should walk this world, yet defamation would
Like a vile cur, bark at the'angel's train.-
To-day the baro itated at your tears:

B. $ ' .Lady'.

Lady Ran. He did so ANNA ! well thy millrefs

knows,

If the leaf[ circumltance, mote of offence,
Should touch the baron's eye, his fight would be
Withjealoufy diforder'd. But the more
It does behove me inflant to declare
The birth of DOUGLAS, and assert his rights,
This night I purpose with my son to meet,
Reveal the secret and consult with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does now, so look'd his noble father,
Array'd in nature's ease: his mein, his fpeecl,
Were sweetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those trivial mortals who teem always wile.
But, when the matter match'd his mighty mind,
Uprofe the hero: on his piercing eye
Sat observation; on each glance of thought
Decision follow'd, as the thunder-bolt
Pursues the flaf.

Aima. That demon haunts you till:
Behold GLENALVON.

Lady Ran. Now I Ihun him not.

This day I brav'd him in behalf of NORVAL:
Perhaps too far: at least my nicer fears
For DOUGLAS thus interpret.

Enter GLENALV.ON.

Glen. Noble dame!

The hov'ring Dane at laa his men hath landed:
No band of piratesp but a mighty host,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers;
To win a country, or to lose themselves,

Lady Ran. But whence comes this intelligence, GLE-

NALVON :

Glen. A nimble courier sent from yonder campl.

To haflen up the chieftains of the northi
Inform'd me, as he pas, that the fierce Dane
Had on the eafcrn coalt of Lothian landed,
Near to that place where the fea:rock immense,,
Amazing bass, looks o'er a fertile land.

Lady Ran. Then mutt this weflern army march to

join
The warlike troops that guard Edna's tow'rs.

Glen.

Glen. Beyond all quellion. if impairing time

Hias not effac'd the image of a place,
Once perfect in my breast, there is a wild
1 Which lyes to wetlward of that mighty rock,

And seems by nature formed for the camp
Of water-wafted armies, whose chief Ltrength
Lies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horle:
If martial Ikill direcs the Danish lords,
There inacceflble their army lies
To our Iwift fcow'ring horse, the bloody field
Mull man to man, and foot to foot, be fought.
Lady Ran. How many mothers Ihall bewail their

ons ?

Sow many widows weep their husban'ds lain i
Ye dames of Denmark ! ev'n for you I feel,
Who, sadly fitting on the fea.beat Ihore,
Long look for lords that never (hall return.

Clen. Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian sword-
lWidow'd the north. The children of the fain
Come, as I hope, to meet their fathers' fate.
The moniter war, with her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are objecs suited to G LE N A LV.O N'S foul.
Scoin is more grievous than the pains of Death;
Reproach more piercing. than the pointed sword.
Lady Ran. I scorn thee not, but when .:ought to,

scorn;.

Nor e'er reproach, but when insulted virtue
Againit audacious vice afrens herself;
I own thy worth, GLENALVON; none more-apt
Than I to praise thine eminence in arms,
And be the echo of thy martial fame.
No longer feed a guilty pafion:
Go and pursue a lawful miltrefs, glory,
Upon the Danifl crelh redeem thy' fault,
And let thy valour be the ihield of RANDOPI'H.-

Glen. One inltant Itay, and hear an alter'd man,.

When beauty pleads-for virtue, vice abafh'd
Flies its own colours, and goes o'er to virtue.
Iam your convert; time will Ihew how truly:
Yet one immediate proof I mean to give.
ITat youth for whom your ardent zeal to.day;

Some

Somewhat too haughtily, defy'd your slave,
Amidst the (hock of armies I'll defend,
And turn death from him, with a guardian arm.
Sedate by use, my bofoni maddens not
At the tumultuous uproar of the field.

Lady Ran. At thus, GLENALVON, and I am thy

friend:

But that's the leaa reward. Believe me, fir,
The truly generous is the truly wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblefR.

Exit Lad)' RANDOI P1.

Glen. [f/o.'u.] Amen! and virtue is its own reward !-

I think that I have hit the very tone
In which Ihe loves to speak; - Honey'd assent
How pleasing art thou to the taltC of man,
And woman also? flattery direct
Rarely disgusts. They little know mankind
Who doubt its operation: 'tis my key,
And opes the wicket of the human heart.
How far I have succeeded now 1 know not.
Yet I incline to think her Itormy virtue
Is lull'd a while: 'tis her alone I fear:
VWhilft (he and RANDOLPH live, and live in fairt
And amity, uncertain is my tenure.
Fate o'er my head suspends disgrace and death, -
By that weak hair, a peevish female's will.
I am not idle: but the ebbs and flows
Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated.
That slave of NORvAL's I have found most apt:
I shew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his foul
To fay ard swear whatever I fuggell.
NORVAL, I'm told, has-that alluring look,
'Twixt man and woman, which I have obferv'd
To charm the nicer and fantaftick dames,
Who are, like lady RANDOLPH, full of virtue.
In raising RANDOLPH'S jealousy I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom errs
Who thinks the worst he can of womankind.

ACT

# ACT IV. SCENE. I.

ACT IV. SCENE. I.

Fiourih of TrumpetJ.

Etser Lord RANDOLPH altended.
Lord Ran. _Ummon an hundred Horse, by break of

SU day,
To wait our plealure at the cafile gate.

Enter Lady RAN.DOLPH.
Lady Ran. Alas! my lord! I've heard unwelcome-

new;

The Dines are landed.

Lord Ran. Ay, no inroad this
Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament efay,
of fomen young knight relblv'd to break a spear,
And ltain with holtile blood his maiden arms.
The Danes are landed: we mull beat them back,
IOr live the slaves of Denmark. -

Lady Ran. Dreadful times!
Lord Ran. The fenceless villages are all forfiken;
The trembling mothers, and their children lodg'd
In well-girt towers and catles;. whilst the men
Retire indigpant. Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return.'
Lady Ran. Imnienfe as fame reports, the Dhiilfhi

holt !
Lord Ran. Were it so num'rous as loud fame re,..

ports,

An army knit like ours wou'dpierce it thro':
Irothers, that (h;ink not from each others fide,
end fono companions, fill our warlike files :
'ctlis dtar offsping, and the wife he lovesi

The,

The hutband, and the fearless father arm.
In vulgar breasts heroic ardor burns,
And the poor peasant mates his daring lord.
Lady Ran. Men's minds are temper'd like their

swords, for war:

Lovers of danger, on de(lrution's brink
They joy to rear ere& their daring forms.
Hence, early graves; hence the lone widow's life;
And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age..
Where is our gallant'gueft?

Lord Ran. Down in the vale

I left him managinga fiery Lteed,
Whose (tubbornnels had foil'd the [trength and fiill
Of every rider. But behold he comnes,
In earnelt .conversation with GLENALVO N.

EnteriNJRVAL andGLEN.ALVON..

GL.EN.LVON-! with the lark arise; go forth,.
And lead my troops that lye in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
NoRVAI., thou goelt with me. But'fayb youngman,
Where didil thou- learn. o to discourse of war,.
And in such terms, as I o'erheard to-day?
War is no village science, nor its phrase
A language taught amongftthe Ihepherd swains..

Ncrv. Small is the hkill my lord delights to praise

In him he favours-Hear from whence it came.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the molt remote
And inaccessible by Shepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit liv'd; a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our. wand'ring swains.
Austere and lonely, cruel to himself,
Did they report him: the cold earth hisbed,
Water his drink, his food the lhepherds alms.-
I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
With reverence and pity. Mild he spake,
An~ entrlng on discourse, such d(ories told
As n..de m oft revisit his fadcell,
For be had been a soldier in his youth
A

Aad

And fought in famous battles, when the peers
Of Europe, by the bold GODFREDO led,
Againlt th' usurping infidel difplay'd
The cross of Chrilt, and won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech (truck from me, the old man would flake
His years away, and a& his young encounters:
Then, having Ihew'd his wiunds, he'd fit him down,
And all the live-long day discourse of war.
To help my fancy, in the smooth green turf
He cut the figures of the marshall'd hols;
Defcrib'd the motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm.
For all that Saracen, or Chritian knew
of war's belt art, was to this hermit known.

Lord Ran. Why did this soldier in a defart hide
Those qualities, that shou'd have grac'd a camp?

Norv. That too at lalt I learn'd. Unhappy man!
Returning homewards by Messina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boift'rous captain of the sea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought:
The firanger fell, and with his dying breath
Declar'd his name and lineage. Mighty God!
The soldier cried, my brother! Oh! my brother!

Lady Ran. His brother!
Norv. Yes; of the fame parents born;
His only brother. They exchang'd forgiveness:
nd happy, in my mind, was he that died:
or many deaths has the survivor fuffer'd.
the wild defart on a rock ie lits,
ron rome nameless lream's untrodden banks,
nd ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
ttimes, alas! not in his perfet mind!
ods dialogues with his lov'd brother's Gholt;
d oft each night forsakes his fullen couch,
make fad orisons for him he flew.
Ldy Ran. To what mylterious woes are mortals

born !
i this dire tragedy were there no more

Unhappy

Unhappy person? did the parents live?

ANerv. No; they were dead: kind heav'n had clos'd

their eyes
Before their son had ihed his brother's blood.

Lord Ran. Hard is his fate; for he was not to

blame!

There is a destiny in this Rrange world,
Which oft decrees an undeserved doom !
Let fchoolmen tell us why. -From whence theft

founds?

(Trumpets roundingat a dillance.]

Enter an OFFICER.
Officer. My Lord, the trumpets of the troops of

Lorn:
Their valiant leader hails the noble RANDOLPH.

Lord Ran. Mine antient guefi! does he the warriorn

lead?
Has Denmark rous'd the brave old knight to arms?

Officer. No; worn with warfare, he religns the

sword.

His eldest hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord Ran. GLENALVON, go,

With hospitality's moR strong requelt
Entreat the chief.

[Exit GLENALVON,]

Officer. My lord, requefis are vain.

He urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foes approach.

Lord Ran. May victory fit on the warrior's plume!

B:avefl of mnt! his flocks and herds are safe;
Remote from war's alarms hlis paltures lye,
By mountains inaccefible fecur'd:
Yet fjreniolt lie into the plain decends,
Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the ancient world:
Contemners they of indolence and gain;
But dill for love of glory, and of arms,
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift

Again?.

Against each tirong antagoniit the spear.
I'll go and press the hero to my breast.

[Exit RANDOLPH.]

Atanet Lady RANDOLPH and NORVA L.
Lady Ran. The soldiers loftners, the pride and

pomp

lnvefting awful war, NORVAL, I fee
Transport thy youthful mind.

Norv. Ah ! ,hould they not ?

Blelt be the hour I left my father's house!
I might have been a shepherd all my days,
And tole obscurely to a peasant's grave.
Now, if I live, with mighty chiefs I stand;
And, if I fall, with noble dust I lye.

Lady Ran. There is a gen'rous spirit in thy breat,
That could have well fuftain'd a prouder fortune.
This way with me; under yon spreading beech,
UnLeen, unheard, by human eye or ear,
I will amaze thee with a wond'rous tale.

Norv. Let there be danger, lady, with the secret,

That I may hug it to my grateful heart,
And prove my faith. Command my sword, my life:
Theft are the sole pofNellions of poor NORVAL.

Lady Ran. Know'lt thou there gems?
Norv. Durst I believe mine eyes
I'd fay I knew them, and they were my father's.
Lady Ran. Thy father's fav'lt thou! ah they were

thy father's!

Norv. I saw them once, and curiously enquir'd
Of both my parents whence such Iplendour came?
uti wvas check'd, and more could never learn.
Lady Ran. Then learn of me thou art not NORVAL'S

son.

Norv. Not NORVAL'S son!
Lady Ran. Nor of a hcepherd sprung.
Norv. Lady, who am I then
Lady Ran. Noble thou art;
r noble was thy fire!
Noro. I will believe .

O0

O! tell me fartherl Say who was my father?

Lady Ran. DOUGLAS!
Norv. Lord Douc LAS, whom to day I saw ?
Lady Ran. His younger brother.
Norv. And in yonder camp?
Lady Ran. Alas!
Norv. You make me tremble-Sighs and tears!
Lives my brave father ?

Lady Ran Ah! too brave indeed!
He fell in battle ere thyself was born.

Norv. Ah me unhappy ! ere I saw the light?

But does my mother live? I may conclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been sorrow.

Lady Ran She lives; but waltes her life in conlant

woe,
Weeping her husband slain, her infant loft.

Norv. You that are (kill'd so well in the fad story

Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their defliny, now have compafnion
Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd.
O ! tell me who, and where my mother is!
Opprelt by a base world, perhaps [he bends
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief;
And desolate implores of heav'n, the aid
Her son should give. It is, it must be so-
Your countenance confefles that Ihe's wretched.
O! tell me her condition! Can the sword -
Who shall refilt me in a parent's cause?
Lady Ran. Thy virtue ends her woe.-My son, my

son!
I am thy Mother and the wife of DOUGLAS !

[Falls upon his neac,
Norv. 0 heav'n and earth, how wond'rons is my

fate;
Art thou my mother? Ever let me kneel!

Lady Ran. Image of DOUGLAS ! Fruit of fatal

love!
All that I owe thy fire I pay to thee.

Norv. RefpeA and admiration till poflefs me,

Checking the love and fondness of a son.
Yet I was filial to my humble parents.

'Bu

But did my fire furpars the reft of men,
As thou excellelt all of womankind .
.Lady Ran. Arise, my son! In me thou dolt behold
The poor remains cf beauty once admir'd:
The autumn of my days is come already;
For sorrow made my summer halte away,
Yet in my prime I equal'd not thy father:
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet fonietimes
Liker the dove's, and as he pleas'd, he won
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

Norv. How did he fall? Sure 'twas a bloody field
When DUG LAS died. 0 Ihave much to alk!
Lady Ran. Hereafter thou flalt hear the lengthen'd

tale

Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
At present this: Thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder cattle, and ihe wide domains
Which now Lord RANDOLPH, as my husband, holds,
But thou shalt not be wrong'd; I have.the power
To right thee still: Before the king 1'lFkheel,
And call Lord DOUGLAS to protect his blood.

Norv. The blood of DOUGLAS will proteCitfelf.
Lady Ran. But we lhall need both friends and favour,

boy,

To wrest thy lands and lordship from the gripe
Of RANDOLPH and his kinsman. Yet I think
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
]y life incline the virtuous to believe.

Atorv. To be the son of DOUGLAS is to me
Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in the feld i'll seek for fame and fortune.
Lady Ran. Thou dost not inow what perils and in-

jultice

Await the poor man's valour. 01 my fonl
The noblest blood in ci1 the land's abalh'd,
Having no lacquay but pale poverty.
Too long halt thou been thusattended DOUGLAS I
Too long halt thou been deem'd4 a pafant's child.
The wanton heir of tome inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee) in the youthful sports;
Whillf thy indignant spirit fwel'd in vain!

Such

Such contumely thou no more shalt bear:
But how I purpose to redress thy wrongs
Must be hereafter told. Prudence direts
That we {hould part before yon chiefs return.
Retire, and from thy rultick follower's hand
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, ditated before
This casual opportunity arore
Of private conference. It's purport mark;
For as I there appoint we meet again.
Leave me, my son! and frame thy manners hill
To NORVAL'S, not to noble DOUGLAS' state.

Noro. I will remember. Where is NORVAL now?
That good old man.

Lady Ran. At hand conceal'd he lies,

An useful witnefr. But beware, my ton,
Of yon GLENALVON ; in his guilty brealt
Resides a villain's ihrewdnefs, ever prone
To faire conjecure. He hath griev'd my heart.

Notv. Has he indeed? Then let yon faire GLENAL-

VON
Beware of me.

[Exit DOUGLAS.

Manet Lady RANDOLPH.

Lady Ran. There burf the fmother'd flame?
! thou all righteous and eternal King!

Who father of the fatherless art calid,
Prote& my son !--Thy'infpiration, Lord!
Hath ill'd his bosom with that ficred fire,
Which in the brealts of his forefather's burrid:
Set him on high like them, that he may Ihine
The liar and glory of his native land !
Then let the minister of death descend,
And bear my willing spirit to its place.
Yonder they come. How do bad w6men find
Unchanging afpecs to conceal their guilt?
When I by reaon, and by'juRiceurg'd,
Full hardly can dissemble wihthere men
In nature's pious cause.

Ente'

Enter Lord RANDOLPH andGLENALVON.

Lord Ran. Yon gallant chief,
Of arms enainour'd, all repose disclaims.

Lady Ran. Be not, my Lord, by his example fway'd:
Arrange the business of to.morrow now,
And when you enter speak of war no more.

[Exil Lady RANDOLPH.

Manet Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.
Lord Ran. 'Tis so by heav'n! her mein, her voice,

her eye,

And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

Glen. He parted from her now: Behind the mount,
Amonglt the trees, I saw him glide along.
Lord Ran. For fad fequelter'd virtue (he's renown'd!
Clen. Molt true, my Lord.
Lord Ran. Yet this diltinguilh'd dame
lavites a youth, the acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This allignation, (shews a letter) the alfralin freed,
Her manifelt affetion for the youth,
Sight breed suspicion in a hutband's brain,
Whose gentle comfort all for love had wedded:
Much more in mine. MATILDA neverlov'd me.
Let no man, after me, a woman wed,
Whose heart he knows he has not; though she brings
mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry:
or let her seem, like the night's Ihadowy queen,
Cold and comtemplative :-He cannot trult her:
e may, she will, bring (hame and sorrow on him;
he worst of sorrow, and the worit of Ihames !
Glen. Yield not, my Lord, to. such aflidcing

thoughts;

let the spirit of an hulband sleep,
I1 your own senses make a sure concluflon.
is billet muRt to blooming NORVAL go:
the next turn awaits my trulty spy;
lli give it him refitted for his matter.

In

In the close thicket take your secret Itand;
The moon Ihines bright, and your own eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

Lord Ran. Thou doll counsel well.
Glen. Permit me now to make one flight elay.

Of all the trophies which vain mortals boalt,
By wit, by valour, or by wisdom won,
The first and faireit, in a young man's eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Successful love
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind;
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Lord Ran. And what avails this maxim?
Glen. Much, my lord!

Withdraw a little: I'll accost young NoaVAL,
And with ironical derisive counsel
Explore his spirit. If he is no more
Than humble NORVAL, by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as he is, he'll Ihrink aftonilh'd from me:
But if he be the favourite of the fair,
Lov'd by the firit of Calcdonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.

Lord Ran. 'ris Ihrewdly thought.
Glen. When we grow loud, draw near. But let my

lord
His riling wrath refrain. [Exit RANDOLPH.

Mlanet GLENALVON.

Glen. 'ris strange by heav'n!

That (he Ihould run full tilt her fond career,
To one so little known. She too that feem'd
Pure as the winter fiream, when ice embofs'd
Whitens it course. EvenI did think her chaste,
Whose charity exceeds not. Precious sex!
Whose deeds lascivious pals GLENALVON'S thoughts!

NoRVAL apecarJi

His port I love; he's in a proper mood
To chide the thunder, if at him it roar'd.
Ha NORVAL seen the troops ?

Norr

N0rv. The setting fun,

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale,
And as the warriors mov'd, each polilh'd helm,
Corflet, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded- beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at its top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they-feem', .
An host angelic, clad in burning arms.

Glen. Thou talk'ft it well; 'no leader of our'liofl

In founds more lofty,. speaks of glorious war.

Norv. If I Ihall e'er acquire a leader's name,

My speech will be leTs ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itself freely; since no part is mine
Of praise, pertaining to the great in arms.
Glen. You wrong yourself, brave fir; your martial

deeds

Have rank'd you with the great: but mark me, No a v A L;
Lord RANDOLPH'S favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know there soldiers, counfe! you.
Give them all honour; seem not to cominand:;
Else they will scarcely brook your late rpiung power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

Norv. Sir, I have been accu(tom'd all my da'ys,
To hear and speak the plain and fiiiple truth:
And tho' 'I have been told, that there are men
Who borrow friendship's tongue to speak their. scorn,
Yet in such language I am little (kill'd.
Therefore I thank GLENALVON for his council,
Altho' it founded harshly. Whiy remind
Me of my birth obscure ? Why slur my dpower
With such contemptuous terms?

Glen. I did not mean
To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

Norv. My pride! '
Glen. Suppress it as you with to prosper.
Your pride's excefliie. Yet for RANDOELH'S faie
I will not leave you to its ra(h direcion . .
If'thus you fIefl, and frwn at: high.born nehi"'' - l
Will high.born men endure a shepherd's froth? ,:
NorP. A Ihepherd's scorn !

C Glen.

Glen. Yes; if you prerume

To bend on soldiers these disdainful eyes,
As if you took the measure of their minds,
And said in secret, you're no match for me;
What will become of you

Norv. If this were told! [#do.
Haft thou no fears for thy presumptuous self!

Glen. Ha! Dolt thou threaten me
Norv. Didlt thou not hear ?
Glen. Unwillingly I did; a nobler foe

Had not been queltion'd thus. But such as thee-

.Norv. Whom dolt thou think me?
Glen. Norval.
Naorv. So I am-
And who is NORVAL in GLENALVON'S eyes?

Glen. A peasant's son, a wandering beggar-boy;
At best no more, even if he speaks the truth.

Ncrv. False as thou art, dollt thou fufpet my truth!
Glen. Thy truth! thou'rt all a lye; and falfeas hell
Is the vain-glorious tale thou told'it to RANDOLPH.

Norv. If I were chain'd, unarm'd, and bedrid old,

Perhaps I Ihould revile: But as I am
I have no tongue to rail. The humble NORVAL
Is of a race, who Drive not but with deeds.
Did I not fear to freeze thy (hallow valour,
And make thee fink too soon beneath my sword,
I'd tell thee-what thou art. I know thee well.

Glen. Doll thou not know GLENALVON, born to

command

Ten thousand slaves like thee?

Nlrv. Villain rio more:

Draw and defendthy life. I did defigo
To have defy'd thee in another cause:
But heaven accelerates its vengeance on thee.
Now for my own and Lady RANDOLPH'S wrongs.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.
Lord Ran. Hold, I command you both. The man

that ltirs
Makes me his foe.

.Norv.

Norv. Another voice than thine

That threat had vainly founded, noble RANDOLPrH,
Glen. Hear him, my lord; he's wond'rous conde-

scending !

Mark the humility of lsepherd NORVAL!
Nort. Now you may feoff in safety.

(Sheaths his ford

Lord Ran. Speak not thus,
Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

Norv. Nay, my good lord, tho' I revere you much,

My cause I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I blush to speak; I will not, cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words that I from him have borne.
To the liege lord of my dear native land
I owe a subjeCt's homage: but ev'n him
And his high arbitration I'd reject.
Within my bosom reigns another lord;
Honour, sole judge and umpire of itself.
If my free speech offend you, noble RANDOLPH,
Revoke your favours, and let NORVAL go
Hence as he came, alone, but not diihonour'd.
Lord Ran. Thus far I'll mediate with impartial

voice:

The ancient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
Suspend your purpose, 'till your country's arms
Repel the bold invader: then decide
The private quarrel.

CGlte. I agree to this..
Norv. And I.

Enter SERVANT.

Serv. The banquet waits,
Lord Ran. We come. [Exit RANDOLPH.
Glen. Norval,
Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of RANDOLPH.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkl'd hate,
Shall {lain my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow;

C 2 Nor

# ACT V. SCENE I.

Nor let our firife disturb the gentle dame.

Norv. Think not so lightly, Sir, of my relentment:
When we contend again, our firife is mortal.

ACT V. S.CE N E I.

- he Wood.

Enter 'DoUGLAS.

HIS'is' the .iace, the centre of the grove.
Here tlands tie .oak, the nlpnarch of the wood.

How sweet and folemn.is this mi.dnightfcene.!
The silver moon, un'clpoded, .holds her way
Thro' Lkies where.I could.countfech little liar.
The fanning .welt wind scarcely Itirs the leaves;
The river, rousing o'er its pebbled.bed,
imposes silence with a fiilly found.
In-fuch ' place as tis, -at such an lour,
If acelfry' can be in aught believ'd,
Descending spirits have convers'd with man,
And told the secrets of tie world unknown.

Enter Old NoRVAi..
Old Norv. 'Tis he. But what if he (hould chide me

hence?
His just reproach I fear.

fDouGLAS furnt and fees him.

Forgive, forgive,

Can'fl thou forgive the man, the felfilh man,
Who bred Sir MALCOLM's heir a shepherd's son.

Doug. Kneel not to me: thou art my.father ltill:

Thy wilh'd for presence now compleats my joy.
Welcome to me, my fortunes thou lhalt Ihare,
And ever honour'd with thy DOUGLAS live.

Old

Old ANort. And do'tl thou call me father ? 0 my son!
I think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
Which in the wildcrnefs so long conceal'd
The blossom of thy youth.

Doug. Not worse the fruit,:
That in the wilderness the blofrom blow'd.
Amongst the shepherds, in the humble' cote,
I learn'd some lessons, which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; .and, when my vassals bow,.
NORVAL shall smooth the crefled pride of DOUGLAS.

Norv. Let me but live to fee thine exaltation!
Yet grievous are my fears. O leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

Doug. Why should I leave them?
Norv. Lord RANDOLPH. and his kinsman seek your

life.

Doug. How knowft thou that?
Norv. I will inform your how.
When evening came, 1 left the secret place
Appointed for me by. your mother's care,
And fondly trod in each accultom'd path
That to the cattle leads. Whillt thus I rang'd,
I was alarn'd with unexpected founds,
Of earneRdvoices. On the persons came:
Unreen I lurk'd, and overheard them nameo
Each other as they talk'd, lord RANDOLPH this,
And that GLENALVON: Itill of yotr they spoke,
And of the lady: threatning was their speech,...
Tho' but imperfectly my ear could hear it.
Twas frange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge. -
Doug. Revenge! for what?
Norv. For being what you. are;.
Sir MALCOLM'S heir: how else have-you offended !
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there fat musing how I belt might.find
bkans to inform you of their wicked purpose,

... C 3 But

But I could think of none: at last perplex'd
I ifued forth, 'encompafing the tower
With many a weary Rep and wilhful look.
Now providence hath brought you to my fight,
Let not your too courageous spirit scorn
The caution which I give.

Doug. I scorn it not.

My mother .warn'd me of GLENALVON'S baseness:
But I will not suspect the noble RANDOLPH.
In our encounter with the vile alfaflins,
I mark'd his brave demeanour: him I'll trust.

Naor. I fear you will too far.
Dozig. Here in this place

I wait my mother's coming: The (hall know
What thou halt told: her counsel I will follow ?
And cautious ever are a mother's counsels.
You must depart; your presence may prevent
Our Interview.

Ncrr. My blessing reft upon thee .
O! may heav'ns hand, which fav'd thee from the

wave,

And from the fword.of foes, be near thee till.;
Turning mischance, if aught hangs o'er thy head,
All upon mine I .!

[Exit Old NORVAI.

Dcug. He loves me like a parent;

And mufl not, (hall not lose the son he loves,
Altho' his Con has found a nobler father.
Eventful day, hcw-haftthou chang:d my (late !
Once on the cold, and.winter Ihaded fide
Of a bleak hill, mischance had rooted:me,.
Never to thrive, child of another foil:
Transplanted now to the gay funny.vale,
Like the green thorn of May, my fortune flowers;
Ye glorious Itars ! high heav'n's resplendent holt !
To whom I oft have;of my lot complain'd,.
Hoar and record my foul's unalter'd wih !
Dead or alive, let me but be renown'd !
May heav'h inspire rome fierce gigantic Dane,
ro give a bold defiance to our holt !'
Before he speaks it out I will accept;

Lik

Like DOUGLAS conquer, or like PPOUGLAS'die.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.'

Lady Ran. My son ! I heard a voicec- :
Doug. - The voice was mine..: . .
Lady Ran. Didf thou complain aloud to'nature's cor,
That thus in dusky Ihades, at mid-night hours.
By itealth the mother and the.fon llould meet ?

[Embracing him.
Doug. No: on this happy day, this. better birth-

day,

MSy thoughts and words are all of hopeand joy. :

Lady Ran. Sad fear and melancholyiftill divide
The empire:of my breat with hope.aad joy.
Now hear what I:advife.

Doug. First, let me-tell
What may the tenor of your counfel.change; .

Lady Ran. My heart forbodes some ekil !
Doug. 'Tis not'good; .

-

At eve, onreen by RA.NDOTPH. and G.LENALVO:N,
The good old NORVAL in the grove o'er-heard .
]heir conversation: oft tbey.mention'd'me: ., .,
With dreadful threatnirrgs; you.they fometimesenatmld.
'rwas ltrange, they said, a wonderful difeov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.
Lady Ran. Defend us, gracious God I we are. be.

tray'd: . .

They have found out:the, eret-rof tliy birth;-.
It mult be so. That is thegreat discovery, .. .
Sir MALCOLMI'S heir is come.to-claim:his osv-; . .
And they will be reveng'd. Perhaps even, now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for.murder, they butiwair
A darker and more silent hour-to.break .
Into the chamber where they: think thou fleep'ft..
This moment, this, heav'a hath. ordain'd to fae'.

thee !

Ply to the camp, my son!-

Doug. And:leave you here?
No: to the caftie.let-us 'go. together,.
Call up the antient servants of your house,:

~~s.-'r~~~~~~~

Who in their youth did eat your father's bread.
Then tell them loudly that I am your son.
If in the breals of men one spark remains
Of sacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your cause will arm. I aft but few
To drive those (poilers from my father's house.

Lady Ran. O nature, nature!: what can check thy

force ?

Thou genuine offspring of the daring DOUGLAS !
But rulh not on deltrution: save thyself,
And Iam safe. To me they mean no harm.
Thy flay but rilks thy precious life in vain.-
That winding path conducts thee to the river;
Cross where thou feelt a broad and beaten way,
Which running eastward leads thee to the camp.
Inltant demand admittance to Lord DOUGLAS.
Shew him these jewels, which his brother wore.
1 hy look, thy voice, will make him feel the truth,
Which I by certain proof will Coon confirm.

Doug. I yield me and obey :-but-yetmy heart

Bleeds-at this parting. Something. bids me ltay
And guard a mother's life. Oft have I read
Of wond'rous deeds-by-one bold arm atchiev'd.
Oar foes are two; no more: let me go forth,
And fee if any Ihield can guard GIENAIVON.-

Lady Ran. If thou regard's thy mother, or rever'lt

Thy father's mem'ry think of this no more.-
One thing I have to fay before we part:
Long wert thou loft; and thou art found, my child,
In a molt fearful season. War and battle
I have great cause to dread.- Too well I fee
Which way the current of thy temper sets:
To day I've found thee. Oh! my long loft hope!.
If thou to giddy valour giv'f the rein)
To-morrow I may lose my Ton for ever.
The love of thee, before thou faw'ft the lights
Sultain'd my life when thy brave father fell.
If thou (halt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this waste world! my son, remember me !

DBug. What shall .l y ? how can I give you com*

fort?.

The

The God of battles of my life dispose
As may be bell for you ? for whore dear tke
I will not bear myself as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boalt founds amongst martial men,
How will inglorious caution suit my claim ?
The poll of fate unfhrinking I maintain,
My country's foes mull witness who I am.
On the invader's heads, I'll prove my birth,
Till friends and foes confers the genuine Itrain.
If in this Itrife Ilfall, blame not your son,
Who if he lives not honour'd, mufl not live.

Lady Ran. I will not utter what ,mybofom feels.
Too well I love that valour whichi l'warn.
Farewel, my son! my counifelsare but vain.

:
: [lEmbracin.

And as high heaven hath will'd it all must be. -[fparbtes.
Lady Ran. Gaze not on me, thou wilt miltake the

path;
I'll point it out again.

7ufl? a1 they are separating, entr from the wood
Lord RANP,o9rii qd GI.ENA.LON.]

Lord Ran. Not in her presence.
Now . ....

Glen. I'm prepar'd.
Lord Ran. No: I command thee ltay.
Igo alone; it never Ihall be said
That I took odds to combat mortal man.
hie noblest vengeance :is the moi6t cbmpleat.

[Exit Lord-RANDOIPi.]
[GLENALVON make fom# Jleps to the fame tde of the

stage, listens and speaks.]

Glen. Demons of death come fettle on my sword,
And to a double slaughter guide it home !
The lover and the husband both must die.

[Lord RANDOLPH behind'thefcenes.]

Lord Ran. Draw, Villain! draw.
Doug. Aftail me not, Lord RANDOLPH;
ot as thou lov'ft thy self.

[Cla/hing efforads.]
[GLENALVON running out.

Now

Now is the time.
Enter Lady RANDOLPH at the opposite fide of theflage

faint and breathlefi.
Lady Ran. Lord RANDOLPH hear me; all Ihalllb

thine own:
But spare! 0 spare my son!

Enter DOUGLAS with afwordin each hand.

My mother's voice!
I can protect thee fill.

Lady Ran. He lives, he lives:

For this, for this to heav'n enternal praise!
But ufre I saw thee fall.

Doug. It WasGLENALVON.

Jolt as my arm had malRer'd RANDOLPH'S sword,
The villain came behind me: but I few him.

Lady Ran. Behind thee! Ah; thou'rt wounded! 0

my child,
How pale thou looknl and Ihall I lore thee now !

Doug. Do not derpair: I feel a little faintness
I hope it will not lalt.

[Leans upon his fword.l

Lady Ran. There is no hope!

And we must part! the hand of death is on thee!
Omy beloved child! 0 DOUGLAS, DOUGLAS!

[DOUGLAS growing more and more faint.
Dcug. Too soon we part: I have not long been

DOUGLAS.

0 deltiny ! hardly thou deal'lt with me:
Clouded and hid, a ltranger to myself,
In low and poor obscurity I liv'd.

Lady Ran. Has heav'n preferv'd thee for an end like

this!

Doug. Oh ! had I fallen as my brave fathers fell,

Turning with fatal arm the tide of battle!
Like them I Ihould have fmil'd and welcom'd dyath.
But thus to perish by a villain's hand!
Cut off from nature's and from glory's course,
Which never mortal was so fond to run.

Lady

Lady Ran. Hear jutlice 1 hear! are there the fruits

of virtue [Dou G IAS falt/J.]
Doug. Unknown I die; no tongue Ihall speak of

me.-

iome noble spirits, judging by themselves,
Nay yet conjeture what I might have prov'd,
and think life only wanting to my fame:
Bat who Ihall comfort thee '
Lady Ran. Despair! despair!
Doug. 0 had it pleas'd high heaven to let me live
h little while!--my eyes that gaze on thee
;row dim apace! my mother- [Dies.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH and ANNA.
Lord Ran. Thy words, the words of truth, have

piere'd my heart.

lam the RIain of knighthood and of arms.
hb! if my brave deliverer survives
rie traitor's sword -

Anna. Alas! look there, my lord.
Lord Ran. The mother and her son! How curst I

am;

las I the cause ? No: I was not the cause.
Ion matchless villain did reduce my foul
Po frantic jealousy.
Anna. My lady lives:
rhe agony of grief hath but fupprelt
Awhile her powers.
Lord Ran. But my deliverer's dead!
tbe world did once esteem Lord RANDOLPH well,
incere of heart, for spotless honour fam'd:
lad, in my early days, glory I gain'd
Ieath the holy banner of the cross.
low pall the noon of life, (hame comes upon me i
'proach, and infamy, and public hate,
re near at hand: for all mankind will think
Rat RANDOLPH basely ftab'd Sir MAiddiL's heir.

[Lady RANDOLPH reccvering.
Lady Ran. Where am- I now! f ill in this wretched

world!

Grief

Grief cannot-break a heart fio hard as mine
My youth' was worn in anguih :.but youth's frength,
With hopes affitdiace, bore the brunt of sorrow;
And train'd me on to be the objea now,
On which omnipotence displays iffelf,
Making a fpeCacle, a tale of me,
To awe its vaial, man.

Lord Ran. 0 misery!

AmidR thy raging grief I muf proclaim
My innocence.

Lady Ran. Thy innocence !
Lord Ran. My guilt
Is innocence, compared with what thou think'l it.

Lady Ran. Of thee I think not: what have I to

do

With thee, or any thing? My fon!r my sori!
My beautiful! my brave! how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy valour! my fond heart
O'erflow'd this day with trafiporrt, when I thought
Of growing old amidst a race of thine,
Who might make up to me their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and 'my hurband's name':
Now all my hopes are dead! A little while
Was I a wife! a mother not so long'!
What am I now ?- I know. - But I (hall be
That only whilst I please; for such a son
And such a husband make a woman. bold.

.

' [Runs cut.
Lord Ran. Follow her, ANNA:;' I mifelf would

follow,
But in this r.agloe e must abhor niy presence.

'[Exit ANNA.

Enter Old NORVAI.
Nor 'I heard'the voice of woe; heavei guard my

child;

lrbd R'an. Already is the idle gaping c'roud
- gone. ;

~fliterfulvligars, cosn e io gaze on. RAN SD6 ir J
, Nrv. I fear thee not. I will not go.

Here

Here 'll remain. I'm an accomplice, Lord,
With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did;help "
To crush down to the ground this loviely plant.
0 noblelt youth that ever yet was born '
Sweetelt and belt, gentled and bravelt spirit, '
That ever blelt the w6rld! Wretch that'i m,
Who saw that noble spirit swell and rife
Above the narrow limits that'onin'd'it! '
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do thee jufice, and reveal the secret '
Which timely known, had rais'd theer r above
The villain's snare. Oh! I am pudilh'd'nbo "
There are the hairs that (hould have ltrew'd'the ground,
And not the locks of DOUGLAS. ;

C 7Tears hil Air,' asid th iotn

A;m0ftdf'UpCt t'jgriUnQd,

Lord Rai. I know thee now: thy boldriefs I forgiv ;
ly crest is falleni For thee I will appoint
A place of relt, if grief will let thee reft.
Iwil' reward, altho' I cannot punish.
Curst, curlt GLFNALVON, lie efcap'd too well,
Tio' lain and bassl'd by the hand he-hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the lalt,
Curling his conqueror, the felon dy'd.

Enter 'ANNA. .

Anna. My Lord, my Lord!
Lord Ran. Speak: I can hear of horror.
Anna. Horror indeed !
Lord Ran. MATILDA!
Aiina. Is no more
She ran, she flew like light'ning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice the gain'd.
Beneath whose low'ring top the river falls
Ingulph'd in rifted rocks: thither the came,
As fearlels as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down--
Lord Ran. 'Twas I! alas! 'twas I
That fill'd her brealt with fury; drove her down
The precipice of death! Wretch that I aml

D . .na.

Anna. 0 had you seen her lalt despairing look!

Upon the brisk Ihe ltood, and calt her eyes
Down on the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heaven, seeming to fay,
Why am I forc'd to this? She plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord Ran. I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the palion of my foul.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of RANDOLPH gave.
They speak aloud, and with the voice of fate
Denounce mydoom. I amrelolv'd. Ill go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me turn aside mufR threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy mirdfs, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
With cost and pomp upon their funerals wait:
For RNDOLPH hopes he never Ihall return.

F I N I S.

# EPILOGUE.

EPILOGUE.

Spoken by Mr. B A R R Y.

IN iEpilogue aJkt'd; but not one word

Our bard will write. He vows 'tis mofi absurd

With comic wit to contradict the strain
Of tragedy, and make your sorrows vain.
Sadly hefays, that pity is the befl,
The noblest pajion of the human breafl:
For when its sacred freams the heart o'er-fow,
InguF/es pleasure with the tide cf woe;
And when its waves retire, lile those of Nile,
They leave behind them such a golden foil,
That there the virtues without culturegrow,
There the sweet blofomd' of afetlion blow.
These were his-words;-void of delusive art
Ifelt them; for.he fpole them from his.heart.,
Nor will I now attempt, wjitV'itty folly,
To ehace away celeflial melancoly.
