DO UGL A S:

A
T RAGE D Y.

As it is aded at the
T H E A T R SES

IN
G ,R EAT BRI T A IN and I[R E L D.

Non ego Tumn vates,'ifcd prifci confcius zvi.
By the Rev. Mr. H U M E.

To which are prefixcd,
1. An Address to the Au- |. tion and Exhortation,

rhor. By David Hume, a by tile Rev. Prilbytery
Lfq; Authlior ofthe Hi- '' of Edinburgh.
flory of Gieat Britanm, § III. Copy of a Declara-
6c. tion, by the Rev, Pres-
I¥. Copy of an Admoni- ~ b'tery of Glafguw.

N E W R Y: %0
i'rintcd by R. STEVENSOON, ioCC;,'.:XXV

# An Address from DAVID HUME, Esq; Author of the History of Great - Britain, &c. to the Rev. Mr. HUME, Author of DOUGLAS, a Tragedy.

,[ 3]3
An Addref from DAVID HUME, EJq; Author oif t1e

History of Great. Britain, &c. to the'RCv. Air. HvUME,
Author of DOUGLas, a Trag.dy.

My dear Sir,

T was the Practice of the Autients to addi¢ss thier
Compositions only to Friends and Equals, and to

render their Dedications Monunients of Regard and
Affection, not of Servilityand Flattery. Iri. those
Days <if ingenuous and candid Liberrty, a Dedication
did Honour to the Perfton to whom it was addressed,
without degrading the Author.': If any Partiality ap-
peared towards the Patron, it wa. .at least he Pir-.
tiality of Friendnlip and Affectibn:

Another Inilance of trueLibertD, of.which antlent

Times can alone afford us an Example, is the Liberty
of Thought, which engaged Men of Letters, how-
ever different in their abftra&l Opinions, to .maihtain?..
a mutual Friendlh;p and Regard; and never to qiuar'l:
rel about Prirciples, while theyagreed in Inclinations
and Manners. Science was often the 'Subje of Dif-
putation, never of Animosity. Cicero, an Academic,
addreffled his philosophical Trealifes, foimeties. to
13rutus, a Stoic; fome:imes to Aitticns, an Epicurean.

I hale been leized with a strong Desire of renewing .-

thele laudable Pra&ices of Antiquity, by addraflins'
the following Diffe:riations to you my good .Friend ;

o'- lochi I will ever c.all and efleen you,notwithftand.
ing thle Oppolition which prevails between us, witli
KRegard to many of our fpecuiati.ve Tenets. There'
DifFerences of Opinion I have only found to enliven
cour Conversation; while our commnon'Paffiion for Sci-
ence and Letters served as a Cement to our Friendfliip.;
I dtill admired your Geriiu, even whlien I imagined ttiat
you lay under the Influen:ceot Prejudice;' and yiu
foinetimes told me, that you ezc.flcd my Errors oa

'A z a ',' ACcount
- -"*: *'' .' - * -* - - * ' ^lr~t

[ 4

Account of the Candour and Sincerity, which, you
thought, accompanied them.

But to teIl Truth, it is Iefs my Admiration of your

fine Genius wh;ch has engaged me to make this Ad-
dress to you, than my Elteem of your Character and
my Affection to your Person. That Generosity of
Mind which ever accompanies you; that Cordiality of
Friendl'ip, that spirited Honoui and Integrity, have
long in:ereft;d me fRrongly in 5our Behalf, and have
made me defirons, that a Moonument of our mutual
Amity ftould be publickly erected, and, if poflible,
be preserved to Poflerity.

I own too, that I have the Ambition to be the rfilt

who shall in public esprefs his Admiration of your no-
bie Tragedy of Dcuglas; one of the most interefling
and pathetic Pieces, that was ever exhibited on any
Theatre. Should I give it the Preference to the Me-
rope of MInffei, and to that of Voltaire, which it re-
fen:;bli in i:s Subject; flould I affirm, that it contain-
ed more Fiie and Spirit than the former, more Ten-
dernefs and Simplicity than the latter; I might be ac-
cufed of Partiality: And how could I entirely acquit
myfeif, after the Professions of Friendship which I
have made you ? But the unfeigned Tears which flow-
ed from every Eye, in the numerous Representations
which were made of it on this Theatre; the unparal-
leled Command, which you appeared to have over eve-
ry Affecion of the human Bi east: These are incontef-
tible Proofs, that you poflefs the true theatric Genius
of Shakefpear and Otway, refined from the unhappy
Birbarifin of the one, and Licentiousness of the
other.

iMy Enemies, you know, and I own even bfometimes

my Friends, have reproached me with the Love of
Paradoses and singular Opinions; and I expec to be
exposed to the fame Impu'ation, on Account of the
Character which I have here given of your DouglIa.
I fliall be told, no doubt that I had artfully chosen
the oniv Time, wrhen this high Esteem of that Piece
could be regarded as a Paradox, to vit, before its
Publication: and that not being able to contradia in
thii Particular the Sentiments of-the Public, I have,

at

# Copy of the Admonition and Exhortation by the Reverend Presbytery of Edinburgh, dated the 5th Day of January, 1757.

[5]

at leafi, refolvedc to go before them. But T shall be
amply compensated for ail these Pleafantries, if you
accept this Testimony of my Regard, and beiieve me
ito be, wiih the greatetl Sincerity, Dear Sir, Youc
rmoft affetionate Friend, and humble Servant,

Edinb. Jan. 3, 1757. DAVID HUME.

;:O .'**..' . .'\ *> \,,\' v \.^.V.'\'V V.'
Copy of te Addmonition and Exhortation by tle Rever-

end Preslyfeey of Edinburgh, dated the 5th Day of
January, 1757.
'T HE Presbytery taking into their fernous confide.

ration, the declining State of Religion, the o-

pen Profanation of the Lord's Day, the Contempt of
public Worlhip, the growing Luxury and Levity of
the present Age.; in which to many seem Lovers of
Pleasure, more than Lovers of God: And being par-
ticularly asseted with the UNPRECEDENTED COUNTE-
NANCE given cf late to the Phy-Houfe in this Place,
when the State of the Nation, and the Circumstances
of the Poor, make fich hurtful Entertainments /till
imore pernicicus; judged it their indifpenfabJe Duty
to express in the most open and solemn Manner, the
deep Concern they feel on this Occasion.

The Opinion xhich the Chrilian Chttrch has al-

ways entertained of Stage Plays and Players, as pre-
judicial to the Interens of Religion and Morality, is
well known; and the fatal Influence which they com-
monly have on the far greater Part of Mankind, par-
ticularly the younger Sort, is too obvious to be called
in Qneflion.

To enumerate how many Servants, Apprentices,

and Students in different Branches of Literature, in
the City and Suburbs, have been reduced from their
proper Biufinefs, by attending the Stage, would be a
painful, disagreeable Talk.

The Prtefbytery in the Year 1727, when consisting

of many pious, prudent, and learned Ministers, whose
Praile is in all the Churches, being aware of these E-

A3 vils,

[ó3

vFils, did prepare a Paper, which was read from the £e-
veral Pulpits within their Bounds, warning their Peo
pie againit the dangerous Infection of the Theatre
then ereded there.

In the Year 1737, the Legislature, in their grear

Wisdom, did by an At of the loth of George JI.
ena& and declare, " That every Person who fllould,
'" for Hire or Reward, a&, or cause to-be aded, any
"Play, or other Entertainment of the Stage, without
"the spec'ial Licence and Authority mentioned in the
" said Ac't, ihould be deemed a Rogue and a Vaga
" bnA, and for every such Offence llhould forfeit the
"Sum of 5cl. Sterling."

At that Time a Projed was set on Foot to obtain ::

licenufed Theatre in this City; but the Mailers and
Piofeffobrs of the Univerlity, supported by the Magi-
firates, having prepared a Petition, setting forth the
dangerous Tendency of a Play-Honle here, with Re-
speCt to the imFportant Inte efts of V;riue and Learn-
ing, the Ptcjc2 wvas laid afde.
' The P:ayers, however, being so audacious as to
continue to a& in Defiance of the Law, h1e Presbytery
did, at their own Charge, prosecute thlEem before the
Court of Seion; and prevailed ir. the 1'rocefs. The
Piayers were fined in Terrms of Law; and Warrants
be~ng issued for apprehending them, they lied fiotno
Juttice. But others came in their Piace; who lince
that Time have attempted to eluide thle Law, by
changing the Narme of the PLAY-HOUSE into that of'
the CCLCERT-HALL.

At finch a flight Evasion, the mere Change of a

NKame, could nIot make the ftnalleft Variation in the
Nature of the Tiling, the Prefytery continued to do
a11 in tieir Pov er, and in their Sphere, to prevent'the
St owing Evil; and think themfSlves at this Time loud-
- cailled upon, in osE Eonri and with ONE VOICE,
to expohilate, in the Bowels of Love and Comp-flion,
with all under their Care and Infpetion.

When our gracious Sovereign, attentive to the

Voice of Providence, is calling from the Throne to
Hornmiiation and Prayer, how unfeenily is it for his
Suijec.s to give t;emfeives up to Milth and Jollity

When

[ 7 ]

When the war in which we are engaged, and many
awful Tokens of the divine Difpleafuire, bespeak us,
in the Language of an infpiiedt Writer, to redeem tte
Time becauf the Das are e'il, fliould that Time be
filuandered away in running the constant Ronnd of
foolilhb, not to fay sinful Amusements ? When the
Wants and Cries of the nuirerous Poor require extra-
ordinary Supplies, how unaccountable is it to lavilh
away vast Sums for fiuch vain and idle Purposes ?
When thle Wisdom of the Nation has guarded the In-
habitants of this City and Suburbs from the InfeicHon
of the Stage, by a plain and expreis Statute; is it not
a high Inftmnce of Folly,' to bresk down that Barrier,
and open a Door with thei' own Hands for theatrical
Reprel'entations ? which are in many Refpeas no less
inconfident with good Policy, than unfriendly to Re-
ligion; and will be found sooner or later, to assec
their temporal as well as spiritual Interelis.

On thele Accounts, and tor many other obvious and

weighty Conlideraiions, thie Presbyiery, warmed wich
jufR Concern for the Good of Souls, do, in the Fear
of God, WARN, EXHORT, and OBTEST, all within their

,Bounds, ag they regard the Glory of God, the Credit
of our holy Religion, and their own Welfare, to walk
worthy of lie Vocation wherewith they are called, by
fliewing a sacred Regard to the Lora's D;ay, and all
the Ordinances of divine Infitution; and by difcou-
ragir.g, in their refpeflive Slpieres, thlie illegal and
dangerous En!erainments cf the Stage.

TiCe Preibytery would plead with ALL in Adthority,

wi'Ih TEACHsas of Yotih, PARENTS, and MASTERS
of Families, to retli ain by every habile Method, such
as are under their Influence, from frequeniting ehefe
Seminaies of Folly and Vice. They woul'. particu-
larly beseech the younger Part of their Flock, to be-
ware, left by Example, or from a fooliPn Defitre of
appearing in the faibioaable World, they be mifl:d
into such pernicious Snares; Snares which mutft ne-
cefflarily retard, if not entirely mar, that Progress in
the refpcaive Par.s of their Education, on which their
future Ul!r'lnlnefs and Sutcefs depend. And,'laltly,
they would intieat and obeft i'Pclons of ail Ranks

and

# Copy of the Declaration of the Rev. Presbytery of Glasgow, dated the 14th Day of February, 1757.

Es8]

and Conditions, that, inflead of contributing to the
growing Licen:ioufnefs of the Age, they may diftin-
guifi themselves by shining as Lights in the World,
being b!amerne!efs and barmnlefs, the Sons of God, with-
out Rebuke, in the MidIt of a crooked and perverse
Naticn; OCCUPYINrG, for the great Purposes of the
Honour of God and the Good of Mankind, that
Time, that Substance, and those other Talents which
they have received from their Lord and Mailer.

On the whole, the Presbytery do, in the molt ear-

re:! Manner, call upon all who have the Inrereft of
Keligion at Heart, to plead fervently at the Thirone
of Grace, in the prevailing Name of the great Medi-
ator, ur.inil tre Spirit Ie peured upn us from on ,igb, and
tie /,A;cir%;si e a fruist;l Field, and ti:e fruitful Field
,I cu<.dr f/ rJi:

r Then judgment ,,Jail d'ell in the

11',i -rnsejj, ar.dRighke'us/es remain in the fruitful Fiehd;
a:.!. ts !rerl cf Righte-l/rie.s flvali be Peace, and the Es
fJ?: cf R;slzl:sijs.'fs, _~sietnesi and /fs, rancepfr ever.

The Prefbyte-y appoint this ADIONITION and EX-

HORTATiON :( beh read from all the Pulpits within their
Bounds, on the alat Sabbath, being the thirtieth Day
of this Month, immediately after divine Service before
Noon.
Cop½ of13e Declaratin cf#e Rev. Presljtery of Glasgow,

dr.ed tibe 14th DOy ss Februar', 1757.

HE Prefiytery of Glasgow having seen a printed
Psper, intitled, An Admonition and Exhorta-

tion of th Reverend Pre/bytery of Edinburgh, which
among othei Evi;s prevailing, laments the extraordi-
nary and unprecedented Countenance given of late to
the Flay-Hcufe in that City; and having good Rea-
son to believe, that this refers to the following me-
lancholy but r.otoricus Fads, that one who is a Mi-
Differ of the Church of Scotland, did himself write
and ccmpofe a Stage-Piay, in:i.led, Tie Tragedy of
Do3gai, and got it to be ace'rd on the Theatre at

Edinburgh;

C 9 ]

Edinburgh; and that he, with several other Ministers
of this Church, were present, and some of them oft-
ner than once, at the aaing of the said Play before a
numerous Audience: The Presbytery being deeply
affected with this new and strange Appearance, think
it their Duty to declare, as they hereby do, that they
agree with the Presbytery of Edinburgh in their Sen-
timents with Respect to Stage-Plays; and particularly
that such Entertainments, firom what has been usually
exhibited in them, and also from the dissolute Lives
(for the most Part) and infamous Characters of the
Players, have been looked upon by the Christian
Church in all Ages, and of all different Communions,
as extremely prejudicial to Religion and Morality; as
well as hurtful to the other valuable Interests of hu-
mun Society, by the wasteful Expence of Money and
Time they have occasioned; and beihg convinced by
long Experience, a lure Tell of the Tendency of any
Acion or Practice, how vain it is to expect fucb a
Reformation of the Stage as is confiflene with the
Ends aforesaid; and therefore iuch Entertainments
should be discouraged and laid aside: And the Pref-
bytery further confidering, that the unprecedented
Countenance given to the Play-House, in the Inflance
mentioned, is greatly aggravated by a late Act of
Parliament, rendering the Stage (becanfe not licensed)
unlawful in Scotland, and also from the present Cir-
cumfiances of the Nation with Regard to the War we
are engaged in, the Dearth of Provisions, and the
awful Tokens of the Divine Anger against us: They
therefore hereby appoint and infiru& £uch of their
Members as nfall represent them in the eiinfuing gene-
ral Aflembly of this Church, to move and inlift in a
regular Manner, that the venerable Assembly do de-
clare, by a public Act, their Judgment and that of
this National Church against the Entertainments of
the Theatre, as of very hurtful'Tendency to the In-
tereis of Religion and Society. zdly, That the As-
fembly do fsrialy inquire whether the Faci above-
mentioned, viz. that a Minitier of this Church his
compoletd and procured to be acted on the Theatre of
the Canongate of Edinburgh, the Tragedy called,

Douglas,

[ lo ]

Douglas, and that the Representation of the said Tra-
gedy was attended by him and several other Minifrers,
have been under the Consideration of the Prelbyters
refpe&rively concerned; and whether there Ministers,
have been found guilty, have been censured as their
Faults deferred; and to give such Direcions as they
in their Wisdom ihall find r.eceftary, that such Mini-
fiers and all others may be sensible that the Church
of Scotland 'ill never prote& her Members in Prac-
tices so unbecomuing their Charader, and of such per-
nicicns Tendency to the great Interests of Religion,
Induiry and Virtue. And, lastly, that the Aifem.
biy would use their bet Endeavours to obtain such
an Explication and Enforcement of the A& of the
I7th of Geo. II. anent the Play-House, as it may
not be liable to the pitiful Evasions by which it is
Kn-'.P eluded.

PROLOGUE,
.·0U:

# PROLOGUE Spoken by Mr. SPARKS.

PROLOGUE

Spoken by Mr. S P A R K S.
IN antient times, 'when Britain's trade 'was arms,

And the lov'd mntick of her youth alarms,

A geod-lile race fi/fain'dfair England' fame:
Who has not heard of gallant PERCY's name?
Ay, and of DOUGCLAS? Such illtftrious fes
In rival Rome and Carthage never ro/?!
;rom age to age brightJhon the EBritili fire,
iAnd every hero 'was a hero's Jfire.
When po'werful fitte decreed ce Warrrior's doom,
Up sprung the Phenix from his Parent's tomb.
But ivhil/t theft generous rivals fought and fll,
'hefe generous r'ivals lv'deach other vwell:
Tho' many a bloody field o'wa:s loft and 'won,
Northing in hate, in honour all was done.
lWhen PERCY nrolng'd, defy'd his prince or peers,

ajsl came the DOUGLAS, 'with his Scottifi/pears;
And when proud DouGcLAS made his King his foe.
For DOUGLAS, PERCy bent his Englilh bo'w.
Expell'd their native homes by adveorfe fate,

h[ey knock'd alternate at each other's gate
'Then blaz'd the cafile at the midnight hour,
For him 'whofr arms hadJ hook the firmest tewer.
This night a DOUGLAS Jour prctecf7ion claims;
,A twife! a mother! pity's fioftefl names:
5The lory of her 'woes indulgent hear,
Alnd grant your fippliant alljsie begs-a tear';
In confidenceJhe hegs; and hopes to find
Each Engliiilh btreatJ-like Inoble PEtRCYS-kind.

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

DRAMATIS PEJRSONI.

LONDON. E.IN uRGH. DUnLIN.

Lord RANDOLPrr, Mr. RIDOUT. Mr. YOUNGER. Mr. DEXTER.
GLBNALVON, Mr. SMITI. Mr. LovE. Mr. STAYLEY.
NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. BARRY. Mr. DIGOs. Mr. SHCRIDAN.
STRANGER, Mr. SPARKS. Mr. HAYMAN. Mr. LEE.

W 0 M E N.

MATILDAo, Lady R'.~-},,„ ,
MaTtLDAP, Ladyy RnaMrs. WOF.FINGTON. Mrs. WARD. Mrs. KENNEDY.

DOA , Mrs. VINCENT. Mrs. HOPINS. Mis G. P P.
A N N. A, Mrs. VINCENT. Mrs. HoPICINs. Mils G, PIY:::;rs.

# ACT I. SCENE I.

0'(21000000000 O~

-~/^** ~.j *,i~,$~'*^t.*" ** '^-'>'.t* j
D 0 U G L A S:

A3 'A
T RAGEDY.

ACT I. SCENE I.
77 Court Cf a 7Jle, ftirrounded witih JIlod;.

Enter Lady Randolph.
Y E woods and wilds, whore melancholy gloom

Accords with my foul's fadneli, ani draws forth

Thie voice of sorrow from my burflting hear',
Fare vel a while: I will not leave you long;
For in ycur flhades [ deem some fpi'ir dwelle,
Who horn the chiding fiream, or greaning oalk,
Still hears, and anfvers to Matilda's moan.
O, Douglas! Douglas! If departed ghofls
Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of tliat wood thou art,
Aiid with thle paflion of immortals hear'It
My lamentation: hear's} thy wretched wife
Weep for her husband slain, her infant lolt.
My brother's timeless death I seem to mourn,
Who perifli'J with thee on this fatal day.
To thee I lift my voice; to thee address
'he plaint which mortal ear has never heard.
dili'regard me not; though I am caii'd
Another's now, my heart is wholly thine.

B
. Incapable

incapable of chinge, affecion lies
Bnried, my Douglas, in thy bloody grave.
But Randolph comes, whom fate has made my Lori:
To chide my anguilb, and defraud the dead.

Enrrsr L:rd Randolph.
Lord Ran. Again there weeds of woe! fay, do'li

thou well

To feed a paffinn which confunes thy life ?
Tie living claim some duty ; v.::nly thou
3elioA'lt thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady Ran. Silent, aias! is he for whom I mourn

Ch;ldlefs, vwithout memorial of his name,
He oni} now in my remembrance live,.

Lord R.i:. Time, that wears out the trace of dee?

es nnguf.,

Has pai o'er thee in vain. Wou'd thou wert not
CcmTpos'd of grief and tenderness alone!
S'ire ihoti art nor the daughter of Sir M.!cclm:
Strong was his rage, eternal his refentmena:
For when thy brother fell, he fmil'd to heir
That Dopg!as' fen in the fame field was slain.

Lady ]rin. Oh! Rake not up the aflses of my f.thers

:npl'cah!e r:erninene; was their crime,
.-;d grievous iras the expiation been.
Co-..c=ing. with th, Dcu3las, gallant lives
Of ei:l.£- house were loft; ray ancestors
Cerr,.:el'd, at l.si to leave their ancient feat
:an Ti'i ot's pieafant bank ; anld now, of them
,No eir is Icfr. Had they not been tob fern,
I h.'d not b:een t.:e !at cf a'l my r.ace.

Lord Rao. .Thygrief wirets to its purposes my wordi

I .vcrt ai_'d of thiee thai ardent love,
Whici l in r:e libreafc of fanc)'s children burns,
Decent a[tc:oon, and complacent kindness
Were all I wii.'d for; but I wilh'd in vain.
H-ence with ti e i1s: regret my eyes behold
T;i- fiorm of war that garthers o'er this land:
If I should periih ,)y the Daniih sword,
Mlarilda would not lhed one tear the more.

Lady Ran. Thiou do'(i not think so: woful as I ar:

[ love thy meritr, and e'teem thy virtues.
But whikher go;i2 thou now ?

CBr * Lo~

Lord Ran. Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on the tip-loe Ltands
Of expecation, and impatient asks
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The D.ines are landed.

Lady Ran.. 0, may adlverfe wins,

' Far from the coast of Scotland drive their fleet!
And every foildier of both holts return
In peace and safety to his pleasant home !
Lord Ran. Thou fpeak'lt a woman's, hear a war-

rior's wilh:

Right fiom thle'r native land, the stormy north,
Mty the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
liinioveol Ie in Caletdoiiia's firand I
Then Ihall our f.,es repent their bold invasion,
And rovirng armies huin the fatal siore.

Lad3 Ran. War I deJctefl: but war with foreign foes,

Whole manners, langna ge, and whole looks are ltrange,
Is not so horr id, nor to me so hateful,
As that which with our neighbours uft we wage.
A river here, there an ideal line
iBy fancy drawn, divides the sifter kingdoms.
On each fide dwells a people similar,
As twains are to each other, valiant both,
Boch for their valour famous thro' the world;
Yet will ihey n'ot unite their kindred arms,
And, if they innut have war, wage diflant war,
But with each other fig'ht in eruel conflic.
Gallant in fItrife, and noble in tlieir ire,
The battle is their paltiine. They go for:th
Gay in the morning, as to finmmer sport:
Wheni ev'ning comes, the glory of the morn,
Tl'ie youthifil warrior, is a clod of clay.
Thus fall the primne of either hapiels land:
And ftch the fruit of Scotch and Engli!h wars.

Lord Ran. I'll heir no more: this melody would

make

A fioldier drop his sword, anJ doff his arms,
Sit do'vn and weep the conquesls he had made.;
Yea, (like a nmonk) ftng reft and ptace in heav'oj
To fouls of warriors in his battle fldn. · , .-

3B 2 Lady

Lidy, farewel: I leave thee not alone;
,onder comes one whose love makes duty light.

EntLer Anna.

/.¥r.a. Forgive the rafltrefs of your Anna's lore:

DTrg'd by affetion, I have thus prefum'd
T'o interrupt your solitary thoughts;
And a;arn you of the hours that you neglec,
ziAnd lose in fdnefs.

Lady Ran. So to lose my hours
Is all the ife I wviih to make of time.

.r.wa. To blame :hee, lady, ifuits not with my state:

]ut sure I amn, since death firt prey'd on man,
iever did filer thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had lollft,
In erly youth, the husband of your heart?

Lady Ra;:. Oh !
ztn'a. Have I diftrel you with officious love,

And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate ?
Fcrgive me, lady: hu'jmble tho' I am,
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune;
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

Lady Ran. What power direced thy unconfcio'J.

tongue
To speak as thou haft done ? to name-

/nr.a. I know' not:

But since mn-y words have made my mistress tremble,
I will speak fn no more;, but silent mix
Mv tears w.ithi hers.

Lady Rian. No, thou shalt not be silent.

I';1 truiR thy f.ii:hFul love, and thou filhtt be
IIencefortlh th' inflruded partner of my woes.
But what avails ir i? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the snood of never-ebbing time ?
Cormpel the earth and ocean to give up
Their dead alive?

iv.vai. What means my noble mifltrefs ?
Lady Ran. Didt thou not afg what had my sorrows

bren ?-

If I in earlv you'h had loft a hufban ?----
la the colJ boso:n of the earth is lodg'd,

Mangl'd

Mangl'd with wounds, the husband of my youth;
And in some cavern of tile ocean lies
My child and hIis.--------

Anna. 0! lady, mos[ rever'd !

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words,
Deign to unfold.

Lady Ran. Alas! an ancient feud,

Hereditary evi', was the source
Ot my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother flould in battle save
The life of Douglas' son, our house's foe:
The youthful warriors vow'd eternal friendflhip.
To fee the vautled filter of his friend
In ptient, Douglas to Balarmo came,
TUnder a borrow'd namne.-My heart he gain'd;
Nor did I long refuse tlie hand he begg'd:
liy brother'cpretence auithoriz'd our marriige.
T'1ree week%, three little weeks, with wings of down,
H.id o'er us flown, when my luv'd lord was call'd
T, fight his father's batties; and with him,
In spite of all my tears, did Malcolm go.
Scarce were they gone, when my stern fire was told
That the f;lie stranger was lord Douglas' ;on.
Frantic wiih rage, the baton drew his sword
And queflion'J me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
Knetling beneath his sword, sak'iing I took
An oath equivocal that I ne'er would
Wed one of Douglas' name. Sincerity,
Thou first of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thy outward path ! altho' the earth lh.uld gape,
And from the gulf of hell deflrntion ciy
To take difiimulation's winding way.

Anna. Alas! how few of woman's fearful kind
)aurft own a truth so hardy!
Lady Ran; The first truth

(s easiest to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale.----
In a few days the dreadful tidings came
Tiat Douglas and my brother both were fl.din.
My lord ! my life ! my hufband!I-mighty God !
What had I done to merit such afflition? -

Anna. My dearest lady ! Many a tale of tears

B 3 I've

I've !islen'd to; but never did I hear
A tale lb fad as this.

Laiy Ran. In the first da.ys

Ofn ;y diitra&ing gt;icf, I tound myself----
,j-s women vwili to be who love their lords.
But who du-ir teii my fadL,; ? The go;d 2rielt
Who jnin'd our hands, my brother's ancient tutor,
With his lov'd M.lcolm, in the battle fell:
They two alo::e were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concralir.ernt I refolv'd,
Till time Lhould nmak.e my fa:hei's fortune mine.
That very niht on which my lbon was born,
My nurse, the cnly confidant I had,
Set coct ith him to reach her- fier's house:
But nurse, nor infant, have I ever 'een,
Or heard f, Anna, lince that fatal hour.
My nurder'd chiilj !i-had thy fond mother sear'd
T''e !o:s cf ithee, i:;e .:al loud fame defy'd,
Defois'd her father's rage, her fatlier's grief,
And u ande['d \\t:h thee thro' the scorning world.

/rJ.:. Not iken, or heard of! then Sei haps he lives.
Lady/R-co. No. It was dark December: sind and

rain

Hid heat ill night. Across the Caron lay
The de::in'd road ; and in its fweliing flcd
My fail;;iul fei-varit pc i!h'd with my child.
O haliefs sotn ! f a moit h:pltfs fire !-
Eut they are both at rtell; and I alone
Dweil in ithis world cf woe, condcmn'd to walk,
Like a gtik-:-t clb-ed Ghof, my painful rounds:
Nor h.;s d.f;i ci\l fate permnitted me
The cenisort ci a sI iltary ib row.
Thb' c'e.id to love, I was ctmpcll'd to wed
Rand-!F.n, who fnatch'd nde from a villain's arms;
And Randolph now polfflTes ihe domains,
Th:at by hir Malcolm's death on me devolv'd;
Dothsins tha; ftnould to Douglas' son have giv'n
A baron's title, and a baron's power.
Such were rrmy toohing thoughts, while I bewail'd
The flaunghtei'd father of a ifon unborn.
And uwhen :hat son came, like a ray from heav'a
Which l:es and difiapcdr ; alas! my. child !.

How

Flow long dill thy fond mother grasp the hope
Of }aving thee, Ihe knew not how, reftor'd ?
Year after year hath worn her hope away;
But left fill nndiiminilh'd her desire.

A2naa. The hand, that Wpins th' uneven thread oflife,
May fmnoth the length thiat's yet to col e of your's.

Lady Ran. Not in this world: I have confider'd well

Its various evils, and on u'hsem they fall.
Alas how oft does goo.infs wound itself,
And fwee: affecion prove the spring of woe ?
O! had I dy'd whe;; my lov'd hsfhand fell !
Had forme good angel op'i to me the book
Of providence, and let nie read my life,
My heart had broke, when I beheld the f'um

f01 ills, which one by one I have endur'd.
Anna. That God, whole mrainillters good angels are,

Hath fl(hut the hook in mercy to niauikind,
But we mult leave this theme: Glenalvon comes:
I saw him bend on you his thlionghtfol eyes,
And hitheiwards he slowly stalks his way.

Lady Ran. I will avoid him. An ungracious person

Is doubly it klome in an hour like this.
Anna. Whly speaks my lady thits of Randolph's

heir?
Lady Ran. Because he's not the heir of Randolph's

virtues.

Subtle and shrewd, he offers to mankind
An artificial image of himlfelf:
And-he with eale can vary to the ratPe
Of cifferent men, i's features. Self-denied,
And mailer of his appetites he seems:
Bsut his fierce naiure, like a fox chain'd uip,
Watches to seize unseen the wisl'd for prey.
Nevcer were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
As in Gle,.aivom's unrelenting mind.
Yet is he brave and politic in war,
And ftinds aloft in tbefe unruly times.
WThy I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter:
Stay, and detain him till I reach the cifile.

[E£.it, Laly Randolph.

Anna. 0, happine's! where art thou to be found?
I fee thou d,'lel}t not with birth and beauty,

'- ~~
, ~~Tho'

Tho' g'-ac'd with grandeur, and in wealth array'd ;
iNor dost thou, it would seem, with virtue dwell;
Eife had this gentle Iddy nils'd thee not.

Eter Giena!von.

Glen. What dolt thou muse on, meditating maid?

Like some entranc',i and vifinniary seer
On earth thou fiand'it, thy thoughts ascend to heaven.

A.m:a. Wcu'd that I were, e'cn as thou fay'd, a seer,
To have my dubts by heav'ni) vision clear'd!

Glcr.. V. hat dli thou doubt of? what haft thou to

L'O

Wi;h fuljcs intricate? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be que'iicned: tbizk of thele good gifts;
And then tl:y ccnmtm[!a;icns will be pleating.

/r:,:a. Let women view yon monument of woe,

Tihen bcofil cf beauty; who so lair as fle ?
But I mu'jf follow: thIis revolving day
Awakes the memory of her antient woes.

[Exit Anna.

Glenalvon/c/ulr.

So!-Lady Randclplh fliu:is me; by and by

I'll woo her as the lion wce, his brides.
The deed's a-doing now, that makes me lord
Of these rch vailie-, aad a chief of power.
The season is mcht apt, my founding steps
Wiill no be heard a.idlt the din ofarms.
Randolph has ]vT'd too long: his better fate
Had the alcendant once, and kept me down:
When I had seiz'd the dame, by chance he came,
Refcu'd, and had the lady for his labour;
] 'fc:p'd unknoan: a slender cenfolation!
Heaven is my wi:ness that 1 do not love
To £ow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvest. Yet I am not safe:
By love, or something like it, lihng, inflam'd,
Mdfdly I biabb'd my paflihn to his wife;
And ihe has threaten'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will I do not know:
But well I know the Baron's wrath is deadly.
I uill not live in fear: the man I dread
Is as a Di.ne to me; ay, and the man
Who stRand betwixt me and m;- chief desire.

No

# ACT II. SCENE I.

No bar but hIe; ihe has no kinlfminm near;
No brother in :is fifer's quarrel bLold;
And for the righteous cause, a Itiranger's cause,
I know no chief that will def'y G;enalvon.

ACT II. SCENE I.

A Court, &c.
Enter Servants and a Stranger at one Door, and Lady

Rndorlph and Anna at another.
Lady Ran. PT HAT means this clamour?

iVV tranper, speak fecuire;
Haft thou been wror.g'd ?J have these rude men pre-

fu 'd
To vex the wveary traveller on his way ?

fil Serv. By us no llranger ever fuffer'd wrong:

T'his man with outcry wildJ has call'd us forth;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
Enter Lord Randolph a:d ysteng AMan, wuith their

S'words .-dra'n and bloodv.
Lady Ran. Nor vain tihe ftrlangcr's iears! how fares

my Lord?
Lord Ran. Th'I'at it fares well, thanks to.this gal-

lant youth,

Whose valour fav'd me from a wretched death!
As down the winding dale I wa!k'd alone,
At thile crofa way four armcd men attack'd me
Rovers I judge, from thle licentious camp,
Who would haive quick'y laid Lord Randolph low,
IIad not this b;.ave and generous Itranger come,
Like my good angel in the hour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my f>es his own.
They turn'd upon him; but his active arm
Struck to the ground, from vwhence they role no more,
The flercefl two; the others fled amain,
Anld les: hin miafiler of the bloody field.

cSpeak, Lady Randrolph; upon ledut)y's tongue

Dtvdl

Dwell accentrs pleasing to the br.ive and bold.
Speak, r.oble dame, and thank him f;:r thy lord.

Lady Ran. Mr lord, 1 cannot Iveak what now I feel.

My heart o'erfows with gratit,:de to heav'n,
And to this noble youth who all unkno' n
To yen and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at Feril, hiut humanely brave
Fought on your fide, against fiinch fearful! ndIs.
Have you yet learn'd of him whom we flhould thank?
Whlioi clil the saviour of Lord Randolpo's life?

LcrdRaJ. Iafik'd that quefiion,and he an.fwei'd not:
But I-mnuft know who my deliv'rer is. [to the/pranger.

Strm.g. A low born man, of parentage obscure,

Who nt ught can boa;.i but his desire to be
A soldier,' and to gain a name in arms.

Lind Ran. Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled

By the grea: King of Kings! thou art ordaiu'd
And flarrpt a hero by the sovereign hand
Ct nature! bhiuflh nor, flower of-modelly
As well as valour, to declare thy birth.

Strar. My name is Norval: on the Grampian

hills

My fa'her feeds his flocks; a frugal swai;n,
Vi'hofe coniult cares were to encreafe his tore,
And keep his caly fir: mr.yleif, at home.
For I had hea:d of battles, and I loniig'd
To fi:low :o ;i:: fr:d Kifume wa:like lord;
And h'earen ibo-:: nr:t::ted what my li'e denied.
Tais iic'op.. ich ,sc 'ao ; nii:ht, round as mry liteld,
slad r.o: yer: ;ii'd he;r i.i;v, w-hen by her light,
A b md i.i sirce bOarbaria;;s, fromn ithe hiils,
Rc.l. ii' ;e a rtorreiit iowa pn tpn lie v:ile,
£''eepi=,i cg:'

- .i:t; and ikeids. The fliepherds fled

For £.fc;r, and for fucccur. I alone,
V'i;: Lre':'u bow, and quiver ftil of arrows,
-ltvi:'d a',o.ct the enemyr, and mark'd
T::e road he ttok, then ha2i:;l to my si lend;;

i;mr.ni, ti:h! a trco? of fi/:y cho;en mlen,

I : .e .

ad': .cing. Tli pursuit I led,
Tis v£e c'=:;otk -i': poil- ent'umbel 'd foe.

,,,'= i''u . 4a : c,,zi:iiuei'd. 'E l ;i lwc.rd was drawr ,

Ain

An arrow firom nmy bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore thai d.iy the armis which now I wear.
Returning home in irintnph, I dildain'd
']'.ie !hlcp;:erd'-sibi Jtiol life; ;and having heard
T'nat our o~.d *Ji 'ing had fummnon'd his bo.ld peers
To leaJ [heir warri-.s to tile Carroln ide,
I left nmy fai:.ier's |holfe, and took with me
A chofeiin I1 van; to condct my fleps.
Yon renbhlintg coward whto fo'hinok his mafler.
Journeying wit i thib ilient, I palt thel'e towers,
Aod, hc.ven-di-eacteJ came thii: day to do
Ti:e i:appy dJeed ~h: gildis my huinbie name.

Lowd Ran, He i s wisas -

as brave. Was ever tale

With filch a g.tillIa rtnod eoy rehedts'd?
Mv brave delivetrer! lthou lhalt cnter now
A nobler liit, and in a monarclh' fihlht
Contend with princes for ihe prize of famne.
I 'vil p, elnt ;ll:e to -'Our Scotrilih King,
Whole valiant sp:rit cvet raioar Icv'd.
Ha! mny Maiida! wherelo,'e lttarts that telr?

Lady Ran. I cannot fIy: tor vai!,us aiFections,

And ilrangely minglced, in my boiom iswcll;
Yet each of themn nmay well c;,mmand a tear.
I joy that tliou art fa'e; and admire
-iin and his.fortunes \' ho hl,,h wronglht thy safety.
Oiscure and fricn,!efs, -he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in ihe rang. of death'
Resblv'd to hunt for famtne, and witlh his ftvord
To gain diltinftion which ili= birth dened.
In this attempt unk.iown he migh' have perilli'd.
And gain'd, with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier no.w of hope
He flands conspicuous; fame and rea:t renown
Are brought within ihe comnpafs of Ihis sword.
On this my mind reflexed, whiiflt you spoke,
And blefs'd thie wvonider-working Ljid of Heaven.

Lord Ran. Pious.and grateful ever arce tihy thoughts!
My deeds 'hall follow where thun point'lt tihe xay.
Next to myflef, and equal to Glenalvon,
In honour and command, thall Norval be.

.,V~rv.

NA'srrv. I know not how to thank you. Rude I am

In speech and manners: never till this hour
Stood I in such a presence: yer, my lord,
There's something in my breat which makes me bold
To fa.y, tiat Norval ne'er will fltame thy favour.

Lady Rn-. I will be fiorn thou viie net. Thcu

fnI.lt be

My knight, and ever, as thou d;dfl to-day,
With hippy valour guard the life of Randolph.

Lomd Ran. Well hail thou fipoke. Let re sorbic:

reply, [To Noival.

We are thy debror fill; thy high d'esert
O'ertops ca;ur gratitude. I mull p:oceed,
As was at. firl intendedi, to the camp.
~cn:e of my train I fee are sp:eding hi:.er,
limpotient, donut!efs, cf their lord's delay.
Go uith me, No val, and th~ne eyes shall fee
The chofeia warriors of thy native land,
Who l.nguifh tfor the fightr, and beat tihe air
With brai.ditih'd swords.

A'.rv. Le: us begone, my lord.
Lord Ran. [To Laady Randolph] About the time

that the decl:ning fun

Shall his broad orbit o'er yen hills fus[:end,
Ex.t&t us to return. Tliih night once more
'Within thefre wl!s I redl; my teni;t I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepa:'e t:e ieat.
Free is Lis heart who for his country fighis:
He in the eve of battle may resign
Hitnelt to social pleasure; fwee:cil then,
When danger to a foidier's fou) endears
The human joy that never may retutn.

[Exseait Randolph and Norval.

SCENE II.

Lady Randolph and Anna.
Lady Ran. His parting words have truck a fatal

truth.

0 Douglas! Douglas! tender was the time
When w-e t'o parted ne'er to meet again!

How

HIow many years of anguiflh and despair
Has heav'n annex'd to those swift pafling hours
Of love and fondness ! Then my bosom's flame
Ofr, as blown back by the rude breath of fear,
Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.
Anna. May gracious heav'n pour the sweet balm of

peace

Into the wounds that fester in your breaf !
For earthly conlfolation cannot cure them.

Lady Ran. One only cure can heav'n itfelfbeftow;-

A grave-that bed in which the weary reft.
Wretch that I am ! Alas! why am I so?
At every happy parent I repine !
How bler the mother of yon gallant Norval!
She for a living husband bore her pains,
And heard him bless her when a man w'as born:
She nurs'd her finiiing infant on her breaf:
'Tended the child, and rear'd the pleating boy:
She, with affecion's triumph, saw the youth
IT grace and comeliness furpals his peers:
Whilili [ to a dead hufhand bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.

Alimna. Alas! alas! why will you thus resume

Your grief afreth ? I thought that gallant youth
Would for a wlhile have won you from your woe.
On him intent you gazed, with a look
Much more delighted, than your pensive eye
Has deign'd on other objeCts to below. ,
Lady Ran. Delighted, fay'l[ thou? Oh! even

there mine eye

Found fuel for my life-confuming sorrow.
I thought, that had the son of Douglas ]iv'd,
He might have been like this young gallant (l'anger.
And pair'd with him in features and in Ihape,
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
My boy with blooming Norval might have number'd.
Whilst thus I mus'd, a spark firom fancy fell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondn'ess
For this young franger, wand'ring from his home,
And like an orphan call upon my care.
i will protect thee (said I to.myfelf)
With all my power, and grace with all my favour.

C Annna.

Anna. Sure heav'n will bless so generous a resolve.

Yon mult, my noble dame, exert your power:
You muxlt awake: devices will be fi'anm'd,
And arro s pointed at the breat of Norval.

Lady Ran. Glenalvon's false and crafty head will

work

AgainE a rival in his kinsman's love,
If I deter him not: I only can.
Bold as he is, Glenalvon will beware
Hnow he pulls down the fabric that I raise.
I'll be the artist of young Norval's fortune.
:Tis pleasing to admire: molt apt was I
To this affetion in my better days;
Thoug:h now I fcemn to you flrnnk up, retir'd
WiJhin the narrow compass of my woe.
Have you not sometimes seen an early flower
Open its bud, and spread its silken leaves,
To catch sweet airs, and odours to bestow;
TiesV, by the keen b!ast nipt, pull in its leaves,
And, tho' frill ii ing, die to scent and beauty' ?
Emblem of me: afflicion, like a form,
Hazh killed the forward bloflbm of my heart.

Enter Glenalvon.

Gler. Where is my dearell kinfinan, noble Randolph?
Lady Ran. Have you not heard, Glenalvon, of the

hafe-.

Glen. I have: ar.d that the villains may not 'scape,

Wizh a itrong band I have begirt the wood:
If they lurk there, ;al!ive rhey (hall be taken,
Aio torture foe fre fi-om them th' important fccret,
Wthether some foe of Randolph hir'd th'eir swords,
Or it-

Lady Rat:. That care becomes a kinsman's love.
,I have a counsel for Glenalvon's ear. [Exit Anna,

Glen. To him your counsels always are commands.
Lady Ra.n. I have not found so: thou art known

to rme.

Gls. Known!
Lady Ran. And most certain is my cause of know~

ledge.

Gk;:. What do you know ? by the most blessed cross,
You much amaze me. No created thing,

Yourseis

You'rself except; durst thus accost Glenalvon.
Lady Ran. Is guilt so bold? and dolt thou make a

merit

Of thy pretended meekness? This to me!
Who, with a gentleness which duty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd what, if divulg'd,
Would make thee nothing; or, what's worie than thar»
An outcaflt beggar, and unpitied too:
For mortals ihudder at a crime like thine.

Glen. Thy virtue awes me. Firlf of womankind!

Permit me yet to fy, that the fond man
Whom love transports beyond ri&c virtue's bounds,
If he is brought by love to misery,
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpitied cannot lie. Pity's the alms
Which on such beggars freely is bestowed:
For mortals know that love is (till their lord,
And o'er their vain ref6lves advances fRtill I
As fire, when kindled by our Ihepherds, moves
Thro' the dry heath before the fanning wind. ^

Lady Ran. Reserve these accents for some other ear.

T'o love's apology I liften not.
Mark thou my words! for it is meet thou [hould'fi.
His brave dtliverer Randolph here retains,
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well:
But, at thy peril, pra&ise aught against him:
Let not thy jealousy attempt to fliake
And loosen the good root he has in Randolph;
Whose favourites I know thou haft supplanted.
Thou look'ft at me, as if thou fain would'flt pry
into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caumion, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendless itranger my protecion claims:
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. LExit.

SC EN E III.

Manet Glenalvon.

Child that Iv tas, to start at my own flladow,
And be the ilha.low fool of coward conscience!

C 2 I ama

# ACT III. SCENE I.

I am not what I have been; what I should be.
The darts of defiiny have ahnmoft pierc'd
My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I should conclude there was an arm above
That fought againQl me, and malignant-turn'd
To catch mryfelt; the fubtie snare I set.
Why, rape and murder are not simple means!
Ta' imperfec't rape to Randolph gave a spouse;
And the inrcnded murder introduc'd
A favoiite to hide the fun from me;
And wors. of all, a rival. Buining hell!
This were thy center, if I thought {he lov'd him!
'Tis certain she ccntemns me; nay, commands me,
And waves the flag of her difpieafure o'er me,
In his behalf. Aid Iball I thus be brav'd ?
Curb'd, as (he calls it, by dame chaflity !
Infernal fiends, if any fiends there are
More fierce than love, ambition, and revenge,
Rife up and fill my bosom with your fires
And policy remorseless! Chance may spoil
A tingle aim; but perseverance mufft
'Prosper at last. For chance and fate are words:
Perfifltive wifdorm is the fate of man.
Darkly a prrject peers upnn my mind,
Like the red.moon when riling in the eaR,
Crofs'd and divided by ftrange-colour'd clouds.
I'll seek the flive who came with Norval hither,
And for his cowardice was spurned from him.
I've know-n a follower's rankled bosom breed
Venom moll fatal to his heedless lord. [Exit.

ACT III. SCENE I.

A Court, &c. as bcfre.

Enter Anna.
Anna.THIY vassals, Grief! great nature's order

1- break,

And

And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour.
Whilf Lady Randolph sleeps I will walk forth,
And tafRe the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers be ! Ye Ministers
Of gracious heaven, who love the human race,
Angels and seraphs, who delight in goudnefs!
Forsake your skies, and to her couch descend!
There from her fancy chafe thofere dismal forms
That haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
With images celelial, such ;u please
The blest above upon their golden beds.

Enter Servant.

Serv. One of the vile aftaffins is fecur'd.

We found the villain lurking in the wood:
Witlh dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not
His first essay: these jewels were conceal'd
In the molt lfecret places of his garment;
]Belike the spoils of some that he has murdered.

A/rna. Let me look on them. Ha! here is a heart,

'T'he chosen crest of Douglas' valiant name !
These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch.

[ CEsit Anna.

Enter Servants Iwith a Prisoner.

Prif. I know no more than does the child unborn,
Of what you charge me with.

iJi Serv. You fay so, Sir!

But torture soon fliall make you speak the truth.
Behold the Lady of Lord Randolph comes;
Prepare yourself to meet her just revenge.

SCENE II.

Enter Lady Randolph and Anna.

Anna. Sumnmon your utmost fortitude, before
You speak with him. Your dignity, your fame
Are now at ftke. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may fly.
Lady Ran. Thou (halt behold me, with a desperate'

heart,

C 3 Hear

Hear how my infant per iflh'd. See he kneels.

[TIe Pr,-iner bneel/.
Prif. Heaven bless that countenance, ib sweet and

mild:

A judge like thee makes innocence more bold.
0 save me, lady ! from these couel men,
Who have attack'd and seiz'd me; who accuse
Mie ofintended murder. As I hope
For mercy at the judgment-feat of God,
The tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
Is not more innocent than I of murder.

Lady Ran. Of this man's guilt what proof can ye

produce?
ift Serv. We found him lurking in the hollow

Glynn,

When yiew'd and cali'd upon, amaz'd, he fled.
We over'ook him, and inquir'd from whence
And awhat he -was: he fa'd he came from far,
And was upon his journey to the camp;
Not fatify'd with this, we scarch'd his cloaths,
And soond there jewels; whose rich value plead
Mot powerfully againlt him. Hard he seems,
And old in villainy. Permit us to try
His flubbornnefs against the tornure's force.

Prif 0, gentle lady ! by your lord's dear life !

Which these weak hands, I iwear, did ne'er asSail;
And by your children's welfare, spare my age I
Let not the iron tear my antient join;s,
Aind my gray hairs bring to the grave with pain.

Lady Ran. Account tor these: thine own they

cannot be:

For there, I fay: be stedfast to the truth;
De¢tcted falfllood is molt certain death.

[Anna removes the SrrvantJ, and returns.J

Ps. Alas I'm fiore beset! let never man,

For fake of lucre, fin zgain11 his foul
Eternal justice is in this molt just !
I, guiltless now, mult former guilt reveal.

Lady Ran. O! Anna, hear !-Once more I charge

thee speak
The truth dire&: for these to me foretel

An~i

And certify a part of thy narralion;
With which if the remainder tallies nor,
An.inftant and a dreadful death abides thee.

Prif. Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speak to you as just

As if you were the Miniler of Heaven,
Sent down to search the feciet fins of men.

Some eighteen years ago, I rented lanid

Of brave Sir Malcolm, then Balarmo's lord;
lut falling to decay, his'fesvants seiz'd
All that I had, and then turn'd me and mine,
(Four helpless infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel, by the river fide,
Receiv'd us: there hard labour, and the skill
In filhing, which was formerly my sport,
Supported life. Whillt thus we poorly.liv'd,
One ltormry night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down, and loud and oft
'T'he angry spirit of the water flhiek'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
Ofone in jeopardy. I rose, and ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
MIy reach whatever floating thing the aream
had caught. The voice was ceas'd ; the person loft:
But looking fad and earnest on the waters,
By the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round,
A basket: lbon I drew it to the bank,
And nefsled curious there an infant lay.

Lady Ran. Was he alive ?
Prif. He was.
Lady Ran. Inhuman that thou art!
How couldst thou kill what waves and tempests spar'd ?

Prif. I am not so inhuman.
Lady Ran. Didflt thou not ?
Anna. My noble miitrefs, you are mov'd too much:

This man has not the aspet of flern murder:
Let him go on, and you, I.hope, will hear
Good tidings ot your kinsman's long loft child..

Prif. The needy man, who has known better days,,
One whom distress has spited at the worlds

Is

Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds as mlake tile prosperous men
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them.
And such a man was 1; a man dec!in'd,
Who saw no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Hlave touch'd that infant, with a hand of harm.

Lady Ran. Ha ! deft thou fay so ? Then perhaps

he lives

Prf. Not many days ago he was alive.
Lady Ran. O! God of Head'n! Did he then die

so lately ?

P/s. I did not fay he died; I hope he lives,

Not many days ago these eyes beheld

ilim, flourishing in youth, and health, and beauty.
Lady Ran. Where is he ow ? '
Prif Alas! I know not where.
Lady Ran. Oh, fate! I fear thee flill. Thou rid-

dler, fpeik
Dire& and clear; else I will search thy foul.

A;na. Permit n;e, ever honour'd ! Keen impatience,

Tho' hard to be reftrain'd, defeats itfelif.-
Pursue thy 1tory with a faithful tongue,
To the last hour that thou didflt keep the child.

Prif. Fear not my faith, tho' I mul Ipeak my shame.

Within the cradle, where the infant lay,
Was ftow'd a mighty fRore of gold and jewels;
Tempted by which, we did refoive to hide,
From all the world, this wonderful event,
And like a peasant breed the noble child.
That none might mark the change of our eflate,
We left the country, traveli'd to the north,
BEought flocks and herds, and gradually brought forth
Our secret wealth. But Gcd's all-feeing eye
Beheld our avarice, and imo;e us fore.
For one by one all our own children daied,
And he, the firanger, lole remain'd the heir
Of "hat indeed was his. Pain then wou'd I,
Who with a father's fondnets lov'd thie boy,
Have truPed him, now in the dawn of youth,
With his nwn lecret: but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never would conlent.

Mean

Mean while tile fsripling grew in years and beauty;
And, as w'e oft obterv'd, he bore himself,
Not as the offspring of our cottage blood ;
For nature will break out: mild with the mild,
But with the frioward he was fierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I set myself against his warlike bent;
But all in vain: for when a desperate band
Of robbers from the fayage mountains came---·

Lady Ran. Eternal providence ! What is thy name !
Prif. My name is Norval: and my name he bears.
Lady Ran. 'Tis he; 'is he himself: It is my fonr!

0 tbvereign mercy ! 'Twas my child I law !
No wonder, Anna, that my bosom burn'd.

Anna. Just are your tranlports, ne'er was woman's

heart

Prov'd with fiuch fierce extremes. High fated dame!
But yet remember that yon are beheld
By servile eyes; your gellures may be seen
Impaflion'd, strange; perhaps your words o'erheard..

Lady Ran. Well dolt thou counsel, Anna: Heaven

beltow
On me that wisdom which my late requires !

Anna. The moments of deliberation pals,

And loon you must resolve. This ufefal man
Muff be difmifs'd in fafsty, 'ere my lord
*hall with his brave deliverer return.

Prif. If I, amidst astonishment and fear,

i!ave of your words and geslures rightly judg'd,
Tqhou art the daughter of my antient master;
The child I refcu'd from the flood is thine.

Lady Ran. With thee.diflimulation now were vain.
i am indeed the daughter of Sir Malcolm;
The child thou refcu'dlt firom the flood is mine.

Prif. Bieft be the hour that made me a poor man I
My poverty has fav'd my matrer's house !

Lady Ran. Thy words furprize me: lure thou dolt

not feign:

The tear fiands in thine eye: such love from thee
Sir Malcolm's house defelv'd not; if aright
Thou tojd's tke (lory of thy own diltrefs.

Pris

Prif Sir Makcolm of our barons was the flower;

The faleft sr;end, the heft and kindelt mafler.
B'lit ah ! he knew not of my fad eflate.
After that battle, where his gallant son,
Your own br;ave brother fell, the good old lord
Grew desperate and reckless of the world;
And rever, as-he erat was wont, went forth
To ev-rlook the conduct of his fervaints.
By ti.em I was thrust out, and them I blame:
May heaven foi, judge me as I judg'd my mafler!
And Go so Ic.ve me as I love hIis race!

Lacy Ran. His race (hall vet reward thee. On thy

faith

Fepenc's l.' fate of ihy lov'd maiter's house.
Ren'emb're¢: ihou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears,
Amcrg the clifts of Carron ?

Puil: I remerrber
The cvt;:zge of 'he c'ists.

Lady Ran. 'Tis that I mean:

The:e deiils a m.n of vncaerble age,
Who in my father's service Ipent his youth:
Tell him I ienr thee, and wita him remain,
'Till I {hali call upcn thee to declare,
Before the l.ir. ard nobles, what thou now
T me haft told. No more but this, and thou
Shalh live in honour all thy future days;
Thy son so long {hall call rhee fa:her fill,
And all the land shll bless the man, who fav'd
The fen of Douglas, and Sir Malcolm's heir.
Remember 'we;l my words: if thou thon!ld'ft meet
Him uhcm thou cali'fl thy sorn, still call him so;
And nen'ion nothing of his nobler father.

Pri. Fear not that I. (hall mar so fair an harvelt:

By puning in my fickle ere ';is ripe.
Why did I leave my home and antient'dame ?
To find :he Yceuh, to tell him all I knew,
And make him wear ihefe jewels on his arms;
Which might, I thought, be challeng'd, and so bring
To light the secret of his noble b-:h.

[Lad) Randolph g:es towards tle Servant/.

Lady

Lady Ran. This man is not the afifaffin you fufpeded.

Tho' chance comrnbin'd some likelihoods againf him,
He is the faihtful bearer of the jesels
To the right owner, whom in hafRe he seeks.
'T'is meet that you ihuiild put him on his way,
Since your miRfdken zeal hath dragg'd him hither.

[ Exeunt Stranger and Servanti.

SCENE III.

Lady RanJolph and Anna.
Lady Ran. My faitliful Anna! dost thou thare my

j,,y ?

I know thou dost. Unparallel'd event!
Reaching from heaven to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the wave,, and brings me-to my foul
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father!
Accept a widow's and a mother's tlianks
For fimch a gift ! What does my Anna think
Of the young eaglet of a valiant nef ?
How soon he gaz': on bright and br ning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where h;s fate had thrownhim
And towe,'d up to the reg;on of his si e.

Anna. How fondly did your eyes devour the boy!

Mylterious nattre, with the unleen cord
Of powerful instinct, drew you to your own.

Lady Ran. The ready story of his birth believ'd

Suppreft my fancy qoire; nor did he owe
To any likeness my so iudden favour:
But now I long to fee his face again,
Examine ever'y feature, and find out
T'he lineaments of Douglas, or my own.
But molt of all, l long to let him know
Who his true parents are, to claSp his peck,
And tell him all the (lory of his father.

Annr. With wary caution you mull bear yourself

In public, left your tenderness break forth,
And in observers stir conjecures frtange.
For, if a cherub in the thape of woman,
Should walk this world, yet defamation would,
Like a vile cur, bark at the angel's train-
T'o-day the baron flarted at your tears.

Lady

Lady Ran. He did so, Anna! well thy miflrefs

knows,

If the leaR circumrtance, mote of offence,
Should louch the baron's eye, his fight would be
With jealonfy diforder'd. But the more
It does behove me inisant to declare
The birth of Douglas, and aftert his rights.
This night I purpole vith my son to meet,
Reveal the fecrer, 'and cenfult with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does now, so look'd his noble father,
Array'd in nature's ease: his mien, his speech,
Were sweetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those ,rivial mortals who seem always wife.
Bu, when the matter match'd his mighty mind,
Up rose the hero: on his piercing eye
Sat obferva:ion; on each glance of thought
Decision follow'd, as the thunder-bolt
Puriues the flafn.

Xnrna. That demon haunts you Rill
Beho!d Gleralvon.

Lady Ran. Now I shun him not.

This day I brav'd him in behalf of Norval;
Berkhaps too far : at lears my nicer fears
For Douglas thus interpret.

Enter Glenalvon.

GsK. N'oble dame i

The hov'ring Dane at la/t his men hath landed:
iN': band of pirates; but a mighty ho4,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers;
Tto win a corntry, or to loss themselves.

Lady Ran. But whence comes tills intelligence,

Glenalvon .?

Gksn. A nimbie courier lent from yonder camp,

To hatten up the chieftains of the north,
Inform'd me, as he pass'd, that the fierce Dane
Had on ti:e e8flern coast of Lothian landed,
Near to that place where the sea-rock immense,
Amazing bars, looks o'er a fertile land.

Lady Ran. Then must this western army march to

join
The warlike troops that guard Edena's towers .

Glen.

Glen. Beyond all question. If impairing time

Has not effac'd the image of a place,
Once perfect in my breaRf, there is a wild
Which lies to weltward of that mighty rockc,
And feerns by nature formed for the camp
Of water-wafted armies, whose chief fitrength
Lies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse:
If martial (kill direts the Danish lords,
Therein acceffble their army lies
To our swift fcow'ring horse, the b!oody field
iMu ft man to man, and foot to foot, be fought.

Lady Ran. How many mothers l(hall bewail their

fens!

How many widows weep their husbands slain !
Ye dames of Denmark! ev'n for you I feel, -
Who, sadly fiting on the sea-beat (hore,
Long look for lords that never (hall return.

Glen. Oft has th' unconquner'd Caledonian sword

Widuow'd the north. The children of the slain
Come, as I hope, to meet their father's fate.
The mronRfter, war, with her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are objeds suited to Glenalvon's foul,
Scorn is more grievous than the pains, of death;
Reproach more piercing than the pointed sword.
.Lady Ran. I feorn thee not, but when I ought to

lcorn;

Nor e'er reproach, but when infulfred virtue
Against audacious vice Iafterts herself.
I own thy worth, Glenalvon; none more apt
Than I to prailfe thine eminence in arms,
And be the echo of thy martial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty paflion :
Go and pursue a lawful nmillreft, glory,
Upon tlhe Danish creRfs redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the (hield of. Randolph.

Glen. One inilant itay, and hear an alter'd man;

When beatny pleads for virtue, vice abafh'd,
Flies its own colours, and goes o'er to virtue.
1 am your convert; time will shew how truly;
Yet one immediate proof I mean to give.
That youth for whom your ardent zeal to-day,

D Some-

Somewhat too haughtily, defy'd your slave,
Amidst the shock of armies I'll defend,
And turn death from him, with a guardian arm.
Sedate by use, my bosom maddens not
At the tumultuous uproar of the field.

Lady Ran. A& thus, Glenalvon, and I am thy

friend:

But that's thy leat reward. Believe me, fir,
The truly generous is the truly wife;
And he who loves not others, lives nnbleft.

[Exit Lady Randolph.

G(/n. []i/s] Amen! and virtue is its own reward!-

I thick that I have hit the very tone
In which she loves to speak. Honey'd affont
How pleasing art thou to the tafre of man,
And woman also ? flattery direct
Rarely difgufs. They little know mankind
Who doubt its operanon: 'lis my key,
And opes the wicket of the human heart.
How far I have succeeded now I know not.
Yet I incline to think her flormy virtue
Is luli'd a while: 'tis her alone I fear:
Whilst fie and Randclph live, and livin faith
And amit7, unceit ain is my tenure.
Fate o'er my head fufpenJs disgrace and death,
By that we;Ik hair, a peerifl femaie's will.
I am not idle: but the ebbs and flows
Of foriune's tide cannot be icalculated.
That flc.ve of Norvai's I have found noft apt:
I fcew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his foul
To fIy and swear whatever I fuggeflt.
Norval, I'm told, has that alluring look,
'TvkI: man and woman, which I have obferv'd
To charm the nicer and fantaftick dames,
Wno are, li-e Lady Randolph, full of virtue.
lo railing Randolph's jealousy I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom errs
Who thinks the wor[ he can of womankind.

-ACT

# ACT IV. SCENE I.

ACT IV. SCENE I.

Flourifl, of rrumpets.

Enter Lord Randolph attended.
Lord Ran. SUmmon an hundred Horse, by break

of day,
To wait our pleasure at the cafle gate.

Enter Lady Randolph.
Lady Ran. Alas! my lord I I've heard unwelcome

news ;.
The-Danes arelanded.

Lord Ran. Ay, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian, bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament essay,
Of some y6ung knight refolv'd to break a spear,
And lain with holtile blood his maiden arms.
The Danes are landed: we muf beat them back,
Or live the slaves of Denmark.

Lady Ran. Dreadful times!
Lord Ran. The fenceless villages are all forsaken; -

The trembling mothers, and their children lodg'd
In well-'girt towers and cafles; whilst the men
Retire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to rerurn.

Lady Ran. Immense, as fame reports, the Daniflh

hoflt!
Lord Ran. Were it as num'rous as loud fame re-

ports,

An army knitlike ours would pierce it thro':
Brothers, that [Irink not from each others fide,
And fond companions, fill our warlike files:
For his dear offspring, and the wife he loves,

D 2 The

The hnubmnd and the fearless father arm.
In vulgar breasts heroic ardor burns,
And the poor peasant meets his daring lord.

Lady Ran. Men's minds are temper'd like their

swords, for war:

Lovers of danger on destruction's brink
They joy to rear eret their daring forms.
Hence, early graves; hence the lone widow's life,
And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age.
Where if cur gallant guefi ?

Lord Ran. Down in the vale

I left him managing a fiery fReed,
Whose liubbornnefs had foii'd the strength and skill
Of every rider. But behold he comes,
In earnest conversation with Glenalvon.

Enter Norval and Glenalvan.

Glenalvon ! with the lark arise; go forth,.
And lead my troops that lie in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
Norval, thou goeft with me. But fay, young man,
Where didft thou learn so to discourse of war,
And in such terms as I o'erheard to-day ?
War is no village science, nor its phiafe
A language taught among the shepherd f'amns..

Xorv. Small is the ftkiil my lord delights to pralife

In him he favours.-Hear from whence it came.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the mcft remote
And inaccessible by shepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal band,
A hermit liv'd; a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our wand'ring swains.
Aufiere and lonely, cruel to himrfelf,
Did they report him; the cold earth his bed,
Water his drink, his food the shepherds alms.
I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
With reverence and pity. Mild he spake,
And entering on discourse, such flories told
As made me oft revisit his fad cell,
For he had been a soldier in his youth;

And

And fought in famous battles, when bthe peers
Of Europe, by the bold Godfredo led,
Againl ih' usurping infidel difplay'd
The cross of Christ, and won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech struck from me, the old man would shake
His years away, and at his young encounters:
Then, having lheY'd his wounds, he'd fit him downy
And all the live-long day discourse of war.
''To help my fancy, in tihe smooth green turf
He cut the figures of the marshall'd hofss;
Defcrib'd the motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'. line,
The square, the cresc'ent, and the phalanx firm.
For all that Saracen, or Christian knew
Of war's bel art, was to this herrisir known.

Lord Ran. Why did this soldier in a deflrt hide

Those qualities, that lhoulJ have grac'd a camp ?

NArv. That too at last I Isar'd. Unhappy man!

Returning homewards by'MItfli:a's port,
Loaded with wealth and honoursbravely won,
A rude and boilt'rous captain of th.; fen
''aften'd a quarrel on him.. l'ie:cQ thbny foeh.t.:, ;
The ti'anger fell, and with his dying bre:th
D)eclar'd his name and lineage. ?iighty God!
The soldier cried, my brother.! :0h i ply brother \

Lady Ran. His brother! .;
Norv. Yes; of the faime parents born;

His only brother. They exchang'di forgiveness:
And happy, in ,iy mind; was hetthat ;ld:
For many deaths has the survivor fiufife'd.
In the wild defart on a rock he fits,
Or on some namelels fiream's untrodden banks,.
And ruminares all day his dreadful fae.
At times, alas! not in liis perfet mind !
Holds dialogues with his lov'd brother's Ghofl;
And oft each night forsakes his fullen couch,
To make fad orisons for him he flew.

Lady Ran. To what mysterious woes are mortals

lbori n!
In this dire tragedy were there no more

D 3 Unhappy

Unhappy persons? did the parents live ?

N"rv. No;. they were dead: kind hieav'n had clos'd

their eyes
Before their fr0n had filed hiii brother's blood.

Lord Ran. Hard is his fate; for he was not to

blame!

There is a defliny in this firange worldJ,
Which oft decrees an undeserved doom !
Let fchoorlmen tell us why.~-- From whence these

founds!

[Trumpets at a djf7ance.]

Enter an Officer.
GQ;cer. My lord, the trumpets of the troops of

Lorn :
Their valiant leader hails the noble Randolph.

Lord Ran. Mine ancient gnefi ! does he the war.

riors lead?
Has Denmark rous'd the brave old knight to arms ?

Ojcer. No; worn with warfare, he resigns the

sword.

His ePdeft hope,- the-valiant John of Lorn,
Now leads hit kindred bands.

Lord Ran. Glenalvon, go,

With hospitality's mofti strong requefit,
Entreat the chief.

[Exit Glenalvon.

Ojicer. My lord, requefits are vain.

He urges on, impatient of delay,
Stur.g with the tidings of the foes approach.

Lady Ran. May vicory fit upon the warrior's plume!

Braeflt of men! his filocks and herds are fare;
Remote fromr war's alarms his paflures lie,
By mountain's inaccefible fecur'd:
Yet foremost be into the plain descends,
Eager to bleedin batitles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the ancient world:
Contemners ihey of indlcknce and gain;
But tiili for love of 3io-y, and of arms,
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift

Againa

Against each fhrnng antagonilt the spear.
I'll go and prelfs the hero to my breall.

[Esit Randolph.]

Mansnt Lady Randolph and Norval.
Lady Ran. The soldier's loftineft, the pride and

pomp

InveRting awful war. Norval, I fee,
Transport thy youthful mind..

Aorv. Ah ! should they not?

Blest be the hour I left my father's house!
1 r.ight have been a Ihepherd ail my days,
And fLole obscurely to a peasant's grave.
Now, if I live, xith mighty ch;efs I Itand;
And, if I fall, wilh noble dust I lie.

Lady Ran. There is a gen'.-ous spirit in thy breatt,

That could have well fuftain'd a prouder fortune.
This way with me; under yon spreading beech,
Unseen, unheard, by hluman eve or ear,
I wili amaze thee with a wond'i ous tale.

Nor-v. Let there be danger, lady, with the fecrer,

That I may hug it to my grateful heairt,
And prove my faith. Command my sword, mylife:
These are the roie p)nfeflions of poor Norval.

Lady Ran. Know'fl thou these gems?
Norv. Durst I believe mine eyes

i'd fay I knew them, and they were my father's.
Lady Ran. Thy f.itbher's, fay'ft thou ! alh ! they

were thy father's!

Naorv. I saw them once, and curiously inquir'd

Of both my parents whence such splendour came?
Bii; I was check'd, and more could never learn.
Lady Ran. Then learn of me-thou art not Norval's

tin.

Arorv. Not Norval's son!
Lany Ran. Nor ofa Lhepherd sprung.
N.crv. Lady, whom am I then ?
La.yv Ran. Noble thou art;
For noble was Lhv fire !

Norv. I will believe

O! tell

0 ! tell me farther ! Say, who was my father ?

Lady Ran. Douglas !
Nerv. Lord Douglas, whom to-day I saw ?
Lady Rln. His younger brother.
_h'rv. And in yonder camp ?
I.ady Rel:. Alas!
ir'rv. Ycu make me tremble-Sighs and tears !
Lives my brave father ?

Lady R.n.. Ah ! tro brave indeed !
He fell in battle ere thylelf was born.

K'\r'. Ah me urnhappy! e'er I saw the light!

Burit does mr.y mnoher live? I may co-clade,
rrcm iry own fare her po:tiirn has bet:' sorrow.
Lady RaC. She lives; bui wadtes heJ life in con-

ftant wvoe,
\Weepin2 her husband flan, her ;nfant lelt.

Acr;-,. YoT2 thiat are i-i!i'd so well in the fad aory

Of my u r.happy parent:, anti with tears
Bewail their dcii'ioy, now have compaflon
Upon the offspring cf thie friends you inov'd.
O ! tell rme "ho, and , here my mother is i
Oppreft by a b.:tfe world, perhaps ihe bends
Beneath the weight of other ills than griefI
And defolaite implores of heav'n, the aid
Her son flould give. It is, it molt be so---
Ycur countenance confesses that Ihe's wretched.
O ! tell me her condition! Can the sword
Who (hall resist me in a parent's cause ?

Lady Ran. Thy virtue ends her woe-My son, my

Ion!
I am thy mother, and the wife of Douglas!

[Falls upon is neck.
crn'. O! heaven and earth, how wond'rous is my

fate!
Art thou my mother ? Ever let me kneel!

Lady Ran. Image of Douglas! Fruit of fatal

love!
All that I owe thy fire, I pay to thee.

Asn.. Respect and admiration till possess me,

Checkirg the love and fondners of a son.
Yet I was filial to my humble parents.

But

But did my fire surpass the refl of men,
As thou excelles all of womankind ?

Lady Rai. Arise, my sot ! In me thou doll behold

The poor remains of beauty once adrnir'd:
The autumn of my days is come already;
For sorrow made my fuinmer haRe away,
yet in my prime I equali'd not thy father:
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet sometimes
Liker thle dove's, and as he plea''d, he won
All hearts with fofrnels, or with fiirit aw'd.

Nl-.rv. How'did lie fall ? Sure 'twas a bl )ody field

When Douglas died. O, I have much to adk!
Lady Rian. Hereaf'er thou shalt hear the lengthen'd

tale

Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
Ar present this: Thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder casile, and the wide domains
Which now Lord Randolph, as my hufiband, holds,
But thou lhalt not be wrong'd ; I have the power
To right thee Qill: Before the king I'll kneel,
And call Lord Douglas to prote& his blood.

Norv, The blood ot Douglaswill protec& itself.
Lady Ran. But we shall need both friends and fa-

vour, boy,

To wfrefl thy lands and lordlfhip from the gripe
Of Randolph'and his kinfmah. Yet I think
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
My life incline the virtuous to believe.

Norv. To be the son cf Douglas, is to me

Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in;lthe field I'll seek for fan!e and fortune.
Lady Ran. Thou dolt not know what perils and in-

justice

Await.the poor man's valour. O ! my son!
The noblest blood in all the land's abalh'd,
Having no lacquey but pale poverty.
Too long haft thou been thus attended, Douglas!
Too long hasl thou been deem'd a peasant's child.
The wanton heir of Ifome inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in the youthful sports;
Whiillt thy indignant ifpirit fwell'd in vain !

Such

Such contumely thou no more (halt bear:
But how I Furpofe to redress thy wrongs
Must be hereafter t,'ld. Prudence direcds
That we should part before yon chiefs return.
Retire, and from thy rultic follower's hand
Receive a biilet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, dicated before
This casual opportunity arose
Of private conference. Its purport mark k
For as I there appoint we meet again.
Leave me, my son ! and frame thy manners fill
To Norval's, not to noble Douglas' state.

Nirv. 1 will remember. Where is Norval now ?
That good old man !

Lady Ran. At hand conceal'd he lies,

An ufefuil witness. But beware, my son,
Of yon Glenaivon; in his guilty breafl
RefGdes a villain's fhrewdnels, ever prone
To faife conjecure. He hath griev'd my heart.

ATorv. Has he, indeed! Then let yon false Glenal.

von
Beware of me.

[Exit Douglas.

Manet Ladj Randolph.

Lady Ran. There burRt the fmother'd flame!

0! thou all-righteous and eternal King !
Who father of the fatherless art cali'd,
Protee my son !I--- Thy inspiration, Lord !
Hath fili'd his bosom vith that sacred fire,
T'hich in the breass of his forefatheirs burn'd :
Set him on high like them, that he may ihine
The fliar and glory of his native land !
Then let the mini!ter of death defcead,
And bear my willing spirit to its place.
Yonder they come. How do bad women find
Uncha ging afpessi to conceal their guilt?
W'hen I .by realbn, and by juflice wrg'd,
Full hardly can dissemble with these men .
In nature's piFus caulfe.

Enter

.Enter Lord Randolph and Glenalvon.

Lord Ran. Yon gallant chief,
:)f arms enamour'd, all repose disclaims.

Lady Ran. Be not, my Lord, by his example fway'd:
Arrange ithe huffnefs of to-morrow now,
And when you enter, speak of war no more.

[£xit Lady Randolph.

Mlanent Lord Randolph and Glenalvon.
Lord Ran. 'Tis so, by heav'n! her mien, her voice,

her eye,

And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

Glen. He parted from her now; ]Behind the mount,

Amongst the trees, 1 saw him glide along.

LordRan. For fad fequefter'd virtue she's renown'd!
Glen. Mot true, my Lord.
Lord Ran. Yet this diftinguifh'd dame

Invites a youth, the acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This afignation (f;ew a letter) the assassin freed,
Her manifest affeftion for the youth,
Might breed futpicion in a husband's brain,
Whose gentle comfort all for love had wedded:
Much more in mine. Matilda never lov'd me.
Let no man, after me a woman wed,
Wlhofe heart he knows he has not; tho' fhsbrings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry;
For let her leem, like the night's Ihadowy queen,
Cold and contemplative :-He cannot truftl her:
She may, tlhe will, bring lirame and sorrow on him;
The worfi of fbrrow, and the worst of fhamcs!

Glen. Yield not, my Lord, to iltch affliaing

thoughts;

But let the spirit of an husband dfleep,
'Till your own senses make a ftire conclusion.
This billet muff to blooming Norval go:
At the next turn awaits my trusty spy;
I'11 give it him refitted for his malter.

In

In the close thicket take your secret sand
The moon ihines brigbt,and your own eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

Lord Ran. Thou dofi counrel well.
Gklen.' Permit me now to make one flight eftay.

Of all the trophies which vain mortals boast,
By wit, by valour, or by wifdoem won,
The firrft and fdireft, in a young man'j eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Successful love
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind;
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves
Air-born, exaltred above vulgar men.

Lord Ran. And what avails this maxim ?
Gks. Much, my lord !

Withdraw a little: I'll accofi young Norval,
And with ironical derisive counsel
Explore his spirit. If he is no more
Than humble Norval, by thy favour rais'd
Brave as he is, he'll fihrink aftonifli'd from me:
But if he be the favourite o£ the fair,
Lov'd by the fir.t of Caledonia's dames,
He'il turn upon me as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.

Lordi Ran. 'Tis shrewdly thought.
GOk;. When we grow loud, draw near. But let

mty lord
His riling wrath restrain. Esxit Randolph.

laianet Glennlvon.

Glren. 'Tis strange, by heav'n !

That she flould run fuli tilt her fond career,
To one to little known. She too that feem'd
Pure as the winter stream, when ice embofs'd
Whitens its couife. Even I did think her chaste,
Whose chari:y exceeds not. .Precious sex!
Whose deeds lascivious pass Glenalvon's thoughts!

[Norval appears.

His port I Jove; he's in a proper mood
To chide the thunder, if at him it roar'd.-
Has Norval seen the troops?

Nrorv.

_Arv. The setting fun,

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale,
And as the warriors mov'd, each polish'd helm,
Coifler, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at its top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they feem'd,
An hot angelic, clad in burning arms.

Glen. Thou talk'ft it well; no leader of our host,
In founds more lofty, speaks of glorious war.

Ncorv. If I shall e'er acquire a leader's name,

My speech will be less ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itself freely; since no part is mine
Of praise, pertaining to the great in arms.

Glen. You wrong yonrfelf, brave fir; your martial

deeds
1lave rank'd you with the great: but mark me,

Norval;

Lord Randolph's favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know these tboidiers, counsel you.
Give them all honour; seem not to command;
Else they will scarcely brook your late sprung power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

Norv. Sir, I have beea accultomed all my days,

To hear and speak the plain and simple truth:
And tho' I have been told, that there are men
Who borrow friendship's tongae to speak their scorn,
Yet in such language I am little fkill'd.
Therefore I thank Glenaivon for his counsel,
Althougih it founded harlhly. Why remind
Me of ,ny birth obscure. Why slur my power
WVitii fuich contemptuous terms ?

Gkln. I did lnot mean
To gdll your pridje, which now I fee is great.

NRorv. My pride!
Glen. Supprelfs it, as you wifli to prosper.

Your pride's exrefllve. Yet for Randolph's fake,
I will not leave you to its ralh dii etion.
If thua you swell, -and frown at high-born men,
Will higli-born men endure a sepherd's fcolm ?

Ncrv. A ihepherd's scorn !

E Glen.

Gl:n. Yes; if you presume

To bend on foldiers'Ithere disdainful eyes,
As ifyou took the measure of their minds,
And ihid in secret, you're no match for me;
What will become of you ?

ncrv. If this were told!---- [/,J

Halt thou no fears for thy presumptuous seif!

G!en. Ha ! Doit thou threaten me?
Norv. Didit thou not hear?
Glzen. Unwillingly I did ; a nobler foe
Had nor been quefiion'd thus. But such as thee-

Nr. Whom dost thou think me ?
Glen. Norval.
n-crr. So I am-
And whxo is Norval in Glenalvon's eyes

Glen. A peasant's ton, a wandering.beggar-boy;
At b-fi~w.ore, even if he fpe-ks the truth.

ysrv. ,F _Le as thou ;art, dost thou fufpea my truth?
G];. Thy;aiith ! thou'rt all a lie; and false as hell
Is the vain-.gtdrious tale thou told'ilt to Randolph.

Ncrv. If I were chain'd, unarmn'd, and bedrid old,

Perhaps Llfborld revile: But as I am,
I have no tongue to rail. The humble Norval
Is of a race, who fIrive not but with deeds.
Did I not fear to freeze thy [hallow valour,
And make thee fink too soon beneath my sword,
i'd tell thee-what thou art. I know thee well.

Glin. Dolt thou not know Glenalvon, born to

. command
Ten thousand slaves like thee ?

_;~'. Villain, no more :

Draw, and defend thy lile. I did design
To have defy'd thee in anot:her cause:
But heaven accelerates its vengeance on tCnee.
Now for my own and Lady Randolph's wrongs.

Enter Lord Randolph.
Lord Ran. Hold! I command ydu both. The

man that Rirs
Makes me his foe.

n'erv.

Arrv. Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly founded, noble Randolph.
Glen. Hear him, my .lord; he's wond'rous conde-

scending !
Maik the humility of shepherd Norval!

Norv. Now you may ficoff in safety.

(Sheat.s is jwcrd.

Lord Ran. Speak not thus,

Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The catfe of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

Norv. Nay, my good lord, tho' I revere you much,

My cause I plead nort, nor demand your judgment.
I blush to speak; I will nor, cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words tha.t I have from him borne.
To the liege lord of my dear native land
I owe a subje&'s homage: but even himn
And his high arbitration I'd rejed.
Within my bosom reigns another lord;
Honour, sole judge and umpire of itself.
If my free speech offend you, noble Randolph,,
Revoke your favours, and-let Norval go
Hence as he came, alone, but not disaonour'd ,
Lord Ran. Thus far I'll meditate with impartial

voice:

The antient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
Suspend your purpose, 'till your country's arms
Repel the bold invader: then decide
The private quarrel.

Glen. I agree to this.
Norv. And I.

Enter Servant.

Serv. The banquet waits.
Lord Ran. We come.
Glen. Norval,

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor vwrong the hospitality of Randolph.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkled hate,
Shatll ilain my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow:

E 2 Nor

# ACT V SCENE I.

Nor let our 1trife diflurb the gentle dame.

N¥rv. rhink not so lightly, Sir, of my refentmenr:

When we contend again, our flrife is mortal.
*^*·-^*^*-^*^*^-^* **^**^*^*^*^**^*-^**^**^**i~S~·S!"^^-

ACTV SCENE I.

7hs I'cd.

Enter Douglas.

HIS !s the place, the center of the grove.
Here ilands the oak, the mnonarch of the wood,

How sweet and solemn is this mid.night scene i
The silver ramon, unclouded, holds her way
Tihro' skies where I could count each little lar.
The fanning weRf- wind scarcely stirs the leaves;
The river, ruhing o'er its pebbled bed,
n.pofes silence with a filly found.
In fich a place as this, at such an hour,
If ancestry can be in aught believ'd,
Descending fpiriti have convers'd with man,
And told the secrets of the world unknown,

Enter Old Norval.
Old Ncrv. 'Tis he. But what if he should chide

me hence ?
H-is jut reproach I fear.

[Douglas turns andfees him,

Forgive, forgive !

Can'st thou forgive the man, the selfish man,
Who bred Sir Mal!colm's heir a (hepherd's son?

Doug. Kneel not to me: thou art my father still:

Thy wifih'd for presence now compleats my joy.
Welccme to me, my fortunes thoi (halt Ih;tre,
And ever honour'd with thy Douglas live.

Old

Old Norv. And dost thou call mre father? O my fou!
I think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Tuas my crime,
Which in the wilderness so long conceal'd
The blofrom of thy youth.

Doug. Not worse the fruit,

Tha; in the wilderness the bloflom blow'd.
Amongst the shepherds, in the humble cot,
I learn'd some lessons, which I'll not fbrget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend, and,, when my vafhals bow,
Norval shall smooth the crested pride of Douglas.

Aorv. Let me but live to fee thine exhaltaiion!

Yet grievous are my fears. O leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

Dogis. Why flhould I leave then ?
Norv. Lord Randolph and his kinfman.feek your

life.

Doug. How know'Rf thou that?
Nro v. I will inform you how:
-When evening cat,:e, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And fondly trod in each accufltom'd path
That to the castle leads. Whilst thus I rang'd,.
I was alarm'd with unexpeaed founds
Of earnest voices. On the pci sons came:
Unlfeen I lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other as they talk'd, Lord Randolph this,.
And that Glenalvon: still of you they spoke,
And of the lady: threat'ning was their speech,
T'ho' but imperfectly my ear could hear it.
'wava fitrange, they said, a woncerfutl discovery::
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Dcug. Revenge ! for what ?
Norv. For being what you are;

Sir Malcolm'sheir: how eife have you offended?
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there fat muting how I best might find
Means to inform you of their wicked purpose,

E 3 But

Bat I could think of none: at laa perplex'd
I issued forth, encompafing the tnower
With many a weary fRep and wi(hful look.
Now providence hath brought you to m) fight,
Let not your too courageous spirit scorn
The caution which I give.

Dsrtg. I scorn it not.

My mother warn'd me of Glenalyon's baseness:
But I will not fufpe& the noble Randolph.
In our encounter uith the vile aff:iCins,
I mark'd his brave demeanor: him I'll trufl.

Nhrv. I fear yuu wiil too far.
D:g. Heie in this place

I nail my mother's coming: she hall know
What thou halt told: her counsel I will follow ?
An! cautious ever are a mother's counfetl.
¥T:u nuft depart; your prefeuce may prevent
Our interview.,

_Krv. My blefling reflt upon thee.
0 may heav'i's hand, which fav'd thee from the

wave,

And fircm the sword of foes, be near thee fl;ll;
Turnii:g mifchar.ce, if aught hangs o'er thy head,
All upon mine !

[Exit Old Norval.

DCs'g. He loves me like a parent;

And niuoR not, fiall not lose tihe son he loves,
Altho' his son has found a nob!er father.
Eventful day; how haRt thou chacg'd my Rate !
Once on the cold, and winter-lhaded lide
Ot a bleak hill, milfcharce had roo'ed me,
Never to thrive, child of ano:her foil:
Transplanted now to the gay funny vale,
Like-the gre;.: ,horn of May, cmy fortune flowers.
Ye glorious liars! high heav'n's resplendent holt !
TóI whom I oft have cf my lot complain'J,
Hlear and record my fiul's unalier'd wifli!
1):ad or alive, let eie but be i-e;iown'd !
Mfy heav'n iifpiie some fierce gigantic Dane,
To g've a bold defiance to our nofR !
Before he speaks it out I will accept;

Like

Like Douglas conquer, or like Douglas die.

Enter Lady Randolph.

Lady Ran. My son ! I heard a voice----
DCog. - The voice was mine.
Lady Ran. Did'ft thou complain aloud to nature's

ear,

That thus in dusky shades, at midnight hours,
By health the mother and the son Ihoiild meet ?

r Eldracin, l:im.
DIug. Nor on this happy.day, this better birth-

day,
My thoughts and words are all of hope and joy.

Lady Ran. Sad fear and melancholy fill. divide

The empire of my breafit with hope and joy.
Now hear what 1 adviie.

Doug. First let me tell
What may the tenor of your counsel change.

Lady Ran. My heart forebodes fonme evil!
Doug . Tis not good----

At eve, unseen by Randolph and Glenalvon,.
The good old Norval in the grove o'erhea:rd
Their conversation: oft they mention'd me,
With dreadful threatnings; you they rometimes nam'd.
'Twas firange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Lady Ran. Defend us, gracious God! we are be-

tray'd :

They have found out the secret of thy birth;
It muf be so. That is the great discovery.
Sir Malcolm's heir is come to claim his own ;'
And they uiil be reveng'd. Perhaps even now,
Anr.i'd antnd prepar'd for murder, they but wait
A da ker and more fi:ent hour to break
In o thie chamber where they think thou fleep'l}.
This momr-enr, this, heav'n hath ordain'd to save

thee!
Fly to the camp, my fTon !

Dcug. And leave you here ! .

Nc': ,) ,he caile let us go together,
Call up the ianiLient fetrvants of your house,

Who

Who in thEr you:h did eat your father's bread.
Th:e. tell them loudly that I am y-our son.
It in he breast of men one spark remains
Of icred love, fidelity, or pity,
Scme in your cause vill arm. I ask but few
To drive thfe /poilers from my father's house.

Ladcv Ran. 0 nature, nature! what can check thy

fo;ce?

Thci! genuine offspring of the daring Douglas 1
Jut rtlh r.ot on defti ucticn : save thyfe!t;
And I am safe. To roe they mean no harm.
Thy fRay but risks thy precious life in vain.
That v:inding path conducs thee to the river.
Crols where 'hou feeft a broad and beaten way,
Which rui'nilrg eltfsward leads thee to the camp.
Inl!ant demand admittance to Lord Douglas.
Shew him these jewels, ,~hich his bi other wore.
Thy loo.k, :hy voice, gill make him feel the truth,
Whlc, I by certain proof will soon confirm.

Doag. I yield nme and obey: but yet my heart

Blezds at tlis parting. Something bids me flay
And guard a mother's life. Oft have I read
Ot xvcrdrcus dceds by one bold arm atchiiev'd.
Ou;r foes are two; n- more: let me go forth,
And fee if any shield can guard Glenalvon.

Lady Ran. If thou regard'it thy mother, or rever'll

Thy father's mem'ry, thinkl of this no more.
One thing I have to favy before we part:
Long vert thou loft: and thou art found, my child,
In a mr.ot fearful feafcn. War and battle
I have great cauife to dread. Too well I fee
Which way the current of thy temper sets:
To-day I've found thee. Oh ! my long loft hope !
If thou to giddy valour giv't the rein,
To.-morrow I may lose my tion for ever.
The !ove of thee, before thou faw'ft ihe light,
Suftain'd my life when thy brave father fell.
If thou shalt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this waite world ! my son, remember me !

Dug. What shall I fay ? how can I give you cornm.

fort ?

The

The God of battles of my life difpo'e
As may lie bet for you ! for whole dear fake
I will not bear myself as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name,
That wh;ch I boas founds amonglt martial men,
How will inglorious caution suit my claim ?
The poll of fate unilirinking I maintain.
My country's foe.s mufl witness who I am.
On the invaders heads P'il prove my birth,
'Till firiends and foes confeCfs the genuine frain.
If in this strife I fall, blame not your son.
Who, if he lives not honour'd, must not live.

Lady Ran. I will not utter what my bolbm feels.

Too well I love that valour which I warn.
Faiewel, my son ! my counsels are but vain.

[Embracing.
And, as high heaven hath will'd it, all muil be.

[SOparautr.
Lady Ran. Gaze not on me, thou wilt miitake the

path;
I'll point it out again.

[EJri? as they are separating, enter froi the welod

Lord Randolph and Glenalvon.]

Lord Ran, Not in her presence.
Now-

Glen. I'm prepar'd.
Lord Ran. No: I command thee flay.

I go alone: it never shali be laid
That I took odds tó combat mortal man.
The noblest vengeance is thle moO compleat.

[Exit Lord Randolph,]
[Glenal'on makes some Jeps to the fame dfde fthe

jfage, lftens and speaks.]

Glen. Demons of death come fettle on my sword,

And to a double dlaughter guide it home !
The lover and the husband both IhalJ die.

[Lord Randolph behind the fcnes,.]

- Lord Ran. Draw, villain, draw !
Doug. Assail me not, Lbrd Randolph,
Not as thou lov'ft thylelf.

[ Cla/aig of fwordi..]
[Glenalvon runiqg out.]

Now

Now is the time,
Er;tcr LZaa Randolph at i.e oppifite fJde of tSe fiage,

aini and breathleqs.
Lady Rn;h. Lcrd Randolph, hear.me; all flaIi be

thire own:
But spare! 0 spare my son!

Entfcr Douglas '.ó. a f'wrd in. each l and.

My mother's voice!
I can protest thee still.

Lady Ran. He lives, he lives!

For this, for this to heav'n eternal praise !
But lure I fawr thee fall.

Do:t;. It was Glenalvon.

Jut as my arm had rnasler'd Randollfh's sword,
Tihe villain came behinrd me: but I flew him.

Lady Ran. Behind thee! Ah! thou'rl wounded !

0 nay child,
How pale thou look'ft ! and ihall I lose thee now ?

Dug,. Do not despair: I feel a little faintness;
I hope it will not last.

CLeant vpon Aifwoord.]

Lady Ran. There is no hope I

And we must parr ! the hand of death is on thee!
0 my beloved child! O Douglas, Douglas!

[Dooglas groowing more and more faint.]
Du£g. Too soon we part: I have not long been

Douglas.

O deflinry! hard;y thou deal'Pc with me:
Clouded and hid, a firanger to mylelf,
In lcw and poor obscurity I liv'd.

Lady Ran. Has heav'n preferv'd thee for an end

like this?

Doug. 0 had I fallen as my brave fathers fell,

Turniog with fatal arm the tide of battle !
Like them I fMould have finil'd and wc!com'd death.
But thus to pe:ilh by a viliain's hand!
C.rt off frcm nature's and from glory's course,
Wh'cb nerer mortal was so fond to run.

Lady

Lady Ran. Hear, jultice! heal' ! are there the s,,nits

ctf virtue ? [Douglasfal/s.
DoT. Unknown I die; no tongue (hall speak of -

me.-

S,mee noble spirit, judging by themselves,
Ma.y yet conjecture what I might have prov'd,
And thiuk life only wanting to my fame:
But who lhall comfort thee ?

Lady Ran. Despair ! derpair!
D.g'. O had it pleas'd high heaven to let me live

A little while !--my eyes that gaze on the
Groew dim apace! ,my mother---- [Died.

Enter Lord Randolph and Anna.
Lord Ran. Thy words, the words of truth, have

pierc'd my heart.

s am the Hain of knighthood and of arms.
Oil! if my brave deliverer survives
'T'he traitor's sword ---

Anna. Alas ! look there, my lord !
Lord Ran. The mother and her fonl! How curtt I'

am !

Was I the cause ? No; I was not the cause.
Yon matchie£i villain did reduce my oiul
'!'u fi'antic jealouly.

Atvna. My lady lives:

Tile agony of grief hath. but £uppreft
A while her powers.

Lo::d Ran. But my deliverer's dead!

The world did once etoeem Lord Randolph well,
Sincere of heart, for spotless honour fam'd;
And, in my early days, glory I gain'd
Beneath the holy banner of the crots.
Now pall the noon of life, fliame comes upon me;
Reproach, and infamy, and public hate,
Are near at hand; for all mankind will think
That Randolpt! barely 1tabb'd Sir Malcolm's heir..

[ Lada Randolph recovering.
Lady Ran. Where am I now ? still in this wretched

world !

Grief

Grief cannot break a heart so hardas mine.
M.y youth was worn in anguiflh; but youth's strength,
With hope's affrit.nce, bore the brunt of fcrrow;
And train'd me on to be the obje& now,
On which omnipotence displays itself,
Mlaking a fpe(tacle, a tale of me,
To awe ihs vassal, man.

Lord Ran. 0 miserv!

AidRs thy raging grief I mus proclaim
My innocence.

Lady Ran. Thy innocence!
Lord Ran. My guilt
Is innrcence, compared with what thou think'ft it.

Lady Ran. Of thee I think not: what have Ito do

With ;hee, or any thing'? My lbn! myion!
My beautifui! my brave! how proud was I
O(r thee, and of thy valour! my fond heart
O'erflow'd this day with transport, whe: I thought
Of growing old amidf a race of thine,
Who might make up to me the;r fa!her's childhood,
And bIear my bro'.her's and my husband's name;
Now all my hopes are dead! A littie while
Was I a wife ! a mother rot so lon.g !
What am I now ?--I know. - But I Ihall be
That only whiili I please; for such a son
Anrd fiuch a hufobdnd make a woman bold.

[Runm out.
Lord Ran. Follow her, Anna, I myieif would

follow,
But in this rage ihe tmuft abhor my presence.

£Exit Anna.

Enuer Old Norval.
Norv. I heard the voice of woe; heaven guard my

child!

Lord Ran. Already is the idle gaping croud,

The ipi:eful vulg.a, come to gaze on Randolph.
beg one!

gerv. I fear thee not. I will not go.

Here-

Here I'll remain. I'man accomplice, Lord,
With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help
To crush down to the ground this lovely plant,
0 noblest youth that ever yet was born!
Sweetest and bed, gentlest and braveIt spirit,
That ever bled the world ! Wretch that I am,

lWho saw that noble spirit swell and rife

Above the narrow litnits that conin'd it!
Yet never was by all thy virtuts won
To do thee juflice, and reveal the secret,
Which timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's snare. Oh! I am punifh'd now !
These are the hairs that Ihould have Li ew'd the ground,
And not the locks of Douglas.

[Tears hi! hair, and t.rosw;

himfelfunpon the ground.

Lord Ran. I know thee not; thy boldners Itorgive:

My crelt is fallen. For thee I will appoint
A place of reft, if grief will let thee reft.
I will reward, altho' I cannot punilh.
Curst, curst Glenalvon, he efcap'd too well.
Tbo' flamn ahd bassl'd by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the last,
Cursing his conqueror, the felon dy'd.

Enter Anna.

Anna. My Lord, my Lord!
Lord Ran. Speak: I can hear of horror.
Anna. Horror indeed!
Lord Ran. Matilda ?
tAnna. Is no more.

She ran, she flew like light'nng up the hill,
No- halted till the precipice she gain'd,
Beneath whose low'ring top the river falls
Ingulpi'd in rifted rocks: thither fie came,
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And beadllong down-- '.

Lord Ran. 'Twas I! alas! 'twas I

That fill'd her breast with fury; drove her down
The precipice of death! Wretch that I am,

F Anna.

Anna. 0 had you seen her last despairing look.

Upon the briak she lood, and cast her eyes
Down on the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heaven, seeming to fay,
Why am I forc'd to this ! She plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord Ran. I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the paflion of my foul.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
There wounds the gratitude of Randolph gave.
They fFeak aloud, and with the voice of fate
Denounce my doom. I am refolv'd. I'll go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me turn aside, mnft threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy miltrefs, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
Wik cost and pomp upon their funerals wait:
For Randolph hopes he never fthall return.

F IN I S.
QZ

# EPILOGUE. Spoken by Mr. BARRY.

EPILOGUE.

Spoken by Mr. B A R R Y.

A N Epilogue I al'd; but nt one 'word
Our bard 'will 'write. He vows 'is mofjl absurd
l'ith comic 'wit to contradi? theJlrain
Of Tragedy, and make yourjsrrows vain.
Sadly e fays, that pity is the bes/,
Tle noble pasion of the human breafi :
for when its sacred Jlreams the heart o'erflow,
In guoies pleafuire 'with the tide of 'woe ;
And vwhen its waves retire, like tho/e of Nile,
They leave behind themn fich a golden foil,
That there the virtues 'without culture gro'w,
There the sweet h1o/ms of asscTion hlo'w.
Thfe vwere his 'words ;-void of delftive art
I felt them; fijr he/poke them from his heart.
Nor will I now attempt, with witty folly,
To ca'ke awvay celestial melancholy:

lirma. 0 had you feea her lafti defpalring look!

Upon the brink {he Iood, and cast her eyes
D)own on the deep: then lifting up her head
lAnd her white hands to hea.en, ifeeming to fay,
Why am I forc'd to this! She plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord Ran. I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the pafiion of my foul.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of Randolph gave.
Tihey fpFeak aloud, and with the voice of fate
Denounce my doom. I am refolv'd. I'll go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me turn aside, mnft threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy mistress, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
Wii coff and pomp upon their funerals wait:
For Randolph hopes he never ihall return,

F IN I S.

EPILOGUE.

Spoken by Mr. B A R R Y.

L N Epilogue I a/k'd; but not one vword

Our bard 'will 'write. He vows 'ti mojf abfiurd
Wlith comic 'wit to contradiC? tieJirain
Of Tragedy, and make your so/rrows vain.
Sadly he Jays, that pity is the heft,
The nobefl paimon of the human breafj:
for 'when its facred/oreams the heart o'erfqow,
In gotuses plea/i)re 'with the tide of 'woe ;
And wuhen its waves retire, like those of Nile,
They leave behind them fuich a golden/ fil,
That there the virtues without culture groww,
Th.ere the sweet bloojims of affetion blow.
Thie 'were his words;-void ofdelhfhe art
I felt them; for he/poke them from his heart.
Nor will I now attempt, with witty Jfilly,
T% chcxe awuay cele]fial melancholy.
