THE
DRAMAtTIC WORKS'

or
J H N H OM E, Esq

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

CONTAI.N.I q, ..

AGIr; j[ AND
DOUGLAS II THLC SIEGE OF AQUILEEA.

EDINBURGH:

PRIN.TED BY GEO. REID & CO.
Baille's Land, opposite Magdalane Chapel, Cowgate;

1798.

# ADVERTISEMENT.

ADVERTISEMENT.
JN the year I760, one Volume of M'

HoME's Plays was publif/ed in London,

dedicated to his present MA7ESTJ, then
PRINCE of WALES. That Volume con-
tained the Tragedies of DOUGLAS, AGIS,
and the SIEGE OF AQUILEIA. The Author's
other Works were neverpublip)ed otherways
than as detached Plays; foSne of which ha-
ving been long out of print, or not to be found
but in a very mutilated Jiate, induced the
Editors to colled them together, and pub-
lij the whole in a uniform manner.

Though all these Plays, at their firt pub-

lication, were ated on the London Boardr,
none of them seem to have attraCted so much
attention as to render them what is termed
Stock-P lays, DOUGLAS and ALONZO only
cxcepled; and even the latter cans carcely
lay claimn to that diflin5lion, particularly in
Scotland, it not having,- to the befl of the
Edilors recolleSion, been petrformed more
than twice at the Edinbutr;h Theatre, and
on both theJf occasion for the Bene/it of IMr
WTooDS: consequently, that Gentleman, and
!:ot the Managers of our Theatre, has the

2 sole

[ 4

sole merit of introduciig this admirniable- Play-
to the notice. of an Edinburgh Audience.

WI)hat has been above figgefled will, the

Editors itrif, be a fifficient apology, for
not having dijfliingUiied, by inverted commas, i
the paqfages omitted in the Representation
of any of our Aithtor's Plays, except Dou-
GLAS ?and ALONZO. That there two arefo
noted, they have to thank Mr WOODS, who
did them the favour, not only of marking
the p frages which are omitted in the Re-
presentation, but likewie of revJiing theproof
Jheets.

And here, it may, perhaps, be nece/fary

to fay a few words with refpeRE to the ar-
rangement of the Plays, as observed in this
Edition. It has been generally underflood,
that DOUGLAS was thefirft of Mr HOME'S
'produciions. But this, the Editors have
good reason to believe, was not the cafe.
Ouir Author wrote AcGs fomle years be-
/fre DOUGLAS, and went to London with
the manumcript, in hopes of getting it intro-
duced'upon the Stage; but in this he was
disappointed, objections having, it is said,
been made to the Plot. He then set about
writing his DOUGLAS, and had the mortifi-

cation

cation of afecond diifappointment, Mr GAR-
RICK, the tben almnoJ flole arbitrator of thea-
trical merit, having declined bringing it for-
ward: and it was not received.upon the other.
London Theatre, until it had.beenreprefent-
ed at Edinburgh with universal approba-
tion. Then, indeed, DOUGLAS met with the
reception it so highly deserved, and soon as-
terwards AGIS, which had formerly been
rejeJted alo, was thought worthy of rep;e-,
Sentation. Though, therefore, DOUGLAS was.
represented before AGIS, yet AGIS, as being'
his firjl Dramatic Production, falls to have.
the fitl! place ina the kWorks of our Author.'

It has been already observed, that DOU-

GLAS and ALONZO are te oizly two of Mr
I-OME'S Plays,, which the Managers of the
London Theatres have latterly thought pro-
per to introduce to their audiences. But,frhom
what has. also been :bbferved, with i'efpecA to
the original fate of DOUGLAS in London, ald '
t. efirm hold it now.poJfeiss in every Tjheatre.
in Great Britain and Ireland, the Editoris
think they may, without being accused of ar-
rogance, venture to fay, that Maiagers of
Theatres are not always infallible, and that
old pieces, which they may judge unfit for;

A 3 representation,

- eprefentation, are nevertheless far fuperi'
or to nmoJ of the new produEtions with wbicdr.
the London Theatres are every feafonfoplen-
tifully supplied.

'Tlhat this is the cafe with all Mr
HOME'S Plays, the- Editors have. no hefi-
tation in declaring. their sentiments. In-
ldeed, they are abundantly jl/flfied in:this
obfcrvation by the uniform conduct of Mr
GGARRICK. himself, after he had unfortunate-
ly given a negative to the performance (of
DOoUGLAS at his Theatre. For that Gentle-
man, than whom, no person, either before or
fihce his time, can claim a superior, if even'
an equal Jhare of Theatrical'abilities, has
left upon record the best evidence that can
pofibly now be received, of his entire ap-
probation of Mr HOME'S other Plays, how-
ever he might have been miJSed with refpeb'
to the merits of DOUGLAS on a first peru-
'al. As a proof of this, hee rwrote Epilogues.
to two of his Plays : He soke also the Pro-
logues to AGIS and the Siee of AQUILEIA;
in both of which Traedies he ?fpported
the principal chara'~ers. It may not be'im-
pi oper, in this place to mention, that.it was
upon the jfuggefion of Mr GARRICK, that

the

. [: 7 ]

fte 1 ft mentioned Play came out under, tte
T fitle which it now bears, Mr HoME bad
originally written a Tragedy, founded, on
the cruel treatmient which the two SETONS,
sons of the Governor of BERWICK, had
experierced- from.. the . Engli/h; and.-gave
the name..of T'he. Siege. of . BERWICK to
the Piece..: But Altr .GARRICK, conceiving
that any niational allfons might tend to
keep alive.the jealousy which thent. infortu-
nately filbjied between the people of Scotland
and England, who, are now,.however, hap-
pily united, the' Editors trun, in the mofi in-
difolluble bonds of ftiendJhip and amity, per-
fuaded him to alter the 1itle,, and,: of con-
sequence, the Names of the Charaaers,
as well as several local passages. insthis
much esteemed Tragedy. thus it would
appear, that this great Luminary of the
Brit!i/ Stage, confciou s f having formed
too hqJly a judgment on the. Tragedy of
DOUGLAS, and anxious to leave to pofierity
a proof of the high ejlimation in whjich he
held the abilities of its Author, did not allow
a ingle Play of his afterwards to appear
upon the Stage, without becoming, in a
manner, its Patron,?

ior

[8]

lor these reasons, the Editors under--

took the present gWork, which they have
endeavoured to render as correct as pojible..

* * A Splendid Edition of the Tragedy

of DOUGLAS, Royal Oaavo, embelli/hed with-
a Head of the Author, and Five other Ele-
gant Engravings, designed from the moJf
Jtriking Passages in the Play, may be had
at the Printing-office of Geo. Reid and Co.
at the Subscription Price of Seven Shillings
and Sixpence.

# TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS GEORGE PRINCE OF WALES.

TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS
G E 0 R. G E

PRINCE OF WALES.

S I R,
IN Dedications, especially those which

Poets write, Mankind expeat to find

little Sentiment, and less Truth. A grate-
ful Imagination adorns its Benefactor with
every Virtue, and even flatters with Since-
rity. Hence the Portrait of each Patron.of
the Muses is drawn with the fame Outline,
and finished as a Model of Perfedtion. In-
struted by -the Errors of others, I presume
not to make the Panegyric of the Prince of
WALES, nor to extol the Patronage of Lite-
rature as the most shining Quality of a Prince.
-Your Royal Highness& will permit. me to

mention

[ Io ]

mention one fort of Patronage which can
never be praised too much; that, I mean,
which extending its influence to the whole
Society, forms and excites the Genius of
Individuals, by exalting the Spirit of the
State.

Intfitutions, that revive in a great and

highly civilized People, those Virtues of
Courage, Manhood, and Love of their Coun-
try, which are most apt, in the Progress of
Refinement, to decay, produce, at the fame
time, that pleasing and ornamental Genius,
which cannot subsist in a Mind that does
not partake of those Qualities which it de-
scribes. This is an Observation which has
escaped the notice of the greater Part of
Writers, who have enquired into the causes
of the Growth and Decay of Poetry and Elo-
quence; but it has not escaped the Pene-
tration of LONGIN:US, who writing in the De-
cline of the ROMAN Empire, and lamenting
that the true Sublime was not to be found
in the Works of his Time, boldly imputes
that Defed to the Change of Policy; and
enumerates, with Indignation, the Vices
of Avarice, Effeminacy, and Pufilanimity,

which,

[ II ]

which, arising from the loss of Liberty, had
so enthralled and debated the Minds of Men,
that they could not look up, as he calls it, to
any thing elevated and sublime: And here,
as in other questions, the great Critic quotes
the Authority of his Mafler HOMER. ,The
Day of Slavery bereaves a Man of half his
virtue. The Experience of succeeding times
has shewn that Genius is affeced by changes'
less violent than the loss of Liberty; that it
ever flourishes in Times of Vigour and En-
terprize, and languiflles amidst the sure cor-
ruption of an inactive age.

Your Royal Highness, as Heir-apparent

of the Britijh Empire, hath in view the no-
blef. Field that ever a laudable Ambition
entered. The envied State of this Nation
cannot remain precisely as it is; the Tide
muff flow, or ebb faster than it has ever
flowed. A Prince destined in such a Period
to reign, begins a memorable 'Era of Per-
section or Degeneracy. The serious Cares
and princely Studies of your Youth, the yi-
fible Tenor of your generous and conflant
Mind, have filled the Breasts of all .good
Men with Hopes of you, equal to. their

WT.Ishcs.

- [ I2 -]

Withes. That these Hopes may be fulfilled
in their utmost Extent, is the sincere and
ardent Prayer of,

2Tour Royal Highnefi's

most bumble,

mofl obedient,

and moJt devoted Servant,

JOHN HOME.
'.A

A G I S.

A
TRAGEDY.

# PROLOGUE, Written by — Spoken by Mr GARRICK.

PROLOGUE,

Written by -

Spoken by Mr GARRICK.
IF in the fe daysr of luxury and cafe,

A tale from Sparta's r igidJlate can please;

Ifpat riot plans a Britifli brcajl can warm;
If Kins afqerting liberty can ch irm;
If virtue/ iill a grateful afpeset wear;
Cbhec not at AGIS'fall the gen'rous tear.

He view'd hir fibjeEls with a parent's love;

With zeal tofave a inking people jirove;
Strove their chang'd hearts with glory to inflame;
To mend their morals, and refore their narme;
Till faEion rose with, murder at her fide -
Then mourn'd his countr, ; pelfever'd; and died,

That country oncefor virtue was rever'd;
dmir'd by Greece; by haught, Afiafeear'.'
_Then citizens andfoldiers were the fame;
Anndfoldiers heroes; for their wealth was fame.
Then for the Brave the Fai, referv'd her charms ;
Andsfcorn'd to clasp a coward in her arms.
The trunmet call'd; Jhefeiz'd theJfiord andJ7ield;
Array'd in hafie her hujband for thefield;
And ,fghing, whbifpr'd in n fond emirace,
" Remember !-death is better than disgrace.'>
bTe wiiow'd mother Jbewv'd her parting fjon
The race ofglo)y which hisJ fire hd run.

:lly son, ty flight alone I /7afa deplore.
' Return viclorious '-or return no more !"

B 2 While

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

[ iv ]

W Vhi/e beauty thus with patriot zseal conmbi:'d,

,Ind round the laurel'd head her myrtle twin'd;
Wzlj/i all couinft the Virtuous wvere the Great;
Fame, Valour, ConquefI, grac'd the SpartanJfate.
1ler Pow'r congenial with her Virtue grew,
.dind Freedom's banner o'er her Phalanxlew ;
But soon as Virtue dropt herJfck'ning head,
Fame, Valour, Conquet, Pow'^r andFreedom led.

May thisJ fd scene iw brove each Briton's heart

Rotofe him wVih 'warmth to cR a Briton's part
Prompt hin with Sparta's nobleJ. sons to vie;
To live in glory; and in freedom die .

DRIAMArTIS PERSONE.

M E N.

AGIS, King of Sparta, Mr Mossop.
IBYSANDER, ) . r GARRICK.
AmPHIARE. s, Spartans. Mr HAVARD.
RIESUS, Thria. Mr HOLLAND.
Euxus, r Mr DAVIES.

W 0 I E N.

AGESISTF.ATA, Mother of AcGI, Mrs PRITCHARD.
SANDANE, Queen to LEONIDAS 7

the exiled King, A Irs YATES.
Elu.ATE:z an Athenian Lady, Mrs CIBBER.

Senators, Ephori, Messengers.

G I .5'

# AGIS.

G I S.

ACT I.
SCENE, A Court and Hall, common to the

Palaces of the Kinls of SPARTA.

Enter SANDANE attended.
Sai. T ASTEN, ORONTES, to the fenate-houfe,,

-l ! And learn if rumour's voice has spoke the
truth. [Exit. Attendant.

The advcrfe fortune of an exil'd king
Pursues my lord. ACHAIA'S generous aid
Sultains his cause in vain. Why rilk a battle,
When the continuance of defensive war
Secur'd success and vicory in Sparta ?
Would I had never left thy splendid court,
Delightful SARDIS! to be Sparta's queen.

Enter AIPHARES.
Welcome, AMIPHARES ! Have the armies met ?

'Aimp. They have. This morning, at the break of davy
The Spartan army charg'd ACHAIA'S holt.
This and no more is known. Suspense and fear
Possess the people ; to the gates they run,
Then to their houses: The still whisper spreads
Thro' jultling multitudes the dread alarm.

B 3 Sa,.

Sar. Alas! revenge and empire now depend

On the wild iflue of unruly war.
Whhat if the arms of AGIS flould prevail ?

A'mph. Although he ihould, the toils of fate f;rround

him.

Dauntless and firm our brave afidciates stand,
And with impatience wait the dcftin'd hour
To rutb on AGIS. This unlook'd for battle
Is but a solemn prelude to the at,
W.hich bold conspiracy will soon perform.
This day lhail terminate the reign of AGIS,
And make, O Qeen ! all powcr in Sparta thinc,

San. I fee that danger only whets the brave.

But yet, AIP:lIAr.Es, if my lord is vanquifl'd,
Will not the conquering army awe the city ?

.AnJJ. Acis shall be the furcty of our cause,

And holtage for our fafetv, till we wrelt
The sword from proud LYSANDER, if he conquers
.But that I fear not much. New to command
Trom idle Athens the mock hero comes,
Starts up a fuldier, and a statesman too ;
Each palm he claims: All honours mull adorn
The ciofen friend, of visionary AcIs.

San. Irfay IMIars direct him so to guide the war,

As AcIS rulesthe ilate: And mutiny
Prove there as fatal as sedition here.

.Amph. This fa&tious late must change its feeble form,

Waver no more beneath a double reign
Of limited, contending, useless kings.
Henceforth one monarch fiall in Sparta rule,
As JovE alone in ligh OLYIPus reigns.

San. So reign the mighty monarchs cf the East ;
And such imperial pov-er, I thought, belong'd

Te.

To Sparta's king, else I liad ne'er been queen.
Young, and deceiv'd, I left my father's court
For Lacedaemon's miserable sceptre.
I did endeavour to extend its sway,
And to ambition rous'd my Spartan lord.
But the vain pupil of the Grecian schools,
Unprincely AGIs, marr'd the brave design..
Chief of the multitude, idol and slave
Of the base populace, he led the herd,
lie urg'd their brutal fury on the king.

JAmph. And now their fury on himf:lf recoils.

Like the unruly elephant, they turn,
And trample down the ranks in which they fought,

San. That is their Liberty.

Admpn. Let us employ,

And then suppress, such formidable licence.
M.Iy magifiracy now is near expir'd,;
A king's resentment and a rival's hate
-Iave long hung over my devoted head:
Farewell to place, to dignity, aid power,
Whilst haughty AGIs fills the Spartan throne.
I will nct live obscure in LacedEemon,
Nor roam thro' Grecian flates a banilh'd man.
If I -nuft set, to rife and shine no more,
A fiery track lhall mark my setting fun.
But AcGI comes.

San. And AGESISTKATA.

Farewell! Success attend thee, brave AMPHARES !
I will not flay. My foul disdains to hide
Its hatred or its scorn. [Exit. SANDANE,

Anmph. Yet they who mean

To gratify these passions, must conceal them.
'This day decides my fate. So let it be,.

Such.

Such brief concluilon have I ever lov'd.
AflIft me, Hermes, God of firatagems,
With artful words, to sooth the mind of AGIs,
And turn him from the track my purpose holds.

Enter AGIS and AGESISTRATA.

A4ef: Alas ! my fn ! that bold bad man I dread !
-gis. He seems to wait us. At this hour, AMPHARES,
I think that thou of all men should'st have shunn'd me.

Izmph. My motive in attending here your presence
Merits a less injurious salutation.

Agis. I know thy merits, and I will reward them,.

Art thou not author of the woes of Sparta,
Prime mover and inflamer of sedition ?
Halt thou not bent the power of thy high office
To the subversion of the dtate thou ferv'f ?
At thee this day my indignation burns.
I am difhonour'd

lh.;ph. What has difhonour'd thee ?
Agis. Thou and thy practices: They have compell'

me

To leave the noblest itation of a prince.
Inttime of war where hfould a king be found
But at his army's head ? There AGIS flood,
When you and your presumptuous Ephori
Requir'd my presence here. Ungrateful Spartans i
Had you allov'd nme but one other day,
Then had I fought this battle for my country,
And died or conquer'd with her bravefl sons.

-Ages Peril, my son ! dwells not in camps alone:

In cities, palaces, and courts ofjuflice,
With treachery and treason fle inhabits.
Peril attended thus thou mull encounter,

MIore-

More hideous sure than in the ranks of war.

Amph. I know my ations have incens'd the king.

But I imagin'd not that such suspicions
Found entertainment in your royal breast.

Agis. Haft thou not join'd the enemies of AGIS ?
Thou who waft once his friend, inconstant man.

1Anph. I have oppos'd the counsel of a foe,
Whose arts depriv'd me of my prince's favour.

,'gh. Thou haft oppos'd LYcuGcus and the laws,

Which rais'd the name of Sparta to the skies.
The Delphic God infpir'd the deep design:
For more than human was that power of thought
Which join'd the public to the private good,
With such perfesion, that each selfish passion
Flow'd in the channel of the common welfare,
And, like one family of sons and fires,
And dearest brothers, a great people liv'd.
In peace they liv'd without or firife or scorn;
In war they fought to conquer, or to die.
Equal and free, our happy fathers knew
No interest but the interest of the state;
No gain but Sparta's glory; proud they bore.
That palm aloft, and flhar'd the high refped,.
The admiration, which consenting Greece
Paid to th' imperial virtue of their conntry.

.Amph. Revolving time that system overthrew,
And chang'd the manners and the laws of Sparta.

Agir. The laws have been negleEted, not annull'd,

And corrupt rulers have corrupted manners.
Authority will soon revive the laws,
And great example yet restore the manners,
In spite of those who have opprefs'd their country,
Iepriv'd the people of their antient rights,

And,

And, while the nation funk beneath their sway,
Still firove for power in a declining kingdom,
Still fought for wealth in an impoverish'd land.
Even at this hour rapacious they perfilt,
And, like some wretches in a stranded vessel,
Plunder and riot in the midst of ruin.

Ymnph. Mov'd by the present perils of the lHate,

This signal hour I chore, unknown as yet
The fortune of the field, to change my condut,
And make an offer of my aid to AGIs.

ygis. If I should judge the future by the past,
Thou must forgive me, tho' I doubt thy faith.

4gef. Yet hear him, AGIS: in an hour like this
He who assistance offers is a friend.

gi/s. This hour may yet deceive their country's foes.

I know the base foundation of that hope
Which makes my bafimed enemies presume.
LYSANDER 'S army in its ranks contains
The belt and braved of Laconia's sons
The faction wifhl and hope defeat to them,
That Sparta's generous youth may ne'er return
To Sgard that freedom wlich has made them brave.

.lih. The boldness of their hopes their deeds will

prove
In the asiembly, if Aclhaa conquer.

Age:s. AMPAIARES, fay, what is their utmost aim ?
Amph. The old dependants of the exil'd king,

And all the venal members of the slate,
Won ly SANDANE'S arts and Foreign gold,
Aim to restore LEONIDAS, who comes
With hotfile armies to enslave his country:
Therefore SANDANE's proffers I rejecled,
Have warn'd the king, and would have, serv'd him too:

'' But

But since resentment and distrust prevent me,
Neutral I iland; and will not seek that welcome
Which his more artful enemies would give.

Agis. Thou fpeak'it more boldly than becomes Atr.

PIIARES.

Add that to the offences I forgive.
It is the sacred maxim of my reign,
That in a prince's consecrated brealt
Revenge and anger (hould not long remain.
These paflions in a king afflict the slate,
By driving rash offenders to despair.
This day decides your chara&er with me.
Now let your ations prove your words sincere.

/,mph. No other terms I alk, and sure I am
Ne'er shall AMIPHARES need again forgiveness.

[Exit AMIPHARES.

IManent AGIs and AGESISTRATA.

-'lgis. Well has he judg'd the season of fubmifiion.
He will aflift us if LYSANDER conquers.

AgfJ May Jove avert the evils which I fear !

I dread the ruin of the Spartan state,
And fear the downfal of our antient houfc.
The blackest fury of the Stygian realm,
The most deftrutive, is infernal Discord.
Bath'd in the blood of kings flie walks this world,
And tumbles flates and empires to the ground.

Agis. Nations oft periih by their princes crime;

But now if Sparta's antient Hate must fall,
(ods and good men hlall witness for its king,
That he with fate contended for his people,
And on the ruins of their virtue fell.

Ages. Think not I'mean to blame your high design.

Age

Age has not chang'd the tenor of my mind,
Nor pall'd my admiration of true glory.
Sprung, like thy father, from Alcides' blood,
I feel the fpirit'of the Spartan line.
Only let me adjure thee to beware
And walk with-caution thro' surrounding perils.
Tho' thou defpifeft every form of danger,
Think what a helpless train attends on thee.
An aged mother, and an infant son.

/-gis. Divine Alcides will protect his race.
Ages. I will invoke the God; in times like there

Prayers are the arms of our defenceless sex.
A spotless choir of matrons and of virgins,
Who o'er their country mourn, ryfelf will lead
To the high temple of the son of Jove.
He yet may hear the voice of supplication,
And firetch his arm to save the Spartan state.

[Exit ACESISTRATA.

AGIS alone.

Agis. Without, the enemy; within, the fation.

What ihou'd I think ? I have a thousand thoughts
That rife and fall like waves upon the shore.
I need thee now, LYSANDER ! O my friend !
I lean on thee, and thou perhaps art fall'n.
Ye ever-living Gods, who know my heart,
I trust in you, for righteous are my thoughts,
All bent on raising up long-proftrate Sparta.
With Sparta too, I would be proud to rife,
And gain such glory as my fathers gain'd,
When Persia's tyrant trembled at their arms.
If in this just ambition I should perish,
My name shall go to nations yet unborn.

But

But I must change my strain: EUANTHE colmes.
Alas ! LYSANDER, led by love and thee,
She left her Athensfor this land of broils.

Enter EUANTHE.
Euan. No tidings from the camp ?

Agis. None, fair EUANTHE.

If we had loft the field, the flying rout
Ere this had reach'd our gates.

Euan. Oh ! many a dame,

IMatron and virgin, tremble at this hour;
But who has cause like mine ? The most forlorn
And desolate of women is EUANTHE !
If-

Agis. Small the chance of what EUANTHE fears

In the long wars of till-contending Greece
Leaders of armies have but rarely fallen.

Euan. One thing I know, and with prophetic tongue

I speak it, Prince ! if Sparta triumph not,
Ne'er Ihall your eyes again behold LYSANDER.
Disdain in him is fatal as despair.

Agis. When he returns vitorious from the field,

Then shall he hear who belt has spoke his praise.
But I must leave you now: The senate waits me.
Hereafter we (hall speak of this, and smile
Like mariners who on the peaceful Ihore
Sit, and with pleasure talk of tempests past.

[Exit AcGs.

EUANTHE alone.

This stedfast ease is all aflum'd, I fee;
He flaggers at the imminent event.
How dreadful is this interval to me,

C Who

Who am bereft and destitute of all
Those aids that flay afflition; and must bear
The weight of woe that's heavier every hour.
The queen, and generous AGIS too, discharge
The dues of kindred with unfeigned love.
But our acquaintance is not old enough
To yield a ripen'd sympathy, whose taste
Alone can comfort such a mind as mine.
Yet I repent me not, in this extreme,
That I forsook my country and my friends.
They would have forc'd me to a loathed bed,
And t')rn me from the noblelt of mankind.
If he lhould fall ! my love ! rny only love !
Shall I survive thee ; and return to Athens,
Be humbled there before my haughty kindred,
And hear them blame the alhes of LYSANDE. ?
Forbid it, fearless love i forbid it, shame !
Forbid it, honour, and my nature's pride !
Death shall forbid it, for 1 dare to die.

Enter RHiESus.
Ei:an. RtIESUs, great Gods ! Oh fay, how fares Ly-

sANDER ?

Rhe. As well as glorious vitory can make him.
Eluan. Forgive my raflh despair, my thanks accept,

Ye gracious powers vd.o guard his daring bredl !
\'Where is he now ?

Rhe. Witlh Acis in the senate.

Euan. Already here; blest be the Gods of Greece I
Rhe. Soon as the trumpet from pursuit recali'd

Our conquering Spartans, in the field arriv'd
A weary messenger, by AcIS sent;
LysANDER firaight bespoke the royal land :

.Wi th

" With all the speed of men to Sparta haste,
" Chastise bold treason, and defend your king."
He laid; and call'd to me. With a few horse
I follov'd him : And when he fought the king,
By his command to you I brought these tidings.

Euan. I'Ioft welcome RiE'sus. But has Sparta lofl
None of her noble youth ?

Rhe. No man of note

Fell in the field but one, whose loss you'll mourn,
LYSANDER'S friend, Athenian POLYDORUS.

.EIua. Alas! alas ! my joy is mix'd with woe.

Unhappy youth I on my ill-omen'd head
The blame of thy untimely death will fall.
Conducing me, thou cam'fl to distant Sparta.
Fatal the honours Sparta's king beftow'd
Upon the generous guardian of EUANTHE.

Rhe. Lady, the people of my native land,

The warlike Thracians, hold it vain to mourn
For men who fall in battle; such they deem
The favourites of MARs, our country's God.
Those they bewail who die by dire disease,
Of youth and vigour full. But most of all
Lament old men, who drink the bitter dregs
Of life and woe, and in decrepit age
(Extremity of dotage) wish to live.

Euan. Who are these men who near the temple Rand ?
Uncouth to me their garb, and strange their arms.

Rhc. They are Thracians, lady.
Euan. What seek they here ?

Rhe. I will accost the herald,
And learn his business.

Euan. To the palace, RHEsuS,
I go the willing meflenger ofjoy.

C2 This

This vi&ory will free the anxious Queen
From many fears. I pray thee do rnot tarry,
But come and tell me what yon herald bears,
And what affairs fill occupy the senate.

Rue. Depend on the unwearied zeal of RHESUS.

[Exit. RHESUS.

Manet EUANTHE.

AGIS and Sparta, and the public cares,
Detain LYSANDER from my longing eyes.
I fee the happy change of my condition,
And share the triumphs of the man I love.
But yet, the slightest circumstance creates
New fears to me. Why lingers thus LYSANDER i
My mind is not at reft; the winds are hush'd,
But still my bosom quivers from the storm.

[Exit. EVANTHE.
The End of the FIRST ACT.

ACT II.
SCENE, A Court, &c. as before.

EUANTHE.
T HEIR tedious council now is at an end,

And surely he will haften to EUANTHE.
What means this clamour ?

[Shout of the People behind the Scenes.

Ha ! he comes, he comes !

Loud acclamations and the voice of joy
PRoclaim the hero,

Entel'

Enter LYSANDER.

Lyfan. 0 my life ! my love !

To meet thee here is happii;ifs complete.
The Gods have blest me to my utmost wifll,
And brought me full of glory to EUANTHE.

Et/an. Thanks to the Gods who have preferv'd LY-

SANDER.
Athenian Pallas sure has heard my prayers.

Lyfan. And mine; for mutual is the lovers' prayer.

Another deity I now invoke,
Whose rites the God of war has long delay'd.
With peace well pleas'd shall golden Hymen come,
And crown at last our long eventful love.

Eian. Speak not of Hymen now : his torch for me

He lhall not light, whilst cruel Discord waves
Her horrid brand, and whilst unburied lies
Thy friend and mine, the generous POLYDORUS.

Lofan. Tho' love and glory both my breast inspire,

And fortune smiles on both, yet sorrow finds
A place to fit in: but 'tis temper'd sorrow;
For never Grecian hero greater died.

Eunn. He fell the victim of his love to thee;

He follow'd thee when thou forfook'ft EOANTHE,
Left me that day I touch'd the Spartan fiore,
Tho' royal AGIS begg'd thee to remain.

Ljfan. Unjust EUANTIE, thus to blame LYSANDER

Who fought the field, the soldier of his love
As of his sacred country : fought to gain,
With liberty, a rank and place of honour,
Such as becomes the husband of EUANTHE;
That tender name, and names that wait upon it,
Awake emotions as implacable
To tyranny, as generous and great,

C3 As

As ever felf-renouncing hero own'd.
When the chief aim is right, all passions else
Of noble kind impell the self-same way.
The lover and the husband rouse and fire
The Spartan and the man.
Of common clay, and in one common mould
Mankind are made ; but the celestial fire..
That gives them life and foul; is liberty,
And I, Prometheus-like, to gain that fire
For Sparta's sons, would brave. the bblt of Jove.

Euan. To me you need not vaunt your daring mind

Alas! LYSANDER ! I am flillafraid
Of perils lurking in this troubled slate.
O leave me not again-to grief and fear,
And to AMPHARES.

Ljfan. Leave thee to AMPHAREs !

Euan. Yes, m thy absence he did talk of love,

.Boasted his wealth, his clients, and his power ;
Mention'd the ruin of thy father's fortunes,
And spoke contemptuous of thy rash designs.

Lyfan. Immortal Gods! Did I not hate this man
Enough ?.

Enter a HELOT.

Whence, HELOT

Hel. Lord, from CELIMENE. [Delivers a letter,

Lyfan. (reads.) " Let AGisJ and upon his guard to-day,
" This to LYSANDERfrom a faithfilfriend."-
HELOT, return, and tell the noble dame,
That the remembrance of her generous mind
Shall.live for ever in my grateful breast.

Euan. Who is this faithful friend ?

Lyfan. A Spartan dame,

,A

A gentle one, tho' wedded to a foe
Of royal AGIS. In her virgin slate
She was the.conflant-a'nd the lov'd companion
Of fair DEIDAMIA, AGIS' flort liv'd queen.
Thro' all our various firife, the generous dame
Preserves the friendships of her early days.
This scroll the King must fee. Farewell, EUANTHE.

Euag. I-tsthreatning strain awakes'my former fears.

Wou'd you had been, like me, content with love,
And never:left Illyffus' flowery banks !
A fairer garland there you might have won,
Than ever war bellow'd, the immortal wreath
Of PALLAS, queen of arts as well as arms.
But you forsook the vale, and left the shade,
To climb ambition's bare and rocky height,
To hand the forms and temperts of the world.

Lysin. Your words, like melancholy music, take

My lift'ning ear, and cause delusive sadness
For vain the malice of our baffled foes,
And impotent will prove their lail endeavours
PaR are the itorms and tempests of our fortune;
Let not EUANTHE heed the rack of clouds,
Nor dread the murmurs of the falling main.

Euan. Elate with viaory, you scorn your foes.

I wiih that RHEsus would return again
Before you go to AGIs.

Lyfan. Where is RHESUS ?

Erian. I saw some warriors clad in horrid arms

Near yonder temple sand. Strait RHEsus knew
The garb and arms of his own native Thrace,
And, wond'ring at the fight, went forth to learn
Who and from whence theywere.

Lvfan. That {hall be known.

In

In yonder temple fit the Ephori,
Those faAious magistrates who love not AGIS.
If RHESUS come to you, detain him not
Our resolutions may on him depend.

Euian. LYSANDER, flay; you go again to AGIS,

Perhaps to plan new perils to thy life;
If so, by all that's sacred I conjure thee
To let me know your purpose. Speak with me
Before you execute what you resolve.
The image of the fiern AMPHARES haunts me;
Need I entreat thee to defend me from him.

Lyfan. No! by the Gods! O urge me not EUANTHE!

Nor route those thoughts a lover cannot bear.
Defend thee from AMIPHARES ! O my fair!
When thou art wrong'd, LYSANDER lives.no more!
But fee the King.

Euan. Let caution fhewv your love.
LYSA:'DER gos off towards that fide of theJ'/ age where

AGIS appears.

Manet EUANTIIE.

If nature teaches me aright to read
The mind of man, this is a powerful spell
To charm the daring fplrit of LYSANDER,
And make him think of me as well as Sparta.

[Exit EUtANTHE.

Enter AGIS.

Lyfan. Regard, 0 King, the warnings of a friend

Instructed in the counsels of thy foes.
Behold the ftedf:ft faith of CELIMENE. [Gives the letter.

Agis. I cannot think so basely of the people.
For them I have unplum'd the regal power,

And

If they betray me ; of all creatures, man
Is most ungrateful to his benefa&or.
The generous courser and the faithful dog
With true affe&ion love their gentle master
Nay even the heavy ox, the flubborn mule,
Dullest of beafs, they know the hand that feeds them.

L1fan. Humanity -lives in thy breast, 0 King!

And dictates confidence unlimited ;
Virtue approves the generous extreme,
And magnanimity this error loves.
Let private men indulge the glorious fault,
And set their lives and fortunes on the faith
And gratitude of:thofe they have oblig'd;
But let feverer prudence guard the heart
Of him whose brows are circled with a crown.

Enter an OFFICER.

O0. 0 King! the captain of Amycla's gate

Informs you that he.has this hour descried
A band of men who halted near his pollt
A thousand Thracians, they report themselves,
Hir'd by AMPHARES for SELEUCUS' service.

Adgis., A thousand Thracians!

Of On their march to Sardis.

Lyfan. By whose permission do they march this way .
Of. Before the troops arriv'd, a herald came
Who to the Ephori a meflage bore.

Agi.' Your diligence in duty I commend.

[Exit OFFICER.
LZfan. The veil's withdrawn, and treason stands;

reveal'd.
Ne'er fiall AIPIHARES need again forgiveness.

With

With what a double tongue the traitor spoke !
All-feeing Gods'! how little do we know
The grcatnefs of those bleflings you confer.
Had we not fought to-day, had we not conquer'd, '
AGIS and Sparta had been loft for ever.

Aglr. This vistory came like the bolt of Jove,
And levell'd their designs.

Ijfan. Yet, if they dare

The worst of crimes, their treason may succeed.
Your troops, your conquering troops, are not arriv'd,
Th' affeinbly meets; unguarded there you htand;
What keeps the traitors from your noble life ?

.gis. 1My life ! LYSANDER. No, I fear not that.

The antient annals of this land record,
That barbarous foes revere the race divine,
And turn in battle from a Spartan king.

Lyfan. The, multitude may till revere their lord

Who from the blood of great Alcides springs;
And yet, some impious hand may ftiike the prince,
Altho' of virtue as of race divine.

.lgis. I'll change the guards, and place at ev'ry gate
Some men of trust.

Lyfan. Mount your Theflalian feed,

And meet the troops that haflen to your aid.
With cager fleps the royal band advance,
And winl for nothing but their king to lead them.
Then if the furies in their wrath provoke
Your foes to rife in arms, let arms decide.
Ne'er were the good and bad winnow'd so well,
And fever'd from each other. Such the hosts,
And such will be their fate, as when the rage
Of earth-born giants dar'd the fons.of heaven.

,/ir, Thou reafon'ft like an anxiousfriend, LYSANDER.

Thy

Thy fears are all for me, mine for my people,

Enter RHESUS.

Hail, gallant RHESUS ; know'ft thou ought of those
Thy countrymen, who thus unlook'd-for come,
And in a doubtful hour perplex our councils ?

Rhe. The Thracians are a thousand men complete.

From snowy Hemus and the northern hills
Of wild Odryfus the fierce warriors come.
RjINAr.CES leads them, of illustrious birth;
-tut, stern, imperious, and grown old in arms,
He knows no umpire but the fwiord, no law
Except obedience to the prince he serves.

4irs Such oft are those that quit a needy home
To ifrve as hirelings in a tyrant's host.

RIe. Next in command, my brother Euxus flands,

A Youth to MARS devoted; for he loves
Danger itfclf, not danger's rich reward.

Lr.fi. Hait thou yet seen him ?

Rhe. No.

Lifan. Has he yet heard
That thou art here in Sparta ?

Rhe. He believes

'lThat I am full in Athens. From the herald
i lept my name and quality coiceal'd
For I fuIlneted that these Thracian troops,
T'iough hir'd for Asia, were for Sparta meant.
1 it prove so, I may be useful here:
E1iy valiant brother bears a generous mind,
And. tho' of arms enamour'd, justice loves.

}i/s. Hafle to your valiant brother, and explain,

With an impartial tongue, the state of Sparta.
Shew him ryhere justice, and where honour (tand.

If

If these are sacred, as thou fay'it they are,
The gallant Euxus, he may prove a friend.

Lyfan. Exert the ftrongperfuafion of a brother;

And tell him, RHESUS, if he loves bright arms,
And that immortal glory valour gains,
No more to wield a mercenary sword,
But plant himself with thee in Sparta's foil,
Where AGIS will his noble nature cherish,
And rear his courage to such lofty deeds,
As antient flory tells of Sparta's chiefs. [Exit RHEsus.

Agis. I hope that RHESUS will divide the Thracians:

This favours well the biass of my mind,
Averse to leave the city on suspicion,
And drive the wavering faftion to extremes.

Lyfan. 0 generous prince ! whom I admire and blame;

The greatest foe, the foe LYSANDER dreads
Is the unequall'd gentleness of AGIS.
Review the story of the Grecian flates,
And mark how freedom fell in every land.
The brave asserters of the public cause
Have ever been too mild in evil times
Have, like indulgent parents, spar'd the rod,
And let the vices of their children live
To kill the virtues. Hence let AGIs learn
The only lesson that his nature needs.

Agis. Uncertain is the peril if I flay,

But certain is the evil if I fly.
I will remain; but to aflure my safety,
You mutl, LYSANDER, to the troops return.

Lyfan. And leave my prince alone amidst his foes !-

Revoke the hard command if you're refolv'd
To brave the peril, then my place I claim
Next to your person; by your fide I stand;

Perhaps

Perhaps some noble service I may render,
Receive the mortal wound aim'd at my prince,
And with my life redeem the life of AGIS.

Agirs. Your great imagination's up in arms;

But hear me, and let calmer reason judge.
I am determin'd not to quit the city.
The guilt of civil war flall not be mine.
LYSANDER'S presence here without the troops
Would but embolden and excite my foes,
Who may be tempted by this fair occasion,
This mighty vantage, to furprize us both.
Without delay, once more, LYSANDER, arm,
And oftentatioufy pass through the gate.
This viaory, and the approaching hoit
Will hufl the threat'ned torm.

L;faln. So may it prove.

But there is something in my heart rebels
Against this counsel! Oh ! I cannot leave you--
Nor ought I now to flay. Let every man
Say in the morning that the day's his own:
Things past belong to memory alone;
Things future are the property of hope.
The narrow line, the ifihmus of thafe seas,
The inflant scarce divisible, is all
That mortals have to iland on. O my prince !
LYsANDER leaves you with a heavy heart.

.gis. Farewell, thou Spartan of the antient mould,
Dear as the brother of his blood to AGIs

[They e.lbriace andpart.
LYSANDER!

Lifan. I-Ia ! may heav'n your purpose change !

Agis. My will is six'd. But though my judgment too
Confirms the secret cbunfel of my heart,

D Yet

Yet I may be deceiv'd; perhaps, my friend,
We part this moment ne'er to meet again.

Ly/an. Let us not part at all. 'Tis inspiration,

The guardian God, the Demon of the mind,
Thus often presses on the human breast.

Agis. Mistake me not, I feel no new impression,

Nor, if I did, should I by that be alter'd;
For such presages, be they fad or joyful,
I deem them but the meteors of the mind,
Bred by the inward clemental flrire,

lWhen great events perplex and flake the foul.

My thoughts regard the slate. If I fliould fall,
To thee, LYSANDER, I commit my son,
The only pledge of my DEIDAMIA'S love.
Train up the boy to work in the fame path
Which we have trod together, the flrcight path
Of virtue and true glory. If he proves
Of noble nature, and I hope no less,
He will not fnlun the lofty path of honour,
Tho' fate should marl it with his father's blood.

LZfan. Hear this, immortal Gods ! who rule the world,

And guard a prince the image of yourselves!
O never, never may 1-s royal race
Lys:ANDER's aid require. [ExLt LxSANDER.

Acis a'nll'.

AfiTeion clhoaks his words.

Hlis generous !heart bursts at this folcmrl: arting.
In times like tlcfe of a lecclining state,
3afcenecs ncs the genral race of mnen
But yet these trying times rear up a few
M'ore excellent, refin'd and conscious spirts,
Miore principled, and lit for all events,

Thaa

Than any in the good, but equal mass
Of a far better age. Such is LYSANDER,
The hour draws near.

Enter SENATORS.

Sen. Assembled Sparta waits.
Agis. I come, my friends ! I will address the people,

Proclaim aloud mine actions, which upbraid,
And soon llall silence, my despiteful foes.
My heart shall speak. This sceptre of my fathers,
.By long descent hereditary mine,
I would disdain to hold, did I not hope,
That by its sway I might recall those days
When Lacedemon was the pride of Greecet
The gaze and terror of the vwond'ring world:
For there, as in a chosen temple, dwelt
Valour and virtue, whilst attending fame
And glory on the land of heroes flione.

ift Sen. 0 Gods above ! how happy were our fires,
In those bright days of antient glory born.

Agis. Those days (hall yet return, Olympian Jove !
Or low in daft fliall Spartan AGrs lie.

[Sound of inmfical iiióirumcnts.
ift Sen. What means this music 2

4gis. To the Gods of Greece

And Sparta's guardian deities it founds.
Let us begone, nor itop the holy train. [Exeunt.

Enter a Proclion.
AGESISTRATA, EUANTPE, Prl'ie Of JUPITER andlHERCULES.

CHORus of Matrons and Virgins.

Woes approach till nol unknown;
Discord flakes the Spartan throne.

D z Ieav'n

Heav'n avert the ills we fear !
Jove, from high Olympus, hear !

Priests of JUPITER.

This day our foes embattled came,
And vow'd to end the Spartan name:
Embattled near our gates they fought
But jove for us deliverance wrought.
He smote Achaia's host with fear,
He thunder'd in their trembling rear
Jove's lightning flam'd from Sparta's spear.

C{iORUS of Matrons and Virgins.

Ever may his mighty arm
Save the Spartan state from harm !
Ne'er may proud invader boait
Glory from our glory loft.
Light, 0 Jove, that sacred fire
TWhich did Sparta's sons inspire,
\'hen the prince and people strove,
Burning with their country's love.
Xerxes, lord of great alarms,
Xerxes rous'd the world to arms.

Priests of JUPITER.

The earth was troubled at his host,
The springs were dried, the rivers lolt ;
But Spartan valour check'd his pride,
A slender band his host defy'd:
Thermopyli (immortal name !)
Beheld the Persian tyrant's fiame.

CIIORUS of all.

There the brave three hundred dy'd,
Faithful, by their prince's fide :
There they conquer'd, tho' they dy'd.

Priefis

Priefis of HERCULES.

On earth below, in Heav'n above,
Rever'd, victorious, son of Jove !
Hear, Alcides, hear our prayer,
Thy godlike offspring claims thy care.

CiORaus of all.

Bend thy bow, Tyrinthius, bend,
Lightly on the earth descend.
Fix an arrow on the firing,
Stand beside the Spartan king,
ArIs, of thy iace divine,
Tried in labours like to thine.

Undaunted, like thee, with moniters lie firives
The fierceit of Hydras in fadion revives.

If he falls a sacrifice,
Never more fliall Sparta rife ! [Exeunt.

As the ProceJf/on goes off; Enter ABlPHARES.

A'nph. Thus may my pious foes for ever flrive,
ce theirs the airy aid of fabled Jove.
In nearer and more certain force I truR:
Of human race, I fight with mortal arms.
Yet, prais'd be Fortune, goddess of my vows,
:Tis flie wllofe happy hand leads forth these dames 3
Ne'er to the palace flall their steps return.
The net I've spread now covers all my foes,
Except LYSANDER : O had he been here !
Then I had flood, like mighty Atlas, firm;
Fate but reserves him to another day.
The time is almost come ; my Thracians now
Hiave rcach'd their poll; and many a daring eye
Looks for the signal. Here it is-my sword.

D 3 When.

Wlhen I appear thus arm'd, the furies rife
Tlhis is the comet, the fierce blazing Ilar,
On which commotion, change, and death attend.

[Exit AMPHARES.
The End of the SECOND ACT.

A CT III.
3SCENE, A Cotr,-t, &c. as before..

Enter I'[UANTHE.
A THENIAN riAla.s O0 my native Gods

Prote& your suppliant in a foreign land r
Whlere hall I fly ? O AGIS ! 0 LYSANDER !

E;:-Lr LYSANDER itl a niELOT'S garb.
HELOT, if pity, or if gold-

LLjfin. E'ANTII E !
Enan. 0 Hcav'n an!d earth I LYSANDER !

Llfran. Yes, my love I

Thou fee'fl LYSANrER, mif!eable man !
Does AGIS live ?

Eicna. Amidst the' clah of arms,

And cries of fighting men, I heard them lhout
The name of AGIS. By-and-by a Spartan,
Flying and wounded, as he pass'd call'd out,
" The king is safe ; the king has gain'd the temple."

Lifan. Then all is safe for Sparta lives in him.

Etian. But the good Qeen !
L-fan. I-er rex, her age protets her.

Euan,

Purfu'd the holy train. Fear gave me speed,
For I outftript them all. But now, LYSANDER,
Betray'd, encompafs'd, now what flall we do ?

L vfa. Wert thoubut safely plac'd, LYSANDEP. knows

What he ihould do. I muff not tarry here.
There is a temple in this spacious city,
For fantity above all, others fam'd,
To Juno sacred, the avenging Qzeen !
Thither a trusty slave of AG1S' house
Will guide thy fleps; by my command he waits
Without the palace.

E;nan. Whither dost thou go ?

Lifan. In this inglorious garb difguis'd, I wait

Till night and darkness come ; then I attempt
The wall, where'cr I find it slightly guarded.
What mortal arm fimll then oppose my way,,
Urg'd as I am ? Alas, my lov'd EUA:THE !
From my compliance with thy fond request
Springs the worfft evil of this dreadful hour.
I have betray'd the confidence of AGIS:
But I'll repair my fault.

Eulan. What dolt thou mean ?

LJfan. AGIs commanded me to leave the city,

And thinks, would to the Gods he thought aright
That his LYSA.NDER heads the Spartan troops,
In whom his only hope of safety lies.
But I, EUANTHE ! partial to thy will,
Sought thee in vain. In that unhappy time
They seiz'd the gates, and fliut me up in Sparta.
Fate punilies with too severe a doom
The human weakness of indulgent love.
AGIS ! I come !-For the deep voices nowv

Of

Of duty, friendlhip, gratitude, and glory,
Sound thro' my breast, and from my beating heart
Their echo rings. Farewell my love, farewell!

Euan. Not yet, LYSANDE. ! AGIS is oppreft,

And Sparta too. Does duty, or does honour
Require LYSANDER, like an eastern slave,
To fall attendant on the royal pile ?
What can you do ? The army will betray you:
So with the few, the faithful few that love you,
You'll do some defparate acion, and be (lain.
If you despise your life, yet think of me,
The prey of curit AIPInIAREs.

Lifan. Infernal Gods !

Let me not think of that. Retire, EUANTUE,
And in the hallov'd temple reft secure.
This night I'll force ill-guarded Sparta's gates,
And save my prince, my country, and EUANTHE.

Er.a;:. Thy prince, thy country are already loll.

O lien, and preserve thyself and me:
The ship that bore me to the Spartan flore
Rides frill at anchor: leave this wretched land.
Where'cr thou go'i: I will attend thy fleps
Thy gods Ihall be my gods; thy people, mine.

Lv::;zn. Alas! EUArNTHE does not fee the flame,

The ruin of that counlel love inlfi]res.
Th' eternal Gods rcDofu this hour in me
No common trul : Upon my deeds depend
The fate of Aicrs, and the fate of Sparta.
My soldiers too, my brave, my faithful soldiers,
The meanest warrior of the royal band
Frcely devotes his life to godlike AGIs.
And 1;all their leader, shall the friend of Acis,
Forsake his prince ? I will forget thy words;

Repeat

Repeat them not.

Euan. Is this LYSANDER'S love ?

Must I not speak ? Is my reward reproach ?
For you I left my friends and native land,
Defy'd all danger, and all censure fcorn'd;
Now in my fore distress I call on thee
For whom I susser, to protec my honour,
And in my fore distress dolt thou upbraid me A
If ever maid, like credulous EUANTHE,
Bursts all the bonds of nature for one man,
Let her beware that he be not a Spartan !
O wretched maid ! O Athens loft in vain !

[Ready to fai;t.

Ljfan. All-ruling powers ! why am I thus diftrcft ?

Why come calamities so thick upon me ?
EUANTHE, hear me; you illall be obey'd.
I'll bear thee hence, and go with thee to Athens,
Restore thee to thy country and thy friends,
Of whom thou dost complain I have bereft thee.
LYSANDER. will acquit himself to thee,
And to mankind-

Euan. Delude me not. Alas!

Thy tongue speaks comfort; but thy voice, thy looks,
Wild and unsettled, drive me to despair:
For thou, methinks, art desperate, LYSANDER.
Those lips that quiver, and those eyes that roll
Like dragon's eyes, those are not signs of love!
Thou fay'ft that thou wilt bear me back to Athens;
Will that acquit thee, if thou leav'ft me there ?
Is that thy purpose ?

Lyfan. Yes. I'll leave the world,

And death Ihall wipe dishonour from my name;
AGIs and Sparta miall forgive me then,

And

And every debt be paid.

Euan. LYSANDER, no.

Love's viftims are not of your flerner sex.
It is the delliny of womankind
Conltant to live, and desolate co die.
To fRrong ncceflity EUANT!IE yields.
If I should tear you from the fide of Acrs,
I fee my fate; you ne'er would love me more:
Th'o you should live, yet you would die to me.
But I vill rather flay and perish here
Than live without thee. Go, and fight for AGIs ;
But in the hour of danger think of me
Calm in the rear dirct the course of battle,
The dreadful van let ot!:;r warriors lead,
In whom nor AGIS nor EUANTHE lives.

Lyfan. These words become my idoliz'd EUANTIrE

And honour now approves the voice of love.
O thou firll objet of my young desires,
And thro' each period of my ripening years
Still more maturely and intensely lov'd,
Hear and believe my words-Beware-Beware.

Enter_ AaMPARES.

[To his people.]

'Tis fie, by Venus ! halt. Fear not, my fair,
Nor meditate escape from your A.IPAaREs.

Euan. iMy AMrPHA.ES !

Amph. Thine, and thine alone 1

Thou low'ring slave, begone ! Haste ! urge me not
To stain my sword with thy ignoble blood.

[E.xit LYSANDER.

Ezan. Is this thy love ? Imperious, and in arms,
Recent from blood and treason, dol thou come

To

To take by force and violence my heart ?

Auph. The love of thee, more powerful than ambition,

Inflam'd me to attempt the Spartan throne.
Thy beauty is the torch that lights the war:
For thee I conquer-Smile not thus in scorn:
Deign to accept my hand and Sparta's crown.

EiLan. Dost thou bestow the diadem of Sparta ?
Where is thy lawful prince ?

.Amph. LEONIDAS ?

Eluan. Acrs.

m>ph. That AGIs is ro more a king:

A suppliant, surrounded by my troops,
In Juno's temple, with the priefis he dwells.
LEsNIDAS, by me reftor'd to po-ver,
Will gladly fliare with me divided empire.
Or, if I please to reign alone, I may.
Thro' dark conspiracy and open frife,
ror thee I llrove ; thou wilt reward my love.
Beauty, lil;e thine, pertains not to the vanquifl'd,
But still triumphant reigns the vicor's queen.

E£uan. Think'lt thou there is no tluth in humanbreafls,

No faithful loyalty, no -confiant love
Soon shalt thou learn thine error. I begin
To teach thee firlt. Thee and thy love I scorn !
And may the gods reward thy base ambition
As I reward thy love.

.iAim/b. 0 wemankind !

HIow well your paflTons teach us to be jus !
You love LYSANDE. fnill; a little time
Will from your mind era's the mcmory
() that vain-glorious, loft, and ruin'd man,
Who was my rival.

Elian. Was ! whate'er he was

He

He is, and more. Thou and thy crimes contribute
To make him more illustrious, more belov'd.
Thou giv'fi him scope and vantage to his virtue.
Speak'ft thou of crowns whilst royal AGIS reigns ?
Of power in Sparta whilst LYSANDER lives ?
The short dominion of this day is thine;
But vengeance and LYSANDER come to-morrow.

Amph. Thou do'st inftru& me. If my time is short,

We should not part. I'll fee thee safely plac'd
Where I command.

Euan. I will not go with thee.

Amph. Yield to necessity; for on my call

Compulsion waits. No other hand than mine
Should touch EUANTHE. [Seizes her hand.

Euan. Help, Spartans ! help!

If any hear me who regard LYSANDER.
Enter LYSANDER with a dagger, and runs at AMPHARES,

who retires.
Amph. Assist me, friends. Surround him-'Tis LY-

SANDER.
Take him alive. [To his people who enter.

Lyfan. No. That they cannot, traitor !

[Snatches afJord from one of the soldiers.
Now I am better arm'd. ':

Anph. Kill him, EUXLV,,
Unless he yield his sword.

Ljfan. Come, brave AMIPHARES !
Come to the front, and there direc my fate.

Anmph. Kill him !

Euxus. That would diflionour me for ever.
Advance on all fides, and close in upon him.

Lyfan. Strangers,,give way, and let the Spartan chiefs

Fight

Fight their own quarrels. I will give you all
The wealth of Sparta.

Armpbh. Ha ! he grows upon them!
Throw down your weapons, or I'll pierce her heart!

[PoiMts hs' sword to E UANTHE'S breafl.

ESgx. Renownd'd L'SANDER ! gi'e thy sword to Euxus.
Eian. Defend thy noble life !. Regard not mine.

[ABIPHARES liftS his alrm.
Ly/fan. Hold, hold.

sAmph. Thou knIov'ft me.-Chufe.
L.fan. I cannot bear to fee EUANTHE die !

[ Throws down his sword.
O AGIS ! 0 my prince-!

A1mph. Vicorious chief,

Statesman and soldier, learned Athens' boast,
W1lhere are thy glories now ?

LJfn. The firife of tongues
I ihun, as thou didRt flun the firife of arms.

,Smh. Yet let thy hauglhtinefs grant one requelt.

Tell me what brought the great LYSANDER hither ?
Some stratagem profound; which none but he
Could have contriv'd to halten his deftruLtion,
And add difgrace'and ridicule to ruin.

Ll n. I-Iadit thou not fled, thou colard,from my sword,
And flriek'd for help, this arm, this single arm,
HIi ,.afled all the craft of false AMlPHAREs.

1A'.4b7. This pride becomes tilee, and thyloll condition.
Ljfcin. In this conditiou it becomes me bes

To brave AIPH.ARES. Had he been a captive
I flould have pitied him.

,- Anih. Plead'ft thou for pity ?
Lyfan. For none that thou canst give. Hear me, then

judge, -

E If

If what I speak is meant to win thy favour.
I should have pitied thee by fate subdued:
Oppreft with crimes, thy spirit would have shrunk
Under calamity, and guilt have marr'd
The inoble vigour and the port of manhood.
Amidst thy triumph, does it not confound thee,
To think thou ow'f it to excess of baseness ?
Thou haft prevail'd, because the gene ous AGIS
Would not believe there could be such a traitor.

.i-mph. Oft have I heard, and often seen thy folly;

lut now to rail is madness. With one word
I could impose on thee eternal silence.

L/,fai. And would-I know thee-if thou thought'fl

it wife.

Even then, as now, I flould contemn thy power:
But know, I fear thee not. The king is safe,
And his vitorious troops at break of day
Will thunder in thine ears: thou and thy band
Will ill fuflain the shock of such an holt.
My life is in thy hands, but yet beware,
Thy fate depends on mine. In Laced:emon
A prince like AGIs soon will find LYSANDERS.

iaph. Uncertain thy predicions of the future:

Small is thy prefcicnce, witness thy condition.
Euxus, conducl him to yon corner tower.

Eiia. LYSAxDER ! '

Lyfaln. Oh ! I have withdrawn my eyes
From thee, and to contention turn'd my heart.

unlci. Yet look on me before we part'for ever.
Lfvn. At looks or words of tenderness he'll smile,

And o'er the sorrows of our love rejoice:
Forgive me still, I must not, cainot speak.

Elnu. But I will fpcak, and earth and heaven flall

hear me.

A;.;P:iARES

A.:.IPI;IAES too isiall hear; for it will gall him
'To hear EUANTrHE now avow her love
And faith to her LYSANDER. - Powerful words,
Emblems and figures of firm constancy,
Such as fond lovers lavishly employ
To sooth the pangs of parting and of absence.
Such music vows accord not with our late,
Our dreadful tate : yet do not grieve thy heart,
Thy noble heart, too full of other sorrows,
With thoughts of what may happen to EUANTHE.
Nothing shall happen to debase EUANTHE.
The bondage and the shame that women susser,
Who live the slaves of those who flew their lords,
I ne'er llall know, I never will endure.
If cruel delliny decrees thy fall,
Unspotted to the fiades 'I'll follow thee;
For whom alone on earth I'd wiLh to live.

Lyfain. Lead on. Farewell, EUANTHE.

Euan. Gods above !
Amfph. Condu& her to the tower where late you

lodg'd
The captive queen.

Eian. Alas ! no guarded tower,

Or vaulted dungeon, ever yet contain'd
Two more unhappy, or more helpless captives!

[ExOunt guarded.

Amph. LYSANDER'S fierce demeanour and his threats,

Proud as he is, spring not from pride alone;
I mull firetch forth my arms to fhelter'd AGIS.
If I accomplifli not this night his ruin,
To-morrow's rising fun may fee my fall.
Curst be the temples ! curll the priests of Sparta!
Now I am like a'mai who has.adventured

1E 2 To

To cross the f.ats forf!;en by tie main,
And loolin,! back fees not the shore hle cet;
Thlro' dce,; anld i hiows, 'e's, aud qu;;akinr fluds,
On he mnuil go. T'o flop is lure perdition.

Enite SANDANE.
Hall to the queen of Sparta !

San. Yc:, AMPIIARES:

Now fortune seems to finile upoi SANDANE.
I saw the fullen captive lcd along,
His gloomy eye-bails six'd upon the earth.

isz,,b. This niglit, 0 queen! must fee the bold

. conclusion

Of a dcfign, thus far so bravely borne.
On hollow and deceitful ground we tread,
'Whilil AGIS lives.

San. Thou fpeak'ft my very thou hts.

Seasons there are, 2AMPII'ARES, which suspend
All fancEimonious reverence and refpe&.

Amiph. Temples, and priefis, and altars flall not

save him,

If fate flould drive us to the las extreme.
Meanwhile, I will employ more gentle means
To gain our ends: For sacrilege would rouse
-' The zealous multitude to rage and arms.

The temple is begirt with Thracian bands,
'Who all access forbid : and Acrs knows not
'What has befalle!n LYs.ND-r. I will eind
A subtle Spartan in LYSANDEn!'S name,
Who may by specious arguments persuade hinm
''T quit the lfain'uary; and then, O queen !
W'ith all solemnity of pomp and form,
Th' assembled Ephori shall pass his doom,

And

And in the fame decree include LYSANDER.

Sna. Think'ft thou the Ephori will give the fan'tion
Of their authority to AcIs' death ?

AimJ. They will. At midiight the fern judges meet

Il Terror's temple; they have charg'd a herald
WVith orders to the troops not to advance
9:I pain of trcabon. The ailonillh'd people
Wi!] crouch and tremble at that awful povwer, '
\-Which draws the fwiord ofjuitice on a king.
'I'lThIc lall your lord's authority revive
-lnd like l!e lin, when bur!ling from a cloud,
\'.i': ,-reater powvcr and brighter splendour Iline.

[Ex:cllit
'I'h En,./ of ,': TIIIRD A.CT.

ACT IV.
iNs.-ANER. as a P riejlfer, the Thracian Guards

at a dd/ianCe.

LYSANDE.R N'mifn, ad/va ces anzdfpeakJ.

' AS virtue no prerogative on earth ?
--- And can the Godls permit the fall of AGIS .
'I;ev c.an. 'Tis man's own arrogance arrays him
in gorgeous titles of excelling nature,
Care of the Gods, and centre of creation,
i far, I fear man's life is but a dream
His foul a subtile eflence of the blood,
A rainbow beauty, made to fniin a fplce,
lc';:n melt and vani!h into air.

^j ^-~~@?

Ye mighty minds of fages and of heroes !
EIpamihondas, Plato, great Lycurgus '
TWho once v-i.h such transcendent glory fione,
Brighter a a than all the iars that deck the heav'ns,
Is your celeifial fire for ever quench'd,
And nou!ght b:;t afhle left, tt:l sport of chance,
W\hich vecr:ng winds llill blovw about the world

*

I will not think f6 ! Yet, alas ! the while
I fee and feel presages that alarm.
If they prove true. If man is like the leaf,
'Whic h falling- fro-m the tree revives no more,
I lhall be Ihortly dui. That will not hear
EUANTIIE wCeep, nor fee t'e fl:,,me of Sparta !
'.;ow I'm a livin': man, my mind is free,
.And, w-!ilft I live a!d breathe, by heav'n I'll ac&t
.As if I rere immortal.

Enllcr REzEsus a.,' Euxus.
R/e. Sec -where lie flands! behold him !-0 my

brother '

The br and the bclt of human klind.
Oppref wit h grief and liamc, and fatal love,
Indignant virtue but augments his pain.
Will not my Euxus give his aid to heave
This noble vessel from the rock it beats on ?

[Goes ip to LYSADER.
My lord ! my leader ! Oh !

Lan1. i, 'y faithful RHESus !

Com'ft thou to lhare the ruin that LYSANDER
I-as brought upon hirfelf, his prince, his country

Rhe. I come more eager and more proud to thare

Thy present fortune, than thy former glory.
Alas, my lord ! 'twould make a firanger w-eep,

To.

To fee the chief, whom conquest crown'd to-day,
A captive.

Ifan. RIIESzJs, thou haft nam'd the leall

' Of my calamities. I could endure,
With Spartan fortitude, r.y own disasters ' ;
Bear to be lhuled from mlerid; n glory,
AXnd, like a failing liar, be ecen no more:
But oh ! the king !-and dcfilate EUANTHE !

Rbe. Do not despair.

L':-.1 Tlhou art my only hope.

This day thy generous brother fav'd my life
At lis request I yielded up my fwvord,
Eii'e had LYSASNDER like a foldicr fail'n.
Thou art my friend in noble perils prov'd.
My fate, the fate of Sparta, and of Acrs,
Is in the hands of Euxss -

Rhe. All my brother i

E'ix's. 0 chief of Sparta ! Euxrs is dilirelt

On every fide. Thy virtue, thy misfortunes,
Have touch'd my heart: but here in trull I fland.
Would 1 had never seen the walls of Sparta !

LJfan. The Gods, the guardian Gods of Lacedemon,

Have brought you hither to preserve a people,
And save from traitors hands the beit of klings.
Althol at firnt you rafily drew the sword
In blind obedience to a leader's v;ill,
The gallant Euxus will not sure persist
In error known, in manifest inultice.
Thy trade is war, brave soldier ; this is not
An office for thy firord.

Euxrrr. True are thy words.

I was indeed dcceiv'd, and came not-here
To mix in Sparta's ltrife 5 but honour now -

Rhe,

Rhe. I will not hear thee plead so bad a cause.

Is there a bond in nature like the tie
Vhich binds the hearts of brothers ? And will Erxus,
From vain ideas of fidelity
To that detested traitor, false AMPHARES,
His brother murder ?

Euxus. No.

Rhe. Then let thy arms

Defend LYSANDER. By our country's Gods
i swear, and by our warlike father's foul,
Whose well-beloved son thou ever wert,
That with the Spartan clief thy brother dies.

Lifan. Slight you not favour the escape of AGS ?
The guards are Thracians.

Euu:.,. I might favour-thine.
MIy polwer extends not to the guards of Acis.

Rhe. And wilt thou not ?

Euxu.s. Command thyself,. my brother.
Rhe. How can2t thou hesitate ?

Euxu:s. I nmut beware,

Inferior in command to bold RHINALCES,
And ever view'd by him with jealous eyes.
Whillt I deliberate, no time is lolt.
The light of day suits not with your designs;
Before the night comes on, I will determine.

Lsnj. 'Tis almolt night, the fun hath left theheavens,.

,And doubtful twilight ushers in the gloom.
Perhaps the enemies of AGIS wait
The darkness of the night to cover deeds-
They dare not a2t by day. This night I dread-

Rhe. The Ephori have sent a herald forth,

Charg'd with some solemn menace, and command
To fcr, tlie army's march.

.~;,,; ...

Lyan. If they obey,

The fane of Juno guards the king no more !
Eternal Gods ! llhov wretched is LYSnDER !
From me that heraild lhould have heard his nfwver.
Cannot my RHESUS find one gallant Spartan
To bear my orders to the royal band
To florm the city?

Rhe. I myself will bear
These orders to the canmp;

Lyfan. Another talk,

More difficult, and dangerous, is thine.
Assume the arms and vesture of thy country,
And thro' the. Thracians win thy-way to AGIS.
RHESUS, .the generous spirit of that prince
Is of a-nature that excludes all fear,
Consideration,. and refpe& of Self:
On earth he a&s as if he were a God,
Immortal, and incapable of harm.
Think- how the artful falfhood of AMPHARES
May operate on such a royal mind.

Enter a TanRAcrAN,
Thra. The Spartan lord draws near,

Euxar.. AMPHARES comes.

Retire, my lord, whilt- 1 advance to meet him:
Our intercourse might lead him to suspicion.

LJfan. Nor vigilance nor care I recommend

To thee, my RHESUS ! But let caution rule
Thy forward zeal.

Rhe. It fliall, my noble lord:

My heart beats high with hope to fee thee rife
Once more, like Mars, in arms.

LAfan. Eternal Gods !

It:

In Thracian breads the Spartan virtue lives.

[LYSANDIFR eneisJ into the tower.

[Exit RHESUS.

Manet Euxus.

Enter AMPHARES.
Amph. How does the haughty captive brook con-

finement ?

Euxus. Full of inquietude he seems, and sadness.

Now in some pensive posture fits a while,
Then smites his breall, and, fitarting from his feat,
Walks to and fro with a diforder'd pace.

Aiipih. Admit no Spartan of whatever sex,
Or whatfoe'er affinity they claim.

Euxus. That firic command hath been already given.
lb:h. 'Tis needful, Euxus; for his furious mind,

In this extreme, will snatch at flight occasions
To make incredible and wild attempts.
Renew the charge; then go and search LYSANDER
For fccret weapons. On his breast he wears
A curious gorget, rich with precious flones,
And a small portrait of surpassing beauty,
The image of the fair Athenian maid,
Drawn by an artist who has vied with nature
In sweet exprefion of her matchless charms:
That I mull have.

Eiuxus. You fliall without delay.

[Exit Euxus.

MlIanet AnIPARES.

Let other men deprive themselves of-pleafure,
And toil for bare ambition; I'll provide
A more luxurious banquet to my taste.

What

IWhat tho' as yet EUANTHE loves me not,
It is the nature of her sex to change.
With wondrous ease the female kind submit
To destiny, and soon are reconcil'd
To persons and conditions once abhor'd.
Like birds new caught, who flutter for a time,
And firuggle with captivity in vain;
But by-aud-by they rcfR; they smooth their plumes,
And to new mafRers sing their former.notes.
This facile temper of the beauteous sex
Great Agamemnon, brave Pelides, prov'd:
They sack'd the cities, and they flew the fires,
The brothers, and the lovers of the fair,
Who weep'd a-while, then wip'd their wat'ry eyes,
And loft their sorrows in the hero's arms.

Enter SANDANE.

San. The herald is return'd. The royal band,

Intiam'd with rage and scorn, the mandate tore
And to the city bend their rapid march.

dAmph. Let them advance. They haften to their fate.

A fccret fratagem I have devis'd
To check these warriors in their bold career.

San. The Ephori in resolution faint-
Alnzh. Their courage I'l restore ; for AGIS yields

To the fallacious counsellor I sent.
D IIocHA.4Es, in sacerdotal robes,
As if difguis'd t'elude the Tlracian guards,
Pall in by my permission, and conjur'd
AGIS to quit the fane's uacertail flielter,
And seek the fare prote&ion of the camp:
;Hi.-t-fi he offer'd as his faithful guide.
JT.is in LYSANDER'S name. AGIS at firS,

Irrefol.:tec

Irrefolutc and doubtful, balanc'd much:
At las1 this thought sprung up, and turn'd the fcalc:
That his cfcape would force us to fubmiflion,
And end tlic Itrife without the flock of arms.
DEMIOCrnARES at midnight is appointed
To come again; and goes with an addition
That will give certain credence to his words
The gorcet of LYSAN'DER.

Sesn. Now, A.iPi'AaES,

I fee the fIares of death are wrapt around him
Our hated foe Hlands on the verge of fate:
He vwho defpis'd S-ANDA;E, and permitted,
Mith mo's inult.n courtcfy, my flay
I wvould not have reniain'd cne day in Sparta,
But for tlh hiope I h.d to work his ruin.
I-e is te.c root, . tli liim the lranches fall.

* i,/hp. Ahltho' i:i; on is !'ife in Orcllomelos,

Yet there in ihopeles; exile he mull live.
lEut AI;ESIsTS.ATA-

Snn. Shall not firvlve

To travel suppliant thro' the flates of Greece,
And shew her hoary hairs with afhcs llrew'd,
To move com an:Gon in the giddy Greeks.
She's old, and lit to die.

Enter a Sanrtan Mrf/l'ner.

ie,.: The Thracian troops

\YWho urld the temple. faithful to their charge,
IHave fJiz'd a spy, who, cloath'd and air'd like them,
At emlted to pafp thro' their ranks to AGIS.
ri ni:<Lcac fcr a lw ile delavyd tlce doom
That n-artial law decrees, till you yourfclf
Difccurfe and judge the captive.

.,mph.

AmNph. I approve
The vigilance and conduc of RHRNALCES.

[Exit Messenger.

San. Still flows the tide of fortune; I'll dispatch

ORONTES to my lord. Joyful he comes
To re-affume his sceptre and his throne.
Farewell restraint, and laws that bind a prince.
The people's majesty, the senate's power,
Shall shrink beneath their awful monarch's fvord.
Fear is the only principle of rule,
Which man, like other animals, obeys.

[Exit SANDANE.

JManet AMPImARES.
Amph. Why tarries Ezxus now?

Entcr Euxus.

I mull applaud

rhy countrymen for discipline and care,
As well as valour; they have seiz'd a spy,
Who mix'd with them, difguis'd in Thracian arns.

Eu.us. In Thracian arms !

Amph. Yes, to pass to Acis.

Some bold adventurer of the royal band,
Whose life-Why art thou troubled? Has LYSANDER
Efcap'd the guards ?-

Euxus. No. I am pale with anger,

At the reproachful terms, the bitter taunts,
Which I have fuffer'd from incens'd LYSANDER,
In execution of thy late commands. [Gives thegorget.

Anmph. Is that the cause ?
He soon shall be no objet of thy wrath.

[Exit AMPHARES.
F Manft

Manet Euxus.

Euxus. My brother seiz'd ! I hesitate no more.

The voice of nature in my breast exclaims
Against the rigour of those guilty laws,
Which bind a soldier blindly to obey.
Son of my mother I Brother of my blood !
I fly to save thee.-Now I'm thine, LYSANDER.

[Goes to the gate of the tower.
Chief of Sparta !

Enter LYSASDER.

Lifan. Is Euxus yet refolv'd ?

Euxus. That thou flalt fee, thy enemies are mine.
RIEsus is taken.

jfian. Mly contagious fate
Infeats my friends ! my brave, my generous RHESUS 1

Euxus. Friend of my brother ! firit I set thee free.

An officer of mine commands that gate
At which the Thracians enter'd; haste thee thither,
Array'd like one of those whom -I will fend
To guide thy steps.

Lyfan. Ye guardian Gods of Greece !

Whose ways mysterious raflly I arraign'd,
Forgive my raflnefs! Prosper now my sword-
Where are my arms ?
[Vthill LYSANDER fpicals, Euxus beckons one of hisol-

diers.

Euxus. IIere enter, and obey
Without reply. [Exeunt LysANDERP and the Thracian

to the lower.

The soldiers hearts are mine.

Their various toils and perils I have flar'd,
Nay more than shar'd, the first in hard extremes,

When

When signal danger claims a leader's sword.
No spoil, no treasure, have I e'er referv'd ;
The wealth I covet is the soldier's love.
Ily bold Odryfians are a faithful band;
In this diltrefs I'll throw myself on them ;
They will support me.

Enter a Spartan AMejenger.

.MAes Leader of Thracian bands!

AMIPHARES and the magistrates of Sparta,
Met in the fenate-houfe, expea thy presence.

Euxus. I will attend them. [Exit MeJ/enger:-

Surely they have learned,
That I am brother to ill-fated RHESUS.

Enter LYSANDER in Thracian dress and arms.

Lyfan. Once more at liberty! Once more in arms
To thee, brave Thracian

Euxus. I am fummbn'd hence

To meet the Ephori. I fear, my lord,
They have difcover'd RHESUS is my brother.

Ljfan. That secret in your breast and his is rodg'd:

Nor can his alter'd features now betray him.
In early youth he left his native land;
The heat of summer, and the winter's cold,
In many a hard campaign, have chac'd his bloom.

EuIxus. Indeed I knew him not.

Lyfan. Then who could know him ?

Calm and determin'd to the senate go:
Here I'll remain, and wait your quick return.
To know what they design imports us much.

Euxurs. Your stay is full of danger; riik it not.
Lrfan. All necessary dangers must be rilk'd.

F z Perhaps

Perhaps I am the fubjea-of their councils.
Perhaps I may be call'd before the senate !
If I appear not, you mufi be difcover'd,
And my escape too soon to them be known.

Euxus. Ycur reaions are of force. I am convinc'd.

Here, take my sword. Then, if we are betray'd,
My troops obey you. Now, my bold SITHONTEs,

[ o one of his Thracians.

Draw your battalion nearer to the square,
And guard the person of this Spartan chief
As you would guard myself. If I'm detain'd,
Follow to death-or vicory LYSANDEr. [Exit Euxus,

Ljan. Shall I obey the impulse of my heart,

And lead these Thracians to the tower that holds
INy loft EUANTSE ? No, let reason rule.
AMPIIARES will not, dares not wrong her honour,
WhillR undcciltd is the fate of AGIs.
'Tis night, but never flall the morning rife
On-Who can know the secret will of heav'n
Down, down, einthufiafin! my heart be calm i
A iItt.le while,'and thou flalt beat no more.
Oft have I wiil'd for perilous occasions;
And, wand'ring in the academic grove,
Have rous'd myself with sirong imagination
Of great exploits by ardent valour done:
But ne'er did fancy's tempest match the truth,
The firong reality of such a.ftorm.
O did I combat but for life alone,
Were Sparta and EUANTHE safe fpeaators,
How gayly flould LYSANDER take the field.-
Euxus draws near-Upon the infecl wing
lOs a small moment ride th' eternal fates.

Euit';-'

Enter Euxus.

Euxur. My fears are vain. The secret is unknown.
But RHESUS is condemn'd to die to-morrow.

Ljfan. To-morrow! many men will die to-morrow,.
Who are not yet condemn'd.

Euxus. 'Tis true, by heav'n !

Mortal designs and enterprizes rife
On every fide. The Ephori resolve
At midnight to surprise the royal band,
And order'd me to hold my troops prepared
Their forces to sustain.

LJfan. 'Tis well ! tis wondrous well!

They urge me now, and point the line of a&ion.
Under the high up-lifted arm of fate
I']l rush, and firike before their blow can fall.
I'll florm the city while they force the camp.
Your troops-

Euxus. Shall join you at the gate. The word ?
Lyfan. AGIS. Farewell Now I (hall save thee, AcGS,
Or leave my blood upon the stones of Sparta.

[Exeunt LYSANDER and Evxus.
The End of the FOURTH ACT.

ACT V.
'AMIPHARES andthe Ephoriwiith the Officers, &c.

The gate of the prison sien at a dif1ance.
sis Epho, HTHE hour is past.

.1 2d. EPfho. I fear--

F 3 3rnp.

Amnph. Silence. He comes.
I hear the fieps of wary treading feet.

Enter a Spartan, Acis foilo-wing.

Agis. This way conduts not to Amycla's gate,
Ah ! whither doll thou lead me ?

AIp;,. To thy death.
The Ephori of Sparta have condemn'd thee.

/Agis. I am betray'd ! What mockery is this

Of lacrcd jultice ? Lay aside the robes
And cniigns of authority prophan'd:
The pomp of magifiracy suits not treason.

Amphl. The licence of thy tongue affronts the laws.
Where awful rcv'rence our ligh office bears.

Ajgi. Know ye not this, ye guardians of the laws,

The meanell citizen of Lacedaemon
Without free trial cannot be condemn'd
Much less your king. What law have I transgressl'd
Point out my crime; produce my bold accusers.

AmL,5/5 Thy crime is tyranny.

Agsr. Is that my crime

Had Acis been a tyrant, thou had'st been
His fawning save, thou enemy of freedom.

Amirp. Behold the flubborn spirit of this man :

He breathes his native arrogance, and flill
Insults his judges, and avows his crimes.

Tgis. Who made you judges of the life of AGIS ?

But you have judg'd: yourselves, and earth, and heav'u.
Know how unjustly. To the Gods above,
The sure avengers of a murder'd king,
I make my last appeal. Their messenger
Is on the wing; LYSANDER comes apace;
And NEMr.ESIS dire&s his righteous sword.

A.p. .

i/mph. Proceeds this boldness from thy trust in him?

Thy great avenger is, like thee, a captive,
And under the fame mortal sentence lies.

Agis. Ye powers above ! LYSANDER too a captive !
Where was he taken?

AWmpb. In the streets of Sparta,
Clad in the servile garment of a Helot.

.Ais. Alas ! alas ! LYSANDER ! my friend !

Thy love for me, thy generous, fearless love,
Has wrought thy fall.. For me thou cam's to Sparta,
And, like the parent bird hov'ring too near
Its captive young, thy noble life is loft !-
Forgive thele tears, my country ! AGIS weeps'
For thee. Alas ! thy brave defender's gone !
O Lacedwcmon, thou art fall'n for ever !
Tlhy bad ellate shall every day grow worse
Succeflive tyrants shall exhaust thy firength,
Till all thy generous youths.have bled in vain ;
At last the consummation of thy woes
Shall come upon thee; some ambitious foe
Shall firetch the iron arm of conquest forth,
And grasp thee in the circle of his empire.
My native land, the kingdom of my fathers,
Shall be no more a nation ! 0 my country,
How irretrievable is thy condition !
The Macedonian vulture hovers o'er thee,
Soon to defeend, and on thy vitals prey.

Amph. Thou may'fl delay, perhaps avoid, thy death.

Send forth thy mandate to the royal band
Io halt till further orders.

Agir. Ha ! No more

I trust thee, traitor. Would I had ever been
Thus deaf to thee I No, let the royal band

Revcnge

Revenge their gallant leader and their king.

iSl Epho. Thou tempt'le thy fate.

Agis. I scorn it. Since my hope

Of Sparta's loft, and my beloved friend
Has perifh'd in my cause, why should I live ?
In any period of my former days
I rather would have chose to die attempting
The glorious deflgn, which you have ruin'd,
Than live the prince of a degenerate people,
The tame fpe&tator of a falling empire.

fl/ Epho. To reason hearken.

Igis. Reason bids me die,

As I have liv'd, unalter'd in my love
To Sparta, and unconquer'd in my purpose.
You mean to take advantage of my state,
Without fpecator, counsellor, or friend:
You think I dread the stern approach of death,
Because the blooming season of my life
Still promises a long extent of years:
But my forefathers blood is in my veins,
The blood of heroes, and of Spartan kings,
Less only than the Gods. I dare your worst,
And with my dying breath acquit my people.
The people rose; they hearken'd to the voice
Of Liberty, and blest the name of AcGs.
But you, the. nobles, an inglorious race,
Base as the dastard and unarmed Helots,,
With foreign arms and mercenary aid,
Bore down the people and oppreft your prince,
Whom death delivers. AcGs shall not fee
The last convulsions of expiring Freedom.
For in the first he dies.

Amnph. We'll hear no more

0£

Of these inveftives. Bear him to the place
Of execution. Officers, advance
And do your duty.

Of. This is not our duty.

Amph. What !
0. Murder of a king is not our duty.
.Amph. Mutinous slaves ! for you I'll find a time.
Sir. [To AGIS.

A is. Touch me not, for uncompell'd I go

To meet my destiny. Weep not for me. [To an Oficer.
0 ! thou whose nature suits not thy employment,
Weep not for me ! I would not change conditions
With these bad men. I flall not feel the woes
That thou and all mufl feel, the woes of Sparta !
0 ! might my death avail my much-lov'd country,
I'd die as joyful then, as fearless now.

[Exit AGis guarded.

Aniph. Atone your insolence by prompt obedience,
Or death's your portion. [To an Oficer.

[Exeunt with AGIs.
MIanent AMiPHAREs, &c.

Amph. Magistrates of Sparta !

This painful work of necessary juflice
Will quickly end the troubles of the itate.
LEONIDAS, wlhe owes his crown to you,
Your faithful zeal and service will reward.

[Exeunt Ephori.
1Manent AIPHIARES and the Spartan who entered with

AGIS.
Anmph. HafRe to the Thracian captain, and require

him

To

To fend his prisoner LYSANDER hither. [Exit Spartan.
AGIS remov'd, and turbulent LYSANDER,
Like snow along the fiore, their army melts.

Enter Mefeinger from the dungeon.

Aseg: The executioners refuse their office:

Sacred they hold the person of a king,
A Spartan king descended from the Gods.

Amph. Again those fables of the villain priests

Rife up to thwart me. Now, my trusty servant,
Approve thy faith, and win my lasting favour.
Each instant of delay is big with peril
Whilst Acs lives. Let thy good sword fulfill
The sentence of the law, and thy own tongue
Shall name the recompense.

Mes. Shall it, my lord ?

I am your instrument, and bind myself
By this bold deed still faster to your fortunes. [Exi,;.

Anmph. Ye sons of bold ambition, learn of me:

Trust not the survey of another's eye:
Your dangerous voyage needs a pilot's care
Who never quits the helm.

Enter SPARTAN.

Spar. We are bctray'd.
LYSANDERR--

2'mphi. What of him ? Speak-faulter not.

Spar. Is fled.

mrph. Whither ? With whom ?-Eternal Gods
Spar. The guards have set him free; the open gates
I saw, and ent'ring fearch'd the empty tower.

Amiph. That traitor Euxus !-Now let me resolve,
And quickly too.

Spar,

Spar. The people are alarm'd,
And gather to their tribes.

tAmph. Curst be their tribes.

The deed is done already. Yet I have
One pledge of value.

Spar. AGESrSTRATA.-

Ampih. This hour (he dies. I've sent a trusty slave

To end her woes. But the Athenian maid,
Her I'll bear off in spite of frowning fortune.
Go to the turret, and conduct her hither. [Exit Spartan.

Manet AMPHARES.

2Imph. Malignant powers ! or blind unerring Fate,
'This is your work: now you aflert your empire.

Entel MESSENGER.

Me,. My lord, the troops of Euxus have revolted.

RHINHALCES visited this night each post,
And near Amycla's gate forne Thracians met,
WhIofe leader, quefUton'd, anfwer'd with his sword.

AHmh. By hcav'n and earth, LYsAnmDE! Ha! proceed.
Mefr. The fadden onset, and the cloud of night

The traitors favour'd; some cfcap'd our swords,
But m-.ry more in the flarp combat fell.

.,!*,3b. Did their fierce leader fall ?

Me/1: Above the reft

Conspicuous he fought; at him each fwiord
Was pointed. If lie fll not on the spot,
Sure he receiv'd wounds that must fatal prove.

Am/,h. Confirm me that, and I will mock at fate.

Command my troops, that in the Forum watch,
To join RUINALcES. I myfclf will follow.

[E:i;/ MESSENGER.

Enter

Enter EUANTHE.

How beautiful she is! Should he survive,
Those charms divine he never shall enjoy.

Euan. Why haft thou call'd me hither to afflia
And torture me with fpetacles of woe ?

[The Gate of the Priton opens, and

AMiPH.RES' Slave advances.

Eternal powers ! why yawn yon dreadful gates ?
And from what horrid deed stalks yonder villain?

Meif Thy orders are obey'd. Hc lives no more.
Euan. Barbarian monitcr ! haft thou kill'd LYSAN-

* DER ?-
But I will not reproach thee, nor complain
To the regardless Gods. My doom is palt;
There is one only refuge for EUANTIIE.
Once more I follow where LYSANDER lcads,
Where murder and AMPHARES cannot come
To part us more.

[She runs towuards the dungeon.

Ar.IPItAREsf'Ze[,s her.

/4mph. Some other season choose.

There is no leisure now for lamentation.
Forthwith conduct her to the Arcadian gate:
There ith the horsemen wait.

Enter MIESSENGZR.

Mef. My Lord, My Lord,
The royal band by Thracian Euxusled-

(Shout.)

_/h,:h. M\y enemy prevails.-This way with me.
Miy lleps pursue, or by the Gods of Hell!-

Eran. I will not leave this place. Draw forth thy

sword,

And

And try if death can terrify despair.

Amph. Drag her along. (Shout.)

Again !-the foe draws near.

(Shout from the other fide, AGIs and Liberty.)
Anmph. I am encompaft; yet I'll mar their triumph.

[Runs at EUANTHE with his/word.

Enter LYSANDER, followed by RHESUS.

Lyfan. Infernal dog, turn and behold LYSANDER,
Fly, RHESUS, to the king. Traitor accurt ! [Exit RiESUs.
Down, down, to Tartarus; there villain, howl.

[AMPHARES falls.

Euan. Amazing powers! alive ! vicorious! Oh !
Lyfan. And have I come to save thee, 0 EUANTHE !

But oh ! I fear I come too late for AGIS.
The dungeon-mouth is open.

Enter RHESUS.
Tell me, RHESUS.

Rhe. The king is murder'd, in yon vault he lies.
Lyfan. My prince ! my friend ! thy goodness, and thy

virtue,

Thy clemency, thy mildness, have undone thee !
Fatal to Nations is the dread example !
Hence monarchs, who with iron sceptre rule,
Will justify their treatment of mankind ;
And virtuous princes, born in-evil times,
Will hesitate to ltem corruption's tide,
Left they should be like AGIS overwhelm'd.

A/mph. He who preferr'd LYSANDER to AMPHARES,

Has paid me with his life. My dying hand
Hath sow'd the feeds of discord and diftration.
Peace ne'er shall dwell in Sparta. Plagues on plagues

G Shall

Shall rife to curse you, as- (Dies.)

Lfanl. Thy foul is curst.

There the fell spirit of APHARTEs ned
In imprecations. Prophet of difalters,
IJpon the difinal banks of Acheron,
Amidll the wailing ghosts, fill curse thy country,
And end a speech the damn'd will hate to hear.
Behold the mother of our murder'd king.

Enter AGESISTRATA and E uxus.

Ages. Alas ! I need not ask the fate of AGIS

Your looks, your silence fay, I have no son
Yet fpcak to me, for I can hear the worst,
I have been long familiar with affliEtion
I am the widow of the fire of AGIs.

Llfain. There lies the bloody author of his death.
Slain by my hand.

4ges. Alas ! alas ! my son !

Oft has my anxious mind this hour foreseen,
And warn'd thee oft. But thou the danger fcorn'd,
'When Sparta's glory was the price of peril.
O ! son of Jove, great author of our race,
Sultain my foul. For he whowras my stay,
\'Iy comfort, and my llrength, is now no more.
Yet in the path his generous spirit chose,
He fell; and conscious virtue crown'd his fall.

Lyfan. So fell not false AMIPHARES.

Eluxus. And SANDANE.
LJfan. SANDANE dead!

Euxes. And dreadful was her death.

She fled, for refuge from the people's rage,
To the fame turret wheie A-XIPHARES' troops
Guarded the cueen, whlofe mantle on the ground

She

She spied, and wrapt it round her wretched head;
When suddenly a stern assassin came
And fabb'd her, as that queen whose robe file wore.
Arriving then, I heard her flriek for help,
Implore her country's Gods with bitter cries,
And, in her agony, divulge her crimes.
It was no wonder that flie sear'd to die.

sres. O guilt ! thou'rt worfl of all; he knew thee

not

For whom I mourn. Untimely was his fate
Yet full of high and pleasing tloughts he fell.
Great-hearted Virtue, in its swelling hour,
Scarce feels the blow that firikes at brittle life.
The painful part is mine, in grief to live.
Would I Lad dy'd for thec, my son ! my fin! i -

El/an. EUANTHE'S tears ihall ever flow with yours,

For her protetor and her gentle friend.
AMyfterious are the counsels of the Gods;
Together AGIS and. Ai',HAAREs fall.

Lrfan. The son of AGIs lives, his infant years

Require a mother's care. Without delay
Proclaim the son of AcGI king of Sparta.
To him, the offspring of my prince ador'd,
Descend the love and faith I bore to AGIs.
Ye generous Thracians, who this day have ihewn
The matchless worth and honour of your minds,
-Ienceforth be Spartans. And, ye Spartan youths,
'Vhom AGIS lov'd, and for whose rights he died,
Display the spirit of your dear-bought freedom
With grateful valour guard the hero's son,
zAnd prove that AcIs periih'd not in vain.

A.er. Condut me, Spartans, to his dear remains.
Lgfat. Forbear a while yon dismal vault.-

G 2 Enter

Enter MESSENGER.

MJg. My Lord,

The people, headed by the priests of Jove
And Hercules, in long procession come,
Bearing the body of their royal lord,
From that base dungeon to the fculptur'd tomb
Which guards the sacred dull of Sparta's kings.

Enter the Proceion with the Body of AGs.

Lijfin. 0 Destiny fipreme !
Eian. 0 fad remains of youth and majefy !

,ges. My son ! my son !

Nature is thwarted here; thou flouldft have borne-
Thy aged parent to the lilent tomb.

CHORUS.

Mourn, ye sons of Sparta, mourn,.
Pour the fad lamenting flrain.
Wretched people ! Land forlorn !
Mourn the beil of princes slain.

Priest of JUPITER.

He fell not as the warrior falls,
Whose breast defends his native walls..
To treason AGIs bow'd his head,
And by his guilty subje&s bled:
Betray'd by those his mercy spar'd
Ingratitude was his reward.

CHORUS.

Shame is mix'd with Sparta's woe,
Blood of kings the city stains.
Ever let our sorrows flow,
Shame indelible remains.

Priel

Priest of JUPITER.

Yet AxGI triumph'd in his fall;
For Virtue triumphs over all!
Great, superior to his fate,
He only griev'd for Sparta's slate.
When Jove decrees a nation's doom,
He calls their heroes to the tomb.
Fearless they fall, immortal rife,
And claim the freedom of the Ikies.

CHORUS.

AGIS trulmph'd in his fall,
Virtue triumphs over all!
Such a king Ihall ne'er return;
Our country and ourselves we mourn.

Pries of HERCULES.

AGIS fell, by fraud o'ercome;
Alike was great Alcides' doom:
Yet then molt worthy of his fire,
The son of JOVE, when wrapt in fire,.
Vicorious crown'd his labours pafl:
His noblest labour was the last.

CHORUS of all.

Now in peace our hero lies,
Ceas'd his toil,, his race is run;
Freedom is the glorious prize
AGIS for his people won.

F I N I S.

# EPILOGUE. SPOKEN BY MRS PRITCHARD.

EPILOGUE.

SPO EN B r MRS PRITCHARD.
A King in bloom of youth, for freedom die!

Orar bard, lho' bolid, di /l not rhave foar'd Jo high.

T.irs is no credulous admiring age;
But sacred, fie, the faith of Plutarcl's page.
In .imp/c Jle le tiat anui'nt sage re/ates
TSe tale of 3parta, chief of Grecian flates:
Eight hiundrdc years it lollrJ', great in arms,
On dangers rojf', andA grew anmnd/l alarms.
Of Sparta's triiaimph you have heard the catife,
More Jlrong, 7nore noble than Lycuirus' laws ;
How Spartan Dames, by glory'J charms ij1ir'dJ.
l7he Jon, the lover, and the h!jband .sird.
Te fair of Britailn's /?e, bhich j:fly claims
The Grecian title, land of /oel , dames,
In !.ritain's canrfe, exert your nmaichkfs charms,
~And route your lovers the love of arms.
HId, not extintf, the spa k of valour lies;
rtar breath la/ll raise i Jam7ing to the Ji;es.
Now Marl. his blood.y banner hangs in air,
AInd bids Britannia's sons for war prepare:
Let each lov'd nzail, each mother bring the JJi!d,l
And arm their cocll::l;'s champions for the sild.

._Armi'

[ 67 ]

.Arm'd and iiisam'd, each Britifi breajl Jfall burn,
No youth unlaurel'd ha/ll to you return.
Then Jfall we cease t' exult at trophies won,
In glory' field, by Heroes-not our own.
France yet Jfall tremble at the British sword,
_/4d dread the Vengeance of her anticnt Lord.

DOUGLAS.

A

TRAGEDY.
Non ego fum vates, fed prifci conSfciu evi.

# PROLOGUE. SPOKEN BY MR SPARKS.

PROLOGUE.

SPOKEN BY MIR SPARKS.

N anti'ent timnes, when Britain's trade was arms,
And the lov'd music of her youth, alarns;

I Yd/-!'ite race fuJ laiu'd fai. England'sfame:
"'T }Vo has not heard of gallant PI ERCY's name ?

ay, anl of DOUGLAS ? Such illljlrious foes

!I' rial Rome and Carthage never rose !

.:': age to age brIihtjJjone the Britilhfre,
i//i' cevry hero was a hcros fre.
'vijen povwefuilfate decreed one warrior's doom,
b~rfpiung the phonlx from his parent's tomb.
B. t whi/fi these generous rivals fought and fell,
Tefe generous rivals lov'd each other wel/:
T.o' many a bloody fe/ll was IofJ and won,
.\ith!bg in bate, in honour all was dons.
IVhen PIERcY wrong'd, defy'd his prilce or peers,
Fajl came the DOUGLAS, with his Scottifl spears ;
Adl, when proud DOUGLAS made his King his foe,
For DOUGLAS, PIERCY bent his Englifli bow.
El.pe!l'd their native homes by adverse fate,
They knock'd alternate at each other's gate:
'Then blaz.'d the caJqle, at the midnight hour,
For him, whose arms had Jhook itsfirmetr tow'r.

This night a DOUGLAS J'our proted7ion c/aims

A- wife! a mother ! Pity'sefofteJ names:
Th/eJIoly of her woes indulgent hear,
'nd grant yourJirppliant all Jfe begs, a tear.
in conofdencefle begs; and hopes to ind
£ach English breall, like noble PIERCY'S, kind.

PROLOGUE

# PROLOGUE SPOKEN AT EDINBURGH.

PROLOGUE

SPOKEN AT EDINBURGH.
IN days of claic fame, when Persia's Lord

Oppos'd his milions to the Grecian sword,

Flourijh'd theJtate of Athens, fnall herJ.ore,
Rugged her fol, and rocky was herjlfore,
Like Caledonia's: yet flJe gaind a name
That fiands unrival'd in the rolls offame.

Such proud pre-eminence not valour gave,

(For who than Sparta's danntlefs sons more brave )
But learning, and the love of every art,
That Virgin Pallas and the Muse impart.

Above the rejf the Tragic Muse admir'd

Each Attic BreaJf with nob/eft Paqfonsfr'd.
In peace their poets with their heroes Jha'd
Glory, the hero's, and the bard's reward.
The Tragic Muse each glorious record kept,
And, o'rr the kings Jhe conquer'd, Athens wept *.

Here let me cease, impatient for theJcene,

To you I need not praise the Tragic Queen:
Oft has this audience soft compa son /hown
To woes of heroes, heroes not their own.
This n.ght our scenes no common tear demand,
.He comes, the hero of your native land!
DOUGLAS, a name thro' all the world renown'd
A name that roitfes lile the trumpet's found!
Oft have your fathers, prodigal of life,
A DOUGLAS follow'd thro' the bloodJJrife;
Hofls have been known at that dread name to yield,
And, DOUGLAS dead, his name hath won the field.

* See the PERSAI of Efchylus.

' v

Lilen attentive to the various tale,
Mark if the author's kindredefeelings fail;.
Sway'd by alternate hopes, alternatefears,
He w-aits the tefl of your congenial tears.
If they,Jallflow, back to the MIife he flies,
And bids your heroes in fltccqjion rife;
Co/le.7r the wand'ring warriors as they roam,.
DOUGLAS afjures them of a welcome home,

DR.A1MATIS

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

DRAMlTTIS PERSONjE.
As Originally Rcprefented at London and Edinburgh.

Covcnt GrLrdln. Edi;nbgh.

MI E N.

.ord RANDOLPHI, Mr RDO r.... . .. r YOUNGER.
GLENALVON, . .Mr Sm IITI..... I.ir LovE.
OLD NORVAL, . Mr SI'ARIJS ..... Mnl H.Y3MAN,
DOUGLAS, . .. I ,Mr B.RtY. ..... Mr DIGCE S.

ScR.V.ANTrs, ,'c.

W 0 ,Mll E N.

Lady RANDOLP., l'Mrs WTOFFINGTON. Mrs WARn.
.L A;NA, .... IMrrs VINCENT.. . Mrs

HEOP.INSN
As Lately Repcei'nted at London and Edinburgih.

Drlur} Lne,. Ed di;;burgh.

M, E N.

L ord RIANDOLPH, Mtr AIC:ZS. .... Mr B)LL.
GLENALVON, . . 1r PALIER. ... r i'S W.OODS.
OLD NORVAL, . i.r BiNSELY.... r.

. S. KEMBLE,
)O'nGLAS, .... Mr KEME1LE... . Mr SiDONss,

SERVANTS, 'c. o

.

V; 0 M. E N.

Lady RANDOLPH1o , Mrs SIDDOs. ... Mrs SIDDOXS,
ANNA, .... MIrs WARD. ..... Mrs WOODS.
Jh7e Ln!Cs dlbiZjIgujtrid ,by iverted Commas are omit:ct

in the ReCrefcntcation,.

# DOUGLAS.

DOUGLAS.

ACT I.
SCENE, The Court of a Cafle surrounded

with I'oods.

Enter LADY RANDOLPH.
Y E woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom.

Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth

The voice of sorrow from my bur(ting heart,
Farewell a while: I will not leave you long;
For in your shades I deem some spirit dwells,
Who from the chiding fiream, or groaning oak,
Still hears, and answers to MATILDA'S moan.
O DOUGLAS ! DOUGLAS ! if departed ghosts
Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of that wood thou art,
And with the paflion of immortals hear'st
My lamentation: hear'st thy wretched wife
Weep for her huiEand slain, her infant lolt.
My brother's timeless death I seem to mourn,
Who perilh'd with thee on this fatal day.
To thee I lift my voice; to thee addtefs
'The plaint which mortal ear has never heard.
0 disregard me not; tho' I am call'd
Another's now, my heart is wholly thine.

Incapable

Incapable of change, affeicion lies
Buried, my DOUGLAS, in thy bloody grave.
But RANDOLPH comes, whom fate has made my Lord,
To chide my anguish, and defraud the dead.

Enter LORD RANDOLPH.

LordR. Again these weeds of woe! fay, dost thou well

To feed a passion which consumes thy life ?
The living claim some duty; vainly thou
Beftow'ft thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady R. Silent, alas! is he for whom I mourn

Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives.
" This fatal day tirs my time-fettled sorrow,
" Troubles afresh the fountain of my heart.

" LordR. When was it pure of sadness! These black

weeds

" Express the wonted colour of thy rmid,
" For ever dark and dismal. Seven long years
" Are pass'd, since we. were join'd by sacred ties:
" Clouds all the while have hung upon thy brow,
"Nor broke, nor parted by one gleam of joy."
Time, that wears out the trace of deepest anguish,
" As the sea smooths the prints made in the sand,"
Has pass'd o'er thee in vain.

" Lady R. If time to come

" Should prove as ineffecual, yet, my lord,
" Thou can'llt not blame me. When our Scottish youth
" Vy'd with each other for my luckless love,
' Oft I besought them, I implor'd them all
" Not to assail me with my father's aid,
" Nor blend their better destiny with mine,
" For melancholy had congeal'd my blood,

"And

"And froze affetion in my chilly breast.
"At last my Sire, rous'd with the base attempt
"To force me from him, which thou rend'redft vain,
" To his own daughter bow'd his hoary head,

Besought me to commiserate his age,
" And vow'd he fhouid not, could not die in peace,
"Unless he saw me wedded, and fecur'd
" From violence and outrage. Then, my Lord !
"In my extreme distress I cali'd on thee,
"Thee I befpake, profefs'd my strong desire
' To lead a single, solitary life,
" And begg'd thy nobleness, not to demand
" Her for a wife whose heart was dead to love.
" How thou prefifted'ft after this, thou know'ft,
" And must confess that I am not unjust,
" Nor more to thee than to myself injurio ;.

" Lord R. That I confess yet ever mufl regret
The grief I cannot cure." Would thou wert. not
Compos'd of grief and tcndernefs alone,
" But had'st a spark of other passions in thee,

Pride, anger, vanity, the strong desire

"Of admiration, dear to woman-kind;
" These might contend with, and allay thy grief,
" As meeting tides and currents smooth our frith.

" Lady R. To such a cause the human mind oft owes
"Its transient calm, a calm I envy not."

LordR. Sure thou art not the daughter of Sir MALCOLM:

Strong was his rage, eternal his resentment:
For when thy brother fell, he fmil'd to hear
That DOUGLAs' son in the fame field was slain.

Lady R. Oh.! rake not up the afles of my fathers:

Implacable resentment was their crime,
And grievous has the expiation been.

Contending

Contending with the DOUGLAS, gallant lives
Of either house were loft; my ancestors
Compell'd, at last, to leave their ancient feat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
No heir is left. Had they not been so flern,
I had not been the last of all my race.

Lord R. Thy grief wrests to its purposes my words.

I never ak'd of thee that ardent love,
Which in the breasts of fancy's children burns.
Decent affctlion and complacent kindness
Were all I wisi'd for; but I wihf'd in vain.
Hence with the less regret my eyes behold
The florn of war that gathers o'er this land
If I should perish by the Danifl sword,
MATILDA would not flied one tear the more.

Laty3j R. T'-Ju do'st not think so: woeful as I am,.

I love thy merit, and esteem thy virtues.
But whither go'll thou now ?

Lord R. Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on the tip-toe stands
Of expe&ation, and impatient afis
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are landed.

Laly R. 0, may adverse winds,

Far from the coast of Scotland, drive their fleet
And every soldier of both hosts return
In'peace and safety to his pleasant home !

Lord R. Thou fpeak'it a woman's, hear a warrior's

wih :

Right from their native land, the flormy north,
May the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
Immoveable in Caledonia's strand !
Then shall our foes repent their bold invasion,

Anid

And roving armies flun the fatal fliore.

( Lady R. War I detest: but war with foreign foes,

" Whose manners, language, and whose looks are strange,
"Is not so horrid, nor to me so hateful,
" As that which with our neighbours oft we wage.
" A river here, there an ideal line,
"By fancy drawn, divides the sifter kingdoms.

On each fide dwells a people similar,
As twins are to each other; valiant both;
" Both for their valour famous thro' the world.
" Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
"And, if they must have war, wage difiant war,
" But with each other fight in cruel conffit.
" Gallant in strife, and noble in their ire,
" The battle is their pastime. They go forth
" Gay in the morning, as to summer sport;
" When ev'ning comes, the glory of the morn,
" The youthful warrior is a clod of clay.
" Thus fall the prime of either hapless land;
" And such the fruit of Scotch and Englifll wars.

" Lord R. I'llhear no more: this melody would make

" A soldier. drop his sword, and doff his arms,
" Sit down and weep the conquests he has made;
" Yea, (lile a monk), sing reft and peace in heav'n
" To fouls of warriors in his battles slain."
Lady, farewell: I leave thee not alone ;
Yonder comes one lwhvfe love makes duty'light. Exit.

Enter ANNA.

Anna. Forgive the-rafhnefs of your ANNA'S love:

Urg'd by affecion, I have thus prefum'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts;
And warn you of the hours that you negle&,

And

And lose in sadness.

Lady R. So to lose my hours
Is all the use I wish to make of time.

Anna. To blame thee, Lady, suits not with my slate:

But sure I am, since death firfl prey'd on man,
Never did fitler thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you hMd loft,
In early youth, the husband of your heart ?

LadyR. Oh!

Anna. Have I diftrefs'd you with officious love,

And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate ?
Forgive me, Lady: humble tho' I am,
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune:
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

Lady R. What power directed thy unconscious tongue
To speak as thou haft done ? to name-

Anna. I know not:

But since my words have made my mistress tremble,
a will speak so no more; but silent mix
My tears with her's.

Lady R. No, thou shalt not be silent,

I'll trust thy faithful love, and thou shalt be
Henceforth th' inlructed partner of my woes.
But what avails it ? Can thy fieble pity
Roll back the flood of never-ebbing time ?
Compel the earth and ocean tb give up -
Their dead alive ?

Anna. What means my noble mistress?

LadyR. Didft thou not aft what had my sorrows been

If I in early youth had loft a husband ?-
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'd,
Mangl'd with wounds, the hulband of my youth;

And

And in some cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his.

Aina. O ! Lady, mofl rcver'd !

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

Land R. Alas ! an ancient feud.

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother should in battle save
The life of DOUGLAS' son, our house's foe:
''The youthful warriors vow'd eternal friendildip.
To fee the vaunted sifter of his friend
Impatient, DOUGLAS to Balarmo came,
Under a borrow'd namc.--My heart he gain'd
Nor did I long refute the hand he begg'd:
MT brother's prefer.ce authoris'd our marriage.
'hre eeeeks, lthree little weeks, with wings of down.
Had o'er us flown, wvhen my lov'd Lord was call'd
To fight his father's battles; and with him,
In spite of all my tears, did MALCOLMA go.
Scarce were they gone, when my fern Sire was to'd
That the false firanger was Lord DOUGLAS' foil.
Frantic with rage, the Baron drew his fivord,
And queftion'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
Kneeling beneath his sword, fault'ring I took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'cr would
Wed one of DoUGLAs' name. Sincerity!
Thou firlt of virtues, let no mortal leave i
Thy onward path, altho' the earth flould gape,
And from the gulph of hell deftruclion cry,~
To take diflimulation's winding way.

Anna. Alas ! how few of woman's fearful kind
Durst own a truth so hardy !

B Lady

Lady R. The first truth

Is easiest to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale.-
In a few days the dreadful tidings came, -
That DOUGLAS and my brbther both,were slain.
My lord ! my life ! my husband !--Mighty God !
What had I done to merit such afliEtion ?

Anna. My dearest Lady ! many a tale of tears

I've liltcn'd to; but never did I hear
A tale so fad as this.

Lady R. In the first days

Of my diltraAing grief, I found myfel--
As women wifli to be who love their Lords.
But who durst tell my father? The good priest
Who join'd our hands, my brother's antient tutor,
With his lov'd MALCOLM, in the battle fell:
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till time fliould make my father's fortune mine.
That very night cn which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confident I had,
Set out with him to reach her sifter's house:
But nurse, nor infant, have I ever seen,
Or heard of, ANNA, since that fatal hour.
" My murder'd child ! -had thy fond mother sear'd
" The lots of thee, fl:e had loud fame defy'd,
" Defpis'd her father's rage, her father's grief,
-" And wander'd with thee thro' the scorning world."

,Ana. Not feeri nor heard of! then perhaps he lives.
Lady R. No. It was dark December: wind and rain

Had beat all night. Across the Carron lay
The deftin'd road; and in its fwclling flood
.My faithful servant perifh'd with my child.

it*~" .

"0 hapless son ! of a moo2 hap'efs fire !-
"1 B3t they are both at re2 t and I alone

D' Dvil in this world of woe, con:lemn'd to walk,

" Like a uiit-troub!'d g;ort, my painful rounds :'
Nor has dcfpitl'"l !late permitted me
The con.;o. t or a solitary sorrow.
Thlo' de.:d :: love, I was compell'd to wed
RANDOLPI1, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms;
An!d RANDOLPm now possesses the domains,
That by Sir MALCOLM'S death on me devolv'd;
Domains, that should to DOUcLAS' son have giv'n
A Baron's title, and a Baron's power.
i Such were my soothing thoughts, while I bewail'd
" The flaughter'd father of a fon'unborn.
" And when that son came, like a ray from heav'n,
" Which ffines and disappears; alas! my child!
" Haw long did thy fond mother grasp the hope

Of having thee, she knew not how, reftor'd.
" Year after year hath worn her hope away;
" But left still undiminifil'd her desire;

" Anna. The hand, that spins th' uneven thread of life,.
" MIay smooth the length that's yet to come of your's.

" Lady R. Not in this world: I have confider'd well
"Its various evils, and on whom they fall.
" Alas.! how oft does goodness wound itself,
" And fwveet affelion prove the spring of woe !"
0 ! had I died when my lov'd hufland fell!
Had some good angel op'd to me the book
Of providence, and let me read my life,
M]y heart had broke, whern I beheld the fum
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

Anna. That God, whose miniiters good angels are,
Hath shut the book in mercy to mankind.

L.*t B 2 But. .

But we muit leave this theme: GLENALVbN comes:
I aw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitherwards he slowly flalks his way.

Lady R. I will avoid him. An ungracious person
is doubly irkforne in an hour like this.

Sinna. Why fpea!s my lady thus of RANDOLPtH'S heir ?
Lady R. Because he's not the heir of RANDOLPH'S

virtues.

Subtle and flrewd, he offers to mankind
An artificial image of himself:
And he with ease can vary to the tatle
Of different men, its features. " Self-deny'd,
" And master of his appetites he teems::
" But his fierce nature, like a fox chaini'd up,
" Watches to seize unseen the wifh'd-for prey.'
" Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
" As in GLENALVON'S unrelenting mind."
Yet is he brave and politic in war,
And flands aloft in these unruly times.
Why I describe him thus I'll tell'hereafter '*
Stay and detain him till I reach the caIle.

Exit. Lady R.xNDOLPHe

Anna. 0 happiness ' where art thou to be found ?

I fee thou dwelleft not with birth and beauty,
Tho' grac'd with grandeur, and in wealth array'd:
Nor dost thou, it would seem, with virtue dwell;
Else had this gentle Lady mifs'd thee not.

Enter GLENALVON.

Glen. What dost thou muse on, meditating maid ?

,ike some entranc'd and visionary fecr,
On earth thou ftand'ft, thy thoughts ascend to heaven.

Anna. Wou'd that I were, e'en as thou fay-'t, a seer,

To

To have my doubts by heav'nly vision clear' !

Glen. What dost thou doubt of ? what has thou to do

With subje&s intricate ? thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be queflion'd: think of these good gifts;
And then thy contemplations will be pleasing.

Anna. Let women view yon monument of woe,

Then boast of beauty: who so fair as fle ?
But I mufi follow : this revolving day
A/wakes' the memory of her antient woes.

[Exit A.NNA..

GLENAL VON soluS.

So !-Lady RANDOLPHI fluns me; by and bye
I'll woo her as the lion wooes his brides.
TlI deed's a-dcing now, that makes me Lord
Of there rich vallies, and a chief of power.
The'feafon is most apt :my founding feps
Will not be heard amidst the din of arms.
R'ANDOLPH has liv'd too long: his better fate
Hai' the ascendant once, and kept me down:
When I had seiz'd the Dame, by chance he came,
Refcu'd, and had the Lady for his labour;
I 'fcap'd. unknown: " a (lender consolation !
" Heaven is my witness that I do not love

To fowin peril, and let others reap

"The jocund harvcil." Yet I am not safe:
By love, or something like it, flung, inflam'd,.
Mladly I blabb'd my palion to his wife,
Andl fle has. threaten'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will I do not knowv:
But well I know the Baron's wrath is deadly.
I will not live in fear : the man I dread
Is as a Dane to me ; ay, and the man -
Who stands betwixt me and my chief desire. -

B3 ]o

No bar but he ; she has no kinsman near ;
No brother in his fifler's quarrel bold ;
And for the righteous cause, a stranger's cause,
I know no chief that will defy GLENALVON. [Exit.

End of the FIRST ACT.

A C T I.

SCENE, A Court, &c. as before.
Enter SERVANTS and a STRANGER at one door, and Ladl

RANDOLPH and ANNA at another.
Lady R. WT HAT means this clamour ? Stranger,

speak secure ;

Haft thoubeen wrong'd ? have these rude men prefum'd
To vex the weary traveller on his way ?

I. Ser. By us no firanger ever fuffer'd wrong:

This man with outcry wild has call'd us forth ;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
Enter Lord RANDOLPH and a YOUNG MAN, with their

floords drawn and bloody.
Lady R. Not vain the Stranger's fears ! how fares

my Lord?
Lord R. That it fares well, thanks to this gallant

youth,

Whose valour fav'd me from a wretched death !
As down the winding dale I walk'd alone,
At the cross way four armed men attack'd me:
Rovers, I judge, from the licentious camp,

Who

Who would have quickly laid Lord RANDOLPH low,
IHad not this brave and generous Stranger come,
Like my good angel, in the hour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my foes his own.
They turn'd upon him: but his. atlive arm
Struck to the ground, from whence they rose no more,.
The fiercest two ; the others fled amain,
And left him mailer of the bloody field.
Speak, Lady RANDOLPH: upon Beauty's tongue
Dwell accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
Speak, noble Dame, and thank him for thy Lord.

Lanty R. My Lord, I cannot speak what now I feel.

My heart o'erflows with gratitude'to heav'n, -
And to this noble youth, 'who, all unknowa
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but humanely brave
Fought on your fide, againfi such fearful odds.
Have you yet learn'd of him whom we should thank?
Whom call the saviour of Lord RANDOLPH'S life ?

Lord R. I asi'd that question, and he anfver'd not:
But I mult know who my deliverer is. (to the Stranger.)

SIran. A low-born man, of parentage obscure,..

Who nought can boast but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Lord R. Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobl'd.

By the great King of kings ! thou art ordain'd
And flamp'd a hero by the sovereign hand
Of Nature! blush not, flower of mode ty
As weli as valour, to declare thy birth.

Siran. My name is NO.vAL : on the Grampian'hills

My father feeds his flocks; a frugal fwiain,
Whose constant cares were to encreafe his store,
And keep his only son, ryfelf, at home,

For

For I had heard of battles, and I long'd'
To follow to the field some warlike Lord:
And heaven soon granted what my Sire deny'd.
This moon which rose last night,-round as my shield;
Had not yet fill'd her horns, when, by her light,
A band of fierce Barbarians, from the hills,
Rufi'd like a torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The shepherds fled
For safety and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'd about the enemy, and mark'd
The road he took, then hafted to my friends,
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
I met advancing. The pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook the fpoil-encumber'd foe.
We fought and conquer'd. Ere a sword was drawrr,.
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Returning home in triumph, I difdain'd
The shepherd's slothful life; and having heard
That our good King had fummon'd his bold Peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron fide,
I left my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to conduE my ileps:-
Yon trembling coward, who forsook his master;
Journeying with this intent, I patl these towers,
And, heaven-direced, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

Lord R. He is as wife as brave. Was ever tale-

With such a gallant modefly rehears'd ?
My brave deliverer ! thou ihalt enter now
A nobler lift, and in a monarch's fight
Contend witL princes for the prize of fame..

I will present thee to our Scottilf King,
Whose valiant spirit ever valour loved.
Ha ! my MATILDA ! wherefore itarts that tear ?

Lady R. I cannot fay: for various affe&ions,.

And strangely mingled, in my bosom swell;
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
I joy that thou art safe; and I admire
Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy fafcty;
Yea, as my mind predits, with thine his own.
Obscure and friendless, he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, and with his sword
To gain diftinicon which his birth deny'd.
In this attempt unknown he might have perifl'd,
And gain'd, with all his valour, but oblivion.
NoW, grac'd -by thee, his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hone
He flands conspicuous; fame and great renown:
Are brought within the compass of his sword.
On this my mind refleted, whilst you spoke,
And blefs'd the wonder-working Lord of heaven.

Lord R. Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts !

My deeds lmall follow where thou poilnt'll the way..
Next to myself, and equal to GLENALVON,
In honour and command shall NORvAL be.

Nor. I know not how to thank you. Rude I am

In speech and manners: never till this hour
Stood I in fhch a presence; yet, my Lord,
There's something in my breadl which makes me bold
To fay, that NOR\vALiie'er will fliame thy. favour.

Lady R. I will be fwiorn thou wilt not. 'Thou shalt be
My knight; and ever, as.thou didft to-day,
With happy valour guard the life of RANDOLa2.

*

- '
* Lord

Lord R. Well haft thou spoke. Let me forbid reply.

[To NORVAL.

We are thy debtors still; thy high desert
O'ertops our gratitude. 1 must proceed,
As was at first intended, to the camp.
Some of my train, I fee, are speeding hither,
Impatient, doubtless, of their Lord's delay.
Go with me, NL'RVAL, and thine eyes liall fee
The chosen warriors of thy native land,
Who languifl for the fight, and beat the air
With branditi'd fwiords.

No;-. Let us be gone, my Lord.
Lord R. [To Lad, RANDOLPH.] About the time that

the declining fun

Shall his broad orbit o'er yen hills suspend,
Expe&t us to return. This night once more
Within these walls I reft; my tent I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepare the feat.
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
He in the eve of battle may resign
Himself to social pleasure; sweetest then,
When danger to a soldier's foul endears
The human joy that never may return.

Exeunt RANDOLPH and NORVALi

Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lady R. His parting words have fruck a fatal truth,

0 DOUGLAS ! DOUGLAS ! tender was the time
When we two parted, ne'er to meet again !
How many years of anguith and despair
Has hcav'n annex'd to those fivift-pafing hours
Of love and fondness " Then my bosom's flame,
" Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of fear

'"Return'd,

"Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd."

Anna. May gracious heav'n pour the sweet balm of

peace

Into the wounds that felter in your breat !
For earthly consolation cannot cure them.

Lady R. One only cure can heav'n itself bestow;-

A grave-that bed in which the weary reft.
Wretch that I am ! Alas ! why am I to ?
At every happy parent I repine !
How blest the mother of yon gallant NORVAL !
She for a living husband bore her. pains,
And heard him bless her when a man was born:
She nurs'd her fniling infant on her breast;
Tended the child, and rear'd the pleaing boy:
She, with affetion's triumph, saw the youth
In grace and comeliness surpass his peers:
Whilit I to a dead husband bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.

mann. Alas ! alas ! why will you thus re.ume

Your grief afrefli ? I thought that gallant youth
Would for a while have won you from your woe.
On him intent you gazed, with a look
Much more delighted, than your pensive eye
Has deign'd on other objecs to befiow.

Lady R. Delighted,fay'Rf thou ? Oh! even there mine

eye

Found fuel for my life-confuming sorrow.
I thought, that had the son of DoUGLAs liv'd,
He might have been like this young gallant flranger,
And p air'd with him in features and in shape.
In ali endowments, as in years, I deem,
liv boy with blooming NORvAL miglt have number'd.
'Whilt thlus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell

On

On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness
For this young flrangei, wand'ring from his home,
And like an orphan cast upon my care.
I will protect thee, (said I to myself)
'With all-my power, and grace with all my favour.

Anna. Sure heav'n will bless so generous a resolve.

You must, my noble Dame, exert your power:
You must awake: devices will be fram'd,
And arrows pointed at the breaf of NORVAL.

Lad'l R. GLENALVON'S faife and crafty lhead willwork

Against a rival in his kinsman's love,
If I deter him not : I only can.
Bold aslhe is, GLENALVON will beware
How he pulls down the fabric that I raise.
I'll be the artist of young NoRvAL's fortune.
'" Tis pleaing to admire ! most apt was I
" To this affeAion in my better days;
" Tho' now I seem to you shrunk up, retir'd
" Within the narrow compass of my woe.
" Have you not sometimes seen an early flower
" Open its bud, and spread its silken leaves,
" To catch sweet airs, and odours to bestow;
"Then, by the keen blast nipt, pull in its leaves,
" And, tho' illl living, die to scent and beauty ?
" Emblem of me: affliction, like a form,
" Hath kill'd the forward blossom of my heart."

Enter GtENALVON.

Glen. Where is my dearefl kinsman, noble RANDOLPI1?
LadJ R. Have you not heard, GLENALVON, of the

base-

Glen. I have : and thl:t the villains may not 'scape,
With a frong band I have begirt the wood.

if

If they lurk there, alive they fllall be taken,
And torture force from them th' important secret,
Wrhether some foe of RANDOLPH hir'd their swords,
Or if-

Lady R. That care becomes a kiinman's love.
I have a counsel for GLENALVON'S ear. [Exit Ai;,:A.

G,en. To him your counsels always are commands.
andy R. I have not found so: thou art known to me.
Gien. Known !
Lady R. And most certain is my cause of knowledge.
Glen. What do you know ? By the most bleiffd cross,

You much amaze me. No created being,
Yourself except, durl thus accost GLENALVON.

Lady R. Is guilt so bold ? and dost thou make a merit

Of thy pretended meekness ? This to me,
Who, with a gcntlenefs which duty blames,
HIave hitherto conceal'd, what, if divulg'd,
Would make thee nothing; or, what's worse than that,
Ain outcast beggar, and unpitied too:
For mortals shudder at a crime like thine.

Glen. Thy virtue awes me. First of womankind !

Permit me yet to fay, that the fond man
Whom love transports beyond ftriE virtue's bounds,
If he is brought by love to misery,
in fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpity'd cannot be. Pity's the alms
Which on such beggars freely is beftow'd:
For mortals know that love is flill their lord,
And o'er their vain resolves advances still:
" As fire, when kindled by our fliepherds, moves
" Thro' the dry heath before,the'fanning wind."

Lady R. Refcrve there accents for some (oher ear.
To love's apology I liften not.

C Mark

.Mark thou my words; for it is meet.thou fhould't.
His brave deliv'rer RANDOLPH here retains.
Perhaps his presence may not-pleafe thee well;
But, at thy peril, pradife ought againfi him:
Let not thy jealousy attempt to flake
And loosen the. good root he has in RANDOLPH,
Whose favourites I know thou haft supplanted.
Thou look'lt at me, as if-thou fain would'st pry
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks avay.
The friendless Stranger my protedion claims:
.His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit.

Mlanel GLENALVON.

'Child that I was, to flart at my own.lhadow,
And be the flallow fool of coward conscience !
I am not what I have been; what I should be.
The darts of destiny have almost pierc'd
.lIy marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I Ihould conclude there was an arm above,
That fought against me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch myself, the subtle snare I set.
Why, rape and murder are not simple means!
.Th' imperfect rape to RANDOLPH gave a fpoufc;
And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fun from me;
And, worst of all, a rival. Burning hell !
This were thy centre, if I thought fle lov'd himn
'Tis certain fime conteinns me; nay, commands me, .
And waves the flag of.her displeasure o'er me,
;In his blealf. And {hall I thus be brav'd

'.*;.' Curb'i.

Curb'd, as fhe'calls it, y dame chastity' ' *- '
Infernal fiends, if any'fiends'there are
IViore fierce than hate ''ambition, and revenge, '
Rife up, and fill imy bofom'wiith yo'ur'fires :

· ''
And policy remorseless ! "'Chance may spoil' '

A single aim; but perfeveraice must

" Prosper at last. For chance and fate are words :
" Perfiflive wisdom is the fate of man."
Darkly a projec peers upon my niind,
" Like the red mo6on-when'rifi'ig in the east,

Crofs'd and'divided by fralige.colour'd ilouds.i'

I'll seek the slave hio came with'NdonvAL hither,
And for his cowardice wassfpurned from him.
I've known a follower's rankled bosom breed
Venom most fatal to his heedless Lord. [Exit.-

End of tbe SECOND ACT.-

A-C T Im.
SCENE;, Court, &c. as before.

Enter ANNA.
A'nna. HY vasals, Grief! great Nature's order.

break,

And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour.
Whilst Lady RANDOLP1 sleeps, I will walk.fortil
And taste the air that breathes on yonder bank' :
Sweet may her slumbers be ! Ye ministers -"''
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,.
Angels and seraphs who delight in goodness,-

C 2 Forfakc';

Forsake your fies,. and to her couch descend !":
There from ler fancy chace those difmnal forms
Tlat haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
With images celestial, ;lch as. please
The blefs'd above upon their golden beds.

Enter SERVANT.

S&rv. One of the vile affiains is fecur'1l.

We found the villain lurking in the wood:
With dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not
His firfl essay: these jewels were conceal'd
In the molt secret places of his garment;
Belike the spoils of some that he has murder'd.

/lAna. Let me look on them. Ha here is a heart,

The chosen crest of DoUGLAs' valiant name
These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch.

[Exzt. ANNA.

Enter Servan:s with a Prfoner.

Pr.f. I know no more than does the child unborn
Of what you charge me with.

i Ser. You.fay so, Sir !

But torture soon shall make you speak the truth.
Bchold, the Lady of Lord RANDOLPH comes:
Preparefyourfclf to meet. her jufl revenge.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

lnna. Summon your utmof fortitude, before

You speak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
Are now at flake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may fly.

Lasy R. Thou s(alt behold me, with a desperate heart,

IIar

Hear how my infant p.erifh'd.. See, he kneels.

[The Pridner'kneels.
Prif. Heav'n bless that countenance fo'fweet and,

mild !

A judge like thee makes innocence more bold.-
0 save me, Lady ! from these cruel men,
Who have attack'd and seiz'd me ;. who accuse
Me of intended murder. As I hope
For mercy at the judgment-feat of God,
The tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
Is not more innocent than I of murder.

Lady R. Of this man's-guilt what proof can ye pro -

duce ?

i- Sero. We found him lurking in the hollow glen.

When view'd and call'd upon, amaz'd he fled.
We overtook him, and enquir'd from whence
And what he was: he said he came from far,
And was upon hisjourney to the:camp.;
Not fatisfy'd with this, we fearch'd his clothes,..
And found these jewels, .whose. rich value plead.
iofr powerfully againil him. Hard he seems,,
And old in villainy.- Permit us try,
His stubbornness againtl the torture's force.

Prif ,0,gentle Lady! by your Lord's dear life,'

Which these weak hands, .I. swear, did neer assail.
And by your children's welfare, spare my age !
Let not the iron tear my:antient joints,-
And my grey hairs bring.to the grave with'pain.

Lady R. Account for these thine ownthey.cannotbe:.

For these, I fay: be Itedfaft to the truth .
Detecled.falfliood is most certain death..

[ANNA removes the Servants and returns.
-Pri/ Alas ! I'm fore beset ! let never-man,

C 3 Fopr

Eternal justice is in this most just !
I, guiltless now, muft:former guilt.reveal.

Lady R. 0! ANNA, hear !-Once more I charge thee

speak

The truth dire&: for there to me foretel
And certify apart of thy narrations
With which, if the remainder tallies not,
An inltant and a dreadful death abides thee,

Pri/ Then, thus adjur'd} I'll speak to you as just

As if you were the minifler of heaven,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men.

Some eighteen years ago, I rented land

Of brave Sir 'MALCOLI, ' then BALARIO'S Lord
But falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
A11 that I had, and then turn'd me and mine,
(Four helpless infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel by the river's fide
Receiv'd us: there hard labour, and the f&ill
In fifiing, which was formerly my sport,
Supported life. Whiltl thus we poorly liv'd,
One fiormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red'came the river'down, and loud and oft
The angry spirit of the water fhriek'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
Of one in jeopardy. I rose, and ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool,
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach whatever floating thing the stream
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd; the person lult:
But, looking fad and earneLi on the wvaters,

By

By the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and.round,
A balket: soon I drew'it.to the bank,
And nefilcd curious there an infant lay.

Ladys R. Was he alive? - .

fl' Prif He. was.

Lady R.. Inhulmani that thoutart!
How could'st thou kill what waves and tempeils spar'd ?

Prif. I was not so inhuman..

Lady R. Didft thou not ?

Anna. My noble miltrefs, you are mov'd too much;

This man has not the aspet of stern murder;
Let him go on, and you, I hope, will hear
Good tidings of your kinfinan's long loft child.

Prif. The needy man who has knowis better days,

One whom diffrefs has spited at the world,
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds, as make the prosperous men
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them.
And such a man was I; a man declin'd,
Who saw no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have touchld that infant with a hand of harm.

Ladj R. Ha! dost thou fay so ? Then perhaps helives!.
Pry. Not many days ago he was alive.
Lady R. 0 God of heav'n! Did he then die so lately ?:
Prf I did not fay he died; I hope he lives.

Not many days ago these eyes beheld
Him, flourifliing in youth, and health, and beauty;.K-', .

Lady R. Where is he now . , c-

i/' Prf. Alas ! I know not where.
LadyR. Oh, fate ! I fear thee fill. Thou riddler,

speak
Dire, and clear else I will search thy foul' ; . :

lmnnWa,

Agna. " Permit me, ever honour'd! Keen impatience,

" Tho' hard to be reftrain'd, defeats itself."-
Pursue thy story with a faithful tongue,
To the last hour that thou didft keep the child.

Pri/ Fear not my faith, tho' I must speak my Ihame..

MWithin the cradle where the infant lay
Was ftow'd a mighty store of gold and jewels 3
Tempted by which, we did resolve to hide,..
From all the world, this wonderful event,
And like a peasant breed the noble child.
That none might mark the change of our estate,
We left the country, travell'd to the North,
Bought flocks and herds, and gradually brought forthi
Our secret wealth. But God's all-feeing eye:
Beheld our avarice, and smote us fore.
For one by one all our own children died,
And he, the Stranger, sole remain'd.the heir
Of what indeed was his. Fain then would I,
Who with a father's f6ndnefs lov'd the boy,.
Have trusted him, .now in the dawn of youth,
With his own secret: but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never.would content,
Meanwhile the. Crippling grew in years and beauty;:
And, as we oft obferv'd, he bore himself,
Notas the offspring of our cottage blood ;
For nature will.break out: mild with the mild,.
But with the forward he was fierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms...
I set myiflf against his warlike bent ;
-But all in vain; for when a desperate band
Of robbers from the savage mountains carme-'

Lady R. Eternal Providence ! What is thy name ?
'Pr,' My name.is NoXVAL; and my name he bears.:

Lady

La4d R. 'Tishie; 'tis il' himself!' It is my soli!

0, sovereign mercy! 'Twas mych'ldI saw !-
No wonder, ANNA,- that ny bofoni burhind. ' '

Anrna. Juit-are your transports: " neer was woman's

heart

"Prov'd with such fierce extremes; High-fated Dame !'.
But yet remember that'you are beheld :
By servile eyes; your gestures may be seen
Impaflion'd firange-; perhaps your words o'erheard.

Lady R. Welldoft'thdio ddunfel; ANNA : heaven

bestow ' -' ·' - .

.-
On me that wifdon 'vhich' my fiate requxies .!

" Anna. The moments of deliberatio'f'pafs;

" And soon you rust resolve. This useful man
"Must be difmifs'd in safety, ere my Lord
" Shall with his brave deliverer return."

Prif If I, amidfftaftoniflimeitahd-fear, -

"i-

Have of your words'and gestures :rightly judg'd,' '
Thou art the daughter of-my ancient master --
The child I refcu'd fromr the flood is thine.'-,

Lady R. With thee diffimulatibn now were vain.
I am indeed the dauglhter of Sii'MALCOLM; ;
The child thou refcu'dft from the flood is mine.

PriJ. Blefs'd be the hour that made me a poor man!
MIy poverty hath fav'd my mafler's-houfe&!- ' '-.

Lady R. Thy words furprize me: sure thou dost n6t

feign !

The tear flanids in thine eye: such love from thee
Sir MALCOLM,'S house deferv'd not ; if aright
Thou told'fP the ftory-of thy own distress, -

Prf. Sir MAL.COLMr of our Barons was the flower;

The faftefl friend, the best, the kindest maiter:'
Pc.t ah ! he knew not of my fad estate.

After

After that lattle, where his gallant' fn, ' '

-

Your own brave brother, fell, the.good o.ld Lord '
Grew desperate and recklefs:of'the world; '
And never,' as he erlt was wonit, went forth-
To overlook the condud of his servants.
By. them I-was thrust out, and'them I blame
May heav'n so judge me.as I-jtdg'd.nmy mailer !
And God so love me asgI love his-race-!

Lady R. His race (hall yet reward.thee; On thy faith

Depends the fate-of thy lbv'd maller's'houfe.
Rememb'retl thou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the cliffs of Carron'?

P-rf. I remember
The cottage of thecliffs.

· :'. LadyR. '; Is'that I.mean:

There dwells a man of: enerable'age,
Who in my-fathers service spent his youth :'
Tell him I fent.thee, and with him remain,
Till I fhall.call upon thee to declare,
Before the King and Noblts,. what thou now
To me haft told.. No more but this, and thou:
Shalt live in honour all thy future days;
Thy son so long fliall callthee father fill,
And all the land (hall bless the man who fav'd
The ofn of DOUGLAS, and Sir MALCOL.M'S heir.
Remember well niy words; if thou fhould'fl meet.
Himn:wliom tldu.call'ft thy son, fill call him so '
And mention nothing of his nobler father.

Prif. Fear not that- I shall mar so fair an harvest,.

By putting in my fickle ere 'tis ripe.
Why did I leave my home and ancient dame ?
To find the youth, to tell him all I knew,

And-

And make him Wcar these jewels in his arms,
Which might, .I thought, be .challeng'di and so bring
To light the secret of his noble birth, . .

[Lady RANDOLPH goes towards.the Servanrts.

Lady R. This. manis not .th' affallin you fuflpeEed, -.'

Tho' chance combin'd some likelihoods againifthim. i.
lie is the faithful bearer.of the jewels. .
To their right owner,; whom in.hafte he seeks.
Tis meet.that you Iphuld put him on. his way, .
Since your miitaken zeal hath dragg'd.him.hither;

: [Exeunt Stranger and Servoantz,

Lady RANDOLPH and ANnA.
Lady R. My faithful ANSA !. dost thou fliare my

joy ?

1 know thou dost. Unparallell'd event !.
Reachingfrorm heav'n to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings:to me my son!
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father,
Accept a widow's and.a mother's thanks
For such a gift! What does my ANiNA think
Of the young.eagIet.of a valiant nest? .
How soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his fate had thrownhim,
And tower'd up to the region of his-fire !

Anna. How fondly did your eyes.devour the.boy !
IMylcfrious nature,- with the unseen cord
Of powerful inftin&t, drew you to your own. .

Ladyj R. The ready flory of his birth believ'd.:.

Suppreft my fancy quite.; .nor did he owe.
To any likenefs.my so sudden favour: .
But now I long to fee. hisface again,
E:xamnne every. feature, and find but- .... . ., -;
The ii!eamcnts;of DoutLAs,- or my oin....... .:

But

But most of all I long to let him know
VWho his true parents are, to clasp his neck,
And tell him all the story of his father.

Anna. With wary caution you mulf bear yourelf

In public, left your tenderness break forth,
And in observers stir conjecures strange.
" For, if a cherub in the fliape of wofnan
" Should walk this world, yet defamation would,
" Like a vile cur, bark at the angel's train."-
To-day the Baron Itarted at your tears.

Lady R. He did so, ANNA ! well thy Mistress krows

If the leat circumfance, mote of offence,
Should touch the Baron's eye, his fight would be
With jealousy difordcr'd. But the more
It does behove me instant to declare
The birth of DOUGLAs, and assert his rights.
This night I purpose with my son to meet,
Reveal the secret, and consult with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does now, so look'd his noble father,
Array'd in nature's ease : his mein, his speech,
Were sweetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd
'Those trivial mortals who seem always wife.
But, when the matter match'd his mighty mind,
Up rose the Hero ; on his piercing eye
Sat Observation; on each glance of thought
Decision follow'd, as the thunderbolt
Pursues the flash.

Anna. That ilemon haunts you fiill
Behold GLENALVON.

Lad.y R. Now I shun him not.

This day I brav'd him in behalf of NORVAL:
Perhaps too far: at least my nicer fears
For DOUGLAS thus interpret.

Entei

Enter GLENALVON.

Glen. Noble Dame!

Tle hov'ring Dane at last his men hath landed:
No band of pirates ; but a mighty host,
That come to fettle where tl .ir valour conquers >
To win a country, or to lore themselves.

Lady R. But whence comes this intelligence, GLEN.

ALVON ?

Glen. A nimble courier sent from yonder camp,

To haften up the chieftains of the north,
Inform'd me, as he pals, that the fierce Dane
Had on the eastern coast of Lothian landed,
" Near to that place where the fea-rock immense,
' Amazing Bass, looks o'er a fertile land.

" Lady R. Then must this western army march to j6in
" The warlike troops that guard Edina's tow'rs.

"Glen. Beyond all question. If impairing time

" Has not effac'd the image of a place,
" Once perfec in my breast, there is a wild
"Which lies' to westward of that mighty rock,
"And seems by nature formed for the camp
"Of water-wafted armies, whose chief strength
" Lies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse:

If martial skill direEts the Danihf lords,
" There inaccessible their army lies
-" To our fwift-fcow'ring horse, the bloody field
"Must man to man, and foot to foot be fought."

Lady R. How many mothers {hall bewail their sons!

How many widows weep their husbands slain!
Ye dames of Denmark ! ev'n for you I-feel,
Who,fadly fitting on the fea-beat (hore,
Long look for lords that never lhall returf;'

Glen. Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian sword

D Widow'd

Widow'd the north. The children of the fain
Come, as I hope, to meet their father's fate.
The monster war, with her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are objeas suited to GLENALVON'S foul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death:
Reproach more piercing than the pointed sword.

Lady R. I scorn thee not, but when I ought to scorn i

Nor e'er reproach, but when insulted virtue
Againlt audacious vice asserts herself.
I own thy worth, GLENALVON; none more apt
Than I to praise thine eminence in aims,
And be the echo of thy martial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty pafflon:
Go and pursue a lawful mistress, Glory.
Upon the Danifl creits redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the flield of RANDOLPH.

Glen. One infiant flay, and hear an alter'd man.

When beauty pleads for virtue, vice abafi'd
Flies its own colours, and goes o'er to virtue.
I am your convert; time will Ihew how truly:
Yet one immediate proof I mean to give.
That youth, for whom your ardent zeal to-day
Somewhat too haughtily dcfy'd your slave,
Amic.ft 'the ihock of armies I'll defend,
And turn death from him with a guardian arm.
" Sedate by ufc, my bosom maddens not
" At the tumultuous uproar of the field.".

Lady R. AMt thus, GLENALVON,, and I am thy friend:

But that's thy leait reward. Believe me, Sir,
The truly generous is the truly wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblest.

[Exii Lady RANDOLPH.

GLEN-

GLENALVON sol0is.

Amen ! and virtue is its own reward !

I think that I have hit the very tone
In which ihe loves to speak. Honey'd assent,
How pleasant art thou toathe taste of man,
And woman also ! flattery diret
Parely disgusts. They little know mankind
Who doubt its operation: 'tis my key,
A nd opes the wicket of the human heart.
How far I have succeeded now, I know not:
Yet I incline to think her flormy virtue
Is lull'd a while. 'Tis her alone I fear:
Whilst file and RANDOLPH live, and liet in faitl
And amity, uncertain is my tenure.
" Fate o'er my head suspends disgrace and death;
' By that weak hair, a peevifl female's will.
" I am not idle; but the ebbs and flows
" Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated."
That slave of NORVAL'S I have found most apt:
I fhelvd him gold, and he has palw'd his foul
To fay and swear whatever I suggest.
NORVAL, I'm told; has that alluring look,
'Twixt man and woman, which I have obferv'd
To charm the nicer and fantastic dames,
Who are, like Lady RANDOLPH, full of virtue.
In raising RANDOLPH'S jealousy, I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom errs,
Who thinks the worst he can of womankind.

[Exi.
The End of the THIRD ACT..

2D -ACT.

ACT IV.
SCENE, A Court, &c. as before.-Flourifb

of riumpets.

Enter LORD RANDOLPH attended.
Lord R. UMMON an hundred horse, by break of

S day,
To wait our pleasure at the caftle-gate.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.
Lady R. Alas! my Lord I've heard unwelcome

news;
The Danes are landed.

Lord R. Ay, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament essay
Of some young knight refolv'd to break a spear,
.And stain with hostile blood his maiden arms..
The Danes are landed: we mull beat them back,
Or live the slaves of Denmark.

Lady R. Dreadful times

Lord R. The fenceless villages are all forsaken

The trembling mothers, and their children lodg'd
In wall-girt towers id cafles; whilst the men
Retire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return.

Lady R. Immense, as fame reports, the Danifli host
Lord R. 'Were it as numerous as loud fame reports,

.An army knit like ours would pierce it thro' :
Brothers, that flrink not from each other's. fide,

And

And fond companions, fill our warlike files r
For his dear offspring, and the wife he loves,
The husband and the fearless father arm.
In vulgar breasts heroic ardour burns,
And the poor peasant mates his daring lord.

Lady R. Men's minds are temper'd, like their swords,

for war;

"Lovers of danger, on defRruction's brink
"They joy to rear ereEt their daring forms.
"Hence, early graves; hence, the lone widow's life;
"And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age."
Where is our gallant guest ?

Lord R. Down in the vale

I left him, managing a fiery steed,
Whose flubbornnefs had foil'd the firength and skill
Of every rider. But behold he comes,.
In earnest conversation with GLENALVON.

Enter NORVAL and GLENALVON.

GLESALVON ! with the lark arise; go forth,.
And lead my troops that lie in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
NORVAL, thou goeft with me. But fay, young man!'
Where didft thou learn so to difeourfe of war,
And in such terms, as I o'erheard to-day ?
War is no village science, nor its phrase
A language taught amongst the ihepherd swains.

lNor. Small is the ikill my Lord delights to praise

In him he favours.-Hear from whence it came.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the molt remote
And inaccessible by Shepherds trod '
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand;
A hermit liv'd; a melancholy man,

D 3 Who

Who was the wonder of our wand'ring swains.
Auflere and lonely, cruel to himself,
Did they report him.; the cold earth his bed,
* ater. his drink, his food the shepherd's alms.
I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
With rev'rence and with pity. Mild he'fpake,
And, entering on discourse, fich tories told
As made me oft revisit his lad cell;
For he had been a soldier in, his youth,
And fought in famous battles, when the Peers
Of Europe, by the bold GODFREDO led,
Against th' usurping Infidel difplay'd
The blessed cross, and' won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech firuck from me, the old man wou'd flake
His years away, and as his young' encounters:
Then, having fliew'd his wounds, he'd fit him down..
And all the live long day discourse of war.
To help my fancy, in the smooth green turf
He cut the figures of the marshall'd hoffs;
Defcrib'd the motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm..
For all that Saracen or Christian knew
Of war's varf art, was to this hermit known.

Lord R. Why did' this soldier in a defart hide
Those qualities that should have grac'd a camp ?

Nor. That too at lass I learn'd. Unhappy man!

Returning homewards by Messina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boift'rous captain of the sea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought:
The ifranger fell, and with his dying breath

Declarerd

Declar'd his name and lineage. Mighty Pow'r !
The soldier cried, my brother ! Oh my brother I

Lady R. His brother !

ANor;. Yes; of the fame parents born;

His only brother. They exchang'd forgiveness:
And happy, in my mind, was he that. died;
For many deaths has the survivor fuffer'd..
In the wild defart on a-rock he fits,
Or on some nameless stream's untrodden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times, alas.! not in his perfect mind,
Holds dialogues with his lov'd brother's ghost;.
And oft each night forsakes his fallen couch,
To make fad orisons for him he flew.

Lady R. To what mysterious woes are mortals born !

In this dire tragedy, were there no more
Unhappy persons ? Did the parents live ?

Nor. No; they were dead: kind heaven had clos'd

their eyes
Before their son had filed his brother's blood.

LordR. Hard is his fate; for he was not to blame L

There is a destiny in this strange world,
Which oft decrees an undcferved doom:
Let fchoolmen tell us why.-From whence these founds?:

[Trumpets at a distance.-

Enter an OFFICER.

Ofj My Lord, the trumpets of the troops of Lorn:

The valiant leader hails the noble RANDOLPH.
Lord R. Mine antient guest! does he the warriorslead ?
Has Denmark rous'd the brave old Knight to arms ?

Of. No ; worn with warfare, he resigns the sword.

His eldest hope, the valiant JOHN of LORN,
Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord

LordR. GLENALVON, go.

With hospitality's most strong request
Entreat the chief. [Exit GLENALVON,.

Of. My Lord, requests are vain.

He urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foe's approach.

Lord.R. MIay viclory fit on the warrior's plume !

Bravest of men ! his flocks and herds are safe
Remote from war's alarms his pallures lie,
By mountains inaccessible fecur'd:
Yet foremost he into the plain descends,.
Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the antient world:
Contemners they of indolence and gain i
But till, for love of glory and of arms,
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift
Against each firong antagonist the spear.
I'll go and press the hero to my breast.

[Exit RANDOLPH,

1Manent Lady RANDOLPH and NORVAL.

Ladt R. The soldier's loftiness, the pride and pomp.

Invefing awful war, NORVAL, I fee,
Transport thy youthful mind.

Nor. Ah ! should they not ?

Blest be the hour I left my father's house !
I might have been a fiepherd all my days,
And stole obscurely to a ?eafant's grave.
Now, if I live, with mighty chiefs I stand;
And, if I fall, with noble dust I lie.

Lady, R. There is a gen'rous spirit in thy breafft

That could have well fuftain'd a prouder fortune.
This way with me ; under yon spreading beech,
Unseen, unheard, by human eye or ear,

1

I will amaze thee with a wondrous tale.

Nor. Let there be danger, Lady, with thz secret,

That I may hug it to my grateful heart,
And prove my faith. Command my sword, my life:
These are the sole possessions of poor NORVAL.

Lady R. Know'it thou these gems ?

Nor. Durst I believe mine eyes,

I'd fay I knew them, and they were my father's.
Lady R. Thy father's, fay'ft thou ? Ah ! they were

thy father's !

Nor. I saw them once, and curiously enquir'd
Of both my parents, whence such splendour came ?
But I was check'd, and more could never learn.

Lady R. Then learn of me, thou art not NORVAL'S son.
Nor. Not NORVAL'S son!

Lady R. Nor of a Ihepherd sprung.
Nor. Lady, who am I then ?

Lady R. Noble thou art;
For noble was thy Sire !

Nor. I will believe-
0, tell me farther ! Say who was my father ?

Lady R. DOUGLAS !
Nor. Lord DOUGLAS, whom to day I saw!
Lady R. His younger brother.
Nor. And in yonder camp ?
Lady R. Alas!
Nor. You make me tremble -Sighs and tears !-
Lives my brave father ?

Lady R. Ah ! too brave indeed !
He fell in battle ere thyself was born.

Nor. Ah me, unhappy ! ere I saw the light ?

But does my mother live? I may conclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been forrovw.

Lady

Lady R. She lives; but waftes herlife in conliant woe,
Weeping her husband slain, her infant loft.

Nor. You that are fkill'd so well in thle fad flory

Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their destiny, now have compaflion
Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd.
0 ! tell me who, and where my mother is
Opprefs'd by a base world, perhaps she bends
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief;
And, desolate, implores of heav'n the aid
Her son fh&uld give. It is, it must be so-
Your countenance confesses that she's wretched..
0 ! tell me her condition ! Can the sword-
Who fliall resist me in a parent's cause?

Lady R. Thy virtue ends her wocs.-My son ! my son!
I am thy mother, and the wife of DOUGLAS !

[Falls upon his nec.

Nor. 0 heav'n and earth, how wondrous is my fate .
Art thou my mother ? Ever let me kneel !

Lady R. Image of DOUGLAS ! Fruit of fatal love !
All that I owe thy Sire, I pay to thee.

Nor. Refpe& and admiration still possess me,

Checking the love and fondness of a son:
Yet I was filial to my humble parents.
But did my Sire surpass the ref of men,
As-thou excelledt all of womankind ?

Lady R. Arise, my son! In me thou dolt behold.

The poor remains of beauty once admir'd:
The autumn of my days is come already;
For sorrow made my summer haste away.
Yet in my prime I equali'd not thy father:
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet sometimes
Liker the. dove's; and, as he pleas'd, he wou

All

All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

Nor. How did he fall ? Sure 'twas a bloody field
When DOUGLAS died. O ! I have much to ask.

Lady R. Hereafter thou flalt hear the lengthened tale

Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
At present this: thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder castle, and the wide domains
Which now Lord RANDOLPH, as my husband, holds.
But thou flalt not be wrond ; I have the power
To right thee fill: before the King I'll kneel,
And call Lord DoUGLAs to protec his blood.

Nor. The blood of DOUGLAS will protea itself.
Lady R. But we fliall need both friends and favour,

boy,

To wrest the lands and lordship from the gripe
Of RANDOLPH and his kinsman. Yet I think
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity.,
My life incline the virtuous to believe.

Nor. To be the son of DOUGLAS is to me

Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in the field I'll seek for fame and fortune.

Latly R. Thou dost not know what perils and injustice

Await the poor man's valour. 0, my son !
The noblest blood of all the land's abafh'd,
Having no lacquey but pale poverty.
Too long hall thou been thus attended, DOUGLAS 1
T'oo long haft thou been deem'd a peasant's child.
T'-e wanton heir of some inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee; in the youthful sports,.
Whilit thy indignant spirit fwvell'd in vain !
Such contumely thou no more flialt bear:
But how I purpose to redress thy wrongs
iThu be hereafter told. Prudence directs

That'

That we Ihould part before yon chiefs return.
Retire, and from thy rustic follower's hand
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, ditiated before
This casual opportunity arose
Of private conference. Its purport mark;
For, as I there appoint, we meet again.
Leave me, my son ! and frame thy manners till
To NoavAL's, not to noble DOUGLAS' slate.

Nor. I will remember. Where is NORVAL now ?
That good old man.

Laad R. At hand conceal'd he lies,

An useful witness. But beware, my son,
Of yon GLENALVONN; in his guilty breast
Relides a villain's shrewdness, ever prone
To false conjecture. He hath griev'd my heart.

Nor. Has he, indeed ? Then let yon false GLENAL-

VON
Beware of me.

[Exit DOUGLAS.

Manet Lady RANDOLPI;.

Lady R. There burst the fmother'd flame !

O ! thou all righteous and eternal King !
Who Father of the fatherless art call'd,
Protet my son !-Thy inspiration, Lord !
Hath fill'd his bosom with that sacred fire,
Which in the breast of his forefathers burn'd:
Set him on high, like them, that he may Ihine
The tlar and giory of his native land !
Then let the minister of death descend,
And bear my willing spirit to its place.
Yonder they come. How do bad women find
Unchanging afpeats to conceal their guilt ?

When

When I, by reason and by justice urg'a, -
Full hardly can diffei'ble with these men
In nature's pious cause ?

Enter LORD RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.

Lord R. Yon gallant chief,
Of arms enamour'd, all repose disclaims.

Ladyl R. Be not, my Lord, by his example fwtay'd:

Arrange the business of to-m'orrow now,
And, when you enter, speak of war no more.

[Exit Lady RANDOLPH.

3Manett LORD RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.
Lord R. 'Tis so, by heav'n ! her mien, her voice, her

eye,

And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

Glen. He parted from'her now: behind the mounts
Amongst the trees, I favw im glide along.

Lord R. For fad fequefter'd virtue she's renown'd.
Glen. Most true, my Lord.

Lord R. Yet this diflinguifhld Dame

invites a youth, 'th' acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight h!our.
This assignation, J[fews ie le/er.] the afraflin freed,
Her manifet assertion for the youth,
Might breed suspicion in a husband's brain,
Whose gentle consort all for love had wedded;
Much more in mine. MATILDA never lov'd me.
Let no man, after me, a woman wed,
Whose heart he knows he has not; tho' she brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry.
For let her seem, like the night's fhadowy.queen,
Cold and contemplative-He cannot trust her;

E ' She

She may, fle will, bring liame and sorrow on him;
The worst of sorrows, and the worst of ihanes !

Glen. Yield not, my Lord, to fich affliEting thoughts;

Buttlet the spirit of an husband sleep,
Till yourown senses make a sure conclusion.
Thlis billet mufll to blooming NORVAL go:
At the next turn awaits my trusty spy;

11ll give it him refitted for his maRer.
In the close thicket take your secret lland
'The moon shines bright, and your own eyes may judge
Of.their behaviour.

LordR. Thou dolt counsel well.
G/en. Permit me now to make one flight eflay.

Of all the trophies which vain mortals boast,
By wit, by valour, or by wildom won,
The firll and fairefl, in a young man's eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Successful love
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind !
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves,
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Lord R. And what avails this maxim ?

Glen. Aluch, my Lord !

Withdraw a little: I'll accost young NoavaxL,
And v:ith ironical derisive counsel
Explore his spirit. If he is no more
~Than humble NORVAL, by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as he is, he'll shrink aftoillh'd from me:
*But if lbe be the fav'rite of the 'fair,
'Lov'd by the sirs of Caledonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.
.Lord R. 'Tis Ihrewdly thought.

t'~ :u~~~Glen.,

Glen. Whenvwe grow loud, drawnear. Butletmy Lord
His riling wrath retlrain. [Exit RANDOLPI.

1Ma;et GLENALVON.

'Tis firange, by heav'n !

Tllat fle fllould.run full tilt. her fond career,
'o one so little known. She too that feem'd
Pure as the winter llream, when ice embofs'd
Whitens its course. Even I did think her chaste,
Whose charity exceeds not. Precious sex !
Whose deeds lascivious pass CGIaN.ALVO.NS thoughts !

Enter NTORvAL.

His port - love ; he's in a proper mood'
To chide the thunder, if at him it roar'd. [4f/de.
las NORVAL seen the troops ?

ior. The setting fun

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale;
And as the warriors mov'd, each polill'd helm,
Corfet, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.
The hill they. climb'd, and hatking at its top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they feem'd
An host angelic, clad in burning arms.

Glen. Thou talk'ft it well; no leader of our host.
In founds more lofty speaks of glorious war.

Yor. If I flall e'er acquire a leader's name,

Mly fpcech will be less ardent. Novelty.
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itfeif freely ; since no part is mine..
Of praise pertaining to the great in arms.-

G/en. You wrong yourself, brave Sir; your martial'

deeds
Have rank'd you with the great: but marl me, NORVAL;

E 2 Lord.

Lord RANDOLPH'S favour now exalts your.youth
Above his veterans of famous service:
Let me, who. know there soldiers, counsel you:
Give them. all honour ;. seem not to command ;
Else. thy will fcarccly brook your late-fprung power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

A'or. Sir, I have been accuftom'd all my days

To hear and speak the plain and simple truth:
And tho' I have been told that there are men
Who borrow friendlhip"s' tongue to speak their scorn,.
Yet in such language I am little fkilld.
Therefore I thank GLENALVON for his counsel,
Altho' it foundedharfliy. Why remind
Me of my birth obscure ? Why slur my power
With such contemptuous terms ?

Glen. I diid not mean-
To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

Nor. My pride !

Glen. Suppress it as you wilh to prosper:

Your pride's excessive. Yet, for RANDOLPH'S fake,.
I will not leave you to its rams diredion;
If thus you fwecll, and frown at high-born men,
Will high-born menl endure a shepherd's scorn ?:

Nor. A shepherd's scorn!

Glen. Yes, if you presume

To bend on soldiers these disdainful eyes,
As if you took the measure of their minds,
And said in secret, you're no match for me
What will become of you ?

Nor. If this were told !-[AJ/de..
Haft thou no fears for thy presumptuous self?

Glen. Ha ! Doll thou threaten me ?

Nor.. Didft thou not hear ?

Glen.

Glen. Unwillingly I did; a nobler foe
Had not been queftion'd thus. But such as thee-

Nor. Whom dost thou think me ?

Glen. NORVAL.
Nor. So I am-
And who is NORVAL in GLENALVON'S eyes ?

Glen. A peasant's son, a wand'ring beggar-boy;
At bell no more, even if he speaks the truth.

Nor. False as thou art, dost thou fufpe& my truth ?
Glen. Thy truth ! thou'rt all a lie ; and false as hell
Is the vain-glorious tale thou told'ft to RANDOLPH.

Nor. If I were chain'd, unarm'd, and bed-rid old,.

Perhaps I flould revile: But as I am,
I havc no tongue to rail. The humble NOR.VAr.-
Is of a race who firive not but with deeds.
Did I not fear to freeze thy shallow valour,
And make thee fink too soon beneath my sword,
I'd tell thee-what thou art. I know thee well.

Glen. Doll thou not know GLENALVON, born to com- -

mand
'Ten thousand slaves like thee !-

-Nor. Villain, no more:;

Draw and defend thy life. I did design
To have defy'd thee in another cause:
But heaven accelerates its vengeance on thee.
Now for my own and Lady RANDOLPH'S wrongs.

Enter LORD RANDOLPH.
Lord R. Hold, I command you both. The man that

llirs
..Iakes me his foe.

ATor. Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly founded, noble RANDOLPH.

E 3 Gle/f.

Glen. Hear him, my Lord; he's: wondrous conde.

scending
Mark the humility ofihepherd NORVAL !

Nor. Now you may fcoffin safety. [Sheaths hissword.

Lord R. Speak not thus,

Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

Nor. Nay, myygood Lord, tho' I revere you much,

My cause I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I blulh to speak; I will riot; cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words that I from him have borne..
To the liege-lord of my dear native land
I owe a fubjet's homage; but,even him.
And his high arbitration I'd reje&.
Within my bosom reigns another lord;
Honour, sole judge and umpire of itself.
If my free fpeecli offend you, noble RANDOLPH,
Revoke your favours, and let NoRVAt, go
Hence as he came, alone, but not dilhonour'd.

LordeR. Thus far I'll mediate with impartial voice:

The ancient foe of Caledonia's land
-Now waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
Suspend your purpose, till your country's arms.
Repel the bold invader: then decide
The private quarrel.

Glen. I agree to this,-
Nor. And I.

Enter SERVANT.-
Ser. The banquet wait..

Lord R. We come.

[Exit. withfervatt..
Glen. NORVAL,

Let

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of RANDOLPI.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkl'd hate,
Shall stain my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow. ;
Nor let our firife disturb the gentle Dame.

Nor. Think not so lightly, Sir, of my resentment:
When we contend again, our firife is mortal..

The end of the FOURTH ACT.

ACT V.
SCENE, Tre i Wood.

Enter DOUGLAS.

HIS is the place, the centre of the grove;.

Here Rands the oak, the monarch of the wood,.

How sweet and solemn is this mid-night scene !
The silver moon, unclouded, holds her way
Thro' skies where I could count each little liar.
The fanning weft wind scarcely stirs the leaves;
The river, ruffing o'er its pebbled bed,.
Imposes silence with a.ftilly found.
In such a place as this, at such an hour,.
If ancestry can be in ought believ'd,
Descending spirits have convers'd with man,,
And told.the secrets of the world unknown.

Enter Old NORVAL.
Old Nor. 'Tis he. But what if he should chide me

hence ?

His.

His just reproach I fear.

[DOUGLAS turns alndfees him..

Forgive, Forgive,

Canst thou forgive the man ,-the selfish man,
Who bred Sir MALCOLM'S heir a ihepherd's son ?

Doug. Kneel not to me: thou art my father till:

Thy wifh'd-for presence now completes my joy.
Welcome to me, my fortunes thou shalt ihare,
And ever honour'd with thy DOUGLAS live.

Old Nor. And dost thou call me father? O my son !

I-think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my'crime
Which in the wilderness so long conceal'd
The blofom of thy youth.

Doug. Not worse the fruit,

That in the wilderness the bloffom.blow'd...
Amongst the shepherds, in the humble cote,
I learn'd some lessons, which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; and, when my vassals bo-w,
NORVAL thall smooth the crested pride of DOUGLAS.

Old Nor. Let me but live to fee thine exaltation !

Yet grievous are my fears. 0 leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers,

Doug. Why should I leave them ?

OldNor. Lord RANDOLPH and his kinsman feekyour lifeo.
Doug. How know'ft thou that ?

Old Nor. I will inform you how.

When evening came, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
,And fondly.trod in each accutlom'd path
That to the cafile leads. Whilst thus I rang'd,

.r

I was alarm'd with unexpe&ed founds
Of earnest voices. On the persons came . -
Unseen I lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other as they talk'd, Lord RANDOLPH this,.
And that GLENALVON: fRill of you they spoke,
And of the Lady: threat'ning was their speech,.
Tho' but imperfealy my ear could hear it.
'Twas strange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;,
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.
Doug. Revenge ! for what ?

Old Nor. For being what you: are,

Sir M ILCOLM'S heir: how else have you offended ?:
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,,
And there fat muting how I belt might find.
Means to inform you of their wicked purpose.
But I could think of none: at las, perplex'd,
I issued forth, encompafing the tower
With many a weary ftep and wifhiful look.
Now Providence hath brought you.to.my fight,:
Let not your.too courageous spirit scorn
The caution which I give.

Doug. I corn it not..

My mother warn'd me of GLENALVON'S baseness -
But I will not fufpea the noble RANDOLPI.
In our encounter with the vile assassins;
I mark'd his brave demeanor:: hiim.I'll.truft.

Old Nor. I. fear you will, too far.

Doug. Here in tlis place

I wait my mother's coming: ihe ihall know
What thou hail told: her counsel I will follow:
And cautious ever are a mother's counsels.
You must depart; your presence may prevent
Our interview.,.

Old

Old Lor. My blessing reft upon thee`'

O may heav'n's hand; which fav'd thee from the wave,
And from the fivord of foes, be near thee frill;
'urning mifclhancec if ought hangs o'er thy head,
All upon mine !

[Exit Old.NoRv.L-,

Doug. He loves me like a parent

And mull not, shall not lose the son hle.loves,
Altho' his son has found a nobler father.
Eventful day ! how haft thou chang'd my slate
Once on the cold and winter-fiaded fide
Of a bleak hill mischance had' oated me,
Never to thrive, child of another foil-:
Transplanted now to the gay funny vale,
Like the green thorn of Mlay my fortune flowers..
Ye glorious flars ! high heav'n's resplendent host
To whom I oft have of my lot complain'd,
Hear and record my foul's unalter'd wlih !
Dead or alive, let me but be renown'd !
May heav'n inspire some fierce gigantic Dane,
To give a bold defiance to our host
Before he speaks it out I will accept;
Like DoUGLA.s conquer, or like DOUGLAS die.

Enter LADY RANDOLPH..
Ladty R. My fen ! I heard a voice-

Dotig. -The voice was mine.

Lad.y R. Didft thou complain aloud to nature's ear,

That thus in dufly thades, at midnight-hours,
By ficalth the mother and the son (hould meet ?

[Embracing hin.

Doug. No ; on this happy day, this better birth-day,
Miy thoughts and :-words are all of hope and joy.:

Lady

Lady R. Sad fear and melancholy fill divide

The empire of my-breaft with hope and joy.
Nowv hear what I advise.

Doug. Firfi, let me tell
What may the tenor of your counsel change.

Lady R. My heart forebodes some evil!

Doug. 'Tis not good.-

At eve, unseen by RANDOLPH and GLENALVON,
The good old NORVAL in the grove o'erheard
Their conversation : oft they mention'd me
With dreadful threat'nings; you they sometimes nam'd''
'Twas fitrange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
.And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Laly R. Defend us, gracious God ! we are betray'd;

They have found out the secret of thy birth;
It must be so. Thatis the great discovery.
Sir IMALCOLMI'S heir is-come to claim his own
And they will be.reveng'd. Perhaps-even now,
Arm'd and.prepar'd for murder, they but wait
A darker and more silent hour, to break
Into the chamber where they think thou fleep'it.
This moment, this, heav'n hath ordain'd to save thee
fly to the camp, my son!

Dotg. And leave you here ?

No: to the castle let us go together,
Call up the antient servants of your house,
Wh!o in their youth did eat your father's bread;
Then tell them loudly that I am your son.
If in the breasts of men one spark remains
Of sacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your cause will arm. I aflk but few
:To drive those spoilers from my father's house.
LadyJR. 0 Nature, Nature! whatcancheckthy force ?

lThou

Thou genuine offspring of the daring DOdULAS !
But rufli not on deftrution: save thyself,
And I am safe. To me'they mean no.harm.
Thy flay but risks thy precious life in vain.
That winding path conducts thee to the river.
Cross where thou feeft a broad and. beaten way,
Which running eaflvard leads thee to the camp.
Inflant demand admittance to Lord DOUGLAS.
Shew him these jewels which his brother wore.
"'hylook, thy voice, will make him feel the truth,
Which I by certain proof will soon confirm.

Doug. I yield me, and obey: but yet my heart

Bleeds at this parting. Something bids me flay
And guard a mother's life. Oft have I read
Of wondrous deeds by one bold arm atchiev'd.
'Our foes are two; no more: let me go forth,
And fee if any shield can guard GLENALVON.

Lady R. If thou regard'ft thy mother, or rever'ft

Thy father's mem'ry, think of this no more.
One thing I have to fay before we part;
Long wert thou loft ; and thou art found, my child,
In a most fearful season. War and battle
I have great cause to dread. Too well I fee
Which way the current of thy temper sets:
To. day I have found thee. Oh ! my long loft hope !
If thou to giddy valour giv'f the rein,
To-morrow I may lose my son for ever.
The love of thee, before thou faw'ft the light,
Suftain'd my life when thy brave father fell.
If thou shalt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this walle world ! my son, remember me !

Doug. What shall I fay ? how can I give you comfort ?
The God of battles of.my life dispose

As

As may be best for you ! for whose dear fake
I will not bear myself as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boast founds amongst martial men.
How will inglorious caution suit my claim ?
'The post of fate unlhrilnking I maintain:
;v country's foes mut witness who I am.
On tile invaders heads I'll prove my birth,
T'ill friends and foes confess the genuine firain.
If in this firife I fall, blame not your son,
W'.lo, if h lie ves not honour'd, mult not live.

Lady, R. I will not utter what my bosom feels.

Too well I love that valour which I warn.
Fareswell, my son ' my counflfs are bat vain;

[Embracing.

.And as high hcav'n lath will'd it all mult be. [Separate.'
Gaze not on me, thou wilt niiflake the patl;

\
ll oint it out again.

E'ts as they are fepariatlgs, enter from the wood

Lord RANDOLPII and GLENALVON.

Lord R. Not in her preernce.
Now- .

G/en. I'm prepar'd.

Lord R. No : I command thee stay.

I go alone: it never flall be said ...,
That I took odds to combat mortal man.
The noblest vengeance is the most complete.

[Etxt Lord 'RANDOLPI.
[GLENALVON mlakelosffel,' eps to the fame fde

of the Jage, lisiens and fpeals.

Gi'e. Demons of death come fettle on my sword,

And to a double slaughter guide it home !
The lover and the husband both must die.

F Lord

[Lord RANDOLPH behlind.thej'cene.
Lord R. Draw, villain ! draw.

Doug. Aflail me not, Lord RANDOLPH;
Not,.as thou lov'ft thyself.

[ClaaJ7ing of words,
Glen. Now is the time.

[Running out.
Enter LADY RANDOLPH at the opposite fide of the lage,

faint and brcathlefs.
Lady R. Lord RANDOLPH, hear me ; all flhall be thine

own:
But spare ! Oh spare my son !

Enter DOUGLAS with afivord in each hand.

Dong. My mother's voice !
I can protec thee still.

Ladj R. He lives, he lives:

For this, for this to heaven eternal praise !
EBut sure I saw thee fall.

Doug. It was GLENALVON.

Just ls my arm had mafter'd RANDOLPH'S sword,
The villain came behind me; but I flew him.

Lady R. Behind thee ! Ah ; thou'rt wounded ! 0

my child,
How pale thou look'ft ! And ihall I lose thee now ?

Doug. Do not despair: I feel a little faintness;
I hope it will not last.

[Leans upon hi'jword.

Lady R. There is no hope !

And we mufl part ! the hand of death is on thee !
,O my b.eloved child ! O DouGirs, DOUGLAS !

[DOUGLAS g1rowing more and moe faint.

Doag.

Doug. Too soon we part; I have iot long beenDouGLAS..
0 deitiny ! hardly thou deal'ft with me:
Clouded and hid, a firanger to myself,,
In low and poor obscurity I liv'd..

Lady R. Has heav'n preferv'd thee for an end like

this ?

Doug. 0 had I fallen as my brave fathers fell,

'Turning with great effort the tide of battle !
Like them I Ihould have fmil'd and welcom'd death.
];ut thus to perifli by a villain's hand !
Cut off from nature's and from glory's course,
Which never mortal was so fond to run.

Lady R. Hear, justice ! hear! firetch thy avenging

arm.

[DOUGLAS falls.

Doug. Unknowli I die ; no tongue shall speak of me.--

Some noble spirits, judging by themselves,
May yet conjeture what I might have prov'd,.
And think life only wanting to my fame:
But who ihall comfort thee ?. .

Lady R. befpair ! despair '

Doug. 0 had it pleas'd high heaven to leti:livc

A little while !- my eyes that gaze on thee?'
Grow dim apace ! my mother !-.0,! my mother!

* [Diers

.Enter LORD RANDOLPH and ANNA.
Lord R. Thy words,.the words of truth, have pierc'd

my heart.

i am the Rain of knighthood and of arms..
Oh! if my brave deliverer survives
The traitor's sword-

F 3 Anna,

Aw:;;a. Alas!' look there, imy Lord.

Lord R. The mother and her.fon L How curst I am.

Wxas I the cause ? No: I was not the cause.
Yon rnatchlefs villain did seduce my foul
To frantic jealous'.

Anna. My Lady lives:

The agony of grief hath but fuppreft
A vwhile her powers.

Lord R. But my deliverer's dead !

" The world did once elleem Lord RANDOLPH well;
'' Sincere of heart, for spotless honour fam'd:
L And in my early days, glory I gain'd
"Beneaththe holy banner of the cross.
"' Now paCf the noon of life, ihame comes upon me
"Reproach, and infamy, and public hate,
" Are near at hand : for all mankind will think
" Tha:t RaNDOLPH bafsly stabb'd Sir MALCOLM'S heir."

[Lady RANDOLlPH recovering.
Lady R. Where am I now ? lill in this wretched

world !

Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine.
" My youth was worn in anguifl : but youth's frength,
"With hope's afliftance, bore the brunt of sorrow ;
" And train'd me on to be the obje& now,
i" On which Omnipotence displays itself,

" Making a fecaacle, a tale of me,
1 To awe its vassal, man.

Lsrd R. 0 mifcry !

Amidst thy raging grief I muf. proclaim
MIy innocence.

Lady R. Thy innocence !

Lord R. M.y guilt
Is inrGcence compar'd with what thou think'fl it.

Lady

Lady R. Of thee I think not: what have I to do

With thee, or any thing ? My son ! my son !
My beautiful! my brave ! how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy valour! My fond heart
O'erfiow'd this day with transport, when I thought
Of growing old amidit a race of thine,
Who mighlt make up to me their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and my hultand's name:
Now all my hopes are dead !'A little while- -
Was'La wife ! a mother not so long! '

lWhat am I now ?- I know,-But I shall be

'Thlt only whilst I please ; for such a son
And such a hulband make a vwoman bold. [Ruins out.

Lord R. Follow her, ANNA: I myself would follow,
But in this rage fie must abhor my presence.

[Exit ANNA.

Enter Old NORVAL.
Old Nor. I hear the voice of woe; heaven guard my

child !

Lord R. Already is the idle gaping crowd,
The spiteful vulgar, come to gaze on RANDotPlr.
Begone.

Old Nor. I fear thee not. .I will not go.

Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplice, Lord,
With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help)
To crull down to the ground this lovely plant.
0 noblei2 youth that ever yet was born !
Sweetest and best, gentlef and bravest sprit
That ever blefs'd the world ! W\retch that I am,
Who saw that noble spirit swell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it,
Yet never wvas by all thy virtues won

'To

To do thee juflice, and reveal the secret,
Which, timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's snare ! Oh ! I am punilh'd now!
These are the hairs that fllould have firew'd the ground,
And not the locks of DOUGLAS.

[Tears his hair, and throws hi'lfef

upon the body of DOUGLAs.

Lord R. I know thee now: " thy boldncfs I forgive

" Mly crest is fallen." For thee I will appoint
A place of reft, if grief will let thee reft.
I will reward, altho' I cannot puniih.
Curst, curll GLENALVON, he efcap'd too well,
Tho' fain and baffled by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the last,
Cursing his conqueror, the felon died.

Enter ANNA.
A.nna. My Lord ! my Lord !

Lsrd R. Speak: I can hear of horror.

Anna. Horror indeed !
Lord R. MATrLDA ?

Anna. Is no more;.

She ran, One flew like light'ning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice she gain'd,
, Beneath whose low'ring top the river falls

Ingulph'd in rifted rocks: thither ihe came,
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down-

Lor R. 'Twas I ! alas ! 'twas I

That fill'd her breast with fury ; drove her down
The precipice of death ! Wretch that I am !

.Anna. 0 had you seen her last despairing lock!
Upon the brink fle flood, and cafl her eyes

Down

Down on the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heaven, seeming to fay,
Why am I forc'd to this ? she plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord R. I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the pafion of my foul.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of RANDOLPH gave.
They speak aloud, and with the voice of fate
Denounce my doom. I am refolv'd. I'll go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me turnaafide must threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy millrefs, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
With cost and pomp upon their funerals wait:
For RANDOLPH hopes he never shall return.

[Exeunt.
lINIS.

# EPILOGUE.

E PILOGUE.
AjN Epilogue I ti/e'd; but ,oot one w-ord

Our bard wili .rite. IIe vows 'tiJ noj, abfard

TWlth comic wiU to con'radic th e fra/in
Of Tragedy, and m;.ae'ycr sorrows viat..
Sadl, he faji', hat pit ,' is the be/',
Ihe nobflsl paqJton of the h:buman brcaji:
For wh-n is facred.Jlreams the heart o'erjw,
In gtljCes plr fi:re ,wih the tide of woc;
And whien itsJ waves retire, li e those of Nile,
They lerve 1ch.nd them .c.b a goden foil,

lThat the re the Ji'tues wUihout culture grow,
There the fiweet b/oojbms of afjelcion l'low.
Thef were Ler s uvordJ:--void of delu'ive art
I felt them; for he fp oke them from his heart.
Ncr wr/ill now atte:iut, w:ith vitty foll'y,
To chace awcy celi/i.al mela.choly.

THE
SIEGE of AJUILEIA.

A

TRAGEDY.

-- Me non oracula certum

Sed mors certa facit, . :.vido, forlique cadendum e :
Ioc salts ejt div:ijr Jovem.

LUCAN.

# PROLOGUE. SPOKEN BY MR GARRICK.

PROLOGUE.

SPOKEN B MR GARRICK.
BJJHEN Philip's/on led forth his warlike band,

To die, or conquer, in a dijfant land;

To fan the fire, a martial muse he chose;
From Homer'sfong a new Achilles rose!
When generous Athens her prime trophies won,
Vanlquil7'd Darius, and Darius'Jon,
Tleftlage breath'd war-thefoldier's bosom burn'd,
And fiercer to the feld each chief return'd:
'ow, when the world resounds with loud alarms,
When vigory fits plum'd on Britain's arms,
Be war our theme: the hero's glor:ious toil,
And virtuefpringing from the iron fol!
Our.fenies present afege intiory known;
Where magnanimity and valour Jhone:
If nature guides us, f the hand of truth
Draws thejlil portrait of a Roman youth,
Who, with the beJf and noblejt paions ir'd,
In the fame moment conquer'd and expir'd;
Perhaps your hearts may own the piRur'd woe,
Andfroom afonderfource your sorrows low :
Wti/ilj warm remembrance aids the poet'. firain,
And England weeps for EnglithheroesxJain.

DRAM.dIS

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

DRAMATIS PERSONVE.

MEN.

S f Consul of Rome, and r GA

' GoverRor of Aquileia, r

GAJ R

PAULUS, 7 Mr AUSTIN.
PAULUS, Sons of the Consul, Mr AUSTIN.
TITUS, 1 ' Mr HOLLAND.
VARUS, S Officersin the Army Mr DAVIES.
DUAINORIX, , of MAXIMIN, 5 Mr BRANSBY.

A A Numidian Officer in r S

GARTHA, / the Troops of]ErMIIus, A

Priet of JUPITER, Mr BURTON.
Lucius, a Freedman, Mr PACKER.
OFFICER, a Messenger, Mr AcKIA.N,

V 0 M E N.
CORNELIA, Wife to the Consul, MIrs CIBBER,

# THE SIEGE of AQUILEIA.

TIIE
SIEGE of ATUILEIA.

A CT I.
SCENE, TJe Palace Court.

Enter PAULUS and TITUS.
Paull. HIS is no time to firive for vain renown.

The fate of Rome, remember that, my

brother!
Depends on the defence of Aquileia.

Titus. PAULUS, I know.

Paul. But thou dolt not confider

Th' importance of this war. We fight not now,
As oft since Freedom fell our fathers fought,
VWhen Latian chiefs contended who flould reign,
\With half the senate lifted on each fide;
Thie viaor still was Roman, and rever'd
The gods and temples of immortal Rome.
But o'er yon.mighty host that guards our walls,
Fierce MAXil.IN commands; whether of Thraces
Or wil1 Dalmatia, so obscure his birth,
Himsel7 scarce knows; but sure Barbarian born.
This savage soldier, nurs'd in blood and war,
Wlhom military frenzy hath set up

B To

To trample on mankind, abhors a Roman;
And marks for death the noble and the brave.
His yoke, at last, th' indignant senate scorns,
The flumb'ring Genius of our country wakes,
And rouses slothful Italy to arms.
The furious tyrant from the frontier haftes,
Like a wild beast gall'd by the hunter's spear,
And, breathing vengeance, ruffies upon Rome:
Here first oppos'd, tenfold his fury burns;
Here, in the pass of fate, our father tfands,
Defies and flops the monster in his rage,
Till Rome's last legions come to give him battle.
Now, when a soldier's life is of such moment,
When delltiny hangs on a tingle day,
To fight for glory, TITUS, were a crime.

T,'us. No, PAULUS, no ! it is not fame alone

''That TITUS seeks to purcLafe from the foe
Tho' such a crime the gods and men would pardon.
I know the peril that o'er Rome impends,
And know the hated cause of all our ills,
That.army, only brave againll their country,
I 'mean to finite them, and their giant leader,
Whom nature for a gladiator form'd,
To be the sport, and riot the lord, of Rome.
'The blow once firuck, our foe must raise the siege,
Or waite his veterans in vain attacks,
And give to GORDIANUS cafy conquest.

Pacl!. Were this a frontier city far from Rome,

And you huge host compbs'd of foes remote,
German, or Parthian, I would fay to thee,
Lead on, my brother ! Shield to fiield we'd go,
And fire yon turret, or together perish.
But now, when conqueR by delay is gain'd,

When

When Aquileia guards the walls of Rome,
Dread of the great event has so possess'd me,
That, like the Persian 'oldier, I could lay

IMy arn? uplifted, patientto the call
Of cautious Duty.

Titus. And renouncing Fame ?

Oh ! PATJLUS ! you have gain'd long since the prize
That I contend for. Every martial palm
Thy sword hath won. When I, like thee, am great
In deeds of arms, like thee I may be wary.
INow to my brother I lay bare my breast:
This famous siege approaches to its end ;
Whatever end the ruling gods. ordain,
Yet no diftinguifh'd acion graces me.
I've done my duty. That I reckon nothing;
The meanei soldier has not ilSrunk. from duty;
Son of JEMILrUS, and thy brother, PAULUS !
I must do more, and by the gods I will!
lHere I have found a patl tliat leads to glory;'
Do not oppose me, elfe-we're friends no more.-
Our father comes. Speak not against my purpose,
And I shall move the Consul's noble mind'

Enter iESILIUS.-

zEmi7. Health to my sons!
Panl. and Titus. Heav'n guard our father's life !
/nEmi/ Andblefsmychildren! ha! yourlooks are keen;

Your's chiefly, TITUS ! what hath stirr'd your spirit.?
How points the enemy ? This quiet night,
In preparation past, portends. a storm..

Paul. On that attack which threats the eastern gate

The encmy.hath labour'd all night long,
RLepairing what the river's rage had ruin'd.

B 2 ZJtmil.

.iSnm/. It was a friendly flood. The river god

With all his waters guards his native walls;
On that firong quarter they can ne'er prevail.
The north I fear, where yon stupendous tower
Our works commands.

Titus. It shall not long command,
Let but the Consul grant me my desire.

.Emil. What would my son ?

Titus. Their tower is weakly guarded.

At break of day, a soldier from yon camp
Fled to my post hollow and gaunt he was;
His shrivell'd limbs scarce bore his founding arms.
Like him, he said, with toil and famine worn,
Were half the tyrant's host. Sos MAXIMIIN,
Mad with delay, and fiercer from repulse,
Reviles his soldiers, drives them to the trench
With whips and sharp reproach. This day, o'ercome
By strong necessity, he breathes a while,
And fends his legions forth to gather in
Whatever this exhausted region yields.
I saw the busy foragers, in troons,
Miarch and disperse themselves on every fide,
Like playful chidren on a summer day,
Secure and careless; for no martial band
Of late hath sallied from our guarded gates.
This is the time. Permit me, O my father !
Now to attack their ill defended lines,
.nd fire that mighty tower in which they trust.

JEm'I. Well haft thou spoke, my son! thy zeal I love,

Nor mufr thy flill and judgment pass unprais'd.
Be thus attentive still, and trust me, TITUS,
In future sieges, and in other wars,
,wist execution shall thy purpose honour.

Titus,

Titus. Ne'er shall I fee another siege like this,

Ne'er draw my sword in such a glorious cause.
Alas! my lord! check not my spring of thought,.
Nor nip the only bud it yet has borne.

emil. Riper occasions will thy valour claim.

Danger comes on; Typhceus like it comes,
Whose fabled stature every hour encreas'd.

T/ir. O ! judge not of the counsel by the weight

Of him that gives it. Would to heav'n, my lord.!
That I could now divest me of that youth
Which mars my credit. Chearfully I'd lep.
Far into age, to gain but for a day
The grave authority which'years bellow..

Pculus. What brings the brave Numidian GArTUA

hither ?

Entelr GARTHA.
Gar. Hail to the general!

IEmil. Hail, valiant GARTHA i
How has the morning past where you command ?

Gar. It has been busy. The prefuniptuoms foe

In loose diforder'd squadrons rang'd the fields.
I watch'd the time; and sudden as the blast
That rites in the defart, out we rushi'd
And fiept them from the plain. Safe in our speed
Wre urg'd the chace far as the rising ground,
And unmolested view'd the camp below.
This worthy of your notice I obfcrv'd,.
Their wond'rous tower; the work of many a day,
Stands now protected by a feeble guard.

Titus. Thanksfor thy welcometidings, noble GARTHA'!

The guardian gods of Rome bend from their ikies,
And point this ation out.. Hear me, my father!.

B 3 I;'

If ever since my birth I gave thee joy,
If e'er thou did'ft, as parents oft are wont,
Interpret large the promise of my childhood,
O hear and grant my chief and dear request !
Let me go forth :.be thismy first exploit,
To wrap in fire the tyrant's boasted tower
That Rome, who glories in the ]Emilian line,
May join your TITssS to his kindred names !

,Emil. In thee the spirit of thy fathers speaks,.

Or some superior power thy boforn fires,
Whom I oppose no more. Go, and fulfill
Thy destiny, Brave GARTHA too fnall add
His troops to thine. Prepare what else-

Titus. 'Tis done,

Defirulive instruments and ballsyf fire
Are ready at the gate.

mEmil. Farewell, my on !

If you prevail, urge not too far your fortune.
Remember still my words; that when we meet,
I may have cause to praise thy conduc then,
As now thy courage, TITUS.

TitUs. GARTIHA. come
[Exeunt TITUS and GARTHA.

Einmni. PAULUS, lead thou thy legion to the gate,

And favour their retreat. It may be needful;
But mix not in the fight; for mighty cities
Have been by such temerity furpriz'd.

Paul. Would that there was no Roman breast more

prone

To rash attempts than mine ! I wish, my lord,
That I had led, and TITUS had fuflain'd me.

Enter

Enter an OFFICER;

Of Consul of Rome ! this arrow, thus infcrib'd,

Fell on the greei flop'd bank, fail by my pof ;
And as it bears. your name, myself hare brought it.

[2EIILIUS reads. '

" In three days hence, even with the ides of June,
" The Roman army comes to your relief.
' Be sparing of your troops; protra& the siege;
" Thou art the shield of Rome and GoDrANus."

E'nil. Soldier, return, and publish to the legions
The welcome tidings of a near relief.

j0. Gladly, my lord. Much have the troops endur'd,
And with unihaken constancy they susser.

[Exit OFFICER.

Paul. Had this advice arriv'd ere TITus went,.

I think he hardly had obtain'd permiflion.
Tlo' MAXIbMIN should raise an hundred towers,
For three (hort days his fury we may scorn.

iEmil. Go, and prevent the sally. Tell thy brother

What the imperial mandate here contains.
It is the Emperor's command recalls him.

Paul. With, pleasure I obey.

[Exit PAULUS.
.EMIILIUS alone.

I must reserve.

Miy sons, my soldiers, for a nobler service,
iAnd in the battle aid the Roman arms.
The hour approaches that must geve to Rome
A legal lord,.by her own suffrage chosen,
Or fix a barb'rous master o'er mankind.
That barb'rous mailer I shall never own.
If I could stoop to drag the servile chain.

And

And live the vaflal of a vile Dalmatian,
Yet I could not conceal me in the croud
Of prostrate Romans; I that flood aloft,
And bore thro' Italy the senate's standard.
Fast by that standard will I plant my foot,
There with my boys a glorious conquest gain,
Or end at once the long ]Emiian line.

[CORNELIA appears.

Behold, the only objet that can llake
One moment my resolve ! What will become
Of thee, CORNELIA ! doom'd perhaps to live,
Like PRIAM's wretched queen,. the slave of those
By whom her sons, her hufband-country fell.

Enter CORNELIA and PRIEST.

Cor. Why is my lord. alone ? Where are my sons ?
Emiil. This day, CoRNELIA,brings us welcome tidings..
The Emperor approaches with his host.

Cor. Thanks to the gods ! But fay, where are my-

children ?

Emnil. This instant. I expeftthem to return.
Cor. From whence, £2EMILIUS ?

.Emil. From the northern gate;

TITUS had f6rm'd a brave, a great design;
But when assurance of relief arriv'd,
My PAULUS hasten'd to recal his brother.

Cor. 'Tis as I sear'd. PAULus will come too late.
The omens of the gods must be fulfill:d.

iEmil. What evil'omens has CORNELIA seen ?
Cor. 'Tis firange to tell; but, as I flumb'ring lay,

About that hour when glad Aurora springs
To chace the lagging shades, methought I was
In Rome, and full of peace the city feem'd.

Miy

My mind oblivious too had loft its care.
Serene I stepp'd along the lofty hall,
Embellifh'd with the statues of our fathers,
When suddenly an universal groan
Issued at once from every marble breast.
Aghast I gaz'd around ! when slowly down
From their high pedestals I saw descend
The murder'd GRAccHr. Hand in hand, the brothers
Stalk'd towards me. As they approach'd more near,
They were no more the GRACCIeI, but my sons
PAULUS and TITUS. At that dreadful change
I fhriek'd and wak'd. But never from my mind
The fpeaacle hall part. Their rueful eyes !
Their cheeks of flone ! the look of death and woe !
So strange a vision ne'er from fancy rose.
The reft, my lord ! this holy Pricft can tells

./Emil. Why this is nothing but a common dream;

For often when the waking mind is charg'd
With apprehension of uncertain ills,
Imagination, in the hour of reft,.
Prefcnteth wild fantastic combinations,
Tha: t have a shade and tinflre of the past:
But 'tis the weakness of the human mind
That joins the vain affembl2ge to futurity.

Pries. IMen rearon thus, my lord ! who think their

reason

Can grasp and measure all; prefumptuons thought !
Sounds more than human have been often heard,
And faapes celeflial seen, by mortal man
But yet most frequent in the silent night
Are warnings given by strange portentous dreams.
The hiftdry of mighty Rome abounds
in awful instances. Tie old republic

By

By them has oft been sivay'd, and oft preferv'd.

sEmil. But tell me, Prielt of JovE ! what do the gods
By their more certain omens now declare ?

Pri/. Consul! with the most veneraL.'e rites

That our religion knows, I have perform'd
A sacrifice to Capitolian JovE,
This pious matron present: never yet,
Since at the altars of the gods I flood,
Did I behold such omens of calamity.
Yet they were intricate, ambiguous, dark
And tho' some parts I might interpret fair,
Even these were mix'd and full of dire perplexity,
No further can I fee into the cloud
That veils the will of heav'n ; but this I fay,
And by the sceptre of the god I serve
It is the truth, some dreadful danger hangs
Q'cr thee thyself, this city, or thy race. (Shoult.)

Cor. Ha ! what means that flout ?

iEmil. It is a joyful shout.

Behold the cause: fee where that dulky smoke
Darkens the air. And now the flame burrts out;.
Their turret blazes, and my TITus conquers.

Cor. 0 heav'n and earth ! 0 son too well belov'd!
Why do there cruel omens check my joy?

Enter an OFFICER.

Of.: Consul ! your valiant son hath sir'd the tower;.

But whilst he urg'd too far the flying foe,
A band, that lay conceal'd beyond the height,
Has gain'd the plain between him and the city.

.Emil. 0 raflly brave ! whom I forewarn'd in vain.-

Retire, CORNELIA, yet he may be refcu'd.
Lucius.

Einter

Enter another OFFICER.

LZuc. The northern gate unguarded ftandsi

For whllen brave PAULUS fawvhis brother's peril,
He with his legion rufh'd upon the foe,
And furious is the fight.

Cor. Both, both are loft !

Emtil. Unhappy youths! my heady PAULUS too !

W:here is our discipline, obedience where ?-
1 have no leisure now for words, CORNELIA !
Implore the gods to guard you and your children.

[Exit with his attendants.

Manent Co"'ELtA and PRIEST.

Cor. Perhaps ere this CORNELIA has no children !

They both are fallen into the fatal snare.
Tremendous oracle ! too late reveal'd.

Prict. Abandon not thy foul-to such despair;

The fiiord of war, devouring as it is,
Consumes not all. The deftin'd number die,
And from the bloodicft field rill some return.

Cor. Myv sons will ne'er return, I know them well.

The noble heart of TITUS, if he lives,
This instant swells wyith grief, and pride, and ihame.
Will he, the author of this fatal combat,
Forsake the soldiers whom he led to laughter;
Return discomfited, and fav'd by flight,
To bear reproach, and blush in Aquileia ?
He will not, holy Flamen ! Nor will PAULUS:
Calm as he is, and maiter of himself,
My generous PAULUS will not leave lis brother.
Alas ! I never shall behold them more:
This is-the evil that thie gods foretold.
Ye conltaut matrons of Rome's former days.!

Alas!

Alas ! I have no fortitude like yours.
Mine were no public cares. In the mild shade
Of fiveet domeRlic happiness I liv'd,
Till this fierce tempest rose, the storm of war,.
Whose rage hath burR on the 2Emilian race.

Priejf. Lady, retire. I to the walls will go,

And learn what has befallen. Remember thou,
How oft, in human life, the great conclusion
Of sear'd and wisf'd events mocks all conje&ure.

[Exeltri.
The End of the FIRST ACT.

ACT II.
SCENE, A Court, &c. as before.

Enter PRIEST.
Priejf. ' 00 soon thy orens are accomplifh'd, JOVE

O wretched parents ! 0 devoted race !

Enter Lucrus.

Luc. CORNELIA comes, impatient of thy flay.
PrieJf. How fliall my tongue perform a faithful office,

And tell CORNELIA what my eyes beheld ?
Her sons I saw surrounded by the foe,
And their small troops feem'd like a bank of sand,
Which, by the flowing tide ercompafs'd round,
Each moment waftes and lessens to the view.
Their wretc'ied father saw, and could not save them:
For full oppos'd to him the tyrant flood

With

With half his host embattled. Thrice ]EDIILIVS
Came to the front of his remaining troops,
As if he meant to ruth upon the foe,
And thrice the Consul pull'd the father back:
Then looking down and leaning on his sword,
The tears fail trickling down the warrior's cheeks,
He paus'd a while, and turn'd him to the city.

Enter CORNELIA.

Cor. Thou bring'fi no comfort! Terror and dismay
are written on thy brow! IHaIe, tell me, Flamen.
PrieJ/. Behold a soldier bleeding from the field.

Enter GARTHA wounded.
Cor. 'Tis the Numidian chief!

Gar. Lady, these wounds,

Which bleed to death, make GARPTIA not aflam'd
That he alone revisits Aquileia.
involuntary meffcnger am I
Of tidings harnl to tell. My fiery Heed,
Gall'd with an arrow, bore me from the plain,
Where still your valiant sons maintain the fight,
And with amazing aAions fate suspend.
The boldest soldiers of the tyrant's host
Shrink from their rage. Lady, I speak with pain.
This to the Consul. I advis'd the rally,
And fell into the ambush. I rejoice
That I shall not survive it-

Priefl. Help ! lie faints.
Gar. Oh ! would I had fallen at the feet of TITzS !

Enter Attendants.
PrEJi. Support, and bear him hence.

C Cor.

Cor. 0 generous GARTHA !
Too dearly halt thou prov'd thy constant faith.

[Exit GARTHAfupJorted.

No more I hear the' fiouts of distant war,
'Tis horrid silence all. The work of death
Is over. Doubt and fear are at an end.
Now certain anguish and despair prevail.

Enter -MILIUS attended.
.Cor. My hufiand !

/nmil. Oh ! CORNELIA ! wretched dame !

Look not to me ; I bring no consolation.
I cannot comfort thee. I could not save
My children from deltru&ion. Rigid duty
Made me fpecator of their overthrow:
O fatal ensigns of unhappy power !
O had IEalMLIus been a poor centurion,
He might unheeded have forsook his flation,
And perifli'd with his children.

Cor. They are dead.

PAULUS and TITUS dead. Their mother lives !
Ye all-direaing gods, whom we adore,
Whom I with fpotlcfs hands have ever serv'd,
Is misery like this my just reward ?
Your dearest gifts are to dellrucion turn'd.
Had I not been the fond, the happy mother
Of sons, for whom all mothers envy'd me,
I had not been above all women wretched.

Priefg. Great are thy woes, CORNELIA, great indeed !

Yet not unfrequent in this changeful world
Are woes like thine ; and greater llill than thine.
The famous matron of thy name and blood,
The firRf CORNELIA, saw her godlike sons

In

In Rome betray'd, and slain by Roman hands.
And oft in every age have wretched mothers
Surviv'd their families, their country's ruin,
And liv'd fad captives in a foreign land:
No kindred ear to hear, no eye to weep
In pity of their woes: no human face
For them to look on, but the hateful' face
Of foes, who made them childless, widows, slaves.
To thee remain thy husband, and thy country,
In whose defence thy sons so greatly died.
Thee Rome ihall honour, and revere in thee
The sacred memory of her heroes slain.

Emi//. It is the right, the birthright, .of our house,

For Rome to die: in every signal firife,
In every firuggling period of the fate,
My fires have bled. My sons have chose their time ;
Bravely they fought, and nobly were they slain.
Rome fill hall Itand, tho' the EAMILu fall.
The tyrant's works are levell'd with the ground,
And his proud tower yet smokes upon the plain.
Our ramparts now his fierce assaults defy
The Roman army, like a gather'd storm,.
Rolls towards him. My sons shall be reveng'd;
SlMy eyes shall fee, my sword fliall flare the vengeance..

Cor. Mean while, unburied on the bloody field,

Amidl: the common heap, my children lie.
i;lajeflic PAULUS, and my lovely TITUS,
Is this the end of all your mother's care,?
Some fierce barbarian now insults the dead;
Adding dilioneft wounds. 0 ! might not gold
Their dear remains redeem ? Alas ! alas !
Sis the sole consolation I can hope for,
o save them from the beasts and birds of prey,

C 2 That

That howl and scream around these fatal walls;
To fold once more their bodies in my arms;
To lay them decent on the funeral pile,
And o'er their aflies pour a parent's heart.

L.:'il. Mindful of that fad duty, I sent forth

A helald to the tyrant, and expec
Each moment his return. The trumpet founds.

EEnter LHrald, with azn O1rICER of /MAXIIN's .

'Tis he, and with him one whose lofty port,
And splendid arms, bespeak his high command.

Cor. Forgive, O chief unknown, a mother's grief,,
vnWhich, flort'ning the refpecd thy presence claims,
Hates to enquire, if MA.XIIIN will give
The bodies of her children to the tomb ?

OfI Far be its dismal honours from. your offspring
Lady, your valiant sons survive the field.

Cor. Are they not dead ? were not the 'E;MILII fain
On yonder field ? Their father saw them fall.

Of. Faint with long fighting, and encompafl round,

OpprefR with numbers, and borne down they fell i
Not slain, nor greatly wounded. Captives now,
In their behalf, from M.AXIIN I come.

Cor. O ! fire of gods and men ! eternal JovE !
For ever prais'd be thy protecting arm !

Of. Upon their father now depends their fate
'Tis his to grant what MAXIMIN requires.

Cor. Let his demands be boundless as the wilh

Of avarice itself, they shall be granted.
Treafurcs there are from age to age preferv'd,
The acquisition of our frugal fires;
Well are the treasures of our house beflto'd,
i.f they redeem their lives who Ihould possess them.

O,$.

Of. It is not gold that MAXIMIN requires.
To thee, EAMLIUS, I address my words.:
Imperial MAXIMIN, lord of Mankind,
Charges the senate and the Roman people
With breach of vows, and unprovok'd rebellion;
But chiefly thee, who first withltood thy sovereign,.
And ftopt the progress of his just revenge.
The righteous gods, he faith, to thee averse,
Have made thy sons the captives of his arms
Them he has doom'd to death, and will this day
The fcntence execute, unless their father,
Before the fun ihall set, give up the city.

Cor. Relentless tyrant ! O all-feeing gods !
H-Iow dire a profpet opens to CORNELIA !

IEmil. I stand not now in equal lifts with MAXIIIN,.

Nor mean I hear to plead the cause of Rome:
'TIvould butt'end thine ear. Yet tell thy lord,
He knows i/EALIus not, and therefore wrongs him-
By this unworthy trial of his faith:
Unhappy, molt unhappy, he may make me,
But he and fortune cannot malke me base.

Qs. Is this the anfver I must bear to MAxrMIN ?
lEmil. What other anfvecr could he hope from me ?'
Of. Think of the consequence of this defiance.
rmiil. I'll meet it when it comes: now I mufl think.'
Of truf trepos'd in me by injur'd Rome.

js. Stout are thy words. But will this pride of spirit

Suflain thee through the horrors that surround thee ?
Thy lips have now pronounc'd thy children's doom,
Which executed, as it soon mult be,
Will move the fterneft soldier of our.camp
To tender pity. Never yet were seen
So brave a pair as thy unhappy sons;

C 3 Natue-

Nature on them has pour'd out all her gifts,
And drefl their virtue in the fairefi form.

Cor. 0 thou, whose tongue in Roman accents speaks,

Whose gentle afpe& fl ews a mind humane !
Take pity on the most unhappy parents
That ever bore the name. This fatal day
HIas prov'd too well the 'worth of tlhefe my sons,
Whom nature, tho' they less deferv'd, would love.
0 ! soften to the tyrant.this refusal.
1 know not what to fay ; I have no right,
But that which signal misery confers,
To beg from thee affifiance. If thou ha.t
At h3me an anxious mother, or fad spouse,
Who daily trembles for thy noble life,
Think of her state, and liften to CORNELIA,
\Whose tongue till now did never plead for favour.

Elm il. 0 gen'rous firanger ! our misfortunes touch
Thy manly mind.

Of. No stranger I: behold

A Roman, and a friend; This helmet off,
Perhaps CORXNLIA may remember VARUS.

Cor. VARUS ! my friend ! companion of my youth !

0 heavy change of times ! on other terms
In Rome, delightful Rome, we ''ont to meet.

Var. loft true, CORNELIA.

Cor. And is VARUS come

To aid the tyrant's arms againfl his country ?
Come the fierce herald of his kinsmen's doom ?

Var. With the fame heart, the fame unalter'd mind
To all that e'cr he lov'd, is VARUS come.

jEmil. Pcrmit me, gallant VATRUS ! fill to claim
Thy friendship, tho' I stand the tyrant's foe.

Var. ]Emal.Ls ! fortune rules the lives of men.

Had

Had I been Consul, and poTefs'd in Rpme
Of civil dignity; perhaps, like thee,
I flould have arm'd me in the senate's cause;
Whilst thou, a soldier on the diflant frontier,
Perhaps, like me, hadst fought thy leader's quarrel.
The armies of the north acknowlcdge MAXIMI'.
I lead the Britifl legions to the war:
But more of this hereafter. Thou hail heard
My horrid metage, and haft made such anfwcr
As well becomes a Roman nnd a Consul.

'mYl;. Barbarian as he is- forgive me, VARUS !

-Ie cannot mean this threat'ning to fulfill.

Var. O ! trust not the humanity of MAXrIIIN.

If he's not cruel, why art thou in arms ?
.Ielides, his temper, ever fierce and savage,
Is now incens'd, enrag'd almost to madness,
3y the wide wailing havock of this day.
His works are levell'd, his best legions thinn'd,
His nephew ALGAR slain by TITUS' hand.
In the first transport of his furious wrath,
-Ie did devote to the infernal gods,
And ALGAR'S liade, the pris'ners of the field.
An old Ligurian, captain of his guards,
Stepp'd in and interpos'd this crafty counsel-
Your answer I will bear, but give it colours
That may denote the dawning of fubmiflion,
And so retard-

Enter an OFFICER.

O. An herald from the camp

Requires the tribune forthwith to return:
Impatient MAXIMIN tlands on the plain,
Known by his purple and gigantic stature.

Cor.

Colr. Dreadful impatience ! most inhuman rage !

By the dear sympathy of Roman blood,
Which in our veins from the fame fountain flows,
Let me entreat thee, 'VARUS, to appease'
The angry tyrant. Represent AEMILIUS
I)ifpos'd to yield all that his honour can..
And if stern MAXIMIN prefers revenge
To proser'd gold, yet try if wealth can win
His friends and favourites to be more gentle.

Var. He has no friends nor favourites ; from fear

His soldiers serve, his officers obey.
I mufl be gone, for MAXIMIN brooks not
His orders flighted. Trust my zeal, CORNELIA !
Had I but equal power, your sons were free,
Consul.

Ezmil. Let me conduct thee to the gate,

And tell thee, as we go, what yet remains
Untold of our condition.

[Exeunt ZEIILIUS and VARUS.

Cot. Interpreter of heaven's mysterious will,

Augur rever'd ! how will the evening close
Of this distressful day ? Hafle to repeat
The sacred rites, and prove thy art divine.

Prices. Such is my purpose, soon as Phoebus bows

From his meridian height. Lady, my mind
Has ponder'd MAXIMIN's abhor'd demand.
One only course there is to end the strife,
The dreadful firife of nature and of duty,
In great ]EMIILIUS' mind; and reconcile
The children's safety ewith the father's honour.

Cor. 'Tis that I with for, but of that despair.
Pries?. The Roman host, by GORDIANUS led,
In three days hence reach Aquileia's walls

Their

Their near approach to MAXMIIN unknown.
Therefore the Consul, without breach of honour,.
Without injustice to the Roman ftatc,
May stipulate with MAXIMIN, to yield
The city on the fourth returning day,
If not reliev'd. Ere that the chance of war
Raises the siege, or makes rcfiftance vain.

Cor. Wife are thy words ; and now the dawn of hope

Breaks on my darckome mind. Believe me, priest,
The loss of my dear sons in battle anin,
As once I thought them, was less terrible
Than the dire apprehension of that death
To which the tyrant dooms them; worse to me,
And worse, far worse to them. Alas ! my sons!
Uncertain is your fate ! who can foretel
The savage motions of the tyrant's will ?
And yet this counsel seems the only means
Of preservation. Minilter of heav'n !
Let us retire, and at the altar bow
Of JOVE eternal, who thy heart infpir'd. [Exeunt.

The End of the SECOND ACT.

A C T III
Enter .rrILIUS ; and, j'3om the othcrJfi!de of

thJtag c, Lucius.
Luc, TjO every polt and station round the wall

a- Your orders have been borne. And eacli
commander

With

With zeal obey'd.

2Emil. The soldiers' countenance,
How seems it, Lucius ?

Luc. Determin'd to the death.

Strong indignation at their leader's fate,
With grief and pity, o'er their visage gleams;
But every paflion fettles to revenge.

,,Eii/. Lucrus ! 'tis well. See that my fleed be led

Aecouter'd to the gate. I know not, Lucius,
HIow soon I may bestride him.

[Exit Lucius.
]EmIILUS alone.

This difrefs

Grows heavier every hour: like a green wound,
At firit I felt it not; it rankles now.
Would I had linen'd to the urgent voice
Of nature, when ihe call'd me to the field !
Who could have blam'd the passions of a father ?
If Rome had blam'd me, in the silent tomb
Her voice had not been heard.

Enter CORNELIA.

Cor. Why tarries VARUS !

j.mil. He will return, CORNELIA ! doubt not that,

The tyrant knows the snare in which we're caught,
And to the uttermolt will prove our fouls
Before he breaks it.

Cor. By the gods infpir'd,

The priest hath found the means to set us free,
If you consent.

.Emil. If I consent ? alas!
That doubt implies suspicion of the means.

Cor,

Corl. Hear me, and judge: capitulate with MAXNMIN,

In three days hence to yield up Aquileia,
If not reliev'd. Before that time expires,
The arms of Rome victorious raise the siege;
Or, if defeated, make refiRance vain.
Bend not thine eye, EMIILIUS, on the ground !
The tiriceft law of duty is fulfill'd.
If thou rejet'(t this counsel, I will fay,
Not MIAxIMIN the tyrant flew my children,
But their own cruel father.

.Emil. Oh ! forbear !

My foul is rack'd 5 my heart asunder torn.
The eyes of all the world on me are six'd;
Rome and mankind from me expect their fate.
I must confider this applauded counsel,
Ere I embrace.

Cot. This city is not Rome,

Nor your small garrison the Roman holt.
A part, a little part, a very grain
Of public interelt, in your mind outweighs
Your children, all your children. Oh ! .EEMILIUS
Alike the father and the mother bear
The name of parent ; but a parent's love
Lives only in the tender mother's heart.

iJmil. Firll let us learn what anfiver VARus brings.

Etiter VArgUs.
He comes, and various passions dim his face.

Cor. 0 ! VARPUSx, VAR.S !

Var. 0 ! too just thy fears

Of my lov'd kinfien unrevok'd the doom !
VTARUS hath kneel'd in vain. Hard as the rocks
Of wild Dalmatia is the tyrant's heart.

Ilcens'd

Incens'd at the refusal which I bore,
His fury rages like a fire confin'd,
And threatens every quarter. Hear, iEMlLlus,
And tremble now for Rome, as for thy children !

zEmil For Rome ?

Var. The tyrant (lend me patience, heav'n

To speak with calmness, I who serve him flill)
This day hath vow'd to raze imperial Romc.

Emnil. Barbarian ! why ?

Far. To fix his wavering host,

To glut his legions with the might) spoil.
Disease and famine prey upon his troops,
And rumour cries, that a relief is near.
The fcldiers faint, and murmur at the length
And havock of this siege. The crafty tyrant
With found of trumpet thro' his camp proclaim'd,
That he will give the city to be sack'd,
Raze her proud walls, and change the feat of empire.
The glad Barbarians thouted to the lkies,
And mix'd with their applause unheard-of oaths
To die with MAXIMIN.

fmnzil. What said the Romans?

Var. In number few, and fcatter'd thro' the bands,
They griev'd, but carefully fuppreft their sorrow.

.Emi/. Was there no Roman near enough to plant
A dagger in the heart of MAxIMIN ?

Var. Before the tyrant reach the walls of Rome,
That Roman may be found.

.Emil. Above the name
Of god-like SCE£VOLA his fame flall rife.

Var. The righteous gods, whom MAXIMIN contemns,

Have in their vengeance urg'd his frantic mind
By this decree to work his own perdition.

Long

Long honour'd Rome ! tho' thou hail loft so much
.Of thy primaeval splendour, fill my heart
Thy image worlhips; flill for thee I fought,
And from Siluria, to the savage shore
Of Caledonia, I thy trophies rear'd !
And shall thy soldier draw his sword againit thee,
Or fIand a tame fpeaator of thy fall ?
No ! I am thine, devoted, as of old
Thy darling sons, when firit thy glory rose.
Nor Ihall thy turrets bow, imperial Rome !
Till low in dust the head of VARUS lies.

lemil. There spoke a Roman!

Cor. I rejoice to hear

The voice of VARUS thus declare for Rome.
Her distant danger may thy arm avert !
But who defends my sons, whose sudden fate
This day.decides ?

Var. Q were it possible

To gain a short delay! Time presses me;
For itrong in troops and terrible is MAXIMIN,
Nor am I yet prepar'd to rife in arms.
In a few days-nay, if the Roman host
Were near at hand,-

Cor. My husband, speak!

RlEmil. ! VARUS
The fates ave merciful. Peruse these lines.

Var. " In three days hence." Then, tyrant, I shall

meet thee.
But what can sheath this day the naked sword ?

.Emil. A truce I'll offer, bind myself by vow
(Nor is the pracice new or strange in war)
Within a certain time to yield the city,
If not. reliev'd; the time, this scroll direcs,

D Tho

The fourth revolving day.

Var. I fee thine aim.

Ere that, the blow is firuck by GORDIANUS ;
Ere that ihall VARUs spread his Roman eagle,
And chace the raven of Dalmatia home.

SEmil. Thou think'ft the tyrant will accept those

terms ?

.Var. I hold it certain : -he can wish no more:

-Unknown to him th' approach of GORDIANUs.
By MARs,,thc father of the Roman race,
Whose spear omnipotent in battle rules,
My life shall stand betwixt your sons and death.

Co:. 0 befl of friends ! This is the work of heav'n,

Whose awful purposes, unconscious man
Promotes, and fondly thinks he serves his own.
Thus from remotet Britain's frozen shore
The tyrant to his aid the warrior calls,
Who comes, a weapon in the hand of JovE,
To smite the proud usurper, and preserve
My children.

Enmil. Yea, his country and mankind.

Var. May the event these pleasing hopes fulfill.

I, that have been a soldier from.my youth,
And fought ou. many a hardunequal conflit
With tribes and nations who no mercy knew,
Yet never felt my bosom thus alarm'd.

lEmil. For us, for Rome, thy Roman mind is mov'd.
Varus. In a new path I tread. I, that ne'er us'd

Dissimulation, muit a while dissemble.
Soon may the hour of nobler aAion come !
When in the front of my brave troops I fland,
And dare the hateful tyrant with my sword,
My heart Jhall beat no more. My friends, farewell!

Cor.

Coor. The gods protee thee, VARUS !

Var,. Consul, 'tis meet

You hold your troops prepar'd, and from the walls
Each motion watch, that rifes in our camp.

JEmil. My vigilance flrall equal the occasion.

[Exit VARUS..

'Tis, as thou faid'ft, indeed the liand'of heav'n !
Ye powers supreme ! who guide the line of fate,
MWhofe winding.courfe eludes the sense of man,
Who could have thought that from our deep diitrefs,
My sons' captivity, and threaten'd death,
Should spring the ruin of insulting MAXIMIN ?

Cor. Him, who contemns the gods, the gods willpunifl

Now or hereafter. To the altar I
Of JovE will haften, and his power implore..
Here Lucius comes

Enter Luclus.
,Emil. What tidings ?

Luc; Good, my lord !

Far on the diflant heights that close the vale,
The watchmen have descried a welcome fight,
Eagles and standards glittering in the fun,
Squadrons of horse that move along the hilll
Your faithful soldiers in loud flouts rejoice,
And-hail the van of GORIDIANUS' holt.
JE;nil Too soon, great gods ! they come.

Luc. Too soon, my lord !-

That cannot be. In a most happy hour
Relief approaches. For in every itreet
Th' afflited citizens exclaim against you,
And, as they pats, upbraid the patient soldier
For tame submission to your rigid, will

D 2 Whie-

Which even your children's danger cannot bend.

JEmil. Would to the gods their murmurs and re.

proaches
Were all I had to bear !

Enter a Herald and an OFFICER from MAXIMIN..

Now bursts the storm..

Cor. This is not VARUS. Sternly he comes on.
This is the dreadful harbinger of death.

Of. Consul! I come from MAxMIN ; that prince

Whose wrath is terrible, now burns with wrath
At thee, and fends me to denounce his vengeance..
He hath difcover'd thy unworthy arts,
The fraudulent proposal of a truce,
When thou didft know the rebel host drew near.
Hither I come to cut all treaties short,
And to pronounce thy sons' immediate death,
Unless, without delay, thou yield'ft this city,
Thyself, thy legions, freely to his mercy.

.iEmil. A cruel mefnage harhly thou deliver't,.

The dreadful echo of thy threat'ning lord.
He grows in his demands.

Of. 'Tis fit he should:

When basely dealt with: treachery fill finds
Its due reward from him.

SEmil. Ha! who art thou,
Who dar'ft presume thus to address the Consul ?

Of. I am the slave of MAXIMIN; if thou

Hat any other name, it is a worse one,
Rebel, proud Roman !

JEmil. Thou'rt protested, slave !

Thy characer is sacred; elfe-Barbarian !
?eturn. to MAXIMIN, the terms I sent

By

By VARus I adhere to, and expet
Another answer, by a gentler herald;

Cor. Thou art no Roman. Wilt thou deign to tell:
Thy name and country ?

O. DvuMlNoix my name,
My country Gaul.

Cor. And of Ligurian race,
Chief of the band Pretorian, art thou not ?

Of. I am, and faithful to the prince I serve.
Cor. Faithful to evil, false to all that's good .:

To nature and humanity a traitor;
Contriver of the murder of my children !
My foul by strong antipathy divin'd thee,..
And fludder'd at thee as her evil genius.

JEmil. CORNELIA, beware, thou wrong'ft thyself,.
Thus to expose to him thy wounded heart.

Of. VARUS, your countryman, hath told you, Lady!

What counsel I suggested to my prince.
This I expeted from. a Roman meflenger,
Whose treachery his master soon shall know.
He told you true. From me the counsel came-;
t thought the dames of Rome had lov'd their children.

[Exit DUMNrorlx.

Cor. Oh ! my huffand! What remedy, what hope
imll/. In VARUS still I trust. The troops of Rome

Are near at hand. That insolent Ligurian
Hath chaf'd me to the height. O ! awful Rome !
Where are thy honours ?' Queen of all the earth !
How art thou fallen! When a vile save like this.
Infu!:s thy Consul, and decrees the doom
Of thy Patrician race ! If this mull be,
'Tis time to die ; we all have liv'd too long.-

Cor; I felt the insult, but my feeble anger

D 3 Blaz'd

Blaz'd for a moment only. Other paflions
Soon quensh'd my indignation. O! my children!

Enter an OFFICER.

Off To arms, my lord! The enemy comes on.
.Emil. We are prepar'd, for MAXIMIN is known..

I look'd for this attack. Against what gate
Bend they their force ?

Of. They threaten every gate;

For all their legions move. DifinEt I saw
Three mighty columns shoaling to the plain,
And in their front are carriages advanc'd
Loaded with beams and rafters, fit to frame
Some engine itrong, againit our batter'd walls.

lEmil. Be not afraid. [To CORNELIA.

, (lJU(Afout.)

What means that fearful cry.?

Cor. A cry! it was a groan, a dreadful groan,
As if a multitude, a legion died.

Emil. Farewell!
Cor. My lord, one moment itay, behold !

Enter Lucius.
jEmi/. From whence that dismal cry ?

O. Alas! alas !

It was the people's voice, the soldiers voice,
Lamenting for your sons.

Cor. Already! heav'n!
.Emil. Say, what has befallen ?

O0. Still; my lord, they live:
But on the verge of death the brothers stand.

Cor.. Still they live !

iEmil. Uninterrupted now relate,

Without

Without a comment,:.what thy.eyes have seen.

f0. The host of MAXIMIN for fight.ariay'd,.

In three huge columns onward slowly mov'd,
And when-their van had reach'd'the little'hill,.
From whence the fountain springs, .fast by the wall
The army halted: then appear'd a band,
Busy artificers, who rear'd in lhafte,,.
A pile we wonder'd at i but soon was changed
Our wonder into sorrow, when we knew
It was a scaffold ; and beheld your sons,
Guarded and bound, draw near. That fpefacle
Produc'd the cry..

Cor. 0 ! insupportable !
My lord-! my husband ! oh !

- Emil. Matron, retire,
And hide thy anguish from the common eye.

Cor. Ha ! whither dolt thou go ?

lEmil. Streight to the gate.

Cor. Where thou art, I will be. I cannot leave thee.

Have mercy upon me, your sons, yourself,
And to necefity a little yield;
Entreat a short delay, new terms propound,.
Let not your children die.

zEmil. Think'ft thou thy sons

Will chufe a life bought by their father's ihame ?
If right my foul divines of both my boys, ,
What they dread moss this inflant, is to live,
Redeem'd inglorious with my honour loft.

Cor. I am encompassed; on a pointed rock
I sand, a dreadful gulph on either fide.

Emil. The time is not expir'd; some hours the fun,

Hath yet to fall; this awful preparation
Is meant to terrify and shake my foul,:

Tha

That I may bow before the next demand.
Go to the palace, when a message comes
From the fell tyrant, thou shalt hear it answered.-

Cor. Deal not, my lord, deceitfully with me.
I have a right, a mother's right.

.Emil. Be calm,

Let me conjure thee by the sacred names
Of thy great ancestors, who died for Rome,
Remember them, and prove thyself their daughter.

[Exit JEIILIUS.

CORNELIA alone.

MIy ancestors ! alas ! ill-omen'd names
Ye slades of heroes, o'er the world: renown'd
For virtue, and for great misfortunes fam'd
Why flould I think of you, but to confirm
The dire presage that rifes from my heart ?
Your matchless worth exempted not from ills,.
But was the cause recorded of your ruin.
Sprung from your blood, I fear that I am born
Heir to the fortunes of the fated line.

[Exit CORNELIA,
The End of the THIRD ACT.

ACT IV.

Enter Lucius..
I WILL report the truth ; too visible

Is the fad objec from our crowded walls.

Unhappy

Unhappy mother ! whom excess of anguish
Drives to pursue additional distress!.
O ! good and great jEMILIUS ! how my foul
Is griev'd for thee, and for thy valiant sons.!
Whom I so oft have carried in my arms.
My generous mailer made me free in vain;
Still I remain'd a voluntary slave,,
Preferr'd his service in a foreign land
To sweet LARISSA, and my native shore.
Mly only son, under hil roof brought forth,
Born on the day that gave young TITUS birth,,
Bred up with him in every Roman art,
Unlike the rudeness of our simple land,
Wild with despair, vows he will not outlive
His dear, dear lord ! his kind; his noble master..

Enter CORNELIA.

Cor. Calamity comes on me like a torrent,.

And overwhelms a mind not us'd to woe.
Ha ! Lucius, haft thou seen my hapless sons ?
Say, can I view them from th' adjacent wall ?

Luc. Too well, alas ! confptcuous they fRand-
Cor. Lucius, lead on..

Luc. Relutant I. obey.
I fear the transports of a mother's mind.

Cor. I will behold them; I will fee my children%.

Whate'er befall me; I will gaze upon them,
Tho' frantic madness fliould my foul surprise:
All lesser fears are.in a greater loll..
Halte and conduE me.

Luc. The fad fpelacle-
Is near at hand.

Cor. 0 ! feeble limbs that fail,

And.

And weakly serve the strength of my despair !

Luc. 'Tis nature shrinks. O! lady ! yet be warn'd.
Cor. No 5 if my wretched limbs refuse their office,

The arms of slaves shall bear me to the wall.
I'm firmer now, proceed.

Luc. The herald comes.
Cor. The lall of heralds; but I will not tarry.

[Exeunt COP.NELIA and Lucius.

Enter Herald and VARUS.

Var. This is the place appointed by the Consul;
Find, and inform him quickly of my presence.

[Exit Heraldi

VARUS alone.

They must not die. It were a deed to firike
Horror from pole to pole. The Parthian fierce,
And the wild Moor would' tremble at the tale,
And mark accurst the pale of Roman empire.
Tyrant, too savage over beasts to rule !
Fidelity to thee were horrid treason
To human nature, to the gracious gods,
Who o'er diflreit humanity preside.
This-day has full difplay'd the tyrant's foul,
And ripen'd thoughts long growing in my breast.
'Tis vain to think of artient freedom now;
The Senate, and the People are no more.
Rome's vail dominions for the scepter call,
The world fubdu'd, one mailer mull command..
But let us have a monarch, not- a tyrant.

Enter i.EMILIus.
Emnil. VARUS return'd ! can MAXIMIN relent >

Var..

Far. Never ! his rage would flab the hoary Priest

Before the altar. Hardly have I gain'd
This last renewal of the first conditions.

,Emil. Where is the host of Rome ?

Var. Far distant flill.

Those squadrons, that in evil hour alarm'd
The tyrant, and defeated our design,
The zeal of GORDIANus had advanc'd
To chear your troops, with promise of relief.

.Emil. 'Tis fate o'erwhelms us. To the tyrant bear

Mry first and latest anfier. With delight,
With transport I would die to save my sons.;
But will not save them by an at of baseness.

Var.-With fortitude, with dignity, EauILIUS.,

Thou haft fuftain'd this cruel shock of fortune,
And juftify'd the sentiments of Rome,
That plac'd her sovereign confidence in thee.
Now hear the counsel of a faithful friend,
Anxious for thee, and zealous for his country.

.Etiitl. No vain desire of glory rules my breast ;

I feel the throbs of nature: all I wish
Is to be just to Rome,; I envy not,
Nor emulate the older Brutus' fame.

VIar. The proffer'd terms accept, and save thy children.

Rome shall not susser: when her troops draw near,
I will forsake the tyrant's fhatter'd fide,
And fix the fortune of the future field.

Emi/l. Compassion dictatcs this delufive.counfel

Thy pity for a miserable father;
But chance may mar thy generous design,
And deep dismay for Aquileia loft,
Confound the legions that contend for Rome.
Then whither ihall forlorn £EMILIUS fly ?

mVThere

Where shall he hide him from reproach and {hame ?
What joy, what comfort, will his children yield,
When he and they with infamy must dwell ?
A new companion to our noble race.
No ! rather let the blow tremendous fall,
And crulh us in the path our fathers trode.
I fee the image of my bleeding country:
I hear the voice of Rome her Consul call;
The chosen guardian in her last extreme.
City of Gods ! mother of heroes fam'd
Like gods of old! shall I abandon thee,
For whom so many noble youths have died,
So many fathers ?

Enter CORNELIA.
Now, my heart, be firm.

Cor. Where is IEMILIUS ? the hard hearted father,
Who whets the tyrant's sword against his children!

iEmil. Alas! CORNELIA !

Cor. I have seen my sons,

Both bound with chains: I saw the deadly axe,
And the stern villain standing by their fide.
Consul I kneel to thee ! O hear thy wife !
Hear me, my huiband, whilst I yet have sense
And reason left to regulate my words.
O drive me not to madness, to despair
Already wavering on the brink I itand,
In agony extreme.

EStil. Trust in the Gods;

They sooth the agonies of guiltless woe,
But to despair resign the felf-condemn'd.
O my beloved wife,. do not aftail
Thy husband's foul, that labours to be just.

Heav'n

HIeav'n knows how dear to my afflited heart
Thou, and the pledges of our virtuous love,
Have ever been; more dear than ever now.
But if their danger, and thy fears lliould bend
My yielding mind to baseness and to lhame,
Remorf would break the concord of our love,
And hate succeed to criminal affeaion.

L:,r. le only hate ; acquit'thy noble sons,

Too like thyself; IE;ILICs, had'St thou seen
Thy iuns, as I beheld them from the ramparts.
Writh head erel, and high, my PAULUS flood.
i knew his stature eminent ; uhmov'd,
And fledfaft was his gelture; firm he feem'd,
Liike a firong camtle on its rocky base.
The port of TITUS ihewv'd a mind less calm.
Around he look'd, and from his scornful eyes,
Threw on his foes defiance and disdain.
At last in earnest speech the brothers joia'd.
I saw them whisper: PAULUS bow'd his head.
The multitude, long silent at my presence,
Lamented then; the weeping mothers clafp'd
Their infants to their breasts, and look'd at me.
I left the walls, to find thee out, my hufhand !
And lead thee thither, that thou might'ft relent.

?ml. Relent, CORNELIA ! 0 eternal powers,

That fee the anguilh of my tortur'd foul,
Sultain me still; let not my duty yield
To the strong yearning of a father's heart.

Cor. Why speaks not VARUS ? Has he too conrlpir'd
Againt me and my children ?

Var. I have spoke,

And told the Consul, that his sons may live,
And Roman arms o'cr MAxImIN prevail.

E Cor.

Cor. What would'fi thou more ? inexorable man !
Var. I fee the bottom of thy troubled mind,

And in this awful hour revere thy virtue,
Which stands aloof, and trembles at dilhonour.
But hear this new addition to my counsel;
Soldiers I have, in every danger try'd,
Bred to hard service in our Britilh wars,
Accuftom'd to explore the forests wild,
Alone, amidst the perils of the night,
And mingle fearless with the savage foes;
Difguis'd in their attire and uncouth arms,
.Of those the moll expert, I will dispatch,
That GORDIANUS may his arms advance.

Enter an OFFICER.
Of. My Lord, your son approaches.

"Cor. Ha ! my Con !

Of. TITUS, your son, attended by a herald,

Slow thro' the gazing multitude proceeds,
Who weep and bless him.

.enmil. Ha ! what change is this

Of. The herald, as he passes, scatters gladness,

Saying that TITUS comes to end the war,
And to compafion move his father's mind.

Emil. TITUS ! does TITUS come to plead compaflon ?

Now, destiny, thou tramples down 2EMILIUs.
Go tell him, Herald, that I will not fee him.;
Let him not come to hear me curse the hour
That made me father of a fon.like him.

Cor. Judge not so rafily, fee and hear thy son.
jiTmil. Mention him not; that father has my envy

Who mourneth o'er his sons in battle slain.
Short-sighted mortals ! Let no man repine

When

When fate bereaves him of the child he loves;
Amidst his anguifli let him think of mine,
CAnd that will comfort him.

Cor. This is not well,

Nor like my son; yet valour cannot change
Its quality so quickly. He hath prov'd
His dauntless courage. Death in terror clad
Could not dismay him. But his noble mind
Is sivay'd by pity of his brother's fate,.
Ill his involv'd.

Enter TITUS,

inGl. Gods ! unabafi'd he seems
Nor at his most inglorious purpose blushes.

[iEMILIUS turns from hin.

Cor. Dear to thy mother still;
Titus. Turn not away, (to his father.)
Nor hold thy TITUS of one look unworthy.

IEmnil. Art thou my TITUS ? Thou that fear's to die,,

And comes a servile suppliant for life !
With coward prayers to seduce the Consul.
No thou art not my son. I had a son !
Whose only fault was valour to excess,
Whole fatal courage was the source of ills
Which he was bound in honour to fullain.
Thou art not he ! thou scandal to thy country
Thou tool of MAXIM!N.

Titus. "Wong not thy son.

alt roll the number'd momepts of my life,
And I mufl haften to redeem my fame.

Cor. I fear, but know not what his wo, ds portend.
7iirs. I have deceiv'd the tyrant, and am come
No messenger nor counsellor of shame.

Xi T1hTo

The cause of honour, of my father's honour,
The cause of Rome againRl myself I plead,
And in my voice the noble PAULUS speaks..
Let no man pity us; aloft we fland
On a high theatre, objecs I think
Of admiration and of envy rather.
The tyrant and his mcnac'd deaths we scorn,
The chearfel victims of our sacred country.

IEmnl. Iear tils ! 0 earth and heav:n ! my son! I my

pridle

Come to thy father's arms; now, now I know
My blood again. 0 bitter pleasing hour!
For I mull lose thee, lose thee, 0 my hero !
Now when I love thee best, and most admire.

Cor. Preserve that virtue which you thus admire,.
My fan ! my hulband ! VARUS, pity me.

Titus. This to prevent I came ; the force I sear'd

Of firong affe&ion, and a mother's tears.
We saw the busy heralds come and go,
.And trembled left the Consul might be. won
Tor ebbing rcfclution ne'er returns,
.Put fiill falls farther from its former shore.
To a:.l my father in his trying hour
Did I afiume a dafiard's vile dil'guife.

E;nil. And did I meet you with reproach and anger?

TVith scorn encounter my devoted son,
Who came to strengthen and support his fire
.Forgive me, lalt of the AIEMILIAN line !
Pure and unftain'd the current of our blood
Ends as it long has flovwd.

Cor. 0 VARUS ! fpcak,

Tell them, thou guardian angel of thy country !
That. Rome does not this sacrifice demand,

Why

Why ihould they die in vain?

mar. Thou noble youth.,

Whose life more and more precious till I deem,.
I am the friend of Rome; of yonider host
No slender part under my ensigns move.
With them I watch the tyrant's overthrow,
And guard my country with a stronger power,-
Than Aquileia, and her feeble walls.
Great is thy glory, thou haft reach'd the top
Of magnanimity, in bloom of youth
The REGULUs reviv'd of antient Rome;
Inflexible to terror, yield to prudence,
No tongue fliall tax thine or thy father's fame.

Titus. Renowned VARUS ! often have I heard

Of thee, and of thy virtues; oft rejoic'd,
That I could claim affinity with them;
But not the fandion of thy honour'd voice,
Not all the credence due to worth like thine,
Can move my fledfalf mind. There is but one,.
One only path which mortals safely tread,
The sacred path of retitude and truth.
I follow, tho' it leads me to the tomb.
Forgive me, noble Roman ! o'er thy head;
Perhaps, this inflant dire discovery hangs,
And thou and Rome are loft, and basely loft.
No, let the Consul, as he ought, defy
The tyrant's threat'ning, and rely on heav'n.
For me, and PAULUS too, our hearts are fix'dl
.Deliberation of our slate is vain:
For if the Consul should the city-yield,.
inevitable death abides his foiis,

Cor. Eternal Gods! thy mystic words explain.
Titus. A solemn oath determined we have sworn.

E 3.. Ne'er

NSe'er to survive the ignominious-ranfom.
.Retor'd to liberty, to death we fly,
And perish mutual by each other's fivord.

_Emil. Immortal Gods! who gave me sons like these.
Forsake them not, but guard your work divine.

Cor. My befR beiov'd ! my darling ! my fond heart

Bleeds tenderness for thee. But there is something
So awful and so great, a glory round thee,
Which dazzles and o'erwhelms me. O my son !
Is life a burden ? Lov'ft.thou not thy parents ?
Who for the love of thee would gladly die.

itus. Think not, O best of mothers, belt of women,.

That with unfilial arrogance I speak.
My heart is full this instant of affecion,
Hard to flipprefs. Dear to my foul are those
I leave behind, bitter to me their sorrows.
But destiny supreme hath mark'd my way:
And I accept what honour cannot shun.
:By trivial accident, by various ills
Fatal to man, thou might'it have lofl thy sons.
And they in dark oblivion would have fiept:
But now I fee the goal that JovE assigns,
And glory terminates our fiort career.
Be this thy comfort; I avow it mine.
Adrnir'd and mourn'd by Rome, for Rome we die,
Of fate fccure, immortal is our fame,
And spotless laurels deck thy childrens tomb.

Cor. Mvyltrious Powevrs ! how firange is my difirefs'

Thy viltue, Ti'Tru, rends thy miother's heart!
Ev'n now the gra o

dcur of thy tow'rin foul

Exalts my hunmlAcr mind to thoughts like thine:
But lwhen thou goet, alas ! I ink again,
'Like the -weak Pvthian when her God has left her.

Ti ri .

Tithu. My father!

AWim. 0 ny son, thou art. the judge

And arbiter of fate. Time, rapid fy,
And bring a.joyful vietory to Rome.
Let me but fee the scale of combat turn'd;
And die in glad assurance of her safety.

Var. The hero's fire invades my secret foul:
Like his my bosom burns. You fiall not die,

(to TITUS.)

Unaided and alone. Perhaps the Gods -
I know not that ; but I will raise a pile
Of glorious ruin. Shine, ye stars of Rome.
Firll in the column stand my Britiftl bands.

(to EaMILIUS.)

Prepare your squadrons, and protraat the time
Of his return.

EItlcr PRIEST of JUPITER, and the ottngcr Lucits..

Pri,.. Consul of mighty Rome.

rirm be the purpose of the present hour.
'he fire of Gods a happy sign hath giv'n:
Tru2l in the aid of heav'n's eternal king,
His adamantine lgis jJO'E extends.

Var. RoPmans and friends, fareswell! Undaunted TITUS,.
I go to aid thee too with mortal arms. [Exit VA'RUS.

7i.-. .Deem me not impious, servant of the Gods !

The,; and thy sacred office I revere;
.But signs and omens may our thoughts deceive.
ilrn mnny mial;ke the purposes of heav'n;
The: fhc idk( of JovE guards not the brave mnan's life,.
:\ur wards his body from the mortal blow.
A fiieid there is, that never can be pierc'd,
The heaviily armour of a mind refolv'd..

Tiat

That mail who wears against all force is clad,
And triumphs o'er the fate by which he falls.

Enter OFFICER.

Of, My Lords ! th' assembled citizens demand
An audience.

iEmil. Tell them, No. It will require

Mly presence to appease their fearful clamour.
Retire, my son, and, till the herald comes,
A fad but. dear society enjoy. [xeunt;

The End of the FOURTH ACT.

ACT V.

T r)e Tr'unpets found.

Enter TITUS, CORNELIA, and ZEAMLIUS.
Titus. F OR me the trumpet founds.

*j C£or. 0 dreadful found
Titus. The hour is come.

Cor. Alas! not yet, my son !
To the lafi mioment flay. So VARUS counsell'd.

TiTus. The herald's at the gate; I must not stay,

Nor linger, like a criminal opprell
With shameful fears. Farewell, my fire, farewell!

Cor. Thou goeft to die, and fay'fl thou but farewell?

It were too little, if from Rome thou went'it
A sportful journey to the Baian shore.
But thou art going never to return,
To the dark region.

TCt asi

Titus. Where all men have gone:

Where all must go ; but glorious'is the path
Thy offspring tread. An honourable death
Is the sole gift which fate cannot resume.
Methinks it suits us not thus to discourse:
Combat thy grief, and make our parting noble.

Cor. Nature forbids. I cannot conquer nature..

Speak not so firm, look not so unconcern'd:
Leave in thy mother's ear some tender words,
Fit for eternal memory.

Trtus. If thou lov'fl,.

0 spare thy son, les MAXIMIN mhould think
He has subdued me. No. He haill not fee
Upon my cheek the vestige of a tear.

.Emil. Thy spirit shall inspire thy father's foul,.

Till to the Ihades he finks to meet thee there:
Then to the founders of immortal Rome
I'll point my heroes.-To my PAULUS this, (Embraces.),
And now, farewell.

Cor. Alas ! thy fire despairs5

He quits thy hand'; till'now I ne'er defpair'd.
The moment is arriv'd, the dreadful moment,
I durit not think of, and cannot endure.
0 TITUS.! TITUS ! let me clasp thy neck.
My son ! those eyes I never fiall behold
In living lustre more..

Enter Lucrus.

Luc. Strife and confufiot;

Reign in the tyrant's camp. Hiimfelf I saw
Leap from his high tribun.l.

iFmil. Sound th' alarm.
This is the work of VAU.s,

,tilS.

Thius. Consul, beware.

Hostility from thee is breach of faith,
Whilst I remain.

./Emil. Too true, my son! Begone,
And free thy father's sword. (Embraces him.)

Cor. He shall not go.

One inflant saves him, keeps him from the tform.
My arms have firength enough to hold my son,
My only left, for now his brother dies.

Titus. Nothing liall hold mle. I have deeply fworr

And left my brother pledge of my return;
Left him, to bear alone the tyrant's rage,
To die by torture, if I break my faith.
Thus would'st thou buy my life ! Unhand me itreight,
Or I must tear myself.

'nil. Thy frenzy, woman,

Cuts off our last resource, adds thame to ruin;
I will not, cannot succour noble VARUs,
And much-wrong'd PAULUs, till thou fett'ft him free;
The clamour ceases. Oh ! what haft thou done ?

Cor. There, let him-go, and perish with his brother.

Forgive tis aftion ; for excess of anguifli
Deprives CoRNELIA of her reason's aid.
Now comes the raven that still bodes my woes.

Enter aerald and DUMNORIX,.
Drm. Captive, the time's expir'd.

Titus. Soldier, 'tis well;
Turn to the gate thy steps. I follow thee.

Duin. Thou art the firlt that e'er employ'd deceit
Againfi himfelfl thy artifice prevails.

(to _EMILIUS.)
Roman ! once more, tho' not from love, I speak;

Yiel

Yield thee, for now thou haft no hope in VARUS.

,Emil. Who told thee, that my resolution flood
On such a hope ? What hath befallen VARUS ?

Dum. His treason is detected; he himself
Seiz'd, and condemn'd with thy rash sons to die.

Cor. Eternal Gods !-How did the legions brook
Their valiant leader's fate ?

Dum. Her tongue betrays

Your secret expecation of revolt,
Where all is calm submission. VARUS came
From hence, entrusted with your last resolve,
And, like an orator, addreft himself
To the tribunal, with a voice so rais'd,
That every soldier in the circle heard ;
And as he told a tale to move their pity,
A sudden murmur rose. The emperor
Leapt from his throne, and call'd aloud to seize
The artful traitor. Soon his guards obey'd.

iEnil. VARUS, the noble VARUS, too must die.

But there are gods above ! Vengeance is theirs,
The tyrant yet flall feel.

Cor. Will vengeance raise
My children from the tomb ?

Dum. Thou queftion'ft well

Matron, I pity thee. Canst thou not move
Thy hulband's heart to spare his dying sons,
Nor win thy children to content to live ?

Cor. Thou pity me ! thou, whose inhuman foul

Devised the counsel that has caus'd my woe.
In vain dolt thou attempt my troubled mind
Had I a magic voice, to cleave the.earth,
To pluck the fun and moon from their high sphere,
Unmov'd my husband and my sons would hear me.

7lttWx.

Titus. This ineffcEtual conference I'll end.

(to DUINORIX.)

'Tis not your office, fir, to counfcl here.
*Condua me to the camp.

Dum. I will, be sure.

The death that thou haft courted, now abides thee:
Come, try the rough embrace.

iieus. Lead on, Ligurian!
I answer to thy lord. (Going.)

Cort. IITUs, my son !
Break, break my heart, for I can bear no more.

(&S'woonsj.)

Titus. She faints, support her; now let me escape
.rrom her asikition: think of Rome, my father! [Exit.

(CORNELIA is carried of:

Matlnet AEMILIUS.

ENmil. Of Rome! aye, and of thee, of thee, my son,

And of thy brother. O unequali'd pair,
Your deeds, your destiny have rais'd your fire
Above the pitch of man. My heart is feel,
I weep not, nor complain. Relentless fiend,
Inhuman MAXIMIN ! for thee I live;
To bury in thy hated breast my fvord,
Then die upon the blow.

Enter Lucius.

Luc. Thy faithful slave,

Uncall'd, intrudes upon his master's woe.
Resign not to despair thy noble mind,
Still there is hope.

Emil. Affetionate old man!
Thou fpeak'ft thy earnest wish; but my frail hopes

Were

Were wreck'd with VARUS.

Luc. Oft when wisdom fails,

Chance interposes, and atchieves the deed.
The Britilh legions, wheeling from their holt,
An angry parley with the tyrant hold,
And every rank re-echoes VARUs' name.

Emil. Immortal gods! Would I were at their head.
A single spark may kindle up the flame.

Luc. My son, devoted to his master's fate,

.Arm'd like a soldier of the tyrant's guard,
Mixs'd with the herald's train.

Eimil. 0 generous youth!

Perhaps-- but I have nourifll'd hope too much.
lie who diveifs him of that conflancy
Which stands in expetation of the worst,
Encounters fortune with a naked breast.
I will do so no more. Now I go forth
Less credulous of what my foul desires,
But not remiss to seize on swift occasion,
And urge it to the utmost. Lucius, flay
And tell CORNELIA-the has no support,
No medicine, but hope-I'll to the gate.

[Exit IEMmILIUS.

Manet Lucius.

L]c. 0 belt of men, I know wh.ere thou wilt go ;

The first alarm provokes thee to the field
One fate abides the children, and their fire.
Tyrannic fortune ! when thou raifeft up
To envy'd eminence the sons of men,
Thou but prepar'ft a triumph for thyself,
A second triumph from their grievous fall.
Alike the-column, and its ruins, mark

F Thy

Thy sovereign sway. Now Lucius will obey
Thy orders, lord; then haften to thy fide;
The humble shrub shall with the cedar fall.

[CORNELIA behind the Scene.

Cot. Stand off.
Luc. CORNELIA'S voice; it founds of woe.

Enter CORNELIA, followed by her woman.

Cor. Stand off, I fay, and let me find my hulland.

Fit mate for me; for me, whose eyes have seen
The murder of my child.

Luc. Alas ! alas!
The blow at latl hath fall'n.

Cor. His fireaming blood
I saw.

Luc. I-Is blood ! whom has the tyrant spar'd !
Cor. None, Lucius, none. - I tarry'd not to fee
A second itroke. Oh lead me to my hulband.

Luc. He guards the gate.

But hark his trumpets found, [Sound oftrumpets.

And found a charge. Lady, my 'on went forth
To route the Britifl legions to defend
Their leader, and thy sons. That found proclaims
Tumult and war are up. Mly lord is there. [Exit.

Manent CORNELIA end attendants.

Cor. The frantic father rushes to revenge

His sons, or throw the load of life away.
The desolate CORNELIA fle remains,
Her children murder'd, and her hulband slain.

Entcr 'PRIEST.
Where are thy omens, thy predictions too,

Thou

Thou priest of fallhood !

Priefi. Know 'twas VARUS fell;

And not thy son ; his fall the signal prov'd
Ofinftantbattle. With a whirlwind's rage
His legions rufh'd upon the tyrant's guard;
Thy valiant sons are free, and lead the fight.

Cor. Can this be truth ? Shall I again believe,

And wake me from the dreadful dream of death
That had poffeft my foul ?

Pri/ley. Matron! thy sons,

Thy husband too, vicorious llall return.
I fiaw the bird of JovE his wings extend,
And hover o'er their battle; si ll he bears
Upon his pinions conquest.

Cor. Say'ft thou so !

Then heav'n and thou forgive me. JOVE supreme !
If I have ought offended, on my head,
On mine alone, let all thy wrath descend:
But spare my fons,'and spare their blameless fire.

Enter Lucius.

Luc. Lady, rejoice, the tyrant is no more;
His barbarous cohorts yield.

Cor. Blest be thy tongue.
But tell me of my sons, and of their father ?

Luc. With voice and hand they urge the fainting foe,

Whose courage with their furious leader died.
Long, like a mound againlt the raging main,
Stood MAXIMIN, the bulwark of his hof;
His strength defied the fury of the storm;
Till to the van resistless TITUS came.
By TITUS' noble arm the giant fell,.
And o'er him ruflh'd the war.

F2 Cor.

Cor. Not without crush

And havock round him, such a ruin fell.
O minister of heav'n ! why dost thou bend
Tine eye on empty space, and gaze on air ?
Canst thou descry the future, or perceive
Evelits accomplifh'd, tho'-unknown ?

Priej/. 'Tis done,

The weary fillers reft. CYLLENIUS-comes,
Like a bright meteor fIreaming down the vault
Of azure heav'n; in his right hand the rod,
And in his left, a laurel dropping blood,
Behold!

Enter SEMILIUS attended.

Cor. My husband ! oh ! Where haft thou left
Thy sons ?-

lEmil. They come vitorious from the field.
Cor. Why dolt thou faintly speak such welcom.e

tidings ?
Thou art not wounded ?

nEmil. No.

Cor. From whence that cloud

Which overcasts thy brcw ? What damps thy joy ?
Tell me, EMILIUS ! for I read thy foul,
There undivulg'd some cruel evil lies.

Emnil. Alas !
Cor. Thou figh'ts not thus for VARsS ioft.

My sons, thou fay'fl, draw near; what is the grief
That wrings thy heart ?

.Emil. 0 summon to thine aid

What conflancy thou halt ; soon Ihalt thou fee
What I.would not relate.

Cor. Ha.! am.I mock'd

Waty.

With false reports ?

What fpetacle is this!
Enter TITUS wounded, and supported by PAULUS a4d

soldiers.
Are these the vidtors ! oh my TITUS dies !

Titus. I flood the chance of war.. Do not bewail

A fate so far above my highest hope
When last we parted. Men are born to die.

Cor. But not like thee, in youth untimely slain,.
Titus. This afive day has been an age of life.

Rome is deliver'd. Thou haft still a bfn.
Why mourns my brother o'er a. soldier's fall ?

Paul. I griev'd not, TITUs ! when our lot was equal.
Cor. There will be wars again to snatch thee too..

Fear not too long a life: the useless live,
The vile, the odious; thy desert is death.

Titus. My limbs grow weak, upon the earth I'll reft.
Have I redeem'd my rashness ? O my father !

.tnmil. 'Tis scarce a blemifl to be brave to rashness.

To thee Rome owes her safety, her existence ;
And with her chief deliverers ranks, thy name.

Titus. I feel my father's praise, now when the hand.
Of death comes near my heart.

Cor. I will be calm.

O let me not ditfurb his parting foul.
Sustain me, mighty gods !

Titus. To sooth her grief,

My PAULUS, be thy care. My last request,
My father, hear. O comfort that good man;
His son before me rullling, in his breast
Receiv'd a javelin, that was aim'd at mine.
Cherish his age. (Dies)

S,mi.

iEmil. Thou Roman, to the height

Of Roman virtue ! to lament for thee,
With common wailings, were a feeble part;
And far beneath the spirit of thy fall;
Unworthy of thy father.

Paul. From this place
Let me persuade my mother to retire.

Cor. I must behold the dead. Fear not excess,

Nor vehemence from me. Those features wear
A look of triumph. Yes, thy mother's heart,
Amidit her anguifll, at that look revives.
The cruel fate thy generous mind embrac'd
Thou halt efcap'd, to meet the death thou lov'dft
In arms, vicaorious o'er thy profirate foe.
Now to the place, where I will dwell with grief,
And ever liftcn to my hero's praise.

[Exit CORNELIA witth PAULUS.

Pries/. He fell not till each omen was acomplifh'd,

Himnfelf his brother, and his country free.
No height, beyond the fnimmit where he flood,
On earth remain'd : that he might ne'er descend,
The gods could only grant a death like his.

..mil. Hence to the forum bear the noble corpse

And let the music of the legions found
A warlike symphony, whose firains express
Our mingled slate of triumph, and of farrow.

[Exeunt omnues,

EPILOGUE,:

# EPILOGUE SPOKEN BY MRS CIBBER.

EPILOGUE

SPOKEN Br MRS CIBBER.
oUR Author, as I'm told, is not to seek

In antient Lore; in Latin, nor in Greek.

I therefore did advise him, as a friend,
To make his learningfervefome useful end:
And let me tell, what rules he hath obfcrv'd,

rWhat unities of tine andplace preferv'd.
He anfwer'd, Poetry is not an art;
'Tis natlure vnly frames the poet's heart:
Still as he thiul's the fene, he feels along,
And from his bosom buyss the raptur'dlfmg.
This is thefacred oracle, theJ frinie
The bardconfiuts, and here, the tunefil Nine.
Tti'l te

ih ame ire, the heearer's foul iui g3low,

Ef/e vain to him the tale of tragic woe.
There is a tem/rer, iwhich ir all in all:
That founds reJ)onfive to the poet's call.
Like Memnon's hart, which poulrd harmonious layr,
TVhene'er itsJIritngs were touch'd by Phebuis' rays.
This temper of the foul ir Jfwct and wild;
It fobs, orfmiles, asfiidden as a child;
:; woes imagti'd, tears unfeigned gives,

ln rd in the poet's world of fancJ lives.
Whi/l thus hefpoke, a bell was heard to ring;

ie /?fopp'd, andJartied lie a guilty thing ;
Ere the dread curtain rofc, in hn./e f widhrew,
And at a dofance W;ait: his doom from yot.

F I N IS.
