.
~....7.;... .... ... . .

:...

As it is Aaed at the

*:-A . . . .
J

; T. -
DRUR r-A G E ;E

ATo which is prefixed,
The S TO R Y of the TRAGEDY Of A GS.

*_- ..'

-

With OBSERVATIONS on the Play, the, Per-
formance, and the Reception.

Tenet auratum Limen Erynnis; .

D U B L IN: ,
Printed for G. andA. EWING, J. HoEY, P. WILSON, .

J. EXSHAW, A. JAMES, W. WiLLiAMSON, R.
WATTS, L. FLIN, W. SLEATOR, B. GUNNES.- -'
J. RUDD, W. WATSO, and R S .
IT. 758.: . 'i

# THE STORY OF THE TRAGEDY OF AGIS. WITH OBSERVATIONS on the Play, the Performance, and the Reception.

: 3H

THE
S T 0R Y

'OF THE
TRAGEDY OF AC1i'S.

WITH
OBSERVATIONS on the Play, the

Performance, and the Reception.

Tenet auratum Limen Erynnis.
A G I S, a good king, rules in Sparta, a former

sovereign has been deposed for his vices: he
is living; and his queen remains in the
place.

Amphares, a turbulent and imperious magifirate,
plots with her for the restoration of her lord.

Lysander is a friend of Agis: he is- an Athenian.
youth; he fights his battles; and is vicorious.

A a Eu antl

[ 4

Euanthe, an.Athenian virgin, in love with Lysander,
has followed him to Sparta.

These are the principal persons.

Agis is acted justly by Mr. Moffop; Lysander glo-

rioufly by Mr. Garrick:. there is all the delicacy of
the sex in the manner of Mrs. Cibber's playing Euan-
the. -

Mr. Havard, one of the best men in the world, la-
bours to appear sufficiently the-villain.

Mrs. Yates performs the queen of the depofed-king:

the part is of importance in the story, but not much
in the person.

Mrs. Pritchard is the mother of the king. Mr.

Holland plays a Thracian, Rbefus, who has served in
the Spartan armies from a youth; and his brother
Euxus commands a body of Thracians brought in to
answer the purposes of the conspirator.

The play breathes heroism and virtue.

Amphares heightens the distress and trouble of the

action, by his love 'for Euanthe. His first objet is
the deftrudion of Agis; the next of Lysander; for a
double cause, because he is the support of Agis, and
he is his rival.

Lysander wins a battle, but leaves his troops with-

out the city. The commotions of the people threaten
Agis; who directs him to go to them, to be ready on
occasion. Love, and obedience to his miltrefs keep
him in the city in disguise; mean time the gates are
shut. There is an army of Thracian mercenaries in
the place; and he cannot get out. While he is speak-
ing with Euanthe, in disguise, Amphares enters, and
seizes the lady. Lysander goes out for a sword; and

returning

[ 5\

returning attacks the ravifler. The Thracians sup-
port Ainphares; but they will not kill Lysander.
Amphares holds his sword to Euanthe's breast, and
gives' the lover the alternative to yield, or fee her die.
Lysander yields himself a prisoner.

The captain of his guard is the brother of Rhesus.

Rhesus attempts to move him, but he is undetermined.
Lysander wants to fend a messenger to the king, who
is in a place of fancuary: Rhesus accepts the office;
and he is discovered, and taken.

This determines the brother: he frees Lysander,

and joins him. That hero has his usual success: he
conquers all opposition, kills Amphares, and pre-
serves Euanthe: but in the mean time the king, de-
luded by a firatagem from his retreat, is sacrificed to
the vengeance of the party. His funeral honours
close the play.

The moral is excellent. That the good of our

country is the sirs: human duty; and death ihould be
delpifed when it comes in opposition.

The plot is well conducted; and, after the two first
aas, is sufficiently full of business.

The. characers are properly supported; and the lan-

guage is unexceptionable. It is in general majeftick,
without false pomp: and there are some paflages,
which would have done honour to the Greeks them-
felves.-Take this example ! " Amphares, having de-
coyed Agis from his retreat in the temple; and'finding
him, when in his power, disregard his menaces, fays
to him, rou urgeyour fate: to which the monarch an-
fwers, in three words, I SCORN IT."

There is the fame sublime in this that made the

Frenchman immortal. What jhouldhe do? fays some
one to Horatius, when his son was supposed to be fly-
ing from three antagonists: the old man anfweis, DYE.

A 3 The

[6

The circumIfance has more fury in this !aft; but the
answer of Agis is as heroic, and as noble.

After our applause of the author, the next is due to

the punic, and his friends. I have seen more gaudy
audiences, but never so judicious. One might have
reckoned every man who honours rank by tasse, a-
mong them: a circle very formidable to a bad author,
but whose applause muff to a good one be the first of
human felicities.

C- T- muff not be offended that I name him,

as a patron of genius, and of virtue. He never atedL
more confiient with his characer. Why ihould the
love of patriotism, or the regard to merit, be confined:
to one scene or subjed ? It warmed one's heart to fee a
person of his judgment and known disinterested cha--
racer, conspicuously applaud, nay, begin the applause,.
where modest worth deserved it.

This is to encourage genius :- these are its best sup--

ports; and we should cherilh the few sparks that glow
among our asses.. Advantage is but the second object
of him who has true spirit: ambition is his first; and.
:if-that can be satisfied, this author feels the perfet:
pleasure,

- It were easy to add to Mr. T-'s a lbng lilt of names.
;of those who gave this play a fantion by their pa-
tronage': but a pitiful and mercenary world would
-fancy interested views ; and call it flattery.

Among the ladies, better judges than ourselves of

what regards the tender pallions, the- success was
-absolute. It was easy to read in the countenance of
lady D-, perhaps the sirs. judge in our age
of theatrical performances, her perfec fatisfadion.

In the next box, the heart perfecly joined this te-

-simony: a lady, overcome by the tenderness of the
scene, fainted.

Tbh-

7

Tliey-ay the breaf of authors is the cave of envy.

rdon't know whether having wrote this pamphlet will
give me title' to that honourable :addition ; but if it
do; there will be one-exceptiori-. Nothing could more
charm me, than to hear that the -earl of'B-, patron
and prot'etor'of every- science, extends--hisjuff regard
to a man injured at home by the too rigid, 'though
much to be reverenced and honoured piety of his bro-
ther clergy,: to fee him tramp the-bullion with his feal
of praise; lead by the- hands an unknown, friendless
and oppressed young'man;,'who had no one recom-
mendatidon but his merit-, procure for him :the favour
of his -prince- and give him:'that encouragement,
which is all the British want (but which.th'ey always
want) to raise them to a superiority over the whole.
world.

The public unanimity on this occasion is more-

f'range. The theatre is a house in which majorities
are common; but I thought the eloquence of a P**'
alone could breathe into them all one spirit ;- lead over-
to the fide of truth those who came determined in the
cause of error.; 'and draw her voice from, the mixedl
multitude.

* Tndeed the sentiments of the.play are fuch.as.ought,
to make a strong and universal impression upon Britons::
and mos at this peculiar juncture;

" That honour gives the soldier- only this. choice,
viAcory or death.

"That kings are born for- the good of their people.

" That it: is happier to perifl. innocently, than tp;
submit to crimes.

And " that men never should repent of virtue;:
though the reward be death."

A -.4hc. -

- " ' [8]

The people -must be indeed devoted on whom such

sentiments have no effea; whom they. do, not warm
and animate, and inspire: but this we had the joy to
fee is not the fate of Britain. The whole people felt
their force r those firit, in whom such thoughts can be
most useful, the higher ranks,the patrons of true worth,
and the friends of virtue; but from them the fame full
glow of fatisfacion and applause diffused itself to the
less elevated and refined: and if less quick in their
susceptibility, they were not leTs strongly moved.
Their eyes, their countenances, confessed the flame;
before their hands or voice expressed it: the scene
brought into life the power of the Orphalan lyre; when
in the Argonautic vessel:

High on tbe fern the Tbratian rais'd his frain,

And Argo fa¢n her kindred trees
Iejcendfrom Pelion to ibe main.

9raniere denmigods jlod round,

Iad mengrew beroes at tbe /ond,

Iafpir'd swith gloryJs arms.
Each chief his feven-foldjbielddifplay'd,

And bas unmbeatb'd the bining blade,
And rocks, andfeas, andJkies resoInd,

To arms, to arms, to arms! !

These are the emotions tragedy mhould raise: these

are its true effets on a brave people. This is its pro-
per office; aid in this it is scarce less honourable than
in the first sacred service, the praise of gods.

It was not only in there general sentiments of virtue

and of glory, the universal voice of this Britilh audi-
ence, worthy of that name diftinguilhed the due
sense of the author's merit, orjuft conception of the
dignity of virtue.

There were particular passages which charmed
them. Private vices appeared an object capable of

striking

firiking them with as frong impressions as public
glory.

The Prologue, not one. of the usual kind, but

something much. more proper, and much better, made
up in sentiment amply what it might be supposed to
want in that pert spirit, which has of late been the
charatcer of those appendages to tile most serious
pieces. The people received it with applauses of the
heart, much more to be desired than the idle, hasty,
and often rafl, noise of hands.

When they.who had not read,-or perhaps heard be-

fore, the rigid Spartan virtue, saw wives and mothers
arming the hulband and the son for battle ; and telling
them, that they would rather hear their death than their
dilhonour, they caught the sacred flame without ex-
ception; and there was not a Britifhl matron but for
the time was such.

I cannot believe the author aimed in any part at

personalities; for it is beneath hisgenius: perhaps'the
pit made their own application: but something there
was said of men who aimed at enriching themselves in times
of general calamity ; and it was felt severely.

Another sentiment that had, though not so suddenly,

its effea, was this: Dangers wbhen necefary oughtriot to
bejhunned... They. heard it patiently; but.when some
one named Rochefort from the boxes, the alarm was in-
ftant and was universal: the applause was not limited to
that of hands, huzzas declared the Britim approbation;
and the performance for some time was interrupted.

We owe acknowledgements to:the manager of this

theatre, for an improvement on the common praCtice,
revived, if not invented of very late time, the introdu-
cing harmony to the afiftance of sense, and the relief of
a too long attention.

This play has flewn a happy effet of it. He has

A 5 obtained

[10]

obtained the composition from a master in the old
school $; who knows how to preserve the foul and
spirit of that manner which rende.ed Purcell's name
so much- ereemed; and to soften the roughness of
its mafter-flrokes with.all the art of new-born modu-
lation.

The symphonies in the first ode are striking, and

perfecly new (a Praise of no mean rank at this time,
when plagiarism is more common in mufick even than
in writing) and they have yet so much of the old great
tyle, that could a pupil of that Purcell's have been re-
vived, he would have sworn they were his master's.

The other excellence of that great manner was the

adapting the found and measure to the sense. I think.
in this, Purcell, as he never had, never will have his.
equal: but if his fame be threatened with rivallhip, it
muff be from his hand who gave expreflion to this and.
to the other ode.

It has been said, the clergy ihould not furniih the-

:atres; and this author has, in an uncommon manner,
felt the weight of that unfair prejudice. Far from.
having reifon on its fide, the opinion denies the stags
the means of its greatest benefit, that of inculcating mo-
jality on its most pure principles: for genius in others;
is too much and too generally tinctured with infidelity:
and it precludes those who are mofl qualified to do it
honour.

Why should not the flage become the fchoolof piety,.

as well as virtue ? It may, without the too free use of
appropriated words claimed by the pulpit. This au-
thor shews it may, and he has given a true sublimity
.to many passages, from the sacred writings, where pei-
-haps few observe the glorious plagiarism.

L Dr. BaQYC

if.

' .J

If any.think men less devoted to the Chriftifan dc--

trines, would give a fairer face to heathen virtue; they
err extremely. This play affords full means of confuta-
tion. One inilance may.be named, with which per-
haps few others of its kind, .in. this. or any play, could.
frand in competition.

Lysander, in his prison, refleAs upon the state. of man:

The author, as this character' was pagan, gives him no
sentiments but such as suit those principles he.muss have
imbibed. in- Athens and at Sparta. He doubts, although
he hopes, a future itate of being.. He fears that man, as
he most beautifully exprelfes it,falls like the leafthat/iall
revive.no more. But his.-efolution on this uncertain,
state of thought is the greatest the human mind can. er-
tertain,.

I 'will live to-day as if I -were immortal.

Many have thought (for to few judges there are many

criticks) that the genius of Mr. Garrick is more calcu-
lated.for comedy than tragedy: I don't know whether-
his friends do not imagine it; but let those who have
entertained that opinion, observe him in thisfpcech. It
is a very finified one; and of a peculiar kind. They
v.ill not think he excels what he does there, not.in. the-
prettiett fooleries of the Wonder..

Though it is idle to praife-this fovereigh. of actors, his

full fame not-admitting augmentation; it would seem in-
sensibility to speak of the play, and not to have named
his conduct in that scene where he resigns his sword, to.
turn from the bofom.ofhis mistress that of the.ravilher.

The conflit is violent, and the scene well worked.

We do not know which part to expect he will take ;
and we are apt to blame him when he chufes to yield.
himself to certain death, and her into the arms of this
bold ruffian. The catastrophe ihews he did right; for.
on this depends her life, his own, his safety, and the
tlate's: but this we cannot at that time foresee. The.

distress

[12..

diftref is therefore the greater: it is notpoflible, con-
fidering all the circumstances, to involve. human nature
in more. This performer executes and expresses it all:
iot:his looks or gestures bnly, not the cadence of his
voice, but his voice itself, broken with anguish, tells us
he gives up with his sword all that is worth his thoughts;
even tho' he prevents the immediate death of the be-
loved Euanthe.

Whatever we want in England, taste for amusements

is'not one of the articles. Plays are the moftinftruc-
tive: with good regulations they may serve the fiate;
and they will always tend to private improvement.
Vice is so common in ordinary life, and so successful,
that, were there not the stage, wherein it is.repre-
sented in its proper colours, men (for they frequent not
churches) might forget even its nature and deformity.

Those who fee there is this value in the theatres will

not fail to observe, that, to fulfil their use, they must
encourage genius. The author no more than the fol-
dier, or the statesman rushes at once perfect into the
field wherein he is to ftew his excelience: and the
public are in all inisances equally to raifc, improve, and
perfect in their servants thole talents which may' be of
use to them.

'Tis thus true genius, thus candour judges: the

owls ofcritcifm sleep in the day of splendor and of
beauty; but if the b:ightnefs fade in any part, the
gloom, their proper day-break, wakes them; and ig-
norant of excellence, they regard only what may be
censured. 'Tis thus they beat down with their broad
heavy wings the fearful and weak infant merit: more
hateful than all human beings, except those who adopt
their doctrines.

PROLOGUE,
I

# PROLOGUE. Written by — Spoken by Mr. GARRICK.

PRO LOG U E.

Written by -

Spoken by Mr. GARRICK.

rS in these days of luxury and ease,
A talefrom Sparta's rigid fiate can pleane

If patriot plans a Britijh breafi can warm
If Kings asserting liberty can charm ;
IfJ irtuefill a grateful asped wear;
Check not at Agis' fall the gen'rous tear.

He view'd his fbjeRls with a parent's love;

With zeal tofave afinking people lrove ;
Strove their chang'd hearts vtitb glory to inflame;
To mend their Morals ; and refore their name:
Till FaSion rose with Murder at her fide;
Then mourn'd his country; perfe-ver'd; and died.

That country oncefor virtue was rever'd;

Admir'd by Greece; by haughty Afiafear'd.
Then Citizens and Soldiers were the fame;
And soldiers heroes; for their wealth was fame.
Then for the Brave the Fair referv'd her charms;
And fcorn'dto clasp a coward in her arms.
The trumpet call'd; Jhefeiz'd thefword and Ihield;
Array'd in hafle her huflandfor the field;
.ndfighing whifJper'd in a fond embrace,
" Remember I -- death is better than disgrace.
sThe widow'd Mother /he'i'd her parting son
The race of glory which hisfire had run.
"Myfon, thy flight alone I lhalldeplore.
" Return avicorious !- or return no more !"

While Beauty thus with patriot zeal combin'd,
dnd round the laurd'd bead her tyrtle twin'd

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

WFbi? all consef the Virtuous were the Great ;;
Fame, Valor, Conquefi, grac'd the Spartan iate;
Her Pow'r congenial with her Virtue grew,
Adutifreedoms Banner o'er her Phalanx few ;
Bitfoon as Virtue dropt berfick'ning head;,
Fame, Valor, Conquefi, Pow'r an2d Freedomfled.

May tbis fadJfcne improve each Briton's heart!

Rouse him with 'warmth to adt a Briton's part!
Prompt bim with Sparta's noblefiJons to -vie;.,
To liveinglory;. and'in freedom die!.

DRAMA TIS PERSO NE.

A:GIS, King of Sparta; Mr. MossoP.

LYSANDER, S7 pMr. GARRICK.
AMPHARES, partans Mr. HAVARD.

RHESUS, Thracians. Mr. H:.LAND.
Euxus,. Mr. DAVIES..

WOMEN..

AGESISTRATA,. Mother of AGIs, Mrs. PR ITCHARD..
SANDANE, Queen to LgEONIDAS YATE.

the exil'd King, . Mrs.

EUAKTHE, an-Athenian Lady, Mrs. CIBBER..
Senators, Ephori, Messengers..

# ACT I. SCENE I.

A G I S:

A
T R AG E D Y:

ACT I. SCENE L
A court and hall, common to the palaces of the

kings of SPARTA.

Enter SANDANE attended.

A S T EN, ORONTES, to the senate house,
..H And learn if rumor's voice.has spoke the truth.

[.Exit Attendant.

The adverse fortune of an exil'd king
Pursues my lord. Achaia's generous aid
Sustains his cause in vain. Why rilk a battle,.
When the continuance of defensive war
Secur'd success and victory in Sparta ?

Would.

Would I had never left thy fplendid-court,
Delightful Sardis ! to be Sparta's queen.

Enter AMPHARES.
Welcome, AMPHARES ! Have the armies met ?

Ampb. They have. This morning, at the break of

day,

The Spartan army charg'd Achaia's host.
This and no more is known. Suspense and fear
Poflefs the people; to the gates they run,
Then to their houses: the fill whisper spreads
Thro' juftling multitudes the dread alarm.

Sand. Alas! revenge and empire now depend

On the wild issue of unruly war.
What if the arms ofAGis should prevail ?

4mpb. Although he should, the toils of fate surround

him.

Dauntless and firm our brave aflociates fland,
And with impatience wait the deftin'd hour
To ruf on AGIS. This unlook'd-for battle
Is but.a solemn prelude to the a&,
Which bold conspiracy will soon perform.
This day flall terminate the reign of AGIS,
And make, 0 Queen! all power in Sparta thine.

Sand. I fee that danger only whets the brave.

But yet, AMPHARES, if my lord is vanquifh'd,
Will not the conquering army awe the city?

Amph. AGIS hal- be the surety of our cause,

And hofrage for our safety, till we wrest
The sword from proud LYSANDER, if he conquers;
But that I fear not much. New to command
From idle Athens the mock hero comes,
Starts up a soldier, and a statesman too;
Each palm he claims: All honours must adorn
The chosen friend of visionary AGIS.

Sand. May Mars direct him so to guide the war,

As AGIS rules the state: And mutiny
Prove there as fatal as sedition here.

Atfph..

Rmph. This factious state muff change its feeble form,

Waver no more beneath a double reign
Of limited, contending, useless kings.
Henceforth 6ur monarch fall in Sparta rule,
As Jove alohein high Olympus reigns.

Sand. So reign the mighty monarchs of the East;

And such imperial power, I thought, belong'd
To Sparta's king, else I had ne'er been queen.
Young, and deceiv'd, I left my father's court
For Lacedemon's miserable sceptre.
I did endeavour to extend its sway,
And to ambition rous'd my Spartan lord.
But the vain pupil of the Grecian schools,
Unprincely AGIS, marr'd-the brave design.
Chief of the multitude, idol and slave
Of the base populace, he led the herd,
He urg'd their brutal fury on the king.

Amnpb. And now their fury on himself recoils

Like the unruly elephant, they turn,
And trample down the ranks in which they fought.

Sand. Thatis their Liberty.
Amph. Let us employ,

And then suppress, such formidable licence.
My magistracy now is near expir'd;
A king's resentment and a rival's hate
Have long hung over my devoted head:
Farewel to place, to dignity, and power,
Whilst haughty AGIS fills the Spartan throne:
I will not live obscure in Lacedemon,
Nor roam thro' Grecian states a banil'd man,
If I muff set, to rife and Ihine no more,
A fiery track ihall mark my setting fun.
But AGIS comes.

SanJi. And AGESISTRATA.

Farewel! Success attend thee, brave AMPHARES !
I will not flay. My foul disdains to hide
Its hatred or its scorn. [Exit SANDANE,

A.mpb. Yet they who mean

To gratify these palfions, muff conceal them.
T

This

This day decides my fate. So- let it be,
Such brief conclusion have I ever lov'd.
Assist me, Hermes, God of fratagem,
With artful words, to sooth the mind ofAGIs.,.:
And turn him from the track my purpose holds&,

Ki!ier AGIS tzIdAGESISTRATA>

Aeft Alas, my son ! that bold bad man I dread !
Agis He seems to wait us. At this hour, AMPHARES,,
I thini thar thou or all men ihou'dil have ihunn'd me.

Ampb. iMyl motive in attending here your presence
Merits a less injurious salutation.

Aris. I know thy merits, and'I will reward them.

Art thou not author of the woes of Sparta,
Prime mover and inflamer of sedition ?
Haft thou no; bent the power of thy high office
To the subversion of the state thou ferv'f ?
At thee this day my indignation burns.
I am dithonour'd--

Ampb. What has dilhonour'd thee ?
Agis. Thou and thy practices, they have compell'd me-

To leave the noblest- fation of a prince.
In time of war where ihould a king be found
But at his army's head ? There AGIS stood,
When you and your presumptuous Ephori
Required mv presence here. Ungrateful Spartans !
Had you allow'd me but one other day,
Then had I fought this battle for my country,
And died or conquer'd with her bravefd sons.

Ages Peril, my son ! dwells not in camps alone;

In cities, palaces, and courts of justice,
With treachery and treason fie inhabits.
Peril attended thus thou must encounter,
More hideous sure than-in the ranks of war.

Amph. I know my ations have incens'd the king.

But I imagin'd not that such suspicions
Found entertainment in your royal breats ?.

Agis.i

Agis. Haft thou not join'd the enemies of AGIS.
Thou who waft once his friend, inconstant man.

4mph. rhave oppos'd the counsel of a foe,
Whose arts depriv'd me of my prince's favour.

Agis. Thou haft pppos'd LYcuRGUS and the laws,.

Which rais'd the name of Sparta to the skies.
The Delphi{ God inrpir'd the deep design:
For more tha-hhamn was that power of thought
Which join'd the public to the private good,
With such perfection, that each felfjih paflion
Flbw'd in the channel of the common welfare,
And, like one family of sons and fires,
And dearest brothers, a great people liv'd.
In peace they liv'd without orftrife or scorn,.
In war they fought to conquer, or to die.
Equal and free, our happy fathers knew.
No interest but the interest of the fate;
*No gain but Sparta's glory; proud they bore
That palm aloft, and lhar'd the high refpeft,.
The admiration, which confenting.Greece
Paid to th' imperial virtue of their country.

Amph. Revolving time that'fyftem overthrew,
And chang'd the manners and the laws of Sparta.

Agis. The laws have been negleted, not-annull'd;,

And corrupt.rulers have corrupted manners.
Authority will soon revive the laws,
And great example yet restore the manners,
In spite of those who have opprefs'd their country,,
Depriv'd the people of their antient rights,
And while the nation funk beneath their sway,
Still strove for power in a declining kingdom,
Still fought for wealth in an impoverilh'd land..
Even at this hour rapacious they persist,
And, like rome wretches in a stranded vessel,
Plunder and riot in the midit of ruin.

Amsph. Mov'd by the present perils of the ifate,.

This signal hour I chose, unknown as yet
The fortune of the field, to.change my condut,
And make an offer of my aid to AGIS.

Ai4e

dgis. If I fhouldjudge the future by the past,
Thou must forgive me, tho' I doubt thy faith.

Ages: Yethear him, AGIS: in an hourlike this
He who affifance offers is a friend.

Agis. This hour mayyet deceive their country's foes.

I know the base foundation of that hope
Which makes my baffled enemies presume.
LYSANDER'S army in its ranks contains
The best and bravelf ofLaconia's sons;
The faction wiih and-hope defeat to them,
That Sparta's generous youth may ne'er return
To guard that freedom which has made them brave.

Ampb. The boldness of their hopes their deeds will

prove
In the assembly, if Achaia conquer.

Ages. AMPHARES, fay, what is their utmoff aim ?
Ampb. The old dependants of the exil'd king,

And all the venal members of the state,
Won by SAmNDANE'S arts and foreign gold,
Aim to restore LEONIDAS, who comes
With hoff'le armies to enslave his country:
Therefore SANDANE'S proffers I rejeced,
Have warn'd the king, and would have serv'd him too;
But since resentment and distrust prevent me,
Neutral I sand, and will not seek that welcome
Which his more artful enemies would give.

Agis. Thou fpeak'ft more boldly than becomes AM-

PHARES.

Add that to the offences I forgive.
It is the sacred maxim of my reign,
That in a prince's consecrated bread
Revenge and anger ihould not long remain.
These passions in a king afflict the fRate,
By driving raih offenders to defpaif.
This day decides your character with me.
Now let your actions prove your words sincere.

Ampb. No other terms I a&, and sure I am
Ne'er liall AMPHARES need again forgiveness.

[Exit AMPHARES.

Manest

A TRAGED Y. 21

Manent AGIS andAGESISTRATA.

Agis. Well has he judg'd the season of submission.
He will assist us if LYSANDER conquers.

Ages. May Jove avert the evils which I fear!

I dread the ruin of the Spartan state,
And fear the downfal of our antient house,
The blackest fury of the Stygian realm,
The most deftruaive, is infernal Discord,
Bath'd in the blood of kings {he walks this world,
And tumbles states and empires to the ground.

Agis. Nations oft perish by their princes crime;

But now if Sparta's antient state muff fall,
Gods and good men shall witness for its king,
That he with fate contended for his people,
And on the ruins of their virtue fell. ·

Ages Think not I mean to blame your high dc-

sign,

Age has not chang'd the tenor of my mind,
Nor pall'd my admiration of true glory.
Sprung, like thy father, from Alcides' blood,
I feel the spirit of the Spartan line.
Only let me adjure thee to beware,
And walk with caution thro' surrounding perils.
Tho' thou defpifeft every form of danger,
Think what a helpless train attends on thee,
An aged mother, and an infant son.

Agis. Divine Alcides will protet his race.
Age. I will invoke the God; in times like these

Prayers are the arms of our defenceless sex,
A spotless choir of matrons and of virgins,
Who o'er their country mourn, ryfelf will lead
To the high temple of the son of Jove.
He yet may hear the voice of supplication,
And firetch his arm to save the Spartan state.

[Exit AGESISTRATA.
Agis. (alone.) Without, the enemy; within, the sac-

tion.
What shou'd I think ? I have a thousand thoughts-

That

That rife and fall like waves upon the shore.
I need thee now, LYSANDER ! 0 my friend!
I lean on thee, and thou perhaps art fall'n.
Ye ever-living gods, who know my heart,
I truf in you, for righteous are my thoughts,
AIIlbent on raising up long-proftrate Sparta.
With Sparta too, I would be proud to rife,
And gain such glory as my fathers gain'd,
When Perlia's tyrant trembled at their arms.
If in this just ambition I hould perish,
My name hall go to nations yet unborn.
But I muftchange my firain; EUANTHE comes.
Alas, LYSANDER, led by love and thee,
She left her Athens for this land of broils.

Enter EUANTHE.

Euan. No tidings from the camp?
.gis. None, fair EUANTHE.

If we had loft the field, the flying rout
Ere this had reach'd our gates.

Euan. Oh ! many a dame,

Matron and virgin, tremble at this hour;
But who has cause like mine? The most forlorn
And desolate of women is EUANTHE !
If

Agis. Small the chance of what EUANTHE fears:

In the long wars of fill-contending Greece
Leaders of armies have but rarely fallen.

E;!ar. One thing I know, and with prophetic tongue

I speak it, Prince! if Sparta triumph not,
Ne'er iall your eyes again behold LYSANDER.
Disdain in him is fatal as despair.

Agis. When he returns viEtorious from the field,

Then hall he hear who best has spoke his praise.
But I mutt leave you now: The senate waits me.
Hereafter we (hall speak of this, and smile
Like mariners who on the peaceful hlore
Sit, and with pleasure talk of tempests past.

(Exit AcGs.

Euan.

Euant. (alone.) This stedfast ease is all atffn'd, I

fee;

He saggers at the imminent event.
How dreadful is this interval to me,
Who am bereft and deffitute of all
Those aids that flay afflicion; and murt'bear
The weight of woe.that's heavier every hour.
The queen, and generous AGIS too, discharge
The dues of kindred with unfeigned love.
But our acquaintance is not old enough,
To yield a ripen'd sympathy, whose tate
Alone can comfort such a mind as mine.
Yet I repent me not in this extreme,
That I forsook my country and my friends.
They would have forc'd me to a loathed bed,
And torn me from the noblest of mankind.
If he ihould fall:! my love! my only love!
Shall I survive thee; and return to Athens,
Be humbled there before my haughty kindred,
And hear them blame the ashes of LYSANDER?
Forbid it, fearless love'! forbid it, Ihame!
Forbid it, honour, and my nature's pride.;
Death ihall forbid it, for I dare to die.

Enter RHESUS.

Erna. RHESUS, 'Great Gods'! Oh fay, how fares
LYSANDER ?

Rhef As well as glorious viEtory can make him.
Euan. Forgive my rash despair, my thanks accept,

Ye gracious powers who guard his darling breast.
Where is he now ?

RhefJ With Acis in the senate.
Eian. Already here; blest be theGods of Greece:!
Rhef Soon as the trumpet from pursuit recall'd

Our conquering Spartans, in the field arriv'd
A weary messenger, 'by AGIs rent;
LYSANDER frait bespoke the -royal band:.
" With all the speed of men to Sparta haste,
" Chastise bold treason, and defend your king,"

,He_

He said; and call'd to me. With a few horse
I follow'd him: And when he fought the king,
By his command to you I brought these tidings.

Euan. Most welcome, RHEsus. But has Sparta

loft .
None of her noble youth ? :

Rbef. No man of note

Fell in the field but one, whose loss you'll mourn,
LYSANDER'S friend, Athenian PLYDORUS.

Euan. Alas! alas! my joy is mix'd with woe.

Unhappy youth! on my ill-omen'd head
The blame of thy untimely death will fall.
Condusting me, thou cam'ft to distant Sparta.
Fatal the honours Sparta's king beftow'd
Upon the generous guardian of EUANTHE.

Rbef Lady, the people of my native land,

The warlike Thracians, hold it vain to mourn
For men who fall in battle; such they deem
The favourites of MARS, our country's God.
Those they bewail who die by dire disease,
Of youth and vigor full. But molt of all
Lament old men, who drink the bitter dregs
Of life and woe,..nd in decrepit age.
(Extremity of dotage) wilh to live.

Euan. Who are thole men who near the temple

'rand?
Uncouth tome their garb, and strange their arms.

Rbef. They are Thracians, lady.
Emuan. What seek they here ?
Rbe. I will accost the herald,
And learn his business.

Euan. To the palace, RHESUS,

I go the willing messenger of joy.
This vicory will free the anxious Queen
From many:fears. I pray thee do not tarry,
But come and tell me what yon herald bears,
And what affairs Rill occupy the senate.

Rbef Depend on the unwearied zeal of RHESUS.

[Exit RHESUS.

Manet

Manet EUANTHI.

Acis and Sparta, and the public cares,
Detain LYSANDER from my longing eyes.
I fee the happy change of my condition,
And ihare the triumphs of the man I love.
But yet the flightef circumrance creates
New fears to me. Why lingers thus LYsANDER I
My mind is not at reft ; the winds; are hush'd, ',
But Rill my bosom quivers from the florm.

[Exit EUANTHE;
End of thefr .; a : -...--

*- B.3 -C. ACT

# ACT II. SCENE I.

ACT II. SC EN E I.
Euan. T. HEIR tedious council now is at an

T. end,

And surely he will haften to EUANTHE.
What means this clamour?

[Shout'of the people behind the Scenes.

Ha! he comes, he comes!

Loud acclamations and the voice of joy
Proclaim the hero.

Enter LYSANDER.

Lyf 0 Omy life! my love!

To meet thee here is happiness compleat.
The gods have blest me to my utmost with;
And brought me full of glory to EUANTHE.

Euan. Thanks to the Gods who have preferv'd LYr

SANDER.
Athenian Pallas sure has heard my prayers.

Lyf. And mine; for mutual is the lover's prayer.

Another deity I now invoke,
Whose rites the god of war has long delay'd,
With peace well-pleas'd ihall golden Hymen come,
And crown at last our long eventful love.

Euan. Speak not of Hymen now: his torch for

me
He ihall not light, whilst cruel Discord waves

Heq,

Her horrid brand, and whilit unburied lies
Thy friend and mine, the generous POLYDORUS.

Lyf. Tho' love and glory both my breast inspire,

And fortune smiles on both, yet sorrow finds
A place to fit in: but 'tis temper'd sorrow;
For never Grecian hero greater died.

Euan. He fell the vicim of his love to thee;

He follow'd thee when thou forfook'ft EUANTHE,
Left me the day I touch'd the Spartan mhore,
Tho' royal AGIs begg'd thee to remain.

Lyf. Unjust EUANTHE, thus to blame LYSANI

DER

Who fought the field, the soldier of his love
As of his sacred country: fought to gain,
With liberty, a rank and place of honour,
Such as becomes the husband of EUANTHE;
That tender name, and names that wait upon it,
Awake emotions as implacable
To tyranny, as generous and great,
As ever felf-renouncing hero own'd.
When the chief aim is right, all paflions else
Of noble kind impel the self-same way.
The lover and the huiband rouse and fire
The Spartan and the man.
Of common clay, and in one common mould
Mankind are made; but the celestial fire
That gives them life and foul, is liberty.
And I, Prometheus like, to gain that fire
For Sparta's sons, would brave the bolt of Jove;

Euan. To me you need not vaunt your daring

mind.

Alas ! LYSANDER ! I am fill afraid
Of perils lurking in this troubled slate.
O leave me not again to grief and fear,
And to AMPHARES.

Lyf. 'Leave thee toAMPHARES?
Etan. Yes, in thy absence he did talk of love,
Boasted his wealth, his clients, and his power;

B z Mention'd

Mention'd the ruin of thy father's fortunes,
And spoke contemptuous of thy rafi designs.

Lyf Immortal gods! Did I not hate this man
Enough ?

Enter a HELOT.
Whence, HELOT ?

Helot. Lord, from Celimene.

(Delivers a Letter.)

Lyf. (reads) Let Acis flandupoi his guardto dy,

This to LYSA DE R from a fiitbfulfriend.-
Helot, return, and tell the noble dame
That the remembrance of her generous.mind
Shall live for ever in my grateful brealt.

Euen. Who is this faithful friend?
Ls. A Spartan dame,

A gentle one, tho' wedded to a foe
Of royal Acis. In her virgin state
She was the constant and the lov'd companion
Of fair DEIDAMIA, AGIs' fhort-iiv'd queen.
Thro' all our various strife, the generous dame
Preserves the friendships of her early days.
This scroll the king must fee. Farewel, .EUANTHE.

Euan. Its threatning I rain awakes my former

fears.

Would you had been, like me, content with love,
And never left I!yffus' flowery banks!
A fairer garland there you might have won,
Than ever war beftow'd, th' immortal wreath
Of PALLAS, queen of arts as well as arms.
But you forsook the vale, and left the shade
To climb ambition's bare and rocky height,
To ifand the forms and tempefis of the world.

LyJf Your words, like melancholy music, take

My lift'ning ear, and cause delusive sadness;
For vain the malice of our baffled foes,
And impotent will prove their last endeavours;
Pall are the forms and tempests of our fortune;

Let

Let not EUANTIHE heed the rack of clouds,
Nor dread the murmurs of the falling main.

Euan. Elate with victory, you scorn your foes.

1 with that RHESUS would return again
Before you go to AcGs.

Ls/ Where is RinESUS ?
Euan. I saw some warriors clad in horrid arms

Near yonder temple stand. Strait RHESUS knew
Thegarband arms of his own native Thrace,
And, wond'ring at the fight, went forth to learn
Who and from whence t-hey were.

Lyf That should be known.

In yonder temple fit the Ephori,
Thole factious magifrates who love not Ac is.
If RHEsus come to you, detain him not;
Our relolutions may on him depend.

Euan. LYSANDER, flay; you go again to AGIS,

Perhaps to plan new perils to thy life;
If so, by all that's sacred I conjure thee
To let me know your purpose. Speak with me
Before you execute what you resolve.
The image of the stern -AMPHARES haunts me;
Need I entreat thee to defend me from him,

L)f.'No ! by the Gods! O urge nme not, EUAN.o

THE!

Nor rouse those thoughts a lover cannot bear.
Defend thee from AMPHARES ! O my fair!
When thou art wrong'd, LYSANDER lives no more!
But fee the king.

Euan. Let caution shew your love.

LYSANDER goes off towards that fide

of the flage where AG is appears.

Manet EUANTHE.

If nature teaches me aright to read
The mind of man, this is a powerful spell
To charm the daring spirit of LYSANDER,
And make him think of me as well as Sparta.

[Exit EUANTHE.
B 3 Enter

Et AGIS:

Enter Ac is.

Lyf Regard, 0 king, the warnings of a friend

lnftruted in the counsels of thy foes.
Behold the stedfast faith of CELIMrENE.

Gives the let.s>

Agis. I cannot think so basely of the people.

Yor them I have unplum'd the regal power,
And deck'd their freedom with the spoils of kings,
If they betray me; of all creatures, man
Is most ungrateful to his benefator.
The generous courser and the faithful dog
MWith true affe&tion love their gentle master;
Nay even the heavy ox, the fiubborn mule,
Dullest of beasts, they know the hand that feeds

them.

Lyf Humanity lives in thy breast, O king

Andidictates confidence unlimited.
Virtue approves the generous extreme,
And magnanimity this error loves.
Let private men indulge the glorious fault,
And set their lives and fortunes on the faith
And gratitude of those they have oblig'd;
But let feverer prudence guard the heart
Of him whose brows are circled with a crown.

Enter an OFFICER.

Offc. 0 King! the captain of Amycla's gate

Informs you that he has this hour descried
A band of men who halted near his pofd;
A thousand Thracians, they report themselves,
mir'd by AMPHARES for SELEUCUS' service.

4gis.

'Agis. A thousand Thracians!
Ofi. On their-march to Sardis.
Lyf By whose permission do they march this way ?
Of. Before the troops'arriv'd, a herald came
Who to the Ephori a message bore.

Agis. Your diligence in duty Lcommend.

[Exit OFFICER.
Lyf. The veil's withdrawn, and treason flands re-

veal'd.

Ne'er shall AMPHARES need again forgiveness.
With what a double tongue the traitor spoke!
All-feeing Gods how little do we know
The greatnets of those blessings you confer.
Had we not fought to day, had we not conquer'd,
AGIS and Sparta had been loft for ever.

Agis. This victory came like the bolt of Jove,
And levell'd their designs.

Lyf. Yet if they dare

The worf of crimes, their treason may succeed.
Your troops, your conquering troops, are not ar-

riv'd;

Th' assembly meets; unguarded there you fland -
What keeps the traitors from your noble life ?

Ag. My life! LYSANDER. No, I fear not that.

The ancient annals of this land record,
That barbarous foes revere the race divine,
And turn in battle from a Spartan king.

L)s. The multitude may till revere their lord

Who from the blood of great Alcides springs;
And yet some impious hand may strike the prince,
Altho' of virtue as of race divine.

Agis. I'll change the guards, and place at ev'ry gate
Some men of trust.

Lyf. Mount your Theffalian feed,

And meet the troops that haften to your aid.
With eager lteps the royal band advance,
And wish for nothing but their king to lead them.
Then if the furies in their wrath provoke

14 Your

Your foes to rife in arms, let arms.decide.
Ne'er were the good and bad ,winnow'd so well,
And fever'd from each other, .Suchb the hoitsj
And such will be their fate, as when the rage
Of earth-born giants da'd the sons. of heav'n.

Agis. Thou reafon'ft like. aa anxious friend, Ly-

- -- SANDER:
Thy fears are all for me, mine for'my'people. .

- Enfier RHssuv.

MHail, gallant RHEsus ! now'ft thou ought of those
Thy countrymen, who thus unlook'd-for come,
And in a doubtful hour perplex our councils.

Rbe. The Thracians are a thousand men con-

pleat . .

From snowy Hemus and the northern hills
Of wild Odryfus the fierce warriors come.
RHINALCES leads thern, of illufrious birth;
But, stern, imperious, and grown old in arms,
He knows no umpire but the sword, no law
Except obedience to the prince he serves.

Sgis. Such oft are those that quit a needy home
To serve as hirelings in a tyrant's hoff.

Rke. Next in command my brother Euxus stand,

A Youth to MARS devoted; for.he loves
Danger itself, not danger's rich reward.

L-. Haft thou yet seen him?
Rke. No.
L.s. Has he yet heard
That thou art herein Sparta ?

RZe. He believes

That i am still in Athens. From the herald
I kept my name and quality conceal'd;
For I fufpeced that these Thracian troops,
Though hir'd for Asia, were for Sparta meant.
If it prove so, I may be useful here:
Miy valiant brother bears a generous mind,
And,. tho' of arms enamour'd, jufice loves.

Ais,

gis. Haste to your valiant brother, and explains

With an impartial tongue, the state of Sparta.
Shew him where justice, and where honour stand.
If these are sacred, as thou fay'ft they are,
To gallant Euxus he may prove a friend.

Lyf. Exert the strong persuasion of a brother;

And tell-him, RHESUS, if he loves bright' arms,
And that immortal glory valour gains,
No more to wield a mercenary sword,
But plant himself with thee in Sparta's foil,
Where AG is willb-is noble nature cherilh,
And fea-ftis courage to such lofty deeds,
As antient tory tells of Sparta's chiefs. -

[Exit RHESUS.
Agis. I hope that RHESUS will divide the Thra-

cians:

This favours well the bias of my mind,
Averse to leave the city on suspicion,
And drive the wavering facion to extremes.

LyfJ O generous prince! whom I admire and blame. -

The greatest foe, the foe LYSANDER dreads
Is the unequall'd gentleness of AGIs.
Review the story of the Grecian fates,
And mark how freedom fell in every land.
The brave asserters of the public cause
Have ever been too mild in evil times;
Have, like indulgent parents, spar'd the rod,
And let the vices of their children live -
To kill the virtues. Hence, let AGis learn,
The only lesson that his nature needs.

Agis. Uncertain is the peril if I stay,

But certain is the evil if I fly.
I will remain; but to assure my safety, -
You must, LYSANDER, to the troops return.

Lyf. And leave my prince alone amidst his foes t-

Revoke the hard command. If you're refolv'd
To brave the peril, then my place I claim
Next to your person; by your fide I tand;

-B 5 Perhaps

Perhaps some noble service I may render,
Receive the mortal wound aim'd at my princes
And with my life redeem the life of AGIS.

Agis. Your great imagination's up in arms;

But hear me, and let calmer reason judge.
I am determin'd not to quit the city,
The guilt of civil war mall not be mine.
LYSANDER'S pretence here without the troops
Would but embolden and excite my foes,
Who may be tempted by this fair occasion,
This mighty vantage to furprize us both.
Without delay, once more, LYSANDER, arm,
And ostentatiously pass thro' the gate.
This victory, and the approaching host,
Will hush the threatned form.

Lyf. So may it prove.

But there is something in my heart rebels
Againfi this counsel! Oh I cannot leave you--
Nor ought I now to stay. Let never man
Say in the morning that the day's his own:
Things pafi belong to memory alone;
-Things future are the property of hope.
The narrow line, the isthmus of these seas,
The infant scarce divisible, is all
That mortals have to iland on. O my prince !
ILYSAKDER leaves you with a heavy heart.

Agis. Farewel, thou Spartan of the antient mould,
Dear as the brother of his blood to AGIS !

[TIey embrace and part.
L1SASDE. r

Lyf. Ha! may beaven your purpose change
Agis. My will is six'd. But though my judgment

too

Confirms the secret counsel of my heart,
Yet l may be deceiv'd ? perhaps, my friend,
We part this moment ne'er to.meet again.

Lyf. Let us not part at all. 'Tis inspiration,.

The guardian god, the Demon of the mind,
Thus QfFen presses on the human bread

'
" * " ' ' ~~~~~~~~~~~~'/role

Agis. Mitake me not, I feel no new impreflion,

Nor if I did, ihould I by that be alter'd;
For such presages be they fad or joyful,
I deem them but the meteors of the mind,
Bred by the inward elemental strife,
When great events perplex and shake the foul.
My thoughts regard the state. If I ihould fall,
To thee, LYSANDER, I commit my son,
The only pledge of my DEIDAMIA'S love.
Train up the boy to walk in the fame path
Which we have trod together, the strait path'
Of virtue and true glory. If he proves
Of noble nature, and I hope no less,
He will not fhun'the lofty path of honour,
Tho' fate ihould mark it with his father's blood.

Lyf Hear this; immortal Gods! who rule the

world,

And guard a prince the image of yourselves!
O never, never may his royal race
LYSAND ER'S aid require.

[Exit LYSANDER.
AGIS alone.

Affeftion choaks his words,

His generous heart bursts at this solemn parting.
In times like these of a declining state,
Baseness infecs the general race of men;
But yet these trying times rear up a few
More excellent, refin'd, and conscious spirits.
More principled, and fit for all events,
Than any in the good, but equal, mass
Of a far better age. Such is LYSA.NDER
The hour draws near.

Enter

Enter SENATORS.

Sen. Assembled Sparta waits.
dIgis. I come, my friends ! I will address the peeo

pie,

Proclaim aloud mine aCtions which upbraid,
And soon shall silence, my despiteful foes.
My heart fiall speak. This sceptre of my fathers,
By long descent hereditary mine,
I would disdain to hold, did I not hope,
That by its sway I might recall those days
When Lacedsemon was the pride of Greece,
The gaze and terror of the wondring world:
For there, as in a chosen temple, dwelt
Valour and virtue, whilf: attending fame
And glory on the land of heroes Dhone.

Fksi Sen. 0 Gods above! How happy were out

fires,
In those bright days of antient glory born.

Sgis. Those days ihall yet return, Olympian Jove
Or low in dust Ihall Spartan AGIs lie.

[Soundof musical ItrIrumentS.

Sirs Sen. What means this mufick ?
Agis. To the Gods of Greece

And Sparta's guardian deities it founds.
Let us begone, nor flop the holy train:

- rr ..

Enter a Proce.fiot.
AGESISTRATA, EUANTHE, Prijs of JUPITER a#?

HE'iCULES.

CHORUS of Matrons and Virgins.

Woes approach, till now unknown;
Discord hakes the Spartan throne.
Heav'n avert the ills we fear !
Jove, from high Olympus, hear!

Priests of JUPITER.

This day our foes embattled came,
And vow'd to end the Spartan name:
Embattled near our gates they fought
But Jove for us deliverance wrought.
He smote Achaia's host with fear,
He thunder'd in their trembling rear;
Jove's lightning flam'd from Sparta's spear.

CHORUS of Matrons and Virgins.

Ever may his mighty arm
Save the Spartan Rate from harm

.._e'e..

Ne'er may proud invader boafr
Glory from our glory loft.
Light, 0 Jove, that sacred fire
Which did Sparta's sons inspire,
When the prince and people ifrove,
Burning with their country's love.
Xerxes, lord of great alarms,
Xerxes rous'd the world to arms.

Priess of JUPITEn.

The earth was troubled at his host,
The springs were dried, the rivers los
But Spartan valour check'd his pride,
A slender band his host defy'd:
Thermopylae (immortal name!)
Beheld the Persian tyrant's shame.

CHORUS ofall.

There the brave three hundred dy'd,
Faithful by their prince's fide:
There they conquer'd, tho' they dy'd.

Prieffs of HERCULES.

On earth below, in Heav'n above,
Rever'd, vicorious, son of Jove!
Hear, Alcides, hear our prayer,
bThy godlike offspring claims thy care'

CHORaV

CHORUS of all.

Bend thy bow, Tyrinthius, bend,
Lightly on the earth descend.
Fix an arrow on the string,
Stand beside the Spartan king,
AcGI of thyrace divine,
Tried in labours like to thine.

Undaunted, like thee, with monsters he flrives;
The fiercest of Hydras in faction revives.

If he falls a sacrifice,
Never more flall Sparta rife I

[Exeunt.] As tie procession goes of

Enter AMPHARES.

Thus may my pious foes for ever frive;
Be theirs the airy aid of fabled Jove.
In nearer and more certain force I truss:
Of human race, I fight with mortal arms.
Yet prais'd be Fortune, goddess of my vows,
'Tis she whose happy hand leads forth these dames
Ne'er to the palace mall their steps return.
The net I've spread now covers all my foes,
Except LYSANDER. 0 had he been here!
Then I had stood, like mighty Atlas, firm;
Fate but reerves. him to. another day.

Thr

The time is almost come; my Thracians Wnow
Have reach'd their pos;. and many a daring eye
Looks for the signal. Here it is-my sword.
When I appear thus arm'd, the furies rife;
Ths is the comet, the fierce blazing star,
On which commotian, change, and death attend.

[Exit AMPiARES.

AcT

# ACT III. SCENE I.

ACT III. SCENE I.

Enter EUArNTHE.

THEN IAN Pallas! O my native Gods
Protect your suppliant in a foreign land,
Where fhallIfly? AGIS OLYSANDE !

Enter SANDANE.

0 Queen ! a stranger thy protection claims,
Altho' thy lord, thy friends, are foes to mine,
Yet thou wilt sympathize with thy own sex,
And save me from the violence I fear.

Sand. Where is thy lover to defend thee now

Where is the conquering valour of LYSANDER ?
And virtuous AGIS ? the reforming king
Whom thou waft wont to praise. Let me advise thee,
On brave AMPHARES try thy boasted charms;
So young, so fair a captive may subdue
The victor's heart.

Eian. Are these a woman's words ?
Sand. They are, and suited to a light adventurer,

Who left her parents, and her native land,
To seek a lover. Sure her roving mind,
True to its passion, may the object change,
And, pleas'd, accept AMPHARES for LYSANDER.

Euan. Thou fpeak'it thy thoughts, and judgeft of

EUANTHE

By the deceitful standard of thy heart.
Too soon thou haft betray'd thy secret foul.
I am not yet a captive; I may live
To ihew thee, Queen, that pity thou deny'ft me.
LYSANDER comes to rescue, or revenge.
.

Sanit

Sand. LYSANPER soon ihall be as AGIs is.

Thy wretched arrogance my foul contemns.
AnenemyI have, the Spartan Queen,
Whose bitter tongue has often wrong'd my fame;
Her will I seek, and triumph o'er the ruin
Of her, and of her peace.

Euan. Had'it thou e'er felt

Sincere affection, thou would'st not insult me;
And had'st thou ever known a mother's pains,
Thou could'st not bear to grieve a mother's heart.

Sa.d. Minion, for this expect ! thou pageant! thou.

That dar'ft to brave, exasperate a Queen.
Thou ihalt repent thy pride, and kneel in vain.

[Exit SANDANE.

Euan. The anger that supported me is gone.
I feel my weakness, and her threat'nins fear.-

Enter LYSANDER in a HELOT' s arb.
HELOT, if pity, or if gold-_---

Lyf. EUANTHE!
Euan. 0 Heev'n and earth! LYSAXDER I
Lyf. Yes, my love!

Thou fee'ft LYSAXDER, miserable man!
Does AGIS live?

Euan. Amidf the clash of arms,

And cries of fighting men, I heard them shout
The name of AGis. By-and-by a Spartan,
Flying and wounded, as he pass'd call'd out,
" The king is safe; the king has gain'd the temple."

Lyf Then all is safe; for Sparta lives in him.
EzIan. But the good Queen!
Lyf. Her sex, her age protects her.
Euan. Heaven grant they may; an impious band in

arms

Purfu'd the holy train. Fear gave me speed,
For I outiipt them alL But now, LYSA;DER
Betray'd, encompals'd, nov..- w hat l wve do .

Lyf

Lyf. Wert thou but safely plac'd, LYSANDER knows

Whathe fould do. I must not tarry here.
There is a temple in this spacious city,
Forfanatity above all others fam'd,
To Juno sacred, the avenging Queen !
Thither a trufiy slave of AGis' house
Will guide thy tfeps;. by my command he waits-
Without the palace.

Euan. Whither doff thou go ?
Lyf. In this inglorious garb difguis'd, I wait

Till night and darkness come; then I attempt
The wall wheree'er I find it slightly guarded.
What mortal arm shall then oppose my way,.
Urg'd as I am ? Alas, my lov'd EUANTHE !
From my compliance with thy fond request
Springs the worst evil of this dreadful hour.
I have betray'd the confidence ofAGIs;
But I'll repair my fault.

E.an. What dost thou mean ?
Lyf A-ils commanded me to leave the city;

And thinks, would to the Gods he thought aright!
That his LYSANDER heads the Spartan troops,
In whom his only hope of safety lies.
But I, EUANTHE ! partial to thy will,
Sought thee in vain. 'In that unhappy time
They seiz'd the gates, and shut me up in Sparta,
Fate puniihes with too severe a doom.
The human weakness of indulgent love.
AGIS ! I come !-For the deep voices now
Of duty, friendship, gratitude, and glory,
Sound thro' my breast, and from my beating heart-
Their echo, rings. Farewel ! my love, farewel !

Eatan. Not yet, LYSAXDER ! Ac-is is oppreft,

And Sparta too. Does duty, or does honour,
Require LYSAXDER, like an eastern slave,
To fall attendant on the royal pile ?
What can you do ? The army will betray you:
So with the few, the faithful few that love you,

You'll

Youll do some desperate a&tion, and be flamni
If you despise your life, yet think of me,
The prey of curfltAMPHAREs.

Lyf. Infernal Gods!

Let me not think:of that. Retire, E.UAFTHE,
And in the hallow'd temple reft secure.
This night I'll force ill-guarded Sparta's gates,
And save my prince, my country, and EUANTHPE

Euan. Thy prince, thy country are already los

O liften, and preserve thyfelfand me:
The ship that bore me to the Spartan fliore
Rides still at anchor: leave this wretched land.
Wheree'er thou goeft I will attend thy fleps;
Thy gods shall be my gods; thy people, mine-

Ls. Alas! EUANTHE does not fee the shame,

The ruin of that couniel love inspires.
Th' eternal gods repose this hour in me
No common trust: Upon my deeds depend
The fate of AGs,- and the fate of Sparta.
My soldiers too, my brave, my faithful soldiers,
The meanest warrior of the royal band
Freely devotes his life to godlike AGIS.
And mhall their leader, shall the friend of AoIs,
Forsake his prince? I will forget thywords;
Repeat them not.

Euan. Is this LYSANDER's love!

Must I not speak ? Is my reward reproach ?
For you I left my friends and native land,
Defy'd all danger, and all censure fcorn'd;
Now in my fore distress I call on thee
For whom I flffer, to proteet my honour,
And in my fore distress dost thou upbraid me ?
If ever maid, like credulous EUAxTHE,
Bursts all the bonds of nature for one man,
Let her beware that he be not a Spartan !
0 wretched maid ! O Athens loft in vain!

[Ready to faint.
Lfr. All-ruling powers! why am I thus diftreft

VWhy

Why come calamities so thick upon me ?
EUANTHE, hear me; you Ihall be obey'd.
I'll bear thee hence, and go with thee to Athens,
Restore thee to thy country and thy friends,
Of whom thou dost complain I have bereft thee.
LYSANDER will acquit himself to thee,
And to mankind--

Euan. Delude me not. Alas!

Thy tongue speaks comfort; but thy voice, thy looks,
Wild and unsettled, drive me to despair:
For thou, methinks, art desperate, LYSANDER.
Those lips that quiver, and those eyes that roll
Like dragon's eyes, those are not signs of love!
Thou fay'lt that thou wilt bear me back to Athens;
Will that acquit thee, if thou leav'fl me there
Is that thy purpose ?

LyfJ Yes. I'll leave the world.

And death shall wipe diflonour from my name;
AcGI and Sparta ihall forgive me then,
And every debt be paid.

Eliin. LYSANDER, no.

Love's victims are not of your sterner sex,
It is the defliny of womankind
Constant to live, and desolate to die.
To itrong neceflity EUANTHE yields.
If I should tear you from the fide of Acts,
I fee my fate; you ne'er would love me more:
Tho' you should live, yet you would die to me.
But I will rather flay and perili here
Than live without thee. Go, and fight for AGIS
But in the hour of danger think of me!
Calm in the rear direa the course of battle,
The dreadful van let other warriors lead,
In whom nor AGIS nor EUANTHE lives.

Ls. These words become my idoliz'd EUANTHE!

And honour now approves the voice of love.
0 thou firfl object of my young desires,

And

And thro' each period of my ripening years
Still more maturely and intensely lov'd,
Hear and believe my words.-Beware-Beware.

fs.er AMPEARES. [To bispeople.]

'Tis fe, by Venus ! halt. Fear not, my fair,
Nor meditate escape from your AMPiARES.

rEuan. My AuPHARES!
sApb. Thine, and thine alone!

Thou low'ring slave, begone! Haste! urge me not
To stain my sword with thy ignoble blood.

Exit LYSANDER,

Eacn. Is this thy love ? Imperious, and in arms,

Recent from blood and treason, doff thou come
To take by force and violence my heart?

A.4pb. The love ofthee,more powerful than ambitions

Inflam'd me to attempt the Spartan throne.
Thy beauty is the torch that lights-the war:
For thee I conquer-Smile not thus in scorn,
Deign to accept my hand and Sparta's crown;

Euan. Doff thou bellow the diadem of Sparta ?
Where is thy lawful prince ?

Ampb. LEONIDAS?
Euam. AGIS.
Anmb. That AGIs is no more a king;

A suppliant, surrounded by my troops,
In Juno's temple, with the priests he dwells,
LEOXIDAS, by me reftor'd to power,
MWiI gladly {hare with me divided empire.
Or, if I please to reign alone, I may.
Thro' dark conipiracy and open firife,
For thee I strove; thou wilt reward my love.
Beauty, like thine, pertains not to the vanquifh'd,
But frill triumphant reigns the viaor's queen.

Euar. Think'it thou there is no truth in humanbreafi,

No faithful loyalty, no constant love?
Soon shalt thou learn thine error. I begin
To teach thee firt. Thee and thy love I scorn!

Aid

And may the gods reward thy base ambition
As I reward thy love.

Ampi. 0 womankind!

How well your passions teach us to bejuft !
You love LYSANDER still; a little time
Will from: your mind erase the.memory
Of that vain-glorious, loft and ruin'd man;
Who Was my rival.

Euain. Was! whate'erhewas

He is, and more. Thou and thy crimes contribute
To make him more illustrious, more belov'd,
Thou giv'ft him scope and vantage to his virtue.
Speak'ft thou of crowns whilst royal Acis reigns
Of power in Sparta whilil LYSANDER lives?
The short dominion of this day is thine,
But vengeance and LYSANDER come to-morrow.

Ampb. Thou do'st instruct me. If my time is ahort

We ihould not part. I'll fee thee safely plac'd
Where I command,

Etan. I will not go with thee,
Ampb. Yieldto neceflity; for onmy call

Compulsion waits. No other hand than mine
Should touch EUANTHE.

[Seizes ier 3ard.

Eanm. Help, Spartans ! help !
If any hear me who regard LYSANDER.

Enter LYSANDER vwitb.a dagger, anh

runs at AMPHARES' Tbo retires.

Ampb. Affi me, friends. Surround him-'Tis Lz-:

SANDER.
Take him alive.

[Co bis people who enter.J
Lyf Noo. That they cannot, traitor!

[Snatches afwordfrr one of tbefoldiers'
Now I am better arm'd.

Ampb. Kill him, Euxus,
Unless he yield his sword.

Lyf. Come, brave AMPHARES!
Come to the front, and there dir¢edmy fate;

2W07

Ampb. Kill him! .-
Euan. That would diflaonour me for ever.
Advance on all fides, and close in upon him.

Lyf. Strangers; give way, and let the Spartaa

-chiefs

Fight their own quarrels. I will give you all
The wealth of Spaita.

Amh., Ha ! he grows upon them!
Throw down your weapons, or I'll pierce her heart !

[Points his sword to E u A N T HE'S reaL,

Eux. Renown'd LYSANDER! give thy sword to
Euxus.

Euan. Defend thy noble life ! Regard not mine.

[AMPHARES lts his arm.

Lyf. Hold, hold.
Amph. Thou know'ft me.-Choofe.
Lyf. I cannot bear to fee EUAN THE die!

Tbrows down hisiawsrd.
0 Acis! 0 my prince!

Amnfh. Vi&torious chief,

Statesman and soldier, learned Athens' boait,
Where are thy glotics now?

Lyf. The strife of tongues
I (un as thou didd shun the firife of arms.

Amph. Yet let thy haughtiness grant one requelt.

Tell me what brought the great LYSA NDER hither?
Some stratagem profound, which none but he
Could have contriv'd to hallen his detruation,
And add disgrace and ridicule to ruin.

Lyf. Hadfl thou not fled, thou coward, from my

sword,

And fhriek'd for help, this arm, this single arm,
Had baffled all the craft of falfle AxPHAa Is.

Amph. This pride becomes thee, and 'hy loft con-

dition.

Lyf In this condition it becomes me belt

Tobrave AMPHARES. Had he been a captive
I should have pitied him.

ath0.

Amth. Plead'ft thou for pity ?
L3s For none that thou can'st give. Hear me, then

judge,

If what I tpeak is meant to win thy favour.
I lhould have pitied thee by fate subdued:
Oppreld with crimes, thy spirit would have shrunk
Under calamity, and guilt have marr'd
The noble vigor and the port ot manhood.
Amidst thy triumph, does it nor confound thee,
To think thou ow'ft it ro excess of baseness ?
Thou haft prevail'd, because the generous Agis
Wouid not believe there could be such a traitor:

dimph. Oft have I heard, and often seen thy folly,

But now to rail is madness. Wi:h one word
I could impose on thee eternal silence.

Li) And m ould-I know thte-if thou thought'it

it wile.

Even then, as now, I flould contemn thy power:
But know, I fear thee not. The king is safe,
And his vidcorious troops at bieak of day
i ill thunder in thine cars; thou and thy band
Will ill sustain the shock of such an holR.
Mv life is in thy hands, but yet beware,
Thy fate depends on mine. In Lracedemon
A prince like Agis soon will lind Lkfaners.

A.:,p. Uncertain thy prediaions of the future:
mrnasl s thy prescience, witness thy condition.
£.;xrs, conduc hin to yon corner tower.

Eva. Lifander!
L>Y. Oh ! I have withdrawn m'ne Eyes
I-romI thee, and to contention turn'd my heart.

E,;a. Yet look on me before we part for ever.
L f At looks or words of tenderness, he'll smile,

And o'er the sorrows of our love rejoice:
Forgivc me imill, I muff not, cannot speak.

Ea. But I will speak, and earth and heaven ihall

hear me.

m;plarcs too fihall hear; for it v,.li gaul him,
To hear Euanthe now avows her love
And faith to her Lj/fzndtr. Poweriul words,
Emblems and fguies of firm conllancy,

C Such

Such as fond lovers lavilhly employ
To sooth the pangs of parting and of absence.
Such music vows accord not with our Rate,
Our dreadful state: yet do not grieve thy heart,
Thy noble heart, too fill of other sorrows,
With thoughts of what may happen to Euanthe.
Nothing shall happen to debase Euantbe.
-The bondage and the shame that women susser,
-Who live the slave of thofe-who flew their lord%
I ne'er flall know, 'I never will endure.
If cruel destiny decrees thy fall,
Unspotted to the liades I'll follow thee,
For whom alone on earth I'd with to live.

Lyf. Lead on.- Farewel, Euanthe.
Eua. Gods above !
.-fpb. Conduc her .to the. tower where late you

ledg'd
The captive Queen.

Ea. Alas! no guarded tower,

Or vaulted dungeon, ever yet contain'd
Two more unhappy, or more helpless captives'!

[Exeunt guarii -

.drap ; lJ.far's fierce demeanour and his threats

-Proud as he is, fpiing not from pride alone;
I muff firetch forth myArms to lhelter'd gis.
Ifl accomplish not this night his ruin,
To-morrow's rising fun'may fee my fall.
,Curs be the temples! curst the priess of Sparta!
Now I am like a.man 'ho has-adventur'd
To crofi the-flats forsaken by the.main,
And looking back fees not the fhore'he left;
Thro' deeps and ihallows, rocks, and quaking sands
On he muff go. To fop is sure perdition.

Enter Sandane.
Hail to the queen of Sparta.

Sand. Yes, Amtbares !

Now fortune seems to smile upon Sazdaue.
I saw the fullen captive led along,
His gloomy eye-balls six'd upon the earth.

rSfib. This night, 0 queen! must fee the hold

conclufioa

Of

Of a design, thus far lo bravely borne.
On hollow and deceitful ground we tread,
Whiltl Agis lives.

Sand. Thou fpeak'ft m. very thoughts.

*Seasons there are,- Ampharet, which suspend
All fanCimonious reverence and refpe&.

4mph. Temples, and priests, and altars shall not

.- favehim,

If fate should drive us to the last extreme.
Meanwhile, I will employ more gentle means
To gain our ends: For sacrilege would rouse
The zealous multitude to rage and arms.'
The temple is begirt with Thracian banids,
Who all accefs-forbid; and Agis knows not
What has befallen Lysander. I will fend
A subtle Spartan in Lysander's name,.
Who may by specious arguments persuade him
To quit the sanctuary; and then, O queen I
With all solemnity of pomp and form,
Th' assembled Ephori shall :pass his doom,
And in the fame decree include Lysander.

Sand. Think'ft thou the Ephori will give the fanclon
Of their authority to Agi' death ?

Amph. They will. At midnight the stern judges

- meet

In Terror's temple; they have charg'd a herald -
With Orders to the troops not to advance
On pain bftreafon. The aftonifh'd people
Will crouch and tremble at that awful power,
Which draws the sword ofjuftice on a king.
Then shall your lord's authority revive;
And like the fun, when bursting from a cloud,
With greater power and brighter splendor ihine.

[Exeunt.
Cs %ACT

# ACT IV. SCENE I.

Lylinder as a: Prifnor , tbe Thcian Guards: atla di-

;* .

* '

s o»C, - .,

Lysander musing, aduvancesaifpeak.s.
j AS virtueno prerogative on earth ?

And .an .the Gods permit the fill of' dg.s .

They can. 'Tis.man's own arrogance arrays him
In gorgeous titles of.excellingnature, ..
Care of the Gods, and centre of.creatdon, .....;. -
I far, I fear man''slife is buta dreamr ;
His foul a subtle essence of the blood,.
A rainbow. beauty, made to hine a space,
Then melt.and.vanifl into air. -
Ye mighty minds offages and of.heroes!
Epaminondas, Plato, greatLycurgusL .
Who once with fuch'tiihtceident glory hone, :. X :,.:

riierthran. ll theftarstihat decl.the:heavens, ..

Is your celestial fire for eeer quench'd;'- -
And nought bnt afies left,. the sport of chance,
Which veering winds still blow about the. world?
I will not -think -o ! Yet, alas 1 the while.
I fee and feel: presages that alannrm .
If they prowe true' Ifzman.is like. the leaf,:
Which falling from. the tree revives no- more,
I ahall be .lortly :duff.. That .will not-hear
Euantbe weep, nor fee the fliame bs Sparta !
Now I'm a living man, my mind, is.free,
And, whilitI live and breathe,. by heaven I'll ac
As if I were immortal.

Enter Rhesus and Euxus.
Rhefis. See where he stands! behold him !-0 my

brother !

The'braveft and the befl-of'human kind.--
Oppreft with grief and lhame, and fatal love,
Indignant virtue but augments his pain.
Will not my Euxus give his aid to heave

This

This noble 'vffol: fioh-nthe xdc ;i it-'beatiii % '
: -

.- !:.'*

. '- [Goes

*p: e ·to LIyfander.
My lord! my leader'! Oh!

f.- 'My faithful Rhbeus.

Com'ft thou to ihare the ruin that yfeakder - -
Has brought upbn ifhieifi;his 'pin'e, -hiti uritry ?
- Rhef. I come more eager and mbre:pirtldfto'tfhare- -
Thy present fortune, than thy former glory.
Alas, my lord! 'twould mal'/;a -tranger' eep,
To fee the chief, whom 'oriquft; crown'd to-day,
A captive. . ...

Lyf. Rhesus, thou haitE nam'd the least-

Of my calamities. I could endu're
With Spartan fortitude, 'my .own:difafters-;
Bear to be hurled from meridiani-glr6y,-
And, like a falling star, .be eeni no moere. -
But oh ! the king!-and desolate Eunthe!t- -

Rhef. Do not despair.
Lyf Thou art my only hope.

This day thy generous brother tfav'd my life;
At his request I yielded up my sword,
Else had Lyfander.like a-foldier fall'n.
Thou art my-:frierd in noble perils prov'd&
My fate, the fate of Sparta, and- of Agis,
Is in the Hands of Euxus--

Rhef/ Ah ! my brother!
Euxis. 0 chief of Sparta! Euxus is diftreft

On every fide. Thy virtue, thy misfortunes
Have touch'd my heart: but here in trust I stand.
Would I had never seen the walls of Sparta !

Lyf. The Gods, the guardian Gods of Lacedeemon,

Have brought you hither to preserve a people,
And save from traitors' hands the best of kings.
Altho' at firlf you rashly drew: the sword
In blind obedience to a leader's will,
The gallant Ecuss will-not sure persist
In error known, in manifest iiijuifice.
Thy, trade is war, brave:foldier;, this is not
An office for thy sword.

Euxus. True are thy words, '
I was indeed deceiv'd, and came not here

C 3 To

To mix hn Sparta's frn'fe ; but honour now--

Rbefi I will not hear thee plead so bad a cause.

Is there a bond in nature like the tie
Which binds the hearts of brothers ? And Vill Euxus,
From vain ideas of fidelity
To that detested traitor, false Amiphares,
His brother murder ?

Euxus. No.
Rhe. Then let thy Arms

Defend Lysander, By our country's Gods
I swear, and by our warlike father's foul,
Whose well-beloved son thou ever wert,
That with the Spartan chief thy brother dies.

Lyf. Might you not favour the escape of gis ?
The guards are Thracians.

Euxus. I might favour thine.
My power extends not to the guards of .gia,

Rhe. And wilt thou not ?
Euxus. Command thyself, my brother.
Rhef. How can( thou hesitate ?
Euxus. I mull beware,

Inferior in command to bold Rlinalces,
And ever view'd by him with jealous eyes.
Whilit I deliberate no time is loll.
The light of day suits not with with your deigns;
Before the night comes on, I will determine.

Lyf. 'Tis almoil night, the fun hath left the heavens,

And doubtful twilight uflers in the gloom.
Perhaps the enemies of .gis wait
The darkness of the night to cover deeds
They dare not act by day. This night I dread-

R-ef. The Ephori have lent a herald forth,

Charg'd with tome solemn menace, and command
To stop the army's march.

Lyf. If they obey,

The fare of Juno guards the king no more !
ErernAl Gods ! how wretched is Ljar::der !
From me that herald Should have heard his ansiser.
Cannot my REJefs find one gallant Spartan
To bear my orders to the royal band
To fzorm thecity ?

PI r

Rlef. I myself will bear
These orders to the camp.

Lvf Another talk,

More difficult and dangerous is thine.
Aifume the arms and velture of thy country,
And thro' the Thracians win thy way to ,gis,
Rhkfi;, the generous spirit of that prince
Is of a nature that excludes all fear,
Consideration, and refpe&of Self:
On earth he acts as if he were 3 God,
immortal, and incapable of harm.
Think how the art'ul falsehood of Admpharts
May operate on such a roya2 mind.

E;2ter a Thracian.

7''rac. The Spartan lord draws near.
Ef:;fs. imp3'a'es co;nes.

Retire, my lord, whvift advance to meet bim;
Our intercourse might lead him to suspicion.

L:/. Nor vigilance nor care I recommend

To thee, my RrefnIs i But let caution rule
Th. forward zeal.

Rbf, It fh!l, my noble lord

Mhi heart beats high with hope to fee thee rife
Once more, !ike Mars, in arms.

L;/: Eternal Gods !
In Thracian breafi s the Spartan v;rtue l;ves:

[Lysander enters ito the tov.'r.

[Exii Rhefug.

alanet Eu:;us.

lEnitr Amphares.
Ho- does the laughty captive brook confinement?

Euxus. Full of inquietude he leems, and ladnefs.

No', in rome pensive polfure fits a-vwhile,
Then fiites his breast, and, frarting from his feat,
W'a.'s to and fro v'ih a diforde:.'d pace.

Ai.&;h. Admit no Spartan of -.hatever sex,
Or rhatfoe'er afinity they ci:m,

E:ix:.s. That Lrric commanld lath been already ghven.
Ais:eh. 'Tis need ul, Euxus; for his furious mind,

In this extreme, v.ii! snatch ar fight occasions
To make incredible and v-id aempts. -

C Renew

Renew the charge; then go and search Lyjander
For secret weapons. On hid bread he wears.
A curious gorget, rich with precious stones,
And a finall portrait offurpaffingbeauty,
The image of the fair Athenian maid,
Drawn by h artist whohas vy'd with nature
In sweet expression of her matchless charms:
That I must have.

Eux. You ihall without delay.

[Exit Eux2l.

Manet Amphares.

Let other men deprive themselves of pleasure,
And toil for bare ambition ; I'll provide
A more luxurious banquet to my tafe,
What tho' as yet Euanthe loves me not,
It is the nature of her sex to change.
With wondrous ease the female kind submit
To deifiny; and soon are reconcil'd
To persons and conditions once abhorr'd.
Like birds-new caught, who flutter for a time,

An!d -----1T ** ft1 ;n --

;n-__

.selS W .»"-at""' A ts

' ut by-and-by they reft; theyimodth their plumes,
And to new malters sing their former notes.
This facile temper of the beauteous sex
Great Agamemnon, brave Pelides, prov'd:
They sack'd the cities, and they few the fires,
The brothers, and the lovers of the fair,
Who wept awhile, then wip'd their watry eyes,
-And loll their sorrows in the hero's arms.

Enter Sandane.

The herald is returi'd. The royal band,
Inflam'd with rage and scorn, the mandate tore;
And to the city bend their rapid march.

Amnp. Let them advance. They haften to their fate.

A secret stratagem I have devis'd
To check there warriors in their bold career.

Sand. The Ephori in resolution faint-
dmpb. Their courage '11 restore; for Agis yields

'To the fallacious counsellor I sent.
Demochares, in sacerdotal robes,
As if difguis'd t' elude the Thracian guards,

Pail

Past in by my permillion, and conjur'd .,
.gis to quit the fane's uncertain shelter,
And seek the sure prote&ion o£f the camp:
Himself he offen'd as hip faidifil guiide,
This in 'Lyfjiar'name' , . at.firft, . .
Irrefolpte.and doubtful'f bia.uc'dp :u, , -,.
At la'fthis 'tihughtfprungp ancd turn1die t sale;
That his escape wóould force us. to rubmiflion,;
And end the strife without the'ihock of arms.
Demochares at midnight is appointed
To come again; and goes with an addition
That will give certain credence. to his words;
The gorget. of Lyfnder. .. ,

Sand. Now, Smphares,

I'ee the snares of death .are wrapt around him;'
Our hated foe:ftands on the verge of fate ,'
He who defpis'd Sandane, and permitted,
With most insulting courtesy, my stay,;.
I would not have remain'd one day:in',Sparta,
But for the hopeI hadtiowork,is.,fih,: . - ..
He is the. root, with himthe kranches; fall.

Amph;. 'Altiho' his 'f6n Is ife in O.rchomends,

Yet there in hopeless exile h'e must live.
But Agefihrata-- :

Sand. Shall not survive

To travel suppliant thro' the states of Greece,
And 'hew'her hhary hairs, with ashes ftrew'd,
To move compai9gnain thegiddyG reeks;
She's old, and fit to die. , :

.
.

Enter a Spartan 7e57enger.

The Thracian troops . ' '
Who guard the tempie, faithful to their charge,
Have seiz'd a spy; who, cioath'd and arm'd like them,
Attempted to pass thro' their ranks to Agis.
Rhinalces for a while delay'd the doom ,
That martial law decrees, till. you yourself
Discourse and judge the captive.

,nmph. I approve . - ' .
The vigilance and conduci of Rhinalces.

[Exit Mefenger.
Sand. Still flows the tide of fortune i I'l dispatch

C Orolteu

Orifies to mylord. Joyful he comes
To re-affume his sceptre and his throne.
Farewel, rtfiraint, and laws that bind a prince.
The people's majesty, the senate's power,
Shall lIrink beneath their awful monarch's sword:
Fear is the only:principle of rule,
Which man, like other animals, obeys, [Exit Sandanc.

: - Maanet Amphares.
Why tarries Euxus now ?

Enter Euxus.

I mutl applaud
Thy countrymen for discipline and care,
As well as valour; they have seiz'd a spy,
Who mix'd with them, difguis'din Thracianarms.

Eux. In Thracian arms!
Ampb. Yes, to pals to dgis.

Some bold adventurer of the royal band,
Whose life-Why art thou troubled ? Has L)fander
Efcap'd the guards ?

Eux. No. -I am pale with anger,:

At the reproachful terms, the bitter taunts,
Which I have fuffer'd from incens'd Lysander,
In execution of thy late commands.

[giZves the Gorget:

m/pb. Is that the cause ?
He fcon shall be no objea of thy wrath:

[Exit Amphares.

Manet Euxus.

My brother seiz'd! I hesitate no more.
The voice of nature in my bread exclaims
Against the rigour of those guilty laws,
Which bind a soldier blindly, to obey.
Son of my mother ! Brother of my blood!
I fly to save thee.-Now I'm thine, Ly/ander.

[Goes to tbe gate of tbi Teo.wtr
Chief of Sparta!

Enter Lysander.
Is Euxus yet refolv'd ?

Eux. That thou thalt fee, thy enemies are mine.
Rhesus is taken.

Lyrf My contagious fate
InfeCts my friends ! my brave, my generous Rbefus 1

][ s ;les

Eux. Friend of my brother! first I set thee free.

An officer of mine commands that gate
At which the Thracians enter'd; haste thee thither,
Array'd like one of those whom I will fend
To guide thy iteps.

Lif Ye guardian Gods of Greece!

Whose ways myflerious fondly I arraign'd,
Forgive my rashness ! Prosper now my sword-- .
Where are my arms ?
[WhilfL Lysander feaks Euxus beckons one of his /oldiers

Eux. Here enter, and obey
Without reply.

[Exeunt Lysander and the Thracian to the ower.

The soldiers hearts are mine:
Their various toils and perils I have shar'd,
And more than ihar'd, the firit in hard extremes,
When signal danger claims a leader's sword.
No spoil, no treasure, have I e'er referv'd;
The wealth I covet is the soldier's love.
My bold Odryfians are a faithful band;
In this distress I'll throw myself on them,
They will support me.

Enter a Spartan Mefenger.

MefJ Leader of Thracian bands !

Amipbares and the magistrates of Sparta,
Met in the fenate-houfe, expect thy presence.

Eux. I will attend them. [Exit mefenger.

Surely they have learned,
That I am brother to ill-fated Rhesus.

Enter Lysander in Thrarian drefi and arms.

Lyf Once more at liberty ! Once more in arms!
To thee, brave Thracian-

Eux. I am fummon'd hence

To meet the Ephori. Ifear, my lord,
They have difcover'd Rhefiu is my brother..

Lyf. That secret in your breast and his is lodg'd.:

Nor can his alter'd features now betray him.
In early youth he left his native land;
The heat of summer, and the winter's cold,
In many a hard campaign, have chas'd his bloom;

Euw. Indeed, I knew him not.

r: ..

Ls. Then who could know him ?

Calm and determin'd to the fenate.go:
Here I'll remain, and wait your quick return.
To know what they design imports us much.

Eux. Your fay is full of danger; rilk it not.
Ls. All necessary dangers must be rifk'd.

Perhaps I am the subjef of their councils,
Perhaps I may be call'd before the senate.
If I appear not, you muff be difcover'd,
And myefcape too soon to them be known.

Eux, Your reasons are.of-force. I am convinc'd,

Here, take my sword. Then, if we are betray'd,
My troopsa beyyou.- Now, my bold Sithontes,

[To one of his Thraciaans.

Draw your-battalion nearer -to the square.
And guard the person of this Spartan chief,
As you would guard myself. If I'm detain'd,
Follow to death or victory, Lysander.

[Exit Euxus.

Lrf: Shall I obey the impulse of my heart,

And lead these Thracians to the tower thar holds
My loftEuanthe ? No, let reason rule.
Amphares wilk not, dares not, wrong her honour,
Whilf undecided is the fate of Agis.
LTis night. but never shall the morning rife.
On--Who can know the secret will of heaven!
Tell me, ye inextinguiihable fires,
That light the counsels of eternal Jove,
Have you, since Time began his long career,
Beheld a mortal like Lysander tofl ?
Down, down, enthusiasm-! my heart-be calm I
A little while, and thou salt beat no more.
Oft have I wilh'd for perilous occasions;
And, wandring in the academic grove,
Have rous'd myself with itrong imagination
Of great exploits by ardent valour done:
But ne'er did fancy's tempeIt match the truth,
The frrong reality of such a storm.
O did'I combat but for life alone,
Were Sparta and Euanfbt safe fpeatrors.
How gaily riould Lysander take the field.--

EuxjS

# ACT V. SCENE I.

Euxus draws near-Upon the infeet wing:' .
Of a small moment ride th' eternal fates.

Enter Euxus. )

My fears were vain. The fecretis. unknown.
But Rheus is'condemn'd to die.to-morrow,, . ,

Lyf. To-morrow! Ere toimorrow mean: Ihall die
Who are not-yet condemn'd. :... .

Eux. 'Tis true-by heaven!': : . .-

Mortal designs and enterprizes rile
On every fide. The Ephor resolve
At midnight to furprize the royal band,
And order'd meto hold my troops prpard
Their forces to fuflain. ... .:

Ls. 'Tis well! 'tis wondrouswell! -

They utge me now,'and point the line of aaion.
Under the high up-lifted arm of fate
I'll rush, and strike before their blow can fall.,
I'll storm the city while they force the camp.
Your troops--- ......

Eux. Shall join you at the gate.. ThewQrd.?
Lyf. Agis. Farewel!-Naw If ali fa.e. thee, AgiS;
Or leave my blood upon the tones Qf.Sparta.

[Exeunt Lysander and Euxus.

I - .,, v-- *
. -.-

A C T V. S C NE I.
,i Amphares and ihe Ephori mwibth.e QO.icrs, ;, ' T

, gate, of the prinfofeen eat a.difiace.

19i ~ ~ Firt Ephore.-
iTIE hour is past

- Second Ephore. ..
1 fear _

Amph. Silence. He comes. '
I hear the ifeps of wary treading feet., -

Enter a Spartan, Agis following.

Agis. This way conduas not to Amycla's gate;
Ha ! whither dofl thou lead me ?

.mph. To thy Aeath. The

The Ephori of Sparta have condemn'd thee.

agis. I am betray'd! What mockery is this

Offacredjuftice? Lay aside the robes
And ensigns of authority prophan'd:
The pomp of magistracy suits not treason.

,nmph. The licence of thy tongue affronts the laws,
Whose awful reverence our office guards.

Agis. Know ye not this, ye guardians of the laws,

The meanest citizen of Lacedemon
Without free trial cannot be condemn'd.;
Much lefsyour king. What law have I tranfgrefs'd?
Point out my crime; produce my bold accusers.

Amp. Thy crime is tyranny.
Agis. Is that my-crime -

Had- 4is been a tyrant, thou had't been
His fanning slave, thou enemy of freedom:

Amp. Behold the stubborn spirit of this man:

He breathes his native arrogance, and still
Insults his judges, and avows his crimes.

Agis. Who made you judges of the life of Agis ?

But you have judg'd: yourselves, and earth,and heaven
Know how uijuftly. To theGods above,
-The sure avengers of a murder'd king,
I make my last appeal. Their messenger
's on the wing; Lysander comes apace;
And Nemesis direts his righteous sword.

Ampb. Proceeds this boldness from thy trust in him?

Thy great avenger is, like thee, a captive,
.And uhder the fame mortal sentence lies.

Agis. Ye powers above ! Lyfnder too a captive !
Where was he taken ?

Amph. In the streets of Sparta,
Clad in the servile garment of a Helot.

Agis. Alas! alas! Lfander ! 0 my friend!

Thy love for me, thy generous, fearless love,
Has wrought thy fall. For me thou cam'tc to Spartat
And, like the parent bird hov'ring too near
Its captive young, thy noble life is loft !---
Forgive these tears, my country ! Agis weeps
For thee. Alas! thy brave defender's gone.
O Lacedamon, thou aIt fallen for ever

-- .' ^hi

Thy bad estate ihall every day grow worse ;
Succefive tyrants shall exhaust thy strength,
Till all thy generous youths have bled in.vain .
At last the consummation of thy woes
Shall come upon thee-; ome ambitious foe .
Shall stretch the iron aii of conqiuec ,forth,
And grasp thee in the circle of his enpire..
My native land, the kingdom of my fathers,
Shall be' no more a nation ! 0 my country,
How irretrievable is thy condition!
The Macedonian vulture hovers o'er thee,
Soon to descend, and on thy vitals prey.

Amph. Thou may:st delay, perhaps avoid, thy death.

Send forth"'thy mandate to theroyal.baind,
To halt till further orders.

Agis. Ha! No more . , .

I trust thee, traitor. Would I had ever.been
Thus deaf to thee ! No, let the royal band
Revenge their gallant leader and their king.

Firfl Ephore.
Thou tempt'ft thy fate.

Agis. I scorn it. Since my hope

Of Sparta's loft, and my beloved friend
Has perilh'd in my cause, why should I live '?
In any period of my former days
I rather would have chose to die attempting
The glorious design, which you have ruin'd,
Than live the prince of a degenerate people,
The tame fpeftator of a falling empire,

F' irft Epihore.
To reason hearken.

Agis. Reason bids me die,

As I have liv'd unalter'd in my love
To Sparta, and unconquer'd in my purpose.
You mean to take advantage of my state,
Without fpe&ator, counsellor, or friend:
You think I dread the stern approach of death,
Because the blooming season of my life
Still promises a long extent of years:
But my forefathers blood is in my veins,
The blood of heroes, and of Spartan kings,

Les

Less only than' th dae

h ds. I dare your sworift;

And with my dingbreath acquit my people.
The pople rose; they hearken'd td the voice
Of Liberty, and blef the nime of 'Ags.' . .
But you, thet:ob saangIr.ous!'race,.-.''".;
Base as the dafard and: unarmed Helots, . ' '
With foreign:arms i d nmercenary aid,: :;
Bore downs the people, a'atd oppreft your prince,
Whom death delivers:. if gis alfnhot fee
The last convulsions of expiring Freedomr
For in the first he dies. -

· Amp/. WVe'll-hear no'more
OF these invec&ives. Bear him to. the' place ' -
Of execution.: Officers,-advance ..
And do your duty. '
. .. :

..0Offers. .

-

.

[ ',
This is not our duty.

Ampb. What!
Off. Murder of a king is not our duty.
Am.b. Mutinous slaves i for you I'il find a time. -

Sir. - [T A
[ is.] '

Agis. Touch me not, for uncoiImpelld I go
To meet .my destiny. Weep, ndot for rge,-

[:ToanOfficer.

0 ! thou whose nature suits not thy employment,
Weep not for me! I would not change conditions
With these bad men. I 'hall not feel. the woes
That thou and all must feel,' the woes of Sparta ! '
0 ! might my death avail my-: much-ldv'd' country
I'd die as joyful then; as fearlefsinow.,

. [Exit.Agis guarded,

Ampb. Atone your insolence by prompt obedience,
Or death's your portion. [To an Ofcer.

[Exeunt wvith Agis,

Manet Amphares, &c.

Ampb.. Magistrates of Sparta!

This painful work of necessary justice
Will quickly end the troubles of the slate.
Lnmuidas, who owes his crown to you,
Your faithulzeal and feryice will reward.

- Exeunt Epmi.

Mantt

Manet Amphares and the Spartan who entered.with Agis:

.Amp.'Hafte to the Thracian captain, and require him

To fend his prlfoner Lysander hither. [Exit Spartan;
.gis remov'd, and turbulent Lysander,
Like snow along the fbore, their army melts.

Enter Meenger from the dungeon..

Me. The executioners refuse their office:

Sacred they hold the person of a king,
A Spartan king descended from the Gods.

Amph. Again thole fables of the villain priests

Rife up to thwart me. Now, my trusty servant,
A pprove thy faith, and win my laling favour.
Each inflant of delay is big with peril
Whilst Agis lives. Let thy good sword fulfil
The sentence of the law, and thy own tongue,
Shall name the recompense.

Mess Shalkit, my lord?

I am your inflrument, and bind myself
By this bold deed fill falter to your fortunes. [Exit.

Amph. Ye sons of bold ambition, learn of me:

Trust not the furveyof another's eye:
i Your dangerous voyage needs a pilot's care

Who never quits the helm.

Enter Spartan.

Spar. We are betray'd.
' Lyfaander'-

Amnh. What of him ? Speak-faulter not.
Spar. Is fled.
Amph. Whither? With whom ?-Eternal Gods!
Spar. The guards have set him free, the open gates
I saw, and ent'ring fearch'd the empty tower.

.Anph. That traitor Buxus ! Now let me resolve
And quickly too.

Spar. The people are alarm'd,
And gather to their tribes.

SAmph. Curit be their tribes.

The deed is done already. Yet I have
One pledge of value.

Spar. Agefiftrata.-
Ampb. This hour lhe dies. I've sent a trusty slave
To end her woes. But the Athenian maid,

'Her

Her I'll bear off in spite of frowning fortune:
Go to the turret, and conduct her hither.

' [Exit Spartan.

Manet Amphares.

Malignant powers! or blind unerring fate,
This is your work: now you assert your empire..

Enter Messenger.

My lord, the troops of Euxus, have revolted.
Rbinalces visited this night each polt,
And near Amycla's gate some Thracians met,
Whose leader. queftion'd, anfwer'd with his sword.

dAmb. By heaven and earth, Ljfander !-Ha ! pro-

ceed.

MeJl-The sudden onset, and the cloud of night

The traitors favour'd; some efcap'd our swords,
But many more in the {harp combat fell.

Ampb. Did their fierce leader fall ?
Me/:. Above the reft

Conipicuous he fought; at him each sword
Was pointed. If he fell not on the spot,
Sure he received wounds that must fatal prove.

Amtb. Confirm me that, and I will mock at fate;

Command my troops, that in the Forum watch,
To join Rhinaces. I myself will follow.

[Exit Messenger.

Enter Euanthe.

How beautiful he is! Should he survive,
Those charms divine he never shall enjoy.

Eoa. Why halt thou call'd me hither to afflii
Arid torture me with fpe&acles of woe ?

[lhe Gate of the Prison opens, and

Amphares's Slaive advances.

Eternal powersJ Why yawn yon dreadful gates ?
And from what horrid deed fralks yonder villain ?

MJe'. Thy orders are obey'd. He lives no more.
Eua. Barbarian monfler! haft thou kill'd Lysander-

But I will not reproach thee, nor complain
To the regardless Gos. MIy doom is past;
There is one only refuge for Euantbe.
Once more I follow where Lysander leads,
Where murder and .m~pares cannot come,

TO

To part us more. '

[She runs towards the dungeot

Amphares seize her,

Amph. Some other season choose.

There is no leisure now for lamentation.
Forthwith conduc her to th' Arcadian gate:
There with the horsemen wait.

Enter Meflenger.

Mef My lord, my lord,
The royal band by Thracian Euxus led--

(Shout.)

Amph. My enemy prevails.-This way with nie.
My steps pursue, or by the Gods of Hell !-

Eua. I will not leave this place. Draw forth thy

fviord,
And try if death can terrify despair.

Amph. Drag her along. (Shout.)

Again !-the foe draws near.

(Shoutfrom the otherfide,

Agis and Liberty.)
Admsh. I am encompat ; yet I'll mar their triumph,

[Runs at Euanthe w.ith his ford.

Enter Lyfanderfol/ov.wed by Rhesus.

Infernal dog, turn and behold Lysander.
Fly, Rhesus, to the king. Traitor accurlt! [Exit Rhesus.
Down, down, to Tartarus; there, villain, howl.

[Ampharesfall/.

Eua. Amazing powers! alive ! vi&orious ! Oh!
Lif And have I come to save thee, O Euanthe!

But oh ! I fear, I come too late for Agis.
The dungeon-mouth is open.

Enter Rhesus.

Tell me, Rhefut.

Rhef The king is murder'd, in yon vault he lies.
L; My prince! my friend! thy goodness, and thy

virtue,

Thy clemency, thy mildness, have undone thee!
Fatal to nations is the dread example !
Hence monarchs, who with iron fceptre'raule
Will justify their treatment of mankind,
And virtuous princes, born in evil times,
Will helitate to ftem corruption's tide. LeRf

k. kpb. hie.who preferr.d-Lyfander to Amphares,

Hlas paid me with his-life. My dying hand
Hath sow'd the feeds of discord and diftraftion.
Peace ne'er ihall dwell in Sparta. Plagues.opn plagues
Shall rife to curfe-you, as- - - (ies.)

Lyf. Thy foul is curfl.- .. ': : .

There the fell spirit of. Apibares fled
In imprecations. Prophet of difafers,
Upon the difiwal banks of Acheron,
Amidif the wailing ghofs, itill curse thy country,
And end a speech- the damn'd will hate to hear,-
Behold the mother of our murder'd king.

Enter Agefiftrata and Euxus.

Ages. Alas I need not alk the fate of 4gis:

Your looks, your silence fay,- have no son !
Yet (peak to me, for I can hear the worst,
I have been long familiar with afflition;
I am the widow of the fire of Agis.

Ls. There lies the bloody author of his death
Slain by my Hand.

Ages Alas'! alas! my son!

Oft has my anxious mind this hour foreseen,
And warn'd thee oft. But thou the danger fcorn'd,
When Sparta's glory was the price of periL
O! f on of Jove, great author of our race,
Snufain my foul. For he who was my stay,
My comfort, and my strength, is now no more,
Yetin the path his generous spirit chose,
He fell; and conscious virtue crown'd his fall.

Ls. So fell not false ampbareu.
Eux. And Sandane
Lss Sandane dead !
Eux. And dreadful was her death.

She fled, for refuge from the people's rage,
'To the fame turret where 4Amphares' troops
Guarded the queen, whose mantle on the ground
She spied, and wrapt it round her wretched head;
When suddenly a stern assassin came,
And flabb'd her, as that queen whose robe he wore.
Arriving then, I heard her ihriek for help,

TImploe

Implore her country's 9tds,

, with bitter cries,

And, in her:agony diVulge her crimes.
It was no wonder that she sear'd to die, .

Xgef O guilt! thou'rt wort of all; he knew thee

not, -

For whom I mourn. Untimely was his fate;7:
Yet full ot high and pleasing thoughts he fell.-
Great-hearted Virtue, in its swelling hour,
Scarce feels the blow that strikes at brittle life.
The painful part is mine, in grief to live. 1
i Would I had dy'd for thee, my son ! my son

Eua. Euanthe's tears shall ever flow with yours,

For her proteCtor and her gentle'friend.
Mferious are-the counfels'of the Gods;
Together Agis and .dmphares fall.

Lyf. The- son of Agis lives, his infant years-

.equire a mother's care. Without delay

roclaim the son of 4gis king of Sparta.
o him, the offspring of my prince ador'd,
efcend the love and faith I bore to Agis.
e generous Thracians, who this day have ihewn
hmatchlefs worth and honour of your minds,
enceforth be Spartans; And, ye Spartan youths
hom Agis lov'd, and for whose rights he died,
ifplay the spirit of your dear-bought freedom;
ith grateful valour guard the hero's Ton,
j nd prove that Agis perih'd not in vain.

Agej ConduEt me, Spartans, to his dear remains.
i Lyf. Forbear awhile yon dismal vault.

Enter Meflenger.

Me: My Lord,
he people headed by the priefis of Jove

Hnd Hercules, in long proceflion come,

!earing the body of their royal lord,i
.rom that base dungeon to the fculptur'd tomb

hich guards the sacred dust of Sparta's kings.

Enter thePrroceffin 'with t.he Bedy f Agis.

0L O Destiny supreme!.

ya. O fad remains
If youth and majesty ! ~/g,

gcf. My son ! My son!

Nature is thwarted here; thou ifouldR have have borne
Thy aged parent to the silent tomb.

CHORUS.

Mourn, ye sons of Sparta, mourn,
Pour the fad lamenting strain.
Wretched People! Land forlorn!
Mourn the best of princes slain.

Priefl of Jupiter:

,He fell not as the warrior falls,
Whose breast defends his native walls.
To treason Agis bow'd his head,
And by his guilty subjects bled:
Betray'd by those his mercy spar'd;
Ingratitude was his reward.

CHORUS.

Shame is mix'd with Sparta's woe,
-Blood of kings the city stains:
Ever-let our sorrows flow,
Shame indelible remains.

Priest of Jupiter.

Yet Agis triumph'd in his fall;
For virtue triumphs over all:
-Great, superior to his fate,
He only gnev'd for Sparta's state.
When Jove decrees a nation's doom,
He calls their heroes to the tomb.
Fearless they fall, immortal rife,
And claim the freedom of the skies.

CHORUS.

Agis triumph'd in his fall,
Virtue triumphs over all!
Such a king shall ne'er return:
Our country and ourselves we mourn,

Priel of Herul

gis fell, by fraud o'ercome;
Alike was great Alcides' doom.
Yet then mot .worthy of his fire,
The son of Jove, when wrapt in fire,
Vi&orious crown'd his labours paitr
His nobbeft labour was the last.

CH ORUS Of all.

Now in peace our hero lies,
Ceas'd his toil, his race is run;
.Freedom is the glorious prize
4'is sori his people won.

F I N I S,

# EPILOGUE. Spoken by Mrs. PRITCHARD.

E P IL O G U E.

Spoken by Mrs. PRITCHARD.

King in bloom of.;ouIr , forfreedom die '
l4 Our bard, tho' bold, dur/t not have fjar'dfo high.

This is no credulous admiring age;

Butfacredfire the faith of Plutarch's page.
InfimpleJtile that antient sage relates
The tale of Sparta, chief of Grecian flates -
Eight hundred years it fourih'd, great in arms,
On dangers rose, and grew amidjt alarms.
Of Sparta's triumph you have heard the cau3l',
More lrong, more noble than Lycurgus' lazs :
How Spartan Dames, by gloy,'s charms iofpir'd,
The fJo, the lover, and the hJ/iand rf'd.
re Fair of Britain's iJTe, which jtjily claims
The Grecian title, land of loving dames,
In Britain's cause exert your matehle/s charms,
And rouse your lovcrs to the love of arms.
Hid, not extinct, the spark of valur lies;
Your breathJhall raise it faming to the 'ies.
Now Mars his bloody banner hangs in ai",
And bids Britannia' sons for tear prepare.
Let each lov'd maid, each nmthcr brin2 the jiclcd,
And arm their country's champions for the fld.
Arm'd andlnjfamn'd each BritiJ breafl shall burn,
No youth unlaurel'djhall to you return.
Thenjhwall we cease t' exult at trophies won,
In glory's field, by Heroes- not our own.
France etJhall tremble at the Britylh sword,
And dread the vengeance of her antient Lord.
