DO U G LA S:

A
TR A G E D Y.

As it is aaed at the
T H E A T R E S

I N

GR EAT BRITAIN and IRELAND.

Non ego fum vates, fed prifci confcius vi.
By the Rev. Mr. H U M E.

To which are prefixed,
I. An Address to the Author. Rev. Prelbyteryof Edin-

By David Hume, Efq; burgh.
Author of the History of III. Copy ofaDeclaration,
Geat-Britain, &c. by the Rev. Presbytery
II. Copy of an Admonition of Glasgow.

and Exhortation, by the

BELFAST:
Printed by JA M ES MAG EE, at the BIBLe and

CROWN in Bridge-ftreet, M,DCC,LXVI.

# An Address from DAVID HUME, Esq; Author of the History of Great - Britain, &c. to the Rev. Mr. HUME, Author of DOUGLAS, a Tragedy.

[3]
An Address from DAVID HUME, Efq; uthorof the

Hiltory of Great-Britain, &c. to the Rev. Mr. HUME,
Author ofDOUGLAS, a Tragedy.

My dear Sir,
T was the Practice of the Antients to address their
Compositions only to Friends and Equals, and to

render their Dedications Monuments of Regard and
Affecion, not of Servility and Flattery. In those Days
of ingenious and and candid Liberty, a Dedication did
Honour to the Person to whom it was addressed, with-
out degrading the Author. If any Partiality appeared
towards the Patron, it was at least the Partiality. of
Friendship and AffeCtion.

Another Inllance of true Liberty, of which antient

Times can alone afford us an Example, is the Liberty
of Thought, which engaged Men of Letters, however
different in their abllract Opinions, to maintain a mutu-
al Friendfhipand Regard; and never to quarrel about
PrincipLes, while they agreed in Inclinations and Mlan-
ners. Science was often the Subjec of Disputation,
neverofAnimofity. Cicero, an Academic, addressed
his philosophical Treatiles, sometimes to Brutus, a
Stoic; fonietimes to Atticus, an Epicurean.

I have been seized with a strong Desire of renewing.

thefellaudable Practices ofAntiquity, by addrelling the
'ollowing Difrertations to you, my good Friend: For
such I evcr will call and eeem you, notwithflanding
the Opposition which prevails between us, with Re-
gard to many of our speculative Tenets. These Diffe-
lences of Opinion I have only found to enliven our
C.jiverfation; while our common Paflion for Science
and Lettcrs served as a Cement to our Friendflip. I
ill admired your Genius, even when I imagined that
you lay under the Influence of Prejudice; and you
olmetimes told nm, that vou cxcufcd my Errors, on

A z Account

[ 4

Account of the Candour and Sincerity, which, you
thought accompanied them.

But to tell Truth, it is less my Admiration of your

fine Genius which has engaged me to make this Ad-
dress toyou, than my Esteem of your Charater and
my Affecion to your Person. That Generosity of
Mind which ever accompanies you; that Cordiality of
Friendship, that spirited Honour and Integrity, have
long interested me flrongly in your Behalf, and have
mlade me desirous, that a Monument of our mutual
Amityflould be publickly ereCted, and, if poflible, be
preserved to Posterity.

I own too, that I have the Ambition to be the first

who fall in public express his Admiration of your noble
Tragedy of Douglas; one of the nmoi interesting and
pathetic Pieces, that was ever exhibited on any Theatre.
Should I give it the Preference to the Merope of Massei,
and to thatof Voltaire, which it resembles in its sub-
jet; flould I affirm, that it contained more Fire and
Spirit than the former, more Tenderness and Sinplici-
ty than the latter; I might be accused of Partiality:
And how could I entirely acquit myself, after the Pro-
feflions of Friendhlip which I have made you ? But the
unfeigned Tears which flowed from every Eye, in the
numerous Representations which were made of it on
this Theatre; the unparalleled Command, which you
appeared to have over every Affection of the human
Breast: These areinconteftible Proofs, that you possess
the true theatric Genius of Shakefpear and Otway, re-
fined from the unhappy Barbarism of the one, and Li-
centioufnefs of the other.

My Enemies, you know, and I own even sometimes

my Friends, have reproached me with the Love of Para-
doxes and singular Opinions ; and I expeC to be expoled
to the fame Imputation, on Account of the Character,
which I have here given of your Douglas. I shall be told
no doubt, that I had artfully chosen tlie only.Timie,
when this high esteem of that Piece could be regarded as
a Paradox, to wit, before its Publication ; and that not
being able to contradiC in this Particular the Sentiments
.es the Public, I have, at leaf, resolved to go before

them

# Copy of the Admonition and Exhortation by the Reverend Presbytery of Edinburgh, dated the 5th Day of January, 1757.

[]'

them · But I hall be amply compensated for all there
Pleafantlies, if you accept this Teflimony of my Re-
gard, and believe me to be, with the greatest Sinceri-
ty, Dear Sir, Your mioft affecionate Friend, and hum-
ble Servant,

Edinb..Jan. 3, 1757, DAVID HUME.
Coby of the A,InJonitin and Exhortation by the Rever-

end Pref/lytepy of Edinburgh, dated the 5th Day of
January, 1757.

I-I E Presbytery taking into their serious Confide-
ration, the declining Stae of Religion, the open

Profanation of the Lord's Day, the Contempt of public
Worship, the growing Luxury and Levity of the present
Age; in which so many feenl Lovers of Pleasure, more
than Lovers of God : And being particularly affected
with the UNIPRrCEDENTED COUNTENANCE given of
late to the Playhouse in this Place, when the State of the
Nation, and the Circuniftances of the Poor, make such
hurtful Entertainments Iill more pernicious; judged it
their indilipenfable Duty to express in the nioft open and
folenin Manner, the deep Concern they feel on this
Occasion.

The Opinion which the Christian Church has always

entertained of Stage Plays and Players, as prejudicial to
the Intcrefts of Religion and Morality, is well known ;
and the fatal Influence which they commonly have on
the far greater Parn of Mankind, particularly the younger
Sort, is too obvious to be called in QLellion.

To enumerate how many Servants, Apprentices, and

Students in different Branches of'Literatu e, in the City
and Suburbs, have been seduced from their proper Bu-
fine's, by attending the Stage, would be a painful, dif-
agreeable Talk.

The Prelbytery in the Year 1727, when confifling of

many pious, prudent, and leained Ministers, whose
Praise is in all the Churches, being aware of these Evils,
did prepare a Paper, which was read from the several

A 3 Pulpits

6

Pulpits within their Bounds, warning their People a-
gainft the dangerous Infetion of the Theatre ten e-
reced there.

In the Year 1737, the Legillature, in their great

Wisdom, did by an Act of the othof George II. en-
act and declare, " That every Person who hould, for
" Hire or Reward, at, or caufetobe ated, any Play,

or other Entertainment of the Stage, without the
"' special Licence and Authority mentioned in the said

ACt, should be deemed a Rogue .and a Vagabond,

* and for every such Offence should forfeit the Sum of
*' 501. Sterling.

At that time a ProjeCt was set on Foot to obtain a

licensed Theatre in this City; but the Masters and Pro-
feflors of the University, Cupported by the Magistrates,
having prepared a Petition, setting forth the dangerous
Tendency ofa Playhouse here, with respeCt to the i-
portant Interests of Virtue and Learning, the ProjeCt
was laid aside. o

The Players, however, being so audacious as to

continue to at in Defiance of the Law, the Preibytery
did, at their own Charge, prosecute them before the
Court ofSeffion; and prevailed in the Process. The
Players were fined in Terns of Law; and Warrants be-
ing issued for apprehending them, they fled from Jus-
tice. But others came in their Place; who since that
Time have attempted to elude the Law, by changing
the Name of the PLAYHOUSE into that of the Con-
CERT-HALL.

As such a flight Evasion, the mere Change of a

Name, could not make the finalleft Variation in the
Nature of the Thing, the Preibytery continued to do
all in their Power, and in their Sphere, to prevent the
growing Evil ; and think themselves at this Time loud-
ly called upon, in ONE BODY, and with ONE V ICE,
toexpoftulate, in the Bowels of Love and Companlion,
with all under their Care and nfpecion.

When our gracious Sovereign, attentive to the Voice

ofProvidence, is calling From the Throne to Humilia-
tion and Prayer, how unseemly is it for his Subjects to

give

7 ]

give themselves up to Mirth and Jollity? When the
War in which we are engaged, and many awful Tokens
of the divine Displeasure, bespeak us, in the Language
of an inspired Writer, to redeem bte Time becarfe the
Days are evil, hould that Time be squandered away in
running the conifant Round offoolifi, not to ay sinful
ALlufements ? When the Wants and Cries of the nu-
merous Poor require extraordinary Supplies, how un-
accountable is it to laviih away vast Sums for such vain
and idle Purposes? When the Wisdom of the Nation
has guarded the Inhabitants of this City and Suburbs
from the Infeaion of the Stage, by a plain and express
Statute; is it nota high Inilance of Folly, to break
down that Barrier, and open a Door with their own
Hands for theatrical Representations ? which are in
many RespeCts no less inconfitlent with good Policy,
than unfriendly to Religion; and will be found soon-
eror later, to assec their temporal as well as spiritual
Interests.

Onthefe Accounts, and for many other obvious and

weighty Considerations, the Presbytery, warmed with
juif Concern for the Good of Souls, do in the Fear of
God, WARN, EXIHORT, and OBTEST, all within their
Bounds, as they regard the Glory of God, the Credit
of our holy'Religion, and their own Welfare, to walk
worthy of the Vocation wherewith they are called, by
shewing a sacred Regard to the Lord's Day, and all the
Ordinances of divine Institution ; and by discouraging,
in their refpeaive Spheres, the illegal and dangerous
Entertainments of the Stage.

The Presbytery would plead with ALL in Authority,
with TEACIERS of Youth, PARENTS and MASTERS
of Families, to reflrain by every habile Method, such
as are under their Influence, from frequenting these Se-
nlinaries of Folly and Vice. They would particularly
beseech the younger Part of their Flock, to beware, left
by Example, or from a foolilh Desire of appearing in
the fashionable World, they be misled into such perni-
cious Snares; Snares which must necessarily retard, if
not entirely mar, that Progress in the refpe&ive Parts of
their Education, on which their future Usefulness and

Success

# Copy of the Declaration of the Rev. Presbytery of Glasgow, dated the 14th Day February, 1757.

Succes depend. And, ly, they would intret and o

Success depend. And, lasily, they would intreat and ob-
test Persons of all Ranks and Conditions, that, instead of
contributing to the growing Licentioulnefs of the Age,
they may dittinguifi thelifelves by hining as Lights in
the World, being hlamelefs and harnilefs, the Sons of
God, without Rebuke, in the MIidll of a crooked and
perverse Nation ; occUPYItG, for the great Purpoles
of the Honour oi God and the Good of Mankind, that
Time, that Substance, and thole other Talents which
they have received from their Lord and Master.

On the whole, the Presbytery do, in the most earnest

Manner, call upon all who have the Interest of Religion
at Heart, to plead fervently at the Throne of Grace,
in the prevailing Name of the great Mediator, until the
Spirit be pauredlupanp us from on high, and the ildler-
nefshe a fruifll Sie/l, and the f/uitful Fie/ld be count-
ed for a ores : Ten u, 'u'went la 'l .d/well in the li!-
dernefs, and Rihkteotijtne/ remain in thre ruitful Siel ;
and the 1 'ork of Ri/I.l!eonu'e. /bill he Pace, and thei
Ebje of RihteoJJftIfs, tOjietzeis ati .i]irance for ever.

The Prefbyte r appoint this A D o T I o N and E-

HORTATION to b Icrtl froi al". the Pulpits within their
Bounds, on the all Sbbath, being the thirtieth Day
of this Month, immediately ater divine Service betore
Noon.

4-^, .

; -->-^ --. F- ^- +

E-
Copy of the Decl, atrlo,' of le PRi. Preliytety cf Glal-

gow, edate i. e .4i Day ilruary, 1757.

H E Pr(flhterv of'lnafgow having een a printed
Paper, intiilcJl, A\n .i;.i:'l.itior. anO E:\olti taion

.of the Reverendl I'refbvterv ot Edinburgh, which among
other Evils prevnilii!, laiinnt: the exrnoritiinarv nnd
unprecedented Countenance iven of lare to the Plav-
lioulC in that City ; and having ood Rlealon to beliee,
that this reeis to the folloing melancholv bit notoi-
ous Fa6s, that one who is a Mliniler of the Church of
Scotland, did hinmfilf write and conpofca Stage-Pla,

intit d,

9 ]

intitled, The Tragedy of Douglas, and gotit to be aed
on the Theatre at Edinburgh ; and that he, with feve-
ral other Ministers of this Church, were present, and
some of them oftner than once, at the ating of the said
'lay before anumerous Audience: The Prelbytery be-
ing deeply affected with this new and strange Appear-
ance, think it their Duty to declare, as they hereby do,
that they agree with the Presbytery of Edinburgh in
their Sentiments with refpea to Stage-Plays; and par-
ticqlarly that such Entertainments, from what has been
usually exhibited in them, and also from the difollute
Lives (for the most part) and infamous Characters of
the Players, have been looked upon by the Chriltian
Church in all Ages, and of all different Communions,
as extreanly prejudicial to Religion ard Morality, as
wellas hurtful to the other valuable Interests of human
Society, by the wasteful expence of Money and Time
they have occasioned; and being convinced by long
Experience, a ure Test of the Tendency of any A&ion
or Practice, how vain it is to expet such a Reformation
of the Stage as is consistent with the Ends aforesaid
and therefore such Entertainments should be discouraged
and laid aside: And the Presbytery further confidering,
that the unprecedented Countenance given to the Play-
house, in the Instance mentioned, is greatly aggravated
by a late Ad of Parliament, rendering the Stage (be-
cause not licensed) unlawful in Scotland, and allo from
the present Circumstances of the Nation with regard to
the War we are engaged in, the Dearth of Provisions,
and the awful Tokens of the Divine Anger against us:
They there!hre hereby appoint and inflruc such oftheir
lemihers as f(hll reprelsnt them in the ensuing general
Aflietilly of this Church, to move and infilf in a regular
Manner, that the venerable Aflyenbly do declare, by a
puhlick At, their Judgment and thnt of this National
Church againl the Entertainments of the Theatre, as
o 'very hurtful Tendency to the Interells of Religion
and Society. 2dlV, That the Aretilmly d.) ftritly en-
quire whether the Fts above-mentioned, viz. that a
Nlinilter of this Church has compoled and procured to
be aed on the Theatre of the Canongate of Edin-

burgh,

[ io ]

burgh, the Tragedy called Douglas, and that the Re-
presentation of the said Tragedy was attended by him
and several other Ministers, have beer. under the Confi-
deration of the Presbyters respectively concerned; and
whether these Ministers, have been found guilty, have
been censured as their Faults deserved ; and to give
such Direcions as they in their Wisdom hall ind ne-
ceffary, that uch Miniilers and all others nmay be lenli-
ble that the Church of Scotland will never protect her
Members in Pracices so unbecoming their Chnracter,
and of such pernicious Ten,!ency to the great Inreretas
of Religion, ndulry and Virtue. And lastly, that the
Affenbly would use their bell Endeavours to obtain
such an Explication and Enforcement of the Act of the
l7th of Geo. II. anent the Playhouse, as it may not
be liable to the pitiful Evasions by which it is now
eluded,

PROLOGUE.

# PROLOGUE.

PROLOG UE.

Spoken by Mr. S P A R K S.

.N antient times, when Britain's trade waus arms,

I And the lov'd muJick of heryouth alarms.
A god-like race fu/ain',lfair England's fame:
kPho has not heard of gallant PI E RcY's name ?
Ay, andol DOUGLAS ? Such illujiriousfoes
In rival Rome and Carthage never rose !
From age to age bright/hone the Britilh.fire,
And every hero was a hero's fire.
When powerfulfate decreed one warrior's doom,
Upfprung the Pbenjxfrom his parent's tomb.
But whil/l these generous rivals fought and fell,
These generous rivals lov'd each other wuell:
Tho' mans a bloodyfieldl was lois and won,
Nothing in hate, in honour all wtas done.
When P E R C Y wrong'd, defj'd his prince or peers,
Faif came the DouGLAs, with his Scottifh/pears;
And when proud Do u G LAS made his King his foe,
FOrDOUGLAS, PIERCY bent his English bow.
Expell'd their native homes by adverJe fate,
They knock'd alternate at each other's gate :
Then blaz'd the ca/fle, at the midnight hour,
For him whofearns hadJhook its firmneft tower.
This Night a Do u.GLAsyour protedion claims;
A wife! a mother ! pity's softel names:
The fiory of her wuoes inalrent hear,
And grantyour suppliant til/he begs, a tear:
In confidence/he begs ; ant hopes to find
Each Englil breajf, like noble Pi RcY's kind.

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

DRAMATIS PERSONE.

LONDON. EDINBURGII. DUBLIN.

Lord RAnDOLPH, Mr. RIDOUT. Mr. YOUNGER. Mr. DEXTER.
GLENALVON, Mr. SMITH. Mr. LOVE. Mr. STAYLEY.
NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. BARRY. Mr. DIGGS. Mr. SHERIDAN.
STRANGER, Mr. SPARKS. Mr. HAYMAN Mr. LEE.
SERVANTS.

WOME N.
MATILDA, Lady RAN-)

DOLPH, Mrs. WOFFINGTON. Mrs WARD. Mrs. KENNEDY.
ANNA, Mrs. VINCENT. Mrs. HqPKINS. Mif G.PHILIPS.

# ACT I. SCENE I.

DOUGLAS:

A

TR A G E D Y.
C'$®0 O OO OQ3-OROOS*0<<00S0 asOOJa

A C T I. SCENE I.
The court of a caflle,furrounded with t'oods.

Enter Lady RANDOLr.r.

E woods and wilds, whole melancholy gloom
Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth
The voice ot sorrow from my bursting heart,

Farewel a while: 1 will not leave you long;
For in your hades I deeim some ipirit dwells,
V/ho from the chiding ltream, or groaningoak,
S;ill hears, and anivers to rMAIl L A'S 1'snoan.
O DOUGLAS ! DOUCI.AS! If departed ghosts
Are e'er permnitted to review this world,
Within the circle of that wood thou art,
And with the pallion of iniilortals hear'll
My lanlentrtion: henr'll thy wretched wife
\\ccep Ibr her hulband nfitin, her infialit loft.
.My brother's tiimelefs death I seem to mnourn,
\Vho pci ifli'd u ith thee on lthis fatal day.
'I'o dhe I lift Imy voice ; to thee addreis
The plaint which mortal ear has never heard.
Odil'regard ise not ; though I an call'd
Another's no., lmy heart is vwholly thine.

BI Incapable

Incapable of change, affection lies
Buried, my DOUGLAS, in thy bloody grave.
But RANDOLPH comes, whom fate has made my Lord,
To chide my anguish, and defraud the dead.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.
Lord Ran. Again these weeds of woe fay, do'st thou

well

To feed a paflion which consumes thy life ?
The living claim fonme duty ; vainly thou
Beftow'ft thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady Ran. Silent, alas ! is he for vhoin I mourn:

Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives.

Lord Ran. Time, that wears out the trace ofdecpest

anguish,

Ilas pat o'er thee in vain. \ou'd thou wert not
Coupos'd of grief and tenderness alone !
Sure thou artnot the daughter ofSir MAI.COLM
Strong was his Rage, eternal his refntmelnt :
For when thy brother fell, he fniil'd to hear
That Do G LAS' on in the fame ield was slain.

Lady Ran. Oh ! rake not up the alies of my fathers:

Implacable resentment was their crime,
And grievous has the expiation been.
Contending with the Do L u ..s, gallant lives
Of either house were lo R; my ancestors
Compell'd, at lalt to leave their ancient leat
On Tiviot's plealant banks ; and now, of them
No heir is left. Had they not been so fern,
I had not been the lalt of all my race.

Lord Ran. Thy grief wrelts to its purposes my words,

I never allk'd of thee that ardent love,
Which in the brealls of fancy's children burns.
Decent affection, and complacent kindnels
Were all I wish'd for ; but I wilh'd in vain.
Hience xvith thee less regret ny eyes behold
The storm of war that gathers o'er this land:
If I (hould peri'f by the Danifli sword,
IMAl T D A would not (bed one tear the more.

Lady Ran. Thou do'lt not think so : woeful as I am,

I love thy merit, and esteem thy virtues.
But whither, goeft thou now ?

Lord

Lord Ran. Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on the tip-toe sands
Ofexpectation, and impatient aks
Each who arrives, if e is come to tell
'The Danes are landed.
Lady Ran. 0, may adverse winds,

Far fron the coall of Scotland, drive their fleet!
Antl every loldier of both hosts return
In peace and safety to his pleasant home !

Lord Ran. Thou fpeak't a woman's, hear a war-

rior's wih :

Right from their native land, the stormy north,
May the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
linmoveablein Caledonia's strand!
Then shall our foes repent their bold invasion,
And roving armies hun the fatal hore.

Lady Ran. War I detest : but war with foreign foes,

Whose manners, language, and whose looks are Itrange,
Is not so horrid, nor to me so hateful,
As that which with our neighbours oft we wage.
A river here, there an ideal line
By fancy drawn, divides the sifter kingdoms.
On each fide dwells a people similar,
As twains are to each other, valiant both,
Both for their valour famous thro' the world;
Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
And, if they muff have war, wage distant war,
But with each other fight in cruel conflit.
Gallant in Itrife, and noble in their ire,
The battle is their paftine. They go forth
Gay in the morning, as to summer sport:
When ev'ning comes the glory of the morn,
The youthful warrior, is a clod of clay.
Thlusf all the prime of either hapless land:
And fich the fruit of Scotch and English wars.

Lord Ran. I'll hear no more: this melody would

make

A soldier drop his sword, and doffhis arms,
Sit down and weep the conquests he had made;
Yea, (like a monk), sing reft and peace in heav'n
To fouls of warriors in his battle slain.

B z. Lady,

Lady, farewel: I leave thee not alone;
Yonder comes one whose love makes duty light.

Enter A N A.

Anna. Forgive therathnefs of your AN .x's love:

Urg'd by affection, 1 have thus prefun'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts;
And warn you of the hours that you neglect,
And lose in fadnels.

Lady Ran. So to lore my hours
Is all the use I wish to make of time.

Anna. To blame thee, lady, suits not with ny fare:

But sure I am, since death irit prev'd on mail,
Never did filter thus a brother mourn.
What had your lorrows been if you had lotr,
In early youth. the husband or your heart ?

Lady Ran. Oh !
Anna. Have I diffreft you with officious love,

And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate ?
Forgive me, lady: humble tho' I am,
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune;
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

Lady Ran. What power directed thy unconscious

tongue
To speak as thou haft done ? to namne-

Anna. 1 know not:

But since my words have made my miltrefs tremb!'e,
I will speak so no more ; but ilent mis.
My tears with hers.

Lady Ran. No, thou halr not be filrnr.

I'll trult thy faithlul love, antl thou lhalt be
Henceforth th' infiruCted partner of ly Woe.
But what avails it Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of nevcr-cbbinl, time ?
Compel the earth and ocean to gic up
Their dead alive?

Anna. What iieans my noble mii:rel; ?
Lady Ran. Didtt thou not alk what had my lorruws

been ?-

If I in eat ly youth had lolt a lhuband ?
In the cold bosom of the earth i lodg'd,

Mat!gl'd

Mangl'd with wounds, the husband of my youth::
And in fonie cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his.---

.nnat. 0! lady, moit rever'd !

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to untold.

Lad)' Ran. Alas !an ancient feud,

Hereditary evil, was the lource
Of my mitforrunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother hould in battle lavc
Thei life of Dou GLA S' Ion, our house's foe
'ihe outhful warriors vow'd eternal friendship.
'o Ice tle vaunted filter ofhis friend
linpatient, Do u G . AS to l3alarino camle,
Under a borrow'd name.-My heart he gain'd;
Nor did 1 long refuse the land he begg'd :
My brother's presence authoriz'd our marriage.
'Three weeks, three little weeks, with wings of down,
Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd lord was call'd
'o fight his father's battles; and with him,
In Ijpite of all my tears, did MNIA LcoL.a go.
Sca;ce were they gone, when my tern ire was told
That the falie tlranger was lord Dour LAS' son.
Flanmic with rage, the baron drew his word
Antiqueltion'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
Kneling beneath his sword, falt'ring I took
An oath equivocal that 1 ne'er would
\e!ed one of Do i ; LAS' nam:e. Sincerity,
'Thou irlt ofi irtues, let no mortal leave
Tivh onward path ! altho' the carth hould gape,
Andi filomn the gulifofhell dellruction cry
'io :ike dillimiulation's winding way.

.i',na Ala ! how ew of woman's fearful kind
Dillft own a truth b hlardy !

Laid Ran. The firfl ti uth
; c.,:iltt tu avLw. This moral learn,
'i!;i pnccious ioral, from my tragic tlc.---
I a tLw days the dreadful tidings came
That Duo U i. s and my brother botli were slain.
My lord ! nmy life ! my hulband !-nighty God !
\ hat had I done to merit fich affliction ?

Adnr. My de.arel y
lMdy ! Many a tale of tears

B 3 I've

I've listen'd to; but never did I hear;
A tale so fad as this.

Lady Ran. In the firfi days

Of my distracting grief, I found myself-
As women wish to be who love their lords.
But who durst tell my father ? The good priest
Whojoin'd our hands, my brother's antient tutor,
With his lov'd MALCOLM, in the battlefell:
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till time hould make my father's fortune mine.
That very night on which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confidant I had,
Set out with him to reach her fifler's house:
But nurse, nor infant, have I ever seen,
Or heard of, ANNA, since that fatal hour.
My murder'd child !-had thy fond mother sear'd
The loss of thee, he had loud fame defy'd,
Defpis'd her father's rage, her father's grief,
And wander'd with thee thro' the scorning world.

Anna. Not seen, or heard of ! then perhaps he lives.
Lady Ran. No. It was dark December : wind and

rain

Had beat all night. Across the Caron lay
The deftin'd road; and in it's welling flood
My faithful servant perifh'd with my child.
O hapless on ! of a most hapless fire !-
But they are both at ret ; and I alone
Dwell in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk,
Like a guilt-troubl'd Gholt, my painful rounds:
Nor has delpiteful fate permitted me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Tho' dead to love, I was compell'd to wed
RANDOLPH, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms
And RANDOLPH now poffefles the domains,
That by Sir MA LCOLM'S death on me devolv'd;
Domains that hould to Do uo LAs' Ibn have giv'n
A baron's title, and a baron's power.
Such were my soothing thoughts, while bewail'd
The flaughter'd father of a Ibn unborn.
And when that son came, like a ray from heav'n
Which Ihiues and difappearst alas wy child

How

How long did thy fond mother grasp the hope
Ofhavingthee, Ihe knew not how, refor'd.
Year after year hath worn her hope away;
But left fRill undiminifh'd her desire.

Anna. The hand, that spins th' uneven thread of life,
May smooth the length that's yet to come of your's.

Lady Ran. Not in this world: I have confider'd well

It's various evils, and on whom they fall.
Alas ! how oft does goodness wound itself?
And sweet affection prove the spring of woe.
O ! had I died when my lov'd husband fell !
Had ome good angel op'd to me the book
Of providence, and let me read my life,
My heart had broke, when I beheld the um
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

Anna. That God whole ministers good angels are,

Hath Ihut the book in mercy to mankind.
But we mufft leave this theme: GLE N A LVON comes:
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitherwards he slowly italks his way.

Lady. Ran. I will avoid him. An ungracious person
Is doubly irksome in an hour like this.

Anna. Why speaks my lady thus of RANDOLPH'S

heir ?
Lady Ran. Because he's not the heir of RANDOLP 'S

virtues.

Subtle and shrewd, he offers to mankind
An artificial image of hiulelf :
And he with ease can vary to the taste
Ofdifferent men, it's features. Self-denied,
And nmaler of his appetites he feemns:
But his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,
Watches to seize unseen the wifled-for prey.
Never were vice and virtue pois'd tb ill,
As in GLEINALVON'S unrelenting mind.
Yet is he brave and politic in war,
And stands aloft in there unruly tinmes.
Why I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter:
Stay and detain him till I reach the caflle.

[Exit. Lady RANDOLPH.

Anna. 0 happiness ! where art thou to be found ?
I fee thou dwellet not with birth and beauty,

Th'

Tho' grac'd with grandeur, and in wealth array'd;
Nor dolt thou, it would seem, with virtue dwell;
Elle had this gentle lady nil's'd thee not.

Enter GLENALVON.

Glen. What dolt thou muse on, meditating maid ?

like obme entranc'd and visionary eer
On earth thou ftand'st, thy thoughts ascend to heaven.

Anna. \Vou'd that I were, e'en as thou fay'd, a seer,
To have my doubts by heav'nly vision clear'd !

CGcn. W\hat dolt thou doubt of ? what haft thou to

do

With subje&s intricate ? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be quefioned : think of these good gifts;
And then thy contemplations will be pleasing.

nnal. Let w omen view on monument of woe;

Then boalt of beauty ; who io fair as fie ?
But I niult s!ow : this revolh ing day
Awakes the niemnory of her antient woes.

[Exit A xN A.

G LE N' A LVo jlus.

So'- Lady RAN DO LI.H fhluns n.e ; byand by

i.'ll woo hr as the lion wooes his brides.
The deed's a doing no'., that makes me lord
Of these rich valleys, and a chief of power.
'The loaibn is mnlt apt : my founding tteps
\Vi!l not be heard ailidft the din of arimIs.
RAt N D I. I' has liv'd uto long: his better fate
I-adl the afendant once, and kept me down:
V'hcen 1 had . I'iz'd the dame, by chance he caellt,
] >'lcu'd and had the lady for hii lablour ;
I 'fcap'd unknown : a ficnder consolation
Ileaven is Iiiv witers that I do not love
'To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocun: harvclt. Yet amu not ra!':
By ioue. or !(n'oethilg like it, flung, initain'd,
h.d1hl" 1 blabh'd iny pallion to his wife,
And ihe has tl'rcatcn'd io acciquint him of it.
The v.': of w\oianl:: will I do not know:
Eu t well I know the baron's wrath is deadly.
I v. ill not live in fear : the iman I dread
Isa.n a Dane to nme; nv, and the man
\'ho lland bctwixt mie r.nd. n)cliveftcfrc.

No

# ACT II. SCENE I.

No bar but he; he has no kinfinan near:
No brother in his filler's quarrel bold;
And for the righteous c-.ule, a tranger's cause,
I know no chief that will deifv L E NALV' O.

a t2 2 ,?+

:

2 *2,

w*%, .7.

.
A C T II. S C E N E 1.

/1 Court, &c.

Enter Ji'.vJnlr a
,t. /ir'mnser at one tr, nd Lan:l

KA .\ D L I' 1 lan A A '

A 1.'lot'r.
Lady Ran. J7 H A T nicans this clamour? Llanger,

W V/ speak secure;

Haft thou been wrong'd ? have thel rude men prelfum'd
To ex the v.'eary traveller on his way ?

i/l Serv. By us no stranger ever uirer'd wrong:

This nlan with outcry wild has call'd us forch;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
Enter Lord RANDOLPH and younZ tlman, uith their

f.uords Tlra'n and bloody.
Lady Ran. Not vain the tranger's fears? how fares

my Lord ?
Lord Ran. That it fares well, thanks to this gallant

youth,

V'hofe valour siv'd me from a wretched death !
As down rhc \.':,,,il;T dal: I v:alii :' l a:l'e,
'. :'le C ,'... '

:(tl ':i ; ,:;. 1 i i Ci ll.

lovcrs l i,"U1 [ ;':,.'n: ti. licc' iuuL>.c;iuip,
\' VI 1 v.Jji,:,i 'i v (jt1ickl) I: -: I 1...

I - uo 1. 11 low,

l 'I.- l I1o: :;i biave a;:! gen io L1i t..I2Cr Coi.I:,
1-ike iiiy .; !. ;ng.l in tile h lur ot' t':',
Andl, iiocl:i'g danger,

a nl:de my oea i:i o.'-n.

'I ul' itii *.i u lai h m;i but hi-: ative anl'
Struck to (hI g:u: d1, lionoa 'iicc thLy role'i no tmore,
The lielcc.l ;,: ;; tlh otlih rs led :I;::in,
Antl let him i i, ll ter ofr ti: bluotly litli.
S;c:ak, LaJy N.\ :; c. l upun "i.luty' tongue

Dwell

Dwell accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
Speak, noble dame, and thank him for thy lord.

Lady Ran. My lord, I cannot speak what now I feel.

My heart o'erflows with gratitude to heav'n,
And to this noble youth who all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but humanely brave
Fought on your fide, againfl such fearful odds.
Have you yet learn'd of him whoim we hould thank?
Whom call the saviour of Lord RAN DO LP l'S life

Lord Ran. I ask'd that queflion, and he aniwerl'd not:
But I inuf know who mly Clel v'reris. (to the Stranger.)

Strung. A low born man, of parentage oblcure,

Who nought can boarf but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Lord Ran. Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled

By the great King of Kings! thou art ordain'd
And ftampt a hero by the sovereign hand
Of nature! blush not, flower of modefy '
As well as valour to declare thy birth.

Strung. My name is NORVAL : on the Grampian

hills

My father feeds his flocks ; a frugal wain,
Whose constant cares were toencreafe his store,
And keep his only son, myself, at home.
For I had heard of battles, and I long'd
To follow to the field some warlike lord;
And heaven soon granted what my fire denied.
This moon which rose last night, round as my ihield,
Had not yet fill'd her horns, when by her light,
A band of fierce barbarians, from the hills,
Rufli'd like a torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The hepherds fled
Forfatety, and for uccour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'dabout the enemy, and mark'd
The road he took, then hafted to my friends:
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
I net advancing. The pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook the poil-encuiiier'd foe.
We fought and conquer'd. 'Er» a sword was drawn,

An

An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Returning home in triumph, I difdain'd
The hepherd's slothful life; and having heard
That our good King had fumnon'd his bold peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron fide,
I left my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to condua my steps:
Yon trembling coward who forsook his master.
Journeying with this intent, I past these towers,
And, heaven-directed, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

Lord Ran. He is as wife as brave. Was ever tale

With such a gallant modesty rehears'd ?
My brave deliverer! thou shalt enter now
A nobler lift, and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame.
I will present thee to our Scottilh King,
Whose valiant spirit ever valour lov'd.
Ha! my MATILDA ! wherefore arts that tear?

Lady Ran. I cannot Cay: for various affections,

And strangely mingled, in my bosom swell;
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
Ijoythat thou art safe ; and admire
Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety.
Obscure and friendless, he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, and with his sword
To gain diftintion which his birth denied.
In this attempt unknown he might have perifh'd,
And gain'd, with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee. his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope
He stands conspicuous; fame and great renown
Are brought within the compass of his sword.
Onthis my mind reflected, whilll you spoke,
And blefs'd the wonder-working Lord of heaven.

Lord Ran. Pious and grateful ever are thy thou ghts !

My deeds hall follov where thou point'ft the way.
Next to myself, and equal to GL ENALVO N,
In honour and command hall NORVAL be.

NVrv.

# SCENE II.

ior.v. I know not how to thank you. Rude I am,

In peech and manners: never tillthis hour
Stood in luch a presence: yet my lord,
There's Ibinething in my breast which makes me bold
To fay, that NORVAL ne'er will fiane thy favour.

Lady Ran. I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou

shalt be

My knight, and ever, as thou didft to day,
With happy valour guard the life of RA DOLP H.

Lord Ran. Well haft thou spoke. Letme forbid re-

ply (To NORVAL.

We are thy debtors fill; thy high desert
O'ertops our gratitude. I must proceed,
As was at firit intended, to the camp.
Some of my train I lee are speeding hither,
Impatient. doubtlels, of their lord's delay.
Go with me, NORVAL, and thine eyes fhallfee
The chosen warriors of thy native land,
Who languifn for the fight, and beat the air
With brandifh'd vords.

N.orv. Let us begone, my lord.
Lord Ran. [To Laly RANDOLPH] About the time

that the declining fun

Shall his broad orbit o'ervon hills suspend,
Expect us to return. This night once more
Within thete walls I relt ; my tent I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepare the feal.
Free is his eart who for his country fights:
-le in the eve of battle may resign
-linilcll to locial pleallre ; fwectefr then,
'W hen danger to a ollier's foul endears
' lie hu:mlan joy that rever nmay return.

Exeuntl RANDOLPi and NORVAL.

SCENE II.

Lady BA N D oL H

r and A :; A .
Lady Ran. His parting words have flruck a fatal

truth.

O DoCGLAS ! DOUGoLAs ! tender was the tin,
When we two parted, nr to mect again !

How many years of anguish and derpair
Has heav'n annex'd to those swift pafling hours
Of love and fondness ! Then my bosom's flame
Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of fear,
Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.

Anna. May gracious heav'n pour the sweet balm of

peace

Into the wounds that fester in your breat !
For earthly consolation cannot cure them.

Lady Ran. One only cure can heav'n itfelfbeltow ;-

A grave-that bed in which the weary reft.
Wretch that am ! Alas ! why am I so?
At every happy parent I repine !
How blest the mother of yon gallant No Rv A L
She for a living husband bore her pains,
And heard hii bless her when a man was born:
She nurs'd her freiling infant on her breast :
'Tended the child, and rear'd the pleasing boy:
She, with affection's triumph, saw the youth
In grace and comeliness urpafs his peers:
\Whilit I to a dead hulband bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.

Anna. Alas ! alas! why will you thus refums

Your grief afrefl ? I thought that gallant youth
Would for a while have won you from your woe.
On him intent you gazed, with a look
Much more delighted, than your pensive eye
Has deign'd on other objeces to bellow.

Lady Ran. Delighted fay'ft thou ? Oh ! even there

mine eye

Pound fuel for nly life-confumling sorrow.
I thought, that had the Ion of DoU.G iAS liv'd,
-le might have been like this young gallant firanger.
And pair'd with himin Ieatures and in fliape,
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
My boy with blooming No ItvAL m night have nunmbr'd.
Whilst thus I mus'd, a fp.rk from fancy ell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondneis
For tlis young llran er, wand'ring fron his home
And like an oplani call pon my care.
I will prote thee, '(fid I to inylelf)
With all ny power, and gace with all my favour.

C Anna.

Anna. Sure heav'n will bless so gen'rous a resolve.

You muff, my noble dame, exert your power:
You must awake : devices will be fram'd,
And arrows pointed at the breast of No RvAL.

Lady Ran. GLENALVON'S false and crafty head will

work

Againit a rival in his knfinan's love,
If I deter him not : I only can.
Bold as he is, GLE.ALVON will beware
Iow he pulls down the fabric that I raise.
I'll be the artist of young NORV.L'S fortune.
'Tis pleasing to admire : most apt was I
To this affection in my better days;
Though now I eeni to you hrunk up, retii'd
Within the narrow compals of my woe.
Have you not some times seen an early flower
Open its bud, and spread its silken leaves,
To catch sweet airs, and odours to bestow
Then, by the keen blall nipt, pull in its leaves,
And, tho' still living, die to scent and beauty
Emblem of me : affliction, like a form,
llath kill'd the forward blossom of my heart.

Enter GLENALVON.

Clen.W here is my dearest kinfilan, noble RA N ) o I.P H ?
Lady Ran. Have you not heard, GLENALVON of the

base-

G.'n. I have : and that the villains may not'fcape,

With a frong band I have begirt the wood:
If they lurk there, alive they liall be taken,
.And torture force fiom them th' important secret
Whether fom foe so oRAND LI' hir'd their swords,
Or if-

I.ady Ran. That care becomes a kinfinan's love.
I have a counsel for GLE NALVON's ear. (Exit AKNA.)

Glen. To him your counlels always are commands.
Lady Ran. I lhave not found so: thou art known to

InC.

; 'n. Known !
.ady Ran. And molt certain is my caufc of know-

ledge.

G.'n. \\ hat do you know ? by the most blefred cross,
Yuu mnuch aiaze ime. No created thing, You

Yourl'cls

# SCENE III.

Yourself except, durst thusaccoft GLENALVON.

Lady Ran. Is guilt so bold? and dost thou make a

merit

Of thy pretended meekness ? This to me !
Who, with a gentleness which duty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd what, if divulg'd,
Would mrnake thee nothing; or, what's worse than that,
An outcart beggar, and unpitied too:
For mortals hudder at a crime like thine.

Glen ''hy virtue awes me. Firit of womankind !

Permit me yet to ay, that the fond man
Whom love transports beyond ffrit virtue's bounds,
If he is brought by love to misery,
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpitied cannot be. Pity's the alms
Which on such beggars freely is bestowed
For mortals know that love is still their lord,
And o'er their vain resolves advances still !
As fire, when kindled by our Shepherds, moves
''hro' the dry heath before the fanning wind.

Lady Ran. Reserve there accents for some other ear.

To love's apology I liften not.
Mark thou my words ! for it is meet thou hould'ft.
His brave deliverer RANDOLPH here retains,
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well:
But, at thy peril, praftife aught against him:
Let not thy jealousy attempt to hake
And loosen the good root he has in RA N D O LP ;
Whose favourites I know thou haft supplanted.
Thou look'll at me, as if thou fain would'll pry
Into ny henrt. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution, and put on

hlie curb, before thy temper breaks away.

The f endless llranger my proteCtion claims:
Hi-i fiiend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit,

SCEN E III.

M.liInct GI.ENALVON.

Chill that I was, to start at my own hadow,
A:nd be the niallow fool of coward confcienc .!

C l Iam:

# ACT III. SCENE I.

I am not what I have been; what I hould be.
The darts of destiny have alnoft pierc'd
My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
J hould conclude there was an arm above
That fought against me, and malignant turn'd
To catch Inyfelf, the subtle snare I set.
Why, rape and murderare not simple means!
Th' imperfect rape to RANDOLPH gate a poulc;
And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fun from me;
And wortt of all, a rival. Burning hell!
This were thy center, ifI thought fle lov'd him !
'Tis certain he contemns me; nay commands mn,
And waves the flag of her difpleal'ure o'er me,
In his behalf. And hall I thus be brav'd ?
Curb'd, as fle calls it, by dame chastity ?
Infernal fiends, if any fiends there are
More fierce than love, ambition, and revenge,
Rile up and fill my bosom with your fires
And policy remorseless! Chance may spoil
A single aim ; but perseverance muRt
Prosper at last. For chance and fate are words:
Perfiftive wisdom is the fate of man.
Darkly a projea peers upon my mind,
Like the red moon when riling in the east,
.Crols'd and divided by ftrange-colour'd clouds.
I'll seek the slave who came with NORVAL hither,
And for his cowardice was spurned from him.
I've known a follower's rankled boson breed
Venom mot fatal to his heedless lord. [.Exit

A C T ll. S C N I.

A Court, &c. as f
I rfe.

Enter AN 'N A.
tAnna. I-IY vassals, Grief! great naturc'a order

break,

Andl

# SCENE II.

And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour.
Whilst Lady RANDOLPH sleeps I will walk forth,
And tale the air that breaths on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers be ! Ye Miniflers
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,
Angels and seraphs who delight in goodness !
Foriake our skies, and to her couch descend !
T'here from her fancy chafe those difimal forms
That haunt her waking ; her fad spirit charm
With images celefial, such as please
The blelf above upon their golden beds.

Enter SERVANT.

Ser,-. One of the vile Affallins is fecur'd.

We found the villain lurking in the wood:
\Vith dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not
hlis firll el;ly : these jewels were conceal'd
In the most secret places of his garment;
{ilike the spoils of oome that he has murdered.

Ana. Let me look on then. Ha! here isaheart.

The chosen crest of DoUGLAS' valiant name !
These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the Wretch.

[Exir ANN .

Enterfervants woith a prisoner.

Prif. I know no more than does the child unborn
Of what you charge me with.

ifl Serv. You fay lb, fir!

But torture Coon (hall make you speak the truth.
Behold the L.adv of Lord RANDO LPH comes
Prepare your'flf to meet herjult Revenge.

SCENE II.

Enter Lady RA NDO LP H and AN ,A.

Anna Summon your utmoRl fortitude, before
Yotu peak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
Are now at flake. Think of the fatal secret,

'Which in a lMoment from your lips may fly.
Lady Ran. 'Thou shalt behold me, with a decperate

heart,

C t. -lear

Hear how my infant periffi'd. See he kneels.

[The prisoner /ineeLs.]
Prif. Heaven bless that countenance, to sweet and

mild :

A judge like thee makes innocence more bold.
0O ave mle, lady ! from these cruel men,
Who have attack'd and seiz'd me ; who accuse
Me of intended murder. As I hope
For mercy at the judgment-feat ot God,
The tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
is not more innocent than 1 of murder.

Lady Ran. Of this man's guilt what proof can ye

produce?
lJ Srt'. M e found him lurking in the hollow

Glynn,

When view'd and call'd upon, amaz'd, he fled.
We overtook him, and enquir'd from whence
And what he was : he said he came from far,
And was upon his journey to the camp.
Not faiisfied with this, we fearch'd his cloaths,
And found thele jewels ; whole rich value plcadl
Most powerfully against him. Haid he Iceius,
And old in villainy. Permit us try
His ftubbornneis againlt the torture's foice.

PriJ. O gentle lady ! by your lord's deia life !

Which thele v.eak hanis, I f ear, did ne'cr aiiail;
And by )our children's wellare, pare my age !
Let not the iron tear my antient joints,
And my gray hais bring to the grnve with pain.

Ludy Ran. Account for these: thine own they can-

nor b :

For these, I I.,y: he fledfalt to the tuth;
l)Dtected falsehood is mioll certain death.

[.A\ N A rea s e fvns an

re.es

the frnt turns ]

ri. ala:, ! I'lm ioe belet ! let never an,

Fnr lake of lucre, fin againl his oIul !
E[.er .i jiilice is in this ni ifljul !
1, m:i;'., . nvo., nii. ftrnmer guilt reveal.

L.tdy R/ a O! A N A. hear !-once miore I charge

litce peak
The truth dii h: for there to nm fortell

And

And certify a part of thy narration;
With which it' the remainder tallies not,
An inlant and a dreadful death abides thee.

Pri. Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speak to you as just

As if you were the miniser of heaven,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men.

Some eighteen years ago, I rented land

Of brave Sir MA-LCOLM, then BALARMO'S lord;
But falling to decay, his servants ieiz'd
All that I had, and then urn'd me and mine,
(Four helpless infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel by the river's fide
Receiv'd us : there hard labour, and the Ikill
In ithiig, which was formerly my Iporr,
Supported life. Whillt thus we poorly liv'd,
One ftornly night, as I remember well,
'he wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the River down, and loud and oft
''he angry spirit of the water hriek'd.
At the dead hour o night was heard the cry
Of uoe in jeopardy. 1 rote, and ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach whatever floating thing the tlieam
lad caught. The voice was ceas'd ; the person loft:
lit looking fad and earnest on the waters,
By the moon's light 1 saw, whirl'd round and round,
A bas:et: loon I drew it to the bank,
And nciled curious there n infant lay.

Lady Ran. Wias he alive ?
Pri. He was
Lady Ran. liihumian that thou art!
llow couldil thou kill what waves anid tenlpefis spat' ?

Pri. I am no; bo inhuman.
Lady Ran Did thou not ?
Anna. M1\ oble unilltes, you are mov'd too much

T.l- nman hisa not the afpct of Itern murder:
Let hiiim ;', , and you, I hope, will hear
Good tiuin ofyour kinlman's long lott child.

Pri. The needy muan, who has known better days,
One whom di'Lrels has spited at the world,

is

Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon'
To do it;chl deeds as iake the prosperous men
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them.
And such a man was I ; a man declin d,
Who saw no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have touch'd that infant, with a hand of harm.

Lady Ran. Ha! dolt thou fayfo ? Then perhaps he

lives !

Pri. Not niany days ago he was alive.
LadyRan. O! God of heav'n! Did he then die so

lately?

Pri. I did not sav he died ; I hope he lives,

Not many days ago these eyes beheld
Him, flourilhing in youth, and health, and beauty.

Lady Ran. M here is he now ?
Pri Alas ! I know not where.
Lady Ran. Oh late ! I fear thee fill. Thou riddler,

fleak
Direct and clear ; elce I will search thy foul.

Anna. Permlit me, ever honour'd ! Keen impatience,

Tho' hard to be rellrain'd, defeats itself.-
Pursue thy tory with a faithful tongue,
To'the lalt hour that thou didit keep the child.

Pri. Fear not my faith, tho' I nmutl speak my h.ame:

Within the cradle, where the infant lay,
Was flow d a mighty store of gold and jewels;
'emnpted by which we did relolve to hide,
lroun all the world, this wonderful event,
And like a peasant breed the noiuie child.
That none might mark the change of our estate,
We lei t the country, travell'd to the north,
Uought tlocks and herds, and gradually biought for!li
Our Icclet wealth. But God's all-feeing eye
Bieheld our avarice, and linote us fore.
For one by one all our own children died.
And lie, the ftrangcr, lble remain'd the heir
Olfwhat indeed was his. Fain then would 1,
Who with a flther's fondness lov'd the boy,
Have trulled him, now in the dawn of youth,
With his own Ifecet: but my anxious ile,
Foreboding evil, never would conlsnt.

Mean

Mean while the tiripling grew inyears and-beauty;
And, as we oft oblerv'd, he bore hilnfelf,
Not as the offspring ol our cottage blood;
For nature will break out : mild with the mild,
But with the froward he was fierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'ldof war and arms.
I let mylelf againit his warlike bent;
But ail in vain: for whenadefperate band
Of robbers from the favae mountains came

Lady Ran. Eternal providence ! What is thy name I
Pri. My name is NO AL : and my name he bears.
Lady Ran. 'Tis he; 'tis le himifelf ! It is my foil !

O sovereign mercy ! 'Twas my child I law !
No wonder, ANNA that my bofomi burn'd.

Anna. Jull are your transports, ne'er was woman's

heart

Prov'd with such fierce extremes. High fated dame !
But yet remember that you are beheld
By servile eyes; your gestures may be seen
ImpafTion'd, firange ; perhaps your words o'er heard.

Lady Ran. Well doll thou council, ANNA : Heaven

betlow
On me that wisdom which my (late requires !

Anna. The moments of deliberation pars,

And soon you mull resolve. This useful man
Must be difilifs'd in safety, 'ere my lord
Shall with his brave deliverer return.

Pri. If I, amidftaftonilhmentand fear,

Have of your words and gelures rightlyjudg'd,
Thou art the daughter of my antient matler;
'I ,ce child I relcu'd from the flood is tline.

Lady Ran. W ith thee dillimulation now were vain.

1 :mIi indire thle dauglter of Sir MAI. CO L ;
'i e child hou refcu'ill fioin the flood is nine.

', i. I3lel' b the hour that in:ide me a poor man !
l ipovet.li hais I','d ily inaller's houle !
Lady RKn,. ''ly wolds furprize Ime: lure thou dof:

nut ci, ,:

''he tear 11:lands i thine eve: fucIh love from thee
Sir .A.I..t oi..1s's houlm; dlcerv'.! 1o01 ; ifalight
'1hou toldl'll tlilt fwii' o tlhv o\\ n dilrel.

Pri.

Pri. Sir MALCOLM ofour barons was the flower 3'

The faflef friend, the bess and kindelt mafler.
But ha! he knew nor of ny fad elrite.
After that battle, wherehis gallant son,
Your own brave brother, fell, the good old lord
Grew delperate and reckless of the World;
And never, as he erst was wont, went ;orth
To overlook the conduct of his servants.
By them I was thrutl out, and theml I blame:
May heaven so judge me as I judg'd my mater !
And God so love mie as I love his race I

Lady Ran. His race llall )et reward thee. On thy

faith

Depends the ate of thy lov'd mafler's houfs.
Reniemb'ieft thou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the clifts of Carron ?

Pri. I remember
The cottage of the clifts.

Lady Ran. 'Tis that I mean:

There dwells a man of venerable age,
Who in my father's service spent his youth:
Tell him I sent thee, and with him remain,
'Till I shall call upon thee to declare,
Before the king and nobles, what thou now
To me haft told. No more but this, and thou
Shalt livein honour all thy future days;
Thy son so long shall call thee father still,
And all the land hall bless the man, who siv'd
The son ofDouc.AS, and Sir VMALCOLM'S heir.
Rememlber well my words: if' thou flould'ft meet
HIinm whom thou call't thy son, flillcall him so;
And mention nothing of his nobler father.

Pri. Fear not that I Ihall mar To fhir an harvefi,

By putting in my fickle ere'tis ripe.
MA hy didi I leave my homic and antient dame ?
To find te Youth, to tell himn all I knew,
And make him wear there jewels on his arms
Which ight, I thought, be ch::lleng'd, and so b!ing
''o light the lfcrct of his noble birth.

[L-.ay RA N DOLI'I ges' tsc'I.r I.s te .SeI 'r.nts.

I .adt

# SCENE III.

Lany Ran. This man is not the assassin you fufpe&ed,

Tho' chance combin'd foine likelihoods against him.
He is tile faithful bearer of the jewels
To their right owner, whom in haste he seeks.
Tis nmeet that you should put him on his way,
Since your miflaken zeal hath dragg'd hin hither.

[Exeunt Stranger and Servuants.

SC ENE ITT.

Lady RAXDOLPH and AXv A.
Lady Ran. My faithful ANNA ! dost thou share my

joy?

I know thou dost. Unparallel'd event !
Reaching from heaven to earrh, Jehova's arin
Snatch'd froin the waves, and brings ne to ny son!
fudge of the widow, and the orphan's father !
Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
For luch a gift ! What does my AN NA think
Of the young eaglet of a valiant nelt ?
How oon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his fate had thrown him,
And tower'd up to the region of his fire.

Anna. How fondly did your eyes devour the boy !
Myllerious nature, with the unseen cord
Of powerful initinEt, drew you to your own.

Lady Rtn. The ready story of his birth believ'd

Supprell my fancy quite; nordid he owe
To any likeness ily bt sudden favour:
But now I long to fee his face again,
Exanine every feature, and find out
Thelineanients of DOUrLAS, or my own.
But noll of all, I long to let him know
WVho his true parents are, to clasp his neck,
And tell hinm all the ltory of his father.

/,lnn. With wvar caution you mull bear yourself

In public, left your tenderneis break forth,
And in oll'ervei stir conieetures llrange.
For, ifa cherub in the hape of womnan
Should walk this world, yet defamation would,
I.ikea vilecur, balk at he angel's train-
To-day the baron Itaricd at your tears.

Lady

Lody Ran. He did o ANNA ! well thy milfrefs

knows,

If the least circumfance, mote of offence,
Should touch the baron's eve, his fight would be
With jealousy diforder'd. But the more
It does behove me inltant to declare
The birth of Dou LAs, and assert his rights.
This night I purpose with my son to meet,
Reveal the secret and consult with him :
For wile he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does now, so look'd his noble Father,
Array'd in nature's eale : his icein, his speech,
Were l'eetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those trivial mortals who feemn always wife.
But, when the matter m.itch'd his mighty mind,
Uprole the hero: on his piercing eye
Sat oblervation; on each glance of thought
Decision follow'd, as the thunder-bolt
Pursues the flash.

Anna. That demon haunts you still:
Behold GLEXALVU .

Lady Ran. Now I fbun liin not.

This dayI brav'd himt in behalf of NORVI. ;
Perhaps too far : at leall mily nicer fears
For DOUGLAS thus interpret.

Enter C L.N \LVU':.

Glen. Noble dame !

The hov'ring Dane at lafl his m:nn hath landed:
Nob.ndl of piraes ; but a mighty lbolt,
That conie to fettle where their v.al.ur conquers;
To win a country, or to lolf theml';lves

Lady Ran. But whence comes this intdligence, G i.:-
NAI.VON ?

Glen. A nimble courier sent from vyoldecr canp,

To haflen up the chieftains o' the north,
lnform'd me, as he pall, that the licrce Dine
H-ad on the eale:rn coall of Lothian landed,
Near to tat pl.ice whvere the ltea-rock iticinfc,
Animaingf hal's, loks o'er a fertile land.

Lady Ran. Then nullt tlhis welcrin armyn mnarch to

join
The warlike troops that guard Edena's tow'rs.

G.en.

Glen. Beyond all question. If impairing time

Has not effac'd the image of a place,
Once perfect in iriy breatt, there is a wild
Which lies to weltward ot that mighty rock,
And seems by nature formed for the camp
Of water-wafted armies, whose chief strength
Lies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse:
If martial fcill direcs the Danish lords,
Therein acceflible their army lies
To our swift fcow'ring horle, the bloody field
Mult mian to man, and foot to foot, be fought.

Lady Ran. How many mothers Ihall bewail their

sons!

How many widows weep their husbands slain
Ye dames of Denmark ! ev'n for you I feel,
Who, sadly fitting on the sea beat ihore,
Lon;, look for lords that never hall return.

Glen. Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian sword

\idow'd the north. The children of the slain
Come as I hope, to meet their fathers' fate.
'The monster war, with her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are objecs luited to GLENALVoN'S foul,
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death;
Reproach more piercing than the pointed sword.

Lady Ran. I scorn thee not, but when I ought to

scorn;

Nor e'er reproach, but when insulted virtue
Againlt audacious vice lrerts herself.

own thy worth, G LENA . VON ; none more apt
'lhan I to prailb thine eminence in arms,
And be the echo of thy martial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty paflion:
(;o and pursue a lawful mistress, glory,
Lpon the Danith.crells redeem thy fault,
And let tliv valour be the ftiield of RANDOLPH.

(.', ,. One instant flay, and hear an alrer'd man,

W\hen beauty pleads for virtue, vice abalh'd
"'liec its own colours, and goes o'er to virtue.
I am your convert; tine will fliew how truly:
Yet one imeodiate proof I mean to give.
'Ih't.youth lor whom 'our ardent zeal to-day,

D Some-

Somewhat.too haughtily, defy'd your slave,
Amidst the shock of armies I'll defend,
And turn death from him, with a guardian arm.
Sedate by use, my boiom maddens not
A: the tumultuous uproar of the field.

LadyRan. Ad thus, GLENALVON, and I am thy

friend:

But that's thy least reward. Believe me, fir,
The truly generous is the tuly wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblest.

Exit Lady RANDOLPn.

Glen. [solus] Amen! and viitue is its own reward!-

I think that I have hit the very tone
In which she loves to speak. Honey'd assent
How pleasing art thou to tle talte of man,
And woman also ? flattery diret
Rarely disgusts. They little know mankind
Who. doubt its operation: 'tis my key,
And opes the wicket of the human heart.
How tar I have succeeded now I know not.
Yet I incline to think her stormy virtue
Is lull'd a while : 'tis her alone I fear:
Whillt she and RANDOLPH live, and live in faith
And amity, uncertain is my tenure.
Fate o'er my head suspends disgrace and death,
By that weak hair, a peevilh female's will.
1 am not idle: but the ebbs and flows
Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated.
That flaveof NOi(VAL'S I have found mos apt:
I thew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his Ibul
To fay and swear whatever I fuggelt.
NORVAL, I'm told, has that alluring look,
'Twixt man and woman, which I have obferv'd
To charm the nicer and fanta(tick dailes,
Who ate, like lady RANDOLPH, full of virtue.
In raising RANDOLPH'S jealousy I may
But point him to the truth. He feldomi errs
Who thinks the worst h can of womankind.

ACT

# ACT IV. SCENE I.

A C T IV. S C E N E I.

Flourish of Trumpets.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH attenle,l.
Lord Ran. Umrnmon an hundred Horse, by break ot

,...~ day
To wait our pleasure at the catle gate.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.
Lady Ran. Alas I my lord! I've heard unwelcome

news
The Danes are landed.

Lord Ran. Ay, no inroad this

Ot the Northumbrian bentto take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament essay,
Of onie young knight refolv'd to break a spear,
And lain with hotile blood his maiden arms.
''he Danes are landed : we must beat them back,
Or live thellaves of Denmark.

Lady Ran. Dreadful times !
Lord Ran. 'I'he fenceless villages are all forsaken;

The treihiling nirthers, and their children lodg'd
In well-girt towers and caflles; whiltlf the men
Retire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
Ihey hut retire more awful to return.
Lady Ran. Ininenlle, as fame reports, the' Dan.

holt !
Iord Ran. Were it as nurn'rous as loud fame re

ports,

An nriv knit like ours wou'd pierce it thro:
Brothers, that flnink nor fronmeach others ide,
And fond companions, fill our warlike files:
For his dear offspring, and the wife he loves,

D 2 The

The husband and the fearless father arm.
In vulgar breadts heroic ardor burns,
And the poor peafnnt mares his daring lord.

Lady Ran. Men's minds are temper'd like their

swords, for war:

Lovers of danger on deflruction's brink
Theyjoy to rear eret their daring forms.
Hence, early graves ; hence the lone widow's life;
And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age.
Where is our gallant guest ?

Lord Ran. Down in the vale

.I left him managing a fiery dfeed,
Whose flubbornnels had foil'd the strength and fill
Of every rider. But behold he comes,
In earnest con:versation with GLE ALVON.

Enter No v A L and GLEN A LV ON.

GLENALVON ! with the lark arise; go forth,
And lead my troops that lye in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
NORVAL, thou goeft with me, But fay, young man,
Where didft thou learn lb to difcourle of war,
And in such terms, as I o'erheard to-day?
War is no village science, nor its phrase
A language taught amongst the fllepherd swains.

Norv. Small is the kill my lord delights to praise

In him he favours.-Hear front whence it came.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the molt remote
And inaccellible by hepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit liv'd ; a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our wand'ring fwairls.
Auflere and lonely, cruel to himself,
Did they report him; the cold earth his bed,
Water his drink, his food the fliepherds alnis.
I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
With reverence and pity. Mild he spake,
And entering on discourse, such stories told
As made me oft revisit hi. fad cell,
For he had been a soldier in his youth;

And

And fought in famous battles, when the peers
Of Europe, by the bold GODFREDO led,
Against th' usurping infidel dililay'd
T'he crols of Chirit, and won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech Itruck from me, the old man would alai
His years away, and at his young encounters:
Then, having shew'd his wounds, he'd fit him down,
And all the live-long day discourse of war.
Tohelp.nmy ancy, in the finooth green turf
He cut the figures of the marlhall'd hofs ;
Defcrib'd the motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,
The quare, the crescent, and the phalanx firm.
Fbr all that Saracen, or ChriRtian knew
Of war's belt art, was to this hermit known.

Lord Ran. Why did this soldier in a defart hide

Tho'se qualities, that shou'd have grac'd a camp ?

Nrv.. That too at lalt I learn'd. Unhappy man !

Returning homewards by Mefina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boilt'rous captain of the tea
Faflen'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought:
The stranger fell, and with his dying breath
Dtclar'd his name and lineage. Mighty God !
The soldier cried, my brother! Oh! my brother!

Lady Ran. His brother !
,'r. Yes; of the fame parents born;

His only brother. They exchang'd forgiveness:
And happy, in my mind, was he that died:
For many deaths has the survivor I'uffer'd.
In the wild dcfart on a rock he fits,
Or on Ibme nameless trea'm's untrodden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times, alas ! not in his perseEt mind !
Holds dialogues with his lov'd brother's Ghost;
And oft each night forfikes his ullen couch,
To make fad orisons for him he flew.
Lady Rnn. To what nlyiterious wo(s are mortal,

born!
In this dire tragedy were there no more

D 3 Unhappy

45
Unhappy persons ? did the parents live ?

Norv. No; they were dead: kind heav'n had clos'd

their eyes
Before their son had hed his brother's blood.

Lord Ran. Hard is his fate; for he was not to blame !

There is a destiny in this strange world,
Which oft decrees an undeserved doom !
Let fchoolmen tell us why.- From whence these

founds!

f[7rumpets at a di;iance.]

Enter an OFFICER.
Officer. My Lord, the trumpets of the troops of

Lorn:
Their valiant leader hails the noble RA N D O L PH.

Lord Ran. Mine ancient guest does he the warriors

lead ?
Has Denmark rous'd the brave old knight to arms ?

Officer. No, worn with warfare, he religns the

sword.

His eldest hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord Ran. GLENALVON, go,

With hospitality's mnofc firong request
Entreat the chief.

[Exit GLE NALY O' ]

Officer. My lord, requests are vain.

Ie urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foes approach.

Lord Ran. May vi&ory fir on the warrior's plume !

Bravett of men ! his flocks and herds are sale
Remote from w.ar's larms his paRtures lie,
By nountains iaccellible fccur'd:
Yet foremnolt he ino the plain delcends,
Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the ancient world:
Conrcmrners they of indolence and gin;
Bur still for love ofglory, and of arms,
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift

Against

Againfl each strong antagonist the spear.
1'1l go and press the hero to my breast.

[Exit RANDOLPH.]

Manent Lady RANDOLPH andNoRVAL.
Lady Ran. The soldier's loftiness, the pride and

pomp

Invefingawful war, NORVAL, I fee,
Transport thy youthful mind.

Norv. A should ghey not?
Blest be the hour I left my father's house !
I might have been a shepherd all my days,
And llole oblcurely to a peatant's grave.
Now, if I live, with mighty chiers 1 ifand;
And, if I fall, with i.obic dull I lye.

Lady Ran. There isagen'rous fpiritin thy brealt,

That could have well fuftain'd a prouder fortune.
This way with me ; under yon fpeiading beech,
Uniecn, unheard, by hu:ain eye or ear,
I will amaze thee with a wond'rous tale.

Norv. Let there be danger, l y, with the secret,

Thbt may hug it to iy gratefui he.irt,
And prove my taith. Commiland my word, my life:
Thet are the lole pcfieflions of poor NORVAL.

Lady Ran. Kncv.'i thou these gems ?
Ni,,v. DurfC I blieve mnine eyes
I'd fay i knew thcim, and they were my father's.

Lady Ran Thy tfather's, :lhy'ft thou! ah ! they were

thy !'.tihet's!

Norv. I law chemi once, nd curiously enquir'd

Of both my parents whence lfch lilendour cane ?
But I was check'd, nd morc could never learn.

Lady Ran ''hen learn of ie thou art not No RAL's

son.

Norv Not NonVAI.'s son !
Lady Ran. Nor of a flephierd prung.
Norv. Lai., who am I thll ?
Lady Ran. Noble thou art;
For noble was thy fire !

.orv. I will beiieve

O

0 ! tell me farther! Say who was my father ?

Lady Ran. DOUGLAS!
ANrv. Lord DOUGLAS, whom to day J saw ?
Lady Ran. His yonger brother.
No.rv. And in yonder camp ?
Lady Rnn. Alas !
Norv; You make me tremble--Sighs and tears!
Lives my brave father ?

Lady Ran. Ah ! too brave indeed !
He fell in battle ere thyself was born.

Norv. Ah me unhappy! ere I ayw the light ?

But does my mother live ? I may conclude,
From im own fate, her portion has been sorrow.

Lady Ran. She lives; but walles her life in conRant

woe,
Weeping her husband slain, her infant loft.

Nor'v. You that are kill'd so well in the fad flory

Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their delliny, now have compallion
Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd.
O ! tell me who, and where my mother is !
Opprefi-bv a base world, perhaps he bends
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief;
And delolate implores of hcav'n, the aid
Her son hould give. It is, it inull'be so-
Your countenance confelfes that he's wretched.
O ! tell ine her condition ! Can the sword
Who hall refill me in a parent's caule ?

Lady Ran. Thy virtue ends her woe.-My son, my

Ion
I am thy Mother, and the wife of DOUGLAS !

[Falls upon his neck.
n\,'or. O heav'n and earth, how wond'rous is mly

tate;
Art thou my mother ? Ever let me kneel

Lady Ran. Image o DOUGLAS! Fruit of fatal

love !
All that I owe thy fire I pay to thee.

n'cv. Rc'pect and admiration ftillpoffrcr me,

Checking the love and fondnels of a son.
Yet 1 was filial to my humble parents.

B.

But did my fire furpals the reft of men,
As thou excellefi all of womankind ?

Lady Ran. Arise, my son ! In me thou dost behold

The poor remains of beauty once adimir'd:
The autumn of Iy days is come already;
For lorrow made my fuiner haRe away,
YeIt in mly prime I equal'd not thy fathler:
His eves were like the engle's, yet fometimnes
Liker the dove's, and as he pleas'd, he won
Ail hearts with iobltnefs, or with pirit aw'd.

nor, . I-ow did he fall ? Sure 'twasa bloody field
\ hen DO u LA S died. O I have much to nik !

Lady Ran. Hereafter thou fialt hear the lengthcn'd

tale

Ofa'! thy father' and thy mother's woes.
At preent this: Thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder castle, and the wide domains
Which now Lord RANDOLPH, as my husband, holds,
But thou lhalt not be wrong'd ; I have the power
To right thee itill: Before the king I'll kneel,
And call Lord DOUGLAS to protect his blood.

.Arrv. The blood of DOUGLAS will proteA itself.
Lady Ran: But we shall need both friends and favour,

l:oy,

To wrest thy lands and lordship from the gripe
Of RANDOLPIX and his kinfilan. Yet I think
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
My life incline the virtuous to elieve.

Nor,. To be the son of DOUGLAS is to me

Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in the field I'll seek for fame and fortune.
Lady Ran. Thou dolt not know what perils and in-

jufice

Await the pool man's valour. O ! my son !
The iulL f blood in all the land's abafli'd,
H-laing no lacquay butpale poverty.
Too Icn g hail thou been thus attended, o c or. A !
'I oo long hnaf thou been deei'd a peasant's child.
The wanton heir ofibmec inglorious chief
'craps hn Ifcorn'd thee, in the outhlul sports.;
lhilit thy indignant 1piiit fcell'd in vain!

Such

Such contumely thou no more halt bear:
But how I purpose to redress thy wrongs
Must be hereafter told. Prudence directs
That we flould part before yon chiefs return.
Retire, and fron thy ruftick follower's hand
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, dictated before
This carual opportunity arose
Of private conference. It's purport naik;
For as I there appoint we meet again.
Leave me, my son ! and fame thy manners fill
ToNoRVAL'S, not to noble DOUGL .AS' Itate.

Nor'v. I willrememiber. here isN oRVAL novw?
That good old man.

Lady Ran. At hand conceal'd he lies,

An useful witness. But beware, my son,
Of yon GLENALVON; in his guilty breast
Resides a villain's shrewdness, ever prone
To faife conjeture. He hath griev'd my heart.

NTorv. Has he indeed ! Then let yon false GLENAL-

VON
Beware of me.

[Exit DoUGLAS.

Manet Lady RANDOLPH.

Lady Ran. There burst the fmorher'd flame ?

O ! thou all righteous and eternal King I
Who father of the fatherless art call'd,
Protect my on !- Thy infpirarion. Lord!
Hath fill'd his bofbm with that sacred fire,
Which in the hrealrs of his forefathers hurn'd:
Set him on high like them, that he may fline
The liar and glory of his native land !
Then let the miniilter of death descend,
And hear nly willing spirit to its place.
Yonder they come. How do bad women find
Unchanging nipeds to conceal their guilt ?
When I by realon. and by justice urg'd,
Full hardly can diltremble with thele nien
In nature's pious cause. Enter

EnterLord RANDorPH and GLENALVON.

Lord Ran. Yon gallant chief,
Ofarms enainour'd, all repose disclaims.

Lady Ran. Be not, my Lord, by his example fway'd:

Arrange the business of to-morrow now,
And when you enter, speak of war no more.

Exit Lady R.AND) LPH.

M.anent Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.
Lord Ran. 'Tis so by heav'n ! her mien, her voice,

her eye,
And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

Glen. He parted from her now: Behind the mount,
Anongft the trees, I hw him glide along.

Lord Ran. For fad fequefter'd virtue he's renown'd 1
Clen. Mos true, nmyLord.
Lord Ran. Yet this diftinguiih'd dame

Invites a youth, the acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This assignation, (he'ws a letter) the aflalin freed,
Her manieft affetiol: for the youth,
MIight breed suspicion in a hulband's brain,
Whose gentle comfort all for love had wedded:
Much more in ine. MATILDA never lov'd me.
Let no man, after mle a woman wed,
Whose heart he knows he has not; though he brings
A mine of gold, a kingdon fr her dowry:
Forlet her femn, like the night's hadowyqueen,
Cold and contemplative:-He cannot trust her:
She may, he will, bring hame and Ibrrow on him;
The woril of sorrow, and the worlt of thames!

Clen. Yield not, my Lord, to fuchl afflicting

thoughts ;

But let the spirit of an husband sleep,
'Till your own enses make a sure conclusion.
This billet mlft to blooming NoRV.L go:
At the next turn awaits my trufy spy;
I'll give it him refitted ior his laster. In

In the close thicket take your secret sand;
The moon hines bright, and your own eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

Lord Ran. Thou dost counsel well.
Glen. Permit me now to make one flight essay.

Of all the trophies which vain mortals boast,
By wit, by valour, or by wifdorm won,
The sirs and fairest, in a young man's eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Successful love
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind;
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Lord Ran. And what avails this maxim ?
Glen. Much, my lord!

Withdraw a little: I'll accoftyoungNoRv r.,
And with ironical derisive counsel
Explore his spirit. If.he is no more
Than humble NORVAL, by thy favour rais'd
Brave as he is, he'll shrink aftonifh'd from nme:
But if he be the favourite of the fair,
Lov'd by the firit of Caledonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's `pear.

Lord Ran. 'Tia hrewdly thought.
Glen. When we grow loud, draw near. But let my

lord
His rising wrath restrain. [Exit RAND L P H.

Manet GLENALVON.

Glen. 'Tis strange by heav'n !

That he hould run full tilt her fond career,
To one so little known. She too that tfcei'd
Pure as the winter fiream, when ice enllols d
Whitens its coure. Even I did think hi:r chaste,
Whose charity exceeds not. Precious lex!
Whose deeds lafciviuus pas GLENALVo N's thoughts!

N o v A L nplearS.

His port I love ; he's in a proper mood
To chide the thunder, ifat him it roar'd.
Has No v A L seen the troops?

nAro'v.

NAorv. The setting fun,

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale,
And as the warriors mov'd, each polih'd helm,
Corflet, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at it's top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they feem'd,
An hott angelic, clad in burning arms.

Glen. Thou talk'ft it well; no leader of our host,
In founds more lofty, speaks of glorious war.

Aorv. If I shall e'er acquire a leader's name,

My speech will be less ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itself freely ; since no part is mine
Ofpraife, pertaining to the great in arms.

Glen. You wrong yourself, brave fir; your martial

deeds

Have rank'd you with the great : but mark me,NoRvAL;
Lord RAN DO LPH'S favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know these soldiers, counsel you.
Give them all honour ; seem not to command;
EIie they will scarcely brook your late sprung power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

A',,v. Sir, I have been accuftom'd all my days,

To hear and speak the plain and finiple truth:
And tho' I ave been told, that there are men
Who borrow. friendship's tongue to speak their scorn,
Yetin fcl, language lan little Ikill'd.
Tlrhrefore I thank G r.EN A LVON for his council,
Altin' it f(un!ed harfily. Why remind
M.: ofi)y birth obscure ? Why slur my power
\'Vi:l Iluc contemptuous terms

GC ,. did not Inean
To < '.: your pride, which now I fee is great.

Aori. My pride !
GC!n. Suppress it as you wish to prorper.

Yonr p ide'sexceflive. Yet for RAND o LPH'S fake
I wil! .,ot leave vou to it's rani direction.
If thuiso u IW'ell, and frown at high-born nmen,
W'i;l Ii !hl-born Inep endure a fliepherd's Icorn ?

Aor'v. A nlephlird's corn !

E GCeN.

Glen. Yes; if you presume

To bend on soldiers these dil'dainful eyes,
As if you took the aleafure of their minds,
And liid in secret, you're no match for me;
What will become of you ?

Arorv. If this were told! [Aside.
Haft thou no fears for thy piefunptuous self!

Glen. I-Ia ! Dost thou threaten me ?
Norv. Didft thou not hear ?
Glen. Unwillingly I did ; a nobler foe
Had not been quet'ion'd thus. But such as thee-

Naor.v. Whom dolt thou think me ?
Glen. Norval.
Nortv. So I am-
And whoisNoRvxrAL in GLENALVON'S eyes ?

Glen. A pealart's Ion, a wandering beggar-boy;
At best no more, even if he speaks the truth.

VNor. False as thou art, dost thou fufpet my truth ?
Glen. Thy truth ! rhou'rt all a lye; and falie as hell
Is the vain-glorious tale thou told'f1 to RANDOLPH.

Aor.v. It I were chain'd, unarn'd, and bedrid old,

Perhaps I should revile : But as I am
I have no tongue to rail. Te humble N RVA1.
Is of a race, who lirive not but with deeds.
Did I not fear to freeze thy flhallow valour,
And make thee fink too soon beneath my word,
I'd tell thee-what thou art. I know thee well.

Glen. Doll thou not know C.ENALVON, born to

conilnland
Ten thoufandl fnaves like thee ?

nAtsr. V\illain, no more:

Draw nd :'!cend thy life. I did de'ign
'Io ; i' det'v'd thee in another cule:
IBut hieaven acceltrites it's vengennce on thee.
Now for mIy own and Lady lA : O LI H'S wrongs.

Enter Lord RA : 01. 1.ll
L.ord Ran. I-sold, I command you both. 'he man

that llirs
MIakes me his te.

,'crv.

Norv. Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly Iounded, noble RANDOLP1H.

Gkn. Hear him, my lord; he's wond'rots conde-
scending !
Mark the humility of hepherd NORVAL !

oAov. Now you may fcof in lafety.

(Sheaths his sword.)

Lord Ran. Speak not thus,

Taunting each other ; but unfold to me
The cau;e ofquarrel, then Ijudge betwixt you.

A'rv. Nay my good lord, tho' I revere you much,

My cause I plead nor, nor demland your judgment.
I blush to peak ; I will not, cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words that I from him have borne.
To the liege lord of my dear native land
I owea fubjeót's homage: but ev'n hin
And his high arbitration I'd rejea.
Within my borom reigns nother lord:
Honour, folejudge and umpire of itself.
If my free speech offend you, noble RAN DOtP «,
Revoke your favours, andlet NORVAL go
hIence as he came, alone, but not dilhonour'd.

Lord Ran. Thus far I'll mediate with ipartial

voice:

The antient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
Suspend your purpole, 'till your country's arin
Repel the bold invader: then decide
The private quarrel.

Glen. I agree to this.
A'orJ. And I.

Enter SERVANlT.

Ser,v. The banquet waits.
Lord Rtin. \e colle.
Glen Norval,

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hofipitaliry of R,\ N OL. I'I.
Nor flowning anger, nor yet wrinkl'd harte,
Sb all tin ily countenance. Smooth thoa thy brow

z bor

# ACT V. SCENE I.

Nor let our trife disturb the gentle dame.

Norv. Think not so lightly, Sir, of my resentment:
When we contend again, our tlrife is mortal.

A C T V. S C E N E I.

The l oco,/.

Entir DouG .AS.

H 1 S is tie place, tile center of the grove.
Heie ilands the oak, the monarch of the wood.

Hiow sweet and folenmn is this mid-night Icenc I
The filvermoon, unclcuded, holds her way
Thro' skies where I could count each little lar.
The fanning well wind carcely lirs the leaves;
The river, rufling o'er its pebbled bel,
Imposes silence with a flilly found.
In such a place as this, at such an hour,
If ancefiry can be in aught belicv'd,
Descending spirits have convcrs'd with minl
And told the secrets of the world unknown..

Enter Old No RV A ..
Old rl\rj'. 'Tis he. But whait if he should chide n.e

hence ?
His just repioach I fear.

'[D ou ; I..AS turn s

nJr 'es/i,,.

Forgice, lurgive,

Can'lt thou or:ive the man, tihe elflil man,
Who bred Sir MAI.co L..'S hir a niephlerd's ton.

Dcug. Kneel not to me: thou art my athr still

Thy wisi'd lor presence now compleats my joy.
Welcome to me, my fortunes thou Ihalt hare,
And ever honour'd with thy DOcGLAS live.

01J1

Old Nor. And do'st thou call me father? O my son

I think that I could die to make aends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
Which in thewildernefs so long conceal'd
The bloffomn of thy youth.

Dou. Not worse the fruit,

That in the wildernels the bloflom blow'd.
Amongif the shepherds, in the humble cot,
I learn'd some lessons, which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a wain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend, and, when my vaflals bow,
NORV L fllall finooth the crested pride ofDou LAS.

NV.,v. Let ne but live to fee thine exaltation !

Yet grievous are my fears. O leave this place,
And thole unfriendly towers.

Doug. Why should I leave them ?
sorv. Lord RaNDOLPHI and his kinfinan seek your

life.

Dou. I-low knov.'ft thou that?
N/Vo,. 1 willintl ni you how.

When evening ca:ile, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's ca-e,
And fondly trod in each accutloin'd path
That to the cattie la:ds. Wlilli thus I rang'!,
I was lnriii'dl w.ith unexpected founds,
Ofearnrl: voices. On the perlons cane:
Unfien I lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other :s they ralk'd, lord RA N DO . this,
Anil that G 1..l : A LVO ': Ilill of you they spoke,
And of the ldy : threatning was rheir speech,
Tho' but i;iprfl;cti/ nmy ear cou2 l e;r it.
'I was Ilrange, tlih v 'id, :a .'oiltcrful diicovcry :
Anid :ler an anon they vo.v'I reL-nge.

Dot,. Rlevenge ! fo\r xv'h:L
A';: ,. For being wilat v."u re;

Sir . .\x I.o. .'.'s hi · :

h a

i ilve you of'enc'ed ?

\Vhie.! ;hliy ; , ,.,c, T hiicd tlme to lly cottagc,
And tlhci.; il t r,,u!'I; !i,'..: bcelt niglit lind
Mealls to inifrim you of their wicked puroofe,

L 3 Jlut

But I could think of none: at last perplex'd
liffued forth, encompalling the tower
With many a weary ftepand wishful look.
Now providence hath brought you to my fight,
Let not your too courageous pirit scorn
The caution which I give.

Doug. I scorn it not.

Mymother warn'd mle ofGLENALVON'S bafenels:
But I will notfufpet the noble RANDOLPH.
In our encounter with the vile affaflins,

mark'd his brave demeanor : him 'll trul.
Norv. I fear you will too far.
Doug. Here in this place

I wait my mother's coming : le (hall know
What thou hall told: her counel I will follow ?
And cautiousever are a mother's counlels.
You muf depart ; your prelence may prevent
Our Interview.

A7Nrv. My blessing rei upon thee?
O may heav'n's hand, which l:sv'd thee from the

wave,

And from the iword of foes, be near thee lill;
Turning imichance, if aught hangs o'er thy head,
All upon Iline !

Exit Old NORVAL.

Doug. lie loves me like n parent;

And iuflt not, (hall not lole le ion he loves,
Altho' his ibn has found a nobler father.
Eventful day, how hal thou chang'd my (late!
Once on the cold, and winter fladed fide
Ofa bleak hill, ii'cihance had rooted me,
Never to thrive, child ofanother loil:
Tranll tlanted now t to the gay funiy vale,
I.ik te green thorn of May, my foi tune flowers.
Ye g;or Lus lnia s ! igh heav'n' relledeint hol l!
TI v .'' .i I oit hlivc of iny lot compl.lin,'J
I [car anl record i:y Iou!'s i nalter'd wifli
1)c.:. or aliic , t ie but Le reno nl'!
May hv'n iim:pile lio:e fierce gigantic Dane,
''o give a bold deliance to oul hoi
Bel'oc rl fle caks it out I will accept;

Like

Like DOUGLAS conquer, or like DOUGLAS die.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

Lady Ran. My son! I heard a voice-
Doug. --The voice was mine.
Lady Ran. Didft thou complain aloud to nature's ear,

That thus in duky shades, at mid-night hours,
By tlealth the mother and the son hould meet ?

[Embracing hi.
Doug. No: on this happy day, this better birth-

day,
My thoughts and words are all of hope and joy.

Lady Ran. Sad fear and melancholy still divide

The empire of my breast with hope and joy.
Now hear what I advise.

Doug. Firit, let me tell
What may the tenor of your counsel change.

Lady Ran. Mly heart forebodes foine evil!
Dou . 'Tis not good---
:t eve, unleen by RANDOLPH an1d GLENALVON,
'lhe good old NoRVAL in the grove o'er-heard
'I'eir converlation: oft they imention'd me:
With dreadful threanings ; you they Ib:netimes nan'd.
* rwas ltrange they laid, a wonderful di'cov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.
Lady Ran. Defend us, gracious God! we are be-

trny'd :

They have found out the secret of thy birth;
It niut be lb. Tliat is the great dilcovery.
Sir M. . co. LM's heir is come to claim his own;
And they will be reveng'd. Perhaps even now,
Arnl'd and prepar'd for imurder, they but wait
A darker and more silent hour to breaik
Into the chamber where they think thou fcep'll.
'I'llis moment, this, heav'a hath ordain'd to save

thee!

Fl. to the c.nip, my Ibn !

Dms,. And leave you here

No: to the calile let us go together,
Call up the antiunt fervanct of your house,

Who

Who in their youth did eat your father's bread,'
Then tell the:n loudly that I am your son.
If in the breaff of men one spark remains
Ofr cred l;ve, fidelity, or pity,
Son.e in your cause will arm. I alk but few
To .. i e'thofe Ipoilers from my father's house.

Lad. Ran. 0 nature, nature ! what can check thy

force ?

Thou genuine oiFspring of the daring DOUGLAS !
Rut rufl not on deltuction: save thyself,
And I am lale To me they mean no harm.
Thy ftav but risks thy precious li.'e in vain.
That winding path conduats thie to the river.
Cross where thou feetl a broad and beaten way,
Which running eastward leads thee to the camp.
Inflant demand admittance to Lord DOUG LAS.
Shew him thefejewels, which his brother wore.
Thy look, thy voice, will make iins tdel the truth,
Which 1 by certain proof will oon conirm..

Dotrg. I yield me and obey : but yet my heart

Bleeds-at this parting. Some-thing bids me flay
And guard a mother's life. Oft have I read
Of wond'rous deeds by one bold arnlm ;tciiev'd.
Our foes are two ; no muore: let me go forths,
And fee if any fhicld can guard Gl.Ea.: .LVON.

Lady Ran. I thou regard'tt thy :lother, or rever's

Thy tather's inem'ry rthiik of this no miore.
One thing I have to fay before we part:
Long were thou lol : and thou art tuuril, my child,
In a nicit fearful eafon. \'var and battle
I have grcat caule to dread. Tno well I fee
Which way the current ofthly tem:p-r lets:
'o day I've found thee. Oh ! ny long loli hope !
If thou to giddy valour giv'ic the rein,
To morrow I may ioi'e my on lor ever.
The love of thee, before thoui .;w'i ii.. light,
Suiiin'd my lile when thy bav\ lather lell.
Il'tlotIt s:alt :;il, 1 have l,tr lotve nor hope
In tlhi walle wollc ! nLm son, cmi:cil.tcr mic

D.rg. \h'it flall I fy ? how ca I give you com-

The

The God of battles of my life dispose
As may be best for you ! fbr whose dear fake
J will not bear mityef as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boast founds aniongft martial men,
How will inglorious caution fiit my claim ?
The pof of fate unfl inking 1 mnaintain.
My country's foes mull: wtirneft who I am.
On the invader's heads, I'll prove my birtl,
' fill friends and fles conses tihe genuine ttrain.
If in this lrife I fall. blame notyour fIn.
Who if he lives not honour'd nult not live.

Lady Ran. I will not utter what my bosom feels.

Too well I love. that valour which I warn.
Farewel, mny son mny counsels are but vain.

Em.racing.
And as high heaven hath wiil'd itall muff he. [feparnts.

Lady Ran. Gaze rot on me, thou wilt nliltake the

path;
I'll point i out again.

['uft as they are fpaatinti, enter fromn the wood

Lortl RANDOLPH ant/GLENALVON]

Lord Ran. Not in her Frelence.

Now--

Glen. I'm prepar'd.
Lord Ran. No: I command thee flay.

I go alone: it never flall be laitd
'I hat I took odds to combat mortal man.
'he noblest vengeance is the olt coinplent.

[I'xit L)rd R. NDO l.PH1.

;G N.L

r ,\r mak s foNne
i Jep to the Jitn fide ofl te

//lZe, h/t'ns; and cazi. 3

(,. . Demons of dcath conme Ittile on my sword,
And to a double fl.gh ter guide it ihomie
Ilicelover Iiil tlie lufi:ind bloth niut die.

f L.ord R. .

A o L PH leLindi the fctnes J

I.ord Ran,. Draw, \ ilain ! draw
Dsvu. All'l toe nor, Lord RANDOI.I) ,.
Not as tiou luv'lt thy l'lt'.

Cl. i./hli of 'we or /.
L[GC.E NALVON runnin oit.

NLW

Now is the time.
Enter Lady RANDOLPHI at t e oppo/ifte e f the flage,

faint and breathlef.
Lady Ran. Lord RAx.DOLPH hear me; all lhallbe

thine own:
But spare ! 0 pare my son !

Enter DOUGLAS tuit/ aafusrd in each hand.

My mother's voice!
1 can protect thee still.

Lady Ran. He lives, he lives:

For this, for this to heav'n eternal praise!
But sure saw thee fall.

Doug. It was GLENALVON.

jull as my arm had mafter'd RANDOLPH'S vword,
The villain came behind me : but I flew him.

Lady Ran. Behind thee! Ah; thou'rt wounded! 0

my child,
How pale thou look'ft ! and lhall I lore thee now ?

Doug. Do not despair : I feel a little faintness ;
1 hope it will not latl.

(Leans upon his Jftvord)

Lady Ran. There is no hope !

And we mulf part ! the hand of death is on thee!
O my beloved child ! O DOUGLAS, DoucL ..\s

Do U G LAS ,ra Cin mn',re r and more faint
Dotup. Too loon we part : I have not long bees

DOUGLA S.

O destiny ! i;:rdly thou dea l'l: vwih me:
Clouded nl hid, a il'.nger to yfelr',
In lo; and poor cblclliry I liv'l.

Lady .,i. -ras !)L..;'n preiev'd thee for an end like

t;, , ?

Dou, . hiad i allen .: my brave fathers fell,

Turn:ng with !' al :,:: . tlh. tide of hatle !
I.i'" th ..: I flionihl ii.iv I :;'1 and welcom'd death.

tiJ r t!lit, to pc; ilh 1,, : 'I :'1::' hand !

Cut olFfromli na-'i el s :,, d 'r:l gloiy's couri,
\Vv ich never mortal was o lond to run.

Lady

LadyRan. Hearjuttice! hear! are these the fruits

of virtue ? [DoucLAsfalls.]
Doug. Unknown I die; no tongue hall speak of

me.-

Some noble spirit, judging by themselves,
Mayyet conjecure what I might have prov'd,
And think liie only wanting to my fame:
But who hall comfort thee ?

Lady Ran. Despair ! despair!
Doug. 0 had it pleas'd high heaven to let me live

A little while !---ny eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apace ! my mother---- [Dies.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH and ANNA.
Lord Ran Tl:y words, the words of truth, have

pierc'd nLy heart.

I nm the fti 'n of knight!- ood and of arms.
Oh ! if my brave (dliverr survives
'Ihe traitor's fwc,'d

Anna. Alas ! Ick there, m;y lord.
Lord Ran. The uloihcr and her son ! How curst I

am!

Was I the caule ? No : 1 v. as not the cause.
Yon machlels villain did fcducc my foul
To frantic jealousy.

Anna. My lady lives:

The agony of grief hath but fippreft
A while her powers.

Lord Ran. But my deliverer's dead!

The world did onceefleeni Lord RA NDOL.PH well.
Sincere of heart, for fporlefs honour famn'd:

i d, in my early days, glory I g in',l

r;eneati the holy b.nner of the crolf.
Now pafl the noon of life, lhaim ciioes upon me
Reproach, and infamy, and public hatc,
Are near at hand : for all mankind will think
That RA oLo I. bcly ftab'd Sir MA LCO I.M's heir.

[Lady RA i o LI' ii tcoverin,,.
Lady Ran. Where am I now ? still in this wrcched

world!

Grief

Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine.
My youth was worn in anguilh: but youth's strength,
With hope's afliftance, bore the brunt oflorrow;
And train'd me on to be the objec now,
On which omnipntence dilplays itlelf,
Making a fpeEtacle, a tale of me,
To awe its vassal, man.

Lord Ran. 0 milery!

Amidit thy raging grief I mut proclaim
My innocence.

Lady Ran. Thy innocence !
Lord Ran. My guilt
Is innocence, compared with what thou think'ft it.

Lady Ran. Of thee I think not: what have I to do

With thee, or any thing? My son! my on!
My beautiful! my brave ! how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy valour ! my fond heart
O'erflow'd this day with transport, when I thou ght
Of growing old amidit a race of thine,
Who might make up to me their father's childhood,
And hear my brother's and my husband's name
Now all my hopes are dead ! A little while
Was I a wife ! a mother not so long !
What am I now ?- I know. - But I hall be
That onlywhillt I pleae ; for such a son
And Ilch a husband lmake a woman bold.

[Runs ut.
Lord Ran. Follow her, A A: T inyfelf would

follow,
Butin this rage nie mull abhor my preSence.

[Exit AN NA.

Enter Old NoltvAL.
iAor'v. Iheard the voice of woe.; heaven guard my

child !

Lord Ran. Aleady is the idle gaping croud,

The piteful vulgar, conme to gaze on Ria N ,u uI'H.
Begone.

NVorv. I fear tlecc not. I will not o.

HeI ce

Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplice, Lord,
With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help
To cruh down to the ground this lovely plant.
0 noblest youth that ever yet was born!
Sweetest and best, gentlest and bravest spirit,
'That ever blest the world! Wretch that I am,
Who saw that noble spirit swell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do theejuftice, and reveal the secret,
Which tinely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's lhare. Oh! I am puniih'd now !
Thele are the hairs that should have tirew'd the ground,
And not the locks of DOUGLAs.

[Tearshis hair, and tbrows

himself upon the ound.

Lord Ran. I know thee not ; thy boldness I forgive:

My crest is fallen. For thee I wilt appoint
A place of reft, if grief will let thee rcit.
I will reward, alrho' I cannot punish.
Curl, curit GLE NALVO., he efcap'd too well,
Tho' slain and halfl'd by the hanld he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury ,' the last,
Curling his conqueror, the felon dy'd.

Enter ANNA.

Anna. My Lord, my Lord !
Lord Ran. Seak : I can hear of horror.
Anna. -Honor indeed !
Lord Ran. MATILD A ?
Anna. Is no more !

She ran, she fl,-w ike lighc'ninc up the hill,
Nor halted til the preciliic e l in'J,
Beneath who;'. losw'rin, :op the ri\ cc 'a!ia
fngulpli'd in riftcc rocks: thiticc Ihie cale,
As fearless as the cngle lights upon it,
And headlong tlown----

L.ord Ran. "',vas 1! la s! 'twas I

Thac ill'd her brcaft with fury drove her dowIn
Thce precipice ofdceath ! Wretch thiat 1 aml!

F lpnn,

'Anna. 0 had you seen her last despairing look!

Upon the brink he stood, and cal her eyes
Down on the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heaven, seeming to fay,
Why am I forc'd to this ? She plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord Ran. I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the passion of my foul.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of RAND oLP H gave.
They speak aloud, and with the voice of fate
Denounce mydoem. I am refolv'd. I'll go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Same turn aside must threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy miflrefs, take this ring,
Bull warrant of my power. Let every rite
With coil and pomp upon their funerals wait:
'or RANDOLP hopes he never hall return.

F INI S.

# EPILOGUE.

E PI L O GU E.

Spoken by Mr. B A R R Y.

VsN Epilogue 1 alk'd; but not one word

./. Our bard 'will write. He voow s 'ti moJl absurd
Iith comic wit to contradidt the firain
Of tragedy, and make yourforrows vain.
Sadly hefays, that pity is the befI,
The nobles pafflon of the human breaf :
For uwhen its sacred lreams the heart o'er-flow,
Inguhes pleasure with the tide of woe;
Ind uwhen its wuaves retire, like those of Nile,
They leave behind them such a golden foil,
That there the virtues without culture grow,
There thef weet 1'loffoms of affedion blow.
These were his uwotrs ;-void of delusive art
Ifel them ; for he/poke them fronm is heart.
A'or xii/l I now attempt, with witty folly,
To cbace uway celellial melancholy.
