DOUGLAS:

A
TRAGEDY.

As it is ACTED at the
THEA RE-R O YAL

I N

CO V EN T-G AR DE N,
Non ego finm vatef, fed pnrci confcits avi.

E D I N B R G I:
Printed for G. HAMILTON & J. BALFOUR, W. GRAY & W.P'ETBS.

M,DCC,LVIF.
[Price One Shilling Sixpence ,

-R VD CO L
LUG 1 1902

J 'LLC, YLCL
~ci~d r~ l~2,s

# PROLOGUE.

PROLOGUE.

. Spoken by. Mr S P A RK S. : .

,

N antient times, when Britain's trade 'iasnarms,
And the lov'd music of her youth, alarms;

A god-like race fuftain'd fair England's fame:
Wioj hias' ihearw of gallant PIER¢tl$t. .?- --

':.'

Ay, and of DOUGLAS? Such illuflrious foes
In'rival Rone and Carthage never rofei"- c - --'
From age toage bright hone the BritihJfire .
Ani every hero iwas a hero's fie.
Whkenppw rful fate decreed one uarrior's down, . :
Up sprung the Phcnix fronz his parent's tomb.
But uhilfl thefegenerous rivals fought aid fell;::. .
Those generous rivals lov'd each other well:
Tho' many a bloody field was loft and won,
Nothing in hate, in honoir i zllis done.
When PIERCY wrong'd defy'd his prince or peers,
Fat, came the DOUGLAS;. ''uitht Iis Scottifpears-·
And, ~when proud DOUGLAS made his King his foe;
For DOUGLAS, PIERCY bent his English bow.
Expell'd their native hmnes by adverse fate,
They knock'd alternate at each other's gate:
Then blaz'd the castle, at the midnight hour,
For him wohofe arms had flook its firneft tow'r.

This night a DOUGLAS your protection claimu;
A wife! a mother! Pity's softest names:
The flory of her woes indulgent hear,
Anl grant your fuppfiant all flie begs, a tear.
In confidenlcehe begs; and hopes to find
Each Englilh breast, like noble PIERCY'5, kind.

DRAM ATIS

# DRAMATIS PERSONAE, As represented at LONDON.

DRA'MATI S PERS ONAE,

As represented at LONDON.

Lord RANDOLPH, Mr.' RI DOUT.

GLENALVON, Mr. SMITH.

NOpVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. BARRY..

TTRANGER, Mr. SPARKS,
SERVAXTS.

WOMEN.
MATILDA, Lady RAN.- Mrs. WOFFINGTON.

DOLPH,
ANNA, Mrs. VINCENT,

# PROLOGUE.

PROL. OGUE.

Spoken at EDINBURGH.

..'" '

"

- - . . ..
IN dayr of caJic fcame, vihen Ferfia's Lord

Oppos'd his millionl. to the Grecian .'.iuord,

FlouriJh'd the tate of Athens, Jinall herJ are,
,Rugged her foil, and rocky was her flore,
Like Caledonia's- yet she gain'd a name
rhat mands unrivall'd in the rolls of fame.

Such proud pre-emninence not valour gave,

(For who than Sparta's dauntless sons more bre )baue
But learning, and the love of every art,
That. Virgin Pallas aznd thfbeMife inpart.

Above the refJ the Tragic Muse admii'd

Each Attic breafi, with'nobleft paffiois sir'd.
In peace their poets with their heroes /Jlar'd
Glory, the hero's, and the bard's reward.
-The Tragic Muse each glorious record kept,
And, o'er the kings )he coniquer'd, Athens euept, *

Here let me cease, impatient for the scene,

To you I ieed not praie the Tragic Queen:
Oft has this audielwce soft compafion hfowno
To 'woes of heroes, heroes not their oun.
This night ourfcenes no commnz tear demand,
He comes, the hero of your native land!
DOUGLAS, a namie thro' all the world renowl'd,
Aname that rounfe like the timnpet's flnd !
Oft have your fathers, prodigal of life,
ADouGLcsf llow'd thro' tthe bloody strife;
Hosts have been knwvn at that dread name to yield,
Adl, DOUGLAS dead, his name hath won the ficlrd.

*

Sfe the P£Rif en
See the PERaSA of Acfchylus.

# DRAMATIS PERSONAE, As represented at EDINBURGH.

· : . .vi^I

.

Liften attentive to the various tale,

Mark if the author's knldredfeelings fail;
Sway'd by alteiate Hopes, alteratefears,
He waits the test of your congenial tears.
If they shall flow, back to the Muf e flies,
Ad bids your heroes iz fuccefion rife;.
Collefs the vwand'riig -warriors as they roan,
DOUGLAS affurcs them of a 'wekoloe.honze. '

DRAMATIS PERSONAE,

As represented at EDINBURGH.

Lord RANDOLPH, Mr. YOUNGER.
GLENALVON, Mr. LOVE.

NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. DIGGS.

STRANGER, - Mr. HAYMA'N.
SERVANTS, &c.

WOM EN.

IMATILDA, LadyRANDOLIPH, Mrs. WARD.
A--NA, . Mrs. HOPIINS.

# ACT I.

D O U G LAS;

A
TRAGEDY.

ACT I.
the court of a caffle frrounded with woods.

Etter Lady RANDOLPH.
Y E woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom

Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth :
The voice of sorrow from my bursting heart,

Farewel a while: I will not leave you long;
For in your liades I deem some spirit dwells,
lWho from tile chiding ifream, or groaning oak,
Still hears, and answers to MATILDA'S moan.
0 DOUGLAS! DOUGLAS ! if departed ghosts
Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of that wood thou art,
And with tie paflion of immortals hearti
My lamentation: hear'st thy wretched wife
Weep for her hulband slain, her infant loft.
My brother's timeless death I seem to mourn;
Who perilh'd with thee on this fatal day.
To thee I lift my voice; to thee address
The plaint which mortal ear has never heard.

0

O disregard me not; tho' I am call'd -
Anotheis now, my heart is whiolly thme. -
Incapable of change, affection lies
Buried, my DOUGLAS, in thy bloody grave.
But RANDOLPH cones, whom fate has made my Lordj
To chide my angiih, and deraud the dead.

Eiter Lord RANDOLPH.

Agin these weeds of woe! fay; do'f thou well
To feed a pafion which confinmes thy life?
The living claim some duty; vainly thou
Beflowfi thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Silent, alas! is he for whom I mourn:
Chbillefl, without memofial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives. .
This fatal day stirs my time-fetiled sorrow,
Troubles afrelh the fountain of my heart.

Lord RANDOLPH.

When was it pure of fadnes ! These black weeds
Express the wonted colour of thy mind,
For ever dark and dismaL Seven long years
Are pas'd, since we were join'd by sacred ties:
Clouds, all the while have hung upon thy brow,
Nor broke, nor parted by one gleam of joy.
Time, that wears out the trace of deepefl anguifli,
As the sea smooths the prints made in the sand,
Has pal o'er thee in vain.

Lady RANDOLPH.

If time to come

Should prove as ineffectual, yet, my Lord,
Thou canst not blame me. When our Scottifli youth
Vy'd with each other for my luckless love,
Oft I besought them, I implor'd them all
Not to assail me with my father's aid,
Nor blend their better destiny with mine.

*
- -- f'oe

For melancholy had congeal'd my blood,
And fioze affecion in my chilly breast.
At lait my Sire, rous'd with the base attempt
To force me from him, which thou rend'red'ft vain,
To his own daughter bow'd his hoary head,
Besought me to commiserate his age,
And vow'd he mhould not, could not die in peace,
Unless he saw me wedded, and fecur'd
From violence and outrage.. Then, my Lord!
In my extreme distress I call'd on thee,
Thee I befpake, profefs'd my strong desire
To lead a single, solitary life,
And begg'd thy Noblenefi, not to demand
Her for a wife whose heart was dead to love.
How thou perfifted'ft after this, thou know'ft,
And must confess that I am not unjust,
Nor more to thee than to myself injurious.

Lord RANDOLPH.

That I confess; yet ever must regret
The grief I cannot cure. Would thou wert not
Compos'd of grief and tenderness alone,
But had'st a spark of other passions in thee,
Pride, anger, vanity, the firong desire
Of admiration, dear to woman kind;
These might contend with, and allay thy grief,
As meeting tides and currents smooth our firth.

Lady RANDOLPH.

To such a cause the human mind oft owes
Its transient calm, a calm I envy not.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Sure thou art not the daughter of Sir MALCOLM:
Strong was his rage, eternal his resentment:
For when thy brother fell, he fmil'd to hear
That DOUGLAS' son in the fame field was slain.

B Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Oh! rake not up the alhes of my fathers:
Implacable resentment was their crime,
And grievous has the expiation been.
Contending with the DOUGLAS, gallant lives
Of either house were loft; my anceflors
Compell'd, at last, to leave their ancient feat
On Tiiot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
No heir is left. Had they not been so stern,
I had not been the last of all my race.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thy grief wrests to its purposes my words.
I never aik'd of thee that ardent love,
Which in the breasts of fancy's children burns.
Decent affection and complacent kindness
Were all I wiih'd for; but I wihi'd in vain,
Hence with the less regret my eyes behold
The storm of war that gathers o'er this land:
If I ihould perish by the Danifi sword,
MATILDA would not fmed one tear the more.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thou do'st not think so: woeful as I am
I love thy merit, and esteem thy virtues.
But whither go'ft thou now?

Lord RANDOLPH.

Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on the tip-toe flands
Of expetation, and impatient asks
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are landed.

Lady RANDOLPH.
0, may adverse winds,

Far from the coast of Scotland, drive their fleet!
And every soldier of both hosts return
In peace and safety to his pleasant home

Lord

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thou fpeak'ft a woman's, hear a warrior's wilh:
Right from their native land, the stormy north,
May the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
Immoveable in Caledonia's strand!
Then Ihall our foes repent their bold invasion,
And roving armies shun the fatal flore.

Lady RANDOLPH.

War I detest: but war with foreign foes,
Whose manners, language, and whose looks are strange,
Is not so horrid, nor to me so hateful,
As that which with our neighbours oft wec wage.
A liver here, there an ideal line,
By fancy drawn, divides the sifter kingdoms.
On each fide dwells a people similar,
As tnins are to each other; valiant both;
Both for their valour famous thro' the world.
Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
And, if they must have war, wage distant war,
But with each other fight in cruel conflict.
Gallant in strife, and noble in their ire,
The battle is their pastime. They go forth
Gay in the morning, as to summer sport;
When ev'ning comes, the glory of dte morn,
The youthful warrior is a clod of clay.
Thus fall the prime of either hapless land;
And such the fruit of Scotch and Englill wars.

Lord RANDOLPH.

I'll hear no more: this melody would make
A soldier drop his vwprd, and doff his arms,
Sit down and weep the conquests he has made;
Yea, (like a monk), sing reft and peace in hcav'n
To fouls of warriors in his battles slain.
Lady, farewel: I leave thee not alone;
Yonder comes one whose love makes duty light. Exit.

El1er

nteer ANNA.

ANNA.

Forgive the rashness of your ANNA'S love:
Urg'd by affedion,- I have thus prefum'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts;
And warn you of the hours that you neglet,
And lose in sadness.

Lady RANDOLPH.

So to lose my hours
Is all the use 1 with to make of time.

ANNA.

To blamefthee, Lady, fiits not with my slate;
But sure I am, since death first prey'd on man,
Never did firer thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had loft,
In early youth, the husband of your heart'

Lady RANDOLPH.
Oh!

- ANNA.

Have I diftref'd you with officious love,
And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate?
Forgive me, Lady: humble tho' I am,
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune;
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

Lady RANDOLPH.

What power direted thy unconscious tongue
To speak as thou haft done to name-

ANNA.

I know not:

But since my words have made my mistress tremble,
I will speak so no more; but silent mix
My tears with her's.

Lady RANDOLPH.

No, thou ihalt not be silent.
IPRl tut thy faithful love, and thou halt be

Henceforth

Henceforth th' iftruded partner of my woes.
But what avails it? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never-ebbing time
Compel the earth and ocean to give up
Their dead alive?

ANNA.

What means my noble mistress

Lady RANDOLPH.

Didft thou not ask what had my sorrows been?--
If I in early youth had loft a hulband?
In the cold bosom of die earth is lodg'd,
Mangl'd with wounds, the husband of my youth;
And in some cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his.-

ANNA.

! Lady, most rever'd!

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Alas! an antient feud,

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother should in battle save
The life of DOUGLAS' son, our house's foe:
The youthful warriors vow'd eternal fiiendfiip.
To fee the vaunted sifter of his friend
Impatient, DOUGLAS to Balarmo came,
Under a borrow'd name.-- My heart he gain'd;
Nor did I long refuse the hand he begg'd:
My brother's presence authoris'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little weeks, with wings of down,
Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd Lord was call'd
To fight his father's battles; and with him,
In spite of all my tears, did MALCOLM go.
Scarce were they gone, when my stern Sire was told
That the false stranger Was Lord DoUCLAS' son.

Frantic

Frantic with rage, the Baron drew his sword,
And queition'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
/Kneeling beneath his sword, fault'ring'I took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
Wed one of DOUGLAS' name. Sincerity,
Thou first of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thy onward.path! altho' the earth should gape,
And from the gulph of hell deftrution cry
To take difimulation's winding way.

ANNA.

Alas! how few of woman's fearful kind
Durit own a truth so hardy!

Lady RANDOLPH.

The first truth

Is eafief to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale.-
In a few days the dreadful tidings came
That DOUGLAS and my brother both were slain.
My Lord! my life! my hulband !-mighty God!
What had I done to merit such afflition?

ANNA.

My dearest Lady! many a tale of tears
I've listen'd to; but never did I hear
A tale so fad as this.

Lady RANDOLPH.

In the first days

Of my ditratfing grief, I found myself--
As women vwif to be who love their Lords.
But who durst tell my father? The good priest
Who join'd our hands, my brother's antient tutor,
With his lov'd MALCOLM, in the battle fell:
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,

ill time (hould make my father's fortune mine.
That very night on which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confident I had,

Set

Set out with him to reach her sifter's house:
But nurse, nor infant, have I ever seen
Or heard of, ANNA, since that fatal hour.
My murder'd child '-had thy fond mother sear'd
The loss of thee, Ihe had loud fame defy'd,
Defpis'd her father's rage, her father's grief,
And wander'd with thee thro' the scorning world.

ANNA.
Not seen nor heard of! then perhaps he lives.

Lady RANDOLPH.

No. It was dark December: wind and rain
Had beat all night. Across the Can-on lay
The deftin'd road; and in its swelling flood
My faithful servant perilh'd with my child.
O hapless son! of a most hapless fire!-
But they are both at reft; and I alone
Dwell in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk,
Like a guilt-troubl'd ghost, my painful rounds:
Nor has despiteful fate permitted me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Tho' dead to love, I was compell'd to wed
RAND OLPH, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms;
And RANDOLPH now possesses the domains,
That by Sir MALCOLM'S death on me devolv'd:
Domains, thatthould to DOUGLAS' son have giv'n
A Baron's title, and a Baron's power.
Such were my soothing thoughts, while I bewail'd
The flaughter'd father of a son unborn.
And when that son came, like a ray from heav'n,
Which Ihines and disappears; alas ! my child!
How long did thy fond mother grasp the hope
Of having thee, Ihe knew not how, reftor'd.
Year after year hath worn her hope away;
But left still undiminili'd her desire.

ANNA.

The hand, that spins th'uneven thread of life,
May smooth the length that's yet to come of your's.

Lady

Lady RAINDOLPH.

Not in this world: I have confider'd well
Its various evils, and on whom they fall.
Alas! how oft does goodness wound itself?
And sweet affe&ion prove the spring of woe.

! had I died when my lov'd husband fell !

Had some good angel op'd to me the book
Of providence, and let me read my life,
My heart had broke when I beheld the fum
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

l.'" ' ANNA.

That God, whofi ministers good angels are,
Hath ihut the book in mercy to mankind.
But we must leave this theme: GLENALVON comes:
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hithenrards he slowly stalks his way.

Lady RANDOLPH.

I will avoid him. An ungracious person
Is doublyirkfome in an hour like this.

ANNA.
Why speaks my Lady thus of RANDOLPH'S heir

Lady RANDOLPH.

Because he's not the heir of RANDOLPH'S virtues.
Subtle and shrewd, he offers to mankind
An artificial image of himself:
And he with ease can vary to the taste
Of different men, its features. Self-deny'd,
And master of his appetites he seems:
But his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,

nWatches to'feize unseen the Uilh'd-for prey.

Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
As in GLENALVON'S unrelenting mind.
Yet is he brave and politic in war,
And flands aloft in these unruly times.
Why I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter:
Stay and detn hiin tillreach the castle;

[Exit Lady RANDOLPHT

ANNA.

ANNA.

O happiness! where art thou to be found?
I fee thou dwelleft not with birth and beautyi
Tho' grac'd with grandeur, and in wealth array'd:
Nor dost thou, it would seem, with virtue dwell;
Else had this gentle Lady mifs'dthee not.

Enter GLENALVON;

GLENALVON.

What dost thou muie on, meditating maid .
Like some entranc'd and visionary seer
On earth thou ltand't, thy thoughts ascend to heaven.

ANNA.

Wou'd that I were, e'en as thou say's, a seer,
To have my doubts by heav'nly vision clear'd!

GLENALVON.

What dost thou doubt of? what halt thou to do
With fubjeds intricate? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be queftion'd: .think of these good gifts;
And then thy contemplations willbe pleasing,

ANNA.

Let women view yon monumentof woe,
Then boast of beauty: who so fair as the
But I mut follow: this revolving day
Awakes the memory of her antient woes.

[Exit ANNA.

GLENALVOM foll.U,

So !-Lady RANDOLPH fluns me; by and by
I'll woo her as the lion wooes his brides.
The deed's a-doing now, that makes me lord
Of thee rich valleys, and a chief of power.
The season is most apt; my founding steps
Will not be heard amidftthe din of arms.
RANDOLPH has liv'd too long: his better fate
Had the ascendant once, and kept me down:

C When

When I had seizd the dame, by chance he came,
Refcu'd, and had theLady for his labour;
I 'fcap'd unknown: a fender consolation!
Heaven is mywitnefs that I do not love
To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvet Yet I am not safe:
By love, or something like it, stung, inflamd,
MadlyI blabb'd my passion to his wife,
And Ihe has threaten'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will I do not know:
But well I know the Baron's wrath is deadly.
Iwillnotlivein far: the manI dread
Is as a Dane to me; ay, andtheman
Who stands betwixt me and my chief desire.
No bar but he; ie has no kinfinan near;
No brother in his filter's quarrel bold;
And for the righteous cause, a fanger's cause,
I know no chief that will defy GLENALVON.

gnd of the FIRST ACT.

ACT

# ACT II.

ACT II.

A Court, &c,
Enter Servants and a Stranger at one door, ad Lady

RANDOLPH and ANNA at another.

Lady RANDOLPH.

X7VHAT means this clamour? Stranger! speak secure;
W Haft thou been wrong'd? have these rude men

-prefum'd
To vex the weary traveller on his way ?

First SERVANT.

By us no stranger ever fuffer'd wrong:
This man with outcry wild has calPd us forth;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
Enter Lord RANDOLPH and young man, with their swords

drawn alnd bloody.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Not vain the Stranger's fears! how fairs my Lord ?

Lord RANDOLPH.

That it fares well, thanks to this gallant youth,
Whose valour fav'd me from a wretched death!
As down the winding dale I walk'd alone,
At the cross way four armed men attack'd me:
Rovers, I judge, from the licentious camp,
Who would have quickly laid Lord RANDOLPH low,
Had not this brave and generous Stranger come,

Like

Like my good angel in the hour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my foes his own.
Theyturn'd upon him: but his asive arm
Struck to the ground, from whence they iofeno more.
The fiercest two; the others fled amain,
And left him master of the bloody field.
Speak, Lady RANDOLPH: upon Beauty's tongue
Dwell accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
Speak, noble Dame, and thank him for thy Lord.

Lady RANDOLPH.

My Lord, I cannot speak what now I feel.
My heart o'erflws with gratitude to heav'n,
And to this noble youth, who all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but humanely brave
Fought on your fide, again~t such fearful odds.
Have you yet learn'd of him whom we ihould thank?
Whom call the saviour of Lord RANDOLPH'S life

Lord RANDOLPH.

I ask'd that question, and he anfver'd not:
ButI mufl know who mydeliverer is. (to the Stirnger.)

STRANGER.

A low born man, of parentage obscure,
Who nought can boast but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Whoe'er thou art, thy fpiritis ennobl'd
By the great King of Kings! thou art ordain'd
And ftamp'd a hero by the'fovereign hand
Of Nature blulh not, flower of modesty
As well as valour, to declare thybirth.

STRANGER.

My name is NORVAL: on the Grampian hills
My father feeds his flocks i a frugal fvain,
Whose constant cares were to increase his store,
And keep his only son, myself, at home.

' - For."

For I had heard of battles, and I long'i .:
To follow to thefield some warlikeLord: '

.

And heaven soon granted-what my Sire deny'd.
This moon which role last night, round as my I.ield,
Had not yet si 'd.her horns, when, by her light,
A band of fierce Barbarians, from the hills,
Rufh'd like a torrent down upon die vale,
Sweeping our flocks and.herds. The fliepherds fled
For safety, and for succour.. I alone, I
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'd about the enemy, and mark'd
The road he took, =then hafted.to my.friends ;
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men, ..
I met advancing. The pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook the fpoilrencumber'd foe. .
We fought and conquer'd. E're a sword was drawn, .
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their- chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Returning home in triumph, I difdamn'd
The fliepherd's slothful life: and having heard
That our good King had fummon'd his-bold'Peers
To lead their warriors-to the' Calron-fide,
I left my father's house, and took with'me
A chosen servant to condudt my steps ;-
Yon trembling coward .who forsook his master.
Journeying with this intent, I paft'thefe towers,
And, heaven-direfed, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

Lord RANDOI;PH.I

He is as wife as brave. Was ever tale
With such a gallant modesty rehears'd?
My brave deliverer! thou mhalt enter' now
A nobler lift, and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame.
} 1vill present thee to our Scottish King,

W'Vhpfe

Whose valiant spirit ever valour ov'd.
Ha! 'my MATILDA ! wherefore starts that tear?

Lady RANDOLPIf.

I cannot fay: for various affeations,
And itrangely mingled, in my bosom swell;
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
I joy that thou art safe, and- Iadmire
Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety; -
Yea, as my mind predicts, with thine.his own.
Obscure and friendleis, he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Refolv'd to hunt forfame, and with his sword
To gain diflintion which his birth deny'd.
In this attempt unknown he might have perifh'd,
And gain'd, with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
Beneath defair.. The soldier now of hope
He fiands conspicuous; fame and great renown
Are brought within the compass of his sword.
On this my mind refle&ed, whilst you spoke,
And blefs'd the.wonder.working Lord of heaven.

Lord IRANDOLPH.

Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts!
My deeds Ihall follow where thou p.int'ft.the way,
,Next to myself, and equal to GLENALVON,
In honour and command-fiall NOR.VAL be.

NOpVAL.

I know not how to thank you. Rude I am
In speech and manners: never till this hour
Stood I in such a pretence: yet, my Lord,
There's something in my breast which makes me bold
To fay, that NORVAL ne'er will fihame thy favour.

Lady RANDOLPH. .
I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou flalt be

My

My knight; and ever, as thou didlfto.day,
With happy valour guard the life of RANDOLPH.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Well halt thou spoke. Let-me forbid reply. [ToONORVAL.
We are thy debtors fill; thy high desert
O'ertops our gratitude. I mud proceed,
As was at first intended, to the camp.
Some of my train I fee are speeding hither,
Impatient doubtless of their Lord's delay.
Go with me, NORVAL, and thine eyes shall fee
The chosen warriors of thy native land,
Who languilh for the fight, and beat the air
With brandilh'd swords.

NORVAL.

Let us begone, my Lord.
Lord RANDOLPH.

[PCo Lad RANDOLPH.

About the time that the declining fun
Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills suspend;
Expe& us to return. -This night once more
Within these walls I reft; my tent I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepare the feast.
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
He in the eve of battle may resign
Himself to social pleasure; sweetest then,
When danger to a soldier's foul endears
The human joy that never may return.

[ExeU2t RANDOLPH' a'dNORVAL,.
Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lady RANDOLPH.

His parting words have struck a fatal truth.
0 DOUGLAS! DOUGLAS ! tender was the time
When we two parted, ne'er to meet again r
How many years of anguish and despair
Has heav'n annex'd to those swift paing hours

Of

Of love and fondnefi! Then my bosom's flame
Oft, as blown back by the rude bieath of fear,
Reumn'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.

ANNA,

May gracious heav'n pour the sweet blm of peace
Into the wounds that fester il your breat!
For earthly consolation cannot cure.them.

Lady RANDOLPH.

One only cure can heav'n itself bestow ;-
A grave-that bed in which the weary reft.
Wretch that I am! - Alas! why am I so
At every happy parent I repine!
How blest the mother of yon gallant NoRVAL !
She for a living husband bore her pains,
And heard him bless her when a man was born i
She nurs'd her fiiling infant on her breast;
Tended the child, and rear'd the pleasing boy
-She, with affeion's triumph, saw the youth
In grace and comeliness firpafs his peers:
Whilf I to a dead husband bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child,

ANNA.

Alas! alas! why ill you thus resume
Your grief afrelh? Ithought that gallant youth
1Would for a while hive won you from your woe.
On him intent you gazed, with a look
Much more delighted, than your pensive eye
Has deign'd on other objefs to beltow.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Delighted, fay'ft thou? Oh! even tiere mine eye
Found fuel for my life-confuming sorrow.
I thought, that had the son of DOUGLAS liv'd,
He might have been like this young gallant stranger,
And pair'd with him in features and in shape;
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
My boy with blooming NOVAL might have number'd.

Wlullt

Whilst thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness
For this young stranger, wand'ring from his home,
And like an orphan cast upon my care.
I Mill protec thee, (said I to myself)
With all my power, and grace with all my favour.

ANNA.

Sure heav'n will bless so generous a resolve.
You must, my noble Dane, exert your powrer:
You must awake: devices will be fiam'd,
And arrows pointed at the breast of NORVAL.

Lady RANDOLPH.

GLENALVON'S false and crafty head will work
Against a rival in his kiinman's love,
If I deter him not: I only can.
Bold as he is, GLENALVON will beware
How he pulls down the fabric that I raie.
I'll be the artist of young NORvAL'S fortune.
'Tis pleasing to admire! most apt was I
To this affection in my better days;.
Tho' now I seem to you ihrunk up, retir'd
Within the narrow compass of my woe.
Hare you not sometimes seen an early flower
Open its bud, and bpread its silken leaves,
To catch sweet airs, and odours to bestow;
Then, by the keen blast nipt, pull in its leaves,
And, tho' till living, die to scent and beauty!
Emblem of me: affliction, like a fornm,
Hath kill'd tie forward bloibm of my heart.

Enter GLENALVON.

GLENALVON.
Where is my dearefl kinifan, noble RANDOLPH?

Lady RANDOLPH.
Have you not heard, GLENALVON, of tle base-

D GLENALVON.

GLENALVON.

I have: and that the villains may not 'scape,
With a strong band I have begirt the wood.
If they lurk there, alive they shall be taken,
Ad' torture force from them th'important secret,
Whether some foe of RANDOLPH hir'd their swords,
Or if-

Lady RANDOLPH.

That care becomes a kinsman-s love.
I have a counsel for GLENALVON'S ear. [Exit ANNA.

GLENALVON.
To him your counsels always are commands.

Lady RANDOLPH.
I have not found so: thou art known to me.

GLENALVON.
Known!

Lady RANDOLPH.
And molt certain is my cause of knowledge,

GLENALVON.

What do you know By the most bleTed cross,
You much amaze me. No created being,
Yourself except, durst thus accost GLENALVON.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Is guilt so bold! and dost thou make a merit
Of thy pretended meekness! This to me,
Who, with a gentleness which duty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd what, if' diviug'd,
Would make thee nothing; or, what's worse than that,
An outcast beggar, and unpitied too!
For mortals ihudder at a crime like tline.

GLENALVON,

Thy virtue awes mr. First of womankind!
Permit me yet to fay, that the 'fond man,
Whom love tanfports beyond fthit virtue's bounds~
If he is brought by love to misery,
In'fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,

Unpitied

tUnpitied cannot be. Pity's the alms
Which on such beggars freely is beftow'd:
For mortals kfiow that love is till their lord,
And o'er their vain resolves advances still:
As fire, when kindled by our shepherds, moves
Thro' the dry heath before the fanning wind.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Reserve there accents for some other ear.
To love's apology I liftennot.
Mark thou my words; for it is meet thou fuonld'ft.
His brave deliverer RANDOLPH here retains.
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well:
But, at thy peril, praftife ought againit him:
Let not thy jealousy attempt to hake
And loosen the good root he has in RANDOLPH
Whose favourites I know thou haft supplanted.
Thou look'ft at me, as if thou fain would'st pry
Into my heart.. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendlels Stranger my protection claims:
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit.

Manet GLENALVON.

Child that I was, to start at my own shadow,
And be the shallow fool of coward conscience
I am not what I have been; what I fmould be.
The darts of destiny have almost pierc'd
My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I fllould conclude there was an arm above,
That fought against me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch myself, the subtle snare I set.
Why, rape and murder are not simple means!
Th'imperfea rape to RANDOLPH gave a spouse;
And the intended murder introduc'd

A

A favourite to hide the fun from me;
And wort of all, a rival. Burning hell!
This were thy centre, if I thought the lov'd him !
Tis certain she contemns me; nay commands me,
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'er me,
Inhis behalf. And shall I thus be brav'd
Cnrb'd, as fle calls it, by dame chastity
Infernal fiends, if any fiends there are
More fierce than hate, ambition, and revenge,
Rife up and fill my bosom with your fires,
And policy remorfeles! Chance may spoil
A single aim; but perseverance mulf
Prosper at last. For chance and fate are words:
Perfiffive wisdom is the fate of man.
Darkly a projec peers upon my mind,
Like the red moon when riling in the east,
Crofs'd and divided by ft/ange-colour'd clouds.
I'll seek the slave who came with NORV.AL hither,
And for his cowardice was spurned from him.
I've known a follower's rankled bosom breed
Venom most fatal to his heedless Lord. [Exit.

End of the SECOND ACT.

-ACT

# ACT III.

A C T II.

A Court, &c. as before.

Enter ANNA.

ANNA.

T YHY valfas, Grief! great Natmres'order break,
-- And change the'noon-tide to the midnight hour.
Whilst Lady RANDOLPH lleeps, I will walk forth,
And taste the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers be! Ye mifilters -
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,
Angels and seraphs who delight in goodness!
Forsake your skies, and to her couch descend!
There from her fancy chace those dismal forms
That haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
With images celestial, such as please
The blefs'd above upon their golden beds.

Enter SERVANT.

SERVANT.

One of the vile affafins is fecur'd.
We found the villain lurking in the wood:
With dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not
His first eflay: these jewels were conceal'd
In the moflt secret places of his garment;
Belike the spoils of some that he has murder'd.

Let

ANNA.

Let me look on them. Ha! here is a heart,
The chosen creR of DOUGLAS' valiant name!
These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretcl.

[Exit ANNA.
Enter Setrants uith a Prioner.

PRISONER.

I know no more than does the child unborn
Of what you charge me with;

First SERVANT.

You fay so, Sir!

But torture soon shall make you speak the truth,
Behold the Lady of Lord RANDOLPH comes:
Prepare yourself to meet her just revenge.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

ANNA.

Summon your utmost fortitude, before
You speak with him; Your dignity, your fame,
Arc now at stake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may fly.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thou shalt behold me, with a desperate heart,
Hear how my infant perifh'd. See hekneels.

[Lrhe Prisoner ikeels.j

PRISONER.

Heav'n bless that countenance, so sweet and mild !
A judge like thee makes innocence more bold.
O save me, Lady! from these cruel men,
Who have attack'd and seiz'd me; who accuse
Me of intended murder. As I hope
For mercy at the judgment feat of God,

The

The tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
Is not more innocent than I of murder.

Lord RANDOLPH.
Of this man's guilt what proof can ye produce?

Firfl SERVANT.

We found him lurking in tle hollow Glynn.
When view'd and call'd upon, amaz'd, he fled.
We overtook him, and inquir'd from whence
And what he was: he said, he came from far,
And was upon his journey to the camp.
Not fatisfy'd with this, we fearch'd his cloaths,
And found these jewels; whose rich value plead
Mofl powerfully against him. Hard he seems
And old in villainy. Permit us try
His ltubbornnefs against the torture's force,

PRISONER.

0 gentle Lady! by your Lord's dear life!
Which these weak hands, I swear, did ne'er assail;
And by your children's welfare, spare my age!
Let not the iron tear my antient joints,
And my grey hairs bring to the grave with pain.

Lady RANDOLPH,

Account for these: thine own they cannot be:
For these, I fay: be stedfast to the truth;
Dereded falflood is most certain death.

[ANNA removes the Servants and retunir.]

PRISONER.

Alas! I'm fore beset! let never man,
For fake of lucre, fin against his foul!
Eternal justice is in this mQft just!
I, guiltlcfs now, mutl former guilt reveal.

Lady RANDOLPH.

0! ANNA hear --once more I charge thee speak
The truth dire&: for these to me foretel
And certify a part of thy narration;
With which if the remainder tallies not,

An

An infant and a dreadful death abides thee.

PRISONER.

Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speak to you as just
As if you were the minister of heaven,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men.

SOME eighteen years ago, I rented land

Of brave Sit MALCOLM, then BALARMO'S Lord;
But falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
All that I had, and then turn'd me and mine,
(Four helpless infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel by the river's fide
Receiv'd us: there hard labour, and the skill
In filhing, which was formerly my sport,
Supported life. Whilst thus we poorly liv'd,
One stormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down, and loud and oft
The angry spirit of the water fhriek'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
Of one in jeopardy. I rose, and ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool,
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach whatever floating thing the stream
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd; the person loft:
But looking fad and earnest on the waters,
By the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round,
A basket: soon I drew it to the bank,
And neffted curious there an infant lay.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Was he alive?

PRISONER.

He was.
Lady RANDOLPH.

Inhuman that thou art!
How could'st thou kill what waves and tempests spar'd?

PRI4

PRISONER.
t am not so inhuman.

Lady RANxOLPWH
Didft thou not?

ANNA.

My noble Mistress, you are mov'd to6 much:
This man has not the afpe& of lern murder;
Let him go on, and you, -I hope, will hear
Good tidings of your kinfinan's long loft child.

PRISONER,

The needy man, who has known better days,
One whom distress has spited at the world,
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds, as mike the prosperous men
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them.
And iuch a man was I; a man declin'd,
Who saw no end of black adverlity:
Yet for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have touch'd that infant, with a hand of harm.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Ha! dost thou fay so? Then perhaps he lives I

PRISONER.
Not many days ago he was alive.

Lady RANDoiPH.
! God of heav'n i Did he then die So lately?

PRISONER.

I did not fay he died; Ihope he lives.
Not many days ago these eyes beheld
Him, flourishing in youth, and health, and beauty.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Where is he now?

PRISONER.

Alas! I know not where.
Lady RANDOLPH.

Oh fate! I fear thee still. Thou riddler, speak
Direa and clear; else I vill fearchthy foul.

E ANNA.

,- AtSA.:

Permit me, ever honour'd ! Keen impatience,
Tho' hard to be refiraii-d, defeats itself.-
Pursue thy {lory with a faithful tongue,
To the lait hour that thou didft keep the child.

PkISOSER.

Fear not my faith, tho' I mufl speak my ihame.
\Titbin the cradle, where the infant lay,
Was ltow'd a mighty store of gold and jewels:
Tempted by which we did resolve to hide,
From all the world, this wonderful event,
And like a peasant breed the-noble child.
That none might mark the chiage of our estate,
We left the country; travell'd to the North,
Bought flocks and herds, .and gradually brought fonlt.
Our secret wealth. But God's all.feeing. eye
Beheld our avarice, and finote us fore.
For one by. one all our own children died,
And he, the Stranger, sole remain'd the heir
Of what indeed was his. Fain then would I,
Who with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
Have trusted him, now in the dawn of youth,
Willth his own secret: but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never would consent.
Mean while the tripling grew in years and beauty;
And, as we oft obferv'd, he bore himself,
Not as the offspring of our cottage blood;
For nature willbreak out: mild with the mild,
But wiL; the froward he was fierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I set myself againlt his warlike bent;
But all in vain: -for when a dce!rat' band
Of robbers from the-favage mounitina cmc---

:' . Lad:y lRAsDOLPH. .
Eternal Providence !. What is ay name? . .

PRISONER.
My name is NORVAL; and my name he bears.

Lady RASDQLPH.

'Tis he; 'tis he himself! It is my son!
0 sovereign mercy! 'Twas my child I saw!
No wonder, ANNA, that my bosom burn'd.

ANNA.

Jul are your transports:: ne'er was woman's heart
Prov'd with such fierce extremes. High fated Dame!
But yet remember that you are beheld
By servile eyes; your gefiures may be seen
Impaffion'd strange; perhaps your words o'erheard.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Well dolt thou counfcl, ANNA: heayen bestow
On me that wifdomn which my lrate requircs !

ANNA.

The moments of deliberation pass,
And soon you mult resolve. This useful man
Must be difmifs'd in safety, 'ere my Lord
Slhall with his brave deliverer return.

PRISONiR.

If I, amidst aftonilhment and fear,
Have of your words and gestures rightly judg'd,
Tiou art the daughter of my antientmafter;
The child I refcu'd from the flood is thine.

Lady RANDOLPH.

With thee difimulation now were vain.
I am indeed the daughter of Sir MAL.COLM ;
The child thou refcu'dlt from die flood is mine.

PRISONER.

Bleis'd be the hour tlha made me a poor mapl
My poverty hath fav'd my master's houf !

Lady RANDOLPH.

'Thy words furprize me: sure thou dost not feign:
''llc tear stands in thine eve : such love from lece

Sir

Sir MALCOLM'S house deferv'd not; if aright
Thou toldft- the tfory of thy own distress.

BRISONER.

Sir MALCOLM of our Barons was the flower;
The fastest friend, the best, the kindest matter;
But ah ! he knew not of my fad estate.
After that battle, where his gallant son,
Your own brave brother, fell, the good oid Lord
Grew desperate and reckless of the world;
And never, as he erf as w wont, went forth
To overlook the condut of his servants,
By them I was thrust out, and them I blame:
May heav'n so judge me as I judg'd my master
And God so love me as I love his race!

Lady RANDOIPH.

His race ihall yet reward thee. On thy faith
Depends the fate of thy lov'd mailer's house.
Rememb'ret thou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the cists of Carton

PRISONER.
I remember
The cottage of the clifts.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Tis that I mean;

There dwells a man of venerable age,
Who in my father's service spent his youth;
Tell him I sent thee, and with him remain,
Till I Ihall call upon thee to declare,
Before the King and Nobles, what thou now
To me hall told. No more but this, and thop
Shalt live in honour ail thy future days:
Thy son so long mhall call 'thee father still,
And all the land shall bless the man, who fav'd
The son of DOUGLAS, and Sir MALCOLM'S heir.
Remember well my words; if thou should'st meet

~ ; .. ..
. . . ..,. . . . .. . . ][

Him whom thou call'ft thy son, till call him so;
And mention nothing of his nobler father.

PRISONER.

year not that I lhall mar so fair an harvelt,
By putting in my fickle 'ere 'tis ripe.
Why did I leave my home and antient dame?
To find the youth to tell him all I knew,
And make him wear these jewels in hisarms;
Which might, I thought, be challeng'd, and so bring.
To light the secret of his noble birth.

[Lady RANDOLPH goes towardr the SerMants.

Lady RANDOLPH.

This man is not th'affafin you fufpeaed,
Tho' chance combin'd some likelihoods againfl him.
Fe is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To their right owner, whom in haste he seeks.
'Tis meet that you mhould put him on his way,
(ince your mistaken zeal hath dragg'd him hither.

[Exeunt Stranger and Servant
Pady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lady R4NDOLH.

My faithful ANNA dpfo thpu Ihare my joy?
I know thou dolt. Unparallell'd event!
Reaching from heav'n to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings to me my fol I
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father!
Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
For such a gift: What does my ANNA, hink
Of the young eaglet of a valiant nest?
How soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his fate had thrown him,
And tower'd up to the region of his fire!

ANNA.

fpow fondly did your eyes Aevour the bpy
,

o. ' , '

MyfteriQus nature, with the unseen cord
Of powerful inftinR,_ drew you to your own.

Lady RANDQLPH.

The ready ftqry of his birth believ'd
Suppreft my fancy quite.; nor did he owe
To any likeness my so sudden favour:
But now I long to fee his face again,
Examine every feature, and find out
The lineaments of DOUGLAS, or my own.
But most of all I long to let him know
Who his true parents are, to clasp his neck,
And tell him all the story of his father.

ANNA.

With wary caution you mufl bear yourself
In public, left your tenderness break forth,
And in obfererrs.ftir conjeaures ftrnge.
For, if a cherub in the Aape of woman
Shouldvalk this wvorld, yet defamation .would,
Like a vile cur, bark at the angel's train-
To-day the Baron started at your tears.

Lady RADOLPH.. '

He did so, ANNA ! well thy Mistress knows,
If the least circumstance, mote of offence,
Should touch the Baron's eye, his fight would be
With jealousy diforder'd. But the more
It does behove me instant to declare
The birth of DOUCLA S, and assert his rights,
This night I purpose with my son to meet,
Reveal the secret, and consult with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does now, so look'd his noble father,
Array'd in nature's ease: his mien, his speech,
Were sweetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those trivial mortals who seem always wife.
But, when the matter match'd his mighty mind,
Up rose the-Hero: on his piercing eye

SAt

Sat Obfervation.::.on each glance of thought '
Decision follow'd, as the thunder-bolt
Pursues the flash.

ANNA.

That demon haunts you still:
Behold GLENALVON.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Now I ihun him not.

This day I brav'd him in behalf of NORVAL;-
Perhaps too far: at least my nicer fears
For DOUGLAS thus interpret.

Enter GLENALVON.

GLENALVON.

Noble Dame!

The hov'ring Dane at last his men hath landed:
No band of pirates; but a mighty host,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers;
To win a country, or. to bore themselves.

Lady RANDOLPH.
But whence comes this intelligence, GLENALVON ?

GLENALVON.

A nimble courier sent from yonder camp,
To haftcn up the -chieftains of the north,
Iiform'd me, as lie paif, that the fierce Dane
Had on the eastern coast of Lothian landed,
Near to that place where the fea-rock immense,
Amazing Bass, looks o'er a fertile land.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Then must this -eftcrn army march to join
The warlike troops that guard Edina's tow'rs.

GLENALVON.

Beyond all queltion. If impairing time
Has not cflic'd the image of a plac,
Once perfcct in my brealt, there is a wild
Which lies to weltward of that mighty rock,

And

And seems by nature formed for the camp
Of water-wafted armies, whose chief strength
Lies in firm foot, unlank'd with warlike horse;
If martial kill direfs the Danilh lords,
There inaccessible their army lies
To our swift fcow'ring horse, the bloody field
Must man to man, and foot to foot, be fought.

Lady RANDOLPH.

How many mothers ihall bewail their sons
How many widows weep their husbands slain!
Ye dames of Denmark! ev'n for you I feel,
Who sadly fitting on the fea-beat Ihore,
Long look for lords that never ihall return.

GLENALtON.

Oft has th'unconqner'd Caledonian fvord
Widow'd the north. The children of the lain
Come, as I hope, to meet their fathers' fate.
The monfter-war, with her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are obje&s suited to GLENALVON'S foul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death:
Reproach more piercing than the pointed fivord.

Lady RANDOLPH.

I scorn thee not, but when I ought to scorn;
Nor e'er reproach, but when insulted virtue
Against audacious vice alerts herself.
I own thy worth, GLENALVON; none more apt
Than I to praise thine eminence in arms,
And be the echo of thy martial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty pafion:
Go and pursue a lawful mistress, glory.
Upon the Danilh crests redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the ihield of RANDOLPH.

GzENALVON.

One initant flay, and hear an ater'd man.
When beauty pleads for virtue, vice abafi'd

Flies

Flies its own colours, and goes 6'er to virtue.
I am your convert; time will shew how truly:
Yet one immediate proof I mean to give.
That youth, for whom your ardent zeal. to-day,
Somewhat too haughtily, defy'd your slave,-
Amidst thefliock of armies I'I defend,
And turn death from him, with a guardian arm.
Sedate by use, my bofomn maddens.-not
At the tumultuous uproar of the field.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Aft thus, GLENALVON, and I am thy friends
But that's thy least reward. Believe me, Sir,
The truly generous' is the truly wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblest.

[Exit Lady RANDOLPH.

GLENALVON fkes.

Amen! and virtue is its own reward!-
t think that I have hit the very tone
In which flle loves to speak. Honey'd aglent,
How pleasing art thou to the taste of man,
And woman also ! flattery dire&
Rarely difguts. They little know mankind
Who doubt its operation: 'tis my key,
And opes the wicket of the human heart.
How far I have succeeded now I know not.
Yet I incline to think her stormy virtue
Is lull'd a while: 'dis her alone I fear :.
Whilst 1he and RANDOLPH live, and live in faith
And amity, uncertain is my tenure.
Fate o'er my head suspends disgrace and death,
By that weak hair, a peevish female's will.
I am not idle: but the ebbs and flows
Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated.
That slave of NORVAL'S I have found mos apt:

F

I shew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his foul
To fay and swear whatever I suggest. :
NORVAL, I'm told, has that alluring look,
'Twixt mad and womarin hiih iI have 6bferv'd
To charm the nicer and faitaftic damiies;
Who are, like Lady RANboLPii, full of virtue.
In raising RANDOLPH'S jealoiify I may
But point him to the truth. He feldomi ers
JWho thinks the worst he cai of womankind.

lbe End of tb} THIRiD ACT.

ACT

# ACT IV.

A C T IV.

- Flourilf as friipets.
Enter Lord RANDOLPH attended.

Lord RANDQLPH . .

CUmmon an hundred hore, by break of day;
S To wait our pleasure at the cafle gate.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Alas! my Lord! I've heard unwelcome news;
The Danes are landed.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Ay, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, 'no tournament essay,
Of some young knight refolv'd to break a ipear,
And slain with hofile blood his maiden arms.
The Danes are landed: wve mufl beat them back,
Or live the slaves of Denmark.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Dreadful times !

Lord.RANDOLPH.

The fenceless villages are all forsaken;
The trembling mothers; and their children lodg'd
In wall-girt towers and castles; whilst the men
Retire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return.

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.
Immense, as fame reports, the Danifl host-

Lord RANDOLPH.

Were it as numerous as loud'fame reports,
An army knit like ours wou'd pierce it thro':
Brothers, that firink not from each other's fide,
And fond companions, fill our warlike files:
For his dear offspring, and the wife he blves,
The husband, and the fearless father arm.
In vulgar breasts heroic ardor burns,
And the poor peasant mates his daring lord.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Men's minds are temper'd, like their fwvords, for war;
Lovers of danger, on deftrution's brink
They joy to rear ere8 their daring forms.
Hence, early graves; hence, the lone widow's life;
And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age.
Where is our gallant guest?

Lord RANDOLPH.

Down in the vale

I left him, managing a fiery teed,
Whose stubbornness had foil'd the strength and iill
Of every rider. But behold he comes,
In earnest conversation with GLENALVON.

Enter NORVA£ and GLENALVON.

GLENALVON ! with the lark arise; go forth,
And lead my troops that ly in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
NORVAL, thou goeft with me. But fayv young man!
Where didll thou learn so to discourse of war,
And in such terms as I o'erheard to-day ?
War is no village science, nor its phrase
A language taught amongIt the Ihepherd fiains.

NORVAL.
Small is the kill my Lord delights to praise

In

In him he favours.-Hear from whence it came.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the most remote
And inacceflible by hepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit liv'd; a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our wand'ring fvain.
Aultere and lonely, cruel to himself,
Did they report him; the cold earth his bed,
Water his drink, his food the shepherd's alms.
I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
'With rev'rence and with pity. Mild he spake,
And, entring on discourse, fuchlflories told
As made me oft reyifit his fad cell..
For he had been a soldier in his youth;
And fought in famous battles, when the Peers
Of Europe, by the hold GODFREDO led,
Against th'ufurping Infidel difplay'd
The cross of Clnift, and won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech struck from me, the ol4 man wou'd ihake
His years away, and at his young encounters:
*Then, having shew'd his wounds, he'd fit him dovwn
And all the live-long day discourse of war.
To help my fancy, in the smooth green turf
He cut the figures of the par/hall'd hosts;
Defcrib'd the motions, and explain'd-the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,
The Square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm.
For all that Saracen or Chlritian knew
Of war's vast ar, was to this hermit known.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Why did this soldier in a defart hide
Thlfe qualities that lould have grac'd a camp

'NORVAL.

That too at las I learn'd. Unhappy man!
Returning homewards by Messina's port,

Loaded

A rude and bpSitrous captain f the sea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought: .
The stranger fell, and with his dying breath.
Declar'd his name and lineage!' Mighty God
The soldier cried, my brother! ,Oh! my brother! .

Lady RANnOLPH. -
His brother!

NORVAL.

Yes; of the fame parents born;

His only brother. They exchang'd forgiveness:
And happy, in my mind, was he that died:
For many deaths has the fhrvivor fuffer'd.
In the wild defart on a rock he fits,
Or on some nameless stream's untrodden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times, alas not in his perse& mind!
Holds dialogues with his lov'd brothers ghost;
And oft each night forfakes'his fllen couch,
To make fad-ori6fns for him he flew.

Lady RANDOLPH.

To what mysterious woes are mortals born!
In this dire tragedy were there no more
Unhappy perfens? :did the parenits lieve

NORVAL.

No; they were dead: kind heav'n had clos'd their eyes
Before their-fon had shed his brother's blood.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Hard is his fate; for he was not to blame!
There is a destiny in this strange world,
Which oft decrees an undeserved doom:
Let fchoolmen tell us why.-From whence these founds?

t'n1fupcts at a dtifance.]

Enter

Enter an OFFICER.

OFFICER.

My Lord, the trumpets, of the troops of Lorn:
The valiant leader hails the noble RANDOLPh.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Mine antient guet ! does he.the warriors lead?
Has Denmark rous'd the brave old lnight to arms

OFFICER.

No; worn with warfare, he resigns the sword.
His eldest hope, the valiant JOHN of Lorn,
Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord RANDOLPH.

GLENALVON, go.

With hofpirality's most strong request
Intreat the chief.

[Eit GLENALVON.]
OFFICER.

My Lord, requets are vain.

He urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foe's approach.

Lord RANDOLPH.

May victory fit on the watrior's plume!
Bravest of men I his flocks and herds are safe;
Remote from war's alarms his pastures lie,
By mountains inacceflible fecur'd:
Yet foremost he into the plain descends,
Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the antiefit world:
Contemners they of indolence and gain;
But still for love of glory, and of arms,
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift
Against each strong antagonist the spear.
I'll go and press the hero to my breast.

[Exit RANDOLPH.

Manet

Manet Lady RANDOLPH and NORVAL.

Lady RANDOLPH.

The soldier's loftiness, 'the pride and pomp
Inveffing awful war, NORVAL, I fee,
Traniport thy youthful mind.

NORVAL.

Ahl! should they not?

Blefl'd be the hour I left my father's house i
I might havebeen a shepherd all my days,
And flole obscurely to a peasant's grave.
Now, if I live, with mighty chiefs I itand;
And, if I fall, with noble dust I lie.

Lady RANDOLP1.

There is a gen'rous spirit in thy breaf,
That could have well fuftain'd a prouder fortune.
,This way with me; under yon spreading beech,
Unseen, unheard, by human eye or ear,
I will amaze thee with a wond'rous tale.

NORVAL.

Let there be danger, Lady, with the secret,
That I may hug it to my grateful heart,
And prove my faith. Command my sword, my life
These are the sole pofleffions of poor NORVAL.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Know'ft thou these gems?

NORVAL.
Durst I believe mine eyes
I'd fay I knew them, and they were my father's.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Thy father's, fay'ft thou! ah ! they were thy father's I

NORVAL.

I saw them once, and curioully inquir'd
Of both my parents, whence such splendor came?
But I was check'd, and more could never learn.

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.
Then learn of hme, thou art-not NORVAL'sfon.

NORVAL.
Not NORVAL'S fOi !

Lady RANDOLPH.

Nor of a ihepherd sprung.

NORVAL.
Lady, who am I then?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Noble thou art;
For noble was thy Sire!

NORVAL.

I Will believe-
! tell me farther! Say who was my father ?

Lady RANDOLPH.
DOUGLAS!

NORVAL.
Lord DOUCLAS, whom to day I saw?

Lady RANDOLPH.
His younger brother.

NORVAL.

And in yonder camp?

Lady RANDOLPH.
Alas!

NORVAL.

You make me tremble-Sighs and tears!
Lives my brave father ?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Ah! too brave indeed!
He fell in battle 'ere thyself was born.

NORVAL.

Ah me unhappy! 'ereI saw the light?
But does my mother live ? I may conclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been sorrow.

G Lady

Lady.RANDOLPH.

She lives; but waftes her life in conltant woe,
Weeping her hulband slain, her infant loft.

NORVAL.

You that are fkill'd so well in the fad story
Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their destiny, now have compafion
Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd I
0 ! tell me who, and where:my-mother is
Opprefs'd by a base world, perhaps {he bends
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief; .
And desolate, implores of heav'n the aid
Her son should give. It is, it mnut be so-
Your countenance confesses that 1he's wretched.
O ! tell me her conditioni!. Can the sword-
Who ihall resist me in a parent's cause?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thy virtue ends her woe.-My son, my son r
I am thy mother, and the wife-of DOUGLAS!

'[Falls. upon bis nlck..

NORVAL.

O heav'n and earth, how wondrous is my fate
Art thou my mother? Ever'let me kneel!

Lady RANDOLPH.

Image of DOULAS ! Fruit of fatal love!
All that I owe thy Sire, I pay to thee.

NORVAL.

Refpe& and admiration still pofleis me,
Checking the love and fondness of a son.
Yet I was filial to my humble parents.
But did my Sire surpass the reft of men,
As thou excelled all of wo0mankind

Lady RANDOLPH.

Arie, my son! In me thou dost behold
The poor remains of beauty once admir'd:
The autumn of my days is come already;

For

For sorrow made myfunmmer haste away.
Yet in my prime I equal'd not thy father:
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet sometimes
Liker the dove's; and, as he pleas'd, he won
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

NORVAL.

How did he fall.? Sure '"nas a bloody field
When DOUcLAS died. 0 Ihave much to aik!

Lady RANDOLPH.

Hereafter thou flialt hear the lengthen'd tale
Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
At present this: thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder castle, and ite wide domailns
WThich now Lord RANDOLPH, asmy hulband, holds.
But thou lhalt not be wrong'd ; I have the power
To right thee still: before the King I'll kneel,
And call Lord DoUcLAS to protee his blood.

NORVAL.
The blood of DOUGLAS will protea itself.

Lady RANDOLPH.

But we llall need both friends and favour, boy,
T6 wrest thy lands and lordlhip from tie gripe
Of RANDOLPH and his kinfinan. Yet I tlink
My tale rill move each gentle heart to pity,
My life incline the virtuous to believe.

N\ORVAL.

To be the son of DOUGLAS is to Inc
Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in the field I'll seek for fame and fortune.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thou dolt not know what perils aid injoftice
Await the poor man's valour. O ! my tbn!
The noblest blood in all the land's abllh'd,
Having no lacquey but pale poverty.
Too long haft thoubeen thus attended, DovcLAS!
Too long halt thou been dcem'd a peaiant's child.

The

The wanton heir of some inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in the youthful sports;
Whilst thy indignant spirit fwell'd in vain!
Such contumely thou no more Malt bear:
But how I purpose to redress thy wrongs
Must be hereafter told. Prudence directs
That we hould part before yon chiefs return.
Retire, and from thy rustic follower's hand
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, ditated before
This casual opportunity arose
Of private conference. Its purport mark;
For as I there appoint we meet again.
Leave me, my son! and frame thy manners still
To NORVAL'S, not to noble DOUGLAS' state.

NORvAL.

I will remember. Where is NORVAL now?
That good old man.

Lady RANDOLPH.

At hand conceal'd he lies,

An useful witness. But beware, my son,
Of yon GLENALVON; in his guilty breast
Resides a villain's shrewdness, ever prone
TQ faife conjeture. He hath griev'd my heart.

NORVAL.

Has he indeed? Then let yon false GLEiALVON
Beware of me.

[Exit DOUGLAS.

Manet Lady RANDOLPH.

There burst the fmotler'd flame !

! thou all righteous and eternal King!

Who father of the fatherless art call'd,
Protet my fun -Thy inspiration, Lord!
Hath sild his bosom with that sacred fire,
Which intle breafss of his forefathers burn'd:

****

* ' *

*
Rer

Set him on high like them, that he nay ihiNe
The itar and glory of his natve land !
Then let the minister of death descend,
And bear my willing spirit to its.place.
Yonder they come. How do bad women find
Unchanging afpe&ts to conceal their.guilt?
When I, by reason, and by justice .urg'd,
Full hardly can dilremble with these men
In nature's pious cause.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON,

Lord RANDOLPH.'

Yon gallant chief,
Of arms enamour'd, all repose disclaims.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Be not, my Lord, by his example fway'd:
Arrange the business of to-morrow now,
And, when you enter, speak of war no more.

[Exit Lady RANDOLPH.
Manent Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.

Lord RANDOLPH.

'Tis so, by heav'n! her mien, her voice, her eye,
And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

GLENALVON.

He parted firom her now: behind the mount,
Amongst tle trees, I saw hlim glide along.

Lord RANDOL-PH.
For fad, fequelter'd virtue fle's renown'd !

GLENALVON.
Most true, my Lord.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Yet this diftinguilh'd Dame
i.vyites a youth, the acquaintance of a day,

Alone

Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This afignation, [Jhews a letter] the affafin freed,
Her manifest affeftion for the youth,
Might breed suspicion in a husband's brain,
Whose gentle consort all for love had wedded;
Much more in mine. MATILDA never lov'd me,
Let no man, after me, a woman wed,
Whose heart he knows he has not; tho' Ihe brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry,
For let her seem, like the night's ihadowy queen,
Cold and contemplative ;-He cannot trust her:
She may, ihe will, bring 1hame and sorrow on him;
The worit of sorrows, and the worst of flames !

GLENALVON..

Yield not, my Lord, to such afflifing thoughts;
But let the spirit of an huiband seep,
Till your own senses make a sure conclusion.
This billet muff to blooming NORVAL go:
At the next turn awaits my tnrfy spy;
I'll give it him refitted for his master.
In the cdoe thicket take your secret stand;
The moon Ihines bright, and your own eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

Lord RANDOLPH.
Thou dost counsel well.

GLENALVON.

Permit me now to make one flight essay.
Of all the trophies which vain mortals boast,
By wit, by valour, or by wisdom won,
The first and fairest, in a young man's eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Successful love
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind;
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves
Air-born, exalted above vulgar mcen.

Lord

Lord RANDOLPH.
And what avails this maxim?

GLENALVON.

Much, my Lord!

Withdraw a little: I'll accost young NORVAL,
And with ironical derisive counsel
Explore his spirit. If he is no more
Than humble NORVAL, by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as he is, he'll frink aftonifh'd from me:
But if he be the fav'rite of the fair,
Lov'd by the firfl of Caledonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.

Lord RANDOLPH.

'Tis Ihrewdly thought.

GLENALVON.

lWhen we grow loud, draw near. But let my Lord
His rising wrath restrain. [Exit RANDOLPH.

Manet GLENALVON.

'Tis strange, by heav'n!

That lihe liould run full tilt her fond career,
To one so little known. She too that feem'd
Pure as the winter stream, when ice erbofs'd
Whitens its course. Even I did think her chaste,
Whose charity exceeds not. Precious sex!
Whose deeds lascivious pass GLENALV.ON's thoughts?

NORVAL appears.

His port I love; he's in a proper mood'
To chide the tlhunder, if at him it roar'd.
Has NORVAL seen the troops?

NORVAL.

The setting fun,

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale,
And as the warriors mov'd, each poliih'd helm,

Corflet,

Corflet, or spear, glancd back his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at its top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they feem'd,
An host angelic, clad in burning arms.

GLENALVON.

Thou talk'ft it well; no leader of our hot,
In founds more lofty, speaks of glorious war.

NORVAL.

If I flall e'er acquire a leader'sname,
My speech will be less ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itself freely; since no part is mine
Of praise pertaining to the great. in arms.

GLENALVON.

You wrong yourself, brave Sir; your martial deeds
Have rank'd you with the great: but mark me NORVAL
Lord RANDOLPH'S favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know these soldiers, counsel you.
Give them all honour; seem not to command:
Else they will scarcely brook your late sprung power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

NORVAL.

Sir, I have been accuftom'd all my days
To hear and speak the plain and simple truth:
And tho' I have been told, that there are men
Who borrow friendihip's tongue to speak their scorn,
Yet in such language I am little fkill'd.
Therefore I thank GLENALVON for his counsel,
Altho' it foundedharfbly. 'Why remind
Me of my birth obscure? Why slur my power
With such contemptuous terms?

GLENALVON.

I did not mean
To gall your pride, which now I fee is great,

NORVAL.

NORVAL.
My pride!

GLENALVON.

Suppress it as you wilh to prosper.

Your pride's excellive. Yet for RANDOLPH'S fake
I will not leave you to its rash direCtion.
If thus you swell, and frown at high-born men,
Will high-born men endure a ihepherd's fcornm

NOR VAL.
A lhepherd's scorn!

GLENALVON.

Yes, if you presume

To bend on soldiers these disdainful eyes,
As if you took the measure of their minds,
And said in secret, you're no match for me;
What will become of you?

NORVAL.
If this were told-- vAde.
Haft thou no fears for thy presumptuous self?

GLENALVON.
Ha! Dolt thou threaten me

NORVAL.

Didft thou not hear?

GLENALVON.

Unwillingly I'did: a nobler foe
Had not been queftion'd thus. But such as thee-

NORVAL.
Whom dost thou think me

GLENALVON.

Norval.
NORVAL.

So I am--
And who is NORVAL in GLENALVON'S eyes?

f GLENALVON.
A peasant's on, a wand'ring beggar-boy;

H At

At best no more, even if he speaks the truth.

NORVAL.
False as thou art, dost thou fufpe&t.my truth?

GLENALVON.

Thy truth! thou'rt all a lie; and false as hell
Is the vain-glorious tale thou told'ft to RANDOLPH.

NORVAL.

If I were chain'd, unarm'd, and bedrid old,
Perhaps I fiould revile: But as I am
I have no tongue to rail. The humble NORVAL
Is of a race who trive-not but with ?deeds.
Did I not fear to freeze thy shallow valour,
And make thee fink too soon beneath my sword,
'd tell thee-what thou art. I know thee well.

GLENALVON.

Dost thou nor know GLENALVON, born to command
Ten thousand slaves like thee .

NORVAL.

Villain, no more:

Draw and defend thy life. I did design
To have defy'd thee in another cause:
But heaven accelerates its vengeance on thee.
Now for my own and Lady RANDOLPH'S wrongs.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Hold, I command you both. The man that firs
Makes me his foe.

NORVAL.

Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly founded, noble RANDOLPH.

GLENALVON.

Hear him, my Lord; he's wondrous condescending!
Mark the humility of fiepherd NORVAL !

NORVA L.

NORVAL.
Now you may fcoff:in safety. [SbeatJhs is sword.

Lord RAND6LPH.

-Speak not thus,

Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The qaufe of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

NORVAL.

Nay, my good Lord, tho' I revere you much,
My cause I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I blufl to speak; I will not, cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words that I from him have borne.
To the liege-lord of my dear native land
I owe a fubjec's homage; but even him
And his high arbitration I'd rejet.
Witlin my bosom reigns another lord;
Honour, sole judge and umpire of itself.
If my free speech offend you, noble RANDOLPH,
Revoke your favours, and let NoRvAL 'go
Hence as he came, alone, but not dilhonour'd.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thus far I'll mediate with impartial voice:
The antient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er her fiighted fields.
Suspend your purpose, till your country's arms
Rep.l thie bold invader; then decide
The private quarrel.

GLENALVON.
II agree to this.

NORVAL.
And I.

Enter SERVANT.

SERVANT.
The banquet waits.

Lord RANDOLPH.

We come.

[Exit RANDOLPH.

GLEN.

GLENALVON.

Norval,

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of RANDOLPH.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkl'd hate,
Shall Rain my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow;
Nor let our flrife disturb the gentle Dame.

NORVAL.

Think not so lightly, Sir, of my resentment;
When we contend again, our strife is mortal.

The End of the FOURTH ACT.

AC.T

# ACT V.

A C T V.

the Wood.

Enter DOUGLAS.
THIS is the place, the centre of the grove.

Here tands the oak, the monarch of the wood.

How sweet and solemn is this mid-night scene!
The silver moon, unclouded, holds her way
Thro' fides where I could count each little flar.
The fanning weft wind scarcely stirs the leaves;
The river, rushing o'er its pebbled bed,
Imposes silence with a fflly found.
In such a place as this, at such an hour,
If ancestry can be in ought believ'd,
Descending spirits have convers'd with man,
And told the fecrers of the world unknown.

Enter Old NoRVAL.

NORVAL.

'Tis he. But what if he should chide me hence ?
i His just reproach I fear.

[DOUGLAS turns oand fees him.
Forgive, forgive,

Cans thou forgive the man, the felfiih man,
Who bred Sir MALCOLM's heir a Ihepherd's son.

DOUGLAS.

Kneel not tome: thou art my father till:
Thy wiih'd-for presence now complcats my joy.

Welconw

Welcome to me, my fortunes thou ihalt flare,
And ever honour'd with thy DOUGLAS live.

Old NORVAL.

And dost thou call me father ? 0 my son !
I think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
Which in the wilderness so long conceal'd
The blossom of thy youth.

DOUGLAS.

Not worse the fiuit,

That in the wilderness the bloflbm blow'd.
Amongst the ihepherds, in the humble cote,
I learn-d some leflons, which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; and, when my vassals bow,
NORVAL hall smooth the'crefted pride of DOUGLAS.

NORVAL.

Let me but live to fee thine exaltation!
Yet grievous are my fears. 0 leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

DOUGLAS.

Why (hould I leave them ?
NORVAL.
LordRl4XDOLPH and his kinsman feekyour life.

DOUGLAS.
How knoxw'ft thou that?

NORVAL.
I will inform you how.

When evening came, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And fondly trod in each accuftom'd path
That to the cafle leads. Whilf, thus I rang'd,
I was alarm'd with unexpeted founds
Of earnest voices. On the persons came;
UnfeenI lurk'd, and overheard them name

Each

Each other as they talk'd, Lord RANDOLPH this,
And that GLENALVON: till of you they spoke,
And of the Lady: lhreat'ning was their speech,
Tho' but imperfectly my ear could hear it.'
'Twas strange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

DOUGLAS.
Revenge! for what?

NORVAL.
For being what you are;

Sir MALCOLM'S heir: how else have you offended?
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there fat musing how I best might find
Means to inform you of their wicked purpose.
But I could think of none: at last perplex'l
I issued forth, encompafing the tower
With many a weary ftep and wishful look.
Now Providence hath brought you to my fight,
Let not your too couragious spirit scorn
The caution wllich I give.

DOUGLAS.
I scorn it not.

Mvy mother warn'd me of GLENALVON'S baseness:
But I will not fufped the noble RANDOLPH.
In our encounter with the vile assassins,
I mark'd his brave demeanor: him I'll trult.

NORVAL.
I fear you will too far.

DOUGLAS.
Here in this place

I wait my mother's coming: ilhe flall know
What thou haft told: her counsel I will follow:
And cautious ever are a mother's counsels.
You must depart; your presence may prevent
Our interview.

NORVA.L.

NORiVAL.

My bleflfin reft upon thee!

0 may heav'n's hand, which fav'd thee from the wave,
And from the sword of foes, be near thee ffill;
Turning mischance, if ought hangs o'er thy head,
All upon mine!

[ExAit Old NORVAL.

DOUGLAS.

He loves me like a parent;

And mufft not, shall not lose the son he loves,
Altho' his son has found-a nobler father.
Eventful day! how halt thou chang'd my slate!
Once on the cold, and winter lhaded fide
Of a bleak hill, mischance had rooted me,
Never to thrive, child of another foil:
Transplanted now to the gay funny vale,
Like the green thorn of May my fortune flowers.
Ye glorious stars! high heav'n's resplendent host!
To whom I oft have of my lot complain'd,
Hear and record my foul's unalter'd wilh!
Dead or alive, let me but be renown'd!
May heav'n inspire some fierce gigantic Dane,
To give a bold defiance to our host!
Before he speaks it out I will accept;
Like DOUGLAS conquer, or like DOUGLAS die.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

Lady RANDOLPH.
My son! I heard a voice

DOUGLAS.
-The voice was mine.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Didil thou complain aloud to nature's car,
That thus in dulky ihades, at mid-night hours,

By

13y health the mother and the son fliould meet ?

[Embracbig bim.

DOUGLAS.

No; on this happy day, this better birth-day,
My thoughts and words are all of hope and joy.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Sad fear and melancholy fill divide
The empire of my breast with hope and joy.
Now hear what I advise.

DOUGLAS.

Firfl, let me tell
What may the tenor of your counsel change.

Lady RANDOLPH.
My heart forebodes some evil!

DOUGLAS.

TTis not good.-

At eve, unseen by RANDOLPH and GLENALVON,
The good old NORVAL in the grove o'erheard
Their conversation: oft they mention'd me
With dreadful threatnings; you they sometimes nam'd.
Twvas strange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Defend us gracious God! we are betray'd&
They have found out the secret of thy birth;
It must be so. That is the great dilcovery.
Sir MALCOLM'S heir is come to claim his own,
And he will be revcng'd. Perhaps even now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for murder, they'but wait
A darker and more silent hour, to break
Into the chamber where they think thou fleep'ft.
This moment, this, heav'n hath ordain'd to save thee!
Fly to the camp, my son!

DOUGLAS.

And leave you here?
No: to the castle let us go together,

I Call

Call up the antient servants of your house,
Who in their youth did eat your father's bread,
Then tell them loudly that I am-your son.
If in the breafts-of men one spark remains
Of sacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your cause will arm. I alk but few
To drive those spoilers from my father's house.

Lady RANDOLPH.

O Nature, Nature! what can check thy force ?
Thou genuine offspring of the daring DOUGLAS.
But rush not on deftrudtion: save thyself,
And I am safe. To me they mean no harm.
Thy stay but riffs thy precious life in vain.
That winding path conducts thee to the river.
Cross where thou feeft a broad and beaten way,
Which running eastward leads thee to the camp,
Instant demand admittance to Lord DOUGLAS.
Shew him these jewels, which his brother wore.
Thylook, thy voice, will make him feel the truth,
Which I by certain proof will soon confirm.

DOUGLAS.

I yield me and obey: but yet my heart
Bleeds at this parting. Something bids me stay
And guard a mother's life. Oft have I read
Of wondrous deeds by one bold armatchiev'd.
Our foes are two: no more: let me go forth,
And fee if any ihield can guard GLENALVON.

Lady RANDOLPH.

If thou regard'ft thy mother, or rever'ft
Thy father's mem'ry, think of this no more.
One thing I have to fay before we part;
Long wert thou loft; and thou art found, my child,
In a most fearful season. War and battle
I have great cause to dread. Too well I fee
Which way the current of thy temper sets:
To day I've found thee. Oh! my long loft hope!

If

If thou to giddy valour giv'ft the rein,
To-morrow I may lose my ion for ever.
The love of thee, before thou faw'ft the light,
Suftain'd my life when thy brave father fell.
If thou ihalt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this waste world! my son, remember me!

DOUGLAS.

What shall I fay? how can Igive you comfort?
The God of battles of my life dispose
As may be best for you ! for whose dear fake
I will not bear myself as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boast founds amongst martial men.
How will inglorious caution fait my claim
The poR of fate unlhrinking I maintain.
My country's foes must witness who I am.
On the invaders heads I'll prove my birth,
'Till friends and foes confess the genuine frain.
If in this strife I fall, blame not your son,
VWho if he lives not honomud, mufl not live.

Lady RANDOLPH.

I will not utter what my bosom feels.
Too well I love that valour which I warn.
Farewel, my son! my counsels are but vain.

[Em bracing.
And as high heav'n hath will'd it all mulf be. [ Sepatrte.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Gaze not on me, thou wilt mistake the path;
I'll point it out again.

[ 7Jif as they are separating, enter from the wood

Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.j

Lord RANDOLPH.

Not in her presence.
Now-

GLENALVON.
'**~~- ~I'm prepar'd.

Lor d

Lord RANDOLPH.

No: I command thee stay.

Igo alone: it never ihallbe said
That I took odds to combat mortal man.
The noblest vengeance is the most compleat.

[Exit Lord RANDOLPH.
[GLENALVON Makes fomiefleps to the fame fids

of tfle flage, listens and peaks.]

GLENALVON.

Demons of death come fettle on my sword,
And to a double slaughter guide it home!
The lover and the hulband both must die,

[Lord RANDOLPH bebinl the scenes.]
Lord RANDOLPH.
Draw, villain! draw.

DOUGLAS.
Aflail me not, Lord RANDOLPH;
Not as thou lov'ft thyself.

[Clashing of ivords.]

[GLENALVON rumllzng out.]

Now is the time.
Enter Lady RANDOLPH at the opposite fide of the

flage faint and breathless.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Lord RANDOLPH, hear me; all {hall be thine own:
But spare! Oh spare my son!

Enter Dou GLA s with a sword in each hand.

My:mother's voice!
I can protec thee ffill.

Lady RANDOLPH.

He lives, he lives:

For this, for this to heaven eternal praise!
But sure I saw thee fall.

DOUGLAS,

DOUGLAS.

It was GLENALVON.

Just as my arm had mafter'd RANDOLPH'S fwor4,
The villain came behind me; but I flew him.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Behind thee! Ah; thou'rt wounded 0 my child,
How pale thou look'ft ! and lhall I lose thee now ?

DOUGLAS.

Do not despair: I feel a litte faintness;
I hope it will not last.

[Leans upon hii fiuord.]
Lady RANDOLPH.

There is no hope!

And we must part! the hand of death is on thee!
O my beloved child! 0 DOUGLAS, DOUGLAS!

DOUGLAS. ,,

Too soon we part; I have not long been DOuG£A s.;:... '
O defriny! hardly thou deal'ft with me:
Clouded and hid, a fitranger to myself,
In low and poor obscurity I liv'd.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Has heav'n preferv'd thee for an end like this ?

DOUGLAS.

O had I fallen as my brave fathers fell,
Turning with great effort the tide of battle!
Like them I Ihould have finil'd and welcom'd death.
But thus to perish by a villain's hand
Cut off from nature's and from glory's course,
Which never mortal was so fond to run.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Hear justice! hear! firetch thy avenging arm.

-[DOUGLAS falls.1

DPUGLAS.

Unknown I die; no tongue lhall speak of me.-
Some noble spirits, judging by theimelves,
May yet conjef.ure what I might have prov'd,

And

And think life only wanting to my fame:
But who ihall comfort thee?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Despair! despair!

DOUGLAS.

0 had it pleas'd high heaven to let me live
A little while !- my eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apace! my mother-O ' my mother.

[Dies'.
Enter Lord RA DOLPH and ANNA.

.

-

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thy words, the words of truth,'have pierc'd my heart
I am the stain of knighthood and of arms.
Oh! if my brave deliverer survives
The traitor's sword-

ANNA.

Alas! look there, my Lord.
Lord RANDOLPH.

The mother and her son! - How curst I am!
Was I the cause ? No: I was not.the cause.
Yon matchless villain did reduce my foul
To frantic jealousy.

ANNA.

My Lady lives:

The agony of grief hath but fuppreft
A while her powers.

Lord RANDOLPH.
But my deliverer's dead!

The world did once esteem Lord RANDOLPH well.
Sincere of heart, for spotless honour fam'd:
And, in my early days, glory I gain'd
Beneath the holy banner of the cross.
Now past the noon of life, lhame comes upon me;

' Reproach,

Reproach, and infamy, and public hate,
Are near at hand: for all mankind will think '
That RANDOLPH basely tab'd Sir MALCOtM'S heir.

[Lady RANDOLPH recoverilg.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Where am I now? frill in this wretched world!
Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine,
My youth was worn in anguilh: but youth's strength,
With hope's afiftance, bore the brunt of sorrow;
And train'd me on to be the objeet now,
On which Omnipotence displays itself,
Making a fpefacle, a tale of me,
To awe its valal, man.

Lord RANDOLPH.

0 misery!

Amidst thy raging grief I must proclaim
My innocence.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Thy innocence!
Lord RANDOLPH.

My guilt
Is innocence compar'd with what thou think'ft it;

Lady RANDOLPH.

Of thee I think not: what have I to do
With thee or any thing? My son! my son!
My beautiful! my brave! how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy valour! My fond heart
O'erflow'd this day with transport, when I thought
Of growing old amidst a race of thine,
Who might make up to me their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and my hutband's name:
Now all my hopes are dead! A little while
Was I a wife ! a mother not so long!
What am I now?-I know.-But I lhall be
That only whilst I please; for such a son
And such a hulband make a woman bold. [.ittis out,

Lord

Lord RANDOLPH.

Follow her, 'ANA: I myself would follow,
But in this rage Ihe must abhor my presence.

Exit ANNA.
Enter Old NORVAL.

NORVAL.
I hear the voice of woe; heaven guard my child!

Lord RANDOLPH.

Already is the idle gaping crowd,
The spiteful vulgar come to gaze on RANDOLPH.
Begone.

NORVAL.

I fear thee not. I will not go.
Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplice, Lord,

- With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help

To crush down to the ground this lovely plant.
0 noblest youth that ever yet was born!
Sweetest and best, gentlest and braveRf spirit,
That ever blefs'd the world! Wretch that I am,
Who saw that noble spirit swell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it!
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do thee jiffice, and reveal the secret,
Which timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's fare! Oh! I am punifh'd now!
These are the hairs that Ihould have ftrew'd the ground,
And not the locks of DoUCLAS.

[gears his hair, and throws him-

self ifpo7 the body of Douglas.

Lord RANDOLPH.

I know thee now: thy boldness I forgive;
My crest is fallen. For thee I will appoint
A place ofreft ifgrief will let thee reft.

I

I will reward, altho'. I cannot punilh.'
Curst, curst GLENALVON, he efcap'd too well,
Tho' slain and baffled by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the last,
Curling his.conqueror, the felon dy'd.

Enter ANN A.
. ANNA. . .:..

ANNA.
My Lord, my Lord .

Lord RANDOLP.H.
. Speak: I can hear of hor.ror,. ;
. : . ANNA. . . '
Horror indeed!

Lord RANDOLPH.
MATILDA?

ANNA.

Is no more;

She ran, file flew like lightning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipicelhe gain'd, ';
Beneath whose low'ring top the river falls
Ingulph'd in rifted rocks: thither Ihe came,
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down.-

Lord RANDOLPH.

'Twas I! alas! 'nvas I

That fill'd her breaf with fury; drove her down
The precipice of death! Wretch that I am!

ANNA.

0 had you seen her last despairing look!
Upon the brink she flood, and cast her eyes
Down on the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heaven, seeming to fay,
Why am I forc'd to this? fle plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

K Lord

Lord RANPOL PH.

I willnot vent,

In vain complaints, the pafion of my foul.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of RANDOLPH gave.
They speak aloud, and with the voice of fate
Denounce my doom. I am refolvUd.. I'll go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me turn aside must threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy mistress, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
With cost and pomp upon their funerals wait:
For RANDOLPH hopes he never shall return.

-F N I S.

# EPILOGUE.

E P I L G U E.
4NEpilogue IaJfd't bt not one 'word

Our bard uwill write. He vowts, 'tis most abjird

iith comic wit to contradicl the Jtrain
:ftragedy, and make your sorrows vain.
Sadly he fays, that pity is the beJt,
: he noblest pafon of the Juman breast.:
For 'when its sacred streams the heart o'erflow,
In gujhes pleaure 'with the tide of woe;
Aid 'when its 'waves retire, like those of Nile,
T hey leave behind them fitch agoldei foil,
That there the virtues without culturegrow,
,There the flueet bloonms of affetion bloyu.
These were his words- -void of delusive art
f"felt them; for he spoke them from his heart.
kYor tuill I now attempt, with 'witty folly,
.)d chafe avway celefiial melancholy.
* it-
