DOUGLAS:

A
TRAGEDY,

[Price One Shilling and Six-pence.]

D O'U G L A S:

A
TRAGEDY.

As it is aAed at the
THEATRE-ROYAL

IN

COVENT-GARDEN.
Non ego fum vaes, fed pricins codfciU avi.

A NEW EDITION.

LONDON:
Printed for A. MILLAR, and Sold by T. CADZLL

in the Strand.
MDCCLXIX

# PROLOGUE.

P R O L O G Ut.;

pkep by r.P... . \

I .

ancient times, when Britain's trade was arms,

And the lv'd wufi of her youth, alarms,

Agid-like race fuiain'dfair England'sfame:
Whb has not heard ofgalant PIERCY's name?
Ay, and f DOUGLAS ? Such illufrioufoes
In rival Rome and Carthage never rose
From age to age brIkw hI B ripty,
And every hero was * hesIf 'r.
When powerful Fate dacrad os tmaror's doom,
Up prung the Phaenix from his parent's tomb.
But wuhilf theft generous rivals fought andfell,
These generous rivals lv'd each other well:
Tho' many a bloody field was loft and won,
Nothing in bate, in honour all was done.
When PIERCY wrong'd defy'd his prince or peers,
Fast came the DOUGLAS, with his Scottifhifpears;
And, when proud DOUGLAS made his King his foe,
For DOUGLAS, PIERCY bent his Engliih bow.
Expel d their native homes by adverfefate,
Thby khck'd alternate at each other's gate:

Then

~Z't~ ~ztd rt1' cJ aje, at the midnight hour,
Frcr him zD r me had j2~zk twer.
27i sni~i ci DOUGLAS yjttr Cr.scdY on daimS;

a iz'ster!pt'sst am:

sic~ :fó her c;- ir~Y"rt~rh~ar,
.srmd Jraut your Sz~plia~t allih7e begs, a tear.
k Cidt-n ~c j;e beg; and hapes fa/frd
Fz E iD breas, lze sbLe .PIERcY'S, kindj

i2-:~ ~sL

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ, as represented at EDINBURGH.

DRAMATIS.PERSONS, as represented at

EDINBURGH.

Lord RANDOLPH, Mr. YOUNGcER

GLENALVON, Mr. LoVE,

NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. DoGGs.

STRANGER, Mr. HAYMAS.
SERVANTS, &C.

-W 0 ME N.

MATILDA, Lady RANDOLPH, Mrs. WARD.
ANNA, .Mrs.HopKINs.

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

0D-k-A IIA t' ,,

T s i t

P S O0 1qN'.

Lord RANDOLPH, Mr. RIDOUt.

.LENALVtof; Mr. Srrut.

NovAti;, DOUGLAS, ' r;

BAKY.,

ShiiANG'R, - 'Mr. SPAiiS.
StiivAXTS, &C.

WOMEN.
MATILD.A, LadyR4s- . . WOFFINGTON.

DOLPHs. i
AWA, ~~~Mr.. VINciNT.

# ACT I. SCENE I.

D 0 U G L A S:

A

TRA GEDY.

ACT I. SCENE I.
<be court of a castle, surrounded with woods.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.
tY E woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom

Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth
The voice of sorrow from my bursting heart,
Farewell a while: I will not leave you long;

For in your shades I deem some spirit dwells,
Who from the chiding fream, or groaning oak,
Still hears, and answers to MATILDA'S moan.
0 DOUGLAS ! DOUGLAS ! if departed ghofta

- B .Are

Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of that wood thou art;
And with the pafon of immortals hear'1t
My lamentatio:n hear'st thy wretched wife.
Weep for her hufoanrd-flain, her infant loft.
My brother's timeless death I seem to mourn:
MWho peril-d wilh thee on this fatal day.
To thee I lift my voice; to thee address
The plaint which mortal ear has never heard.
O difreardo me not; though I am call'd
Another's now, my heart is -vholly thine.
Incapable of cr hange, as. on lies
Buried, my DOUGLAS, in thy bloody grave.
But RANSDOLPH comCes. whom fate has made my Lord,
To chide rmy- anguigh, and defraud the dead.

Eratr Lord RANDOLPH.

Arain th'f weeds of -wee! fa , do'if thou well
To feed a .aSon which consumes thy life ?
The living claim some duty ; vainly thou
Beto'-t.nty' ch-res upon the silent dead.

Lady RANDOLPH.-

Silent, aizs ! is he for whom I mourn:
ChilcJefs, vwihout memcrial of his name,
He only now in mY rermembrance lives.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Time, that wears out the trace of deepefr anguish,
Has -:1i o'er thee in vain. 'Wou'd thou wer't not
Comaos'd of grief and tenderness alone !
Su-e thou art not the dauz.her of Sir MALCOLM :
Strong w-. s his rage, eternal his resentment;
For -.-en :hy brother 'fe, heimiil'd to hear
Th; DOI;GLAS' ion in the fame field was slain.

L. dy RA.\DOLPH.

G1h I rare no. u- the a-las of my fathers:
Imal-cb-le resentment was their crime,
And ri evous has the expiation been,

Con-

Contending with the DOUGLAS, gallant lives
Of either house were loft; my ancestors
Compell'd, at last, to leave-their ancient feat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
No heir is left. Had they not been so fern,
*I had Snot been the last of all my race.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thy grief wrefis to its purposes my words.
I never asl'd of thee that ardent love,
Which in the breafis of fancy's children burns.
Decent affetion, and complacent kindness
Were all I wish'd for; but I wish'd in vain,
Hence with the less regret my eyes behold
The storm of war that gathers o'er this land:
If I ihould perish by the Danish sword,
MATILDA would not fled one tear the more.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thou do'th not think so: woeful as I am
I love thy merit, and esteem thy virtues.
But whither goess thou now ?

Lord RANDOLPH.

Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on the tip-toe stands
Of expectation, and impatient asks
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are landed.

Lady RANDOLPH.

0, may adverse winds,

Far from the coaf of Scotland drive their fleet!
And every soldier of both hosts return
In peace and safety to his pleasant home!

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thou fpeak'ft a woman's, hear a warrior's wish:
Right from their native land, the ftormy'north,
.lay the wind'blow, till every-keel is six'd

B ' Im-

Immoveab'e in Caledoni?'s i.rand!
Then h all our foes repent their bold invasion, -
And rovina armies shun the fatal Ihore.

Lady RAN-DorP H.

War I detef;: bu: -uar vith foreign foes,
Whsfe mar. ne' s, langusCge,)and whose looks are taange,
Is not so horrid, nor to rne so hateful,
As that whichwith our neighbours oft we wage.
A river here, there an ideal line
By fancy d-rawr, divides the fiter kingdoms.
On each fide dwells a people fimi!ar,.
As twins are to each other, valiant both,
Bo:h for their valour famous thro' the world.
Yet wil' they- not uni:e their kindred arms,
And, if they rmusl have war, wage diilant war,
But with each other fight in cruel conflia.
Gallant in firife, and noble in their ire,
The battle is their pafiime. They go forth
Gay in the morning, as to fuimmer sport:
V,»hen ev'ning comes, the glory of the morn,
The youthfii warriour, is a clod of clay.
Th-us fal the prim.e of either haplefs'land;
And such the fruit of Scotch and English wars.

Lord RANDOL-PH.

I'il hear no mre: this meloddy would make
A fc!;dier crop i:i hi .ord, and dos.his arms,
Sit dovn a.ed .wre ;h conquests he has made;
Yea, (like a fonk) sing ref and peace in heav'n
To fouls of w-rriours in his battles'flain.
Ladv, farewell: I leave thee not alone;
Yonder comes nre whose love makes duty light.

RaEter ANS'A.

.

.

.

-

:.

Forgive the raflne(s of your ANNA'S love:
U.-g'd by a..e :on, I have thus prefum'd

Te

To interruFt your Tolitary thoughts; .
And warn you of the hours that you neglet,
And lose in sadness.

Lady RANDOLPH.

* o to lose my hours
Is all the use I wish to make of time.

ANNA.

To blame thee, lady, suits not with my faate:
But sure I am, since death first prey'd'bn man,
Never did sifter thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had losr,
In early youth; the hufoarid of your heart ?

' Lady RAND'OLPH.
Oh! .... ........

ANNA.

Have I diftrefs'd.yout:ith'Wfficibus'.orVe,
And ill-tin'd menti6onof.your brother's fate?
F rgiveme, lady: humble tho'.Iam- ,.: ,
"The mind I bea'partlkes notof i y fortune':.'. .

So fervently I love you; .thatto dry- . -
These piteous tears,,: 'd throw my. life away.

.- ..Lady RANDOLPH.

'What power direAed thy. unconfeious tongue'
To speak as thou haft done ? to name

ANNA.

I know not:

But since my words have made my mifrefs tremble,
I will speak To no more;,but silent mix
My tears with hers.

Lady RANDOLPH.

No, thou shalt nothbe silent.

I'll trust thy faithful love, and thou fhalt'be
Henceforth th' inftruteU' partner of my woes.
But what avails it?. Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never-ebbing tir: ?

3R n Comr-

Co..~,l the earth and ocean to give up
Their dead alive ?

ANN;A.

What means my noble mitrefs ?
Lady RANDOLPH.

DirP : thou not as. what had my sorrows been,---
I I i n early y-outh had loft a husband r? --
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'd,
Mn. n!'d With wounds, the husband of my youth;
And in omre cavern of the ocean lies
.f chil d anr his.- --

ANSA.

O ! lady, rrmof rever'd !

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

Lads RANDOLPH.

Alas i an ancient feud,

Hereditary evil. v.as the source
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That y brav:e brother fhuld in battle save
The e of DOUGLAS' tfon, our house's foe:
The you.hful w.arricrs vow.'d eternal friendfnip.
To fe te he aunted fiter of his friend
Lrpa-.ir.t, DOUG-LAS to Balarmo came,
nndr ra -orrow'd name.-,'Iy heart he gain'd;
-Nr cid I jSong re.fue the handhe begg'd:
''.. brother s rfence authoriz'd our rarriage.

Thee c.-s, hree iitle weeks, with a ings of down,

H c eer us Tlo. wn, 'hen my lov'd lord was call'd
To 'F t his fath-er' bat;!s; and with him,
In T.:: cf 'il my, tears, did MALCOL. go.
Scar e .c:r z the. gene, when my stern fire was told
Tn a -e fii e stranger was lord DOUGLAS' fou.
r:an :i 'ith rage, the baron drew his sword
And cue tion;'d me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
Kneeling tneath his f.ivord, fault'ring I took

An

An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
Wed one of DOUGLAS' name. Sincerity !
Thou first of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thy onward path ! altho' the earth should gape,
And from the gulf of hell deftrucion cry
To take dissimulation's winding way.

ANNA.

Alas ! how few of woman's fearful kind
Durfl own a truth so hardy!

Lady RANDOLPH.

The first truth

Is easiest to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale.--
In a few days the dreadful tidings came
That DOUGLAS and my brother both were slain.
My lord ! my life! my husband ! - mighty God!
What had I done to merit such afflicion ?

ANNA.

My dearefl lady ! many a tale of tears
I've listen'd to; but never did I hear
A tale so fad as this.

Lady RANDOLPH.

In the first days

Of my diftra6Eing grief, I found myself--
As women wish to be who love their lords.
But who durfl tell my father ? The good priest
Who join'd our hands, my brother's antient tutor,
With his lov'd MALCOLM, in the battle fell:
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till time should make my father's fortune mine.
That very night on which my fon'was born,
My nurse, the only confident I had,
Set out with him to reach her filfer's l)ouse:.
But nurse, nor infant, have I ever seen,
Or heard of, ANNA, since that fatal hour.
My murder'd child !-had thy fond mother sear'd

B 4 The

The lots of thee, the hadIoud fame dcyd,
Defpis'd her father's rige,,her father's grief,
And wander'd with thee thro' the fcornir.g world.

ANNA.
Not seen, nor heard of! then perhaps he lives.

Lady RANDOIPH ..

No. It was dark December: wind and rain
Had beat all night. Acrob the Carron lay
The deftin'd road; and in its swelling flood
My faithful servant perih'd with my child.
O haples son ! of a mbft hapless fire !--
But they are both at reft: and Ialone
Dwell in this world of woe, condcmn'd to walk,
Like a guilt-troubl'd ghoif, my painful rounds:
Nor bas despiteful fate;permitted me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Tho' dead to love, I was compell'd to wed
RANDOLPH, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms;
And RANDOLPH now poCffees the domains,
That by Sir MALCoLM'S death on me devolv'd;
Domains, that Ihould to DOUGLAS' son have giv'n
A baron's tide, and a baron's power.
Such were my soothing thoughts, while I bewail'd
The flaughter'd father of a Ton unborn.
And when that son came, like a ray from heav'n,
Which shines and disappears; alas I my child !
How long did thy fond mother grasp the hope
Of having thee, Ihe knew not how, reftor'd.
Year after year hath worn her hope away;
But left still undiminifh'd her desire.

ANNA.

The hand, that spins th' uneven thread of life,
May finooth the length that's yet to come of your's.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Not in this world: I have confider'd well
Its vario evils, and on whom they fall.

Alas !

Alas! how oft does goodnefr wound itself ?
And (weet affgion prove the spring of 'woe.' '.

! had I died when my lIov'diutbad faln l '

. c::: ::. .

Had some good gl op'd to me thebook .

·

Of providence, and let me read my life,; : '
My heart had broke, when I beheld the rum ;:,.- .:
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

ANNA.

That God, whose ministers good angels are,
Hath {hut the book in mercy to'mankind.
But we mutl leave this theme: GL.NALTVO coas:
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes, '
And hitherwards he fiowly stalks his way. --::

Lady RANDOLPH.

I will avoid him. An ungracious person
Is doubly irksome in an hour like this.

ANNA. -
Why speak my lady thus of RANDOLPH'S heir ?

Lady RANDOLP1H.

Because he's not the heir of RANDOLPH'S virtuess
Subtle and (hrewd, he offers to mankind
An artificial image of himself'
And he with ease can vary to the tafle
Of different men, its features. Self-denied,
And master of his appetites he seems:
But his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,
Watches to seize unseen the wil'd-for prey.
Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
As in GLENALVON'S unrelenting mind.
Yet is he brave and politic in war,
And flands aloft in these unruly times.
Why I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter:
Stay, and detain him till I reach the cafle.

[Exit Lady RANDOLPH.

ANNA.

ANNA.

O happiness.! where art thou to be found ?
I fee thou dwelert not with birth and beauty,
Tho' grac'd w.-h grandeur and in wealth arrayed:
Nor dof thou, it would ieem, with virtue dwell;
Else had this gentle lady mnifs'd thee not.

E:tcr GLENALVON.

EGLENALVON.

What doat thou muse on, meditating maid ?
Like some entranc'd and visionary seer,
On earth thou s.and':, thy thoughts ascend to heaven.

ANNA.

WVou'd that I were, e'en as thou fay'if, a seer,
To have my doubts by heav'nly vision clear'd !

GLENALVON.

WThat dofr thou doubt of ? what haft thou to do
With fubjets intricate ? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be questioned: think of these good gifts;
And tis thy contemplations will be pleasing.

ANNA.

Let women view yon monument of woe,
Then boafl of beauty: who so fair as she ?
But I -muf follow: this revolving day
Awakes the memory of her antient woes.

[Exit ANNA.

GLENALrON flUs.

So !-Lady RANDOLPHi huns me; by and by
I ll woo her as the lion wooes his brides.
The deed's a doing now; that makes me lord
Of these rich valleys, and a chief of power.
The feifon is moRs apt; my founding feps
Will not be heard amidf: the din of arms.

RAN-

RANDOLPH has liv'd too long: his better fate
Had the ascendant once, and kept me down:
When I had seiz'd the dame, by chance he came,
Refcu'd and had the lady fqr his labour;
I 'fcap'd unknown: a slender consolation !
Heav'n is my witness that I do not love
To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvest. Yet I am not safe:
By love, or something like it, flung, inflam'd,
Madly I blabb'd my paflion to his wife,
And she has threaten'd to acquaint,himof it.
The way of woman's will I do not know:
But well I know the baron's wrath is deadly.
I will not live in fear: the man.I dread
Is as a Dane to me ay, and the man
Who flands betwixt me and my chief desire.
No bar but- he; She has no kinsman near ;
No brother in his-fifter's quarrel bold; .
And for the righteous cause, a stranger's cause,
J know no chief that wil. defy 'GiENALyQN. :

nd of 4ke 'F rI a T ACT,

A C

# ACT II. SCENE I.

ACT II.. S G-E N E .

A Corf, &c.
Er.trri frva ts and a jfran.ger at ne doer, and Lady RAN-

DOLPH and ANxA at another.

Lady RANDOLPH.

X i'XTHAT means this clamour? Rtranger, speak secure;
WY HaEi thou been wrong'd ? have these rude men
To vex the weav- traveller on his way? [ prefum'd.

First SERVANT.

By us no firanger ever fffered wrong:
This man with outc-r wild has call'd us forth;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
Ener Lsrd.-RAN OLPH ar.-d j:::;g i7an., witi their swords

arayn and issdy.

Ladv RANDOLPH.
Not vain the r'anger's fears ! hov-fares my lord?

Lord RANDOLPH.

That it fares wel, thanks to this gallant youth,
Whose valour fa;'d me from a wretched death !
As down the windi.nz dale I waik'd alone,
At the cross war four armed men attack'd me:
Rovers, I judge, fro..the licentious camp,
5Who would have quickly laid Lord RANDOLPH low,
Had not this brave and generous stranger come,

Like -

Like my good angel in- the hour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my foes his own. .
They turn'd upon him: but his ative arm
Struck to.the ground, from whence they rose no more,
The fiercest two; the others fled amain, . .'
And left him. master of the bloody field .. ..
Speak, Lady RANDOLPH :, upon Beauty's tongue
Dwell accents pleating to the brave and bold.
Speak, noble dame, and thank him for thy lord. . .

'Lady RANDOLPH.

My lord, I cannot speak what-now I feel.
My heart o'erflows with gratitude to heav'n,
And to this noble youth, who all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd.at peril, but humanely brave -
Fought on your fide, against such fearful odds.
Have you yet learn'd of him whom we ilhouldthank
Whom call the saviour of Lord RANDOLPH?' life?

.Lord RANDOLPH.

I ask'd that queflion, and-he anfwer'd not:
But I mufl know who my deliverer is. (To the Stranger.)

STRANGER.

A low born man, of parentage obscure,
Who nought can boast but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled
By the great King of Kings! thou art ordain'd
And ftampt a hero by the sovereign hand
Of nature ! bluhb not, flower of modesty
As well as valour, to declare thy birth.

STRANGER.

My name is NORVAL: on the Grampion hills
My father feeds his flocks; a frugal swain,
Wh.ose constant cares were to increase his store,

xI~~~ ~~And

And keep his onl.y on, myflf, at home.
For I had heard of battles, anid I long'd
To follow to the field some warlike lord;
Ard heav'n soon granted what my fire denied.
Th os moon which rcfe lar night, round as my flield,
Had not yet sli'd her horns, when, by her light,
A band of fierce barbarians from the hills,
Rufih'd like a torrent dowx upon the vale,
Sweeping our ocks and herds. The shepherds fled
For afetly, and for succour. -I alone,
VWiA bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Iover'd abou: the enem.y and mark'd
The road he took, then hafled to my friends;
*'Whcm, with a troop of iftv chosen men,
I met advancing. The purluit I led,
Till we o'ertook the foii-encumber'd foe.

rfe fought and ccnquer'd. Ere a sword was drawn,
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,

v.ho wore that day the arms which now I wear.

Returir.g home in triumph, I difdain'd
The fiepherd's lcthful life; and having heard
That our good king had fummon'd his bold peers
To lead their warriours to the Carron fide,
I left my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to conduct my Ieps:--
Yon trembling coward who forsook his taRser.
journeying wirh this intent, I pa-r these towers,
And, heb-en-direted, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

Lord RANDOLPH.

He is as wife as brave. \Was ever tale
With such a gallant modesty rehears'd?
My brave deliverer ! thou halt enter now
A nobler IjI, and in a monarch'sfight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame.

zI -will

I will preferit thee to our Scottifl. king,
Whose valiant spirit ever valour lov'd.
Ha! my MATILDA ! wherefore starts that tear?

Lady RANDOLP. -

I cannot fay: for various affetions,
And firangely iingled, in my bosom swell
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
I joy that thou art safe; and admire
Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety.
Obscure and friendless, he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, and with his fivord
To gain diftirfcion which his birth denied.
In this attempt unknown he might have perifh'd,
And gain'd with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtue' serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope
He flands conspicuous-; fanie and great renown
Are brought within the compass of his sword.
On this my mind reflected, whilfl you spoke,
And blefs'd the wonder-working Lord of heaven;

L'ord RANDOLPH.

Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts!
My deeds shall follow where thou point'ft theway.
Next to myself, and equal to GLENALVON,
In honour and command shall NORVAL be.

NORv'A,.

I know not how to thank you. Rude I am,
In speech and manners:- never till this hour
Stood I in such a presence:' yet, my lord,
There's something in my breaf which makes me bold
To fay, that'NORVAL ne'er will" hame thy favour.

Lady RANDOLPH.
I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou lhalt be

My

My knight; and eer, a thou didft to-day,
Withbappy valour glurd the life of RANDOLPHU

. . Lad RANIOLPH.

Well hatthou spoke.. et me forbid reply. [TO NORVAL.
We are thy debtors Aill; thy high desert
O'ertops ourgratitude. I must proceed,
As was at frit intended, to the camp.
Some of my train siee are speeding hither,
Impatient doub5efs, of their lord's delay.
Go witi'me, NORVAL, and thine eyes iball fee
Thechofenwarriours of thy native land,
Who languil for the fight, and beat the air,
With bnhdih'd swords.

NORiVAL.

Let us be gone, my lord.
Lord RANDOLPH.

[To Lad RANDOLPH.

About the time that the declining fun
Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills suspend,
Expet us to return. This night once more
Within these walls I reft; my tent I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepare the feast.
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
He in the eve of battle may resign
Himsef to social pleasure; sweetest then,
When danger to a soldier's foul endears
The human joy that never may return.

[Exit RANDOLPH nd NORVAL.

S C E- N E II.
Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lady RANDOLPH.

His parting words have struck a fatal truth.
O DoucGLAS DOUGLAS I tender was the time

When

When we two parted, ne'er to meet again!
How many yeats of anguish and despair
Has heaven annex'd to those swift palling hours
Of love and fondness! Then my bosom's flame
Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of fear,
Returned, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.

ARNA.

May gracious heav'n pouir the sweet balm of peace
Into the wounds that fester in your breast !
For earthly consolation cannot cure them.

Lady RANDOLPH.

One only cure can heav'n itself bellow;-
A grave-that Bed in which the weary reft.
Wretch that I am ! Alas i why am I so ?
At every happy parent I repine !
How blef the mother of yon gallant NORVAL !
She for a living husband bore her pains,
And heard him bless her when a man was born:
She nurs'd her finiling infant on her breat;
Tended the child, and rear'd the pleasing boy:
She, with affection's triumph, saw the youth
In grace and comeliness surpass his peers:
Whilst I to a dead husband bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.

ANNA.

Alas ! alas ! why will you thus resume
Your grief afresh ? I thought that gallant youth
Would for a while have won you from your woe.
On him intent you.gazed, with a look
Much more delighted, than your pensive eye
Has deign'd on other objects to befow.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Delighted fay'ft thou ? Oh ! even there mine eye

C Found

Found fuel for my life-h~fiming forow;
I thought, that had the ftE of DOUGLAS liv'd,
He might hve been like this young gallant tranger,
And pair'd with him in featurc and in fiape,
In all cdoweuts, a. in. years, I deen,
My boy with bhooing NOVAL might have number'd.
WhilR thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondnefi
For thls young stager, wandring from his home,
And like an orphan cast upon my care.
I will proted thee, (said I to *iyfelf)
With all my power, .and grace with all my favour.

AtWA.

Sure heav'n will bles so gen'rous a resolve.
You mud, my noble dame, exert your power r
You mufl awake: devices will be fram'd, '
And arrowspomtd at the breaf of NORVAL.

Lady RANBOLPH,

GLENALVON'S falfc and crafty bead will work
Against a rival in his kinfaan's love,
If I deter him not: I only can.
Bold as he is, GL.NALVON will beware
How he pulls down the fabric that I raise.
I'll be the artist of young NORVAL'S fortune.
`Tis pleasing to admire! molt apt was I
To this affeation in my better days;
Though now I seem to you firutnk up, retiret
Within the naarow compafC of my woe.
Have you not f6etimes seen an early iower
Open it's bud, and fi-read it's ilken leaes,
To catch fwet airs, and odours to befow ;
Then, by the keen blat nipt, pdul in it's laves,
And, tho' still living, die to kent and beauty ?

i Em.

Embiem of me: aftlition, 'ite a storm,
Hath kill'd the bfrward blossom of my heart. -

?ntrr GLEWALYON.

GiENALVON.
Where is my Aeareft kinfnman, noble RANDOLPH t

Lady RANDOLPH,
Have you not heard^ GLiMA.LNN, of the bale-_'

GLEUALVON.

I have: and that the villains may not 'frFpi
With a ftropg band I have begirt the wooJ.
If they lurk thW., ai. e abm y Ihail b taken,
And torture force frow tbemi th' impontat secret~
Whether fBwe ,fe of RA^DOLPH hi'd .their swords
Or if--

Lady RANDOLPM.

that care becomes a kinsman's love.
I hart a ,coufel for GriENALVON'S ear. [Ji4 AtTA.

iGi[LfNALVON. '
To him your counsels always arm conrinds.

Lady RANDOLrI.
t have not found so: thou art known to-me.

GLENALVON
Known!

Lady RANDOI.tP.
And moft.certain is my cause of knowledgce

GLEIALYVOQ;

What do you kdow i By the most blelffd cross,
'You much amlze me. No cleted thio
Yourself except, durst thus accost GLENALVON?

Lady RANDOLPH,

Is guilt so bold ? and dost thou make a merit
Of thy pretended meekness ? This to me,
Wh4t wish a gentleness which duty blames)
Iave hitherto conceal'd what, if divulg'd,
Would make thee nothing; or, what's worse than that,

C a An

An outcast begg, and unpitietd :
For mortals ihudder at a crimeitne .
t.w.

GLeNALt,Ow.

Thy virtue awes me. FirR of womankind!
Permit me yet to fay, that the fond .man
Whom love transports beyond si& virtiue's-bounds,
If he is brought by love to mifry, '
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpitied cannot be. Pity's the alms
Which on such beggrs freely is beftowd:
For mortals know that love is ffill their lord,
And o'er their vain resolve advances tHI:
As fire, when kiindld by our ihepberds; moves
Thbo' the dry heatbbefore thefanning wind.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Reserve there accents for some other car.
To love's apolgy:I iLft not.
Maki tbou my words; for it is meet thou ilbould't.
His brave deliverer RANDOLP'there retains.
Perhaps his pe(feace may not please thee well:
But, at thy peril, pa'aife ought againR him:

et not thyjealofy attempt to shake
And loosen the good root he has in RANDOLPH i
Whose favourites I know thou half supplanted.
Thou look'ft at me as if thou fain would'st pry
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The frindlefs franger my protetrfon claims:
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit.

SCENE

'S C E N E II.

Mantt GLENALVON.

Child that I was; to flart at my own ihadow,
And be the /hallow fool of coward conscience !
I am not what I have been; what I should be.
The darts of deltiny have almost pierc'd
My marble heart. Had I one,grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I lhould conclude there was an arm above
That fought against me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch myself, the subtle snare I set.
Why, rape and murder are not simple means !
Th' imperfec rape to RANDOLPH gave a spouse;
And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fun from me;
And worfi of all, a rival. Burning hell!
This were thy center, if I thought ihe loved him !
'Tis certain {he contemns me; nay commands me,
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'er me,
In his behalf. And {hall I thus be brav'd ?
Curb'd, as ihe calls it, by dame chastity
Infernal fiends, if any fiends there are
More fierce than love, ambition, and revenge,
Rife up and fill my bosom with your fires
And policy remorseless ! Chance may spoil
A single aim; but perseverance must
Prosper at las. For chance and fate are words:
Perfiftive wiliom is the fate of man.
Darkly a projea peers upon my mind,
like the red moon when rising in the east,

C 3 Crofs'd

ill seek the nave who came with NORVAL hither,
And for his cowardice was fpumed from him.
I've known &udi folloiers ,fnklId bfobmreed
Venom most fatal to hi; heedless lod. [Exit.

ds Of tu SzC6WD AdT.

A c T

# ACT III. SCENE I.

AC T III. SCENE I.

A Court, &c. as before.

Enter ANNA.

ANNA.
T HY vassals, Grief! great nature's order break,

And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour.

Whilst Lady RANDOLPH leeps, I will walk forth,
And taRe the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers be! Ye miniiters
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,
Angels and seraphs who delight in goodnes !
Forsake your ikies, and to her couch descend !
There from her fancy chafe those dismal forms
That haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
With images celestial, fucb as please
The blef above upon their golden beds.

Enter SERVANT.

SEERVANT.

One of the vile assassins is fccur'd.
We found the villain lurking in the wood:
With dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not
His sirs essay: these jewels were conceal'd
In the most secret places of his garment
Belike the spoils of some that he has murder'd.

ANNA,

Let me look on them. Ha . here is a heart,
The chosen crest of DOUGLAS' valiant name

C 4 Theft

Thee re no vulgarjewels. Guard the wretch.

[E xit ANNA.
Entarftrants wuisb a prio/nwr.

' PRIBO.NEl.' :

I k no o more than does the child unborn
Of what you charge me with.

Sirs SERVANT.

You fay so, fir !

But torture soon Mball make you speak the truth.
Behold the Lady of Lord RANDOLPH tomes:
Prepare youfelf to meet her just revenge.

SCENE II.
E Ir Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

ANNA.

Summon your utmost fortitude, before
You speak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
Are now at stake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may ly.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thou shalt behold me, with a desperate heart,
Hear how my infant perifh'd. See he kneels.

[The prionwr Ane4sh,

PRISONER.

Heav'n bless that countenance so sweet and mild !
A judge like thee makes innocence more bold.
0 save me lady! from thefecruel men,
Who have attack'd and seiz'd me; who accuse
Me of intended murder. As 1 hope
For mercy at the judgment feat of God,
The tenderlamb, that never nipt the grass,
I not more innocent than I of murder.

I J -Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.
Of this man's guilt what proof can ye produce?

First SERvArr.

We found him lurking in the hobfow Glynn.
When view'd and called upon, amaz'd be fed.
We overtook him, and enqiiir'd from whence
And what he was: he said he came from far,
And was upon his journey td the camp.
Not satisfied with this we searched his cloaths,
And found these jewels, whose rich value plead
Most powerfully againfitim. Hard he eems
And old in villainy. Permit us try
His stubbornness against the t6rture's force.

PRISONER.

O gentle lady ! by your lord's dear life !
Which these weak hands, I swear, did ne'er assail;
And by your childrens welfare, spare my age!
Let not the iron tear my ancient joints,
And my grey hairs bring to the grave with pain.

Lady RANDOLPI.

Account for these: thine own they cannot be:
For these, I fay be fledfaft to the truth;
Deteted fallhood is most certain death.

[ANNA removes tfefery nts ad return*.

PRISONER.

Alas! I'm fore beset ! let never man,
For fake of lucre, fin against his foul!
Eternal juflice is in this most jufi !
I, guiltless now, muf former guilt reveal.

Lady RANDOLPH.

O ! ANNA hear !-once more I charge thee speak
The truth direc: for these to me foretell
And certify a part of thy narration;
With which if the remainder tallies not,
An initant and a dreadful death abides thee.

PRI-

Then, 'thubsdjur'd, I'll fpak to yo i jut
As if you were the miier of heaven,
Sent down to fenach the secret fins of men.

Some eighteen years ago, I rented land

Of brave Sir MALCOLM, then BALARMO'S lord;
But falling to decay, hi servants seiz'd
All that I bad, and then turned me and mine,
(Four helpe infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A littlehovel by the river's fide
Received us: there bard labour, and the (kill
In fdhing, which wa formerly my sport,
Supported life. Wbillt thus we poorly liv'd,
One stormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down, and loud and oft
The angry spirit of the water ifieck'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
Of one in jeopardy. I role, and ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool
Beneath tie ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach whatever floating thing the fiream
Had caught. 'The voice was ceas'd; the perCon loft:
'ut looking fad and earnft on the waters,
By the moon's light I saw, whiri'd round and round,
A baiet: soon I drew it to the bank,
And neiled curious there an infant lay.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Was he alive ?

PkISONER.

He was.
Lady RANDOLPH.

Inhuman that thou art!
How couldt thou kill what waves and tempPfts spared ?

PRI-

PB&SOE34.
[ am not rs Inutt *.

.Lady RAt4DOLi.
pidft thou not?

ANNA.

My noble mitrreCs, you are pioy'd too much:
This man has not the afpe& of flern murder
Let him go on, and you I hope will hear
Good tidings of your kinsman's long los child,

Patsolnx,

The needy man, who has known better da}t,
One whom diftrs has spited at the world,
Is he whom tempting iends would pitch upon
To do such deeds, as makes the prosperous men
Lift up their hamds and wonder who could do tkea,
And such a mtn was I a man declin'd,
Who Aw no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdora,- I would not
Have touched that infant with a hand of harm.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Ha! dof thou fay so ? Then perhaps he lives I

PasowNi.
Not, many days ago he was alive.

Lady RANDOL'H.
0 ! God of heav'n ! Did he then die so lately?

PRISxONE.

I did not fay he died; I hope he lives.
Not many days ago these eyes beheld
Him, flouriihing in youth, and health, and beauty.

Lady RANDOI.PB.
Where is he now?

PRISONtR.

Alas! I know not where.

Lady

Oh fate ! I ser thee still. Thoiu ddr, .fpek
i-rea and cdear; dl Iwill search tc y foul.

- AvuA.

Permit me, ever honour'd! KIeen impatience,
Tho' hard to be reftan'd, defats itself.-
Pursue thy Aij with a faithful tongue,
To th last hour that thou didt keepthe- child.

PISONIR.

Fear not my faith, tho' I must speak my lhame.
Within the cradle where the infant lay,
Was ftowd amighty store of gold and jewels;
Tempted by wich we did resolve to hide,.
From all the world, this wonderful event,
And like a peasant breed the noble child.
That none might mark the change of our etate,
We left the country, travll'd to the north;
Bought flocks and herds, and gradually brought fofth
Our fecrct wealth. But God's all-feing eye
Beheld our avarice, and smote us fore.
For one by one all our own children died,
And he, the frabger, sole remain'd the heir
Of what indeed was his. Fain then would I,
Who with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
Have trusted him, now in the dawn of youth,
With his own secret: but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never would consent.
Mean while the Rripling grew in years and beauty;
And, as we oft obferv'd, he bore himself,
Not as the offspring of our cottage blood;
For nature will break out: mild with the mild,
But with the froward he was fierce as fire,
And night and daybe talk'd of war and arms.
I set myfelfagainft bis warlike bent;
But all in vain: for when a defpCrate band
Of robber fro th. fivagc. mountains came--

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.-
Eternal Providence ! What is thy name ?

PRISONER.
My name is NORVAL; and my name ie bears.

Lady RANDOLPH.

'Tis he; 'tis he himself! It is my son!
0 sovereign mercy! 'Twas my child 1 saw!
No wonder, ANNA;, that my bosom burn'd.

ANNA.

Jus are your transports: ne'er was woman's heart
Prov'd with such fierce extremes. High fated dame!
But yet remember that you are beheld
By servile eyes; your gestures may befeen
Impaffion'd, firange; perhaps your words o'erheard.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Well dost thou coonsel, ANNA: Heav'n bestow
On me that wisdom which my state requires!

ANNA.

The moments of deliberation pass,
And soon you mufa resolve. This useful man
MufR be difmils'd with safety, ere my lord
Shall with his brave deliverer return.

PRISONER.

If I, amidf aftonilhment and fear,
Have of your words and gestures rightly judg'd,
Thou art the daughter of my ancient master;
The child I refu'd from the flood is thine.

Lady RANDOLPH.

With thee diffimulution now were vain.
I am indeed the daughter of Sir MALCOLM;
The child thou refcu'dft from the flood is mine.

PRISONER.

Blef be the hour that made me a poor man!
My poverty hath fav'd my mater's house !

Lady

Thy words furprize me: sure t4ou dost not feign
The tear ands in thine eye: such Jove from thee
Sir MALCOLM's houfc dcferv'd not; if aright
Thou told't the s7o of thy own distress.

Sir MALCOLM of .ur hao wa dh lowrui;
The faefte friend, the bel and kindest mafier.
But ah I he knew. ot of my fd eftae.
After that battle, where his gan t son,
Your own brave broher, fel, the good old lord
Grew defperataod mecklefs of the world;
And jam, Ii~ wat wor no t went forih
To overlook the coodu& of hi feryapts.
By them was thruff out, and them I blame;
May hcav'n bojjud, me as I jd' md my .rter
And God so love me as I love his race!

Lady rAwPew .

His race fb yet eard thee. On thy faith
Depends the fate es Bhy lov'd nam bo' hoof.
Rememh'reft thou a ittle lonely hut,
That like a holy hermisie appWs
Among the clifts of Car*nd i

~;I s01~11,

' PRISOW1tR.

I remember
The cottage of the clits.

Lady lRNDOtP.tt

'TTis that I mea

There dwl-a mao *f cwrgtble age,
Who in my father's service fpson his youth:
Tell him I ent thee. and with him rcmain,
'Till I shall call upon thee to dclare,
Before the king and nobles, what thou now

To

To me haft told. No more butthis, and thou
Shalt live in honour all thy future days
Thy son so long flall call thee father fill,
And all the land hall ble& the man, who fav'd
The son of DOUGLAS, and Sir MALCOLM'S heir.
Remember well my words: if thou liouldf meet
Him whom thou call'ft thy son, fill call him so;
And mention nothing of his nobler father.

PaIsoNeR.

Fear not that I shall mar so fair an barveff,
By putting in my fickle ere 'tis ripe.
Why did I leave my home and ancient dame ?
To find the youth, to tell him all I knew,
And make him wear there jewels in his arms;
Which might, I thought, be challeng'd, and so bring
To light the secret of his noble birth.

[Lady RANDOLPH goes towards the Srttnls.

Lady RANDOLPH.

This man is not th' afaflin you fufpefed,
Tho' chance combin'd some likelihoods against him.
He is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To their right owner, whom in hafe he seeks.
'Tis meet that you should put him on his way,
Since your mistaken zeal hath dragg'd him hither.

[Exeunt Stranger and Ssrvatl,

SCENE III.
Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lady RANDOLPH.

My faithful ANNA ! dost thou (hare my joy ?
I know tou dot. Unparallel'd event!
Reaching from heav'n to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings to me my son
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father!

Accept

A"cept a widoi'a and i mother's thanks .
For such a gift! What does my ANNA think
Of the young eaglet of a valiant net ?
How soon he gaz'd on.bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his fate had thrown him,
And tower'd up to the region of his fire ?

ANNA.

How fondly did your eyes devour the boy.!
Mysterious nature, with the unseen cord
Of powerful inftinf, drew you to your own.

Lady RANDOLPH.

The ready story of his birth believ'd
Suppreft my fancy quite; nor did he owe
To any likeness my so sudden favour:
But now I long to fee his face again,
Examine-every feature, and find out
The lineaments of DOUGLAS, or my own.
But most of all, I long to let him know
Who his true parents are, to clasp his neck,
And tell him all the f/ory of his father.

ANNA.

With wary caution you must bear yourself
In public, left your tenderness break forth,
And in observers fir conjectures frange.
For, if a cherub in the shape of woman
Should walk this world, yet defamation would,
Like a vile cur, bark at the angel's train-
To-day the baron ltarted at your tears.

Lady RANDOLPH.

He did so, ANNA f well thy mifirefs knows,
If the leat circumstance, mote of offeice,
Should touch the baron's eye, his fight would be
VWith jealousy diforder'd. But the more
It does behove me instant to declare
The birth of DOUGLAS, and aflert his rights.

This

This ni&4 I u c wit 9yn? '

to stS

Reveal the fecret.Ap.4 Cqnitvj4 4Wi-
For wife he is, or my psod jd4gmnt errs.
As he does n9W5 1Q Apd t4 Jiohic fp he r
Array'd in Aahro 9 ;; Wen his bifgh.s
Were sweetly simple, and full oft deceiv d
Those trivial mortals who seem always wife.
But, when the matter matched his mighty mifd,
Up rose the Her9: on his piercing eye
Sat Observation; on each glance of tlought
Decision follow'd, as the ;hunder-bolt
Pursues the flafih.

ANNE.

That demcn haunts you Rill:
Behold GLENALVON.

Lady g^ApoLPR.

Now I hun him not,

This day I brav'd him in behalf of NORvAL:
Perhaps too far: at least my njcer fears
For DOUGLAs thus interpret.

Enter GLENALVON.

.GLENALVON.

Noble Dame !

The hov'ring Dane at las his men bath landed:
No band of pirates; but a mighty hot,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers:
To win a country, or to lose themselves.

Lady RANDOLPH.
But whence comes this intelligence, GPENALVON ?

GLENALVON.

A nimble courier feat from yonder camp,
To haften up the chieftains of the north,
Inform'd me, as he pass'd, that the fierce Dane
Had on the Eatern coaf of Lothian landed,

D Near

Near to that pei wher the feiarock immense,
Amazing Bahi, rl61s oier afillanid.

Lady RANN^isi.

Then must this weltern rimy march tojoin
The warlike troops that ggi Edena's tow'rs.

GLENtAVON.

Beyond all quefion. If impairing time
Has not effac'd the image of a place,
Once perfet in my breast there is a wild
Which lies to westward of that mighty rock.
And seems by nature formed for the camp
Of water-wafted armies, whose chief strength
Lies in irm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse:
If martial ikill directs'the Danish lords,
There inaccessible their army lies
To our fwift-fcowring'horfe, the bloody field
Must man to man, and foot to foot, be fought.

Lady RANDOLPH.

How many mothers hall bewiil'their sons!
How many widows weep their huibands slain .
Ye dames of Denmark,! ev'n for you I feel,
Who, sadly fitting on the fea-beat boore,
Long look for lords that never iall return.

GLENALVON.

Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian sword
Widow'd the north. The children of the slain
Come, as I hope, to meet their fathers' fate.
The monser war, with her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are objets suited to GLENALVON'S foul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death;
Reproach, more piercing than the pointed sword.

Lady RANDOLPH.
I (corn thee not, out when I ought to scorn;

N or

Nor e'er reproach, hut whn'ifulteid virtue
Against audaious vice users berfe.
1 own thy worth, GLENALVON ; none nmre apt
Than I to praise thine eminence in arms,
And be the echo of thy martial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guiltypaffion:
Go and purfie a lawful miftrefh, Glory.
Upon the Danish crests redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the shield of RANDOLPH.

QLENALVON.

One instant stay, and hear an alter'd man.
When beauty pleads for virtue; vice abafh'd
Flies its own colpdrs, and goes o'er to virtue.
I am your convert; time will shew how truly:
Yet one immediate proof I mean to give.
That youth for whom your ardent zeal to-day,
Somewhat too haughtily, defy'd your slave,
Amidst the flock of armies I'll defend,
And turn death from him, with a guardian arm.
Sedate by u'se, my bosom maddens not
At the tumultuous uproar of the field.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Aa thus, GLENALVON, and I am thy friend:
But that's thy least reward. Believe me, Sir,
The truly generous is the truly wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblest.

[Exit Lady RANDOLPH.

GLENALVON fTlus.

Amen ! and virtue is its own reward !
I think that I have hit the very tone
In which she loves to speak. Honey'd assent,
How pleasing art thou to the taste of man,
And woman also ! flattery direc
RarelX disgusts. They little know mankind
Who doubt its operation: 'tis my key,

D 2 And

How far I have iucceeded now, I know not.
Yet I incline to think her srorny virtue
Is luli'd awhile: 'tis her alone I fear:
VWhilft she and RNDOLPH live, and live in faith
And amitr, uncertain is my tenure.
Fate o'er my he:d suspends disgrace and death,
By ,at weak- hair, a peevish female's will.
I am not idle: but the ebbs and flows
Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated.
That slave of NoRVAL's I have found most apt:
I shew'd hims gold, and he has pawn'd his foul
To fay and swear whatever I suggest.
NORVAL, I'm told, has that alluring look,
'Twixt man and woman, which I have obferv'd
To charm the nicer and fantaftick dames,
Who are, like Lady RANDOLPH, full of virtue.
In railing RANDOLPH'S jealousy I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom errs
Who thinks the worst he can of womankind.

T' E'':d of
, ie THIRD ACT.

ACT

# ACT IV. SCENE I.

ACT IV. SC NE N E

Flouril of tru7pets.
.nter Lord RANDOLPH attended.

Lord RANDOLPH.

SUmmon an hundred horse, by break of day,
S; To wait our pleasure at the castle gate.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Alas! my lord ! I've- heard unwelcome news;
The Danes are landed.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Ay, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament essay,
Of some young knight resolved to break a spear,
And Rain with hostile blood his maiden arms.
The Danes are landed : we must beat them back,
Or live the slaves of Denmark.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Dreadful times!

Lord RANDOLPH,

The feiitdlefs villages are all forsaken
The trembling rmothers, and their children lodg'd
In well-girt towers and castles; whilst the men

t) $ Retire

Retire indignant. Yet like broken waves,
They but retire more-awOf t reu.rn. *- ..-

Lidy RA? . :
Immente, as fame reports, the Daniih host!

Lord RANDOLPH.,

Were it as numerous as load fame reports,
An army knit like ours wou'd pierce it tbro':
Brothers, that ihrink not from each other's fide,
And fond companions, fil our warlike files:
For his dear offspring, and the wife he loves,
The bulband, and the fearless father arm.
In vulgar breasts heroic ardour burs,
And the poor peasant mates his daring lord.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Men's minds are temperad, like their swords, for war;
Lovers of danger, on defrut'ion's brink
They joy to rear eret their daring forms.
Hence, early graves; hence the lone widow's life;
And the fad motber's grief-emnbtter'd age.
Where is our gallant guest ?

Lord RANDOLPH.

Down in the vale

I left him, managing a fiery feed,
Whose fiubbornnefs had foil'd the ftength and fiill
Of every rider. But behold he comes,
In earnest conversation with GLENALVON.

Enter NORVAL and GLENALVON.

GLENALVON ! with the larkLarife;,go forth,
And lead my troops that lye in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
NOBVAL, thou gocft with me. But fay, young man I
Where did uthou learn so to discourse of war, .
And in such terms, as I o'ezrrd tp-day -
War is no village science, 4or its phrase
... - A

A language taught amongt the shepherd swains.

. NOIVAL.

Small is the skill my, lorddelights to prii.
In him he favours.-Hear from whence it came
Beneath.a mountain's brows the most remotte
And inaccefible by thepherds trod.
In a deep cave, dug by na mortal band ..
A hermit liv'd; a melanchaly man
Who was the wonder of our wind'ring swains;
AufRere and lonely, cruel. to himfclf, :
Did they report him.;, thecold earth his bed,
Water his drink, his food the shepherd's alms. ..
I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
With reverence and pity. Mild he spake,
And, entring on difcour', fuchi ftoiies told
As mad e me oft revisit his fad cell.
For he had been a foldiert i.his youtii;
And fought in famous'battles, when the peers
Of Europe, by the bold GbOFREDo led,
Againi h' ufiirping Infidel difplay'd
The cross of Christ, and won the Holy Laujd:
Pleas'd with my admiration;. and the fire
His speech firuck from me, the old man 'wou'd fiake
His years away, and ai6 his young encounters:
Then, having ffiew'd his wounds, he'd :ti him down,
And all the live-tong day difcourfe-of war.
To help ny fancy, in the smooth green turf
He cut the figures of the mrihal'd hosts;
Defcrib'd the motions, and explaihed the use .
Of the deep column, .and the'lengthen'd line,
The square,. the crescent, and- the phalanx firm.
For all that Saracen or Chriffian knew. .
Of war's vast art, was to this hermit known.

Lord..RAtDOLP h.. '.'

:
Why did this fdldier in a defart hide....

D 4 Those

Those qualities, that hnoIld have grac'd a camp?

NoRVAL.

That too at ht I learn'd. Unhappy mah !
Returning hoevwards by Meffiin's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boift'rous captain of the sea
Fafeen'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought:
The fr;anger fell, and with his dying brethi
Declar'd his name and lineage. Mighty God !
The soldier cried, my brother! Oh ! my brother I

Lady RANDOLPH.
His brother !

NORVAL.

Yes; of the fame parents born;
-is only brother. They exchang'd forgiveness:
And haFpy, in my mind, was he that died:
For many deaths has the survivor fuffer'd.
In the wild defart on a rock he fits,
Or on some riamelefs stream's untrodden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times alas ! not in his perfec mind !
Holds dialogues with his lov'd brother's ghost;
And oft each night forsakes his fullen couch,
To make fad orisons for him he flew.

Lady RANDOLPH.

To what mysterious woes are mortals born!
In this dire tragedy were there no more
Unhappy persons ? Did the parents live ?

NORVAL.

No; they were dead: kind heav'n had clos'd their eyes
Before their for had shed his brother's blood.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Hard is his fate; for he was not to blame !
There is a dertiny in this firange world,

Which

Which oft decrees an Untdererved dooii:
Let fchoolmen tell is Why-.Froet whence these fouitds ?

[ ,Ufipetsa at a diane.
Enter an OFFICER.

OFFICER.

My Lord, the trumpets of the troops of Lorn:
Their valiant leader:hails the noble RANDOLPIF.

Lord RANbOLPi.

Mine ancient guefl ! does he the warriors lead
Has Denmark rous'd the brave old knight to arms ?

OFFICER.

No; worn with warfare, he refigis the sword.
His eldest hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord RANDOLPH.

GLENALVON, go.

With hospitality's moR strong request
Entreat the chief,

[Exit GLENALVONS

OFFICER.

My lord, requests are vain.

He urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foe's approach.

Lord RANDOLP'H.

May vitory fit on the warriour's plutne !
Bravest of (neh i his flocks and herds are safe;
Rem6te from war's alarms his pastures lye,
By mountains inaccessible fecur'd:
Yet foremost he into the plain -descends,
Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the ancient world: -
Contemners they of indolence and gain ;
But still for love of glory and of arms,

~~~~2 ~~~. ·Prone

Prone to encounter peril, and to lift
Against each {Irong anrtagonit the spear
i'li go and press the hero to my breaf.

[Exit RANDOLPH;
.ia:.:i Lady RANDOLPH and NORVAL.

Lady RANDOLPH. .

The soldier's loftiness, the pride and pomp
in-tin r

.:i a-wful war, NORVAL, Ifee,
T-a.n.- : thv youthful mind.

N ORVAL......
Ah ! fnould they not ?

2IE-: b- the hour I left my father's house'!
I might have been a ihepherd all my days,
And fo!e obscurely to a peasant's grave.
Nov., if I live, with mighty chiefs I tand;
And. if I fall, with noble dust I lye.

Lady RANDOLPH..

There is a gen'rous spirit in thy breast,.
Thaz could have well ifuIain'd a prouder fortune.
This vway With rnm; under yon spreading beech,
UTn.een, unheard, by human eye or ear,
I will amaze thee with a wond'rous tale.

N ORVAL.

Let there be danger, lady, with the secret,
That I may hug it-to my grateful heart,
And prove my faith. Command my sword, my life :-
These are thefole pofreffions of poor NORVAL.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Kno ;w'i t th hefe gems ?

NORPVAL.
Durr I believe mine eyes
Id .-,y I ;:.ne them, and they were my father's

Lady RANDOLPH..
Thy father's fay t thou ! ah ! they, erre thy father's"!

2 NORVAL

NORVAL.

I saw them once, and curiously enquir'd
Of both my parents, whence such fplendor.came
But I was check'd, and more could never learn.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Then learn of me, thou art not NORVAL'S son.

NORVALe:
Not NORVAL'S son!

Lady RANDOLPH.

Nor of a shepherd fprungi
NORVAL.
Lady, who am I then ?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Noble thou art
For noble was.thy fire !

NORVAL.
I will believe---
O ! tell me farther! Say, who was my father?

. Lady RANDOLPH,
DOUGLAS!

NORVAL.
Lord DOUGLAS, whom-to day I saw? .

Lady RANDOLPH.
His yoinger brother.

NORVAL.

And in yonder camp ?
Lady RANDOLPH.
Alas!

NORVAL. -

You make me tremble-Sighs and tears.!.
'Lives my brave father ?

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.
Ah ! too brave indeed!
He fell in battle ere thyfeif was born.

NORVAL.

Ah me unhappy ! ere I saw the light ?
But does m. mother live ? I may coriclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been sorrow,

Lady RANDOLPH.

She lives ; but wases her life in coftlant woe,
Weeping her husband slain, her infant loft.

NO'CVAL.

You that are fil:i'd so well in the fad ftort
Of my unhappy pirents, and with tears
Bewail their dfliny, now have compaflion
Upon the ofspring of the friends you lor'd,
O ! tell me who, and where my mother is!
Opprefs'd by a base world, perhaps she bends
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief;
And desolate, implores of heav'n, the aid
Her son faould give. It is, it must be so -
Your countenance confefies that she's wretched.
0 ! tell me her condition ! Can the sword
W1ho fali resist r-e in a parent's cause?-

Lady RANDOLPH,

Thy virtue ends her woe !-My ton ! my fan !
I am thy mother, and the wife of DOUGLAS !

[Falls upon his neck.

NORVAL.

O heav'n and earth, how wond'rous is my fate!
Art thou mny mother ? Ever let me kneel !

-Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Image of DOUGLAS I Fruit of fatal love !
All that I owe thy fire I pay to thee,

NOR VA,.

Refpet and admiration till possess me,
Checking the love and fondness of a son.
Yet I was filial to my humble parents.
But did my fire surpass the reft of men,
As thou excelleft all of womankind I

Lady RANDOLPH.

Arise, my son! In me thou doff behold
The poor remains of beauty once admir'd:
The autumn of my days is come already;
For sorrow made my summer haste away.
Yet in my prime I equall'd not thy father:
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet sometimes
Liker the dove's; and, as he pleas'd, he won
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

NORVAL.

How did he fall ? Sure 'twas a bloody field
When DOUGLAS died. 0 I have much to ak !

-Lady RANDOLPH.

Hereafter thou ihalt hear the lengthen'd tale
Of all thy father's and thy mothej's woes.
At present this: Thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder caffle, and the wide domains
Which now Lord RANDOLPH, as my husband, holds.
But thou shalt not be wrong'd ;. I have the power
To right thee till.: Before the king I'll kneel,
And call Lord DOUGLAS to proteEt his blood.

NORVAL.
The blood of DOUGLAS will proteA itself.

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

But we fiall need both friends and favour, boy,
To wrefr thy lands and lordship from the gripe
Of RANDiPHzi and his kinsman. Yet I think
iMyv tile wrill move each gentle heart to pity,
Mv life incline the virtuous to believe.

NORVAL.

To be the tfon of DOUGLAS is to me
Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in the feld I'll seek for fame and fortune.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thou do{l not know what perils and inju{tice
Await the poor man's valour. 0 ! my son!
The noblest blood in all the land's abafh'd,
Having no lacquey but pale poverty.
Too long ha5 thou been thus attended, DOUGLAS.!
Too long haft thou been deem'd a peasant's child.
The wanton heir of some inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in the youthful sports;

nhilft hny indignant Spirit fwell'd in vain !

Such contumely thou no more ihalt bear:
But how I purpose to redress thy wrongs
MuR be hereafter told. Prudence direts
Th-t we hnould part before yon chiefs return.
Retire, and from thy ruftick follower's hand
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, ditated before,
This casual opportunity arose
Of private conference. Its purport rark;
For as I there appoint we meet again.
Leave me, my son ! and frame thy manners till
To NORVAL'S, not to noble DOUGLAS' slate.

NORVAL.

I will remember. Where is NORVAL now ?
That good old man,

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

At hand conceal'd he lies,

An useful witness. But beware, my son,
Of yon GLENALVON; in his guilty breast
Reildes a villain's shrewdness, ever prone
To false conjecture. He hath griev'd my heart.

NORVAL.

Has he indeed ? Then let yon false GLENALVON
Beware of me.

[Exit -DOUGLAS.

Manet Lady RANDOLPH.

There burst the fmother'd flame !

0 ! thou all righteous and eternal King !
Who father of the fatherless art call'd,
Protet my son ! - Thy inspiration, Lord!
Hath fill'd his bofom'with that sacred fire,
Which in the breasts of his forefathers burn'd':
Set him on high like them, that he may Ihine
The star-and glory of his native land !
Then let the minister of death descend,
And bear my willing spirit to its place.
Yonder they come. How do bad women find
Unchanging aspe&s to conceal their guilt
When I by reason, and by justice urg'd,
Full hardly can dissemble with these men
In nature's piops cause.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Yon gallant chief,
Of arms enamour'd, all repose disclaims.

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Be not: my Lord, by his example fway'd:
Arrange the bufin-es of to-morrow now,
And, when you enter, speak of war no more.

[Exit Lady RANDOQIPH,
Mlss;r;. Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.

Lord RANDOLpH.

'Tis so, by heav'n ! her mien, her voice, her eye,
And her inmptience to be gone, confirm it.

GLENALVON.

He parted from her now: Behind the mount,
Amongst the trees, I faZw him glide along.

Lord RANDOLPH.
For fad fecuefter'd virtue {he's renown'd!

GLENALVON.
iMoO true, my Lord.

Lord RANDOLPH,

Yet this diftinguifl'd dame

Inv,: s a youth, the acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This aisn:tion, (f;,'s a ltter) the assassin freed,
Her arn-ifef aeclieon for the youth,
l:iicht breed fifpicion in a hufoand's brain,
W hose gentle coniort all for love had wedded:
MBiuch more in mine. MAXTILDA never lov'd me.
Let no man, -fter me, a woman wed,

mWhofe heart he knows he has not; tho' she brings

A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry.
For let her seer, like the night's shadowy queen,
Cold and contempative ;-He cannot trut her:
She may,: Ge wili, bring ihame and sorrow on him
The worf of sorrow, and the worf of shames!

GLENALVON.

GLENALVON.

Yield-not, my Lord, to such affliiing thoughts;
But let the spirit of an husband sleep,
'Till your own senses make a sure conclusion.
This billet must to blooming NORVAL go:
At the next turn awaits my trusty spy;
I'll give it him refitted for his master.
In the close thicket take your secret iand;
The moon fines bright, and your own eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

Lord RANDOLPH.
Thou dolt counsel well.

GLENALVON.

Permit me now to make one flight essay.
Of all the trophies which vain mortals boast,
By wit, by valour, or by wisdom won,
The first and fairest, in a young man's eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Successful love
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind;
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Lord RANDOLPH.
And what avails this maxim?

GLENALVON.

Much, my Lord!

Withdraw a little: I'll accost young NORVAL,
And with ironical derisive counsel
Explore his spirit. If he is no more
Than humble NORVAL, by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as he is, he'll shrink aftonifh'd from me:
But if he be the favourite of the fair,
Lov'd by the first of Caledonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.

Lord RANDOLPH.

'Tis shrewdly thought.

E GtE-

Wheo w p* ir , i mnw. 'i. let my Lord
His rising wrath uakin. : ..

[Br RawpOLPz.
Jlawt GLUNALvQH,

Tis stage, b hybe'n 1'

That Ihe qfiuld sun fll tilt her~t iar r,
To on so little kno. She too that fman'd
Pure as the winter fream, when ice embofs*d
Whitens its course. Ew. I did think her chaste,
Whose charity cccd not, Prqcios sex !
Whose deeds lafciviQoU pas GLaWALVON'S thoughts!

[NoavA.L appats.

His port I lo.C; hW' in4 a pcor qI
To chide the thunder, if a him it Im'd.
Has Nov4.L fee the tops ?

N-ORVAL.

The setting fun,

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale,
And as the warriours mov'd, each polilh'd helm,
Corflet, or spear, glanced back his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at its top,
Of more than mortal fie, tow'ring, they feem'd
An host angeic, clad in burning arms.

GLENALVON.

Thou talk'ft it well; no leader of our hot
In founds more lofty speaks of glorious war.

NoRtVAtL.

If I shall e'er acquire a leader's name,
My speech will be.lefs ardent. 'Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and yeuthfil aniration
Vents itself freely ; since no part is mine
Of praise, pertaiing to the great in arms.

GLE-

GL.EtALVON.

You wrong yourself, brave Sir; your martial deeds
Have rank'd you witthe g: .ibut mark me, NORVAL;
Lord RANDOH'Wf fsvout nowrt alts yqur youth
Above his vetmans fa sms tf.ic.
Let me, whs- kIts: to folarw,1 ceuhiel you.
Give themaUl honow; fee- no tQ eonmamnd
Else they will scarcely brook yquf late ipmng poir,
Which nor alliance pros, uor birth adorns.

- NORVAL.

Sir, I have been accudom'd all my days
To hear and speak the plain and simple truth:
And though I have been told, that there are mnt
Who borrow friendflip's tongue to speak their scorn,
Yet in such language I am littld kill'd.
Therefore I thank GLENALVON for his counsel,
Although it founded, harflily. Why remind
Me of my birth obscure . Why slur my power
With feh eentemptuous terms ?

GLENALVON.

I did not mean
To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

NOgYAL.
My pride !

GLENALVON.

Suppress it as you wiflh to prosper,

Your pride's exceflsve. Yet for RANDOLPH'S fake
I will not leave you to its rash direction.
If thus you swell, and frown at high-born men,
Will highrhorn men endure a hepherd's fcon ?

E 2 NORVAL.

NOQVAL.
A lheperd's scorn !

GLENALVON.
Yesa if you preume

To bend on soldiers there disdainful eyes,
As if you took the nmeaure of their minds,
And said in fecrct, you're no match for me;
What will become of you

NORVAL.
If this were told! [
Ha thou no fears for thy presumptuous self !

GLENALVON.
Ha! dot thou threaten me?

OORVAL.
Didt thou not hear ?

GLENALVON.

Unwillingly I did; a nobler foe
Had not been queftion'd thus. But such as thee-

NORVAL.
Whom dolt thou think me?

GLENALVON.

Norvat.

NORVAL.
So I am-
And who is NORVAL in GLENALVON'S eyes ?

GLENALVON.

A peaant's son, a wandering beggar-boy;
At best no more, even if he fpeals the truth.

NORVAL.
False as thou art, doll thou fufpea my truth ?

GLE-

/

GLENALVON.

Thy truth ! thou'rt all a lye; and falle as bell
Is the vain-glorious tale thou told'A to RANDOLPH.

NORVAL.

If I were chain'd, unarms, and bedrid old,
Perhaps I should revile: But as I am
I have no tongue to rail. The humble NORVAL
Is of a race, who strive hot but with deeds.
Did I not fear to freeze thy lhallow valour,
And make thee fink too soon beneath my sword,
I'd tell thee- what thou art, I know thee well.

GLENALV9N.

Dost thou not know GLENALVON, born to command
Ten thousand saves like thee ?

NORVAL.
Villain, no more:

Draw and defend thy life. I did design
To have defy'd thee in another cause:
But heav'n accelerates its vengeance on thee.
Now for my own and Lady RANDOLPH'S wrongs.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Hold, I command you both. The man that stirs
Makes me his foe.

NORVAL.
Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly founded, noble RANDOLPH,

GLENALVON.

Hear him, my Lord; he's wond'rous condescending!
Mark the humility of shepherd NORVAL !

NORVAL.
Now you may scoff in safety.

[Sheati his surd.
E 3 Lord

Lord RANDiOLIH.
Speak not thus,

Taunting ec-h other; but uafold to me
The cause of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

NORVAL.

Na;;, mr good Lord, tho' I revere you muchb
Mi- caue I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I bluf3 to ipek; I will not, cannot speak
Th' cpprobrious words that I from him have borne.
To the lige-lod of my dear native land
I owe a fubiects homage: but ev'n him
And i s high arbitration I'd rejec.
Within mrv bosom reigns another lord;
Honour-, f!e judge and umpire of itsel.
If my free speech ofend you, noble RANDOLPH4
Revoke your favours, and let NORVAL go
Hence as he came, alone, but not difhonour'd.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thus far Ill mediate with impartial voice:
The ancient foe cf Caledonia's land
Nov. waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
Suspend your purpose, 'till your country's arms
Repel the bold rnWvader: then decide
The private quarrel.

GLENALVON.

I agree to this,

NOREVAL.
And I.

Ecissr SERVANT.

SERVANT.
The b au.cet awaits.

Lord RANDOLPH.

We come.

[Ext RANDOLPH.
GLEXALVON.

Norval,

Let

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of RANDOLPH.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkled hate,
Shall stain my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow;
Nor let our strife disturb the gentle dame.

.. NORVAL..

Think not so lightly, Sir, of my resentment:
When we contend again, our firife is mortal.

End of the FOURTH ACT.

E 4 ACT

# ACT V. SCENE I.

ACT V. SCENE I.

'he Wood.

Ener DOUGLAS.
T HIS is the place, the centre of the grove;

Here stands the oak, the monarch of the wood.

How sweet and solemn is this midnight scene!
The silver moon, unclouded, holds her way
Thro' lries where I could count each little Rar.
The fanning weft wind scarcely Asirs the leaves;
The river, rushing o'er its pebbled bed,
Imposes silence with a stilly found.
In such a place as this, at such an hour,
If ancestry can be ia ought believed,
Descending spirits have convets'd with man,
And told the fccrets of the world unknown.

Etxr Old NORvAL.

Old NOnVAL.

'Tis he. But what if he 1hould chide me hence ?
His just reproach I fear.

[DOUGLAS tu rns d sues hbm.

Forgive, forgive,

Can'st thou forgive the man, the felfilh man,
Who bred Sir MALCOLM'S heir a thepherd's son.

DOUGLAs.

Kneel not to me: thou art my father still:
Tby wilhh'-for presence now compleats my joy.

Welcome

Welcome to me, my fortunes thou lhalt Iate,
And ever honoured with thy DOUGLAS livte

Old NORVAL.

And dost thou call me father? 0 my son!
I think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
Which in the wilderness so long concal'd
The blossom of thy youth.

DOUGLAS.

Not worse the fruit,

That in the wilderness the blofom blow'd.
Amongst the shepherds, in the humble cote,
I learn'd some lefons, which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a twain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; and, when my vaflals bow,
NORVAL lhall smooth the crested pride of DOUGLAS.

NORVAL.

Let me but live to fee thine exaltation!
Yet grievous are my fears. 0 leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

DOUGLAS.

Why should I leave them

NORVAL.
Lord RANDOLPH and his kinsman seek your life.

DOUGLAS.
How know'ft thou that?

NORVAL.

I will inform you how.

When evening came, I left the secret place
Appointed for me-by your mother's care,
And fondly trod in each accustomed path
That to the cafle leads. Whilst thus I rang'd,
I was alarmed with unexpected founds

5 Of

Of earnest voices; On the persons came:
Unseen I lurk'd, and oerheard them name
Each-other as they talk'd, lord RANDOLPH this,
And that GLENALVO\ : iiil of you they spoke,
And of the lady: threatning was their speech,
Tho' but imperfecly my ear could hear it.
'Twvs trange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

DOUGLAS.
Revenge 1 for what?

N0RS AL.
For being what you are,

Sir MALCCOL:I'S heir: how else have you offended ?
W'hen they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there fat ;muing how I bet might find
Means to inform you of their wicked purpose.
But I could think of none: at last perplex'd
I i7fued forth, encompaffng the tower
With many a weary ftep and wishful look.
1Now providence hath brought you to my fight,
Let not your too couragious spirit scorn
The caution which I give.

DoUGLAS.'

I scorn it not.

Mi mother warn'd me of GLENALVON'S baseness;
But I w,-iil not ffbec b

the noble RAoNOLPH.

In our encounter with the vile aiaffiins,
I r.rk'd his br?.ve demeanor: him i'll trult.

P\ ORVAL.
I f..r au wiV'll tO3 ,'r.

DOUGC-LAS.
Herc in this place

ait my morrther's coming: she Pnall know
What thou bas: rc': her counsel I will follow:

And

And cautious ever are a mother's counsels,
You must depart j your prefente may .pevent
Our interview..

NORv.AL.
My blessing reft upon thee!

O may heav'n's hand, which fav'd thee from the wave,
And from the'iword of foes, be near thee ftili;
Turning mifdhance, if ought hangs o'er thy head,
All upon mine!

[Exit Old NORVAL.

DOUGLAS.

He loves me like a parent;

And must not, ihall not lose the son he loves,
Altho' his son has found a nobler father.
Eventful day! how haft thou chang'd my tfate !
Once on the cold, and winter shaded fide
Of a bleak hill, mirchance had rooted me,
Never to thrive, child of another foil:
Transplanted now to the gay funny vale,
Like the green thorn of May my fortune flowers.
Ye glorious 'fars ! high heav'n's resplendent host

o

To whom I oft have of my lot complain'd,
Hear and record my foul's unalter'd wish !
Dead or alive, let me but be renown'd !
May heav'n inspire some fierce gigantic Dane,
To give a bold defiance to our host!
Before he speaks it out I will accept;
Like DOUGLAS conquer, or like DOUGLAS die.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

Lady RANDOLPH.
My son ! I heard a voice-

DOUGLAS.
-The voice was mine.

Lady

.- yll AHBOA1 -P -

Didft thou complan aloud to mn e's ear,
That thus in dulry ihades, at midnight hour,
By fcalth the mother and tbefon should meet ?

'

- ~-

-~ [Embraing bim.

-*--"*' ~ DOUGLAS.

No; on this happy day, this better birth-day,
My theghts and wods areall of hope and joy.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Si fear and melantholy fiill divide
The empire of my breast with hope and joy.
Now hear what I advie.

DOVGLAS.

F rft, let me tell
What may the tenor of your counsel change.

Lady RANDOLPH.
My heart forebodes Tome evil !

DOUGLAS.
'Tis not good.-

At eve unseen by RANDOLPH and GLENALVON,
The good old NORVAL in the grove o'erheard
Their conversation: oft they mention'd me
With dreadful threatnings; you they fonietimes nam'd.
Twas strange, they laid, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

/Lay RANDOLPH.

Defend u graciou God I1 we are betray'd
They have found out the secret of thy birth;
It must be Co. That is the great discovery.
Sir MALCOLM'S heir is come to claim his own;
And they will be reveng'd. Perhaps even now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for murd.r,. they but wait
A darker and mote fient our, to break

Into

Into the chamber where they thinkthou neep4.;: -:-
This moment, this, heavtn hath ordain'd to save thee!
Fly to the camp, my son '

DOUGLAS.
And leave you here ?

No: to the castle let us go together,
Call up the antient servants -of your house,
Who in their youth did eat your father's bread.
Then tell them loudly that I am your son.
If in the breasts of men one spark remains
Of sacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your cause will arm. I alk but few
To drive those spoilers from my father's house.

Lady RANDOLPH.

O nature, nature! what can check thy force?
Thou genuine offspring of the daring DOUGLAS !
But rush not on deftru&ion: save thyself,
And I am safe. To me they mean no harm.
Thy stay but rilks thy precious life in vain.
That winding path conduas thee.to the river.
Cross where thou fees a broad and beaten way,
Which running eastward leads thee to the camp.
Initant demand admittance to Lord DOUGLAS.
Shew him these jewels, which his brother wore.
Thy look, thy voice, will make him feel the truth,
Which I by certain proof will soon confirm.

DOUGLAS.

I yield me, and obey: but yet my heart
Bleeds at this parting. Something bids me tay
And guard a mother's life. Oft have I read
Of wond'rous deeds by one bold arm atchiev'd.
Our foes are two; no more: let me go forth,
And fee if any ihield can guard GLENALVON.

Lady RANDOLPH.

If thou regard'fi thy mother, or rever'1t
Thy father's memory, think of this no more.

One

lwuhco 1514to d im An 5*q& MP
'.gi thuhitsciwd istwt in St edd^
In a mos fearful fcafon. Wart madb~ ,.
I havegreat cause to Toowell I fee
Which way th cwun oQft temper sets:
Today I've found d . QO n,1 l ael t

a e F

If thou to giddy vlnw gv' * e iC
To-mor I ksh4b my fm hr er, .
The love of tho be thou 6fv' the light,
Sufained my lif whmtb thy- uwe fat fel.
If thou'lhalt fall, I hae aorloIQ w hM t
In this wal wodd! my si^ ramewba met

DOV] LAS.

What lhall I fayi bor can 1 gi you comfort
The Godtof bantl of my his difpolf
As may he fw you! few wi dear fake
I will not bear myself s I re1r 'd.
But yet co~der, as no vulgar name
That which I hoad founds amngob martial men.
How will ingloriou caution suit my dcim
The pot of fate nbrinking I maintain.
My country' foes must wtaces who I am.
On the inasde heads In prow my birth,
'Till frinds and foe confe& th g~umine lrain.
if is this rife fall, blame not youf foe,
Who if he liv a not honourd, m~ not live.

Lady RAWDOLPH.

I will not utter what my bafom feels.
Too wct I love that valour which I warn.
Farewell, my fn l my eouneld are but vain.

[Emhbacriig.
And as high heaven hath wilN it all nmui be. [fpsraie.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Gate not on me, thou wih mistake the path;

l'll

I'll point it out again, ,
.

[(Jy as tbq arfararing, tsr frm the wed

Lsrd RANDOLPHK dMGLiBALVON.
Lord RANDOLPH.

Not in her prtefncc.
Now

GLENALVON.

I'm prepxd.
Lord RANDOLPFI, ...

No: I command thee flay.

I go alone: it ever lhall be said
That I took odds to coQrbat mortal man.
The noblest vengeance is the rmot compleat.

[Exit Lord RANDOLPH.
[GLENALVON makes fie/eps, to th Jawm

fid of thbfjag, .liens and speak.,

GLENALVON.

Demons of death come fettle on my sword,
And to a double slaughter guide it home !
Thm lover and the hulband both must die.

[Lord RANDOLPH behindthfitnes.
Lord RANDOLPH.
Draw, Villain! draw.

DOUGLAS.

Aiail me not, Lard RANDOLPH;
Not as thou lov'f thyself.

[CloJia/hg ffw/ di.

[GLENALVON runWig wt.

Now is the time.
Enter Lady RANDOLPH, at the oeofitte fid of tht fJage,

faint and breatbhls.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Lord RANDOLPM hear me; all flall be thine own:

$ But

L00g wtzbh ,u id u rt i id, MP etid,
In a mos fearful season. Wat i bafd h
I have great cause to eai. Too well I fee
Which way the cwurt Qft temper lets:
To-day I've found4dM Oh

Q 'u lot bgc hoPe r

If thou to giddy vJ gnv'f t*o tbs,
To-moft I iqr tf y. fm fr ev,.
The love of thee bws tho fw'a th light,
Sustained my lif whien thy bma iftbr feil
If thoulhalt fall, I hao acIqw r haw
In this ae wodd!
wo alry si e reusb m

.POULAS.

What ihall I ay h can 1 giv you comfort
The God of battles of my difpore
As ma h bsftfow you sos wb dear fakt
I will not bear oyfref I sreiv.
But yet co~ r, as no vulgar nam
That which I boat founds amngf martial men.
How will inglorious caution suit my daim s
The p* of fate unirinking I maintin.
My contry's foes nmut wmtefó who I am.
On the intadm heads Ill powe y birth,
'Till fiend and faes consef thb g~ai Arain.
If ip thi fife fall, blame nt your so,
Who if he lia not hoour, mad not live.

Lady RAbOLPH.

I will not utter what my bosom fels.
Too wec I love that valour which I warn.
Farewell, my fen my counsel are but vain.

-[Emrihciis.
And as high heaen hath wiId it all mft be. Lfparate.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Gase not on me, thou wilt mifake the path;

I'll

I'll point it out again,

[Jujf as tbe aretfiarating, odtrfram the wed

Lrd RAiDOLPR auGLGtrALVON.
Lord RANDOLPH.

Not in her prefocc.
Now-,-

GIENAL.VN.

I'm prepr'd.
Lord RANDLP l . ..

. No: I command thee flay.

I go alone: it newr hall be said
That I took odds to conbat mort;l man.
The noblest vengeance is the mofl compleat.

[Exit Lord RANDOLPH.
[GLENALVON makes sleeps to the th/fo

fide of thelage, liilens awd speak,

GLENALVON.

Demons of death come fettle on my sword,
And to a double slaughter guide it home!
The lover and the husband both must die.

[Lord RANDOLPH bebindthetfnes.
Lord RANDOLPH.
Draw, Villain! draw.

DOUGLAS.

Afil me not, Lord RANDOLPH;
Not as thou lov'f thyself.

[Cla/ig o ffword.

[GLENALVON runting jut.

Now is the time.
Enter Lady RANDOLPH, at the ppofite fide of tht sage,

faint and breathlyfs.
Lady RANDOLPH.
Lord RANDOLPH hear me; all fliall be thine own:

S But

- Butpare! Oh pure my on! - .:

&E DOUGLAS witb a iffw n a band.

My mother's voice !
I an pro thee till.

Lady RANDO.PH.

He lives, helives:

For this, frb this to heaven eternal praise!
But sure I saw thee fall.

DOUGLAS.

It Was GLENALVON.

JuR as my arm had mafer'd RANDOLPH'S sword,
The villain came behind me; but I flew him.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Behind thee! Ah ! thou'rt wounded! 0 my child,
How pale thou look't ! and shall I lose thee now?

DOUGLAS.

Do not depir: I feel a little faintness;
I hope it will not lat.

[Laons upon hibsJiwrd
Lady RANDOLPH.

There is no hope !

And we must part! the hand of Death is on thee!
0 my beloved child ! O DOUGLAS, DOUGLAS!

[DOUGLAS grwnrg mart and mar faint.

DOUGLAS.

Too soon we part: I have not long been DOUGLAS.
O destiny ! hardly thou dealft with me:
Clouded and hid, a Iranger to myself,
In low and poor obkcurity lliv'd.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Has heav'n preferv'd thee for an end like this ?

DOUGLAS.
O had I fallc as my brave fathers fell,

Turning

Turning with fatal arm the tide of battle I
Like them I /hould have fmird and welcom'd death.
But thus to perih by a villai'a hand l
Cut off from nature's and from glory's course,
Which never mortal was so fond to run.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Hear julice ! hear! are tbefe the fruits of virtue?

[DoUGLASfal.

DOUGIAS.

Unknown I die; no tongue hall speak of me.
Some noble spirits, judging by themfelyes,
May yet conjecure what I might have prov'd,
And think life only wanting to my fame:
But who ihall comfort thee?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Despair ! despair!

DOUGLAS.

O had it pleas'd high heaven to let me live
A little while !-my eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apace! my mother- [Dies.

Eter Lord RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thy words, the words of truth, have pierc'd my heart.
I am the stain of knighthood and of arms.
Oh! if my brave deliverer survives
The traitor's sword-

ANNA.
Alas! look there, my Lord.

Lord RANDOLPH.

The mother and her son! How curst I am I
Was I the cause ? No: I was not the cause.
Yon matchless villain did seduce my foul
To frantic jealousy.

F ANNA.

AN -A.

iv Ladv lives:

The 'aony of grief hath but fuppfes'd
A while her powers.

Lord RANDOLPH.
But my deliverer's dead !

The wor'd did once efieer Lord RANDOLPH wel?,-
Sincere of heart, for spotless honour fam'd:
AnJ, in my early days, glory I gain'd
Beneath the holy banner of the cross.
Now pair the noon of life, frame comes upon me-
Reproach, and infamy, and public hate,
Are near at hand: for all mankind will think
That RANDOLPH basely ftab'd Sir MALCOLM'S heir.

[Lady RANDOLPH recoverzing.

Lady RANDOLPH.

W1,here am I now? Still in this wretched world !
Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine.
My youth was worn in anguih: but youth's strength,
With1 hoe's asiarance, bore the brunt offorrowj
And train'd me on to be the objea now,
On which omnipotence displays itfeif,
Making a ipe--acle a tale of me,
To awe its vail, man.

Lord R.ANDOLPH.

0 mife-y !

Amikdit th raging grief I must proclainl,
M-yI in.noence.

Lady RANDOLPH,

Thy innocence!
Lord RANDOLPH.

My guilt
fs nnocence, compar'd vwith what thou think'ft it.

Lady

Lady RANDOLP'.

OSs thee I tihitk ot ' whatlihive I i6 do
WVith thee, or arty thing ? My soh ! yy ton!
My beautiful ! -my brave ! how proud Was I
Of thee, aind of thy valour ! My fond heart
O'erflow'd this day with transport, when i thought
Of growing old a'midf a race of thine,
Who might make up to nie their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and fny hufoahd's name:
-Now all' ry hopes are dead! A little while
Was I a wife ! a mother iot so long!
What -aim I how ? - I know. - But I ~'all be
That only whilst I please; for such a son
And such' a husband make a woman bold.

[Runs wt:

Lord RANDOLPH.

Follow her, ANNA: I myself would folloy,
But in this rage ihe must abhor my presence.

[Exit ANNA.
Enter Old NORVAL.

NORVAL,
I heard the voice of woe: heaven guard my child !

Lord RANDOLPH.

Already is the idle gaping crowd,
The spiteful vulgar, come to gaze on RANDOLPH.
Begone.

NORVAL.

I fear thee not. I will n'ot go.
Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplice, Lord,

F 2 With

With thee in -mrder. YeS y frns did help
To cui down to the go -this lonly plat.
O nobeft puh tbat ever yet was born !
Sweetest and be, gentldr ad bravt spirit,
That ever bief'd the wdd ,Wretch that I am,
Who &w tat noble spirit fJl and rife
Above he ne naow limits that coSn'd it I
Yet neer was by l thy viratu won
To do thee juftie, and rcndal thefecret,
Which timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's snare. Oh!l I am punil'd now !
These are the has that Ihould have ftrew'd the ground,
And not the locks of DOUOGLAS.

[Tsars bIs air, acd dtrnu

bimfrlf upen the grnd.

m0J1 RANDOLPH.

I know the how thy boldness I forgive:
My crt is fallen. For the will appoint
A place of reft, if grief will let thee relt.
I will reward, altho' I cannot punilh.
Curt, curst GLENAl4,N,. herfcap'd too well,
Tho' fain and bassed by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fiy to the last,
Cursing hisconqueor, the felon died.

EaUr ANNA.

ANNA.
My Lord! my Lord!

',ord RANDOLPH.

Spela: I can hear of horror.

ANNA.

ANNA.
Horror indeed I

Lord RANDOLIPH

MATILDA?

Is no more:,

She ran, The few like light'ning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice ibe gain'd,
Beneath whose low'ring top the river fulls
Ingulph'd in rifted rocks: thither she came,
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down - - -

Lord RANDOLPH.

'Twas I! alas 'twas I

That fill'd her breast with fury: drove her down
The precipice of death ! Wretch that I am!

ANNA.

0 had you seen her last despairing look!
Upon the brink te flood, and cast her eyes
Down on the deep; then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heaen,. seeming to fay,
Why am 1 forc'd to this ? She plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord RANDOLPH.

I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the paflion of my foul.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of RANDOLPH gave.
They speak aloud, and with the voice of fate

2 Denounce

i

Denounce my doom. I am refolv'd. Iill go
Straight to the battle, where the m.an that maker
Me turn aside muff threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy miflrefs, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
With cost and pomp upon their funerals wait:
For RANDOIPH hopes he neter flial! retu,'

. I N I S.

§r
w h

# EPILOGUE.

E P- L 0 G U £.

Spoken by Mr. B A R R Y
dN Epilogue I ak'd; but not one word

Our bard will write. He vows 'tis mol adbfirl

tilth comick wit to contradici theJlrain
Of tragedy, and make your sorrows vain.
Sadly hes ays, that pity is the be/i,
And noblest pafion of the human breafi:
For when its facredjreams the heart o'er-flow,
In gushes pleasure with the tide of woe i
And when its waves-retire, like those of Niile
·rey lave behind them fich a golden foil,
Tat there the virtujs without culture g-roW
7here thefiveet blJoims of afieSlon blow,

wTiefe were his words; void of delufivt art

I felt them; for hefpoke them mfm his heart.
Nor will I now attempt, with wittyfcoly,
To ca)fe away cel]/iah me!.ncholy.
