dc11( DOUGLAS.

1 11h1

eit. C1~aIyF'zOA ii z 14- C~arac~t~r· of
LI~aml: ~Ya nc~" in~i norr Aaprr,n

,~c~lc/rly £4~/,/s /()~C~ ' e-itl

r/~~L4) tmnr.~

D O U 'G L A S.

A

T R A G E D YP
TRAGEDY, /

MR. H 0 M E.

Marked with the Variaticns in the
M A N A G E R's B 0 0 K,

A T T H E - k
Iecatre Sopal in- ¢oent--atremn,

.ion ego fum vates, fedprifci coiciuis v'i.

L NDON:
PRINTEB FOR T. LOWNDES; W. NICOLL; AND

S. BLADON.
M.DCC.L X XXV.

,* The Reader is desired to obfen'e, that thepaflages
omitted in the Representation at the Theatre, are
here preserved, and marked with inverted Commas;
as at Line 20 to 28 in Page 6.

'· - -
I'l. '4N )

# PROLOGUE.

PROLOGUE.

Nr ancient times, 'when Britain's trade 'was arms,
And the lov'd muf/c of her youth, alarms !

Agod-like race fij ain''dfair England'sfam;:
$S'ho has not heard of gallant PERCY's name?
Ay, and of DOUG LA ? Such illu riousfoes
In rival Rome and Carthage never rose!
From age to age brightjone the Britiih/re,
And every hero 'was a hero'sjire.
WThenpo.ivetfulrate decreed one 'warrior's doom,
Up sprung the phainix from his parent's tomb.
But wvhilfg thife generous rivals fought and fell,
Ta'fegenerous rivals lov'd each other 'well:

aho' maany a bloody field was loft and .won,

N'othing in hate, in honour all was done.
;When PER c Y wrong'd defy'd his prince or peers,
FaJf came the DouGLAs, wvith his Scottifhfpears;
And, vwhen proud DoUG LAS made his King his foe,
ForDotCvLAS, PERCY bent his Englilh boa .
Expell'd their native home by ad-vefe fate,
Try 'nock'd a!lternazte at each other's gate:
TIhen blaz'd the cafle, at the midight hoar,
For him vwhoe armsl had hook its firmj;c tovu'r.

7his nigh: a DouGLAss ypcur proteatioa claims;

A sv, ifr! a msother! Pity's soft/.s names:
The jioOy of her.woes indulgent hea:,
And graltj orr fippliant alllhe begs, a tear.
In confidenc e e bgs ; and hopes to find
Each Englifl breait, lie noble PERCY's, kind.

A z DRA:.IATIS

# Dramatis Personæ, 1784.

Dramatis Perionla, 1734.

IM E N. At Drury-Lane. At Cvcnt-Garden.

Douglas, - - Mr. BRERSTon. Mr. LEWIs.
Lord Randolph, Mr. FARRYN. Mr. WRouGH'rot,
Glenalvon, Mr. PALMEA. Mr. AICKIN.
Norval, r- Mr. BENSLEY. Mr. HlINDERsor .
Stranger, - Mr. PACKER. Mr; CLARKE.
Servant, - Mr. PHILLIMORI. Mr. DAVIS.

W 0 M t N.

Lady Randolph, Mrs. SIDDOrrs. Mrs. CRAvWFORD.
Anna, - Miss WHEELER. Mrs. MORTON.

# ACT I.

.D 0 -G L

A
T R A aG - 1) Y.

A C T I.
7'ht Court of a Calkle/ furi'ouzd with FVoodil

Enter Lady Randolph.

'YTE woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom
1 Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth
The voice of sorrow fiom my burIting heart,.
Farewel a while; I will not leave you long;
For in your lhades I deem some spirit dwells,
Who from the chiding stream, or groaning oak,
Still hears, and answers to Matilda's moan..
0 Douglas ! Douglas ! if departed ghoits
Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of that wood tl.ou art,
And with the passion of immortals hear'st
My lamentation: hear'st thy wretched wife
Weep for her husband slain, her. infant loll.

A 3 My

My brother's timeless death I seem to mourn;
Who perished wihi thee on this fatal day. ,
To thee I lift my voice; to thee address
The plaint which mortal ear has never heard.
O disregard me not; tho' I am call'd
Another's now, my heart is wholly thine.
Incapable of change, affetion lies
Buried, my Douglas, in thy bloody grave.
But Randolph comes, whom fate has made my Lord,
To chide -y aguiih, and defraud the dead.

EPter Lord Randolph.
Lord Rand. Again these weeds of woe! fay, dolt

thou well

To feed a pasion which consumes thy life ?
The living claim fime duty: vainly thou
.Below'i! thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady cand. Silent, alas! is he for whom I mourn:

Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives.
' This fatal day itirs my time-fettled sorrow,
· Troubles afresh the fountain of my heart.'
Lord Rand. ' When was it pure of sadness! These

' black weeds

Express the wonted colour of thv mind,
' For ever dark and dismal. Seven long years
· Are pass'd, 5nre we were join'd by sacred ties:
· Cloids all the while have hung upon thy brow,
' Nor broke nor par:ed by one gleam of joy.'
Time, that wears out the trace of deepest anguiih,
1 As the fIa smooths the prints made in the sand,'
Has pafro'er thee in vain.

' Lady Ran-d. If time to come
Should prove as ineffetual, yet, my Lord,
Thou canil not blame me. When our Scottifli youth
Vy'd with each other for my luckless love,
Oft Ibeefouaht them, 1 implor'd them all
Not to afiail me with my father's aid,
' Nor blend their better destiny with mine.

For melancholy had congeal'd my blood,
And froze affcEtion in my chilly breast.

r At

At last my Sire, rous'd with the base attempt
To force me from him, which thou rend'red'ft vain,
To his own daughter bow'd his hoary head,
Besought me tocommiferate his age,
And vow'd he should not, could'not die in peace,
Unless he saw me wedded and fecur'd
From violence and outrage. Then, my Lord!
In my extreme diltrefs I call'd on thee,
Thee I befpake, profefs'd my strong desire
To lead a single, solitary life,
And begg'd thy Nobleness not to demand
Her for a wife whose heart was dead to love.
How thou perfitted'it after this, thou know'lt,
And must confers that I am not unjust,
Nor more to thee than to myself injurious.
' Lord Rand. That I confess; yet ever must regret
The grief I cannot cure. Would thou wert not
Compos'd of griefand tenderness alone,
But hadlt a spark ofother pallions in thee,
Pride, anger, vanity, the fRrong desire
Ofadmiration, dear to woman-kind;
These might contend with, and allay thy grief,
As meeting tides and currents smooth our firth.
' Lady Rand. To such a cau fe the human mindoft owe;

' its transient calm, a calm I envy not.
' Lord Rand.' Sure thou art not the daughter of Sir

Malcolm?

Strong was his rage, eternal his resentment,;
For when thy brother fell, he fmil'd to'hear
That Douglas' son in the fame field was slain.

Lady Rand. Oh! rake not up-the ashes of my fathers:

Implacable resentment was their crime,
And grievous has the expiation been.
Contending with the Douglas, gallant lives
Of either house were loll; my ancestors
Compell'd, at last, to leave their ancient feat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
No heir is left. Had they not been so stern,
I had not been the last of all my race.

Lord Rand. Thy grief wreits to its purposes my words.
I never ask'd of thee that ardent love,

A 4 Which

Which in the breasts of fancy's children burns.
Decent affeEion, and complacent kindness
Were a!l I wiM'd for; bat I wif'd in vain,
Hence with the less regret my eyes behold
The fiorm of war that gathers o'er this land;
If I hould perish by the Danish sword,
Miatilda would not shed onetear the more.

Lady Rand. Thou doll not think o : woeful as-I anm,

I love thy merit, and efleem thy virtues.
Bat whither go'ft thou now?

Lord Rand. Strait to the camp,

Where every warrior on the tip-toe flands
Of expectation, and impatient asks
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are landed.

Lady Rand. 0, may adverse winds,

Far from the coast of Scotland, drive their fleet!
And every soldier of both hofs return
In peace and safety to his pleasant home!

Lord Rand. Thou fpeak'ft a woman's, hear a warrior's

wish;

Right from their native land, the flormy north,
May the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
Immoveable in Caledonia's strand!
Then ihall our woes repent their bold invasion,
And roving armies thun the fatal Ihore.

' Lady Rand. War I detest: but war with foreign foes,
W hose manners, language, and whose looks are Itrange,
Is not so horrid, nor tome so hateful,
As that which wi:h our neighbours oft we wage.
A ri er here, there an ideal line,
By fancy drawn, divides the filler kingdoms.
On each fide dwells a people finilar,
As twins are to each other; valiant both:
Both for their valour famous through the world.
Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
And, if they mull have war, wage distant war,
· But with each other fight in cruel conflict.

Gallant ia firife, and noble in their ire,
The battle is their pastime. They go forth
Gay in the morning, as to summer sport;

'When

'When ev'ning comes, the glory of.the morn,

The youthful warrior is a clod of clay.
' Thus fall the prime of either hapless land;
' And such the fruit of Scotch and Englilh wars.

Lord Rand. I'll hear nomore: this melody would make
A soldier drop his {word, and doff his arms,
'Sit down and weep the conquests he has made;
'Yea, (like a-monk,) sing reft and peace in heaven

To fouls of warriors in'his battles slain.'
Lady, farewel: I leave thee not alone ;
Yonder comes one whose love makes duty light. [Exit.

Enter Anna.

Anna. Forgive the rashness ofyour Anna's love:.

Urg'd by affection, I have thus prefum'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts;
And warn you of the hours that you neglc,.
And lose in fadneis.

Lady Rand. So to lore my hours'
Is all the use i wi .ih to make of time.

Anna. To blame thee,.Lady, suits not with .my trate;:

But sure I am,.fince death firitprey'd on man,
Never did siser thus a brother mourn..
What had your sorrows been if you had loft,
In early youth, the hulband of your heart?

Lady Rand. Oh !
Anna. -Have I diflrefs'd you witl officious love,.

And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate?
Eorgive me, Lady: humble tho' I am,
The mind l-bear partakes not of my fortune:.
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

Lady Rand. What power directed thy unconfeious

tongue
To speak as thou haft done ? to name-

lnaai. T.know not:

But since my words have made my mistress tremble,-
I will fpeakl so no more; but silent mix
My tears with her's.

Lady Rand. No, thou hiialt not be silent.
I'll trust thy faithful love, and thou shalt be

A 5 Hence-

Henceforth th' initrufed partner of my woes.
But what avails it? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never-ebbirg time?
Compel the earth and ccean to give up
Their dead alive ?

jinna. What means my noble mistress ?
Lady Rand. Didfi thou not aik what had my sorrows

been ?

If I in early youth had loft a husband?-
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'd,
Mangled with wounds, the husband of my youth;
And in some cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his.-

Anna. O ! Lady, molt rever'd!

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

Lady Rand. Alas, an ancient feud,

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother Should in battle save
The life of Douglas' son, our house's foe:
The youthful warriors vow'd eternal friendlhip.
To fee the vaunted siser of his friend
IrDpatient Douglas to Balarmo came,
Unpder a borrow'd name.-Mv hezrt he gain'd;
Nor did I long refuse the hand he begg'd:
My brother's presence authoriz'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little weeks, with wings of down,
Had o'er us flown, when my iov'd Lord was call'd
To fight his father's battles; and with him,
In fpitc of all my tears, did Malcolm go.
Scarce were hey gone, when my fiern Sire was told.
That the false itranger was Lord Douglas' son.
Frantic with rage, the Baron drew his sword,
And queeftcn'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
Kneeling beneath his sword, fault'ring I took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
WVed one of Douglas'name. Sincerity
Thou first of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thyonward path! allho' the earth shall gape,

Anid

And from the gulph of hell deftrulion cry
To take dissimulation's winding way.

da na. Alas! how few of woman's fearful kind
Darll own a truth so hardy ?

Lady Rand. The first truth

Is easiest to avow. This moral learn
This precious moral-from my tragic tale--
n a few days the dreadfultidings came
That Douglas and my brother both were slain.
My lord ! my life ! my husband !-Mighty heaven !
What had I done to merit such afiliction ?

Anna. My dearest Lady ! many a tale of tears

I've listen'd to; but never did 1 hear
A tale so fad as this.

Lady Rand. In the first days

Of my diftrading grief, I found myself--
As women with to be who love their lords.
But who durst tell my father ? The good prielt
Who join'd our hands, my brother's ancient tutor,
With his lov'd Malcolm, in the battle fell:
They too alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till time should make my father's fortune mine.-
That very night on which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confidant I had,
Set out with him to reach her filter's house:
But nurse, nor infant, have I ever seen
Or heard of, Anna, iince that fatal hour.
' My murder'd child ! had thy fond mother sear'd

The loss of thee, ihe had loud fame defy'd, j

' DefPis'd her father's rage; her father's grief,
* And wander'd with thee thro' the scorning world.'

Anna. Not seen nor heard of! then perhaps he lives.
Lady Rand. No. It was dark December; wind and'

rain

Had beat all night. Across the Carron lay
The deftin'd road; and in its swelling flood
My faithful servant perii''d w ith my child,

0' hapless son ! of a molt hap!efs ire !-

· But they are both at reft; and I alone
' Dwell in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk,

A 6 ' Like

Like a guilt-troubl'd ghost, my painful rounds:'
Nor has despiteful fate permitted me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Tho' dead to love, I was compell'd to wed
Randolph, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms;
And Randolph now pofleffes the domains
That by Sir Malcolm's death on me devolv'd;
Domains, that should to Douglas' son have giv'n
A Baron's title, anda Baron's power.
· Such were my soothing thoughts, while I bewail'd

The flaughter'd father of a son unborn.
And when that son came, like a ray from heav'n,
Which /hines and disappears ! alas I my child!
How long did thy fond mother grasp the hope
· Of having thee, [he knew not how, reftor'd.
· Year after year hath worn her hope away;
But left fill undiminifh'd her desire.'

Anna. The hand, that spins th' uneven thread of

life,

Mayfmooth the length that's yet to come of your's.
' Lady Rand. Not in this world: I have confider'd

well

· Its various evils, and on whom they fall,
: Alas! how oft does goodners wound itself?
' And sweet affection prove the spring of woe.'
O ! had I died wher my lov'd hulband fell !
Had some good angel op'd to me the book
Of providence, and let me read my life,
My heart had broke when I beheld the fum
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

Anna. That power, whose ministers good angels are;,

Hath shut the ibok in mercy to mankind.
But we mufl leave this theme: Glenalvon comes:
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes
And hitherwards he fowly stalks his way.

Lady Rand. Iwill avoid him. An ungraciousperfon
Is d-ubly irksome in an hour like this.

Anna. Why fFeaks my Lady thus of Randolph's heir?
Lady Rand. Because he's not the heir of Randolph's

virtues.
Subtle and flrewd, he offersto mankind

An

An artificial image of himself :-
And he witheafe can vary to the tast'e
Of different men, its features. ' Self-deny'd,.

And master of his appetites he seems:
But his fierce nature, 'like a fox chain'd'up,.
Watches to seize unseen. the wifh'd-for prey..
Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
As in Glenalvon's unrelenting mind.'

Yet is he b: ave and politic in war,
And hands aloft :in these unruly ,times.
Why I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter;
Stay and detain him till I reach' the cattle. [Exif.

Anna. 0 happiness ! where art thou to be found?

I fee thou dwelleft not with birth and beauty,
Tho' grac'd with grandeur, and in.wealth.array'd:
Nor doft.thou, it would seem, with virtue dwell;.,
Else had this gentle lady mifs'd thee not,.

Enter Glenalvon.-

Glen. What doll thou muse on, meditating maid?

Like some entranc'd and vifionarv. seer
On earth thou fland'ft, thy thoughts ascend to heav'n.

Anna. Wou'd that I were, e'en as thou fay'ft, a seer,.
To have my doubts by heav'nly vision clear'd!

Glen. What doff thou duubt of? what hat thou to do.

With fubjees intricate ? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be queftion'd : think of these good gifts,
And then thy contemplations will be pleasing.

Anna. Let women view yon monument of woe,.

Then boast of beauty, who so fair as the?
But I must follow ; this revolving day
Awakes the memory of her antient woes. [Exit.

Glen. So !-Lady Randolph ihuns me ! by and by

I'll woo her as the lion woos his brides..
The-deed's a-doing now, that makes me lord'
Of these rich valleys, and. a chief of power,.
The season is most apt; my founding feps
Will not be heard amidst the din of-arms.
Randolph has liv'd too long: his better fate
Had the afceudant once, and kept me down:
When I had seiz'd the dame, by chance he came,

Refcu'd,

Refcu'd, and had the Lady for his labour;
I 'fcap'd unknown: a slender conifolation !
Heaven is my witness that I do not love .
To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvef. Yet I am not safe;
By love, or fomethinglike it, flung, inflam'd,
Madly I blabb'd my passion to his wife,
And (he has threaten'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will'I do not know:
But well I know the Baron's wrath is deadly.
1 will not live in fear; ' the man I dread
· Is as a Dane to'me;' he is the man
Who flands betwixt me and my chief desire.
No b:r but he; the has no kinsman near;
No brother in his filer's quarrel bold;
And for the righteous cause, a firanger's cause,
I know aachief tha. will defy Glenalvon. [Exit.

ACT

# ACT II.

A C T II.

A Court, &c.

Stranger Cwithin. Oh Mercy ! Mercy!
Enter Ser'vants, and a Stranger at one'door, and Lady

Randolph and Anna at another.

Lady Randolph.
W HAT means this clamour? Strnger! speak

secure';

Halt thou been wrong'd ? have these rude men prefum'd
To vex the weary traveller on his way ?

Sirs/ Serv. By us no stranger ever fuffer'd wrong,

This man with outcry wild has call'd us forth;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
Enter Lord Randolph and Norval, qwith their s/word

dra.wn and bloody.
Lady Rand. Not vain the Stranger's fears ! how fares

my Lord ?
Lord Rand. That it fares well, thanks to this gallant

youth,

'Whose valour fav'd me from a wretched death;
As down the winding dale I walk'd alone,
At the cross way four armed men attack'd me:
Rovers, I judge, from the licentious camp,
Who would have quickly laid Lord Randolph low,
Had not this brave and generous Stranger come,
Like my good angel in the hour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my foes his own.
They turn'd upon him ; but his acive arm
Struck to the ground, from whence they rose no more,
The fiercest two; the others fled amain,
And left him master of the bloody field.
Speak Lady Randolph : upon Beauty's tongue
Dwell accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
Speak, noble Dame, and thank him for thy Lord.

Lady

Lady Rr,,i. My Lord, I cannot speak what now I feel,

AMy heart o'erflows with gratitude to heav'n,
And to this noble youth, who, all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but,.humanely brave,
Fought on your fide, againit such fearful odds.
Have you yet learn'd of him, whom we should thank?
Whom call the saviour of Lord Randolph's life ?

Lord Rald. I aD;'d that question, andhe anfwer'd not:

But I mull know who my deliverer is. [To the Stranger.
-Norr-. A low-born man, ofPparentage obscure,
Who nought can boast but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Lord Rard; Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled;

By the great King of Kings I thou art ordain'd
And ftamp'd a hero by the foivreign hand
Of Nature ! blush not, flower of modesty
As well as valour, to declare thy birth.

Norv. My name is Norval -on the Grampian hills

Miy fatherfeeds his flocks; a frugal swain,
Whose conflant cares-were io increase. his flore,
And keep his only son, myfel, at home.
For I had heard of battles, and I long'd
To follow to the field some w.rlil:e Lord;
And heaven soon granted what my Sire deny'd.
This mnon iv-hich role last night, round as my shield,.
Had not yet ill'd her horns, when,, by her light,
A band of ierce Barbarians frorn ihe hilis,
Ruih'd like a torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The ihepherds fled
For safety and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'd about the enemy, and mark'd
The road he took, then hafled to my friends;
*Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
I met advancing. The pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook.the fpoil-encumber'd foe.
We fought and conquer'd.. Ere a sword was'drawn,
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Returnijlg home in triumph, 1 difdain'd

The

The liepherd.'s 'flothfl life: and having heard
That our good :King:had fummon'd his bold Peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron fide,.
t left.my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to condu& ny steps---
Yon trembling coward, who foffook his mailer.
Journeying with this intent, I palt these towers,
And, heaven direted, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

Lord Rand. He is as wife as brave. Was ever tale

With such a gallant modelty rehears'd ?
My brave deliverer'! thou shalt enter now
A nobler lilt, and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize of fhme.
I will present thee to our Scottiih King,
Whole valiant spirit ever valour lov'd.
Ha ! my Matilda ! wherefore flarts that tear F

Lady Rand. I cannot .fay; for various affections,

And ifrangely mingled, in m.y bosom swell;
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
I joy that thou art safe, and I admire
Hi;s and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety;
Yea, as my mind predits, with thine his own.
Obscure and friendless, he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, and with his sword.
To gain diflination which his birth deny'd.
In this attempt unknown he might have perifh'd,.
And gain'd, with all his valour, but oblivion..
Now grac'd:by thee, his virtue serves no more
Berieath despair. The soldier now of hope
lie stands conspicuous; fame and great renown
Are brought within the compass of his sword.
On this my mind refle&ed, whilst you spoke,
And blefs'd the wonder-working hand of heaven.,

Lord Rand. Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts !

My deeds lhall follow where thou point'ft the way.
Next to myself, and equal to Glenalvon,
In honour and command flall Norval be.

Nor-v. I know not'how to thank you. Rude I am
In speech and manners: never tilL this hour

Stooa

Stood I in such a presence: yet my Lord,
There's foniething in my breast which makes me bold
To fay, that Norval ne'er will shame thy favour.

Lady Rand. I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou ihaIt be

My knight; and ever, as thou didft to-day,
With happy valour guard the life of Randolph. :
Lord Rand. Well halt thou spoke. Let me forbid

reply. . To Norval,

We are thy debtors still; thy high desert
O'ertops our gratitude. I must proceed,
As was at first intended, to the camp.
Some of my train, I fee, are speeding hither,
Impatient, doubtless, of their Lord's delay.
Go with me, Norval, and thine eyes shall fee
The chosen warriors of thy native land,
Who languish for the fight, and beat the air
With braudif'ld ivords.

Ncor-v. Let us be gone, my Lord -.
Lord Rand. [To Lady Randolph.] About the time.

that the declining fun

Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills suspend,
Expe& us to return. This night once more
Within these walls I reit: my tent I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepare the feast.
Free is his heart who fcrhis country fights
He in the eve of battle may resign
Himself to social pleasure; fwieeteft then,
When danger to a soldier's foul endears
The human joy that never may return.

[Exeunt Lord Randolph and Norval.
Lady Rand. Hii parting words have struck a fatal

truth.

0 Douglas ! Douglas ! tender was the time
When we two parted, ne'er to meet again !
How many years ofanguifl and despair
Has heav'n annex'd to those fivift-paffing hours
Of love and fondness! ' Then my bosom's flame
' Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of fear,
' Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.'
Anna. -May gracious heav'n pour the sweet balm of

peace

Into

i'lnto the wounds that fester in your breast !
iFor earthly consolation cannot cure them.

Lady Rand. One only cure can heaven itfelfbeftow;

:A grave-that bed in which the weary reft.
WWretch that I am ! Alas ! why am I so ?
'At every happy parent I repine !
i'-Iow blest the mother of yon gallant Norval !
AShe for a living huiband bore her pains,
And heard him bless her when a man was horn
dShe nurs'd her finiling infant on her breast;
!Tended the child, and rear'd the pleating boy:
She, with affeAtion's triumph, saw the youth
'In grace and comeliness surpass his peers:
Whilst I to a dead husband bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.

Anna. Alas ! alas ! why will you thus resume

Your griefafrefh ? I thought that gallant youth
Would for a while have won you from your woe.
On him intent you gaz'd, with a look
; Much more delighted, than your pensive eye
Has deign'd on other objects to bestow.
Iad; Rand. Delighted, fay't thou? Oh ! even there

mine eye

Found fuel for my life-confuming sorrow.
I thought that, had the son of Douglas liv'd,
He might have been like this young gallant fIranger,
And pair'd with him in features and in shape;
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
My boy with blooming Norval might have number'd,
Whillt thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy' fell
;On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness .
For this'young stranger, wand'ring from his home,
And'like an orphan cast upon my care.
I will protec thee (said 1 to myself)
TWith all my power, and grace with all my favour.

Anna. Sure heav'n will bless so generous a resolve,

You must, my noble Dame, exert your power:
You must awake: devices will be fram'd,
,And arrows pointed:at the breast of Norval.

Lady Rand. Glenalvon's false and crafty head will.

work

Against

Agninfl a rival in his kinsman's love,
If deter him not: I only can.
Bold as he is, G!enalvon will beware
How he pulls down the fabric that I raise;
I'll be the artiLt of young Norval's fortune.

'Tis pleasing to admire ! most apt was I
To this affetion in my better days;
Tho' now I seem to you ihrunk up, retir'd!
Within the narrow compass of my woe.
Have you not sometimes seen an, early flower
Open its bud, and spread its silken leaves,
To catch sweet airs, and odours to bellow;
Then, by the keen blast nipt, pull in its leaves,
And, tho' still living, die to icent and beauty t
Emblem of me: afflition, like a torm,
'Hath ki'l:d the forward blossom of my heart?'

Enter Glenalvon.-
Glen. Where is my dearest kinsman, noble Ran-

dolph ?
Lady Rand. Have you not heard, Glenalvon, of the

base

Glen. I have:, and that the villains may not 'scape.

With a strong band I have begirt the wood.
If they lurk there, alive they lhall be taken,
And torture force from them th' important secret,
Whether some foe of Randolph 'hir'd their swords,
Or if-

Lady Ran.d: That care becomes a Einfman's love;
I have a counfei for Glenah'on's ear. :[EJit Amna.

Glen. To him your coun els.alwwyas are commands.
Lady Ra.;d. L have not found -so: thon art known to

me.

Glen. Knowvn!'
Lady Rar-r. Andmnft certahiisnmy ,carse of knw-

ledge.

GOl.. What do you knlow? ;By ;ieav'n

You much amaze me. No created leing,
VoCrfehfCcePt, dur& thas accost Gleaulvot..

Lady.

: ILady Rand. Is guilt so bold ! and dost thou make a

merit

:f thy pretended mneeknefs I This to me,
-.Who, with a gentleness which duty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd what, if divulg'd,
Would make thee nothing; or, what's worse than that,
An outcalf beggar, and unpity'd too !
-'For mortals Ihudder at a crime like tline.

Glen. Thy virtue awes me. Firt of womankind!

-Permit me yet tofay, that the fond man,
;Whom love transports beyond itrid virtue's bounds,
Ijf he is brought by love to miser.y,
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
;Unpity'd cannot be. Pity's the alms
Which on such beggars fraely is beftow'd-
For mortals know. that love is fill their lord,
:And o'er their vain resolves advances still:
As fire, when kindlcd by our Shepherds, moves
Thro' the dry heath againfl the fanning wind.

Lady Rand. Reserve these accents for sone other ear.

To love's apology Iliften not.
*Mark thou my words ; for it is meet thou fiould'il.
His brave deliverer Randolph here retains.
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well:
-But, at thy peril, pra&ise ought againIt him:
Let not thy jealousy attempt to Ihake
And loosen the good root he has in Randolph;
Whose favourites, I know, thou haft supplanted.
'Thou look'ft at me, as if thou fain would'st pry
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendless firanger my prote.tion claims:
.His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit.

Glen. Child that I was, to start at myown shadow,

And be the shallow fool of coward conscience !
I am not what I have been; what I hould be.
The darts of destiny have almost pierc'd
'My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I Ihould conclude there was an arm above,

That

That fought againfl me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch myself, the subtle snare I set.
Why, rape and murder are not fiT.ple means !
Th' imperfe& rape to Randolph gave a spouse;
And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fan from me;
And, worst of all, a rival. Burning hell!
This were thy centre, if I thought /he lov'd him !
'Tis certain flie contemns me; nay, commands me,
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'er me,
In his behalf. And Shall I thus be brav'd ?
Curb'd, as ihe calls it, by dame chaffity ?
Infernal fiends, if any fiends there are
More fierce than hate, ambition, and revenge,
Rife up and fill my bosom with your fires,
' And policy remorseless ! Chance may spoil
' tA single aim; but perseverance must
' Prosper at last. For chance and fate are words:

Perfiftive wisdom is the fate of man.'

Darkly a project peers upon my mind,
Like the red moon when riling in the east,
Crofs'd and divided by ftrange-colour'd clouds.
I'll seek the slave who came with Norval hither,
And for his cowardice was spurned from him.
I've known a follower's rankled bosom breed
?'enom mbaf fatal to his heedless Lord, [Exit,

ACT

# ACT III.

ACT III.
A Court, &c. as before.

Enter Anna.
T H Y vassals, Grief! great Nature's order break,

And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour.

Whilst Lady Randolph sleeps, I will walk forth,
And tale the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers be ! Ye ministers
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,
Angels and seraphs who delight in goodness !
Forsake your skies, and to her couch descend !
There from her fancy chace those dismal forms
That haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
With images celestial, such as please
The blefs'd above upon their golden beds.

Enter Servant.

Serv. One of the vile afaflins is secured.

We found the villain lurking in the wood:
With dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not
His first eflay ; these jewels were conceal'd
In the most secret places of his garment;
Belike the spoils of tome that he has murder'd.

Anna. Let me look on them. Ha ! here is a heart,

The chosen cretl of Douglas' valiant name !
These are.no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch.

[Exit Anna.

Enter Sert.ants 'with the Prioner.

Prif/ I know no more than does the child unborn

Of what you charge me with.

First Serv. You fay so, Sir!
But torture soon shall make you speak the truth.

a Behold

.Behold the Lady of Lord Randolph come'y
Prepare yourself to meet her just revenge.

Enter Lady Randolph and Anna.

Amna. Summon your utmost fortitude, before

You speak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
Are now at flake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your'lips may fly.
Lady Rand. Thou flalt behold me, with a defp'rate

heart,
Hear how my infant periih'd. See, he kneels.

[9che prionerkreels.
Pry. Heav'n bless that countenance, so fweer and'

mild!

A judge like thee makes innocence more bold.
O save me, Lady, from these cruel men
iWho have attack'd and seiz'd me; who accuse
Meofintended murder. As Ihope
For mercy at the judgment-feat of Heav'ir,
The tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
1s not more innocent than I of murder,

Lady Rand. Of this man's guilt what proof can ye

produce
Fir-. Ser-v. We found him lurking in the hollow

Glynn.

When view'd and call'd upon, amaz'd, he fled.
We overtook him, and inquir'd from whence
And what he was; he said, he came from far,
And was upon his journey to the camp.
Not fatisfy'd with this, we fearch'd his cloaths,
And found these jewels, whbfe rich value plead
Most powerfuly againfl him. Hard he seems,
And old in villainy. Permit us try
His stubbornness against the torture's force.

Prf. 0 gentle Lady! by your Lord's dear life!

Which these weak- hands, I swear, did ne'er:afail;
And by your childrens welfare, spare my age !
Let not the iron tear my antient joints,
And ny grey hairs bring to the grave with pain.

X Lady

Lady Rand. Account for these: thine own they can-

not be:

For thee, I fay ; be stedfast to the truth;
Detet:ed fallhood is most certain death.

[Anna refmoves the Servazts, and retums.r

Pri/ Alas ! I'm fore beset ! let never man,

For fake of lucre, fin against his foul !
Eternal jullice is in this molt just !
I, guiltlers now, must former guilt reveal.

Lady Rand. O ! Anna hear! once more, I charge

thee, speak

The truth direst: for these to me foretell
And certify a part of thy narration;
With which if the remainder tallies not,
An inflant and a dreadful death abides thee.

Prif. Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speak to thee as'iul

As if you were the minilter of heaven,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men.
Some eighteen years ago, I rented land
Of brave Sir Malcolm, then Balarmo's Lord;

jBt falling to decay, his servants seiz'd

Al that 1 had, and then turn'd me and mine,
(i'iur helpless infants, and their weeping mother)
Oit to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hove! by the river's fide
Receiv'd us; there hard labour, and the skill
In tflhing, which was formerly my sport,
Supported life. Whilit thus we poorly liv'd,
One tlormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down, and loud and oft
The angry spirit of the water fhriek'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
Of one in jeopardy. 1 rose, and ran
'To where the circling eddy of a pool,
beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach whatever floating thing the lream
lil:d canght. The voice was ceas'd ; the p: ion loft;
'.tt looling fad and earne on the waters,
1y\ the .mocn's light I fa, vwhi.-'d round and round,

- . .· ., barset;:

A balet: soon I drewit to the bank,
And nestled curious there an infant lay.

Lady Rand. Was he alive ?
Pr../ He was.
Lady Rand. Inhuman that thou art !
How cculd'tl thou kill what waves and tempefls spar'd ?

Prif. I am not so inhuman.
LadyR..R;;d. Didft thou not?
Arna. My noble mitlrefs, you are mov'd too much:

This man has not the afpe& of lern murder:
Let him go on, and you, I hope, will hear
Good tidings of your kinsman's long loft child.

Pr.f. The needy man, who has known better days,

One whom distress has spited at the world,
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds, as make the prosperous men
Lifi up their hLands and wonder who could do them.
And luch a man was I; a man declin'd,
Who saw no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have touch'd that infant with a hand of harm.

Lady Rard. Ha! dot thou fay so ? Then perhaps he

lives!

Pri. Not many days ago he was alive.
Lady Ra,:d. 0 ' heav'niy Pow'r ! did he then die so

lateivy

Prif. I did not fay he died: I hope he lives.

Tot manv days ago these eyes beheld
Him, ficuri'hing in youth, and health, and beauty.

Lady Rand. Where is he now ?
Prif. Alas ! I know not where.
Lady Rar.d. Oh ! fate, I fear thee still. Thou rid-

dler, speak
Direct and clear: else I will search thy foul.

' r.r.a. Permit me, ever honour'd ! keen impatience,
' ho' hard to be ref.rain'd, defeats itself.-'
Ladv Rand. Pursue thy fory with a faithful tongue,
To the las hour that thou didft keep the child.

Pr.;f Fear not my faith, tho' I mull speak my shame.

Within the cradle where the infaut lay,
lWas s:ow'd a mighty store of gold and jewels:

I Tempted

Tempted by which, we did resolve to hide,
'From all the world, this wonderful event,
And like a peasant breed the noble child.
That none might mark the change of our estate,
We left the country, travell'd to the North,
lought flocks and herds, and gradually brought forth
Our secret wealth. But God's all-feeing eye
Beheld our avarice, and smote us fore.
For, one by one, all our own children dy'd,
And he, the Stranger, sole remain'd the heir
-Of what, indeed, was his. Fain then, wouldI,
wtho with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
fIave trulted him, now in the dawn of youth,
YWith his own secret: but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never would consent.
Mleanwhile the Irhipling grew in years and beauty;
And, as we oft oblerv'd, he bore himself
Not as the offspring of our cottage blood;
For nature will break out: mild wi:h the mild,
But with the forward he was fierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I set myself againfr his warlike bent;
But all in vain: for iwhen a desperate band
Of robbers from the savage mountains came-

Lady Rand. Eternal Providence! What is thy name ?
Pri. My name is Norval: and my name he bears.
Lady Rand. 'Tis he ! 'tis he himself! it is my son !

O ! sovereign mercy ! 'Twas my child I saw !
No wonder, Anna, that my bosom burn'd.

_nna. Just are your transports: ' ne'er was woman's

heart

''Prov'd with such fierce extremes. High fated Dame !'
But yet remember that vou are beheld -
By servile eyes; your gestures may be seen
Impaffion'd strange; perhaps your words o'erheard.

Lady Rand. Well dolt thou counsel, Anna: heav'r

beltow

On me th.it wifliom which my slate requires !
: ' A:na. The moments of deliberation pass,
' And soon you muft-refolve. This ufefil man

Bea ' Maia

' Mul be difmifs'd in safety, ere my Lord
' Shall with his brave deliverer return.'

Pr;-i If I, aridft astonishment and fear,

Have of your words and gestures rightly j udg'd,
Thou art the daughter of my ancient malter;
The child I refcu'd from the flood is thine.

Lady Rand. With thee diffimulationr now were vain,

I am indeed the daughter of Sir Malcolm;
The child thou refcu'dii from the flood is mine.

Prif. Blefs'd be the hour that made me a poor man !
My poverty hath fav'd my master's house !

Lady Rand. Thy words furprize me: sure thou doll

not feign:

The tear sands in thine eye: such love from thee
Sir Malcolm's house deferv'd not; if aright
Thou told'f the story of thy own distress.

-Prif. Sir Malcolm of our Barons was the flower;
The faftelt friend, the best, the kindelt master:
But ah ! he knew not of my fad estate.
After that battle, where his gallant son,
Your own brave brother, fell, the good old Lord
Grew desperate and reckless of the world;
And never, as he erst was wont, went forth
To overlook the conduc of-his servants.
By them 1 was thrust out, and them I blame:
May heav'n so judge me, as I judg'd my master !
Ad God so love me as I love his race.
Lady Rarad. His race shall yet reward thee. On thy

faith

Depends the fate of thy lov'd master's house.
Renembreft thou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the clifts of Carron ?

Prif. I remember
The cottage of the clifts.

Lady Rand, 'Tis that I mean:

There dwells a man, of venerable age,
Who in my father's service spent his youth:
Tell him I sent thee, and with him remain,
Till I fliall call upon thee to declare,
Before the King and Nobles, what thou now

3 To

To me haft told. No more but this,. and thou
Shalt live in honour all thy future days;
Thy son so long /hall call thee father till,
And all the land flall bless the man who fav'd
The fan of Douglas, and Sir Malcolm's heir.
R.emember well my words: if thou should'st meet
Him whom thou call'll thy son, fiill call hiim o,
And mention nothing of his nobler father.

Prif. Fear not that I flould mar so fair an harvef,

By putting in my fickle ere 'tis ripe.
Why did I leave my home, and antient dame ?
To find the youth to tell him all I knew,
And make him wear these jewels in his arms;
Which might, I thought, be challeng'd, and so bring
To light the secret of his noble birth.

[Lady Randolph goes towards the Servants.

Lady Rand. This man is not th' assassin you fufpeEted,

'ho' chance combin'd some likelihoods against him.
lie is the faithful bearer of the jewels
'To their right owner, whom in haste he seeks.
'Tis meet that you Thould put him on his way,
Since your miflaken zeal hath dragg'd him hither.

[Exeunt Stranger and Ser.vants}

My faithful Anna dost thou share my joy ?
I know thou dofl. Unparallel'd event !
Reaching from heav'n to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings to me my son !
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father;
Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
For such a gift! What does my Anna think
Of the young.eaglet of a valiant net ?
How soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his fate had thrown.h iir,
And tower'd up to the region of his fire !

i4nta. How fondly did your eyes devour the boy !

Myllerious nature, with the unseen cord
Of powerful inflint, drew you to your own.

Lady Rand. The ready story of his birth believ'd

Supprefs'd my fancy quite; nor did he owe
To any likeness my so sudden favour:
But nowl long to fee his face.again,

B,3 Examlne

Examine every feature, and find out
The lineaments of Douglas, or my own.
But most of all I long to let him know
Who his true paen:s are, to clasp his neck,
And tell him all the story of his father.

Azna. With wary caution you muf bear yourself

In public, lelf your tenderness break forth,
And in observers ilir conje&ures strange.
' For, if a cherub in the shape of woman
' Should walk this world, yet defamation would,
' Like a vile cur, bark at the angel's train '
To-day the Baron ilarted at your tears.
Lady Rard. He did so, Anna ! well thy Mistress

knows,

If the lea.r circuminfnce, mote of offence,
Should touch the Baron's eve, his fight would be
WiTith jealufy diforder'd. But the more
It does behove me inllant to declare
The birth of Doug'as, and aifert his rights.
This night I purpose with my son to meet,
Reveal the secret, and consult with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs,
As he does no w, so lock'd his noble father,
Array'd in nature's ease: his mien, his speech,
~Were i;feetiv firple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those trivial mortals who seem always wife.
Bur, when the matter macch'd his mighty mind,
UTp roe the Hero: on his piercing eye
Sat ofr-.-ation: on each glance of thought
Deciuion folowv'd, as the thunder-bolt
Pur-Les :he lallh.

A.;na. That demon haunts you fill:
Behold Gdenl--on.

Ladvy 1and. Now I shun him not.

This day I brav'd hi;n in behalf of Nor-a!:
Perhlrps too fr: at !I'af my nicer fears
For Douglas thus interpret.

E;i'!r Glenalvon.

Gler. Noble Dame !
The hov'-ring Dane at last his men hath landed:

INv

No band of pirates; but a mighty hoa,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers;
'To win a country, or to lose themselves.

Lady Rand. But whence comes this intelligence,

Glenalvon ?

Glen. A nimble courier sent from yonder camp,

'To halten up the chieftains of the north,
Inform'd me, as he past, that the fierce Dane
Had on the ealtern coast of Lothian landed,
( Near to that place where the sea rock immense,
' Amazing Bass, looks o'er a fertile land.

' Lady Rand. Then must this western army march

; to join

The warlike troops that guard Edina's tow'rs.
' Gln. Beyond all question. If impairing time
HIas not effac'd the image of a place
Once perfect in my brea!k, there is a wild
Which lies to westward of that mighty rock,
And seems by nature formed for the camp,
Of water-wafted armies, whose chief trength
Lies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse:
if martial &kill direcs the Danilh lords,
There inaccessible their army lies
To our fwift-fcow'ring horse, the bloody field
Must man to man, and foot to foot, be fought.'
Lady Rand. How many mothers ihall bewail their

sons ! -

How many widows weep their husbands lain
Ye dames of Denmark ! ev'n for you I feel,
Who sadly fitting on the fea-beat (horc,
Long look for lords that never flall return.

Glen. Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian sword

Widow'd the north. The children ofthe slain
Come, as I hope, to meet their father's fate.
The moanser war, with her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are objects luited to Glenalvon's foul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death:
Reproach more piercing than the pointed sword.

Lady Rand. 1 scorn thee not, but when I ought to

scorn ;

B4 Nor

?ior e'er reproach, but when insulted virtue
Against audacious vice asserts herself.
I own thy worth, Glenalvon; none more apt-
Than I to praise thine eminence in arms,
J\nd re the echo of thy martial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty pailion:
Go and rurfue a lawful miilrefs, Glorr.
Upon the Danish cre!ts redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the shield cf Randolph.

G.!n. One in..ant flay, and hear an alter'd man.

When beauty pleads for virtue, vice abafn'd
Flies irs own colours, .nd goes o'er to virtue.
I am your convert; time will flew how truly:
Yet one immediate roof I mean to give.
iTht youth, for whom your ardent zeal to-day
bcmewrhat too haughtily defy'd your slave,
Am.icfr the shock of armies I'll defend,
And turn death from him with a guardian arm.
* Sdate by use, my bosom maddens not
' Ar the tumultuous uproar of the fieid.'
Lady Rand. Act thus, Glenslvon, and I am thy

friend;

Ect that's thy leall reward. Believe me, Sir,
' ie truly generous is the truly wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblest.

[Exit Lady Randolph and Anna.

Ghn. Amen ! and viriue i its own reward!-

I think that I have hit the very tone
Jn vhich she loves to speak. H.oney'd aflent,
.Ho- pleasant art thou to the taite of man,
And woman also ! 'lattery direct
Rarely cilfii, i. They little know mankind
Who doubt its operation: 'tis my key,
And ores the wicket of the human heart.
How far I have succeeded now I know not,
Yet I incline to think her flormy virtue
Is lu!i'd awhile: 'Tis her alone I fear:
While she in Randolph live, and live in faith
And amity, uncertain is my tenure.

Fate o'er omy head iufoends diigrace and death,
' By that weak hair, a peeviih female's will,

' lam

- I am not idle: but the ebbs and flows
' Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated.'
That slave of Norval's I have found molt apt.
I .hew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his foul
To fay and swear whatever I suggest.
Norval, I'm told, has that alluring look,
'Twixt man and woman, which I have obferv'd
To charm the nicer and fantastic dames,
Who are, like Lady Randolph, full of virtue.
In railing Randolph's jealousy I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom errs
Who think the worst he can of womankind.

B )A C T

# ACT IV.

AC T IV.

Fr:i.rij of 'Trumpets.

::er Lsrd Randolph.

Lcrd Randolph.

Q U MMi ON an hundred horse, by break of day,
) To waait our pleasure at the cafle-gate.

Ea.:'r La.ij Randolph.
L:dy Ramdz. Alas! my Lord I I've heard unwelcoeme

news:
Th-_panes are landed.

Loa Rand. Av, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournarnent essay
Of lon.e young knight refolv'd to break a spear,
And f.ain with hofiile blood his maiden arms.
The Danes are landed ; we must beat them back,
Or live the slaves of Denmark.

Ladv- Rand. Dreadful times !
Lord Rand. The fenceless villages are all forsaken;

Th:e trembling mothers and their children lodg'd
In val-girt towers and caRles ; whilst the men
Rerire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
They- bu: r-ire more aw.ful to return.

Lady Rand. Irr.menfe, as fame reports, the Daniflh

hofl
Lord Ra,?d. Were it as numerous as loud fame re-

ports,
An army knit like ours would pierce it thro':

Brothers,

Brothers, that lhrink not from each other's fide,
And fond companions, fill our warlike files:
For his dear offspring, and the wife he loves,
The husband, and the fearless father arm.
In vulgar breafs heroic ardour burns,
And the poor peasant mates his daring lord.
Lidy Rand. Men's minds are. temper'd, like their

swords, for war;

' Lovers of danger, on deltrution's brink
' They joy to rear erea their daring forms.
· Hence, early graves ; hence, the lone widow's life;
· And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age.'
Where is our gallant guelt ?

Lord Rand. Down in the vale

I left him, managing a fiery steed,
Whose stubbornness had foil'd the trength and skill
Of every rider, But behold he comes,
In earnelt conversation with Glenalvon.

Enter Norval and Glenalvon.

Glenalvon ! .with the lark arise: go forth,

And lead my troops that lie in yonder vale.:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
Norval, thou goeil with me. But fly, young man !
Where didft thou learn so to discourse of war,
And in such terms as I o'erheard to-day r
War is no village science, nor its phrase
A language taught amongfr the (hepherd swains.

Niiv. Small is the skill my Lord delights to praise

In him he favours-Hear from whence it came.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the molt remote
And inacceflible, by shepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit liv'd ;_a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our wand'ring swains.
Auelere and lonely, cruel to himself,
Did they report him : the cold earth his bed,
Water his drink, his food the Ihep! irds'alms.
I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
With rev'rencic and with pity. Mild he spake,

B'6 And

And, ent'ring on discourse, such flories told
A's made me eft revisit his fad cell.
For he had been a soldier in his youth;
And fought in famous battles, when the Peers
OfFurope, by the bold Godfredo led
Againit ih' usurping Infidel difplay'd
The blessed Cross, and won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech I'ruck from me,-the old man would lhake
His years away, and ah his young encounters:
Then, having Ihew'd his wounds, he'd fit him down,
And all the live-long day discourse of war.
To help my fancy, in the fniooth green turf
He cut the figures of the mar:h l'd hefts;
Defcrib'd the motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep columnn, and the lcngthen'd line,
The iquare, the creicent, and the phalanx firm,
For all that-Saracen or Chriflian knew
Of war's raft art, was to this hermit known.

Lord Rand. Why did this soldier in a desert hide
Those qualities that ihould have grac'd a-camp?

iljr',. That too at iaf I iearn'd. Unhappy man !

Returning homewards-by Mefina's port,
Leaded with wealh and honours bravely won,
A rude and hoifi'rous captain of the sea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought:
The firanger fell, and w;ith his dying biea:h
re-lar'dhis name and ilneag ! Miglity Power!
The foidier cried, my brother ! Oh ! my brother !

Lady Rannd. His brother !
Nr,-,v. Yes; of the fame pairents hcrn;

His only brother. They exchang'd folgivenef:
And happy, in my mind,' vas he that died:
For many deaths has the firvivor fufftr'd.
in the wild desert on a rock he fits,
Or oi-fome nameless l.ream's untrodden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times, alas ! not in his perfect mind !
Holds dialogues with his lov'd brother's ghoR;
And oft each night forsakes his fullen couch,
To -make fad orisons for him he siew.

Lady

Lady Rand. To what mysterious woes are mortals

born!

In this dire tragedy were there no more
Unhappy persons.? did theparents live ?
Norv. No; they were dead: kind heav'n had clos'd

their eyes
Before their son had (hed his brother's blood.

Lord Rand. Hard is his fate; for he was not to blame!

There is a destiny in this strange world,
Which oft decrees an undeserved doom:
Let fchoolmen tell us why.-From whence these founds?

[Trumpets at a diJfance.

Enter an Officer.

Of. My Lord, the trumpets of the troops of Lorn:

The valiant leader hails the noble Randolph.
Lord Rand. Mine antient gueif! does he the war-

riors lead?
Has Denmarkrous'd the brave old Knight to arms?

Off. No: worn with warfare, he resigns the sword.

His eldest hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord Rand.. Glenalvon, go.

With hospitality's most strong request
Intreat the chief. [Exit Glenalvon.

Of: My Lord, requefis are vain.

He urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foe's approach. [Exit.

Lord Rand. May vitory fit on the warrior's plume !

Bravest of men! his flocks and herds are safe;
Remote from war's alarms his pasture lie,
By mountains inacceflible fecur'd;
Yet foremost he into the plain descends,
Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the antient world;
Contemners they of. indolence and gain;
But frill for love of glory, and of arms,
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift
Againit each frong antagonist the spear.
I'll go and press the hero to my breat. [Exit.

Lady

LadyRand. Thefoldier'sloftinefs, the pride andpomp

Invelling awful war, Norval, I fee,
Transport thy youthful mind.

Norv. Ah ! hould they not?

Blefi be the hour I left my father's house-!
1 might have been a shepherd all my day)s,
And tole obscurely to apeafant's grave.
Now, if I live, with mighty chiefs I l.and;
And, if I fall, with noble duf I lie.

Lady Rand. There is a generous spirit in thy breat,

That could have well fuftain'd a prouder fortune.

This way with me, under you spreading beech,'
Since lucky chance has left us here alone,
Unseen, unheard, by human eye or ear,
I will amaze thee with a wond'rous tale.

. Gr'v. Let there be danger, Lady, with the-fecret,
That I may hug it to my grateful heart,
And prove my faith. Command my sword, my life;
These are the sole pofleffions of poor Norval.

Lady Rand. Know'ft thou these gems?
Nor-v. Durt I believe mine eyes,

I'd fay I knew them, and they were my father's.
LadyRanr. Thy father's, fay'ft thou! ah! they were

thy father's t

Acmr. I saw them once, and curiously inquir'd

Of both my parents, whence such splendor came?
But I was check'd; and more could never learn.
Lady Rand. Then learn of me, thou art not Norval's

son.

Nsrv. Not Norval's son!
Lady Rand. Nor of a iheherd sprung.
Ncr-v. Lady, who am I then
Lady Rand. Noble thou art;
For noble was thy Sire !

Kir-u. I will believe
O! tell me farther! Say who was my father

Lady Rand. Douglas!
·Nr-u. Lord Douglas, whom to-day I saw?
Lady Rand. His younger brother.
ior--J. And in yonder camp . '
Lady Ranrd Alas I

«'ri-.

Noir-. You make me tremble--- Sighs and tears !
Lives my brave father ?

Lady Rand. Ah ! too brave indeed !
He fellin battle ere thyself was born.

ANorv. Ah me unhappy ! ere I saw the light ?

But does my mother live? I may conclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been sorrow.

Lady Rand.. She lives; but waltes her life in conflant

woe,
Weeping her husband slain, her infant loft.

Norv. You that are fkill'd so well in the fad llory

Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their deltiny, now have comptfflioa
Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd !
O ! tell me who, and where my mother is !
Opprefs'd by a base world, perhaps she bends
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief;
And, desolate, implores of heav'n the aid
Her ion should give. It is, it must be so-
Your countenance confesses that she's wretched.
O ! tell me her condition ! Can the f.vord-
Who lhall refill me in a parent's cause?
Lady Rand. Thy virtue ends her woe ! My son! my

son !

1Norv. Art thou my mother ?
Lady Rand. I am thy mother, and the wife of

Douglas! [Falls upon his neck.

Nor.v. 0 heav'n and earth, how wondrous is my fate!
Art thou my mother? Ever let me kneel !

Lady Rand. Image of Douglas! Fruit of fatal love!
All that I owe thy Sire, I pay to thee..

ANorv. RespeCt and admiration still possess me,

Checking the love and fondness of a son.
YetI was filial to my humble parents.
But did my Sire surpass the ref of men,.
As thou excelled all of womankind ?

Lady Rand. Arise, my son ! In me thou doll behold

The poor remains of beauty once admir'd:
The autumn of my days is come already;
For sorrow made my summer halle away.
Yet in my primre I cquall'd not thy father;

His

His eyes were like the eagle's, yet sometimes
Liker the dove's; and, as he pleas'd, he won
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

Normv. How did he fall? Sure 'twas a bloody field
When Douglas died. O I have much to as !

Lady Rand. Hereafter thou flialt hear the lengthen'd

tale

Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
At present this: thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder caille, and the wide domains
Which now Lord Randolph, as myhuiband, holds.
But thou lhalt not be wrong'd; I have the power
To right thee still: before the King I'll kneel,
And call Lord Douglas to protet his blood.

Nsrv. The blood of Douglas will protect itself,
Lady Rand. But we ihall need both friends and fa-

vour, boy,

To wres thy lands and lordship from the gripe
Of Randolph and his kinsman. Yet I think
My tale will move each gentle.heart to pity,
Mv life incline the virtuous to believe.

A.rv. To be thebfon of Douglas is to me

Inheritance enough: Declare my birth,
And in the field 11 seek for fame and fortune.
Lady Ran.i Thou dost not know what perils and

injuiAice

Await the poor man's valour. O ! my son!
The noblest blood of all the land's abhfh'd,
Haring no lacquey but pale poverty.
Too long haft thou been thus attended, Douglas !
Too long has thou been deem'd a peasant's child.
The wanton heir o some inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in the youthful sports;
WhiilI thy indignant spirit fiell'd in vain !
Such contumely thou no more shalt bear:
But how 1 purpose to redress thy wrongs
Must be hereafter told. Prudence directs
That we should part before yon chiefs return.
Retire, and from thy rustic follower's hand
Receive a billet, which-thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, dietated before

This

*iThis casual opportunity arose
Of private conference. Its purport mark;
For, as I there appoint, we meet again.
Leave me, my son ! and frame thy manners Rill
To Norval's, not to noble Douglas' fiate.

Norv.z I will remember. Where is Norval now ?

That good old man.

LadyRand. Athand conceal'd helies,

An useful witness. But bewace, my son,
Of yon Glenalvon; in his guilty breast
Resides a villain's shrewdness, ever nrone
To false conjeture. He hath griev'd my heart.

Nor v. Has he indeed? Then let yon false Glenalvon

Beware of me. [Exit.

Lady Rand. There burst the finother'd flame !

O ! thou all righteous and eternal King!
Who father of the fatherless art call'd,
Protet my Ton !-Thy inspiration, Lor !
Hath fill'd his bosom with that sacred fire,
Which in the breafs of his forefathers burn'd:
Sethim on high like them, that he mayfhine
The star andglory of his native land !
Then let the minister of death descend,
And bear my willing spirit to its place.
Yonder they come. How do bad women find
Unchanging afpecs to conceal their guilt?
When I, by reason, and byjuftice urg'd,
Pull hardly can dissemble with these men
In nature's pious cause.

Enter Lord Randolph and Glenalvcn.

Lord Rand. Yon gallant chief,

Of arms enamour'd, all repose disclaims.

Lady Rand. Be not, my Lord, by his example fway'd:

Arrange the business of to-morrow now,
And, when you enter, speak of war no more. [Exit.
Lord Rand. 'Tis so, by heav'n ! her mien, her voice,

her eye,
And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

Glen,

Glen. He parted from her now: behind the mount,
Amongff the trees, I saw him glide along.

,ord Rand. For fad, fequeftred virtue .he's renown'd!
Glen. Most true, my Lord.
Lord Rand. Yet this diftinguilh'd Dame

Invites a youth, the acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This afiznation \Zje~.s a letter] the afaffin freed,
Her manifest af.etion for the youth,
Might breed suspicion in a hu.band's brain,
Whose genlle comi;rt all for love had vwedde ;
Much more in mine. Miatilda never lov'd me.
Let no man, after me, a woman wed,
Whose heart he knows he has not; tho' ihe brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry.
For let her seer, lke the night's fhadowv queen,
Cold and ccn:emplative ;-he cannot Truii her:
She may, fie will, bring liame and sorrow on him;
The wori. of farrows, and the worfi of shames

Glen. Yield not, my Lord, to such affliaing thoughts,

But let the spirit of an husband sleep,
Till yourown senses made a sure concluion.
This billet must to blooming Norval go:
At the next turn awaits my trusty spy;
I'll give it him refitted for his master.
In the close thicket take your secret stand;
The moon !fiines bright, and your own eyes mayjudge
Of their behaviour.

Lord Rard. Thou doff counsel well.
GiL.. Permit me now to make one flight eflay,

Of al the trophies which vain mortals boas,
By it, by valour, or by wisdom won,
The first and fairefr in ayoung man's eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Successful love
With e'orious flames ilntoxicates the mind !
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Lord Rand. And what avails this maxim ?
Gen. Much, my Lord!

Withdraw a little; I'l! accost young Norval,
And with ironical d rifive counsel

Explore

Explore his spirit. If he is no more
Than humble Norval, by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as he is, he'll shrink aftonifh'd from mec
But if lie be the fav'rite of the fair,
Lov'd by the first of Caledonia's dames,
Ile'll turn upon me, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.

Lord Rand. 'Tis flrewdly thought.
Glen. When we grow loud, draw near. But let my

Lord

His riling wrath reflrain [Ex't Randolph.
.------ 'Tis strange, by heav'n !
That fle Ihould run full tilt her fond career,
To one so little known. She too that feem'd
Pure as the winter llream,' when ice embofs'd
Whitens its course. Even I did think her chalte
Whose charity exceeds not. Precious sex !
Whose deeds lascivious pass Glenalvon's thoughts!

[Norval apptcas.

His port I love; he's in a proper mood
To chide the thunder, if at him it roar'd.
Has Norval seen the troops?

Norv. The setting fun,

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale,
And as the warriors mov'd, each polish'd helm,
Corflet, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at its top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they feem'd,
An host angelic, clad in burning arms.

GIne. Thou talk'ft it well; no leader of our host,
In founds more lofty, speaks of glorious war.

Asr-J. If I hall e'er acquire a leader's name,

My speech will be lets ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Velnts itself freely; since no part is mine
Of praise pertaining to the great in arms.
Gleni. You wrong yourself, brave Sir; your martial

deeds

Have rank'd you with the great: but mark me, Norval;
Lord Randolph's favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.

Let

Let me, who know the soldiers, counsel you.
Give them all honour; seem not to command;
Else they will scarcely brook your late sprung power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

nir'-. Sir, I have been accullom'd all my days.

To hear and speak the plain and imple truth:
And tho' I have been told, that there are men
Who borrow friendship's tongue to speak their scorn,
Yet in such language I am little flili'd.
Therefore I thank Glenalvon for his counsel,
Although it founded harlhly. Why remind
Me of my birth obscure? Why slur my power
With such contemptuous terms?

Glen. I did not mean
To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

Kcrv. My pride-!
Glen. Suppress it as you wilh to prosper.

Your pride's excessive. Yet for Randolph's fake
I will not leave you to its rash diretion.
If thus you swell, and frown at high-born men,
Think you they will endure a fllepherd's scorn?

Nsr-v. A shepherd's scorn!
G!en. Yes, if you presume

To bend on soldiers these disdainful eyes,
'What will become of you?

Ncr-v. If this were told- [.Afile.
Haft thou no fears for thy presumptuous self?

Gkon. Ha! Dot thou threaten me?
NArv. Didf thou not hear?
Glen. Unwillingly I did; a noble foe
Had not been queftion'd thus. But such as thee-

ANr-v. Whom doll thou think me ?
Glee. Norval.
Tcr.v. So I am
And who is Norval in Glenalvon's eyes?

Glen. A peasant's son, a wand'ring beggar-boy;
At best no more, even if he speaks the truth.

Nsr-v. False as thou art, dolt thou fufpea mny truth?
Gkn. Thy truth ! thou'rt all a lie;- and false as hell
Is the vain-glorious tale thou tcld'll to Randolph.

Norv.

norv. If I were chain'd, unarm'd, and bedrid old,

Perhaps I flould revile: But as I am
1 have no tongue to rail. The humble Norval
Is of a race who itrives not but with deeds,
Did [ not fear to freeze thyfllallow valour,
And make thee fink too soon beneath my sword,
I'd tell thee-what thou art. I know thee well.

Glen. Dofl thou not know Glenalvon, born to corn-

mand
Ten thousand hlaves like thee?

Nor-v. Villain, no more:

Draw and defend thy life. I did design
To have defy'd thee in another cause:
But heaven accelerates its vengeance on thee.
Now for my own and Lady Randolph's wrongs.

Enter Lord Randolphp
Lord Rand. Hold, I command you both. The man

that.ftirs
Makes me his foe.

Norv. Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly founded, noble Randolph.

Glen. Hear him, my Lord; he's wond'rous con-

dcfcending!
Mark the humility of shepherd Norval!

Nor'v. Now you may fcoffin safety. [Sheaths hisjivori.
Lord Rand. Speak not thus,

Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

Norv. Nay, my good Lord, tho' I revere you

much,

My cause I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I blush to speak; I will not, cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words that I from him have borne.
To the liege-lord of my dear native land
I owe a fubjea's homage; but even him
And his high arbitration I'd reje&.
Within my bosom reigns another lord;
Honour, sole judge and umpire ofitfelf.
If my free speech offend you, noble Randolph.

*Revoke

Revoke your favours, and let Norval go
Hence rs he came, alone, but not difionour'd.

Lord Rand. Thus far I'il mediate with impnrtial

voice.

The antient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
Suspend your purpose, till your countrys arms
Repel the bold invader; then decide
The private quarrel.

Gien. I agree to this.
isri-v. And I.

Entf.r Servant.

Ser-v. The banquet waits.
Lord Rand. We come. [Exit Randolph and Servant.
Gl,-. Norval,

Let nct our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hofpititait of Randolph.
Nor frown ng an er, nor vet wrinkled hate,
Shall ilain my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow;
Nor let oarlirife diiurb the gentle Dame.

Ncrv. Think not iio h:ly, Sir, of my resentment;
When we contend again, our ilrife is mortal.

[Exeunt.
ACT

# ACT V.

ACT V.

the WFood.

Enter Douglas.
H IIIS is the place, the centre of the grove.

Here tands the oak, the monarch of the wood.

How sweet and solemn is this midnight scene!
The silver moon, unclouded, holds her way
Thro' flies where I could count each little Itar.
The fanning weft wind scarcely stirs the leaves;
The river, rufling o'er its pebble bed,
Imposes silence with a tilly found.
In such a place as this, at such an hour,
If anceltiy can le in ought believ'd,
Descending spirits have convers'd with man,
And told the-fecrets of the world unknown.

Enter Old Norval.
N.rv. 'Tis he. But what if he should chide me

hence

His just reproach I fear. [Douglas turns andfees him,
Forgive, forgive,
Canll thou forgive the man, the selfish man,
Who bred Sir Malcolm's heir a flepherd's son.

Doug. Kneel not to me: thou art my father fill:

Thy wifh'd-for presence now compleats my joy.
Welcome to me, my fortunes thou shalt Ihare,
And ever honour'd with thy Douglas live.
Aorv. And dost thou call me father? 0 my

son!
I think that 1 could die to make amends,

For

For the great wrong I did thee. 'rwas my crime
Which in the .vildernefs o long couceal'd
The blossom of thy youth.

Dsru. Not worf the fruit,

That in the v.ildernefs tlhebloffom blow'd.
Amongst the fliepherds, in the humble cot,
I learn'd some leflons, which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; and, when my vassals bow,
Norval (hall smooth the crefied pride of Douglas.

Xorv. Let me but live to fee thine exaltation!

Yet grievous are my fears. 0 leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

Do/ig. Why should I leave them ?
Ncrr.. Lord Randolph and his kininan seek your life
Doug. How know'it thou that?
Acr-v. I will inform you how.

When evening came, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And fondly trod in each accuftom'd path
That to the caile leads. Whilf thus I rang'd,
I was alarm'd with unexpected founds
Of earnest voices. On the persons came;
Unseen I lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each otheras they talk'd, Lord Randolph this,
And that Glenalvon: still of you they spoke,
And of the Lady: threat'ning was their speech,
'ho' but imperfectly my ear could hear it.
'Twas firange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Doug. Revenge! for what?
Ncr'.. For being what you are;

Sir Malcolm's heir: how else have you offended ?
When they were gone, I hy'd me to my cottage,
And there fat muting how I belt might find
Means to inform you of their wicked purpose.
But I could think of none:' at last, perplex'd,
I iffu'd forth, encompassing the tower
Wiith many a weary fep, and wilhful look.
Ncw Providence hath brought you to my fight,

Let

Let not your too courageous spirit scorn
, The caution which I give.

. Doug. I scorn it not.
My mother warn'd me of Glenalvon's baseness:
But I will not fufpe& the noble Randolph.
In our encounter with the vile aflafins,
1 mark'd his brave demeanor: him I'll trull.

A orv. I fear you will too far.
Dolg. Here in. this place

I wait my mother's coming; she lhall know
What thou haft told : her counsel I will follow;
And cautious ever are a mother's counsels.
You mula depart; your presence may prevent
Our interview.

Norlv. My blessing reft upon thee 1

0 n may heav'n's hand. which fav'd thee from the wave,
And from the fiord of foes, be near thee llill;
Turning mischance, if ought hangs o'er thy head,
1All upon mine! r ,;7/,
3 1 D,. MHe loves me like a parent;

And mull not, shall not lose ,he son he-loves,
Altho' his son has found a nobler father.
Eventful day i how hal thou chang'd my Itate!
Once on the cold, and winter-fhaded fide
Of a bleak hill, mischance had rooted me,
Never to thrive, child of another foil:
'Pranfplanted now to the gay funnyv ale,
Like the green thorn of May nly fortune flowers.
Ye glorious faars I high heav'n's refp'endent !loft i

o whom I oft have of my lot complain'd,
Hciar and record my foul's unatclr'd wilth .
DI)cad or alive, let me but b- renown'd !

lMay Ileav'n inspire some fierce gigantic Dane,
TIo give a bold defiance to our :oft
lSe-Lre he speaks it out I will accept:
}Like Douglas conquer, or like Douglas die.

Enter Lady Randolph.

\Lady Rand. *My son ! I heard a %voice -
Doi-,g. The voice was mine.

C r

Lady Rand. Didft thou complain aloud to nature's

ear,

That thus in dufiy shades, at midnight hours,
By health the mother and the son should meet ?

[Embracing him,

Doug. No ; on this happy day, this better birth-day,

My thoughts and words are all of hope and joy.

-Lady Rand. Sad fear and melancholy itill divide
The empire of my breast with hope and joy.
Now hear what I advise.

Doug. First let me tell
What may the tenor of your counsel change.

Lady Rand. My heart forebodes some evil !
Doug. 'Tis not good.-

At eve, unseen by Randolph and Glenalvon,
The good old Norval in the grove o'erheard
Their conversation: oft they mention'd me
'With dreadful threatnings; you they sometimes nam'd.
'Twas ilrange, the) said, a ;wonderful discovery;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Lad) Rand. Defend us, gracious God: we are be-

tray'd:

They have found eut the secret of thy birth;
It must be ib. That is the great discovery.
Sir Malcolm's heir is come to claim his own;
And he will be reveng'd. Perhaps even now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for murder, they but wait
A darker and more silent hour, to break
Into the chamber where they think thou fleep'ft.
This moment, this, heav'n hath ordain'd to save thee !
Fly to the camp, my son !

Do0. And leave you here ?

No; to the cable let us go together,
Call up the ancient fer-ants of your house,
Who in their youth did eat your father's bread.
Then tell them loudiy tha: i am your son.
If in the breafis of men one spark remains
Offacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your cause will arm. I ask but few
To drive those spoilers from my father's house.

Lady

Lady Raud. 0 Nature, Nature ! what can check thy

force

Thou genuine offspring of the daring Douglas !
But rush not on detruction: save thyself,
And I am safe. To me they mean no harm.
Thy ltay but risks thy precious life in vain.
That winding path conducs thee to the river.
Crofg where thou feelt a broad and beaten way,
Which running eastward leads thee to the camp.
Inliant demand admittance to Lord Douglas.
Shew him these jewels, which his brother wore.
'Thy look, thy voice, will make him feel the truth,
Which I by certain proof will soon confirm.

Doug. I yield me and obey: but yet my heart

Bleeds at this parting. Something bids me tlay
And guard a mother's life. Oft have I read
Of wondrous deeds by one bold arm atchiev'd.
Our foes are two: no more: let me go forth,
And fee if any shield can guard Glenalvon.

Lady Randl. If thou regard'fl thy mother, or revcr'ft

Thy father's mem'ry, think of this no more.
One thing I have to fay before we part;
Long wert thou loft; and thou art found, my child,
In a molt fearful season. War and battle
I have great cause to dread. Too.well I fee
Which way the current of tliy temper sets:
To-day I've found thee. Oh ! my long loft hope !
If thou to giddy valour giv'lt the rein,
To-morrow I may lose iny son for ever.
The love of thee, before thou faw'dl the light,
Suftain'd my life when thy brave father fell.
If thou shalt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this wade world ! my son, remember me !

Doug. What Ihall I fay ? how can I give you comfort?

The God of battles of my life diipofe
As may be belt for you ! for whose dear fake
I will not bear myself as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boast founds amongst martial men,
How will inglorious caution suit my claim
The polt of fate unfhrinking I maintain.

C z My

Mivy coantry's foes must witness who I am.
On the invaders heads I'll prove my birth,
'Til! friends and. fees confess the genuine ftraln.
If in this itrife I fall, blame not your son,
Who, if he lives not honour'd, mulf not live.

Lady Rand. I wiill not utter what my bosom feels,

ToCo w.ell I love that valour which I warn.
Fare-wei, my son! my councils are but -ain.

[Em.'vracieg.
And, as high heav'n hath will'd it, all mult be.

[Sepa late.

Gaze not on me, thou wilt mistake the path;
I'Il point out aain.

[7-y, as
1 :yj arefparatirg, entcr' fm thec vcd Lord

Randolph and Glenalvon.]

Lord. RSa:d. Not in her presence.
Noaw

Gl.n. I'm prepar'd.
Lord c.r.d. No: I command thee stay.'

I go alone: it never fhali be said
That I tcol odds to combat mortal man.
The noblest vengeance is the moll compleat.

[Exit Lord Randolpli,
[Gle2alvon mnakesfomel Jeps to the fame fid e of

tbe fjage, lij/ensz, and/peaks.

Gl'-. Demons of death, come fettle on my sword,

And to a double fikughter guide it home !
The lover and the huiiiand both must die.

[Lcrd Randolph cehin'd the/cene.

Lord Ra.d. Dra-v, villain ! draw.
Ds:,g. Afiail me not, Lord Randolph
Not as thou lov'l thyself. [Clashing offworad;.

[Glenalvon revMing out.

Now is the time.
Enter La0y Randolph at t.le oppote e fde the ifage,

fain! ar.d Erath.'efj.
Lady Ra :d. Lord Randolph, hear me; all shall be

thine own:
But ifare ! Oh, marae m.y son !

Enter

Enter Douglas, vwith afword i each hand,

Doug. My mother's voice !
I can protec- thee fiill.

Lady Rand. He lives, he lives:

For this, for this to heav'n eternal praise
But fare I faxw thee fall.

Doug. It was Glenalvon.

Jult as my arm had mafter'd Randolph's sword,
The villain came behind me ; but I flew him.

Lady Rand. Behind thee ! Ah, thou'rt woundeld

O my child,
How pale thoa look'ft ! and (hail I lose thee now ?

Dolug. Do not despair: I fecl a little f.tnitnefs;
I hope it will not lalt: [Leans upon hisj zvrdi.

Lady Rand. There is no hope!

And we must part ! the hand of death is on thee!
O my beloved child i O Douglas, Douglas !
Doug. Too soon we part; I have not long been

Douglas.

O defriny ! hardly thou deal'ft with me:
Clouded and hid, a stranger to mnyfelf,
In low and poor obscurity i liv'd.

.Lady Rand. . as Heav'n preferv'd thee for an end

like this ?

Dcus. O had I all'n as nmy brave fathers fell,

Turnina with great effort the tide of battle !
Li!:e thcm I ihou!d have inil'd and v-elcom'd death,
Bat thus to perifin by a vi!lain's hand!
Cut off fiom nature's and from glory's course,
'iWnicill nlever mortal was so fond to run.

Lady Rand. iHearjultice ! hear! iretch thy aveng-

ing arm. [Douglas falls.

Deug. Unknown I die; no tongu.e iiall fpeakofme,

Some nob!h spirits, judging by themselves,
May \et conjedture what I n:igh; lhae prov'd,
And think life only wanting to my fame:
But who lhall comfort thee ?

Lady Rand. Despair ! despair!

C(3 DE,

Ds:'g. had it pleas'd high heav'n to let me live

A little while !-My eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apace! my mother--Oh, my mother!

[Dies,

Enter Lord Randolph and Anna.
Lord Rand. Thy words, the words of truth, have

pierc'd my heart.

I am the l1ain of knighthood and of arms.
Oh ! if my brave deliverer survives
The traitor's sword

.r.na. Alas! look there, my Lord.
Lord Rar.d. The mother and her son ! How curst I

am !

Was I the use ? No: I was not the cause.
Yon matchless villain did seduce my faul
To frantic jealoufv.

nr.ar. My Lady lives:

The agony of grief hath but fuppreft
A.h::ie her powers.

Lord Rar.d. But my deliverer's dead!
Thne :.;o.' di-. once eRseem Lord Randolph well.

' Sin:ere or . ::, fcr spotless honour fam'd:

And, in my eai-ly days, glory I gain'd

: Beneath the ho!; banner of the cross.
' Niav p2- Ihie -o;In of .ife, llfames comes upon me:

I:eprcach, a' iamy, and pubiic hate,

' Are nea. at har': far all mankind will think
That R andoilph ba1iy stabb'd Sir- Macolm's heir.'

[Ladi Randolph recoveriig.
Lad Ra,,'. 't lere am I i1aw ? llill in this wretched

world ?

Griefcannct b.eak a heart so hard as mine.
· Mil vouth -:-.s vnrli in angaiih: but youth's strength

1 WTi.h hop -'s aGznce, bre the brunt of sorrow;
- And ;r. n'd me or to be the objet now,
' On which O(mnn 'n ne difipays ittfif,
' Making a f;-&acle, a tale es me,
· To awe its v..irl, man.'

Lord

Lord Rand.i 0 misery!

Aniidlf thy raving grief I muff proclaim
My innocence.

Lady Rand. Thy innocence !
Lord Rand. My guilt
Is innocence compar'd with what thou think'ft it.

Lady Rand. Of thee I think not: what have I to do

With thee or any thing? My son ! my son !
Mv beautiful ! my brave! how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy valour! My fond heart
O'erfiow'd this day with transport, when I thought
Of growing old amidst a race of thine,
Who might make up to me their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and my huiband's name;.
Now all my hopes are dead! A little while
VWas I a wife ! a mother not so lcng !
What am I now:-I knowkn..- But I hlall be
iThat only whl!it 1 please; for such a son
And ifch a husband drive me to my fate. [Runs. ort,

Lord Rand. Follow her, Anna: I myfelfwould folloxv
But in this rage file must abhor my pretence.

[Exit. Anna,

Enter Old Norval.
,nrv. I hear the voice of woe; heaven guard my

child !

Lord Rand. Already is the idle gaping crowd,

The spiteful vulgar come to gaze on Randolph.
Begone.

Nlor. I fear thee not. I will not go.

Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplice, Lord,
With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help
'To crush down to the ground this lovely plant.
O noblell youth that ever yet. was born !
Sweetest and best, gentlest and bravelt spirit,
That ever blefs'd the world ! Wretch that I am,
Who saw that nob'e spirit ivell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it!
Yet never was by all thy virtues vwon
To do thee jufrice, and reveal the secret,

Whieh,

Which, timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's snare! Oh! I am punifll'd now;
These are the hairs that fiould have frew'd the ground,
And nor the locks of Douglas.

[Tears h's hair, and throws hiueylf

upon the boj. oef Douglas.
Lord Rard. I know thee now: ' thy boldness I for.

' give !

' My creRl is fallen.' For thee I will appoint
A piace of relf, if grief wvill let thee relt.
I vill reward, although I cannot puniflh.
Curi, cur;' C-enalion, he efcap'd too well,
Tho' flin and bafled by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the ialt,
Curning his conqueror, the felon died.

E.itrr Anna.

.dn:a. My Lord! niy Lord !
Lord _r... Speak: I can hear of horror,
Anna Horror ireede !
Lord Ra,,n . Matilda'
.n:.z. Is no more;

She rtn, fe Sei like !ightning up the hill,
N-.r hlted fid the pretifice lue gain'd.

iernea:il wvh- lo;v'ring top the river flls

Inguloti'd in riftec rocks: thither fle camie,
As fearie;s as tae eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down-

Lord Rard. 'Tvws I ! alas ! 'ts'- I

That 4i!t'd her brezat 'itih far,; drove her down
The precipice of dea:! Wretch that I am !

:r.an . 0 had. you seen her lail..defpairing look!

Upon the brink ihe stood, and call her e/es
Down on the deep: then lifting up her head,
And her white hands to heaven, seeming to fay,
Why am I fcrc'd to this ? she plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord Rar.d, I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the pafiion cf my foul.
PEace in this word I never can enjov.

These

Iib' hefc wounds the gratitude of Randolph gave.
!'ihe' speak aloud, and with the voice of fate
,Renounce my doom. I amrefolv'd. 1'11 go
aStra3it to the battle, where the man that makes
i.Ie turn aside mult threaten worse than death.
-'i'ou, f'.ilthiul to thy miltrefs, take this ring,
211'ull warrant of my power. Let every rite

'With colt and pomp upon their funerals wait:
or lRandolplh opes lhe never shall return.
1 [Exeunt wpnes.

'''~..~~~~~~~~
.i uir oaI

# EPILOGUE.

E P I L OGU E,
A N Epiloge I ajk'd; btt not e uvo:'d

O;r Bardwill write He vo-es, 'tis m, t acyi;ri

iT7'th comic ivwit to contradit tle strain
Of tragcde, and ma oe jo;n-r rro.ws va'in.
Sadl be fays, that pifj is thre bl,
T be u.sbleji paifon fs tlte human I'reart:
F:r whcrin itss crcdflr can:s the hcart o'cojowv,

ln g .fhcs plealure with the tide of vvse:
And when its waves retire, like thojs of Nile,
They leave behind them such a goldeno fil,
That there the 'virtues without culture growv,
'here the feet bljfims cf affeAicn blv.
T'kfe v.ere his vswrds :--oid of dhlflve art

cfelt t'cm; for heL poke th.mmfrom his heart.

Yi-r .,ill I ncov atempnt cwith witty folly,
'i chafe cb rceljial melancho.5'.

F I N 1 -S.

# PLAYS printed for S. BLADON, No. 13, Pater - noster - Row, (Price 6d.)

LAYS pr;iiedforf S. BLADON, No. 13, Pater.

nofter-Row, (Price' 6d.)
, Lchemift, by Ben Macbeth, by Shakfpeare

I Jonson Mariamne, by Fenton

All for Love, by Dryden Measure for Measure
mphytrion, by Dryden Merchant of Venice
As you like It Mourning Bride
eaux Stratagem Much ado about Nothing
Beggar's Opera, by Gay Nonjuror, by C. Cibber
Bold Stroke for a Wife (Edipus, by Dryden
Busy Body, by Centlivre Old Bachelor, byCongreve
Careless Hulband Orphan, b\ Otway
Cato, by Addifol Othello, by Shakfpeare
Chaplct Phsdra and Hippolitus
Conscious Lovers Provok'd Wife
Committee Refusal, by Cibber
Confederacy Rehearsal, byD.of Bucks
Constant Couple Relapse, by Vanbrugh
Country Lafies Revenge, by Dr. Young
Cy'mbcline Richard III. by C. Cibber
Damon and Phillida Rival Queens, by Barry
Diltreffid Mother Romeo and Juliet
]ouble Dealer Rule a Wife, and have a
I )oubie Gallant, by Cibber Wife
Dragon of Wantley She would and flie wou!l
Every Man in his Humour not
Fair Penitent, by Rowe Siege of Damascus

m c1:~ral Sir H-arry Wildair

George Barnwell, by Lilo State of Innocence
Hamlet, by Shakfpeare Suspicious Hnfband
-Ienry IV. z Parts, by ditto Tamerlane
H-mnry V. by ditto Tempest
Henry VI. 3 Parts, byditto Tender Husband
Henry ViiI. by ditto Theodosius
Jane llore, by Rowe Twelfth Night
Jane Gray, by Rowe Twin Rivals
King John, by Shakfpeare Way of the World
King Lear, by Tate What d'ye call it
Love for Love Woman's a Riddle
Love makes a Man Wonder, a Woman keeps
Love's Lall Shift a Secret
LyingLover, by Steele Chroonh: onthologos

# Just published, making 12 handsome Volumes in Duo decimo, neatly bound, Price 1l. 16s.

J u pub'limed, makinsg I 2 handomc Volumes in D ilt

decimo, neatly bound, Price il. i6s.

THE ENGLISH THEATRE, containing 60 of
1 the bedl Tragedies and Comedies in the English
Language; each Volume has an elegant Vignette Title,
and every Play a Frontispiece, reprelenting a ifriking
Likeness of the mok favourite Ators and Actresses, de-
signed and engraved by the best artiils.

VOL. I. VOL. VII.

Bufv Body Provok'd Husband
Bold Stroke Love makes a lan
Conicious Lovers Drummer
Miser Careless Huband
Suspicious Husband Funeral

VOL. II. VoL. VIII.

Orphan Earl of Esex
Fair Penitent Barbareiff
Pbedraasd HippFlitu.5 >Iahomnetr
Tarcred and Sigi:inunida All for Love
Revenge Jane Gray

V CL. I¢r- r-. V'xOL. iX.

Swanilt Friar / m'

. '\ .Amphi ryon

RFle a Wife 6 GC - 1 Double Dealer
COd Eac'; .ori , ' · o ]Inconi:tant

eccruiting OWmc-:r_'-.' Double Gallant
P.,.ook'd o
Wife Conlfant Couple

VOL. IV. VOL. X

Mleroae Siege of Damasc;us
,r,3,Jrni.-g ,.-el Theodosius

r.n S}- c"r nCato
.-;. i:,;s j5Douglas
GaCii.r Zara

Vo ,. V. VoL. XI.

V '-,- cfthe W .'ci City Wives Confederacy
S-.i- MIar, in his iuvr.our Country Wife
Cc;nrnm.ee 1Minor
r,-aux Strsata.n 1Vcnder

VV n -. c
Lc; -,e fc:r ,Ov; C!hanctS

VOL . VI. VOL. XET,

Or-e rckv :lcdea
Gccrze -r..-. el - Grecian Daugil.er
T'ia£;era,;se Ron:an Fath;r
V c-icei-rc-ervd Brothers
Diri:.t e'Moher " Isabella
Any of the above Plays may be ha(i ftparate, Prce. 6d.

al!c-;,h the Frontifpiiecs are *orth the Mcr.ey alone.
