j r'..R A G E- 1,

As it is AdedIXt

4T ATRE-1{oYAL ;nletiJ~,dL
Non ego furn. noes, fed rpri4

L 0 N D (9 ~3J0 :
~SstPRINTED INT HE YEARMDC~X.~-

..~~~~~.

^'
'· óx4 rteoe

^.y '

,

.

, .

:'* *^ ^ ^i.)^I P

*

. * * **»,
, . «'X~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~v» <- ^ ~ ·' ~

# PROLOGUE.

P R O L O G U E.

Spoken by Mr SPARKS.

TN antient times, when Britain's trade was arms,'.

rAnd the lov'd music of her youtb, alarms;

A god-like race fufiain'd, ir'ir England's'fanme
Who has not heaid of gallant Piercy's name ?
Ay, and of Douglas? such illufirious foes
In Rival Rome and.Carthage never rose !
From age to age bright Jhone the British fre,
,Azd every hero was a hero's fre..
When pow'rful fate decreed one warriour's doom, '"
Up sprung the phcenix from his parents 'tomb. --,
But whilJf these gen'rous rivals fought and fell,
-Those gen'rous rivals lov'd each other wvell . .
Tho' many a bloody field was loft and won, ' -'*'-
.Nothing in hate, in honour all was done. .. ::'
When Piercy wrong'd defy'd his prince or peers,' '

' i

'Fafl came the Douglas, with his Scottish Jfears; : '.-
And when proud Douglas made his Kling ,is t/ifi -
For Douglas, Piercy bent his Englifl hiow
Expell'd their native homes by adverse fate,
7hey knock'd alternate on each other 'sget': '- .".
Then blaz'd the ca/ile, at the midnight'hour ' ' '
For him wuhofe arms had hook its firtmeft;to:, 'r. i ·.

This night a Douglas your proteCior: clais,^: ''". i
A wife! a mother ! Pity's foftefi names. '
The iory of her woes indulgen .hear, ^ '''.-
And grant your fuippliant all he begs,; a-tea'r. : ' :- "
ln confidencefhe begs; and hoes f1ofind: ' : :;5 *,:i»4
h'ach English breaf, like noble Pie rirind. -'

~',q c ; '... -;2 ' -; .....'

# Dramatis Personæ, As represented at London.

Dramatis Person,
As represented at Londot.

M E N.

Lord RANDOLPH, Mr Ridout.

_PLENALVON, - r Smith.
:NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr arry.
iPRI SNER, Spark
S-RVANTS,.

WO MEN.

iIATILDA, Lady RANDOLPH, Mrs Vffinto
Ax xa, Mrs fie,.

# PROLOGUE.

P- R 0 .JL 0 G UG m

Spoken at EDINBURGH.
IN days of classic fame, when Persia'S Lord

'Oppos'd his millions to the Grecian fiord,.

FlouriJh'd the fate of Athens, small herjlore,.
Rugged her foil, and rocky was herJhore,
Like Caledonia's: yet he gain'd a name-
That sands unrivall'd in the rolls of fame. -

Such proud pre-eminence not valour gave,

(For who than Sparta's dauntless sons more ,brave .2-:
-But learning, and the love of every art,
That Virgin Pallas and the Muse impart.

Above the reft'the Tragic IMufe admir'd, . ..:

Each Attic breast uwi.th nobles paffonsfir'd. . -
In peace their poets with their herocs lhar'd
Glory, the hero's, and the bard's reward. '

-

The Tragic Muse each glorious record kept, -

. :-i
And, o'er the kings she conquer'd, Athens wept ':

Here let me cease,, impatient for thesce, - ':;-c!,f

To you I need not praise the Tragic Q9ueen; '.' .
Off has this audience oft compaionfJo'wn ; 1"'

P.' " *s'

To woes of heroes, heroes not their own. :. - :
This night our scenes no common tear demand, '' :
He comes, the hero of your native land-!' :
Douglas, a name thro' all the world i'eniovn'dl ' " .::
A name that rouses like the trumpet found .
Oft have your fathers, prodigal of life,
A Douglasfollow'd thro' the bloody jrife; -
Ho/is have been known at that dread name to yield
4nd, Douglas dead, his name hath. on ti ei -'l

A 3 -

. -:
See the P E S A of Aefcbylus. :

# Dramatis Personæ, As represented at Edinburgh.

[ vi ]

Es:tr. at er.tizve to the various talB,
.,irk if the author's kindred feelings fail ;
S&,lvay'd tby alternate hopes, alternatefears,
HTe ,:.aits the test ofu .ra' cogenial tears.
If they fiall fisw, back so the life e flies,
.;:d !iiis 1your h.eroes in filccejion rife;
CodiZ.s the wmridrhig warriours as they roam.
Douglas ajfr-es them of a welcome home.

Dramatis Perfonxs
As reprcfented at Ediznblrgb..

ME N

.: ord RAN oLPH, .Mr- rounger, .

.GLENALYON, Mr. Love,

NORY.ZL, DOUGLAS, Mr Diggs.

PR ISON.ER, M- E Hayman..
SERVANTS, &c.

W O M E N..

MATILDA, Lady RAXNDOLPH, MIrs lfYart. :

!A- INS NAL ..
1;- K A„ :.^

si~
a&'s * "

# ACT I.

D 0 U G L
U'S. s,

AC T I.

S C E N E,
The court of a cafle f.rrounded wlith woods..

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.
7E woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom -.

Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws for tI

"- The voice of sorrow from my burffing heart,
Farewel a while: I will not leave you long ; .
For in your: hades I deem some spirit dwells, '
Whlio from the chiding fIream, or groaning oaki .
Still hears, and answers to MIat'ida's moan. :
0 Douiglas! Douglas! if departed ghosts-. ...
Are e'er permitted to review this world; i:; :
Within the circle of that wood thou art, '':
And w\ith the passion of immortals hear'st- . -"-?-
My lamentation: hear'fl thy wretcheld ife:
Weep for her husband slain, her infant lofit . ;-
My brother's timeless death I seem to mourn,;m . ';:
Who perifl'd with thee on this fatal day. '

,'- i.:

To thee I lift my voice; to thee address. 'r '
The plaint which mortal-ear has never heaird, - .
O difi-egard me not; tho' I am call'd .-..
Another's now,. my heart is wholly thine.. .

.

Incapable of change, afetion lies - . .-. :.
Buried, my Douglas, in thy bl grav e.,^.5.: 1
But Randolph· comres, whom fate -has.m'atden'my i:
To-chideiny anguith, and defraud.thi ded:. i.)-:.

,. ;-: -' -- Efrer--ord R ANDOt IN.

O .L; .

.
:~ tnhe.e.weeds of woe.! fay, d.'fttbou ei

To feed a pallion which confumes-thy life?
The living claim some duty; vainly thou
Beftow'ft thy cares upon the silent dead.

La. Rand. Silent, alas! is he for whom I mournm:

Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives.
This fatal day flirs my time-fettled sorrow,
Troubles afreh the fountain of my heart.

L. Rand. When was it pure of sadness! These black

weeds

Express the wonted cplour of thy mind,
For ever dark and difmali. Seven long years
Are pass'd, fmce we were join'd by sacred ties:
Clouds, all the while, have hung upon thy brow,.
Nor broke, nor parted by one gleam of joy.
Time, that wears out the trace of deepest anguish,
As the sea smooths the prints made in the sand,
Has pafl o'er thee in vain. -

La. Rand. If time to come'

Should prove as ineffeaual, yet, my Lord,
Thou canst not blame me. When our Scottish youth;
Vdy'd with each other for my luckless love,
Oft I besought them, I implored them all
Not to assail me with my father's aid,
Nor blend their better definy with mine..
For melancholy had congeal'd my blood,
: And froze affecion in my chilly breast.

At last my Sire, rous'd with the base attempt
To force me from him, which thou rend'red'ft vain,
To his own daughter bow'd his hoary head,
Besought me to commiserate his age,
And vow'd he Ihould not, could not die in peace,.
Unless he saw me wedded, and fecur'd
From violence-and outrage. Then, my Lord!
In my extreme difitefs I elcd on thee,
Thee I befpake, priof'" rong desire , :
To lead a fmgle, folai4 ., '
And-begg'd thy N -In" 'to demand -

!er for a wife whose heart' as" dead to love.

;' How thou perfifted'ft after this, thou know'ft, .:: i.

And must confess that I am not unjust, -

,
Nor more to thee than to myself injurious. -

L. Rand. That I confess; yet ever must regret,-:

The grief I cannot cure. Would thou wert inot
Compos'd of grief and tenderness alone,
But had'st a spark of other paflions in thee,
Pride, anger, vanity, the fh-ong desire :-
Of admiration, dear to woman kind; - -
These might contend mith,' and allay tlihygf,
As meeting tides and chrlneints .smooth ou'iirth. -

La. Rand. To such a cause the human mind-oft owes.

Its transient calm, a calm, I envy not. - -

L.Rand. Sure thou artnot the.daughter of Sir.;Ialcol:.,-
Strong was his rage, eternal his-refenimeit: et .
For when thy brother fell, 'he fmii'd to hearS. .
That Douglas' Son in the fame field was slain. '

La. Rand. Oh! rake not up the. ashes of myFathersl

Implacable resentment was their crime,. .&,;;; .;:
And'.grievous has the expiation been.: '-, " - -:.
Contending with the Douglas, gallant lives : -
Of either house were loft; my ancesfors : ~

.

Compell'd, at last, to leave their ancient-.eat -, .-: i
On- Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, o:f them.: (,<-
No heir is left. Had they not beenifQf'eri--e :-

.
I had not been the lalt of all my race. ; . ;;

L. Rand. Thy grief wrests to itspurpoTes.my.ords.!

I never ask'd of thee that ardent love, .
Which in the breasts of fancy's children burns. .; :
Decent affetion and complacent kindness: ;
Were all I wish'd for; but I wiflld in vahi.;: :i;:i.i
Hence with the less regret my eyes beholij i .i'
The toirn of war that gathers o'er this laM -':{n}
Js I should -periih by the D 'hi fwvord,7 -

. . ..

.
-ll.atla'.oiuldr not ,hed orietemidthei"more? " : : '' ..

I^L^^ ; Thou do't Riot iih o wue1 ' aE2 k
*Bov^ simeritr and ersem-thystues-,<2'IS s

at''ai£^ i? '-*^

L. Rand. Straight to the camp,

Where every warriour on the tip-toe Plands
Of expectation, and impatient asks
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are lauded.

La. Rand. 0, may adverse winds,

Far fiom the coast of Scotland, drive their fleet!
And every foldierof both hosts return
In peace and safety to 1,is pleasant home!

L. Ranzd. Thou fpeak'ft a woman's, hear a warriour's

wifll:

Eight from their native land, the. formy north,
AMay the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
Iminoveab!e in Caledonia's flanid !
Then flall our foes repent their bold invasion,
And roving armies shun the fatal fiore.

La. Rand. War I detelt: but war with foreign foes,

W'. ofe. manners, ianguagc, and v:: ofe looks arc i.range,
Is not so horrid, por to me so hatcful,
As that which with onr neighbours oft we wage.
A river here, there an ideal line,
By f.Incy drawn, divides the lii.er kingdoms.
On each ride dwells a people similar,
As twins are to each other; valiant both;
Both for their valour famons thro' the w orld.
Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
And, if they mul have war, wage distant war,
But witl each other fight in cruel conflict.
Gallanc in strife, and noble in their ire,
The battle is their pastime. They go forth
Gay in the morning, as to summer Iport;
When ev'ning comes, the glory of the morn,
The youthful warriour is a clod of clay.
Thus fall the prime of eirher hapless land;
And lich the fruit of Scotch and English wars.

L. Rand. I'll hear no more: this melody would make

A foldier.drop his sword, and doff his arms,
Sit dowvn and wveep the conquests he has made;
Yea, (like a monk,) ting reft and peace in hcav'n ..

To fouls of warriours in his battle slain.
Lady, Farewel: I leave thee not alone;
Yonder comes one whose love makes duty light..

Enter ANNA.

Anna. Forgive the rathnefs of your Anna's love:

Urg'd by affection, I have thus prefum'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts;
And warn you of the hours that you negle&,
And lose in sadness.

La. Rand. So to lose my hours
Is all the use I wish to make of time.

Anna. To blame thee, Lady, suits not with my slate:

But sure I am, filce death first prey'd on man,
Never did fLiter thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had loft,
In early youth, the huiband of your heart?

La. Rand. Oh!

Anna. Have I difltefs'd you with officious love,

And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate?
Forgive me, Lady: humble tho' I am,
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune:
So fervently I love you, that to dry ;
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.-'

La. Rand. What power directed thy unconscious

tongue
To speak as thou haft done? to name-

Anna. I know not:

But since my words have made my mifti'efS tremble,
I will speak so no more; but silent mix
My tears with her's.

La. Rand. No, thou shalt not be silent.

I'll trust thy faithful love, and thou shalt be . '
Henceforth th' inftru&ed partner of my woes.
But what avails it?'Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never-ebbing time?-::
Compel th'eearth and ocean to give up -
Their dead alive?

' Anna. What meansmynoble mistress ?

at & B, ^

..

'-

/;. ,Tr..^

-
.. _ n ]

La. Rand. Didft thou not alk what had my sorrows

been?-

If I in early youth had loft a husband ?-
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'd,
Mangl'd with wounds, the huiband of my youth;
And in some cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his. -

Anna. O ! Lady, most rever'd .

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

La. Rand. Alas! an antient feud,

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother fould in battle save
The life of Douglas' son, our house's foe:
The youthful warriours vow'd eternal friendflip.
To fee the vaunted siser of his fiiend
Impatient, Douglas to Balarmo came,
Under a borrow'd name. - My heart he gain'd;
Nor did I long refuse the hand he begg'd:
My brother's presence authoris'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little weeks, with wings of down,
Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd Lord was call'd
To fight his father's battles; and with him,
In spite of all my tears, did Malcolm go.
Scarce were they gone, when my itern Sire was told
That the false stranger was Lord Douglas' son.
Frantic with rage, the Baron drew his sword,
And queltioh'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
Kneeling beneath his sword, fault'ring I took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
Wed one of Douglas' name. Sincerity,
Thou first of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thy onward path! altho' the earth ofluld gape,
And from the gulph of hell deftruftion cry
To take dilfimulation's winding way.

Anna. Alas ! how few of woman's fearful kind
Durst own a truth so hardy! . n

La. Rapins

:* ''
.. .G.,

r~~~i ~ La. Rand. The firit truth'

Is easiest to avow. This moial learn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale.--
In a few days the dreadful tidings came
That Douglas and my brother both were slain.
My Lord! my life ! my huiband!- mighty God!
What had I done to merit such affliction?

Anna. My dearest Lady! many a.tale of tears

I've listen'd to; but never did I hear
A tale so fad as this.

La. Rand. In the firft'days

Of my distracting grief, I found myself--
As women wish to be who love their Lords.
But who durst tell my father? The good priest.
Who join'd our hands, my brother's antient tutor, -
With his lov'd Malcolm, in the battle fell:
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till time fiould make my father's fortune mine.
That very night on which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confident I had,
Set out with him to reach her fiiter's house:
But nurse, nor infant, have I ever seen
Or heard of, Anna, since that fatal hour.
My murder'd child!- had thy fond' piother sear'd
The loss of thee, file had loud fame d:sy'd,
Defpis'd her father's rage, her father's grief,
And wander'd with thee thro' the scorning" w0odd.

Anna. Not seen nor heard of! then perhaps leimaes.
La. Rand. Fain wou'd I lean upon that ilendeer A .

But it was dark December: wind and rain *
Had beat all night. Across the Carron lay
The deffin'd road; and in its swelling flood
My faithful servant perifll'd with my child.
O hapless son! of a most hapless fire !.
But they are both at reft; and I alone' 't,
Dwell in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk- . i

.

Like a guilt-troubled ghost, my painful round;.
.Nor ha despiteful fate permitted me

^B - Tlie,

The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Tho' dead to love, I was compell'd to wed
Randolph, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms;
And Randolph now possesses the domains
That by Sir .MIalcoln's death on me devolv'd;
Domains, that hould to Douglas' ibn have giv'ri
A Baron's title, and a Baron's pow'r.
Such were my soothing thoughts, while I bewail'd
The flaughter'd father of a son unborn.
And -when that son came, like a ray fiom heav'n,
Which mhines and disappears; alas! my child !
How long did thy fond mother grasp the hope
Of having thee, Ihe knew not how, reflor'd ?
Year after year hath worn her hope away;
But left still undiminilh'd her desire.

Anna. The hand, that spins th'uneven thread of life,
May smooth the length that's yet to come of your's.

La. Rand. Not in this world, I've confider'd well

Its various evils, and on whom they fall.
Alas! how oft does goodness wound itself,
And sweet affection prove the spring of woe !
O ! had I dy'd when my lov'd husband fell!
Had some good angel op'd to me the book
Of providence, and let me read my life,
My heart had broke when I beheld the fum
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

Anna. That God, whose ministers good angels are,

Hath ihut the book in mercy to mankind.
But we must leave this theme: Glenalvon comes:
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitherwards he slowly stalks his way.

La. Rand. I will avoid him, an ungracious person
Is doubly irksome in an hour like this.

Anna. Why speaks my lady thus of Randolph's heir ?
La. Rand. Because he's not the heir of Randolph's

virtues.

Subtle anShrewd, he offers to mankind
An artificif image of himself:
And he with ease can vary to the tafle

. - :{'
-.

Of different men, it's features. Self-deny'd- .
And master of his appetites he seems:
But his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,
Watches to seize unseen the wifh'd-for prey.
Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill
.As it Glenalvon's unrelenting mind.
Yet is he brave and politic in war,
And stands aloft in these unruly times.
Why I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter:
Stay and detain him till I reach the cafile.

[Exit La. Randolph.

Anna. 0 happiness ! where art thou to be found ?

I fee thou dwellelt not with birth and beauty,
Tho' grac'd with grandeur, and in wealth array'd:
Nor doff thou, it would seem, with virtue dwell;
Else had this gentle Lady mifs'd thee not.

Enter GLENALVON..

Glen. What dolt thou muse on, meditating maid ?

Like some entranc'd and visionary seer
On earth thou ftand'ft, thy thoughts ascend to heaven.

Anna. Wou'd that I were, e'en as thou fay'ft, a leer,
To have my doubts by heav'nly vision clear'd!

Glen. What dost thou doubt of ? what haft thou to do

With fubjeds intricate ? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be queftion'd: think of these good gifts;
And then thy contemplations will be pleasing.

Anna. Let women view yon monument of woe,

Then boast of beauty : who so fair as she ?
But I muff follow: this revolving day
Awakes the mem'ry of her antient woes.

[Exit Anna.

GLENALVON solus.

So !- Lady Randolph hnuns me ; by and by
I'll woo her as the lion wooes his brides.
The deed's a-doing now, that makes me lord
Of these rich valleys, and a chief of pow'r.
The season is most apt; my founding steps
Will not be heard amidf the din of arms.

.;! .B

a2 Ranc lolat j
I L,, to'^ - *r'-'i.T : - .*.-*-sj.',v > *d -, - *s:< > - -. -*t-'w -- 'a

Randolph has liv'd too long; his better fate
Had the ascendant once; and kept me down:
When I had seiz'd the dame, by'chance he came,,
Refcu'd; and had the Lady for his labour;
I 'fcap'd unknown: a slender consolation !
Ieav'n is my witness that I do not love
To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvest. Yet I am not safe:
By love, or something like-it, stung, inflam'd,
Mladly I blabb'd my paii on to his wife,
And the has threaten'd to acquaint him of it.
aThe way of woman's will I do not know:
But well I know the Baron's wrath is deadly.
I will not live in fear: the man I dread
Is as a Dane to me; ay, and the man
Who fiands betwixt me and my chief desire.
-No bar but he; the has no kinsman near;
No brother in his ffter's quarrel bold;
And for the righteous cause, a-ftranger's cause,.
I know no chief that will defy Glenalvon.

End of the Sirs/ AS.

ACT

# ACT II.

'
ACT II.

, . - .,> .i

S C EN E, A Court, &c. as before.
Enter Servants and a Stranger at one door, and Lady

RANDOLPH and ANNA at another.

Lady RANDOLPH.
W HAT means this clamour? Stranger! fpeal

secure; :

Haftthoubeenwrong'd? havetheferude men prefim'
To vex the weary trav'ller oni his way? -

First Serv. By us no stranger ever fiffer'd wrong:

This man with outcry wild has call'd us forth;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears. ''
Enter Lord RANDOLPH and young man with theirfivords-

drawn and bloody. -
La. Rand. Not vain the firanger's fears! how faresi:-

my Lord?
L. Rand. That it fares well, thanks to this gallant:

- youth,

Whose valour fav'd me from a wretched death!
As down the winding dale I walk'd alone,
At the cross way four armed men attack'd me:
Rovers, I judge, from the licentious camp,
Who would have quickly laid Lord Randolph-! w,1v
Had not this brave and gen'rous Stranger cifme,
Like my good angel in the hour of fate, :

'

And, mocking danger, made my foes his-own.
They turn'd upon him: but his aCtive arm
Struck to the ground, from whence they: rofeno more
The fierceibvo; the others fled amain,;:' .
And left him master of the bloody field.
Speak Lady Randolph: upon Beauty's tongue-:.· ..-.- '
i eU11 accents pleagirg to ite brave ad o0ld-:' ';: -:

d - - s..-,.R< i óe

Speak, noble Dame, and thank him for thy Lord.

La. Rand. MyLord, I cannot speak whatnow I feel,

My heart o'erflows with gratitude to heav'n,
And to this noble youth, who all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but humanely brave
Fought on your fide, against such fearful odds.
Have you yet learn'd of him whom we Should thank?
Whom call the saviour of Lord Randolph's life ?

L. Rand. I ask'd that queffion, and he anfwer'dnot:
But I mutt know who my deliv'rer is. (to theJ/ranger.)

Stran. A low born man, of parentage obscure,

Who nought can boast but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

L. Rand. Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobl'd

By the great king of kings! thou art ordain'd
And ftamp'd a hero by the sovereign hand
Of Nature! blush not, flow'r of modefly
As well as valour, to declare thy birth.

Stran. My name is Norval on the Grampian hills

My father feeds his flocks; a frugal swain,
,Whose conn'ant cares were to increase his store,
And keep his only son, myfeif, at home.
For i had heard of battles, and I long'd
To follow to the field tome warlike Lord:
And heav'n soon granted what my Sire deny'd.
This moon which role last night, round'as my 1ieldd,
Ead not yet filld her horns, when, by her light,
A band of fierce Barbarians, from the hills,
Ruun'd liEke a torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The mhepherds fled
For safety, and for succour, I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'd about tie enemy, and mark'd
The road he took, then halted to my friends;
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen me' .
I met advancing. The pursuit I led, . :;
Till we o'ertook the fpoil-encumber'd foe. -
We fought and conquer'd. Ere a: fvor;d was r.j .

An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief, '
Who wore that day the arms which now I wea,.: 1'
Returning home in triumph, I difdain'd .
The shepherd's slothful life: and having heard
That our good King had fummon'd his bold Peers.
To lead their warriours to the Carron fide,
I left my father's house, and took with me .
*A chosen servant to conduc my steps;-.-
Yon trembling coward who forfopk his mafler...
Journeying with this intent, I past these tow'rs,
And, heav'n.direCted, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

L. Rand. He is as wife as brave. Was ever tale

With such a gallant modefly rehears'd ? 'i :-
My brave deliverer ! thou fhalt-enter now -. ': ,
A nobler lift, and in a monarch's fight - .-
Contend with princes for the.prize of fame. .
I will present thee to our Scottilh King, . .- ;
Whose valiant spirit ever valour lov'd. '.
Ha! my Matilda ! wherefore starts that tear ?

La. Rand. I cannot fay: for variousaffe&i ns,

And firangely mingled, in my bosom 'fw.el; '
Yet each of them may well command a:tear. -.-- .
I joy that thou art safe, and I-admire: :- ' ;-
Him and hii fortunes who hath wrought thyffts';
Yea, as my mind predifts, with thine his own.'
Obscure and friendIefs; he the army fought .
Bent upon peril, -in the rage of death .
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, and with his sword:'
To gain distinction which his birth deny'd ... --
In this attempt unknown ihe ight have perilii'd
And gain'd, with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtue ferv.es.no iol e
Beneath despair. "'The soldier now ofhope .

:

He flands conspicuous: fame; and great renown.
Are. bought within the compass. of his sword. - - ?!
On this my mind refleted, whilst you spoke,
;'Aiid'blefs'd the wonder-woking.-Lord of-heav'n. ;.
..; ?..Rnd. Piouanid grateful ever arethy thotght

-A d m -na.,.,:- .., , i

My deeds lhall follow where thou point'ft the way.
Next to myself, and equal to Glenalvon,
In honour and command lhall Norval be.

Nor. I know not how to thank you. Rude I am

In speech and manners: never till this hour
Stood I in such a presence: yet, my Lord,
There's something in my breast which makes me bold
To fay, that Norval ne'er will shame thy favour.

La. Rand. I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou

flalr be

My knight; and ever, as thou didft to-day,
With happy valour gaurd the life of Randolph.

L. Rand. Well haft thou spoke. Let me forbid re-

ply. [To Norval.

We are thy debtors fill; thy high desert
O'ertops our gratitude. I must proceed,
As was at firit intended, to the camp.
Some of my train I fee are speeding hither,
Impatient doubtless of their Lord's delay.
Go with me; Norval, and thine eyes shall fee
The chosen warriours of thy native land,
Who languish for the fight, and beat the air
With brandifh'd swords.

Nor. Let us begone, my Lord..

L. Rand. [ To La. Rand,

About the time that the declining fun
Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills suspend,
Expe&R us to return. This night once more
Within these walls I reft; my tent I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepare the seas.
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
He in the eve of battle may resign
Hinfelf to social pleasure; sweetest then,
When danger to a soldier's foul indears
The human joy that never may return.

Exeunt Randolph and, Norval.

Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.
La. Rand. Hispartigwordshaveftruckafataltrin

.
* -- -

0 Douglas ! Douglas ! tender was the time '

, .

" I

When we two parted ne'er to meet again

f! ' "!.t1

How many years of anguilh and despair '--
Has heav'n annex'd to those swift palling hours
Of love and fondness ! Then my bosom's flame
-Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of fear,
Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.

*Anna. May gracious heaven pour the sweet balm

of peace

Into the wounds that fester in your breast!
For earthly consolation cannot cure them. '- .

La. Rand. One onlycure can heav'n itself bestow'-

A grave-that bed in which the weary reft.- .
Wretch that I am ! Alas! why am I so? .
At ev'ry happy parent I repine!
How blest the mother of yon gallant Norval- '-
She for a living husband bore her pains, -;
And heard him bless her when a man was born; i
She nurs'd her finiling infant on her breafti; -
Tended the child, and rear'd the plealing.hoy: -
She, with affection's triumph, saw the youth '.
In grace and comeliness surpass his peers : ' -a
Whilst I to a dead husband bore a son, . '
And to the roaring-waters gave-my child.. .

Anna. Alas t Alas! why will you thus refumi6:

Your grief afresh ? I thought that gallant youth . '^i
Would for a while have won you from your woe.
On him intent you gazed with a look -
Much more delighted than your pensive eye '
Has deign'd on other objets to bestow.-

La. Rand. Delighted, fay'ftthou? Oh ! ev'n there*

mine eye .

.

Found fuel for my life-confuming sorrow. '
I thought, that had the ion oif ougla.lii'd,.' ' . i
He might have been like this young-all.nt anet r

nge

And pair'd with him in features and in^ih'pe; '* :
In. all endowments, as in years, I deem,.- .. :' :.
*My boy with blooming Norval might havenuimber'd.:.
,.Whilst thus I mus'd, a fpark-from fancy .fll .-' .

-....i m . . . ,
..... ;

On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness '
For this young stranger, wand'ring from his home;
And like an orphan cast upon my care.
I will prote& thee (said I to myself)
With all my pow'r, and grace with all my favour.

Anna. Sure heav'n will bless so gen'rous a resolve.

You mut, my noble Dame, exert your pow'r:
You mufi awake: devices will be fram'd,,
And arrows pointed at the breast of Norval.

La. Rand. Glenalvon's false and crafty head will work

Againil a rival in his kinsman's love,
If I deter him not: I only can.
Bold as he is, Glenalvon will beware
How he pulls down the fabric that I raise.
I'll be the artist of young Norval's fortune.
'Tis pleasing to admire i moat apt was I
To this affection in my better days;
Tho' now I seem to you lirunk up, retir'd
Within the narrow compass of my woe.
Have you not sometimes seen an early flow'r
Open its bud, and spread its silken leaves,
To catch sweet airs, and odours to bestow;
Then, by the keen blai nipt, pull in its leaves,
And, tho' still living, die to scent. and beauty
Emblem of me: afflition, like a storm,
Hath lkil'd the forward blossom of:my heart.

Enter GLENALVON.

Glen. Where is mydeareft kininan, noble Randolph?
La. Rand. Have you not heard, Glenalvon, of the

base-

Glen. I have: and that the villains may-not 'scape,

With a strong band I have begirt the wood.
If they lurk there, alive they ihall be taken,
And torture force from them th' important secret,:.
Whether fome'foe of Randolph hir'd their swords
Or if

La. Rand. That care becomes a kinfinan's love*

I have a counsel for Glenalvon's ear. [Exi Annia~,

I,. *
.. -' ^

Glen.To' him-your counsels always are conmands.
La. Rand. I have not found' so: thou art known to

me.- . - .... '

. -

Glen. Known! !
La. Rand. Andmof certainis mycaufe of knowledge.:
Glen. What do you know ? by the most blefed cross,

You much amaze me. No created being, -

.
-Yourself except, durst thus accost Glentilvon.

La. Rand. Is guilt so bold ! and dost thou make a

merit

Of thy pretended meekness ! This to me,
Who, with a gentleness whichiduty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd, what, if divulg'd,-
Would make thee nothing; or, what'sworfe than that,
An outcast beggar, and unpitied too !
For mortals shudder at a crime like 'thine.

Glen. Thy virtue awes me. Firit of woman kind !

Permit me yet to fay, that the fond man,
Whom love- transports beyond ftrit virtue's'bounds,
If he is brought by love to misery,'
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpitied cannot be. Pity's the alms .
Which on such beggars freely is beftow'd: --
For mortals know that love is Aill their lord,
And o'er their vain resolves advances still;
As fire,, when kindled by our'lhepherds, moves
Thro' the dry heath before the fanning wind.

La. Rand. Reserve these accents for some other e.ar.

To love's apology I liften not. -;=, . ;
Mark thou my words; for it is meet thou fhioiid'ii.
His brave deliv'rer Randolph here retains.
Perhaps his presence may not please- thee well '
But, at thy peril, praftife ought against i n. ' ' .
Let not thyjealoufy attempt:to (hake '
And loosen the good root he has in Randotlph;: - :
Whose favourites I know thoi: hait fupplaiited.
Thou look'ft at me, as if thou 'fain would'ftpry
:Into my heart. 'Tis open asnmy speech. - ,: .--
'i;e this early cauion andputon , '-

I_ 22q&_.zzr;.J"'. :-..9..ssiz-s.._

The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendless Stranger my prote&tion claims:
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. LExit.

MIanet GLENALVON

Child that I was, to start at my own ihadow,
And be the shallow fool of coward conscience !
I am not what I have been; what I fhould.be.
The.darts of deffiny have almost pierc'd
My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I mhould conclude there was an arm above
That fought against me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch myself, the subtle snare I set.
Why, rape and murder are not simple means!
Tl' hnperfect rape to Randolph gave a spouse;
And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fun from me;
And worst of all, a rival. Burning hell!
This were thy centre, if I thought she lov'd him!
'Tis certain me contenns me; nay commands me,
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'er m,
In his behalf. And shall I thus be brav'd?
Curb'd as {he calls it, by dame chafity ?
Infernal fiends, if any fiends there are
More fierce than hate, ambition and revenge,
Rife up and fill my boffom with your fires,
And policies remorseless! Chance may spoil
A finle aim ; but perseverance must
Prosper at last. For chance and fate are words:
Perfiffive wiidom is the fate of man.
Darkly a projet 'ppears upon my mind,
Like the red moon when rising in the east,
Crofs'd and divided by strange colour'd clouds.
I'll seek the slave who came with Norval hither,
And for his cowardice was spurn'd from him.
I've known a followers rankled boffom breed
Venom most fatal to his heedless Lord.

End ofthe Secnd .; Exit.
End of theSecond A,.

# ACT III.

A C T III.
S C E N E, A Court, &c. as. before.

Enter ANNA.

ANNA.

T-HY vassals, Grief! great Nature's order break,
_ And change the noon-tide to the'midnight hour,
Whilst Lady Randolph sleeps, I will walk forth,
And taste the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sw'eet may her slumbers be ! Ye ministers
Of gracious heav'n who love the human race, . '
Angels and.feraphs, who delight in goodness,
Forsake your flies, .and to her couch descend !
There'from her fancy chafe thofe..difmal forms
T!aat'haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
With inages celeffial, such as please
'The blefs'd above'upon their golden beds.

-:"' ~ Enter SERVANT.
Ser; One of the vile affafins is fecur'd.

.We found the villain lurking in the wood:
'With dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not
His first essay: these jewels were conceal'd
In the most secret places of his garment';
Belike the spoils of some that he has miurder'd.

Anna. Let. me look on them. Ha! here is a hear'i,

The chosen crest of Douglas' valiant name !
These are no vulgar jewels. Guardidhe wretch..'

: , - "-

; f.Exit:ANRNA.

I . . Enter Se.warats with a.'Phi ier."v'. :';-

.:

\Pif. I know no more'than'doesiti'e 'tiid' uiboFn-
LOt. iat. vou charge me wvith :' - '

. -
'

e ri - J,:.....l *. iit

First Ser. You fay so, Sir

But torture soon ihall make you speak the truth.
Behold the Lady of Lord Randolph comes:
Prepare yourself to meet her jfft revenge.

E;nter Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Anna. Summon your utmost fortitude, before

You speak v'ith him. Your dignity, your fame,
Are now at flake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may fly.

La. Rand. Thou fnalt behold me, with a defp'rate

heart,
Hear how my infant perifh'd. See he kneels.

[The Prisoner kneels;]
Prif. Heav'n bless that countenance, so sweet and

mild!

A judge like thee makes innocence more bold.
0 save me, Lady ! from these cruel men,
Who have attack'd and seiz'd me; who accuse
Me of intended murder. As I hope
For mercy at the judgment feat of God,
The tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
Is not more innocent than I of murder. ....;

La. Rand. Cf this man's guilt what proof can ye

produce?

FirstSer. W e found him lurking inthehollowGlynn.

When view'd and call'd upon, amaz'd, h fled.
We overtook him, and enquir'd from wience,
And what he was: he said, he came,from far,
And was upon his journey to the camp.
Not fatisfy'd with this, -we fearch'd his cloaths,
-And found there jewels; whose rich vahle plead

Moif pow'rfully against him. Hard he seems
And old in villany. Permit us try
His ftubbornmefs against the torture's force.

Prii. 0 gentle Lady !by your Lord's dear life!

Wlich there weak hands, I swear, did ne'er assail,
And by your children's welfare, spare my age '! 'I
Let not the iron tear my antient joints,

ent S 'S.:

And my gray hairs bring to the grave with pain.:I:

La. Rand. Account for these: thine own itheycan-'

not be: ' '.

For these, I fay: be f-edfaft to the truth; . -

, '
Deteced fallhood is most certain death. ',;-:"

[ANNA removes the Servantisr aid turns.r

Prif. Alas ! I'm fore beset ! let never man,

For fake of lucre, fin against his foul! i
Eternal jufiice is in this molf just!
I, guiltless now, must former guilt reveal.

La. Rand. 0 ! Anna hear ! - once moie I charge

I ' thee speak
The truth diret: for these tdome foretel
And certify a part of thy narration;
With which if the remainder tallies not,
An instant and a dreadful death abides thee.

Prif. Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speak to yjou asjinft

As if you were the minister of heav'n,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men.

Some eighteen years ago, .I rented land

Of brave Sir Malcolm, then Balarmo's Lord; '
But falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
All that

. had, and then turn'd me and mine,

i'(Four helpless infants and their weeping mother)
!Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
tA little hovel by the river's fide.
(Receiv'd us: there hard labour, 'and the flill - ·
In fishing, which was formerly my sport,
Supported life. Whilst thus we poorly liv'd,
One stormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down, and loud and oft>,- '
The angry spirit of the water fllriek'd. -:

t the dead hour of night wvasheard :the cry
Cf one in jeopardy. I rfe, 'and ran -
To where the circling eddy of a poo0- .
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within.
ly reach whatever floating.ithig the tirean
ad' caught.: The voice was ceas'd:. the perfln loft:

- ^ -. 5
2,..- .jg. - Bu

But looking fad and earnest on the waters,
By the roon's light I sav., whirl'd round and roundl
A ba(ket: ioon I drew it to the.bank,
And ne;.led curious'there an infant lay.

La. Rand. Was he alive?

Pri/f He was.

La. Rand. Inhuman that thou art!
How could'n thou kill v hat ,'aves and tempelftfpar'd?

Pf'J. I was not so inhuman.

La. Rvrnd. Didft thon not?

Aina. My noble Mi'-efis, you are mov'd too much:

This man has not the aif'eft of itern murder;
Let him go on, and yobu, I hope, will hear
Good tidings-of vour'kindihian's long loft child.

PiO f 1 he needy man, who has known better days,

One whoim diitrefs has spited at the world,
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds, as make the pliofp'rous men
*Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them.
Anl fuhch a man was I; a man declin'd,
Who saw no end of black adversity:
Yet for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have tauch'd that infant, with a hand of harm.

La. ,and. Ha ! dost thou fay so ? Then perhaps

he lives.

Prif. Not many days ago he was alive.
La. Rand. 0! God of heav'n ! Did he then die so

lately ?

Prif. I did not. fay he dy'd; I hope he lives.

Not many days ago there eyes beheld
Hiim flouriihing in youth, and health, and beauty.

La. Rand. \W"here is he now?

Pi;. Alas ! I know not where.
. n. Rand. Oh fate ! I iear thee flill. Thou riddler

speak
Direca and clear ; else I will search thy foul.

Aim!a. Permit me, ever honour'd ! Keen impatience

Tho' hard to be rellraii'dl, defeats itself.--
Pursue thy flory with a faithful tongue,

..". DS

To the last hour that thou didft keep the child.

sris. Fear not my faith, tho' fmuit ieak'myliame,

Within the cradle,. where the infant lay,
Was ftow'd a mighty flore of gold and jewels :'
Tempted by which we did resolve to'hide,
From all-the world, this wbnderful event,
And like a peasant breed the noble child.
That none might mark the change of our efiate,
We left the countrr, travell'd to the North,
Bought flocks and herds, and gradually brought forth
Our secret wealth. But God's all-feeing eye
Beheld our avarice, and smote us iore.
For one by -one all our own children dy'd,
And. he, the Stranger, sole remain'd the heir
Of what indeed was his. Fain then would I,.
Who wtith a fathers fondness lov'd the boy,
Have trusted him, nomw in the dawn of ycuthi
With his own secret: but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never would consent.
Mean while the fripling grew in yeari and beauty ;
And, as we oft obferv'd, he bore himself
Not as the offspring of our cottage bloo ; .
For nature will break out: mild witli the Uild,
But with the fioward he was fierce as'fire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I set myself againlt his warlike bent':
But all in vain: for when a defp'rate band
Of robbers from the savage mountains came--
:

La. Rand. Eternal providence ! ' hat is thly name?
Priif. My name is Nolval; and my name he bears..
La. Rand. 'Tis. he; ;tis he himself! It is my ion!

O sovereign mercy ! 'Twas my child I saw !
;'o wonder, .Ann;a, . that my bosom burn'd.

Anna. Juil are your transports: ne'er Was ii''s

Prov'dl with fich fierce extremes. -High fated Dane-!
Bat ytt r lemeher that you are beheld
',;'tervie eyes; your gefturs mnay be seen
ISipaffion'l, fitrange; perhaps your words o'erlheard,,

,[" -
sea ..;-. _'-^: t^ a^^ _.. . ' J:!^r .-

La. Rand. Well dost thou counsel, Anna:. heav'n

bestow
On me that wisdom which my state requires!

Alna. The moments of deliberation pass,

And soon you must resolve. This useful man
Mutl be difmifs'd in safety, 'ere my Lord
Shall with his brave deliverer return.

Pr.f. If I, amidst aftoniflment and fear,

Have of your,.words and'geftures rightly judg'd,
Thou art the daughter of my antient master;
The child I refcu'd from the flood is thine.

La. Rand. With thee diflimulation now were vain.

I am indeed the daughter of Sir Malcoln;
The child thou refcu'dft from the flood is mine.

Prif. Blefs'd be the hour that made me a poor man!
My poverty hath fav'd my master's house !

La. Rand. Thy words furprize me: lure thou doll

not feign:

The tear tands in thine eye: such love fiom thee
Sir Malcolm's house deferv'd not; if aright
Thou told'ft the story of thy own distress.

PrIif. Sir lialcohn of our Barons was the flow'r;

The fastest fiiend, the best, the kindest matler:
But ah ! he knew not of my fad estate.
After that battle, where his gallant son,
Your own brave brother, fell, the good old Lord
Grew desperate and reckless of the world;
And never, as he erst was wont, went forth
To overlook the conduct of his servants.
By them I was thurft out, and them I blame:
Miay heav'n so judge me as I judg'd my malter!
And God so love me as I love his race !

La. Rand. His race shall yet reward thee. On thy

faith

Depends the fate of thy lov'd master's house.
Rememb'reft thou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears
.iAmong the cliffs of Carron ?

Prif. I remember |

The cottage of the cliffs.

La. Rand. 'Tis that I mean:

There dwells a man of venerable age,
Who in my father's service spent his youth
Tell him I sent thee, and with him remain,
Till I ihall call upon thee to declare,
Before the King and nobles, what thou now
To me haft told. No more but this, and thou
Shalt live in honour all thy future days;
Thy son so long Ihall call thee father frill,
And all the land mhall bless the man, who fav'd
The son of Douglas, and Sir Malcolm's heir.
Remember well my words: if thou ihould'ft meet
Him whom thou call'dit thy son, ftll call him so;
And mention nothing of his noble father.

Prif. Fear not that I Ihall mar so.s;- ^.-"'

By putting in my fickle ',- "'-'"T'
Why did I leave my home and antient dame !
To find the youth, to tell him all I knew,
And fiake him wear tliefe jewels in his arms;
Which might, I thought, be challeng'd, and so bring
To light the secret of his noble birth.

[Lady Randolph goes towards the Servants.

La. Rand. This man is not th'affa.fin you fufpededi!

Tho' chance combin'd some likelihoods againftshim. E
He is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To the right owner whom in haste he seeks.
'Tis meet that you should put him on his way,
Since your mitlaken zeal hath dragg'd .in hither..

[Exeunt Stranger and Servants.

Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

La. Rand. MyfaithfulAnna! dof thoullare myjoy.

I know thou dost. Unparalell'd event l
Reaching from heav'n to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd fron! the waves, and brings to me-my son! ,
Judge of the widow, and the orphan s father!.'
Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
. For. fich a gift! what does my Anna think

Of the oung eaglet of a valiant nest?
How soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghil where his fate had thrown

him,
And towv'r'd up to the region of his fire !

Anm. How fondly did your eyes devour the boy .

Mvfterious nature, with the unseen cord
Of pow'rful inftin&, drew you to your own.

La. Ranzd The ready (tory of his birth believ'd

Suppreft my fancy quite; nor did he owe.
To any likeness my fo.fudden favour :
But now I long to fee his face again,
Examine every feature, and find out
The lineaments of Douglas, or my own.
But moil of all I long to let him know

-'' ~---arents are, to clasp his neck,
And tell :ilI a, ....- .. s

~And tcll I a .~--* Of lhis father.

tAnna. With wary caution you lmut bear vyorfclf

In public, least your tenderness break forth,
And in observers stir conjectures strange.
For, -if a cherub in the thape of woman
Should walk this world, yet defamation would,
Like a vile cur, bark at the angels train-
To-day the Baron started at your tears.

La. Rand. He did so, Aima! well thy mistress knows,

If theleaft circumstance, mote of offence,
Should touch the Baron's eye, his fight would be
With jealousy diforder'd. But the more
It does behove me instant to declare
The birth of Douglas, and aftel c his rights.
This night I purpose with my i;)n to mleet,
Reveal the secret, and confidt with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judginent errs.
As he does now, so look'd his noble father,
Arry'd in nature's ease : his mien, his ifeedi,
iWerc fwveetly tilnTe, and full oft deceiv'd
"1Thof trivial mort;>ss who ifem el-was wile.

lit,'- wrhen the matter match'dl his mighty mind,.
.p re.e te hero: on his piercing eye

' '

-

. ^ . "

. . . . -,. .

::... *
, 'S

Sat Oblervation t on each glance of thought
Decision follow'd, as the thunder-bolt
Pursues the flalh.

Anna. That demon haunts vou fitll:
Behold GCealM:n.

La. Rand. Now I fliun him not.

This day I brav'd him in behalf of No,'val;
Perhaps too far : at leaf my nicer fears
For Douglas thus interpret.

Enter GLENALVON.

Gle,;. Noble Dame!

The hov'ring Dane at last his men hath landed:
No band of pirates: but a mighty holt,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers;
To win a country or to lose themselves.

La. Rand. But whence comes this intelligence, GC6In

alvon ?

Glen. A nimble courier sent from yonder camp,

To haften up the chieftains of the north,
Inform'd me, as he pall, that the fierce Dane
Had on the eaflern coalt of Lothian landed,
Near to that place where the fea-rock immense,
Amazing Bais, looks o'er a fertile land.

La. Rand. Thenmuitthisweflern army marchtojoin.
The warlike troops that guard Edina's toyw'rs.

Glen. Beyond all quelfion. If imparing time

HTas not efrac'd the image of a place,
Once perfect in my breast, there is a wild
Which lies to westward of that mighty rock;
And eems by nature formed for the camp
Of water-wafted armies, whose chief flrength
Lies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse;
If martial skill directs the Daniih lords,
There inacceflible their army lies
To our swift fcow'ring hore : the bloody field-
iMuft man to man, and foot to foot ;be fought.

La. Rand. How manymotherslhitsewailthei- sons:
Tow.i manv widows weep their huifands slain - .
(,C . -.. .

Ye dames of Denmark! ev'n for you I feel,
Who sadly fitting on the fea-beat flore,
Long look for lords that never flall return.

Glen. Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian sword

Widow'd the north. The children of the slain
Come, as I hope, to meet their father's fate,
The monster war, with his infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are objes suited to Glenalvon's foul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death:
Reproach more piercing than the pointed sword.

La. Rand. I. scorn thee not, but when I ought to

scorn;

Nor e'er reproach, but when insulted virtue
Against audacious vice asserts herself.
I own thy worth, Glenalvon; none more apt
Than I to praise thine eminence in arms,
And be the eccho of thr martial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty passion;
Go and pursue a lawful miitrefs, Glory.
tJpon the Danish cres.s redeem thy fault:
- And let thy valour be the mhield of Randolph.
:- Glen. One instant flay, and hear an alter'd man.

When beauty pleads for virtue, vice abaih'd
Flies its own colours, and goes o'er to virtue.
I am your convert; time will Ihew how truly;
Yet one immediate proof I mean to give.
That youth, for whom your ardent zeal to-day,
Somewhat too haughtily, defyd your slave,
Amidst the mhock of armies I'll defend,
And turn death from him, with a guardian arm.
Sedate by use, my bosom maddens not
At the tumult'ous uproar of the field.

La. Rand. At thus, Glenalvon, and I am thy friend:

But that's thy least reward. Believe me, Sir,
? The truly gen'rous is the truly wife;

And he who loves not others; lives unblest

-g, , [Exit Lady Randolph.

- -. . .- GLEN.
[ . . An. A~~

GLENALVON fopl-.

Amen ! and virtue is its own reward !-
I think that I have hit the very tone '
In which {he loves to speak. Honey'd aflent,
How pleasing art thou to the tafle of man,
And woman also! flattery direct ' i
Rarely difguits. They little know mankind
Who doubt its operation : tis my key,
And opes the wicket of the human heart. ;
How far I have succeeded now I know not.
Yet I incline to think her stormy virtue
Is lull'd a while: 'tis her alone I fear:
Whilst ihe and Randolph live, and live in faith
Andamity, uncertain is :my tenure.
Fate~ 'er my head. suspends disgrace and death,
By that weak hair, a peevilh female's will.
I am not idle: but the ebbs and flows
Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated.
That slave of Norval's I have found most apt:
I shew'd him gold, and he has pawri'dihis foul:. - .
To fay and swear whatever I suggest, .
Norval, I'm told, has that alluring look,
'Twixt man and woman, which I have obferv'd,
To charm the nicer and fantaflic dames,
Who are, like Lady Randolpb, full of virtue.
In railing Randalph's jealousy I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom errs
Who thinks the worfi he can of womankind.

End of the 7tird ti ..:
** . ..~A. ,C .

- ' . ' !.;A'e
.

# ACT IV.

ACT IV.
SCEN E, A Court, &c. as before.

Flolrifh of Trumlpets.
Enter Lord RANDOLPH attended.

Lord RANDOLPH.

SUmmon an hundred horse by break of day;
J To wait our pleasure at the cafile gate,

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.
La. Rad. Alas! my Lord ! I've heard unwelcome

news;
The Danes are landed.

L. Rand. Ay ! no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament essay,
Of tome young knight refolv'd to break a spear,
And fIain with hoRtile blood his maiden arms.
The Danes are landed: we muff beat them back,
Or live the slaves of Denmark.

La. Rand. Dreadful times !

L. Rand. The fenceless villages are all forsaken;

The tremnbling mothers: and their children lodg'd
In wall-girt tow'rs and castles; whilit the men
Retire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return.

La. Rand. Immense, as fame reports, the Daniih

host-

L. Rand. Were it as famous as loud fame repor·t

An army knit like ours would pierce it thro'
Brothers, that 1hrink not from each other's fide,
And fond companions, fill our warlike files:

" . .
* o

For his dear offspring,and the wife he loves,
The husband, and the fearless father arm.
In vulgar breasts heroic ardor burns,
And the poor peasant mates his daring Lord.

La. Rand. Men's minds are temper'd, like their

fvords, for war;

Lovers of danger, on defiruction's brink
They joy to rear ereft their daring forms.
Hence, 'early graves; hence, the lone widow's life,
And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age.
Where is our gallant guest ?

L. Rand. Down in the vale

I left him, managing a fiery steed;
Whose itubbornnefs had foil'd the strength and kill
Of every rider. But behold he comes,
In earnest conversation with Glenalvon.

Enter NTORVAL and GLFNALVON.

Glenalvon ! with the lark arise; go forth,

And lead my troops that lie in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
Norval, thou go'ft with me. But fay, young man I
Where didft thou learn so to discourse of war,
And in such terms as I o'erheard to-day ?
War is no village science, nor its phrase
A language taught amongfl the 'hepherd fwaifs.

Nor. Small is the Ikill my Lord delights to praise-

In him he favours--Iear from whence it came.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the most remote
And inacceflible by shepherds trode,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit liv'd; a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our wand'ring swains.
Austere and lonely, cruel to himself,
Did they report him; the cold earth his bed, -
Water his drink, his food the Ihepherd's alms.
I went to fee him, and my heartvwas touched
With rev'rence and with pity. Mild he spake,
And, entering on discourse, such sories told
se..- D - AsI

As made me oft revisit his fad cell.
For he had been a soldier in his youth;
And fought in famous battles, when the Peers
Of Europe, by the bold Godfredo led,
Against th'ufurping Infidel difplay'd
The cross of Chrifi, and won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech struck from me, the old man would fllake
His years away, and a&i his young encounters:
Then, hiving (hew'd his wounds, he'd fit him down,
And ail the live-long day discourse of war.
To help my fancy, in the smooth green turf
He cut the figures of the marlhall'd hoils;
Defcrib'd the motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep columnn, and the lengthen'd line,
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm.
.. For all that Saracen or Chriflian knew
Of war's vast art was to this hermit known.

L. Rand. Why did this soldier in a desert hide
Those qualities that fiould have grac'd a camp ?

Nor. That too at last I learn'd. Unhappy man!

Returning homewards by Messina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boift'rous captain of the sea
Salen'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought:
The firanger fell, and with his dying breath
Declar'd his name and lineage ! Mighty God !
The soldier cried, my brother ! Oh ! my brother!

La. Rand. His brother !

Nor. Yes; of the fame parents born;

His only brother. They exchang'd forgiveness:
And happy, in my mind, was he that dy'd:
For many deaths has the survivor fuffer'd.
In the wild desert on a rock he fits,
Or on some nameless scream's untroden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times, .alas! not in his perfet mind !
Holds dialgRues with his lov'd brother's ghost;
And det eai night-forfakes his fullen couch,

"'

'
* '^ .

To make fad orisons for him he flew.

La. Rand. To what mysterious woes are riortals

born!

In this dire tragedy were there no more
Unhappy persons? did the parents live ?

NVor. No; they were dead: kind heav'n had los'd

their eyes
Before their son had shed his brother's blood.

L. Rand. Hard is his fate; for he was not to blame I

There is a destiny in this fhrange Wxorld,
Which oft decrees an undeserved doom:
Letichoolmen tellnswhy.-From whence these founds?

[Truimpets at a dijiance.]

Enter an OFFICER.

Of. My Lord, the trumpets of the troops of Lorn;
The valiant leader hails the noble Randslph .

L. Rand. Mine antient guest ! does he the warriouirs

lead ?
Has Denmark rous'd the brave old Knight to arms?-

Of. No; worn with warfare, he religns the sword..

His eldest hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
Now leads his kindred bands.

L. Rand. Clenalvon, go,

With hospitality's moit ifrong request
Intreat the chief.

[Exit Glenalvon;

Of. My Lord, requeffs are vain.

He urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foe's approach.

L. Rand. May victory fit on the warriour's plume

Bravest of men ! his flocks and herds are iaie;
Remote from war's alarms his paflures lie,
By mountains inaccellible fecur'd:
5 et foremolt he into the plain descends,
Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the antient world':
Contemners they of indolence and gain; ,
Vikt still for love of glory, and of arms, ;
L*:; .. *D 2 Pron<A

Prone to encounter peril, and to lift
Against each strong antagonist the spear.
I'll go and press the heroe to my breast.

[Exit Randolph.

/Tanet Ladv RANDOLPH and NonVAL.

La. Rand. The soldiers loftiness, t:le pride and pomp

Inve 'ing awful war,- NoIval, I fee,
Transport thy youthful minld.

Nor. Ha! fl-ould they not?

Blefs'd be the hour I left my father's honfe!
I might have been a ihepherd all my days,
And tole obscurely to a peasant's grave.
Now, if I live, wiitil mirhty chiefs I iland,
And, if I fall, woith noble dull i lie.

La. Rand, There is a gen'rous spirit in thy breast,

That could have well flilain'd a prouder fortune,
This way with me ; under yon spreading beech,
Ulifeen, unheard, by human eye or ear,
I will amaze thee with a wond'rous tale.

Nor. L-et there be danger, Lady, with the secret,

That I may hug it to my grateful heart,
And prove my faith. Command my sword, my life:
These are the role poffeflions of poor Norval.

La. Rand. IKnow'ft thou these gems?

Nor. Durst I believe mine eyes
I'd fay I knew them, and they were my father's.

La. Rand. Thy father's, fay'It thou! ah! they

were thy father's!

Nor. I saw them once, and curiously inquir'd

Of both my parents, whence such splendor came ?
But I was check'd, and more could never learn.

La. Rand. Then learn of me, thou art not Nornal's

son.
Nor. Not Norval's son !

La. Rand. Nor of a Ihepherd sprung.
N or. Lady, who am I then?

La. Rand. Noble thou art;
For'noble was thy Sire! !

- * henry

Nor. I will believe thee----
0 ! tell me farther ! Say who was my father ?

La. Rand. Douglas!
Nor-. Lord Douglas, whom to-day I saw ?
La. Rand. His younger brother.

Nor. And in yonder camp ?

La. Rand. Alas!
Nor. You make me tremble-Sighs and tears !
Lives my brave father ?

La. Rand. Ah ! too brave indeed !

He fell in battle ere thyself waft born.

-Nor. Ah me unhappy ! 'ere myself was born!
But does my mother live ? I may conclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been sorrow.

La. Rand. She lives; but wattes her life in constant

woe,
Weeping her husband slain, her infant loft.

Nor. You that are fkill'd so well in the fad story

Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their destiny, now have compalfion
Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd!
O ! tell me who, and where my mother is !
Opprefs'd by a base world, perhaps {he bends
Beneath the weight of other ills and grief;
And desolate, implores of heav'n the aid
Her fTn lhould give. It is, it must be so-
Your countenance confesses that Ihe's wretched.
O ! tell me her condition ! Can the sword ? --
Who (hall resist me in a parent's cause ?
,La. Rand. Thy virtue ends her woe.-My son,

my son! ' '
I am thy mother, and the wife of Douglas !

[Falls upon his neck.

Nor. O heav'n and earth, howwondrous is myfate!
Art thou my mother ! Ever let me kneel!,

La. Rand. Image of Douglas! Fruit of a.taaI lovei
All that I owe thy Sire, I pay to thee, :.

Nor. RefpeC and admiration Sill poiefl'me , i

Checking the love and fondness of'-'i:.; ' '.
ls '

1 ^- _D. a P *

Yet I was filial to my humble parents.
But did my Sire surpass the reft of men,
As thou excelleft all of womankind?

La. Rind. Arise, my son! In methoudoftbehol6

The poor remains of beauty once admir'd:
The autumn of my days is come already;
For sorrow made my summer haste away,
Yet in my prime I equall'd not thy father;
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet Sometimes
Liker the dove's; and, as he pleas'd, he won
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

Nor. How did he fall ? Sure 'twas a bloody field
When Douglas dy'd. O I have much to alk!

La. Rand. Heareafter thou Ihalt hear the lengthen'd

tale

Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
At present this: thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder catle, and the wide domains
Which now Lord Randolph, as my hulband, holds.
But thou shalt not be wrong'd; I have tho pow'r
To right thee ffill: before the King I'll kneel,
And call Lord Douglas to protet his blood.

ANor. The blood of Douglas will protec itself.
La. Rand. But we lhall need both friends and fa-

vour, boy,

To.wref thy lands and lordmhip from the gripe
Of Randolph and his kinsman. Yet I think
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
-- M life incline the virt'ous to believe.

VNor. To be the son of Douglas is to me

Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in the field I'll seek for fame and fortune;

La. Rand. Thou dost not know what perils and in-

jutice

A'.vait the poor man's valour.- 0 ! my son-
Tile noleft blood in all the land's abafh'd,
Having no lacquey but pale poverty,
Too long halt thou been thus attended, Douglas! -
Too long haft thou been deem'd a peafalt's cild.

:__-.

-..,

-

:

.:

rl?'*

.
.t!®

The wanton heir of some inglorious chief :- '..
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in thy youthful.fp'-:s ;:
Whilst thy indignant spirit fwell'd in vain!;' :
Such contumely thou no more Ihalt bear:, '
But how I purpose to redress thy wrongs
Must be hereafter told. Prudence directs
That weihould part before yon chiefs return.
Retire, and from thy ruffic follower's hand . .
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, di&ated before
This casual opportunity arose
Of private conference. · Its purport mafrk;
For as I there appoint we meet again.
Leave me, my son! and frame thy manners still
To Norval's, not to noble Dozglas' itate. '

Nor. I will remember. Where is Norval now ?
That good old man. -

La. Rand. At hand conceal'd he lies,

An useful witness. But beware, my son,- .
Of yon Glenalvon; in his guilty breaf
Resides a villain's shrewdness, ever prone. - -
To false conjeture. He hath griev'dmy heatt. .

Nor. -Has he indeed ? Then let yon false Glenalvoi '
Beware of me. - [Ex'it Doulazr '

Manet Lady RANDOLPH. ,
;: 3

There burst the fmin rame!

O ! thou all righteous and eternal Kinghi/?¥-'': ':'- ..'
Who father of the fatherless art call'd; ' -: .
Prote& my son !--Thy inspiration,. Lord ! -- ...
Hath fill'd his bosom with that sacred fire, ''
Which in the breast of his forefathers burin'd.;.
Set him on high like them, thathe may~ ii;
The flar and glory of his native land:': , ?: ; : :.
.Then let the minister ofdeath descend, '
And bear my willing spirit to its place. :
Yonder they come. -How- do bad women-find; :
Unchanging .aspe&s to conceal their guilt-? - -
' -

h)jen I, by reason, -and by jufliQe urg'd, -'

Full hardly can dissemble with these men
In nature's pious cause.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.

aL. Rand. Yon gallant chief,
Of arms enamour'd, all repose difdaims.

La. Rand. Be not, my Lord, by his example fway'd:

Arrange the business of to-morrow now,
And; when you enter, speak of war no more.

[Exit Lady RANDOLPH.

Manet Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.
L. Rand. 'Tis so, by heav'n! her mein, her voice,

her eye,
And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

Glen. He parted from her now: behind the mount,
Amonget the trees, I saw him glide along.

L. Raid. For fad, fequefter'd virtue she's renown'd!
Glen. Mos true, my Lord.

L. Rand. Yet this diffinguifh'd Dame

Invites a youth, th' acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This aifignation, [fhewvs a letter,],the assassin freed.
Her manifest affetion for the youth,
Might breed suspicion in a husband's brain,
Whose gentle consort all for love had wedded;
Much more in mine. Matilda never lov'd me.
Let no man after me a woman wed,
Whose heart he lnows he has not; tho' she brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry;
For let her seem, like the nights shadowy queen,
Cold and contemplative ;-He cannot trust her:
She may, the will, bring shame and forrowon him;
The worf of sorrows, and the worst of hames !

Glen. Yieldnot, myLord, tofuchafflifingthoughts;

But let the spirit of an husband sleep,
Till your oewn senses make a sure conclusion.
This billet mhft to blooming Norval go: .
At the next turn awaits my trufy spy;

L .'^ i - t~~~~~iwl

I'll. give it him refitted for his master. ;
In the close thicket take your secret stand ..
The moon Ihines bright, and your own eyes may judge
Of their behaviour. '

L. Rand. Thou dost counfelwell.

Glen. Permit me now to make 'one flight essay.

Of all the trophies which vain mortals boat,
By wit, by valour, or by wisdom is on,
T he first and fairest, in a young man's eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Successful love.
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind:
And the proud conqueror in triumph.moves
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

L. Rand. And what avails this maxim ?

Glen. Much, my Lord !

Withdraw a little: I'll accost young Norval,
And with ironical derisive counsel
Explore his spirit. If he is no more
-Than humble Norval, by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as he is, he'll Ihrink aflonilh'd fiom me:
But if he be the fav'rite of the fair,
Lov'd by the firfi of Caledonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear. -

L. Rand. 'Tis shrewdly thought. .
Glen. When we grow loud, draw near. But let

my Lord
His riing wrath restrain. [Exit Ranldoph.

Manet GLENALVON. .;-

'Tis strange, by heav'n !.-'-.

That {he should run full tilt her fond career, ' ..
To one so little known. She too that.ifeein'd- .

.d

Pure as the winter fiream, when ice emboss'ld- . .. :
Whitens its course. Even I did think her chaste,..- i
Whole charity exceeds not. Precious:fex! - ---'; .-
Whose deeds lascivious pass Glenalvbn's ;thoughts'

>v .

.-s Norval appears. :

;His.port I love; he's in a .proper .mood : . :. .
i,: ^. -.. ..*.;:.. -. ^a ^ -.^-- -T

To chide the thunder, if at him it roar'd.
Has Vorval seen the troops?

Nor. The setting fun,

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale,
And as the warriours mov'd, each poli&h'd helm,
Corflet, or spear, glanc'd back-his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at its top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they feem'd,
An hof angelic, cad in burning arms.

Glen. Thou talk'ft it well; no leader of our holt
-In founds more lofty speaks of glorious war.

Nor. If I ihall e'er acquire a leader's name,

My speech will be less ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itself freely; fmce no part is mine
Of praise pertaining to the great in arms.
-Glen. You wrong yourself, brave Sir; your mar-

tial deeds

Have rank'd you with the great: but mark me Nomval;
Lord Rando.!p''s favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know these soldiers, counsel you,
Give them all honour ; seem not to command
Else they will scarcely brook your late sprung podv'r,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

Nor. Sir, I have been accuftom'd all my days

To hear and speak the plain and funple truth:
And tho' I have been told, that there are men
Who borrow fiiendihip's tongue to speak their scorn,
Yet in such language I am little fkill'd.
Therefore I thank Glenalvon for his counsel,
Altho' it founded harshly. Why remind
Me of my birth obscure ? Why slur my pow'r
With such contempt'ous terms?

Glen. I did not mean
To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

No-. My pride! '

Glen. Suppress it as you wifll to prosper.

Your pride's excefive Yet for Randolph's fake:
E :- -* --^ - - : -I.W.

I will not leave you to its rafh'diretion.
If thus you swell, and frown at high -b6ornmen;. ;i
Will high-born men endure a shepherd's scorn ?

Nor. A ihephers's scorn! ,

..' '

: . Glen. Yes, if you presume

To bend on soldiers these difdaififil eyes, . '
As if you took the measure of their minds, '.:
And said in secret, you're no match for me;
What will become of you?.' ' '.-

Nor. If this were told-[.E , e.,.
Haft thou not fears for thy prefumpt'ous self? .

Glen. Ha ! doft'thou threaten me? . . '

Nor. Didft thou not hear ?

'Glen. Unwillingly I did; a nobler foe.
Had not been queftion'd thus. But fiuch as thee-- '

Nor. Whom dost thou think me ? . -

Glen. sNorval.

Nor.- So I am-»-'
And who is Norval in Glenalvon's eyes ? ., .

Glen. A peasant's son, a wand'ring beggari.boy;:
At best no more, ev'n if he speaks the truth.

Nor. Falle as thou art, dost thou fufpe& my truth .?
Glen. Thy truth ! thou'rt all a lie; and falfe.as hell .
Is the vain-glorious tale thou told'ft to Randolph.:: . -

Nor. If I were chain'd, unarm'di and b'edrid.oid

Perhaps T hould revile: But as I am ' '
I have no tongue to rail. The humble.N or'ual'
Is of a race Who' frive not but with deeds.-
Did I not fear to freeze thy Thallow valour, - . -
And make thee fink too soon beneath my fi:Or-;i" . -
I'd tell thee-what thou art. I, know thee :eli' ': :

Glen. Doif thou not know 'lenalvon, born to coin.

mand . .
Ten thousand slaves like thee ?

Nor. Villain, no more:

Draw and defend thy life. I did design ' :::"',!-;i: . -;
To have'defy'd thee in another cauife -:- :. -"
Blut.heaOv'n acceleratesaits vengeance on .tee.-.;· - '

.
~ofor my own and Lady Randolph os : :'

4'M 2ns
s':

Enter Lord R4NDOLPH.
L. Rand. Hold, I command you both. The mag

that itirs
Makes me his foe.

Nor. Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly founded, noble Randolph.

Glen. Hear him, my Lord; he's wondrous conde-

scending!

Mark the humility of ihepherd Norval
Nor. Now you may fcoffin safety. [Sheaths hisfword.

L. Rand. Speak not thus,

Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

Nor. Nay, my good Lord, tho' I revere you much,

My cause I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I bluwh to speak; I will not, cannot speak
Th' opprobrious wo:ds that I from him have born.
To the liege lord of my dear native land
I oxe a subje&'s homage; but ev'n him
'And his high arbitration I'd reje&.
Within my bofomn reigns another lord
Honour, sole judge and umpire of itself.
If my free speech offend you, noble Randolph,
Revoke your favours, and let Norval go
Hence as he came, alone, but not difhonour'd.

L. Rand. Thus farI'llmediatewith impartial voice;

The antient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
Suspend your purpose, till your country's arms
Repel the bold invader; then decide
The private quarrel.

Glen. I agree to this.
Nor. And I.

* Enter SERVANT.
Ser. The banquet waits.

L. Rand. We come.

[Exit Randolph.,

-**-

'.

..
..*.;j-,»a

# ACT V.

Glen. Aorval, ,

Let not our variance mar the social hour, '
Nor wrong the hospitality of Randolph., " '.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkled hate, :
Shall tain my countenance. Smooth thou thy-brosw;
Nor let our strife disturb the gentle Dame.

Nor. Think not so lightly, Sir, of my resentment;
When we contend again, our strife is mortal.

End of the Fourth ASg.

ACT V.
S C E N E, The Wood.

Enter DOUGLAS.

H I S is the place, the centre of the grove.
Here itands the oak, the monarch of the wood,

How sweet and solemn is this mid.night scene !
The 'ilver moon, unclouded, holds-her way
Thro' ikies where I could count each little star::
The fanning weft-wind scarcely ffirs the leaves;
The river,. ruihing o'er its pebbled bed,
Imposes filenee with a filly found.
In such a place as this, at such an hour,
If ancestry can be in ought believ'd,
Descending spirits have convers'd wvith man,;
And told the secrets of the world unknown.

Enter Old NORVAL. - -

Nor. 'Tis he. But what if he hould chide me hence:.:
His jus reproach I fear. . ..

[LDouglas turns andfees hixm' '

Forgive, forgive,- '

Canst thou forgive the man, the 'fefilh man '-
Who bred Sir Malcolm's heir a ihepherd's son?

L* „,..

Doug. Kneel .not to me: thou art my father ffil:

Thy wilh'd for presence now compleats my joy.
Welcome to me, my fortunes thou lialt share,
And ever honour'd with thy Douglas live.

Nor. And doql thou call me father? 0 my-fon!

I think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
Which in the wilderness so long conceal'd
The blossom of thy youth.

Doug. Not worse the fruit,

That in the wilderness the blossom blow'd.
Amongst the ihepherds, in the humble cote,
I learn'd some lessons, which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
'I vho was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; and, when my vassals bow,
jA rval ihall finooth the crefied pride of Douglas.
- Nor. Let me but live to fee thine exaltation!
Yet grievous are my fears. 0 leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

Doug. Why ihould I leave them ?

Nasr. Lord Randolph and his kinsman seek your life.
Doug. How know'it thou that?

Nor. I will inform you how.

When ev'ning came, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And fondly trode in each accuftom'd path
That to the cafle leads. Whilst thus I rang'd,
I was alarm'd with unexpected founds
Of earnest voices. On the persons came;
Unseen I lurked, and o'erheard them name
Each other as they talk'd, Lord Randolph this,
And that Glenalvon: ffill of you they spoke,
And of the Lady: threat'ning was their fpeecb,
Tho' but imperfectly my ear could hear it.
'Twas firange, theyfaid, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Doug. Revenge ! for what ?-

Nor. For being what you are;

, -Sirl

Sir Malcolm's heir: how else have you offended -
When they were gone, I hy'd me to my cottage,
And there fat musing how I best mightfind
Means to infbrm you of their wicked purpose.
But I could think of none: at last perplex'd
I issued forth, encompafing the tow'r
With many a weary ftep and wishful look.
Now providence hath brought you to my fight,
Let not your too courageous spirit scorn
The caution which I give.

Doug. I scorn it not.

My mother warn'd nie of Glenalvon's b'aenefs:
But I will not fufpe& the noble Randolph.
In our encounter with the vile afaffins,
I mark'd his brave demeanor: him I'll trust.

Nor. I fear you will too far.

Doug. Here in this place

I wait my mother's coming: file shall know
What thou haft told: her counsel I will follow;
'And cautious ever are a mother's counsels.
You must depart: your presence may prevent
Our interview.

Nor. My blessing reft upon thfe' .!

0 may heav'n's hand, which fav'd thee from the wave'
And from the sword of foes, be-nar thee itll; -- '
Turning mischance, if ought hangs o'er thy head,
All upon mine!

rExit Old Nrval.

Doug. He loves. me like a parent ; . '

And must not, shall not lose the son he laves,
Altho' his son has found a nobler fathei:r.- -
Eventful day ! how haft thou chang'd my state d
Oece'bon the cold, and winter shaded fide:
Of a bleak hill, mischance had rooted me,"' :
Never to thrive, child of another foil: -.' ^
Transplanted now to the gay funny'vale, '-
Like the green thorn of May my fortune flow'ers. :
Ie gloriousars ias high heav'n's refplendant host ,

;t -

ITe wlhom I oft have of my lot complain'd '

,:.l.';
] ,onduecor l's Wunalted' !,e ','::,*

Dead or alive, let me but be renown'd !
May heav'n inspire some fierce gigantic Dane,
To give a hokl defiance to our host !
Bcfore he speaks it out I will accept;
Like Douglas conquer, or like Douglas die.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.
La. Rand. My son! I heard a voice

Doug --T he voice was mine.

La. Rand. i.dt thou complain aloud to nature's ear,
That thus in dulky ihades, at mid-night hours,
By flealth the mother and the son lhould meet ?

[Emhracit himn.

Dou~. No; on this happy day, this better hirth.day,
AMy thoughts and words are all of hope and joy.

La. Ra;.d. Sad fear and melancholy fill divide

Tihe empire of ny breaf with hope and joy.
Now hear what I advise.

Douig. First, let me tell
What may the tenor of vour counsel change.

La. Rand My heart forebodes some evil !

Doug. 'Tis not good-

At eve, unseen by Randolph and Glenalvon,
The good old nTorval in the grove o'erheard
Their conversation: oft they mention'd me
'r:Vith dreadful threat'nings; you they sometimes nam'd.
'l'w as strange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

La. Rand. Defend us gracious God! we are be-

tray'd:

They have found out the secret of thy birth;
It muf be so. That is the great difcov'ry.
Sir ,ialcolm's heir is come to claim his own;
And he will be reveng'd. Perhaps ev'n now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for murder, they but wait
A darker and more silent hour, to break
Into the chamber where they think thou fleep'ft.
This moment, this, heav'n hath ordain'd to save thee .
Fly to the camp, my son!

Doug. And leave you he11e !

'
tNo: to tb cast let us go together, " , j

Calf up the antient servants of your house,
Who in their youth did eat your father's bread.
Then tell them loudly that I am your son.
If in the breafis of men one spark remains.
Of sacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your cause will arm. I ask but few
To drive those spoilers from my father's house.

La. Rand. 0 Nature, Nature! what can check

thy force ?

Thou genuine offspring of the daring Douglas!
But rush not on delh'uetion: save thyself,
And I am safe. To me they mean no harm.
Thy flay but rifls thy precious life in vain.
That winding path conducts thee to the river.
Cross where thou feeft a broad and beaten way,.
Which running eastward leads thee to the camp.
Instant demand admittance to Lord Douglas.
Shew him these jewels, which his brother wore.
Thy look, thy voice, will make him feel the truth,.
Which I by certain proof will loon confirm.

Doug. I yield me and obey: but yet my heart

Bleeds at this parting. Something bids me ifay
And guard a mother's life. Oft have I read , .
Of wond'rous deeds by one bold arm atchiev'd- :
Our foes are two: no more: let me go forth, -
And fee if any shield can guard Glenalvon. '

La. Rand. If thou regard'it thy mother, or rever'ft

Thy father's mem'ry, think of this no more.
One thing I have to fay before we part;
Long wert thou loft; and thou art found, my child, :
In a molt fearful season. War and battle
I have great cause to dread. Too well I fee '
Which way the current of thy temper sets: :
To-day I've found thee. Oh ! my long loft hope ^
If thou to giddy valour giv'ft the rein,
To-morrow I may lose my ion for ever.
The love of thee, before thou faw'ft the light,
Suftain'd my life when thy brave father fell.
If thou Ihalt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this vafte world ! my son, rememnber me3 :. 1. '

Doug. Whatfliall I fay? howcanlgive you comfort?

The God of battles of my life dispose
As may be best for you ! for whose dear fake
I will not bear myself as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boast founds amongst martial men,
How will inglorious caution suit my claim
The post of fate unfirinking I maintain.
My country's foes must witness who I am.
On the invaders heads I'll prove my birth,
'Till friends and foes confess the genuine firain..
If in this strife I fall, blame not your son,
Who if he lives not honour'd, must not live.

La. Rand. I will not utter what my bosom feels.

Too well I love that valour which I warn:
Farewel, my son ! my counsels are but vain.

[Embracing.
And as high heav'n hath will'd it ll must be.

[Separate.
La. Rand. Gaze not on me, thou wilt mistake the

path;
I'll point it out again.

s[i at as they are separating, enter from the wood

Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.]

-~'.'- L. Rand. Not in her presence.
Nxovw-

Glen. I'm prepar'd.

L. Rand. No: I command thee, itay.

I go alone: it never aiall be said
That I took odds to combat mortal man.
The noblest vengeance is the mo6 compleat.

[Exit Lord Randplp'h
[Glenalvon makes foRme jeps to the fame fide

of thej asSe, lil!ens and speaks.]

C/'n. Demons of death come fettle on my sword,

And to a double slaughter guide it home !
The lover and the husband both mutt die.

[Lord Randolph behind the scenes.]
L. Rand. Draw, villain! draw. :

- - '- !' - . * -- .- .D znl g

La. Rand. Where am I now? fill in this w-etclied

world! . ,

Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine, -
My youth was worn in anguilh; butyouth's flrengith
With hope's affifance, bore the brunt of sorrow,;'.
And train'd me on to be the objec now,
- On which Omnipotence displays itself,
Making a fpeaacle, a tale of me,
To awe its vassal, man.

L. Rand. 0 misery!

Amidst thy raging grief I'muft proclaim
My innocence.

La. Rand. Thy innocence

L. Rand. My guilti
Is innocence compared with what thou thinkit' it.

La. Rand. Of thee I think not: what have I to' do

With thee or any thing? l'y son ! my son !
My beautiful ! my brave I how proud waS I
Of thee, and of thy valour! My fond heart
O'erflow'd this day with transport, when.I thought'
.Of growing old amidst a race of thine,
Who might make up to me their father's childhood:
And bear my brother's and. my husband's name; . -.
Now all my hopes are dead! A little while : :
Was I a wife ! a mother not'fo long! -...
What am I now?-I know.-BJut I hall 'be \,...
That only whilst I please; for such a son .

.

And such a hhuband make a woman bold. [R*n.:ti't

L. Rand. Follow her, Anna: I myself would follow,?
But in this rage Ihe must abhor my pretence.

Exit Anna.

Enter Old NORYALm. . . .- ,
Nor. I hear the voice of woe; heav'n guard:imy J

child !

L. Rand. Already is the idle gaping croud, ;

The spiteful vulgar come to gaze on Randotpi.? :

-

'
Begone. - ' -.' . '

Aor.: Lfear thee not.' I will n6tog -: - i:
Hiere i remain. 'm accompc .;i .

With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help
To crush down to the ground this lovely plant.
O noblest youth that ever yet was born !
Sweetest and'beft, 'gentlef and bravest spirit,
That ever blefs'd the world! Wretch that I am,
Who saw that noble spirit swell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it!
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do thee jutice, and reveal the secret,
Which timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's fiare ! Oh ! I am punifh'd now!
These are the hairs that Ihouldhaveftrew'dthe ground,
And not the locks of Douglas.

[Tears his hair, and throws Bim-

self upon the body of Douglas.

L. Rand. I know thee now: thy boldness I forgive;

My crest is fallen. For thee I will appoint
A place of reft, if grief will let thee reft.
I will reward, altho' I cannot punish.
Curit, curst Glenalvon, he efcap'd too well,
Tho' slain and baffled by the hand he hated.
-'Foaming with rage and fury tothe lait,
Cursing his conqueror, the felon dy'd.

Enter ANNA.
Ama. My Lord, my Lord!

L. Rand. Speak: I can hear of horror.
Anna. Horror indeed!

L. Rand. latilda?

Anna. Is no more;

She ran, the flew like light'ning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice ihe gain'd,
Beneath whose low'ring top the river falls
Lngulph'd in rifted rocks: thither ihe caime,;
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down.

L. Rand. 'Twas I! alas! 'twas I

That filld her breast with fury; drove her down
'ae prepice of death! Wretch that I aim

3set-~-

*:'' '-*

'''
. ^ '

Anna. 0 had you seen her last despairing look

Upon the brink {he flood, and cast her eyes
Down on the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heav'n, seeming to fay,
Why am I forc'd to this ? fie plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

L. Rand, I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the passion of my foul,
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of Randolph gave.
They speak aloud, and with the voice of fate
Denounce my doom. I am refolv'd. I'll go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me turn aside must threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy mistress, take this ring,
Pull warrant of my pow'r. Let ev'ry rite
With cost and pomp upon their funerals.wait:
For Randolph hopes he never Ihall return.

SpIN.
I S

. I

k
' .. ',3 i.!

# EPILOGUE.

6

- . - : A
:

' '''E P 1 L , o - ,! '

A N Epilogue I aj'd, but nor one 'word.
- Our bard. will write, e vows, 'tis moJ? ahfird
-W.ith comic f' sgto contradie? th eyirain . ,;
Of tragedy, antl make your sorrows vain.
Sadly he fjys, thiatpity is:the'bej ,.. :.
* The nrllfpajfioS of the hbumat breafJ .
-For when ifs acredfireamns the heart o'erflowy .

. -

.

In gushei pleasure with the tide of woe;

'And- -w z waen.it es retire like'thofe of Nile,
- They leave behind them such a golden-foil,

TJ hat th ,ere the virtues without culture grow,

, here e

tie jeet bloffoineof affeieion blow.
., . ef-jwere his words.--void of delufrJe art, .

I felt them; for he spake them from his heart.
: .Nor -ill I now attempt, with witty folly

T - eT chafe away celestial melancholy.-

it "!elj

With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help
To crush down to the ground this lovely plant.
0 noblest youth that ever yet was born !
Sweetest and'bet, 'gentlef and bravest spirit,
That ever blefs'd the world! Wretch that I am,
Who saw that noble spirit swell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it !
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do thee juffice, and reveal the secret,
Which timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's snare ! Oh ! I am punifh'd now !
These are the hairs that fhouldhavefirew'dthe ground,
And not the locks of Douglas.

~-'~ ~[Tears his hair, and throws him-

self upon the body of Douglas.

L. Rand. I know thee now: thy boldness I forgive;

My crest is fallen. For thee I will appoint
A place of reft, if grief will let thee reft.
-I will reward, altho' I cannot punish.
Curst, curst Glenalvon, he efcap'd too well,
Tho' slain and baffled by the hand he hated.
-TFoaming with rage and fury to the last,
Cursing his conqueror, the felon dy'd.

Enter ANNA.
Anna. My Lord, my Lord!

L. Rand. Speak: I can hear of horror.
Anna. Horror indeed !

L. Rand. Mlat;lda

Anna. Is no more;

She ran, mhe flew like light'ning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice The gain'd,
Beneath whose low'ring top the river falls
Inoulph'd in rifted rocks: thither she camne,
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down.

L. Rand. 'Twas I ! alas! 'twas I

-That sil'd her breast with fury; drove her down
-Ie precipice of death ! Wretch that I am !

Anna. 0 had you seen herlaft despairing look !

Upon the brink {he stood, and cast her eyes
Down on the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heav'n, seeming to fay,
Why am I forc'd to this? she plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

L. Rand. I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the paflion of my foul,
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of Randolph gave.
They speak aloud, and with the voice of fate
Denounce my doom. I am refolv'd. I'll go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me turn aside must threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy mistress, take this ring,
Full warrant of my pow'r. Let ev'ry rite
With cost and pomp upon their funerals.wait:
For Randolph hopes he never shall return.

F I N I S.

"
-.' -'

E IP L U.0:- i

.
A N/ Epilogue lajk'd, .ut not.one wuord.

Or bOard will write, He vois, 'tis moJf aJfiir

.*i't!5 comic Wi' to contradicS fheh'ain - ;
Of tragedy, ani make your sorrows vain,
Sadly he fays, tat, pity is the'bej.. f ', ,
"The nolitpaffioit of the 'hiiiuman east
-For wheni its acredflreams the heart o'erflo-s . .
-' In gujhi:s pleasure with the tide of woe;
.-A'nd v,'ei its waves retire like those of Nile,

bThey leave tehind temifuch a golden foil,

-That tfere the virtues without culture grow,

7'here the feeet bloffomnof affeeilon blow. .
. . ,efe-were his words:--void of delufre arti

If- felt them; for he spake them from his heart.
-A or will I now attempt, with witty folly
-7o chafe away celefial melancholy.

,, '
" . - ' 'i.(
