DOUGLAS:
A T R A G E D Y.

- As it is A&ed at
The T H E A T R E S

IN
G R E A T B R I T A I N.

Non ego fum vates, fedrifci confcius vi.

By the REVEREND
Mr. J O H N H 0OM E.

G L A S G O W:
?rigttd and fold by ROBERT DUNCAN,

jMDCC,XCI:

# PROLOGUE.

P R O L O G U E.

Spoken by Mr. SPARKIS.

N antient times, when Britain's trade was arms,
And the lov'd music of her youth alarms.

A god-lie race filain'dfair England's fame:.
Who has not heard of gallant PIERCY's name?
Ay, and of DOUGLAS? Such illuflrious foes
In rival Rome and Carthage never rose!
From age to age bright /hone the BritJh fire,
And every hero wuas a hero's fire.
When powerful fate decreed one warrior's doom,
Upfprung the Phenix from his warrior's tomb.
Budt whilf those generous warriors fought andfell,
Those generous rivals lov'd each other well:
Though many a bloody field was loJf and 'won,
Nothing in hate, in honour all vas done,
lWhen PIERCY wrong'd, defy'd his prince or peers,
Fajl came the DOUGLAS, with his Scotth spears; -
And, when proud DOUGLAS made his 'ing his foe,
For DOUGLAS, PIERCY beni his Englih bow,
Expell'd their native homes by adverfeifae,
They kneck'd alternate at each other's gate:
Then blaz'd the caqle, a! the midnight hour,
For him who.se arms hadlJfook its frmfl tow:,r.

This night a DOUGLAS your protecion claims;

A wife! a mother ! pity's /fftcJ names:
rThJefory of her woes indulgent hear,
And grant your fippliant allJhe becr, a tear:
In confidence Jh begs; and hopes tofind
Each Englijh breaj?, like noble PIERCY'S kind.

A 2

# DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

DR A M ATI E RSONAE.

MEN,

LONDON. EDINBURGH.

Lord Randolpb, Mr. Ridout. Mr. Younger.
Glenalvon, Mr. Smith. Mr. Love.
Norval, Douglas, Mr. Barry. Mr. Digges.
Stranger, Mr. Sparks. Mr. Hayman.
Servants.

WOMEN.
.Matilda, Lady 7

Randolph, } Mrs. Woffington. Mrs. Ward.
Anna, Mrs. Vincent. Mrs. Hopkins,

# ACT I.

DOUGLAS;
A T R A G E D Y.

C T I.

S C.E N E I. '
~Ve Court of a Cafll, firrrunded wilth k'cods.

Enter Lady RAP.DOLPH.

YE Woods and Wilds, whose melancholy gloom
IAccords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth
The voice of sorrow from my bursting heart,
Farewell a while: I will not leave you long;
For in your shades I deem some spirit dwells,
Who from the chiding stream or growing oak,
Still hears and answers to Matilda's moan.
0 DOUGLAS! DOUGLAS! if departed guests
Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of the wood thou art,
And with the passion of immortals hear'st
My lamentation; hear'st thy wretched wife
Weep for her husband slain, her infant loft,
My brother's timeless death I seem to mourn,
Who perifh'd with thee on this fatal day.
To thee I lift my voice; to thee address
The plaint which mortal ear has never heard,
O disregard me not though I am call'd
Another's now, my heart is wholly thine
Incapable of change, affeifon lies
Buried my DOUGLAS, in thy bloody grave. -
But Randolph comes, whom fate has made my Lord,

' >

To chide my anguish, and defraud the dead.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.
Ld. Ran. Again these weeds of woe! fay, do'flthoi

well

To feed a paflion which consumes thy life
The living claim 4ome duty; vainly thou
Beltow'tel thy cares upon the silent dead.

La.Ran. Silent, alas ! is he for whom.I mourn:

Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives,
This fatal day itirs my time fettled sorrow,
Troubles afresh the fountain of my heart.

Ld. Ron. When was it of pure sadness ! These black

weeds

Express the wonted colour of thy mind,
For ever dark and dismal. Seven long years
Are pars'd, since we were join'd by sacred ties:
Clouds all the while have hung upon thy brow,
Nor broke, nor parted by one gleam of joys
Time, that wears out the trace of deepest anguifi,
As the feafmooths the prints made in the sand,
H1as pa31 o'er thee in vain.

La. Ran. If time to come

Should prove as ineffeauai, yet my Lord,
Thou cans not blame me. When-our Scottish youth
Vy'd with each other for my luckless love,
Oft I besought them, I implor'd them all
Not to afgail me with my father's aid,
Nor blend their better deftiny-with mine:
For melancholly had congeal'd my blood,
And froze affetion in my chilly breast.
At last my Sire, rous'd with the'bafe attempt
To force me from him, which'thoa rend'red'ft vain,
To his own daughter bow'd his hoary head,
Befonght me to commiserate his age,
And vow'd he Ihou'd not, could not die in peace,
Un!efs he saw me wedded, and fecur'd'
From violence and outrage.en, my Lord! .
In my extreme ditlrefs ig ee,:

a,
J~ n' ..-^.^-,„ ..-

Thee I befpake, profefs'd my strong desire
To lead a single, solitary life,
And begg'd thy nobleness, not to demand
Her for a wife whose heart was dead to love.
How thou perfifted'ft after this, thou know'it,
And must confers that am not unjust,
Nor more to thee than to myself injurious.

Ld. Ran. That I confess; yet ever must regret

The grief I cannot cure. Would thou wert not
Compos'd of grief and tenderness alone,
But had'st a spark of other paflions in thee,
Pride, anger, vanity, the strong desire
Of admiration, dear to woman kind;
These might contend with, and allay thy grief,
As meeting tides and currents smooth our firth.

La. Ran. To such a cause the human mind oft owes

Its transient calm, a calm I envy not.
Ld. Ran. Sure thou art not the daughter of Sir Mal,

colm:

Strong was his rage, eternal his resentment:
For when thy brother fell, he fmil'd to hear
That DOUGLAS' son in the fame field was slain.

La. Ran. Oh! rake not up the ashes of my fathers:

Implacable resentment was their crime,
And grievous has the expiation been.

Contending with the DOUGLAS, gallant lives

Of either house were loft; my ancestors
Compell'd, at last, to leave their antient feat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
No heir is left. Had they not been so stern,
I had not been the last of all my race.

Ld. Ran. Thy grief wrests to its purposes my words

I never alk'd of thee that ardent love,
Which in the breasts of fancy's children burns.
Decent affection, and complacent kindness
Were all I wish'd for; but I wish'd in vain.
Hence with the less regret my eyes behold
The florm of war that gathers o'er this land:
If I should perilh by the Danifl sword,

Matilda would not hied bon tear the moro.

LA. RAN. Thou dost not think so: woful as I ami

I lov.e thy merit, and efteenm thy virtues'.
But whither goeft thda now?- -

Ld. Ran. Straight-to the camps -

Where every warri6or on'the-tipitoe:ftaiids
Of- expeoation -and impatient afles
Each who arrives, if he-is- come'-to tell
The Danes are landed. - -

La. Ran. 0, may adverse winds *

_Far from the coast of Sc4tland, drive their fleet!
And every soldier of -bbth 'hbots retnih - :
In peace and safety to his pleasant home?

Ld. Ran. Thou speak's a womwn's hear a warrior's

wish: -

-

Right From their native land, the fRormy north,
May the wind blow, till the keel is six'd
Immoveable in Caledonia's strand' !- ;'-
Then shall our foes repeint their bold invalion-
And roving armies fhun(the fatat shore.

La. Ran. War I detest; but war with foreign foesi

Whose manner, language, and wvhbfe looks& are..ftrange;
Is not so horrid, not to me so hateful,
As that which with our-neighbours oft we wage.
A river here,-there an ideal ine
By fancy drawn, divides the ifter kingdoms.
On each fide dwells a people similar,
As twins are to each other, valiant both,
Both for their valour famous through the world ;
Yet will they not- untie their ldieed. arms,
And, if they mutl have war, wage dillant war,
But with each other fight: in cruel confliA ,
Gallant in strife, and noble in their ire, .
The battle is their pastime. They go forth
Gay in the morningk as tofumrmer:fpart:.
When ev'ning omaes,- the glory of :thi tnern,
The youthful warrior is a clod- ds lay..
Thus fall the prime of either hapefs iand :..
And such the fruit of Scotch and Engli'h war

Ld. Ran. I'll hear no more: this melody would make

A soldier drop his sword, and doff his arms,
Sit down and weep the conquests he has made;
Yea (like a monk) ling reft and peace in heaven
To fouls of warriors in his battle slain.
Lady, farewell: I leave thee n6t alone;
Yonder comes one whose love makes duty light. [Exit.

Enter Anna;

Ann. Forgive thl rashness of your Anna's love:

Urg'd by affection,-I have thus prefum'd
To interruptyour solitary thoughts;
And warn you of the hours that you neglet,
And lose in sadness. -

La. Ran. So to lose my hours
Is all the use I wish to make of time.

Ann. To blame thee, lady, suits nor with my state:

But sure I am, since death firt prey'd on man,
Never did sifter thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been, if you had loft,
In early youth, the huiband of your heart

La. Ran. Oh !.
Ann. Have I diftreRf you with officious love,

And ill tim'd mention of your brother's fate?
Forgive me, lady: humble though I am,
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune;
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.
La. Ran. What power dire&ted thy unconscious

. tongue
To speak as thou halt done ? to name-

Ann. I-know not:

But since my words have made my miRfrefs tremble,
I will speak so no more; but silent miix
My tears with her's...

La. Ran. No, thou fIalt not be silent.

I'll trust thy faithful love, and thou shalt be
Hencefortli th' inftru&ed partner of miy woes,
But what apails it ?. Can thy feeble pity
RI1 back the flood ps Oever ebbing time .

B

Compel the tnh and ocea to giv up
Their dead tlive?

Ann. Wnt Beas my noble miftrds.?
La. a. Dif theu mt a& -what had my brrows:

been ?-

If I in early youod 'ai a hm d ?i -
la the cold befr of e earth is lodg'd,
IMangl'd with wounds, the hulband of my youth;
And in e c.fom ern of the oceaa lie
My child and his.----.-

Ann. O! lady, zaft reer'd

The tale wpt upin lyar amazing words
Deign to unfold.

La. Ran. Alas! an ciemf eud,

Hereditary evil, ws the foare
Of my misfoftnne tuliUtgte decreed,
That my tave bmtbtr 'iloid abatle save
The life of Dougl/':sm, mr itoul's fee:
The youdtfl aio wow'd tteni fiendihip.
To fee the vaad fiter of his fiend
Impatient. Douglas to Balarmo came,
Under a~ eirv mn --My heart e gain'd;
Nor did I lagi the hnd he begg'd::
My brother's pwfeaaa*adto~-.d our marriage.
Three wtheii~te tie weeks, with wings ds down,
Had o'er us flown, wenriny lovd lord was call'd
To fight his 'ft baslsts; and with him,
.In fpi of alli y teFs, 'did Mlcom go.
Scarce were they gone, when fern fire was told
That the falie ftrangeraws lord Dras' son.
Franti with rage,the Baron drew:his faord
And -qefti~im.. A.ne,.frfikcen, faint,
Kneeling beneath:his sword, :faWtring I took
An oath equivocal; that I ne'er would
-Wedone of D~gw Dane. Sincrity,
Thou first of -irtes, lt-o mrtal leave
The onward ath! although tie earth should gape,
And from the gulh of hell dematio cry,
To take diaulai ns iwintdig wy.

Ann. Alas ! how-sew of woman's fearful liad
Durit own a troth so hardy !

La. Ran. The girft truth

Is easiest to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale-w
Jn a few days the dreadful tidings came
That Douglas and mj brother both were lain.
My lord! my life! my hulband !--mighty God !
What had I done to merit such aflition ?

Ann. My dearest lady ! many a tale of tears

I've listen'd to; but never did I hear V
A tale so fad as this.

La. Ran. In the fiift days

Of my diftrafting grief, I found myself-.- ---
As women wih. to be who love their lords.
But who darft tell my sifter I The good pries
Who join'd our hands, my brother's ancient tutor,
With his lov'd Malcom, in the battle fell.
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd.
Till time should make my father's fortune mine.
That very night on which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confident I had,
Set out with him to reach her fiRer's house:
But nurse, or infant, have I never seen,
Nor heard of, Anna, since that fatal hour. '-
My murder'd child I had thy fond mother sear'd
The los 'of thee, she had loud fame defy'd,
Defpis'd her father's rage, thy father's grief,
And wander'd with thee through the scorning world.

Ain. Not seen or heard of! then perhaps he lives.
La. Ran. No. Itwas dark December: wind and rain

Had beat-all night. Across the Carron lay
The deftin'd road; and in its swelling flood
My faithful servant perifh'd with my child.
O hapless son ! of a most hapless fire .

1

But they are both at reft; and I alone
Dwell in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk,
Like a guilt-troubl'd ghost, my painful-rounds:.

; 2

Nor has dfpitefil fate permitted me
The comfort of a foliiarv sorrow.
Though dead to love, I xas compell'd to wed
Randolph, who fiatch'd me from a villain's. arms;
And Randolph now pofl'efs sthefe domains,
That by Sir bNalcolm's death on rue devolv'd;
Domains, that floould to Doeglas' on have giv'n
A baron's title, and a baron's power.
ti'uch were my soothing thoughts, .while I bewail'd
'The fl;ughter'd father of a son unborn.
And when that son came, like a ray from heaven,
Which Ihines and difapjiears; alas! mv child!
How loogd/id thy fond mother grafl the hoIe
Of havingthee, ..:e knew not how, rcRor'd.
Year after year hath wbrn her hope away;
But left still undiminifh'd her delire.

Ann. The-hard that sis th th.erven threid of life,
May fm-ioth thelength that's'et to come of your's.

La. Raz. Not in this world: I hare conlder'd well

Jts virious evilr,'and on whom they fall.
Alas ! how oft does goodncfs wound itself,
And fwect affeation prove the spring of woe.
( ! had Idy'd ieon my luv'd husband fell
And some good ange op'd to.me the book
Of providence, .ard let me' read my.life,
lv heart h;d broke, -vhen I beheld the.fun
Of i!;s,' whic' one by.one I ha.ve:end.ur'..

Ann That G-ol, vlihofe niihiftrs good angels are,
la;th Il:ctthe'bool inD ercy to mankind.
FJutlwe muf Iceare this theme Glenalvon comes:
1 saw him bean ce you his thoughtful eves,
And. hi:herward he flbowy fralks his way.

-La. -Ran, -I vili avoid him. An .ungracious perfa,
Is doubly irlfome in an-hour like this,

Arm. WIyfieaks mv'lady this of Randolph's heir?
La. Ran. kbecife he's.not the. heir .of lardolph's

virtues. .

Suabde and firewd,-f be ofers to mankiad.
An artificial ima;ge'of hinife!f:

And he with ease can vary to the taRe
Of different menj its features. Self denied,
And master of his appetites he seems;
But his fierce nature,'like a'fox chain'd up,
Watches to seize unseen the wish'd for prey.
Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
As in Glenalvon's unrelenting mind.
Yet he is brave and politic in war,
And ifands aloft in these unruly times.
Whv I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter:
Stay and detain him till I reach the castle.

[Exit Lady Randolph

Ann. 0 ! happiness where art thou to be found ?

1 fee thou dwelleft not with birth ahd beauty,
Though grac'd with grandeur, and in wealth array'd;
Nor dost thou, it would feei, with virtue dwell;
Else had this gentle lady mifs'd thee not.

Enter GLEMALIVON.

Glen. What dofl thou muse on, meditating maid ?

Like some entranc'd and visionary seer
On earth thou ftand'ft, thy thoughts ascend to heaven.

Ann. Wou'd that I were, e'en as thou say's, a seer,
To have my doubts by heavenly vision clear'd !

Glen. What dost thou doubt of? what haft thou to do

With subjects intricate ? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be queftion'd: think of thefc good gifts
And then thy contemplations will be pleaing.

Ann. Let women view yon monument of woe,

Then boast of beauty; who so fair as 1he ?
But I mufl follow: this revolving day
Awakes~the memory of her ancient woes.

[Exit Anna

GLENALVONf/IUs.

So!-Lady Randolph 1huns me; by and by
I'll woo her as the lion wooes his bride;
The deed's a doing now, that makes me lord
Of there rich valleys, and a chief of power,
The season is most apt my founding ileps
Will not be heard amidst the din of arrhs

# ACT II.

Randolph has liv'd too long: his better fate
Had the afjpUdant once, and kept me down:
When I had seiz'd the dame, by chance he came,
Refcu'd, and had the lady for his labour;
I fcap'd unknown; a slender consolation !
Heaven is my witness that I io not love
To low in yelil, a.d. let others reap
The jocund harvef. Yet I am not safe:
By love, or fonetbing.like it, fting inflam'd,
t'adly I blabb'd my passion to his wife,
And the has threaten'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will I do not know:
But well I know the laron's ir'rath is deadly.
t will not live in fear: the man 1 dread
s as a Dane to inc; ay, and the. man
Who stAnds betwixtme and my chief desire.
No bar but he; flie has nD tinfA an near :
No brother in his fitlr's quarrel bold;
And for the righteous cause, a flranger's cufe,
1 linow no chief that will defy Glenalvon.

ACT II.
C E N E ,.
Enter Strvat ondarager r at. n dmar, ai Lady Ran.

dathld rinnA wtasthr. ;
La. Ran. W HAT mns -this clamour strange!

' fpeakfecure

Haft thou been wrong'd ! have thee rode nn prefum'd
To vex the weary traveller on his way ?

1ft S&r. By us no franger ever fuffer'd wrong:

This man with outcry 'wild has cali'd us forth;
So fore asiaid he cannot speak his fears.
Lnter Lord Randolph, ard Young Min, .tihiJ'f-word&

dra-n, and /aoed'.

,a.R .
R.. kt vain the ifranger's fears! how fares my

Lord!

Ld. Ran. That it fares well, ihanks to this gallant

youth,:

W.hose valour fav'd me from a wretched death !
As down the waking dale I walk'd alone,
At the crofts way four men attack'd me:
Rovers, I judge, from the licentious camp,
Who would have quickly laid Lord Randolph low,
Had not this brave and generous Atranger come,
Like my good angel, in the hour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made the foes his own.
They turn'd upon him , but his active arm
Struck to ;the ground, from whence-they rose no more,
The fiercest two; the others fled amain,
And left him maller of the bloody field.
Speak, Lady Randolph; upon beauty's tongue
Dwell accents pleafig to the.brave and bold.
Speak, noble dame, and thank him him for thy lord.

La. Ran. My lord, I cannot (peak what now I feel,

My heart o'erflows with gratitude to heaven,
And to this hoble youth, who all nmknewn
To yout and- yurs, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but humanely brave
Fought on your fde, agaibi such fearful odds.
Have you yet learn'd of him -wh.r you ihould thank ?
Whom call the saviour of Lord Randolph's 'life ?

Ld. Ran. I aik'd that question, and he-anfwer'd not:
But I must know who my deliverer is. ( TherS ranger.

Strang. A lot born man, of parentage ebfctre,

Wlio nought can boast, but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Ld. Ran. Whoe'er thou art, thy fpirii is ennobled

By the great King of kings! thou art ordain'd
And ftampt a heio:by the Sovereign hand · ·
Of nature ! blufli not, flower of modesty
As well as valour, to declare lty birth.

Stran. My-name is NORVAL :on theCrampianihils

My fatherfeeds his flocks: afrugal swain
Whose conitant cares-were to inc'eafe his store,
And keep his only son, myself, at. home.

For I had heard of battles, and I long'd
To follow to the field iome warlike lord:
And heaven soon granted what my fire deny'd.
This moon which rose lall night, round as my fhiicll,
Had not yet fill'd her horns, when, by her light.
A band of fierce balbiarians, from the hills,
Rufh'd like a torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The lliepherds fled
For safety, and for succour, I alone,
Vcith bended bew, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'd about the enemy, and malk'd
The road they took, then haftcd to my friends
Whom, with a troop us fifty chosen men,
I met advancing. The pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook the spoil encumbcr'd foe.
We fought and conquer'd. Eie a sword was drawn,
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Wo wore that day the arms which I now wear.
Returning home in triumph, I difdain'd
The fheplerd3 slothful life; and having heard
That our good king had furmon'd his bold peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron fide,
I left my father's house, and took with nec
A chosen servant to conduc my steps: -
Yon trembling coward, who forsook his nmfter.
Journeying with this intent, I pall these towers,
And, heaven-directed, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.
-Ld. Ran. He is as wife as brave. Was ever tale
With such a gallant modesty rehears'd ?
My brave deliv'rer ! thou ihalt enter now
A nobler lilt, and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize of famc.
I will present thee to our Scottith king,
Wlhofe valiant spirit ever valour lov'd.
Ha! my Matilda ! wherefore ifarts that tear ?

La. Ran. I cannot ay : for various affeclion:,

And strangely mingled, in my bosom swell;
Ycl each of them may well command a te;a.

I joy that thou art safe; and I admire
l-im and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety
Yea, as my mind predicts, with thine own.
Oblcure and friendless, he the'army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
RLsIlv'd to hunt for fame, in the range of death
To gain diftindion which his birth deny'd.
In this attempt unknown he might have perilh'd,
And gain'd, with all his.valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtues serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope
He stands conSpicuous; fame and great renown
Are brought within the compass of his sword.
On this my mind reflected, whilst you spoke,
And blefs'd the wonder-working Lord of heaven.

Ld. Ran. Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts!

My deeds (hall follow where thou ppint'ft the-way.
Next to myself, and equal to Glenalvon,
In honour and command thall NVorqal be.

TNorv. I know not how to thank you. Rude:I am,

In speech and manners: never till this hour
Stood I in such a presence: yet my lord,
There's something in my breafl, which makes me bold
To fay, that Norvnl ne'er will shame thy favour,

La. Ran. I will be fvorn thou wilt not.. Thou ihalt

ba

,lMv knight, and ever, as thou didft to-day,
\Vir' hlappy valour guard the life of Randolph..

Ld. Ra:. Well haft tliou spoke. Let me forbid reply-.

.(T Norval.

We are thy debtors fill; thy: high desert
O'ertops our gratitude. . I nmu proceed,
As was at first intended, to the camp...
diome of my train I fee, are fpreacdig.thifer,
impatient, doubtless, of their lord's, delay.
JGo with me, N'rval, and thine eyes lhall lee
The chosen warriors of thy native land,
Who languish for. the fight, and beat. t.e air
With briaidili'd swords.

C

Acrv. Let us begone, my lord.
Ld. Ran. [To Lady Randolph.] About the time that

the declining fun

Shall his broad ortit o'er yon hills suspend,
Expe& us to return. This night once more
Within there walls I reft; my tent I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepare the seass,
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
He in the eve of battle may refgn
Himself to social pleasure; sweetest then,
When danger to a soldier's foul endears
The human joy that never may return.

[Exeunt Randolph and Norval.

S C E N E IIL
Lady RASDOLPH atd ANNA.

La Ran. ins parting words have flrucl a fatal truth.

o0 ouglas! Douglas ! tender was the time
When we too parted, ne'er to meet again!
How many years of anguish and despair
Has heav'n annex'd to those swift pafling hours
Of love and foiidhefsi Then my bosom's flame
Oft, as blown back the rude breath of fear,
Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.

Ann. May gracious hcav'n pour -the sweet balm of

peace'

Into the wounds that seter in your breast!
For earthly consolation cannot cure them.

La. Ran. One onlyt cure can heaven itself beRlow;-

A grave-that bed in which the weary reft.:
Wretch that I am ? Aas'r why am I so ?
At every hb"ny paientrepine ! '
Hew blft the mother of yo gallant Norvalo
She fir i ingiulfliand Bocehetpains, ' '.
And heard kimblefs her' whe a tnan was born if
She nrs'd her Diniling infant on her bre :-
Tended the cil, and rear'ddie pleasing bo
She, with affetio's triumph, law the youth

44/

In grace and comeliness futrpafs his peers:
Whill I to a dead hulband bore a ion,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.

AMnn. Alas! alas! why will you thus rcfume

Your grief afrefl ? I thought that gallant youth
Woauld for a while have won you from yotr wvoe.'
On him intent you gazed, with a lookl
Much more delighted,. than your penrve eye '
Has deigo'd on other objeas to bclloW.
La. Ran. Delighted fayeft thous ' Oh !' erCv tihere

mine eye

Found fuel for my'life consuming sorrow.
I thought, that had the son of Douglas liv'd.
He might have been like this young gallant lrtanner,
And pair'd with him in features and in IhaTe,
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
My boy with blooming Norval might have numb.r'd.
Whilst thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness
For this young stranger, wand'ring from, his home,
And like an orphan cast upon my care.
I will protct thee (said I to myself)
With all my power, and grace with all my favour.

Ann. Sure heaven will bless so gen'tius a resolve,

You must, my noble dame, exert your power
You must awake: devices will be fraind,
And arrows pointed at the breast of Norval.

La. Ran. Glenalvon's false and crafty head vAil work

Against a rival in his kinsman's love.
If I deter him not: I only can.
Bold as he is, Glenalvon will beware
How he pulls down tie fabric that I rai.e.
I'll be the artist of.young Norval's furtune.
'Tis pleasing to admire: moit apt was I
To this affecion in my better days;
Though now I seem to you ihrunk up, retir'd
Within the narrow cornpafs of my woe.
Have you not fomeimes seen an earLy flAwcr
Opea its bud, 4nd Iprcad its filkca lkvc, .

C

To catch sweet airs, and odours to bellow;
Then, by the keen blast nipt, pull in its leaves,
And, though still living, die to scent and beauty ?
Emblem of me: afflition, like a storm,
Hath kill'd the forward blossom of my heart.

Enter GLENALVON.

Glen. Where is my dearelf kinsman, noble Randolph?
La. Ran. Have you not heard, Glenalvon, of the

basle

Glen. I have: and that the villains may not'fcape,

With a itrong band I have begirt the wood:
If they lurk there, alive thesy llall be taken,
And torture force fioom them th' important secret,
Whedler some foe of Randolph hir'd their swords,
Or if-

La. Ran. That care becomes a kinfinan's love.
I have a counsel for Glenalvon's ear. [Exit Anna.

Gin. To him your counsels always are commands.
La. Ran. I have not found so: thou art known to me.
G.'n. Known!
La. Ran And moll certain is my cause of knowledge.
GLCn. m\ hat do you know ? by the. molt blessed cross

You much amaze me. No created being,
Yourfeif except, durnt thus accost Glenalvon.

La. Ran. Is guilt so bold ? and dost thou make a merit

Of thy pretended meekness ! This to me,
Who, with a gentleness which duty blames,. ,

.

Have hitherto concea'd, what, if aivulg'd, -
Would make thee nothing; or, what's worse than that,
An outcalt beggar, and unpity'd too i
For mortals fnudder at a crime like thine.

Glen. Thy. virtue awes me. First of womankind!

Permit me yet to fay, that the fond man
Whom love transports beyond flrit virtues bounds,
If he is brought by love to mifrry,
In fortune ruin'd, is in mind forlorn,
Unpity'd cannot be. Pity's the amns
Which on such beggars freely is beftow'd:
For mortals know that love is flill their lord,

And o'er their vain resolves advances till
As fire, when kindled: by out shepherds, moves .
Through the dry heath against the fanning wind.

La. Ran. Reerve these accepts for some other ear'

To love's apology I liften not.:
Mark thou my words; for it is! meet thou lhould'.L:
His brave deliv'rer Randolph here retains,
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well:
But, at thy peril, practise aught against him :.
Let not thy jealousy attempt to ,hake
And loosen. the good.ioot he has in Randolph.;
Whose favourites I know thou haft supplanted.
Thou look'it at me, as if thou fain wonldft pry
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before, thy temper breaks away.
The friendless itranger my protection claims:
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit.

S C E N E III.

Manet GLENALoN. -

Child that I was, toftart-at my own lhadow,
And be the ihallow fool of coward conscience!
I am not what I have been: what I 1hould be.
The darts of destiny have almost pierc'd
My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I Ihould conclude there was an arm above
That fought against me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch myself, the subtle snare I set.
Why, rape and murder are not simple means!
Th' imperfet rape to Randolph gave a spouse.
And the intended murder introduc'd :
A favourite to hide the fun from me ;.
And worst of all, a rival. Burning hell!
This were thy centre if I thought Ihe lov'd him !
'Tis certain lhe.contemns me; nay,. commnands me,
And waves the flag of her difpleal're o'er me,

# ACT III.

In his behalf. And shall Ih usbebra'd?
Curb'd, as lhe cairs it, by dame chastity !
Infernal fiends if .ny fiends there are
More fierce than hbce, -aNition, andTvenge,
Rife up and- fill mybofomnwith your fircs-
And policy remoodetefi! Chtice may spoil
A single aim; btt petfevernice must
Prosper at hft For chance and fate are words
Perfftive wisdom is the fate of man.
Parkly a projectpeers upon my mindi
Like the red-moon when riling in the east,
Crofs'd and divided by faange colourd clouds.
I'll seek the slave who came with'Nwval hither,

nd for his cowardice was spurned from him.
I've known a follower's rankled bosom breed
Venom most al to his heedless lord. [Exit.

ACT III.

S C E N 1 I.
J Qourt:,. c. as before.

r A ,NA.
THfY Vasals, grief! great nature's order break,

And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour.

Whilf lady Randolph sleeps I will walk forth,
And taste the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers bet Ye ministers
Of gracious heaven, who love the human race,
Angels and seraphs, who delight in goodness I
Foiiake your flies, and to her couch descend!
There from her fancy chafe thole dismal forms
That haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
With images celttil, such as please
The blefi above upon their golden beds.

Enter StLVAwr.

&r One of the vile aff'ins is fecur'd.
We foi th i v-iin !:lking ia the wood; :

With dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. B. ut ths.is not
His sirs essay: these jewels were conceal'd
In the moRf:fecret places of his garment
Belike the spoils of some that he has murder'd.

Ann. Let me look on. them. Ha 1here is a heart,

The chosen crest of Douglas' valiant natme!
These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch.

[ Exit Anna.

Enter servants weit a prifomr.

Prif. I know no more than does the child unborn
Of what you charge me with.

/?f Serv. You fay so Sir !

But torture loon (hall make you (peak the truth.
Behold the lady of lord Randolph comes;
Prepare yourself to meet her just revenge.

SC ENE E i.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH and ANiA.

Ann. Summon your utmoat fortitude, before

You speak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
ATe now at Rake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may fly.
La. Ran. Thou. salt behold-me *ith a desperate

heart, - .
Hear how myinfaot perilh'd.. See he kneels.

,. :." . [c.re pykoner ineet.
PriY Heaven bles that countenance so sweet and

mild. .

A judge like thee makes innocence more bold,
0 save me lady! - from-thefe-exnel men,
Who have attack'd.and. siz'd me; who accuse
Me of intended murder,: As I hope
For mercy at the judgment-feat of-God,
The tender lamb that ever-nipl tlh grass,
Is not more innocent than I of. murder.

La. Ran. Of this mi 'd guilt what proof can ye pro-

duee.

1j? Serv. We found him lurking in the hollow glen,

lWhen view'd, and call'd upon, amlaz'd he fled.
WVe overtook him, and enquir'd from whence,
And what he was ? .He said he came fiom far,
And was upon hlis journey to. the camp.
Not fatisfy'd with this~,we.fealch'd his cloaths
And found these jewels, rwhte rich value pledd
Mot: powerful againfl hiim. Hard-he seems.,.
And old in villainy. Permit us to try)
His stubbornness againfl the tolture's force.

PriJ: 0 gentle lady ! by your lord's dear life!

Which these .wealk hards, I fswear, did ne'er afihil;
And by your children's welfare, fplale my Iae I
Let not the iro .tear my antlent joints,
And my gray hairs bring to the giave -ith paiin.

La. Ra.n; Account for these: tline own they cannot

be:

For these I fay, be tedfaft to the truth;
Deteted falfhood is moil certain dtath.

[Anna removes the ferrvuts and rterirns.]

Prf. Alas ! I'm fore beset ! let never man,

For fake of lucre, fin againflt his foul !
Eternal justice is in this nmoft just
I, guiltless now, must former guilt rcvecl.

La. Ran. 0 ! Anna hear !- once more I charge

thee speak

The truth dired: for there to ime foretell
And certify a part of thy narration; -
With which if the remainder tallies not,
An initant and a dreadful death'abides thee.

Prif. Then thus adjur'd, I'l-p;ea;k to thee as just

As if you were the miniftcr f.heaven,
Sent down to fcarch the secret fins of men,

Some eighteen years ago, I reptcd'land

Of brave Sir Malcolm, !then Balarmo's lord;
But falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
All that I had, and then turn'd me and mine
(Four helpless infaats and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter-winds.

A little hovel by the river's fide
Received us ! there hard labour, and the fiill
In fishing, which was formerly my sport,
Supported lifei Whilf thus we poorly liv'd,
One stormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
led came the river down, and loud and oft
The angry spirit of the water fhriek'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
Of one in jeopardy. I rose, and ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach, whatever floating thing the stream
Had caught. The voice was ceased the person loft:
But looking fad and earnest en the waters,
By the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round,
A baflet: soon I drew it to the bank,
And neitled curious there an infant lay.

La. Ran. Was he alive ?
Prif. He was.
La. Ran.. Inhuman that thou art!
How could'it thou kill what waves and tempeits spar'd ?

pif. I am not so inhuman.
La. Ran. Didft thou not?
Ann. My noble miltrefs, you are mov'd too much:

This man has not the aspect of stern murder:
Let him go on, and you, I hope, will hear
Good tidings of your kinsman's long loft child.

PrifJ The needy man, who has known better days,

Or.e whom distress has spited at the world,
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds, as make the prolperous men
Lift up their hands, and wonder ~who could do them.
And such a man was I; a man declin'd,
UWho saw no end of black adverfiry:
Yet for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have touch'd that infant, with a hand of harm.

La. Ran. Ha! dost thou fay so ? Then perhaps he

lives !

<s D

Prif Not many days ago he was alive.
La. Ran. 0 ! God of heaven ! did he .then die so

lately ?

Pri. I did not fay he died: I hope he lives:

Not many days ago these eyes beheld
Him, flourishing in youth, and health, and beauty.

La. Ran. Where is he now ?
Pri. Alas ! I know not whee.
La. Ran. Oh fate! I fear thee f:ils. Thou -riddkt,

Ipeak
Direct and clear, else I will fearchi thy foul.

Arn. Permit me, ever honour'd 1 Keen impatience,

Though hard to be reftra'md, defeats itself.--
Purife -iy Iftry with a faithful tongue,
To the lall hour that thou didlt -eep the child.

'Prif. tear 'ot my faith, tho' I muifll fpe'k my Ihame.

Within the cradle, where the infant lay.
Was ftow'd a mighty tore of gold and jewels;
Tempted by which we did refoke to fhide,
From all the world, this wonderful event,
And like a peafantbreed the noble child.
That .nme might mark the change of our elate,
We left the country, travell'd to the north,
Bought flocks and herds, and gradually brought forth
Ourfecret wealth. ButxGod's all-feeing eye
Beheld our avarice, 'and smote us fore.
For one by one all eur own children died.
And he, The itranger, sole remaind the'heir
Of 'what -ideed was his. 'Fain'then wouldt,
-Who with a fther's fondness ov'd the boy,
Have trufted!him, 'now in the :dawn of youth,
With hisown secret; -butrniy anxious wife,
Fa.ebodimgavil, never awould coifear.
Meanwhile the ftripling'grew in years and beauty;
And, as we oft obferv'd, 'he:bore hinfelf,
Not as the offspring of-our cottage'blood;
For nature will break out; mild with the mild,
Bkt'~ihthe froward:he was!fiere as -ire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms,

I set myself against his warlike bent;
But all in vain ; for when a desperate band
Of robbers from the savage mountains came-

La. Ran. Eternal providence ! What is thy name
Prif. My name is Norval: and my name he-bears.
La. Ran. 'Tis he; 'tis be bimfelf ! It is my son !

0 sovereign mercy ! 'Twas my child I saw !
No wonder, Anna, that my bosom burn'd..

Ann. Just are you tranoports; ne'er was woman's

heart

Prov'd with such fierce extremes. High fated dame!
But yet remember that thou art beheld
By servile eyes; your geflures may be seen
Impaffion'd strange; perhaps your word o'erheard.
Ka. Ran. Well dost thou counsel, Anna, Heaven be-

stow
Oa me that wifdomr which my state requires!

Ann. The moments of deliberation pass,

And soon you must resolve. This useful maa
Muff be difmifs'd in safety, ere my lord
Shall with his brave deliverer return.

Prf I

I I amidst astonishment and fear,

Have of your words and gestures rightly judg'd,
Thou art the daughter of my antientmafer;
The child I refctid from the flood is thine.

La. Ran, With thee dissimulation now were vain.

I am indeed the daughter of Sir Malcolm;
The child thou refcu'dhl from the flood is mine.

Prif. BlefR be the hour that made me a poor man!

My poverty has said my tbaer's house!
La. Ran. Thy words furprize me: fare thou doff not

feign:

The tear sands in thine eye: such love from thee
Sir Malcolm's house deferv'd not: if aright
Thou told'ft the sory of thy own diftreif.

Prif. Sir Malcolm of our baron's was the.flower;

The faftelt friend, the best, the kindest maifer:
But ah! he knew not of my fad estate.
After that battle, where his gallant son,

D2

Your own brave brother, fell, the good old lord
Grew desperate and reckless of the world;
And never, as the reft was won, went forth
To overlook the condut of his servants . -
By then I was thrust out, and them I blame:
May heaven so judge me as I judg'd my mailer I
And God so love me as I love his race

La. Ran. His race dull yet reward thee. On thy

faith

Depends the fate of thy lov'd mailer's house,
Rememli'reft thoq a ii tie lvely hur,
Tat like a holy hermitage appears
Among the clefts of Carron o

PrY: -I remember
The cottage of the clifts.

La. Ran. 'Tis that I mean:

There dwells a man of venerable age,
Who in my father's service spent his youth s
Tell him I sent thee, and with him remain,
'Till I shall call upon thee to declare,
Before the king and nobles, what thou know'ft
To nie'haft tol. No more but this, and thou
'-halt live in honour all thy future days;
Thy son so long (hall call thee father still,
Andal the land {hall bless the man, who fav'd
The tan of Douglas, and Sir Malcolm's heir.
Remember well mv words: if thouldft meet
Him whom thou call'ft thy son, still call him so;
And mention nothing of his nobler father.

Prf: Fear not that I hall mar so fair an harvest,

By putting in my fickle ere tis-ripe.
Why did I leave my home and antient dame ?
-To ir[d the youth, to tell him all I knew,
And make him wear these jewels'in his arms:
Which might I thought, be challeng'd, and so bring
To light the secret of his'noble birth.

[Lady Randolpb goes twar.rj the Servants.

La Ran. This min is' not the aflaflin you fili;peed,
Tho' chance combia'd Qmnie.liik likelihoods againit him.

Ie is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To their right owner, whom in haste he fecks. '-
'Tis meet that you. fliould:put him bn;his way,
Since your miftiken zeal hatllh draggd'tibim- hiitlier'.

* - [;Exeut:t Stranger' aid &Sri!'.i't,'

S C E N-E'', L

r

Lady RANDOLPH trw/,ANmsA.

La. Ran. My faithful A na'! dost thou illhar my joy

I know thou doRt. Unpall'el'd event!
Reaching from heaven tr earth, JEHOVAHI- arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and' brings "o ie nlmy u
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's 'featler
Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
For such a gift ! What does my Anna think
Of the young eagles--of a-valiant nieft '
Ilow soon he gaz'd on bright and buinin'g arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his lfte had tlhrowli hira
And tower'd up to the region of his fire.

Ann. How fondly did your eyes .evdir the boyl

Mylterious nature, with the 'infeeni cord'
Of powerful inftina;t drewi you to your own.

La. Ran. The ready tory o'f his birth bcliev'd

Suppreft my fancy quite; 'nor did 'he owe
To any kindness my f fifdden fdiavur .' '
But now I'long to-fee.his face again,'
Exanine- every featuir, anbid fA out ..
The lineaments of:Doiga, or iny own.'
But niot of all'i long'to'let iim .ri'ow .-
Who his true parents-are, to clap his Reck,'
And tell him all the ftoiy of his farfer.

Ann. With wary caution you must bear yourtflf

In public, left your tet'defoefi' break frth, '
Antd in obferversfliir:cQe1&ure* frange, ;' '
I'or, if a cherub in the flapie of'-wonian
Should walk this world, ft'defainmation'-wou!d,
Like a vile cur, bark' at the angel's train-
To day the baron farted at yodr tca.s.

La. Ran. He did so, Anna! well thy miftrefr knows,

If the least circumstance, mote of offence,
Should touch the Baron's eye, his fight would b
With jealousy diforder'd. Bt the more
It does behove me instant to declare
The birth of Doaglao, and assert his rights,
This night I putpofe-with my son to meet,
Reveal the secret, and consult with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does now, so look'd his noble father.
Array'd in nature's ease: his mien, his speech,
Were sweetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those trivial mortals, who seem always wife.
But, when the matter match'd his mighty mind,
VJp rose the hero: on his piercing eye
Sat observation; on each glance of thought
Decision follow'd, as the thunder-bol;
Pursues the flalb.-

Ain. That demon haunts you till:
Behold GlenalvnM

La. Ran. Now I shun him not.

This day I brav'd him in behalf of Norwai -
Perhaps too far; at least my nicer fears
For Dougla thus interpret.

- Enr Glenalvon.

G!ie. Noble dame !

The hov'ring Dane at laU his men hath landed:
No band of pirates; but a mighty hopft
That come to fettle where their valour conquers;
To win a country, or to lose themfqlves.

La. Ran. But whence comes this intelligence, Glen.

alvon ?

Glen. A nimble courier tent from yonder camp,

To haften up the chieftains of the -north,
Inform'd me as he pat, that the fierce Dane
Hlad on the eastern coast of Lothian landed,
Near to that place where the fea-rock imnmenfe,
Amaziug Bass, looks o'er a fertile land,

La Ran. Then miul this western army march to join
The warlike troops that guard Edina's tow'rs

Glen. Beyond all question. If impairing time

Has not ,eftac' the image of a place,
Once perfec in my breast, there is a wild
Which lies to westward of .that mighty rock,
And seems by nature formed for the camp
Of water-wafted armies, whofe.ohief strength
Lies in firm foot, utflank'd with warlike horse:
If martial lkill directs the Danish lords,
There inaccessible their army lies -
To our swift fcow'ring-horfe, the bloody-field
Miit man to man, and foot tofoot, be fought..

La. Ran. How many mothers {hall bewail their sons

How many widows weep their husbands slain !
Ye dames of Denmark ! ev'rtfor you I.feel,
Who, sadly fitting on the :feabeat Ihore,
Long look for lords that neverlifall return.

Glcu. Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian sword

Widow'd the north. The.children of the. slain
Come, as I hope, to meet their;fathers fate.
The monfler war, with her infernal.brood,
Loud yelling fury, and. life-ending-pain,
Are objecs suited to Glenalvon's foul.
Scorn is mere grievous than thepains of death;
Reproach more piercing than the.pointed sword.
La. Ran. I scorn thee not, but when :I ought to

scorn ;

Nor e'er reproach'd, but-when insultcd virtue
Against audacious -vie. exerts itself.
I own thy worth, Glenalvon; none more apt
Than Ilto praise thine eminence in-arms,
And be theeccho of thy martial ifame.
No longer feed a guily paflion:
Go and.purfue a lawfualmiftrefs's glory.
Upon the Danifhe.refts redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the'fhiekd of:Randolph.

Gien. Oneinftant iay, and',hear an alterd-man,
When beauty pleadsfor virtue, -vice. basl'd

Flies it own colours, find goes b'e ritp4<...-. o
I am your convert-i time will tell how truiy,j,. . ,'.-', '
Yet one immediate proof I mean to give
That youth for whom your-ardent,zeal to-day,
Somewhat too highly,-defyd. y6ur slave,
Amidst the hock.ef armies 1ll defend,
And turn death from hin iwith a guardiari arm.
Sedate my usei -'mitf;bfdnl adde~m.ns
At the tumultuous uproar of the field.

La. Ran.'A-t thus, GJen Ytvoqs nd4;1m thy friend

.Bat that's thy .lekt re-ward . Beli¢ee.*e-.Sirj.
The truly generods is the trulyrwil ;
And he who loves not others, lives unblest

·: . F i Laay Randolph

-t- sis J 3 Aeirn i aodvi*rje is.as owiq esward !-
I think that I have hit the very tone .,
In which mhe loves to speak. Hopey'd.afc,, -
How pleasant art thou to the tafie. of man .
And woman a o ?: flatery direRi. :--.,, .
Rarely difguts. They .ltd..0ow.iaa.lrmd. .
Who doubt its operation --. 'uts. m.ker.. .......
And opes.the wicket of-te r pe ia.., . : . -,
lHoufarr Iavejfucceeded.now I JoWvot.. -
Yet I incline to think hgrrtt rtry .^tu. ,.;
Is lull'd a while: 'tis her "loeqf.ri ,f -
TVhilftAhe and -andolp live, -and lie irnfaith
And-amity, uncertain is my t.enumr. -..
Fate o'er my hcad- ffpendS-diiracenu, death,
By that weak hair,- peeevjih fejtale's wil,.
I m not idle: but the ebb!.s;..odv4ig .w --
Of fortnne's tide cganot b.e.ca-ila. te. d . ::
That flav of .iNorwa:s I;hae:-,fouqd mwoiof apt:
1 lhew'd him-gold, and.bheas'wpa.wo's is foul
To fay and swear whatever I lgg.ef., ,. .
Norval I'm told,- has that aU.lring look,
'Twixt man and womani: -whichjL have obfev'd
To charm the nicer and fantastic. dam;s,: .
Who are, like lady Randdlph, fll;ff-lirtue.,
In railing Randolp's jealoQul:Ixn~y, .. , -.: ,.

# ACT IV.

But point him to the truth. He seldom errs
Who thinks the worst he can of womankind. [Exit.

,ACT IV.
S C 'E' X ; E l,s

Flour/h of.Tru:npet..

- inter Lord RANDOiL.H attMetnd.
Ld. Ran. SUMMoN' an hundred horse, by break of

day,
To wait our pleasure' a the taste gate.

Enter Lady RNDOLPH.
La. Ran, Alas! iy' lord ! I've heard unwelcome

news;
The Danes are laridedl

Ld. Ran. Ay, no, irod this.

Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil
No sportive wart no 'tournament essay,
Of some young knight refolv'd to break a (pear,
And stain with hostile blood his maiden arms
The Danes are landed t we.muft beat them back)
Or live the flaes of Denmatk,

La. Ran. Dreadful times!.
Ld. Ran. The fehcelefs villages are all forsaken;

The trembling mothersi and their children lodg'd
In walligirt towers and castles; whilt the men
Retire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return.

La. Ran. Immenses as fame reports, the Danilh boil !
Ld. Rabtn Were it'as nun'rous as loud fame reports,

An army knit like otir' 'wou'd pierce it through:
Brothers, that flrink not fromn each other's fide-
And fond comipanions f our warlike. files:
For his dear dffspring, and- the-wife he loves,
The hulband, and the fearless father arm.
In vulgar brafts heroic ardouriburns,
And the poor pefant mates his daring lord.

E

La. Ran. Mens minds are temper'd like their. fwprds,

for war: ..

Lovers of danger, on deftrucion's brink
The joy to rear ered their daring forms.
Hence early graves; hence the lone widow's life;
And the fad mother's grief pbibtter'd.age.,
Where is our gallant guet ?,

Ld. Ran. Down in the vale

I left him managing a fiery Reed,.
Whose luabborneTs had:foil'd the Irength and lkilt
Of every tider. But behold he comes,
In earnest conversation with Glenalvon.

Enter NQAVAL and GLENALVON..

G!enalvon ! with the lark arise ;.go forth,
And lead, m troops that ly in yonder vale :

.v

Private I travelto the royal camp :
No'val, thou goeft with me. But-fay, young man '
'Where didft thou learn so to dificorfe of war,
And in such terms as I o'erheard te-day. ; :
W'ar is no'village feience,- nor its phrae .
A language taught amongst. the thepherdifwvaius.

Norv. Small is the fil' my lord. delights to praif.

In him he favours.-Hear- from whence it came.'
Beneath a mountain's -brow, die mioft remote
And inacceffble by fliepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by ne-morial hind . -
A hernnit livd; a melancholy man ,
Who was the w.nder of our wandering swains.
Austere and:loaely, crnelto lirtfef,
Did they report him - theeold earth his bed,
Waiter his drirn, his food the fiepherds alms.
I went rotsee him, and my heart was touch'd
With.reverence and pity. Mil he spake,
And entering on dietrfe, fac.r firief told,
As made me oft revisit his fad, celH
For he had been a soldier in his youth:
And fought in famous battles, when the peerr
Of Europe, when he bold Godfedo led,
Againf the ufirping iafidel difplay'd

'rhe crbf of thfit,: and vwon the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech struck froM me, the old man would hakl:e
His yearsaway, arid dat his young encounteirs:
Then, having flhewl'd his wouhds, he'd fit him down,
And all the live-long day difcdtlrf of war.
To help mi- fanncy, in the finooth gteen tuirf
He cut the figures of the marshall'd hosts;
Dfcrib'd thle mrtioii and explain'd the ule
Of the deep column, and the length'd line,
The square, the crescent¥ and the phatanx firm.
For all that Saracen, or Christian knew
Of war's vast art, was to this hermit known.

Ld. Ran. Wliy did this 'fodier in a desert hide

Those qualities thai m6o'd fiave grid i caoip ?

Nwoiv. Thar too at last I learn'd. Unlappy man

Returniing tiod'niwirds- by eiSlina's pbrt,
Loaded Witfi wealth ah'd honours bravely won,
A rude and boif'ro6us captain of the fa
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fiefce they fought:
The stanger fell, and with his dtyirg breatli
Declar'd his name aridilineage. Mighty God !
The fotdier cried, my brother ! Oh ! my brother!

La. Ran. His brother!
Adorv. Yes; of the tameii parents born;

His only brothiet. 'Pth ex"e chaing'd' forgiverinefs;
And happy; in nisy- mini', .as' he that dy'd:
Fsr many deaths has the furvtior futf'er'd;
In the wild defart in i : rok he fits,
Or on some nameless ftre'aril untrodden banks :
And ruminates atfday' ii'drieadful fate.
At times, alas ! not in ilis perfet nriibd!
Holds dialogues' -with hii' lIi'd brother's ghost;
And oft each nighit'f iake-s;iisi'fulieh codci
To make fad orizons for hirm lie flew.

La. Ran. To what niyferibus Wes oes are mortals born!

In this dire tragedywere there no more
Unhappy person ? 'did the parents live ?:

E2

A'or. No; they were dea4; kind hicav'n had clos'd

their eyes
Before their foa had shed his brother's blood.

Ld. Ran. Hard is hisTate; for he was nLO.t tablamet

There is a destiny in this firange world,
Which oft decrees an undeserved doom;
Let fchool-mer tell us why.--Fr9om whence .thef

founds?

[ rumrtc att a d;ilance,]

Enter an OFFICER.

WO(ir. My Lprd, the trumpets of the troops, of Lorn
The aliant leader hails 4te noble Randolph.

Ld. Ran. Mine andent .guert! do.es he the warriot

lead ?
Has Denmark rous'd the brave old knigh; to a.rmi ?

Offcer. No; worn with w~rfare, he refiggs. the fyord.

His eldet hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
Now leads his kindredbands.

Ld. 'Ran. Glenalvon, o opn.

With hofpirality's most ftropg reueft .
Entreat the chief, [Exi Glenalvo

OQicer. My lord, requests are v^. :

He urges on, impatient of delayt- -
Stung with the- tidings of thc foes approach..:

Ld. an. May vi&ory fion.thir warrior's plume !

Braves- of men! his herd i ld flocks are fae;
Remote from wars alarms his pafturcs ly,
By mountains inaccefible fecur'd:
Yet foremioft he into the plains descends,
Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the ancient world;
Contenners they of indolence and gain; ...
But frill for love- of glory, and of arms,
Prone-to encounter peril, and to lift. . -
Against each firong antagonist the. spear.
rIll go and press the hero .to ry breast...

[Exit Randol~h

lMafane ady

. Randolph and Norval,

La. Ran.. The soldier's loftiness, the pride apd pomp

Investing awful war, Noerval, I fee.
Transport thy youthful mind..

Norv. Ah!. pxould thy .not ?:

Blest be the hour I: eft mny falher's house !
I might have been a-hepherd all yy. days,
And 1sole obscurely to a peasant's graie.
Now,1 it J.lyve,,with mighty chiefs I itand;
And, if I fall, with noble dust I ly.

La. Ran. Therj isa gei'rous fiprit in thy treaft,

That could'have iell fuftaifi'd a prouder fortune.
Thlis way -vwih r: undlrthr-yon spreading beach,
Unseen, unheard, by h.upan-eyee or epr,
I will amaze;thee-sithK-wond'raus tale.

Norv. Let there be danger, lady, s ith the secret,

That I may hagit'to m.y grateful heart,
And provt t faditl:. :Command my sword, mny life:
These are the. folepofDilions of poor NZorval.

La. Ran. Know'ft thou these gems ?
Norv.' Durst I believe mine eyes ,.
I'd fay-I knew them, and they .were.my fther's.

La. Ran.. Thy father's fay'ft thou ! ah! -they were.

thy father!s! -' . . .. ''

Norv. I saw tbem.once, and curiously enquir'd

Of b6th' my-parents, whence such splendor came?
But I ivas check'diand inore could never learn.

La. Ria. Thenleara.of me, thou art not Norval's son.
WNrvN NOt Mlor tas son.- .
La. Ran. Nor of a flepherd sprung.
Arorv.:. Ldy,; vQ Iamij then .
La. Ran. Noble thou art:i ;
For noble Was thy fire :; ..

Norv. I willbelieve- .

. ,

0 ! tell me sartherd !. Say who was my father..

,la;. Ran. DOUGLAS!
Norv. Lord DouglatHwhom to day I saw?
La. Ran. .Iis. younger brother..
laorv.- And, in yonder camp I

La. Ran. Alas! .
Ncrv. You make me tremble- .Sighs and trars i'
Liyes my brave father.?

La. Ran. Ah ! too brave indeed: ·
He fell in battle ere thyf(lf was born. :

Norv. Ah menhhappy! ere I saw the light?

But does my nmother live ? I may conclude, ....
From my own fate, her portion has been sorrows . .

La. Rnm. 'She lives; but waltcs her life it confiant

woe,
Weeping her liuiand slain, her infant loft.. .

LNorv. You that are Pill'd so well in the fad Rory

Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their deitiny, now with compation
Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd%
0 ! tell me who, and Where my mother is !
(ppreft by a baie world, perhaps she bends.
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief;
And desolate implores of heaven the aid .
Her son ihould give, It is, it 'iuft bes .
Your countenance confesses that lhe's wretched.
O ! tell mt her condition! Can the sword--..
Who hall resist me in a parent's daunfe? . .

La.' Ran. Thy virtue ends her woe, -My:fon nmy foul
I am thj otae~, aMd the wife of D~ gar!. .

*.. .' .„ [R[Pay M hisn n ttA.

Naro. O heav' and earth, how wond'rous my fate!
Art thon my mother; Ever let me knee I .

La Ran. Image of Douglas Erit' f' fatal love!
All that I owe thy fire I pay to thbl.

'Nrv. Refpef and admiration fill-poefss me,

C4hecking the love and fondness of a bbn.
Yet I was filial to my humble parents, .
But did my fire surpass the re- of men,.
As thou excelled all of womankind

La. Ran. Arise, my son! In' e thou dost beWold

The poor remains of beauty once admir'd:
Trhe autumn of my days is come already:
for sorrow made my summer haste away. ..

Yct in my prime I equalld not thry fther: :
His eyes were, lite the eagle'si yet sometimes
Liker the doves; and, as' he pleas'd4 fle won
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

Norv. tHpw did he fall ? Sure 'twas a. bloody field
\Vhen Douglas dy'd. O I have much to ask !
La. Ran. Hereafter thou halt hear the lngthen'd

tale

Of all thy:father's and thy ffother's woes.
At present this: thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder castle and 'the' wide domains.
Which now Lord Randolph, as ny hufoand, holds.;
But thou shalt not be wrong'd[; I have the power-
To right thee still ' Before the king 1'1 kneel,
And Call Lord Douglas to protet. his blood.

Norv. The blood of Douglas will protect itself.;
La.-Ran. But we shall need both fiiends and savoury

boy,

To wrest thy lands and liordfip'fiom the gripe
Of Randolph and his kinsman. Yet.I think
IMy tale will move each. gentle heart to pity,
My life incline the tirtmous to believe,

NTorv. To be the son of Doglas is to me

Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in the field I'll seek for fame and f6rtune.'
La. Ran. Thou: dost dot know hlat perils and injuf

tice

Await the poor, man's'valour. O ! my son.!'
The noblest blood in 'all th: land s.abalh'd,
Havingno. lacquey but pale poverty.
Too long hafti-thou been:thus attended, DoNgla!.
Too long haft thou been deem'd. a peasant's child.
The wauton heir-of fomeeinglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in the youthful sports.;. .
Whilst thy. indignant fpirhit' fell'd in vain !
Such contumely.thou no more. halt. bear r
But how I purpose to'redrefs thy wrongs
Must be hereafter'told. Prudeoce.directs .
T'ht w¢-ihivld part before.yon chiefs reumrn

Retire, and from thy rustic follower's hand
Receive a biller, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to ke thee, diEtited before
This casual opportunity arofl
Of private conferencer; Its purport mark;
For as I there appoint to mcet again.
Leave me, my son ! and frame thy manncrs filli
To NVrva['s, not to noble Douglas' state.

Nowr. I will renmembir. Where is Nrvral now ?
That good old man.

La. Ran. At hand conceal'd he lies,

An ufef;l witness. But bewv-e my son,
Of yon Glenalvon; inbis.guiity breast
Be(;des a villain's fhrewvdnefs, ever prone
To falle conjeaure. He hath griev'd my heart.

Norv. Has he indeed ! Then let yon ftife Glenalvot
E' vare or me. [ ;txit Douglis.

AManel Lady RAn DOLPH.

La. Ran. There burst the fmother'd flame !

0 ! thou all righteous and eternal king !
Who father of the fatberlefs art call'd,
Protea my fon-Thy inspiration, Lord !
Hath fill'd his bosom with that sacred fire,
Which in the breafit of his forefathets burn'd:
Set him on high like them, that he may shine
The star and glory of his native land:
Then let the minifier of death descend,
And bear my willing spirit to its place
Yonder they come. How do bad women find
Unchanging afpcsCs to conceal their guilt ?
When i by reason, and by justice urg'd,
Fall hardly can diflemble with these men
In nature's pious cauCe.

Enter lord Randolph and Glenalvon,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.

Ld. Ran. Yon gallant chief,

Of arms enamoured, all repose disclaims.
Ld. Ran. Be not, my loid, b; his example fway'd'

hrrange the burness of to.morrow now,
And when you enteri speak of war no more.

[Exit Lady Randolph.

Manent Lord Randolph and Glenalvon.
I.. Ran. 'Tis so, by heav'n! her mien, her voice#

her eye.

And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

Glen. He parted from her now: Behind the mount,

Amongst the trees, I raw him glide along.

I.d Ran. For fad fequefter'd virtue the is renowndl!
Glen. Moft.true, my lord,
I, d. Ran. Yet this diftinguifh'd dame
Invites a youth, the acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This assignation (Jfews a letter) th. aflaflin freed,
Her manifest affection for the youth,
Might breed suspicion in a hulband's brain,
Whose gentle comfort all for love had wedded:
Much more in mine. Matilda never lov'd me,
Let no man, after me, a woman wed,
WVhofe heart he knows he has not; though Ihe brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry:
For let her seem, like the night's (hadowy queen,
Cold and contemplative :-He cannot trust her:
She may, fie will, bring (hame and sorrow on him ?
The worst of sorrows, and the worst of shames !

Glen. Yield not my Lord, to such affliAing thoughts;

But let the spirit of an husband sleep,
Till your own senses make a full conclusion.
Thils billet muft'to blooming Norval go:
At the next turn awaits my trusty spy;
I'll give it him' refitted for his maf er.
In the close thicket take your secret stand;
The moon {hines bright, and your own eyes may judge
QW their behaviour.

Ld. Ian. Thou dost counsel well.
Glen. Permit me now to make one flight essay.

Of all the trophies which vain mortals boast,
By v it, by vlour, .r' by wisdom -,on,

The first and faircft, in a yonlrg mnia'seye,
Is woman's caIpte lfeart. -Success love
With gtirioans i'smes -intoxicates the mind !
And the-i'eotd tnquairr in triumhph:moves
Air-b6rWe, 'eied .above ivuar 'men.

Ld. Ran. And what avails this maxim'?
Gkn. Much, 'hiy Lbr:!

Withraw^alittle: I'H accbft young-Arotai/,
And with ironiCiadeiifive eounfel
Siplioe hs spirit. I-f ke -s :no -moine
Than humble ATornal, by thy favoar rais'i,
Brave as he is, he'1 1hMriink;idfnitnWd from me:
But if h e te hefoaddit'e if hie'fiir,
Lov'd by the frftfieCltdosia's:dames,
He'll tunh 'pci -hie, as'the h'iiottas
Upon te- hunter's fipai.

Ld. Ran. '"Tis'lbte'dily iot t.
- Gln. -Wenhwe ro M-'bd diavrwet . 'I :tl't-iny

lord-
His rising wrath reflafat '[hit 'Rabddli

Glen. 'Tisftriant, by heaven !

That fhel^isAd irtn fuil' tilt-herfdna l carteer
To oneto little known. -:She-too that feem'i
Pure das he'winter-ftiret , when iee etib6of'd
Whitens its- loffe. :Eten t did'think her chaste,
Whose eBfirirty eiieei s 'n6t. 'Precious ;fx
Whose deeds ]afeiiionspas 'Genalvon's thoughts!

[Norvil appears,

His port I love :.' ie's in'a-proper'mEod
To chide the thunder, 'if-at him it roar'd,
Has Norvalfeen the troops ?

XNro. The;fetting fun,

Wiih :yelldw radiance, lightten'd allIhe tile,
And as the warriors mov'd, each pofl]Wd' telm,
Corfet, or ipear, ghnc'd'back his gilfedt'beams.
The hill Fthey ciFmbd, andd h:ltibg at its tbp,
Of more than -motal fze, 'tow'iing, they feem'd -
An host angelic dad ia'burniag rmns.

Gle.'. Thou talk'ft it well; no leader of our host,

In founds more lofty, speaks of glorious Var.

'Aorv. If I flall e'er acquire a leader's name,

Mly speech will be less, ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue,' and yputthl admitation
Vents itself freely; lince noh pait is min .
Of praise, pertaining to the great in arms.
Glen. You wrong yourself, brave Sir: your martni

degds

Have rank'd you with the great: but mark me, Norvtl,
Lord Randolph's fivbour iow exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know these foldierst c'ounsel you.
Give them-all honour'; seem not to cornmand;
Else they will fcarcely-brook your late (prung power,
Which nor alliance props, nbr birth adorns.

Norv. Sir, I have been accuftom'd all my days,

To hear and speak the p lain aid simple truth:
And though I have been told that there are men
Who borrow friendship's tongue to fpek their scorn,
Yet in such language I'am little fiill'd.
Therefore I thank Glenalvon for his counsel,
Although it founded harshly.. Why remind
Me of my birth obscure ? 'Why flr my power
With such contemptuous terms?

Glen. I did not mean

To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

Norv. My pride!
Glen. ' Suppress it as you wish to prosper.

Your pride's'exceffive. Yet for Randolph's fake
I will not leave y6u to its raflt direction.
If thus you swell, and frown at high-born men,
Will highborn men endure a she etper's fcorq'?

Nory. 4 shepherd's scorn -
Glen. Yes; if you prefiimt

To bend on fl6diers'thefe disdainful eyes.
What will become of you?

Norv. If this were told! - .d.
HIaf thu no fears for thy preluioptuous self!

Glen. Ha! dost thou threaten me ?
Narv. Didft thou not hear ?
Gln. Unwillingly I did; a .nobler foe
Hid not been queiiion'd thus. But such as thee

~Non. Whom dost thou think me ?
Glen. Norval.'
'Wly. So I am--
And who is Norval in ;Glenalvon's eyes ?

Gle,. A peasant's son, a wald'ring beggar boy
At bes no more, even if he peaks the truth.

NVorv. Falle as thou art, dolt thou fufpea my truth!
Glen. Thy-truth? thou'r at.ia he and false as hell
Is the vain glorious tale thou toldft to Randolph.

INor. If I-were chaina'd , nanrm'd and bed-rid old,

Perhaps I ihoul revile : But as I am
I have no tongue to rail.' :The humble Norval
Is of a race, who lriT no.t but with deeds.
])id i ndotXfar to freeze tyi iballow valpur,.
And make thee rlink too soon beneath my fxvword,
I'd tell thee-l1i'at thou art. T know thee well.

Glen. Dost thou o not w
k Genalvon, born to com.

mand
Ten thousand slaves like thee '

Nsrv. Villain, nbo'ore:

Draw and.defend thy life; I did defig'
:'Tolave defy'd thee in another'caufe; -
But heaven accelerates its vengeance,on thee.
Now for my own and Lady Randoilph's wrongs,

- ners Lord RANDDuLPH.,
I.d. Pan; Hold, I cormmand 'o/ both. ' The ma=

that ifirs-
Makes me his foe.

Nor,. Another voice taii thine .
That threat had vainly fouh.ded, noble Randolph.

Gln. Hear him, my lord i he's wond'rous cdndefcea'

ding!.
Mark the humility of Ibepherd Norval!

Nerv. Now you miayicoffio fafeiy [Sia;lh s £isf/wQrd
jd. 1in. Speakhbot this,

# ACT V.

Taunting each oiher ;but unfold to me
The caule ps quarrel, then r,-judge betwixt you.

Norv. Nay, myrgood l'ordd tho I .revere you mucht

My cause I plead not, nor demain4 your judgment.
I blush to fpeaik'l 'Iwiil riot cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words that I fromp him have h.orne
To the liege lord of my dear native land
I owe a fubjedt's honagel ' but e'an ii
And his high arbitration Id reje& ....,
Within my bosom relgn. another lord;
Honour, ible judge aidn umir' of' ftelf., ..
If my free speech offend 'ou, noble gandolph,
Revoke your favours and let Norva go '
I-ence as:he came, alone, but not diihonourd. ,

Ld. Ran. Thus far I'll mediate with imparal voice

The antient foi of'Caledonias' land, '.'
Now waves his banners o0er his frighted.fiejs.
Suspend your urppfe, till your country's.,artps
Repel the bold inyader : then decide
The private quarrel. '
;

Glen. I agree dt this.
korv. An4 . .

Enter SE:RVAN'.

Serv. The banquet waits. .
Ld Ran; We'come. . C.[Exi- dolph.
Glen. Norval,

t.et not'our yariance ?ar the f'cial iour,
Nor wrong thelhofpitality ps Rap'dolph.
Nor frowning angerj 'nort wriDkl';4 hate,
Shall ftairi iy-countefai'e.' Sinooth thou thy brow;
Nor let our strife disturb the gentle .da.,

Nerv. Think not lightly of ;y. rferntnient:
When we contend iginji.our irhife is mortal,

ACT V.
,, ek TE ,'od. ' .,'

Lnter Douglas.
r H I S is the place, the centre of the grove.

H ere tands the oak, the monarch of the wood.

How sweet and bflema is this midnight scene
The fiver moon, unclouded, holds her way
Thro' skies where I could count each little far.
The fanning weft wind scarcely stirs the leaves i
The river, rufling o'er its pebbled bed,
Imposes silence with a filly found,
In such a place as this, at such an hour,
If ancestry can be in aught believ'd,
Descending spirits have convers'd with man,
And told the secrets of the world unknown.

Enter Old Norval.
Old Norv. 'Tis he. But what if he fhould'chide me

hence ?
His just reproach I fear. [Douglas turns and fees hirn.

Forgive, forgive,

Can's thou forgive the man, the-fefifh man,
Who bred Sir Malcolm's heir a Ihepherd's son.

Doug. Kneel not to me; thou art my father fill;

Tlhv wiih'd-for presence now completes my joy,
Welcome to me, my fortunes thou ihalt share,
And ever honour'd with thy Douglas live.

Norv. And dost thou call me father ? O my son !

I think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
Which in the wilderness f6 long conceal'd
The blossom of thy yotth.

Doug. Not worse the fruit,

That in the wilderneis the bloflbm n ow'd.
Amongst the Shepherds in the humble cote,
I learn'd some lessons, which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend and when my vaials bow,
Norval small smooth the cressed pride of Douglas.

Norv. Let me but live to fee thine exaltation !

Yet grievous are my fears. O leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

Doug. Why (hould 1 leave. them ?
Norv. Lord Radolph and his kinsman seek your life.

Doug. How know'f'thou that'?
Norv. I will inform 'you how.

When evening-came, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by'your moffler's care,
And fondly'trod'in each accuftom'd path
That to the cafle leads. IWhilt thus 'I rang'd,
I was alarmd with unexpe&ed founds,
Of earnef voices. :On the'perfons came:
Unseen I'lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other as they talk'd, lord'Randolph thisi
And that Glenalvon: tRill'-df you.'they spoke,
And of the lady 1 threatening was'thei fipeech;
Tho' but imperfectly my ear could'hear it;
'Twas 'strange, they said, a'wondeffui difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Doug. Revenge ! for what'?
Norv. For being what you ate;

Sir Malcolm's Ifeir: how else have you -dffoended;
When theyv ere'gone, I hied-me to my. ottage,
And there fat muting how I best might.find
Means to inform you of their wicked purpose,
But I could think of none: at las perplex'd
I iflied forth, encompalling the tower
With many a weary ftep and wishful look.
Now ProvidernCe'hath'brought you to-my (ight,
Let not your too courageous fpirit'fiorn
The caution which I give,

Doug. I scorn itnot.

My mother wami'd;ie ds Glenatvon's jfenefs l
But I will notiit'fpecdthe noble Randolph. ,
In onr'encotmter with the vile:affafin.s '
I mark'd his brave demeanor,-him' -triuA

Norv. 'I'you-'will too far. '
Doug. Hoer.in:'thisL place -

I wait my mother's coming: she flIll' now
What thou hatl told: her counth 't-uHll follow
And cautious ever are a -mother's counsels.
You must departt; your preftence mayprevent
Our interview.

Nory. ]M bleffng reft upon, thee,!

0 may heav'ns hand, which fav'd.tieei,frionp the wave;
And from the sword of foesj e.pear thee ,iil;,,
Turning -nifchaace, if aught haas.,o'er .t!yjlead, .
All upon mrinc! . .. . [./it 014Norval:

Doug. He loves me like a parent.; .. . .

:.: '

And amut nbt,- hall not.lofe the:-to hbetjvesl
Altho' his fon.ha.lfound:a noira.fthber. . , .
Eventful day, how bait ihona ghag'd mj.fite I .
Once on the qold,. ad wittrjhadel fidq, . .'. . :-
Of a bleak bill, mi6sace:iadrootemi :e
Never to threi, ahld of'amB er foin..

: .: .. .

Tranfplaied now io.thc gay anny nnyas-.., 1:. .. .-
Like the green tilri -oflMayf . y foriune floert:
Ye gloridusas i high.liea1y'i re'lencnt hof
To whom I oft hate of my lot conplain'd ..
Hear and record my foul's unaicr' .w.dh I: -
Dead or alives let me be "txtno.wpu' .,.:
Miay heav'n infpirle.fome.ferce gigantuc Dane.
To gie a bol definci to

ip hofl! . . -

Before he speaks itbout I.will accept i . ..
Like Devu coaquert or.like Dogls die;

AEher i4 BRAXDoiLPH::.:

La. Ran , fy on !;-heard a .oice .- -. .
Dug.--The voice wxas.ine.. .... ,
La. Ran. Diad thou cbmplain aloud to nature's teai

That thus in duly ilades,. at midoigbt.bhurs, ..
By stealth the mother .an-.the fnihouldi.mnnete ,.

. :o .- .... I

- J;hEmraung biv

Doug No; Qn his:happy.day, t4iS: beter birth-day,.
:iy thoughts aid -ords:ama lb;ofwhope and joy. ....

La. Ran.. Sad fear and'mlnlacholy-ill[diide,

The empire of my breast witk hope.andjoy..
Now hear what.lad'ifie.: .... -. - ... :L: .... ;..

Dou.g Firi, kterme tell ...;. -,, .. :., :-

l... ,..
What may tke tenor of .ymr.counfel chage. ,.. - \ t

La. Ran. Myhean forebodes fimc evil- . - -
/ag. 'Ts notgood-- -' .- . .

At eve, unseen by Randolph and Glenalvon,
The good old Ndrval in the grove o'erheard
Their conversation: oft they mention me. .
With dreadful,.threatenings; you they sometimes nanx'd.
'Twas trange, they' aid, a wonderful discovery;,
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge,

La. Ran. Defend us, gracious God, we are betray'd.

They have found out::the fecre of. thy birth;
It must be so. That is the 'greafldifcovery.
Sir Malcom's heir is come to:claim. his own -
And he will be reveig'd. -.Perhaps even now, .
Arm'd and prepar'd for-lnuvderi they but wait
A darker ahd more silent hour to break
Into the chamfSert' here they think thou fleep'fl.
This mortent, this-. heav'n hath ordain'd to save thee!
Fly to the camp, my, fin t ; -

.

Doug. And leave you here!

No: to the cafle let us go together,
Call up the antient servants of your:.houte..
Who in their youth did eat your father's bread .
Then tell them loudly that 1 am your fan. -
If in the breasts of men one fparkremains. -
Of sacred love, fidelity, or. pity,
Some in your cause.' -.

l ak .but few . '

To drive thofe-fpoilers!from my'father's, house,".
La. Ran. 0 nature,. nature; what can check thy

:force;- . '

Thou genuine offspring of. the daring Douglas
But rush not on-lderau tion :: Save.thyfel-f.
And I amna.faf;. T'o me they mean no harm.
Thy. stay but ri&fa'thy. precious lJfe: in.vain.
That winding. path cqnduas ihee:to the river,
Cross where thibu'feft a.broad and beaten way,
Which running;eaftward.leads .thee to the camp,
Inflant demand admittance to Lord.Dougaa
Shew him these jewels, which liie brother wore.
Thy look, thy yoide,.illi make himfeei.the truth,
Which I by certain proof.will soon confirmi.
D0ug. I yield me and obey: butyr ni:mv heart

G

Bleeds at this paiting. Something bids me Ray
And guiards a mother's life. 'Oft have I read
Of wond'rous deeds by one bold armn atehiet'd.
Our foes are two; no more; let me go forth,
And fee if any flnief cangard
c Gnaven.

La. Ran. If ihou regard'i thy mother, or rever'if

Thy father's mem'ty think of this no more.
Ono thing I have to fiy befose *e pasts
Long wer't thou loft; and thou art found, my ehild,
In a most fearful feaon, 'War and battle
I have grearcaufe to dread. Too well I fee
Which way the current of 'thy temper sets r
To day I've found thee. Oh ! my ong los hope!
If thou to gifdd talodr gri's the teii,
To morrow I may los my fn- for ever,
The love of thee, before thou saw's the light,
Suftain'd my life when thy brave fathet fell.
If thou malt fall, I have hs love nor hope
In this wvaRe rworld! my son, remember me

Doug. 'What fhall-t fay i? ow can I give'you comfortl

The God of battles of my life if pose
As may be for you ! for whose dear fake
I will not bear myself as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boast fond's amongst martial men,
How will inglorious caution fait my claim
The post of fair unlhrinking I maintain.
My country's foes mft witness whlo I am.
On the invader's heads, I'll proveint-'birth *
T;11 friends and fees confess te gtiuine ftrainr
If in this strife I fall, blame noi'youro h,
Who if he lives not honour'd, must not live.

La. Ran. I will not utter what ny besom dread.

Too well I love'that valour which I warn.
7tarewel my son-! my cournfes aretbut vain. (Emradcig
And as high heavn 'hath iill'd it all nrft be. (fiparatr.

La. Ran. Gaze not on me, thou wilt mifta the path;
I'" point it Ot'agi.-; .' "

[Yfl as they are r atin', enterfrom the weod' X-

Lord Randolhb and Glenalvon]

Ld. Ran. Not in her presence.
Now---- _

Glen. I'm preptr'd
Ld. Ran. No: I eomnnmd thee flay.
I go alone ? it never. aall be said

That I took odds to con'bat mortal man.
The noble& vengeaner is tJiE molt comnpleat.

E xit Lord Randolph.
[Glenalvon mates sone Jsep, to the fate fide of t,.

Jlage, li/Ie, andfpeakis.]

Glen. Demons of death- come fettle on my sword,

And to a double (laughter guide it homel
The lover and the hulband both must die.

[ Lord Randolph behind t.[efIe:

Ii. Ran. Draw, villain, draw.
Doug. Aflail n not, Lord Randolph;
Not as thou lov'ft thyself. . .Clafniig offwords.]

' [.[Gienalvod rannin, oat

Now is the time.
Enter Lady Randolph at the opposite fde of tse Jlage

faint and breathless.
Lai Ran. Lord Randolph hear me; all shall be thine

! own:
But flpre! 0 spare my son!

Enter Douglas with afword i each haAd.

Doug. My mother's voice!

I can protedt thee {till.

La. Ran. 'He lives, he lives:

For this, for this to Heav'n eternal praise!
But sure I Saw thee fall.

Doug. It was Glenalvon.

Jull as my arm had mafter'd Randolph's sword.
The villain came bihiid me but I flew nim.
La. Ran. Behiud thee ! A; thour't wounded 0 my

child,

How pale thou fook't! and' flallf I lose thee now!
Daug. Do not despair; I feel a little faintness;

G 2

I hope it will not lafi. [Leans upopn Jit ford.

La. Ran. There is no hope !

And we muf part! the hand.of death is on thee !
O my beloved child ! O Douglas, Douglas.!

EDcuglas, growing more and more:faint
Doug. Too foan we part: I have not long been Dou.

glas.

O dcftiny ! hardly thou deall with mie:
Clouded and hid, afrrangcr tp myflef.
In low and poor obfcqrity I liv'd.

La. Ran. Has heav'n preferv'd thee for an end like

this ?

Dog, 0 4pad I flln- as my brave father's fell,

Turning with great effort the tide of battle !
Like them 1 Ihould have finil'd-and welcom'd dpath.
But thus to parish by a villain's hand!
Cut off from nature's, and from glpry's course,
Which never mnotal wasofofond to. run,

La. Ran. Hear justice! hear I stretch thy avenging

arm. [Douglas falls.

Doug. Unknown I die; no tongue shall speak of me.

Some noble spirits, judging by themselves,
May yet conjefure what I might have prov'd,
And think life wanting only to my fame;
But who shall comfort thee?

La. Ran. Despair! despair!
Doug. Oshad it pleas'dhigh heav'n to let me live.

A little le

wile !--- my eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apace! my mother! QO my mother ! [UtJi

Enter Lord Randolph andA.nna.
L. Ran. Thy words, the words oftruth, have pierc'4

my heart.

I am the Rain of knighthood and of arms.
Oh !-if my brave dejiverer survives
The traitor's fwprd ----

Ann. Alas !look there, my lord. ,
Ld. iR The mother and her Con! HoIowtril ! am

Was I the cause ? No: ;I was-not the czfe.
Yon matchless vilin did seduce my foul ..

To frantic jealousy. -

Ann. My lady lives:

Thc agony of grief hath but fuppre f
A while her powers.

Ld Ran. But nmy delivrers dead!.

The world did once esteem Lord Randolph well,
Sincere of heart, for spotless lqpour fam'd:
And in my early days, glory I gain'd
Beneath the holy banner of the cross;
Now pal the noon of life, Ihaine:comes upon-me;
Reproach,: and infamy, and public hate,
Are near at hand; for all mankind will think
That Randolph t!fely Aabi'd, Sir itTalcp's heit.

.[Lay Randolph reco2vring,
La. R4in. Where aml now? still in this wretched

world !

Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine.
My youth was worn in anguish; but youth's tirength,
With hole's afliftance bore the brunt of sorrow;
And train'd me on to he the objet now,
On which omnipotence displays itself,
Making a fpetale, a tale of met
To awe.its vaflal, man.

Ld. Ran. 0 misery!

Amidst thy raging grief I murf proclaim
My innocence.

La. Ran. Thy innocence!
Ld. Ran;, My gui!t

Is innocence comnpar'd with what thou think's it.'

La. Ran.. Of thee I think not: what have I to O.

With thee, or-any thing? My son ! my son!
My beautiful! my brave ! how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy valour ! my fond heart
O'erflow'd this day with tranfpoin when I thought
Of growing old amidst a race of thine,
Who might make up to me their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and My huiband's name
Now all my hopes are dead! a little w.ile
Was I a wife! a mother not fo-long-

. . ..

What am I now ?- I know- But I lhall be
That only whillt I please; for such a son
And such a husband make a woman boldi [Runs out.

Ld. Ran. Follow her, Anna: I myfelfwould follow,
But in this rage she mult abhor my pretence [Exit Anna

Enter Old Norval.
Vorv. I heard the voice of woe; heav'n guard my

child!

Ld. Rar. Already is the idle gaping croud,

The spiteful vulgar, come to gaze on Randolph.
Begone.

N.rv,. I fear thee not. X will not go.

Here i' ! remain. I'm an accomplice, lord,
With thc- in murder.' Yes, my fins did help
To crush dcwn to the ground this lovely-plant.
0 nebleft youth that ever yet was born I
S e-:e i andbeft, gentlest and bravest spirit,
That ever blest the world! Wretch that I am,
Who saw that noble spirit swell and rife
Above the narroi limits that confin'd it !
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do thee juitice, and reveal the secret,
Which timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's snare. Oh ! I am punifh'd now!
These are the hairs that Iholnd hae ftrew'd the ground,
And not the locks of Douglas,

[Tears his hair, and tbre'os bimfei

upon the body of Douglas.

Ld. Ran. 1 know thee now: thy boldnef 'I forgive;

My crest is fall'n. For'thee I will appoint
A place of reft, if grief, will let thee reft.
1 will reward, although I cannot punish.
Curif, curst Glenalvon, he efcap'd too well,
Though flan and baffled by the hand he hated.
Foaming with-rage and firy to the last,
(urfing his conqueror, the fellon dy'd.

Enter ANNA.

Ann. My lord, my lord!
id. Ran. Speak: I can hear of horror.

Ann. Horror indeed!
Ld. Ran. Matilda!
Ann. Is no more.

She ran, lhe flew like light'ning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice ihe gain'd,
Benathe whose low'ring top the river falls
Ingulph'd in rifted rocks : thither (he camer
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down----

Ld. Ran. 'Twas I ! alas ! twas I

That fill'd her breast with fury; drove her down
The precipice of death! Wretch that I am!

Ann. O had you seen her last despairing look!

Upon the brink {he fRood, and cast her eyes
Down on the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heav'n, teeming to fayt
Why am I forc'd to this ? She plunged herself
Into the empty air.

Ld. Ran. I will not vents

In vain complaints, the passion of my foul.
Peace in this world 1 never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of Randolph gave.
They Tpeak aloud, and with the voice of fate
Denounce my doom, I am refolv'd. Ill go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me turn aside must threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy miftrefsi take this ring.
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
With cost and pomp upon their funerals wait;
For Randolph hopes he never (hall return.

E I N I S,

# EPILOGUE

E P i L 0 G U
-

Spoken by Mr. BARRY.
AN Epilogue I aflc'd but not one word

One bard will write. He vows 'tis nioft absurd

With comic wit to contradict the strain
Of tragedy, and make your fbrrows vaini
Sadly he 'fs, that pity is the best
The noblen paIfion of the human breast:
For when its sacred itreams the heart o'erflow,
In guihes pleasure with. the tide of woe;
And when it's waves retire, like those of Nile,
They leave behind them such a golden foil,
That there the virtues without culture grow,
There the sweet blossoms of affe&ion blow.
These were his words;-void of delusive art
I felt them; for he spoke them from hls heart#
Nor will I now attempt, with witty folly,
To chace away celestial melancholy.

,. iy
*y .^^-
