Ad.Z77 - D OT GLA o

___ .'

.?
1 1

D o'u G L. ~.'S:.'.

·'

A TRAGEDY,

As written by Mr. HO0 ME.

-

. -

;- - ·- -
_ /^

DISTINCUISHING ALSO THE.
VARIATIONS or THE THEATRE,

AS ?ERFORMEB

AT THE

€N~~eattes ^ opaI.

Regulated froni the-PROMPT-BOOKS,
B2' PERMISSION OF THE M4NAGERS.

Non ego fum vates,' fed prifciua confaius avi.

LONDON: Printed for

J. B&RaKEz, Dramatic Repository,
N0o,19, Great RuBfell-Sttet Coves. Oardc,%

# PROLOGUE.

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

"PROLOGUE,

- I7 ancitei times, when Britain's trade .wai arms,
. And the lov'd music of her youib, alarms,

gaod-like race fuflain'dfair England's fame:
IWh has not heard of gallant Pierc's name?
Ay, and of Douglas ? Such illuftriousfoes
In ri.val Rome and Carthage never rote !
From age to age brights one the Briij fire,
And ever) hero 'was a hero's fire.
i6/en powe'ful fate decreed one warrior's doom,
Upfpruns= the Phenixfrom biiparent's ltomb.
But whilfi thbfe generous rivals /fought and fell,

'hese generous rivals lov'd each other 'well:
_ Though many a losdy fiedd 'was li and 'won,

othint in hate, in honour all was done.
When Pierc 'w'ong'd, dify'd his prince or peers,
Fast came the Douglas wish his S&ttifh spears;
And .hen prcr.d Douglas made bis King his foe,
F or Douglas, Pierry bent bis Englh bow.
Experld ib:ir native homes by adverse fate,
They knock'd alternate at each other's gale:
The:n laa'd the cafie at thIe iridnigbht hbur,
For him hbfh arms had jhook its firmefl tovoer.
'This night a Douglas your protciou claims;
A z.;f il! a mother ! pit's sojfeft names: .

the fjory of her -,woes indulgent bear,

And grant your fuepliaMt allj/he begs, a tea,
in confidence, f/e begs; andhopes t' find
Each Engl/h ,i reuj~, >.sPiercy's, kind.

r3:;v'rdg Couett Garden.

D.uglas, MTr C.KEMBLE. Mr. LEWIss.
Lord RanK-'h. Mr. lOLLAND- Mr. W ROUGHTON.i
GlFhIolvn, Mr. CORY. ' Mr. F. AICK!N.
Jc-aa!. ' Mr. POWEL. Mr. HULL.
Sitranier, Mr. PACKER&.
&Srvai:s, Z'c.

Laaj Randi,:h, 'Mrr. SIDDONS. Mrs. POPE.
~.nna, Miss HEARD. MisS MOuRIS.

D 0 U G L A S.

'-he pafigtg s marked by i4nerted commas are omitted in the reprejecnrbtian.
.SCENE, the Court of a Cafle,fierrotnded 'with Woods,

Enter Lady RAN DQLP H.
Lady R. J7'E woods and wilds, whose melan-

.L choly gloom

Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth
The voice offorrow from my burlting heart,
Farewdli a while: I will not leave you long;
.For in your ihades I deem some spirit dwells,
Who tram a chiding llream, or groaning oak,
Still hears and auifwers to Matilda's moan.
Oh, Ddtglas! Douglas ! 'if departed gholts
-Are e'er permitted to review this tvorld,
*Within the circle of that wood thou art,
.And with the pailion of immortals hear'st
My lamentation: hear'st thy wretched wifi
Weep for her hulband slain, her infant loft.
My brother's timeless death I feeim to mouri;
Who perifh'd'with thee on this fatal day.
To thee I.lift my voice; to thee address
The plaint which mortal ear has never heard:
Oil, disregard mejnot; thlugh I am call'd
Another's nowv, myheart is wholly thine.
Incapable of change, after.ion lies
Buricd, my Douglas, in thy bloody grave.
But Randolph comes, whom fare has mad'e my Lord,
To chide my anguifl, and defraud thle dead.

Entier Lord RAN DOLPH.

Lord R. Again these weeds of woe ! fay, dolt thout

To feed a pa'lion which conflmres thy life - [well
The living claim fime duty; vainly thou
IHerltow'l thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady R. Silent, alas! is he for whom I mourn:

Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives.

- A z Lord R.

L£rdR- Time, that wears out the trace of deepRft

angnifh,

Has past o'er thee in vain. ' Would thou wer't not,

Compos'd of grief and tenderness alone !'

Sure thou art not the daughbter of Sir Malcormb:
Sir, ng was his rage. eternal his resentment:
For wheA tby bro.her fell, he fmil'd to hear
That Douglas' f,;n in the fame field wasfiain.

Lady .R. Oh ! rake not up the ashes of my fathers:

Impl3cable resentment awas the c:iie,
And grievoos has the expiation hoen.
Contending with the Douglas, ga!!ant lives
Of either house were lo!t: my anceltors
Comi-ell'd, at lat, to leave their ancient feat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks: and new, of them
No heir is left. had they not been so Item,
I had njt been ;he la'i of all my race.

Lord R Thy grief wre!:s to its yurpofes my woos.

I never aIk'd of thee that ardent Jove,
Whirh in the hbeafts of fiacy's children burns,
Deceni affeAion, and complacent kindnefr
Were all 1 will'd for: bat I wfi'd in vain,
Hence with the !ekfs regret my eyes behold
The storm of war that gathers o'er this land;
If ihonld'perifih by the Danifih fwordr
,.Iatiida would not shed one tear the more.

Lady R. Thou do'st not think so ; woeful ae I nnm,

I love thy merit, and elleem your virtues.
But whither go'Pc thou now ?

LordR. Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on tip. toe ttands
Ofexpectation, and impatient aiks
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are landed.

Ladj R. Oh, may adverse winds,

Far fromthe coast of Scotland drive their fleet!
And every soldier of both holts return
In peace and safety to his pleasant home! [ifh,

Lsrad R. Thou fpeak'lI a woman's, hear a warrior'!

Right from their-native land; the Rftormy north, .
May the wind blow, till every keel i» six'd
lmmioyeabk ia Caledonia's sirand .

. Then

Then hall'our foes repent their bold inva'fon,
And roving armies (hun the fatal ihore.

Lady R. War I detest: but war with foreign foes,

· Whose manners, language, and whose looks are
' Is not so hbrrid, nor to me so hateful, [ftrangce
'As 'ht which with"our neighbours oft we wage.

A river here, there an ideal line.

' By fancy drawn, divides the tiaer kingdomss.

On each fide dwells a people imilar,

' As twins are to each other, valiant both,.
· Both for their valour famous through the world.
' Yet will they not unite their kindred arivs, ,

And, if they. mut.have.war, wage difftant war, -

' But with each other fight in cruel confhlt.

Gallant in ltrife, and noble ini their ire,.
The-battle is their pi'ime. They go forth,
' Gay in the morning, as to summer sport:
: When ev'ning comes, the glory of the morn,
' 'The youthful warrior, is a clod of clay;-
; Thus fallthe prime ofeither haplefs'land:
' And such the fruit of Scotch and English wars.

' Lord R. 1'll hear no more-: this melody would

' .4 soldier drop his sword, and-doff his arms, [make

Sit down and weep the conqueflts he hab made ;

· Yea, like a monk, snog rei!t and peace in heav'n
· To fouls of warriors in his battles slain,'
Lady, fdrewell: I leave thee not alone;
Yonder comes one whole love makes duty light. [Exit.

.Enter ANNA.

-Anna. Forgive the rashness ofyour Anna's love "
Urg'd by afiction, I have thus prefum'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts;
And warn you of the hours that yoil negleO,
And lose in sadness.

Lady R. So to lore my hours
Is all the use I wiso to make of time.

Atnna. To blame thee, lady, suits not with my slate

But sure I am, fiaice death firil prey'd on man,
Never did filter thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had loft,
Ia early youth, -the hulband of your heart ?

'Aq Lady R.

L4,, A. Oh!
.Ana. Have I -difirefi'd you with ofcioui love,

Anil!-tim'd mention of yonr brother's fate?
Forgive me, lady; humble though I am,
The mind I bear, Fartakes not of my fortune:
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

Lad R. What Fouc er direced thy unconfcioas tolagne
To rpeak as thou haft done ? to name--

Aaro. I know not:

But since my words have made my miflrefs trembl:,
iwill speak no more; but silent mix
·ily tears with hers.

Lady R. No, thou shalt not be silent.

I'll trufi thy faithful love, and thou halt be
Idenceforth th'inflrnuted partner of my woes.
But what avails it? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never ebbing time'?
Compel the erth and ocean to give up
Their dead alive ?

.dBa. What means my nob'e miflrefs ?
Lady R. Didft ihoau not ask what had my sorrows

If I in early youth had loll a hulfband.-- [been,--.
In :he cold bosom of the earth is Iodg'd,
~langl'd with wonund, the husband ofmyyouth;
And in fame cavern of the ocean lies

Iy child and his---
adra. Oh! lady most rever'd!

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

!ci,/ R. Alas! an'ancient feud,

lereditary evil, was the fonrte
Of my misfortunes. ' Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother fihonidin battle save
The life of Dongias' son, our house's foe:
The vonthful warriors vow'd eternel friendship,
To fee the vaunted fiicr of his friend,
Impatient, Douglas to Balarmo came,
Under a borrow'd name-My heart he gain'd;
Nor did I long refnufe the hand he begg'd:
14y brother's prefence'aunhoriz'd our marriage.
Tihree weeks, three little weeks, with wings of down,

Had

Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd L6rd was call'd
To fighthis father's battles; and with him,
In spite of all my tear;, did Malcomb go.
Scarce were they gone. when my stern fire was told
That the false stranger was lord Douglas' son.
Frantic with rage, the baron drew his sword
And qcelion'd me. Alone, forfakeri, faint,
Kneeling beneath his sword, faolt'ring I took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
Wed one of Douglas' name. Sincerity!
Thou first of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thy onward path! although the earth mhould gape,
And from the gulph of hell deftrution cry
To take difimulation's winding way.

Anna. Alas ! how few of woman's fearful kind
Durst own a truth so hardy !

Lad..R. The firRft truth

Is easiest to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral, from~my tragic tale.-
Jn a few days the dreadful tidings came
That Douglas and my brother both were slain.
My lord ! my life ! my husband! -mighty Heaven!
What had I done to merit such affli&tion ?

Anna. My dearest lady ! many a tale of tears

I've liflen'd-to; but never did I hear
A tale so fad as this.

Ladj R. In the first days

Of my diflra&ting grief I found myself-..
As women wish to be who love their lords.
But who durlt tell my father ? The good prielt
Who join'd our hands, my brother's ancient tutor,
With his lov'd Malcomb, in the battle fell:
They two alone wvere privy to the marriage. -
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till time fliould make my fathe?'s fortune mine.
That very night on which my son was born,
My'nurfe, the only confidant I had,
Set out with me to reach her fifier's houie:
But narfe, nor infant, have I ever seen,
Or heard of, Anna, since that fatal hoaur.
· My murder'd child '-had thy fond mother sear'd
' The loss of thee, he had loud fame defv'd,

' Defpis'd

' Defpis'd her father's rage, her father's grief,
' And winder'd with thee ;hro' the.fcorning wborld.'

A'na. Not-feen, nor heard c:f! then.perhaps helives.
La4F.R. No. It was dark December; wind and rain

Had bear all night. Across the Carron lay
ThM defin'd road; and in its fweliing fl-od
My f-ithfu! fervadt rerifh'd with my child.
· Oh, hapless son ! of a molt hap.Lfs fire ! -
' But they are both at reit; and I alod e
" Dvell in this w:r!d ofwoe condemn'd to walk,
' Like a guilt trcubled.ghofi, my painful round ;'
Nor hat despiteful fate permitted me
The comfort of a foli:ary sorrow. -
- Thounh dead to love, I wai compeil'd to wed
Randolph, who fr.atch'd me from a viliain5s arms;
And Randolph now pofieffes the domains,
That by Sir Malcomb's death on me devolv'd;
Domains, that fhouid to Douglas' son have giv'n
A baron's title and a baron's power.
· Such were my soothing thoughts, while I bewvaild
' The flaughter'd father of a son unborn.
' And when that son came, like a ray from heaven,
· Which Ihines and difappea:s; alas ! my child !
' How iong did thy fond mother grasp the hope
, Ofhaving thee, .he knew not how, reftor'd.
' Year after year h;th worn her hope away;
C Bot left fti:l ondiminifi'd her desire. [life,

· :5an. The hand, that spins th' uneven thread of
' May Imooth the length that's yet ta come qfyours.

· Lady R. Not in this world: I have confider'd

C Its various evils and on whom they fa3ll. [well
, Alas i hw oft does goodnets wound i;''ef?
' And sweet affetion prove 'he spring of woe.'
Oh i had I died when my iov'd husband fell [
Had some good acgei op'd :o me it e book
Of Providence, ano let me read my Ii''e,
My heart had broke, when I beheld the fum
Ofiis,'whicia one by'one I have endur'd.

_.qnn.That Fcwer, whfe .:int'fters good sngelsarei

Hath fiSut he boLk, in mercy to mnarkird:
Eut we-mu!i leave thi. theme: Glenlv:,n comes:
I law him bend on you his. thoughtful eyes,

. *

. *
- - ~~~Ana:

And hiltherwards he-fljwly ftalks-his way.

Lady R. I will avoid' him. An ungracious perfoa
Is doubly irksome in an hour like this, [heir ?

Anna. Why speaks my lady thus of Randolph's
Lady R. 'Because he's not the heir of Randolph's

Subtle and fhrewd,'he offers to mankind [virtues.
An artificial image of himself;
And he with ease can vary to the taste
Of different men, its features. ' Self denied,

And mailer of his appetites he seems:
' But his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,

Watches to seize unseeo the wish'd for prey,
Never uwere vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
As in Glsenalvpn's unrelenting mind.'

Yet is he brave and politic in war,
.And llands aloft in these unruly times,
Why. I describe him tbus'I'll tell hereafter,
Stdy, and detain him till I reach the catle.

[Exit Lady Randolph.

Anaa. Oh, happiness ! where art- thou to be foundit

I fee thou dwelleft not with birth and beauty,
Tho' grac'd with grandeur and in wealth array'd':
Nor dost thou, it. would seem, with virtue dwell;
Else had this gentle lady mifs'd thee not,

Enter GLENALVON.

Gklen. What dollt thou muse on, meditating maid ?

Like some entranc'd and visionary seer,
On earth thou fiand't', thy thoughts ascend to heaven.

Anna. Would that I were, e'en as thou fay'Ift, afeer,
To have my doubts by heavenly vifidn clear'd !i

Glen. What dost thou doubt of? What ball thou to

With fubjedts intricate? Thy youth, thy beauty, [do
Cannot be queltioned: think (f these good gifts;
And then thy contemplations will be pleating.

Anna. Let women view yon monument of woe,

Then boaht of beauty : who tfb fair as she?
But I muff followv; this revolving day
Awakes the memory of her antient woes. [Exit Anna

Glen. [i/olu.] So !--Lady Rando!ph Ihuns we; by

I'l1 woo her as the lion wooes his brides.' [and by.
The deed's a doing nos, that makes me. lord

CQf

# ACT II.

Of these rich valies, and a chiefofpow'r.
The season is mpft apt; my founding fleps
Will not be heard amidst the din of arms.
Rahdolph has liv'd too long: his berter f te
Had -the afcendaor cnce, and kept me down:
Whee I had seiz'd the dase, by chance he came,
Reicu'd, and had the lady for his labour;
1 'sca'd unknotwn ! a fiender confolatioa !.
Heav'n is my witness that I dJ not kve
To sow in pe:il, and !etPohers re-.p .
The jocund harnel. Yetljoa not safe:
By lope or fomneibhing l:ke it, i.ung. i flm'd,
Miiadly I b!abb'd my pasion :o hia crife,
And ihe has thre-ten'd to tcq,.int him ofit.
£he way of .crnamar.s wii I Cuo not know:
Bar well I kooa the baron's wraih is dead!y,
I wii! r.otr live in fear; the man I dread ,
Is a Dane to me: ty, and the mian
Wiho gands becwixt me and my chiefdefire.
No bar but he; she has no kinsman near; -
No brother in his filter's quarrel boid;
And for the righteous caufe,.a ftiranger's cause,
I know no chief that will defy Glenalvon. ['Exit,

ACT 11.

SCENE, aCwrt, &c. .
EsfSerervaatt ;and a Stra.ger at orn Der, and Lady

R. A nDo L H and A S A at atlghr.o
Lad, R. WHAT means this claom0ur Stranger,

i,-e-k ficure ;

Haa bhoi bEen wrong'd ? Hate there rude men pre,
To '-ex the weary traveller on his wa'? .[funi'd

ijl Str-rvam. Sy as no iraneer ever 'futar'd ,r(ng:

Thi- man w;rh u.'crv wild h s cal'd us fobrh;
So fore si-aid he caneo' ~speak his fears.
£ftr LesrJd Ao:; oLpI'i erd a voung 3lan with Beir

S v.o,d aoraJnn and bIcody.
LZa R. Not vaia :he .itranger's sers ! how fares

m- ' Lord ?

Lord

Lard R. That it fares wll; thanks to.this gallant

Whose valour fav'd me from a wretchd death ![youth,
As down the winding dale ' wal!'d alone, '
At the cross way four armed men attack'd me:
Rovers, I judge, fiom the licentious camp,
Who would ha'e quicklsy'laid Lord Randolph low,.
Had not this brave and generous stranger come,
Like my good angel, iii the hour'of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my foes his own.
They turn'd upon him; but his asive'arm
Struck to theground, fr..m whence they rose no more,
The fiercest two: the others fled amain,
And left him malter of thie bloody field.
Speak, Lady Randolph; upon beauty's tongue
ID)well accents pleating to the brave and bold.
SFeak, noble dame, and thank him for thy. Lord.

Lady R. My Lord, I cannot speak what now I feel.

My heart o'erflowsv with gratitude to heav'ai,
And to this noble, youth, who all unknow'n
To you and yours; deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but humanely brave
Fought on your fide, against such fearful odds,
Ha'e you not learn'd of him whom ;e fnould thank?
Whom call the saviour of Lord Randolph's life?

LordR. I ask'd that quellion, and he anfwer'd not:

But I mullt know who my deliverer is, [To the.Stranger.-

Strung. A low born man, of parentage obscure,

Who nought can boast but his desire to be -
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Lord R. Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled

By the great (Kiig of Kings thou art ordain'd
And ltampt a hero by the fivereign hand
Of nature! blush not, flower of modefiy
As well as valour, to declare thy birth.

Strang. My name isNorval: on the Grampion hills

My fatner feeds his flocks;.a frugal iwain,
Wibofe conltant cares were to iotreale his fore,
And keep his only son, myself, a't home.
For 1 had-heard of bdtrles, and I long'd
To lol.low to the field some warlike lord;
'And heav'n toon granted what my fire deny'd.
This moon which rose laII night, round as my shield,

Had

Had not yet fill'd her.horns, when, by her light,
A band of fierce barbarians'from- the hills,
Rufh'd like a. tourrent down upon the vale,
S eeping our flocks and herds. The shepherds fled
For safety, and for fucconr. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver fu'l of arrows,
HJver'd about the-enemy, and.mark'd
The road he tock; then hailed to my friends,
Whom,. with a-roop of fifty chosen men,
_ 1 met advancing. The parfait I led,

'Till we o'ertook the fpoil-encumber'd'foe. -
We fought ahd conquer'd. Ere a sword was drawn,
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Returning home in triumph; I difdain'd
The hepherd's flothfnl life; and having heard
That our good king had fummon'd his bild peers
To lead their warriors to.the Carron fide,
I left my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to condut my steps:;.
Yon trembling coward, who forsook his maftiler.
- Journeying with this intent, I past there towers,

And, heaven-direaed, came this day tb do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

Lord R. He is as wife as brave. Was ever tale

With foch a gallant modefity rehears'd ?
My brave deliverer! thou shalt enter now
A nobler lilt, and'in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame,
I will present thee to our Scottilh king,
Whose valiant spirit ever valour lov'd.
Ha! my Matilda! wherefore ltarts that tear?

Lady R. I cannot fay: for various affecions,

And lirangely. mingled, in my bosom swell;
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
I joy that thou art safe; and Iadmire
Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety;
Obscure and fiiendlefs, he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, and -with his sword
To gain- dilinti6n-which his birth denied.
In this attempt unknown he might have perilh'd,

And

And gain'd with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The fo!diernow of hope
lHe siands conspicuous; fame and great renown
Are brought within the compass of his sword.
On this my mind refleted, whilst you spoke,
And blefs'd the wonder-working hand of Heaven;

-Lor'dR. Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts!
My deeds Thall followwhere thou point'it the way.
Next to myself, and equal to Glenalvon,
In honour and command Ihall Norval be.

Nor. I know not how to thank you. Rude I am,

In speech and manners never till this hour
Stood I in fuchaprefence: yet, my Lord,-
There's something in my breast, which makes me~bold
To fay, that Norval ne'er will ibame thy favour.

Lady R; I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou malt

My knight: and ever;as thou dolt to-day, [be
With happy valour guard.the life of Randolph.

Lord R. Well halt thou spoke. Letme forbid reply.

[To Norval.

We are thy debtors till ; thy high desert
O'ertops our gratitude. I muff proceed,
As was at first intended, to the camp.
Some of my train Ifee are speeding hither,
Impatient, doubtless, of their Lord's delay.
Go with me, Norval, and thine eyes ihall'fee
The chosen warriors of thy native land,
Who lahguifh for the fight, and beat the air,
With brandifh'd swords.

Nor. Let us be gone, my Lord.
LordR. [sr Lady Randolph.] About the tiie

that the declining fun

Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills furpend,
Expe& us to return, This night once more
Within these walls I reft; my tent I pitch
To-morrow'in the field. Prepare the feafi.
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
He in the eve of battle may resign
Himself to social pleasure; sweetest then,
When danger to a soldier's foul endears

~B 'XThe

-14 DOUGLAS. M II.
Thehuman joy that never may return.

[Exeunt Randolph and. Norval.

Lady R. His parting words have flruck a fatal truth.,
Oh, Douglas! Douglas! tender was the time,
Whenwe two parted, ne'er to meet again !
How many years of anguifh-and derpair
Has heaven annex'd to those swift passing hours
Of love an.fondnefs.' 'Then my bosom's flame
· Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of fear
' Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd' -
An.sa. Maygraciou» Heav'n pour the sweet balm of

-Into the wounds that fefler in your breast ! [peace
For earthly con&fation cannot cure them.

LadyR. One only cure can Heav'n itfelfbeftow ;-

A grave-that bed in which the weary refi.
Wretch that I a i! Alas ! why am I so r
At every happy parent I repine !
How blelt the mother of.yon gallant Norval! '
She for a living husband bore her pains,
And heamd him bless be? when a man was born:
She nnrs'd her fmiiing infant on her breast; .
Tended the child, and rear'd the pleasing boy:
She, with affetion's triumph, law the youth
In grace and comeiinefs furIpafshis peers:
Whilff I to a dead huiband bose a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.

Anna. Alas! Alas! why will you thus resume

Your grief afresh ? I thought that gallant youth
Would for awhile have won you. from your wMe
On him intent you gazed, with a look

.

Much more delighted, than your penfis'e .eye
Has deign'd on other obje&s to betow.

Lady R. Delighted, fay'ft th u ? Oh! even'there

Found fuel far my iife-confuming sorrow; [mine eye
I thought, that had the son of Douglis Iiv'd,
He might have-been like this young gallant fitranger,
And pair'd with him in features and in shape.
In all endowments, ai in years, I deem,
My boy with blooming Norval might have number'd.
Whilst thus I mns'd, a spark from fancy fell
On my fad hearr, and kindled up a fouidnefs
For this young stranger wand'ring from his home,

A- nd

And like an orphan calf upon my care.
1 ,will protet thee, said I to, myfielf,
With all my powver, and grace withlall my favour.

'Anna. Sure heav'n will bless so gen'r6us a resolve.

Y'u mufll, my noble dame, exert your power:
You must awake: devices will be fram'd,
And arrows pointed at the brea of 6fNorval.

LadyR. Glenalvon's false and crafiy head will work

Against a rival in his liinfmans love,
IfI deter him not; I onily can.
Bold as he is, Glenalvon will beware
How he pulls down the fabric thdt I raire.
I'11 be the artist of young Norval's'fortuei.

'Tis pleating to admire ! moil apt was I
To this affectioiinin my better days;
Though now I seem to you ihrunk up, retir'd
' Within the narrow compass of my woe.

Have you not sometimes seen an early flower

' Open its bud, and spread its silken leaves,

To catch sweet airs, and'odours to'bellow;
' Then, by the keen blafl nipt, pull in its leaves,
' 'And, though frill living, die to fcentand beauty?
· Emblem of me; afflision,like a storm,
Hath kill'd the forward bloffomni of my heart.'

-Enler GL'N ALVOtN.

Glen.Where is my deareftkinfman, nobleRandolph?
LadyR. Have you not heard, Glenalvon, of the b'ase-
Glen. I have; and that the villains may not 'Tcape,

With a {irong band I have begirt the wood.
If they lurk there, alive they_ihaill be taken,
And torture force from them th' important secret,
Whether some foe of Randolph hir'd their swords,
Orif----- ..

Lady R. That care becomes a kinsman's love.
I have a counsel for Glenalvon'sear. [Exit Anna.

Glen. To him your counsels avlways are commands,.
Lady R. I have not found so; thou art known to
Glen. Known ! [me.
LadyR. And mout certain is my cause of knowledge.
Glen. What do you know ? by Heaven,

You much amaze me.: No created thing,
Yourself except, durRft thus accost me.

B 2 Lady

Ladj; R.Is guilt so bold ? and dof thou make a merit

Of thy pretended meekness? This to me,
Who, with a genrlenefis which duty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd what, ifdivulg'd, -
Would male thee nothbing; or, what's worse than
An ontcall beggar, and unpitied too: - [that,
For mortals ihudder at a crime like thine.

G/ae. Thv virtue awes me. First of womankind!

Permit me yet [o fay, that the fond man
Whom lo'e transports beyond ftrit tirtue's bound.s,
If he is brought by love to mrifery,
oIn fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
'jnpitiec cannot be. Pity's the alms
Which on such beggars freely is beftow'd :
For mortals know that love is fill their lord,
And o'er their vain resolves advances still:'
As fire, when kindled by our shepherds, moves.
.hrough the dry heath before the fanning wind,

Ladj R. Referve-thefe accents for some other ear,

To love's apology I l.fteu nor.
Mark thou my words; for it-is meet thou fiiould'I,
Hisbrave deliverer Randolph here retains.
Perslap: his presence may not please thee well:
But, at thy peril, prai&if ought against him ;
Let not thy jealousy attempt to shake
And loosen the good root he has in Randolph
WVhofe favourites I know thou hait fuppianted.
Thou look'ft at me, as if thou faih would'fl pry_
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendless firanger my proteaion claims:
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit.

Glen.-Child that Iwas, toitart at my own flhadow,

And be the fihallow fool of coward conscience 1
I am not what I have been ; what I lhould be.
'The darts of destiny have almoftl pierc'd
iMy marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I ihoold conclude-here was an arm above
That fought againfIt me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch myself, the fubsie snare I set.

Why,

# ACT III.

Why, rape and murder are not simple means ?.
Th' imperfe& rape to Randolph gave a spo'use ;
And the intended'murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fun from me ;
And worst ofall, a rival. Burning hell!
This were thy center, if I thought fie lov'd him!
'Tis-certaib hlie contemns me; nay,: commands me,
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'er me,
In his, behalf. And siall I thus be brav'd ?
Curb'd, as mhe calls it, by dameC'hafltity ?
Infernal fiends, if any fiendsthere are
More fierce than love, ambition, and revenges
Rife up, and fill my bofomin with your fires.
' And policy remorseless !. Chance may spoil
"A single aim ; but perseverance mufit
' Prosper atlas. For chance and fate are words:
' Perfitiive wifdomis the fate of man.'
Darkly a project peers upon my mind,
Like the red mnoon when riling in the east,
Crofs'dmdand diivided by ftrange.colour'd clouds.
I'll leek the slave who came with Norval hither,
And for his cowardice was spurned from him.
I've known such follower's rankled bosom breed
Venom moit fatal to his heed less lord. [Exit.

'A C T III.
S C E N E; a Court, c, as before,

Enter ANNA.

THY valhls, grief, great nature's order break,'

And change the noon 'tide to the midnight hour.
Whilst Lady Randolph sleeps, 1 will walk forth,
And taste the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her lumbers be ! Ye ministers -
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,
Angels and seraphs who delight in goodness!
Forsake your ikies, and to her couch descend !
There from her fancy chafe those dismal forms
That haunt her waking, her fad spirit charm
With mages celestial, such as please
The blefi above upon their golden beds,

E 3 Ziner

*Enter Servant.

Sir. One of the vile affains is is fecor'd.

'We found the villain lurking in the wood;
WVith dreadful imprecations he denies
All.knowledge of the crime. But this is not
His first essay: these jewels were conceai'd
In the most secret places of his garment;
Belike the spoils of some that he has mnrder'd.

Arna. Letme look on them. Ha ! here is a heart;

The chosen crest of Douglas' valiant name!
.These are no vulgar jeweli. Guard the wretch.

[Exit Anna.

Enter Ser'vants witb a Prif/ner.

Pri. I know no more than does the child unborn
Of what you charge me with.

if Ser. You fay o, fir!
uEat torture soon thall make you speak the truth.
Behold, the Lady of Lord Randolph comes:
- Prepare yourself to meet her jolt revenge.

E.ter Lady RANDOLPH and ANNa.

Anna. Summon your otmoft fortitude before

You speak with him. Your dignity, yoar fame,
Are now atf Rake. Think of the fatal fecrer,
Whiciin a moment from your lips may fly.

Ladj R. Thou shalt behold me, with a desperate

heart.
Hear how my infant perifh'd. See, he kneels.

[The Prifiner bzeel,

Pr/. Heav'a bless that countenance so fwee: and

Ajudge like thee makes innocence more bold. [mild I
Oh, save me, lady ! from these cruel men,
Who have attack'd and seiz'd me; who accuse
iMe of intended murder. As I hope
For ae'cy at the judgment feat of heaven,
The tender lamb, that never nipt the grase,
Is not moae innocent than I of murder. [produce ?

Ladyo R. Of this man's euilt what proof can ye-
isiSer. We found him lurking in the hollow glynn.

When v;ew'd and cail'd upon, amaz'd he fled,
We overt:.ok him, and enquir'd from whence
And what he was: he faia he came from far, .
And was u£on his journey to the camp,

Not

*Not satisfied with this, we fearch'd his clothes,
And found there jewels ; whose rich value plead
Most powerfully against him. Hard.'he seems
And old in villainy.. Permit us to try
His 'stubbornness against the torture's force.

Prij Oh, gentle lady ! by your Lord's dear life,

Which there weak hands, 1 swear, did ne'er assail;
And by your children's welfaire, spare my age '
Let not the iron tear my.ancient joints,
And my grey hairs bring to the grave with pain.

La'y R. Account for there; thine own they cannot

For these, I fay: be ftedfafl to the truth ; [be;
Dete&ted fallhood is most certain death.

[Anna remoes the s/ervants and returns.

Prif. Alas i I'm fore blefet i let never man,

For fake of lucre, fin againlt his foul!
Eternal jullice is in this molt just i
I, guiltless now, mufll former, guilt reveal.

LVaiy R. Oh ! Anna, hear!--once more I charge

The truth direct; for these to me foretel [thee speak
And certify a part of thy narration:
With which if the remainder tallies not,
An inltant and a dreadful death abides thee.

Prif, Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speak to you asjuft

As if you were the minilter of heaven,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men.
Some eighteen years ago, I rented land,
Of brave Sir Malcolm, then Balarmo's Lord;
But failing to decay, his servants seiz'd
All that I had, and then turri'd me and mine,
(Four help!efs infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A litle hovel by the river's fide
Reieiv'd us: there hird labour, and the ikill
In fishing, which was formerly my sport,
Supported life. Whillt thus we poorl' liv'di
One stormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof;
Red came the riverdown, and loud and oft
'I he angry spirit of the water fhriek'd,
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
Of one injeopardy. I rose, and ran

To

To where the circling eddy of a pool,
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
Myreach whatever floating thing the fiream
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd; the p:rf)nloit:
But looking fad and earnest on the waters,
By theEmoon's light Ifaw, whirl'd round and round,
A batket: soon I drew itto the bank,
And nefl!ed cIrious there an infant lay.

Lad, R. Was he alive ?
Pr/.- He was.
Lady R. Inhuman that thou art!

How couldst thou kill what waves and temnpefts

Pr/. I am not so inhuman. sipai'd

.

Lady R. Didft thou not?
Armna. My noble mistress, you are mov'd too much :

This man has not the aspea of tern murder;
Let him go on, and you, I hope,-wi!l hear
Good tidings of your kinsman's long loft child.

Prif. The needy mani, who has known better days,

One whom difirefs has spited at the world,
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds as makes the prcfperous men
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do themr,
And such a man was I; a man declin'd,
Who law no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have teuch'd that infant with a hand of harm.
'- Ladj R. Ha ! dost thou fay so; then perhaps he

Pri: Not many days ago he was alive. [lives !
Lady R..Oh ! heavenly powers! Did he then die

so lately ?

Prif. Idid not fay he died; I hope he lives.

Not many days ago these eyes beheld
iriw, flourifliing in y: uth, and health, and beauty.

Lady R. Where is he now ?
Pri Alas ! I know net where.
Lady R. Oh i fate ! I fear thee fiill. Thou ridler,
Dired and clear, else I will search thy foal. [speak

.danna. 'Permit me, ever honou/r'd ! Keen impa-

tience,

· Though hard to be rearain'd, defeats itself.'-
P:rfe thy story with a faithful tongue,
To the lai hocur that thou didft keep the child.

p,.;

Prjf Fear not my faith, though I: mnufit speak my

Within the cradle where the infant lay, [shame.
Was ftow'd a mighty {}ore of gold and jewels;
Tempted by which, we did resolve to hide,
From all the wvbrld, this'wonderftul event,
And like a peasant bleed the noble child.
That none might nmark the change of our elate,
We leFt the country, travell'd.to the north,
Bought flocks and herds, and gradually Brought forth
Our secret wealth. But God's all-feeing eye,
Belh'eld our avarice, and smote us fore.
For one by one all our ownl children died,
And he the stranger, sole remain'd the heir
Of what indeed was his. Fain then would I,
Who with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
Have trulted him, now in the dawn of youth,
With his own secret: but my anxious wife,
Forboding evil, never would consent.
Mean while the stripling grew in" years and beauty ;
And, as we oft obferv'd, he bore himself,
Not as the offspring of our cottage blo6d
For nature will break out: mild with the mild,
But with the froward he was fierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I set myfelfagainit his warlikebent;
But allin vain: for when a desperate: band
Of robbers from the savage mountains camine----

Lady R. Eternal Providence ! What is thy name ?
Prif. My name is Norval; and my name he bears°
Lady R. 'Tis he ! 'tis he himfelt ! It is my ion

Oh, sovereign mercy ! 'Twas my child I saw!
No wonder, Anna, that my bosom burn'd.

Anna. Ju[. are your transports: ne'er was wo-

man's heart

Prov'd with such fierce extremes. High fated dame!'

But yet remember that you are beheld
By servile eyes ; your geafures may be seen
Impaffion'd, strange ; perhaps your words o'erheard.

Lady R. Well dost thou counsel, Anna: Heav'n be-
On me that wisdom which my slate requires. [[tow

. Anna. The moments of deliberation pass,
. And soon you must resolve. This useful man

· Must

- Must be difmiffed'with safety, ere my Lord ;
. Shall with his brave deliverer return.'

Pr. If I, amidst aftonilhmentand fes., ,

Have ofyour~ words and geftares righilyj udg'd,
Thouart the daughter of my ancient malter;
The child I refcn'dlfrom the flood is thine.

Lady R. With thee dissimulation now were vain.

I am indeed the daughter of Sir Malcolm;
The child thou refcu'dfl from the flood is mine.

Pri/. Blest be the hour that'made me a poor man !
My poverty hath fav'd my master's house !

Lady R. Thy p.'ords furprize me: fare thou do '

notfeign !

The tear fRands in tnine eye: fuich lovre frdm thee
Sir Milcolm's house deferv'd notr; if eriaht
Thca told'fr the ilory of thy own diPirefs.

Pri. Sir Malcolm of our harons was the Rower;

The faftell friend, the bes and kindest maoter. '
Bat, ah ! he knew not of my fad eltate. -
After the battle, whtre his gallant son,
Your own breve brother, fell, the good old lord
Grew desperate and reckless of the wor!d ;
And -never, as he erfi was w'ait, s'ent forth
To omerlook the condua dfohi feryalnts.
By them 1 was thrullt out, and thiem I blame:
May heav'n fojutge me as I judge my maiter !
And God so love me as I love his race !

Lady R. His race ihlil yet reward ihee. On. thy

Depecds the fareofihy lov'd mailer's house. [faithl
Rememb'reft thou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the cliffs ofCarron ?

Prf. I renember
The cottage of the cliffs.

Ladj R. 'Tis that 1 mean:

There dwells a man of venerable age,
Who in my father's ferrice spent his youth :
Tell him I sent thee, and with him remain,
'Till I shall call upon thee to declare,
Before the king and nobles, what thou now
To me has told. No more but this, and thnou
Salt live i, honou; all thy future days;

Thy

Thy son so long shall call thee father fll',
And all the land fhallblefs the man wh6 fav'd
The son of Douglas and Sir Malcolm's heir.
Remember well my words; if thou' ihouldit meet
Him whom.thou call'ft thy son, Rillcall him so;
And mention nothing of his noble father.

Prf Fear not that I thall mar so fair an harvst:,

By putting in my fickle ere 'tis ripe.
Why did I leave my home and ancient dame?
To find, the youth, to tell him alI knew,
And make him wear these jewels in his arms,
Which might, Irthought, be challeng'd, and so bring
To light the secret of his noble birth.

[Lady Randolphgoe towards theJervants.r.

Lady R. This man is not th' affaflin you suspected,

Though chance coinlin'd some likelihoods against
He is the faithful bearer of the jewels [him.
To their right owner, whom in halle he seeks.
'Tis meet that you should putit him on his way,
Since your miflaken zeal hath dragg'd him hither,

[Exeunt Stranger and Servantsr,

My faithful Anna ! dost thou thare'my joy ?
I know thou dof. Unp'aral)el'd event !
Reaching from heav'n to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings to me my fonl
Judge of the widow, and the orplian's father,
Accept a widow's and a motheirs thanks -
For such a gift ! What does my Anna-think
Of the young eaglet of a valiant nef ?
How soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his fate had thrown
And tower'd up to the regionof his fire! [him,

Anmd, Ho'v fondly did your eyes devour the boy !

Mysterious nature, with the unseen cord
Of powerful inltina, drew you to your own.

Lady R, The ready story of his. birth be!iev'd

Suppress'd my fancy quite; nor did he owe
To any likeness my so fuddeni favour :
But now I long to fee hi 'face again,
Examine every feature, .and find out.
The lineaments of Douglas, or my own.
But mos of all,I long to let him know

Who

Who-his true parents are, to clasp his neck,
And tell him all the story of his father.

Anna. With wary caution you muff bear yourself

In public, left your tenderness break forth,
And in observers itir conjectures strange.

F For ifa chernb in the ihape of woman
· Should walk this world, yet defamation would,
· Like a vile cur, bark at the angels train.'--
To-daythe baron started at your tears.

Lady R. He did so, Anna! well thy miitrefs knows,

If the least circumlfance, mote of offence,
Should touch the baron's eye, his fight would be
With jealousy diforder'd. But the more
It does behove me instant to declare
The birth of Dougl!as, andaffert his ights.
-This night I purpose with my son to meet,
Reveal the secret and consult with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does now, so look'd his noble father,
-. Array'd in nature's ease: his mien, his speech,

Were fwiveetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those trivial mortals who feeaii always wife;
But, when the matter match'd his mighty mind,
Up rote the hero; on his piercing eye
Sat Observation; on each glance of thought
Decision follow'd, as the thunder-bolt
Pursues the fiali.

Anna. That demon haunts you fRill.:

Behold Glenalvon.
* Lady R. Now I fhnn him not.,
This day I brav'd him in behalf of Norval:
Perhaps too far: at least my nicer fears
For Douglas thus interpret.

Enter GLENALVON.

Glen. Noble dame !

The hov'ring Dane at last his men hath landed;
No band of pirates; but aniighty host,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers;
To win a country, or to lose themselves.

Lady R. But whence comes this intelligence, Gle.

nalvon ?

Glen.

G/e,,. A ni.mble courier lent from yonder camp,

To-bahten up thechieftains of the noith,
Inform'd me, as he pass'd, that tlie fierie Dane -
iHad on the ealtern coaftof Lothian landed.
' Near to that place where the fea-rock immense,
' Amazing bass, looks 'o'er a- fertile land.

'Lad)' R. Then mull this weflern- rmy march tojoin,
' The warlike troops tht guard. Edena's tow'rs.

' Glen. Beyond all question, Ifimpairing time
Has not effac'd the image ofa place, : -

' Once perfeain my brealt, there is a wild
· Which lies to wefiltward ofthat mighty rock,
' And seems by nature formed for the camp
' Ofwater-wafred armies, whose chief flrength ....
' Lies in firm foot, unflank'd with *arlike horse:
' If miartial fkill'direAs the Daniih lords,.
' There inacceflible their army lies
' T.o our fivift-fcow'ring horse, the bloody field
Muff man to man, and foot to foot,be fought;'
Lady R. How many mothers Ihall bewail their sons ?

How many widows weep their'hulands fliin !
Y< dames of Denmark,,ev'n for you ifeel-,
Who, sadly fitting on the fea-beat liore,'
Long look for lords that never Ihalll return.

GOka. Oft has th'unconqutr'd Caledonian sword

Widow'd the north. Ths children of the slain '
Come,.as I hope, to rmeet their father's fate.
The monlter war, with her inferial brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are objecs suited to Glenaleofi's ib-l,
Scorn is more glievous than the pains of death;
Repe.oach, more piercing lhari the pointed sword.
4 La.yR. I scorn thee not, bhut when I-ought tofeorn;.
Nor e'er reproach, but when insulted virtue
Againfi audacious vice asserts herself,
I'own thy worth, Gienalvon; none more apt
Than I to praise thine eminence in arms,
And be the echo of thy martial fame.
No longer vainly. feed- a-guilty pailion:
Go and pursue a lawful millrefs, Glory. -
Upoul the Danilh crels redeem thy faui',
And let thy valour be the Ihield of Randslph.

G4e. One inftang tay, and hear an alier'd mari.

C Whsa

When beauty pleads for virtue, vice abalh'd
Flies its owncolours, and goeso'er to virtue.
I am your convert; time will thew how truly:
Yet one immediate proof I mean to give.
That youth for whom your ardent-zeal to-day,
Somerbat too haughtily, defy'd your lave,
Amidst the shock of armies I'll defend,
And turn death from him, with a guardian ainm.

Sedate by uie, my bosom maddens not
· At the-tumuruous uprcarof the field.'

Lady R. A& thus, Glenal1on, and I am thy friend:

But that's thyleaft r eward. Believe me, Sir,
The truly generous is the truly wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblest.

- Exit Lady Randolph.

Glen. [Scln] Amen !and virtue is its own ieward !

I think that 1 have hit the very tone
In which iheloves to speak. Honey'd afert, o
How pieaiing artthou to the taftReof man,
And woman also! flattery dire&
Rarely difguis. They little know mankind
Who doubtits operation: 'tis my key,
And opes the wicket of the human heart.
How far I have succeeded now, 1 know not.
.Yet I incline to think her stormy virtue
Is luli'd awhile; 'tis her alone I fear:
Whilit fie and Randolph live, and live in faith
And amity, uncertain is my tenure.
' Fate o'er my head fufpenc's disgrace and death,
: By that weak a/, a peeviflh female's will.
: I am riot idle; but the ebbs and flows

Of feitaone's tide cannot be calculated.'

That slave ofNorval's I have'found mofo apt:
I ihew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his fcul
To fay and swear whatever I foggest.
Norvai I'm. told, has that alluring look,
'Twixt man and woman, which I have obferv'd
To charm the nicer and fantastic dames,
Who are like Lady Randolph, fu:l of virtue.
Ia rairtng Randolph's jealousy I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom errs
Who thinks the worf he can of womankind.

A C T

# ACT IV.

- A CTT IV.
Flour/iF of Trumpeti.

Enter Lord RAN DOLFH attended,'

LordR. SUMMON an hundred horse by break of

*To wait our'pleafure at .the catlea gate. [day,

.Lady R. Alas! my lord 1 i've heard unwelcome
The Danes are landed. [news;
- Lrd R. Ay, no inroad this
Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil;
No sportive war, no tournament essay,
Of ime young knight refolv'd.to break a spear,
And Rlain with.hoftile blood his maiden arms. '
The Danes are landed.: we nmuft beat them back,.
Or live the slaves of Denshark. -

Lady R. Dreadful times!
LordRi The fenceless villages are all forsaken ;

The trembling mothers, and-their children lodg'd
In well:girt towers and cafrles: whilftr.the men
Retire indignant. Yet like-brokena.wayes,
They but retire more awful mo return.-

Lady R. Immense, as fame reports, the Diilh hoR t
LordR. Were it as numerous as loud fame reports,

An army'knit like ours would pierce it through:
Brothers, that Ihrink riot from each other's fide,
* And fond companions, fill our warlike files:
For his dear offspring, and the wifehe loves,
The huiand, and-the fearless father arm.
In vulgar breaRs heroic ardour burns,
And the poor, peasant mates his daring lord.
Lady R. Men's minds are temper'd, like their

swords, for war;

c Lovers of danger on deftruaion's brink

They joy to rear ere& their daring forms.
Hence early graves; hence the lone widow's life;

' And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age.'
Where is our gallant guell?

LordR. Down in the vale

I left him, managing a fiery teed,
Whose Rubbjrnnefs had foil'd the Rrength and skill
Of every rider. But bebhold he comes,
In earnest converfatibn with Glenalvon.,

C 2 Enter
_ t~~~~~~~~~

Eltr NoRVAL aedGLENALVOI. -

G!ecalvon ! with the lark arise; go forth, -
And ie=d my troops that lie in yonder vale :
Private I travel to the royal camp
· :Norvd, thou goet: with m'e Bot fay, young man !
Where didfi thou learn so to discourse of war,
And in such rems as I o'erheard to-day ?
War is no village fdioce, nor its phrase
A language taaght among the £eFpherd swains,

¥r. Small i, the .eili my Lord delights to prgife

In him he favours. Hear from whence it came.
Benea;h a incontain's brow, the most remote
Arid iaacceiible by fliepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dog by no mortal hand, .
-Ahermitliv'd; a melanchlyj man,
Who0 was :he wonder of our wand'ring fvains
Auftereacd-lonely, creel to hitnfelf,
Did-they report him; the cold earth his bed,
Water his drink, his food the:ffiepherds alms,
I went rt'ofeehim, and my heart was touch'd
.With xeverene and pity. Mild he spake,
iAnd; enteriong on difcoarfe, such stories told
As made me oft revisit hi- fad cell.
Ftor he had boen a foildier in his yonth; -
And foughtin famous battles, when the peers.
Of Europe, by the bold Godfrcdo led,
Againfi rb' usurping infidel difplay'd -
The bieffed-crofs, an~ won the Hoiy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, anu the fire
:Iisfpeech ftruk frjm me; the old man would shake,
Hils years away, end a& his young encounteri;
Then, having shew'd his wounds, he'd fit him:dowftl,
And all the live-long day difccurfe of war.
To help'my fancy, in the smooth green torf
sle cut the sgores of the marlhal'd holls;
Defcrib'd the moeions,and explain'd the use
Of the deep ccoumn, and-the iengthen'd line,
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm.
For ail that Saracen or Christian knew
Of war's vast art, was to this hermit known.

Lcrd R. Why did this soldier in a defrt hide
Those qualities, that mould have grac'd a camp!'

Nr...

Nor. That too at last I.learn'd. Unhappy man I

Returning homeward .by Messina's port,
Loaded with wealth and hondurs bravely won;
A rude and boift'ros captain of the sea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they.fought;
The stranger fell, and wvith his dying breath
Dcclar'd hi4 name and lineage. Mighty pow'r!
The soldier cried, my brother! Oh, my brother £

Lady R. His brother!
Nor. Yes; of the fame parents born;

His only brother. They exchang'd forgiveness -
And happy, in my mind, was he that died ;
For many deaths has the fuirvivor fuffer'd. .
In the wild desert on a rock he fits,
Or on some nameless stream's untrddden banks, ,,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times, alas 1 not in his perfec mind,
Holds dialogues with his lo.v'd brother's ghoff;
And oft each. night forsakes his fullen couch,
To make fad orifonsfor. him he flew,.

Lady R. To what myflerious woes-are mortals born !:

In this dire tragedy were there no more
Unhappy persons ?.Did the parents live?

N[r. No, they were dead 3 kind heav'n clos'd their.
Before their son had shed his brother's blood. [eyes,

Lord R. Hard is his fate. for lie was not to blane.l

There is a defliny in this strange world,
Which oft decrees an undeserved doom~
Let fchoolmen tell us why-From whence these

founds? [ Trumpets at a. deiance?

Enter an Oi'cer.

Of..My Lord, the trumpets of the troops ofLorn::
Their valiant leader hails the noble Randolph.

LordR. Mline ancient guest! Does he the warriors;

lead?
Has Denmark rous'd the brave old knight to.armi .

Of No; worn with warfare, he resigns the sword..

His eldest hope,. the valiant John of Lorn,
Now leads his kindred bands..

Lord R. Glenalvon, go.

With hospitality's moi frirong requess
Entreat the Ghief, [EiI Glcnalvoa,.

~* ; ' ~C. .o3.;

Of. My Lord, reqaefts are vain.

He urges on, impatient ofde!ay,
Stuig with the tidings of the foe's apptr.-aei.

L/rd R. May.victory fit on the warrior's plume !~

Bravest of men! his floc, and herds are fatfe;
Remote from war's alarms his paflutnres lie,
By mountains inaccefiible fecur'd:
Ye: hremoft he into the plain defceods, .
Eager to bleed in bttlrs not his own.
Such were the heroes of the ancient worl;
Contemners they of indolence.and gain;
But still, for love of glory and of arms,
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift
Againft-each flrong{ zntagonift the spear.
'll go and prefl the hero to my breast. [Exit 'wiib Of.

LadyR. The foldie.-" loftiness, the pride and poimp

Inavetig awful w;r, Nirval, I fee,
Transport thy youthful mind.

Ncr. Ah should they not 3

Blefs'd be the boor I left my fa:her's house
I might have been a fIhepherd allmy days,
And ftoleobfcurely to a peasant's grave.
- Now, if I live, with mighty chiefs I stand;
And, if I fall, with noble dult I lie.

Lady R. There is a generous spirit in thy breafe,

That could havewell fuftain'd a prouder fortune.
Some lucky chance has left ushere alone,_
UJnfee, unheard, by human eye or ear,
1 will amaze thee with a wond'roos tale.

:Nor. Let there be danger, Lsdy, iith the secret,
That I may hug-it to my grateful heart,
And prove my faith. Command my sword, my life.
There are the foie poffelions of poor Norval.

Lad R. Know'ft thou these gemsr?
Nsr. Du.rd I believe mine eyes,
I'd fay I knew thlem. and they were my father's.

LadS R. Thy father's, fay'ft thou? Ah, they were

thy father's!

.?vr. I saw them once, and curiougv enquir'd

Of both my parentis, whence such splendour came i
But I was check'd, and more could neverlearn.

LcajR. Then learn of me, thouaart not Norval'&
Nor. Not Norval's fun I [fun,.

Lady R. Nor of a flIhepherd sprung..' ': '

.

,Nor. Lady, who am.I then? -
Lady R. Noble thou art,
For noble was'thy fire.

Nor. I will believe-
Oh, tell mefarther! Say. who was my fatker !

Lady R. Douglas !
Nor. Lord Douglas, whom to.day I saw?
LadyR. His younger brother. '
Nor. And-in yonder camp?
LadyR. Alas! '
Nor. You make me tremble-Sighs and tears .
Lives my brave father?'

Lady R. Ah, too brave indeed !
He fell in battle ere thyself was-born.

Nor. Ah, me unhappy! EreI saw the light!

But does my mother live? I may conclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been sorrow.

Lady R. She lives; but waftes her life in constant

woe,

Weeping her hulband slain, her infant loll.

Nor. Vounthat are eili'd so well In the fad dtory

Of my unhappy'parents, and with tears
Bewail their deffiny, now have compafion.
Upon. the offspring of the friends you. lov'd.
Oh, tell me who and where my mother is!
Opptefs'd by a base world, perhaps mhe bends
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief;
And, desolate, implores of Heaven the aid
'Her ton should give. It is, it mna be so--. .
Your countenance confesses that Ihe is wretched.
Oh, tell me her condision! Can the fworid---
Who shall refill the in a paresit's cause ?

Lady R. Thy virtue ends her woe,-My son ! my
Nor. Art'thou my mother? : [son
Lady R. I am thy mother, and the wife of DoIug-

las! , [F/lsup Is his mcL.

Nor..Oh, heav'n and earth! howv wond'rous is my-
Ever let me kneel! - [fte!

Lady IR. Imsge of Do.uglas! fruit of fatal love!
All that 1 owe thy fire I pay to thee. '

Nnr, Refpce and admiration still possess me,

Checking .

Checking the love and fondnfis of a fTon
Yet I wasfilial-to.my humble parents.
Bnut did my fire flirpafs the reft of men,
As thou excelleft all of womankind ?

Lady R. Arise, my son. In me-thou dolft behold

The. poor remains of beauty once admir'd..
The antumn of my days is come already;
For sorrow made my fumner hafteaway.
Yet in my prime I eqoall'd not thy father:
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet sometimes
Liker the dove's: and, as hM pleas'd, he won
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

Nor. How did he fall Sure 'was a bloody field/
When Dsoglas died. Oh, I have much to a/e !

Lady R. Hereafter thou shalt hear the lengthen'd

Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes. [tale.
At present this-Thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder catle, and the wide domains
Which now Lord Randolph, as my husband,. hnlds..
But thou shalt not be wrong'd; I have the power
To right thee fRill. Before the King'I'll kneel,
And call Lord Douglas to prote&'.his blood.

Nar. The blood f Douglas will prote& itself.
Lady R. But we mhall mwd both friend and favour,.

To wrest thy lands and lordlhip from the gripe [boy,.
Of Randolph and his kinsman. YetI think
MIy tale will move each gentle heart to pity,.
My life incline the virtuous to believe. -

NVr. To be the son of Douglas is tolme

Inoheritance enough. Declare-my birth,
And in the field I'll ~-ek for fameand fortune.

Ladj R. Thou dost not know what perils and in-

Await the poor man's valour. Oh, my son! [jufRice
The nobieft blood in all the land's abalh'd,
Having no lacquey but pale poverty.
Too longhaft thou been thus attended, Dpug!as,
Too long haft thou been deem'd a peasant's child:.
The wanton heir of some inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd. thee in the youthful fporgs,
Whilst thy indignant spirit fwell'd in vain,
Such contumely thou no more shalt bear:
But how I purpose to reirefs thy wongs '

MustR *

Mufi be hereafter told. Prudence direis:
That we fho'uild part before yon chiefs return.
Retire and fiom thy rustic follower's hand
Receive a b Ilet, which thy mnothei's care,
Anxious to fee'thee, didated b-efore
(shis casual opportunity arose
Of private conference, Its purport mark;
For as I there appoint we meet again.
Leaveine, my.ion; and frame thy manners lill
To N.trval's, not to noble Doug!la' Irate.;

Arw. I will remember.. Where is Norval now ?
That good old man.

Lady R. At hand conceal'd he lie,.

An useful witness. But beware my ftn,
Of yon Gienaivon; in his guilty-breaft
Resides a villain's shrewdness, ever prone
* To false conjeture He bath griev'd my heart.

Nr. lias heindeed ? Then let yoni false Glenal/ on

Beware of me. [Exit.
* Lady R. There burnt the fmother'd flame,
Oh, thou all-righteous and eternal King;
Who fasther of the fatherliefs art call'd,
Protect my son! Thy inspiration, Lord,
Hath fili'd his bosom with that sacrcd fire,
Which in the breaRis of his forefathers burn'd :
Set him on high, like 'ithem, that he may shine
The itar and gksry of hiis native lano !
Then let the miniiier of death defceod,.
And bear my willing spirit to its pilce.
Yonder they come., How do bid women find
Unchanging afpeas to conceal theirguilt,
When I by reason sad by.jtjulie urg'd.,
Full hardly can diffrmnb!e''ith these men
In nature's'pious ranfe ?

Enter LordRANDOLPH andGLENA.LVON .

Lord R. Yon gallhnt chief,
Of arms enamour'd,.all repose diflaims.

LasoR. Be nor, niy Lord, by his example fwvay'd.

Arrange the buihnefs of ta-morrow now,
And when you eitlr speak of war no more. [Exit,

Lord R. 'l is so, by heav'n I her mien, her boice~,
And her imsatien-c to be gone, confirm it. [her eye,

GleI,

Gle,. He parted from her now. Behind the mount,
Amongst the trees, I saw him glide along.

LcidR. For fad fequefter'd vinrtue ihe'srenown'd.
Glee. Moi true, my L6rd.
Lcrd R. Yet this diRftingui/h'd dame

Invites a youth, the acquaintance ot a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This aflignation, [Sbe ws a letter.j the aftaflia freed,
Her manifelt affection for-the youth,
Might breed suspicion in ahufband's brain,
Whose gentle coafort all for love had wedded:
Much more in mine. Maiilda never lov'd me.
Let no man, after me, a woman wed
Whose heart he knows he ha. not; though she brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for.her dowry.
For let her seem, like-the night fIhadowy queen,
Cold and contemplative--he canjnJt truit her;
She may, fte will, bring thane and f rrdw oh him;
The worst of sorrow, and the worst of thames !

GIa..Yield not, oyLord, to fach ffli&ing though:»;

But let the fpirir of an hufiband sleep,
Till your own fecnes make a fare .conclulion.
This billet mnft to blooming Norval go:
At the next turn awaits my trusty .py;;
I'11 give it him reitred for his malter.
In the close thicket take your fecretland ;
The moon Tbines bright, and your own eyes may
Of their behaviour. [judge

LrdR. Thou dof counsel well.
Glert. Permit me now to make one flight essay

Of all the trophies which vain miortals boast,
By wit, by valoer, or bt wifdorm won,
The first and fairest in a young man's eye
Is woman's captive heart. Successful love
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind,
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves,.
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men,

LordR. And what avails-this t;axim ?
Glue. Much, myLo'd.

Withdraw a little-; I'II accoRt young Ncrval,
Aou with ironical derisive counsel
Explole his fpiirit. If he is no more

Thanm

Than humble Norval, by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as he.is, he'll shrink altonilh'd from me:
But if he be the favourite of the fair,
Lov'd by the firfi of Caledona's dames,
He'll turn upon me, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear,'

Lord R. 'Tis Ihrewdly thought. [Lord
Glen. When we grow loud, draw near. But let my

His rising wrath reltrain. [Exit Randolph, '*
'Tis fitrange, by Heav'n !i
That she mhould run full tilt her fond career
To one so little known. .She toothat feem'd
Pure as the winier fieain, wheni ice imbofs'd
Whitens its course. Even.I did think her chafle,
Whose charity exceeds not. Precious sex !i
Whofc deeds lafciviqus pass Glenalvon's thoughts!

Enter No.vAL.

His port I love; he's in a proper ,mood
To chide the thunder, if at him ft roar'd, [)/fde.
Has Norsrl seen the troops ?

Nor. Tkefeating fun

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale;
And as the warriors mov'd, each polilh'd helm,
Corfter, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams,
The hill they clinb'd, and halting at its top,
Of more than mortal size; low'iing, they feem'd
'An holt angelic, clad in burning arms.

Glen. Thou ralk'fl it well; no leader of our hou'
nla founds more lofty speaks of glorious war.

Nor. If I nall e'er acquire a leader's name,

My' speech will be less ardent. Novelty,
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itself freely; since no part is mine
Of praise pertaining to the great in arms. [deeds

Glen. You wrong yourself, brave Sir, your martial

Have rank'd yctiG with the great. B ut mark me,Norval;
Lord Randolph's favour now exalts your youth
Above 1is veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know these fo!dier:, counsel you.
Give them all honour: seem not to command;
Else they will scarcely brook your late sprung power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns,

* -. '§Nor.

:Nor. Sir, I have been arcuitom'd all mry days

To hear and-f4peak the plain and fimopl truth: -.
And tho' I have been told ihat there are men
Who borrow friendfliip's tongue tr6 speak their fcorri,
Yet in such language laim littlefkili'd.
Therefore I thank'Glenalion' for his coonsel, .
Although it founded karfliy. Why remind
!Me of my bith obfcare? Why slur my p~,ver
W-ith such contemptubiis terms ?

G/en. I did not mean
To gall your pride which now I fee is great.

Nor. Mypiide.! '
Glt. Suppre/s it, -as you wifl to prosper.

Your pride'sexcefftive. Yet for riandolph's.fake,
I willnot leave you to its rolh direaion.
If thus you fvell, and frown at high-born men,
Think you, will they endure a shepherd's scorn'? '

J'r.-'A ihepherd's scorn!
Glen. Yes; ifycttprefoume

Tobend on foldiers-thefe disdainful eyes,
As if you took the meafore of their minds,
And said in secret, yon're no match for me,
'Whit will become of ycu ?

Nor. If this were told !-- [Ade.
Hiaft thou no fears for thy prefunptuous felif?

G!en. Ha! dollt thou ;hre-a.cen-me?
Not; Didft thou cot hear?
Glen. Unwillingly 1 did; a nobler foe
Hadnor been queiliorn'd thus. But such as thee-

Nor. Whom dost thou think me?
Gl·/. Norval. -
Nor. So I am- -
And who is Norval in Glenalvon'seyes?

Glen. A peasant's fun, a wanderinr.g beggar boy
At bert no more; even if. he fpe.ks the troth.

Nor. False as then art, dost thou fnfpea my truth?
Glen. Thy truth! thou'rt all i lie; and lfeli as hell
Is the vain glorious tale thou told'ft to Randolph.

Nor. IffI w'ere chain'd, unarm'd, and bed-rid old,

Perhaps I should revile; bur as I.,m,
I have no tongue to rail. The humble Norv al
Is of a race who strive not barwith deeds.

Did

D]d I not fear to freeze thy lhallow valour, .'
And mnake thee flick too loon beneath my sword,
I'd tell thee-what thou'art. I know thee well.
" Gle. Did'it thou.not know Glenalvon, both to cornm
Ten thousand slaves like thee- j'. . '[mand

Nor. Villain, no more ! -

Draw and defend thy life. I did design
To have defy'd 'thee in anothe'caufe:
But Heav'n accelerates its vengeance on thee,.
Now soir my own and Lady Randolph's wrongs.

T nter LORD RANDOLPHI.

Lorad R. Hold, I comnmand you both. · The man
Makes me his foe. [that stirs

Nor. Another voice than thine
That threat hadvainly founded, noble Randolph.

Glen. Hear him, my Lord;:- he's woud'rous cdnde.
Mark the humility of shepherd Norval! [scending!

Nor. Now yot( may fcoffin safety. [Sheaths hisJsword.
LordR, Speak not thus, ·

'Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

Nor, Nay., my good Lord,'tho' Irevere you much,

My cause I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I blush to speak: I will not, cannot speak
Th''opprobous wordsthat I from him have borne,
To the liege lord of my dear native land
I owe a fubjet's homage: but ev'n him
And his high arbitration I'd reje&. -.
Within my bosom reigns another lord:;
:oaoui, role judge and umpire ofitfelf.
If my free speech offend you, noble Randolph,
Revoke your favours, and let Norval go '
Hence as he came, alone, but no: dilhonour'd.

LordR. Thus far I'll mediate with impartial voice;

The ancient foe of Caledonia's land
Nowv waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
Suspend your purpose till your country's arms
Repel the bold invader: then decide
The private quarrel.

Glen. I agree to this. '
Nr, And I.

D Enter

# ACT V.

Enter Servrant.

Srw. The banquet waits.
Lord R. We come. [Exit with Servant.
Glen. Norval,

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of Randolph.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkled hate,
Shall stain my countenance. Sooth thou thy brow:
Nor let our strife dilturb the gentle dame.

Nor. Think not so lightly, Sir, of my resentment.
When we contend again, our strife is mortal.[Exeunt,

A C T V.
SCENE, the Wod.

Enter DOUGLAS.

A Da. THIS is the place, the centre of the grove;

Here Rands the oak, the monarch of the wood.
How sweet and folenin is the midnight scene !
The silver moon, unclouded holds her way
Thro' Cikies where I could count each little liar.
The fanniig wesl wind scarcely stirs the leaves;
The river ruffling o'er its pebbled bed,
Imposes silence with a ftily found.
In such a place as this, at such an hour,
If anceiftry can be in ought believed,
Descending spirits have convers'd with man,
And told the secrets of the world-unknown.

Enter OLD NeRVAL.

Old Nsr. 'Tis he. Bat what if he ihould chide me
His jft reproach I fear. - [hence?

[Douglas turns aftde and fies him.

Forgive, forgive,
Canst thou forgive the man, the feifiih man,
Who bred -Sir Ma!colm's heir a-fhepherd' faon?

Dcuf. ' Kneel not to me:' thou art my father still:
Thy wiih'd for presence now compleats my joy.

Welcome

Welcome to me; my-fortunes thou shalt share,
And ever honour'd with thy Douglaslive.

'Old Nor. And dolft thou call me father? Oh, my
I think thatI could die, to make amends [son

[

For the great wrong I. did thee. 'Twas my crime1
Which in the wildeirnefs so long conceal'd
The blofiim of thy youth.

Doug. Not worse the fruit,

That in the wilderness the blofibm blow'd.
Amongit the shepherds, in the humble cot,
I learn'd Come lessons, which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend ; and when my vassals bow,
Norval shall smooth the crested pride of Douglas.

Nor. Let me but live to fee thine exaltation !

Yet grievous are my fears. Ol, leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers!

Doug. Why should I leave them ?
Old Nor. Lord Randolph and hiskinfmanfeek your
Dougr. How know'ft thou that? [life,
Old Nor. I will inform you how.

When evening came, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And fondly trod in each accuftom'd path
That to the castle leads. Whilst thus I rang'd,
I was alarm'd with unexpected founds
Of earnest voices. On the persons came.
Unrfeen I lurk'd, and heard them name
Each other is they talk'd, Lord Randolph this,.
A$nd that Glenalvon. Still of you they spoke,
And of the Lady ; threat'ning was their speech,
Tho' but imoerfedly my ear could hear it.
'Twvas strange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Dovg. Revenge!' for what?
Old Nor. For being what you are,

Sir Alalcolm's heir: how else have you offended ?
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there fit muting how I best might find
Means to inform you of their wicked purpose,
But i could think of none. At last, perplex'd,
I iflsed, forth, encompaliing the tower With,

With many a weary flep and wihfol look.
lXow Providence hath brdought you to my fight,
Let not your too courageous spirit scorn
The caution which I give,

Doug. I scorn it not.

My mother warn'd me of Glenalyon's bafenefr:
But I will not fufpest the noble Randolph.
Jn our encounter with the vile affaflins,
I mark'd his brave demeanour; him I'll trust.

Old Nor. I fear yba will, too fai.
Dozig. Here in this place

I wait my Bother's coming; Ihe Thall know
'What thou haft told; her counsel Iwill follow,
And cautious ever are a mother's counsels.
Yoa mnftu depart: your presence may prevent-.
Our interview.

OldNor. My blessing reft upon thee ! [waye,

Oh, may Heav'n's hasnd, which'fav'd thee from the
And from the sword of foes, benear theeltill;
Turning mifcbance, if ought hangs O'er thy head,
All opn mine! - [Exit.

Diug. He loves me like a parent;

And mnaft not, shall not, lore the son be lovese,
Altho' his son has found a nobler father.
Eventful day! how haft thou chang'd my itate !
Once on the cold, and winter shaded fide.
Of a bleak hill mischance had rooted m',
· -7ever to thrive, child of another foil;
Transplanted now to the gay funny vale,
Like the greenuhorn of May my fortune flowers.
Ye glorious ltars! high heaven's resplendent host.!
To whom I oft have-ofmy lot complain'd,
Hear and record my foul's unalter'd wilh !
Dead or alive, let me but be renown'd !
May Heav'n inspire some fierce gigantic Dane,
To give a bold defiance to our hoil!
Before he speaks it out I will accept;-
: Like Douglas conquer, or like Douglas die. ,

Enter LA$Py RAtDOLPH.

Ladj R. My son! I heard a voice-. -
Drag. The voice was mine.
td3 R. Didft tho. complain aloud to nature's ear,

IThai

That thus in dusky thades, at midnight hours,
By Realth the'mother and the son rhould meet ? -

, [sEmLraces him.

Doag. No; o' this happy. day, this better birth-
My thoughts and cvords are allofhope and joy. [days.

Lady.R. Sad fear and melancholy still divide

The empire of my breal[ with hope and joy,
Now hear what I advise-

Ooug. Firsl, let me tell
What msy the tenor of your counsel change,

L.aiy R. My heart forebodes rome evil.
Daug. 'TIs not good ----'

At eve, unseen by Randolph and Glenalvon,
The good old Norvdl in the grove o'erheard ',
Theirconveratiion: oft they mention'dime [nam'iil.
With dreadful threat'nings; you they rometimes
qTwas ltrange, they siid, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Lady R.. Defend us, gracious GMd ! we are betray'd;.

They have found out the secret of thy birth :
It mull be To. That is the great discovery.
Sir Malcolm's heir is come to claim hisown,
And they will be reveng'd. Perhaps even now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for murder, they but wait
A darke, and more silent hour, to break
Into the chaMber ~hMre they think thou fleep'lL'
This moment, this, Heav'n hath ordain'd to save
Fly to the camrp, my son ![ , [thee !

Doug. And leave you here?

No: to the castle let us go together,
Call'up the antient servants of your house,
Who in their youth did eat your father's bread,:
Then tell them loudly that I am your Ton..
If in the breast cfmen one spark remains
Of sacred love,.fidelity, or pity,
Some in your cause will arm. I ask but few
To drive thole spoilers from my father's house;

Lad. R, Oh. Nature, Nature i what can checld.thy

Thoiu genuineroffspring of tile daring Douglas! jfor*'.
But ruih not on deftrucion : save thyself,
And I am safe. ' To me they mean no harm..
Thy Iyau but ritks thy precious life in vain.
That winding path conducs thee to the river.

D 3. Crofe /

Crofs-where thoun feeft a broad and beaten way,
Which running eastward leads thee to the camp.
Inflant demand admittance to Lord Douglas;
Shew him these jewels, which his brother wore.
Thy look, thy voice, will make him feel the truth,
,Which I by certain proof will soon confirm.

Daug. I yield me, and obey: but yet my heart

'Bleeds at this'parting. Something bids me stay
And guard a mother's life. Oft have I read
Of wondrous deeds by one bold arm atchiev'd.
Our foes are two; no more: let me go forth,
;And fee if any shield can guard Glenalvon.

Laod R. If thou regard'ft thy mother, or rever's

Thy father's memory, think of this no more.
One thing I have to fay before we part:
Long were thou loft; and'thou art found, my child,
an a most fearful season. War and battle
I have great cause to dread. Too well I fee
W·hich way the current of thy temper sets :
T6 day I've fomnd thee. Oh ! my long loft hoped'
3fthou to giddy valour giv'ft the reign,
Tc-morrow I may lose my sorn for ever.
The love of thee before thou faw'ft the light,
Suflain'd my life when thy brave father fell.
If thou ialt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this waste world! My son, remember me!

Dcug.Wbatfhall Ifayr? How can I give you co-ifort.

The God of battles of my life dispose
As may be best for you ! for whole dear fake
I will not bear myfeif as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boafr founds amongst martial 'men.
_Hoi' will inglorious caution suit my claim ?
The poss of faie unlhrinking I maintain.
A.y country's foesmuft witness who I am,
On the invader's heads I'1I prove my birth,
'Till friends and foes confess the genuine strain.
If in this ftrifeI fall, blame not your son,
Who if he lives not honour'd, muff not live.

Lady R. I will not utter what my bbofom feels.

Too well I love that valour which i warn.

',Fare':e!, my son! my counsels are but vain.[emriactisg
And as igh fIeavwn hath wili'd it all mus be [Separate

-Gaz

Gaze not on me, thou wilt mistake the path;
I'll point it out again. [Ju.ftasthey nreftparating
nterfrom the Wood, LoaD RANDOLPH and GLI-

- NALVON.

lord R. Not in her presence.
Now--

Glen. I'm prepar'd.
Lord R. No: I command thee tay.

I go alone: it never ihall be said
That I took odds to combat mortal man.
The noblest vengeance is the most complete. [Exit.

[Glenalvon maesfamefleps to the fame fide of

the sage, lifens andfpeaks.

Glen. Demons of death, come fettle on my fwvrd, .

And to a double slaughter guide it home !
The lover and the husband both mult die.

LordR. [Behind the/Fenes] Draw, villain ! draw!
Dong. Wi'thiout] Assail me not, Lord Randolph;

Not as thou lov'ft thyfe!f. [Clashing offvwords.
Enter LADY RANDOLPH, at the oppo/ite fide of .he

Jlage,faint and breathless.

Lady R. Lord Randolph.hear me; all (hall be thine
But spare ! Oh, spare my fen ! [own:

Enter Dou GLAs, 'with af'wordit each hand.

Dofug. My mother's voice!
I can protect thee still.

Lady R. He lives, he lives;

For this, for this to heaven eternal praise!
But fore I saw thee fall.

Doug. Itwas Glenalvon.

Just as. my arm had rmalter'd Randolph's sword,
The villain came behind me; but I flew him.[child,

ZadyR.Behind thee!Ah! thou'rt wounded! Oh, my
How pale thou look'ft ! And flhall I lose thee now ?

Doug. Do not despair: I feel a little faintness;
I hope it will not last. [Leans upon hisf'word.

Lady R. There is no hope!

And we must part !,The hand of death is on thee !
O my beloved child! 0O Douglas, Douglas!

[Douglas growing rmore and more faiut,

-- ' Gg,

Doug. Too soon we part: I have not long been
O destiny! hardly thou deal'ft with me: [Douglas.
Clouded and hid, a thranger to myself,
In low and poor cbfcurity ,l've liv'd. [this ?

Lady R. Has>Heav'n preferv'd thee for an end like
Deug. Oh, had I fallen as my brave fathers fell,

Turning-with fata! arm the tide of bad:le!
Like them I ihould have finil'd and welcom'd death,
Bot thus to peri'i by a villain's hand !
Cat off from nature's and from glory's course,
Which nerer mortal was so fond corun.

Lady R. Hearjuftice; hear! are these the fruits

of-virtue? [Douglasfalls.

Dcug. Unknown I die; no tongue fha!l fpeakofme,

Some noble spirits judging by themselves
May yet conje&unre what I might have prov'd,
And think life only wanting to my fame
But who hall comfort ther ? .

Lady R. Despair, despair!
Dcug. Oh, had it pleased high Heaven to let me

A little while !-my eyes that gaze on thoe [live -
Grow dim apace! my mother-- ' [Dies4

E.ter LORD RANDOLPH and ANNA.

LgrdR.Thy word9,thy words of troth have pieirc'd

I am the 1tain of kniihthood and of arms.[mr; heart.
Oh ! if my brave deliverer survives
The traitor's sword-

ana. Alas! lock there, my Lord.
'LsrdR, The mother and her son ! how curst I am .
Was I the cause? No: I was not the cause.
Yon matchlefsvillain did seduce my foul
To franiic jea!onfy.

Anna. i'5y lady lives;

The agony of grief hath but fupprefs'd
Awhile her powers.

icrJR. Bu. m: deliverer's dead i

· The wcr;d did once efteem.Lord Randolph well,
* Sincere of heart, for spotless honour famn'd:

And, in my ea.sy days, glory-I gain'd
· Beneath the holy banner .-f t-e cross.
· 'bw pafit the noon oflife, fihame comes upon me;

_ Reproach,

'Reproach, and infamy, and public hate,
' Are near at hand: for all mankind will think
* ThatRandolph basely stabb'd Sir Malcolm's heir.'

Lady R. [recovering] Where am I now? Still in

this wretched world !

Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine.
' My youth was worn in anguish: but youth's ftrengtb,
'With hope's Bififtance,. .bore the brunt of sorrow:
'And train'd me on to be the objeft now,
On which Omnipotence displays itifelf,
Making a fpetacle, a tale of me,
· To awe its vassal, man.'

Lord R. Oh, misery!

Amidit thy raging grief I muftpro;lain
My innocence.

Lady R. Thy innocence!
.ordR. My guilt
I, in;scence, compar'd with what thou think'ft it.

Lady R. Of thee I think not: what have I to do

With thee, or any thing? My son I my son I
My beautiful!, mfy brave! how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy valour; my iond. heart
O'erflow'd this day with transport, when I thought
Of growing old amidst a race of thine,
Who might make up to me their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and my hulband's name.
Now all'm'y hopes are dead ! A. little while
Was I a wife! a mother not so long !
What am I now --I know.-But I shall be
That only whilt I please; for such a son,
And such a huiband drive meto my fate. [rota ouht

Lard R. Follow her, Anna: I myself would follow,
But in this rage he muftll abhor my presence.

LExit Anna,

Enter Old NORVAL.
Old Nor. I heard the voice of woe: Heaven guard

my child i

Lord R. Already is the idle gaping crowd,

The fpitefu! vulgar, come to gaze on Randolph.
Begone.

Ol/ Nor. I fear thee not. I will not go.

Here

Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplice,. Lord,
With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help
To crush down to the ground =hislovely plant.
Oh, nobieft youth that ever yet-was born !
Sw-eteft and bet, gentlell and bravest fpirir,
That ever bieft the world ! Wrxtch that I am,
Who saw that noble spirit fiell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confia'd it I
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do theejoftice, and reveal the fecrer,
Which timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's snare. Oh ! I am punifh'd now !
These are the hairs that fliould haye -ftrew'd_ the
And not the locks of Don-las. [ground,

[Tears his bairand ihrc'ws hm./fel'rpoon ib. ground.

Lord R. I know thee now;' thy bordnefs I forgive;
My crest is fallen.' For thee I will appoint

A place of reft, if grief will let thee rel.
I will reward, altho' I cannot puniCh.
Cors'd, curs'd Glenalvon, he escaped too well,
Tho' slain and baffle-d by-the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the last,
Cauring his conqueror, the felon died,

Ena:r ANNA.

A.na. My Lord ! My Lord !
L.rdR. Speak; I can hear of horror.
Aena. Hcrror, indeed!
Lrd R. Matilda .?

,na.. Is no more:

She ran, the flew !ike lIghtning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice he gain'd,
Beneath whole !ow':ing top the river falls
Iogulpn'd in ri!fted rocks; thlther she came,
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And ihead long down--

-Lrd. R. 'Twas I, ala, 'tws I

That ili'd her breadt wih fury; drove'her down
The precipice of death! Wrtch that I am !

dAnra. Oh. ha you seen her lad despairing look!

Upon the brink file ftcjd, and cad her eyes
Down in the deep; then lifting up her head

And

# EPILOGUE.

And her white hands to heaven, fcemin' to fay,
Why am I forc'd to this? she plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord R. I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the pafllion of my foul.
Peace in this wvor:, I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of Randolph gave;
They fpesk aloud. and with the voice of fate.
Denource iy doom. I amrefolv'd. I'll go
Straight to the battle, where the man that mikes
Me urn aside muff threaten worse than death.
Thou faithful to thy miflrefs, take this ring,
Full warrantof my power. Let every rite
With coif and pomp upon their funerals wait:
For Randolph hopes he never lhall return. [Exeunt;

THE END.'

EPILOG U'E.

AN Epilogue I ajk'd; b.t pot one 'word
Our bard 'will 'write. He .oows 'tis moar aiard '
With :omic awit to contradit the strain
Of tragedy, and make jour /sorrow vain.
Sadly he fays, that pity is the heft,
And ncble/1l pa/on of the human breast :
For when its f/cred freams the heart o'eft'sw,
In gUhes plea/re with the tide of woe;
And when its waaues retire, l!ke thlofe of Nile,
They leave behind him uch agolden /oil,
That there the virtrues 'witbout culture grow,
There hthefoeet hle1sms of a.fgin blhwo.
9~efe 'were his 'words; void of delh/i've art,
Ifelt them, for he jjoke them from his hearto
Nor wil/ I now attempt, 'wi:h ,witty folly,
iT chafe away cele/lial melancholy,

# SOLD BY JAMES BARKER, DRAMATIC REPOSITORY, Great Russell - Street, Covent - Garden.

. SOLD/ BY JAMES BARKER, ·

-' DRAMATIC REPOSITORY,

Creat 'RU/Ul-Street,. Covtnj.Gardes.

At One S$illing each. TTwoMifers

All the World's a Stage Toy Lunipkino inTown;
Apparition, by Cross - by ("Keeffe,&c &c.&
April;Day .
Birth-Day, by-O'Keeffe t-Is 6d beach.
Barnaby Brittle Alfred
Caernarvon Cafle Beggar's Opera, wit ihtad
DeafLover IMujic
Double Difgnife,.witba Brothers, by Cumberland

platc of Mrs. Cryncb. Battle of Haftlings, ditto

Daphne and Amintor Cclumbus, by Morton
Edward and Eleonora Chrifitmas Tale
Fool, by Capt, Topham Clandestine Marriage
First Floor ' Fashionable Lovers, by
Fatal Cariofily - Comberlanad
Guardian, by Garrick - Good-natured Man
Horse and Widow Henry If. or Fall ofRofa-
le Would ifHeCoold mond,vwiehbie ·vignetue -
Intrigues of aMorning Jealous Wife
Irith Mimt, or Blunders London Hermnit, by

at Brighton,by. O'Keeffe O'Keeffe .
Little'Hunchback - ' Man of Family
Midas < " 4 39 Peruvian
Man of QM lity"ó "J Plain Dealer
Marriage A&- Runaway
Maid of the Oaaa [ Siege of Berwick
Modern Honour South Briton
Purse, orBenevolent Tar Widow of Malabar
Qgaker- · World in a Village
SicilianRomaance,an Ope- -
----

ra, by H. Siddons 'At Two Sbhi'ligt each.

Sheep Shearing Emigrant in London,
Tom Thumb, plate y Hoc- Corn. in Fr. & Eng.

garthb Indiscretion

Thomas and Sally Life's Vagaries, by
Tit for Tat O'Keeffe
Three Weeks after Mar- Vortigero & Henry I, 45

riage - -&c. &c.
fricttd byJ.Barkar, OG-aaR~U Stret, Covcn Gardati
