DOUGLAS:

A ;
T.RA G E DY,

As it is a&ed at the
H E A T R E S

IN
(GRE·AT-BRITAIN and IRELAND,

Non ego urm vates, fed prifci confcius evi.
By the Rev. JO H N HOME.

n ..'o which are prefixed, ...

I. AnAddrefs to the Author. By DAVID HUME, Elq?
Author of the History of Great-Britain, &c.
II. Copy of an Admonition and Exhortation, by the Rev.
Preibytery of Edinburgh,
II. Copy of a Declaration, by the Rev. Presbytery of
Glasgow.

D U B L I N:

'rinted for O. FAULKINEI, J. HOEY, P. WILSo0.
J. EXSHAW, A. JAMES, M. WILLIAMSON,. and

W. SLEATER. M,DCC,LXI.

# An Address from DAVID HUME, Esq; Author of the History of Great Britain, &c. to the Rev. Mr. HOME, Author of DOUGLAS, a Tragedy.

Ia~~
ae( 3 )
I An Address from DAVI.D HtME, Efq; Author of the

Hit'oy of Great-Britain, &c. to the Rev. Mr. HOME,
A~thor of DOUGLAS, a Triagedy.

My dear Sir,
I T was the Practe of the Antients to address their

Compositions only to Friends and Equals, and to

render their Dedications Monuments of Regard and
Affeaion, not of Servility and Flattery. In those Days.
of ingenious and- candid Liberty, a Dedication did.
Honour to the Person to whom it was addressed, with-
out degrading the Author. If any Partiality appeared
towards the Patron, it was at least the Partiality of
Friendship and Affection.

Another Instance of true Liberty, of which antient

Times can alone afford us an Example, is the Liberty
of Thought, which engaged Men of Letters, however
different in their abtract Opinions, to maintain a mutu-
al Friendihip and Regard; and never to quarrel about
Principles, while they agreed in Inclinations and Man-
ners. Science was often the Subjea of Disputation,
never of Animosity, Cicero, an Academic, addressed
his philosophical Treatises, sometimes to Brutus, a
Stoic; sometimes to Atticus, an Epicurean.

I have been seized with a itrong Desire of renewing

these laudable Pradices of Antiquity, by addrefling the
following Dissertations to you, my good Friend: For
such I will ever call and esteem you, notwithstanding.
the Opposition which prevails between us, with Re-
gard to many of our fpeculati e Tenets. These Diffe-
rences of Opinion I have only found to enliven our.
Converiation; while our common Paflion for Science.
and Letters served as a Cement to our Friendship. I
still admired your Genius, even when I imagined that
you lay under the Influence of Prejudice; and you;
sometimes told me, that you excused my Errors, on

A z .Account i

(4)

Account of the Candour and Sincerity, which you
thought accompanied them.

But to tell Truth, it is leTs my Admiration of your

fine Genius, which has engaged me to make this Ad-
dref-toyou, than my Esteem of your Character and
mrv Affecion to your Person. That Generosity of
Mind which ever accompanies you; that Cordiality of
Friendihip; that spirited Honour and Integrity, have
long interested me kirongly in your Behalf, and have
made me desirous, that a Monument of our mutual
Amity flihould 'be publickly erected, and, if poflible, be
preserved to Pofrerity.

i own too, that I have the Ambition tobe the first

who ihall in public express his Admiration of your noble
Tragedy of Dsuglas; one of'the moftinterefting anti
pathetic Pieces, that was ever exhibited on any Theatre.
Should I give it the Preference to the Merope of Massei,
and to that of Voltaire, which it resembles in its sub.
ject; should I asrm, that it contained more Fire and
Spirit than the. former, nmiore tenderness and Simplici-
ty than the latter; I might be :ccufed of Partiality:
And how could I entirely acquit myself, after the Fro-
sessions of Friendship which I have made you? But the
unfeigned Tears which flowed from every Eye, in the
wnumerous Representations which were made of kit on
this Theatre; the unparalleled Command, which you
appeared to have over every Affection of the human
Breast: Thefe-are inconteftible' Proofs, that you possess
the true theatric Genius of Shakefpear and Otway, re-
fined from the unhappy Barbarism of the one, and Li-
centioufnefs of the other.

My Enemies, you mknow, and I -own even sometimes

my Friends, have reproached me with the Love of Para-
doxes and singular Opinions; and I expec to be exposed
to the fame Imputation, on Account of the Character,
which I have here given of your Doulas. I ihall be told,
no doubt, that I had artfully chosen the only Time, when
this high Esteem of that Piece could be regarded as a
Paradox, to wit, before its Publication; and that not
biang able to contradict in this Particular the Sentiments
of the Public, I have, at least, resolved to go before

them.

# Copy of the Admonition and Exhortation by the Reverend Presbytery of Edinburgh, dated the 5th Day of January 1757.

(5)

threm. ' But I /ha1l be amply compenfatedfor all'there
i Pleafantries, if'you accept this Testimony of my Re-

gard, and believe me to .be, with the greatest Sinceri-
ty, Dear Sir, Your most affetionate Friend, and hum-
ble Servant,

Edinb. Jan. 3, 1757.- DavID HUME.
Copy of the Admnonition and Exhortation ly the Rea'erend

Pre/jiytery of Edinburgh, dated the 5th Day of Janu'-
ary 1757.

: IE, Prelbytery taking into their serious Confider-

T ation, the declining State of Religion, the open.
Profanation of the Lord's Day, the Contempt of public
'Worihip, the.growing Luxury and Levity of the present
Age; in which so many seem Lovers of Pleasure, more
than Lovers of God: And being particularly affected
with the UNPRECEDENTED COUNrTENANCE given og
late to the Playhouse in this Place, when the State of the
Nation,. and the Circumstances of the Poor, make such.
hurtful Entertainments still. more pernicious; judged it
their indispensable Duty to express in the most open and.
solemn Manner, the deep Concern, they feel on. this Oc-'
cation. .-

The Opinion which the Chrlftian Church has always ".

entertained of Stage Plays and Players, as prejudicial to. ',i
the Interests of Religion and Morality, is well known;
and the fatal Influence which they commonly have on 'i
the far greater Part of Mankind, particularly the younger ,
Sort, is too obvious to Be called in Question.

To enumerate how many Servants, Apprentices, and

Students in different Branches of Literature, in the City
and Suburbs, have been reduced from their proper Bu-
finess, by attending the Stage, would be a painful, dif- i
agreeable Talk. 1'

The Prelbytery in the Year 1727, when consisting of :

many pious, prudent, and learned Ministers, whose I'
did prepare a Paper, which was read from the several i' i

A 3 Pulpits i!P

Pulpits within their Bounds, warning their rPeople a-
-gait the dangerous Infetion of the Theatre then
erered there.

In the Year 1737, the Legislature, in :their ,great

. Wisdom, did, by an Ad of the ioth of George L.
enac and declare, " That every Person who liould,
"forHire or Reward, a&, or cause to be acted, 'any

Play, or other Entertainment of the Stage, without

"the special Licence and Authority mentioned in the
" said At, Thould be deemed a Rogue and a Vaga-
C' bond, and for every such Offence fhduld forfeit the
"Sum of 501. Sterling."

At that Time a Proiec was let on Foot to obtain a

licensed Theatre in this City; but the Maiters and Pro-
feiftors of the University, supported by the Magistrates,
having prepared a Petition, setting forth the dangerous
Tendency of a Playhouse here, wvith refpe&':to the iin-
portant Interests of Virtue and Learning, -theProjeCdwas
Jaid aside. :

The Players, however, *being so audacious as to

continue to at in Defiance of the Law, the Pre'sbytery
did, at their own Charge, prosecute :them-before the
Court of Sefion; -and 'prevailed in.the .Procefi. The
Players were fined .in Terms -of 'Law; and Warrants
being iflued forapprehending them, .they *fled .from Ju-
ftice. But others came in their :Place; who :since that
Time have attempted to elude the Law, by changing
the Name of the PLAhYOUSE into that of the CoN-
CERT-HALL.

As such a flight Evasion, the mere Change of a

Name, could not make the smallest Variation in the
Nature of the Thing, the Presbytery continued to do
all in their Power, and in their Sphere, to prevent the
growing Evil; and think themselves at this Time
loudly called upon, in oNE BODY, and with ONE
X ICE, to expostulate, in the Bowels of Love and.
Comnpaffion, with all under their Care and Infpec-
tion.

When our gracious Sovereign, attentive to.the Voice

of Providence, is calling from the Throne to Humilia-
tion and Prayer, how unseemly is it for his Subjets to

give

'( 7)

give themselves up to Mirth and. Jollity? When the
War in which we are engaged, and many awful Tokens
of the divine Displeasure, bespeak us, in the Language
of an inspired Writer, to redeemr rhe srime lecaufe the
Days are evil, Thould that Time be squandered away in
running the conitant Round of foolish, not to fay sinful
Amusements ? When the Wants and Cries of the nu-
merous Poor require extraordinary Supplies, how un-
accountable is it to lavilh away vast Sums for such vain
and idle Purposes When the Wisdom of the Nation
has guarded ihe Inhabitants of this City and Suburbs
from the Infecion of the Stage, by a plain and express
Statute; is it not a high Infance of Folly, to break
down that Barrier, and open a Door with their owlr
Hands for theatrical Representations? which are in
many Refpests no less inconsistent with good Policy,.
than unfriendly to Religion; and will be found soon-
er or later, to affect their temporal as well as spiritual.
Interefrs.

On there Accounts, and for many other obvious.and

weighty Considerations, the Preibytery, warmed with
just concern for the Good of Souls, do, in the Fear of
God, WARN, EXHORT, and OBTEST, all within their
Bounds, as they regard the Glory of God, the Credit
of our holy Religion, and their own Welfare, to walk
worthy of the Vocation wherewith they are called, by
Ihewing a sacred Regard to the Lord's Day, and all the
Ordinances of divine Institution; and by discouraging,.
in their refpeative Spheres, the illegal and dangerous En--
tertninments of the Stage.

The Prefoytery would plead with ALL in Authority,

with TEACHERS of Youth, PARENTS, and MASTERS
of Families, to restrain by every habile Method, fucli
as are under their Influence, from frequenting there Se-
minaries of Folly and Vice. They would particularly.
beseech the younger Part of their Flock, to beware, left,
by Example, or from a foolish Desire of appearing ian
the fashionable World, they be misled into such perni-
cious Snares; Snares which must necessarily retard, if
not entirely mar, that Progress in the refpecaive Parts of.
their Education, on which their future Usefulness and

A 4 Success,

# Copy of the Declaration of the Rev. Presbytery of Glasgow, dated the 14th Day of February 1757.

(8)

Success depend. And, laffly, they would intreat and
obtreft Persons of all Ranks and Conditions, that, instead
of contributing to the growing Licentioufneis of the Age,
they may diftinguilh themselves by Thining as Lights in the
World, being blameless and harmless, the Sons of God,
without Rebuke, in the Midit of a crooked and perverse
Nation; OCCUPYI-G, for the great Purposes of the
Honour of God and the Good of MIankind, that Time,
that Subltance, and those other Talents which they
have received from their Lord and MIafter.

On the whole, the Presbytery do, in the moit earnest

Manner, call upon all who have the Interest of Religion
at Heart, to plead fervently at the Throne of Grace,
in the prevailing Name of the great Mediator, until the
Spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the Wildernefi
he af'ritful Siel, and the fruitfullField he counted/or a
Fsreft: Then Judgment hal d.wellin the Wilderness, and
Rightleaufnefi remain in the fruitsid Fietd; and the Work
of Rigbteojnei:.ej/ball be Peace, and the Effed of Righte-
oufnefs, !tietnefi and AWirance fr ever.

The Presbytery appoint this ADMONITION and Ex-

HORTATION to be read from all the Pulpits within their
Bounds, on the last Sabbath, being the thirtieth Day
of this Month, immediately after divine Service before
Noon.
Coy ops theDeclaration of the Retv. P'resbytery of Glasgow.,

dated the 4thb Day of February 175'7.

H E Presbytery of Glasgow having seen a printed
Paper, intitled, An Admonition and Exhortationi.

of the Reverend Presbytery of Edi.burgh, which, among
other Evils prevailing, laments the extraordinary and
unprecedented Countenance given of late to the Play-
house in that City; and having good Reason to believe,
that this refers to the following melancholy but notori-
ous Sacs, that one who is a Minister in the Church of
Scotland did himself write and compose a Stage-Play,

intitled,

(9)

d
i ntitled, 5the Tragedy of Douglas, and got it to be acted'
i on the Theatre at Edinburgh ; and that he, with. feve-

ral other Ministers of this Church; were present, and
some of them oftner than once, at the acAing of the 'said
Play before a numerous Audience: The Prebytery be-
ing deeply affeced with this new and' strange Appeac-
j ance, think it their Duty to declare, as they hereby do,
that they agree with the Preibytery of Edinburgh in
their Sentiments with refped to Stage-Plays; and parti-
cularly that such Entertainments, from what has been
usually exhibited in them, and also from the .dissolute

. Lives (for the most part) and infamous Characters of

the. Players, have been looked upon by the Chriftiaa
Church in all ages, and of arl different Communions,
as extremely prejudicial to Religion and Morality, as
well as hurtful to the other valuable Interests of human
Society, by the wasteful Expence of Money and Time
they) have.occafioned! and being convinced by long
Experience, a sure Telt of the Tendency of any Ation
or Practice, how vain it is to expeA such a Reformation.
of the Stage as is confitent with the "Ends aforesaid,,
and therefore such Entertainments should de discouraged
and laid aside: And the Preibytery further confidering,.
that the unprecedented Countenance given to the Play-
i house, in the Instance mentioned, is greatly aggravated.
by a late Adt of Parliament, rendering the Stage (be-
cause not licenced) unlawful in Scotland, and alolb from
tIhe present Circumstances of the Nation with regard to.
tlr \' War we are engaged in, the Dearth of Provisions,
and the awful Tokens of the Divine Anger againflt us:
They therefore hereby appoint and inftrudt such of their
M'Iembers as shall represent them in the ensuing geneta'
iAffembly of this Church, to move and infit in a regular

'Ianner, that the venerable Affemblv do declare, by a.
publick Ac, their Judgment and that of this National
Church, againit the Entertainments of the Theatre, aa
of' very hurtful Tendency to the Interelts of Religion. -
*nd Society. zdly, That the Assembly do ftricly en-
quire whether the Fadts above-mentiioned, viz. that a.
Ilinifrer of this Church has composed and procured to,
l~ ated on the Theatre of the Canongate of Edin-

burgh,

( 10o)

burgh, the Tragedy called Douglas, and that the Re-
presentation of the said Tragedy was attended by him
and several other Ministers, have been under the Con-
sideration of the Presbyters respectively concerned; and
whether these Ministers, having been found guilty, have
been censured as their Faults deserved; and to give
such Dirertions as they in their Wisdom flhall find ne-
ceflary, that such Ministers and all others may be fenfi-
ble that the Church of Scotland will never prote& her
Members in a Pratice so unbecoming their Character,
and of such pernicious Tendency to the great Interelfts
of Religion, Induiftry and Virtue. And lastly, that the
Aflembly would use their best Endeavours to obtain
such an Explication and Enforcement of the ACt of the
I7th of Geo. II. anent the Playhouse, as it may not
be liable to the pitiful Evasions by which it is now
eluded.

CV.

PROLOG UE,

# PROLOGUE, Spoken by Mr. SPARKS.

ve i
ye ?i

1: R-0 LOG U E.
:r1 I
s J Spoken by Mr. SPARKS.

-;i
in t

rT ancient times, when Britain's trade was arms,
And the lov'dmuTick of her youth alarms,
l god-like race fiuflain''dfair England's fame :
thio has not heard of gallant PIERCY'J nItame?
4,and ofDoUGLAS ? Such ilu/frious foes
rival Rome and Carthage never rose t!
sron age to age bright/hone the Britilhfire,
nd evety hero was a hero's fire.
en powe ful fate decreed one warrior's doom,
" jsrung the Pheenix from his parent's tomb.
utwhilft ihofe generous rivals fought and fll,
efe generous ri~vals lov'deach other wvell:
o many a bloody field Vas loft and won,
Whing in hate, in honour all was done.
h'en Piracy 'vrong'd defy'd his prince or peers,
ajs came the DOUGLAS, with his Scottrlfhfpears ;

, vwhen proud DoUGLAS made his King his foe,
r DOUGLAS, PIERCY lent his English bow.
.pell'd their native home by adverse fate,
y hnock'd alternate at each other's gate:
en bla'd the cal/t/e, at the midnight hour,
r him whose arms had/hook its firmefj towoer.
is night a DoUGLAS your protedlion claims ;

ife! a mother ! pity's softest names:
]ftooy of her woes indulgent hear,
dgrant your suppliant all Jhe begs, a tear;
mfidnencefhe begs; and hopes to find
' Engliuh breafi, like noble PiERce's, kind.

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

DR AMATIS PE RSON SN,

L.,O NDON. ]-1

NIUR. DR IDLIN,
.~,ord RANDOI.PI-I, MI'. RIDOUT, MI'. YOUN(; E, Mr,.DI:TlR,

I.ENAL.VOZ M'r. SMITrH. Mr. LovE,:, Mr. ST'AYI.EY.

NORVAI., DOUGL.AS, Mr. BARIkY, Mr. DIGGS, Mr. SIHERIDAN,
STI~.ANGEI, Mr. SI'AaKS. Mr. HAYMAN, Mr. LEE.
SERVANTS.

~'V O Mi EI N,

PATILDA, LadyR R- Mrs' %-WOFFINGTON. Mrs. WARD. Mr-s. KENNEDY,
kN:NAx Mrs. VINCENT, Mrs, HOPKINS. Mils G, PHIL~rIPS.

# ACT I. SCENE I.

[)O U G L A S:

i P ~ A
IT RA G E D Y.

ACT I. SCENE 1.
7he court of a -caJtle, firrounied with woods.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH1.

7T E woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom
[' Accords with my foul's sadness, atd draws forth

The voice of sorrow from my bursting heart,

arewel awhile: I will not leave you long;
or in your shades I deem some spirit dweXs,
ho from the chiding itream, or groaning oak,
il hears, and answers to MATILDA'S moan. -
DOUGLAS ! DOUGLAS! If departed ghosts
e e'er permitted to review this world,
kithin the circle of that wood thou art,
nd with the paflion of immortals hear'fl
'h lameniation: hear'st thy wretched wife
eep for her husband slain, her infant loft.
y brother's timeless death I seem to mourn,
;ho perifh'd with thee on this fatal day.
o thee I lift my voice; to thee addres
he plaint which mortal ear has never heard.
disregard me not; though I am call'd
nother's now, nmy heart is wholly thine.

Incapable

Incapable of change, affeaion lies
Buried, my Do UGLAS, in thy bloody grave.
Bur RANDOLPH comes, whom fate has made my Lord,
To chide my anguilh, and defraud the dead.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.
Lord Ran. Again these weeds of woe! fay, do'st tho

well

To feed a passion which consumes thy life ?
The living claim some duty; vainly thou
Beftow'ft thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady Ran. Silent, alas! is he for whom f mourn.:

Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives.

Lord Ran. Time, that wears out the trace ofdeepel

anguiih,

Has past o'er thee in vain. Wou'd thou wer't not
Compos'd of grief and tenderness alone !
Sure thou art not the daughter of Sir MALCOLM :
Strong was his rage, eternal his resentment:
For when thy brother fell, he fmil'd to hear
That DOUCGLAS' son in the fame field was lain.

Lady Ran. Oh ! rakie not up the ashes of my fathers;

Implacable refenrment was theircrime,
And grievous has the expiation been.
Contending with the DOUGLAS, gallant lives
Of either house were loft; my ancestors
Compelt'd, at last, to leave thedr ancient feat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
No heir is left. Had they not been so fitern,
I had not been the last of all my race.

Lord Ran. Thy grief wrefs to its purposes my word,

I never ask'd of thee that ardent love,
Which in the breasts of fancy's children burns.
Decent affection, and complacent kindness
Were all I wish'd for; but I wish'd in vain.
Hence with the less regret my eyes behold
The storm of war that gathers o'er this land:
If I fliould perish by the Danilh sword,
MATILDA would not sned one Tear the more.

Lady Ran. Thou do'st not think so: woeful as I am

I love thy merit, and esteem thy virtues.
But whither goeft thou now ?

Lot

Lord Ran. Straight to:the camp,
Where every warrior onthe tip-toe stands
Of expeCtation, and impatient aiks
i Each who arrives, if he is come to tell

The Danes are landed;

Lady Ran. 0, mayadverfe winds,

r, Far from thecoaft of Scotland, drive their fleet!
And every soldier of both hoats return
In peace and safety to his pleasant home !
Lord Ran. Thou fpeak'ft a woman's, hear a warrior's

wiih:

· Right from their native land, the stormy north,

May the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
, nimoveable in Caledonia's itrand!

'

Then lhall our foes repent their bold invasion,
And roving armies ihun the fatal ihore.

Lady Ran. War I detelf: but war with foreign foes,
Whoife manners; language, and whose looks are strange,
Is not io horrid, nor to me so hateful,
As that which with'our neighbours oft we wage;
3A river here; there an ideal line.
By fancy drawn, divides the sifter kingdoms.
On each fide dwells a peoplefimilar,
As twins are to each other, valiant both,
Both for their valour famous thro' 'the world;
Yet wvill they not unite their kindred arms,
And, if they muff have war, wage distant war,
But with each other.fight in cruel conflict.
Gallant in ifrife, and noble in their ire,
Th& battle ia their pastime. They go forth
_ay in the morning, as to summer sport:
Whlen ev'ning comes the glory of the morn,
The youthful warrior, is a clod of clay.

bTus fall the prime of'either hapless land;
and lfuch the fruit of Scotch and Englilh wars.
Lord Ran. I'll hear no more: this melody would make
sol!dier drop his sword, and doff his arms;
it down and weep the conquests he hlas made;
'ea, (like a monk), sing reft and peace in heav'n,
[o fouls of warriors in his battle slain.
*ady, farewel: I leave thee not alone;
onder comes oIi whose love makes duty light.

| I~~~~~~~~lEnter

Enter A1NA.

Anna. Forgive the raflinefs of your ANNA'S love:

Urg'd by affection, I have thus prefum'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts;
And warn you of the hours that you neglect,
And lose in sadness.

Lady Ran. So to lose my hours
Is all the use I wilh to make of time.

Anna. To blame thee, lady, suits not with my state:

Bet sure I am, since death firit prey'd on man,
Never did riser thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had loft,
In early youth, the huiband of your heart?

Lady Ran. Oh!
Anna. Have i diftreft you with officious love,

_And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate ?
Forgive me, lady: humble tho' I am,
The mind I bare partakes not of my fortune:
So fenrvently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

Lady Ran. What power direted thy unconfcioue

tongue
To speak as thou haft done ? to name--

Anna. I knImow not:

But since my words have made my mistress tremble,
I will speak so no more; but silent mix
My tears with hers.

Lady Ran. No, thou fihalt not be silent.

I'1 trult thy faithful love, and thou shalt be
Henceforth th' inftruced partner of my woes.
But what avails it ? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never ebbing time ?
Compel the earth and ocean to give up
Their dead alive?

Anna. What means my noble miltreis ?
Lady Ran. Didit thou not alk what had miy sorrows

been?-

If I in early youth had loft a huiband ? -----
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'd,
Mangl'd with wounds, the hiufband of my youth;
And in some cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his. ---- -----

An. .

Aema. O ! lady, most rever'd!

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

Lady Ran. Alas! an ancient feud,.

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother should in battle save
The life of DOUGLAS' son, our houfe'sfoe:
The youthful.warriors .vow'd eternal friendihip..
To fee the vaunted fiflter of his friend
Impatient, DOUGLAS to Balarmo came,
Under a borrow'd name.-My heart he gain'd;
Nor did I long refuse the hand he begg'd:
My brother's presence authoriz'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three.little weeks, with wings of down;
Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd lord was-call'd
To fight his father's battles.; and with him,
In fpiteof all my tears, did MALCOLM go.
Scarce were they gone, when my stern fire was told
'I That the false stranger was lord DOUGLAS' son.
Frantic with rage, the baron drew his sword
And queftion'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,.-
Kneeling beneath his sword, fait'ring I took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would.
YW\ed one of. DouGLAs'S' name. Sincerity,
Thou sirs: of. virtues, let no mortal leave
IThy onward path ! altho? the earth ihould gape,.
, And from the gulf of hell deftru¢ion cry

To take diffimnulation's winding way.

Anna. Alas! 'how few of woman'sfearful kind -

i Durftowna truth so hardy !.
i Lady Ran. .The first truth
i Iseafiefit to avow. This moral. learn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale. -
In a few days the.dreadful tidings came
'T'hat Do UGLAS and my brother both were slain.
My lord ! my life ! my husband !--mighty God !.
What had I done to merit such aflicion ?

Anna. My:deareft lady !. Many a tale of tears -

I've listen'd too; but never did I hear
A tale so fad as this.
Lady Ran,. In the firit days

B Of

Of my distracting grief, I found myself---.
As women wiih to be who love their lords.
But who durst tel! my father ? The good priest
Who join'd our hands, my brother's ancient tutor,.
Withhislov'd MALCOLM, in the:battle'fell.
Theyi two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till time should make my father's fortune mine,.
That very night on which mnv son was born,
My nurse, the only confident Iihad,
Set out with him to reach her fife-'s :house:
But nurse, nor infant, have I-ever seen,
Or heard of, ANNA, since that fatal hour.
3MIy murder'd child L--had thy fond motherfear'd;
The loss of thee, she had loud fame defy'd,
Defpis'd her father's rage, her father's grief, -
And wander'd with thee thro'the scorning world.

Anna. Not seen, or heard of!: then perhaps he lives.
Lady Ran: No. It was dark-December: wind and rih.

Had beat all night. Across the Carron lay
The deftin'd road; and in it's fwelling-flood
My faithful servant peri/h'd with my child.
O hapless son! of a most hapless fire ! -
But they are both at reft and I alone
Dwell in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk,
Like a guilt-trcubi'd ghost, my painful rounds:
Nor has deTpitefiul fate permitted me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Tho' dead to love, I was compeli'd to wed
RANDOLPH, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms ;-
And RANDOLPH now possesses the domains,
That by Sir MALCOLM'S death on me devolv'd ;.
Domains, that should to DOUGLAS' son have giv'n.
A baron's title, and a baron's power.
Such were my soothing thoughts, while I bewail'd.
The flaughter'd father of a son unborn.
And when that'ion.came, like a ray fronm heav'n,
Which fiines and disappears; alas! my child !.
How long did thy fond mother grasp the hope..
Of having thee, ihe knew not how, reftor'd..
Year after year hath .orn her hope away;
Blut left frill undimirilh'd her desire,

dAma .

Anna. The hand that fplns th' uneven thread-of life,
May fimooth the length that's yet to.come of.you'r.

Lady Ran. Not in this world : I have confider'd weHl

It's various evils, and on whom they fall;
Alas ! 3row oft does goodness wound itself ?

irl And fivee.t assertion prove the spring ofwoe.
0 0t had 'I died when my lov d hu/band fell !
il Had rome good angel op'd to .me the book
l Of providence, and let me read my life,

j My heart had broke, When 'Ibeheld the rum'
Of ills, which one by one I.have:endud. '

Anna. That God, whole 'ministers good angels are,
Hath /ut the book in. mercy to mankind.

1! But we mul:.lea:ve .this theme: GLENALVON comes:

I I saw hikm bend on you. his thoughtful eyes,

And hitherwards he slowly Psalks his way.

Lady Ran. I willavoid himh An ungraco us.perfoni
T, Is doubly irktbme in an hour like this.

.Anna. Why speaks my lady thus of RAN'-DOLPHn'S heir?
Lady Ran. B'ecause he's not the heir of RaNDOr,)PH's

virtues.

Subtle and/hirewd, he offers to mankind
- An artificial image of himIelf:

And he with ease can. vary to the tase
Of different men, its features. Self-denied,
And masrer of his appetites he seems :
But his fierce nature, like a. fox chain'd up,
Watches to seize unseen the wiih'd-for prey. --
Never were vice and virtue pois'd To ill,
As in GLEWALVOv'S unrelenting mind.
Yet is he brave and politic in war, (
jAnd stands aloft in these unruly times.
|. Why I describe him'thus '11 tell hereafter :'
| Stay and detain him till' I reach .the ca5le.

. * [Exit Lady RA,,NDOLP v.

Anna. 0 happhefs !' :where art thou to be found ?

I fee thou dwellest not with birth and beauty,
jrho' grac'd with' grandeur, "and in wealth array'd :
| Nor dost thou, it would seem, with virtue dwell;
jElfe had this gentle lady mifs'd thee not.

* ~~Enter GLENALVO~.
| Gltn. What dost thou mule on, meditating maid ?

B 2, Like

Like some entranc'd and vifioniary seer
Onearth thou fland'ft, thy thoughts ascend to heaven,

Anna. Wou'd that I were, e'en as thou fay'd, a seer,
To have my doubts by heav'nly vision, clear'd!

Glen. What dolt thou doubt of ? what haft.thou to do

With fubjets intricate ? Thy youth, thy beauty,.
Cannot be questioned: think of these good gifts;.
And then thy contemplations will be pleasing.

·Anna. Let women view yon monument of woe,.
Then boast of beauty: who £o fair as Ihe ?
But I muff follow: this revolving day
Awakes. the memory of her ancient :woes. [E'it Anna.

GLENALVON solus.

So!-Lady RANDOLPH ihuns me ; by and by

I'll woo her as the lion does his brides.
The deed's adoing.now, that makes me liord
Of these rich valleys, and.a chief of power..
The season is most apt; my founding steps
Will not be heard arrmidft the din of arms..
RA-BOLPH hasliv'd too long: his better fate
Had the ascendant once, and kept me down:
WVhen I had feiz'd.the dame, by chance he came,
Refcu'd and had the lady for his labour ;
I 'fcap'd unknown: a slender consolation.!
Heaven is my witness that I do not love
To fowin peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvest. Yet I am not safe:
By love, or something like it, stung, inflam'd;
Madly i blabb'd my. passion to. his wife,
And she has threaten'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will I do not know.:
But well I know the baron's wrath is deadly.
I will not live in fear: the man I dread
Is as a Dane to me; ay, and theman
Viho stands betwixt.me and my chiefdefire.
No bar but he; fhe.has no kinfmania near;
No brother in his fitler's quarrel bold-;
And for the.righteous cause, a (hanger's cause»
I know no chiefthat will defy GLENAL/VO..

AC.T

# ACT II. SCENE I.

ACT II. SC:E.N.E I,

|:~ A~'~ Court, &c; :
: Enterferwants sand a firanger at one door, and La4S.

RANDOLuPH and ANNA at another.
Lady Ran.. T HAT meanstliis clamour. ? stranger,.

WV speak secure;

Hafl thou been wrong'd ? have these rude men prefum'd
To vex the weary traveller on his way ?

Ist Serv. By us no.itranger ever fuffer'd wrong.:
1 This man with outcry wild has call'd us forth;

So fore afraidhe. cannotfpeak his fears..
Enter Lord'RANSDoLPH.and yooung man, vitib iteir:

,swa.rds drawn and bloody.
Lady Ran. Not vain,the f ranger's fears! how fires my

lord?
i Lord. Ran.. T.hat it. fares well, thanks to this gallant.

youth,.

Whose valour fayvd me. from a wretched death!'
As down the winding dale I walk'd alohe,
At the.crofs way four armed men at.tack'd.me:
Rovers, I judge, from thelicentious camp,
Who would have.quickly laid Lord RANDOLPH loW ,
Had not this brave and generous stranger come,
Like my good angel in.ithe hour.of fate,
And, mocking danger, mnade my foes his own..
They turn'd upon him ; but hi aive irm .
Struck to the ground, from whence they role no more,
The fiercei: two; the others fled amain,
And left himn, mafter.of the.bloody field..
Speak, Lady RAND OtPH ,; upon. Beauty's tongue.
Dwtell accents pleasing to thebrave and bold.
Speak, noble dame, and thank him for thy lord.

Lady Ran. My lard, I cannot speak what now I feel:

My heart o'erfiows with gratitude to .heav.'n,,
Anrd to this nobleyouth, who all unknown.
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but humanely brave
|oight on your fide againftfuch fearful odds.

Have-

Have you yet learn'd of him whom we Iliould thank?-
Whom call the faviourof Lord RANDOLPH'S life ?

Lord Ran. I ask'd that question, and he anfwer'd not:
But I mufl know whomy deliv.'reris. (ta. the Stntranger.

Strang. A low born man, of parentage obscure,

Who nought can boast but his desire tabe'
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Lord Ran. Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled_

By the great King of Kings r thou art ordain'd
And ftamnpt a hero by the foverein.hand
Of nature! blush not, flower ofm6defty
As well as valour, to declare thy birth.

Strang. My name fslo-RVA.L: on-the Grampian hills:

My father feeds his flocks; a frgal.fwamn,
Whole constant cares were to encreaie his store,.
And keep his only son, myself athome.
For I had heard of battles, and I long'd
To follow to the field some warlike lord;
And heaven loon granted what my fire denied.
This moon which role last night, round as my ihield,.
Had not yet fillI'd her horns, when, by her light,
A band of fierce barbarians, from the hills,
Rufh'd like a torrent down upon the-vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The shepherds fled;,
For safety, and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full-of arrows,
IIover'd about the enemy, and mark'd
The road he took,'then. halfted to my friends:.
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
L met advancing, The pursuit I led,
Tillwe o'ertook the fpoil-encumber'd foe..
We fought and conquer'd. Ere a sword was drawn;,
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Returning home in triumph, I difdain'd
The fahepherd's slothful life; and having heard
T'hat -our good king had.falmmon'd his bold peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron fide,
I left my father's honfe, and took with me
A chosen servant to conduat-my fleps:--
Yon trembling coward who forsook his mailer.
Journeying wvith this intent, I pafl these towers,

And;,

And, heaven-direced, came this day to do
The happy deed that' gilds my humble~name.

Lord Ran. He ins as wife as brave.' WVas ever tale.

With such a gallant modesty reheats'd .
My brave deliverer ! -thou ihalt enter now
; A nobler lift, and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame..
I will present thee to our Scottish king,
iWhofe valiant spirit ever valour lov'd.
!ta ! my MAT'ILD A ! wherefore starts that tear ?
j- Lady Ran. I cannot fay: for various affections,,
tiAnd Itrangely mingled in my bosom swell;
iYet each of them may well command a tear.
ljoy that thou art safe ; and admire
-:Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety.
-Obscure and friendless,' he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
|efolv'd to hunt for fame, and with his sword
1o gain dillinc:ion which his birth denied.
n this attempt unknown he might have.periftsd,
nd gain'd with all his valour, but oblivion.
ow grac'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
eneath despair. The soldier now of hope

ftlands conspicuous; fame and great renown:
re brought within the companfs of his sword.
nthis my mind .refleted, whilftyou spoke,
d blefs'd the wonder-workng Lord of heaven..
Lord Ran. Pious and grateful ever.are thy thoughts.
Iy deeds Ihall follow where th6u point'ft the way !
extto myself, and equal to GLENALVON,
honour and command shall NORVA.L be.
Nr-v. Iknow not how to thank you. Rude-I am,.
speech and manners: never till this hour
od I in such a presence: yet, my lord,
here's something in my breast which makes me bold-
fay, that NoyvA.L ne'er will Tfiame thy favour.
Laldy Ran. I will be sworn thou:wilt not. ThoufimnIt be-
y knight; and ever, as thou didft. to day,
ith happy valour guard the life of.RANjO*LPr.-
Lord Ran. Well.haff thou ?poke. Let me forbid reply..

[To NOAVAL.
i. are. thy debtors frill; thy higih deert

O'ertols,

O'ertops our gratitude. Imuff proceed,
As was at firfl intended, to the camp. -
Someof my train I fee are speeding hither,.
Impatient, doubtless, of their lord's delay.
Go with me,No RVA.L, and thine eyes shall fee-
The chosen warriors of thy native land,
Who languish for the fight, and beat the air,
With brandifh'd swords,

Nor-v. Let us begone, my lbrd.
LordRan. [To Larby RANDOLPH.] About the. time

that the declining fun:

Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills suspend;
Expect us to return. This night once more-
Within these walls I reft ;. my tent I pitch
To-moFrow'in the field. Prepare the feast...
Free is his heart who for 'his country fights:.
He in the eve of battle may resign
HIimfelf tofocial pleasure-;- sweetest then,
Wheirdanger to a soldier's foul endears
The.human joy that never may return.

[Exeunt RANDOLPH and NoRVAl..

S GC E N E. II;

Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA:

Lady Ran. His parting words have struck a fatal truth;

O DOUGLAS ! DouGLAS! tender was the time
When we two parted, ne'er to meet again!
How many years of anguiih and despair
H&s heav'n annex'd to those swift pafl;ng hours.
Of love and fondness! .Then my bosom's flame.
Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of. fear,
Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.

A.nna. May gracious heav'n pour.the sweet balmo

peace

Into the wounds that fester in your breast!
- Fr . -.hly consolation cannot cure them.

Lady R,;:. One only-cure can beav'n itself befsow ;--

A.grave-that b.d'in- .which the-weary reft.=
Wretch that I am' Alas! why am I so ?.
At every happy parint I repine!
How blest the mother of yon gallant NORVAL !

' * - 5~~~~~~~~ht

She for a li1Mng hutband bore her pains,
And heard him bless her when a man was born:
She nurs'd her smiling infant on her breast;
Tended the child, and rearkd the pleasing boy:
She, with affeaion's triumph, saw the youth
In grace and comeliners surpass his peers:
Whilst I to a dead Hutband bore a ton,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.

Anna. Alas! alas! why will you thus resume

Your grief afreih? I thought that gallant youth
Would for a while have won you from your woe.
On him intent you gazed, with a look
Much more delighted, than your pensive eye
i. Has deign'd on other objets to bestow.
Lady Ran. Delighted fay'itl thou? Oh! even there

mine eye

Found fuel for my life-confuming sorrow.
I thought, that had the son of DOUGLAS liv'd,
He might have been like this young gallant stranger,
And pair'd with him in features and in shape:
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
My boy with bloonming No.avAL might have numnber'd.
WhilfR thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness
For this young stranger, wand'ring from his home,
i And like an orphan cast upon my care.
I will protect thee, (said I to myself)
\¥ith all my power, and grace with all my favour.

j 'nna. Sure heav'n will bless so gen'rous a resolve.

i You muf, my noble dame, exert your power:
You must awake: devices will be framn'd,
A.d arrows pointed at the breast of NORVAL.

Lady Ran. GLENALVON'S false and crafty head will
| work

Against a rival in his kinfinan's love,
s I deter him not: I only can.
Bokld as he is, GLEKALVON will bewVare
How he pulls down the fabric that I raise.
'Ill be the artist of young NORVAL'S fortune.
'lis pleasing to admire mofl apt was I
To this affeAiori in my better days;
Though now I eem to you shrunk up, retir'd

-C Withhi

Within the narrow compass of my woe.
Have you not sometimes seen an early flower
Open it's bud, and spread it's silken leaves,
To catch sweet airs, and odours to bestow;
Then, by the keen blast nipt, pull in it's leaves,
And, tho' still living, die to scent and beauty ?
Emblem of me! affliction, like a storm,
Hath kill'd the forward blossom of my heart.

Enter GLENALVoN.

Glen. Where is my dearest kinsman, nobleRA D o LP a?
Lady Ran. Have you not heard, GLENALVON, of the

base-

Glen. I have: and that the villains may not scape,

With a lirong band I have begirt the wood:
If they lurk there, alive they lhall be taken,
And torture force from them th' important secret.
Whether some foe of RANDOLPH hir'd their swords,
Orif-

Lady Ran. That care becomes a kinsman's love.
I have a counsel for GLENALVON'S ear. (Exit ANNA.)

Glen. To him your counsels always are commands.
Lady Ran. I have not found so: thou art known to

me.

Glen. Known!
Lady Ran. And moit certain is my cause of know-

ledge.

Glen. What do you know ? By the mos: blessed cross,

You much amaze me. No created thing,
Yourself except, durst thus accost GLENALVON.

Lady Ran. Is guilt so bold? and dofft thou make a merit

_ Of thy pretended meekness? This to me,
Who, with a gentleness which duty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd what, if divulg'd,
Would make thee nothing; or, what's worse than that,
An outcafl beggar, and unpitied too:
For mortals Ihudder at a crime like thine.

Glen. Thv virtue awes me. First of womankind!

Permit me yet to lay, that the fond man
Whom love transports beyond ftrit virtue's bounds,
If he is brought by love to misery,
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpiied cannot be. Pity's the alms

Which

Which on such beggars freely is beftow'd:
For mortals know that love is still their lord,
And o'er their vain resolves advances liill:
As fire, when kindled by our shepherds, moves
Thro' the dry heath before the fanning wind;

Lady Ran. Reserve these accents for some other ear.

To love's apology. .I liften not.
Mark thou my words; for it is meet thou should'st.
His brave deliverer RANDOLPH here retains.
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well:
; But, at thy peril, praftife aught againf him:

Let not thy jealousy attempt to shake
And loosen the'good, root he has in RANDOLPH;
i Whose favourites I kRow thou haft supplanted.

Thou look'fk at me, as if thou fain would'st pry
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendless stranger my protetion claims:
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit.

SCENE III.

Manet GLENALVON.

Child that I was, to ktart at my own ihadow,
And be the ihallow fool of coward .conscience!
I am not what I have been; what I Thould be.
The darts of destiny have almost pierc'd.
My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I lihould conclude there was an arm above
That fought against me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch my ielf, the subtle snare I let.
Why, rape and murder are not simple means
Th'i'mperfet rape to RANDOLPH gave a spouse;
And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fun from me;
And worR of all, a rival. Burning hell:
This were thy center, iif I thought fle !ov'd himn!
'Tis certain flhe contemns me ; nay commands me,
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'er me,
In his behalf. And ihall I thus be brav'd ?

C z Curb'd,

# ACT III. SCENE I.

Curb'd, as ihe calls it, by dame chastity ?
Infernal fiends, if any fiends there are :
M.ore fierce than iove, ambition, and revenge,
Rife up and fill my bofot-with your fires .
And policy remorseless ? Chance may spoil
A fmingle aim; but perseverance must
Prosper at lass. For chance and fate are words:
Perfiftive wisdom is the fate of man.
Darkly a prdject peers upon my mind,
ILike the red moon when riling in the east,
Crofs'd and divided by trange colour'd clouds.
I'll seek the rave who came with NoRVAL hither,
And for his cowardice wvas spurned from him.
I've Iknown a follower's rankled bosom breed
Venom moist fatal to his heedless lord. - - [exils

ACT III. SCE NE. I..

A Court, &c. as before.

Enter A.NA.
Anna. T H Y vassals, Grief! great nature's .order

_ break,

And change the noon-tide to the midnight houir.
Whilftr Lady RxDoLrpI sleeps I will wolk forth,
And taste the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her fiuombers be! Ye ministers
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,
Ange!s and seraphs vwho delight in goodness !
Forsake your ikies, and to her couch descend !
There from her fancy chafe thole dilfnal forms
Tbat haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
With image celefial, fuchaspleafe
The blefft above upon their goiden beds.

Enter SERVANT.

Sei-v. One of the vile affafins is fecur'd.

We found the villain lurking in the wood:
With dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not
His sirs eftay: these jewels vwere conceal'd I

In the most secret places of his garment;
Belike the spoils of some that he has murder'd.

Anna. Let me look on' them. Ha! here is a heart,

The chosen crest of DOUGLAS' valiant name!
These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch.

[Exit AN A.

Enter eraneervnts ivith) a prioner.

Prif I know no more than does the child unborn -
Of what you charge me with.

,ift &erv. You fay so, Sir!

But torture soon lhall make you speak the truth.
Behold the Lady of Lord RA^DOLPH comes:
Prepare yourfeif to meet her just revenge.

SCENE II.
E ~ Enter Lady RANDOnLPH and AlrA.

E Anna. Summon your utmost fortitude, before

You speak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
Are now at flake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may fly.

Lady Ran. Thou ihalt behold me, with a desperate

heart,
Hear how my infant perilh'd. See he kneels.

[The prisoner. kneels. J
Pr/f. Heav'n bless that countenance, so sweet and

mild !

Ajudge like thee makes innocence more bold.
O save me, lady! from these cruel men,
Who have attack'd and seiz'd me; who accuse
Me of intended murder. As I hope
For mercy at the judgment feat of God,
The tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
Is not more innocent than I of murder.
Lady Ran. Of this man's guilt what proof can ye

produce?

ift Serv. We found him lurking in the hollow Glynn,

When view'd and call'd upon, amaz'd, he fled.
We overtook him, and enquir'd from whence
And what he was: he laid he came from far,
And was upon his journey to the camp.
Not satisfied with this, we fearch'd his cloaths,

C3 And

And found these jewels; whole rich value plead
Mvoft powerfully againfl him. Hard he seems
And old in villainy. Permit us try
His stubbornness against the torture's force.
.

Prif. O gentle lady! by your lord's dear life! :

Which these weak hands, I swear, did ne'er aflail;
And by your children's welfare, spare my age!
Let not the iron tear my ancient joints,
And my grey hairs bring to the grave with pain.

Lady Rani: Account for these: thine own they can-

- not be:

For these, I fay: be ftedfafr to the truth;
Detected falsehood is mol certain death.

[AX:.A rem .ves the ferrvants andreturns.]

Pr/f. Alas! I'm fore be:et . let never man,

for fake of lucre, fmin gainft his foul!
.Eternal jultice is in this most just!
I, guiltlefa now, must former guilt reveal.

Lady Ran. O! AXXA hearl I-once more I charge

thee speak

The truth dire&; for these to me foretell
And certifyi a part of thy narration;
V¥ith which if the remainder tallies not,
An iniant and a dreadful death abides thee.

Sris. Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speak to you asjufit

As if you were the miniftier of heaven,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men.

Some eighteen years ago, I rented land

Of brave Sir MALCOLM , then BALAK MO''S lord;
Eut falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
All that I had, and then turn'd me and mine,
(Four helpless infants and their weeping mother)
Cut to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel by the river's fide
Receiv'd us: there hard labour, and the skill
In fishing, which was formerly my sport,
Supported life. Whil/f thus we poorly liv'd,
One lthrmy night, as I remember well,
'T'he wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down, and loud and oft
The angry spirit of the water fsriek'd.
A; the dead hour of night was heard the cry

Of

Of one in jeopardy. I rose, and ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring w;ithin
My reach whatever floating thing the stream
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd; the person loft:
But looking fad and earnest on the waters,
By the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round,
A balker: soon I drew it to the bank,
And nestled curious there an infant- lay.

Lady Ran. Was he alive ?
Prif: He was.
Lady Ran: Inhuman that thou art!
How couldif thou kill what waves and tempefs spar'd ?

Prif. I am not so inhuman.
Lady Ran. Didft thou not?
4Anna. My noble miltrefs, you are mov'd too much:

This man has not the alfpe of stern murder:
Let him go.on, and you, I hope, will hear
Good tidings of your kinfinan's long los child.

Prif The needy man, who has known better days,

One whom distress has spited at the'worid,
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
: To do such deeds, as make the prosperous men
Lift up their hands and wonder who could.do them.
And such a man was I; a man deciin'd,
Who law no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have touch'd that infant, with a hand of harm.
Lady Ran. Ha! doff thou fay so ? Then perhaps he

lives!

Prif. Not many days ago he was alive.
Lady Ran. 0 ! God of heav'n! Did he-then die To

lately ?

Prif: I did not fay he died; I hope he lives:
Not many days ago these eyes beheld
i Him, flouriihing in youth, and health, and beauty.

Lady Ran. Where is he now?
Prif Alas! I know not where.
LadyRan. Oh fate! I fear thee fill. Thou riddler,

speak

Diret and clear; else I will search thy foul.
AImna. Permit me, ever honour'd! Keen impatience,

C4 Tho'

Tho' hard to be reftrain'd, defeats itself- -
Furfue C f itory with a faithful tongue,
To the last hour that thou didft keep the child.

Pri-: Fear not my faith, tho' I mufp speak my fliame.

Within the cradle, where the infant lay,
Was iow-'d a mighty fore of gold and jewels;
Tenmpted by which we did refhlve to hide,
Fronm :!I the wcrlid, this wcnderful event,
And like a Ferfant breed the noble child.
That nocne nright mark the change of our efsate,
We left ihe country, traveli'd to the north,
Bought flocks and herds, and gradually brought forth
Our secret w.'lth. But God's all-feeing eye
Beheld cur avarice, and finotre us fore.
For one by on anil our owvn children died,
And he, the firanger, sole remain'd ti e heir
Of whrt indeed was his. Fain then would I,
Who with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
Have trufled him, now in the dawn of youth,
VWiih his ov;n secret: but my anxious wife,
Forehoding evil, never would consent.
Mean while the f-ripling grew in years and beauty;
Ard, as we oft obferv'd, he bore himself,
Net as the offspring of our cottage blood;
For nature will break out: mild with the mild,
But w-ith the froward he was fierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I let mryfeif againpf his warlike bent;
But all in vain: for when a desperate band,
Of robbers from the savage mountains came ---

Lady Ran. Eternal providence! What is thy name ?
Prif Mvynamneis No.,VAL; and my name he bears.
Lady Ran. 'Tis he; 'tis hehimfelf! It is my son!

0 sovereign mercy ! 'Twas my child I saw!
No wonder, Ax.A, thatmybofiom burn'd.

Anna. Juit are your transports: ne'er was woman's

heart

Prov'd with such fierce extremes. High fated dame!
But vet remember that you are beheld
By servile eyes; your gefsures may be seen
Impaison'd, frrange; perhaps your words o'er heard.

Lady Ran. Wel! dost thou ccunifel, A'xA : Heaven

belltow On

. On me that wisdom which my ifate requires!

II nna. The moments of deliberation pass,

And soon you muff resolve. Thisufeful man
Must be difmifs'd in safety, ere my lord
Shall with his brave deliverer return.

Pri. If I, amidst aftonilhment and fear,

,Have of your words and geflures rightly judg'd,
Thou art the daughter of my ancient nmafer;
The child I refcu'd from the flood is thine.

Lady Ran. With thee difinmulation now were vain.
I am indeed the daughter of Sir MALCOLM;
The child thou refcii'dfr from the flood is mine.

Pr2i. Blefft be the hour that made me a poor man!
: My poverty hath tav'd my master's house! -

Lady Ran. Thy words furprize me: lure thou dost

not feign:

The tear Ltands in thine eye: such love from thee;
Sir MALCOLM'S house deferv'd not; if aright
Thou told'ft the story of thy own dit'refs.

[ Pri. Sir MALCOLM of our barons was the flower;
The safest friend, the best and kindest master,
} But ah! he knew not of my fad estate.
After that battle, where his gallant son,
Your own brave brother, fell, the good old lord
Grew desperate and reclklefs of the world;
And niever, as lie cr.. ws wont, went forth
To overlook the conduc: of his servants.
Bythem I was thrust out, and them I blame:
;May heaven foaudge me as I judg'd my master!
And God so love me as I love his race!
Lady Ran. His race ihall yet reward thee. On thy

faith

Depends the fate of thy lov'd master's house.
Renemb'reft thou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the clifts of Carron?
'Pri. I remember
IThe cottage of the clifts.
I Lady Ran. 'Tis that I mean :
IThere dwells a man of venerable age,
Wlho in my father's service spent his youth:
Ild hin I font thee, and with him remain,

Till

'Till Ifhall call upon thee to declare,
Before the king and nobles, what thou now
To me haft told. No more but this, and thou
Shalt live in honour all thy future days;
Thy son tso long shall call thee father still,
And all the land hall blels the man, who fav'd
The son of DOUGLAS, and Sir MALCOLM's heir.
Remember well my words: if thou houldft meet
Him whom thou call'ft thy fTon, still call him so,
And mention nothing of his nobler father.

Pr-i. Fear not that I /hall mar so fair an harvest,

By putting in my fickle ere 'tis ripe.
Why did I leave my home and ancient dame ?
To find the youth, to tell him all I knew,
And make him wear there jewels in his arms;
Which might, I thought, be challeng'd, and so bring
To light the secret of his noble birth.

[Lady RANXDOLPH goes towards the Servants.

Lady Ran. This man is not the affaflin you fufpeted,

Tho' chance combin'd some likelihoods against him.
He is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To their right owner, whom in haste he seeks.
'Tis meet that you thould put him on his way,
Since your mistaken zeal hath dragg'd him hither.

[Exeunt Stranger and Servants.

SCENE III;

Lad, RANDOLPH and A'N,,

LadyRan. My faithful A.NNA! doff thou ihare myjoy ?

I know thou doiff. Unparal!el'd event!
Reaching from heaven to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings to me my son !
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father!
Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
For such a gift ! What does my ANNA think
Of the young eaglet of a valiant nefft ?
How soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his fate had thrown him,
And tower'd up to the region of his fire.

Anna. How fondly did your eyes devour the boy!
Mifterious nature, with the unseen cord

Of

Of powerful instinct, drew you to your own.
iady R/an. The ready iftory of his birth believ'd

.Suppreft my fancy quite; nor did he ovwe
To any likeness my so sudden favour: :
But now I long to fee his face again,
:xamine every feature, and find out
The lineaments of DOUGLAS, or my own.
Bumoft of all, I long to let him know
Who his true parents are, to clasp his neck,
And tell hnim all the story of his father.
Ii cnn. With wary caution you nmuft bear yourself

npublic, left your tenderness. break forth,
And in observers stir conjectures strange.
or, ifa cherub in the shape of woman
lhould walk this world, yet defamation would, -
Like a vile cur, bark at the angel's train-
To-day the baron started at your tears.

Lady Ran. He did.fo, A NA! F well thy miffrefo knows,
f the leaf circumifance, mote of offence,
,hould touch the barons eye, his fight would be
Tith jealousy disorder'd: But the more
t does behove me instant to declare
he birth of DOUGLAs, and aiftert his rights.
This night I purpose with my son to meet,
eveal the secret and consult with him:
or wvife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
she does now, so look'd his noble father,
rray'd in nature's ease: his mien, his speech
ere sweetly imple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those trivial mortals who seem always wife.
ut, when the matter match'd his mighty mind,
1prose the hero: on his piercing eye
iat Observation; on each glance of thought
ecifion follow'd, as the thunder-bolt
!2urfues the fla/h.

.4nna. That demon haunts you fiill:

i'ehold GLE.*ALVON.
I Lady Ran. Now I tliun him not.
~his day l brav'd himnt nbehalf of N\IORV4L ;
,erhapstoo far': at lear my nicest fears
'or DOUcLAs thus interpret.

Enter

. Enter GLZ.,ALVON.

Gkn. Noble dame!

The hov'ring Dane at Iaft his men hath landed:
No band of pirates;:; but a mighty hoff,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers;.
To win a country, or to lose rhemfelves.

Lady Ran. But whence comes this intelligence, GL.

N-aLVO . ?

Glen. A nimble courier lent from yonder camp,

To haften up the chieftains of the north,
Inform'd me, as he pafi, that the fierce Dane
Had on the eafern coafi of Lothian landed,
Near to that place where the fea-rock immen'e,
Amazing BaTs, looks o'er a fertile land.

Lady Ran. Then mufl this western army march tojoin
The warlike troops that guard Edena's tow'rs.

Glen. Beyoad all question. If impairing time

Has not effac'd the image of a place,
Once perfect in my breair, there is a wild
Which lyes to westward of that mighty rock,
And seems by nature formed for the camp
Of water wafted armies, whose chief strength
Lies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse:
If martial skill direas the Danish lords,
There iaacceffible their army lies
To our swift kow'ring horse, the bloody field
Muill man to man, and foot to foot, be fought.

Lady Ran. How many mothers ihlall bewail their sons!

How many widows weep their husbands slain!
Ye dames of Denmark! ev'n for you Ifeel,
Who, sadly fitting on the fea-beat ftihore,
Long look for lords that never ihall return.

Glen. Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian sword

Widow'd the north. The children of the slain
Come, as I hope, to meet their fathers' fate.
The monster -war, wirh her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are objefts suited to GLEXALVON'S foul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death;
Reproach, more piercing thaa the pointed sword.

Lady Ran. I scorn thee not, but when I ought [0

scorn; .

Nor e'er reproach, but when insulted virtue
Against audacious vice.afifertsih'erfelf . . .
¢I Iown thy worth, GLENALVON; none more at.
' Than I to praise thine eminence in arms,
And be the echo ;of thy martial fame. :
No longer'vainly feed a guilty paflion:
- Go and pursue a lawful mifrefs, glory.

Upon the Danish cresss redeem thy fault,
iAnd let thy valour be the shie!d of RANDOLPH.

Glen. One instant flay, and hear an alter'd man.

jWhen beauty pleads for virtue, vice abalh'd
j Flies it's own colours, and goes o'er to virtue.
I am your convert; time will tew how truely.:
Yet one immediate proof 1 mean to give.
i That youth for whom your ardent zeal to-day,

Somewhat too haughtily, defy'd your slave,
AAmidft the fhockof armies I'il defend,
And turn death from him, with a guardian arm.
Sedate by use, my bosom maddens not
At the tumultuous uproar of the field.
Lady Ran. Ac& thus, GLENALVON, and I am thy

friend:

IBut that's thy least reward. Believe me, fir,
The truely generous is the truely wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unb!esl'

Exit Lady RANDOLNH,

Glen. [,fous.] Amen ! and virtue isits own reward !-

I 'hink ithat I have hit the very tone
Ii which fie loves to speak. Honey'd aftnt,
.lJwv pleasing art thou to the tate of man,
And won;an also ! flattery direct
Rarely dilgults. They little kno;v mankind
Vho doubt it's operation 'tis my key,

:And copes the wicket of the human heairt.
How tar ] have fucceeoed now I know not.
Yet 1 incline to think her frormy virtue

ulul'N- dawhie : 'tis her alone Ifear:

\hifi !le and RANDOLPH live, and live in faith
And amiry, uncertain is my tenure.
ate o:cr my head suspends disgrace and death,
y tlhat weak hair, a peeviih females u.[i'l.
la: no? ilie: but the ebo and flows

Of

# ACT. IV. SCENE I.

Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated.
That slave of NORVAL'S I have found most apt:
I ihew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his foul
To fay and iwear whatever I suggest.
-NORVAL, I'm told, has that alluring look,
'Twixt man and woman, which I have obferv'd
To charm the nicer and fantaftick dames,
Who are, like lady RANDOLPH, full of virtue.
In raising RANDOLPH'sjealoufv, I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom errs
Who thinks the worst he can of womankind.

ACT. IV. SCE NE I.

Flourlsh of Trumpets.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH attended.
Lord Ran. C Ummon an hundred horse, by break o(

3 day,
To wait our pleasure at the castle gate.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.
Lady Ran. Alas! my lord! I've heard unwelcome

News;
The Danes are landed.

Lord Ran. Ay, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament essay,
Of some young knight refolv'd to break a spear,
And irain with hostile blood his maiden arms.
The Danes are landed: we mus beat them back,
Or live the slaves of Denmark.

Lady Ran. Dreadful times !
Lord Ran. The fenceless villages are all forsaken;

The trembling mothers, and their children lodg'd
In well-girt towers and cafles; whilt the men
Retire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awfuil to return.

Lady Ran. Immense, as fame reports, the Danilih host!
Lord Ran. Were it as num'rous as loud fame reports,

An

An army knit like ours wou'd pierce it thro':
Brothers, that lhrink not from. each others fide,
And f:nd companions, fill our warlike files:

The husband the ifearlefs father arm.
In vulgar breasts heroic ardor burns,
And :he poor peasant mates his daring lord.

Lady Ran. Mien's minds are temper'd, like their swords,

for war:

Lovers of danger, on deltru&ion's brink
They joy to rear eret their daring forms.
Hence, early graves ; hence the lone widow's life
And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age.
Where is our gallant guest ?

Lord Ran. Down in the vale

I left him, managing a fiery steed,
WhoCe tubbornnefs had foil'd the strength and flill
Of every rider. But behold he comes,
In earnest conversation with GLENALVON.

Enter'No ivAL and GLENALVON.

GLENALVON ! with the lark arie ; go forth,
And lead my troops that lye in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
NoRVAL, thou goeft with me But fay, young man,
!Where didsc thou learn To to discourse of war,
And in such terms, as I o'erheard to day?
War is no village science, nor it's phrase
Alanguage taught among the shepherd swains.
nA o1v. Small is the lkill my lord delights to praise
In him he favours.- Hear from whence it came.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the moit remote
And inaccellible by ihepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit liv'd; a melancholy man,
WVho was the wonder of ourwand'ring swains.
Auisere and lonely,, cruel to hihnfels,
|Did they report lhim ; the cold earth his bed,
Water his drink, his food the fthepherds almns.
went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
With reverence and pity. Mila he spake,

c.ad, entring on ditcourfe, such Itories told
i- made me oft revisit his fad cell,

For

For he had been a foidier in his youth ;
And fought in famous battles, when the peers
Of Europe, by the bold GODFRE.DO led, -
AgaialAt'iufiirping Infidel difplay'd :
The r-oss of Chrifit, and won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech iftruck from me, the old man wou'd lhake
His years away, and a& his young encounters:
. Then, having lhew'd his wounds, he'd fit him down,
And all the lire-long day discourse of war..
To help my fancy, in the smooth green turf
He cut-the figures of the marshall'd hoffs;
Defcrib'd the motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm.
For all that Saracen, or Christian knew
Of war's vast art, was to this hermit known.

Lord Ran Why did this soldier in a defart hide
Thole qualities, that /hou'd have grac'd a camp ?

Norv. That too at latt I learn'd. Unhappy man!

Returning homewards by Meflina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boif'rous captain of the sea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought:
The firanger fell, and with his dying breath
Declar'd his name and lineage. Mighty God!
The soldier cried, my brother! Oh ! my brother !

Lady Ran. His brother!
Nar'rv. Yes; of the fame parents born;

His only brother. They exclang'd forgiveness:
And happy, in my mind, was he that died:
For many deaths has the survivor fuffer'd.
In the wild defart on a rock he fits,
Or on fomine nameless stream's untrodden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful frate.
At times, alas! not in his perfect mind !
Holds dialogues with his lov'd brother's ghost
And oft each nightrforfikes his fuilen couch,
To make fad orisons for him he flew.

Lady Ran. To what niyfterious woes are mortals born!

In this dire tragedy were there no more
Unhacppy perfo:s ? did the parents live ?

Nor'w. No; they were dead: kind heav'n had clos'd

their eyes
I Before their Ton had shed his brortherfs blood.

Lord Ran. Hard is his fate; for he was not to blame!

There is a desriny/in this strange world,
Which oft decrees ah undeserved doom!
Let fchoolmen tell us why.-From whence these founds?

' '[Trumpets at a ddifance.]

Enter an OFpICER.

Officer. My Lord, the trumpets of the troops of Lorn :
. Their valiant leader hailsthe noble RANDOLPH.

Lord Ran. Mine ancient guest! does he the warriors

lead ?

Has Denmark rous'd the brave old knight to arms ?

Officer. No; worn with warfare, he resigns the sword.

His eldest hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
N' Now leads his kindred bands.

I! Lord Ran. GLENALVON, go,
: With hospitality's moft.strong requeflt
Entreat the chief [Exit GLENALVOK.J

Officer. My lord; requests are vain.

Heurges on, impatient of delay,.
Stung with the tidings of the bfoe's approach.

Lord Ran. May victory fit on the warrior's plume!

4::Bravest of men! his flocks and herds are safe

:Remote from war's alarms his pastures lye,
By mountains inacceflible fecur'd:
LYet foremost he into the plain descends,.
Eager to bleed in .battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of. the ancient world:.
Contemners they of indolence and gain;
But still for love of glory, and of arms,
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift
Again/f each strong antagonist the spear.
I'll go and press the,hero to my breast.

[Exit RANDOLPh.]

Manent Lady RAN D OLPH and No RVAL.

Lady Ran. The soldier's loftiness, the pride and pomp
nveflingawful war, N6'RVAL, I fee,.
ranfport thy youthful mind.
Norv. Ah ! lhould they not ?
left be the hour I left my father's house !'

D I migh:

I might have been a fnepherd all my days,
And frole obscurely to a peasant's grave.
Now, if I live, with mighcy chiefs.I fitand;
And, if I fall, with noble duf: 1 lye.

Lady Ran. There is a gen'rous spirit in thy breast,

That could have well fuftain'd a prouder fortune.
-This way with me; under yon spreading beech,
Un'een, unheard, by human eye or ear,
I will amaze thee with a wond'rous tale.

ATorv. Let there be danger, lady, with the secret,

That I may hug it to my grateful heart,
And prove my faith. Command my sword, my life:
These are the sole pofeffions of poor NOPVAL.

Lady Ran. Know'fl thou these gems?
_arv. Durst I believe mine eyes '
I'd fay I knew them, and they were my father's..

Lady Ran. Thy father's fay'ft thou ! ah! they were

thy father's!

Nsr'. I saw them once, and curiouflyenquir'd

Of both my parents whence such splendor came ?
But I was check'd, and more could never learn.

Lady Ran. Then learnof me thou art not NoRVAL'S

son.

Norv. Not NoRVAL's son!
Lady Ran. Nor of a shepherd sprung.
Nsor'. Lady, who am I then ?
Lady Ran. Noble thou art
For noble was thy fire!

Nsr-z'. I will believe---

O ! tell me farther! Say, who was my father?

Lady Ran. DOUGLAS!
N]; v. Lord DouGLAs, whom to day I saw?
Lady Ran. His younger brother.
Nor,'. And in yonder camp ?
Lady Ran. Alas!

rv.-j. You make me tremble-Sighs and tears !
Lives my brave father ?

Lady Ran. Ah! too braveindeed!
He fell in battle ere thyself was born.

Nrv-. Ah me unhappy! ere I saw the light ?

Bat does my miother live ? I miay conclude,
From my ov.n fate, her portion has been sorrow.

Lady

Lady Ran. She lives; but waftes her life in constant

woe,

Weeping her husband slain, her infant loft.

Norv. You that are lkill'd so well in the fad flory

Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their destiny, now have compafion
Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd.
O ! tell me who, and where my mother is!
Oppreftl by a base world, perhaps ihe bends
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief;

; And desolate, implores of heav'n, the aid

Her son hould give. It is, it must be so--
Your countenance confesses that the's wretched.
0! tell me her condition! Can the sword
*: Who thall resist me in a parent's cause ?
: Lady Ran. Thy virtue ends her woe.-My son, my

son!
lain thy mother, and the wifeof DOUGLAS !

[Falls upon his neck.

Nor-v. 0 heav'n and earth, how wond'rous is my fate!

Art thou my mother ! Ever let me kneel!

Lady Ran. Imnage of Do uGLAs ! Fruit of fatal love !
: All that I owe thy fire Ipay to thee.

Norv. Refpea and admiration frill pofifels me,
Checking the love and fondness of a son.
Yet I was filial to my humble parents.
i But did my fire surpass the reft of men,
|As thou excellefR all of womankind ?
[ Lady Ran. Arise, my son! iin me thou doff behold
The poor remains of beauty once admir'd:
The autumn of my days is come already;
[For sorrow made my summer haffe awayv.
Yet in my pi ime I equal'd not thy father:
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet someti.mes
Liker the dove's, and as he pleas'd, he wvon
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

No',v. How did he fall? Sure 'twas a bloocdy field
When DouGLAs died. 0 1 have much to aik!
LadyRan. Hereafter thou ihair hear the lenghlien'd

tale

f all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
present tlis; Thou art the rightful heir

D .Of

Of yonder castle, and the wide domains
Which now Lord RAnDOLPH, asimy husband, holds.
But thou halt not be wrong'd; I have the power ,
To right thee fill Before the king I'll kneel,
And call Lord Do UGLAS to protect his blood.

Nory. The blood of DOUGLAS will proteat itsel£
Lady Ran. But we lhall need both friends and favour,

boy.

To wrest thy land and lordship from the gripe
Of RA.DOLPH and his kinsman. YetI think
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
My life incline the virtuous to believe.

Narv. To be the son of DOUGLAS is to me

Inheritance enough Declare my birth,
And in the field i'll seek for fame and fortune.

Lsady Ran. Thou dost not know what perils and in

justice

Await the poor man's valour. 0 ! my son !
Tihe noblel blood in all the land's abaih'd,
Having no lacquay but pale poverty.
Too long has2 thou been thus attended, DOUGLAS !
Tco long haft thou ben deem'd a peasant's child.
The v.an:on heir of some inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in the youthful sports .;
Whilt thy indignant spirit fwveii'd in vain!
Such can.ui.ely thou no more fha!t bear:
Eu hbov: I purpole to redress thy wrongs
Mui'r be iereafter toid. Piuc.ence dircdts
That we. lhould part bcfore yon chiefs return.,
Retire, and from thy rufdck follower's hand
Receive a biil.t, which thy mother's care,
AnXsicu: to fee thee, dilated before
This cafiali opportunity arose
Of private conference. It's purport mark ;
For as I there appoint we nmeet again.
Leave me, my ion ! "., frame thy manners still
To NoarAt.'s, not to noble DouGcLAS' state.

Kscrv. I will remember. Where is NoavaL now ?
- That good old man.

Lady Ran At hand concel'dhe lies,

An useful witness. But beware, my son,
Of yon GLENALVON ; in his guiky breast

·.~~~ ~ Resides

I Resides a villain's shrewdness, ever prone

To falie conjecture. He hath griev'd my heart.
1No.av. Has he indeed ? Then 'let .yon fairfe G E-.

N NALVON

Beware of me. ' . [Exit DOUGLAS.-
*^ ~ Manet Lady RANDOLPH:
Lady Ran. There burst the fmother'd'flame !.

0! thou all righteous and eternal King!.
Who father of the fatherless art call'd,

: Protea my son! --Thy inspiration, Lord !
I Hath fill'd his bosom with that sacred fire,

Which in the breasts of his forefathers burn'd:

* Set him on high like them, that he may r(Line
.The itar and glory :of his native land !

Then let the miniiter of death descend,
And bear my willing fplrit to it's place.
Yonder they come. How do bad women find..
* UnchangingafpecAts to.conceal their guilt?

When I by reason, and by juPtice urg'd,
[ Full hardly can diffemnble with these men
; In nature's pious canfe.

Enter: LordRADOLpH qnd GLENALVON.

! Lord Ran. Yon gallant chief,
: Of arms enamour'd, all repose disclaims.

Lady Ran. Be not, my Lord, by his example fway'd :-

.\rrange the bufiners of to-morrownow,
And when you enter, speak of war no more.

[Exit Lady RANDOLPH.

I anlrnt Lord RA.N.DOLPH and GrLENA.Lvo N.
Lord Ran. 'Tis so by heav'n ! her mien, her voice, her,

eye,

A nd her inmpatience to be gone, confirm it.

Glen. He parted from her now: Behind the. mount,
Amoungft the trees, I saw him glide along.
I Lord Ran. For fad fequefrcr'd virtue ihe's renown'd!

Glen. Mol true, my Lord.
Lord Ran. Yet this diftinguilh'd dame

Invites a youth, the acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight.hour.
This assignation, (fihevjs a letter.) the affiflin freed,
Her inanirel: a~fection for the youth,
MBight breed suspicion in a husband's. brain,

~~' * Whole

Whose gentle consort all for love had wedded: .
Much more in mine. MATILDA never lov'd me.
Letno man, after me, a woman wed,
Whole heart he knows he has not; tho' the brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry:
For let her seem, like the night's shadowy queen,
Cold and contemplative ;-He cannot trust her:
She may, the will, bring ihame and sorrow on him;
The worit of sorrow, and the worst of /hames!

Glen. Yield not, my Lord, to such afflicting thoughts

But let the spirit of an huiband sleep,
'Till your own senses make a sure conclusion.
This billet must to blooming NORVAL go:
At the next turn awaits my truity spy;
I'll give it him refitted for his matter.
In the close thicket take your secret iftand;
The moon thines bright, and your own eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

Lord Ran. Thou dolt counsel well.
Glen. Permit me now to make one flight essay.

Of all the trophies which vain mortal's boast,
By wit, by valour, orby wisdom won,
The firfR and faireif, in a young man's eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Successful love
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind;
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Lord Ran. And what avails this maxim ?
Glen. Much, my lord !

Withdraw a little: I'll accost young NoR EVAL,
And with ironical derisive counsel
Explore his fpirir. If he is no more
Than humble NORVAL, by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as he is, he'l! shrink aitonifh'd from me:
Butif he be the favourite of the fair,
Lov'd by the sirs: of Ca!edonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's ipear

Lord Ran. 'Tis shrewdly thought.
Glen. When we grow loud, draw near. But let my

Lord
Hiscooling wrath refitrain. [Exit RANDOLPH.

Manet

Manet GLENALVON.

Glen. 'Tis strange by heav'n

That she should run full tilt her fond career,
To one so little known. She too that feem'd
Pure as the winter stream, whenice embofs'd
Whitens it's course. Even I did think'her chaste,'
: Whose charity exceeds not. Precious sex!

: Whose deeds lascivious pals GLENALVON'S thoughts i
i'- NORVAL appears.

His port I love; he's in a proper mood
To chide the thunder, if at him it roar'd.
Has NORVAL seen the troops ?
i Arorwv. Thefetting fun,
With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale,
And as the warriors mov'd, each poliih'd helm,
' Corflet, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at it's top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they feem'd,
An hos angelic, clad in burning arms.

Glen. Thou talk'ftit well; no leader of pur hoflt,
In founds more lofty, speaks of glorious war.

Nor.v. If I hall e'er acquire a leader's name,

!Mvy speech will be less ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itself freely ; since no part is mine
Of praise, pertaining to the great in arms.

Glen. You wrong yourself, brave fir; your martial deeds
Have rank'd you with the great: but mark me, NORVAL;
Lord KRANDOLPH'S favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know there soldiers, counsel you.
Give them all honour; seem not to command;
Life they will scarcely brook your late sprung power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

Norv'. Sir, I have been accuftom'd all my days
To hear and speak the plain and simple truth:
And tho' I have been told, that there are men
Tho borrow friendship's tongue to speak their scorn, .
etin such language I am little fkill'd.
iierefore I thank GLENALVON for his counsel,
Itho'it founded harihly. Why remind
he of my birth obscure ? Why slur my power

..... With

With fnch contemptuous terms ?

Glen. I did not mean
To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

NTrv. My pride!
Glen. Suppress it as you wilh to prosper.

Your pride's exceffire.. Yet for R.ANDOLPH'S fake'
I will not leave you to it's ralh direcion.
If thus you fwe!l, and frown at high-born men,
Will high-born men endure a shepherd's scorn!

Nrma. A ihepherd's scorn!
Glen. Yes; if you piefume

To bend on soldiers thele disdainful eyes,
As if you took the measure of their minds,
And said in secret, you're no match for me.;
What will become of you ?

Ni.?. If this were told!----- [¢fide.
Haft thou no fears for thy presumptuous self !

Glen. Ha ! Doftthou threaten me ?
Nor-v, Didft thou not hear ?
Glen.' LUnwillingly I did; a nobler foe
Had not been quefion'd thus. But such as thee---.

Nwv-. Whom dof- thou think me
Glen. Norval.
\ srv. So I am--
And who is NORvxAL in GLE::.A LVox's eyes

Glen. A peafint's son, a -wandering beggar-boy ;
At best no more, eren if he peaJ:s the truth.

Arm. Faile as thou art, do-i thou fufp4ec my truth ?
Glen. Thy truth thou'rt al a lye; and faife as hell
Is the vain-glorious tale thou told'ft to R.ANDOLPH.

Nsr-j. If I were chain'd, unarmn'd, and bedrid old,.

PerhapsI mould revile: But as I am
I have no tongue to rail. The hufilble NoaRVAL
Is of a race, who firive not but with deeds.
Did I not fear 'to freeze thy fnallow valour,
And make thee fink too fcoa beneath my-fTword,
I'd tell theev what thou art. I know thee well.

Glen. Dost thou not iknow GLE..L..O., born to conm-

mannd
Ten thoufiand flares like thee ?

Nr-v. Villain, no more:
Draw and defend thy life. I did design

Toi

To have defy'd thee in another cause:
But heaven accelerates it's vengeance on thee.

~!i Now for my own and Lady. RANDOL¥H'S wrongs.
-! Enter Lord RANDOLPH.
^- LordRan. Hold, I command you both. The man that
| Makes me his foe. '[stirs

, ~¥orv. Another voice than thine
gH That threat had vainly founded, noble RANDOLPH.

^:Glen. Hear him, my lord; he's wonderous condescend-
Mark the humility of shepherd NOirVAL! [ing!

Nor-v. Now you may scoff in safety. (Sheaths hisfword.)
Lord Ran. Speaknot thus,.

'Taunting. each other ; but-unfold to,;me
The cause of quarrel, :then I judge betwixt you.

.a r'v. Nay,. my good lord, the, I revere you much,

! My cause I plead: not,. nor demand. your judgment.
ii blufl to speak; I will'not; cannot speak.
B Th' opprobrious' words:that I from; him .have borne.
: To the liege-lord of my 'dear narive.land -
i I owe a fubje&l's homage: but ev'n .him..
| And his high arbitration' I'd:'rejec.
Within my bosom reigns another lord.;
Honour, role judge and umpire of itself.
If my free speech offend- you; noble RANDOLPH,
Revoke your favours, and let NORVA.L go
Hence as he came, alone, but not dithonour'd.
| Lord Ran. Thus far 1'11 mediate with impartial voice:
The ancient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
Suspend your purpose, 'till your country's arm,
Repel the'bold invader: then decide
The private quarrel.

Glen. I agree to this.
]KSrv. And I.

Enter SERVANT.

Ser-v. The banquet waits.
Lord Ran. We come. [Exit RAxDOPr,,H.
Glen. NoRvAL,
Let not our variance mar the social hour,
or wrong the hospitality of RANDOLPH.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkled hate,
Shall stain my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow;

'E Nor

# ACT. V. SCENE I.

Nor let our frife difgurb the gentle dame.

Xarva. Think, not so lightly, Sir, of my resentment;
When we contend again our strife is mortal.

ACT. V. SCENEI.

the Wood.

E]nte- DOUGLAS.

HIS is the place the center of the grove.
Here stands the oak, the monarch of the wood.

How sweet and rolemn is this mid-night scene!
The fiver moon, unclouded holds her way
Thro' fides where I could count each little liar.
The fanning wef: wind scarcely stirs the leaves;
The river rushing o'er its pebbled bed,
Imposes silence with a stilly found.
In such a place as this at such an hour,
If ancestry can be in aught believ'd,
Descending spirits have convers'd with nman,
And told the secrets of the world unknown.

Enter Old NORVAL.
Old Asr-'- 'Tis he. But what if he ihould chide me

hence ?
His jus reproach I fear. [DOUGLAS tturns andi fees hint.

Forgive, forgive,

Can'st thou forgive the man, the selfish man,
Who bred Sir MALCOLM'S heir a Ihepherd's son.

Doug. Kneel not to me: thou art my father fill:

Thy wisl'd for pretence now compleats my joy.
Welcome to me, my fortunes thou Ihalt share,
And ever honour'd with thy DOUGLAS live.

Old Norv. And do'ft.thou call me father ? 0 my fTon!

I think that I could die to make amends !
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
Which in the wildernefis so long conceal'd
The blossom of thy youth.

Doug. Not worse the fruit,

That in the wilderness the blossom blow'd.
Amongit the ihepherds in the humble cotes

i learn'd

I learn'd some lessons, which I'11 not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
J, who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; and, when my vassals bow,
NOB.VAL shall smooth the crested pride of DOUGLAS.

Norv. Let me but live to fee thine exaltation!

Yet grievous are my fears. O leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

Doug. Why /hould I leave them?
ANorv. Lord RANDoLPH and is kinsman seek your life.
Doug. How know'ft thou that?
ANorv. I will inform you how,

When evening came, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care;
And fondly trod in each accuftom'd path
That to the castle leads. Whil/f thus I rang'd,
I was alarm'd with unexpe&ted founds,
Of earnest voices. On the persons came:
Unseen I lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other as they talk'd, lord RANDOLPH this,
And that GLENALVON: grill of you they spoke,
And of the lady: threatning was their speech,
Tho' but imperfetly my ear could hear it.
'Twas strange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Doug. Revenge! for what?
Nor.v. For being what you are;
Sir MALCOLM'S heir: how else have you offended ?
When they were gone, I hied me tT my cottage,
And there fat muting how I best might find
Means to inform you of their wicked purpose,
But I could think of none: at last perplex'd
1 issued forth, incompafling the tower
With many a weary frep and wihfiful look.
Now providence hath brought you to my fight,
Let not your too courageous spirit scorn
The caution which I give.

Doug. I scorn it not.

My mother warn'd me of GrENALVON'S baseness:
But I will not fufpe& the noble RANDoLPH.
In our encounter with the vile assassins,
I marked his brave demeanour: him I'll truf/

E z NAyt,

Ni'orv. I fear you. will too far.
Doug. Here in this .place

I wait my mother's coming: lheihall know
What thou has: told: her. counsel I will foilow:
And cautious. ever are.a mother's counsels.
You mnufit'epart; your presence may prevent
Our interview.

N.orv. My blefling ref upon thee!

O may heavn's hband, w'.hich:fav~d thee from the'wave,
-And from the fwordof'fies, beneartbeeftill;
Turning niiichance, ifaught hangs o:er thy; head,
All upon mine! [Exit Old NO:RVAL'

Doug. Heloves:.e. like aparent;

And must not, hall not lose the son he loves,
Altho' his son has founda nobler-father.
Eventful day; how haft thou chang'd my-fate i
Once on the cold, and winter-ihaded fide
Of a bleak hill, mischancehad rooted me,
Never to thrive, child of another foil:
Transplanted now to the.gay funny vale,
Like the green thorn of May my fortune flowers.
Ye glorious ltars! high.heav'n's resplendent host {
To whom I oft have of my lot.comnplain'd,
Hear and record my foul's unalter'd .wjf!
Dead or alive, let me but be renown'd!
May heav'n inipire rome fierce gigantic Dane,
To give a bold defiance to our.hoft!
Before he speaks it out I will accept;
Like DOUGLAS conquer, orlike:DouGLAs die.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

Lady Ran. Mly son! I heard avoice -
Doug. --That voice was mine.
Lady Ran. Didft thou complain aloud to nature's ear,

That thus in dulky shades, at mid-night'hours,
By Ptealth the mother and the son shou!d meet?

· [Embracing hi.

Doug. No; on this happyday, thisbetter birth-day,
My thoughts and words are all of hope and joy.

Lady Ran. Sad fear and melancholy still divide

The empire ofmy-breaft with~hope.and joy.
Now hear what I advise.

Doug. Firt, let me tell

Wha:

: What may the tenor of your counsel change.
; Lady Ran. My heart forebodes rome evil

Doug. 'Tis not good---
Ateve, unfeenby RANDOLPH and GLENALVON,
The good old NORVAL in the grove o'er-heard
Their conversation: oft they mention'd me

E: With dreadful threarnings;. you they fomrnetimes nam'd.
:-i 'Twasfirange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
' And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Lady Ran. Defend us, gracious God! we are betray'd.:

; They have found out the secret of thy birth;
Itmuft be so. That is the great discovery.
Sir MALCOLM'S heir is come to claim his own';
And they will be reveng'd. Perhaps even now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for murder, they but wait'
A darker and more fiient hour to break
Into the chamber where they think thou sleep'ss.
This moment, this, heav'n hath. ordain'd to save thee!.
Fly to the camp, my son!

Doug. Andleave you here?
No: to the castle let us go together,
Call up the ancient servants of your house,
Who in their youth did eat your father's bread..
Then tell them loudly that 1 am your son.
If in the breasts of men one spark remains.
Offacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your caufe-will arm. I:afk but few
To drive those spoilers from my father's house.

LadyRan. 0 nature, nature! what can check thy force ?
Thou genuine offspring of the daring DOUGLAS!
But ruih not on deftrution: save thyself,
And I am safe. Tome they mean.no harm.
Thy stay but rilks thy precious life in vain.
That winding path conducs thee to'the river.
Cross where thou feeft a broad and beaten way,
Which running eafsward leads thee tothe camp.
Inftantdemand admittance to Lord DOUGLAS.
Shew himr there jewels, which his brother wore.
Thy look, thy voice, will'make him feel the truth,.
Which I by certain proof will soon confirm..

Doug. I yield me and obey: but yet my heart.
Bl at this parting. Something bids me stay

E3 A.tid

And guard a mother's life. -Oft ,have·I r.d
Of wond'rous deeds by one bold arm atchiev'd.
Our foes are two; no more: let mego:forth,
And fee if any shield can guard GIENALVON.

Lady Ran. Ifthou regard'ft thymother, or rever'ft

Thy father's mem'ry, think of this no more.
One thing I have to fay before we part:-
Long wert thou loit; _and thou art found, -mychild,.
In a mos fearful season. War and battle
I -have great..caufe to dread. Too-wellI fee
Which way the current of thy temper sets:
To day I've.found thee. -Oh! my long loft hope L
If thou to giddy valour giv't the rein,
To morrow I:maylofe my fon-forever.
The love ofthee,-beforethou faw¶ft the light,
Suftain'd my life when thy brav.efather fell.
If thou flhalt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this waste world! my son, remember mel

Doug. What shall I fay? howcan.I gieeyo.u comfot

The God of battles of my life dispose
As may be bes for you! for whose dear faike
I will not bear myfelfas I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boait founds amongst martial men.
How will inglorious caution suit my claim ?.
The pofft of fate unihrinking I maintain.
Mly country's foes muff witness who I am.
On the invaders heads 1'1 prove mny birth,
'Till friends and foes confess the genuine frain.
If in this itrife I fall, blame not your son,
Whoif he lives not honour'd, must not live.

Lady Ran. I will not utter whatmy bosom feels.

Too well I love that valour which I warn.
Farewel, my son! my counsels are but vain.

[Emtiraci
And as high heaven hath will'd it all mufft be. [feparant

Lady Ran. Gazenjiot on me, thou.wilt mifake the pat
I'11 point it out again.

[Jufit as tbey are jeparating, enter froze13e ml

. LordRANDOLPIH and GLEiALVON.]

Lord Ran. Not inher presence.
~ow-'"--

Glen. I'm prepar'd.
Lord Ran. No: ;I command thee stay.

I go alone : it never shall befaid
That I took-odds to combat mortalman.
The noblest vengeance is the most compleat.
* : ['Exit LordRANDOLP H.]

[GLENALVON ,aikes fomeftieps to the famnefde of the

tiage, lifsens and/peaks.]

Glen. Demons of death come fettle on my sword,.

And to a double flaughterguide.it home!
The lover and the huthand both muf die.

It~ ~

~ [Lord RANDO LPH :behind-thefcenes.]

Lord Ran. Draw, Villain! draw.
Doug. Assail me not, Lord RANDOLPH ;
Not as thou lov'ft thy self. [Cla/bing of swords.]

[GLEN.ALVON running out.]

Now is the time.
Enter Lady RANDOLPH at the opposite fide of the stage,.

I~~ ~ ~faint and Ibrenthlefs.
Lady Ran. Lord RANDOLPH hear me, all £haIl be-

thine own:
But spare! O spare my son!

Enter Do UGLAS with a fwordT.n each hand,

My mother's voice!
I can protect thee still.

Lady Ran. He lives, he lives:

For this, for this to heaven.eternal praise !
But sure I saw thee fall.

Doug.. It was GLEALVON.

Just as my arm had mafter'd RA NDWO LP'S sword,
The villain came behind me ; but I flew him.

Lady Ran. Behind thee! Ah; thou'rt wounded! -

my child,
How pale thou look'ft! and liall I lore tlhee' now ?

Doug. Do not despair: I feel a little faintness;
I hope it will not latt. [Leans upon his fwojrd.]

Lady Ran. There is no hope i

And we must part! the hand of death is on.thee !
0 my beloved child! 0 DOUGLAS, DOUtGLAS !

[DOUGLAS growing more and more faint.]
Doug. Too soon we part; I. have not long been.

0 deltiny!

O destiny! hardly thou deal'ft with me:
Clouded and hid, a stranger to myself,
In low and poor obscurity I liv'd.

Lady Ran. Has heav'n preferv'd thee for an end lik¢

this?

Doug. O had I fallen as my brave fathers fell,

Turning with fatal arm the tide of battle!
Like them I ihould have fmnil'd and welcom'd death.
But thus to perilh by a villain's hand!
Cat off from nature's and from glory's course,
Which never mortal was so fond to. run.

Lady Ran. Hear, justice! hear! are these the fruits of

virtue? [DOUGLAS falls.
- Doug. Unknown. I die; no tongue shall speak of

me. ---

Some noble fpinits, judging by themselves,
May yet conjecure what I might have prov.'d;
And think life only wanting to my fame r
But who ihall comfort thee ?

LadyRan. Despair.! despai'r!.
Doug. 0 had it pleas'd high heaven to let me live

A little while !--my eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apace! my mother - [Dies.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH and ANNA.
Lord Ran. Thy words, the words of truth, have

pierc'd my heart, :

I am the stain of knighthood and of arms..-
Oh ! if my brave deliverer survives
The traitor's sword.

Anna. Alas! look theremy lord,.
LordRan. The mother. and. her son ! How curst. I:

am!

Was I the cause? No: I was not the cause.
Yon matchleft villain did reduce my foul
To frantic jealousy-

Anna. My lady lives:

The agony of grief hath but fuppreft
A while her powers.

Lord Ran. But my deliverer's dead'!

The world did once esteem Lord RANDOLPH.well,.
Sincere of heart, for fpotlef honour fam'd:.
And, in my early days, glory I gain'd .nth

Beneath the holy banner of the cross.
Now past the noon.of life, thame comes upon me;i
Reproach, and infamy, and.public hate,
Are near at hand: for all mankind will think
That RAN DO LP H basely ftab'd Sir MALCOLM's heir.

[Lady.RAi DOL H recovering.
Lady Ran. Where am I. now? frill in this wretched

world!

Grief cannot break a.heart: so hard as mine.
My youth was worn in anguih : but youth's strength,
With hope's aliirance, bore the brunt of sorrow i
And train'd me on: to. be the objeca now,
On which .omnipotence displays itself,
Making: afpetacle,a tale of me,
To awe it's vassal, man.

Lord 'Ran. 0 nifery !

Amidst thy raging grief I muff proclaim
My innocence.
H Lady Ran. Thy innocence!
Lord Ran. Myguilt

Is innocence, compared with what thou think's: it.

Lady Ran. Of thee I think not: what have I to do
With thee, or any thing ? My bn ! my son!
My beautiful ! my brave! how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy valour! my fond heart
O'erflow'd this day withrtranfport, when t thought
Of growing old amidst a race of thine,
Who might make up to me their fa' her's childhood,
And bear my brother's and my husband's name;
Now all my hopes are dead! A little while
- Was 1 a wife! a mother not so long !
What am I now ? -- Iknow. But I shall be
That only whilst I pleale; for such a son
And such a hufoand make a woman bold. [Runs out.

Lord Ran. Follow her, ANNA: I myself would follow,
But in this rage the muff abhor my presence.

[Exit AN 'A.

|Enter Old NORVAL.
A'Norv. I heard 'the voice of woe; -heaven .guard my

child!

Lord Ran,. Already isthe idle gaping croud,
The spiteful vulgar, come to gaze on RANDoiLPH.
iegone. N&r'.I,

Noro. I fear thee not. I will not go.'

Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplice, Lord,
With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help
To crush down to the ground this lovely plant.
0 noblest youth that ever yet was born!
Sweetest and best, gentlest and bravest spirit,
That ever blest the world! Wretch that I am,
Who saw that noble sprit swell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it!
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do thee justice, and reveal the secret,
Which timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's snare. Oh ! I am punifh'd now!
These are the hairs that Ihould have ftrew'd the ground,
And not the locks of DOUGLAS.

[Tears his hair, and throws him, l upon l

graound.

Lord Ran. I know thee now: thyboldnefs I forglve:;

My crest is fallen. For thee I will appoint
A place of reft, if grief will let thee reit.
I will reward, altho'I cannot punish.
Curfi, curit GLENALVON, he efcap'd too well,
Tho' slain and bafled by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the lafit,
Curling his conqueror, the felon dy'd.

Enter ANNA.

Anna. My Lord, my Lord !
Lord Ran. Speak: I can hear of horror.
Anna. Horror indeed !
Lord Ran. MATILDA ?
Anna. Is no more:

She ran, he flew like light'ning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice ihe gain'd,
Beneath whofelow'ring top the river falls
Ingulph'd in rifted rocks: thither ihe came,
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong dovwn -

Lord Ran. 'Twas I! alas! 'twas I

That filI'd her breast with firy ; drove her down
The precipice of death! Wretch that I am!

Anna. 0 had you seen her last despairing look!
Upon the brink she stood, and call her eyes.

'Dma

Down on the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heaven, feemlng to Cay,
Why am I forc'd to this? Sheplung'd her.elf
Into thle empty air.

Lord Ran. I will not vent,
In vain complaints, the paliion of my foul.
Peacein this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of RANDOLPH gave.

BThey fpeakaloud, and with the voice of fate

Denoute mty "
doom. I-am resolv'd. I'll go

battle, where the man that makes

Me turn aside musi threaten wors.e than death.
Thou, faithful to thy mittrefs, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Letevery re

ith col and pomp upon theizr funerals wait:
,For RAND oLPr hopes he never hall return.

FINIs..

# EPILOGUE. Spoken by Mr. BARRY.

[60]
EPILOGUE.

Spoken by Mr. BAR R:;Y.
A V Epilogue I ak'd; but not one word

Our bard will write. He cvows 'tis mojl absurd

With comic wit to contradic the strain
e.s tragedy, and make your sorro-ws vain.
Sadly be fays, that pity is the heft,
The noblest passon of the human br.east:
For when its facredftreams tbe heart o'er-flow,
In gu/bes pkafure ,with the tide of woe;
And -when its wa-vas retire, like those of Nile,
They leave behind th-rifuch a golden foil,
Trhat there the virtzes without culture grow,
There theft'eet bloSms of affeion blow.
Thef were bis wrdsi ;-v-id of delufire art
I felt them; fir bespoke them from his heart.
Nor will I new attempt, witb witty folly,
Tre cbace a-'ay celefmial mnldanchsly.

*."t^ .... -
