DO U LAS

A
TRAGED Y.

As it is ated at the
TH E AT R E-RO YA L

I N
C O V EN T-G AR D EN.

Non ego fum vates, fed prifci confcius wvi.

LONDON:
Printed for A, M L L A R, in the Strand.

MDCCLVII.,

# PROLOGUE.

P R O L OG UE.

Spoken by Mr. S P A R K S.
IN antient times, when Britain's trade was arms,

And the lov'd muick of her youth, alarms.

Agod-like race fujiain'dfair England's fame:
Who bas mt heard of gallant PIERCY's name ?
Ay, and of DOUGLAS ? Such illuflrious foes
In rival Rome and Carthage never rase !
From age to age bright Jhone the British fire,
And every hero was · hro's fire.
When powerful fate decreed one warrior's doom,
Up sprung the Phenix fromn his parent's tomb.
But whil? there generous rivals fought and fll,
seise generous rivals lov'd each other well:
Tho' many a bloody sie'd was lIJl and won,
Nothing in hate, in honour all was done.
When PI ERCY wrong'd defy'd his prince or peers,
Fajf came the DOUGLAS, with his Scottifhfpears;
And, when proud DOUGLAS made his King hisfoe,
For DOUGLAS, PIERC Y bent his English bow.
Expeli'd their native homes by adverfefate,
They knock,'d alternate at each other's gate:

Then

Then bl4atd the cql/H at the midnight her,
Fr him whobj arms bad jok its firmefitawr,
This night a DOUGLAS yourproteaion claims;
A wife ! a mother ! pity's softef names:
nhe flry of her wees indulgent hear,
And grant your suppliant all he begs, a tear.
In confidncejh begs; and hopes tofind
Each Englifih breaf/, like noble PIERCY' kind.

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

DRAMATIS P.E R Q N E.

Lord RANDOLPH, Mr. RIDOUT'

GLENALVON, Mr. SMITH.

NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. BARRY.

STRANGER, Mr. SPAR1CS.
SERVANTS.

W OME N.
MATILDAP Lady:R- } 'MS. WOFFINGTON;

.r~EJA ' '

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ, as represented at EDINBURGH.

DRAMATIS PERSONA, as represented

at ED-INB;UR H.--

Lord RANDOLPH, Mr. YOUNGER.

GLENALVON, Mr. Love.

NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. DoIos.

STRANGER, Mr. HAYMAN.
SERVANTS, &C.

MW.O ENN. rN .-

MAT!LpA, Lady RANDOLPH, Mrs. WARD.
ANNA, 'J' 58 Mrs. HOPKINS.

# ACT I. SCENE I.

D O U G L A S:

A
T R A G E D Y.

ACT I. SCENE I.
the court of a castle, surrounded with woods.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.
Y E woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom

Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth
The voice of sorrow from my burfling heart,
Farewel a while: I will not leave you long;

For in your {hades I deem some spirit dwells,
Who from the chiding fiream, or groaning oak,
Still hears, and answers to MATILDA'S moan.
0 DOUGLAS ! DOUGLAS! If departed ghofls

B Are

Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of that wood thou art,
And with the passion of immortals hear'st
My lamentation: hear'st thy wretched wife
Weep for her husband slain, her infant loft.
My brother's timeless death I seem to mourn;
Who perilsh'd with thee on this fatal day.
'To thee I lift my voice; to thee address
The plaint which mortal ear has never heard.
O disregard me not; though I am call'd
Another's now, my heart is wholly thine.
Incapable of change, affection lies
Buried, my DOUGLAS, in thy bloody grave.
But RANDOLPH comes, whom fate has made my Lord,
To chide my anguish, and defraud the dead.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.

Again these weeds of woe ! fay, do'st thou well
To feed a passion which consumes thy life ?
The living claim some duty; vainly thou
Beltow'ft thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Silent, alas ! is he for whom I mourn:
Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Time, that wears out the trace of deepest anguish,
Has past o'er thee in vain. Wou'd thou wer't not
Compos'd of grief and tenderness alone !
Sure thou art not the daughter of Sir MALCOLM:
Strong was his rage, eternal his resentment:
For when thy brother fell, he fmil'd to hear
That DOUGLAS' son in the fame field was slain.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Oh ! rake not up the ashes of my fathers:
Implacable resentment was their crime,
And grievous has the expiation been.

Con-

Contending with the Do GLAS, gallant lives
Of either house were lolf; my anceflors
Compell'd, at last, to leave their ancient feat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
No heir is left. Had they not been so stern,
I had not been the last of all my race.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thy grief wrests to its purposes my words.
I never ask'd of thee that ardent love,
Which in the breasts of fancy's children burns.
Decent affection, and complacent kindness
Were all I wish'd for; but I wish'd in vain.
Hence with the less regret my eyes behold
The form of war that gathers o'er this land:
If I Ihould perih' by the Danish sword,
MATILDA would not shed one tear the more.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thou do'st not think so: woeful as I am
I love thy merit, and esteem thy virtues.
But whither goeft thou now ?

Lord RANDOLPH.

Straight to the camp,

Where every-warrior on the tip-toe stands
Of expectation, and impatient asks
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are landed.

Lady RANDOLPH.

0, may adverse winds,

Far from the coast of Scotland, drive their fleet!
And every soldier of both hosts return
In peace and safety to his pleasant home !

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thou fpeak'ft a woman's, hear a warrior's wish:
Right from their native land, the stormy north,
May the wind blow, till every keel is six'd

B 2 I-

Immoveable in Caledonia's ltrand !
Then shall our foes repent their bold invasion,
And roving armies shun the fatal shore.

Lady RAtNOLPH.

War I detest: but war with foreign foes,
Whose manners, language, and whole looks are firange,
Is not so horrid, nor to me so hateful,
As that which with our neighbours oft we wage.
A river here, there an ideal line
By fancy drawn, divides the sifter kingdoms.
On each fide dwells a people similar,
As twins are to each other, valiant both,
Both for their valour famous thro' the world.
Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
And, if they must have war, wage distant war,
But with each other fight in cruel confRi&.
Gallant in strife, and noble in their ire,
' he battle is their pastime. They go forth
Gay in the morning, as to summer sport:
When ev'ning comes, the glory of the morn,
The youthful warrior, is a clod of clay.
Thus fall the prime of either hapless land;
And such the fruit of Scotch and Englilh wars.

Lord RANDOLPH.

I'll hear no more: this melody would make
A soldier drop his sword, and doff his arms,
Sit down and weep the conquests he has made;
Yea, (like a monk), sing reit and peace in heav'n
To fouls of warriours in his battles slain.
Lady, farewel: I leave-thee not alone;
Yonder comes one wliofe love makes duty light.

Enter ANNA.

ANNA.

Forgive the rashness of your ANNA'S love:
Urg'd by affection, I have thus prefum'd

To

To interrupt your solitary thoughts;
And warn you of the hours that you negleft,
And lose in sadness.

Lady RANDOLPH.

So to 4ofe my hours
Is all the use I wvifh to make of time.

ANNA.

To blame thee, lady, suits not with my state:
But sure I am, since death first prey'd on man,
Never did fiter thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had loft,
In early youth, the husband of your heart ?

Lady RANDOLPH.
Oh!

ANNA.

Have I difirelt you with officious love,
And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate ?
Forgive me, lady: humble tho' I am,
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune:
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears I'd throw my life away.

Lady RANDOLPH.

What power directed thy unconscious tongue
To speak as thou haft done ? to name

ANNA.

I know not:

But since my words have made my mistress tremble,
I will speak so no more; but silent mix
My tears with hers.

Lady RANDOLPH.

No, thou shalt not be silent.

I'll trust thy faithful love, and thou ihalt be
Ioneeforth th' inftru&ed partner of my woes.
But what avails it ? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never-ebbing time ?

B 3 Com-

Compell the earth and ocean to give up
Their dead alive ?

ANNA.

What means my noble mistress ?
Lady RANDOLPH.

Didft thou not ask what had my sorrows been ?-
If I in early youth had loft a husband ?--
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'd,
Mangl'd with wounds, the husband of my youth;
And in some cavern of the ocean lyes
My child and his.-- - --

ANNA.

0 ! lady, most rever'd !

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Alas ! an anciert feud,

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother flould in battle save
'l he life of DOUGLAS' son, our house's foe t
The youthful waxriours vow'd eternal friendlhip.
To fee the vaunted filter of his friend
Impatient, DOUGLAS to Balarmo came,
Under a borrow'd name.-My hearthe gain'd;
Nor did I long refuse the hand he begg'd:
My brother's presence authoriz'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little weeks, with wings of down,
Had o'er us flown; when my lov'd lord was call'd
To fight his father's battles; and with him,
In spite of all my tears, did MALCOLM go.
Scarce were they gone, whea.my tern fire was told
That the false firanger wasJord DOUGLAS' son.
Frantic with rage, the baron drew his sword
And queftion'd inc. Alone, forsaken, faint,
Kneeling bencath his sward, fault'ring I took

An

An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
Wed one of DOUGLAS name. Sincerity
Thou first of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thy onward path ! altho' the earth should gape,
And from the gulf of hell deftruAion cry
To take dissimulation's winding way.

ANNA.

Alas ! how few of woman's fearful kind
Durst own a truth so hardy !

Lady RANDOLPH.

The first truth

Is easiest to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale.-
In a few days the dreadful tidings came
That Do UGLAS and my brother both were slain.
My lord ! my life ! my hulband !- mighty God !
What had I done to merit such afflition ?

ANNA.

My dearest lady I Many a tale of tears
I've listen'd to; but never did I hear
A tale so fad as this.

Lady RANDOLPH.

In the firfl days

Of my distracting grief, I found myself-
As women with to be who love their lords.
But who durst tell my father ? The good priest
Who join'd our hands, my brother's antient tutour,
With his lov'd MALCOLM, in the battle fell.:
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till time ihould make my father's fortune mine.
That very night on which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confident I had,
Set out with him to reach her sifter's house:
But nurse, nor infant, have I ever seen,
Or heard of, ANNA, since that fatal hour.
My murder'd child !-had thy fond mother sear'd

B 4

The loss of thee, /he had loud fame defy'd,
Defpis'd her father's rage, her father's grief,
And wander'd with thee thro' the scorning word.

ANNA.
Not seen, nor heard of! 'then perhaps he lives.

Lady RANDOLPH.

No. It was dark December: wind and rain
Had beat all night. Across the Carron lay
The deftin'd road; and in it's fwvelling flood
My faithful servant perifh'd with my child.
0 hapless son ! of a most ihapldfs fire !-
But they are both at reft ; and I alone
Dwell in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk,
Like a guilt-troubl'd ghost, my painful rounds
Nor has despiteful fate permitted me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Tho' dead to love, I was compell'd to wed
RANDOLPH, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms;
And RANDOLPH now polffies the dormais,
That by Sir MALCOLM'S death on me devocv'd;
Domains, that fhonld to DOUGLAS' son have givea
A baron's title, and a baron's power.
Such were my soothing thoughts, while I bewail'd
The flaughter'd father of a son unborn.
And when that fen came, like a ray from -heav'n,
Which shines and disappears; alas ! my child !
How long did thy fond mother grasp the hope
Of having thee, she knew not how, reftor'd.
Year after year hath worn her hope away;
But left fill undiminilh'd her desire.

A:NNA.

The hand, that spins th' uneven thread of life,
May fiooth the length that's yet to come of your's.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Not in this world: I have confider'd well
It s various evils, and on whom they fall.

Alas !

Alas! how oft does goodness wound itself?
And sweet affetion prove the spring of woe
O ! had I died when my lov'd huiband fell!
Had fame good angel op'd to me the book
Of providence, and let me read ny life,
My heart had broke, when I beheld the fum
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

ANNA.

That God, whose ministers good angels are,
Hath shut the book in mercy to mankind.
But we must leave this theme: GLENALVON comes:
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitherwards he slowly stalks his way.

Lady RANDOLPH.

I will avoid him. An ungracious person
Is doubly irksome in an hour like this.

ANNA.
Why speaks my lady thus of RANDoLPH's heir ?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Because he's not the heir of RANDOLPH'S virtues.
Subtle and fhriewd, be offers to mankind
An artificial image of himself: .
And he with ease can vary to the tafe
Of different men, it's features. · Self.denied,
And matter of his appetites he seems:
But his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,
Watches to seize unseen the wifh'd-for prey.
Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
As in GLENALVON'S unrelenting mind.
Yet is he brave and politic in war,
And itands aloft in these unruly times.
Why I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter;
Stay and detain him till I reach the castle.

[Exit Lady RANDOLPH.

ANNA.

ANNA.

0 happiness! where art thou to be found ?
I fee thou dwelleft not with birth and beauty,
Tho' grac'd with grandeur, and in wealth array'd:
Nor dost thou, it would.feem, with virtue dwell;
Else had this gentle lady mifs'd thee not.

Enter GLENALVON.

GLENALVON.

What doll thou muse on, meditating maid ?
Like some entranc'd and visionary seer
On earth thou ftand'ft, thy thoughts ascend to heaven.

ANNA.

Wou'd that I were, e'en as thou fay'ft, a seer,
To have my doubts by heav'nly vilion clear'd !

GLENALVON.

What dost thou doubt of? what haft thou to da
With fubjets intricate ? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be queflioned: think of there good gifts;
And then thy contemplations will be pleasing.

ANNA.

Let women view yon monument of woe,
Then boast of beauty: who so fair as Ihe ?
But I must follow: this revolving day
Awakes the memory of her ancient woes.

[Exit ANNA.

GLENALVON solus.

So !-Lady RANDOLPH shuns me; by and by
I'll woo her as the lion wooes his brides.
'The deed's a doing pow, that makes me lord
Of these rich valleys, and a chief of power.
T'he season is most apt; my founding fleps
Will not be heard amidst the din of arms.

RAN-

RANDOLPH has liv'd too long: his better fate
Had the ascendant once, and kept me down:
When I had seiz'd the dame, by chance he came,
Refcu'd and had the lady for his labour;
I 'fcap'd unknown: a slender consolation !
Heaven is my witness that I do not love
To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvest. Yet I am not safe:
By love, or something like it, flung, inflam'd,
Madly I blabb'd my pallion to his wife,
And The has threaten'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will I do not know:
But well I know the baron's wrath is deadly.
I will not live in fear: the man I dread
Is as a Dane to me; ay, and the man
Who stands betwixt me and my chief desire.
No bar but he; she has no kinsman near;
No brother in his sifter's quarrel bold;
And for the righteous cause, a stranger's cause,
I know no chief that will defy GLENALVON.

End of the FIRST ACT.

ACT

# ACT II. SCENE I.

ACT I. SCENE I.

A Court, &c.
Enter fervanis and a JIranger at one door, and Lady RAN.

DOLPH and ANNA at another.

Lady RANDOLPH.
W HAT means this clamour ? firanger, speak secure;

Haft thou been wrong'd? have these rude men
To vex the weary traveller on his way ? [prefum'd

* Firt SERVANT.

By us no firanger ever fuffer'd wrong:
This man with outcry wild has call'd us forth;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
Enter Lord RANDOLPH and young man, with their fztjrds

drawn and bloody.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Not vain the firanger's fears ! how fares my lord ?

Lord RANDOLPH.

That it fares well, thanks to this gallant youth,
Whose valour fav'd me from a wretched death !
As down the winding dale I walk'd alone,
At the cross way four armed men attack'd me:
Rovers, I judge, from the licentious camp,
Who would have quickly laid Lord RANDOLPH IOW,
ILad not this brave and generous stranger come,

Like

Like my good angel in the hour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my foes his own.
They turn'd upon ,him: but his active arm
Struck to the ground, from whence they rose no more,
The fiercest two; the others fled amain,
And left him master of the bloody field.
Speak, Lady RANDOLPH: upon Beauty's tongue
Dwell accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
Speak, noble dame, and thank him for thy lord.

Lady RANDOLPH.

My lord, I cannot speak what now I feel.
My heart o'erflows with gratitude to heav'n,
And to this noble youth, who all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but humanely brave
Fought on your fide, against such fearful odds.
Have you yet learn'd of him whom we should thank ?
Whom call the saviour of Lord RANDOLPH'S life ?

Lord RANDOLPH.

I ask'd that question, and he anfwer'd nof:
But I must know who my deliverer is. (to the Stranger)

STRANGER.

A low born man, of parentage obscure,
Who nought can boast but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled
By the great King of Kings ! thou art ordain'd
And ftampt a hero by the sovereign hand
Of nature ! blufl not, flower of modesty
As well as valour, to declare thy birth.

STRANGER.

My name is NORVAL : on the Grampian hills
My father feeds his flocks'; a frugal swain,
Whose constant cares were to encreafe his store,

And

And keep his only son, myself, at home.
For I had heard of battles, and I long'd
To follow to the field some warlike lord;
And heaven soon granted what my fire denied.
This moon which rose last night, round as my (hield,
Had not yet fill'd her horns, when, by her light,
A band of fierce barbarians, from the hills,
Rulh'd like a torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The shepherds fled
For safety, and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'd about the endmy, and mark'd
The road he took, then halted to my friends;
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
1 met advancing. The pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook the fpoil-encumber'd foe.
We fought and conquer'd. E're a sword was drawn,
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Returning home in triumph, I difdain'd
The shepherd's slothful life; and having heard
That our good king had fummon'd his bold pcers
To lead their warliours to the Car-on fide,
I left my father's house, and took with me
A choten servant to condu& my lteps :-
Yon trembling coward who forsook his mailer.
Journeying with this intent, I past there to:ers,
And, heaven-dire&ed, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

Lord RANDOLPH.

He is as wife as brave. Was ever tale
With such a gallant modefly rehears'd ?
My brave deliverer ! thou mfalt enter now
A nobler lift, and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame.

I will

I will present thee to our Scottish king,
Whose valiant spirit ever valour lov'd.
Ha ! my MATILDA ! wherefore itarts that tear ?

Lady RANDOLPH.

I cannot fay: for various affe&ions,
And strangely mingled, in my bosom swell;
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
I joy that thou art safe; and admire
Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety.
Obscure and friendless, he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, and with his sword
To gain diftintion which his birth denied.
In this attempt unknown he might have perith'd,
And gain'd,with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope
He flands conspicuous; fame and great renown
Are brought within the compass of his sword.
On this my mind reflected, whilst you spoke,
And blefs'd the wonder-working Lord of heaven.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts !
My deeds shall follow where thou point'ft the way.
Next to myself, and equal to GIENALVON,
In honour and command shall NORVAL be.

NORVAL.

I know not how to thank you. Rude I am,
In speech and manners : never till this hour
Stood I in such a presence: yet, my lord,
There's something in my breast which makes me bold
To fay, that NORVAL ne'er will Ihame thy favour.

Lady RANDOLPH.
I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou shalt be

My

My knight; and ever, as thou didft to-day,
With happy valour guard the life of RANDOLPH.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Well haft thou spoke. Let me forbid reply. [To NORVAL.
We are thy debtors fill; thy high desert
O'ertops our gratintde. I must proceed,
As was at first intended, to the camp.
Some of my'train I fee are speeding hither,
Impatient, doubtless, of their lord's delay.
Go with me, NORVAL, and thine eyes ihall fee
The chosen warriors of thy native land,
Who languish for the fight, and beat the air
With brandifh'd swords.

NORVAL.

Let us begone, my lord.
Lord RANDOLPH.

[To Lady RANDOLPH.

About the time that the declining fun
Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills suspend,
Expeft us to return. This night once more
Within there walls I reft; my tent I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepare the fealt.
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
He in the eve of battle may resign
Himself to social pleasure; sweetest then,
When danger to a soldier's foul endears
The human joy that never may return.

Exeunt RANDOLPH and NORVAL.

SCENE II.
Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lady RANDOLPH.

His parting words have firuck a fatal truth.
0 DOUGLAS ! DOUGLAS! tender was the time

z When

When we two parted, ne'er to meet again !
How many years of anguish and despair
Has heav'n annex'd to those swift passing hours
Of love and fondness ! Then my bosom's flame
Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of fear,
Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.

ANNA.

May gracious heav'n pour the sweet balm of peace
Into the wounds that fester in your breast !
For earthly consolation cannot cure them.

Lady RANDOLPH.

One only cure can heav'n itself bestow;-
A grave-that bed in which the weary reft.
Wretch that I am! Alas ! why am I so ?
At every happy parent I repine I
How blest the mother of yon gallant NORVAL I
She for a living husband bore her pains,
And heard him bless her when a man was born.
She nurs'd her fmillng infant on her breast;
Tended the child, and rear'd the pleasing boy;
She, with affetion's- triumph, saw the youth
In grace and comeliness surpass his peers :
\Vhilft I to a dead hulband bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child;

ANNA.

Alas ! alas ! why will you thus resume
Your grief afresh ? I thought that gallant youth
Would for a while have won you from your woe.
On him intent you gazed, with a look
Much more delighted, than your pensive eye
Has deign'd on other obje&ts to bestow.

Lady RANDOLPH,
Delighted fay'l thou ? Oh ! even there mine eye

C Found

Found fuel for my life-confuming sorrow.
I thought, that had the son of Do GLAS liv'd,
He might have been like this young gallant firanger,
And pair'd with him in features and in Ihape,
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
My boy with blooming NORVAL might have number'd.
Whilst thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness
For this young stranger, wand'ring from his home,
And like an orphan cast upon my care.
I will protec thee, (said I to myself)
With all my power, and grace with all my favour.

ANNA.

Sure heav'n will bless so gen'rous a resolve.
You mult, my noble dame, exert your power:
You must awake: devices will be fram'd,
And arrows pointed at the breast of NORVAL.

Lady RANDOLPH.

GLENALVON'S false and crafty head will work
Againfi a rival in his kinsman's love,
If I deter him not: I only can.
Bold as he is, GLENALVON will beware
How he pulls down the fabric that I raise.
I'll be the artist of young NORVAL'S fortune.
'Tis pleating to admire ! mofl apt was I
To this affeCtion in my better days;
Though now I seem to you fhrnnk up, retir'd
Within the narrow compass of my woe.
Have you not sometimes seen an early flower
Open it's bud, and spread it's silken leaves,
To catch sweet ails, and odours to bellow;
Then, by the keen blast nipt, pull in it's leaves,
And, tho' till living, die to scent and beauty ?

6i Ep-

Emblem of me: affliction, like a storm,
Hath kill'd the forward blossom of my heart.

Enter GLENALVON.

GLENALVON.
Where is my dearest kinsman, noble RANDOLPH ?

Lady RANDOLPH.
Have you not heard, GLENALVON, of the base--

GLENALVON.

I have : and that the villains may not scape,
With a firong band I have begirt the wood.
If they lurk there, alive they ihall be taken,
And torture force from them th' important secret
Whether tome foe of RANDOLPH hir'd their swords,
Or if-

Lady RANDOLPH.

That care becomes a kinsman's love.
I have a counsel for GLENALVON'S ear. (Exit ANNA.)

GLENALVON.
To him your counsels always are commands.

Lady RANDOLPH.
I have not found so : thou art known to me.

GLENALVON.
Known !

Lady RANDOLPH.
And most certain is my cause of knowledge.

GLENALVON.

What do you know? By the most blessed cross,
You much amaze me. No created thing,
Yourself except, durst thus accost GLENALVON.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Is guilt so bold ? and dost thou make a merit
Of thy pretended meekness? This to me,
Who, with a gentleness which duty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd what, if divulg d,
Would make thee nothing; or, what's worse than than,

C z An

An outcast beggar, and unpitied too:
For mortals shudder at a crime like thine.

GLENALVON.

Thy virtue awes me. First of womankind !
Permit mc yet to fay, that the fond man
Whom love transports beyond firi&t virtue's bounds,
If hc is brought by love to misery,
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpitied cannot be. Pity's the alms
Which on such beggars freely is beftow'd:
For mortals know that love is still their lord,
And o'er their vain resolves advances still:
As fire, when kindled by our shepherds, moves
Thro' the dry heath before the fanning wind.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Reserve these accents for tome other ear.
To love's apology I liften not.
Mark thou my words; for it is meet thou should'st
His brave deliverer RANDOLPH here retains.
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well:
But, at thy peril, praftife ought against him:
Let not thy jealousy attempt to shake
And loosen the good root he has in RANDOLPH;
Whose favourites I know thou haft Supplanted.
Thou look'ft at me, as if thou fain would'st pry
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendless firanger my prote&tion claims:
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit.

SCENE

S C E N E III.

Manet GLENALVON.

Child that I was, to start at my own (hadow,
And be the (hallow fool of coward confceence !
I am not what I have been; what I {hould be.
The darts of defliny have almost pierc'd
My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I {hould conclude there was an arm above
That fought against me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch my self, the subtle snare I set.
Why, rape and murder are not simple means !
Th'imperfe& rape to RANDOLPH gavea spouse;
And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fun from me;
And worst of all, a rival. Burning hell!
-This were thy center, if I thought /he lov'd him !
'Tis certain lhe contemns me; nay commands me,
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'er me,
In his behalf. And (hall I thus be brav'd ?
Curb'd, as lie calls it, by dame chastity ?
Infernal fiends, if any fiends there are
More fierce than love, ambition, and revenge,
Rife up and fill my bosom with your fires
And policy remorseless ! Chance may spoil
A single aim; but perseverance mufi
Prosper at last. For chance and fate are words:
Perfillive wisdom is the fate of man.
Darkly a projet peers upon my mind,
Like the red moon when rising in the east,

C 1 Crofs'd

Crofs'd and divided by ftrange-colour'd clouds.
I'll seek the slave who came with NORVAL hither,
And for his cowardice was spurned from him.
I've known a follower's rankled bosom breed
Venom moll fatal to his heedless lord. [Exit.

End of the SECOND ACT.

ACT

# ACT III. SCENE I.

ACT III. SCENE I.

A Court, &c. as before.

Enter ANNA.

ANNA.
T'HY vassals, Grief! great nature's order break,

And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour.

Whilst Lady RANDOLPH sleeps I will walk forth,
And taste the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers be ! Ye mininifers
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,
Angels and seraphs who delight in goodness !
Forsake your skies, and to her couch descend i
There from her fancy chafe those dismal forms
That haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
With images celeflial, such as please
The blest above upon their golden beds.

Enter SERVANT.

SERVANT.

One of the vile altaffins is fecur'd.
WVe found the villain lurking in the wood:
With dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not
His firll efay : these jewels were conccal'd
In the most iecret places of his garment;
Belike the spoils of some that he has murder'd.

ANNA.

Let me look on them. Ha ! here is a heart,'
The chosen crest of DOUGLAS' valiant name!

C 4 These

These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch.

[Exit ANNA.
Entirfervants with a Prisoner.

PRISONER.

1 know no more than does the child unborn
Of what you charge me with.

First SERVANT.

You fay so, fir !

But torture soon fiall make you fpcak the truth.
Behold the Lady of Lord RANDOLPH comes:
Prepare yourself to meet her just revenge.

SCENE 1I.
Enter Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

ANNA.

Summon your utmost fortitude, before
You speak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
Are now at stake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may fly.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thou (halt behold me, with a desperate heart,
Hear how my infant perifh'd. See he kneels.

[The p i/fner kneels.

PRISOoNER.

Heav'n bless that countenance, so sweet and mild !
4 judge like thee makes innocence more bold.
0 save me, lady ! from these cruel men,
Who have attack'd and seiz'd me; who accuse
Me of intended murder. As I hope
For mercy at the judgment feat of God,
The tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
Is not more innocent than I of murder.

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.
Of this man's guilt what proof can ye produce ?

First SERVANT.

We found him lurking in the hollow Glynn.
When view'd and call'd upon, amaz'd, he fled.
We overtook him, and enquir-d from whence
And what he was: he said he came from far,
And was upon his journey to the camp.
Not satisfied with this, we fearch'd his cloaths,
And found thefejewels; whose rich value plead
Most powerfully against him. Hard he fcems
And old in villainy. Permit us try
His ftubbornefs against the torture's force.

PRISONER.

O gentle lady ! by your lord's dear life !
Which these weak hands, I swear, did ne'er assail;
And by your children's welfare, spare my age !
Let not the iron tear my ancient joints,
And my grey hairs bring to the grave with pain.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Account for there : thine own they cannot be:
For these, I fay: be stedfast to the truth;
Deteded falsehood is most certain death.

[AN NA removes the servants and returns,]

PRISONER.

Alas ! I'm fore beset ! let never man,
For fake of lucre, fin against his foul!
Eternal juflice is in this most just !
I, guiltless now, must former guilt reveal.

Lady RANDOLPH.

P ! ANNA hear !-once more I charge thee speak
The truth diret : for these tome foretell
And certify a part of thy narration ;
With which if the remainder tallies not,
An instant and a dreadful death abides thee.

PRI-

PRISONER.

Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speak to you as just
As if you were the minister of heaven,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men.

Some eighteen years ago, I rented land

Of brave Sir MALCOLM, then BALARMO'S lord;
But falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
All that I had, and then turn'd me and mine,
(Four helpless infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel by the river's fide
Rcceiv'd us: there hard labour, and the skill
In fishing, which was formerly my sport,
Supported life. Whilst thus we poorly liv'd,
One flormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down, and loud and oft
The angry spirit of the water flriek'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
Of one in jeopardy. I rose, and ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach whatever floating thing the stream
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd; the person lofl:
But looking fad and earnest on the waters,
BY the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round,
A balket: soon I drew it to the bank,
And neflled curious there an infant lay.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Was he alive ?

PRISONER.

He was.
Lady RANDOLPH.

Inhuman that thou art!
How couldst thou kill what waves and tempests spar'd ?

PRI-

PRISONER.
I am not so inhuman.

Lady RANDOLPH.

DidA thou not ?

ANNA.

My noble mistress, you are mov'd too much:
This man has not the aspet of flern murder;
Let him go on, and you, I hope, will hear
Good tidings of your kinsman's long loft child.

PRISONER.

The needy man, who has known better days,
One whom distress has spited at the world,
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds, as makes the prosperous men
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them.
And such a man was I; a man declin'd,
Who saw no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have touch'd that infant, with a hand of harm.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Ha ! dost thou fay so ? Then perhaps he lives !

PRISONER.
Not many days ago he was alive.

Lady RANDOLPH.
O ! God of heav'n ! Did he then die so lately?

PRISONER.

I did not fay he died; I hope he lives.
Not many days ago these eyes beheld
Him, flourishing in youth, and health, and beauty.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Where is he now ?

PRISONER.
Alas! I know not where.

,.' '.~ Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Oh fate ! I fear thee still. Thou riddler, speak
Direc and clear; else I will search thy foul.

ANNA.

Permit me, ever honour'd ! Keen impatience,
Tho' hard to be reftrain'd, defeats itself.-
Pursue thy tfory with a faithful tongue,
To the lalf hour that thou didft keep the child.

PRISONER.

Fear not my faith, tho' I must speak my Ihame.
Within the cradle, where the infant lay,
Was itow'd a mighty store of gold and jewels;
Tempted by which we did resolve to hide,
From all the world, this wonderful event,
And like a peasant breed the noble child.
That none.might mark the change of our estate,
We left the country, travell'd to the north,
Bought flocks and herds, and gradually brought forth
Our secret wealth, But God's all-feeing eye
Beheld our avarice, and finotc us fore.
For one by one all our own children died,
And he, the firanger, sole remain'd the heir
Of what indeed was his. Fain then would I,
Who with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
Have trusted him, now in the dawn of youth,
With his own secret: but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never would content.
Mcan while the stripling grew in years and beauty ,
And, as we oft obfcrv'd, he bore himself,
Not as the offspring of our cottage blood;
For nature will break out: mild with the mild,
But with the froward he was fierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I fct myself against his warlike bent;
But all in vain : for when a desperate band
Of robbers fiom the iaavage mountains came-

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.
Eternal providence ! What is thy name ?

PRISONER.
My name is NORVAL; and my name he bears,

Lady RANDOLPH.

'Tis he; 'tis he himself ! It is my son!
O sovereign mercy ! 'Twas my child I saw !
No wonder, ANNA, that my bosom burn'd.

ANNA.

Jufi are your transports: ne'er was woman's heart
Prov'd with such fierce extremes. High fated dame!
But yet remember that you are beheld
By servile eyes; your geflures may be seen
Impaffion'd, firange; perhaps your words o'erheard.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Well dost thou counsel, ANNA: Heaven bellow
On me that wisdom which my state requires !

ANNA.

The moments of deliberation pass,
And soon you must resolve. This useful man
Must be difmtfs'd in safety, e'er my lord
Shall with his brave deliverer return.

PRISONER.

If I, amnidft astonishment and fear,
Have of your words and gestures rightly judg'd,
Thou art the daughter of my ancient master;
The child I refcu'd from the flood is thine.

Lady RANDOLPH.

With thee difimulation now were vain.
I am indeed the daughter of Sir MALCOLM;
The child thou refcu'dft from the flood is mine

PRISONER.

Blest be the hour that made me a poor man!
My poverty hath fav'd my malter's house !

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thy words furprize me f ure thou doll rot feign:
The tear itands in thine eye: such love from thee
Sir MALCOLM'S house deferv'd not; if aright
Thou told'ft the ilory of thy own diatres.

PRISONER.

Sir MALCOLM of our barons was the flower;
The fastest friend, the belt and kindefl master.
But ah ! he knew not of my fad estate.
After that battle, where his gallant son,
Your own brave brother, fell, the good old lord
Grew desperate and reckless of the world;
And never, as he erst was wont, went forth
To overlook the conduct of his servants.
By them I was thrust out, and them I blame:
May heaven so judge me as I judg'd my mailer i
And Godfo love me asI love his race !

Lady RANDOLPH.

His race lhall yet reward thee. On thy faith
Depends the fate of thy lot'd master's house.
Rememb'refl thou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the clifts of Carron ?

PRISONER,

I remember
The cottage of the clifts.

Lady RANDOLPH.

'Tis that I mean:

There dwells a man of venerable age,
Who in my father's service spent his youth:
Tell him I sent thee, and with him remain,
'Till I /hall call upon thee to declare,
Before the king and nobles, what thou now

To

To me haft told. No more but this, and thou
Shalt live in honour all thy future days;
Thy son so long Ihall call thee father fill,
And all the land shall bless the man, who fav'd
The son of DOUGLAS, and Sir MALCOLM'S heir.
Remember well my words: if thou fhouldfl meet
Him whom thou call'ft thy son, still call him so;
And mention nothing of his nobler father.

PRISONER.

Fear not that I shall mar fb fair an harvest,
By putting in my fickle 'ere 'ts ripe.
Why did I leave my home and ancient dame ?
To find the youth, to tell him all I knew,
And make him wear these jewels in his arms;
Which might, I thought, be challeng'd, and so bring
To light the secret of his noble birth.

[Lady RANDOLPH goes towards the Servaat.,

Lady RANDOLPH.

This man is not th'aflaflin you fufpeeed,
Tho' chance combin'd some likelyhooda againlt him.
He is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To their right owner, whom in haste he seeks.
'Tis meet that you should put him on his way,
Since your mistaken zeal hath dragg'd him hither.

[Exeunt Stranger and Scrvaft.s

S C E N E III.
Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lady RANDOLPH.

My faithful ANNA ! dost thou Ihare my joy ?
I know thou dost. Unparalell'd event !
Reaching from heaven to earth, Jehovah's arun
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings to me my fpn !
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father !

Accept

Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
For such a gift ! What does my ANNA think
Of the young eaglet of a valiant nest ?
How soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his fate had thrown him,
And tower'd up to the region of his fire !

ANNA.

How fondly did your eyes devour the boy !
Mysterious nature, with the unseen cord
Of powerful inflin&, drew you to your own.

Lady RANDOLPH.

The ready flory of his birth believ'd
Suppreft my fancy quite; nor did he owe
To any likeness my so sudden favour:
But now I long to fee his face again,
Examine every feature, and find out
.The lineaments of DOUGLAS, or my own.
But most of all, I long to let him know
Who his true parents are, to clasp his neck,
And tell him all the tlory of his father.

ANNA.

With wary caution you mull bear yourself
In public, left your tenderness break forth,
And in observers fir conjectures itrange.
For, if a cherub in the shape of woman
Should walk this world, yet defamation would,
Like a vile cur, bark at the angel's train-
To-day the baron started at your tears.

Lady RANDOLPH.

He did so, ANNA ! well thy mistress knows,
If the least circumfaance, mote of offence,
Should touch the baron's eye, his fight would be
With jealousy diforder'd. But the more
It does behove me inflant to declare
The birth of DOUGLAS, and aftert his rights.

This

jA TRAGEDY. 3;

This night I purpose with my son to meet,
Reveal the secret and consult with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does now, so look'd his noble father,
Array'd in nature's ease: his mien, his speech,
Were sweetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those trivial mortals who feemh always wife.
But, when the matter match'd his mighty mind,
Uprofe the Hero : on his piercing eye
Sat Obfervatioh; on each glance of thought
Decision follow'd, as the thunder-bolt
Pursues the flash.

ANNA.

That demon haunts you still:
Behold GLENALVON.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Now I Ihun him not.

This day I brav'd him in behalf of NORVAL
Perhaps too far: at least my nicer fears
For DouGLAS thus interpret.

Enter GLE.NALVON.

GLENA LVON

Noble dame !

The hov'ring Dane at last his men hath landed:
No band of pirates; but a mighty holt,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers;
To win a country, or to lose themselves.

Lady RANDOLPH.
But whence comes this intelligence, GLENALvON ?

GLENALVON.

A nimble courier sent from yonder camp,
To haflen up the chieftains of the north,
Inform'd me, as he past, that the fierce Dane
Had on the eastern coast of Lothian landed,

D Near

Near to tlhat place where the fea-rockimmenfe,
Amazing Bass looks o'er a fertile land.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Then must this western army march to join
The warlike troops that guard Edena's tow'rs.

GLENALVON.

Beyond all question. If impairing time
Has not citfc'd the image of a place,
Once perfec in my breast, there is a wild
Which lyes to westward of that mighty rock,
And leens by nature formed for the camp
Of watcr-wafted armies, whole chief strength
Lies in firm foot, unflank'd \vith warlike horfc
If martial skill directs the Danilh lords,
There inaccessible their army lies
To our swift fCow'ring horse, the bloody field'
Must man to man, and foot to foot, besought.

Lady RANDOLPH.

How many mothers shall bewail their sons!
I-low many widows weep their husbands slain
Ye dames of Denmark ev'n for you I feel,
Who, sadly fitting on the fea-beat shore,
Long look for lords that never shall return.

GLENALVON.

Oft has th'unconquer'd Caledonian sword
Widow'd the north. The children of the fain
Come, as I hope, to meet their fathers' fate.
The monster war, with her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are objets suited to GLENALVON'S foul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death
Reproach, more piercing. than the pointed sword.

Jbady RANDOLPH.
I scorn thee not, but whea I ought to scorn ;

Nor

Nor e'er reproach, but when insulted virtue
Against audacious vice aflerts herself.
I own thy worth, GLENALVON; none more apt
Than I to praise thine eminence in arms,
And be the echo of thy martial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty palfion:
Go and pursue a lawful mistress, glory.
Upon the Danish crests redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the Ihield of RANDOLPH.

GLENALVON.

One initant flay, and hear an alter'd man.
When beauty pleads for virtue, vice abafh'd
Flies it's own colours, and goes o'er to virtue.
I am your convert; time will shew how truely
Yet one immediate proof I mean to give.
That youth for whom your ardent zeal to-day,
Somewhat too haughtily, defy'd your slave,
Amidst the shock of armies I'll defend,
And turn death from him, with a guardian arm.
Sedate by use, my bosom maddens not
At the tumultuous uproar of the field.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Aft thus, GLENALVON, and I am thy friend:
But that's thy least reward. Believe me, fir,
The truly generous is the truely wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblest.

Exit Lady RANDOLPH,

GLENALVON fols.

Amen ! and virtue is it's own reward !-
I think that I have hit the very tone
In which she loves to speak. -Honey'd aflent
How pleasing art thou to the taste of man,
And woman also ! flattery dire&
Rarely disgusts. They little know mankind
Who doubt it's operation: 'tis my key,

D 2 Ara

And opes the wicket of the human heart.
How far I have succeeded now I know not.
Yet I incline to think her stormy virtne
Is lull'd awhile : 'tis her alone I fear:
Whilst ile and RANDOL PH live, and live in faith
And amity, uncertain is my tenure.
Fate o'er my head suspends disgrace and death,
By that weak hair, a peevilh female's will.
I am not idle: but the ebbs and flows
Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated.
That slave of NORVAL'S I have found moftapt:
I lhew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his foul
To fay and swear whatever I fuggefl.
NORVAL, I'm told, has that alluring look,
'Twixt man and woman, which I have obferv'd
To charm the nicer and fantaltick dames,
Who are, like lady RANDOLPH, full of virtue.
In railing RANDOLPH' jealousy I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom errs
Who thinks the worfi he can of womankind.

7h End of the TIURD AcrT

ACT

# ACT IV. SCENE I.

AC T IV. SCENE 1.

llourih of Trumpets.
Enter Lord RANDOLPH attended.

Lord RANDOLPH.
SUmmon an hundred horse, by break of day,

To wait our pleasure at the castle gate.

E).ter Lady RANDOLPH.
Lady RANDOLPH.

Alas ! my lord ! I've heard unwelcome News;
The Danes are landed.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Ay, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament efay,
Of some young knight refolv'd to break a spear,
And stain with hostile blood his maiden arms.
The Danes are landed: we must beat them back,
Or live the slaves of Denmark.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Dreadful times !

Lord RANDOLPH.

The fenceless villages are all forsaken;
The trembling mothers, and their children lodg'd
In well-girt towers and castles; whilst the men

D 3 Retire

Retire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Immense, as fame reports, the Danifl hofl!

Lord RANDOLPH.

Were it as numerous as loud fame reports,
An army knit like ours wou'd pierce it thro':
Brothers, that shrink not from each others fide,
And fond companions, fill our warlike files:
For his dear offspring, and the wife he loves,
The husband, and the fearless father arm.
In vulgar breatfs heroic ardor burns,
And the poor peasant mates his daring lord.

Lady RANDOLPH.

AMen's minds are temper'd, like their swords, for war;
Lovers of danger, on deftruEtion's brink
They joy to rear ere& their daring forms.
Hence, early graves; hence the lone widow's life;
And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age.
Where is our gallant guest ?

Lord RANDOLPH.

Down in the vale

I left him, managing a fiery fReed,
Whose stubbornness had foil'd the itrength and skill
Of every rider. But behold he Comes,
In earnest cenverfation with GLENALVON.

Enter NORVAL and GLENALVON.

GLENALVON ! with the lark arise; go forth,
And lead my troops that ly in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
NORVAL, thou goeft with me. But fay young man !
Where didft thou learn so to discourse of war,
And in such terms, as I o'erheard to day ?
War is no village science, nor it's phrase

A

A language taught amongit the shepherd swains.

NORVAL.

Small is the still my lord delights to praise
In him he favours. -Hear from whence it came.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the moit remote
And inaccelEblec by shepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit liv'd ; a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our wand'ring swains.
Aultere and lonely, cruel to himself,
Did they report him; the cold earth his bed,
Water his drink, his food the shepherd's alms.
I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
With reverence and pity. Mild he spake,
And, entring on discourse, such flories told
As made me oft revisit his fad cell.
For he had been a soldier in his youth;
And fought in famous battles, when the peers
Of Europe, by the bold GODFREDO led,
Against th' ufarping Infidel difplay'd
The cross of Chri£t, and won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech Itruck from me, the old man wou'd flake
His years away, and at his young encountel s:
Then, having shew'd his wounds, he'd fit him dowvn,
And all the live-long day discourse of war.
To help my fancy, in the smooth green turf
lie cut the figures of the marnlall'd hosts;
Defcrib'd the motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm.
For all that Saracen, or Chriflian knew
Of war's vast art, was to this hermit known.

Lord RANDOLPH.
Why did this soldier in a defart hide

D 4 T1cfe

Thore qualities, that ihou'd have grac'd a camp ?

NORVAL.

That too at last I learn'd. Unhappy man !
Returning homewards by Messina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boift'rous captain of the sea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Tierce they fought
The flrangcr fell, and with his dying breath
Declar'd his name and lineage. Mighty God !
The soldier cried, my brother ! Oh ! my brother I

Lady RANDOLPH.
His brother I.

NOR VAL.

Yes; of the fame parents born;
His only brother. They exchang'd forgiveness;
And happy, in my mind, was he that died:
For many deaths has the survivor fuffer'd.
In the wild defart on a rock he fits,
Or on some nameless Itream's untrodden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times, alas ! not in his perfe&t mind !
Holds dialogues with his lov'd brother's ghost;
And oft each night forsakes his fullen couch,
To make fad orilons for him he flew.

Lady RANDOLPH.

To what myiferious woes are mortals born !
In this dire tragedy were there no more
Unhappy persons ? did the parents live ?

NORVAL.

No; they were dead : kind heav'n had clos'd their eyes
Before their son had shed his brother's blood.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Hard is his fate; for he was not to blame!
There is a defliny in this strange world,

Which

Which oft decrees an undeserved doom:
Let fchoolmen tell us why. ---From whence these founds ?

[Trumpets at a dif/ancr.]
Enter an OFFICER.

OFFICER.

My Lord, the trumpets of the troops of Lorn:
Their valiant leader hails the noble RANDOLPH.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Mine ancient guest ! does he the warriors lead ?
Has Denmark rous'd the brave old knight to arms ?

OFFICER.

No; worn with warfare, he resigns the sword.
His eldest hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord RANDOLPH.

GLENALVO N, go.

With hospitality's most irong request
Entreat the chief.

[Exit GLENALVON.]
OFFICER.

My lord, requests are vaia.

He urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foe's approach.

Lord RANDOLPH.

May vitory fit on the warriour's plume !
Bravest of men !this flocks and herds are safe;
Remote from wars alarms his pastures lye,
By mountains inacceflible fecur'd:
Yet foremost he into the plain descends,
Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the ancient world:
Contemners they of indolence and gain;
But still for love of glory, and of arms,

5 Prone
Of as^ . J'itl. kL / S s v-e^ *

Prone to encounter peril, and to lift
Against each strong antagonist the spear.
I'll go and press the hero to my breast.

[Exit RANDOLPH."]
Malanet Lady RANDOLPH and NORVAL.

Lady RANDOLPH.

The soldier's loftiness, the pride and pomp
Invefling awful war, NORVAL, I fee,
Transport thy youthful mind.

NoRVsA

Ah ! fliould they not

Blest be the hour I left my father's house !
I might have been a lhepherd all my days,
And stole obscurely to a peasant's grave.
Now, if I live, with mighty chiefs I stand;
And, if I fall, with noble dust I lye.

Lady RANDOLPH.

There is a gen'rous spirit in thy breast,
That could have well fuftain'd a prouder fortune.
This way with me; under yon spreading beech,
Unseen, unheard, by human eye or ear,
I will amaze thee with a wond'rous tale.

NORVAL.

Let there be danger lady with the secret,
That I may hug it to my grateful heart,
And prove my faith. Command my sword, my life:
These are the sole possessions of poor NORvAL.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Know'ft thou these gems ?

NORVAL.

Durst I believe mine eyes
I'd fay I knew them, and they were my father's.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Thy-father's fay'lt thou ! ah ! they were thy father's !

NORVAL.

NORVAL.

I saw them once, and curiously enquir'd
Of both my parents whence such fpIendor came ?
But I was check'd, and more could never learn.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Then learn of me, thou art not NORVAL'S son.

NORVAL.
Not NORVAL'S son !

Lady RANDOLPH.

Nor of a shepherd sprung.

NORVAL.
Lady, who am I then ?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Noble thou art;
For noble was thy fire !

NORVAL.

I will believe
O ! tell me farther ! Say who was my father?

Lady RANDOLPH.
DOUGLAS !

NORVAL.
Lord DOUGLAS, whom to day I saw ?

Lady RANDOLPH.
His younger brother.

NORVAL.

And in yonder camp ?

Lady RANDOLPH.
Alas!

NORVAL.

You make me tremble - Sighs and tears!
Lives my brave father ?

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Ah ! too brave indeed!
He fell in battle e're thyfeif was born.

NORVAL.

Ah me unhappy ! e're I saw the light ?
But does my mother live ? I may conclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been sorrow.

Lady RANDOLPH.

She lives; but waftes her life in,constant woe,
Weeping her husband slain, her infant loft.

NORVAL.

you that are fkill'd so well in the fad flory
Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their destiny, now have compafnion
Upon the offspring of the friends you Iov'd.
O ! tell me who, and where my mother is !
Oppreft by a base world, perhaps she bends
Beneath the -weight of other ills than grief;
And desolate, implores of heav'n, the aid
Her son should give. It is, it mull be so -
Your countenance confesses that lhe's wretched.
O ! tell me her condition ! Can the sword
Who shall resist me in a parent's cause ?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thy virtue ends her woe.- My son, my son !
I am thy mother, and the wife of DOUGLAS !

[Falls upon his neck.

NORVAL.

O heav'n and earth, how wond'rous is my fate !
Art thou my mother? Ever let me kneel!

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Image of DOUGLAS ! Fruit of fatal love !
All that I owe thy fire I pay to thee.

NORVAL.

Refpet and admiration still possess me,
Checking the love and fondness of a for.
Yet I was filial to my humble parents.
But did my fire surpass the reft of men,
As thou excelleft all of womankind ?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Arise, my son! In me thou dost behold
The poor remains of beauty once admir'd:
The autumn of my days is come already;
For sorrow made my summer hafle away.
Yet in my prime I equal'd not thy father:
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet sometimes
Liker the dove's; and, as he pleas'd, he won
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

NORVAL.

How did he fall? Sure 'twas a bloody field
When DOUGLAS died. 0 I have much to alk !

Lady RANDOLPH.

Hereafter thou shalt hear the lengthen'd talc
Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
At present this: Thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder castle, and the wide domains
Which now Lord RANDOLPH, as my husband, holds.
But thou shalt not be wrong'd; I have the power
To right thee still: Before the king I'll kneel,
And call Lord DOUGLAS to protect his blood.

NORVAL.
The blood of Do GLAs will protect itself.

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

But we shall need both friends and favour, boy,
To wrest thy lands and lordship from the gripe
Of RANDOLPH and his kinsman. Yet I think
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
My life incline the virtuous to believe.

NoRVAL.

To be the son of DOUGLAS is to me
Inheritance enough. -Declare my birth,
And in the field I'll seek for fame and fortune.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thou dost not know what perils and injustice
Await the poor man's valour. 0 ! my son!
The noblest blood in all the land's abafh'd,
Having no lacquey but pale poverty.
Too long half thou been thus attended, DOUGLAS I
Too long haft thou been deem'd a peasant's child.
The wanton heir of some inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in the youthful sports;
Whilst thy indignant spirit fwell'd in vain !
Such contumely thou no more shalt bear:
But how I purpose to redress thy wrongs
Must be hereafter told. Prudence directs
That we should part before yon chiefs return.
Retire, and from thy rutlick follower's hand
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, di&ated before
This casual opportunity arose
Of private conference. It's purport mark;
For as I there appoint we meet again.
Leave me, my son ! and frame thy manners still
To Nov AL's, not to noble DouGLAS' state.

NORVAL.

I will remember. Where is NORVAL now ?
That good old man.

7 La

Lady RANDOLPH.

At hand conceal'd he lies,

An useful witness. But beware, my son,
Of yon GLENALVON; in his guilty breast
Resides a villain's shrewdness, ever prone
To false conjecture. He hath griev'd my heart.

NARVOL.

Has he indeed ? Then let yon false GLENALVON
Beware of me.

[Ex.t DOUGLAS.
Manet Lady RANDOLPH.

There burst the fmother'd flame !

0 ! thou all righteous and eternal King !
Who father of the fatherless art call'd,
ProteCt my son ! - Thy inspiration, Lord !
Hath fill'd his bosom with that sacred fire,
Which in the breasts of his forefathers burn'd:
Set him on high like them, that he may ihine
The star and glory of his native land!
Then let the minister of death descend,
And bear my willing spirit to it's place.
Yonder they come. How do bad women find
Unchanging afpets to conceal their guilt ?
When I by reason, and by justice urg'd,
Full hardly can difremble with these men
In nature's pious cause.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Yon gallant chief,
Of arms enamour'd, all repose difelaims.

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Be not, my Lord, by his example fway'd:
Arrange the business of to-morrow now,
And, when you enter, speak of war no more.

[Exit Lady RANDOLPH1
Manent Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.

Lord RANDOLPH.

'Tis so by heav'n ! her mien, her voice, her eye,
And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

GLENALVO,'.

He parted from her now: Behind the mount,
Amongst the trees, I saw him glide along.

Lord RANDOLPH.
For fad, fequefter'd virtue Ihe's renown'd !

GLENALVON.
Most true, my Lord.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Yet this diftinguith'd dame

Invites a youth, the acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This aflignation, (hews a letter) the affafin freed,
Her manifest affection for the youth,
Might breed suspicion in a hulband's brain,
Whose gentle consort all for love had wedded:
Much more in mine. MATILDA never lov'd me.
Let no man, after me, a woman wed,
Whose heart he knows he has not; tho' ihe brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry,
For let her seem, like the night's shadowy queen,
Cold and contemplative; - He cannot trust her:
She may, {he will, bring shame and sorrow on him;
The worfl of sorrow, and the worst of Ihames !

GLE-

GLENALVON.

Yield not, my Lord, to such afflitig thoughts;
But let the spirit of an hulband (leep,
'Till your own senses make a sure conclusion.
This billet tnuft to blooming NORVAL go:
'At the next turn awaits my trulty spy;
I'll give it him refitted for his matter.
In the close thicket take your secret stand;
The moon shines bright, and your own eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

Lord RANDOLPH.
Thou dost ounfel well.

GLBNALVON.

Permit me now to make one flight eflay.
Of all the trophies which vain mortal's boast,
By wit, by valour, or by wisdom won,
The firfi and fairest, in a young mans eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Successful love
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind;
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves
Air-born, exlted abovevulgar men.

Lord RANDOLPIPr.
And what avails this maxim.?

GLEN ALVON.

Mnuch, my lord t

Withdraw a little: I'll accost young NaOR L,
And with ironical derisive counsel
Explore his spirit. f he is np more
Than humble NORVAL, by thy favour.rais'd,
Brave as he is, he'll fhrinlk aftonifh'd from me:
But if he be the favouriteef the fair,
Lov'd by the first of Caledonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.

Lord RANDOLP H.

'Tis shrewdly thought.

T GLE-

GLENALVON.

When we grow loud, draw near. But let my Lord
His rising wrath reflrain.

[Exit RANDOLPH.
Manet GLENALVON.

'Tis frange by heav'n !

That {he should run full tilt her fond career,
To one so little known. She too that feem'd
Pure as the winter stream, when ice embofs'd
Whitens it's course. Even I did think her chaste,
Whose charity exceeds not. Precious sex!
Whose deeds lascivious pass GLENALVON'S thoughts!

NORVAL appears.

His port I love; he's in a proper mood
To chide the thunder,. if at him it roar'd;
Has NORVAL seen the troops ?

.NORVAL.

The setting fun,

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale,
And as the warriours mov'd, each polish'd helm,
Corfet, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at it's top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they feem'd,
An host angelic, -clad in burning arms.

GLENALVON.

Thou talk'ft it well; no leader of our hoif,
In founds more lofty, speaks of glorious war.

NORVAL.

If I shall e'er acquire a leader's name,
My speech will be less ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itself freely; since no part is mine
Of praise, pertaining to the great in arms.

GLI-

GLENALVON.

You wrong yourself, brave fir; your martial deeds
Have rank'd you with the great: but mark me NORVAL;
Lord RANDOLPH'S favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know these soldiers, counsel you.
Give them all honour; seem not to command;
Else they will scarcely brook your late sprung power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

NORVAL.

Sir, I have been accuitom'd all my days
To hear and speak the plain and simple truth:
And tho' I have been told, that there are men
Who borrow friendship's tongue to speak their scorn,
Yet in such language I am little fkill'd.
Therefore I thank GLENALVON for his counsel,
Altho' it founded harshly. Why remind
Me of my birth obscure ? Why slur my power
With such contemptuous terms ?

GLENALVON.

I did not mean
To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

NORVAL.
My pride!

GLENALVON.

Suppress it as you wish to prosper.

Your pride's excessive. Yet for RANDOLPH'S fake
I will not leave you to it's rash direction.
If thus you swell, and frown at high-born men,
Will high-born men endure a shepherd's scorn ?

E 2 NOR'

NORVAL.
A fhepherd?'s.corn!

GlEn-A'LVO.

Yes-; if you piriite~

To bend on soldiers -thee difdariful eytes,
As if yoi todk iliet neafiire-fitheir'nitids,
And said in :fetett, 'yfQue son iatch for !nt.;
What will becone 'f 'you ?

·NORVAL.

If this '*-ee told! [-- d'
Halt thou no fiats for thy prefumptuots self!

GLENALVON.
Ha ! Dost thou threaten me?

NORVAL.
;Didft thou not hear .

GLENALYVON.

Unwillingly I did:; a-nobler'fo - -
Had not been queftion'd thus. BUt fcuh -s thte -

NORVAL.
Whom dost thou think me ?

GLENALVON.

Norval.

NORVAL.

So I am
And who is NORVAL in GLENALVON'S eyes?

GLENAILVON.

A peasant's son, a wandering beggar-boy;
At best no more, even if he speaks the truth.

NORVAL.
Talfe as thou art, dost thou fufpe& my truth ?

2 Gis-

GLENALVON.

Thy truth I thou'rt all a 1iy; and false as hell
Is the vain-glorious. tale thou told'ft; to RANDOLPH.

NOR VAL.

If I were chain'd, unarm'd, and bedrid old,
Perhaps I should revile But. as I am
I have no tongue to rail. The humble NoRvA^L
Is of a race, who strive not but with deeds.
Did I not fear to freeze thy /hallow valour,
And make thee fink too soon beneath my sword,
I'd tell thee-what thou art. I know thee well.

G.LENALVON.

Dost thou not know GLENALYON, born to command
Ten thousand naves like thee ?

NORVAL.

Villain, no more:

Draw and defend thy life. I did design
To have defy'd thee in another cause:
But heaven accelerates it's vengeance on thee.
Now for my own and Lady RANDOLPH'S wrongs.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Hold, I command you both. The man that flirs
Makes me his foe.

NORVAL.

Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly founded, noble RANDOLPH.

G.L NAL VON.

Hear him, my lord; he's wond'rous condescending !
Mark the humility of Ihepherd NORVAL !

NORVAL.
Now you may scoff in safety.

(Sheaths hisfword.)
E 3 Lord

Lord RAN4DOLPH.

Speak not thus,

Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

NORVAL.

Nay, my good lord, tho' I revere you much,
My cause I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I blush to speak; I will not, cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words that I from him have borne.
To the liege-lord of my dear native land
I owe a subje&'s homage: but ev'n him
And his high arbitration I'd rejet.
Within my bosom reigns another lord;
Honour, sole judge and umpire of itself.
If mly free speech offend you, noble RANDOLPH,
Revoke your favours, and letNoRvAL go
Hence as he came, alone, but not difhonour'd.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thus far I'll mediate with impartial voice
The ancient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er.her frighted fields.
Suspend your purpose, 'till your country's arms
Repel the bold invader: then decide,
Th ::i:a.:c quairel.

GLENALVON.

I agree to this.

NORVAL.
Enter SERVANT.

SERVANT,
The banquet waits.

Lord RANDOLPH.

We come,

[E.;li RANDOLPH.
GLENALVON.

Norval,

At

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of RANDOLPH.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkl'd hate,
Shall slain my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow;
Nor let our strife disturb the gentle dame.

NORVAL.

Think not so lightly, Sir, -of my resentment:
When we contend again, our strife is mortal.

End of tke FOURTH ACT.

E 4 ACT

# ACT V. SCENE I.

ACT V. SCENE I.

lThe Wood.

Enter DOUGLAS.
T isIs is the place the centre of the grove.

Here ltands the oak, the monarch of the wood.

How sweet and solemn is this mid-night scene !
The silver moon, unclouded, holds her way
Thro' ikies where I couldc count each little star.
The fanning weft wind scarcely stirs the leaves;
The river, rufling o'er its pebbled bed,
Imposes silence with a stilly found.
In such a place as this at such an hour,
If ancestry can be in ought teliev'd,
Descending spirits have convers'd with man,
And told the secrets of the world-unknown.

Enter Old NORVAL.

Old NORVAL.

'Tis he. Butbwhat if he should chide me hence ?
Hisjuft reproach r fear.

[DOUGLAS turns and fees him.

Forgive, forgive,

Can'st thou forgive the man, the selfish man,
Who bred Sir MALCOLM's heir a shepherd's son.

DOUGLAS.

Kneel not to me: thou aSt mn father still:
Thy wifh'd-for presence now cornpleats my joy.

Welcome

Welcome to me,. my fortunes thao ihalt hare,'
And ever honour'd with thy DouGcLas lie.

Old NoRVAL.

And do'st thou call me father ? 0 my son !
I think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
Which in the wilderness so long conceal'd
The blossom of thy youth.

DOU GLAS.

Not worse the fruit,

That in the wilderness the btoolbm blow'd.
Amongst the shepherds, in the humble cote,
I learn'd some lessons which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a twain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; and, when my vassals bow,
NORVAL shall iooth the crested pride of Dou L A s.

NORVAL.

Let me but live to fee thine exaltation!
Yet grievous are my fears. O leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers;

DOUGLAS.

Why should I leave them ?

NORVAL.
Lord RANDOLPH and his kinimran seek your life.

DOUGLAS.
How know'ft thou that ?

NORV AL.

I will inform you how.

When evening came, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
,And fondly trod in each accuftom'd path
That to the castle leads. Whilst thus I rang'd,
I was alarm'd with unexpeced founds

Of

Of earnef voices. On the persons came:
Unseen I lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other as they talk'd, lord RANDOLPH this,
And that GLENALVON: still of you they spoke,
And of the lady: threatning was their speech,
Tho' but imperfectly my ear could hear it.
'Twas strange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

DOUGLAS.
Revenge ! for what ?

NORVAL.
For being what you are;

Sir MALCOLM'S heir: how else have you offended ?
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there fat musing how I best might find
Means to inform you of their wicked purpose.
But I could think of none: at last perplex'd
I issued forth, encompafling the tower
With many a weary ftep and wifhiful look.
Now providence hath brought you to my fight,
Let not your too couragious spirit scorn
The caution w hich I give.

DOUGLAS.

I scorn it not.

Mfy mother warn'd me of GLENALVON'S baseness:
But I will not fufpe& the noble RANDOLPH.
In our encounter with the vile aflaffins,
I mark'd his brave demeanor: him I'll trust.

NORVAL.
I fear you will too far.

DOUGLAS.
Here in this place

I wait my mother's coming: she shall know
What thou haft told: her counsel I will follow:

And

And cautious ever are a mother's counsels.
You muff depart; your presence may prevent
Our interview.

NORVAL.

My blessing reft upon thee

O may heav'n's hand, which fav'd thee from the wave,
And from the sword of foes, be near thee still;
Turning mischance, if ought hangs o'er thy head,
All upon mine!

[Exit Old NOR VAL.

.DOUGLAS.
He loves me like a parent;

And must not, shall not lose the son he loves,
Altho' his son has found a nobler father.
Eventful .day l how haft thou chang'd my ftatel
Once on the cold, and winter ihaded fide
Of a bleak hill, mischance had rooted me,
Never to thrive, child of another foil:
Transplanted now t9 the gay funny vale,
Like the green thorn of May my fortune flowers.
Ye glorious liars ! high heav'n's resplendent host
To whom I oft have of my lot complain'd,
Hear and record my foul's unalter'd wish!
Dead or alive, let me but be renown'd !
May heav'n inspire some fierce gigantic Dane,
To give a bold defiance to our host !
Before he speaks it out I will accept;
Like DOUGLAS conquer,or like DOUGLAS die.

Entfr Lady RaNDOLPH.

Lady RANDOLPH.
MIy son! I heard a voice-

DOUGiAS.
-The voice was minc.

Lady

iady RANDOQLPH. '

Didft thou complain aloud. to nature's car,.
That thus in dusky [hades, at mid-night- hours,
By fealth the mother and the foi mhould meet ?

[Embracing him.

DOUGLA .

No; on this happy day,- this better birthday,
My thoughts and words are all of hope and joy.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Sad fear and melancholy still divide
The empire of my breast with hope and joy.
Now hear what I advise.

DOUGLAS.

Firfl, let me tell
What may the tenor of your counsel change.

Lady RANDOLPH.
My heart forebodes some evil !

DOUGLAS.
'Tis not good.

At eve, unseen by RANDOLPH and G LENA VON,.
The good old NORVAL in the grove o'er heard
Their conversation: oft they mention'd me
With dreadful threatnings; you they sometimes nam'd-
'Twas strange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Defend us gracious God ! we are betray'd:
They have found out the secret of thy birth;
It mull be so. That is the great difcavery.
Sir MALCOLM'S heir is come to claim his own;
And they will be reveng'd. Ptrhaps even now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for murder, they but wait
A darker and.more silent hour, to break,

Into

Into the chamber where they think thou fleep'ft.
This moment, :this, heav'n hath ordain'd to save thee!
Fly to the camp, my son !

DOUGLAS.

And leave you here ?.

No: to the castle let us go together,
Call up the ancient servants of your house,
Who in their youth did eat }your father's bread.
Then tell them loudly that I am your son.
If in the breaits of men one spark remains
Of sacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your cause will: arm. I ask but-few
To drive those spoilers from my father's house.

Lady RANDOLPH..

O nature, nature ! ,what can check thy force ?
Thou genuine offspring of the daring DouoLAS.!
But rush not on deftru6tion: save thyself,
And I am safe. To me they mean no harm.
Thy stay butrilks thy precious life in vain..
That winding path conducts thee to the river.
Cross where thou feeft a broad and beatan way,
Which running eastward leads thee to the camp.
Instant demand admittance to Lord Dou GLAS.
Shew him .these jewels, which his brother wore,
Thy look, thy voice, will make him feel the truth,
Which I by certain proof will soon confirm.

DOUGLAS.

I yield me and obey: but yet my heart
Bleeds at this parting. Something bids meftay
And guard a mother',s life. Oft have I read
Of wond'rous deeds by one'bold arm atchiev'd.
Our foes are two; no more: let me go forth,
And fee if any shield can guard GLEN-A L VON.

Lady RANDOLPH.

If thou regard'ft thy mother, or revertft
Thy father's mem'ry, think of this no more.

One

One thing I have to fay before we part:
Long wcrt thou loft; and thou art found, my child,
In a most fearful season. War and battle

have great cause to dread. Too well I fee
Which way the current of thy temper sets:
To day I've found thee. Oh ! my long loft hope !
If thou to giddy valour giv'ft the rein,
To morrow I may lose my son for ever.
The love of thee, before thou faw'ft the light;
Suftain'd my life when thy brave father fell.
If thou shalt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this waste world ! my son, remember me !

DOUGLAS.

What (hall I fay ? how can I give you comfort ?
The God of battles of my life dispose
As may be best for you ! for whose dear fake
I will not bear myself as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boast founds amongit martial men.
How will inglorious caution suit my claim ?
The post of fate unlhrinking I maintain.
My country's foes mull witness who I am.
On the invaders heads I'll prove my birth,
'Till friends and foes confess the'genuine firain.
If in this firife I fall, blame not your son,
Who if he lives not honour'd, must not live.

Lady RANDOLPH.

I will not utter what my bosom feels.
Too well I love that valour which I warn.
Farewell, my son ! my counsels are but vain.

EEmbra, ing.
And as high heaven hath will'd it all must be. [flparait.

Lady RAN.DOLPH.
Gaze not on me, thou wilt mistake the path;

I'll

I'll point it out again.

[CJuf as they are feparasing, enterfr:m the wood

Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON ]
Lord RANDOLPH.

Not in her presence.
Now --

GLENALVON.

I'm prepar'd.
Lord RANDOLPH.

No: I command thee flay.

I go alone: it never shall be said
That I took odds to combat mortal man.
The noblest vengeance is the most compleat.

[Exit Lord RANDOLPH.]
[GLEN ALvoN makes fme fleps to tie fame

fide of the fJagr, lifens and peaks.]
GLENALVON.

Demons of death come fettle on my sword,
And to a double slaughter guide it home !
The lover and the husband both must die.

[Lord RANDOLPH behind the fanes.]
Lord RANDOLPH.
Draw, Villain ! draw.

DOUGLAS.
Aflail me not Lord, RANDOLPH;
Not as thou lov'ft thy self.

[Clalhing of fwords.l

[GLENALVON running out.]

Now is the time.
Enter Lady RANDOLPH at the oppojite fide of the Jtage,

faint and breathless.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Lord RANDOLPH hear me:; all (hall be thine own:

But

IEut spare ! Oh spare my son !

Enter DOUGLAS with a sword in each hIand.

My mother's voice!
I can protet thee tlill.

Lady RANDOLPH.

He lines, he lives;

For this, for this to heaven eternal praise 1
But sure I saw thee fall.

DOUGLAS.

It WiSGLE2XALVON..

Just as my arm had tmafter'd AW.D s L PlM'GIfwr4d
The villaincame behindme; butI fliw him.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Behind thee! Ah; thou'rt wdided ! 0 my child,
How pale thou looklf ! and shall I lose thee now ?

DoUGLrAS.

Do not despair: I feel a little-intnefs;
I hope itwill not last.

:Leans upon hisfwrrd.]
:Lady .RANDOLPRH.

ihere is no hope 1

And we must part! the hand of death is on thee
O my beloved child ! ODoWGLIAS, DOUGLAS I

'DOUoGLAS:grawtiig more and more fait.]

DOUGLAS.

Too soon we part : I have not long been Dou GLAS.
O deliny ! hardly thou dealft with me:
Clouded and hid, a.ftranger.to myself,
In low and poor obscurity I liv'd.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Has heav'n prefervd thee for an end like this ?

DO G LAS.
O hadI fallen as my brame fathrs fell,.

Turning

Turning with fatal arm the tide of battle !
Like them I should have fmil'd and welcom'd death.
But thus to perish by a villain's hand !
Cut off from nature's and from glory's course,
Which never mortal was so fond to run.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Hear julfice ! hear ! are these the fruits of virtue ?

[DOUGLAS falls.

DOUGLAS.

Unknown I die; no tongue shall speak of me.
Some noble spirits, judging by themselves,
May yet conjecture what I might have prov'd,
And think life onl y wanting to my fame:
But who Ihall comfort thee ?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Despair ! despair!

DoUGLAS.

O had it pleas'd high heaven to let me live
A little while,! - my eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apace ! my mother - [ Des.]

Enter Lord RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thy words, the words of truth, have pierc'd my heart.
I am the slain of knighthood and of arms.
Oh ! if my brave deliverer survives
The traitor's sword

ANNA.
Alas ! look there, my lord.

Lord RANDOLPH.

The mother and her son ! How curt I am !
Was I the cause ? No: I was not the cause.
Yon matchless villain did reduce my foul
To frantic jealousy.

F ANNA.

ANNA.

My lady lives:

The agony of grief hath but fuppreft
Awhile her powers.

Lord RANDOLPH.

But my deliverer's dead !

The world did once esteem Lord RANDOLPH wel,
Sincere of heart, for spotless honour fam'd:
And, in my early days, glory I gain'd
Beneath the holy banner of the cross.-
Now pallt the noon of life, (hame comes upon me;
Reproach, and infamy, and public hate,
Are near at hand: for all mankind will think
That RANDOLPH basely ftab'd Sir MALCOLM'S heir.

[Lady RANDOLPH recovering.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Where am I now ? still in this wretched world !
Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine.
My youth was worn in anguish : but youth's strength,
With hope's assistance, bore the brunt of sorrow;
And train'd me on to be the object now,
On which omnipotence displays itself,
Making a spectacle, a tale of me,
To awe it's vafral, man.

Lord RANDOLPH.

0 misery i

Amidit thy raging grief I must proclaim
My innocence.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thy innocence t
Lord RANDOLPH.

My guilt
Is innocence, compared with what thou think'ft it.

8 Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Of thee I think not: what have I to do
With thee, or any thing ? My son! my son i
My beautiful! my brave ! how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy yalour ! My fond heart
O'erflow'd this day with transport, when I thought
Of growing old amidst a race of thine,
Who might make up to me their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and my husband's name:
Now all my hopes are dead ! A little while
Was I a wife ! a mother not so long !
What am I r.ov ?- I know. -- But I fhallbe
That only whilst I please; for such a son
And such a husband make a woman bold.

[Runs out.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Follow her, AN:NA: I myself would follow,
But in this rage flhe must abhor my presence.

[Exit ANNA.
Enter Old NORVAL.

NORVAL.
I heard the voice of woe; heaven guard my child

Lord RANDOLPH.

Already is the idle gaping croud,
The spiteful vulgar, come to gaze on RANDOiLPH.
Begone.

NORVAL.

I fear thee not. I will not go.
Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplice, Lord.

F 2 Wit'

With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help
To crush down to the ground this lovely plant.
O noblest youth that ever yet was born i
Sweetelt and best, gentlest and bravest spirit,
That ever blefs'd the world ! Wretch that I am,
Who saw that noble spirit swell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it !
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do thee justice, and reveal the secret,
Which timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's filarc. Oh ! I am punifh'd now !
These are the hairs that should have ftrew'd the ground,
And not the locks of DOUGLAS.

[ Tears his hair, and throws

himself upon the ground.

Lord RANDOLPH.

I know thee now: thy boldness I forgive:
My crest is fallen. For thee I will appoint
A place of reft, if grief will let thee reft.
I will reward, altho' I cannot punish.
Curst, curst GLENALVON, he efcap'd too well,
Tho' slain and baffled by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the last,
Curling his conqueror, the felon dy'd.

.Enter ANNA.

ANNA.
My Lord, my Lord !

Lord RANDOLPH.

Speak: I can hear of horror.

ANNA,

ANNA.
Horror indeed!

Lord RANDOLPH.
MATILDA

ANNA.

Is no rmore

She ran, she flew like light'ning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice she gain'd,
Beneath whose low'ring top the river falls
Ingulph'd in rifted rocks : thither she came,
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down. --

Lord RANDOLPH.

'Twas I! alas! 'twas I

That fill'd her breast with fury; drove her down
'1 he precipice of death ! Wretch that I am !

ANNA.

0 had you seen her last despairing look!
Upon the brink she stood, and cast her eyes
Down on the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heaven, teeming to fay,
Why am I forc'd to this ? She plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord RANDOLPH.

I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the passion of my foul.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of RANDOLPH gave.
They speak aloud, and with the voice of fate

Denounce

Denounce my doom. I am refolv'd. I'll go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me turn aside must threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy mistress, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
Wiii cost and pomp upon their funerals wait:
For RANDOLPH hopes he never ihall return.

F I N I S.
,-4 OC 58

# EPILOGUE.

E P I L G U E.

Spoken by Mr. B A R RY.
AN Epilogue I ak'd; but not one word

Our bard will write. He vows 'tis moJt absurd

fPith comick wit to contradief thej rain
Of tragedy, and make your sorrows vain.
Sadly be fays, that pity is the be/t,
And nobleJl pafion of the bueman brca/?:
For when its facredjreams the heart o'er-fow,
In guJhes pleasure with the tide of woe;
And when its waves retire, like those of Nile,
They leave behind them such a golden oil,
That there the virtues without culture grow,
There the sweet blofoms of affeflion blow.
Thefi were his words; void of delusive art
I felt them ; for he/poke them from his heart.
Nor will I now attempt, with witty folly,
To chace away celefiial melancholy.
