D-O U G L A S:

Jr ..:.l-"' ? ?-/s-77

A
T R AG E D Y.

B Y

MR. JOH N HOM E.
NON EGO SUM VATES, SED ilRISCI CONSCIUS JEVIl

4;----pAhBa-

GL ASGOW:
PRINTED SOO JAMES DUNCAS, BOOKSELLER, TRONGATEe

M,DCC,LXXIX, .

# PROLOGUE.

P R 0 L 0 G U E

SPOKEN BY MR. SPARKS.
IN antient times, when Britain's trade was arms,

And the lov'd music of her youth, alarms;

A god-like race fuftain'd fair England's fame:
Who has not heard of gallant Piercy's name?
Ay, and of Douglas? such iliuftrious foes
In Rival Rome and Carthage never rose!
From age to age bright llone the Britiflh fire,
And every hero was a hero's fire.
When pow'rful fate decreed one warrior's doomn
Up sprung the Phoenix from his parent's tomb.
But whillt these gen'rous rivals fought and fell,
Those gen'rous rivals lov'd each other well:
Though many a bloody field was loft and won,
Nothing in hate, in honour all was done.
When Piercy wrong'd, defv'd his prince or peers,
Fast came the Douglas, with his Scottish ipears;
And when proud Douglas made his King his foe,
For Douglas, Piercy bent his English bow,
Expell'd their native homes by adverse fate,
They knock'd alternate at each other's gate:
Then blaz'd the cattle, at the midnight hour,
For him whose arms had flook its firmest tow'r.

This night a Douglas your protection claims

A wife! a mother! Pity's softest names:
The story of her woes indulgent hear,
And grant your suppliant all flie begs, a tear:
In confidence ahe begs; and hopes to find
Each English breast, like noble Piercy's, kind,

A 2

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

DRAMATIS PERSONE.

LO R D RANDOLPH.

G L E N A L V N.

NORVAL, DOUGLAS.

PRISONER.

SERVANTS.

MATILDA, LADY RANDOLPH.

ANN A.
. -1'

# ACT I. SCENE I.

D 0 U G L A S.

A C T I. S C E NE I.
The Court of a Cafice, furroum2ed 'wi./ [[2iCrI..

Enter LADY RANDOLPH.

Y E woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom
l Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth
The voice of sorrow from my bursting heart,
Farewell a while: I will not leave you long;
For in your liades I deem some spirit dwells,
Who from the chiding fiream, or groaning oak,
Still hears, and answers to Matilda's moan.
0 Douglas! Dougl,! if departed ghosts
Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of that wood thou art,
And with the passion of immortals hear'st
My lamentation: hear'st thy wretched wife
Weep for her husband slain, her infant loft.
My brother's timeless death I eiem to mourn;
Who perifh'd with thee on this fatal day;
To thee I lift my voice; to thee address
The plaint which mortal ear has never heard.
0 disregard me not; though I am call'd
Another's n6w, my heart is wholly tjine.

- Incapableof change, affetion lies
Buried, my Douglas, in thy bloody grave.
But Randolph comes, whom fate has made my-Lord,
To chide my anguish, and defraud the dead.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.

Lord Ran. Again these weeds of wo! fay, doll thou well

To feed a paflion which consumes thy life?
The living claim tome duty; vainly thou
Beftow'ft thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady Ran. Silent, alas! is he for whom I mourn:

Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives.
This fatal day stirs my time-fettled sorrow,
Troubles afrefl the fountain of my heart.

Lord Ran. When was it pure of sadness ? These black weeds

-Express the wonted colour of thy mind,
For ever dark and dismal. Seven long years
Are pass'd, since we were join'd by sacred ties:
Clouds, all the while, have hung upon thy brow,
Nor broke, nor parted by one gleam of joy.
Time, that wears out the trace of deepelt anguish,
As the Tea smooths the prints made in the sand,
Has pat o'er thee in vain.

Lady Ran. If time to come

Should prove as ineffetual, yet, my lord,
Thou canfr not blame me. When our Scottish youth
Vy'd with each other for my luckless love,
Oft I besought them, I implor'd them all
Not to assail me with my father's aid,
Nor blend their better destiny with mine.
For melancholy had congeal'd my blood,
And froze affction in my chilly breast.
At laOI my Sire, rous'd with the base attempt
To force me from him, which thou rend'red'lt vain,
To his own daughter bow'd his hoary head,
Besought me to commiserate his age,
And vow'd he should not, could not die in peace, .;,, i
Unless he saw me wedded, and fecur'd - / t ,
From violence and outrage. Then. my Lord! ,'fs:

.n<", *^ S

In my extreme distress I cail'd on thee,
Thee I befpake, profefs'd my strong defre
To lead a'fingle, solitary life.
And begg'd thy nobleness, not to demand
Her for a wife whose heart was dead to love.
How thou petfifted'ft after this, thou know'ft,

nd muff confess that I am not unjust,
Nor more to thee than to myself injurious.

Lord Ran. That I confess; yet ever muff regret
he grief I cannot cure. Would thou wert not
Compos'd of grief and tenderness alone,
ut had'st a spark of other paflions in thee,
ride, anger, vanity, the strong desire
f admiration, dear to woman kind;
hefe might contend with, and allay thy grief,
s meeting tides and currents fmooth-our frith.
Lady Ran. To such a cause the human mind oft owes
ts transient calm, a calm I envy not.
Lord Ran. 'Sure thou art not the daughter of Sir Malcolm:
trong was his rage, eternal his resentment:
or when thy brother fell, he frmil'd to hear
hat Douglas' son in the fame field was slain.
Lady Ran. Oh! rake not up the ashes of my fathers:
mplacable resentment was their crime,
nd grievous has the expiation been.
ontending with the Douglas, gallant lives
f either house were loft; my ancestors
ompell'd, at lafd, to leave their ancient feat
n Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
o heir is left. Had they not been so iern,
had not been the lass of all my race.
Lord Ran. Thy grief wrests to its purposes my words.
never ask'd of thee that ardent love,
hich in the brcafts of fancy's children burns.
ecent affection and complacent kindness
ere all I wish'd for; but I wish'd in vain.
ence with the less regret my eyes behold
he form of war that gathers o'er this land:
f I should perish by the Danish sword,
atilda would not shed one tear the more.

Lady Ran. Thou do'fl not think so: woful as I am.

I love thy merit, and efteem_thy virtues.
But whither goess thou now?

Lord Ran. Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on the tip-toe (tands
Of expectation, and impatient aflcs
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are landed.

Lady Ran. 0, may adverse winds,

Far from the coast of Scotland, drive their fleet!
And every soldier of both hosts return
In peace and tafety to his pleasant home!

Lord Ran. Thou fpeak'lt a woman's, hear a warrior's wifl

Right from their native land, the stormy north,
May the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
Immoveable in Caledonia's £trand !
Then shall our foes repent their bold invasion,
And roving armies fliun the fatal hore.

Lady Ran. War I detest:' but war with foreign foes,

Whose manners, language, and whose looks are strange;
Is not so horrid, nor to me so hateful,
As that which with our neighbours oft we wage.
A river here, there an ideal line,
By fancy drawn, divides the fifler kingdoms.
On-each fide dwells a people similar,
As twins are to each other; valiant both;
Both for their valour famous through the world.
Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,.
And, if they must have war, wage distant war,
But with each other fight in cruel conflic. -
Gallant in firife, and noble in their ire,
The battle is their paltime. They go forth
'Gay in the morning, as to summer sport;
When ev'ning comes, the glory of the morn,
The youthful warrior is a clod of clay.
Thus fall the prime of either hapless land;
And such the fruit of Scotch and English wars.

Lord Ran. I'll hear no more: this melody would make

A soldier drop his sword and doff his arms, :
Bit down and weep the conquests he has made;

Yea, (like a monk,) sing reft and peace in heav'n
To fouls of warriors in his battle lain.
Lady, Farewell: I leave thee not alone;
Yonder comes one whose love makes duty light. [Exit.

Enter ANNA.

Ann. Forgive the rashness of your Anna's love:

Trg'd by affecion, I have thus prefunm'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts;
And warn you of the hours that you neglect,
And lose in sadness.

Lady Ran. So to lose my hours
Is all the use I wish to make of time.

Alnn. To blame thee, Lady, suits not with my state:

But sure I am, since death firlf prey'd on man,
Never did filler thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had loft,
In early youth, the husband of your heart?

Lady Ran. Oh!
Ann. Have I diftrefs'd you with officious love,

And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate?
Forgive me, Lady: humble though I am,
The mind 1 bear partakes not of my fortune-;
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

Lady Ran. WVhat power direced thy unconscious tongue
To speak as thou haft done? to name-

Ann. I know not:
But since my words have made my mistress tremble,
I will speak no more: but silent mix
My tears with hers.

Lady Ran. No, thou shalt not be silent.

I'll trust thy faithful love, and thou ilalt be
Henceforth th' inftruced partner of my woes.
But what avails it? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never-ebbing time?
Compel the earth and ocean to give up
Their dead alive?

Ann. What neans my noble miflrefs ?
L-adi Ran. Didft thou not afl what had my forro.vs been!-

-B

If I in early youth had loft a husband?-
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'd,
Mangl'd with wounds, the husband of my youth;
And in rome cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his.

^7;i. O! Lady, mofl r.ever'd!

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

Lady Ranu. Alas! an ancient feud,

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother flould in battle save
The life of Douglas' son, our house's foe:
The youthful warriors vow'd eternal friendfliip,
To fee the vaunted filler of his friend
Impatient, Douglas to Balarmo came,
Under a borrow'd name.-My heart he gain'd;
Nor did I long refuse the hand ' g'd:
My brother's presence authc marriage.
Three weeks, three little we ., with wings of down,
Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd lord' was call'd
To fight his father's battles; and with him,
In spite of all my tears, did Malcolm go.
Scarce, were they gone, when my tern fire was told
That the false stranger was Lord Douglas' son.
Frantic with rage, the Baron drew his sword
And queftion'd me. Alone,. forsaken, faint,
Kneeling beneath his sword, fault'ring 1 took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
WVed one of Douglas' name. Sincerity,
Thou first of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thy onward path! although the.earth flould gape,
And from the gulph of hell, dettruaion cry
To take diflimulation's winding way.

A;zn. Alas! how few of woman's fearful kind
Durst own a truth so hardy!

Lady Ran. The first truth

Is easiest to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale,--
In a few-days the dreadful tidings came

That Douglas and my brother both were slain.
My lord! my life! my husband!- mighty God!
What had I done to merit filch affliction ?

Ann. My dearell lady! many a tale of tears

I've listened to; but never did I hear
A tale so fad as this.

Lady Ran. In the first days

Of my diftracing grief, I found ryfelf-
As women wiih to be who love their lords.
But who durst tell my father? The good prierd
Who join'd our hands, my brother's ancient tutor,
With his lov'd Malcolm, in the battle fell:
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till time flould make my father's fortune mine.
That very night on which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confidant I had;
Set out with him to reach her filler's house:
But nurse, nor infant, ' : 'ever seen
Or heard of, Anna, fih tal hour.
My murder'd child !--h fbnd mother sear'd
The loss of thee, fle had loud fame defy'd,
Defpis'd her father's rage, her father's grief,
And wander'd with thee through the scorning world.

A/nn. Not seen nor heard of! then perhaps he lives.
Lady Ran. No. It was dark December: wind and raii

Had beat all night. Across the Carton lay
The deftin'd road; and in its livelling flood
My faithful servant perifh'd with my child.
O hapless son! of a moll hapless fire!-
But they are both at reft; and I alone
Dwell in this world of wo, condemn'd to walk,
Like a guilt-troubl'd ghofr, my painful rounds:
Nor has despiteful fate permitted me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Though dea'd to love, I was compell'd to wed
Randolph, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms;
And Randolph now poff-fles the domains
That by Sir Malcolm's death on me devolv'd;
Domains that flould to Douglas' son have giv'n

B 2

A Baron's title, and a Baron's power.
Such were my soothing thoughts, while I bewail'd
The flaughter'd father of a son unborn.
And when that son came, like a ray from heav'n
Which flines and disappears; alas! my child!
How long did thy fond mother grasp the hope
Of having thee, she knew not how, reftor'd.
Year after year hath worn her hope away;
But left still undiminifh'd her desire.

.inn. The hand, that spins th' uneven thread of life,
May finooth the length that's yet to come of yours.

Lady Ran. Not in this world: 1 have confidered well

Its various evils, and on whom they fall.
Alas! how oft does goodness wound itself?
And sweet affecion prove the spring of wo.
O! had I dy'd when my lov'd husband fell!
Had some good angel op'd to me the book
Of providence, and let me read my life,
My heart had broke when I beheld the tumr
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

/tnn. That God, whose ministers good angels are,

Hath shut the book in mercy to mankind.
But we mufl leave this theme: Glenalvoi comes:
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitherwards he slowly stalks his way.

Lady Ran. I will avoid him. An ungracious person
Is doubly irksome in an hour like this.

Ann. Why speaks my lady thus of Randolph's heir?
Lady Ran. Because he's not the heir of Randolph's virtues,

Subtle and shrewd, he offers to mankind
An artificial image of himself:
And he with ease can vary to the talle
Of different men, its features. Self-denied,
And matter of his appetites he seems:
But his.fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,
Watches to seize unseen the wisl'd for prey.
Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill
As in Glenalvon's unrelenting mind.
Yet is he brave and politic il.wvar,
And flands aloft in these unruly times.

Why I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter:
Stay and detain him till I reach the cafile.

[E.xit Lady Randolph.

A tln. 0 happiness! where art thou to be found

I fee thou dwclleft not with birth and beauty,
Tho' grac'd with grandeur, and in wealth array'd:
Nor doll thou, it would seem, with virtue dwell;
Else had this gentle Lady mifs'd thee not.

Enter GLENALVON.

Glen. What doff thou muse on, meditating maid?

Like some entranc'd and visionary seer
On earth thou fland'fl, thy thoughts ascend to heaven.

A Ann. Wou'd that 1 were, e'en as thou fay'lt, a seer,
To have my doubts by heav'nly vision clear'd!

Glen. What dolt thou doubt of? what hafl thou to do

With fubjeAs intricate? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be queltion'd: think of these good gifts;
And then thy contemplations will be pleasing.

/Ann. Let women view yon monument of woe,

Then boast of beauty: who so fair as fle?
But [ mull follow: this revolving day
Awakes the mem'ry of her antient woes.

[Exit Anna.

GLENALVON fi.lls.

So!- Lady Randolph fliuns me; by and by
I'll woo her as the lion wooes his brides.
The deed's a-doing now, that makes me lord
Of these rich valleys, and a chief of pow'r.
The season is most apt; my founding lteps
Will not be heard amidfl the din of arms.
Randolph has liv'd too long: his better fate
Had the ascendant once, and keptme down:
JWhen I had seiz'd the dame, by chance he came,
!Refcu'd, and had the Lady for his labour;
j 'fcap'd unknown: a slender consolation!
Heaven is my witness that I do notiove
To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvest. Yet I am not safe:

# ACT II. SCENE I.

By love, or something like it, fRung, inflam'd,
Madly I blabb'd my paflion to his wife,
And (he has threatn'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will I do not know:
But well I know the Baron's wrath is deadly.
I will not live in fear: the man I dread
Is as a Dane to me; ay, and the man
Who stands betwixt me and my chief desire.
No bar but he; she has no kinsman near;
No brother in his sifter's quarrel bold;
And for the righteous cause, a stranger's cause,
I know no chief that will defy Glenalvon.

ACT II. SC E N E I.

A Court, &c.
Enter Servants and a Stranger at one door, and Lady RAN-

DOLPH and ANNA at another.

Lady RANDOLPH.

HAT means this clamour? Stranger! speak secure;
Halt thou beenwrong'd ? have these rude men prefum'd
To vex the weary trav'ller on his way?

IJi Serv. By us no firanger ever fuffer'd wrong:

This man with outcry wild has call'd us forth;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
Enter Lord RANDOLPH and Young Man ,with their swords

draqwn and bloody.
Lady Ran. Not vain the tranger's fears! how fares my

Lord?

Lord Ran. That it fares well, thanks to this gallant youth,

Whose valour fav'd me from a wretched death!
As down the winding dale I walk'd alone,
At the cross way four armed men attack'd me:
Rovers, I judge, from the licentious camp,

,k

Who would have quickly laid Lord Randolph low,
Had not this brave and gen'rous Stranger come,
Like my good angel in the hour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my foes his own.
They turn'd upon him: but his aAive arm
Struck to the ground, from whence they rose no more,
The fiercefl two; the others fled amain,
And left him master of the bloody field.
Speak, Lady Randolph: upon beauty's tongue
Dwell accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
Speak, noble dame, and thank him for thy lord.

Lady Ran. My Lord, I cannot speak what now I feel.

My heart o'erflows with gratitude to heav'n,
And to this noble youth, who all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but humanely brave
Fought on your fide, against such fearful odds.
Have you yet learn'd of him whom we should thank?
Whom call the saviour of Lord Randolph's life?

Lord Ran. I asc'd that question, and he anfwer'd not:
But I murf know who my deliv'rer is. (To the .iranger.)

Stran. A low born man, of parentage obscure,

Who nought can boafl but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Lord Ran. Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled

By the great King of kings ! thou art ordain'd
And flamp'd a hero by the sovereign hand
Of nature! blush not, flower of modesty
As well as valour, to declare thy birth.

Stran. My name is Norval: on the Grampian hills

My father feeds his flocks; a frugal swain,
Whose constant cares were to increase his store,
And keep his only son, myself, at home.
For I had heard of battles, and I long'd
To follow to the field some warlike lord;
And heav'n soon granted what my fire deny'd.
This moon which rose last night, round as my (hield,
Had not yet fill'd her horns, when by her light,
A band of fierce Barbarians, from the hills,
Rufh'd like a torrent down upon the vale,

Sweeping our flocks and herds. The shepherds fled
For safety, and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
I-Iover'd about the enemy, and mark'd
The road he took, then hafted to my friends;
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
I met advancing. The pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook the fpoil-encumbcr'd foe.
We fought and conquer'd. Ire a sword was drawn;
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Returning home in triumph, I difdain'd
The fiepherd's slothful life: and having heard
That our good king had fummnon'd his bold peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron fide,
I left my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to condut my steps:---
Yon trembling coward who forsook his mailer.
Journeying with this intent, I pafr these tow'rs,
And, heaven-direceed, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

Lord Ran. He is as wife as brave. Was ever tale

With such a gallant modesty rehears'd?
My brave deliv'rer ! thou (halt enter now
A nobler lift, and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame.
1 will present thee to our Scottinl king,
Whose valiant spirit ever valour lov'd.
Ha! my Matilda! wherefore (farts that tear?

Lady Ran. 1 cannot fay: for various affeaions,

And firangely mingled, in my bosom swell;
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
I joy that thou art safe, and I admire
Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety;
Yea, as my mind prcdi&s, with thine his own.
Obscure and friendless, he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the rage of death
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, and with his sword
To gain diftination which his birth deny'd.
In this attempt unknown he might have perifh'd,

And gain'd, with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope
He stands conspicuous; fame and great renown
Are brought within the coinpafs of his sword.
On this my mind refleced, whilst you spoke,
And blefs'd the wonder-working Lord of heav'n.

Lord Ran. Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts!

My deeds shall follow where thou point's[ the way.
Next to myself, and equal to Glenalvon,
In honour and command flall Norval be.

Norv. I know not how to thank you. Rude I am

In speech and manners: never till this hour
Stood I in such a presence: yet, my Lord,
There's something in my breast which makes me bold
To fay, that Norval ne'er wili thame thy favour.

Lady Ran. I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou shalt be

My knight; and ever, as thou didIt to-day,
With happy valour guard the life of Randolph.

Lord Ran. Well haft thou spoke. Let me forbid reply.

To Ndrval.

We are thy debtors still; thy high desert
O'ertops our gratitude. I must proceed,
:As was at first intended, to the camp.
iSome of my train I fee are speeding thither,
Impatient doubtless of their lord's delay.
Go with me, Norval, and thine eyes fnall fee
The chosen warriors of thy native land,
jWho languifli for the fight, and beat the air
'With brandifh'd swords.

Norv. Let us begone, my lord.
Lord Ran. [To Lady Randolph.] About the time that the

declining fun

Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills suspend,
Expea us to return. This night once more
1Within these walls I reft; my tent 1 pitch
n'o-morrow in the field. Prepare the feast.
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
[He, in' the eve of battle, may resign
inifelf to social pleasure; fweetelt then,

C

'Vhen danger to a soldier's foul endears
Tlhe human joy that never may return.

[Exeunt Randolph and Norval.

S C E N E II.

Lady RANDOLTH and ANNA.

L.nad Ran. His parting words have firuck a fatal truth.

O Douglas! Douglas! tender was the time
WVhen we two parted ne'er to meet again!'
How many years of anguish and despair
Has heav'n annex'd to those swift passing hours
Of love and fondness! Then my bosom's flame
Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of fear,
Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.

A,;n. May gracious heav'n pour the sweet balm of peace

Into the wounds that felter in your breast!
For earthly consolation cannot cure'them.

Laciy Ran. One only cure can heav'n itfelfbeftow;-

A gravelthat bed in which the weary reft.
Wretch that I am! Ala;'l why am I so?
At ev'ry happy parent I repine!
How blest the mother of yon gallant Norvai!
She for a living hulband bore her pains,
And heard him bless her when a man was born:
She nurs'd her smiling infant on her breat:
Tended the child, and rear'd the pleasing boy:
She, with affetion's triumph, saw the youth
In grace and comeliness surpass his peers:
Wlhilif I to a dead husband bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.

Ainn. Alas! Alas! why will you thus resume

Your grief afrclh? I thought that gallant youth
WVould for a while have won you fiom your wo.
On him intent you gazed with a look
Much more delighted than your pensive eye
Has deign'd on other objects to beltow.

Lady Ran. Delighted, fay'ft thou? Oh! ev'n there mine eye
Found fuel for my life-conluming Sorrow.

I thought, that had the son of Douglas liv'd,
He might have been like this young gallant itranger,
And pair'd with him in features and in shape,
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
My boy with blooming Norval might have number'd.
Whilst thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness
For this young stranger, wand'ring from his home,
And like an orphan cast upon my care.
I will protect thee, (said I to myself)
With all my power, and grace with all my favour.

Ann. Sure heav'n will bless so gen'rous a refolvc.

You must, my noble dame, exert your power:
You must awake: devices will be fram'd,
And arrows pointed at the breast of Norval.

Lady Ran. Glenalvon's false and crafty head will wori.

Against a rival in his kinsman's love,
If I deter him not: I only can.
Bold as he is, Glenalvon will beware
How he pulls down the fabric that I raise.
I'11 be the artist of young Norvals fortune.
'Tis pleating to admire: most apt was I
To this affection in my better days;
Though now I seem to you fllrunk up, retir'd
Within the narrow compass of my wo.
Have you not sometimes seen an early flower
Open its bud, and spread its silken leaves,
To catch sweet airs, and odours to bestow;
Then, by tlie keen blast nipt, pull in its leaves,
And, though (till living, die to scent and beauty '
Emblem of me: affliction, like a Iform,
Ilath kill'd the forward bloflom of my heart.

Enter GL ENALVON.

Glen. Where is my dearest kinsman, noble Randoilph i
Lady Ran. Have you not heard, Glenalvon, of the bafc--
Glen. I have: and that the villains may not'fcape,

With a fIrong band I have begirt the wood.
If they lurk there, alive they shall be taken,
And torture force from them th' important secret,

C z

Whether some foe of Randolph hir'd their swords,
Or if-

Lady Ran. That care becomes a kinsman's love.
I have a counsel for Glenalvon's ear. EExii Anna.

GC/ez. To him your counsels always are commands.
Lady Ran. I have not found so: thou art known to me.
Glen. Known!
Lady Ran. And mofl certain is my cause of knowledge.
Glen. What do you know? by the most blessed cross,

You much amaze me. No created being,
Yourself except, durlt thus accoit Glenalvon.

Lady Ran. Is guilt so bold? and doll thou make a merit

Of thy pretended meekness? This to me,
WVho, with a gentleness which duty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd, what, if divulg'd,
Would make thee nothing; or, what's worse than that,
An outcast beggar, and unpitied tool
For mortals shudder at a crime like thine.

G/le.. Thy virtue awes me. Fir/t of womankind

Permit me yet to fay, that the fond man,
Whom love transports beyond ftrit virtue's bounds,
If he is brought by love to misery,
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpitied cannot be. Pity's the alms
Which on such beggars freely is beftow'd:
For mortals know that love is flill their lord,
And o'er their vain resolves advances still:
As fire, when kindled by our shepherds, moves
Through the dry heath against the fanning wind.

Lady Ran. Reserve these accents for some other ear;

To love's apology I liften not.
Mark thou my words; for it is meet thou (hould'ft.
His brave deliv'rer Randolph here retains,
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well:
B1ut, at thy peril pratife ought against him:
Let not thy jealousy attempt to shake
And loosen the good root he has in Randolph;
Whose favourites I know thou haft supplanted.
Thou look'lt at me, as if thou fain wouldit pry
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech,

I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendless stranger my protection claims:
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit.

S C E NE III.

Manet GLENALVON.

Child that I was, to Itart at my own shadow;

And be the shallow fool of coward conscience!
I am not what I have been; what I should be.
The darts of defliny have almost pierc'd
My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
iI flould conclude there was an arm above
iThat fought against me, and malignant turn'd,
%To catch myself, the subtle snare I set.
Why, rape and murder are not simple means!
rTh' imperfeA rape to Randolph gave a spouse;
And the intended murder introduc'd

favourite to hide the fun from me;

And worst of all, a rival. Burning hell!
This were thy centre, if I thought she lov'd him!
jTis certain ihe contemns me; nay commands me,
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'er me,
In his behalf. And fiall I thus be brav'd?
Curb'd as (he calls it, by dame Chaflity?
.nfernal fiends, if any fiends there are
,lore fierce than hate, ambition, and revenge,
|Life up and fill my bosom with your fires
And policy remorseless! Chance may spoil
A single aim; but perseverance muff
>rofper at lafl. For chance and fate are words:
'er.fiive wisdom is the fate of man.
)arkly a project 'ppears upon my mind,
ike the red moon when rising in the eaOf,
,rofsd and divided by firange colour'd clouds.
'1l seek the slave who came with Norval hithzr,

# ACT III. SCENE I.

And for his cowardice was spurned from him.
I've known a follower's rankled bosom breed
Venom most fatal to his heediefs lord. [Exit.

A C T II. SCENE I.

A Court, &c. as before.

Enter ANNA.
r IHY vassals, grief! great nature's order break,

And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour.

Whilst Lady Randolph sleeps, I will walk forth,
And tafle the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers be! Ye ministers
Of gracious heav'n who love the human race,
Angels and seraphs who delight in goodness!
So fake your flcies, and to her couch descend!
There from her fancy chace those difinal forms
That haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
`With images celestial, such as please
The blefs'd above upon their golden beds.

Enter SERVANT.

Serv. One of the vile assassins is fecur'd,

'We found the villain lurking in the wood:
With dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not
His first eflay: these jewels were conceal'd
In the most secret places of his garment;
Belike the spoils of some that he has murder'd.

Ann. Let me look on them. Ha! here is a heart,

The chosen crest of Douglas' valiant name!
-These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch. [Exit Anna,

Enter Servants ,with a Prisoner.

Pr/f. I know no more than does the child unborn
,Of what you charge me with.

ifi Serv. You fay so, Sir!

But torture soon shall make you speak the truth.
Behold the Lady of Lord Randolph comes;
Prepare yourself to meet her just revenge.

SCENE II.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Ann. Summon your utmoit fortitude, before

You speak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
Are now at tlake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may fly.

Lady Ran. Thou shalt behold me with a defp'ratc heart,
Hear how my infant perifli'd. See he kneels.

7 The Prifonr kneels.

Prif. Heaven bless that countenance, so fwect and mild!

iA judge like thee makes innocence more bold.
0 save me, Lady! from these cruel men,
Who have attack'd and seiz'd me; who accufc
Me of intended murder. As I hope
For mercy at the judgment-feat of God,
The tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
Is not inore innocent than I of murder.

Lady Ran. Of this man's guilt what proof can ye produce '
i?2 Scrv. We found him lurking in the hollow glynn,

When view'd, and call'd upon, amaz'd, he fled.
We overtook him, and enquir'd from whence,
And what he was? He said, he came fiom far,
And was upon his journey to the camp.
Not fatisfy'd \vith this, we fearch'd his cloaths,
And found these jewels, whose rich valueplead
Most pow'rfully against him. Hard he seems,
And old in villainy. Permit us t' try
His stubbornness against the torture's force.

Prif 0 gentle Lady! by your Lord's dear life'

Which these weak hands, 1 swear did ne'er assail
And by your children's welfare, spare my age!
Let not the iron tear my antient joints,
And my gray hairs bring to the grave with pain,

Lady Ran. Account for these: thine own they cannot be:

For these, I fay, be fledfaft to the truth;
Detected falsehood is molf certain death.

- [Anna removes the Servants and returns.

Pri/: Alas! I'm fore beset! let never man,

For fake of lucre, fin againfl his foul!
Eternal Justice is in this moR just!
I, guiltless now, muff former guilt reveal.

Lady Ran. O! Anna hear !-once more I charge thee speak

The truth direct: for these to me foretel
And certify a part of thy narration;
WVith which if the remainder tallies not,
An inflant and a dreadful death abides thee.

Prif Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speak to thee as just

As if you were the minister of heaven,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men.

Some eighteen years ago, I rented land

Of brave Sir Malcolm, then Balarmo's Lord;
But falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
All that I had, and then turn'd me and mine,
(Four helpless infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel by the river's fide
Receiv'd us: There hard labour, and the fiill
It fifling, which was formerly my sport,
Supported life. Whilst thus we poorly liv'd,
One flormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down, and loud and oft
The angry spirit of the water fhriek'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
Of one in jeopardy. 1 rose, and ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach whatever floating thing the fiream
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd; the person lollf
But looking fad and earnePt on the waters,
By the moon's light I fsw, whirl'd round and round,
A baflet: soon I drew it to the bank,
And nestled curious there an infant lay.

Lady Ran. Was he alive?
Prif. He was.
Lady Ran. Inhuman that thou art!
How could'st thou kill what waves and tempest spar'd?

Prif I was not so inhuman.
Lady Ran. Did'fl thou not
Ann. My noble mistress, you are mov'd too much:

This man has not the aspea of flern murder:
Let him go on, and you, I hope, will hear
Good tidings-of your kinsman's long loft child.

Prif The needy man, who has known better days,

One whom difirefs has spited at the world,
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds, as make the prosperous men
Lift up their hands, and wonder who could do them.
And such a man was I; a man declined,
Who saw no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
i Have touch'd that infant, with a hand of harm.

Lady Ran. Ha! dollt thou fay so? Then perhaps he lives.
Prif Not many days ago he was alive.
Lady Ran. O! God of heaven! Did he then die so lately
Prif I did not fay he dy.'d; I hope he lives:

Not many days ago these eyes beheld
Him, flourishing in youth, and health, and beauty.

Lady Ran. Where is he now?
Prif Alas! I know not where.
Lady Ran. Oh fate! I fear thee flill. Thou iddler, speak
Diree and clear, else I will search thy foul.

Ann. Permit me, ever honour'd! Keen impatience,

Though hard to be reftrain'd, defeats itself.-
Pursue thy flory with a faithful tongue,
To the last hour that thou didfl keep the child.

Prif Fear not my faith, though I must speak my (hame,

Within the cradle, where the infant lay,
Was flow'd a mighty store of gold and jewels;
Tempted by which we did resolve to hide,
From all the world, this wonderful event,
And like a peasant breed the noble child.
That none might mark the change of our eflate.

D

XVe left the country, travell'd to the north,
Bought flocks and .hc ds, and gradually brought forth
Our secret wcallh. But God's all-feeing eye
lBeheld our avarice, and inore us fore.
For one by one all our own children dy'd,
And he, the Itranger, sole remain'd the heir
Of what indeed was his. Fain then would I,
xVho wih a fatlher's fondness lov'd the boy,
]-.ve trusted him, now in the dawn of youth,
XWith his own secret; but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never would consent.
',Iean-while tie htripling grew in years and beauty;
And, as we oft obferv'd, he bore himself
Not as the offspring of our cottage blood;
For nature will break out: mild with the mild,
But with the froward, he was fierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I set niyfelf again(t his warlike bent;
But all in vain: for when a defp'rate band
Of robbers from the {ivage mountains came-

Lady Ran. Eternal providence! What is thy name?
Prif. My name is Norval: and my name he bears.
i.alvy Ran. 'Ts is she 'tie himself! It is my son!

0 sovereign mercy! 'Twas my child I saw!
No wonder, Anna, that my bosom burn'd.

Art.. Ju(t are your transports: ne'er was woman's heart

Prov'd with fiich fierce extremes. High fated dame!
But yet remember that you are beheld
By servile eyes; your geltures may be fcen
Impa]i;on'd {irance; pt:liaps your words o'erhcard.

Lady Rn,:. Well dotl thou counifl, Anna: heav'n beftov
On me that wifdori which my state requires !

.4ann The moments of deliberation liass,

And soon you muff resolve. This useful man
lMTu(t be difmifs'd in safety, ere my lord
Shall with his brave deliverer return.

Pr/.f .f I, amidfl altonifliment and fear,

Have of your words and gestures rightly judg'd,
Thou art the daughter of my ancient matter;
The child I refcu'd fiom the flood is thine.

L'ody Ran. With thee diffimufation now were vain.

I am indeed the daughter of Sir Malcolm;
The child thou refcu'dft from the flood is mine.

Prif. Blefs'd be the hour that made me a poor man !
My poverty hath fav'd my mafler's house!

Lady Ran. Thy words surprise me: sure thou dolt not feign a

The tear flands in thine eye: such love from thee
Sir Malcolm's house deferv'd not; if aright
Thou told'ft the (tory of thy own diftrefe.

Pr:. Sir Malcolm of our barons was the flower;

The faleft friend, the best, the kindelt matcer:
But ah! he knew not of my fad estate.
After that battle, where his gallant son,
i Your own brave brother, fell, the good old lord
i Grew desperate and reckless of the world;

And never, as he erst was wont, went forth
To overlook the conduct of his servants.
i By them I was thrust out, and them I blame:

May heav'n so judge me as I judg'd my maler!
And God so love fle as 1 loxe his race!

Lady Ran. His race Ihall yet reward thee. On thy s.ith

i. Depends the fate of thy lov'd maiter's house.

Rememb'reft thou a little lonely hut,
' That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the clifts of Carron?

Pri-. I remember
; The cottage of the clifis.

.Cady Ran. 'Tis that I mean:
V There dwells a man of venerable age,
Who in my father's service spent his youth:
Tell him I sent thee, and with him remain,
Till I (hall call upon thee to declare,

i Before the king and nobles, what thou now

To me hall told. No more but this, and thou

:s Shalt live in honour all thy future days;
:i Thy son so long flall call thee father still,

And all the land shall bless the man, who fav'd

! The son of Douglas, and Sir Malcolm's heir.
. Remember well my words: if thou fhould'lt meet
! Him whom thou call'ft thy son, still call .him so;

D 2

And mention nothing of his nobler father.

Prif Fear not that I shall mar so fair an harvest,

By putting in my fickle ere 'tis ripe.
Why did I leave my home and ancient dame?
To find the youth, to tell him all I knew,
And make him wear these jewels in his arms;
Which might, I thought, be challeng'd, and so bring
To light the secret of his noble birth.

CLady Randolph goes towards the fervanti.

Lady Ran. This man is not th' affaflin you fufpeaed,

Though chance combin'd some likelihoods against him.
He is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To the right o\vner whom in hate he seeks.
'Tis meet that you should put him on his way,
Since your mistaken zeal hath dragg'd him hither.

[Exeunt Stranger and Servatts.

S C E E

N I.

Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lady Ran. My faithful Anna! dost thou lhare my joy?

I know thou doll. Unparallel'd event!
Reaching from heav'n to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings to me my son!
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father!
Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
For such a gift! What does my Anna think
Of the young eaglet of a valiant netl?
How soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his fate had thrown him,
And tower'd op to che region of his fire.

Ann. How fondly did your eyes devour the boy!

Mylterious nature, with the unseen cord
Of powerful inftint, drew you to your own.

Lady Ran. The ready fory of his birth believ'd

Supprefl my fancy quite; nor did he owe
To any likeness my so sudden favour:
But now I long to -fee his face again,
Examine every feature, and find out

The lineaments of DouglaS, or my own.
But mots of all, I long to let him know
Who his true parents are, to clasp his neck,
And tell him all the tfory of his father.
I Ann. With wary caution you must bear yourself
In public, left your tenderness break forth,
i And in observers Ltir conjectures itrange.
For, if a cherub in the shape of woman
Should walk this world, yet defamation would,
Like a vile cur, bark at the angels train-
!To-day the Baron flarted at your tears.

Lady Ran. He did so, Anna! well thy mifrefs knows,

.If the least circumfrance, mote of offence,
Should touch the Baron's eye, his fight would be
With jealousy diforder'd. But the more
It does behove me instant to declare
,The birth of Douglas, and assert his rights.
'This night I purpose with my son to meet,
iReveal the secret, and consult with him:
]For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
|As he does now, so look'd his noble father,
jArray'd in nature's cafe: his mein, his speech,
'Were sweetly finple, and full oft deceiv'd
iThofe trivial mortals who seem always wife.
,But, when the matter match'd his mighty mind,
JUp rose the hero: on his piercing eye
jSat observation; on each glance of thought
:Decilion follow'd, as the thunder-bolt
WPurfues the flash.

Ann. That demon haunts you fill.
;Behold Glenalvon.

Lady Rat. Now I shun him not.

'This day I brav'd him in behalf of Norval;
'Perhaps too far: at lealt my nicer fears
'For Douglas thus interpret.

Enter GLENALVON.

Glen. Noble dame!

The hov'ring Dane at last his men hath landed:
No band of pirates; but a mighty host,

That come to fettle where their valour conquers;
To win a country, or to lose themselves.

Lady Ran. But whence comes this intelligence, Glenalvon?
Glen. A nimble courier sent from yonder camp,

To ha!ten up the chieftains of the north,
Inform'd me, as he past, that the fierce Dane
Had on the eastern coast of Lothian landed,
Nor to that place where the fea-rock immense,
Amazing Bass, looks o'er a fertile land.

Lady Ran. Then mulf this western army march to join
The warlike troops that guard Edina's tow'rs?

Glen. Beyond all queltion. If impairing time

Has not effac'd the image of a place,
Once perse& in my breast, there is a wild
Which lies to westward of that mighty rock,
And seems by nature formed for the camp
Of water-wafted armies, whose chief strength
Lies in film foot unflank'd with warlike horse:
If martial skill direcs the I)anifh lords,
There inacceflible their army lies
To our swift fcow'ring horse: the bloody field
Must man to man, and foot to foot, be fought.

Lady Ran. How many mothers flall bewail their sons i

How many widows weep their husbands slain!
Ye dames of Denmark! ev'n for you I feel,
Who sadly fitting on the fea-beat ihore,
Long look for lords that never shall return.

Glen. Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian sword

Widow'd the north. The children of the slain
Come, as I hope, to meet their father's fate.
The monster war, with her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are objects suited to Glenalvon's foul:
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death;
Reproach more piercing than the pointed sword.

Lady Ran. I scorn thee not, but when I ought to scorn;

Nor e'er reproach'd, but when insulted virtue
Against audacious vice exerts herself.
I own thy worth, Glenalvon; none more apt
Than I to praise thine eminence in arms,

And be the echo of thy martial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty pafion:
Go and pursue a lawful mistress, glory.
Upon the Danish crests redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the 1hield of Randolph.

Glen. One inltant flay, and hear an'alter'd man.

When beauty pleads for virtue, vice abafl'd
Flies its own colours, and goes o'er to vi tue.
I am your convert; time will Lhew how truly:
Yet one immediate proof 1 mean to give.
That youth, for whom your ardent zeal to-day,
Somewhat too haughtily, defy'd your slave,
Amidfl the Ihock of armies I'll defend,
And turn death from him, with a guardian arm.
Sedate by use, my bosom maddens not
At the tumult'ous uproar of the field.

Lady Ran. Ac thus, Glenalvon, and I am thy friend:

But that's thy least reward. Believe me, Sir,
The truly generous is the truly wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblest.

[Exit Lady Randolph.

G/en. [fluzs] Amen ! and virtue is its own reward !-

I think that I have hit the very tone
In which lle loves to speak. Honey'd afl;nt,
How pleasant art thou to the talte of man,
And woman also. flattery diret
Rarely disgusts. They little know mankind
Who doubt its operation: 'tis my key,
And opes the wicket of the human heart.
How far I have succeeded now I know not.
Yet I incline to think her flormy virtue
Is lull'd a while: 'tis her alone I fear:
Whillt ihe and Randolph live, and live in faith
And amity, uncertain is my tenure.
Fate o'er my head suspends disgrace and death,
By that weak heir, a peevifl female's will.
I am not idle: but the ebbs and flows
Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated.
That slave of Norval's 1 have found moss apt:
I ihewed him gold, and he has paxvn'd his foul

# ACT IV. SCENE I.

To fay and swear whatever I fuggelt.
Norval, I'm told, has that alluring look,
'Twixt man and woman, which 1 have obferv'd,
To charm the nicer and fantastic dames,
Who are, like lady Randolph, full of virtue.
In raising Randolph's jealousy I may
Blut point him to the truth. He seldom errs
Who thinks the worfl he can of womankind.

A C T V. S C E NE I.

Ficr'rt? cf Trumpets.
Erter Lord RANDOt PH attended.

Lord RANDOtPH.
SUMMON an hundred horse, by break of day

To wait our pleasure at the castle gate.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

Lady Ran. Alas! my lord! I've heard unwelcome news;
The Danes are landed.

Lord Ran. Ay! no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take the spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament efiey,
Of some young knight resolved to break a spear,
And (lain with holtile blood his maiden arms.
The Danes are landed: we must beat them back,
Or live the slaves of DeDmark.

Lady Ran. Dreadful times!
Lord Ra^. The fenceless villages are all forsaken;

The trembling mothers, and their children lodg'd
In wall girt towers aid castles; whilst the men
Retire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return.

Ladv Ran. Immense, as fame reports, the Danish host!--

Lord Ran. Were it as num'rous as loud fame reports,

An army knit like ours would pierce it through:
i Brothers, that flrink not from each other's fide,
And fond companions, fill our warlike files:
For his dear offspring, and the wife he loves,
j The husband, and the fearless father arm.

In vulgar breasts heroic ardour burns,
And the poor peasant mates his daring lord.

Lady Ran. Mlen's minds are temper'd like their swords, for

war:

Lovers of danger, on deflruction's brink
They joy to rear eret their daring forms.
Hence, early graves; hence the lone widow's life;
And the fad mother's grief-imbitter'd age.
Where is our gallant guest?

Lord Ran. Down in the vale

I left him, managing a fiery freed,
Whose flubbornnefs had foil'd the strength and fIill
Of every rider: But behold he conies,
In earnefl conversation with Glenalvon.

Enter NORVAL and GLENALVON.

Glenalvon! With the lark arise; go forth,
And lead my troops that lie in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
Norval, thou go'lt with me. But fay, young man?
Where didft thou learn so to discourse of war,
And in such terms as I o'erheard to-day?
War is no village science, nor its phrase
IA language taught amongst the shepherd swains.

Norv. Small is the i(ill my lord delights to praise

In him he favours.-Hear from whence it came.
Beneath a mountain's brow the most remote
And inacceflible by (hepherds trod,
In a deep cave dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit liv'd; a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our wand'ring swains.
Auflere and lonely, cruel to himself,
Did they report him; the cold earth his bed,
Water his drink, his food the shepherds alms.

E

I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
With rev'rence and with pity. Mild he spake,
And, entering on discourse, such flories told
As made me oft revisit his fad cell.
For he had been a soldier in his youth;
And fought in famous battles, when the peers
Of Europe, by the bold Godfredo led,
Againfl th' usurping infidel difplay'd
The cross of Christ, and won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His i)eech firuck from me, the old man would flake
His years away, and at his young encounters:
Then, having shew'd his wounds, he'd fit him down,
And all the live-long day discourse of war.
To help my fancy, in the smooth green turf,
He cut the figures of the marshall'd hosts;
Defcrib'd the motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm.
For all that Saracen, or Christian knew
Of war's valt art was to this hermit known.

Lord Ran. Why did this soldier in a desert hide
Those qualities that fiould have grac'd a camp?

Arorv. That too at lafl I learn'd. Unhappy manl

Returning homewards by Messina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boifl'rous captain of the Tea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought:
The firanger fell, and with his dying breath
Declar'd his name and lineage. Mighty God!
The soldier cry'd, my brothel! Oh! my brother!

Lady Ran. His brother!
Norv. Yes; of the fame parents born;

His only brother. They exchang'd forgiveness:
And happy, in my mind, was he that dy'd:
For many deaths has the survivor fuffer'd.
In the wild desert on a rock he fits,
Or on some nameless fiream's untroden banks;
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times, alas! not in his perfect mind!

Holds dialogues with his lov'd brother's ghofl;
And oft each night forsakes his fullen couch,
To make fad orisons for him he flew.

Lad, Ran. To what mysterious woes are mortals born!

In this dire tragedy were there no more
Unhappy persons? did the parents live?
Norv. No; they were dead: kind heav'n had clos'd their

eyes

Before their son had flied his brother's blood.

Lord Ran. Hard is his fate; for he was not to blame!

There is a destiny in this strange world,
4 Which oft decrees an undeserved doom:
Let fchoolmen tell us why.-From whence these founds?

[ Trrumpets at a dijlancr.

I\4 ~ Enter an OFFICER.

Officer. My Lord, the trumpets of the troops of Lorn:
The valiant leader hails the noble Randolph.

Lord Ran. Mine ancient guelt! does he the warriors lead ?

Has Denmark rous'd the brave old knight to arms ?

Officer. No; worn with warfare, he resigns the fwvord.

His eldest hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
1Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord Ran. Glenalvon, go,

With hospitality's molt strong request
jInrreat the chief.

| 1$~ *s~

~[Exit Glenalvon.

Officer. My Lord, requests are vain.

IHe urges on, impatient of delay,
jStung with the tidings of the foe's approach.

Lord Ran. May victory fit on the warrior's plume !

»Braves of men! his flocka and herds are safe;
Remote from war's alarms his pastures lie,
By mountains inacceflible fecurl'd:
Yet foremost he into the plain descends,
iEager to bleed in battles not his ovxn.
}Such were the heroes of the ancient world;
Contemners they of indolence and gain;
[But still for love of glory, and of arms,
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift

E 2,
1

Againfi each strong antagonifi the ipear.
1'1 go and press the hero to my breafd.

[Exit 'Randolph.

Manent Lady RANDOLPH and NORVAL.

Lary Ran. The soldier's loftiness, the pride and pomp

Invefling awful war, Norval, I fee,
Transport thy youthful mind.

NVorv. Ah! flould they not?

Blefs'd be the hour 1 left my father's house!
I might have been a fhepherd'all my days,
And stole obscurely to a peasant's grave.
Now, if I live, with mighty chiefs I fland;
And, if I fall, with noble dupf I lie.

Lady Ran. There is a gen'rous spirit in thy breast,

That could have well fuftain'd a prouder fortune:
This way with me; under yon spreading beech,
Unseen, unheard, by human eye or ear,
I will amaze thee with a vwond'rous tale.

Norv. Let there be danger, Lady, with the secret,

That I may hug it to my grateful heart,
And prove my faith. Command my sword, my life:
These are the sole possessions of poor Norval.

Lady Ran. Know'ft thou these gems?
Norv. Durst I believe mine eyes
I'd fay I knew them, and they were my father's.

Lady Ran. Thy father's, fay'fi thou! ah! they were thy

father's!

Norv. I saw them once, and curiously inquir'd

Of both my parents, whence'fuch splendor came?
But I was check'd, and more could never learn.

Lady Ran. Then learn of me, thou art not Norval's son.
Nor. Not Norval's son!
Lady Ran. Nor of a ihepherd sprung.
Norv. Lady, who am I then?
Lady Ran. Noble thou art!
For noble was thy Sire!

Norv. I will believe
O! tell me farther! Say, who was my father?

Lady Ran. Douglas!

Norv. Lord Douglas, whom to-day I saw?
Lady Ran. His younger brother.
Norv. And in yonder camp?
LIady Ran. Alas!
rorv. You make me tremble-Sighs and tears!
Lives my brave father?

Lady Ran. Ah! too brave indeed!
-He fell in battle ere thyself was born.

Norv. Ah me unhappy! ere 1 saw the light?

:But does my mother live? I may conclude,
'From my own fate, her portion has been fbrrow.

Lady Ran. She lives; but waftes.her life in confiant wo,
Weeping hei husband slain, her infant loft.

Norv. You that are flill'd so well in the fad flory

Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their destiny, now have compaflion
' Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd.
O! tell me who, and where my mother is!
Opprefs'd by a base world, perhaps flie bends
! Beneath the weight of other ills than grief;
And desolate, implores of heav'n, the aid
Her son (hould give. It is, it muff be so
Your countenance confesses that flie's wretched.
O! tell me her condition! Can the sword
Who shall refillt me in a parent's cause?

L ady Ran. Thy virtue ends her woe.-My son, my son!
I am thy mother, and the wife of Douglas!

1;~3~~~~~~~ [Falls upon his neck.

Niorv. 0 heav'n and earth, how wondrous is my fate!
} Art thou my mother? Ever let me kneel !

Lady Ran. Image of Douglas! Frulit of fatal love!
All that I owe thy Sire, I pay to thee.

Norv. Refpet and admiration still poflefs me,

Checking the love and fondness of a son.
1 et I was filial to my humble parents.
1 But did my Sire surpass the relt of men,
As thou excelletl all of womankind?

Lady Ran. Arise, my son! In me thou dofl behold

The poor remains of beauty once admir'd:
The autumn of my days is come already;

For sorrow made my summer halte away.
.Yet in my prime I equall'd not thy father:
IHis eyes were like the eagle's, yet sometimes
Liker the dove's; and, as he pleas'd, he won
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

Norv. How did he fall? Sure twvas a bloody field
When Douglas dy'd. O I have much to afc!

Liad) Ran. Hereafter thou (halt hear the lengthen'd tale

Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes,
At prcfent this: thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder caille, and the wide domains
Which now Lord Randolph, as my husband, holds,
But thou ihalt not be wrong'd; I have the pow'r
To right thee Itill: before the king I'll kneel,
And call Lord Douglas to prote& his blood.

Ncrv. The blood of Douglas will protect itself.
Lady Ran. But we flall need both friends and favour, boy,

To wrest thy lands and )ordfhip from the gripe
Of Randolph and his kinsman. Yet I think
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
My life incline the virtuous to believe.

Norv. To be the son of Douglas is to me

Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in the field i'll seek for fame and fortune.

Lady Ran. Thou dof not know what perils and injustice

Await the poor man's valour. O! my son!
The noblest blood in all the land's abafll'd,
Having no lacquey but pale poverty.
Too long halt thou been thus attended, Douglas!
Too long haft thou been deem'd a peasant's child.
The wanton heir of some inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in the youthful sports;
Whilst thy indignant spirit fwell'd in vain!
Such contumely thou no more ihalt bear:
But how 1 purpose to redrcfs thy wrongs
Mufl be hereafter told. Prudence direfls
That we fliould part before yon chiefs return.
Retire, and from thy rustic follower's hand
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Axnxious to fee thee, dictated before

This casual opportunity arose
Of private conference. Its purport mark;
'For as I there appoint we meet again.
:Leave me, my son! and frame thy manners flilI
lTo Norval's, nbt to noble Douglas' {tate.

Nrv. I will remember. Where is Norval now?

That good old man.

Lady Ran. At hand conceal'd he lies,

;An useful witness. But beware, my foi,
Of yon Glenalvon; in his guilty breast
Resides a villain's flrewdnefs, ever prone
To false conjecture. He hath griev'd my heart.
\ N'orv. Has he indeed? Then let yon false Glenalvon
1 Beware of me.

[Exit Douglas.

·i Manent LADY RANDOLPH.
i Lady Ran. There burf tthe finother'd flame!
0 thou all righteous and eternal King!
Who father of the fatherless art call'd,
: Prote&t my son!- -- hy inspiration, Lord!
-I Hath fill'd his bosom with that sacred fire,
i Which in the breasts of his forefathers burn'd:

Set him on high like them, that he may fltine
The flar and glory of his native land!
1 Then let the minister of death descend,
And bear my willing spirit to its place.
t Yonder they come. How do bad women find
e Unchanging afpets to conceal their guilt?
When 1, by reason, and by justice urg'd,

'I Fall hardly can dissemble with these men
33 In nature's pious cause.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.

Lord Ran. Yon gallant chief,
Of arms enamour'd, all repose disclaims.

Lady Ran. Be not, my Lord, by his example fway'd:

A!rrange the business of to-morrow now,
And, when you enter, speak of war no more.

[Exit Lady RANDOLPn.

Manent Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.
Lord Ran. 'Tis so, by heav'n! her mein, her voice, her

eye,
And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

Glen. He parted from her now: behind the mount,
Amongst the trees, I saw him glide along.

Lord Ran. For fad, fequefter'd virtue (he's renown'd!
Glen. Mopt true, my lord.
Lord Ran. Yet this diftinguifh'd dame

Invites a youth, th' acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This assignation (Jhews a letter) the assassin freed,
Her manifest affecion for the youth,
Might breed suspicion in a husband's brain,
Whose gentle consort all for love had wedded:
Much more in mine. Matilda never lov'd me.
ILet no man, after me, a woman weds
Whose heart he knows he has not; tho' she brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry:
For let her seem, like the night's (hadowy queen,
Cold and contemplative :-He cannot trust her:
She may, (he will, bring flame and sorrow on him;
The worst of sorrows, and the worst of shames !

Glen. Yield not, my lord, to such afflicing thoughts;

But let the spirit of an husband sleep,
Till your own senses make a sure conclusion.
This billet muit to blooming Norval go:
At the next turn awaits my truly spy;
I'll give it him refitted for his mafler.
In the close thicket take your secret stand;
The moon flines bright, and your own eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

Lord Ran. Thou doff counsel well.
Glen. Permit me now to make one flight cflay.

Of all the trophies which vain mortals boal,'
By wit, by valour, or by wisdom won,
The first and fairest, in a young man's eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Successful love
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind!

And the proud conqueror in triumph moves
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Lord Ran. And what avails this maxim ?
Glen. Much, my lord!

Withdraw a little: I'll accolt young Norval,
And with ironical derisive couinfel
Explore his spirit. If he is no more
Than humble Norval, by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as he is, he'll shrink aftonifh'd from me:
But if he be the fav'rite of the fair,
Lov'd by the first of Caledonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's ipear.

Lord Ran. 'Tis shrewdly thought.
Glen. When we grow loud, draw near. But let my Lord
His rising wrath reitrain. [Exit Randolph.

Manent GLENALVON.

Glen. 'Tis strange, by heav'n!

That she should run full tilt her fond career,
To one so little known. She too that feem'd
Pure as the winter fiream, when ice embofs'd
Whitens its course. Even I did think her chaste,
Whose charity exceeds not. Precious sex!
Whose deeds lascivious pals Glenalvon's thoughts!

[Norval appears.

His port I love; he's in a proper mood
To chide the thunder, if at him it roar'd.
Has Norval seen the troops?

Norv. The setting fun,

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale,
And as the warriors mov'd, each polish'd helm,
Corfet, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and, halting at its top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they feem'd
An holt angelic, clad in burning arms.

Glen. Thou talk'll it well; no leader of our ihof,
[n founds more lofty, speaks of glorious war.

Norv. If I shall e'er acquire a leader's name,
By speech will be less ardent. Novelty

F

Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itself freely; since no part is mine
Of praise, pertaining to the great in arms.

Glen. You wrong yourself, brave Sir; your martial deeds

Have rank'd you with the great: but, mark me Norval;
Lord Randolph's favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know these soldiers, counsel you.
Give them all honour; seem not to command;
Else they will scarcely brook your late sprung pow'r,
Whc.h nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

Norv. Sir, I have been accuftom'd all my days,

To hear and speak the plain and simple truth:
And tho' I have been told, that there are men
Who borrow friendship's tongue to speak their scorn,
Yet in such language I am little fiill'd.
Therefore I thank Glenalvon for his counsel,
Altho' it founded harshly. Why remind
Me of my birth obscure? Why slur my pow'r
With such contempt'ous terms ?

Glen. I did not mean
To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

Norv. My pride!
Glen. Suppress it as you wish to prosper.

Your pride's excessive. Yet for Randolph's fake
I will not leave you to its rash direction.
If thus you swell, and frown at high-born men,
Will high-born men endure a Ihepherd's scorn

Norv. A shepherd's scorn!
Glen. Yes; if you presume

To bend on soldiers these disdainful eyes,
As if you took the measure of their minds,
And said in secret you're no match for me;
What will become of you?

Norv. If this were told! [.J
Iaft thou no fears for thy presumptuous felfl

Glen. Hal dolt thou threaten me?
Norv. DidfR thou not hear?
Glen. Unwillingly I did; a nobler foe
Had not been queition'd thus. But such as thee-

Norv. Whom dost thou think me?
Glen. Norval.
Norv. So I am -

And who is Norval in Glenalvon's eyes ?

Glen. A peasant's son, a wandering beggar-boy;

At best no more, ev'n if he speaks the truth.

Norv. False as thou art, dost thou fufpele my truth ?
Glen. Thy truth ! thou'rt all a lie; and false as hell

Is the vain-glorious tale thou told'lt to Randolph.

Norv. If I were chain'd, unarm'd, and bedrid old,

Perhaps I should revile: But as I am
I have no tongue to rail. The humble Norval
Is of a race, who frive not but with deeds.
Did I not fear to freeze thy shallow valour,
{And make thee fink too Coon beneath my sword,
I'd tell thee what thou art. I know thee well.
· Glen. Dolft thou not know Glenalvon, born to command
Ten thousand slaves like thee ?

Norv. Villain, no more:

{Draw and defend thy life. I did design
]To have defy'd thee in another cause:
'But heav'n accelerates its vengeance on thee.
jNow for my own and Lady Randolph's wrongs.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.

Lord Ran. Hold, I command you both. The man that stirs
1Makes me his foe.

Norv. Another voice than thine

iThat threat had vainly founded, noble Randolph.
: Glen. Hear him, my Lord; he's wondrous condescending !
Mark the humility of shepherd Norval!

Nrorv. Now you may scoff in safety. [Sheathi hit fiword.
Lord Ran. Speak not thus,
[Taunting each other; but unfold to me
[The cause of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

Norv. Nay, my good lord, tho' I revere you much,

My cause I plead not, nor demand your judgment.

blush to speak; I will not, cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words that I from him have born.
To the liege lord of my dear native land

F

# ACT V. SCENE I.

I owe a subject's homage: but ev'n him
And his high arbitration I'd reject.
Within my bosom reigns another lord;
Honour, sole judge and umpire of itself.
If my free speech offend you, noble Randolph,
Revoke your favours, and let Norval go
Hence as he came, alone, but not difhonour'd.

L.ord Ran. Thus far I'll mediate with impartial voice:

The ancient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
Suspend your purpose, till your country's arms
Repel the bold invader: then decide
The private quarrel.

Glen. I agree to this.
Norv. And I.

Enter SERVA. r

Serv. The banquet waits.
Lord Ran. We come. [Exit Randolph.
Glen. Norval,

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of Randolph.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkled hate,
Shall stain my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow;
Nor let our tfrife dilturb the gentle dame.

Norv. Think not so lightly, Sir, of my resentment:
When we contend again, our strife is mortal.

ACT V. S C E N E I.

The Wood.

Enter DOUGLAS.
TH I S is the place, the center of the grove.

Here stands the oak, the monarch of the wood.

How sweet and solemn is this midnight scene!
The ilyer moon, unclouded, holds her way

Thro' fides where I could count each little liar.
The fanning weft-wind scarcely firs the leaves;
The river, ruffling o'er its pebbled bed,
Imposes silence with a filly found.
In such a place as this, at such an hour,
If ancestry can be in ought believ'd,
Descending spirits have convers'd with man,
And told the secrets of the world unknown.

Enter Old NORVAL.

Old Norv. 'Tis he. But what if he should chide me hence?
His just reproach I fear. [Douglas turns and fee him.

Forgive, forgive,

Canst thou forgive the man, the felfifli man,
Who bred Sir Malcolm's heir a fiepherd's son?

Doug. Kneel not to me: thou art my father still:

iThy wifh'd-for presence now compleats my joy.
Welcome to me, my fortunes thou shalt share,
And ever honour'd, with thy Douglas live.

ANorv. And dost thou call me father? O my son!

I think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
Which in the wilderness so long conceal'd
The blossom of thy youth.
i Doug. Not worse the fruit,
iThat in the wilderness the blossom blow'd.
!Amongst the shepherds, in the humble cote,
I learn'd some lessons, which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; and, when my vassals bow,
Norval shall smooth the crefled pride of Douglas.

Norv. Let me but live to fee thine exaltation?

Yet grievous are my fears. O leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

Doug. Why should I leave them?
Norv. Lord Randolph and his kinsman seek your life.
Doug. How know'ft thou that?
Norv. I will inform you how.
When ev'ning came, I left the secret place

Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And fondly trode in each accuftom'd path
That to the castle leads. Whilst thus I rang'd,
I was alarm'd with unexpected founds,
Of earnest voices. On the persons came:
Unseen I lurked, and overheard them name
Each other as they talk'd, Lord Randolph this,
And that Glenalvon: iftill of you they spoke,
And of the Lady: threat'ning was their speech,
Tho' but imperfectly my ear could hear it.
'Twas firange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Deug. Revenge! for what ?
Norv. For being what you are;

Sir Malcolm's heir: how else have you offended;
When they were gone, I hy'd me to my cottage,
And there fat musing how I befl might find
Means to inform you of their wicked purpose,
But I could think of none: at last perplex'd
I issued forth, encompafling the tow'r
With many a weary ftep and wishful look.
Now providence hath brought you to my fight,
Let not your too courageous spirit scorn
The caution which I give.

Doug. I scorn it not.

My mother warn'd me of Glenalvon's baseness:
But I will not fufpea the noble Randolph.
In our encounter with the vile affaflins,
I mark'd his brave demeanor, him I'll trust.

Norv. I fear you will too far.
Doug. Here in this place

I wait my mother's coming: she (hall know
What thou haft told: her counsel I will follow;
And cautious ever are a mother's counsels.
You must depart; your presence may prevent
Our interview.

Norv. My blefflng reft upon thee!

0 may heav'n's hand, which fav'd thee from the wave
And from the sword of foes, be near thee till;

Turning mischance, if ought hangs o'er thy head,
All upon mine! [Exit Old Norval.

Doug. He loves me like a parent;

And must not, shall not lose the son he loves,
Altho' his son has found a nobler father.
Eventful day, how haft thou chang'd my state !
Once on the cold, and winter-fhaded fide
Of a bleak hill, mischance had rooted me,
Never to thrive, child of another foil:
Transplanted now to the gay funny vale,
Like the green thorn of May, my fortune flowers.
Ye glorious flars ! high heav'n's resplendent host 1
To whom I oft have of my lot complain'd,
Hear and record my foul's unalter'd with!
Dead or alive, let me but be renown'd!
May heav'n inspire some fierce gigantic Dane,
To give a bold defiance to our hot !
Before he speaks it out I will accept;
Like Douglas conquer, or like Douglas die.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

Lady Ran. My son! I heard a voice-
Doug.--The voice was mine.
Lady Ran. Didfl thou complain aloud to nature's ear,

Tilat thus in dusky shades, at midnight-hours,
By stealth the mother andthe fonfhould meet? [EmEbracinghinm.

Doug. No: on this happy day, this better birth-day,
My thoughts and words are all of hope and joy.

Lady Ran. Sad fear and melancholy still divide

The empire of my breast with hope and joy.
Now hear what 1 advise.

Doug. Firlt, let me tell
What may the tenor of your counsel change.

Lady Ran. My heart forebodes some evil!
Doug. 'Tis not good-

At eve, unseen by Randolph and Glenalvon,
The good old Norval in the grove o'er heard
Their conversation: oft they mention'd me
With dreadful threat'nings: you they Sometimes nam'd.
'Twas firange, they Gsid, a wonderful difcov'ry;

And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Lady Ran. Defend us gracious God! we are betray'd:

They have found out the secret of thy birth;
It must be so. That is the great difcov'ry.
Sir Malcolm's heir is come to claim his own;
And he will be reveng'd. Perhaps ev'n now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for murder, they but wait
A darker and more silent hour to break
Into the chamber where they think thou fleep'll.
This moment, this, heav'n hath ordain'd to save thee!
Fly to the camp, my son!

Doug. And leave you here ?

No: to the caffle let us go together,
Call up the ancient servants of your house,
Who in your youth did eat your father's bread.
Then tell them loudly that I am your son.
If in the breasts of men one spark remains
Of sacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your cause will arm. I afli but few
To drive those spoilers from my father's house.

Lady Ran. 0 nature, nature! what can check thy force

Thou genuine offspring of the daring Douglas!
But rush not on deftrudion: save thyself,
And I am safe. To me they mean no harm.
Thy flay but rifles thy precious life in vain:
That winding path conducts thee to the river.
Cross where thou feeft a broad and beaten way,
Which running eafiward leads thee to the camp.
Inflant demand admittance to Lord Douglas.
Shew him these jewels, which his brother wore.
Thy look, thy voice, will make him feel the truth,
Which I by certain proof will soon confirm.

Dotug. I yield me and obey: but yet my heart

Bleeds at this parting. Something bids me flay
And guard a mother's life. Oft have I read
Of wond'rous deeds by one bold arm atchiev'd.
Our foes are two; no more: let me go forth,
And fee if any flhield can guard Glenalvon.

Lady Ran. If thou regard'ft thy mother, or rever'ft
Thy father's mem'ry, think of this no more.

One thing I have to fay before we part:
Long wert thou loft; and thou art found, my child,
In a molt fearful season. War and battle
I have great cause to dread. Too well I fee
Which way the current of thy temper sets:
To-day I've found thee. Oh! my long loft hope!
If thou to giddy valour giv'ft the rein,
To-morrow I may lose my fbn for ever.
The love of thee, before thou faw'ft the light,
Suftain'd my life when thy brave father fell.
If thou (halt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this waste world! my son, remember me!

Doug. What fiall 1 fay? how can I give you comfort?

The God of battles of my life dispose
As may be belt for you! for whose dear fake
I will not bear ayfelf as I refolv'd.
jut yet confider, as no vulgar name
iThat which I boast founds amongst martial men,
How will inglorious caution suit my claim?
iThe post of fate unfhrinking I maintain.
jMy country's foes muff witness who I am.
On the invaders' heads, I'll prove my birth,
"'ill friends and foes confess the genuine strain.
Ilfin this strife I fall, blame not your ton,
jWho, if I live not honour'd, mufft not live.
i Lady Ran. I will not utter what my bosom feels.
|Too well I love that valour which I warn.
'Farewel, my son! my counsels are but vain. [CE mnacing.
{And as high heav'n hath will'd it all muff be. [Separates.

Lady Ran. Gaze not on me, thou wilt mistake the path;
I'll point it out again.

[J_7t/ as they are separating, enter fi-oo the .wood

Lord Randolph and Glenalvon.]

Lord Ran. Not in her presence.
Now--

Glen. I'm prepar'd.
Lord Ran. No: I command thee stay.
I go alone: it never shall be laid

G

That I took odds to combat mortal man.
The noblest vengeance is the moll compleat.

[Exit Lord Randolph.

[Glenalvon nakes foume Jcps to the fame fJde of tkA
J/age, lifens and speak,.3

Glen. Demons of death, come fettle on my sword,

And to a double slaughter guide it home!
The lover and the husband both mull die.

[Lord Randolph behind the scenes.]

Lord Ran. Draw, villain! draw.
Doug. Assail me not, Lord Randolph;
Not as thou lov'it thyself. [Claihing of vord.

[Glenalvon running out.

Now is the time.
Enter LADY RANDOLPH at the oppoSe Jide. of the flage,

faint and breath/efr.
Lady Ran. Lord Randolph, hear me; all flall be thine

own:
But spare! Oh spare my son!

Enter DOUGLAS with a fvord in each hand.

Doug. My mother's voice!
I can protect thee flill.

Lady Ran. He lives, he lives:

For this, for this to heav'n eternal praise!
But sure I saw thee fall.

Doug. It was Glenalvon.

Jutl as my arm had mafter'd Randolph's sword,
The villain came behind me: but I flew him.

Lady Ran. Behind thee! ah; thou'rt wounded! O my

child,
How pale thou look'll! and shall I lose thee now?

Doug. Do not despair: I feel a little faintness;
I hope it will not lass. [Leans upon his sword.

Lady Ran. There is no hope!

And we mull part! the hand of death is on thee!
0 my beloved child! 0 Douglas, Douglas!

[Douglas growing more and more faint.
Doug. Too soon we part: I have not long been Douglas.

0 destiny! hardly thou deal'ft with me:
Clouded and hid, a firanger to myself,
In low and poor obscurity I liv'd.

Lady Ran. Has heav'n preferv'd thee for an end like this?
Doutg. 0 had I fallen asmy brave fathers fell,

Turning with great effort the tide of battle!
Like them I should have fmil'd and welcom'd death,
But thus to perish by a villain's hand!
Cut off from nature's, and from glory's course
Which never mortal was so fond to run.

l.ady Ran. Hear justice! hear! stretch thy avenging

arm. [Douglas fall,.

Doug. Unknown I die; no tongue shall speak of me.-

Some noble spirits, judging by themselves,
May yet conjecture what 1 might have prov'd,
And think life only wanting to my fame:
But who shall comfort thee?

Lady Ran. Defplair! despair!
Doug. 0 had it pleas'd high heav'n to let me live

1 A little while!-my eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apace! my mother-Oh! my mother! [Dier.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH and ANNA.
Lord Ran. Thy words, the words of truth, have pierc'd

my heart.

i I am the itain of knighthood and of arms.
3 Oh! if my brave deliverer survives
The traitor's sword-

.Ann. Alas! look there, my lord.
Lord Ran. The mother and her son! how curst I am!

Was I the cause? No: I was not the cause.
Yon matchless villain did seduce my foul
To frantic jealousy.

Ann. My lady lives:

The agony of grief hath but fuppreft
A while her powers.

Lord Ran. But my deliverer's dead!

The world did once esteem Lord Randolph well,
Sincere of heart, for spotless honour fam'd:
And, in my early days, glory I gain'd

Gz
I

Beneath the holy banner of the cross.
Now pa(t the noon of life, hlame comes upon me;
Reproach, and infamy, and public hate,
Are near at hand: for all mankind will think
That Randolph basely tfabb'd Sir Malcolm's heir.

[Lady Randolph recovering,

Lady Ran. Where am I now! trill in this wretched world!

Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine.
My youth was worn in anguifl: but youth's firength,
With hope's affiflance, bore the brunt of sorrow;
And train'd me on to be the objec now,
On which omnipotence difplaya itself.
Making a spectacle, a tale of me,
To awe its vasal, man.

Lord Ran. 0 misery!

Amidll-thy raging grief I must proclaim
My innocence.

Lady Ran. Thy innocence !
Lord Ran. My guilt
Is innocence compar'd with what thou think'ft it.

Lady Ran. Of thee I think not: what have I to do

With thee or any thing ? My son! my son !
My beautiful! my brave! how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy valour! My fond heart
O'erflowv'd this day with transport, when I thought
Of growing old amidst a race of thine,
Who might make up to me their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and my husband's name:
Now all my hopes are dead! a little while
Was a I wife! a mother not so long!
What am I now ?-I know.-But 1 hall be
That only whilst I please; for such a son
And such a husband make a woman bold. [Runs out.

Lord Ran. Follow her, Anna: I myself would follow,
But in this rage she must abhor my presence.

[Exit Anna.

Enter Old NOP.VAL.

Norv. r heard the voice of wo; heav'n guard my child!
Lord-Ran. Already is the idle gaping croud,

The spiteful vulgar, come to gaze on Randolph ?
Begone.

N'orv. I fear thee not. I will not go.

Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplice, Lord,
With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help
To crush down to the ground this lovely plant.
O noblelt youth that ever yet was born!
Sweetest and best, gentlell and bravest spirit,
That ever blefs'd the world! Wretch that I am,
Who saw that noble spirit swell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it!
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do thee justice, and reveal the secret,
Which, timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's snare. Oh! I am punifh'd now.
These are the hairs that should have ftrew'd the ground,
And not the locks of Douglas.

[Tears his hair, and throws hinfelf upon the body.

of Douglas.

Lord Ran. I know thee now: thy boldness I forgive:

My crest is fallen. For thee I will appoint
A place of reft, if grief will let thee reft.
I will reward, altho' I cannot punish.
Curst, curst Glenalvon, he efcap'd too well,
Tho' slain and baffled by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the last,
Cursing his conqueror, the felon dy'd.

Enter ANNA.

Ann. My Lord, my Lord!
Lord Ran. Speak: I can hear of horror.
Ann. Horror indeed!
Lord Ran. Matilda!
Fnn. Is no more!

She ran, hle flew like light'ning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice (he gain'd,
Beneath whose low'ring top the river falls
I Ingulph'd in rifted rocks: thither she came,
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down ---

'Lord Ran. 'Twas I! alas!- 'twas I

That fill'd her breast with fury; drove her down
The precipice of death! Wretch that I am!

Ann. 0 had you seen her lalt despairing look!

Upon the brink she flood, and calt her eyes
Down on the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heaven, seeming to fay,
Why am I forc'd to this? She plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord Ran. I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the passion of my foul.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of Randolph gave;
They speak aloud, and, with the voice of fate,
Denounce my doom. I am refolv'd. I'll go.
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me turn aside must threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy miltrefs, take this iing,
Full warrant of my pow'r. Let ev'ry rite
With cost and pomp upon their funerals wait;
For Randolph hopes he never shall return.

^*^'^^sr^

# EPILOGUE, Spoken by Mr BARRY.

EPILOGUE,

Spoken by Mr BARRY.

AN Epilogue I asl'd; but not one word

Our bard will write. He vows, 'tis molt absurd
With comic wit to contradict the (train
Of tragedy, and make your sorrows vain.
Sadly he fays, that pity is the.beft,
The noblest paflion of the human breast:
For when its sacred streams the heart o'erflow,
In gushes pleasure with the tide of wo;
And when its waves retire, like those of Nile,
They leave behind them such a golden foil,
That there the virtues without culture grow,
There the sweet blofloms of affection blow.
These were his words;-void of delusive art
I felt them; for he spoke them from his heart.
Nor will I now attempt, with witty folly,
To chace away celestial melancholy.

# PROLOGUE, Spoken at Edinburgh.

P R O L O G U E,

Spoken at Edinburgh.

IN days of classic fame, when Persia's Lord

.Oppos'd his millions to the Grecian sword,
Flourifh'd the Prate of Athens, small her ftorc.
Rugged her foil, and rocky was her shore,
Like Caledonia's: yet fie gain'd a name
That tfands unrivall'd in the rolls of fame.

Such proud pre-eminence not valour gave,

(For who than Sparta's dauntless sons more brave?)
But learning, and the love of every art,
That virgin Pallas and the muse impart.

Above the reft the tragic Muse admir'd,

Each Attic breast with noblest passions sir'd.
In peace their poets with their heroes shar'd
Glory, the hero's, and the bard's, reward.
The Tragic Muse each glorious record kept,
And, o'er the kings she conquer'd, Athens wept '.

Here let me cease, impatient for the scene,

To you I need not praise the Tragic Qeen.
'Oft has this audience soft companion shown
To woes of heroes, heroes not their own.
This night our scenes no common tear demand,
He comes, the hero of your native land!
Douglas, a name through all the world renown'd,
A name that rouses like the trumpet's found!
Oft have your fathers, prodigal of life,
A Douglas follow'd through the bloody strife;
Hosts have been known at that dread name to yield!
And, Douglas dead, his name hath won the field.
Liften.attentive to the various tale,
Mark if the author's kindred feelings fail;
:$ Sway'd by alternate hopes, alternate fears,
He waits the test of your congenial tears.
If they shall flow, back to the Mute he flies,
AAnd bids your heroes in succession rife;
,ColleAs the wand'ring warriors as they roam.
Douglas assures them ofawiS, home.

, $:S, ,~ ''t~'
