.DOUGLAS.

A

TRAGEDY.
B 1JOHN HOME.

ADAPTED FOR
THEATRICAL REPRESENTATION,

AS PERFORMED Ar TIlE

THEATRES -ROYAL,
DRURI'-LAINE AND COFEN\T-GARDEN.

REGULATED FROM TIIE PROMPT-BOOKS,

y Per1mi rio: Js the M?:1.7crs.
. TLc Llnc~ dl xen.,n}I .1 + ; n Cr, m . ,,rt tlllted il, the RtPrC,¢nllnon/.

LONDO N:
Printedfor the Proprietors, ilnder the Direeion of JOHN BELL,

is;tillj )Liibrarp, STRAND,
Bookseller to his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales.

I DUCC XCI.

# TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS, GEORGE PRINCE OF WALES.

TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS,

GEORGE

PRINCE OF 'WALES.

SIR,

IN Dedications, especially those vhich e

Poets; write, Mankind ex.

pect to find little Sentiment, and less Truth. A grateful Imagina.
tion adorns its Benefactor with every Virtue, and even flatters
'with Sinceriy. Hence the Portrait of each Patron of the Alsses
is dra-wn 'with the same Outline, and finished as a Model of Per-
f ction. Instructed by the Errors of others, I presume not to mnak
the Panegyrick of the Prince of WVALEs, nor to extol the Patron.
age of Literature as the most shining Quality of a Prince. ounr
Royal Highness vwill permit me to mnentios one sort of Patronage
,which can never be praised too much; that, I mean, which ex-
tending its Influence to the Uwhole Society, forms and excites the Ge.
ims of Individuals by exaltig the Spirit of the State.

Institutions, that revive, in a great ansd highly civilized People

those Virtues of Courage, M1anhod, and Love of their Ccnnir',
rihich are nmost apt, in the progress of Refinemenot, to decay, pro-
dirce at the same time that pleasing and ornamental Genis, which
cannot subsist in a Mind that docs not partake of those O(aalities
rhuich it describes. lThis is asn observation which has escaped the
Notice of the greater Part of lriters, vwho have ihiqnire iinto the
Causes of the Grosvth and Decay of Portly asnd E'i:irielin; blut it
has not escaped the Penetration of LO N XC IN , Uwho 'writisng in the
Decline of the RoMIAN Empire, and lanmentiig that the true Sub-
ime uias not to be sonnd in the Tl o ks of his Time, bolly imputes
that Dcfect to the Change of Policy; and esnnot)neres -ith Indig-
nation the Vices of Avarice, Eiffeminay, and Pusillanimity, 'rhichj

arising, from the Loss of Liberty, had so enthralled and debased
the Minds of Men, that they could not look up, as he calls it, to
any thing elevated and sublimee : ,nd here, as in other Questions,
the great Critic 9yztet the iAuthority of his Master HorE R. The
Day of Slavery bereaves a Man of half his Virtue. The Expe
rience of succeeding Times has shewn that Genius is afected by
Changes less 'vilent than the Loss of Liberty ; that it ever fiou-
fishes in Times of Vigosr ansd Enterprize, and languishes amidst the
srre Corruption of an inactive Age.

Your Royal Highrsis, as Heir Apparent of the British Emspire,

bash in vie-wi the noblest Field that ever a laudable Ambition en-
tered. The envied State of this Aation cannot remain precisely as it
i-; the Tide must flow, or ebb faster than it has ever flowed. A
Prince destined in such a Period to reign, begins a memorable Era
of Perfectio or Degeneracy. The serious Cares and princely Stu-
dies of your Y}outh, the visible Tenor of your generous and constant
Mind, have filled the Breasts of all good Mein w ith hopes of you
efual to their lf'ishts. That these Floprs may be fulfilled in their
utmost Extent, is the sincere and ardent Prayer of

lour Royal Highness's

Most humble
Mlost obediint,

And most devtled Servant,

JOHN HOME.

# JOHN HOME.

JOHN HOME.

TuEI Author of the Tragedy of D)o!glas was originally de-
signed for the Ministry-The Bisgraplia remarks, that look
ing upon Tragedy as a Moral Pecm, inculcating the purest
principles of Religion, he did not iimagine the particular de-
signation of his life as at all exempting him from thus indulg.
ing in the strong bent of Genius:--Ie accordingly composed
the Tragedy of Douglas.

The Kirk of Scotland however, conscientiously no doubt,

endeavoured to win over this stray child from presumed perdi-
tion, and finding him resolutely bent upon standing the hazard
of the die, they charitably persecuted not mcrely himself, but
those who encouraged our young Bard.

If he bore up against all this inecterate wrong, he had the

success of his piece to console him for what he might lose, and
what was certainly better still for 1o1 E;, the attention of the
Earl of BITE , who, like a true .lAhaas, introduced him to
the knovledge of his AuGUSTUS, our present gracious SovL-
iREIGN, then Prince of Wales: this assur'd Mr. HlosE the
comforts of a fpcasio, and we believe a place.-Ile " has keipt
" the noiseless tenour of his way," known only to his Frien.is
and to the Muses.

Te follcwihvg are lbi; Drai:as:

I DoUGl.As,.printed 1757 4 FATAL DISCOvERY J769
2 Acs - 1758 5 ALO A - - 173
3 SIEGE or A(ouILelA.I76o 6 ALEI'i.uD - 1778

# DOUGLAS.

# CHILD MAURICE.

DOUGLAS.

MxIa. GRAY offers an opinion upon this tragedy so consonant
with that of the present writer, that he claims permission to
cite it, as, poetically, an authority perhaps the highest. " I
" am greatly struck with the tragedy of Douglas, though it has
"infinite faults: the author seems to have retrieved the true
"language of the stage, which had been lost for these hundred
" years; and there is one scene between Matilda and the old
"peasant so masterly, that it strikes me blind to all the defects
"' in the world.'

This tragedy abounds in nervous picuresque and pathetic

writing; the chief incidents are extracted from an ancient
Scottish Ballad, entitled CHILD MAURICE.-To supply cu-
riosity with a reference at hand, it is here printed correctly:-

CHILD MA URICE.

CrHILD , AURICEv was an erle's son

His name it waxed wide;

It was nae for his great riches,

Nor yit his meikle pride,

But for his dame, a lady gay

Wha livd on Carron side.

Whar sail I get a bonny boy

That will win hose and shoen,

That will gae to lord Barnard's ha,
' And bid his lady come ?

' And ye maun rin errand Willie,

' And ye maun rin wi speid;
When ither boys gang on their feet
' Ye sail ha prancing steid.',

" 0 no! oh no ! my master deir !

" I dar na for my life;

" I'll no gae to tie bauld barons,

" For to triest furth his wife."

My bird Willie, my boy Willie,
' My deir Willie, he said,
How can ye strive against the strcim
' For I sall be obey'd.'

" But 0 my master deir! lie cryd,

"' In grenewode ye're your lane:

" Gi owr sic thochts I wald ye red,

" For feir ye sold be tane."

* Haste, haste, I say, gae to the ha,

' Bid her come here ni speid;

' If ye refuse my hie command,

' 1'1l gar your body bleid.

' Gae bid her tak this gay mantel,

' Tis a gowd bot the hem;

' Bid her come to the glide grenewode,

' Ein by hersel alane .

And there it is, a silken bark,
' Her ain hand scwd the slcive;
' And bid her come to Child Maurice;
' Speir nae bauld balon's leive.'

"Yes I will gae your black errand,

" Thouch it be to your cost;
" Sen ye will nat be warnd by me,

In it ye sail find frost.

" The baron lie's a man o micht,

" He neir could bide to taunt:

" And ye will see before its nicht,

" Sma cause ye ha to vaunt.

" And sen I maun your errand rin,

"Sae sair against my will,
I'se mak a vow, and keep it trow,
" It sallbe done for ill."

Whan lie cam to the broken brig,

lie bent his bow and swam

And whan lie came to grass growilig,

Sat down his feet and ran.

And whan lie cam to Barnard's yeat,

Wold neither chap nor ca,

But set his bent bow to his breist,

And lichtly lap the \sa.

He wald na tell the man his errand,

Thoch lie stude at the yeat;

But streight into the ha lie cam,

Whar they were set at meat.

l Hail ! hail ! my gentle sire and dame !
' My message winna wait,
' Dame, ye maun to the grenewode ga,

'Afore that it be late.

' Ye're bidden tak this gay mantel,

' Tis a gowd bot the hem:
Ye mauin haste to the gude grenewode,
' Ein by yoursel alane.

And there it is, a silken sark,
' Your ain hand sewd the sleive;

' Ye maun gae speik to Child Maurice;

' Speir nae bauld baron's leive.'

The lady stamped wi her foot,

And winked wi lier cie;

But a that she cold say or do,

Forbidden lie wald nae be.

" It's surely to my bower-woman,

" It neir cold be to me."
I broclt it to lord Barnard's lady,
' I trow that ye be slice.'

Then up and spak the wylie nurse,

(The bairn uponl her knie,)
'c If it be cumr iromi Clild Maurice

" It's deir welcusil to me."

' Ye lie, ye lie, ye filthy nurse,

' Sac loud as I heir ye lie;

' I brocht it to lord Barlnard's lady

' I trow ye be nac she.'

Then up and spae te tll bahuld baron,

_An anlry mIlall Wi he:
lie has tane ihe table u i his foot,

Sac hlas he wi Iis kniic,

B

Till crystal cup and ezar dish

In flinders he gard flie.

Gae bring a robe of your cliding,
" Wi a the haste ye can,

" And I'll gae to the gude grcnewode,

" And speik wi yoar leman."

0' bide at hame now lord Barnard !
' I ward ye bide at hamc;
* Neir wyte a man for violence,

Wha ncir wyte ye swi nane.'

Child Manrice sat in the glencwode,

He whistled and he sang:
" 0 what meins a the folk coming

" My mother tarries lang-."

The baron to the grenewode cam,

Wi meikle dule and care;

And there he fir:t spyd Child Maurice,

Kaming his yel'ow hair.

Nae wonder, nae wonder, Child Maurice,
' My lady locs thee weil:

' The fairest part of my body

' Is blacker than thy heil.
' et neir the less now, Child Maurice,

For a thy great bewtie,

Ye'se rew the day ye eir was born;
· That head sail gae wi me.'

Now lie has drawn his trusty brand.
And slaided owr the strae;

And throuch Child Maurice fair body

He gar'd the cauld iron gae.

And he has tane Child Maurice held,

And set it on a speir;

The meinest man in a his train,

Has gotten that heid to beir.

And he has tane Child Maurice up,

Laid him across his stcid;

And brocht himn to his painted bower

And laid him on a bed.

The lady on the castle wa

Beheld baith dale and down;

And there she saw Child Maurice lheid

Cum trailing to the toun.

" Better I loe that bluidy held,

" Bot and that ycllosw hair,

" Than lord Barnard and a his lands

"As they lig here and there."

And she has tane Child Maurice heid,

And kissed baith cheik and chin;

' I was anes sow of Child Maurice

"' As the hip is o the stane.

" I gat ye in my father's house

" We meikle sin and shame;

" I brocht ye up in the grenewode

" Ken'd to mysel alane:

As Aft have I by thy craddle sitten,
" Ad fondly beiu thee sleip;

" But now I maun gac 'bout thy grave

"A mother's teirs to weip."

Again she kiss'd his bluidy cheik,

Again his bluidy chin;
0" better I looed my son Maurice,
" Than a my kyth and kin!"

" Awa, awa, ye ill woman,

' An ill dethe may ye die !
Gin I had ken'd lie was your son
' He had neir bein slayne by me.'

" Obraid me not, my lord Barnard!

" Obraid me not for shame

" Wi that sam speir, 0 pe:ce my heart,

" And save me frae my pain!

" Since naething but Child Maurice heid

" Thy jealous rage cold quell

" Let that same hand now tak her yfe,

" That neir to 'hee did ill.

" To me nae after days nor nichts
*" Will eir be =aft or kind:

I'll fill the air ith heavy sichs,
" And greit till I be blind."

' Eneuch of bluid by me's been spilt,

' Seek not your dethe fiae me;

' I'd rather far it had been mysel,

' Than either hlin or thee.

' Wi hopeless wae I hear your plaint,
' Sair, sair, 1 me the deid.-

' That cir tlis cursed had of mine

' SoSd gar his budy bleid !

Dryi up your teirs, my V. insome dame,
' They neir can heal tile wound

' Ye see his heid upon the speir,

' His heart's bluid on the ground.

I curse the hand that did tle deid,
' The heart that thlcht the ill,
The feet that bare me wi sic speid,
' The comely youth to kill.

I'll aye lament for Child Maurica
' As gin lie war my ain;

' I'll neir forget the dre;rr day
' On which the youth was slain.'

# PROLOGUE.

PROLOGUE.

IN a nmti nt times, suhen Britain's t -al. i was arms,
lAnd the lov'd music of her yo:th, alarmss;
A godelik re rce sustain'dfair England's faine:
Who has !not hard ofgallatal PI l R c's name ?
Ay, andof DOUGLAS? Such illustrious foes
In rival Rome and Carthage never rose!
From age to age bright shine the British fire,
And ev-ery hero ,was a ero's sire.
W hsen pv-aJcofnl ate decreed one 'warrior'. doom,
Up sprunog the phacnix frm his parent's tomb.
B:!t vohilst tho'e genetroNs rivals fought and fell,
Those genesous rival lov'd each oth;er eull:
'7ho' manO a blAo jtv feld ta.es lost and urs,
Ntothing in hate, in honsour all 'was dsne.
TV ren PIERCY ro.ig'd, delf'd his prince or peers,
Fat came the DOUG.LAs ,viti his Scottish spears;
n,;1, Luhlen proUd DOUGLAS made his Ki ig his foe,
lor ])OUCGLAS, P1 LRCY b;:nt his English blVu.
l'.$xi d their native homes by ada-v. rse fate,
'I7h /)ick'daltenate ate each othr's gate:
7 h n blaz'd ihe castl, at the msidsnight hour,
Fr5 him e-hose arms had shook its firmest tou'r.
I'is ,ight a DoL GLAS yo:r) proteiein cliimss;
iA wife! a mother! Piiy's softest names:
The stori of her usces indulgent hear,
And grayt your su/ppliant all she begs, a tear.
In cosnfidnce she Lbgs; and hopes tofind
Each English breast, like noble PILRCY'S, kind.

# PROLOGUE. SPOKEN AT EDINBURGH.

PROLOGUE.

SPOlKEN AT EDINBURGIH.

It days 6f classic fame, voh!a Persia's Lord
Oppos'd his millions to the Grecian savrd,
Flontish'd the state of Athens, small her store,
R rgged her soil, and rocky ecas her shore,
Like Caledonia's: yct she gai'd a nlame
That stands in;rinal'd ii the rolis offame.

SIch prosd pre-emilesice nsAt vilotur ga-ve,

(eor uhls !Lhans Sparta's da:,slok sons sn!src brave ?)
BBut c'ari;ing, And the e lc of eyey nart,
T/at iviim n Pallas and sthe Mnise iairnt.

,Above the rest the Tragic 'Iuse admir'd

Enach Attic breast wilth noblest passions sir'd.
I. peace their piets vuith their heroes shar'd
Glosy, the hero's, and the bard's re card.
The Tragic Muse each glorisns reords kept,
And, o'er th, iiis she cant7er'd, Athens qc"it*.

I' re let me ceas,, iinpaticnt fsr th e scee,

To y-o1 I need st! prise the Tragic Queen:
Ofi /as this aundience ssft compassion shc icuv
To qsses of herses, herses lsst their sow.

his night o:r scenes no csmmon tear demand,
He comes, the heso of ysonr unati-e /lal !
Dot G I.AS, a name thro' all the wvorld rensOvi'd,
A1 name that ri-;ncs lik e the trumet's sound!

See the PEPS.l of rEschylus.

f/,, iha:', fa, ! S

,-, pi'odi'al of i/f?,

A D oi: r.As fs/l;-d thr)' the blody sl';if';
IT.'s h/ae iseess ks:o.i:: at ci rt dreard name to yioell,
;.i,', D Uo rt s
l ial:, his .ia;s; haIlh vou the field.

Listio a.icist;-;' to t l'e l'aii;s lale,

liL7?'sk si ':e a:rthor's iindred fieligrs fail;
S$ray d Ig al.r:a!ntz h :/pis, lc'ra.at' fears,

li at te tais /: f

test cf . i1. c trneial tears.

1. !.- st lli', rack to .*,' -mi:lse ,,cflies,

Asnd bids .j'oir her'o: iz szcccsii? risc;
C(l/,l;,5s the aql;i-'.g 'n warriors as they roam,
DocUGcLAS assures t !he of an rerleoe home.

# Dramatis Personae.

DRURY.LANE.

mc.

LORD RANDOLPH, . Mr. Aickin.
GLENALVON, .

. Mr. Palmer.

NORVAL, . .r. Kemble.
STRANGER, . -- Mr. Bensley.

il'omen.

LADY RANDOLPH, , Mrs. Siddons.
ANNA, . . . Mrs. Ward.

COYEIVT-GARDE£;
- -"I-s?

Mefen.

tOAD RANDOLPH, Mr. Farren.
GLENALVON, - - Mr. Harley.
NORVAL, - Mr. Aickin.
DOUGLAS, Mr. Holman.

Ifomen.

LADY RANDOLH, - t Mrs. Pope.
ANNA, -- Mis. Rock.

s Ji

-

i------ -----i=---c -_i--

iI-h

i·

_ZF
--I--Ss-= 
==;----

8"
,,

I-S=

s
i3--

Lii -L= i

slwl

sswea-
r r

I-.

I-/ n?
1

-I

I
1=

-- -- n==G;
EIis

I:r
P=

# ACT I. SCENE I.

DOUGLAS.

ACT I. SCENE I.
The Court of a Castle, surrounded with Ir oods. Enter Lady

RANDOLPH.

Lad)y Razdol/lh.

YE woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom
Accords with my soul's sadness, and draws forth
The voice of sorrow from my bursting heart,
Farewell a while: I will not leave you long;
For in your shades I deem some spirit dwells,
Who from the chiding stream, or groaning oak,
Still hears and answers to Matilda's moan.
Oh, Douglas! Douglas! if departed ghosts
Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of that wood thou art,
And with the passion of immortals hear'st
My lamentation: hear'st thy wretched wife
Weep for her husband slain, her infant lost.
My brother's timeless death I seem to mourn
Who perish'd with thee on this fatal day.-
To thee I lift my voice; to thee address

The plaint which mortal ear has never heard,
O disregard me not; tho' I am cali'd
Another's now, my heart is wholly thine.
Incapable of change, affection lies
Buried, my Douglas, in thy bloody grave.
But Randolph comes, whom fate has made my lord,
To chide my anguish, and defraud the dead.

Ez!er Lord RAN DOLP H.

Lord R. Again these weeds of woe! say, dost thou well

To feed a passion which consumes thy life ?
The living claim some duty; vainly thou
Bestow'st thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady R. Silent, alas! is he for whom I mourn:

Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives,
"This fatal day stirs my time-settled sorrow,
" Troubles afresh the fountain of my heart.

" Lord R. When was it pure of sadness! These black weeds

"Express the wonted colour of thy mind,
" For ever dark and dismal. Seven long years
"Are pass'd, since we were join'd by sacred ties:
"Clouds all the while have hung upon thy brow,
" Nor broke, nor parted by one gleam of joy."
Time, that wears out the trace of decpcst anguish,
" As the sea smoothes the prints made in the sand,"
Has pass'd o'er thee in vain.

" Lady R. If time to come

" Should prove as ineffeiual, yet, my lord,
" Thou cans't not blame me. When our Scottish youth
"Vy'd with each other for my luckless love,
" Oft I besought them, I implor'd them all
'I Not to assail me with my father's aid,

"Nor blend their better destiny with mine.
" For melancholy had congeal'd my blood,
"And froze affection in my chilly breast.
' At last my Sire, rous'd with the base attempt
" To force me from him, which thou rend'redst vain,
"To his own daughter bow'd his hoary head,
"Besought me to commiserate his age,

And vow'd he should not, could not die in peace,

"Unless he saw me wedded, and secur'd
"From violence and outrage. Then, my lord!
"In my extreme distress I call'd on thee,
' Thee I bespake, profess'd my strong desire
"To lead a single, solitary life,
"And begg'd thy Nobleness, not to demand
" er for a wife whose heart was dead to love.
" Iow thou persisted'st after this, thou know'st,
" And must confess that I am not unjust,
" Nor more to thee than to myself injurious.

"Lord R. That I confess; yet ever rsust regret

"The grief I cannot cure." Vould thou wert not
Compos'd of grief and tenderness alone,
" But had'st a spark of other passions in thee,

Pride, anger, vanity, the strong desire

" Of admiration, dear to woman-kind;
"These might contend with, and allay thy grief,

As meeting tides and currents smooth our firth.
" Lady R. To such a cause the human mind oft owes
" Its transient calm, a calm I envy not."

Lord R. Sure thou art not the daughter of Sir Malcolm:

Strong was his rage, eternal his resentment:
For when thy brother fell, he smil'd to hear
That Douglas' son in the same field was slain.
Lady R, Oh! rake not up the ashes of my fathers: So

Implacaple resentment was their crime,
And grievous has the expiation been.
Contending with the Douglas' gallant lives
Of eit.er house were lost; my ancestors
Compell'd, at last, to leave their ancient seat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
No heir is left. Had they not been so stern,
I had not been the last of all my race.

L9rd R. Thy grief wrests to its purposes my words,

I never ask'd of thee that ardent love
Which in the breasts of fancy's children burns.
Decent affection and complacent kindness
Were all I wish'd for; but I wish'd in vain.
Hence with the less regret my eyes behold
The storm of war that gathers o'er this land:
If I should perish with the Danish sword,
Matilda would not shed one tear the more.

Lady R. Thou dost not think so: woeful as I am,

I love thy merit, and esteem thy virtues,
But whither go'st thou now ?

Lord R. Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on the tip-toe stands
Of cxpectation, and impatient asks
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are landed.

Lady R. 0, may adverse winds,

Far from the coast of Scotland, drive their fleet!
And every soldier of both hosts return
In peace and safety to his pleasant home!

Lord R. Thou speak'st a woman's, hear a warrior's wish

Right from their native land, the stormy north,
May the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
Immovcable in Caledonia's stranl !

And roving armies shun the fatal shore.

Lady R. " War I detest: but war with foreign foes,

' Whose manners, language, and whose looks are strange,
" Is not so horrid, nor to me so hateful,
"As that which with our neighbours oft we wage.
' A river here, there an ideal line,
"By fancy drawn, divide the sister kingdoms.
" On each side dwells a people similar,
"As twins are to each other; valiant both;
' Both for their valour famous thro' the world.
"Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
"And, if they must have war, wage distant war,
' But with each other fight in cruel conflidc.
"( Galant in strife, and noble in their ire,
, The battle is their pastime. They go forth
"Gay in the morning, as to summer sport;
" When ev'ning comes, the glory of the morn,

The youthful warrior is a clod of clay.

" Thus fall the prime of either hapless land;
" And such the fruit of Scotch and English wars.

" Lord R, I'll hear no more: this melody would make
A soldier drop his sword, and doff his arms,

"Sit down and weep the conquests he has made;
"Yea, (like a monk), sing rest and peace in heav'n
' To souls of warriors in his battles slain,"
Lady, farewell: I leave thee not alone; 2zo
Yonder comes one whose love makes duty light, [Exit,

Eater ANNA.

Anna. Forgive the rashness of your Anna's love

Urg'd by affeAion, I have thus presum'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts

And warn you of the hours that you neglect,
And lose in sadness.

Lady R. So to lose my hours
Is all the use I wish to make of time.

Anna. To blame thee, lady, suits not with my state:

But sure I am, since death first prey'd on man,
Never did sister thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had lost,
In early youth, the husband of your heart ?

Lady R. Oh!
Anna. Have I distress'd you with officious love,

And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate ?
Forgive me, Lady: humble though I am,
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune:
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away. 240

Lady R. What power directed thy unconscious tongue

To speak as thou hast done ? to name-

Anna. I know not:

But since my words have made my mistress tremble,
I will speak so no more: but silent mix
My tears with hers.

Lady R. No, thou shalt not be silent.

I'll trust thy faithful love, and thou shalt be
Henceforth th' instructed partner of my woes.
But what avails it ? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never-ebbing time ?
Compel the earth and ocean to give up
Their dead alive ?

Anna. What means my noble mistress ?
Lady R. Dids't thou not ask what had my sorrows been,

If I in early youth had lost a husband ?-
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'd,

Mangl'd with wounds, the husband of my youth;
And in some cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his. 26o

Anna. Oh ! Lady most rever'd!

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

Lady R. Alas! an ancient feud,

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother should in battle save
The life of Douglas' son, our house's foe:
The youthful warriors vow'd eternal friendship.
To see the vaunted sister of his friend,
Impatient, Douglas to Balarmo came,
Under a borrow'd name.-My heart he gain'd;
Nor did I long refuse the hand he begg'd:
My brother's presence authoris'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little weeks, with wings of down,
Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd lord was call'd
To fight his father's battles; and with him,
In spite of all my tears, did Malcolm go.
Scarce were they gone, when my stern sire was told
That the false stranger was lord Douglas' son.
Frantic with rage, the baron drew his sword
And question'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
Kneeling beneath his sword, fiult'ring I took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
Wed one of Douglas' name. Sincerity!
Thou first of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thy onsvard path, although the earth should gape,
And from the gulph of hell destruction cry,
To take dissimulation's winding way.
.lnan. Alas! hol few of woman's fearful kind

D

Durst own a truth so hardy!

Lany R. The first truth

Is easiest to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral from my tragic tale.---
In a few days the dreadful tidings came
That Douglas and my brother both were slain.
My lord ! my life! my husband !-mighty God!
What had I done to merit such affliction ?

Anna. My dearest lady! many a tale of tears

I've listen'd to; but never did I hear 300
A tale so sad as thi;s.

Lady R. In the first days

Of my distractng grief, I found myself-
As women wish to be who love their lords.
But who durst tell my father ? The good priest
Who join'd our hands, my brother's ancient tutor,
With his lov'd Malcolm, in the battle fell:
Theiy two alone were privy to the marriage,
On silence and concealment I resolv'd,
Till time should make my father's f)rtune mine.
That very night on which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confident I had,
Set out with him to reach her sister's house:
But nurse, nor infant have I ever seen,
Or heard of, Anna, since that fatal hour.
" My murder'd child !-had thy fond Mother sear'd
" The loss of thee, she had loud fame defy'd,
"Dcspis'd her father's rage, her father's grief,

And nanderd with thee through the scorning world.'
Anna. Not seen nor heard of! then perhaps he lives.
Lady I. No. It was dark December; wind and rain

Had beat all night. Across the Carron lay
lThe destin'd road; and in its swelling flood

My faithful servant perish'd with my child.

Oh! hapless son of a most hapless sire!

" But they are both at rest; and I alone
" Dwell in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk,
' Like a guilt-troubled ghost, my painful rounds;"
Nor has despiteful fate permitted me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Though dead to love, I was compell'd to wed
Randolph, who snatch'd me from a villains arms;
And Randolph now possesses the domains,
That by Sir Malcolm's death on me devolv'd;
Domains, that should to Douglas' son have giv'n
A baron's title and a baron's power.
" Such were my soothing thoughts, while I bewail'd
" The slaughter'd father of a son unborn.
" And when that son came, like a ray from heav'n,
" lWhich shines and disappears; alas; my child !
" -ow long did thy fond mother grap the hope
" Of having thee, she knew not how, restor'd.
" Year after year hath wro!i her hope away;
" But left still undeminish'd her desire.

" AsnaZ. The hand that spins ti' uneven thread of life,
' May smooth the length that's yet to come of yours.

"Ladny R. Not in this world; I have consider'd well

"Its various evils, and on whom they fall.
"Alas! how oft does goocness swound itself?
"And sweet affecion prove the spring of woe."
Oh ! had I died when my lov'd husband fell!
Had some good angel op'd to me the book
Of Providence, and let me read my life,
Miy heart had broke, when I beheld the sum
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

A.ca. That God, whose ministers good angels are,

Ilath shut the book, in mercy to mankind;
But we must leave this theme: Glenalvon comes:
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hirherwards he slowly stalks his way.

Lady R. I will avoid him. An ungracious person

Is doubly irksome in an hour like this.

Anna. Why speaks my lady thus of Randolph's heir ?
Lad R. Because he's not the heir of Randolph's virtues.

Subtle and shrewd, he offers to mankind
An artificial irpage of himself:
And he with ease can vary to the taste
Of different men, its features. " Self-denied,
" And master of his appetites he seems:

But his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,

" Watches to seize unseen the wish'd-for prey.
" Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
" As in Glenalvon's unrelenting mind."
Yet he is brave and politic in war,
And stands aloft in these unruly times.
Why I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter.
Stay, and detain him till I reach the castle.

[Exit Lady .andolph,

Anna. Oh happiness! w here art thou to be found ?

I see thou dwellest not with birth and beauty,
Tho' grac'd with grandeur and in wealth array'd:
Nor dost thou, it would seiem wvith virtue dwell;
Else had this gentle lady miss'd thee not.

inter GI.Zr A L VON.

Glen. What dost thou muse on, meditating maid ?

Like some entranc'd and visionary seer,
On earth thou stand'st, thy thoughts ascend to heaven.
Anna. Would that I were, e'en as thou say'st, a seer,

To have my doubts by heavenly vision clear'd!

Glce. What dost thou doubt of? What hast thou to do

With subjects intricate? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be questioned : think of these good gifts;
And then thy contemplations will be ple:siig.

Ansna. Let women view yon monument of woe,

Then boast of beauty: who so fair as she ?
But I must follow; this revolving day
Awakes the mem'ry of her anticnt woes. [E-it Anna.

Glen. [s.ib/.] So!-Lady Randolph shuns me; by and by

I'll woo her as the lion wooes his brides.
The deed's a doing now, that malkes me lord
Of these rich valleys, and a chief of pow'r
The season is most apt; my sounding steps
Will not be heard amidst the din of arms.
Randolph has liv'd too long: his better fate
Had the ascendant once, and kept me down:
When I had sciz'd the dame, by chance he came,
Rescu'd, and had the lady for his labour;
I 'scap'd unknown; a slender consolation!
Heav'n is my witness that I do not love
To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvest. Yet I am not safe:
By love or something like it, stung, infiamn'd,
Madly I blabb'd my passion to his wife,
And she has threaten'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of women's will I do not know:
But vell I know the Baron's w:rath is deadly.
I will not live in fear: the man I dread
Is as a Dane to me: av, and the man
Wilo stands betwixt me and my chief desire.
No bar but he; she has no kinsman near;
No brother in his sister's quarrel bold;

# ACT II. SCENE I.

And for the righteous cause, a stranger's cause, 420
I know no chief that will defy Glenalvon. [Exit.

ACT II. SCE'E L
A Court, &c. Enter Se-rants and a Stranger at one dor, and

l ajy RAN DO L and ANNA at another.

Lady Randolpb.

MV.IAT means this clamour? Stranger, speak secure;
Hast thou been wrong'd ? Have these rude men prcsum'd
To vex the weary traveller on his way ?

F. Ser. By us no stranger ever suff.red wrong:

This man with outcry wild has called us forth;
So sore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
Enitr Lord R.AADO" L nas n;d a yil ci;g ean,, sith tceir s;otr5ds

dlnavn ai:d bloody.

Lad, R. Not vain the srranger's fears! how fares my lord.
Lord R. That it fares well, thanks to this gallant youth,

Whose valour sav'd me from a wretched death
As down the winding dale I walk'd alone,
At the cross way four armed men attaclk'd me:
Rovers, I judge, from the licentious camp,

lWho would lave quickly laid lord Randolph low,
-Had not this brave and generous stranger comlc,
Like my good angel, in the hour of fate,
And mocking danger, made my foes his on,.
Ti:e;- turn'd upon him, but his aaiirc arm
Struck to the ground, from whence they rose no liorocj
'I he fiercest two; the others fled amain,
And left him master of the bloody field.

Speak, lady Randolph; upon beauties tongue
Dwell accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
Speak noble dame, and thank him for thy lord.

Lady R. My lord, I cannot speak what now I feel.

My heart o'erflows with gratitude to Heav'n,
And to this noble youth, who, all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but, humanely brave,
Fought on your side against such fearful odds.
Have you not learn'd of him, whom we should thank ?
Whom call the saviour of lord Randolph's life ?

Lord R. I ask'd that question and he answered not:
But I must know, who my deliver is.

[To tIe Stragesr,

Sirr.!. A low-born man, of parentage obscure,

'Who nought can boast but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Lord R. Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobl'd

By the great King of kings! thou art ordain'd
And stamp'd a hero, by the sovereign hand
Of Nature ! blush not, flower of modesty
As well as valour to declare thy birth.

Sira7n. hMy name is Norval: on the Grampion hills

My father feeds his flocks; a frugal swain,
\ hose constant cares were to increase his store,
Anld keep his only son, myself, at homce.
For I had heard of battles, and I long'd
To foilow to the siel. some warlike lIrd:
An,! Ileav'n soon granted what my sire deny'd.
' hi', moon which rose last night, round as my shield,
I iL.l not yet fill'd her horns, when by her light,
A band of fierce barbarians, from the hills,
Rusi'd like a torrent down upon the vale,

Sweeping our flocks and herds. The shepherds fled
For safety and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'd about the enemy, and mark'd
The road he took! then lasted to my friends,
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
I ret advancing. The pursuit I led.
'Till we o'ertook the spoil-encumber'd foe. 60
'We fought and conquer'd. Ere a sword was drawn, -
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Returning home in triumph, I disdain'd
The shepherd's slothful life; and having heard
That our good king had summoned his bold peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron side,
I left my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to condult my steps:-
Yon trembling coward, who forsook his master.
Journeying with this intent, I pass'd these towers,
And, Ieaven-direced, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

LardRan. He is as wise as brave. Was ever tale

\With such a gallant modesty rchears'd ?
My brave deliverer! thou shalt enter now
A nobler list, and in a monarch's sight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame.
I will present thee to our Scottish king,
\Whose valiant spirit ever valour lov'd, 80
Al ! my Matilda, wherefore starts that tear ?

Lady R. I cannot say : for various affcetions,

And strangely mingled, in my bosom swell;
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
I joy that thou art safe; and 1 admire

Him and his fortunes, who hath wrought thy safety;
Yea, as my mind predicts, with thine his own.
Obscure and friendless, he the army sought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Rcsolv'd to hunt for fame, and with his sword
To gain distinction which his birth denied.
In this attempt unknown he might have perish'd,
And gain'd with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now, grac'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope
IIc stands conspicuous; fame and great renown
Are brought within the compass of his sword;
On this my mind reflected, whilst you spoke,
And bless'd the wonder-working Lord of Heaven.

Lord R. Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts! o00

My deeds shall follow where thou point'st the way.
Next to myself, and equal to Glenalvon,
In honour and command shall Norval be.

Nor. I know not how to thank you. Rude I am,

In speech and manners: never till this hour
Stood 1 in such a presence: yet, my lord,
There's something in my breast, which makes me bold
To say, that Norval ne'er will shame thy favour.

Lady) R. I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou shalt be

My knight; and ever, as thou didst to day,
With happy valour guard the life of Randolph.

Lord R. Well hast thou spoke. Let me forbid reply.

[7'0 NonRvA..

We are thy debtors still! Thy high desert
O'ertopsour gratitude. I must pr(cecd,
As was at first intended, to the camsp.
Some of my train, I see are speeding hither,
Impatient, doubtless, of their lord's delay-.

E

Go with me, Norval, and thine eyes shall see
The chosen warriors of thy native land,
'Who languish for the fight, and beat the air o20
With brandish'd swords,

Bor. Let us be gone, my lord.
LordR. [To Lady RsANDorrLP.] About the time that the

declining sun

Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills suspend,
Expeft us to return. This night once more
Within these walls I rest; my tent I pitch
To morrow in the field. Prepare the feast,
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
He in the eve of battle may resign
Himself to social pleasure: sweetest then,
When danger to a soldier's soul endears
The human joy that never may return.

[Exeunt RANDOLP , and NoRPVAL.

Lady R. His parting words have struck a fatal truth.

Oh, Douglas! Douglas! tender was the time
WRhen we two parted, ne'er to meet again!
How many years of anguish and despair
Has Heaven annex'd to those swift-passing hours
Of love and fondness. " Then my bosom's flame
" Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of fear
" Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd." r40

Al1:na. May gracious Heav'n pour the sweet balm of peace

Into the wounds that fester in )our breast!
For earthly consolation cannot cure them.

Lad), R. One only cure can HI-eav'n itself bestow;-

A grave-that bed in which the weary rest.
Wretch that I am! Alas! why am I so ?
At every happy parent I repine!
How blest the mother of yon gallant Norval

She for a living husband bore her pains,
And heard him bless her when a man was born:
She nurs'd her smiling infant on her breast;
Tended the child, and rear'd the pleasing boy:
She, with affecion's triumph, saw the youth
In grace and comeliness surpass his peers:
\Vhilst I to a dead husband bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.

lAnna. Alas! alas! why will you thus resume

Your grief afresh ? I thought that gallant youth
Would for a while have won you from your woe,
On him intent you gazed, with a look 6o
Much more delighted, than your pensive eve
Ilas deign'd on other objecs to bestow.

Ladj R. Delighted, say'st thou ? Ohi! even there mine eye

Found fuel for my iife-consumling sorrow;
I thought, that had the son of Douglas liv'd,
lie might have been like this young gallant stranger,
And pair'd with him in features and in shape.
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
My boy with blooming Norval might have number'd,
\Whilst thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell
On my sad heart, and kindled up a fondness
For this young stranger wand'ring from his home,
And like an orphan cast up my care.
I v, ill proted thee, said I to myself,
\Vith all my power, and grace with all my favour.

A.,na. Sure Heav'n will bless so gen'rous a resolve.

You must, rny noble dame, exert your power:
You must awake: devices will be fram'd,
And arrows pointed at the breast of Norval.

Lady R. Glenalvon's false and crafty head will work
Against a rival in his kinsman's love,

If I deter him not; I only can.
Bold as he is, Glenalvon will beware
How he pulls down the fabric that I raise.
I'll be the artist of young Norval's fortune.
"'Tis pleasing to admire! most apt was I
"To this affection in my better days;
" Though now I seem to you shrunk up, retir'd
" Within the narrow compass of my woe.
" Have you not sometimes seen an early flower
"Open its bud, and spread its silken leaves,
"To catch sweet airs, and odours to bestow;
"Then, by the keen blast nipt, pull in its leaves,
"And, though still living, die to scent and beauty?
" Emblem of me; affliction, like a storm,
"Hath kill'd the forward blossom of my heart."

Enter GLENALVON.

Glen. Where is my dearest kinsman, noble Randolph ?
Lady R. Have you not heard, Glenalvon, of the base-
Glen. I have, and that the villains may not 'scape,

With a strong band I have begirt the wood. ISo
If they lurk there, alive they shall be taken,
And torture force from them th' important secret,
Whether some foe of Randolph hir'd their swords,
Or if-

Lad)y R. That care becomes a kinsman's love.

I have a counsel for Glenalvon's ear. [Exii Anna.

GIna. To him your counsels always are commands.
Lady R. I have not found so; thou art known to me.
Glen. Known!
Lady R. And most certain is my cause of knowledge.
Glen, What do you know ? By the most blessed cross,
You much amaze me. No created being,

Yourself except, durst thus accost Glenalvon.

Lady R. Is guilt so bold ? and dost thou make a merit

Of thy pretended meekness ? This to me,
Who, with a gentleness which duty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd what, if divulg'd,
Would make thee nothing; or, what's worse than that,
An outcast beggar, and unpitied too:
For mortals shudder at a crime like thine.

GCli. Thy virtue awes me. First of womankind!

Permit me yet to say, that the fond man
\'hom love transports beyond strict virtue's bounds,
If he is brought by love to misery,
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpitied cannot be. Pity's the alms
WVhich on such beggars freely is bestow'd
For mortals know that love is still their lord,
And o'er their vain resolves advances still:
As fire, when kindled by our shepherds, moves
Through the dry heath before the fanning wind.

Lady R. Reserve these accents for some other car,

To love's apology I listen not.
Mark thou my words, for it is meet thou shouldst,
His brave deliverer Randolph here retains.
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well;
But, at thy peril, pracice ought against him:

e.ct not thy jealousy attempt to shake
And loosen the good root he has in Randolph;
\Whose favourites I know thou hast supplanted.
Thou look'st at me, as if thou fain would'st pry
Into my ecart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendless stranger my protection claims;

His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit.

Glen. Child that I was to start at my own shadow,

And be the shallow fool of coward conscience !
I am not what I have been ; what I should be.
The darts of destiny have almost pierc'd
My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends and religious tales,
I should conclude there was an arm above
That fought against me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch myself, the subtle snare I set.
I'Why, rape and murder are not simple means!
T' imperfec rape to Randolph gave a spouse;
And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the sun from me;
And worst of all, a rival. lurning hell!
This were thy centre, if I thought she loved him
'Tis certain she contemns me; nay, commands me,
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'er me,
In his behalf. And shall I thus be brav'd ?
Curb'd, as she calls it, by dame Chastity ?
Infernal fiends, if any fiends there are
More fierce than hate, ambition, and revenge,
Rise up, and fill my bosom with your fires
" And policy remorseless ? Chance may spoil

A single aim; but perseverance must

" Prosper at last. For chance and fate are wcrds:
" Persistive wisiom is the fate of man."
Darkly a project peers upon my mind,
,ike the red moon when rising in the east,
Cross'd and divided by strange-colour'd clouds.
I'll seek the slave who came with Xorval hither,
And for his cowardice was spurned from him.
I've known a follower's rankled bosom bleed
Venom most fatal to his heedless lord, it

# ACT III. SCENE I.

ACT III. SCENE I
A Court, &c. as before. EnterAANNA.

Anna.

THY vassals, grief, great nature's order break,
And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour,
Whilst lady Randolgh sleeps, I will walk forth,
And taste the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers be! Ye ministers
Of gracious Heaven who love the human race,
Angels and seraphs who delight in goodness!
Forsake your skies, and to her couch descend
There from her fancy chase those dismal forms
That haunt her waking; her sad spirit charm

'With images celestial, such as please
The blest above upon their golden beds.

Enter S rvante.

Ser. One of the vile assassins is secur'd.

We found the villain lurking in the wood:
W\ith dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this Is not
Iiis first essay: these jewels were conceai'd
In the most secret places of his garment;
Bclike the spoils of some that he has murdcr'd.

Alnna. Let me look on them. Ha! here is a heart, 20

The chosen crest of Douglas' v:aient name!
These are no vulgar jewels, Guard the wsretch. [Exit Anna,

Enter Servanzts with a Prisaonr.

Pris. I know no more than does the child unborn
Of what you charge me 'vith.

Ist Ser. You say so, Sir!

But torture soon shall make you speak the truth.
Behold, the lady of lord Randolph comes:
Prepare yourself to meet her just revenge.

Ent!r Lady RANDO.LPH and AXNNA,

Anna. Summon your utmost fortitude, before

You speak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
Are now at stake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may fly.

Lady R. Thou shalt behold me, with a desperate heart,
Hear how my infant perish'd. See, he kneels.

[The Prisoner kleels,

Pris. Heav'n bless that countenance so sweet and mild!

A judge like thee makes innocence more bold.
Oh, save me, lady ! from these cruel men,
Who have attack'd and ieiz'd me; who accuse
\Me of intended murder. As I hope
For mercy at the judgment-seat of Heav'n, 40
The tender lamb that never nipt the grass,
Is not more innocent than I of murder.

Lady R. Of this man's guilt what proof car ye produce?
ist Sóerv. We found him lurking in the hollow glynn.

\When views'd and call'd upon, amaz'd he fled,
We overtook him, and enquir'd from whence
And what he was: he said lie came from far,
And was upon his journey to the c:!mp.
Not satisfied with this we search'd his clothes,
And found these jeswels, whose rich value plead

Most pow'rfilly against him. Hard lie seems,
And old in villainy. Permit us try
His stubbornness against the torture's force.

Pris. Oh, gentle lady ! by your lord's dear life;

\hich these weak hands, I swear, did ne'er assail;
And by your children's welfare, spare my age !
Let not the iron tear my ancient joints,
And my grey hairs bring to the grave with pain.

Lady R. Account for these; thine oswn they cannot be:

For these, I say: be stedfast to the truth; 60
DetecAed falshood is most certain death.

[Anna 'rc:-mves ile Servants and returns.

Pris. Alas! I'm sore beset ! let never man,

For sake of lucre, sin against his soul!
Eternal justice is in this most just !
I, guiltless now, must former guilt reveal.

Lady R. Oh ! Anna hear !-once more I charge thee speak

The truth dirc't; for these to me forctcl
And certify a part of thy narration;
With which, if the remainder tallies not,
An instant and a dreadful death abides thee.

Pris. Then, thus abjur'd, I'll speak to you as just

As if you were the minister of heaven,
Sent down to search the secret sins of men:-
Some eighteen years ago I rented land
Of brave Sir Malcolm, then Balarmo's lord;
But falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
All that I had, and then turn'd me and mine,
(Four helpless infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel by the river's side So
Received us: there hard labjur, and the skill
In fishing, which was formerly my sport,

l

Supported life. Whilst thus we poorly liv'do
One stormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof;
Red came the river down, and loud and oft
The angry spirit of the water shriek'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
Of one in jeopardy. I rose, and ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool,
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach, whatever floating thing the stream
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd; the person lost:
But looking sad and earnest on the waters,
By the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round,
A basket: soon I drew it to the bank,
And nestled curious there an infant lay.

Ladi R. W\as he alive ?
Pris. He was.
Laid R. Inhuman that thou art! 100
How could'st thou kill what waves and tempests spared ?

Pris. I am not so inhuman.
Lady R. Didst thou not ?
Anina. My noble mistress, you are mov'd too much:

This man has not the aspea of stern murder;
Let him go on, and sou, I hope, swill hear
Good tidings of your kinsman's long-lost child.

PrI:. The needy man who Ias known better days,

One whom distress has spited at the world,
Is he who:n tempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds as make the prosperous men
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them,
And such a man was I a man dcolin'd,
W ho saw no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not

Have touch'd that infant with a hand of harm.

Lady R. Ha! dost thou say so ? then perhaps he lives!
P;iis. Not many days ago he was alive.
Lady R. 0 God of Heav'n ! did he then die so lately ?
Pris. I did not say he died; I hope he lives. 120

Not many days ago these eyes beheld
Him, flourishing in youth, and health, and beauty.

Lady R. Where is he now ?
Ptis. Alas! I know not where.
Lady R. Oh, fate! I fear thee still. Thou riddler, speak

DireEt and clear; else I will search thy soul.

Aiza. " Permit me, ever lionour'd ! Keen impatience,

': Though hard to be restrain'd, defeats itself."-
Pursue thy story with a faithful tongue,
To the last hour that thou didst keep tile child.

Pris. Fear not my faith, though I must speak my shame.
l'ithin the cradle where the inf;i!it lay,
Was stow'd a mighty store of gold and jewels;
Tempted by which, we did resolve to hide,
From all the world this wonderful event,
And like a peasant breed the noble child.
That none might marl the change of our estate,
\We left the country, travell'd to the north,
Bought flocks and herds, and gradually brought forth
Our secret wealth. But God's all-seeing eye
Belheld our avarice, and smote us sore. i40
For one by one all our ow.n children died,
And he, the Stranger, sole remain'd the heir
Of what indeed was his. Fain then would I,
Who with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
Hlave trusted him, now in the dawn of outh,
With his own secret: but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never would consent.

Meanwhile the stripling grew in years and beauty;
And, as we oft observ'd, he bore himself,
Not as the offspring of our cottage blood;
For nature will break out: mild with the mild,
But with the forward he was fierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
1 set myself against his warlike bent;
But all in vain; for when a desperate band
Of robbers from the savage mountains came -

Lady R. Eternal Providence ! What is thy name ?
Pris. My name is Norval; and my name he bears.
Lady R. 'Tis he! 'tis he himself! It is my son! IGo

Oh, sovereign mercy! 'Twas my child I saw!
No wonder, Anna, that my bosom burn'd.

.'inm. Just are your transports: "ne'er was woman's heart

" Prov'd with such fierce extremes, High fated dame !"
But vet remember that you are beheld
By servile eycs; your gesture, may be seen
Impassion'd, strange; perhaps your words o'erheard.

Laay R. Well dost thou counsel, Anina Heay'n bestow

On me that wisdom which my state requires.

" Ama. The moments of deliberation pass,
" And soon you must resolve. This useful man

M ust be dismissed in safety, ere my lord
"Shall with his brave deliverer return."

ri . If I, amidst astonishment and fear,

H ave of your words and gestures rightly judg,'d,
'I hou art the daughter of my ancient master;
'I e child I rcecu'd from the flood is thine.

Lady R. With thee dissimulation now were vain,

I am indeed the d: lghter of Sir Ma lcolm;
The child thou rescui't fromn the flood is mine. ISo
Prism Blest be the hour thalt made me a poor mall,

Mly poverty hath sav'd my master's house!

Lady R. Thy words surprize me : sure thou dost not feign !

The tear stands in thine eye; such love from thee
Sir Malcolm's house descrv'd not; if aright
Thou told'st the story of thy own distress.

Ptis. Sir Malcolm of our barons was the flower;

The fastest friend, the best, the kindest master.
But ah ! he knew not of my sad estate.
After that battle, where his gallant son,
Your own brave brother, fell, the good old lord
Grew desperate and reckless of the world;
And never, as he erst was wont, went forth
To overlook the conduct of his servants.
By them I was thrust out, and them I blame:
May Heav'n so judge me as I judge my master!
And God so love me as I love his race!

Lady R. His race shall yet reward thee. Oni thy faith

Depends the fate of thy lov'd master's house.
Rememb'rest thou a little lonely hut, zoo
That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the cliffs of Carron ?

Pis. I remember the cottage of the cliffs.
Lady R. 'Tis that I mean:

There dwells a man of venerable age,
Who in my father's service spent his youth:
Tell him I sent thee, and with him remain,
'Till I shall call upon thee to declare,
Before the king and nobles, what thou now
To me hast told. No more but this, and thou
Shalt live in honour all thy future days;
Tlhy son so long, shall call thee farth r still,
And all the land shall bless the man who sav'd
The son of Douglas, and Sir Malcolm's heir.

Remember well my words; if thou shouldst meet
Him whom thou call'st thy son, still call him so;
And mention nothing of his nobler father.

Pris. Fear not that I shall mar so fair an harvest,

By putting in my sickle ere 'tis ripe.
Why did I leave my home and ancient dame ? 220
To find the youth, to tell him all I knew,
And make him wear these jewels in his arms,
Which might, I thought, be challeng'd, and so bring
To light the secret of his noble birth.

[Lady RA N DO LP HI goes toswards tie Scrvants,

Lady R. This man is not th' assassin you suspected,

Though chance combin'd some likelihoods against him.
He is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To their right owner, whom in haste he seeks.
'Tis meet that you should put him on his way,
Since your mistaken zeal hath dragg'd him hitLer.

[Exeunt Stra:iger and Serivants.

Myv faithful Anna! dost thou share my joy?
I know thou dost. Unparallel'd event!
Reaching from heav'n to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings to me my son !
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father,
Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
iFor such a gift! \What does my Anna think
Of the you'ng eaglet of a valiant nest
I o;: soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd tie low: dunghill where his fate had thrown him, 2.!o
And tower'd up to the reoion of his sire!

An'ia. How fondly did vour eves devour the boy !
iMysterious nature, with the unseen cord
Of pov'rful instinct, drew you to your own.

l.ay R. 'Ilie ready story of his birth believ'd

Supprest my fancy quite; nor did he owe
To any likeness my so sudden favour:
But now I long to see his face again,
Examine every feature, and find out
The lineaments of Douglas, or my own.
But most of all I long to let him know
Who his true parents are, to clasp his neck,
And tell him all the story of his father.

Anna. With wary caution you must bear yourself

In public, lest your tenderness break forth,
And in observers stir conjectures strange.
" For, if a cherub in the shape of woman
" Should walk this world, yet defamation would,
" Like a vile cur, bark at the angel's train."- 260
To-day the baron started at your tears.

Lady R. I-Ie did so, Anna! well thy mistress knows

If the least circumstance, mote of offence,
Should touch the baron's eye, his sight would be
W\ith jealousy disorder'd. But the nore
It does behove me instant to declare
The birth of Douglas, and assert his rights.
This night 1 purpose with my son to meet,
Reveal the secret, and consult with him
For wvise he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does now, so look'd his noble hfther,
Array'd in Nature's ease : his mien, his spechl,
Were sweetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd
'I hose trivial mortals who seem alwavs wise.
But, when the matter match'd his migh!ty mind,
Up rose the hero; on his piercing eye
Sat observation; on easch glance of thclio;ht
Decision follolw'd, as the thunlderbolt
Pursues the flash.

Anna. That demon haunts you still:
Behold Glenalvon. 2So

Lady R. Now I shun him not.

This dav 1 brav'd him in behalf of Norval:
Perhaps too far: at least my nicer fears
For Douglas thus interpret.

Enel!r GLI NALVO'.

Glcn, Noble dame !

The hovering Dane at last his men hath landed:
No band of pirates; but a mighty host,
That come to settle where their valour conquers:
To win a country, or to lose themselves.

Lady R. But whence comes this intelligence, Glenalvon ?
Glen. A nimble courier sent from yonder camp,

To hasten up the chieftains of the north,
Inform'd me as he pass'd, that tl:h fierce Dane
Hiad on the eastern coast of Lothian landed,
" Near to that place where the sea rock immense,
" Amazing bass, looks o'er a fertile land.

" Lady R. Then must rhis western army march to join

" The warlike troops that guard Edena's tow'rs.

"Glwa. Beyond all question. If impairing time

" Ias not effac'd the image of a place, 3c-
" Once perfec in my breast, there is a wild
" \Which lies to westward of that mighty' rock,
" And seems by nature formed for the camp
"Of water-wafted armies, whose chief strength
"Lies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse:
"If martial skill direc; the Danish lords,

There inaccessible their army lies
To our ssift-scow'ring horse, the bloody field
"Must man to man, and foot to foot be fought."

Lady R. How many mothers shall bewail their sons!

Ilow many widows weep their husbands slain;
Ye dames of Denmark, ev'n for you I feel.
Who, sadly sitting on the sea-beat shore,
Long look for lords that never shall return.

GLn. Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian sword

\Widow'd the north. The children of the slain
Come, as I hope, to meet their father's fate.
The monster war, with her infernal brood,
Loud-yelling fury and life ending pain,
Are objefts suited to Glenalvon's soul. 320
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death;
Reproach more piercing than the pointed sword.

Lad, R. I scorn thee not but iwhen I ought to scorn;

Nor e'er reproach, but when insulted virtue
Against audacious vice asserts herself.
I own thy worth, Glenalvon; none more apt
Than I to praise thine eminence in arms,
And be the echo of thy martial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty passion:
Go and pursue a lawful mistress, Glory.
Upon the Danish crests redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the shield of Randolph.

Glun. One instant stay, and hear an alter'd man.

When beauty pleads for virtue, vice abash'd
Flies its own colours, and goes o'er to virtue.
I am your convert; time will show how truly:
Vet one immediate proof I mean to give.
That youth for whom your ardent zeal to day,
Somewhat too haughtily defy'd your slave,
Amidst the shock of armies I'll defend, 340
And turn death from him, writh a guardian arm,
" Sedate by use, my bosom maddens not

G

At the tumultuous uproar of the field."
Lady R. Aft thus, Glenalvon, and I am thy friend:

But that's thy least reward. Believe me, sir,
The truly generous is the truly wise;
And he who loves not others lives unblest.

[Exit Lady RANDOLP1.

Glen. [sl/hs.] Amen ! and virtue is its own reward !

I think that I have hit the very tone
In which she loves to speak. HIoney'd assent,
How pleasant art thou to the taste of man,
And woman also! flattery direct
Rarely disgusts. They little know mankind
W\ho doubt its operation : 'tis my key,
And opes the w.icket of the human heart.
Ilow far I have succeeded now, I know not.
Yet I incline to think her stormy .rirtue
Is lull'd awhile; 'tis her alone I fear;
Whilst she and Randolph live, and live in faith
And amity, uncertain is my tenure. 360
"Fate o'er my head su.pends disgrace and death,

By that weak air, a peevish female's will.

" I am not idle; but the ebbs and flows
"Of fortuuc's tide cannot be calculated."
That slave of Norval's I have found most apt:
I shew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his soul
To say and swear whatever I suggest.
Norval, I'm told, has that alluring look,
'1 wixt man and woman, which I have observ'd
To charm the nicer and fantastic dames,
WVho are, like lady Randolph, full of virtue.
In raising Randolph's jealousy, I may
But point him to the truth. 1-e seldom errs,
Who thinks the worst he can of womankind.
# -

# ACT IV. SCENE I.

ACT IV. SCENE I.
fIulrish of Trlmpets. Enter Lord RANDOLPH attended.

Lord Raiidolnh.

SU.iMON an hundred horse, by break of day,
To wait our pleasure at the castle gate.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

Ladv R. Alas, my Lord ! I've heard unwelcome news;
The Danes are landed.

Lord R. Ay, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament essay,
Of some young knight resolv'd to break a spear,
And stain with hostile blood his maiden arms.
The Danes are landed: we must bea: them back,
Or live the slaves of Denmark.

Ladvl R. Dreadful times!
LordR. The fenceless villages are all forsaken;

The trembling mothers, and their children lodg'd
In wall-girt towers and castles: whilst the men
Retire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awsful to return.

Lady R. Immense, as faise reports, the Danish host ?
Lord R. \Vere it as numerous as loud fame reports,

An army knit like ours would pierce it through: 20
Brothers, that shrink not from each other's side,
And fond companions, fill our warlike files:
For his dear offspring, and the wife he loves,
The husband, and the fearless father arm,

In vulgar breasts heroic ardor burns,
And the poor peasant mates his daring lord.

Lar.y R. Men's minds are temper'd, like their swords, for

war;

"Lovers of danger, on destruflion's brink
"They joy to rear ereft their daring forms.
" Hence, early graves; hence, the lone widow's life;
" And the sad mocher's grief-embitter'd age."
Where is our gallant guest ?

Lird R. Down in the vale

I left him, managing a fiery steed,
Whose stubbornness had foil'd the strength and skill
Of every rider. But behold he comes,
In earnest conversation Sith Glenalvon.

EICer NOR.VAL a(nd GLENALVON.

Glevalvon! with the lark arise; go forth,
And lead my troops that lie in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp: 40
Norval, thou goest with me. But say, young man!
Where didst thou learn so to discourse of war,
And in such terms, as I o'erheiad to day ?
'War is no village science, nor its phrase
A language taught amongst the shepherd swains.

,sr. Small is the skill my lord delights to praise

In him he favours. Ilear from whelnce it cAme.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the most remote
And inaccessible by shepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit liv'd; a melancholy man,
WVho was the wonder of our wand'ring swains.
Austere and lonely, cruel to himself,
Did thde report him; the cold earth his bed,

Water his drink, his food the shepherd's alms.
I went to see him and my heart was touch'd,
With rev'rence and with pity. Mild he spake,
And, entering on discourse, such stories told
As made me oft revisit his sad cell.
For he had been a soldier in his youth; 6o
And fought in famous battles, when the peers
Of Europe, by the bold Godfredo led,
Against th' usurping infidel display'd
The blessed cross, and won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech struck from me, the old man would shake
His years away, and act his young encounters:
Then, having shew'd his wounds, he'd sit him down,
And all the live-long day discourse of war.
To help my fancy in the smooth green turf
He cut the figures of the marshall'd hosts;
Describ'd the motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm.
For all that Saracen or Christian knew
Of war's vast art, was to this hermit known.

Lord R. Why did this soldier in a desart hide
Those qualities, that should have grac'd a camp ?

Ncr. That too at last I learn'd. Unhappy man!

Returling homewards by Miessina's port, So
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boist'rous captain of the sea
Fasten'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought;
The stranger fell, and with his dving breath
Deciar'd his name and lineage. Mighty power!
The soldier cry'd, my brother ! Oh my brother!
Lad' R. His brother!

Yor. Yes; of the same parents born;

His only brother. They exchang'd forgiveness:
And happy in my mind was he that died;
I:or many deaths has the survivor suffer'd.
In the wild desart on a rock he sits,
Or on some nameless stream's untrodden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times, alas! not in his perfect mind,
I folds dialogues with his lov'd brother's ghost;
And oft each night forsakes his sullen couch,
To make sad orisons for him he slew.

Lady R. To what misterious woes are mortals born!

In this dire tragedy were there no more oo0
Unhappy persons ? Did the parents live ?

i',; No, they were dead; kind I Icav'n had clos'd their eyes,
Before their son had shed his brorher's blood.

Lo.; I

R. iard is his fate; for he was not to blame!

There is a destiny in this strange world,
aW'hich oft decrees an undeserved doom.
Let schoolmen tell us y hy- From whence these sounds?

[7i'utpcts at a dislance.

E;lter an c//icer.

Of.. lyv lorcd, the trumpets of the troops of Lorn:
'Ihe valiant leader hails the noble Randolph.

LSrd R. Mine ancient guest! Does he the warriors lead?

Ilas Denmark rous'd the brave old knight to arms ?

(ffi. No; worn with warfarc, he resigns the sword.

Iis eldest hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
Iow leads his kindld bands.

I.;.rd R. Glenalvon, go.

Vi ith hospitality's most strong request
Entreat the chief. [Exit Glenalson.

Off. My lord, requests are vain.

He urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foe's approach. 120

Lord R. May victory sit on the warrior's plume I

Bravest of men! his flocks and herds are safe;
Remote from war's alarms his pastures lie,
By mountains inaccessible secur'd:
Yet foremost he into the plain descends,
Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the ancient world;
Contemners they of indolence and gain;
But still, for love of glory and of arms,
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift,
Against each strong antagonist, the >pear.
I'll go and press the hero to my breast. [Exirt aith the Oficer.

Lady R. The soldiers's loftiness, the pride and pomp

Investing awful war, Norval, I see,
Transport thy youthful mind.

Nir. Ah ! should they not ?

Bless'd be the hour I left my fither's house!
I might have been a shepherd all mv days,
And stole obscurely to a pesalnt's grave.
Now, if I live, with mighty chiefs I stan.d; 140
And, if I fall, with noble dust I lie.

Li,': R. There is a generous spirit ;n thy breast,

That could have well sustain'd a prouder fortune.
'This way with me; under yon spreading beech,
Unseen, unheard, b- human eve or car,
I will amaze tlhee with a wond'rous talc.

Aor. Let there be danger, lady, with the secret,

That I may hug it to ms grateiul heart,
And prove my faith. Command mi sword, my life:
These are the sole posessions of poor Nor\ al.

Lady R. Know'st thou these gems?
Aor. Durst I believe mine eyes,

I'd say I knew them, and they were my father's.
Lady R. Thy father's, say'st thou ? Ah, they were thy fa-

ther's !

Nor. I saw them once, and curiously enquir'd

Of both my parents, whence such splendor care ?
But I was check'd, and more could never learn.

Ladye R. Then learn of me, thou art not Norval's son.
Nor. Not Norval's son!
Lady R. Nor of a shepherd sprung. i60
N-or. Lady, who am I then ?
Lady R. Noble thou art;

For noble was thy sire.

Nor. I will believe -
Oh, tell me farther! Say, who was my father ?

Lady R. Douglas!
nAr. Lord Douglas, whom to-day I saw ?
Ladr R. His younger brother.
NA'r. And in yonder camp ?
I adr R. Alas!
i'r.. You make me tremble-Sighs and tears!

Lives my brave father?

Lady R. Ah ! too brave, in.'eed!
iHe fell in battle ere thyself wsas born.
N\r. Ah me, unhappy ! Ere I saw the light!

But does my mother live ? I iday conclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been sorrow.

Lady R. She lives; but wastes her life in constant woe,

Weeping her husband slain, her infant lost.

Nor. You that are skill'd so well in tle sad story 180

Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their destiny, now have compassion

Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd.
Oh, tell me who and where my mother is!
Oppress'd by a base world, perhaps she bends
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief;
And, desolate, implores of Heaven the aid
Her son should give. It is, it must be so -
Your countenance confesses that she's wretched.
Oh, tell me her condition! Can the sword-
Who shall resist me in a parent's cause ?

Lady R. Thy virtue ends her woes-My son, my son
I am thy mother, and the wife of Douglas!

[Falls upon his neck.

Ncr. Oh, heaven and earth ? how wond'rous is my fate!

Art thou my mother ? Ever let me kneel!

Lady R. Image of Douglas! fruit of fatal love!

All that I owe thy sire, I pay to thee.

Nor. Respec and admiration still possess me.

Checking the love and fondness of a son:
Yet I was filial to my humble parents. 200
But did my sire surpass the rest of men,
As thou excellest all of womankind ?

Lady R. Arise, my son. In me thou dost behold

The poor remains of beauty once admir'd.
'The autumn of my days is come already:
For sorrow made my summer haste away,
Yet in my prime I cquall'd not thy father:
H is eyes were like the eagle's, yet sometimes
Liker the dove's; and, as he pleas'd, !e wcon
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

A'r.: How did he fall? Sure 'twas a bloody field

When Douglas died. Oh, I have much to ask!

Lady R. Ilre.ftcr thou shalt hear the lengthened talc
Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.

tI

At present this-Thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder castle, and the wide domains
Which now lord Randolph, as my husband, holds.
But thou shalt not be wrong'd; I have the power
To right thee still. Before the King I'll kneel,
And call lord Douglas to protect his blood. 220

AXr. The blood of Douglas will protect itself.
Lay R. CBut we shall need both friends and favour, boy,

To wrest thy lands and lordship from the gripe
Of Randolph and his kinsman. Yet I think

Iy tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
My life incline the virtuous to believe.

ANr. To be the son of Douglas is to me

Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
-And in the field I'll seek for fame and fortune.

Lad. R. Thou dost not knolw what perils and injustice
:wait the poor man's valour. Oh, my son!
' he noblest blood of all the land's abash'd,
Having no lacquey but pale poverty.
Too long hast thou been thus attended, Douglas,
Too long hast thou been deem'd a peasant's child.
The wvonton heir of some inglorious chief
Perhaps has scorn'd thee in the youthful sports,
'Whilst thy indignant spirit slcli'd in vain.
Such contumely thou no more shalt bear:
But how I purpose to redress thy wrongs 240
Must be hereafter told. Prudence dircts
That swe should part before yon chiefs return.
Retire, and from thy rustic follower's hand
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to see thee, dictated before
This casual opportunity arose
Of private conference. Its purport mark;

For as I there appoint, we meet again.
Leave me, my son; and frame thy manners still
To Norval's, not to noble Douglas' state.

Nor. I will remember. Where is Norval now ?

That good old man.

Lady R. At hand conceal'd he lies,

An usefuLl witness. But beware, my son,
Of yon Glenalvon; in his guilty breast
Resides a villain's shrewdness, ever prone
To false conjeclure. lHe hath gricv'd my Itcart.

Nor. Has he, indeed ? Then let von false Glenalvon

Beware of me. [Exit.

Lad), R. There burst the smother'd flame. 260

Oh, thou all-righteous and etcrn;l King !
lWho Father of the fatherless art cal!'d,
Protecl my son ! Thy inspiration, Lord!
Ilath fill'd his bosol with that sacred fire,
Which in the breasts of his forefatihrs burn'd:
Set him on high, like them, that he may shine
The star and glory of his native land !
Then let the minister of death descend,
And bear my willing spirit to its place.
Yonder they come. How do bad womcen find
Unchanging aspeits to conceal their guilt,
Wihen I, )by reason and by justice urg'd,
Full hardly can dissemble with the:e men
In nature's pious cause?

L.s;tri Lord RAN DOL' P- a;.a' GLE NA LON.

Lord R. Yon gallant chief,

Of arms ciamour'd, all repose disclaims.

Lady R. Be not, my lord, by his example sway'd,
Arrange the business of to-morrow now,

And when you enter, speak of war no more. [Exit.

Lord R. 'Tis so by heav'n! her mien, her voice, her eye,

And her impatience to be gone, confirm it. 281

Glen. He parted from her now. Behind the mount,
Amongst the trees, I saw him glide along.

Lord R. For sad sequestzr'd virtue she's renown'd.
Glen. Most true, my Lord.
Lord R. Yet this distinguis'd dame

Invites a youth, th' acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This assignation [Shevws a letter.] the assassin freed,
Her manifest affection for the youth,
Might breed suspicion in a husband's brain,
'Whose gentle consort all for love had wedded:
Much more in mine. Matilda never lov'd me.
Let no man, after me, a woman wed
Whose heart he knows he has not; though she brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom fir her dowry.
For let her seem, like the night's shadowy queen,
Cold and contemplative--he cannot trust her:
She may, she will, bring shame and sorrow on him;
The worst of sorrows, and the worst of shames! 300

Gle,. Yield not, my lord, to such affliling thoughts;

But let the spirit of an husband sleep,
Till your own senses make a sure conclusion.
This billet must to blooming Norval go:
At the next turn awaits my trusty spy;
I'll give it him refitted for his master.
In the close thicket take your secret stand;
The moon shines bright, and your own eyes may judge
Of their behas iour.

Iord R. Thou dost counsel wc!l.
Glen. Permit me now to make one slight essay.

Of all the trophies which vain mortals boast,
By wit, by valour, or by wisdom won,
The first and fairest in a young man's eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Successful love
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind,
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves,
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Lord R. Arid what avails this maxim ?
Glen. Mluch, nmy lord. ,20

Withdraw a little ! Ill accost young Norval,
And with ironical derisive counsel
Explore his spirit. If he is no more
Than humble Norval by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as he is, he'll shrink astonish'd from me:
But if he be the favourite of the fair,
Lov'd by the first of Caledonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.

Lord R. 'Tis shrewdly thought.
Glen. When we grow loud, draw near. But let my lord

His rising wrath restrain. [Exit Randolph.
'Tis strange, by Heav'n!
That she should run fill tilt her fond career
To one so little known. She too that .emen'd
Pure as the winter stream, when ice emboss'd,
W\hitins its course. Even I did thinl her chaste,
Whlose charity exceeds not. Precious sex!
Whose deeds lascivious, pass Glenalvon's thoughts

Enfte NORVAL.

Ilis port I love; he's in a proper mood 340
To chide the thunder if at him it roar'd. [Aside.
Has Norval seen the troops ?

'},. The setting sun

Witb yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale;
And as the warriors mov'd each polish'd helm,
Corslet, or spear, glhnc'd back his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at its top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they seem'd
An host angelic, clad in burning arms.

GhCii. Thou talk'st it well; no leader of our host
In sounds more lofty speaks of glorious war.

NVor. If I shall e'er acquire a leader's name,

My speech will be less ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itself freely; since no part is mine
Of praise pertaining to the great i i arms.

G/An. You wrong yourself, bra-,e Sir; your martial deeds

Have rank'd you with the great. But mark me, Norval;
Lord Randolph's favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service. 360
Let me, who know these soldiers, counsel you.
Give them all honour: Ceem not to command;
Else they will scarcely brook your late sprung power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

or.; Sir, I have been accustomed all my days

To hear and speak the plain and simple truth:
And tho' I have been told that there are men
WVho borrow friendslip's tongue to speak their scorn,
Yet in such lmnguage I am little skill'd.
Therefore I thank (lenalvon for his counsel,
Although it sounded har!idls. \Vhy remind
Mie of my birth obscure ? \Why slur my power
With such contemptuous terms ?

GLn. I did not mean
To gall your pride, vwhlch now I sce is great.

\or. My pride!
Glnw. Suppress it, as you wish to prosper.

Your pride's excessive. Yet, for Randolph's sake,
I will not leave you to its rash direcdion.
If thus you swell, and frown at high-born men, 380
\Will high-born men endure a shepherd's scorn ?

ANor A shepherd's scorn!
GlCk. Yes; if you presume

To bend on soldiers these disdainful eyes,
\What will become of you ?

Aor. If this were told ! - [Aside.

Hast thou no fears for iliy presumptuous self?

GL,/. Illa! dost thou threaten me ?
iAr. Didst thou not hear ?
Glen. Unwillingly I did: a nobler foe

Had not been que.ction'd thus. But such as thee-

Aor. W'hom dost thou think me ?
Glen. Noreal.
Alsr. So I am-

And lwho is Norval in Glenalvon's eyes?

GIZ.i A peasant's son, a wandering beggar-boy;

At best no nore, even if he speaks the truth.

Air. False as thou art, dost thou sui pe my truth ?
(iIz. Thy- truth ! thou'rt all a lie: and filse as hell
Is the vain-glorious tale thou told'st to Randolph. 400

\Ao. If Icre chain'd unarm'i(d, and bed-rid old,

F'Perhaps I should revile; but as I am,
I have no tongue to rail. The hulmble Norval
Is of a race sho strive not but withr deeds.
Did I not tfeCr to freeze thy shallos)w a! nur,
And make thee sink too soo'! bcn::e.. c:' sword,
I'd tell thee-i; hat tlou art. I knows thee rwell.
Glen. Dost thou not knosw Glenalven, born to command

Ten thousand slaves like thee-

'or. Villain, no more i

Draw .and defend thy, life. I did design
T, have dcfy'd thee in another cause:
Btt Ieav'n accceerates its vengeance on thee.
'Now for my own and lady Randolph's wrongs.

L£::cr Lord RANDOLPH.

Lordi R. Hold, I command you both. The man that stirs
Makes me his fee.

Kor. Another voice than thine

That threat had vainly sounded, noble Randolph,

Glen. Hear him, my Lord; lie's wond'rous condescending!

Mark the humility of shepherd Norval! 420

Nir. Now you may scoff in safety. [SEahals his cswrd.
Lord R. Speak not thus,

Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel, then I judge betvwixt you.

oar. Nay, my good Lord, tho' I revere you much,

My cause I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I blush to speak; I will not, cannot speak
Th' onprobrious words that I from him have borne.
To the liege-lord of my dear native land
I owe a subje&'s homage: but cv'n limn
And his high arbitration I'd reject.

ithin my bosom reigns another lord;

1-onour, sole judge, and umpire of itself.
If my free speech o;fend you, noble Randolph,
Revoke your favours, and let Norval go
Hence as he came, alone, but not dishonour'd.

Lord R. Thus far I'll meditate with inpartial voice:

'Ihe ancient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.

# ACT V. SCENE I.

Suspend your purpose till your country's arms 440
Repel the bold invader: then decide
The private quarrel.

Gin.i I agree to this.
NAr. And I.

Enter Servaiit.

Scr. The banquct waits.
Llrd R. i'e come. [Exit

. iL.'h Scrvanit.

Glu. Norval,

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of Randolph.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkled hate,
Shall stain my countenance. Sooth thou thy brow;
Nor let our strife disturb the gentle dame.

Nir. Think not so lightly, Sir, of my resentment.
When we contend again, our strife is mortal. rErxest.

ACT V. SCEATE I
Enter DOUG.LAS.

Douglas.

Trii s is the place, the centre of the grove;
1-ere stands the oal, the monarch of the -s ood.
I ow snwet and solemn is this midnight scene!
The silver moon, unclouded, holds her way
Thro' skies where I could count each little star,
The fanning west wind scarcely stirs the leaves! 460
The river, rushing o'er its pebbled bed,
Imposes silence with a stilly sound.
In such a place as this, at such an hour,

I

If ancestry can be in ought believed,
Descending spirits have convers'd with man,
And told the secrets of the world unknown.

Enter Old NORVAL.

Old Nr. 'Tis he. But what if he should chide me hence ?

HIis just reproach I fear. [Douglas turns aside and sees him.
Forgive, forgive,
Canst thou forgive the man, the selfish man,
Who bred Sir Malcolm's heir, a shepherd's son ?

Doug. Kneel not to me: thou art my father still:

Thy wish'd-for presence now completes my joy.
Welcome to me; my fortunes thou shalt share,
And ever honour'd with thy Douglas live.

Old No,. And dost thou call me father; Oh, my son I

I think that I could, to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
Which in the wilderness so long conceal'd
The blossom of thy youth. 480

Doug. Not worse the fruit,

That in the wilderness the blossom blow'd.
Amongst the shepherds, in the humble cot,
I learn'd some lessons, which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; and when my vassals bow,
Norval shall smooth the crested pride of Douglas.

Nor. Let me but live to see thine exaltation!

Yet grievous are my fears. Oh, leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers!

Doug. Why should I leave them ?
Nor. Lord Randolph and his kinsman seek your life.
Dong. How know'st thou that?

Old Nor. I will inform you how:

When evening came, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And fondly trod in each accustom'd path
That to the castle leads. Whilst thus I rang'd,
I was alarm'd with unexpected sounds 500
Of earnest voices. On the persons came.
Unseen I lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other as they talk'd, lord Randolph this,
And that Glenalvon. Still of you they spoke,
And of the lady; threat'ning was their speech,
Tho' but imperfetly my ear could hear it.
'Twas strange, they said, a wonderful discov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Doug. Revenge! for what ?
Old Nor. For being what you are,

Sir Malcolm's heir: how else have you offended ?
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there sat musing how I best might find
Means to inform you of their wicked purpose,
But I could think of none. At last, perplex'd,
I issued forth, encompassing the tower
With many a wearied step and wishful look.
Now Providence hath brought you to my sight,
Let not your too courageous spirit scorn
The caution which I give. 520

Doug. I scorn it not.

My mother warn'd me of Glenalvon's baseness;
But I will not suspeft the noble Randolph.
In our encounter with the vile assassins,
1 mark'd his brave demeanour; him I'll trust.

Old Nor. I fear you will, too far.
Doug. Here in this place

I wait my mother's coming: she shall know
\.'hat thou hast told : her counsel I will follow.
And cautious ever are a mother's counsels.
You must depart: your presence may prevent
Our interview.

Ohl\ o,; MIy blessing rest upon thee!

Oh, may Ileav'n's hand, which sav'd thee from the wave,
And from the sword of foes, be near thee still;
Turning mischance, if ought hangs o'er thy head,
All upon mine ! [Exit

Dcóg. He loves me like a parent;

And must not, shall not, lose the son he loves,
Altho' his son has found a nobler father. 5.0
Eventful day ! how hast thou clha.lg'd my state
Once on the cold and winter-slladed side
Of a bleak hill mischance had rooted me,
Never to thrive, child of another soil;
Transplated non to the gay sunny vale,
Like the green thorn of May my fortune flowers,
Ye glorious stars ! high Heaven's resplendent host
To whom I ofi have of i.y lot complain'd,
I lear and record my soul's unalter'd wish!
Dead or alive, let me but be renown'd !
May Hcav'n inspire some fierce gigantic Dane,
To give a bold defiance to our host!
Before he speaks it out I will accei t;
Like Douglas conquer, or like Douglas die.

Ei';i,t La.,y R. N , o LP i.

LadI R. iMy son ! I heard a voice--
Do:,. TIe voie voic as mi.e.
Lany R. Didst thou complain aloud to Nature's car..
That thus in dusk!y shad.c, at midnight hours,

By stealth the mother and the son should meet ?

[Emblracig .im.

Docug. No; on this happy day, this better birth-day, 560

My thoughits and words are all of hope and joy.

Lady R. Sad fear and melancholy still divide

The empire of my breast with hope and joy.
Now hear wvhat I advise-

Doisg. First, let me tell
What may the tenor of your counsel change.

Lair/ R. My heart forebodes some evil.
Doig. 'Tis not good-

At eve, unseen by Randolph and Glenalvon,
The good old Norval in the grove o'erheard
Their conversation; oft they nmention'd me
With dreadful threat'nings; you they sometimes nam'd,
'Twas striane, they said, a wonderful discov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow ' revenge.

Ladj R. Defenrd us, gracious God! )we are betray'd:

They have found out the secret of thy birth:
It must be so. That is the great discovery.
Sir Malcol!'s heir is come ta claim his own,
And they will be reveng'd. Perhaps even now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for murder, they) ut wait 580
A darker and more silent hour, to break
Into the chamber where they think thou sleep'st.
This moment, this, Hfeav'it hath ord.iin'd to save thee
Fl- to the camn, my son !

Ds.,g. And leave you here ?

No: to the castle let us go together.
Call up the anciiet servants of your house,
\ ho in their youth did eat your fabter's bread.
Then tell them loudly that I am your son.
If in the breasts of men one spark remains

Of sacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your cause will arm. I ask but few
To drive those spoilers from my father's house.

La,' R. Oh, Nature, Nature ! what can check thy force ?

Thou genuine ofispring of the daring Douglas!
But rush not on destruction: save thyself,
And I am safe. To me they mean no harm.
Th!y stay but risls thy precious life in vain.
That winding path conducs thee to the river.
Cross where thou seest a broad and beaten way, 600
Which running eastward leads thee to the camp.
Instant demand admittance to lord Douglas;
Shew him these jewels which his brother wore.
Thy look. thy voice, will make him feel the truth,
\Vhich I by a certain proof will scon confirm.

Do;a. I yield me, and obey: but yet my heart

Bleeds at this parting. Somethiing bids me stay
And guard a mother's life. Oft have I read
Of wond'rous deeds by one bold arm atchie'. 'd.
Our foes are two; no more: lt Inm go forth,
And see if any shield can guard Glenalvon.

i.ci R. If thou regard'st thy molhur, or revel',t

Thy tdaher's memtory, think of tlis no more.
(Or. thing, I have to ay befrre sve part:
.Long weit thou lost: and thcu art found, my child,
In a most fearffil sensnn. \Var and battle
1 have rcat ca:.i to dread. Too well I see
\Vihichi way the current o tlhy tcemper sets:
To-day I've found thee. Oh ! my long-lost hope i
If thou to giddy valour givst the reign, 620
To-morioo I may lose m, son tor eer.
The love of thee before thou saw'.t the lighlt,
Sustain'd my life whecn thy brave iath!er fell.

If thou shalt fall, I have nor love nor hop^
In this waste world ! My son, remember m. !

Dozg. What shall I say ? IHow can I give you co;mort ?

The God of battles of my life dispose
As may be best for you ! for whose dear sake
I will not bear myself as I resolv'd.
But yet consider, as no vulgar name,
That which I boast, snunds amongst mari;il men,
Iow wiil inglorious caution suit my claimn '
The post of fate unshrinking I maintain,
My country's foes must witness who I am.
On the invaders' heads I'll prove m- birth,
'Till friends and foes confess the genuine strain.
If in this strife I fall, blame not your son,
\Vho, if he lives not honour'd, must not live.

Lnad R. I will not utter what me, bosom feels.

Too well I love that valour which I warn. 640
Farewell, my son! my counsels are but vain, [E'ii
And as higih IHeav'n hath will'd it, all must be. [Searaen.
Gaze not on me, thou wilt mistake the path;
I'll point it out again. [J,,;t as thry niae scparz:;..

Eni!trf. sm tbe u;ad Lord RA DOLr : an. GLE N n o\' .
Lord R. Not in her presence.

Now --

Gl ,. I'm prepar'd.
Lrai! 'R. No: I command thee stay.

1 go alone: it never shall be said
That I took odds to combat mortal man.
The noblest vcngeance is the most com.,;eat. [;

[ G L i: N.LV O N : as seme sm es to ;hmesadjn e

si

de :!e 't
! e,

listens andt speaks.
Glen. Demons of death come settle on my sword,

And to a double slaughter guide it home!
The lo.er and the husband both must die.

Lord R. [i!Bhldii he scenes.] Draw, villain! draw!
DoAgi. [llith,'i.] Assail me not, lord Randolph;

Not as thou lov'st h)-ysci. [Clashiisg of svords

Glcn. [Rsnsaig oat.] Now is the time.
Einter Lady R.XNDOLPII, at the OfPitsite side of the stage, faiat

and brlathkiess.

Lan.y R. Lord Pandolph, hear me; all shall be thine own!
But spare ! Oh, spare my son! 6So

Enter Dou TLA', with a s-C.rdisa each hand.

Do:g. My mother's voice!

I can protect thce still.

Lady R. IIe lives, he lives;

For this, for this to Heav'n eternal praise!
But sure I saw thee fall.

Dcsng. It was Glenalvon,

Just as my arm had master'd Randolph's sword,
The villain came be;ii.d me; but I slew him.

Lady R. Behind thee! al ! thou'rt wounded ! Oh, my child,

I ow pale thou look'st ! And shall I lose thee now ?

D;,g. Do not despair: I feel a little faintness;
I hope it will not la.-t. [Leans nsonz his siword.

Lad,' R. There is no hope !

And we must p.art! '1 he hand of death is on thee!
Oh ! my belovcd child ! O Douglas, Douglas

[DOUGcLAS grorovig more anid nmoe faint?

Dog. Too soon we part: 1 have not long been Douglas;

O destiny) hardly thou deal'st with me;
Clouded and hid, a stranger to myself,
In low and poor obscurity I've liv'd.

Lady R. Iias IIeav'n preserv'd thee for an end like this ?
Doug. Oh! had I fall'n as my brave fathers fell, 86r

Turning with fatal arm the tide of battle!
Like them I should have smil'd and wclcom'd death:
But thus to perish by a villain's hand!
Cut off from nature's and from glory's course,
Which never mortal was so fond to run.
Lady R. Hear justice; hear! stretch thy avenging arm.

[DOUGLAS falls.

Dorg. Unknown I die; no tongue shall speak of me.

Some noble spirits, judging by themselves
May yet conjecure what I might have prov'd,
And think life only wanting to my fame:
But who shall comfort thee ?

Lad). R. Despair, despair!
Doirg. Oh, had it pleas'd high I-cav'n to let me live

A little v-iile !- my eyes that gaze on thee
Grov dim apace ! my mother-O ! my mother! [Dies.

Eiatc Lord RANDOLPH r and A NNA.
Lard R. Thy words, thy words of truth, have pierc'd my

heart;

I am the stain of knighthood and of arms.
Oh! if my brave deliecrer survives
The traitor's sword- oo7

.Isoz. Alas ! look there, my lord.
LI.rd R. The mother and her 0on ! How curs'd I am!

Was I the caue ? No; I was not tl:e cause.
Yon matchless villain did seduce my soul
To frantic jeal:ius-.

il;:a. ily lady lives:

The agony of grief liath but suppres'd
Awvhile her powers.

K

Lord R. But my deliverer's dead;

" The world did once esteem lord Randolph well,
" Sincere of heart, for spotless honour fam'd:
"And, in my early days, glory I gain'd
; Beneath the holy banner of the cross.
" ow past the noon of life, shame comes upon me;
" Reproach, and infamy, and public hate,
" Are near at hand: for all mankind will think
" That Randolph basely stabb'd Sir Malcolm's heir."

Lady R. [Recovcriaig.] Where am I now? Still in this

wretched orld !

Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine.
" My youth was worn in anguish: but youth's strength,
" With hope's assistance, bore the brunt of sorrow;
" And train'd me on to be the object now,
" On which Omnipotence displays itself,
" Making a spectacle, a tale of me,
" To awe its vassal, man."

Lord R. Oh, misery!

Amidst thy raging grief I must proclaim
My innocence.

Lady R. Thy innocence!
Lord R. My guilt 730
Is innocence compar'd with what thou think'st it.

Lady R. Of thee I think not: what have I to do

With thee, or any thing ? My son! my son !
My beautiful! my brave! how proud was I
Of thee and of thy valour ! my fond heart
O'erlow'd this day wi:h transport, when I thought
Of growing old amidst a race of thine,
Who might make up to ime their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and my husband's name:
Now all my hopes are dead! A little while

Was I a wife ! a mother not so long!
What am I now ?-I know.-But I shall be
That only whilst I please; for such a son
And such a husband drive me to my fate. [Runs out.

Lord R. Follow her, Anna: I myself would follow,
But in this rage she must abhor my presence. [xit ANA.

Enter Old NoR VAL.

Old Nor. I heard the voice of woe: Heaven guard my child!
Lord R. Already is the idle gaping crowd,

The spiteful vulgar, come to gaze on Randolph.
Begone. 750

Old Nor. I fear thee not. I will not go.

Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplice, lord,
With thee in murder. Yes, my sins did help
To crush down to the ground this lovely plant.
Oh, noblest youth that ever yet was born!
Sweetest and best, gentlest and bravest spirit,
That ever blest the world ! Wretch that I am,
Who saw that noble spirit swell and rise
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it,
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do thee justice, and reveal the secret,
Which, timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's snare. Oh ! I am punish'd now!
These are the hairs that should have strew'd the ground,
And not the locks of Douglas.

[Tcars his bair, and thrcs bimIself uonJO tbe bod. of Douglas.
Lord R. I know thee now: " thy boldness I forgive:

" iy crest is fallen." For thee I will appoint
A place of rest, if grief will let thee rest.
I will reward, altho' I cannot punish.
Curs'd, curs'd Glenalvon, he cscap'd too well, 770

Tho' slain and baffled by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the last,
Cursing his conqueror, the felon died.

Enter A ss A.

Anna, My lord! My lord!
Lord R. Speak: I can hear of horror.
Anna. Horror, indeed !
Lord R. Matilda ?
Anna. Is no more:

She ran, she flew like lightning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice she gain'd, 78o
Beneath whjse low'ring top the river falls
Ingulph'd in rifted rocks: thither she came.
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down-

Lord R. 'Twas I alas! 'twas I

That fill'd her breast with fury; drove her down
' he precipice of death! W\retch that I am!

Anna. Oh, had you seen her last despairing look!

Upon the brink she stood, and cast her eyes
Down on the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to Heaven, seeming to say,
Why am 1 forc'd to this? she plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord R. I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the passion of my soul.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of Randolph gave;
They speak aloud, and with the voice of fate
Denounce my doom. 1 am rcsolv'd. I'll go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes 800
Me turn aside must threaten worse than death.

Thou, faithful to thy mistress, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
With cost and pomp upon their funerals wait:
For Randolph hopes he never shall return. [Exeunt.

# EPILOGUE.

EPILOGUE.

A V Fpilioge I ask'd; bat not on e wuord
Our bard

r will vwrite. He JvCWos 'tis most absorrd

With comic 'wit to contradi8t the strain
Of tragedy and make your sorr6ovus vasin.
Sady he says, that pity is the best,
And noblest passion of the humana breast:
For nwhen its sacred streams the heart o erfow,
In gushes pleasure wvith the tide of sooe;
And awhen its wavnaes retire, like those of Nile,
They leave behiid him such a golden soil,
That thi re the virtl!ues wsithoat cualture grow,
There the sweet blossoms of ajfedion blw.
These -were his words; nvoid of delosiPve art,
If lt them: for he spoke them from his heart.
NIor 'will I nowv attempt, with witty folly,
To chase away, celestial melancholy.

j_. · '
