DOUGLAS:

A
TRAGE DY.

As it is ased at the
T H E A T R E S

IN

GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND.

Non ego fum vates, fed prirci confcius evi.
By the Rev. Mr. HUME. HE 0

To which are prefixed,
I.An Address to theAuthor. Rev. Presbytery of Edin-

By David Hume, Efq; burgh.
Authorof the History of III. Copy of a Declaration,
Great Britain, 6c. by the Rev. Presbyteiy
II. Copy of an Admonition of Glasgow. -

and Exhortation, by the 1

B E L F A S T:
Printed by and for J A M E S M A G E E, in Bridge.

street, M, DCC LVII.

# An Address from DAVID HUME, Esq; Author of the History of Great Britain, &c. to the Rev. Mr. HUME, Author of DOUGLAS, a Tragedy.

[33
An. 4dreis from DAVID HUME, E/;. Author fr Je

. Hinory of Great Britain, i/c. tp t3¢ Rev. Mr. HU ME,

duitor ofi UGLAs , a 7agdy. '

.

My dear Sir,

TT was the Pratice of the Antients to address their
. Compositions only to Friends and.Equals, and to,
render their .Ddications Monuments. of,R fgar4; and*
Affetion, .not of Servility and Flattery.. tn thpoe Days,
of .ingenious and candid Liberty, a Dedicationdicd
Honour to the Person to whom it was addrefld, with-.
out degrading the Author. If any Partialiiy appeared.
towards the Patron, it was at lealt the Partiality of.
Friendship and Affection.

Another Inflance of true Liberty, of which antient'

Times can alone afford us an Exanplei,.is the. Libery,
of Thought, which engaged, Men of tietters, hpwevepr
different in their abftrat Opinions, to maintain a mutu.a
al Friend(h'ip and Regard; and never to quarrel about
Principles, while they agreed in Inclinations and Man-
ners. Science was often the Subjec of Disputation,
never of Animosity. Cicero, an Academic, addrelted
his philosophical Treitifes, sometimes. to BrutpJ, a
Stoic; sometimes to Atticus, an Epicurean.

I -have been seized with a tfrong Desire of renewi g

these laudable PraAices of Antiquity, by addrefing-the
following Diflertations to you, my good Friend: For
such I will ever call and esteem you, notwithltanding.
the Oppolition which prevails between us, with Re-
gard to many of our speculative Tenets. These Diffte.
rences of Opinion I have only found to enliven our
Conversation; while our common Pallion for Science
and Letters served as a Cement to our Friendlhip. I
fill admired your Genius, even when I imagined that.
you lay;under the Influence of Prejudice; and you
sometimes told me, that you excused my Errors, on

A 2 Account

[43

Account of the Candour and Sincerity, which, you
thought accompanied them.

But to tell Truth, it is less my Admiration of your

fine Genius, which has engaged me to make this Ad-
dress to yon, than my Esteem of your Character and
my Affecion to your Perron. That Generosity of
lind which ever accompanies you; that Cordiality of
Friendlhip, that spirited Honour and Integrity, have
long intereited me strongly in your Behalf, and have
made me desirous, that a Monument of our mutual
Amity Ihould be publickly erected, and, if poflible, be
preserved to Pofierity.

I own too, that-I have the Ambition to be the first

who mhall in public express his Admiration ofyour noble
Tragedy of Douglas; one of the molt interesting and
pathetic Pieces, that was ever exhibited on any Theatre.
Should I give it the Preference to the Merope of Massei,
and to that of Voltaire, which it resembles in its sub-
jed; Ihould I affirm, that it contained more Fire and

tpirit than the former, more Tenderness and Simplici-

ty than the latter; I might be accused of Partiality:
And how could I entirely acquit myself, after the Pro.
sessions of Friendship which I have made you? But the
unfeigned Tears which flowed from every Eye, in the
numerous Representations which were made of it on
this Theatre; the unparalleled Command, which you
appeared to have over every Affecion of the human
Breast: These are incbnteftible Proofs, that you possess
the true theatric Genius of Shakefpear and Otway, re-
fined from the unhappy Barbarism of the one, and Li-
centioufnefs of the other.

My Enemies, you know, and I own even sometimes

my Friends, have reproached me with the Love of Para-
doxes and singular Opinions; and I expe&tto be exposed
to the fame Imputation, on Account of the Charaser,
which Ihave here given of your Douglas; I {hall be told no
doubt, that I had arttully chosen the only Time, when
this high esteem of that Piece could be regarded as a
Paradox, to wit, before its Publication; and that not
being able to contradict in this Particular the Sentiments
of the Public, I have, at lealt, resolved to go before

them.

# Copy of the Admonition and Exhortation by the Reverend Presbytery of Edinburgh, dated the 5th Day of January, 1757.

- C r I

them. But I liall be amply compensated for all these
pleafantries, if you accept this Testimony of my Re-
gard, and believe me to be, with the greatest Sinceri-
ty, Dear Sir, Your molt affectionate Friend, and hum-
ble Servanti

Edinb. Jan. 3, 1757. DAVID HUME.
.Copy of the Admonition and Exhortation by the Re.

verend Preibylery of Edinburgh, datedthe thb Day
cf January, i757.
T H Prelbytery taking into their serious Confide-

ration, tie declining State of Religion, the opet

Profanation of the Lord's Day, the Contempt of public
Worlhip, the growing Luxury and Levity of the present
Age; in which so many seem Lovers of Pleasure, more
than Lovers of God: And being particularly affected
with the UNPREC'DENTED COUNrENANCE given of'
late to the Playhouse in this Place, when the State of the
Nation, and the Circumltances of the Poor, make such'
hurtful Entertainments till more pernicious; judged it
.their indifpenlable Duty to express in the molt open and
solemn Manner, the deep Concern they feel on this
Occasion.

The Opinion which the Christian Church has always

entertained of Stage Plays and Players, as prejudicial io
the Interests of Religion and Morality, is-well known';
and the fatal Influence which they commonly have-o'n-
the far greater Part of Mankind, particularly the younger
Sort, is too obvious to be called in Question.

To enumerate how many Servants, Apprentices, and-

Students in different Branches of Literature, in the City'
and Suburbs, have been reduced from their proper Bu-
finess, by attending the Stage, would be a painful, dif-
.agreeable Talk.

The Presbytery in tlie Year 1727, when confifling.óf

many pious, prudent,. and learned Minilters, whdof
Praile is in all the Churches, being aware of there Evils'
did p: eare a Paper, which was read' from the several

A ali

[ 6

Pulp'ts within their Bounds, warning their People a.
gainit the dangerous Infedion of the Theatre then e-
re&ed there.

In the Year 1737, the Legislature, in their great

Wisdom, did, by an At of the loth of George II.
enat and declare, " That every Person who mhould,
" for Hire or Reward, aft, or cause to be acted, any
"Play, or other Entertainment of the Stage, without
" the special Licence and Authority mentioned in the
" said Ad, should be deemed a Rogue and a Vaga.
"bond, and for every such Offence (hould forfeit the

Sum of 501. Sterling."
At that Time a Projet was set on Foot to obtain a

licensed Theatre in this City; but the Malters and Pro-
fefiors of the University, supported by the Magitlrates,
having prepared a Petition, setting forth the dangerous
Tendency of a Playhouse here, with respect to the im-
portant Interefis of Virtue and Learning, the Projet was
laid aside.

The Players, however, being so audacious as to

continue to at in Defiance of the Law, the Presbytery
did, at their own Charge, prosecute them before the
Court of Seflon; and prevailed in the Process. The
Players were fined in Terms of Law; and Warrants
being issued for apprehending them, they fled from Ju-
tfice. But others came in their Place ; who since that
Time have attempted to elude the Law, by changing
the Name of the PLAYHOUSE into that of the CoN-
CERITHALL.

As such a flight Evfion, the mere Change of a

Name, could not make the smalleR Variation in the
Nature of the Thing, the Presbytery continued to do
all in their Power, and in their Sphere, to prevent the
growing Evil; and think themselves at this Time
loudly called upon, in ONE BODY, and with ONE
VOICE, to expofulate, in the Bowels of Love and
Compalion, with all under their Care and Infpec.
tion.

When our gracious Sovereign, attentive to the Voice

es Providence, is calling from the Throne to Humilia-
tion and Prayer, how unseemly is it for his Subjects to

giwv

give themselves up to Mirth and Jollity ? When the
War in which we are engaged) and many awful Tokens
of the divine Displeasure, bespeak us, in. the Langage
of an inspired Writer, to redeem bs T7ie becaule the
Day, are evil, Ihould that Time be squandered away in
running the contfant Round of foolish, not tofidyfinful
Amusements? When the Wants and Cries of.the nu-
merous Poor require extraordinary Supplies, how un-
accountable is it to lavish away vafi Sums for such vain
and idle Purposes? When the Wisdom of the- Nation
has guarded the Inhabitants of this City and Suburbs
from the Infeaion of the Stage, by a Plain and exprefa
Statute; is it not a high Inltance of Folly, to break
down that Barrier, and open a Door with their own
Hands for theatrical Reprefentatione6 which are in
many Refpeas no less inconfiltent with good Policyb
than unfriendly to Religion; and will be found soon-
er or later, to affect their temporal as well as spiritual
Interests.

On these Accounts, and for many other obvious and

weighty Considerations, the Presbytery, warmed with
jult concern for the Good of Souls, do, in the Fear of
God, WARN, EXHORT, and OBTEST, all within their
Bounds, as they regard the Glory of God, the Credit
of our holy Religion, and their own Welfare, to walk
worthy of the Vocation wherewith they are called, by
fliewing a sacred Regard to the Lord's Day, and all the
Ordinances of divine Inltitution; and by discouraging,
in their refpecive Spheres, the illegal and dangerous En-
tertainments of the Stage.

The Prelbytery would plead with ALL in Authority,

with TEACHERS of Youth, PARENTS, and MASTERS
of Families, to refrain by every habile Method, such
as are under their Influence, from frequenting these Se-
minaries of Folly and Vice. They would particularly
beseech the younger Part of their Flock, to beware, left,
by Example, or from a foolish Desire of appearing in
the falhionable World, they be misled into such perni.
cious Snares; Snares which mufl necelfarily retard, if
not entirely mar, that Progress in the refpetive Parts of
their Education, on. which their future Usefulness and

Success

# Copy of the Declaration of the Rev. Presbytery of Glasgow, dated the 14th Day February 1757.

E 8 ]
i8)

Siccess depend. And, lafly, they would intreat and obtelt
Persons of all Ranks and Conditions, that, intead of con-
tributing to the growing Licentiousness of the Age, they
may diitinguifl themselves by shining as Lights in the
World, being blameless and harmless, the Sons of God,
without Rebuke, in the Midst of a crooked and perverse
Nation; OCCUPYING, for the great Purposes of the
Honour of God and the Good of Mankind, that Time,
that SubRlance, and those other Talents which they
have received from their Lord and Mater.

On the whole, the Presbytery do, in the motl earnest

Manner, call upon all who have the Interelt of Religion
at Heart, to plead fervently at the Throne of Grace,
in the prevailing Name of the great Mediator, until the
Spirit he pouredupon uisfrom on high, and the Wilder-
nefA be a fruitful Field, and thefruitful Field he count.
edfor a Forejt: Then Judgment /hall dwell in the Wil.
dcrnfc , and Rghteoufrnef remain in thefruitful Field;
and the Work of Righteoufnefi /hall he Peace, and the
Efse of Righteouftnefs, Quietne/s and Afurancefor ever.

The Prelbytery appoint this ADMONITION and Ex-

HORTATION to be read from all the Pulpits within their
Bounds, on the lalt Sabbath, being the thirtieth Djy
of this Month, immediately after divine Service before
Noon.

<$-,,I- *-^

4 -

+ - ^

4-^ _r-3 *E
Copy of the Declaration of the Rev. PreJ. tery of/Glaf.

gow, dated the x4th Day February 757.

HE Presbytery of Glasgow having seen a printed
Paper, intitled, An Admonition and Exhortation

of the Reverend Presbytery of Edinburgh, a hich, among
other Evils prevailing, laments the extraordinary and
unprecedented Countenance given of late to the Play.
bouse in that City; and having good Reason to believe,
that this refers to the following melancholy but notori-
ous Fads, that one who is a Miniltcr of the Church of
Scotland, did himself write and compose a Stage-Play,

intilled,

[ 9 i

intitled, 7Me Tragedy of Dougris, and gotiittobe ,ted
on the Theatre at Edinburgh,; and that be, with I.O-
ral other Minilers of this. Churchb, were prefnt, and
some of them oftner than oncei at the iaing ofithb:faid
Play before a numerous Audiencei .The 'Preytery. ti-
ing deeply asseted with this new and; .tlange;.Appear,
ance,, think it their Dutyrto declare, us theyherebydo,
that they agree.with the Prefbytecy Of Edinbpqrh in
their Sentiments with refpec& to Stage.Playst and pari
ticularly that such Entertainments,, from what has, ben
usually exhibited in them, and also from ,thendifolute
Lives (for the most part) and infamous Characters of
the Players, have been looked upon by the Chriflian
Churchin all Ages, and of all differentCommunionsi
as extremely prejudicial:to Religion and Morality, .
well as hurtful to the otler valuable ptereftsof human
Society, by the walteful expence of Money and Time
they have occalioned; and being convinced by long
Experience, a sure Telt of the Tendency of any Ation
or Practice, how vain it is to expedc such a Reformation
of the Stage as is confifent with the Ends aforesaid;
and therefore such Entertainments should be discouraged
and laid aside: And the Presbytery further confidering,
that the unprecedented Countenance given to the Play-
house, in the Instance mentioned, is greatly aggravated
by a late At of Parliament, rendering the Stage (be-
caule not licensed) unlawful in Scotland, and also from
the present Circumltances of the Nation with regard to
the War we are engaged in, the Dearth of Provisions,
and the awful Tokens of the Divine Anger against us:
They therefore hereby appoint and intfrut such of their
Members as Ihall represent them in the ensuing general
AfTemblyofthis Church, to move and insist in a regular
Manner, that the venerable Afiembly do declare, by a
publick As, their Judgment and that of this National
Church against the Entertainments of the Theatre, as
of very hurtful Tendency to the Interelts of Religion
and Society. 2dly, That the Assembly do Itricly en-
quire whether the Fats above-mentioned, viz. that a
Minister of this Church has composed and procured to
be afted on the Theatre of the Canongate of Edin.

burgh,

[: IO 3

buigb, the Tragedy called Douglas, and that the Re:
presentation of the said Tragedy was attended by him
and several other Ministers, have been under the Confi-
deration of the Presbyters refpe&ively concerned; and
whether tbefe Miniflers, having been found guilty, have
been cenfared as their Faults deserved; and to give
such Directions as they in their Wisdom Ihall find ne-
ceflary, that fach Ministers and all others may be fenfi-
ble that the Church of Scotland will never prote& her
Members in Pracice so unbecoming their Charater,
and of such pernicious Tendency to the great Interelts
of Religion, Induiry and Virtue. And laltly, that the
Allembly would use their best Endeavours to obtain
such an Explication and Enforcement of the At of the
i7th of Geo. II. anent the Playhouse, as it may not
be liable to the pitiful Evasions by which it is now
eluded.

PROLOGUE.

# PROLOGUE. Spoken by Mr. SPARKS.

PROLOGUE.

Spoken by Mr. SPARK S.

TN antient times, when Britain's trade was armts
a And the lov'dmufick of her youth alarms. ....
Agod-like race /uflain'dfair:England's fame ::
Who has not heard of gallant PIERCY's namet
A7, and of DOUGLAS? Such illufiriNusfos
Jn rival Rome and Carthage never roei! -
From age to age bright hone the Britiih fire,
Andevery hero was a herosfire.
When powerfulfate decreed one warrior's doom,l
Upfprung the Phenix from his parent' tomb.
But whilfl these generous rivals fought andfell,
Thefegenerous rivals lov'd eac other ill: '
Tho' many a bloody field &was lft and won,
Nothing in hate, in honour all was done. ',
When PIERCY wrong'd, dtfy'dhis princ or peirs,
Fafi came the DOUGLAS, with his Scottiflifpearj;
And, when proud DOUGLAS made his King his set,
For DOUGLAS, PIERCY bent his Englilh bow.
Expell'd their native homes by adverficfate,
They knoc'd alternate at each ether's gate: .
Then blaz'd the cafle, at the'midnight hour, -
For him whose arms hadjhook its firmest tower. -
This Night a Douvo-Asyour protedtin claims;
.i wife! a mother ! pity'sfofteft names:
The flory of her woes indulgent hear,
Andgrant your suppliant all/he begs, a tear:
In confidence he begs; and hopes to/fnd
Each Englilh breafl, like nobk PIERCY', kind.

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

D RAM AT IS, PE R SON. iE.

LONDON. EDINBURGH. DUBLIN.

Lord RANDO6LPM, Mr.. RIDOUT. Mr.. Y"NG'gR. R Me. PaxcTER.

GLENALVONy , Mr. SxlzTHj Mr. L qvg. Mr. SrTAVLEV.

N1ORWAL, DoUGLAS, Mr. sLRRY. Mr. DG. Mr. IpstRDAN .
'STRANGER, '. .Mr. S~ARJC& Lr. -HAYAN. -HMr. 14E.
*~ .;SERVAI~TS. r

W O M E N.

~,MATI LDA Ladyt RAN~b~
ll DL~ WI·NTX

Mady RAN.

~rs. WOFFINwOr. WMr. WA1D. Mrs. JCNUEDY.
DOLFHk i

Mrs. VINCENT. Mrs. HOP'xsNS. Milri G. pki Lip S'

# ACT I. SCENE I.

DOU G L A S:

A
TR A G E D Y.

ACT I. SCENE I.
kAe court of a caflle, fitrrounded with wcais.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.
Y E woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom

Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth
The voice of sorrow from my bursting heart,

Farewel a while: I will not leave you long;
For in your {hades I deem some spirit dwells,
Who from the chiding {tream, or groaning oak,
Still hears, and answers to MATILDA'S moan.
(O DOUGLAS ' DOUGLAS ! If departed ghosts
Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of that wood thou art,
And with the palion of immortals hear'lt
My lamentation : hear'st thy wretched wife
Weep for her husband slain, her infant loft.
My brother's timeless death I seem to mourn,
Who perifh'd with thee on this fatal day.
To thee I lift my voice ; to thee address
The plaint which mortal ear has never heard.
0 disregard me not; though I am call'd
Another's now, my heart is wholly thine.

B Incapable

Incapable of change, affecion lies
Buried, my DOUGLAS, in thy bloody grave,
But RAKDOLPH comes, whom fate has made my Lord,
To chide my anguilh, and defraud the dead.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.
Lord Ran. Again there weeds of woe! fay, dc'ft thou

well

To feed a passion which consumes thy life ?
The living claim some duty; vainly thou
Beftow'ft thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady Ran. Silent, alas! is he for whom I mourn:

Child!efs, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives.

Lord Ran. Time, that wears out the trace of deepest

anguish,

Has pai o'er.thee in vain. Wou'd thou wert not
Compos'd of grief and tenderness alone
Sure thou art not the daughter of Sir MALCOLM:
Strong was his Rage, eternal his refcntment:
For when thy brother fell, he frnii'd to hear
That Do GLAS' son in the fame field was slain.

Lady Ran. Oh ! rake not up the alhes of my fathers:

Implacable resentment was their crime,
And grievous has the expiation been.
Contending with the D UGLAS, gallant lives
of either house were loft ; my ancelsors
Compeli'd, at lalt, to leave their ancient feat
On Tiviot's p!easant banks; and now, of them
No heir is left. Had they not been so tern,
I had not been the ladt of all my race.

Lord Ran. Thy grief wrelts to its purposes my words.

Inever fk'd cf thee that ardent love,
Which in the breads of fancy's children burns.
Decent ffection, and complacent kindness
Were all I with'd for ; but I wish'd in vain.
Hence with the less regret my eyes behold
The form of war that gathers o'er this land:
If I (hould perish by the Danish sword,
MATILDA would not fbed one tear the more.

Lady Ran. Thou do't not think so: woeful as I am,

1 lcve thy merit, and esteem thy virtues,
Bat whither, goelt thou now ?

Lord

Lord Ran. Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on the tip-toe (ands
Of expectation, and impatient asks
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are landed.

Lady Ran. 0, may adverse winds,

Far from the coast of Scotland, drive their fleet!
And every fordier of both hosts return
In peace and safety to his pleasant home !

Lord Ran. Thou 'peak'ft a woman';, hear a war-

rior's wish:

Right from their native land, the trorim north,
May the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
Immoveable in Caledonia's strand!
Then shall our foes rep.nt their bolJ iilv:ion,
And roving armies (hun the fatal fllre.

Lady Ran. War I detelt: but war with foreign foes,.

Whole minners, language, and whose looks are firange,
Is not so horrid, nor to m so, hateful,
As that which with our neighbours oft we wage.
A river here, there an ideal line
By fancy drawn, divi.!es the filler kingdo;mc .
On each fide dwells a people fi.nilar,
As twains are to each other, valiant boih,
Both for their valour famous thro' the world;
Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
And, if they mull have war, wage diltant war,.
Bit with each other fight in cruel cjrfl 't.
Gallant in (trife, and noble in their ire,
The battle is their paltime. They go forth
Gay in the morning, as to funmer sport:
When ev'ning comes the glory of the morn,.
The youthful warrior, is a clod of clay.
Thus fall the prime of either hapless land:
And such the fruit of Scotch and Englilh wars.

Lord Ran. I'il hear no more: this melody would;

make

A soldier drop his sword, and doff his arms,
Sit down and weep the conquells he had made
Yea, (like a monk), sing reft and peace in heav'n
To fouls of warriors in his battle slain,

B 2 Lady,.

Lady, farewel: I leave thee not alone.
Yonder comes one whose love makes duty light.

Enter ANNA.

rnna. Forgive the ralhnefs of your ANNA'S love:

Urg'd by affection, I have thus prefum'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts;
And warn you of the hours that you neglect,
And lose in sadness.

Lady Ran. So to lore my hours
Is all the use I with to make of time.

Anna. To blame thee, lady, suits not with my ltate:

But sure I am, since death firlt prey'd on man,
Never did filter thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had loft,
In early youth, the husband of your heart?

Lady Ran. Oh !
anna. Have I diltrelt you with officious love,

And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate?
Forgive me) lady: humble tho' I am,
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune;
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

Lady Ran. What power direded thy unconscious

tongue
To speak as thou hall done ? to name-

A'.:a. I know not:

But lince my words have made my mistress tremble,
I ill speak so no more; but silent mix
My tears with hers.

Lady Ran. No, thou lhalt not be silent.

1'Jl trult thy faithful love, and thou (halt be
Henceforth th' inltru&ed partner of my woes.
But what avails it? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never-ebbing time ?
Compel the earth and ocean to give up
Their dead alive ?

Ainm. What means my noble mistress i
Lady Ran. Didft thou not ask what had my sorrows

been ?

If I in early youth had loll a husband ?--
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'd,

Mlngi'd

Mangl'd with wounds, the husband of my youth;.
And in some cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his.------

rmna. O! lady, molt rever'd !

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

Lady Ran. Alas! an ancient feud,

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother should in battle save
The life of DOUGLAS' son, our boule's foe:
The youthful warriors vow'd eternal friendship;
To fee the vaunted fiGter of his friend
Impatient, DJUGLAS to Balarmo came,
Under a borrow'd name.-My heart he gain'd;
Nor did I long refute the hand he begg'd:
My brother's presence authoriz'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little weeks, with wings of downr
Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd lord was call'd
To fight his father's battles; and with him,
In spite of all my tears, did MALCOLM go.
Scarce were they gone, when my (tern fire was told.
That the false tfranger was lord DOUGLAS' son.
Franticwwith rage, the baron drew his sword
Andqueltion'dme. Alone, forlaken, faint,.
Kneeling beneath his sword, falt'ring I took:
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
Wed one of DoUGLA' name; S;ncerity,.
Thou first of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thy onward path! altho' the earth should gape,.
And from the gulf of hell'deltruation cry
'I'o take dissimulation's winding way.

Inna. Alas! how few of woman's fearful kind'
Durit own a truth so hardy !

Lady Ran. The firit truth -

Is ealielt to avow. This moral learn;
This precious moral, from my tragic tale.-.--
In a few days the dreadful tidings came
That DOUGLAS and my brother both were slain..
My lord! my life! my hufband!-mighty God!:
What had I done to merit such affliaion?

xAnn.. My dearest lady! Many a tale of tears-

B:3 .le

I've lillen' to; but never did I hear
A tale so fad as this.

Lady Ran. In the firlt days

Of my diitrafting grief, I found myself----
As women wish to be who love their lords.
But who durlt tell my father? The good priest
Whojoin'd our hands, my brother's antient tutor,
With his lov'd MALCOLM, in the battle fell:
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till time ihould make my father's fortune mine.
That very night on which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confident I had,
Set out with him to reach her sifter's houfc:
But nurse, nor infant, have I ever seen,
Or heard of, ANNA, since that fatal hour.
My murder'd child!-had thy fond mother sear'd
The loss of thee, the had loud fame defy'd,
De'pis'd her father's rage, her father's grief,
And wander'd with thee thro' the scorning world.

Anna. Not seen, or heard of! then perhaps he lives.
Lady Ran. No. It was dark December: wind and

rain

Had beat all night. Across the Carron lay
The deltin'd road; and in it's [weeling flood
My faithful servant perifh'd with my child.
0 hapless son! of a molt hapless fire!-
But they are both at relt; and I alone
).vell in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk,
Like a guiit-troubl'd Gholt, my painful rounds:
Nor his despiteful fate permitted me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Tho' dead to love, I was compell'd to wed
RANDOLPH, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms;
And RANDOLPH now poiffles the domains,
That by Sir MALcoLM's death on me devolv'd;
Domains, that Ihould to DOUGLAS' son have giv'i
A baron's title, and a baron's power.
Such were my soothing thoughts, while I bewail'd
The flaughter'd father of a Con unborn.
And when that son came, like a ray from heav'n.
Which Ihines and disappears; alas ! my child

How

How long did thy fond mother grasp the hope
Of having thee, the knew not how, reftor'd.
Year after year hath worn her hope away;
But left still undiminilh'd herdefire.

Anna. The hand, that spins th' uneven thread of life,
May smooth the length that's yet to come of yonr's.

Lady Ran. Not in this world t I have confider'd well

It's various evils, and on whom they fall.
Alas! how oft does goodness wound itself?
And sweet affetion prove the spring of woe.
O! had I died when my lov'd husband fell!
Had some good angel op'd to me the book
Of providence, and let me read my life,
My heart had broke, when I beheld the fum
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

Anna. That God, whose ministers good angels are,

Hath Ihut the book in mercy to mankind.
But we mutt leave this theme: GLENALVON comes:
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitherwards he slowly fialks his way.

Lady Ran. I will avoid him. An ungracious person
Is doubly irksome in an hour like this.

Anna. Why speaks my lady thus of RANDOLPH'S

heir?
Lady Ran. Because he's not the heir of RANDOLPH'S,

virtues.

Subtle and shrewd, he offers to mankind
An artificial image of himself:
And he with ease can vary to the taste
Of different men, it's features. Self.denied,,
And matter of his appetites he seems:
But his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,
Watches to seize unseen the wilh'd-for prey.
Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
As in GLENALVON'S unrelenting mind.
Yet is he brave and politic in war,
And (tands aloft in these unruly times.
Why I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter:
Stay and detain him till I reach the castle.

Exit. Lady RANPr.PH..

Anna. 0 happiness! where art thou to be found?
I fee thou dwelleft not with birthand beauty . '

Tho

Tho' grac'd with grandeur, and in wealth array'd;
Nor dofR thou, it would seem,- with virtue dwell;
Else had this gentle lady mifs'd thee not.

Enter GLENALVON.

Glen. What dolt thou muse on, meditating maid '

Like some entranc'd and visionary seer
On earth thou ftand't, thy thoughts ascend to heaven.

Anna. Wou'd that I were, e'en as thou fay'd, a seer,
To have my doubts by heav'nly vision clear'd!

Glen. What doll thou doubt of? what hall thou to

do

With fubjeAs intricate? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be questioned: think of these good gifts;
And then thy contemplations will be pleating.

Anna. Let women view yon monument of woe,

Then boas of beauty; who so fair as she ?
But I mult follow: this revolving day
Awakes the memory of her antient woes.

[Exit ANNA.

GLENALVON fiJ'i.

So!-Lady RANDOLPH (huns me; by and by

I'll woo her as the lion wooes his brides.
The deed's a doing now, that makes me lord
Of there rich valleys, and a chief of power.
The season is molt apt: my founding Iteps
Will not be heard amidst the din of arms.
RANDOLPH has liv'd too long: his better fate
Had the ascendant once, and kept me down:
When I had seiz'd the dame, by chance he came,.
Refcu'd and had the lady for his labour;
I 'fcap'd unknown: a slender consolation!
Heaven is my witness that I do not love
To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvelt. YetI am not safe:
By love, or something like it,. Itung, inflam'd,,
Madly I blabb'd my paflion to his wife,
And [he has threaten'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will I do not know:
But well I know the baron's wrath is deadly..
I.wil not live in fear: the man I dread
Is ai aDane to me; ay, and the man
Who lands betwixt me and my chief dfire..

No

# ACT II. SCENE I.

No bar but he; she has no kinsman near;
No brother in his sifter's quarrel bold;
And for the righteous cause, a Itranger's cause,
I know no chief that will defy GLENALVON.

A C T II. S C E N E .

-A Court, &c.
Enter servants and a franger at one door, and Ladj

RANDOLPH and ANNA at another.
Lady Ran. 7 H A T means this clamour? itranger,

VV speak secure;

Hall thou been wrong'd ? have these rude men prefum'd
To vex the weary traveller on his way?

i f Serv. By us no firanger ever fuffer'd wrong:

This man with outcry wild has call'd us forth;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
Enter Lord RANDOLPH and yo.ng man, with their

swords drawn and bloody.
Lady Ran. Not vain the itranger's fears! how fares

my Lord?
Lord Ran That it fares well, thanks to this gallant

youth,

Whore valour fav'd me from a wretched death!
As down the winding dale I walk'd alone,
At the cross way four armed men attack'd me:
Rovers, I judgei. from the licentious camp,
Who would have quickly laid Lord RANDOLPH low,
Had not this brave and generous firanger come,
Like my good angel in the hour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my foes his own.
They turn'd upon him; but his active arm
Struck to the ground, from whence they rose no more,
The fiercelt two; the others fled amain,
And left him malfer of the bloody field.
Speak, Lady RANDOLPH; upon Beautys· tongue

Dwell

Dwell accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
Speak, noble dame, and thank him for thy lord.

Lady Ran. My lord, I cannot speak what now I feel.

My heart o'erflows with gratitude to heav'n,
And to this noble youth, who all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but humanely brave
Fought on your fide, againrt such fearful odds.
Have you yet learn'd of him whom we (hould thank?
Whom call the saviour of Lord RANDOLPH'S life?

Lord Ran. I ask'd that question, and he anfwer'd not:
But Imuflknowwho mydeliv'reris. (to the Stranger.)

Strang. A low born man, of parentage obscure,

Who nought can boalt but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Lord Ran. Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled

By the great King of Kings! thou art ordain'd
And ftampt a hero by the sovereign hand
Of nature! blush not, flower of modesty
As well as valour to declare thy birth.

Strang. My name is NORVAL: on the Grampian

bills

My father feeds his flocks; a frugal swain,
Whose conltant cares were to encreafe his fore,
And keep his only son, myself, at home.
For I had heard of battles, and I long'd
To follow to the field some warlike lord;
And heaven soon granted what my fire denied.
This moon which rose lait night, round as my shield,
Had not yet fill'd her horns, when, by her light,
A band of fierce barbarians, from the hillss
Rulh'd like a torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The Shepherds fled
For safety, and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver fill of arrows,
Hover'd about the enemy, and mark'd
The road he took, then halted to my friends:
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
I met advancing. The pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook the fpoil-encumber'd foe.
We fought and conquer'd. Ere a sword was drawn,

An

An arrow frommy bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Returning home in triumph, I difdain'd
The (hepherd's slothful life; and having heard
That our good King had fummon'd his bold peers
To lead their warriors tothe Carron fide,
I left my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to conduct my tleps:--.
Yon trembling coward who forsook his matter.
Journeying with this intent, I palt these towers, -
And, heaven.direted, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

Lord Ran. He is as wife as brave. Was ever tale

With such a gallant modesty rehears'd?
My brave deliverer! thou (halt enter now
A nobler lift, and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame.-
I will present thee to our Scottilh King,
Whole valiant spirit ever valour lov'd.
Ha! my MATILDA! wherefore starts that tear?

Lady Ran. I cannot fay: for various affetions,

And firangely mingled, in my bosom swell;.
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
Ijoy that thou art safe; and admire
Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety.,
Obscure and friendless, he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, and with his sword
To gain diltintion which his birth denied.
In this attempt unknown he might have periil'd,
And gain'd, with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope
lie flands conspicuous; fame and great renown
Are brought within the compass of his sword.
On this my mind refected, whilf you spoke,
And blefs'd the wonder.working Lord of heaven.

Lord Ran. Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts!

My deeds (hall follow where thou point'it the way.
Next to myself, and equal to GLENALVON,
In honour and command shall NORVAL be.

Norv.

,crv. I know not how to thank you. Rude I am,

In speech and manners: never till this hour
Stood I in such a presence: yet, my lord,
There's something in my breast which makes me bold
To fay, that NOR VAL ne'er will Shame thy favour.

Lady Ran. I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou

(halt be

My knigbt, and ever, as thou did(t to day,
With happy valour guard the life of RANDOLPH.

Lord Ran. Well haft thou spoke. Let me forbid re.

ply. (To NORVAL.

We are thy debtors Rill; thy high desert
O'ertops our gratitude. I must proceed,
As was at firit intended, to the camp.
Some of my train I fee are speeding hither,,
Impatient, doubtless, of their lord's delay.
Go with me, NORVAL, and thine eyes (hall fee
The chosen warriors of thy native land,
Who languish for the fight, and beat the air
With brandifh'd swords.

Norv. Let us begone, my lord.
Lord Ran. [To Lady RANDOLPH] About the tinm

that the declining fun

Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills suspend,
Expea us to return. This night once more
Within these walls I reft; my tent I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepare the fealt.
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
ie in the eve of battle may resign
Himself to social pleasure; (weetetl then,
When danger to a soldier's foul endears
The human joy that never may return.

Exeunt RANDOLPH and NO VAi.

SCENE II.

Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.
Lady Ran. His parting words have struck a fatal

truth.

0 DOUGLAS! DOUGLAS! tender was the time
When we two parted, ne'er to meet again!

How

How many years of anguilh and despair
Has heav'n annex'd to those swift paning hours
Of love and fondness! Then my bosom's flame
Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of fear,
Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.

Anna. May gracious heav'n pour the sweet balm of

peace

Into the wounds that fetter in your breal !
For earthly consolation cannot cure them.

Lady Ran. One only cure can heav'n itself below ;--

A grave-that bed in which the weary relt.
Wretch thatI am! Alas! why am I ob?
At every happy parent I repine !
How blest the mother of yon gallant NORVAL!
She for a living husband bore her pains,
And heard him blels her when a man was born:
She nurs'd her smiling infant on her brealt:
'Tended the child, and rcar'd the pleating boy:
She, with affeaion's triumph, saw the youth
In grace and comeliness firpafs his peers:
Whilst I to a dead husband bore a Ton,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.
* Anna. Alas! alas! why will you thus resume
Your grief afreh ? I thought that gallant youth
Would for a while have won you from your woe.
On him intent you gazed, with a look
Much more delighted, than your pen ive eye
Has deign'd on other objecs to bellow.

Lady Ran. Delighted fay'lt thou? Oh! even there

mine eye

Found soel for my life-confuming sorrow.
I thought, that had the son of DOUGLAS liv'd,
He might have been like this young gallant stranger,
Andpair'd with him in features and in Ihape,
In alt endowments, as in years, I deem,
My boy with blooming NORVAL might have number'
Whillt thus I nus'd, a spark from fancy fell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness
For this young (tranger, wand'ring from his ho:ne
And like an orphan call upon my care.
I will proted thee, (said I to myself)
With all my power, and grace with all my favour.

C a.

- /m ra. Sure heav'n will bless so gen'rous a rerolve.

You mull, my noble dame, exert your power:
You must awake: devices will be fram'd,
And arrows pointed at the brealt of NORVAL. X

Lady Ran. GLENALVON'S false and crafty-head will

work

Against a rival in his kinsman's love,
If I deter him not: I only can.
Bold as he is, G LENALVON will beware
How he pulls down the fabric that I raise.
'41 be the artilt of young NORVAL's fortune.
Tis pleating to admire: molt apt was I
To this affe&ion in my better days;
Though now I seem to you (hrunk up, retir'd
Within the narrow compass of my woe.
Have you not Sometimes seen an early flower
open its bud,' and spread its silken leaves,
To catch sweet airs, and odours to bellow;
Then, by the keen blalt nipt, pull in its leaves,
And, tho' still living, die to scent and beauty?
Emblem of me: afflition, like a storm,
Hath kill'd the forward blossom of my heart.

Enter GLENALVON.

Glen Whereismydeareftkinfman, noble RANDOLPH?
Lady Ran. Have you not heard, GLENALVON of the

base-

Glen. I have: and that the villains may not 'scape,

With a Itrong band I have begirt the wood:
If they lurk there, alive they (hall be taken,
And torture force from them th' important secret
WVhether some foe of RANDOLPH hir'd their swords,
Or if-

Lady Ran. That care becomes a kinsman's love.
J haveacounfelforGLENALvoN'sear. (ExitANNA.)

Glen. To him your counsels always are commands.
Lady Ran. I have not found so: thou art known to

me.

Glen. Known!
Lady Ran. And moaf certain is my cause of know-

ledge.

Glen. What do.you know by the molt blefled cross,
You much amize me. No created thing,

Yourself

Yourself except, durit thus accoi OLENAItvo.

Lady Ran. Is guilt so bold? and dolt thou make at

merit

Of thy pretended meekness? This to me,.
Who, with a gentleness which duty blames,-
Have hitherto conceal'd what, if divulg'd,
Would make thee nothing or, what's worse than thaty
An outcalt beggar, and unpitied too:
For mortals (hudder at a crime like thine..

Glen. Thy virtue awes me. First of womankind!

Permit me yet to fay, that the fond man
Whom love transports beyond ftrit virtue's bounds,
If he is brought by love to misery,
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlornr
Unpitied cannotbe. Pity's the alms
Which on such beggars freely is bellow'd:
For mortals know that love is (till their lord,
And o'er their vain resolves advances till:
As fire, when kindled by our (hepherds, moves
Thro' the dry heath before the fanning wind.

Lady Ran. Reserve these accents for some other ear.

To love's apology I lillen not.
Mark thou my words; for it is meet thou inould't.
His brave deliverer RANDOLPH here retains,
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well:
But, at thy peril, praftife aught againlt him:
Let not thy jealousy attempt to (hake
And loosen the good root he has in RANDO PHN;
Whose favourites I know thou halt supplanted.
Thou look'It at me, as if thou fain would'it pry
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech..
I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away,.
The friendless Itranger my protection claims:
His friend . am,. and be not ihouwhis foe. [Exit.-

S C E N E IIL

lManet GLENAI-VON.

Child that I was, to (tart at my own shadow,
And be the (hallow fool of coward conlciencei

C : XIam,

# ACT III. SCENE I.

I am not what I have been; what I should be.
The darts of destiny have almost pierc'd
My marble heart. Had ! one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I lhould conclude there was an arm above
That fought against me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch my self, the subtle snare I set.
Why, rape and murder are not simple means!
Th' imperfec rape to RANDOLPH gave a spouse;
And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fun from me;
And worR of all, a rival. Burning hell!
This were thy center, if I thought fle lov'd him!
'Tis certain she contemns me; nay commands me,
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'er me,
In his behalf. And hall I thus be brav'd
Curb'd, as the calls it, by dame chastity ?
Infernal fiends, if any fiends there are
More fierce than love, ambition, and revenge,
Rife up and fill my bosom with your fires
And policy remorseless! Chance may spoil
A sing!e aim; but perseverance mutt
Prosper at lalt. For chance and fate are words:
Pe liltive wisdom is the fate of man.
Darkly a project peers upon my mind,
Like the red moon when riling in the eafl,
Crofs'd and divided by ftrange-colour'd clouds.
I'll seek the flve who came with NORVAL hither,
And for his cowardice was spurned from him.
I've known a follower's rankled boloni breed
Venom molt fatal to his heedless lord. [Exit.
-~ .-*v --, -I - 4-S ^-¢ .--.. +- -.--..

ACT III. SCENE I.

A Ccurt, &c. as before.

Enter ANNA.
afrna. THY vaffils, Grief! great nature's order

break,

And

And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour.
Whilst Lady RANDOLPH sleeps I will walk forth,,
And talte the air that breaths on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers be! Ye Ministers
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,.
Angels and seraphs who delight in goodness!
Forsake your: skies, and to her couch descend!
There from her fancy chafe those dirmal forms-
Tlat haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm .
With images-celettial, such as please
The blelt above upon their golden beds;

Enter SERVANT.

Serv. One of the vile Affallins is fecut'd.

We found the villain lurking in the wood:
With dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not'
His first essay: these jewels were conceal'd
In the most secret places of his garment;
Belike the spoils of tonme that he has murder'd.

inna. Let me look on them. Ha! here is a heairt[

The chosen crest of DOUGLAS' valiant nime!
These are. no vulgar jewels. Guard the Wretch. '

[Exit ANNA.

Enter feromntl with a prifon:r. .

Prif. I know no more than does the child unborna
Of what you' charge me with.

fl Serv. You fay lb, fir!

But torture Coon flhall make you speak the truth.
Behold the Lady of Lord RANDOLPH conCes;
Prepare yourself to meet her just Revenge.

S -C E- E II. ' "3

Enter Lad. RANDOLPH and AKNA.o-

Anna. Summon your utmofi fortitude, before::

You speak with him. Your dignity, -your-fame,,
Are now at Rake. Think of the fatal (ecret,
Whichin a Moment from your lips may fly.

Lady Ran. Thou (halt behold me, with- a defcpratC'

heart, ..

t.

, C 3-
A - -

Hear how my infant perifh'd. See he kneels.

[The prifirer kneels.]
Prif. Heaven bless that countenance, so sweet and

mild:

A judge like thee makes innocence more bold.
O save me, lady! from these cruel men,
Who have auack'd and seiz'd me; who accuse
}Me of intended murder. As I hope
For mercy at the judgment-feat of God,
The tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
Is not more innocent than I of murder.

Lady Ran. Of this man's guilt what proof can ye

produce
if Serv. We found him lurking in the hollow

Glynn,

When view'd and call'd upon, amaz'd, he fled.
We overtook him, aad enquir'd from whence
And what he was: be said he came from far,
And was upon his journey to the camp.
Not fatisfed with this, we fearch'd his cloaths,
And found these jewels; whose rich value plead
Molt powerfully againit him. Hard he seems,
And old in vallainy. Permit us try
His ltubbornnefs againit the torture's force.

Pri. 0 gentle lady! by your lord's dear life!

Which there weak hands, I swear, did ne'er aflail;
And by your children's welfare, spare my age!
Let not the iron tear my antient joints,
And my gray hairs bring to the grave with pain.

Lady Ran. Account for these: thine own they cat-

not be:

For these, I fay: be Redfalt to the truth;
Deteded falsehood is molt certain death.

[ANNA removes the servants and returns.]

Pri, Alas! I'm fore beset! let never mans

For lake of lucre, fin against his foul !
Eternal julhce is in this motjult !
I, guiknefs now, malt former guilt reveal.

Lady Ran. O! ANNA hear!-once more I charge

thee speak
The truth direct: for these to me foretell

And

And certify a part of thy narration;
With which if the remainder tallies not,
An instant and a dreadful death abides thee.

Pri. Then, thus sdjtr'd, rl speak to you as jstl

As if you were the minitier of heaven,
Sent down to farch the secret fins of mun.

Some eighteen years ago, I rented land

Of brave Sir MALCOLM, then BAIARaso's lod;
But falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
All that I had, and then tum'd me and mine,
(Four helpiefi infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel by the river's fide
Receiv'd us: there hard labour, and the 4ull .
In filhing, which was formerly my sport, .: '
Supported life. Whilst thus we poorly liv'd,
One Itormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down, and loud and oft
The angry spirit of the water llriek'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
Of one in jeopardy. I rose, and ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach whatever floating thing the ftretn
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd; the perton jolt:
But looking fad and earnelt on the waters,
By the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round,
A balket: Coon I drew it to the bank,
And nettled curious there an infant ly.

Lady Ran. Was he alive ?
Pri. He was.
Lady Ran. Inhuman that thou art!
How couldit thou kill what waves and tempelfs fpi'd?,

Pri. I am not so unbuman.
Lady Ran. Didit thou not?
Anna. My noble miflrefs, you are mov'd too much r.

This man has not the aspec of Item murder r
Let him go on, and you, I hope, will hear
Good tidings of your kiufman's long loll child.

Pri. The needy man, who has known better days,.
One whom diltrefs has fpitelat. the world, -

Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds, as make the prosperous men'
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them.
And fich a man was I; a man declin'd,
Who saw no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have tonch'd that infant, with a hand of harm.

Lady Ran. Ha! dost thou fay so ? Then perhaps he

lives!

Pri. Not many days ago he was alive.
Lady Ran. O! God of heav'n! Did he then die so

lately ?

Pri. I did not fay he died; I hope he lives,

Not many days ago these eyes beheld
Him, flourithing in youth, and health, and beauty.

Lady Ran. Where is he now ?
Pri. Alas! I know not where.
Lady Ran. Oh fate ! I fear thee {till. Thou riddler,.

speak
Dire& and clear; else I will search thy foul.

Anna. Permit me, ever honour'd! Keen impatience,

Tho' hard to be reftrain'd, defeats itself.-
Pursue thy story with a faithful tongue,
To the last hour that thou didft keep the child.

Pri. Fear not my faith, tho' I muds speak my (hame,.

Wkhin the cradle, where the infant lay,
Was ftow'd a mighty {tore of gold and jewels;
Tempted by which we did resolve to hide,
From all the world, this wonderful event,
And like a peasant breed the noble child.
That none might mark the change of our estate,
We left the country, travell'd to the north,
Bought flocks and herdsj and gradually-brought forth.
Our secret wealth. But God's all-feeing eye
Beheld our avarice, and smote us fore.
For one by one all our own children-died,
And he, the-{tranger, sole remain'd the heir
Of what indeed was his. Fain then would I,
%Who with a father's fondners lov'd the boy)
Have trudsed him, now in the dawn of youth,
With his own secret: but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never would cpnCent,

Mi'aii

Mean while the fripling grew in years and beauty;
And, as we oft obferv'd, he bore himself,
Not as the offspring of our cottage blood;
For nature will break out: mild with the mild,
But with the froward he was fierce as ire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I let myself againit his warlike bent;
But all in vain: for when a desperate band
Of robbers from the savage mountains came -

Lady Ran. Eternal providence! What is thy nanme?
Pri. My name is NoRVAL: and my name he bears.
Lady Ran. 'Tis he; 'tis he himfelt! It is my son!

O Sovereign mercy! 'Twas my child I saw!
No wonder, ANNA, that my bosom burn'd.

Anna. Just are your transports: ne'erwas womanll

heart

Prov'd with such fierce extremes. High fated dame!
But yet remember that you are beheld
By servile eyes; your geflures may be seen
Impaflion'd, Ltrange; perhaps your words o'etheard. -

Lady Ran. Well dolt thou council, ANNA: Heaven

bellow
On me that wildom which my slate requires!

mnna. The moments of deliberation paTs,

And soon you mull resolve. This useful man
Muil be difmifs'd in safety, ere my lord
Shall with his brave delieverer return.

Pri. If I, amidst altonifhment and fear,

Have of your words and gestures rightly judg'd,
Thou art the daughter of my antient mailer;
The child I refcu'd from the flood is thine.

Lady Ran. With thee diflimulation now were vain.

I am indeed the daughter of Sir MALCOLM;
The child thou refcu'dlt from the flood is mine.

Pri. Blef be the hour that made me a poor mani
My poverty has fav'd my master's house!

Lady Ran. Thy words furprize me:.fure thou doll

not feign:

The tearltands in thine eye: such love from thee
SirMAicoLMM'shoufe deferv'd not; if aright
Thou told'fl the story of thy own diltrefh

Prif

Pri. Sir MALCOLM of our barons was the flower;

The fadet friend, the belt and kindelt matter.
But ah ! he knew not of my fad estate.
After that battle, where his gallant son,
Your own brave brother, fell, the good old lord
Grew desperate and reckleSs of the World;
And never, as-he erst was wont, went forth
To overlook the condu& of his frrvants.
By them -Iwas thrust out, and them I blame:
May-heaven so judge me as I judg'd my mailer!
And God To love me as I love his race!

Lady Ran. His race (hall yet reward thee. On thy

faith

Dependsthe fate of thy lov'd matier's house.
Rememb'reft thou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the clifts of Carron?

Pri. I remember

The cottage of the clifts.

Lady Ran. Tis that I mean:

There dwells a man of venerable age,
Who in my father's service spent his youth:
Tell him I sent thee, and with him remain,
'Till I (hall call upon thee to declare,
Before the king and nobles, what thou now
To me halt told. No more but this, and thou
Shalt live in honour all thy future days;
Thy Ton so long (hall call thee father still,
And all the land (hall bless the man, who fav'd
The son of DoUGLAS, and Sir MALCOLd'S heir.
Remember well my words: if thou (houldlt meet
Him whom thou call'it thy son, frill call him so;
And mention nothing of his nobler father.

Pri. Fear not that I Ihall mar so fair an harvest,

By putting in my fickle ere 'tis ripe.
Why did I leave my home and antient dame?
To find the youth, to tell him all I knew,
And make him wear there jewels in his arms;
Which might, I thought, be challenge'd and so bring
To light the secret of his noble birth.

.Lady RANDOiBgoeC t6wards the Servants.

Lady

Lady Ran. This man is not ,the aflafin you fuflpeaed,

Tho' chance combin'd some likelihoods againlt him.
He is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To their right owner, whom in baste he seeks.
'Tis meet that you Ihould put him on his way,
Since your mistaken zeal hath dragg'd him hither. ;

[Exeunt Stranger and Servants;

* S C. E NE II.

Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA. :
Lady Ran. My faithful ANNA! dolt thou mhare my

joy?

I know thou dost. Unparallel'd event!
Reaching from heaven to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings me to my son!
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father!
Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
For such a gift! What does my ANNA think
Of the young eaglet of a valiant nest}
How soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his fate had thrown him,
And tower'd up to the region of his fire.

Anna. How fondly did your eyes devour the boy!,

Mysterious nature, with the unseen cord
Of powerful inltindt, drew you to your own.

Lady Ran. The ready (tory of his birth bcliev'd \

Supprelt my fancy quite; nor did he owe
To any likeness my so sudden favour: ;
But now I long to fee his face again, ,
Examine every feature, and find out
The lineaments of DOUGLAS, or my own. ;
But molt of all, I long to let him know
Who his true parents are, to clasp his neck,
And tell him all the Itory of his father.

Anna. With wary caution you mutt bear yourselfs

In public, left your tenderness break forth,
And in observers stir conjecures Itrange.
For, if a cherub in the Ihape of a woman
Should walk this world, yet defamation would,
Like a vile cur, bark at the angel's train-
To-day the baron Itarted at your tears.

Lady

Lady R . He did so ANNA! well thy mifrefs

knows,

If the leat circumfiance, mote of offence,
Should touch the baron's eye, his fight would be
Withjealonuy diforder'd. But the more
It does behove me infant to declare
'Te birth of DOUGLAS, and aflert his rights.
This night I purpose with my son to meet,
Reveal the secret and consult with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does now, so look'd his noble Father,
Arra'd in nature's ease: his mein, his speech,
Were sweetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those trivial mortals who seem always wife.
But, when the matter match'd his mighty mind,
Uprof the hero: on his piercing eye
Sat observation; on each glance of thought
Deciion follow'd, as the thunder-bolt
Pursues the flah.

Anna. That demon haunts you Ltill:
Behold GLENALVON.

Lady Ran. Now I (hun him not.

This day I brav'd him in behalf of NORVAL;
Perhaps too far: at lead my nicer fears
For DouCGAS thus interpret.

Enter GLENALVON.

Glen. Noble dame!

The hov'ring Dane at last his men hath landed:
No band of pirates; but a mighty holt,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers;
To win a country, or to lose themselves.

Lady Ran. But whence comes this intelligence, GLE-

NALVON?

Glen. A nimble courier sent from yonder camp,

To batten up the chieftains of the north,
Inform'd me, as he past, that the fierce Dane
Had on the eastern coast of Lothian landed,
Near to that place where the fea-rock immense,
Amazing bars, looks o'er a fertile land.
Lady Ran. Then mutt this weltern army march to

join
The warlike troops that guard Edena's tow'rs.

Glen.

Glen. Beyond all question. If impairing time

Has not effac'd the image of a place,
Once perfed in my brealt, there is a wild
Which lyes to wellward of that mighty rock,
And seems by nature formed for the camp
Of water-wafted armies, whose chief firength
Lies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse:
If martial ikill direcs the Danilh lords,
There inacceflible their a. my lies
To our swift fcow'ring horse, the bloody field
Mull man to man, and foot to foot, be fought.

Lady Ran. How many mothers Ihall bewail their

sons!

How many widows weep their husbands slain!
Ye dames of Denmark ! ev'n for you I feel,
Who, sadly fitting on the tea beat Ifore,
Long look for lords that never Ihall return.

Glen. Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian sword

Widow'd the north. The children of the lain
Come, as I hope, to meet their fathers' fate.
The monster war, with her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are ohjedts suited to GLENALVON'sfoul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death;
Reproach more piercing than the pointed sword.

Lady Ran. I scorn thee not, but when I ought to

scorn;

Nor e'er reproach, but when insulted virtue
Against audacious vice asserts herfclf.
I own thy worth, GLENALVON; none more apt
Than I to praise thine eminence in arms,
And be the echo of thy martial fame.
No lodger vainly feed a guilty paflion:
Go and pursue a lawful mitrefs, glory,
Upon the Danish crefis redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the Ihield of RANDOLPH.

Glen. One instant flay, and hear an alter'd man.

When beauty pleads for virtue, vice.abafh'd
Flies its own colours, and goes o'er to virtue.
I am your convert; time will Ihew how truly:
Yet one immediate proof I mean to give.
That youth for whom your ardent zeal to-day,

D Some-.

Somewhat too haughtily, defy'd your slave,
Amidst the (hock of armies I'll defend,
And turn death from him, with a guardian arm.
Sedate by use, my bosom maddens not
At the tumultuous uproar of the field.

Lady Ran. At thus, GLENALVONS and I am thy

friend:

But that's thy leafi reward. Believe me, fir,
The truly generous is the truly wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblell.

Exit Lady RANDOLPH.

Glen [fl/s] Amen! and virtue is its own reward!-

I think that I have hit the very tone
In which (he loves to speak. Honey'd aflent
How pleating art thou to the taste of man,
And woman also ? flattery dire&
Rarely difgufls. They little know mankind
Who doubt its operation: 'tis my key,
And opes the wicket of the human heart.
How far I have succeeded now I knbw not.
Yet I incline to think her formy virtue
Is lull'd a while: 'tis her alone I fear:
Whilst (he and RANDOLPH live, and live in faith
And amity, uncertain is my tenure.
Fate o'er my head suspends disgrace and death,
By that weak hair, a peevilb female's will.
I am not idle: but the ebbs and flows
Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated.
-That save of NORVAL'S I have found most apt:
1 (hew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd bis foul
To fay and swear whatever I fugget.
NORVAL, I'm told, h-s that alluring look,
'Twixt man and woman, which I have obferv'd
To charm the nicer and fantaftick dames,
Who are, like lady RANDOIPH, full of virtue.
In raising RANDO1PabS jealousy I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom errs
U:ho thinks the worst he can of womankind.

ACT

# ACT IV. SCENE I.

ACT IV. SCENE I.

Flouri/h of TrumpetS.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH attended.
Lord Ran. Ummon an hundred Horse, by break of

3 day,
To wait our pleafare at the castle gate.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.
Lady Ran. Alas! my lord! I've heard unwelcome

new;
The Danes are landed.

Lord Ran. AV, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament elay,
Of some young knight refol*vd to break a spear,
And Itain with hfltile blood his maiden arms.
The Danes are landed: we mutl beat them back,
Or live the saves of Denmark.

Lady Ran. Dreadful times!
Lord Ran. The fenceless villages are all forsaken;

The trembling mothers, and their children lodg'd
In well-girt towers and castles; whilst the men
Retire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return.

Lady Ran. Immense, as fame reports, the D.mnilI

host !
Lord Ran. Were it as num'rous as loud fame re-

ports,

An army knit like ours wou'd pierce it thro
Brothers, that (hrink not from each others fide,
And fond companions, fill our warlike files:
for his dear offspring, and the wife he loves,

D z The

The husband, and the fearless father arm.
In vulgar breafs heroic ardor burns,
And the poor peasant mates his daring lord..

Lady Ran. Men's minds are temper'd like their

swords, for war:

Lovers of danger, on destruction's brink
They joy to rear erect their daring forms.
Hence, early graves; hence the lone widow's life;
And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age.
Where is our gallant guefi ?

Lord Ran. Down in the vale

I left him managing a fiery Reed,
Whose ftubbornefs had foil'd the frength and (kill
Of every rider. But behold he comes,
In earneR conversation with GLENALVON.

Enter NORVAL and GLENALVON.

GLENALVON ! with the lark arise; go forth,
And lead my troops that lye in yonder vale:
Private I travel the royal camp:
NORVAL, tbougoet with me. But fay, young man,
Where didf thB learn so to discourse of war,
And in such terms, as I o'erheard to-day?
War is no village science, nor its phrase
A language taught amongst the (hepherd swains.

Nory. Small is the (kill my lord delights to praise

In him he favours.-Hear from whence it came.
Benath a mountain's brow, the molt remote
And inacceflible by (hepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit liv'd; a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our wand'ring swains.
Auttere and lonely; cruel to himself,
Did they report him ; the cold earth his bed,
Water his drink, his food the (hepherds alms.
I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
With reverence and pity. Mild he spake,
And entring on discourse, such itories told
As made me oft revisit his fad cell,
For he had been a soldier in his youth;

And

And fought in famous battles, when the peersz
Of Europe, by the bold GODFREDO led,
Against th' usurping i'nfidel diSplay'd
The cross of Christ, and won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, And the fire
His speech iruck from me, the old man would fiake
His years away, and a& his young encounters:
Then, having shew'd his wounds,. he'd fit him down>,
And all the live.long day discourse of war.
To help my fancy, in the smooth green turf
He cut the figures of the marshall'd holts;
Defcrib'd the motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,.
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm.
For all that Saracen; or Chriltian knew
Of war's belt art, was-to this hermit known.

Lord Ran. Why did this foldier-in a defart hide
Those qualities, that shou'd have grac'd a camp?

Norv. That too at last I learn'd. Unhappy man L

Returning homewards by Melfna's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boilt'rous captain of the Tea
Faten'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fouglit:
The (tranger fell, and with his dying breath
Declar'd his name and lineage. Mighty God!
The soldier cried; my brother!' Oh! my brother!;

Lady Ran. His brother!'
N.orv. Yes; of the fame parentsborn;

His only brother. They exchang'e forgiveness :
And happy, in my mind, was he that died:
For many deaths has the survivor fffear'd. -
In the wild.defart on a rock.he fits,
Or on some nameless flream's untrodden banks,.
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times, alas! not in his perfe&t mind!
Holds dialogues with his lov'd brother's Ghof ;:
And oft each night forsakes his fillen couch,
To make fad orisons for him he flew.

Lady Ran To what mykterious woes are mortalts

born!
In this-dire tragedy were there no more.

D, 3 Unhappi

Unhappy persons? did the parents live?

Noro. No; they were dead: kind heav'n had closd'

their eyes

Before their son had (hed his brother's blood.
Lord Ran. Hard is his fate; for he was not to

blame!

There is a deliny in this flrange world,
Which oft decrees an undeserved doom!
Let fcboolmen tell us why. -From whence these

founds?

[Triumpets at a diflance ]

Ent:r an OFFICER.
Q9ffi;r. My Lord, the trumpets of the troops of

Lorn:
Their valiant leader hails the noble RANDOLPH.

Lord Ran. Mine ancient guet ! does he the warriors

lead?
Has Denmark rous'd the brave old knight to arms?

Officer. No; worn with warefare, he resigns the

sword.

His eldest hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord Ran. GLENALVON, go,

With hospitality's molt frong request
Entreat the chief.

[Exit GLENALVON.3

Officer. My lord, requefis are vain.

He urges os, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foes approach.

Lord Rcn. May vitory fit on the warrior's plume!

Braved of men! his flocks and herds are safe;
Remote from war's alarms his palfures lye,
By mountains inaccessible fecur'd:
Yet foremost he into the plain descends,
Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the ancient worId:
Contemners they of indolence and gain;
But flill for love of glory, and of arms,
Prone to. encounter peril, and to lift

AgainSl

Against each strong antagonist the spear.
I'll go and press the hero to my breast.

[Exit RANDOLPH.]

Manent Lady RANDOLPH and NORVAL.
Lady Ran. The soldier's lofiinefs, the pride and

pomp

Invelling awful war, NORVAL, I fee,
Transport thy youthful mind.

Norv. Ah! should they not?

Blest be the hour I left my father's house!.
I might have been a shepherd all my days,
And stole obscurely to a peasant's grave.
Now, if I live, with mighty chiefs I (land;
And, if I fall, with notle dull I lye. '

Lady Ran. There is a gen'rous spirit in thy breast,

That could have well sustainMd a prouder fortune.
This way with me; under yon spreading beech,.
Unseen, unheard, by human eye or ear,,
I will amaze thee with a wond'rous tale.

Norv. Let there be danger,. lady,. with the secret,

That I may hug it to my grateful heart,
And prove my faith. Cbmmand my sword, my life:
These are the sole pofleffions of poor NORV.A L.

Lady Ran. Know'ft thou these gems?
Norv. Durlt I believe mine eyes
I'd fay I knew them, and'they were my father's..

Lady Ran. Thy father's fay'it thou! ah! they were

thy father's!

Noorv. I saw them once, and'curioufly enquir'd

Of both my parents whence such splendour came?
But I was check'd, and more could never learn..

Lady Ran. Then learn of me thou art not NORV.A L'S

son.

Norv. Not NORVAL'S font
Lady Ran. Nor of a Ihepherd sprung.
Norv. Lady, who am I then?
Lady Ron: Noble thou art;

For noble was thy fire!
Norv. I will believe

C 4. 0!

O! tell me farther! Say who was my fther?

Lady dan. DOUGLAS!
VNeor Lord DOVGLAS, whom to day I saw?'
Lady Ran. His younger brother.
Nor. And in yonder camp?'
Lady Rn. Alas!
NIer. You makeme tremble-Sighs and tears!
Lives my brave father?

Lady Ran. Ah! too brave indeed!
He fell in battle ere thyself was born.

Norv. Ah me unhappy! ere I saw the light?

But does my mother live? I may conclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been sorrow.

Lady Ran. She lives; but waltes- her life in constant

woe,
Weeping her hufland slain, her infant loll.

lNro. You that are fkill'd so well in the fad Itory

Of my nhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their detiny, now have compallion
Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd.-
O! tell me who, and where my mother is!
Opprefby base world, perhaps she bends
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief;
And deolate implores of beav'n, the aid
Her son (hould give. It it, it mut be so--
Your countenance confefes that she's wretched.
O! tell me her condition! Can the sword -
Who Ihall refitl me in a parent's cause

Lady Ran. Thy virtue ends her woe.-My son, my

son!
I am thy Mother, and the wife of DoU GLAS !

[Fali upn hir neck.
Norr. O heav'n and earth, how wond'rous is my

fate;
Art thou my mother? Ever let me kneel!

Lady Ran. Image of Dou6L.;a Fruit of fatal;

love!

All that I owe thy fire I pay to thee.
- Norv. Refpe" and admiration still poflefs me,
Checking the love and fondnefs-of a son.
let I was filial to my humble parents.

But

But did my fire surpass the reft of men,
As thou excelleft all of womankind ?

Lady Ran. Arise, my son! In me thou dotl behold

The poor remains of beauty once admir'd:
The autumn of my days is come already;
For sorrow made my summer haste away,
Yet in my prime I equal'd not thy father:
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet Sometimes
Liker the dQve's, and as he pleas'd, he won
All hearts with fofinefs, or with spirit aw'd.

Norv. How did he fall ? Sure 'twas a bloody field
When DOUGLAS died.-- 0 I have much to alk!

Lady Ran. Hereafter thou {halt hear the lengthen'd

tale

Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
At present this: Thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder caflle, and the wide domains
Which now Lord RANDOLPH, as my husband, holds,:
But thou (halt not be wrong'd; I have the power
To right thee (till: Before the king I'll kneel,
And call Lord DOU LAS to protet his blood.;

Norv. The blood of DOUGLAS will protect itself.
Lady Ran. But we {hall need both friends and favour,

boy

To wref thy lands and lordship from the gripe
Of RAND 'LPH and his kinsman. Yet I think
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
My life incline the virtuous to believe.

Norv. To be the son of DOUGLAS is to me

Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in the field I'll seek for fame and fortune.

Lady Ran. Thou doll not know what perils and in-

jufice

Await the oor man's valour. O! rmy son!
The noblelt blood in all the land's abalh'd,
Having no lacquay but pale poverty.
Too long hafl thou been thus attended, DquGlAs L
Too long hall thou been deem'd a peasant's child..
The wanton heir of some inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in the youthful sports;
Whillt thy indignant spirit fwell'd in vain !

Such

Such contumely thou no more (halt bear:
But how I purpose to redress thy wrongs
Moul be heister told. Prudence directs
That we should part before yon chiefs return.
Retire, and from thy rottick follower's band
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, diltated before
This casual opportunity arose
Of private conference. It's purport mark;
For as I there appoint we meet again.
Leave me, my Con! and frame thy manners still
To NORVAL'S, not to noble DOUGLAS' Rate.

Nerv. I will remember. Where is NoRVAI now?
That good old man.

Lady Ran. At hand conceal'd he lies,

An ufefnl witness. But beware, my son,
Of yon GLENALVON; in his guilty breast
Resides a villain's (brewdnefs, ever prone
To false conjecure. He hath griev'd my heart.

Nrov. Has he indeed? Then let yon faire GLENAL-

vow
Beware of me,

[Exit DOUGLAS.

Manet Lady RANDOLPH.

Lady Ran. There burst the fmothez'd flame ?

0! thou all righteous and eternal King!
Who father of the fatherless art call'd,
Prote&t my Ton!- Thy inspiration, Lord!
Hath fill'd his bosom with that sacred fire,
Which in the brealts of his forefather's burn'd:
Set him on high like them, that he may Ihine
The liar and glory of his native land!
Then let the minister of death descend,
And bear my willing spirit to its place.
Yonder they come. How do bad women find
Unchanging aspects to conceal their guilt?
When I by reason, and byjiftice urg'd,
Full hardly can diflemble with there mene
la nature's pious cause.

Enter

Enter Lord RANDOLPi and GtlNiwom.

Lord Ran. Yon gallant chief, .
Of arms enamour'd, all repose disclaims .

Lady Ran. Benot, my Lord, by his zxample firay':

Arrange the bulinefs of to-morrow now,
And when you enter, speak of war no more.

[Exit Lady RANmBOLi

Manent Lord RANDOLPH and GUNALYVON.
Lord Ran. Tis so by heav'n! het miep blet voice,

her eye,
And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

Glen. He parted from her now: ehind the m~tst,
Amonglt the trees, I saw him glide along.

Lord Ran. For fad fequelter'd virtue he's renown'd!
Glen. Molt true, my Lord.
Lord Ran. Yet this dilfinguilh'd dame

Invites a youth, the acquaintance of a dayj
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This afignation, (shews a letter) the alafd i freedi-
Her manifest affection for the youth,
Might breed suspicion in a husband's brain,
Whose gentle comfort all for love had wedded:
Much more in mine. MATILDk-never lov'd me.
Let no man, after me, a woman wed,
Whose heart he knows he has not; though Ihe brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry:
For let her seem, like the night's :hadowy queen,
Cold and contemplative:-He cannot trult her:
She may, Ihe will, bring lhame and forrowon him;
The worlt of sorrow, and the wortt oflhames!

Glen. Yield not, my Lord, to such affllsing

thoughts;

But let the spirit of an husband Deep,
'Till your own senses make a sure conclusion.
This billet must to blooming NORVAL go:
At the next turn awaits my trulty spy;
'11 give it him refitted for his matter.

In

In the close thicket take your secret fland;
The moon (hines bright, and your own eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

Lord Ran. Thou dost counsel well.
Glen. Permit me now to make one flight efiay.

Of all the trophies which vain mortals boast,
By wit, by valour, or by wisdom won,
The firt and fairet, in a young man's eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Successful love
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind;
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Lord Ran. And what avails this maxim
Glen. Much, my lord !

Withdraw a little: I'll accost young NoavAL,
And withironical derisive counsel
Explore his spirit. If he is no more
Than humble NoaTAL, by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as he is, he'll ihrink altonifh'd from me:
But if he be the favourite of the fair,
Lov'd by the frfr of Caledonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.

Lord Ran. 'lis ihrewdly thought.
Glen. When we grow loud, draw near. But let my

lord
His riling wrath refirain. [Exit RANDOLPH.

Ilanet GLEN ALYON.

Glen. 'Tis strange by heav'n!

That (he ihould run full tilt her fond career,
To one so little known. She too that feem'd
Pure as the winter fiream, when ice embofs'd
Whitens it course. Even I did think her chafle,
Whose charity exceeds not. Precious sex!
Whose deeds lascivious pass GLENALVON'S thoughts!

NOaVAL appeats.

His port I love; he's in a proper mood
To chide the thunder, if at him it roar'd.
Has NovYuL seen the troops!

Norv.

Norv. The setting fun,

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale,
And as the warriors mov'd, each polish'd helm,
Corflet, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at it's top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they feem'd,
An holt angelic, clad in burning arms.

Glen. Thou talk'lt it well; no leader of our holt,
In founds more lofty, fpeaks.of-glorious war.

Norv. If I Ihall e'er acquire a leader's name,

My speech will be lets ardent. Npvelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itself freely; since no part is mine
Of praise, pertaining to the great in arms.

Glen. You wrong yourself, brave fir; your martial

deeds

Have rank'd you with the great: but mark me, NR v a L;
Lord RA NDOLPHa' favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know there soldiers, counfel'you.
Give them all honour; seem not to command;
FJfe they will fcarcelj brook your late sprung power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

Norv. Sir, I have been accultom'd all my days'

To hear and speak the plain and timple truth:
And tho' I have been told, that there are men
Who borrow friendlhip's to tongue speak their scorn,
Yet.in such' language I am little ftill'd.
Therefore I thank GLENA LVON for'his council,
Altho' it founded harlhly. Why remind
Me of my birth obscure? Why slur my power
With such contemptuous terms?

Glen. I did not mean
To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

Norv. -Myy pride!'
Glen. Suppress it as you wilh to prosper.

Your pride's excefive. Yet forR.ANDoLPtH's fake
I will not leave you to it's ralh direction.
If thus ybu swell, and ftown' at high-born men,
Will high-born men endure a {hepherd's fcotn?

Norv. A (hepherd's scorn!

"**~~

F,*
R~ C/~ceG,i

Glen. Yes; if you presume

To bend on soldiers there disdainful eyes,
As if you took the rneafure of their minds,
And said in secret, you're no match for me;
What will become of you?

Noro. If this were told!--. [fide.
Halt thou no fears for thy prefumptuousfelf!

Glen. Ha! Dolt thou threaten me?
Ncrv. Didft thou not hear?
Glen. Unwillingly I did; a nobler foe
Had not been queltion'd thus. But such as thee-

Norv. Whom dost thou think me?
Glen. Norval.
Ncrv. So I am-
And who is NORVAL in GLENALVON'S eyes?

Glen. A peasant's ton, a wandering beggar-boy;
At belt no more, even if he speaks the truth.

Norv. False as thou art, dolt thou fufpeat my truth
Glen. Thy truth' thou'rt all a lye; and false as hell
Is the vain-glorious tale thou told'ft to RANDOLPH.

Norv. if I were chain'd, unarm'd, and bedrid old,

Perhaps I Ihould revile: But as I am
I have no tongue to rail. The humble NoRVAL
Is of a race, who Irive not but with deeds.
Did I not fear to freeze thy thallow valour,
And make thee fink too soon beneath my sword,
I'd tell thee-what thou art. I know thee well.

Glen. Dolt thou not know GtENALVO., born to

command
Ten thousand slaves like thee?

Norv. Villain, no more:

Draw and defend thy life. I did defig
To have defy'd thee in another cause:-
But heaven accelerates it's vengeance on thee.
,Now for my own and Lady RANDOLPH'S wrongs.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.
Lord Ran. Hold, I command you both. The man

that stirs
Makes me his foe.

Ncrvr.

Norv. Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly founded, noble RANDOLPH.

Glen. Hear him, my lord; he's wond'rous conde.
scending!
Mark the humility of (hepherd NORVAt!'

Norv. Now you may fcoffln safety.

. (Sheaths lisfword.)

Lord Ran. Speak not thus,

Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

Norv. Nay,' my good lord, tho' I revere you much,

My cause I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I blulh to speak; I will not, cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words that 1 from him have borne.
To the liege lord of my dear native land
I owe a fubjea's homage: but ev'n him
And his high arbitration I'd reject.
Within my bosom reigns another lord;
Honour, folejudge and umpire of itself.
If my free speech offend you, noble RANDOIr ,
Revoke your favours, and let NORVAL go
Hence as he came, alone, but not difhonour'd.

Lord Ran. Thus far I'll mediate with impartial

voice:

The antient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
Suspend your purpose, 'till your country's arms
Repel the bold invader: then decide
The private quarrel.

Glen. I agree to this.
Norv. And I.

Enter SERVANT.

Sere. The banquet waits.
Lord Ran. We come. [Exit RANDOLPHi,.
Glen, Norval,

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of RANDOLPH.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkl'd hate,
Shall ltain my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow;

E 2 Nor

# ACT V. SCENE I.

Nor let our firife disturb the gentle dame.

Vcrv. Think not so lightly, Sir, of my resentment:
When we contend again,- our strife is mortal.

ACT V. SCENE I.

The Wood.

Enter DOUGLAS.

H IS is the place, the centre of the grove.
Here Itands the oak, the monarch of the wood.

How sweet and solemn is this mid-night scene!
The silver moon, unclouded, holds her way
Thro' Ikies where I could count each little ilar.
The fanning weft wind scarcely stirs the leaves;
The river, rulhing o'er its pebbled bed,
Imposes silence with a tilly found.
In such a place as this, at such an hour,
If anceflry can be in aught believ'd,
Deftending spirits have convers'd with man,
And told the secrets of the world unknown.

Enter Old NORVAL.
Old Norv. 'Tis he. But what if he lhould chide me

hence?
His juR reproach I fear.

[DOUGLAS turns and fees him.

Forgiv, forgive,

Can'st thou forgive the mda, the selfish man,
Who bred Sir MALCOLM'S heir a (hepherd's son.

Doug. Kneel not to me: thou art my father fill:

Thy wish'd for presence now compleats my joy.
Welcome to me, my fortunes thou shalt Ihare,
And ever honour'd with thy DOUGLAS live.

Old

Old Norv. And do'lt thou call me father? 0 my son!:

I think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
Which in the wilderness so long conceal'd
The blossom of thy youth.

Doug. Not worse the fruit, a

That in the wilderness the bloflom blow'd.
Amongst the (hepherds, in the humble cote,'
I learn'd rome leflons, which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; and, when my vafLls bow,
NORVA.L (hall smooth the crered pride of DoUGL.S. .

Ncrv. Let me but Eve to fee thine exaltation!

Yet grievous are my fears. O leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

Dotig. Why Ihould I leave them ?
Norv. Lord RANDOLPH and his kinfaian seek your

life.

ADug. How know't thou that?
Ncrv. I will inform you how.

When evening came, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And fondly trod in each accuftom'd path
That to the castle leads. Whilst thus I rang'd,
I was alarm'd with unexpeced founds,
Of earnefd voices. On the persons came:
Unseen I lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other as they talkd, lord RANDOLPH this,.
And that GLENALVON: still of you they spoke,.
And of the lady: threatning was their speech,
Tho' but imperfectly my ear could hear it.
'rwas strange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;.
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Doug. Revenge! for what?
Notv. For being what you are;

Sir MALCOLM'S heir: how else have you offended.:
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there fat muling how I belt might find
Means to inform you of their wicked purpose,.

E 3 B't

But I could think of none: at last perplex'd
I issued forth, encompafing the tower
With many a weary flep and wilhful look.
Now providence hath brought you to my fight,
Let not your too courageous rpirit tcorn
The caution which I give.

Dwg. I scorn it not.

My mother warn'd me of GLENALVON'S bareners:
But I will not fufp.& the noble RANDOLPH.
Tn our encounter with the vile aflfllins,
I mark'd his brave demeanor: him I'll trust.

Ncro. I fear you will too far.
Dcug. Here in this place

I wait my mothei's coming: The (hall know
Whlat thou hass told: her counsel I will follow?
And cautiousever are a mothet's counsels.
You mull depart; your presence may prevent
Oaur Interview.

Norv. My blefing reft upon thee?
0 may heav'n's hand, which fav'd thee from the

wave,

And from the sword of foes, be near thee fill;
Turning mischance, if aught'hangs o'er thy head,
All upon mine!

($xit Old NoRVA.

Doug. He loves me like a parent;

And mult not, Ihall not lose the son he loves,
Altho' his son has found a nobler father.
F.ventful day, how haft thou cihang'd my nate!
Once on the cold, and winter'lhaded fide
Of a bleak hill, mischance had rooted me,
Never to thrive, child of another foil:
Transplanted now to the gay funny vale,
Like the green thorn of May, my fortune flowers.
Ye glorious stars! high heav'n's resplendent host!
To whom I oft have of my lot complain d,
lear and record my foul's unalter'd wish !
Dead or alive, let me but be renown'd!
May heav'n inspire rome fierce gigantic Dane.
To give a bold defiance to our hol !
Before he speaks it out I will accept;

Like

Like DovOLAS conquer, or like DouG LA die.'

Etcr IAdysRAwnor1 ..

Lady Ran. My son! Ihearda voice. ..
Doug. The voice was mine.
Lady Ran. Didit thou complain alq.d to nature~s ear,

That thus in dusky shades, at mid-night houss,
By Itealth the mother and the Ton hould meet'.

Doug. No: on this happy day, lis better
bins

day,
My thoughts and words are all of .hpe and oy.

Lady Ran. Sad fear and melancholy.lill 'divide

The empire of my brealt with bope.and joy.
Now hear what I advise.

Doug. Firit, let me tell
What may the tenor of your counsel change.

Lady Ran My heart forebodes .ome evil I
Doug. 'ris not.good-

At eve, unseen by RANDOLPH and GLEbAL.,vog,
The good old NORVAL in the grove o'erbeard
Their conversation: oft they mention'd me:
With dreadful threatnings; you they boretimes naan. '
'rwas (trange, they said, a woaderful dikcovtry;
Andever and anon they vow'drevceqge.

Lady Ran. Defend us, gracious God! we are 'be

tray'd:

They have found out the secret of thy birth .
It mull be so. That is the great discovery.
Sir MALCOLM'S heir is come to claimJis own ;
And they will be reveng'd. -Perhaps even nows
Arm'd and prepar'd for murder, they but wait
A darker and more silent hour to break
Into the chamber where they think thou fleep'fl.
This moment, this, heav'n hath ordain'd to iavy

thee!
Fly to the camp, my son!

Doug. And leave you here ?

No: -to -the catle let us go together,
Call up the anticnt servants of your houre,

Who

Who in their youth did eat your father's bread;
Then tell them loudly that I am your son.
if in the breaits of men one spark remains
Of sacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your cause will arm. I alk but few
To drive those spoilers from my father's house.

Lady Ran. 0 nature, nature ! what can check thy

force?

Thou genuine offspring of the daring DouGSAS!
But rulh not on deltruftion: save thyself,
And I am safe. To me they mean no harm;
Thy Ray but risks thy precious life in vain.
That winding path conducts thee to the river.
Cross where thou feeft a broad and beaten way,
Which running eastward leads thee to the camp.
Inflant demand admittance to Lord Dou GLAS.
Shew him thefejewels, which his brother wore.
Thy look, thy voice, will make him feel the truth,
Which I by certain proof will soon confirm.

Doug. I yield me and obey: but yet my heart

Bleeds at this parting. Something bids me flay
And guard a mother's life. Oft have I read
Of wond'rous deeds by one bold arm atchiev'd.
Our foes are two; no more: let me go forth,
And fee if any Ihield can guard GLENALVON.

Lady Ran. It thou regard'ft thy mother, or rever'ft

Thy father's mem'ry think of this no more.
One thing I have to fay before we part:
Long wert thou loft; and thou art found, my child;
In a most fearful season. War and battle
I have great cause to dread Too well I fee
Which way the current of thy temper sets :
To day I've found thee. Oh ! my long loft hope !
If thou to giddy valour giv'It the reign,
To morrow I may lose my son for ever.
The love of thee, before thou faw'ft the light,
Snltain'd my life when thy brave father fell.
If thou (halt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this ware world i my son, remember me !

Doug. What halt I fay ? how can I give you corn.

fort "

The

The God of battles ds my life dispose
As may be best for you! for whole dear fake
I will not bear myself as I refolv'd.
But yet, confider, as no vulgar name
That which. I boast founds amongst martial men.
How will inglorious caution suit my claim.
The polt of fate unfhrinking I maintain.
My country's foes mutt witness who I am.
On the invader's heads, I'll prove my birth,
'Till friends and foes confess the genuine !lrain.
If in this Itrife I fall, blame not your Ton,
Who if he lives not honour'd, mulf not live.

Lady Ran. I will not utter what my bosom fedls.

Too well Ilove that valour which I warn.
Farewel, my Con! my courifels are but vain.

[E#mracing.

And as high heaven hath will'd it all mula be. .[f¥rflis.
Lady Ran. Gaze not on me, thou wilt 'mi0akle tbi

path;
1'll point it out again.

[JufI as tey arefeparating, en;lrfroem the woeod

Lord RANDOLPH and GL£NAL YVON..

Lord Ran. Not in her presence.
Now -

Glen. I'm prepar'd.
Lord Ran: No: I command thee flay.

I go alone: it never (hall be said
That I took odds to combat mnortal man.
The noblelt vengeance is the molt compleat.

[Exit Lord RANDOH.L]
[GLENALVON makesJome fep to the am ltde ofthe

stage, listens and f/eaRs.]

Glen. Demons of death come fettle on my fwvord,

And to a double faughter guide it hom e!
The lover and the husband both mult die.

[Lord RANDOLPH beh'iA{4 the fenetJ.

Lord Ran. Draw, Villain! draw.
Doag. Aflail me not, Lord RANDoLPH;
Not as thou lov'ft thy self.

[C¢laEhig o 'fN ourds.3
- [GLENA^VON ranonag eit.1

Fvrsi

Now is the time.
Enter Lady RANDOLPH at the opposite fde oftheJiage,

faint and brca:hlefi.
Lady Ran. Lord RANDOLPH hear me; all shall be

thine own:
Botfpare! O spare my son!

Enter DOUGLAS with a sword in each hand.

My mother's voice!
I can prote& thee Rill.

Lady Ran. He lives, he lives:

For this, for this to heav'n enternal praise!
But sure I saw thee fall.

Dorg. It was GLENALVON.

Jnuf as my arm had mafter'd RANDOLPH'S sword,
The villain came behind me: but I few him.

Lady Ran. Behind thee! Ah; thou'rt wounded! 0

my child,
Howl pale thou look'Rf! and (hall I lose thee now!?

Doug. Do not despair: I feel a little faintness;
I hope it will not last.

(Leans upcn bis sword.]

Lady Ran. There is no hope!

And we mutt part! the hand of death is on thee!
0 my beloved child! 0 DOUGLAS, DOUGLAS !

[Don GLAS growing more and more faint.
Doug. Too soon we part: I have not long been

DOVGLAS.

O detiny! hardly thou deallt with me:
Clouded and hid, a tranger to myself,
Ii low and poor obscurity I liv'd.

Lady Ran. Has heav'n preferv'd thee for an end like

this?

Doug. 0 had I fallen as my brave fathers fell,

Turning with fatalarm the tide of battle !
Like them I Ihould have fmil'd and welcom'd death.
But thus to perilh by a villain's hand !
Cut off fromnaure's and-from glory's course,
Which never mortal was so fond to run.

Lady

Lady Ran. Hear juRice! hear! are there the fnrits

of virtue? [DOUGLAS fills.]
Doug. Unknown I die; no tongue Ihall speak of

me.-

Some noble spirits, judging by themselves,
May yet conjecture what I might have prov'd,
And think life only wanting to my fame:
But who Ihall comfort thee?

Lady Ran. Despair! despair!
Doug. 0 had it pleas'd high heaven to let me live

A little while !- my eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apace! my mother- [Dies.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH andANNA.
Lord Ran. Thy words, the words of truth, have.

pierc'd my heart.

I am the htain of knighthood and of arms.
Oh! if my brave deliverer survives
The traitors sword -

Anna. Alas! look there, my lord.
Lord Ran. The mother and her son! How curR' I

am!

Was I the cause ? No: I was not the cause.
Yon matchless villain did seduce my foul
To frantic jealousy.

.nna. My lady lives:

The agony of grief hath but fuppreft
A while her powers.

Lord Ran. But my deliverer's dead!

The world did once esteen Lord RANDOLPH well,'
Sincere of heart, for spotless honour fam'd:
And, in my early days, glory I gain'd
Beneath the holy banner of the cross.
Now palt the noon of life, shame comes upon me;
Reproach, and infamy, and public hate, -
Are near at hand: for all mankind will think
That RANDOLPH barely lab'd Sir MALCOLN'S heir.

[Lady RANDOLPH recovering.,
Lady Ran. Where am I now? fill in this wretched

world!

Grief

GCief cannot break a heart so hard as mine.
My youth was worn in anguish: but youth's strength,
With hopes afiftance, bore the brunt of fdrrow;
And train d me on to be the object now,
On which omnipotence displays itself,
Making a fpedacle, a tale of me,
To awe it's vasal, man.

Lord Ran. 0 misery!

Amidst thy raging grief I must proclaim
My innocence.

Lady Ran. Thy innocence!
Lord Ran. My guilt
Is innocence, compared with what thou think'ft it.

Lady Ran. Of thee I think not: what have I to

do

Withthee, orany thing? My soh! my son!
My beautiful! my brave! how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy valour! my fond heart
O'erfow'd this day with transport, when I thought
Of growing old amidR a race of thine,
Who might make up to me their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and my hutband's name:
Now all my hopes are dead! A little while
Was I a wife! a mother not so long!
What am I now? - I know. - But I (hall be
That only whilst I please; for such a son
And such a husband make a woman bold.

[Runs cut.
Lord Ran. Follow her, ANNA: I myself would

follow,
But in this rage Lhe must abhor my presence.

[Exit ANNA.

Enter Old NORVAL.
Norv. I heard the voice of woe; heaven guard my

child!

Lord Ran. Already is the idle gaping croud,

The fpitefl vulgar, come to gaze on RANDOLPH.
Begone.

Norv. I fear thee not. I will not not go.

Here

Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplices Lord,
With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help
To crulh down to the ground this lovely plants
O noblest youth that ever yet was born !
Sweetest and best, gentlest and bravest spirit,
That ever blelt the world ! Wretch that I am,
Who saw that noble spirit swell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it!
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do thee justice, and reveal the secret,
Which timely known, had raisd thee far above
The villain's snare. Oh ! I am punifh'd now!
There are the hairs that should have ftrew'd the ground,
And not the locks of DOUGLAS.

[Tears his hair, and throws

him/elf upon the ground.

Lord Ran. I know thee now: thy boldness forgive t

My crest is fallen. For thee I will appoint
A place of reft, if grief will let thee relt.
I will reward, altho' I cannot punish.
Curdt, curit GLENALVON, he efcap'd too well,
Tho' slain and bassl'd by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the last,
Cursing his conqueror, the felon dy'd.

Enter ANNA.

Anna. My Lord, my Lord!
Lord Ran. Speak: I can hear of horror.
Aanna Horror indeed!
Lord Ran. MATILDA i
Anna. Is no more!

She ran, Ihe flew like lightening up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice she gain'd, }
Beneath whole low'ring top the river falls
Ingulph'd in rifted rocks; thither (he came,
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down-

Lord Ran. 'Twas I! alas! 'twas I

That fill'd her breast with fury; drove her down
The precipice of death ! Wretch that I am i-

F Anna.

4nna. 0 had you seen her last despairing look!

Upon the brink Ite food, and calt her eyes
Down on the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heaven, seeming to fay,
Why am I forc'd to this ? She plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord Ran. I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the passion of my foul.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
There wounds the gratitude of RANDOLPH gave.
They speak aloud, and with the voice of fate
Denounce my doom. I am refolvd. I'll go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me turn aside mull threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy miltrefs, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
With cost and pomp upon their funerals wait:
For RANDoLPa hopes he never [hall return.

F I N IS,

< ":-.

/1 \

# EPILOGUE. Spoken by Mr. BARRY.

EPILOGU G U E

Spoken by Mr. B A R.R Y.
A N Epilogue Iask'd; but not one word

Our bard will write. He vows 'sis mop abfur4

With comic wit to contradia the strain
Of tragedy, andmake yourforroow vain.
Sadly he fays that pity is the befl
The noble/s pajfon of the human breafl:
For when it sacred freams the heart o'er-flow,
Inguihes pleasure with the tide of woe;
And when its waves retire, like thole of Nile,
They leave behind themfuch a goldenfoil,
That there the virtues without culture grow,
There thefweet blossoms of affeiion blow,
These were his words;-void of delusive art
I felt them; for he spoke them from his heart.
Nor will I now attempt, with wity folly,
To chace away celeflial melancholy.
