DOUGLAS:

A
TRAGEDY.

As it is ated at the
THE AT R ES

IN
GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND.

.nt
Non ego fum vates, fed prifci confcius xevi.

By the Rev. Mr. H U M E.

To which are prefixed,
I. AnAddrefs to the Author. I Rev. Prelbytery of Edin-

By David Hume, Efq; i burgh.
Author of the History of III. Copy of a Declaration,
Great Britain, &c. s

t by the Rev. Prelbytery
iII. Copy of an Admonition of Glasgow.

and Exhortation, by the

D U BLIN:

Printed for G. FAULKNER, J. HOEY, P. WILSON,
J. EXSHAW, A. JAMES, M.WILLIAMSON, and

W. SLEATER. M,DCC,LVII.

# An Address from DAVID HUME, Esq; Author of the History of Great - Britain, &c. to the Rev. Mr. HUME, Author of DOUGLAS, a Tragedy.

(3)
A· AddrefJs from DAVID HUME, Efq; Autbor of the

Hiffory of Great-Britain, &c. to the Rev. Mr. HUME,
Author of DOUGLAS, a Tragedy.

My dear Sir,
IT was the Pratice of the Antients to address their

Compositions only to Friends and Equals, and to

render their Dedications Monuments of Regard and
Affetion, not of Servility and Flattery. In those Days.
of ingenious and candid Liberty, a Dedication did
Honour to the Person to whom it was addressed, with-
out degrading the Author. If any Partiality appeared
towards the Patron, it was at least the Partiality of
Friendship and Affection.

Another Instance of true Liberty, of which antient

Times can alone afford us an Example, i. the Liberty.
of Thought, which engaged Men of Letters, however
different in their abtract Opinions, to maintain a mutu-
al Friendship and Regard; and never to quarrel about
Principles, while they agreed in Inclinations and Man-
ners. Science was often the Subjet of Disputation,
never of Animosity. Cicero, an Academic, addressed
his philosophical Treatises, sometimes to Brutus, a
Stoic; Sometimes to Atticus, an Epicurean.

I have been seized with a strong Desire of renewing

these laudable Pratices of Antiquity, by addressing the
following Dissertations to you, my good Friend: For
such I will ever call and esteem you, notwithstanding
the Opposition which prevails between us, with Re-
gard to many of our speculative Tenets. These Diffe-
rences of Opinion I have only found to enliven our
Conversation; while our common Paflion for Science
and Letters served as a Cement to our Friendlhip. I
still admired your Genius, even when I imagined that
you lay under the Influence of Prejudice; and you
sometimes told me, that you excused my Errors, on,

A a Account

(4 )

Account of the Candour and Sincerity, which, you
thought accompanied them.

But to tell Truth, it is less my Admiration of your

fine Genius, which has engaged me to make this Ad-
dress to you, than my Esteem of your Charader and.
my Affection to your Person. That Generosity of
Mlind which ever accompanies you; that Cordiality of
Friendfsip, that spirited Honour and Integrity, have
long inrerefted me iorongly in your Behalf, and have
made me desirous, that a Monument of our mutual
Amity should be publickly erected, and, if poflible, be
preserved to Posterity.

I own too, that 1 have the Ambition to be the first

who shall in public express his Admiration of your noble
Tragedy of Ds/,lans; one of the most interesting and
pathetic Pieces, that was ever exhibited on any Theatre.
sohould I give it the Preference to the Merope of Massei,
and to that of Voltaire, which it resembles in its sub-
iecL; ihould I affirm, that it contained more Fire and
Spirit than the former, more Tenderness and Simplici-
ty than the latter; I might be accused of Partiality:
And how could I entirely acquit myself, after the Pro-
fefions of Friendihip which I have made you ? But the
unfeigned Tears which flowed from every Eye, in the
numerous Representations which were made of it on
this Theatre; the unparalleled Command, which you
appeared to have over every Affection of the human
Breast: These are inconteftible Proofs, that you possess
the true theatric Genius of Shakefpear and Otway, re-
fined from the unhappy Barbarism of the one, and LU-
centioufnefs of the other.

Mv Enemies, you know, and I own even rometimes

mv Friends, have reproached me with the Love of Para-
doxes and finguiar Opinions; and I expect to he exposed
to the fame Imputation, on Account of the Character,
which I have here given of your Douglas. I ihall be told no
doubt, thati had artfully chosen the only Time, when
this high Esteem of that Piece could be regarded as a
Paradox, to wit, before its Publication ; and that not
being able to contradict ini , dcular the Sentiments '
es the Public, nI havefolved to go before

„-'Z:' '- jthem,

# Copy of the Admonition and Exhortation by the Reverend Presbytery of Edinburgh, dated the 5th Day of January 1757.

(5 )

them. But I shall be amply compensated for all these-
Pleafantries, if you accept this Tefsimony of my Re-
gard, and believe me to be, with the greatest Sinceri-
ty, Dear Sir, Your most affectionate Friend, and hum-
ble Servant,;

Edinb. Jan. 3, 1757. DAVID HUME.
Copy of the Admoniion and Exhortation by the Reverend

Presbytery ofEdinburgh, dated the 5th Day of Janu-
ary 1757.

HE Preibytery taking into their serious Confider-
ation, the declining State of Religion, the open

Profanation of the Lord's Day, the Contempt of public
Worship, the growing Luxury and Levity of the present
Age; in which so many seem Lovers of Pleasure, more
than Lovers of God: And being particularly affeecte
with the UNPRECEDENTED COUNTENANCE given of
late to the Playhouse in this Place, when the State of the
Nation, and the Circumitances of the Poor, make fucl
hurtful Entertainments still more pernicious; judged it
their indjfpenfable Duty to express in the most open and
solemn Manner, the deep Concern they feel on this
Occasion.

The Opinion which the Christian Church has always

entertained of Stage Plays and Players, as prejudicial to
the Interests of Religion and Morality, is well known;
and the fatal Influence which they commonly have on
the far greater Part of Mankind, particularly the younger
Sort, is too obvious to be called in Question.

To enumerate how many Servants, Apprentices, and

Students in different Branches of Literature, in the City
and Suburbs, have been reduced from their proper Bu-
finess, by attending the Stage, would be a painful, dif-
.agreeable Talk.

The Preibytery in the Year i 727, when confifing of

.many pious, prudent, and learned Ministers, whose
Praise is in all the Churches, being aware of these Evils,
did preparea. Paper, which was read from the several

A 3. Pulpits.

(6)

Pulpits within their Bounds, warning their People a-
gainft the dangerous Infecion of the Theatre then
erected there.

In the Year 1737, the Legislature, in their great

\.ifdom, did, by an At of the loth of George II.
enact and declare, " That every Person who should,

for Hire or Reward, at, or cause to be ated, any
Play, or other- Entertainment of the Stage, without

"the special Licence and Authority mentioned in the
' said ACt, fiould be deemed a Rogue and a Vaga-
· bond, and forevery such Offence ihould forfeit the
" Sum of 501. Sterling."

At that Time a Projet was set on Foot to obtain a

lEc;nfid Theatre in this City; but the Mailers and Pro-
feifors ofthe Univerfint, supported by the MagifRrates,
having prepared a Petition, letting forth the dangerous
Tendency of a Playhouse here, with refpe& to the im-
portant Interests of Virtue and Learning, the Projet was
laid aside.

The Players, however, being so audacious as to

continue to adt in Defiance of the Law, the Presbytery
.1d, at their own Charge, prosecute them before the
Court of SefEon; and prevailed in the Process. The
Players were fined in Terms of Law; and Warrants
being issued for apprehending them, they fled from Ju-
fitce. But others came in their Place; who since that
Time have attempted to elude the Law, by changing
theName of the PLAYHOUSE into that of the CON-
CERT-HALL.

As such a flight Evasion, the mere Change of a

]qame, could not make the smallest Variation in the
Nature of the Thing, the Prelbytery continued to do
all in their Power, and in their Sphere, to prevent the
growing Evil; and think themselves at this Time
loudly called upon, in ONE BODY, and with ONE
VOICE, to expostulate, in the Bowels of Love and
Compaf.on, with all under their Care and Infpec.
tion.

When our gracious Sovereign, attentive to the Voice

of Providence, is calling from the Throne to Humilia-
tion and Prayer, how unseemly is it for lis-Subjees .t

give

( 7 )

gve themselves up to Mirth and Jollity? When the
War in which we are engaged, and many awful -Tokens
of the divine Displeasure, bespeak us, in the Language
of an inrpired Writer, to redeem the Time because the
Days are evil, should that Time be squandered away ire
running the confRant Round of foolish, not to fay sinful
Amusements ? When the Wants and Cries of the nu-
merous Poor require extraordinary Supplies, how un-
accountable is it to lavish away vast Sums for such vain
*and idle Purposes ? When the Wisdom of the Nationr
has guarded the Inhabitants of this City and Suburbs
from the Infection of the Stage, by a plain and express-
Statute; is it not a high Inftaace of Folly, to break
down that Barrier, and open a Door with their own-
Hands for theatrical Representations ? which are in
many Respects no less inconsistent with good Policy,
than unfriendly to Religion; and will be found soon-
er or later, to assea their temporal as well as spiritual
Interests.

On these Accounts, and for many othet obvious and-

weighty Considerations, the Prelbytery, warmed with
just concern for the Good of Souls, do, in the Fear of
God, WARN, EXHORT, and OBTEST, all within their
Bounds, as they regard the Glory of God,- the Credit
of our holy Religion, and their own Welfare, to walk-
worthy of the Vocation wherewith they are called, by
shewing a sacred Regard to the Lord's Day, and all the
Ordinances of divine Inflitution; and by discouraging,
in their respective Spheres, the illegal and dangerous En-
tertainments of the Stage.

The Presbytery would plead with ALL in Authority,

with TEACHERS of Youth, PARENTS, and MASTERS
of Families, to restrain by every habile Method, fucki
is are under their Influence, from frequenting there Se-
mninaries of Folly and Vice. They would particularly
beseech the younger Part of their Flock, to beware, left,
by Example, or from a foolilh Desire of appearing in,
the'fafhionable World, they be mifed into such perni-
cious Snares; Snares which must neceflarily retard, if
not entirely mar, that Progress in the refpe&ive Parts of
their Education, or which their future Usefulness and

Success

# Copy of the Declaration of the Rev. Presbytery of Glasgow, dated the 14th Day of February 1757.

( 8 r

Success depend. And, lastly, they would intreat and obtest
Persons of all Ranks and Conditions, that, instead of con-
tributing to the growing Licentiousness of the Age, they
may diftinguiih themselves by fihning as Lights in the.
World, being blameless and harmless, the Sons of God,
without Rebuke, in the Midfi of a crooked and perverse
Nation; OCCuPYING, for the great Purposes of the
Honour of God and the Goodof Mankind, that Time,.
that SubRance, and those other Talents which they
have received from their Lord and Master.

On the whole, the Prelbytery do, in the mos earnest

Manner, call upon all who have the Interest of Religion
at Heart, to plead fervently at the Throne of Grace,
in the prevailing Name of the great Mediator, until the.
Spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the Cildernef/
be a fruitful Field, and the fruitful Field be counted for a
Fsrefi: Then Judgtment Jball dwell in the IYilernefs and
.iigieoufne/f remain in the fr!itful Field; and the Work of
Ribteoufre's .ball be Peace, and the Effe of Righteouftefs,,
tietneis and AfUzrance for ever.

The Presbytery appoint this ADMONITION and Ex-

HORTATION to be read from all the Pulpits within their.
Bounds, on the last Sabbath, being the thirtieth Day
of this Month, immediately after divine Service before
Noon.
Coty of the Declaration of the Re v. Prefbylery of Glasgow,

dated the I 4tb Day of February 1757.
T HE Prefbytery-of Glasgow having seen a printed

Paper, intitled, An Admonition and Exhortation

of the Reverend Presbytery of Edinburgh, which, among
other Evils prevailing, laments the extraordinary and
unprecedented Countenance given of late to the Play-
house in that City; and having good Reason to believe,
that this refers to the following melancholy but notori-
ous Sacs, that one who is a Minister of the Church of
Scotland did himfeif write and compose a Stage-Play,

intitled,.

(9.)

iititled, 'The Tragedy of Douglas, and got it to be ated'
on the Theatre at Edinburgh; and that he, with feve-
ral other Ministers of this Church, were present, and.
rome of them oftner than once, at the ating of the said.
Play before a numerous Audience: The Presbytery be-
?ng deeply affe&ed with this new and firange Appear-
ance, think.it their Duty to declare, as they hereby do,
that they agree with the Prelbytery of Edinburgh in
their Sentiments with refpea to Stage-Plays; and parti-
cularly that such Entertainments, from what has been:
usually exhibited in them, and also from the dissolute:
Lives (for the most Part) and infamous Characers of
the Players, have been looked upon by the Christian
Church in all ages, and of all different Communions,
as extreamly prejudicial to Religion and Morality, as
well as hurtful to the other valuable Interests of human
Society, by the wasteful Expence of Money and.Time;
they have occasioned; and being convinced by long
Experience, a sure Test of the Tendency of any Acion
or Practice, how vain it is to expeCt such a Reformation
of the Stage as is confiifent with the Ends aforesaid;
and therefore such Entertainments should be discouraged
and laid aside: And the Presbytery further confidering,
that the unprecedented Countenance given to the Play-
house, in the Instance mentioned, is greatly aggravated
by a late Act of Parliament, rendering the Stage (be-
cause not licensed) unlawful in Scotland, and also from
the present Circumstances of the Nation with regard to
the War we are engaged in, the Dearth of Provisions,
and the awful Tokens of the Divine Anger against us:
They therefore hereby appoint and inftfut such of their
Members as shall represent them in the ensuing general
Assembly of this Church, to move and inet in a regular
Manner, that the venerable Assembly do declare, by a
publick At, their Judgment and that of this Nationat
Church against the Entertainments of the Theatre, as.
of very hurtful Tendency to the Interests of Religion.
and Society. 2dly, That the Assembly do strictly en-
quire whether the Faces above-mentioned, viz. that a
Minister of this Church has composed and procured ta
be acted on the Theatre of the Canongate of Edin-

burgh,.

( 10)

burgh,- the Tragedy called Douglas, and that the Re-
presentation of the said Tragedy was attended by him
and several other Ministers, have been under the Con-
fderation of the Presbyters respectively concerned; and
whether these Mivifters, having been found guilty, have
been censured as their Faults deserved; and to give
such Directions as they in their Wisdom Ihall find ne-
ceffary, that such Ministers and all others may be fenfi-
ble that the Church of Scotland will never protec her
Members in Practice so unbecoming their Charader,
and of such pernicious Tendency to the great Interests
of Religion, Indufiry and Virtue. And lastly, that the.
Afembly would use their best Endeavours to obtain
such an Explication and Enforcement of the AAf of the
i7th of Geo. II. anent the Playhouse, as it may not
be liable to the pitiful Evasions by which it is now
eluded.

PROLOGUE:

# PROLOGUE. Spoken by Mr. SPARKS.

P R O LO G U E.

Spoken by Mr. S P A R K S.
JN antient times, when Britain's trade was arms,

And the lov'dmufck of heryouth alarms.

A god-like race fuj/ain'dfair England's fame :
Who has not heard of gallai Pi ERCY'S name ?
Ay, andof DOUGLAS ? Such ill/urious foes
In rival Rome and Carthage never rose !
From age to age bright/hone the Britilhfire,
And every hero was a hero's fire.
When powerfulfate decreed one warrior's doom,
Upfprung the Phbnixfrom his parent's tomb.
But 'whill these generous rivalsfought andfell,
These generous rivals lov'd each other well:
ho' many a bloody field was loft and won,
Nothing in hate, in honour allwas done.

brhen PIERCY ,wrongd defy'd his prince or pters,
Fa/l came the DOUGLAS, with his ScottiSlfpears;
And, when proud Do UGLAs made his King hisfoe,
For DO GLAS, P ERCY bent his Englilh bow.
Expell'd their native homes by adverse fate,
They knock'd alternate at each other's gate:
Then blaz'd the cafle, at the midnight hour,
For him whose arms had/hook itsfirme/ tovwer.
This night a Do UG LASyour proteaion claims;
A wife ! a mother ! pity'sfofte/f names:
bhe flory of her woes indulgent hear,
And grantyour suppliant alljhe begs, a tear
In confidencer e begs; and hopes tofind
Each Englifi breaj/, like tblk PIER cY's kind.

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

DRAMATIS PERSON .:

LONDON. EDINBURGH. DUBLIN.

Lord RANDOLiPi . Mr. RIDOUT. Mr. YOUNGER. Mr. DEXTER.

GLENALVON, Mr. SMITH. Mr. LOVE. Mr. STAYE.Y.

NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. BARRY. Mr. DIGGS. Mr. SHERIDAN.

STRANGER, Mr. SPARKS. Mr. HAYMAX. MP. LEE.
SERVANT S. '"

W 0 M E N.

MATILDA,Lady RAN-I7MrS. WOl'FINGTON. Mrs. WARD. Mrs. KENNEDr.
ANNA . .. , .Mrs. VINCENT. Mrs. HoPKINS. Miss G. EILIPS.

# ACT I. SCENE I.

D OU G L A S:

A
TRAGE.DY.

ACT I. SCEN E' I.
The court of a caflle, fliroeris d with 'wooJs.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

E woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom
y Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth

The voice of sorrow from my burifing heart, '

Farewel ahile: I will not leave you long ;
For in your ihades I deem some spirit dwells,
Wvho from the chiding frecam, or groaning oak,
Still hears, and answers to MATILDA'S moan.
O DOUGLAS ! DOUGLAS ! If departed gholts
Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of that wood thou art,
And with the paflion of immortals hear'st
My lamentation: hear'rt thy wretched wife
Weep for her Husband slain, her infant loft.
My brother's timeless death I seem to mourn,
Who perifh'd with thee on this fatal day.
To thee I liit my voice; to thee address
The plaint which mortal ear has never heard.
0 dilregard me not; though I am call'd
Another's now, my heart is wholly thine.

B Incapable

Incapable of change, affetion lies
Buried, my DouGLAS, in thy bloody grave.
But RANDOLPH comes, whom fate has made my Lord,
To chide my anguilh, and defraud the dead.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.
Lord Ran. Again these weeds of woe ! fay, do'st thou

well ·

To feed a paflion which consumes thy life ?
The living claim some duty; vainly thou
Beftovw'l thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady Ran. Silent, alas! is he for whom I mourn:

Child!efs, without memorialof his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives.

Lord Ran. Time, that wears out the trace of deepest

ancuifh,

Has past o'er thee in vain. Wou'd thou wer't not
Compos'd of grief and tenderness alone !
Sure thou artnot the daughter of Sir MALCOLM:
Strong was his rage, eternal his resentment:
For when thy brother fell, he fmil'd to hear
That DOUGLAS' son in the fame field was slain.

Lady Ran. Oh! rake not up the alhes of my fathers:

Implacable resentment was their crime,
And grievous has the expiation been.
Contending with the DOUGLAS, gallant lives
Of either house were loft; my ancestors
Compell'd, at last, to leave their ancient feat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
NS heir isleft. Had they not been so tern,
I had not been the laftof all my race.

Lord Ran. Thy grief wrests to its purposes my words.

I never ask'd of thee that ardent love,
Which in the breasts of fancy's children burns.
Decent affecion, and complacent kindness
Were all I wish'd for; but I wisL'd in vain.
Hence with the less regret my eyes behold
The form of war that gathers o'er this land:
If I should periff by the Danilh sword,
MATILDA would not lhed one tear the more.

Lady Ran. Thou do'st not think so: woeful as I am

I love thy merit, and esteem thy virtues.
But whither, goeft thou now ?

Lord

Lord Ran. Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on the tip-toe lands
Of expectation, and impatient afl;s
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are landed.

Lady Ran. 0, may adverse winds,

Far from the coast of Scotland, drive their fleet!
And every soldier of both hotsf return
·In peace and safety to his pleasant home !

Lord Ran. Thou fpeak'ft a woman's, hear a war-

rior's wilh:

Right from their native land, the stormy north,
May the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
Immoveable in Caledonia's strand !
Then shall our foes repent their bold invasion,
And roving armies shun the fatal Ihore.

Lady Ran. War I detest: but war with foreign foes,

Whose manners, language, and whose looks are ltrange,
Is'not so horrid, nor to me so hateful,
As that which with our neighbours oft we wage.
A river here, there an ideal line
By fancy drawn, divides the fitter kingdoms.
On each fide dwells a people similar,
As twins are to each other, valiant both,
Both for their valour famous thro' the world;
Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
And, if they mull have war, wage distant war,
But with each other fight in cruel conflit.
Gallant in strife, and noble in their ire,
The battle is their pastime. They go forth
Gay in the morning, as to summer sport:
When ev'ning comes the glory of the morn,
The youthful warrior, is a clod of clay.
Thus fall the prime of either hapless land;
And such the fruit of Scotch and English wars.

Lord Ran. I'll hear no more: this melody would

make

A soldier drop his sword, and doff his arms,
Sit down and weep the conquests he had made;
Yea, (like a monk), sing reft and peace in heav'n
To fouls of warriors in his battle slain."

B z Lady,

Ladv, fare:-zl: I leave thee not alone;
Yonder coliu one \-;hle love lemakes duty liglt.

E;::er AN ' A.

.:.ra. Fcrgive the raLiners of your A NA'S love:

Ur7'd b- aiecldion, I have thus prefura'd
To interrupt your folitar, thoughts;
And warn vou of the hours that yvu pne!e2,
Andi loe in fadrnes.

Lady Ran:. So to lose my hours
Is all the use I with to make of time.

,:r.a. To blame thee, lady, suits not with my itate:

But lure I am, since death firll prey'd on man,
Never did fiter thus a brother mourn.

~h:t had your sorrows been if you had loft,
In earlv vouth, the hufbind of your heart ?

Ladv; Ran. Oh !
A: a. Have I difrreft you v ith officious love,

And ii!-tin'd mention of your brother's fate
Forsive me, lady: humble tho' Iam,
Tke' ind I bear partakes notof my fortune:
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These pireous tears, I'd throw my life away.
Lsd.- Ran \'hat power directed thy unconscious

tonge:
To F pe as tho-u hal done ? to nama--

/.7:a. I lnov: not:

Eu- fin:e mv words have made my mifirefs tremble,
I v iel e:k soo no more ; but silent mix
Mv te rs vi:h hers

L d'; ..:. No, thou fealt not be silent.

I'1I trul} rL'.' f%.hi:ul love, and thou altMt be
i- n;o:t -: h'i ins rucr-d partner of my woes.
But vhat avai5s it ? Can thy feeble pity
Roll b.rck the rlood of never-ebbing time ?
Comp- l he arh and ocean to give up

..:::a. \V'h:t rnarns my noble miilrefs ?
Lady Raa. Did : thou not ask- what had my furrows

been i?---

If I in ea-, y5ou1 id oft a hu.oand ? -
In ;ln .ol' bo:bmo of t'h earit is io^i'd,

. ' *
M l'd

Mangl'd with wounds, the husband of my youth;
And in some cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his.- ---.----

Anna. ! lady, most rever'd I

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

LadyRan. Alas ! an ancient feud,

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother should in battle save
The life of DOUGLAS' son, our house's foe:
The youthful warriors vow'd eternal friendflip,
To fee the vaunted filter of his friend
Impatient, DOUvcIAS to Balarmo came,
Under a borrow'd name.-My heart he gain'd ;
Nor did I long refuse the hand he begg'd:
My brother's pretence authoriz'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little weeks, with wings of down,,
Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd lord was call'd
To fight his father's battles; and with him,.
In spite of all my tears, did MALCOLM go;
Scarce were they gone, when my flern fire was told
That the false itranger waslord DOUGLAS' son.
Frantic with rage, the baron drew his fivord
And queftion'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
Kneeling beneath his sword, falt'ring 1 took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
Wed one of DOUGLAS' name. Sincerity,
Thou firit of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thy onward path ! altho' the earth Ihould gape,.
And from the gulf of hell deftrudtion cry
To take dilfimulation's winding way.

Anna. Alas ! how few of woman's fearful kind.
Durst own a truth so hardy !

Lady Ran. The first truth

Is easiest to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale.- .
In a few days the dreadful tidings came
That DOUGLAS and my brother both were slain.
M'y lord! my life ! my husband I -- mighty God !
What had I done to merit such affliction ?

Anna. My dearest lady! Many a tale of tears

1:3 I've

I've listen'd to; but never did I hear
A tale so fad as this.

Lady Ran. In the firftdays

Of my diftracing grief, I found mvelf---
As women with to be who love their lords.
But who durst tell my father ? The good priest
W-ho join'd our hands, my brother's ancient tutor,
With his lov'd MALCOLM, in the battle fell:
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till time fiould mke my father's fortune mine.
That verynight on which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confident I had,
Set out with him to reach her sifter's house:
But nurie, nor infant, have I ever seen,
Or heard of, As4 , since that fatal hour.
Mv rnurder'd child ! - had thy fond mother sear'd
The loss of thee, the had loud fame defy'd,
Defpis'd her father's rage, her father's grief,
And wvander'd with thee thro' the scorning world.

Ar.:a. Not seen, or heard of! then perhaps he lives.
Lady Ran. No. It was dark December: wind and

rain

Had beat all night. Across the Carron lay
The deftin'd road; and in it's swelling flood
,;ly faithful servant perish'd with my child.
O hapless son ! of a most hapless fire!-
But they are both at reft; and I alone
Dwell in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk,
Like a guilt-troubl'd ghost, my painful rounds:
Nor has despiteful fate permitted me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Tho' dead to love, I was compell'd to wed
RANDOLPH, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms;
And RANDOLPH now poeflWes the domains,.
That by Sir MALCOLIM'S death on me devolv'd;
Domains, that should to DOUGLAS' son have giv'n
A baron's tide, and a baron's power.
Such were my soothing thoughts, while I bewail'd
The flaughter'd father of a son unborn.
And when that son came, like a ray from heav'n,
Which flines and disappears; alas! my child !

How

How long did thy fond mother grasp the hope
Of having thee, she knew not how, reftor'd.
Year after year hath worn her hope away;
But left still undiniinilh'd her desire.

Anna. The hand, that spins th' uneven thread of life,
May smooth the length that's yet to come of your's.

Lady Ran. Not in this world : I have confider'd well

It's various evils, and on whom they fall.
Alas! how oft does goodness wound itself?
And sweet affection prove the spring of woe.

! had I died when my lov'd husband fell!

Had some good angel op'd to me the book
Of providence, and let me read niy life,
My heart had broke, when I beheld the fum
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

Anna. That God, whdfe miniffters good angels are,

Hath fllat the book in mercy to mankind.
But *we mufr leave this theme: GLENALVON comes:
I. saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitherwards he slowly stalks his way.

Lady Ran. I will avoid him. An ungracious person
Is doubly irksome in an hour like this.

Anna. Why speaks my lady thus of RANDOLPH '

heir?
Lady Ran. Because he'snot the heir of RANDOLPH'S

virtues.

Subtle and shrewd, he offers to mankind
An artificial image of himself:
And he with eafe'can vary to the taste
Of different men, it's features. Self-denied,
And master of his appetites he seems:
But his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,
Watches to seize unseen the wifh'd-for prey.
Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
As in GLENALVON'S unrelenting mind.
Yet is he brave and politic in war,
And stands aloft in there unruly times.
Why I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter:
Stay and detain him till I reach the castle.

[Exit. Lady RANDOLrH.

Anna. 0 happiness ! where art thoi to be found ?
I fee thou dwelleft not with birth and beauty,

B 4 Tho'

Tho' -racd v. th grandeur, -and in wealth array'd.-
INor doll thou, it would ieem, with virtue dwell;
E:-e had this gentle lady mifs'd thee not.

Enter GLENALVON.

G.n. What dolt thou muse on, meditating maid?

Like forme entranc'd and viilonary seer
Oa earth thou frand'ft, thy thoughts arcend to heaven.

ir.r. 'W-cu'd that I were, e'en as thou ay'd, a seer,
To have my doubts by heav'nly vlfion clear'd !

Gln. Wihat doif thou doubt of? what haft thou to.

do

V\:Ih fiubiecs intricate? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be cuefrioned: think of these good gifts;
And then thy contemplations will be pleasing.

A,.er. Le: w-omen view yon monument of woe,

Then boa2t of beauty: who so fair as The ?
Eu-t-T must folow: this revolving day
Avwakes re memory of her ancient woes.

[Exit ANNA,

GLENALVO Nfo!us.

So ! - Lady RAD OLPH shuns rme; by and by
li ;;oo her as the lion wooes his brides.
'i he deed's a doing nov., that makes me lord
Of these rich valleys, and a chiefof power.
The feaoba is mo's apt; my founding steps
Will not be heard amidst the din of arms.
RANDOLH has liv'd too long: his better fate
Had the ascendant once, and kept me down:
When I had seiz'd the dame, by chance he came,
Refcu d and had the lady for his labour;
I 'fcap'd unknown: a slender consolation!
Heaven is mrv witnes that I do not love
To lo.- in peril, and let others reap
The jocnuad harvest. Yet I am not safe:
Lv love, or something like it, flung, inflam'd,.

.1adiv I blabb'd my paflion to his wife,
And ie has threaten'd to acouaint him of it.
The vway of woman's will I do not know:
Ba well I know the baron's wrath is deadly.
I will not live in fear: the man I dread
Is as a Dane to me; ay, and the man
Who fiands betwixt me and my chief dere. .

k' T-

# ACT II. SCENE I.

No bar but he; she has no kinsman near;.
No brother in his filler's quarrel bold;
And for the righteous cause, a stranger's cause,
I know no chief that will defy GLENALVON.

ACT II. SC EN E I.

A Court, &c.
Enter fer.vats and a Jfranger at one door, and Lady RAN-

DOLPH and ANNA at another.
Lady Ran. 17 HAT means this clamour? firanger;

VV.W speak secure;

Haft thou been wrong'd ? have these rude men prefum'd.
To vex the weary traveller on his way?

Ift Srrv. By us no stranger ever fulfer'd wrong:

This man with outcry wild has call'd us forth;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
Enter Lord RA NDOLPH and yo!un man, wvlth theirJevordi

drawn and blood.y.
Lady Ran. Not vain the stranger's fears! how fares

my lord?
Lord Ran. That it fares well, thanks to this gallant

youth,

Whose valour fav'd me fiom a wretched death !
As down the winding dale I vwalk'd alone,
At the cross way four armed men attack'd me:
Rovers, I judge, from the licentious camp,
Who'would have quickly laid Lord RANDOLPH low,
Had not this brave and generous stranger come,
Like my good angel in the hour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my foes his own.
They turn'd upon him; but his acdive arm
Struck to the ground, from whence they rose no more,.
The fiercest two; the others fled amain,
And left him master of the bloody field.
Speak, Lady RANDOLPH ;.-upon Beauty's tornue

B 5 Dwell

Dwell accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
Speak, noble dame, and thank him for thy lord.

Lady Ran. My lord, I cannot speak what now I feeL

My heard o'erflows with gratitude to heav'n,
And to this noble youth, who all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but humanely brave
Fought on your fide, against such fearful odds.
Have you yet learn'd of him whom we should thank ?
Whom call the saviour of Lord RANDOLPH'S life?

Lord Ran. I ask'd that question, and he anfwer'd not:
But I must know ho my deliv'rer is. (to the Stranger.)

Strang. A low born man, of parentage obscure,

Who nought can boas but his deiire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Lord Ran. Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled

By the great King of Kings! thou art ordain'd
And ftampt a hero by the sovereign hand
Of nature! blush not, flower of modesty
As well as valour, to declare thy birth.

Strang. My name is NORVAL: on the Grampian

hills

My father feeds his flocks; a frugal swain,
Whose constant cares were to encreafe his flore,
And keep his only son, myself, at home.
For I had heard of battles, and I long'd
To foliowv to the field some warlike lord;
And heaven soon granted what my fire denied.
This moon which rose last night, round as my shield,
Had not yet fill'd her horns, when, by her light,
A band of fierce barbarians, from the hills,
Rush'd like a torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The fihepherds fled
For safety, and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hoverd about the enemy, and mark'd
The road he took, then hafted to my friends:
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
1 r.'_t advancing. The pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook the fpoil-encumber'd foe.
We sough; and conquer'd. Ere a fwQrd was drawn,

An

An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Returning home in triumph, I difdain'd
The shepherd's slothful life; and having heard
That our good king had fummon'd his bold peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron fide,
I left my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to conduct my steps:---
Yon trembling coward who forsook his mafler.
Journeying with this intent, I pail these towers,
And, heaven-dire'ted, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my-humble name.

Lord Ran. He is as wife as brave. Was ever tale

With such a gallant modesty rehears'd ?
My brave deliverer! thou lhalt enter now
A nobler lift, and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame.
I will present thee to our Scottiih king,
Whose valiant spirit ever valour lov'd.
Ha! myM.TILDA ! wherefore harts that teat?

Lady Ran. I cannot fay: for various affections,

Andftrangely mingled, in my bosom swell;
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
I joy that thou art safe; and admire
Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety,
Obscure and friendless, he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, and with his sword
To gain diftindion which his birth denied.
In this attempt unknown he might have periih'd,
And gain'd, with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope
He sands conspicuous; fame and great renown
Are brought within the compass of his' sword.
On this my mind refleted, whilst you spoke,
And blefs'd the wonder-working Lord of heaven.

Lord Ran. Pious and gratefulever are thy thoughts

My deeds. hall follow where thou point'ft the way.
Next to myself, and equal to GLENALVON,
In honour and command lhall.NoRvAL be.

* Norv,

Asr-a. I know not how to thank you. Rude I an; -

In speech and manners: never till this hour
Srood I in such a pretence: yet, my lord,
There's something in my breast which makes me bold
To fay, that NoCVAL ne'er will ihame thy favour.

Lady Ran. I will be fwom thou wilt not. Thou,

fait be

Myv night; and ever, as thou didftto day,
V' ith h=ppy valour guard the life of RANDOLPH.
Lord Ran. Weli haft thou spoke. Let me forbid re-

ply. [so NORVAL.

We are thy debtors fill; thy high desert
O'ertops our gratitude. I must proceed,
As was at Hr!l intended, to the camp.
Seme of ry train I fee are speeding hither,
Impatient, doubteis, of their lord's delay.
Go v-ith me, NoRVAL, and thine eyes shall fee
The chcfen warriors of thy native land,
W-ho lan.iil for the fight, and beat the air

itrh bran dih'd swords.

cr-v. Let us begone, my lord.
Lord Ran. [T Lay RANDOLPH.] About the time

that the declining fun

Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills suspend,
Expea us to return. This night once more
Within these walls I reft; my tent I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepare the feast.
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
He in the eve of battle may resign
Hiimfelf to social pleasure; sweetest then,,
When danger to a soldier's foul endears
The human joy that never may return.

Exeunt RAxNDOLP p andNoRVAL,

SCENE II.

Lady R.ABDOLPH and ANNA..
Lady. Ra.. His parting words have. ituck a fatal.

truth.

O DDnGLAS ! DOUGLAS! tender was the time
,4When we twioparred, ne'er to meet again.!

How

How. nlany years of anguilh and:defpair
Has heav'n annex'd to those swift pafling hours
Of love and fondness ! Then my bosom's flame
Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of fear,
Return'd, and with.redoubled ardour blaz'd.

Anna. May gracious heav'n pour the sweet balm off

peace

Into the wounds that feller in your breast !
For earthly consolation cannot cure them.
' LadyRan. One only cure can heav'n itfelfbeftow;-.
A grave-that bed in which the weary reft.
Wretch that I am ! Alas! why am I so ?
At every happy parent I repine!
How blest the mother of yon gallant NoRvAL !
She for a living huiband bore her pains,
And heard him bless her when a man was born :
She nurs'd her smiling infant on her breast;
Tended the child, and rear'd the pleasing boy::
She, with affection's triumph, saw the youth
In grace and comeliness surpass his peers:
Whilf I to a dead Hulband bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child;

Anna. Alas ! alas! why will you thus resume.

Your grief afrefli ? I thought that gallant youth,
Would for a while have won you from your woe.
On him intent you gazed, with a look
Much more delighted, than your pensive eye
Has deign'd on other objects to bestow.

Lady Ran. Delighted fay'ft thou? Oh! even there

mine eye

Found fuel for my life-confuming sorrow:
I thought, thathad tie son ofDoUGLAs liv'd,
He might have been like this young gallant stranger,
And pair'd with him in features and in Ihape,
In all endowments, as in years, Ideem,
My boy with blooming NORVAL mighthave.number'cd
Whilst thus I mus'd, a Ipark from fancy fell
On my.fad heart, and kindled up a.fondnefs
For this young ftraiger, wand'ring from-his home.
And like an orphan cast upon my care.
I will proteEt thee, (said I to myself)
With all.my power, and grace with all my favour;

Anna.

Anna. Sue heav'n will bless so gen'rous a resolve.

You must, my noble dame, exert your power:
You must awake: devices will be fram'd,
And arrows pointed at the breast of NoRVAL.

Lady Ran. GLENALVON'S false and crafty head will

work

Againf a rival in his kinsman's love,
If I deter him not: I only can.
Bold as he is, GLENALVON will beware
HQw he pulls down the fabric that I raise.
I'll be the artist of young NORVAL'S fortune.
'Tis pleasing to admire: most apt was I
To this affeaion in my better days;
Though now I seem to you ihrunk up, retir'd
Within the narrow compass of my woe.
Have you not Sometimes seen an early flower
Open it's bud, and spread it's silken leaves,
To catch sweet airs, and odours to bellow;
Then, by the keen blast nipt, pull in it's leaves,
And, tho' still living, die to scent and beauty ?
Emblem of me: affiction, like a storm,
Hath lii'd the forward blofom of my heart.

Enter GLENALVON.

CGen. Where is my dearest kinsman, noble RANDOLPH ?
Lady Ran. Have you not heard, GLENALVON of the

base-

G/en. I have: and that the villains may not scape,

With a strong band I have begirt the wood:
If they lurk there, alive they ihall be taken,
And torture force from them th' important secret
Whether some foe of RANDOLPH hir'd their swords,
Or if-

Lady Ra:r. That care becomes a kinsman's love.
I have a counsel for GLEKALVON'S ear. (Exit ANXA.)

Glen. To him vour counsels always are commands.
Lady Ran. I hive not found so: thou art known to

mre.

GCn. Known !
Lady Ran. And most certain is my cause of know-

ledge.

Gmr. What do you know ? By the most blessed cross,
You much amaze me. No created thing,

Yourself

Yourself except, durf thus accost GLENALVON.

Lady Ran. Is guilt so bold ? and dolt thou make a

ment

Of thy pretended meekness ? This to me,
Who, with a gentleness which duty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd what, if divulg'd,
Would make thee nothing; or, what's worse than that,
An outcast beggar, and unpitied too:
For mortals shudder at a crime like thine.

Glen. Thy virtue awes me. First of womankind !.

Permit me yet to fay, that the fond man
Whom love transports beyond ftrit virtue's bounds,
If he is brought by love to misery,
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpitied cannot be. Pity's the alas
Which on such beggars freely is beftow'd:
For mortals know that love is stilt their lord,
And o'er their vain resolves advances Kill:
As fire, when kindled by our Shepherds, moves
Thro' the dryheath before the fanning wind.

Lady Ran. Reserve there accents for some other ear;

To love's apology I liften not.
Mark thou my words; for it is meet thou should'st.
His brave deliverer RANDOLPH here retains.
Perhaps his pretence may not please thee well:
But, at thy peril, pradife aught against him:
Let not thy jealousy attempt to lhake
And loQfen the good root he has in RANDoLPH ;
Whose favourites I know thou haft supplanted.
Thou look'ft at me, as if thou fain would'st pry
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give thisearlycaution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendless stranger my protecion claims:
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit:

SCENE III.

Manet GLENALVON.

Child that I was, to start at my own Shadow,
And be the lallow fool of coward conscience t

I am

# ACT III. SCENE I.

I am not what I hare been; whatl ihould be.
The darts of deifiny have almost pierc'd
MIv marble heart. Had I one grain of faith.
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I fiould conclude there was an arm above
That fought agairift me, and malignant turn'd
To-catch my self, thefubtle snare I let.
Why, rape and murder are not simple means!
Th' imperfec. rape to R.&NDOLPH gave a spouse.
And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fun from me;
And wortl of all, a rival. Burning hell!
This were thy center, if. I thought Ihe lov'd him r
'Tis certain she contemns me; nay commands me,
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'er me,
In his behalf. And ffall 1 thus be brav'd ?
Curb'd, as lie calls it, by dame chafrity
Infernal fiends, if any fiends there are
More fierce than love, ambition, and revenge,:
Ri.e up and fill mv bosom with your fires
And policy remorfeefs !. Chance may spoil.
A fmgle aim; but perseverance muff
Profoer.at last. For chance and fate are words:
Perfiidve wisdom is the fate of man.
Darkly a projea peers upon my mind,
Like the red moon when rifingin the east,
Crofs'd and divided by ftrange-colour'd clouds.
ll l eek the slave who came with NoxvAL hither,
And for his cowardice was spurned from him.
Ive known a follower's rankled bosom breed
Venom moit fatal to his heedlef lord. . [Exi..

ACT III. SCE NE I.

. Court, &c. as befire.

En.er ANNA.
"a. = HY vaflals, Grief! great nature's order-

. break,

And.

And change'the noon-tide to the midnight hour.
Whilit Lady RANDOiLPI leeps I will walk forth,
And taste the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers be! Ye ministers
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,
Angels and seraphs who delight in goodness!
Forsake your skies, and to her couch descend !
There from her fancy chafe those dismal forms.
That haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
With images celestial, such as please
The blef: above upon their golden beds.

Enter SERVANT.

Serv. One of the vile aflaflins is fecur'd

We found the iillain lurking in the wood:
With dreadful imprecations he denies.
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not
His first essay: these jewels were conceal'd.
In the most secret places of his garment;
Belike the spoils of some that he has murder'd.

Anna. Let me look on them. Ha! here is a heart,

The cholen crest of DOUGLAS' valiant name.!
These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch.

[Exit ANNA.

Enter servants uith a prisoner.

Prif. I'know no more than does the child unborn
Of what you charge me with.

fl Ser.v.. You fay so, fiT!

But torture soon shall make you speak the truth.
Behold theLady of Lord RANDOLPH comes:
Pr.epare yourself to meet her just revenge.

S C E N E 1I.

'Enter Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Anna. Summon your utmost fortitude, before

You speak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
Are now at iak'e. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may fly.
Lady Ran. Thou flialt behold me, with a desperate-

heart,
'. ''' Hear

Hear how my infant perilh'd. See he kneels.

[Tbe prioner ineel.]i
Prif Heav'n bless that countenance, so sweet and

mi!d!

A judge like thee makes innocence more bold.
O save me, lady! frc.m there cruel men,
Who have attack'd ,ad seiz'd me; who accuse
ie of ntended r-r:rer. As I hope
For mercy at the ju;ag-ent eat of God,
The tender lamb, that n-e'r ript the grais,
Is no. more innocent than I o murder.

Lady Ran. Of this man's guilt what proof can ye

produce ?
if Serv. We found him lurking in the hollow

Glynn

When view'd and call'd upon, amaz'd, he fled.
We overtook him, and eaquir'd from whence
And what he was: he said he came from far,
And was upon his journey to the camp.
Not faisfied with this, we fearch'd his cloaths,
And found these jewels; whole rich value plead
Mol powerfully against him. Hard he seems
And old in villainy. Permit us try
His stubbornness against the tottnre's force.

Pri. 0 gentle lady! by your lord's dear life !

Which there weak hands, I swear, did ne'er assail;
And by your children's welfare, spare my age!
Let not the iron tear my ancient joints,
And my grey hairs bring to the grave with pain.

Lady Ran. Account for these: thine own they can-

not be:

For there, I fay: be stedfast to the truth;
Deteaed falsehood is most certain death.

. [A.NA remowes thbeferants and returns.]

Pri. Alas! I'm fore beset! let never man,

For fake of lucre, fin againit his foul!
Eternal jitice is in this mot justs!
I, guiitlefs now, must former guilt reveal.

Lady Ran. O! ANNA hear!-once more I charge

thee speak.
The truth direct: for there to me foretell

And

And certify a part of thy narration;
With which it the remainder tallies not,
An initant and a dreadful death abides thee.

Pri. Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speak to you asjuft

As if you were the minister of heaven,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men.

Some eighteen years ago; I rented land

Of brave Sir MALCOLM, then BALARMO'S lord;
But falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
All that I had, and then turn'd me ard mine,
(Four helpless infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel by the river's fide
Receiv'd us: there hard labour, and the lkill
In filhing, which was formerly my sport,
Supported life. Whilt thus we poorlyliv'd,
One tormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down, and loud and oft,
The angry fpitit of the water lhriek'd:
At the dead hour of the night was heard the cry
Of one in jeopardy. I roTe, and ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach whatever floating thing the dIream
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd; the person loft:
But looking fad and earnest on the waters,
By the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round,
A basket: soon I drew it to the bank,
And neftlld curious there an infant lay.

Lady Ran. Was he alive ?
Pri. He was.
Lady Ran. Inhuman that thou art !
How couldit thou kill what waves and tempelts spar'd ?

Pri. I am not so inhuman.
Lady Ran. Didft thou not?
'mna. My noble mistress, you are mov'd too much:

This man has not the aspea of stern murder: -
Let him go on, and you, I hope, will hear
Good tidings of your kinsman's long loft child.

Pri. The needy man, who has known better days,
One whom distress has spited at the world,

Is he whom temp-ing fiends would pitch upon
To do f-ich deeds, as make the prosperous men
Lif; up their hands and wonder who could do them.
And such a man was I; a mnn declin'd,
Who saw no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth ofkingdans, I would not
Have touch'd that infant, with a hand of harm.

Lady Ran. Ha! doff thou fay so ? Then perhaps he

lives!

Pri. Not many days ago he was alive.
Lady Ran. 0 ! God of heav'n ! Did he then die so

la elv?

Pri. I did not fay he died; I hope he lives,

Not many days ago these eyes beheld
Him, flouri;hing in youth, and health, and beauty.

Lady Ran. Where is he now?
Pri. Alas! I know not where.
Lady Ran. Oh fate! I fear thee still. Thou riddler,

speak
Diret and clear; else I will search thy foul.

Ar.a. -Permit me, ever honour'd! Keen impatience,.

Tho' hard to be reftrain'd, defeats itself.-
Pursue thy flory with a faithful tongue,
To the last hour that thou didIf keep the child.

Pri. Fear not my faith, tho' I muf speak my fliame;

Within the cradle, where the inant lay,
Was stow'd a mighty store of gold and jewels;
Tempted by which we did resolve to hide,
From all the world, this wonderful event,
And like a peafant.breed the noble child.
Tha nmne might mark the change of our estate,
VWye left the country, travell'd to the north,
Bought flocks and herds, and gradually brought forth:
Our ,ecret wealth. But God's all-feeing eye
Beheld our avarice, and smote us fore.
For one by one all our own children died,
And he, the stranger, sole remain'd the heir
Of vhat indeed was his. Fain then would I,.
Who with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
Have truled him, now in the dawn of youth,
WXi-h his own secret: but my anxious wife,
Forboding evil, never would cojfent.

Mean

Mean while the stripling grew in years and beauty;
And, as.e oft obierv'd, he borehhimfelf,
Not as the offspring of our cottage blood;
For nature will break out: mild with the mild,
But with the froward he was fierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I set myfelfagainit his warlike bent;
But all in vain: for when a desperate band
Of robbers from the savage mountains came

Lady Ran. Eternal providence ! What is thy name ?
Pri. My name is NORVAL: and my name he bears.
Lady Ran. 'Tis he; 'tis he himself! It is my son!

O sovereign mercy ! 'Twas my child I fai !
No wonder, ANNA, that my bosom burn'd.

Anna. Just are your transports: ne'er was woman's

heart

Prov'd with such fierce extremes. High fated dame!
But .yet remember that you are beheld
By servile eyes; your gestures may be seen
Impaflion'd, flrange; perhaps your words o'erleard.

Lady Ran. Well-doff thou counsel, ANNA: IIeaveiU

betlow
On me that wisdom which my tate requires!

Anna. The moments of deliberation pass,

And soon you mulf resolve. This useful man
Muff be difmifs'd in safety, ere my lord
Shall with his brave deliverer return.

Pri. Ifl, amidiiafltonifhment and fear,

Have of your words and gestures rightly judg'd,
Thou art the daughter ol my ancient master;
The child I refcu'd from the flood is thine.

Lady. Ran. With thee diflinulation now were vain.

I am inde2d the daughter of Sir MALCOLM;
The child thou refcu'dft from the flood is mine.

Pri. 1Bieet be the hour that made me a poor man !
My poverty hath fav'd my mailer's house !

Lady Ran. Thy words furprize me: sure thou dost

not feign:

The tear stands in thine eye: such love from thee
Sir MALCOLM'S house deferv'd not; if aright
Thou told'ft the flory of thy own distress.

Pti.

Pri. Sir MALCOLM of our barons was the flower;

The faftell friend, the best and kindest rmafer.
But ah! he knew not of my fad estate.
After that battle, where his gallant son,
Your own brave brother, fell, the good old lord
Grew desperate and reckless of the world;
And never, as he erst was wont, went forth
To overlook the conduct of his servants.
By them I was thrust out, and them I blame:
May heaven o judge me as I judg'd my malter!
And God so love me as I love his race!

Lady Ran. His race fiall yet reward thee. On thy

faith

Depends the fate of thy lov'd mafler's house.
Rememb'reft thou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the clifts of Carron ?

Pri. I remember
The cottage of the cliifts.

Lady Ran. 'Tis that I mean:

There dwells a man of venerable age,
Who in my father's fernice spent his youth:
Tell him i sent thee, and with him remain,
'Till I hall call upon thee to declare,
Before the king and nobles, what thou now
To me haft told. No more but this, and thou
Shalt live in honour all thy future days;
Thy son so long lhall call thee father still,
And all the land shall biefs the man, who fav'd
The Ion of DOUGLAS, and Sir MALCOLM'S heir.
Remember well my words: if thou fiouldif meet
Him whom thou call'lt thy son, still call him so;
And mendon nothing of his nobler father.

Pri. Fear not that I sfall mar so fair an harvest,

Elv-pu:: g in my fickle ere 'tis ride.

-Why did I leave my home and ancient dame?

To find the youth, to tell him all I knew,
And mnake him wear these jewels in:his arms;

hich might, I thought, be challeng'd, and so bring
To light the secret of his noble birth.

[Lady R.ANDOLPH goes lowards tbe Servants.

Lady

Lady Ran. This man is not the assassin you fufpeted,

Tho' chance combin'd tome likelihoods againf him.
He is the faithful bearer of thejewels
To their right owner, whom in haste he seeks.
'Tis meet that you should put him on his way,
Since your miflaken zeal hath dragg'd him hither.

[Exeunt Stranger and Servants.

SCENE III.

Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA. -
Lady Ran. My faithful ANNA ! dost thou Ihare my

joy?

I know thou doff. . nparallel'd event!
Reaching from heaven to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings to me my son!
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father!
Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
For such a gift! What does my ANNA think
Of the young eaglet of a valiant nest ?
How soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his fate had thrown him,
And tower'd up to the region of his- ire.

Anna. How fondly did your eyes devour the boy!

Mysterious nature, with the unseen cord
Of powerful inftindt, drew you to your own.

Lady Ran. The ready story of his birth believ'd

Supprefl my fancy quite; nor did he owe
To any likeness my so sudden favour:
But now I long to feehis face again,
Examine every feature, and find out
The lineaments of DOUGLAS, OErmy own.
But most of all, I long to let him know
Who his true parents are, to'clafp his neck,
And tell him all the fory of his father.

Anna. With wary caution you must bear yourself

In public, left your tenderness break forth,
And in observers flir conjectures Itrange.
For, if a cherub in the shape of woman
Should walk this world, yet defamation would,
Like a vile cur, bark at the angel's train-
To-day the baron lfarted at your tear;.

Lady

Lady Rna. He did so, ANNA! well thy 'niflef

knows,

If the least circumffance, mote of offence,
Should touch the baron's ey;e, his fight would be
With jealous? diforder'd. But the more
It does behove: me inflant to declare- -
The birth of' D.o GLAs , and assert his rights.
This night I purvof/e with my son to-meet,
Reveal the secret and confu!t with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does now, so look'd his noble Father,
Artray'd.in nature's ease: his mien, his speech,
Were i:eetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those trivial mortals who seem always wife.
But, when the matter match'd his mighty mind,
Uprofe the Hero: on his piercing eye
Sat Obfer.vaton; on each glance of thought
Decision follow'd, as the thunder-bolt
Pursues the flalh.

Arnna. That demon haunts you still:
Behold GLENALVOls.

Lady Ra::. Novw I fun him not.

This day I brav'd him in behalfofNo RVAL;
Perhaps too far: at ieafs my nicer fears
For DOUGLAS thus interpret.

Enter GLENALVON.

Gi... Noble dame!

The hov'ring Dane at lafr his men hath landed:
No band of pirates; but a mightv host,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers;
To win a country, or to lose themlelves.

Lady Ran. 'BLt whence comes this intelligence, GLE-

XALVOK ?

G.,1:. A nimble courier sent from yonder camp,

To hailen uo t;he-chieftains of the north,
Inform'd me, as he pass, that the fierce-Dane
Had on the eafrern coast of Lothian landed,.
Near to that place where the fea-rock immense,
Amazing Bass, locks o'er a fertile land.

Ladjy can. Then musi this vweftern army march to

join
The warlitroops that gard Edena's tow'rs.

Glen.

Glen, Beyond all queflion. If impairing time

Has not effac'd the image of a place,
Once perfect in my breast, there is a wild
Which lyes to westward of that mighty rock,
'And seems by nature formed for the camp
Of water-wafted armies, whose chief Strength
Lies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse:
If martial skill directs the Danish lords,
There inaccessible. their army lies
To our swift fcow'ring horse, the bloody field
Mufl man to man, and foot to foot, be fought.

Lady Ran. How many mothers ihall bewail their

sons!

How many widows weep their husbands fiain!
Ye dames of Denmark! ev'n for you I feel,
Who, sadly fitting on the fea-beat snore,
Longlook for lords that never shall return.

Glen. Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian fiord

Widow'd the north. The children of the slain
Come, as I hope, to meet their fathers' fate.
The monster war, with her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are objets suited to GLENALVON'S foul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death;
Reproach, more piercing than the pointed fwi:ord.

Lady Ran. I scorn thee not, but when I ought to

scorn;

Nor e'er reproach,. but when insulted virtue
Against audacious vice asserts herself.
I own thy worth, GLENALVON; none more apt
Than I to praise thine eminence in arms,
And be the echo of thy martial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty pailion:
Go and pursue a lawful mistress, glory.
Upon the Danish crests redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the shield of RANDOLPH.

Glen. One instant flay, and hearan alter'd ma,.

When beauty pleads for virtue, vice abafh'd
Flies it's own colours, and goes o'er to virtue.
I am your convert; time will shew how truely:
Yet one immediate proofI mean to give.
That youth for whom your ardent zeal to-dav,

C Some-

Somewhat too haughtily, defv'd your slave,
Amid/t the fock of armies I'll de'end,
And turn death from him, with a guardian arm.
Sedate byufe, my bosom maddens not
At the tumultuous uproar of the field.

Lady Ran. Act thus, GLENALVON, and I am thy

friend:

But that's thy least reward. Believe me, fir,
The truly generous is the truely wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblest.

Exit Lady RANDOLPH.

Gk'n. [s.!us] Amen! and virtue is it's own reward !-

I think that I have hit the very tone
In v-hich she loves to speak. Honey'd afent
How pleating art thou to the taste of man,
And woman aloi ! flattery direct
Rarely difgults. They little know mankind
M\ho doubt i:'s operation: 'tis my key,
And opes the wicket of the human heart.
How far I have succeeded now 1 know not.
Yet I incline to think her iformy virtue
Is lull'd awhile: 'tis.her alone I fear:

-hilil lhe and RANDOLPH live, and live in faith

And amirr, uncertain is my tenure.
Fa:e o'er my head fi:pcnds disgrace and death,
Ev that weak hair, a peevish female's will.
I am not idle: but the ebbs and flows
Of for:une's tide cannot be calculated.
That slave of NORVAL's I have found mofl apt:
1 fiew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his foul
To fay and ftvear whatever I suggest.
N.RV iL, I'. told, has that alluring look,
"'T:-ixt man and woman, which I have obferv'd
To charm the nicer and fantaitick dames,
\!ho are, like lady RANDOLPH, full of virtue.
In raising RANDOLPH'sjealoufl I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom errs
V, ho thinks the worst he can of omankini.

AC T.

# ACT IV. SCENE I.

ACT IV. SCENE I.

Flouri/b of Trumpets.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH attended.
Lord Ran.SUmmon an hundred horse, by break of

S. day,
To wait our pleasure at the cattle gate.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.
Lady Ran. Alas! my lord! I've heard unwelcome

News;
The Danes are landed.

Lord Ran. Ay, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament essay,
Of some young knight refolv'd to break a spear,
And itain with hostile blood his maiden arms.
The Danes are landed: we must beat them back,
Or live the slaves of Denmark.

Lady Ran. Dreadful times !
Lord Ran. The fenceless villages are all forsaken;

The trembling mothers, and their children lodg'd
In well-girt towers and castles; whilf the men
Retire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return.

Lady Ran Immense, as fame reports, the Danili

host!
Lord Ran. Were it as num'rous as loud fame ie-

ports,

An army knit like ours wou'd pierce it thro':
Brothers, that shrink not from each others fide,
And fond companions, fill our warlike files:
For his dear offspring, and the wife he lo'ts,

C The

The husband, and the fearless father arm.
In vulgar breafs heroic ardor burns,
And the poor paafant mates his daring lord.

Lady Ran. Men's minds are temper'd, like their

swords, for war:

Lovers of danger, on deftrucion's brink
They jov to rear erec their daring forms.
Hence, early graves; hence the lone widow's life;
And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age..
V. here is our gallant guest ?

Lord Ran. Down in the vale

I left him, managing a fiery steed,
Whole itubbornnefs had foil'd the strength and skill
Of every rider. But behold he comes,
In earneli conversation with GLENALVON.

Enter NORVAL afl/GLENALVON',

GLEN.ALVOX ! with the lark arise; go forth,
And lead my troops that lye in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
NORVAL, thou goei with me. But fay, young man,
Where didll thou learn so to discourse of war,
And in such terms, as I o'erheard to day?
War is no village science, nor it's phrase
A language taught amongst the fnepherd swains.

Aorv. Small is the fdill my lord delights to praise

In him he favours. - Hear from whence it came.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the most remote
And inaccellible by lhepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit liv'd ; a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our wand'ring swains.
Auitere and lonely; cruel to himself,
Did they report him; the cold earth-his bed,
Water his drink, his food the (hepherds alms.
I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
With reverence and pity. Mild he spake,
And, entring on discourse, such stories told
As made me oft revisit his fad cell
for he had been a soldier in his youth;

And

And fought in famous battles, when the peers
Of Europe, by the bold GODFREDO led,
AgainRf th' usurping Infidel difplay'd
The cross of Christ, and won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech itruck from me, the old man wou'd flake
His years away, and aEt his young encounters:
Then, having shew'd his wounds, he'd fit him down,
And all the live-long day discourse of war.
To help my fancy, in the smooth green turf
He cut the fighres of the marflall'd hosts;
Defcrib'd the motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm.
For all that Saracen, or Christian knew
Of war's vaif art, was to this hermit known.

Lord Ran. Why did this soldier ;n a defart hide
Those qualities, that shou'd have grac'd a camp ?

Ntor1,. That too at last I learn'd. Unhappy man!.

Returning homewards by Meflina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boift'rous captain of the sea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought:
The stranger fell, and with his dying breath
Declar'd his name and lineage. Mighty God!
The soldier cried, my brother! Oh.! my brother!

Lady Ran. His brother!
Norv. Yes; of the fame parents born;

His only brother. They exchang'd forgiveness:
And happy, in my mind, was he that died:
For many deaths has the survivor fuffer'd.
In the wild defart on a rock he fits,
Or on some nameless fIream's untrodden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times, alas! not in his perfet: mind!
Holds dialogues with his lov'd brother's ghioft
And oft each night forsakes his fillen couch,
To make fad orisons for him he flew.

Lady Ran. To what mysterious woes are mortals

born!
In this dire tragedy were there no more

C 3 Unhappy

Unhappy persons ? did the parents live ?

Ncrv. No; they were dead: kind heav'n had clos'd

their eyes
Eefore their son had shed his brother's blood.

Lord Ran. Hard is his fate; for he was not to

blame !

There is a destiny in this flrange world,
V\hich oft decrees an undeserved doom!
Let ifcoolmen tell us why. -From whence these

founds ?

[Trumpets at a daifance.]

Enter an OFFICER.
OCJf.r. MIly Lord, the trumpets of the troops of

Lorn:
Tieir aia:nt leader ksils the noble RANDOLPH.

Lord Ran. Mine ancient guest ! does he the warriors

lead ?
Has Denmark rous'd the brave old knight to arms?

Office. No ; worn with warfare, he resigns the

sword.

His elde4 hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
how leads his kindred bands.

Lord Ran. GLENALVON, go,

Vith hofpimlity's most strong request
Entreat the chief

[Exit GLENALVON.]

Offcer. My lord, requeits are vain.

He urges on, impatient of delay,-
Stung v:ith the tidings of the foe's approach.

Lord Ran. May. victory fit on the warrior's plume !

E;areil of men! his flocks and herds are faie;
R( mote from. war's alarms his pastures lye,
By mountain: inaccesible fecur'd:
Yet fjremoit he into the plain descends,
Eze.: to bleed in battles not hisown.
Such .: ere the heroes of the ancient world:
Ccniemners they of indolence and gain;
liut fri! for love of glory, and of arms,
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift

Against

Against each ifrong antagonist the spear.
I'll go and press the hero to my breast.

[Exit RANDOLPH.]

Malnent Lady RANDOLPH andNORVAL.
Lady Ran.. The soldier's loftiness, the pride and

pomp

Inverting awful war, NORVAL, Ifee,
Transport thy youthful mind.

Naorv. Ah! ihould they not?

B!est be the hour I left my father's house!
I might have been a shepherd all my days,
And fRole obscurely to a peasant's grave.
Now, if I live, with mighty chiefs I stand;
And, if I fall, with noble duff I lye.

Lady Ran. There is a,gen'rous spirit in thy breast,

That could have well futaain'd a prouder fortune,
This way with me; under yon spreading beech,
Unseen, unheard, by human eye or ear,
I will amaze thee with a wond'rous tale.

No,,v. Let there be danger, lady, with the secret,

That I may hug it to my grateful heart,
And prove my faith. Command my sword, my life:
These are the sole possessions of poor NORVAL.

Lady Ran. Know'ft thou these gems ?
Nor.v. Durfl I believe mine eyes-
I'd fay I knew them, and they were my father's.

Lady Ran. Thy father's lay'ft thou! ah ! they were

thy father's !

Norv'. Ifaw them once, and curiously enquir'

Of both my parents whence such splendor came ?
But I was check'd, and m'ore could never learn.

Lady Ran. Then learn of me thou art notNoRYAL'S

son.

NATorv. Not NoRvAL's son!
Lady Ran. Nor of a shepherd sprung.
Nor'v. Lady, who an I then ?
Lady Ran. Noble thou art;
For noble was thy fire!

NArv. I will believe

C4 O

O ! tll me farther! Say vho was my father?

La?.y Ran. DOUG-LAS !
NViv. Lord DOUGLAS, whom to day saw?
Lady Ran. His younger brother.
A7r:,-. And in yonder camp ?
Lady Ran. Alas !
A',rv. You make me tremble-Sighs and tears!
Lives nv brave father ?'

LZdv Ran. Ah !. too brave indeed !
He fell in battle ere thyself was born.

N'A-r. Ah me unhappy ! ere I sav the lght ?

But does my mother live ? I may conclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been :orrow.

Lady Ran. She lives; but wafies her life in contlant

wvoe,
Weeping her husband slain, her infant loft.

NVr. You that are fkill'd so well in the fad flory

Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Beail their deliny , now have compaflion
TUp-n the oiF-?ringof the friends you lov'd.
O ! tell me who, and where my mother is !
Oppreft by a ba e world, perhaps she bends
l;caeath the wveight of other ills than grief;
And de'clate, implores of heav'n, the aid
Iler son i'o id gve. It is, it mull be o -
Your countenance confesses that Ihe's wretched.
C tlli me her condition ! Can the sword-
Who fiall refif me in a parent's cause?
Lady Ran. Thy virtue ends her woe. -My son, my

son!
I am thy mother, and the wife of DOUGLAS !

[Falls upon his neck.
Ni7rv. 0 heav'n and earth, how wond'rousis my

f-te!
Art thou my mother ? Ever let me kneel!

Lady Ran. Image of DOUGLAS! Fruit of fatal

love !
All that I owe :hv fire I pay to thee.

,VKrJ. Refpe& and admiration frill posiess me,

Checking the love and fondness of a son.
YT; I was fiiM to my humble parents.

But

But did my fire surpass the reft of men,
As thou excelleft all of womankind ?
- Lady Ran. Arise, my son ! In me thou dost behold
The poor remains of beauty once admir'd:
The autumn of my days is come already;
For sorrow made my fummerhaffe away.
Yet in my prime I equal'd not thy father:
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet sometimes
'Liker the dove's, and as he pleas'd, he won
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

Norv. How did he fall ? Sure 'twas a bloody field
When DoUGLAS died. O I have much to alk!

Lady Ran. Hereafter thou (halt hear the lengthen'd

tale

Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
At present this: Thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder castle, and the wide domains
Which now Lord RAXDOLPtI, as my husband, holds.
But'thou Shalt not be wurong'd ; I have the power
To right thee still: -Before the king I'll kneel,
And call Lord DOUGLAS to protect his blood.

Nor'v. The blood of DOUGLAS will protect itself .;
Lady Ran. But we (hall need both friends and favour,

boy.

To wrest thy lands and- lordlhip from the gripe
Of RANDOLPH and his knfinan. Yet I think
MA tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
My life incline the virtuous to believe.

aNorv. To be the fonof DOUGLAS IS to me

Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in the field I'11 seek for fame and fortune.

Lady :Ran. Thou dost not know what perils and in-

juifice

Await the poor man's valour. 0 ! my son!
The noblest blood in all the land's abalh'd,
Having no lacquay but pale poverty.
Too long haft thou been thus attended, DOUGLAS !
Too long haft thou been deem'd a peasant's child.
The wanton heir of some inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in the youthful sports;
V, hilit thy indignant spirit fwell'd in vain !

C 5 Such

Such contumely thou no more thalt bear:
But how I purpose to redress thy wrongs
Must be hereafter told. Prudence directs
That we fiould part before yon chiefs return.
Rertre, and from thy ruftick follower's hand
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, dictated before
This caf!al opportunity arose
Of private conference. It's purport mark;
For as I there appoint we meet again.
L:ave me, my son! and frame thy manners fill
To NOF.VAL's, not to noble DoUGLAS' state.

Nwrv. I will remember. Where is NORVAL now ?
Tha: good old man.

Lady .ar.. At hand conceal'd he lies,

An u.fe:ul vwinefs. But beware, my son,
Or yo- GLENALVON; in his guilty breast
Resides a villain's shrewdness, ever prone
To fahle conjeture. He hath griev'd my heart.

NSrv. Has he indeed ? Then let yon faife GLsNAL-

VON
beware of me.

[Exit DOUGLAS.

Ma7tr Lady RANDOLPH.

Lady Ran. There burif the fmother'd flame!

O ! thou all righteous and eternal King!
W\ho fa:her of the ihtheriefs art caii'd,
Protect my son! -- Thy inspiration, Lord!
Hath fill d hi. bosom with that lacred fire,
Which in the breasts of his forefather's burn'd:
Set him on high like them, that he may ihine
The frar and glory of his native land !
Then let t e iminifter of death descend,
And becr my wiling spirit to it's place.
Yonder they come. How do bad women find
Unchanging - :ic-ts to conceal their guilt ?
\Vhen I by reason, and by j.ifice urg'd,
Full hardl can di'femble with these men'
in na:u:e s pi:us caule.

EHIIP-

Enter Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.

Lord Ran. Yon gallant chief,
Of arms enamour'd, all repose disclaims.

Lady Ran. Be not, my Lord, by his example fway'd:.

Arrange the business of to-morrow now,
And when you enter, speak of war no more.

[Exit Lady RANDOLPH.

Manent Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.
Lord Ran. 'Tis so by heav'n! her mien, her voice,.

her eye,
And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

Glen. He parted from her now: Behind the mount,
Amongif the trees, I saw him glide along.

Lord Ran. For fad fequeller'd virtue Ihe's renown'd !
Glen. Most true, my Lord.
Lord Ran. Yet this diftinguifh'd dame

Invites a youth, the acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This assignation, (I/e'us a letter) the affallin freed,
Her manifefr affection for the youth,
Might breed suspicion in a husband's brain,
Whose gentle consort all forlove had wedded:
Much more in mine. MATILDA never lov'd me.
Let no man, after me, a woman wed,
Whose heart he knows he has not; tho' ihe brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry:
For let her seem, like the night's ihadowy queen,
Cold and contemplative; - He cannot trust her:
She may, she will, bring shame and sorrow on him;
The worst of sorrow, and the worst of shames!

Glen. Yield not, my Lord, to such - affliting

thoughts;

But let the ipirit of an hulband sleep,
'Till your own senses make a sure conclusion.
This billet muff to blooming No RVA L go;
At the next turn awaits my trusty spy;
I'll give ithim refitted for his mailer.

Ins

In the close thicket take your secret frand;
The moon shines bright, and your own eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

Lord Ran. Thou dot counsel well.
GiLn. Permit me now to make one flight essay.

Of ail the trophies which vain mortal's boast,
Ev wit, by valour, or by wisdom won,
'The firt and fairest, in a young man's eye,
s vwoman's captive heart. Successful love
\\ ith glorious fumes intoxicates the mind;
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Lord Ran. And what avails this maxim ?
G.';. Much, my lord !

\Withdraw a little: I'll accost young NORVAL,
Apd with ironical derisive counsel
Explore his spirit. If he is no more
Than humble NORVAL, by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as he is, he'll shrink aftoniih'd from me:
But if he be the favourite of the fair,
Lov'd by the firlt of Caledonia's dames,
Hell turn upon me, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.

Lord Ran. 'Tis shrewdly thought.
Glen. When we grow loud, draw near. But let my

Lord
His rising wrath restrain. [Exit RANDOLPH.

Manet GLENALVON.

GCI!. 'Tis frange by heav'n!

That fie lhould run full tilt her fond career,
To one so little known. She too that seem'cd
Pure as the winter stream, when ice embofs'd
Whitens it's course. Even I did think her chaste,
Whose chariry exceeds not. Precious sex!
Whose deeds lascivious pass GLENALVON'S thoughts !

NORVAL aippears

His port I love; he's in a proper mood
To chide the thunder, if at him it roar'd.
Has NOP.VAL seen the troops ?

Nsrwv,

Norv. The setting fun,

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale,
And as the warriors mov'd, each polish'd helm,
Corftet, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at it's top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they feem'd,
An host angelic, clad in burning arms.

Glen. Thou talk'ft it well; no leader of our hot,
'In founds more lofty, speaks of glorious war.

Norv. If I shall e'er acquire a leader's name,

My speech will be less ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itself freely; since no part is mine
Of praise, pertaining to the great in arms.

Glen. You wrong yourself, brave fir; your martial

deeds

Have rank'd you with the great: but mark me,NoRVA L;
Lord RANDOLPH'S favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know these soldiers; counsel you.
Give them all honour; seem not to command;
Else they will scarcely brook your late sprung power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

Norv. Sir, I have been accuftom'd all my days

To hear and speak the plain and simple truth:
And tho' I have been told, that there are men
Who borrow friendlhip's tongue to speak their scorn,
Yet in such language I am little Ikill'd.
Therefore I thank GLENALVON for his counsel,
Altho' it founded harlhly. Why remind
Me of my birth obscure ? Why slur my power
With such contemptuous terms?

Glen. I did not mean
To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

Norov. My pride
Glen. Suppress it as you wilh to prosper.

Your pride'sexceffive. Yet for RANDOLPH s fake
I will not leave you to it's rash direction.
If thus you swell, and frown at high-born men,
Will high-born men endure a shepherd's scorn ?

Narv. A faepherd's scorn!

Glet,

Glen. Yes; if you presume

To bend on soldiers there disdainful eyes,
As if you took the measure of their minds,
And said in secret, you're no match for me;
What will become of you ?

Nsrv. If this were told! [AfJt.
Haft thou no fears for thy presumptuous self!

Gle. Ha! Dost thou threaten me ?
Nsrv. Didti thou not hear?
Glen. Unwillingly I did; a nobler foe
Had not been queftion'd thus. But such as thee -

Asirv. Whom dofl thou think me ?
Glen. Norval.
ATorv. So I am
And who is NORVAL in GLENALVON'S eyes?

Glen. A peasant's son, a wandering beggar-boy;
At befl no more, even if he speaks the truth.

ATsrJ. False as thou art, dolt thou fufpea my truth?
Glen. Thy truth! thou'rt all a lye; and false as hell
Is the vain-glorious tale thou told't to RANDOLPH.

Arrv. Ifl were chain'd, unarm'd, and bedrid old,

Perhaps I hould revile: But as I am
I have no tongue to rail. The humble NORVAL
Is of a race, who ifrive not but with deeds.
Did I not fear to freeze thy shallow valour,
And make thee fink too soon beneath my sword,
I'd tell thee-what thou art. I know thee well.

G!en. Dost thou not know GLENALVON, born to

command
Ten thouflid slaves like thee ?

N.Arv. Villain, no more:

Draw and defend thy life. I did deSgn
To have defy'd thee in another cause:
But heaven accelerates it's vengeance on thee.
Now for my own and Lady RANDOLPH'S wrongs.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.
Lord Ran. Hold, I command you both. The man

that firs
Makes me his foe.

- ' Asrv,

rorv. Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly founded, noble RANDOLPH.

Glen. Hear him, my lord; he's wond'rous conde.
scending!
Mark the humility of hepherd NORVAL !

Norv. Now you may fcoffin safety.

(Sheaths his fvord.)

Lord Ran. Speak not thus,

'Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

Norv. Nay, my good lord, tho' I revere you much,

My cause I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I bluih to speak; I will not, cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words that I from him have borne.
To the liege-lord of my dear native land
I owe a fubjea's homage: but ev'n him
And his high arbitration I'd reject.
Within my bosom reigns another lord;
Honour, sole judge and umpire of itself.
If my free speech offend you, noble RANDOLPH,
Revoke your favours, and let NORVAL go
Hence as he came, alone, but not dilhonour'd.

Lord Ran. Thus far I'll mediate with impartial

voice:

The ancient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
Sufpead your purpose, 'till your country's arms
Repel the bold invader: then decide
The private quarrel.

Glen. I agree to this.
Norv. And I.

Enter SERVANT.

Serv. The banquet waits.
Lord Ran. We come. [Exit RANDOLPH;
Glen. Norval,

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of RANDOLPH.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkl'd hate,
Shall slain my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow

Nor

# ACT V. SCENE I.

Nor let our strife diflurb the gentle dame.

A'r-v. Think not so lightly, Sir, of my resentment:
When we contend again, our itrife is mortal.

ACT V. SCENE I.

The Wood.

Enter DOUGLAS.

HIS is the place the center of the grove.
Here frands the oak, the monarch of the wood.

How fv-eet and solemn is this mid-night scene!
The fiveer moon, unclouded, holds herway
Thro' fides where I could count each little flar.
The fanning weft wind scarcely stirs the leaves;
The river, rulfing o'er its pebbled bed,
Imposes silence with a frilly found.
In such a place as this at such an hour,
Ifancei..v can be in aught believ'd,
Descending spirits have convers'd with man,
And told the secrets of the world unknown.

Enter Old NORVAL.
Old ATsr,. 'Tis he. But what if he Lhould chide me

hence ?
His julf reproach I fear.

[DOUGLAS turns andfees him.

Forgive, forgive,

Can'st thou forgive the man, the selfish man,
Who bred Sir -MA LCOLM's heir a shepherd's son.

Ds.g. Kneel not to me: thou art my father still:

Thy rwih'd for presence now compleats myjoy.
Welcome to me, my fortunes thou flalt snare,
And ever honour'd with thy DOUGLAS live.

Old

Old Alortv. And do'st thou call me father? 0 my

son!

I think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
Which in the wilderness so long conceal'd
The blossom of thy youth.

Doug. Not worle the fruit,

That in the wilderness the blossom blow'd.
Amongf the shepherds, in the humble cote,
I learn'd some lessons, which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; and, when my vassals bow,
NORVAL f a-ll smooth the crested pride of DOUGLAS.

Nortv. Let me but live to fee thine exaltation I

Yet grievous are my fears. O leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

Dong. Why Ihould I leave them ?
Norv. Lord RANDOLPH and his kinsman seek your

life.

Doug. How know'ft thou that?
Norv. I will inform you how.

When evening came, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And fondly trod in each accuftom'd path
That to the castle leads. Whilst thus I rang'd,
I was alarm'd with unexpeted founds,
Of earnet voices. On the persons came:
Unseen I lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other as they talk'd, lord RANDOLPH this,
And that GLENALVON : ftillofyou they spoke,
And of the lady: threatning was their speech,
Tho' but imperfetly my ear could hear it.
'Twas strange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Doug. Revenge ! for what ?
Norv. For being what you are;

Sir MALCOLM'S heir: how else have you offended ?
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there fat muting how I belt might find
Means to inform you of their wicked purpose,

But

But I could think of none: at lafi perplex'd
I issued forth, encompailing the tower
With many a weary siep and wilhful look.
Now providence hath brought you to my fight,
Let not your too courageous spirit scorn
The caution which I give.

Doug. I scorn it not.

My mother warn'd me of GLEN:ALVON'S bafeners:
But I will not fi;upea the noble RANDOLPH.
In our encounter with the vile afaflins,
I mark'd his brave demeanor: him I'll trust.

'9-v. I fear vou will too far.

Doug. Here in this place

I wait my mother's coming: ihe'fiall know
What thou haft told: her couniel I will follow:
And cautious ever are a mother's counsels.
You mufr depart; your pretence may prevent
Our Interview.

NSr'v. My blefing ref upon thee!
0 may heav'n's hand, which fav'd thee from the

wave,

And from the fvword of foes, be near thee till;
Turning mischance, if aught hangs o'er thy head,
All upon mine !

[Exit Old NORVAL,.

D.u. He loves me like a parent;

And must not, ihall not lose the son he loves,
Altho' his son has found a nobler father.
Eventful day; how haft thou chang'd my fa e !
Once on the cold, and winter Ihaded fide
Of a bleak hill, miichance had rooted me,
Never to thrive, child of another foil:
Transplanted now to the gay funny vale,
LiLe the green thorn of May my fortune flowers.
Ye glorious lars! high heav'n's replnendent holl!
To whom I oft ave of my lot complain'd,
Hear and record my foul's unalter'd wilh !
Dead or alive, let me bur be reno:n'd !
May heav'n inspire some £rrce gigantic Dane,
To give a ,old defiance to our hot !
B:fore he speaks it out I will accep;;

Like

Like DOUGLAS conquer, or like DOUGLAS die.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

Lady Ran. My son! I heard a voice-_
Doug. - The voice was mine.
Lady Ran. Didft thou complain aloud to nature's ear,

That thus in dulky ihades, at mid-night hburs,
By fealth the mother and the son fcould meet ?

[Embracing him.
Doug. No; on this happy day, this better birth-

day,
My thoughts and words are all of hope and joy.

Lady Ran. Sad fear ard melancholy fill divide

The empire of my breast with hope and joy.
Now hear what I advise.

Doug. Firfi, let me tell
What may the tenor of your counsel change.

Lady Ran. My heart forebodes some evil!
Doug. 'Tis not good-

At eve, unseen by RANDOLPH and GLENALVO;,
The good old NORVAL in the grove o'er-heard
Their conversation: oft they mention'd me
With dreadful threatnings; you they sometimes nam'd.
'Twas strange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Lady Ran. Defend us, gracious God! we are bee

tray'd:

They have found out the secret of thy birth;
It must be so. That is the great discovery.
Sir MALCOLM'S heir is come to claim his own;
And they will be reveng'd. Perhaps even now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for murder, they but wait
A darker and more fi!ent hour to break
Into the chamber where they think thou fleep'ft.
This moment, this, heav'n hath ordain'd to save

thee !
Fly to the camp, my son !

Doug. And leave you here ?

No: to the castle let us go together,
Call up the ancient servants of your house,

WhQ

W:o in their youth did eat your father's bread.
Then tell them loudly that I am your son.
If in the breafis of men one spark remains
Of sacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your caue vw.ill arm. I ask but few
To drive those fr. ilrs from my father's house.

Lady Rra.. O nature, nature! what can check thy

force ?

Thou genuine offspringof the daring DOUGLAS !
But nru; not on dc'iruion: save thyself,
And I am fife. To me they mean no harm.
Thy iary but riks t"v precious life in vain.
Th : winding pa.h coaducIs thee to the river.
Crof. where tiou feet a broad and beaten way,
'Which runnig eaftv.'ard leads thee to the camp.
Inflant demand admittance to Lord DOUGLAS.
Shew hi these jewels, which his brother wore.
Thy look, thy voice, v.ill make him feel the truth,
MWhich I by. certain proof will soon confirm.

Dc:?e. I yield me and obey: but yet my heart

Bleeds at this parting. Something bids me stay
And guard a mother's life. Of: have I read
Of w.ond'rous deeds by one bold arm atchiev'd.
Our foes are two; no more: let me go forth,
And fee if any shield can guard GLENALVON.

Lady Ran. If thou regard'ft thy mother, or rever's

Thy father's mem'ry think of this no more.
One thing I have to fay before we part:
Long wert thou loft; and thou art found, my child,
In a mofl fearful season. War and battle
I have great cause to dread. Too well I fee
Wlhich way the current of thy temper sets :
To day I've found thee. Oh ! my long loft hope !
If thou to giddy valour giv'f the rein,
To morrow I may lore my son for ever.
The love of thee, before thou faw'ft the light,
Suftain'd my life when thy brave father fell.
If thou fait fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this wafle world ! mv son, remember me!

Doig. What shall I fay ? how can I give you com-

fort ?

The

The God of battles of my life dispose
As may be best for you ! for whose dear fake
I will not bear myself as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boast founds amongst martial men.
Hlow will inglorious caution suit my claim ?
The post of fate unflrinking I maintain.
My country's foes muff witness who I am.
On the invaders heads I'll prove my birth,.
'Till friends and foes confers the genuine strain.
If in this firife I fall, blame not your son,
Who if he lives not honour'd, must not live.

LadyRan. I will not utter what my bosom feels.

Too well I love that valour which I warn.
Farewell, my son! my counfcls are but vain.

[Embracing.
And as high heaven hath wil'd it all must be. [separates.

Lady Ran. Gaze not on me, thou wilt milfake the

path;
I'll point it out again.

[JyI/ ais they are Jeparatin, enter from the wood

Lo'rdRANDOLPH aidGLENALvo'N.]

Lord Ran. Not in her presence.
Now

Glen.. I'm prepar'd.
Lord Ran. No: I comm'and thee stay.

I go alone: it never shall be said
''hat I took odds to.combat mortal man.
The noblest vengeance is the most compleat.

[Exit Lord RANDOLPH.]
[GLENALVON mtaes some neps to the fwnefie of the

jiage,: li/lens njidf/eanks.]

Glen. Demons of death come little on my sword,

And to a double slaughter guide it home !
The lover and the huiband both must die.

[Lord RANDOI P be'.td tbefceres..]

Lord Ran. Draw, Villain! draw.
Doug. Aflail me not, Lord RANDOLPH;
Not as thou lov t thy self.

[Ch,/afig of fJwords.]
[GLENALVON tininig out.]

Now

Now is the time.
Enter Lady R.ANDO LPH at tbe Oppofitefide of the Jfage,

faint and breatblfs.
Lady Ran. Lord RAIDOLPH hear me; all /hall be

thine own:
But spare ! 0 spare my on !

Eter DOUGLAS swith afvordin each band.

,IMy mother's voice
I can protea thee still.

Lady Ran. He lives, he lives:

For this, for this to heaven eternal praise !
But sure I saw thee fall.

Doug. It was GLENALVON.

Just as my arm had mafter'd RAN.DOLPH'S fvord,
The villain came behind me; but I flew him.

Lady Ran. Behind thee ! Ah; thou'rt wounded! 0

my child,
How pale thou look's ! and shall I lose thee now ?

Dcug. Do not despair: I feel a little faintness;
I hope it will not lal.

[Leans upon hisfword]

Lady Ran. There is no hope !
And we must part! the hand of death is on thee !

my beloved child! 0 DOUGLAS, DOULAS !

[Do u G CAs grovwig more andn orefaint. ]
Doug. Too loon we part: I have not long been

DOUGLAS.

O defliny! hardly thou dealftwith me:
Clouded and hid, a stranger to myself,
In low and poor obscurity I liv'd.

Lady Ran. Has heav'n preferv'd thee for an end like

this ?

Doug. 0 had i fallen as my brave fathers fell,

Turning with fatal arm the tide of battle!
Like them I {sou!d have fiil'd and welcom'd death.
But thus to perif by a villain's hand!
Cut off from nature's and from glory's course,
Which never mortal was so fond to run.

Lady

Lady Ran. Hear juflice! hear! are these the fruits

of virtue? [DouGLAsfalls.]
Doug. Unknown I die; no tongue shall speak of

me. -

Some noble spirits, judging by themselves,
May yet conjecture what I might have prov'd,
And think life only wanting to my fame:
But who lhall comfort thee?

Lady Ran. Despair! despair!
Doug. 0 had it pleas'd high heaven to let me live

A little while !- my eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apace! my mother-- [Dies.

Enter Lord RANDoLPH andAN NA.
Lord Ran. Thy words, the words of truth, have

pierc'd my heart.

I am the ftain'of knighthood and of arms.
Oh ! if my brave deliverer frvives
The traitor's liord-

Anna. Alas ! look there, my lord.
Lord Ran. The mother and her Ton ! How curst I

am !

Was I the cause ? No: I was not the canfe.
Yon matchless villain did reduce my foul
To frantic jealousy.

Anna. My lady lives:

The agony of grief hath but fuppreft
A while her powers.

Lord Ran. But my deliverer's dead !

The world did once esteem Lord RANDOLPH well,
Sincere of heart, for spotless honour fam'd:
And, in my early days, glory I gain'd
Beneath the holy banner of the cross.
Now past the noon of life, shame comes upon me;
Reproach, and infamy, and public hate,
Are near at hand : for all mankind will think
That RANDOLPH basely ftab'd Sir MA L C L M'S heir.

[Lady RA N D o H recovering.
Lady Ran. Where am I now ? f il in this wretched

world

Grief

Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine.
My youth was worn in anguifli: but youth's strength,
With hope's affiiance, bore the brunt of sorrow;
And train'd me on to be the obje& now,
On which omnipotence displays itself,
Making a spectacle, a tale of me,
To awe it's vassal, man.

Lord Ran. 0 misery !

Amidst thy raging grief I must proclaim
MIy innocence.

Lady Ran. Thy innocence !
Lord Ran. My guilt
Is innocence, compared with what thou think'ft it.

Lady Ran. Of thee I think not: what have I to

de

With thee, or any thing ? My son ! my son !
Mly beautiful! my brave! how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy valour ! my fond heart
O'erflow'd this day with transport, when I thought
Of gro.ing old amidrf a race of thine,
Who might make up to me their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and my hutband's name:
Now al! my hopes are dead ! A little while
Was I a wi fe! a mother not so long!
What am I now? - I know. - But I shall be
That only whilit I please; for such a son
And such a hufoand make a woman bold.

[Runs out.
Lord Ran. Follow her, ANNA: I mnyfelf would

follow,
But in this rage fae mut abhor my pretence.

[Exit ANNA.

Enter Old NORVAL.
Xirv. I heard the voice of woe; heaven guard my

child!

Lord Ran. Already is the idle gaping croud,

The spiteful vulgar, come to gaze on RANDOLPH.
Begone.

s=r-.v. I fear thee not. I will not not go. H

Here

iere I'll remain; I'm an accomplice, Lord,
With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help
To crulh down to the ground this lovely plant.
0 noblest youth that ever yet was born !
Sweetest and best, gentlelt and bravest spirit,
That ever blest the world ! Wretch that I am,
Who saw that noble spirit swell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it I
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do thee jullice, and reveal the secret,
Which timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's snare. Oh! I am punifh'd now!
These are the hairs that should have itrew'd the ground,
And not thelocks of DOUGLAS.

[Tears his hair, and thrown

himself upon the ground.

Lord Ran. I know thee now :'thy boldness I forgive:

My crest is fallen. For thee I will appoint
A place of reft, if grief will let thee reft.
I will reward, altho' I cannot punilh.
Curst, curst GLENAL V ON, he efcap'd too well,
Tho' slain and baffled by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the last,
Cursing his conqueror, the felon dy'd.

Enter ANNA.

Anna. My Lord, my Lord !
Lord Ran. Speak: I can hear of horror.
Anna. Horror indeed!
Lord Ran. MATILDA?
Anna. Is no more:

She ran, she flew like light'ning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice Ihe gain'd,
Beneath whose low'ring top the river falls
Ingulph'd in rifted rocks: thither flie came,
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down

Lord Ran. 'Twas I ! alas! 'twas I

That fill'd her breast with fury; drove her down
The precipice of death ! Wretch that I am !

D Anea.

ASa. 0 had you seen her last despairing look!

Upon the brink fe flood, and cast her eyes
Dov-n on the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heaven, seeming to fay,
Why am I forc'd to this ? She plung'd herelf
into the empty air.

Lord Ran. I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the passion of my foul.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These woundsthe gratitude of RANDOLPH gave.
They speak aloud, and with the voice of fate
Denounce my doom. I am refolv'd. I'll go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me :urn aside must threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy mistress, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
With colt and pomp upon their funerals wait:
For RA DOLPH hopes he-,aer fall return.

F I N I S.

# EPILOGUE. Spoken by Mr. BARRY.

EPILOGUE.

Spoken by Mr. B ARRY.
A N Epilogue I ajkd; but not one word

Our bard will write. He vows 'tis molt abJrd

With comic wit to contradic the frain
Of tragedy, and makeyour sorrows vain.
Sadly hefays, that pity is the beji,
The noblesl pa.ion of the human breafi:
For when itsfacredjfreams the heart o'er-flow,
In guShes pleasure with the tide of woe;
And when its waves retire, like those of Nile,
They leave behind them fiich a golden foil,
That there the virtues without culture grow,
There thefbweet blofoms of affedfion blow.
These were his words ;-void of delusive art
I felt them; for hefpoke tbem from his heart.
Nor will I now attempt, with witty folly,
To cbacs away celeflial melancholy.
