D O U G .L ...

T R A G D

As it is aaed at the
-T H E A T R E

N

GREAT B R I.-T A N
NON EGO SUvMVATES, SED PRtSCE CONSCIUS JV1;

BY THE RSVRBEN2
MR. JOHN HOME,

G L A S G o W:
,PitNTED BY ROBERT DUNCAN.

IM, DCC) LXXXVII.

·~~~~~~~-

/o
· '

SI, P -1~

i 7-OCT196s
<IBpe

# PROLOGUE Spoken by Mr. SPARKS.

P R 0 -L 0 G U

Spoken by -Mitt- SPARKS.

N antient times, when Britain's trade :vas arms,
-And the lov'd mufick of her youth alarms.
A god like race fuftain'd fair England's fame:
Who has not heard of gallant PI ERCY'S namc?
Ay, and of DGUGLAS ? Such illuRrious foes
In rival Rome and Carthage never rose !
fr0om.age to age bright shone the British fire,
And every hero was a hero's fire.
When powerful fate decreed one warrior's .doom,
Up sprung the Phoenix from his warrior's tomb,
But .whilf those genorous rivals fought and fell,
Those generous rivals lov'd each other well:
Though many a bloudy.field was loft and won,
Nothing in hate, in honour all was done,
.When PIERCY wrong'd. defy'd his prince or peers,
FaRt came the DOUGLAS, with his Scottish spears;
And, when proud DOUGLAS stade his king his foes
For DOUGLAS, PIERCY bent his English bow,
Expell'd their native homes by adverse fate,
They knock'd alternate.at each other's gate:
Then blaz'd the cattle, at the midnight hour,
For him whose arms had shook its firmell tower..

This night a DOUGLAS your protecion claims;

A wife ! a mother ! pity's fofterl names:
'1 he Aory of her woes indulgent hear,
And grant your fuppl'int ail file begs, a tear:
In confidence the begs; and hopes to find
Each English breast, like noble PIE tRCY's kind,

A 2

# DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

B1 E N.

LONDON. EDINBURGH.

Lord RANDOLPM Mr Ridout. Mr, Younger

GLENALvON, Mr, Smith. Mr. Love,

NOR.VAL, DovGLiAS, Mr. Barry. Mr. Digges.

STRANGER,. Mr. Sparks. Mr. Hayman.
SERVANT ,

W O M E N.
MAT ILDA, Lady )

Mrs. Woffington. Mrs. Ward

RANDOLPH, J
ANNA. Mrs. Vincent. YMrs. Hopkin

# ACT I. SCENE I.

DO U G L A S:

A

T R A G E D Y.

A C T I. S C E N E I.
The Court of a Caftce, JurroZnded with I;.;ds.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.
E woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom

Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws torth

The voice of sorrow from my btrlting heart,
Farewell a while: I will not leave you long;
Fur in your shades I deem some spirit dells,
Who from the chiding ltream or growing oak.
Still hears. and answers to Matilda's moan.
O DOUGLAS ! DOUGLAS! if departed ghols
Are e'er permitted to review thiLs world,
Within the circ'.: of the wood thou art,
And with the pafion of immortals hear'st
My lamentation: hear'lt thy wretched wife
Weep for her husband slain, her infant loft,
My brother's timeless death I seem to mourn,
Who perifl'd with thee on this fatal day.
To thee I left my voice; to thee address
The plaint which mortal ear has niver heard,
O disregard me not though i am cal;'d
Another's now, my heart is whoily thiue.
Incapable of change, aifecaiono ies
Buried my DOUGLAS, in thy -blooiy grave.
.ut Randolph coanes, whom fate ha; 4:ade my Lord,

To chide my anguish, and defraud the dead.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.
Ld. RAN. Again these weeds of woe ! fay, do'fl thou

well

To feed a pafion which consumes thy life
The living claim some duty; vainly thou
Beltow'ft thy cares upon the silent dead.

La. RAN. silent, alas ! is he for whom I mourn:

Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrancelives.
This fatal day firs my time fettled sorrow,
'Troubles afresh the fountain of my heart.

Ld. RAN. when was it pure of sadness ! Thefeblack

weeds

(Express the wonted colour of thy mind,
L For ever dark and dismal. Seven long years
&Are pass'd, since we were join'd by sacred ties:
Clouds all the while have hung upon thy brow,
\Nor broke, nor parted by one gleam of joy.
Time, that wears out the-traceof deepest anguilh,
k As the sea Cmopths the prints made in the sand,
Has past o'er thee in vain.

La. RAN. If time to come

Should prove as inneffecual, yet my Lord,
' Thou canfi not blame me. When our Scottish youth
' Vy'd with each other for my luckless love,
Oft I besought them, I implor'd them all
Not to afTail me with my father's aid,
N· or blend their better destiny with mine:
For melancholy had congeal'd riy blood,
· And fioze affe'9ion in my chilly breaf.
At lal my Sire, rous'd with the base attempt
* To force me from hinm, which thou rend'red'ft vain,
' To his own daughter bow'd his hoary head,
Besought me tb commniierate his age,
'And vow'd he fln u'd rot, cculd not die in peace,
Unless he saw me wedded; and fecur'd
Foim violence and outrage. '1 hen, my Lord -
In ry extreme dif!rces i cal'J on thee,

Thee I befpake, prosers'd my tirong desire
T1o lea'd a ingle, solitary life,
And begg'd thy nobleness,. not to demadd
a e-r~-f a wife whose heart was dead to love.

How thou perfiRed'ft after this, thou know'fl,
And must confefs-that am not unjust,
Nor more to thee than to myself injurious.

Ld. R AN. That I conses ; yet ever mull regret

The grief I cannot cure.' Would thou wert not
CompoPfd of grief and tenderness alone,
But had't :a spark of other passions in thee;
Pride, anger, vanity, the itrong delire
Of admiration, dear to woman kind;
These might contend with, and allay thy grief,
As meeting tide; and currents smooth our firth.

La. RAN. 'To such a cause the human mind oft owes
ts transient calm, a calm I envy not./
Ld. RAN. Sure thou art not the daughter of Sir Mal-

colm :

trong was his rage, eternal his rerentment:
'or when thy brother fell, he fmil'd to hear
rhat DouGcAS' son in the fame field was lain.
La. RAN. Oh ! rake not up the ashes of my fathers:
mplacable resen'tment was their crime,
nd grievous has the expiation been.
ontending with the DOUGLAS, gallant lives
f either house were los l; my ancestors
ompell'd, at last, to leave their antient feat
n Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
o heir is left. Had they not been so stern,
had not been the Jaf of all my race.
Ld. RAN. Thy grief'welfts to its purposes my words
never alk'd of thee that ardent love,
hich in the breadls of fancy's children burns.)
ecent affection- and complacent kindness
ere all I 'wisl'd for; but I wish'd in vain.
ence with the less regret my eyes behold
he form of war that gathers o'er this land:
I lhould perih by the 'Danish sword,

,Iatilda would not shed one tear the more.

La. RAN. Thou do'Et not think so: woful as I anit

I love thy merit, and elteem thy virtues.
But whither goeil thou now ?

Ld. Ran. Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on the tip-toe [lands
Of expestation, and impatient aoks
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are landed.

La. Ran. 0, iimay adverse winds,

Far from the coast of Scotland, drive their fleet!
And every soldier of both hoils return
In peace and safety to his pleasant home ?

Ld. Ran. Thou fpeak'ft a woman's, bear a warrior's

with:

Right from their native land, the flormy north.
May the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
Immoveab!e in Caledonia's frand !
Then shall our foes repent their bold invasion,
And roving armies shun the fatal Ihore.

La. Ran. War I detest ; but war with foreign foes,

Whose manner, language, and whore looks are firange,
Is not so horrid, nor to me so hateful,
'As that which with our neighbours oft we wage.
A river here, there an ideal line
By fancy drawn, divides the fifier kingdoms,
On each fide dwells a people similar,
' As twins are to each other, valiant both,
Both so, their valour famous through. the world;
'Yet will they'not untie their kindred arms,
And, if they must have war, wage difltat war <
But with each other fight in cruel conflict.
Gallant ii flrief, and noble in their ire,
The battle is their paflime. They go forth
Gay in the morning, as to summer sport:
"When ev'ning comes, the glory of the morn.
The youthful warrior is a clod of clay.
-Thus fall the prime of either hapless land:
-4'ni futh the fruit of Scotch and Eqglift wa

.~~~~~~~~~~~~
'

td Ran. I'11 hear no more: this melody would make

A soldier drop his sword, and doff his arms,
Sit down and weep the conquests he has made
Yea, (like a .monk), Ling relt and peace in heaven
To fouls of warriors in his battle'fain.
Lady, farewell Ileavethee not alone;
Yonder comes one ,whose love makes duty light. . Eci.

Enter An42a.

Ann. Forgive the raninefs of your Anna's love :

trg'd by affection, I have thus prefum'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts;
And warn you of the hours.that you negleFt
And lore in fadners.

La. Ran. So to iofe iy houts
is all the use I wi(h to make of time.

Ann. To blame thee, lady, suits not with .my site ,

lut sure I am, since death firt prey'd on man,
Never did filler thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been, if you had loft,
In early youth, the -utband of your heart ?

La. Ran. Oh !
,Ann. Have I diftreft you with.officious love,

And ill tim'd mention of your brother's fate ?
Forgive me, lady: humbly though I am, -
The,mind I bear partakes not of my fortune;
So 'fervently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

La. Ran. What power direted thy uneonfcious

tongue
To speak as thou haft done i to name-

Ann. I know not:

But since my words have made my miatrefs tremble,
I will speak so no more ; but silent mix
My tears with her's.

La. Ran. No, ;thou:(halt not be silent.

I'll trulf thy faithful love, and thou shalt be
Henceforth th' inilruted partner of my woes,
But what avails it ? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never ebbing time ?

B

'Compel the earth and ocean to give up
Their dead' alive?

Ann. What means my noble miflrefs ?
La.'R.n. Didft thou not afll what had my sorrows

been ?-

If I in early youth hadfl loft a husband ?-
fn the- cold bosom of the earth is lodg'd,
Mangl'd with wounds, the hulband of my youth;
And in folne cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his.:- --

/nn. 0 ! lady, molt rever'd t

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

La. Ran. Alas ! an ancient feud,

Hereditary evil, -was the source
Of-my misfortunes. Ruliag fate decreed,
That my brave brother fliould in battle save
The life of Doug/as' Con, our house's foe:
The Youthful warriors vow'd eternal friendship.
To fee the vaunted fitler of his friend.
Impatient, Douglas to Balarmo came,
Under a borrow'd name.-My heart he gain'd;
Nor did I long refuse the hand he begg'd:
Mly brother's presence authoriz'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little weeks, with wings of down,
Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd lord was call'd
1lo fight his father's battles; and with him,
In spite of all my tears, did Malcolm go.
Scarce were they gone, when stern fire was told
That the false stranger was lord Douglas' son.
F antick with rage, the Baron drew his sword
And qileltion'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
Kneeling beneath his sword, faul'trieg l.took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'cr would
Wed one of Douglas' name. Sincerity,
Thou firti of virtues, let no mortal leave
The onward path ! although the earth should gape,
And from the gulph of hell dellruCtion cry,
To tale diffimulatiqn's winding way.

( Ann. Alas ! how. few of woman's fearful kind
Durst own a truth Co hardy .!

La. Rad. The first truth

Is easiest to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale -
In a few days the dreadfultidings came
That Douglas and my brother both were slain.
My lord! my life / my husband --mighty God !
What had I done to merit such afflicaion ?

Ann. My'deareft lady !(many a tale of tears

I've listen'd to; but)never did I hear
A tale so fad as this.

La. Ran. In the firfl days

Of my diftraating grief, I found m-yself .-----' -
As women with to be who love their lords.
But who durf tell my father ?T'he good priest
Who join'd our hands, my brother's ancient tutor,
With his lov'd Malcolm, in the battle fe'l:
they two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence end concealment I refolv d.
Till time should make my father's fortune mine.
That very night on which nay ion was born,
My nurse, the only confident I had,
Set out with him to reach her sifter's house -
But nurse, or infant, have 1 never seen,
lor heard of, Anna, since that fatal hour.
dy murder'd child ' had thy fond mother sear'd
rhe'lofs of thee, she had loud fame defy,'d,
)efpis'd her father's rage, thy father's grief,
knd wander'd with thee through the scorning world.
.Ann. Not jeen or heard of! then perhaps lie lives.
La. Ran. No. It was dark December .wind and rain
[ad beat all night. Across the Carron lay
he deflin'd road; and in its swelling flood
!y faithful servant perifh'd with my chid.
hapless ton ! of a mo(s hapless fire -
it they are both at ref ; and I along
'well in this world of woe, condemn d to walk,
ke a guilt-troubl'd ghost, my painful ronds:

B 2

Nor has despiteful fate permitted me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Though dead to love, I was compell'd to wed
Randolph who fnatch'd me from a villains armis
And Randolph now poflefies these domairs,
That by Sir Malco!m's death on me devolv'd;
Domains, that should to Douglas' son have giv'n
A baron's title, and a baron's power.
Such were my soothing thoughts, while I bewaii'd
The flaughter'd father of a ftn unb6rn
And when that son came, like a' ray from heaven,
Which shines and difrppears; alas ! myrchild !
' ow long did thy fond mother grasp the hdpe
Of ha'viig.thee, she kkew hot how, reftor'd.
'Year after.yea'r hath worn her hope away;
' But left fill undiminifh'd her derire.

A.nnt.'The hand that fpinis th' uinven thread of life,
May smooth tte length that's yet'to coere of your's.

Ls. Ran. Nopt in this world : 'I have cobnfde'r'd well

Its various evils, and on whipm they fall.
Alas ! hoiv oft doe's goodrefs woiind itself,
' And sweet affeaion prove the fprihg of woe.
O ! had I dy'd when my lov'd husb'and fell I
And Tome good angel op'd to me thie 'boik
Of providence, and let'me reid my life,
My heart had broke, when I beheld the fum
Of ills, which one by'phie'l have-'entdur'd.

Ajnn. That God, whofi niinifters 'good angels are,

Hath shut the book in mercy to mankind;)
But we must leave this ihemc: GlenalvoTi'comes:
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful'eyes,
Aond. hitherwards he slowly fialks' his way.

La Ran. 1 will avoid him. -Ani ungraciou'spprfOn
Is doubly irkrome in an hour like this

Ann. Why speaks my lady thus of Raridolph's heir
La. Ran. Because he's not the heir 'of Rand6olpb

virtues.
- 'Subtle and shrewd, he offers to mankihb

An artificial image of himself:

And he with- afe can varyrto the taste
Of different men, its features. Self denied,
And matler of his appetites he seems:
But his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,
Watches to seize unseen the wifh'd-for prey.
Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
As in Glenalvon's unrelenting mind.
Yet he is brave and politic in war,
And-flands aloft in these unruly .times.)
Why I describe him thus l'il tell hereafter:
Stay and detain him till I reach the castle.

Exit Lady Randolph.

Ann. 0 happiness ! where art thou to be found ?

I fee thou dwellet not with birth and beauty,
Though grac'd with grandeur, and in wealth array'd ;
Nor dost thou, it would seem, with virtue dwell
Eife had this gentle lady mifs'd thee not. '

Enter G-LENALVON.

Glen. What dost thou muse on, meditating maid ?

Like forp entranc'd and visionary leer
On earth thou lland'ft, thy thoughts arcend to heaven.

Anzn. .Wou'd that I were, e'en as thou fay'ft, a seer,
To have my doubts by heavenly vision clear'd !

Gleri. Wlhat dost thou doubt of? what ha[l thou to do

W'it''fubjects intricate ' Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cadnot be queflion'd : think of these good gifts;
And then thy contemplations will be pleasing. !

inn. Let women view yon monument of woe,

Then boait of beauty ; who so fair as [he ?
Put'l rluft follow : this revolving day
Awakes the memory of her ancient woes.

Exit 4nna4

Gy.ENALVON folts.

So !-Lady Randolph (liuns me ; by and by
I'll woo her as the lion wooes his brides
The deed's a doing now, that makes me lord
Of these rich valleys, and a chief of power,
The season is most apt '^my founding fleps
Wtrill not be heard amr.dit the din of arms

# ACT II. SCENE I.

Randolph has liv'd too long iis better fate
H-ad the ascendant once, and kept me down:
When I had seiz'd the dame, by chance-he came,
,Refcu'd, and had the lady for his labour;
I fcap'd unknown :a slender consolation.!
' Heav'n is my witness that I do not love
To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harveil? Yet I am not fare:
By love, or Comething like it, flung inflam'd,
Madly I blabb'd my passion to his wife,
Ar1 flie has threaten'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will I do not know:
But well I know the baron's wrath is deadly.
1 will not live in fear : the man I dread
Is as a Dane to me ; ay, and the man
Who fiands betwixt me and my chief desire.
No bar but he ; (lie has no kinsman hear;
(No brother in his filter's quairel bold;
'And for the righteous caule. a stranger's caueJ.
1 know no chief that will defy Glenaivon.

A CT I. S C ENE I.
Enter Servants and a Jfranger at one door, and

Lady Randolph and A-nna at another.
La. Ran. W HAT means this clamour ? frranger I

speak secure;

HaR thou been wrong'd ? have these rude men prefun'd,
To vex the weary traveller on his way?

!ft Serv. By us no stranger ever fuffer'd wrong:

.This man with outcry .wild has call'd us forth;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
Enter Lord Randolph, and Young man, twith their

swords drntwn and bloody.
La. Ran. Not vain the franger's fears ! how fares

my Lord !

Ld. Ran. That it fares well, thanks to this gallant

youth,

,Vhofe valour fav'd me from a wretched death !
sdown the winding dale I walk'd alone,
t the crol way four men attack'd me:
overs, I judge, from the licentious camp,
ho would have quickly laid Lord Randolph low,
ad not this brave and generous stranger cme,
ike my good angel, in the hour of fate,
nd, mocking danger, made the foes his own.
hey turn'd upon him; but his aAive arm
truck to the gtound, from whence they rose no more,
he ficrcel two ; the others fled amain,
nd left him master of the bloody field,
peak, Lady Randolph; upon beauty's tongue
well accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
peak, noble dame, and thank him for thy lord.
La Ran. My lord, I cannot speak what now I feil,
ly heart o'erflows with gratitude to heaven,
ad to this noble youth,' who all unknown
o you and yours, deliberated not,
or paus'd at peril, but humanely brave
ought on your fide, against fnch fearful odds. .
ave .ou yet learn'd of him whom you should thank ?
horn. cal the fariour of Lord Randolph's life ?
Ld. Ran. I alk'd that question, and he anfwer'd not:
ut I must know who my deliverer is. (To theftranger.
Stran. A low born man, of parentage obscure,
rho nought can boait, but his desire to be
soldier, and to gain a name in aims.
Ld. Ran. Who'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled
the great king of kings i thou art ordain'd
nd ftampt a hero by the sovereign hand
f nature ! bluh not, ovower of modesty
well as valour, to declare thy birth.
Stran. My name is NORVAI': on the Grampian bills
y father feeds his flocks ; a frugalfv'ain,
bose confiant cares were to inrceafe his store,
ikeep his only son, myf,-lf, at hore.

For I had heard of battles an I lopg'd
To follow to the field Come warlike lord:
And heaven fooi granted what my fire denyld.
This moon which rose last night, round as .my flieild,
Had not yet fill'd her horns, when, by her light.
A band of fierce barbarians, from the hills,
Rulh'd like a torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The shepherds flei
For safety, and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'd about the enemy, and mark'd
The road they took, then hafled to my friends;
Whom, with a troop of :fifty chosen menj,
I met advancing. The pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook.the poil encunlber'd foe.
WVe fought and conquer'd. Ere a .sword was drawnj
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd.their chief,
Who. wore that day-the arms which I now wear.
Returning home in ;triumph, .1 di.dain'd
The shepherd's slothful life ; and having:heard
That our good king had funmmon'd his bold peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron fide,
I left my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to.condut my steps:-
Yon trembling coward who forsook his master.-
Journey.ing .with this intent, I past these towers,
And, heaven-.direaed, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

Ld. Ran. He.is as wife as brave. Was ever tale

With such a gallant.modefly rehears'd ?
My brave deliv'rer I thou shalt enter now
A nobler lift, .and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame.
I will present thee to our Scoti(h king,
Whose valiant spirit ever valour lov'd.
( Ha ! my Matilda I wherefore starts that tear ?

La. Ran. I cannot fay: for various affe&ion:,

And itrangely mingled, in my bosom fw11ll;
Tet each of them mray well command a tear.

t jy that thou art safe; and I admire
Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety >
tea, as my mind predicts, with thine his own.
Pbfcure and friendless, he the army fought,
3ent upon peril, in the rage of death
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, -and with the sword
ro gain diLtintion which his birth deny'd.
n this attempt unknown he might have perith'di
kndgain'd, with all his valour, but-oblivion.
ow grac'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
seneath despair. The soldier nowof hope
ie ftands'confpicuous; fame and great renown
rre brought within the compass of his sword.
)n this my mind refleaed, whilst you spoke,
And blefs'd the wonder-working Lord of heaven.

Ld. Ran. Pious and greatful ever are thy thoughts 3
jiy deeds ball follow where thou. point'ft the way,) -
'Jext to myself, and equal to Glenalvon,
n honour and command shall Norval be.
Norv. I know not how to thank you. Rude I am,
speech and manners : never till this hour
tood I in such a preSence: yet my lord,
here's something in my breast which makes me bold
o fay, that Norval ne'er will Ihame thy favour,
La. Ran. I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou Ihalt

be

y knight, and everj as thou didlt to day,
ith happy valour guard the life of Randolph.
Ld. Ran. Well haft thou spoke. Let me forbid reply,

(To Norval.

e are thy debtors flill; thy high desert
'ertops our gratitude. I must proceed,
was at first intended, to the camp.
me of my train I fee are speeding thither,
patient, doubtless, of their lord's delay.)
o with me, Norval. and thine eyes shall fee
.e chosen warriors of thy native land,
ho languish for the fight, and beat the air
ith brandilh'd swords

l~~~~-

Norv. Let us begone, my lord.
Ld. Ran. 'Tro Lady Randolph.] About the time that

the declining fun

Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hill suspend,
Expe& us to return. This night once more
Within there walls I reft; my tent pitch
To morrow in the field. Prepare the feast.
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
He in the eve of battle may resign
Himself to focial'pleafure: fweetefl then,
'When danger to a soldier's foul endears
The human joy that never may return.

Exeunt Randolph and Norvald

S C E N E II.

Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

La. Ran. His parting words have P(ruck a fatal truth,

O Douglas ! Douglas! tender was the time
When we too parted, ne'er to meet again !
How many years of anguish and despair
Has heav'n anex'd to those swift passing hours
Of love and fondness ! Then my bosom's flame
Oft, as blown back the rude breath of fear,
Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.

Ann. May gracious heav'n pour the sweet balm of

peace

Intoe the wounds that fester in your breaR !
For earthly consolation cannot cure them.

La. Ran. One only cure can heaven itself bestow ;-

A grave-that bed in which the weary reft.
Wretch that I am ! Alas! why am I so?
At every happy parent I repine !
How blef the mother of yon gallant Norval!
She for a living husband bore her pains,
And heard him bless her when a man was born:
She nurs'd her smiling infant on her breast:
Tended the child, and rcar'd the pleating boy:
She with affeaion's triumph, saw the youth

ya grace and comeliness surpass his peers:
Whilst I to a dead husband bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.

IAnn. Alas I alas ! why will you thus resume

Your grief afresh ? I thought that gallant youth
'Would for a while have won you from your woe.
On him intent you gazed, with a look
1Much more delighted, than your pensive eye
Has deign'd on other objects to bellow.

La. Ran. Delighted fay'it thou ? Oh ! even there

mine eye

Found fuel for my life consuming sorrow.
I thought, that bad the son of Douglas liv'd.
He might have been like this young gallant stranger,
And pair'd with him in features and in shape,
n all endowments, as inryears, I deem,
My boy with blooming Norval might have number'd,
Whilst thus I rnus'd, a spark from fancy fell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness
For this young firanger, wand'ring from his home,
and like an orphan cast upon my care,
will protect thee, (said I to myself)
,rith all my power, and grace with all my favour.
Ann. Sure heaven will bless so gen'rous a refolvc.
rou muRt, my noble dame, exert your power:
rou must awake: devices will be fram'd,
and arrows pointed at the breast of Norval.)

La. Ran. - Glenalvon's false and crafty head will woil
~gainft a rival in his kinsman's love.
f I deter him not: I only can.
Sold as he is, Glenalvon will beware
low he pulls down the fabrick that I raise.
id be the artist of young Norval's fortune.
Tis pleasing to admire: most apt was 1
o this affeaion in my better days;
hough now I seem to you shrunk up, retir'd
Vithin the narrow compass of my woe.
lave you not fonietimes seen an early flower
£pen its bad, and spread its fliken 'eaves. " :

C 2 -
*.. . . , *

To catch sweet airs, and odours to bestow;
Then, by the keen blat nipt, pull in its leaves,
And, though still living, die to scent and beauty ?
Fmblem of me: afflicion, like a florm,
Hath kill'd the forward bloflom of my heart.

Enter GiLEALVON.

Clen. Where is my dearest kinsman, noble Randolph?
La. Ran. Have you not heard, Gleaalvon of the

base--

Glen. I have : and that the villains may not 'scape,

With a strong band I have begirt the wood:
If they lurk there, alive they shall be taken,
And torture force from them th' importunt secret,
Whether some foe of Randolph hir'd their swords,
Or if-

La. Ran. That care becomes a kinsman's love.
I have a coufpel for Glenalvon's ear. EExit Anna.

Glen. To him your counsels always are commands.
La. Ran. I have not found so: thou art known to me.
Glen Known!
La Ran. And mofl certain is my cauSe of knowledge.
Glen. What do you know ? by the most blessed cross

You much amaze me. No created being,
Yourself except, durfi thus accost Glenalvon.

La. Ran. Is guilt so bold ? and dost thou make a merit

On thy pretended meekness ? This to me,
Who, with a gentleness which duty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd, what, if divulg'd,
Would make thee nothing; or, what's worse than that,
An outcast beggar, and unpity'd ton
For mortals shudder at a crime like thine.

Glen. Thy virtue awes me. First of womankind !

Permit me yet to fay, (that the found man
Whom love transports beyond flrict virtues boundsq
If he is brought by love to misery,
In fortune ruin'd, is in mind forlorn,
Unpity'd cannot be. Pity's the alms
Which on such beggars freely is beflow'd:
for motals know that love is fill their lords

And o'er their vain refolvts advances full:
As fire, when kindled by our shepherds, moves
Through the dry heath against the fanning wind.)

La. Ran. Reserve these accepts for some other ear

To love's apology I liflen not.
Mark thou my words; for it is meet thou llould'[t'
His brave deliv'rer Randolph here retains,
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well:
But, at thy peril, praEtife aught against him:
Let not thy jealousy attempt to (hake
And loosen the good root he has in Randolph;
Whose favourites I know thou half fupp'anted.
Thou look'ft at me, as if thou fain wouldiR pry
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution and put on
The crub, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendless firanger my proteClion claims:
His friend I am and be not thou his foe.

Sc EiNE lIT.

Manet GLENALVON.

Child that I was, to {tart at my own shadow,
And be the {hallow fool of coward conscience I
I am not what I have been; what I ficuld be.
-The darts of destiny have almost pierc'd
-My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I should conclude there was an arm above
That fought against me, and maligant turn'4,
To catch myself, the fubtil snare 1 set.,
Why rape and murder are not simple means !
Th' imperfe& rape to Randolph gave a spouse:
And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fun from me;
And word of all. a rival. Burning hell !
This were thy centre if I thought (le lov'd him !
?Tis certain Ihe contemns me; nay, commands me.n
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'cr nrc,

# ACT III. SCENE I.

-In his behalf. And (hall I thus be brav'd ?
-Cur'd, as she call it, by dame chalHty ?
-Infernal fiends. if any fiends there are
-More fierce than hate, ambition, and revenge,
-Rife up and fill. my bosom with your fires
-And policy remorseless ! Chance may spoil
-A ingle aim; but perseverance must
--Prosper at last. For chance and fate are words;
-Perfiltive wisdom is the fate of man.
Darkly a projec peers upon my mind,
(Like the red moon when rising in the eatl,
-Crofs'd and divided by Ifrange colour'd clouds)
I'll fetk the slave who came with Norval hither,
And for his cowardice was spurned from him.
Iv'd known a follower's rankled bosom breed
Venom mofl fatal to his heed ecs lord.

ACT III. SCENE I
A Couzrt, &c. as before.

Enter ANNA.

ARNSA.
tHY valaals, grief! great nature's order break,

' And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour,

Whilfi lady Randolph ileeps I will walk forth,
And tafle the air that breathes on yonder bank,
Sweet may her (lumbers be ! Ye ministers
Of gracious heaven, who love the human race,
Forsake your skies, and to her couch descend !
' here from her fancy chafe those dismal forms
That haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
V'Vith images ce'eftial, such as please
The blift above upon their goldeo beds. )

- Enter SERVANT.

Serz,. One of the vile afflfins is fecur'd.
We fcpnd the villian lurking in the wood:

With dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not
His first essay : there jewels were conceal'd
In the mot fiecret places of his garment;
Belike the spoils of some that he has murder'd;

Ann. Let me look on them. Ha ! here is a heart,

The chosen crest of Douglas' valiant name !
These are no vulgar jewels. Guard.the wretch.

[Exit Anna,

Enter, servan'ts with a prijoncr

Pris. I know no more than does the child unbonn
Of what you charge me with.

Jit Serv. You fay so Sir !

But torture Toon {hall make you speak the truth.
Behold the lady of Lord Randolph comes ;
Prepare yourself to meet her just revenge.

S C E N E II.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Ann. Summon your utmott fortitude, before

You speak with him. Your dignity, your frame,
/Are now at stake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may fly.

La. Ran. Thou nhalt behold me with a desperate

heart,
Hear how the infant perifli'd. See he kneels.

[I7 he priforer kneels.
Pris. Heaven bless that countenance so fwcet anr

mild !

A judge like thee makes innocence more bold,
D save me lady ! from these cruel men,
Who have attack'd and seiz'd me ; who accuse
le of intended murder. As I hope
'or mercy at the judgment feat of God,
[hetender lamb that never nipt the grass,
s not more innocent than I of maurder.
La. Ran. Of this man's guilt v.hat proof can ye pro-

duce

rft Serv. We found him lurking in the hollow glynrin

When view'd, and call'd upon, amaz'd, he fled.
We overtook him, and enquir'd from whence,
And what he was ? He-faid he came from far,
And was upon his journey to the camp.
Not fatisfy'd with this, we fearch'd his c'oaths
And found these jewels, whose rich value plead
Most powerfully against him, Hard he seems,
And old in villainy. ) Permit us 't try
His stubbornness against the torture's force.

Pris. 0 gentle lady ! by your lord's dear life !

'Which these weak hands, I swear, did ne'er afflil ?
And by your children's welfare, spare my age I
Let not the iron tear my antient joints,
And my gray hairs bring to the grave with pain.

La. Ran, Account for there;: thine own they cannot

be:

For these I fay, be stedfast to the truth ;
Deteaed falfhood is most certain death.

[Anna removes th /e rvants and ireturns]

Pris. Alas ! I'm fore biset ! let never man,

For fake of lucre, fin against his foul !
Eternal jufice is in this most jut !
I, guiltless now, must former guilt reveal.

La. Ran. 0 ! Anna hear -- once more I charge

thee speak

The truth diret : for tliefe to me foretel
And certify a part of thy narration;
W'ith which if the remainder ta'lies not,
An initant and a dreadful death abides thee.

Psis. Then thus adjur'd, I'll speak to you as just

As iF you were the minister of heaven,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men;
Some eighteen years ago, I rented land
Of brave Sir Malcolm, then Balarmo's lord;
But falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
All that I had, and then turi'd me and mine;
(Four helpless infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter-winds.

A little hovel by the river's fide
Receiv'd us: there hard labour, and the skill
In filhing, which was formerly my sport,
Supported life. Whilst thus we poorly liv'dd
One stormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down, and loed and oft
The angry spirit of the water fhrick'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
of one in jeopardy. I rose and ran
To where the circling ebby of a pool
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach, whatever floating thing the fiream
Had caught. The voice was ceaf'd ; the person loft:
But looking fad and earnest on the waters,
By the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round;
A balket: soon I drew it to the bank,
And nestled curious there an infant lay.

La. Ran. Was he alive ?
Pris. He was.
La. Ran. Inhuman that thou art !
How could'ftithou kill what waves and tempelis spar'd ?

Pris. I am not so inhuman.
La. Ran. Didft thou not .
Ann. My noble miflrefs, you are mov'd too much:

This man has not the aspec of stern murder:
Let him go on, and you, I hope, will hear
Good tidings of your kinsman's long loft child,

Pris. The needy man, who has known better daysy

One whom distress has spited at the world,
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds, as make the prosperous men
Lift up their hands, and wander who could do them.
And such a man was I; a man declin'd,
Who saw no end of black adversity:
Yet for the wealth of kingdoms I would not
Have to'uch'd that infant. with a hand of harm.

La. Ran. Ha ! dost thou fay so ? Then perhaps he

livcs !

D

Pris. Not many days ago he was alive.
La. Ran. O! God of heaven ! did he then die fdS

lately !

Pris. I did not fay he died ; I hope he lives:

Not many days ago there eyes beheld
Him, flourifling in youth, and health, and beauty

La. Ran. Where is he now ?
Prs. Alas ! I know not where.
La. Ran. Oh fate ! I fear thee still. Thou riddler,

speak
Diret and clear, else I will search thy foul.

.Ann. Permit me, ever honour'd ! Keen impatiencey

Though hard to be reftrain'd, defeats itself.--
Pursue thy flory with a faithful tongue,
To the lafl hour that thou didfl keep the child.

Pris. Fear not my faith, tho' I mull speak my fliamn:

WTithin the cradle, where the infant lay,
Was i:ow'd a mighty t(ore of gold and jewels;
Tempted by which we did resolve to hide,
From all the world. this wonderful event,
Anrd like a peasant breed the noble child
That none might mark the change of our eflate,
We left the country, travell'd to the north,
Bought flocks and herbs, and gradually brought forth
Our (ecret wealth. But God's all-feeing eye
Beheld our avarice, and smote us fore.
For one by one of our own children died.
And he, the stranger, foie remain'd the heir
Of what indeed was his Fain then would I,
Who with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
Have trusted him, now in the dawn of youth,
With his own secret; but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never would consent.
Mean while the ftrpling grew in years and beauty
And as we oft obferv'd, he bore himself,
Not as the off-spring of our cottage-blood;
For nature will break out; mild with the mild,
'But wirt the forward he was fierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms,

I set myself againf his warlike bent;
But all in vain; for when a desperate band
Of robbers from the ravage mountains came---

La. Ran. Eternal providence ! VWhat is thy name ?
Pris. My name is NVorval: and my name he bears.
La. Ran. 'Iis he; tis he himelf ! it is my ibn

O sovereign mercy ! 'Twas my child I law !
No wonder, Anna, that my bosom burn'd.

Anna. Jull are your transports: newer was woman's

heart

Prov'd with such fierce extremes High fated dame !
But yet remember that thou-art beheld
By servile eyes ; jour geflurcs may be seen
Impafion'd fIrange ; perhaps your word o'erheard.

La. Ran. Well dolt thou counsel, Anna: Heaven

bestow
On me that wisdom which my slate requires !

Ann. The moments of deliberation pass,

And soon you mull resolve. This useful man
Must be difmifs'd in safety, ere my lord
Shall with his brave deliverer return.

Pris. If I amidfl aftonifiment and fear.

Have of your words and ge!.ures rightly judg'e,
Thou art the daughter of my ancient maftcer
The child I refcu'dft from the flood is thine.

La. Ran. With thee diflimulation now were vain.

I am indeed the daughter of Sir Malcolm;
The child thou refcu'dfl from the flood is mine.

Pris. Blest be the hour that made me a poor man !
My poverty has fav'd my master's house !

La. Ran. Thy words furprize me: sure thou dlft

feign:

The tear flands in thine eye: such love from thee
Sir Malcolm's house delerv'd not; if aright
Thou told'ft the flory of thy own difirefs.

Pris. Sir Malcolm of our baron's was the flower;

The fastest friend, the belt the kindest master:
Bnt ah ! he knew nut of my fad eliale.
After that battle, where his gailar. fjr,,

r-x

Your own brave brother, fell, the good old lor4
Grew dcfperate and reckless of the world;
And never, as he erfl was won, went forth
To overlook the condua of his servants.
By them I was thrust out, and them I blame:
May heaven so judge me as I judg'd my mafier !
And God so love me as I love his race !

La. Ran. His race mhall yet reward thee. On thy

faith

Depends the fate of thy lov'd mafler's house.
lRcmemb'reRf thou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the clefts of Carron ?

Pris. I remember
The cottage of the clefts.

La. Ran 'Tis that I mean:

There dwells a man of venerable age,
Who in my father's service fpenr his youth
Tell him 1 tent thee, and with him remain,
'Ti.l I (hall call upon thee to declare.
Bdfore the Iing and nobles, what thoa now
To me haft to'd. No more but this, and thoq
Shalt live in honour all thy future days:
T'by son so long (hall call thee father still,
And all the land shall bless the man, who fav'd
The ton of Douglas, and Sir Malcolm's heir.
Remember well my words: if thou fhouldlt meet
Him whom thou call'lt thy ton, itill call him so;
And mention nothing of his nobler father.

Pris. Fear not that I ihall marr so f.ir a harveff,

By putting in my fickle ere 'its ripe.
'Why did I leave my home and antiert dame ?
To find'the youth, to tell him all I knew,
And make him wear these jewels in his arrms:
Which might I thought, be challeng'd, and ro bring
'Tolight the lecret of his noble birth.

[Lady Randolph goes tot'ards the Servants

La. T-uan. This man is not the aaiffio you ifpet,
Tho' chance cumbin'd fonm likelihucks againit i,;:..

EHe is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To their right owner, whom in halfe he seeks.
?Tis nmeet that you should put him on h;s way,
Since your miflaken zeal hath dragg'd him hither.

tExeunt Stranager a td Servants,

S C E N E .

Lady R.AN.DO-LP and ANNA.

La. Ran. My faithlul Anna ! dost thou share my joy?
I know thou dolt. Unparallel'd event !
Reaching from heaven to earth. Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings to me my son !
Judge of the widow, and the orphans father
Accept a widow's and a mothers thank's
For such a gift ! What does my Anna think
of the young eagles of a valiant nest ?
How soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spuru'd the low dunghill where his fate h-d thrown him,
And tower'd up to the region of his fire.

Anna. How fondly did your eyes devour the boy

M)iterious nature, with the unseen cord
Of powerful inltina, drew you to your own.

La. Ran. The ready flory of hi3 birrh belicv'd

Suppreft my fancy quite; nor did he owe
To any likeness my so sudden favour:
But now I long to fee his face again,
Examine every feature, and find out
'1 he lineaments of Dogzi'as, or my owo.
But molt of all, I long to let hima know
.Who his true parents are, to c!afp ulis g.ek,
And tell him all the story of his .faher.

innz With wary caution you nuil be.r yori;..

In public, left your tenderness break f.o-ih;
And in observers ftirr conjcztures tra.-,.

i'or, If a cherub in the fliape of wV;,naa

Should walk this world, yet defamati:, would5
Like a vile curr, bark at the angel's trai;---
'p day the baron flarted at your tear:.

La. Ran, He did Co, Anna ! well thy mistress knows

If the leart circumstance, mote of offence,
Should touch tli baron's eye, his fight would be
With jealousy diforder'd. But the more
It does behove me inflant to declare
The birth of Douglas, and assert his rights.
This night I purpose with my son to meet,
Reveal the secret, and consult with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does, now so look'd his noble father,
Array'd in nature's ease: his mien, his speech,
Were sweetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those trivial mortals who seem always wife.
But, when the matter match'd his mighty mind,
Up rose the hero: on his piercing eye
Sat observation ; on each glance of thought
Decision follow'd, as the thunder bolt
Pursues the flash.

Ann. That demon haunts you still:
Belold Glenalvon.

La. Ran. Now I shun him not.

This day I brav'd him in behalf-of Norval;
Perhaps too far; at least my nicer fears
For Dozugl.as thus interpret.

Entcr Glenalvon.

Glen. Noble dame I

'The hov'ring Dane at last his men hath landed:
No band of pirates; but a mighty hofl,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers;
To win a country, or to lore themselves.

La. Ran. But whence comes this intelligence, Glei

alvon ?

Glen. A nimble courier sent from yonder camp,

To haften up the chieftains of the north,
Inform'd me, as he pat, that the fierce Daoe
i-ad on the eastern coalt of Lothian landed,
Near to that place where the fea-rock immense,
Amazing Bais, ookas o'er a fcrtilz Irad.

La. Ran.'Then mull this western army march to joih
The warlike troops that guard Edina's tow'rs !

Glen.' Beyond all question. If impairing time

Has not effac'd the image of a place,
Once perfec in my brcaft, there is a wild
Which lies to westward of that mighty rock,
And seems by nature formed for the camp
Of water-wafted armies, whose chief firength
Lies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse:
If martial fkili directs the Danifli lords,
There inaccellible their army lies
To our swift fcow'ring horse, the bloody field
Mulf man to man, and foot to foot be fought.

La. Ran. How many mothers shall bewail their sons i

How many widows weep their husbands slain !
Ye dames of Denmark ! ev'n for you I feel,
Who, sadly fitting on the fea-beat shore,
Long look for lords that never (hall return.

Glen. Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian sword

Widow'd the north. The children of the slain
Come, as 1 hope, to meet their fathers fate.
The monfler war, with her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life ending pain,
Are objects suited to Glenalvon's foul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death
Reproach more piercing than the pointed sword.

La. Ran. I scorn thee not, but when I ought to

scorn ;

Nor e'er reproach'd, but when insultcd virtue
Agaiaft audacious vice exerts itself.
I own thy worth, Glenalvon none more apt
Than I to praise thine eminence in arms,
And be the echo of thy martial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty palfion
Go and pursue a lawful mifirefs glory.
Upon the Danish crests redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the ihield of lRandclph.

Glen. One inflant (tay, and hear an alter'd man.
When beauty pleads for virtue, vice abafh'd

Flies its own colours, and goes o'er to virtue;
I am your convert time will tell how truly :
Yet one immediate proof I mean to give
That youth for whom your ardent zeal to-day,
Somewhat too haughtily, defy'd your lave,
Amidst the (hock of armies '11 defend,
And turn death from him with a guardi4n arm.
'Sedate my use, my bosom maddens not
,At the tumultuous uproar of the field.-'

La. Ran. AA thus, Glehalvon, and I am thy ftiend:

(But that's thy least reward. Believe me, Sir, -
The truly generous is the truely wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblest.

[Exit Lady Randolph

Glen. t[/oits] Ament ! and virtue is its own reward !-

I think that I have hit the very tone
In which (he loves to speak. Honey'd assent,
How pleasant art thou to the tafle of man
And woman alo ? flattery dire&t
Rarely disgusts. They little know nhankind
'Who doubt its operation: 'tis my key,
And opens the wicket of the human heart.
H-ow far I have succeeded now I know not;
Yet I incline to think her flormy virtue
Is lull'd a while: 'tis her alone I fear:
'Whilst she and Randolph live, and live in faith
And amity, uncertain is my tenure.
Fate o'or my head suspends disgrace and death,
By that weak hair, a peevish female's will.
I am not idle: but the ebbs and flows
Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated. /
That slave of Norval's I have found most apt
I (hew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his foul
To fay and swear whatever I suggest.
Norval I'm told, has that alluring look,
'Twixt man and woman, which I have obferv'd
To charm the nicer and fantastic dames,
'Who are, like lady Randolph, full of virtue.
In raising Randolph's jealeufy I may

# ACT IV. SCENE I.

But point him to the truth. He seldom errs
Who thinks the worit he can of womankind. [Exit

A CT IV. SCENE I.

Flour.:/ of Trmpetfs

Enter Lord RANDOLrH aitended.
Ld. . Uan. UzMON an hundred horse, by break oP

'-' day,
To wait our pleasure at the catlie gate.

Et2tcr Lady vIaNDoLP1l.
La. Ran. Alas! my lord ! I've heard unwelconme

rnew !
Tlihe Danes are landed.

Ld. Ran. Ay, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take ,. spoil;
No sportive war, no tournament essay,
Of some young knight refolv'd to break a spear;
And fta'n with holHle blood his maiden arms.
She Danes are landed : we must beat them backp
r live the slaves of Dnnmark.
La. Ran. Dreadful times !
Ld Ran. The fenceless villages are all forSaken
he Trembling mothers, and their children lodg'd
awall-girt towers and cafll:s; whilst the men
etire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
hey but retire more awfol to return.
La. Ran. Immense as fame reports the Danifli hof !
Ld. Ran. Were it as num'rous as loud fa:ne reports,
n army knit like our's wou'd pierce it through
rothers that shrink not from each olier's fide,
nd fond companions fill our wailike files:
or his dear offspring, and the wife he ioves,
he husband, and the fearlcfs father arm.
vulgar brealts heroic ardor burns,
nd the poor peaf;nt mates his d?.ring lord ,

La. Ran, Men's minds are temper'd like their swords

for war:

Lovers of danger, on deftrution's brink
'The joy to rear ere& their daring forms.
'-Hence early graves ; hence the lone widow's life;
And the fad mother's grief embitter'd age,
Where is our gallant guet ?

Ld. Ran. Down in the vale

I left him managing a fiery freed,
Whose flubbornefs had foii'd the strength and tkill
Of every rider. But behold he comes,
In earnest conversation with Gienalvon.

Enter NORVAL and GLENALVON.

Glenalvon ! with the lark arise ; go forth,
And lead my troops that ly in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
Norval, thou goeft with me. But, Cay young man !
Where didft thou learn so to discourse of .war,
And in such terms as I o'erheard to day ?
War is no village fcierce, nor its phrase
A language taught among the shepherd swains.

iVorv. Small is the skill my lord-delights to praise

In him he favours.-Hear from whence it came.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the molt remote
And inaccessible by shepherds trod,
In a deep cave dug by no mortal hand
A hermit liv'd ; a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our wandering swains.
Austere and lonel, cruel to himself,
Did they report him ; the cold earth his bed,
Water his drink, his food the shepherds alms.
I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
VWith reverecce and pity. Mild he spake,
Ald enterii.g on discourse, such foeries told,
As made me oft revisit his fad cell,
For he had been a soldier in his youth;
And fought in famous battles, when the peers
Of Europe, by the bold Godfred led,
Ai.gainiftheuf rpiiT itii1el display d

The crors of Chriif, and won the Holy-Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech fruck fiom me, the old man would fliake
His years away, -and at his young encounters:
Then, having (hew'd his wounds, he'd fit him down,
And all the live-long day discourse of war.'
To help my fancy, in the fiiooth green turf
He cut the figures of the nmarflall'd hosts;
Defcrib'd the motions and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm.
'For all that Saracen, or Christian knew
Of war's vast art, was to this hermit known.

Ld. Ran. Why did this soldier in a defart hide
Those qualities that should have grac'd a camp ?

XAorv. That too at last I learn'd. Unhappy man !

Returning homewards by Meflina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boift'rous captain of the sea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fonght:
'The stranger fell, and with his dying breath
Declar'd his name and lineage. Mighty God !

he soldier cried, my brother ! Oh ! my brother !
La. Ran. His brother !
Avorv. Yes ; of the fame parents born;
His only brother. They exchang'd forgivenners:
nd happy, in my mind, was be that dy'd:
For many deaths has the survivor fuffer'd.
n the wild defart on a rock he fits,
Or on rome narnelefs (lream's untrodden banks,
nd ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
t times, alas ! not in his perfect mind !
olds dialogues with his lov'd brother's ghost
nd oft each night forsakes his fullen couch,
To make fad orizons for him he flew.

La. Ran. To what mysterious woes are mortals born !
n this dire tragedy were there no more
.nhappy perfor.s ? did the parents live ?

E z

Norv. No; they were dead: kind heav'n had closd

their eyes
Before their son had shed his brothers.blood.

Ld. Ran. Hard is his fate; for lie was not to blame!

There is a defliny in this strange world,
'Which oft decrees an undeserved doom:
Let fchool-men tell us wihy.---- From whence these

founds ?

[Trumpets at a difaance.]

Enter an Oyry CER.

Oficer. My Lord, the trumpets of the troops of Lorn.
The valiant leader hails the noble Randolph.

Ld. Ran. Mine antient guest ! does he the warriors

lead?
H3-s Denmark rous'd the brave old Knight to arms ?

Officer. No; worn with warfare, he resigns the sword,

His eldest hope, the valiant John of Lorni
.owv leads his kindred bands. -

Ld. Ran. Glenalvon, go.

With hospitality's most trong request
Entreat the chief, [Exit Glenalvon

Offier. My lord, requests are vain.

He urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foes approach.

Ld. Ran. May vi&ory fit on the warrior's plume !

Bravest of men ! his herds and flocks are safe
Remote from wars alarms his paflures ly,
By mountains inacceffble fecur'd:
-et foremofl he into the plains descends,
l:ager to bleed in battles not his own.
t.Such were the heroes of the ancient world;

,Cortcmoers they of indolence and gain;
3ut frill for love of glory, and of arms,
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift
nAainfl each strong antagonist the speer.)
I'll no and press the hero to my breast.

[Exit Randolpi

Manent Lady Rand.,lph and Norval

La. Ran. The soldier's. .oftinefs, the pride.and pomp

Invefling awful war, Norval, I fee,
Transport thy youthful:mind.

Norv. Ah! should they not ?

Blest be the hour .left my father's house !
I might have been a (hepherd all m.y days,
And Role obfcarely to a peasant's grave.
Now, if I live, withmiighlty chiefs I fiand;
And, if I fall, with noble dust I ly.

La. Ran. There is a gee'rous spirit in thy breaflr

That could have well fuftain'd a.prouder fortune.
This way with me; under yon spreading beach,
I will amaze thee with a Wvond'rous tale.

ANorv. Let there be danger, lady, with the secret,

That I may hug it to my grateful heart,
And prove my faith. Command my sword, my life:
These are the sole pofleflions of poor Norval.

La. Ran. Know'ft thou these gems ?
Norv. Durst I believe mine eyes
I'd fay 1 knew them and they were my father's

La. Ran. Thy father's fay'ft thou ! ah ! they were

thy father's I

Norv. I saw them once, and curiously eoquir'd

Of both my parents, whencefuch splendor came ?
But I was check'd, and more could never-learn.

La. Ran. Then learn of me thou art not Norval's far.
Niorv. Not Norval's son
La. Ran. Nor of a shepherd sprung.
Norv. Lady, who ar 'I then ?
La. Ran. Noble thou art;
For noble was thy fire!

Norv. I will believe-
0 ! tell me farther ! Say who was my father ?

La. Ran. DOUGLAS !
Norv. Lord Dcztg!as, whom to day I saw
La. Ran. His younger brother.
orv, And in yonder camp ?

La. Ran. Alas !

rorv. You make me tremble--Sighs and tears !
Lives my brave father ?

La. Ran. Ah ! too brave indeed:
He fell in battle ere thyself was born.

Norv. Ah me unhappy I ere I saw the light !

But does my mother live ? I may conclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been sorrow.

La. Ran. She lives; but wases her life in conflant

woe,
Weeping her husband nain. her infant loft;

Aorv. You that are fkill'd so well in the fad story

Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their defliny, now with compaffiord
Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd,
O ! Tell me who, and where my mother is !
Oppreft by a base world, perhaps {he bends
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief;
And desolate implores of heaven the aid
Her son should give. It is, it muff be so---
Your countenance confeies that she's wretched.
O ! tell me her condition ! Can the sword-
Who [hall regis me in a parent's cause ?

La. Ran. Thy virtue ends her woe-My son myTfon!
I am thy mother, and the wife of Douglas !

[Falls upon his neck.

Norv. 0 heav'n and earth, how wond'rous is my fatal
Art thou my mother ? Ever let me kneel !

La Ran. Image of Doug/as! Fruit of fatal love!
All that I owe thy fire I pay to thee.

Norv. Refpet and admiration flill yofefs me,

Checking the love and fondness of a son.
Yet I was filial to my humble parents.
But did my fire surpass the reft-of men,
As thou excelled all of womankind ?

La. Ran. Arise, my fonl ! In me thou dofl behold

The poor remains of beauty once admir'd:
The autumn of my days is come already:
For sorrow made my summer hare away.

Yet in my prime I equall'd not thy father:
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet sometimes
Liker the dove's and, as he pleas'd, he wan
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd,

Norv. How did he fall ? Sure 'twas a bloody field
When Douglas dy'd. O I have much to ask I

La. Ran. Hereafter thou shalt here the lengthen'd

tale

Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
At present this: thou art the rightful heit
Of yonder cafile, and the wide domains
Wrhich now Lord Randolph as my husband, holds,
But thou shalt not be wrong'd; I have the power
To right thee ftiil: before the king 1'Jl kneel,
And call Lord Douglas to protet his blood.

Niorv. The blood of Douglas will proteac itself.
La. Ran. But we fhail need both friends and favour

boy,

To wrest thy lands and lordflip from the gripe
Of Randoip'. and his kiofman. Yet I thick
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
My life incline trh virtuous to believe.

Norv. To be the foa of Douglas is to me

Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in the field I'll seek for fame and fortune.

La. Ran. Thou dolft not know what perils and ilju-

fiice

Await the poor man's valour. O ! my son !
The noblest blood in all the land's abalh'd,
Having no lacquey but pale poverty.
Too long haft thou been thus attended, Doztglas!
Too long haft thou been deem'd a peasant's child.
The wanton heir of some inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in the youthful sports;
Whilst thy indignant spirit fwell'd in vain !
Such contumely thou no mole {halt bear
But how I purpose to redress thy wrongs
Must be hereafter told. Prudence directs
That we flould part before yon chiefs return.

Retire, and from; thy ruftio. follower's hand
Receive a billets which- thy mother's Carej-
Anxious to fee thee: ditated'before
This casual opportunity, aroe-.
Of private conference.: . It's- purport mark;
For as [ there appoint to meet again.
Leave me, my son ! and: frame thy manners still
To Norval's, not to noble Douglas' state.

Norv. I will remember, Where is.Norval now ?
That good old: man.

La. cRn. At hand conceal'd he lies;

An fitna witness. But beware my son,
Of yon Glenalvon; in hisguilty breast
Resides a villain's (hrewdnefs, ever prone
To false eonjecture.. He hath griev'd my heart.

Norv. Has he indeed ? Then let yon false Glenaiven
Beware of me. LExit Douglas.

Mdanc Lady RANDOLPH.

La. Ran.\There burst the fmother'd flame i

O ! thou all righteous and eternal king !
Who father of the fatherless art call'd,
Protea my ton-Thy inspiration, Lord !
Hath fill'd his bosom with -that sacred fire,
Which in the breads of his forefathers burn'd t
Set him on' high like them, that he may fline
The star and glory of his native land.
Then let the minister of death descend,
And bear my willing spirit to its place
Yonder they come, How do bad women find
Unchanging afpeds to conceal their gui't ?
When I by reason, and by justice urg'd,
Full hardly can dirfemble with there men
In nature's pious cause.

Enter Lord Randolph and Glenalvon.
.A-lmne-to meet. her:at-t de- midnightio-isr. )

Ld. Ran. Yon gallant-chief,
Of armlsenamour'd, all repose dirflaiiss.

La. Ran. Be not, my lord, by his example fwaay'd:

Arrange the bulinefs of to-morrow now,
And when you enter, speak of war no more.

[Exit Lady Randolph.

Manent Lord Randolph and Glenalvon.
Ld. Ran. 'Tis so, by heav'n! her mein, her voice,

her eye.
And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

Glen. He parted from her now: Behind the mount,
Amongst the trees, 1 law him glide along.

Ld. Ran. For fad fequefler'd virtue the is renown'd
Glen, Motl true, my lord.
Ld. Ran. Yet this diftingifh'd dame

Invites a youth, the acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This afignation, (Jhewes a letter) the aLfaffin freed,
Her manifest affecTion for the youth
Mlight breed suspicion in a husband's brain,
'Whose gentle consort all for love had wedded:
Much more in mine. Matilda never-lov'd me,
Let no man, after me, a woman wed,
Whose heart he knows he has not; though s(he brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry:
For let her seem, like the night's.maduwy queen,
Cold and contemplative :---He cannot trult her
She may, she will, bring fliame and sorrow on him;
'Ihe worst of sorrows, and the worfd of flianues !

Glen. Yield not my Lord, to such afilicing thoughts;

But let the spirit of an husband fieep,
Till your own senses make a full conclusion.
'This billet must to blooming *Norvae go:
At the next turn awaits my trusty spy;
1'll give it him refitted for his malter.
In the c!ofe thicket take'your secret fland;
'The moon shines brigtt, and your own eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

Ld. Ran. Thou dost counfcl well.
(;Cn. Permit me now to make one flight etTay.

Of all the trophies which vain mortals bjoit.
By wit, by valour, or by wisdom nwon,

F

The first and farieft, in a young man's eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Succefsfil love
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind !
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Ld. Ran. And what avails this maxim
Glen. Much, my Lord !

Withdraw a little: I'll accofi young 2Aorval,
And with ironical derisive counsel
Explore his spirit. If ho is no more
Than humble Norval, by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as he is, he'll (Irink altoni'd from mie:
But if he be the favourite of the fair,
Lov'd by the firA of Caledonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.

Ld. Ran. 'Tis shrewdly thought.
Gien. When we grow loud draw near. But let my

lord
His rising wrath restrain. [Exit Randolph.

Manet GLENALVON.

Glen. 'Tis strange, by heaven !

That (he should run full tilt her fond career,
To one so little known. She too that feem'd
Pure as the winter fiream, when ice imbofs'd
Whitens its course. Even I did think her chafe,
Whose charity exceeds not. Precious sex !
Whose deeds lafivious pass Glenalvon'A thoughts !

[VNorval appears.

His port I love; he's in a proper'mood
To chide the thunder, if at him it roar'd.
Has Norval seen the troops?

IVorv. The fettiog fun, -

With yellow radiance, lighten'd all the vale,
And as the warriors mov'd, each polish'd helm,
Corflet, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at its top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they feem'd,
An holt angelic clad in burning arms.

Glen. Thou talk's it well; no leader of our host,
In founds more. lofty, speaks of glorious war.

Norv. If I (hall e'er acquire a leader's name,

My speech will be less ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itself freely; fioce no part is mine
Of praise, pertaining to the great in arms.

Glen. You wrong yourself, brave Sir: your martial

deeds

Have rank'd you with the great: but mark me, Norval;
Lord Randolph's favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know there soldiers, counfll you.
Give them all honour; seem not to command;
Else they will scarcely brook your late sprung power,
Which our alliance props, nor birth adorns.
Norv. Sir, I have been accuftom'd all my days,
To hear and speak the plain and fmple truth:
nd though I have been told that there are men
Who borrow friendlhip's tongue to speak their scorn,
Set in such language I am little fcill'd.
Cherefore I thank Glenalvon for his counsel,
lthough it founded harshly. Why remind
e of my birth obscure ! Why slur my power
With such contemptuous terms ?
Glen. I did not mean to

To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

Norv. My pride !
Glen. Suppress it as you with to prosper.
Your pride's exceflive. Yet for Randolph's fake
will not leave you to its rash direcion.
f thus yoa swell, and frown at high-born men,
Fill high-born men endure a Ihepherd's scorn ?

Norv, A shepherd's scorn !
Glen. Yes; if you presume
So bend on soldiers these disdainful eyes.
Vht will become of you?
Norv. If this were told ! -- /Aide.
iaft thou no fears for thy presumptuous self!

F 2

Glen. Ha ! dof thou threaten me?
Norv. Did'ft thou not hear?
Glen. Unwillingly I did; a nobler foe
Had not been queflion'd thus. But such as thee-

.Norv. Whom doff thou think me ?
Gle-,. Norval.
Norv. So I am--
And who is 'orval in Glenalvon's eyes ?

Glen. A peasant's son a wandering beggar boy;
At best no more, even if he speaks the truth.

Norv. False as thou art, dofl thou fufpeA my truth?
Glen. Thy truth ! thou'rt all a lie; and faire as hell
Is the vain glorious tale thou toldft to Randolph.

Niorv. If I were chain'd, unarm'd, and bed-rid old,

Perhaps I fllould revile: But as I am
I have no tongue to rail. The humble Norval
Is of a race) who fIrive riot but with deeds.
Did r not fear to frceze.lhy shallow valour,
And make thee fink too loon beneath my sword,
I'd tell thee what thou art. I know thce well.

G!cn. I)oft thou not know Glenalvon, born to co!rn

rnand mar.d
Ten thicufad ilaves like thee ?

Norv. Villain, no more:

Draw and defend thy life. I did design
' o have defy'd thee in another cause:
But heaven accelerates its venge..nce on thee.
Now for my own and Lady Randolph's wrongs.

En:ztr Loid RANDOLPH.
Ld. Ran. Hold, I commarnl you both. The man t'a

fiirs
Mlakes me his foe.

Norv. Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly founiled, noble Randolph.

Glen. Hear him, my lord ; he's wond'rous condefccn.

ing!
Mark the humility of (hephcrd Norval !

Norv Now you may scoff in fafcty [Sheaths his fwl
Ld. Ran. Speak not thus,

# ACT V. SCENE I.

Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

Norv. Nay, my good lord, tho' I revere you much,

My cause .I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I blush to speak; I will not, cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words that I from him have borne.
To the liege lord of my dear native land
I owe a fubje&t's homage: but ev'n him
And his high arbitration Id rejet.
Within my bosom reigns another lord;
Honour, sole judge and umpire of itself.
If my free speech offend you, noble Randolph,
Revoke your favours and let Norval go
Hence as he came, alone, but not diflonour'd.

Ld. Ran. Thus far I'll medeate with impartial voice:

The antient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er his frighted fields.
Suspend your purpose, till your country's arms
Repel the bold invader: then decide
The private quarrel.

Glen. I agree to this.
Norv. And I.

Enter SERVANT.

Sert. The banquet waits.
Ld. Ran. Wre come. Extit Randolph,
Glen. Norval.

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of Randolph.
Nor fruwning anget, nor yet wrinkl'd hate,
Shall lsain my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow;
Nor let our firife disturb the gentle dame.

NVorv Think not lightly of my resentment:
When we contend again, our strife is mortal.

A CT V. SCENE I.

rhe Wood.

Enter Douglas.
PjHIS is the place, the centre of the grove.

lHere slauds the oak, the monarch of the wood.

How sweet and folenin is this midnight scene !
The (ilver moon, unclouded, holds her'way
Thro' Skies where I could count each little flar,
The fanning weft wind scarcely itirs the leaves;
The river, rufling o'er its pebbled bed,
Imposes flence with a lilly found
In such a place as this, at such an hour,
If anceifry can be in aught believ'd,
Descending spirits have convers'd with man,
And told the secrets of the world unknown.

Enter Old Norval.
Old Aorv. 'Tis he. But what if he (hould chide me

hence ?
His just reproach I fear. [Douglas turns andfees hinm.

Forgive, forgive,

Can'st thou forgive the-man, the selfish man,
Who bred Sir Malcom's heir a shepherd's son.

Doug. Kneel not to me : thou art my father still;

The wifh'd-for pretence now completes my joy.
Welcome to me, my fbrtunes thou shalt share,
And ever honour'd with thy Douglas ive.

Norv. And dost thou call me father ? O my son !

I think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
Which in the wilderness so long conceal'd
The blossom of thy youth.

Doug. Not worse the fruit,

That in the wilderness the b'offom blow'd,
Amonglt the R(epherds in the humble cote,
I learn'd some lessons, which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend ; and when my vafials bow,
Norval fball smooth the crested pride of Douglas.

Norv. Let me but live to fee thine exaltation !

Yet grievous are my fears. O leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

Doug. Why should 1 leave them ?
Norv. Lord Randolph and his kinsman seek your life.

Doug. How know'lt.thou that?
NAorv. I will inform you how.

When evening came, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And foadly trod in each accuftom'd path
That to the cafle leads. WVhilft thus I rang'd,
I was alarm'd with unexpected foundsj
Of earnef voices. On the persons came:
Unseen I lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other as they talk'd, lord Randolph this,
And that Glenalvon: [till of you they spoke.
And of the lady: threating was their speech,
Tho' but imperfe&ly my ear could hear it.
'Twas strange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry ,
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Doug. Revenge ! for what ?
VNorv. For being what you are ,

Sir Malcolm's heir: how else have you offended ?
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there fat musing how I befl might find
Means to inform you of their wicked purpose,
But I could think of none: at last perplex'd
I isSued forth, encompafling the tower
With many a weary ftep and wiflful look.
Now providence hath brought you to my fih:;,
Let not your too courageous fpiit scorn
The caution which I give.

Doug. I scorn it not.

My mother warn'd me of Glenalvon's bafencfs
But I will not fufpe& the nobLe Randolp.
In our encounter with the vile affaliins,
I mark'd his brave demeanor, him I'll truRt '

Norv. I fear you will too far.
Doug. Here in this place

[ wait my mother's corning: {he fhail know
What thou hail told : her council I will follow;
And cautions ever are a mother's counsels.
You must depart; your pieirnce may prevent
Our interview.

Nort. My blefling reft upon thee !.

O may heav'ns hand, which fav'd thee from the wave,
And from the sword of foes, be near thee ltill,
Turning mirchance, if aught hangs o'er thy head,
all upon mine ! [Exit old Ncrval

Deug. He loves me like a parent;

And mufl not, fhali not lose the son he loves,
Altho' his son has found a nobler father.
Eventful day, how hall thou chaog'd my state !
Once on the cold, and winter shaded fide
Of a bleak hill, mifchauce had rooted me,
Never to thrive, child of another foil:
Transplanted now to the gay funny vale,
Like the green:thorn of May, my fortune flowers.
te glorious flars ! high heaven's resplendent host !
'To whom I oft have of my lot complain'd,
BIear and record my foul's unalter'd wish !
Dead or alive, let me be but renown'd
May hcav'n inspire Come fierce gigantic Dane,
To give a'bo!d defiance to our host I
Before he 1peaks it out I will accept;
Like Douglas conquer, or like Douglas die.

Enter Lady PANDOLPH.

La. Lan. My son ! I heard a voice-
Doug. - The voice was mine.
La. Ran. Didit thou complain aloud to nature's ear

That thus in dufly shades, at midnight hours,
3y (feaith the mother and the son should meet?

[Enmbracing his

Doug. No: on this happy day. this better bilth-da
lMy thoughts and words are all of hope and joy.

La. Ran. Sad fear and melancholy (till divide

The empire of my b.eaft'with hope and joy.
Now hear what ladvife.

Dozrg. First, let me tell
W hat may the tenor of your counsel change.

La. Ian. My heart forebodes fomp -vii.
Dlugv. 'Tis no: good

At eve, unreen by Randolph and Glenalvon,
The good old Norval in tlhe grove o'erheard
Their conr'erfation: oft they mention'd me
With dreadful threatnings ; you they sometimes nami'd.
'Twas itrange, they said, a wonderful discovery;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

La. Ran. Defend us, gracious God, we. are betray'd.

They have found-out the ecret of thy birth;
It mufi be so. That is the great discovery.
Sir Malcom's heir is come to claim his own;
And he will be reveng'd. ' Perhaps even now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for murder, they but wait
A darker and more silent hour to break
Into the chamber where they think thou leep'ft.
This moment, this, heav'n hath.ordain'd to save thee !
Fly to the camp, my son 1

Doug. And leave you here !

No: to the c file let us go together,
Call up the antient feryants of your house,
Who in their youth did eat your father's bread,
Then tell them loudly that I am your son.
If in the breasts of men one spark remains
Of sacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your cause will arm. I ask but few
To drive those spoilers from my father's house.

La. Ran. 0 nature, nature ; what can check thy

force ?

Thou genuine offspring of the daring Douglas !
'But raih not on deftru&ion : ave thyself,
And I am fare. To me they mean no harm.
Thy, flay but risks thy precious life in vain.
That winding path conducts thee to the river.
C'oss where thou feeft a broad 'and beaten way,
Which running eastward leads thee to the camrp,
iniant demand admittance to Lord Douglas.
h:w him these jewels, which his brother wore.
Thy look, thy voice, will make him feel the truth,,
Which I by certain proof will Coon cnnfilm.

Doug. 1 yield me and obey: but yet my hart

G

Bleeds at this parting., Something bids me flay
And guard a mother's life. Oft have I read
Of wond'rous deeds by one bold arm atchiev'd.
Our foes are two ; no more; let me go forth,
And fee if any shield can guard Glenalvon.

La. Ran. If thou regardft thy mother, or revcr'f

Thy father's mem'ry think of this no more.
One thing I have to fay before we part:
[ Long wert thou loft; and thou art found, my child,
'In a most fearful season, War and battle
I have.great cause to dread. Too well I fee
Which way the current of thy temper sets:
To day I've found thee. Oh ! my long loft hope )
If thou to giddy valour giv'ft the rein,
To morrow I may lose my son for ever,
!The love.of thee, before thou faw'ft the light,
Suftain'd my life when thy brave father fell:
If thou shalt fall, I have no love nor hope
In this waste world ! my son, remember me !

Dong. What (hall I fay? how can I give you comfort?

The God of battles of my life dispose
As may be best for you ! for whose dear fake
I will not bear myself as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boast founds amongst martial mena
How will inglorious caution suit my claim?
The post of fate unflrinking I maintain.
My country's foes must witness who I am.
On the invaders heads, I'll prove my birth,
Till friends and foes confess the genuine ftraiu.
If in this firife I fall, blame not your son,
WVho if he lives not honour'd, must not live.

La. Ran. I will not utter what my bosom feels.

Too well I love that valour which I warn.
Farewel my son ! my counsels are but vain. (Embracing.
And as high heav'n hath will'd it all must be. (/eparates.

La. Ran. Gaze not on me, thou wilt miflake the path-
I'll point it out again.

[JuJt as they arefeparating, enterfrom the wood.

Lord Randolph and Glenalvonj

Ld. Ran. Not in her presence.
Now-

Glen, I'm prepar'd
Ld. Ran. No: I command thee flay.
I go alone: it never Ihall be said

That I took odds to combat mortal man.
The noblest vengeance is the molt compleat.

[Exit Lord Randolph.
[Glenalvon makesfonze fleps to the fame fide of the

tfage, listens and speaks.]

Glen. Demons of death come fettle on my sword,

And to a double slaughter guide it home !
The lover and the husband both mult die.

[Lord Randolph behind the scenes

Ld. Ran. Draw, villain, draw,
Doug. Assail me not, Lord Randolph;
Not as thou lov'ft thyself. CClaJhing of fiuords.]

CGlenalvon running out

Now is the time.
Enter Lady Randolph at the oppefitefide of the s/age

faint and breathless.
La. Ran. Lord Randolph hear me; all (hall be thine

own:
But Ipare ! 0 spare my son i

Enter Douglas with a sword in each hand.

Doug. My mother's voice !
I can prote&t thee still.

La. Ran. He lives, he lives

'or this, for this to Heav'n eternal praise !
But sure I saw thee fall.

Doug. It was Glenalvon.

Just as my arm had malter'd Randolph's sword,
The villain came behind me but I flew him.

La. Ran. Behind thee ! Ah ; thou'rt wounded O my

child,
How pale thou look'ft ! and (hall I lose thee now !

Doug. Do not despair: I feel a little faintness;

G 2

I hope it will not lafl. LLeans upon hixfword.

Ld. Ran. There is no hope !

And we must part! the hand of death is on thee !
0 my beloved child ! 0 Douglas, Douglas !

[Douglas growing more and more faint.
Doug. Too soon we part: I have pot long been Dou-

glas.

0 deitiny ! hardly thou deal's with me:
Clotded and hid, a stranger to myself,
In low and poor obscurity I liv'd:

La. Ran. Has heav'n preferv'd thee for an end like

this ?

Dou. '0 had I fall'n 9s nly brave fathers fell,

Turlning with great effort the tide of batt!e
Like them I should have fmil'd and welcom'd death.
Put thus to palimh by a villain's hand !
Cut oin from nature's, :nd from glory's course,
uVhich never mortdl was sb fsnd to run.

L,z. lan. Hear j:lice ! hear! firetch thy avenging

ai . [Douglas ails.

Doz!g. Unknown I die; no tongue shall speak of me.

!ome n oble spirits, judging by thr.nfelves,
lMay yet conjet.;e what I might hayeprov'd,
And think life wanting only to my fame;
liut who Riall comfort thee >

La.I Rain Defpail i despair I
D!,g. 0 had it pleas'd high lheav'n to let me live

A little while ! -- 'my eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apace ! my motlher i Oh i riy mother i CDie.

Eniztr ]. or.l :andolph and Anna.
Ld. Ran. Thy wrdcs, the words of truth, have pierc'd

my litArt.

I am the slain of knitlithood and of arms.
.)h ! if my bhlae deliverer survives
Trhe ilitoir's f-or----

,*I' \!az ! lo.'k dhere, my lord.
I.i. u, i i., luotoer and her son! Tlow cuitl am I

, . i til cai-ce ? , to: I was not the caul{.
t' ni m t;.lTf viilli did seduce my foul

To frantic jealousy.

Amnz. My lady lives:

The agony of grief hath but fuppreft
A while her powers.

Ld. Ran. But my deliy'rers dead !

The world did once efleem Lord Randolph wvell,
Sincere of heart, for spotless hlonour fam'd:
And in my early days, glory I gain'd
leneath the holy banner of the cross.
Now past the noon-ot life, shame corms upon me ;
IReproach, aad infamy, and public hate,
lAre near at hand ; for all mankind will think
That Randolph basely stabb'd Sir MIalcolm's heir. /

.Lady Randolph recovering.
La. R1bn. Where am I now ? still in this wretched

world !

Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine.
My youth was worn in anguish -; bur yeoth's flrcngth~
With hope's aflitance, bore the brunt of sorrow;
And train'd me on to be the obje&t now,
On which omnipotence displays itfrlf,

[laking a fpeAacle, a tale of me,
To awe its vassal, man.

Ld. Ran. 0 misery!'

Aniidt thy raging grief I must proclaim
My innocence.

La. Ran. Thy innocence!
Ld. Ran. My guilt
Is innocence compar'd with what thou think'fl it.

La. Ran. Of thee I think not: what have I to ds

lWith thee, or any thing ? My son ! my son!
MIy beautiful ! my brave ! how proud '..as I
Of thee, and of thy valour ! my fond heart
O'erflow'd this day with tranfForr, wlhen I thought
Of growing old amidst a race of (hine,
WVhlo night make up to me their father's child!lood,

'..d bear my brother's and my h'.uLand'z na1me:

New ;,! my hopes are dead ! A little v.h:ie
\ as I a wife ! a mother not so Ion !

What am I now ?- I know-But I shall be
That only whilst I please; for such a son
And such a hufb;nd make a woman bold. [R1uns out

Ld. Ran. Follow her, Anna.: I myself would follow
But in this rage she mult abhor my presence. [,Exit Ann

Enter Old Norval.
Norv I heard the voice of wQe; heav'n guard m

child !

Ld. Rin. Already is the idle gaping croud,

The fpitfcul vulgar, come to gaze on Randolph.
Begone,

Norv. I Fear thee not. I will uot go.

Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplice, lord,
Witli thee in ourder. Yes, my fins did help
To crufl down to the ground this lovely plant.
O noblest youth that ever yet was born !
Sweetest and bes:, gentlest. and.braveft spirit,
That ever blest the world ! Wreich that I am,
Who saw that ncble fpisit swell and rife
Above the narrow limits tharconin'd it !
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
TIo do th:e juflice, and reveal the secret,
Which timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's snare. Oh! i am punifl'd now !

LThefe are the hairs that flould have rfrew'd the ground,
And rnt thie locks of Douglas, ,

C7ears his hair, and throws himnlf

upon the body of Douglas.

Ld. Ran. I know thee now: thy boldnels I forgive

My crel[ is fall'n/ For thee I will appoint
A place of re ft. if grief will let thee reft.
I will reward although I cannot putifih.
Curit, curfl Glenalvon, he efcap'd too we!!,
Though slain anil bassed by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the last,
Cursing his conqueror, the felon dy'd.

Enter ANNa.

A.7i7. My lord, ny lord !
Zd. Ran. Speak: I can hear cf l.orror

Ann Horror indeed !
Ld. Rau. Matilda ?
Ann. Is no more.
he ran, she flew like lightning up the hill,
or halted till the precipice (he gain'd,
emeath whose low'ring top the river falls
gu!ph'd in rifted rocks: thither (he came,
s fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
nd headlong down-----.
Ld. Ran. 'Twas I ! alas! 'twas I
hat ill'd her breast with fury; drove her down
he precipice of death ! Wretch that I am!
Ann. 0 had you seen. her lath defparing look !
pon the brink {he stood, and call her eyes
own on the deep: then lifting up her head
d her white hands to heav'n, seeming to fay,
hy am I forc'd to this ? She-plunged herself
o the empty air.
Ld. Ran. I will not vent,
vain complaints, the paflion of my Poul.
ace in this world I never can enjoy.
efe wounds the gratitude of Randolph gave.
iy speak aloud, and with the voice of fate
nounce my doom. I am rcfolv'd. I'll go
aight to the battle, where the man that makes
turn aside mufi threaten worse than death.
ou, faithful to thy miflrefs, take this ring,
1 warrant of my power. Let every rite
th cost and pornp upon their funerals wait;
Randolph hopes he never shall return.

F I N I S.

# EPILOGUE. Spoken by Mr. BARRY.

E P I L 0 G U E.

Spoken by Mr. BARRY.

A N Epilogu I-atlk'd ; .but nft' one word

OAar bard will write.; He vows 'tis moRs abf(drd

'With comic wit. to contradit the l.rain
Of tragedy, and rmake yonr forrops vain.
Sadly he fays, that pity is the best.-
The nobleft-paafioi of the hauliat breall-:
For when iis sacred flreams the heart o'erflvw,
In gufies pleafere with the tide of woe;
And when its waves retird, like those of 1Nilei
They leive behind them such a-golden foil,
That there the virlues withint culture grow,
There the fwe.:s bloflms .ofa'eflion blow.
These were his wcrds s-vo'od of delauvE? art
I felt them ; fir lie spoke theni from his heart,
Nor will [ now attempt, with witty folly,
Te chace away celefsial nelansholy.

-C,
